The Dark Night of the Soul (St. John of the Cross, trans. David Lewis, 1864)
==========================================================
Lewis's 1864 translation of St. John of the Cross's Dark Night — the Carmelite's poem and commentary on the soul's purgation. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

-N<,


^^t


:SS._


r*^-


If  ^


it:


A^*-
;*1^


>^i'*,'


'J-r


^i:M^


.v'>.ir-


m(^

T"'^.


.i-'


'h/


•»♦••  .i'


THE


DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SO^L


SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE,


AND


THE  LIVING  FLAME  OF  LOVE,


OF


SAINT  lOHN  OF  THE  CROSS,

OF  THK  ORDER  OF  OUR'  LADY  OF  CARMEL,
TRANSLATED  BY

DAVID     LEWIS,     M.A.


SECOND    EDITION,    REVISED.


LONDON :
THOMAS     BAKER,     SOHO     SQUARE

MDCCCXCI.


'•I


R.  E.  Thomas  &  Co.,
24,  White  Street,  Moorfields,  E.G.


i


CONTENTS


THE  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL.


BOOK  I.

OF    THE    NIGHT    OF    SENSE.


CHAPTER    I.  PAGE

Of  the  imperfections  of  beginners  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         5

CHAPTER    II.
Of  some  spiritual  imperfections  to  which  beginners  are  liable  in  the

matter  of  pride  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         7

CHAPTER    III.

Of  the  imperfections  of  avarice,  in  the  spiritual  sense         ...         ...       12

CHAPTER    IV.

Of  the  imperfection  of  luxury,  spiritually  understood  ...         .  .       14

CHAPTER   V.
Of  the  imperfections  of  anger     ...         ...  '       ...         ...         ...  ...         19

CHAPTER    VI.
Of  the  imperfections  of  spiritual  gluttony       20

CHAPTER  VII.
Of  the  imperfections  of  envy  and  spiritual  sloth      ...         ...  ..         24

CHAPTER  VIII.
Explanation  of  the  dark  night 27

CHAPTER  IX.
Of  the  signs  by  which  it  may  be  known  that  the  spiritual  man  is

walking  in  the  way  of  this  night  or  purgation  of  sense         ...         30


NGV  Z    1S83


IV.  CONTENTS.

CHAPTER  X.  •.  '   .

How  they  are  to  conduct   themselves  who  have  entered  the  da^.

night    /', ...         36

/''

CHAPTER  XI.
Explanation  of  the  second  line  of  the  first  stanza   ...         ...         ...         39

CHAPTER  XII.
Of  the  benefits  of  the  night  of  sense    ...         ...         ...         43

CHAPTER  XIII.
Of  other  benefits  of  the  night  of  sense  ...         ...         ...         ...         50

CHAPTER  XIV.
The  last  line  of  the  first  stanza  explained      ...         ...        55


BOOK  II.

OF    THE    NIGHT    OF    THE    SPIRIT.


CHAPTER    I.
The  second  night;    that  of  the  spirit.     When  it  begins     ...         ...         59

CHAPTER  II.
Of  certain  imperfections  of  proficients...         ...         ...         ...         ...         61

CHAPTER  III.
Introduction  ...         ...         ,,.         ...         64

CHAPTER  IV.
The  explanation  of  the  first  stanza       ...         ...        66

CHAPTER  V.
The  dim  contemplation  is  not  a  night  only,  but   pain    and    torment

also  for  the  soul         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         •..         ...         68

CHAPTER  VI.
Of  other  sufferings  of  the  soul  in  this  night 72

CHAPTER  VII.
The  same  subject  continued.     Other  afflictions  and  trials  of  the  will         76


CONTENTS.  V.

CHAPTER  VIII.  PAGE

soul  in  this  state    ...         ...         ...         82

CHAPTER  IX.
How    this   night   enlightens   the  mind,   though   it   brings   darkness

over  it     ...         ...  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         85

CHAPTER  X.
lExplanation  of  this  purgation  by  a  comparison        ...         93

CHAPTER  XL
A  vehement  passion  of  divine  love  the  fruit  of  these  sharp  afflictions

of  the  soul         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         97

CHAPTER  XII.

How  this  awful  night  is  like  purgatory.  How  the  divine  wisdom
illuminates  men  on  earth  with  that  light  in  which  the  angels
are  purified  and  enlightened  in  heaven    ...         ...         ...         ...       102

CHAPTER  XIII.
Other  sweet  effects  of  the  dark  night  of  contemplation     ...         ...       105

CHAPTER  XIV.
The  last  lines  of  the  first  stanza  explained     ...         ...         ...         ...       iii

XV.

Explanation  of  the  second  stanza  113

CHAPTER  XVI.
How  the  soul  joujneys  securely  in  darkness  ...         ...         ...         114

CHAPTER  XVII.

The  dim  contemplation  is  secret  ...         ...         ...  122

CHAPTER   XVIII.
|How  this  secret  wisdom  is  also  a  ladder        ...         ...         ...         ...       128

CHAPTER  XIX.
iThe  mystic  ladder  has  ten  degrees      ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         131

CHAPTER  XX.
;■ .        Of  the  other  degrees  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...       136

'}  ■      ,  CHAPTER  XXI.

,;-*        The  meaning  of  '  disguised.'      The  colours  in  which  the  soul  dis-

1^'.  guises  itself  in  this  night      ...  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...       139


VI.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER    XXII  PAGE

The  third  line  of  the  second  stanza  M5

CHAPTER  XXIII.

The  wonderful  hiding-place  of  the  soul,  which    the    devil    cannot

14G

enter       •••        •••        •••  ••  ^

CHAPTER  XXIV.

The  last  line  of  the  second  stanza        '33

CHAPTER  XXV.
Third  stanza  ...  ••  '55


SPIRITUAL    CANTICLE    OF    THE    SOUL   AXU
THE  BRIDEGROOM   CHRIST.


Prologue       ...  '57

Song  of  the  Soul  and  the  Bridegroom  i'jo

Argument     ^^7


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  STANZAS.


Stanza  I i''9

Stanza  II i'3

Stanza  III.            1 -~i

Stanza  IV.             19.^

Stanza  V kjJ

Stanza  VI.             loo

Stanza  VII.           j.  ■;

Stanza   VIII j  .;

Stanza  IX.             210

Stanza  X.  ...         ...         ...        ...         ...         ...         ...         ...          ..  21')

Stanza  XI.             219

Stanza  XII.             227

Stanza  XIII.         234

Stanza  XIV.,  XV 242


CONTENTS.


Vll.


Stanza  XV.

Stanza  XVI.

Stanza  XVII

Stanza  XVIII.      .

Stanza  XIX.

Stanza  XX.,  XXI.

Stanza  XXII.

Stanza  XXI 11

Stanza  XXIV

Stanza  XXV.

Stanza  XXVI.

Stanza  XX Vll.

Stanza  XXVI 11
Stanza  XXI.X
Stan/a  XXX.
Sta.nza  XXXI.
Stanza   XXXII
Stanza  XXXI li
Stanza  XXXIV.
St.\nz.\  .\,\.\V.
Stanza  XXXVI.

K  XXXVII.    .
/A  XXXVIII.
Ktanza  XXXIX.
Stanza  XL.


PAGE

262
268

279

J05

.^'  '

ii  '

-U)
3-40

,<■»•)

J<"
366
370
375
381
386

393
403


illi:    LIVING    FLAME    OF    LOVE.


I'roIoRue


>tanza  iii.
Jtanza  I\'.


NSTRUCTIONS  AND  PRECAUTIONS

'  RS

;  lAL    Ma.MMs
'OEV
KDIX


407
409
410

428
44S

499


511
52'
553
611

^'55


THE


DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL.


WITH  AN  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  STANZAS  COMPRISING
THE  WAY  OF  THE  PERFECT  UNION  OF  LOVE  WITH
GOD,  SUCH  AS  IS  POSSIBLE  IN  THIS  LIFE  ;  AND  THE
ADMIRABLE  ENDOWMENTS  OF  THE  SOUL  WHICH  HAS
ATTAINED   TO    IT.


ARGUMENT.

The  stanzas  to  be  explained  are  set  forth  at  the  beginning  of
this  book,  then  an  explanation  of  each  severally,  the  stanza
being  placed  before  it.  After  that  an  explanation  of  each  line,
which  is  also  set  before  the  explanation.  The  first  two  stanzas
explain  the  two  spiritual  purgations  of  the  sensual  and  spiritual
part  of  man,  and  the  other  six  the  various  and  admirable
effects  of  the  spiritual  enlightenment  and  union  of  love  with
God.

STANZAS,
I

In  a  dark  night,

With  anxious  love  inflamed,

O,  happy  lot !

Forth  unobserved  I  went,

My  house  being  now  at  rest.

II

In  darkness  and  in  safety.

By  the  secret  ladder,  disguised,

O,  happy  lot !

In  darkness  and  concealment.

My  house  being  now  at  rest.


THE    DARK    NIGHT


In  that  happy  night,

In  secret,  seen  of  none,

Seeing  nought  myself,

Without  other  light  or  guide

Save  that  which  in  my  heart  was  burning


That  light  guided  me

More  surely  than  the  noonday  sun

To  the  place  where  He  was  waiting  for  me,

Whom  I  knew  well.

And  where  none  appeared.


O,  guiding  night ;

O,  night  more  lovely  than  the  dawn  ;

O,  night  that  hast  united

The  lover  with  His  beloved,

And  changed  her  into  her  love.


On  my  flowery  bosom,

Kept  whole  for  Him  alone.

There  He  reposed  and  slept ;

And  I  cherished  Him,  and  the  waving

Of  the  cedars  fanned  Him.


As  His  hair  floated  in  the  breeze
That  from  the  turret  blew,
He  struck  me  on  the  neck
With  His  gentle  hand.
And  all  sensation  left  me.


I  continued  in  oblivion  lost.
My  head  was  resting  on  my  love ;
Lost  to  all  things  and  myself,
And,  amid  the  lilies  forgotten,
Threw  all  my  cares  awaj'.


OF  THE  SOUL.


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  STANZAS.

Before  we  enter  on  an  explanation  of  these,  it  is  right
we  should  understand  that  they  are  the  words  of  the  soul
already  in  the  state  of  perfection,  which  is  the  union  of
love  with  God,  when  it  has  gone  through  the  straits,
tribulations  and  severities,  by  means  of  the  spiritual
training,  of  the  strait  way  of  everlasting  life,  by  which
ordinarily  the  soul  attains  to  this  high  and  divine  union
with  God.  Of  it  our  Saviour  says  in  the  Gospel,*  '  How
narrow  is  the  gate  and  strait  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to  life,
and  few  there  are  that  find  it.'  This  road  being  so  strait,
and  they  who  find  it  being  so  few,  the  soul  regards  it  as  a
great  and  joyful  blessing  that  it  has  journeyed  on  it  to  the
perfection  of  love,  as  it  sings  in  the  first  stanza,  very
rightly  calling  the  strait  road,  a  dark  night,  as  may  be
seen  further  on  in  the  words  of  the  stanza.  The  soul,
therefore,  rejoicing  in  that  it  has  travelled  on  this  strait
road  whereby  so  great  a  blessing  has  come  to  it,  sings  as
follows.

*  S.  Matt.  vii.  14.


B2


THE    DARK    NIGHT


BOOK   I.


OF   THE    NIGHT    OF    SENSE.


In  a  dark  mght.

With  anxious  love  iiijla?ned,

0,  happy  lot !

Fciih  tmobserved  I  went.

My  house  being  nozv  at  rest.

In  the  first  stanza  the  soul  sings  of  the  way  and  manner
of  its  going  forth,  as  to  its  affections,  from  self  and  all
created  things,  dying  thereto  b}^  real  mortification,  that  it
may  live  the  life  of  love,  sweet  and  delicious  in  God.  It
went  forth,  from  itself  and  from  all  things,  in  a  dark  night,
by  which  is  meant  here  purgative  contemplation — as  I
shall  hereinafter  explain* — which  leads  the  soul  to  deny
itself  and  all  besides.  This  departure,  it  says,  it  was  able
to  accomplish  in  the  strength  and  fervour  which  the  love
of  the  Bridegroom  supplied,  in  the  obscure  contemplation
for  that  end.  The  soul  magnifies  its  own  happiness  in
having  journeyed  Godwards  in  that  night  so  successfully
as  to  escape  all  hindrance  on  the  part  of  its  three  enemies
— the  world,  the  devil,  and  the  flesh — which  are  alwaj-s
found  infesting  this  road ;  for  the  night  of  purgative
contemplation  had  lulled  to  sleep  and  mortified,  in  the
house  of  sensuality,  all  passions  and  desires,  in  their
rebellious  movements.

*    Ch.  viii.


OF    THE    SOUL.


CHAPTER  I.


Begins  with  the  first  stanza  and  treats  of  the  imperfections  of

beginners.

In  a  dark  night.

OOULS  begin  to  enter  the  dark  night  when  God  is
drawing  them  out  of  the  state  of  beginners,  w^hich
is  that  of  those  who  meditate  on  the  spiritual  road,  and
is  leading  them  into  that  of  proficients,  the  state  of  con-
templatives,  that,  having  passed  through  it,  they  may
arrive  at  the  state  of  the  perfect,  w^hich  is  that  of  the
divine  union  with  God.  That  we  may  the  better  under-
stand and  explain  the  nature  of  this  night  through  which
the  soul  has  to  pass,  and  why  God  leads  men  into  it,  it
may  be  well  tcf  touch  first  upon  certain  peculiarities  of
beginners,  that  they  may  perceive  the  weakness  of  the
state  they  are  in,  take  courage,  and  desire  to  be  led  of
God  into  this  night,  where  the  soul  is  established  in
virtue  and  made  strong  for  the  inestimable  delights  of  His
love.  Though  I  shall  dwell  at  some  length  upon  this
point,  I  shall  do  so  no  longer  than  suffices  for  the
immediate  discussion   of  this  dark  night.

2.  We  are  to  keep  in  mind  that  a  soul,  when  seriously
converted  to  the  service  of  God,  is,  in  general,  spiritually
nursed  and  caressed,  as  an  infant  by  its  loving  mother,
who  warms  it  in  her  bosom,  nourishes  it  with  her  own
sweet  milk,  feeds  it  with  tender  and  delicate  food,  carries
it  in  her  arms,  and  fondles  it.     But  as  the  child  grows  up


6  THE    DARK   NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

the  mother  withholds  her  caresses,  hides  her  breasts,  and
anoints  them  with  the  juice  of  bitter  aloes  ;  she  carries
the  infant  in  her  arms  no .  longer,  but  makes  it  walk  on
the  ground,  so  that,  losing  the  habits  of  an  infant,  it  may
apply  itself  to  greater  and  more  substantial  pursuits.

3.  The  grace  of  God,*  like  a  loving  mother,  as  soon  as
the  soul  is  regenerated  in  the  new  lire  and  fervour  of  His
service,  treats  it  in  the  same  way ;  for  it  enables  it,
without  labour  on  its  own  part,  to  find  its  spiritual  milk,
sweet  and  delicious,  in  all  the  things  of  God,  and  in
devotional  exercises  great  sv^^eetness  ;  God  giving  it  the
breasts  of  His  own  tender  love,  as  to  a  tender  babe.
Such  souls,  therefore,  delight  to  spend  many  hours,  and
perhaps  whole  nights,  in  prayer ;  their  pleasures  are
penances,  their  joy  is  fasting,  and  their  consolations  lie
in  the  use  of  the  sacraments  and  in  speaking  of  divine
things.

4.  Now  spiritual  men  generally,  speaking  spiritually,
are  extremely  weak  and  imperfect  here,  though  they
apply  themselves  to  devotion,  and  practise  it  with  great
resolution,  earnestness,  and  care.  F'or  being  drawn  to
these  things  and  to  their  spiritual  exercises  by  the
comfort  and  satisfaction  they  find  therein,  and  not  yet
confirmed  in  virtue  by  the  struggle  it  demands,  they  fall
into  many  errors  and  imperfections  in  their  spiritual
life  :  for  every  man's  work  corresponds  to  the  habit  of
perfection  which  he  has  acquired.  These  souls,  therefore,
not  having  had  time  to  acquire  those  habits  of  vigour,
must,  of  necessity,  perform  their  acts,  like  children,  weakly.

*  Sap.  xvi.   25. — In    omnia    transfigurata    omnium    nutrici   gratis    tusc
deserviebat.


CHAP.  II.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  7

5.  To  make  this  more  clear,  and  to  show  how  weak
are  beginners  in  virtue  in  those  good  works  which  they
perform  with  so  much  ease  and  pleasure,  I  proceed  to
explain  by  reference  to  the  seven  capital  sins,  pointing
out  some  of  the  imperfections  into  which  beginners  fall  in
the  matter  of  each  of  them.  This  will  show  us  plainly
how  like  children  they  are  in  all  they  do,  and  also  how
great  are  the  blessings  of  this  dark  night  of  which  I  am
about  to  speak*;  seeing  that  it  cleanses  and  purilies  the
soul  from  all  these  imperfections.


CHAPTER  II.

Of  some  spiritual  imperfections  to  which  beginners  are  liable
in  the  matter  of  pride.

When  beginners  become  aware  of  their  own  fervour  and
diligence  in  their  spiritual  works  and  devotional  exercises,
this  prosperity  of  theirs  gives  rise  to  secret  pride — though
holy  things  tend  of  their  own  nature  to  humility — because
of  their  imperfections  ;  and  the  issue  is  that  they  conceive
a  certain  satisfaction  in  the  contemplation  of  their  works
and  of  themselves.  From  the  same  source,  too,  proceeds
that  empty  eagerness  which  they  display,  in  speaking
before  others  of  the  spiritual  life,  and  sometimes  as
teachers  rather  than  learners.  They  condemn  others
in  their  heart  when  they  see  that  they  are  not  devout  in
their  way.     Sometimes  also  they  say  it  in  words,  showing

*  Ch.  xii.  g  2.


8  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

themselves  herein  to  be  hke  the  Pharisee,  who  in  the  act
of  prayer  boasted  of  his  own  works  and  despised  the
Publican.*

2.  Their  fervour,  and  desire  to  do  these  and  other
works,  is  frequently  fed  by  satan  in  order  that  they  may
grow  in  pride  and  presumption  :  he  knows  perfectly  well
that  all  their  virtue  and  works  are  not  only  nothing  worth,
but  rather  tending  to  sin.  Some  of  them  go  so  far  as  to
think  none  good  but  themselves,  and  so,  at  all  times,  both
in  word  and  deed  fall  into  condemnation  and  detraction
of  others.  They  see  the  mote  in  the  eye  of  their  brother,
but  not  the  beam  which  is  in  their  own.f  They  strain  out
the  gnat  in  another  man's  cup,  and  swallow  the  camel  in
their  own.  t

3.  Sometimes,  also,  when  their  spiritual  masters,  such
as  confessors  and  superiors,  do  not  approve  of  their  spirit
and  conduct — for  they  wish  to  be  praised  and  considered
for  what  they  do — they  decide  that  they  are  not  under-
stood, and  that  their  superiors  are  not  spiritual  men
because  they  do  not  approve  and  sanction  their  pro-
ceedings. So  they  go  about  in  quest  of  some  one  else,  who
will  accommodate  himself  to  their  fancy ;  for  in  general
they  love  to  discuss  their  spiritual  state  with  those  who,
they  think,  will  commend  and  respect  it.  They  avoid,  as
they  would  death,  those  who  destroy  their  delusion  with
the  view  of  leading  them  into  a  safe  way,  and  sometimes
they  even  hate  them.  Presuming  greatly  on  themselves,
they  make  many  resolutions,  and  accomplish  little.  They
are  occasionally  desirous  that  others  should  perceive  their
spirituality  and  devotion,  and  for  that  end  they  give  out-

*  S.  Luke  xviii.  11,  12.  t  S.  Matt.  vii.  3.  J  lb.  xxiii.  24.


CHAP.  II.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  9

ward  tokens  by  movements,  sighs  and  divers  ceremonies ;
sometimes,  too,  they  fall  into  certain  trances  in  public
rather  than  in  private — whereunto  satan  contributes —
and  are  pleased  when  others  are  witnesses  of  them.

4.  Many  of  them  seek  to  be  the  favourites  of  their
confessors,  and  the  result  is  endless  envy  and  disquietude.
They  are  ashamed  to  confess  their  sins  plainly,  lest  their
confessors  should  think  less  of  them,  so  they  go  about
palliating  them,  that  they  may  not  seem  so  bad :  which  is
excusing  rather  than  accusing  themselves.  Sometimes
they  go  to  a  stranger  to  confess  their  sin,  that  their  usual
confessor  may  think  they  are  not  sinners,  but  good  people.
And  so  they  always  take  pleasure  in  telling  him  of  their
goodness,  and  that  in  terms  suggestive  of  more  than  is  in
them  :  at  the  least,  they  wish  all  their  goodness  to  be
appreciated,  when  it  would  be  greater  humility  on  their
part,  as  I  shall  presently  show,*  to  undervalue  it,  and
wish  that  neither  their  confessor  nor  anyone  else  should
think  it  of  the  least  importance.

5.  Some  beginners,  too,  make  light  of  their  faults,  and
at  other  times  indulge  in  immoderate  grief  when  they
commit  them.  They  thought  themselves  already  saints,
and  so  they  become  angry  and  impatient  with  themselves,
which  is  another  great  imperfection.  They  also  importune
God  to  dehver  them  from  their  faults  and  imperfections,
but  it  is  for  the  comfort  of  living  in  peace,  unmolested  by
them,  and  not  for  God ;  they  do  not  consider  that,  were
He  to  deliver  them,  they  would  become,  perhaps,  prouder
than  ever.  They  are  great  enemies  of  other  men's  praise,
but  great  lovers  of  their  own,  and  sometimes  they  seek  it.

*  §  7-


10  THE    DARK    NIGHT  •  [bOOK    I.

In  this  respect  they  resemble  the  foohsh  virgins,  who,
when  their  lamps  gave  no  light,  went  about  in  search  of
oil,  saying  :  '  Give  us  of  your  oil,  for  our  lamps  are  going
out,'*

6.  From  these  some  go  on  to  very  serious  imperfections,
and  come  to  great  harm  thereby.  Some,  however,  fall
into  them  less  than  others,  and  some  have  to  contend  with
little  more  than  the  first  movements  of  them.  But
scarcely  anyone  can  be  found  who,  in  his  first  fervours,
did  not  fall  into  some  of  them,

7.  But  those  who  at  this  time  are  going  on  to
perfection  proceed  in  a  very  different  way,  and  in  a  very
different  temper  of  mind :  they  grow  and  are  built  up  in
humility,  not  only  looking  on  their  own  works  as  nothing,
but  also  dissatisfied  Math  themselves  :  they  look  upon  all.
others  as  much  better,  they  regard  them  with  a  holy  envy
m  their  anxiety  to  serve  God  as  they  do.  For  the  greater
their  fervour,  the  more  numerous  their  good  works  ;  and
the  keener  the  pleasure  therein,  the  more  they  perceive —
for  they  humble  themselves  —  how  much  that  is  which
God  deserves  at  their  hands,  and  how  little  is  all  they  can
do  for  Him  :  thus  the  more  the}'  do,  the  less  are  they
satisfied:

8.  So  great  is  that  which  they  in  their  love  would  fain
<lc),  that  all  they  are  doing  seems  nothing.  This  loving
anxiety  so  importunes  and  fills  them  that  they  never
consider  whether  others  are  doing  good  or  not,  and  if  they
do,  it  is,  as  I  have  said,  in  the  conviction  that  all  others  are
much  better  than  they  are.  They  think  little  of  themselves,
and  wish  others  to  do  so  also,  to  make  noaccount  of  them,

*  S.  Matt.  XXV.  S.


lAP  II.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  11

and  despise  their  works.  Moreover,  if  anyone  should
praise  and  respect  them  they  will  give  them  no  credit,  for
they  think  it  strange  that  anybody  should  speak  well  of
them.

9.  They,  in  great  tranquility  and  humility,  are  very
desirous  to  learn  the  things  that  are  profitable  to  them
from  anyone  ;  in  this  respect  the  very  opposite  of  those  of
whom  I  have  just  spoken,  who  are  willing  to  teach
everybody  ;  arid  who,  when  anyone  seems  about  to  teach
them  anything,  take  the  words  out  of  his  mouth,  as  if
they  knew  it  already.

10.  But  they  of  whom  I  am  now  speaking  are  very  far
from  wishing  to  instruct  anyone ;  they  are  most  ready  to
travel  by  another  road  if  they  be  but  commanded,  for  they
never  imagine  that  they  can  be  right  in  anything.  When
others  are  praised  they  rejoice,  and  their  only  regret  is
that  they  do  not  serve  God  themselves  as  well  as  they.
They  have  no  wish  to  speak  about  their  own  state,  for  they
think  so  lightly  of  it,  that  they  are  ashamed  to  speak  of  it
to  their  own  confessors  ;  it  seems  to  them  unworthy  of
any  mention  whatever.  But  they  have  a  great  desire  to
speak  of  their  shortcomings  and  sins,  or  of  that  which
they  consider  not  to  be  virtue :  thus  they  incline  to  treat
of  the  affairs  of  their  soul  with  those  who  have  no  great
opinion  of  their  state  and  spirit.*  This  is  a  characteristic
of  that  spirituality  which  is  pure,  simple,  true,  and  most
pleasing  unto  God.  For  as  the  wise  Spirit  of  God  dwells
in  these  humble  souls,  He  moves  and  inclines  them  to
keep  His  treasures  secretly  within,  and  to  cast  out
the  evil.      For    God   gives  this  grace,  together  with  the

*  See  Life  of  St.  Teresa,  Relation  vii.  §  11.


12  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

other  virtues,  to  the  humble,  and  withholds  it  from  the
proud.

II.  These  will  give  their  hearts'  blood  for  him  who
serves  God,  and  will  help  him  to  serve  Him  to  the  utmost
of  their  powers.  When  they  fall  into  any  imperfection
they  bear  up  under  it  with  humility,  in  meekness  of  spirit,
in  loving  fear  of  God,  and  hoping  in  Him. .  But  the  souls
who  in  the  beginning  travel  thus  towards  perfection  are,
as  I  said,*  few,  yea,  very  few,  and  we  ought  to  be  content
when  they  do  not  rush  into  the  opposite  evils.  This  is
the  reason,  as  I  shall  hereafter  explain,!  why  God  leads
into  the  dark  night  those  souls  whom  He  will  purify  from
all  these  imperfections  in  order  to  their  further  progress.


CHAPTER  III.

Of  the  imperfections  into  which   some  beginners  are  wont  to

fall,  in   the  matter  of  the  second  capital  sin,  which  is  avarice,

in  the  spiritual  sense.

Maxy  a  beginner  also  falls  at  times  into  great  spiritual
avarice.  Scarcelv  anvone  is  contented  with  that  measure
of  the  spirit  which  God  gives :  thev  are  very  disconsolate
and  querulous  because  thev  do  not  find  the  comfort  they
desire  in  spiritual  things.  Manv  are  never  satisfied  with
listening  to  spiritual  counsels  and  precepts,  with  reading
books  which  treat  of  their  state  ;  and  they  spend  more  time
in  this  than  in  doing  their  dutv,  having  no  regard  to  that
mortification,  and  perfection  of  interior  poverty  of  spirit,
to  which  they  ought  to  apply  themselves.  Besides,  they
load  themselves  with  images,  rosaries,  and  crucifixes,
*  §  6.        t  Ch.  viii  §  5.


CHAP.  IV.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  13

curious  and  costly  ;  now  taking  up  one,  then  another,
now  changing  them,  and  then  resuming  them  again.  At
one  time  they  will  have  them  of  a  certain  fashion,  at
another  time  of  another,  prizing  one  more  than  another
because  more  curious  or  costly.  Some  may  be  seen  with
an  Agnus  Dei,  and  with  relics  and  medals,  like  children
with  coral.

2.  I  condemn  here  that  attachment  and  clinging  of  the
heart  to  the  form,  number,  and  variety  of  these  things,
because  in  direct  opposition  to  poverty  of  spirit,  which
looks  only  to  the  substance  of  devotion  ;  which  makes  use
indeed  of  these  things,  but  only  sufficiently  for  the  end,
and  disdains  that  variety  and  curiosity,  for  real  devotion
must  spring  out  of  the  heart,  and  consider  only  the  truth
and  substance  which  the  objects  in  question  represent.
All  beyond  this  is  attachment  and  greed  of  imperfection  ;
he  who  will  go  on  unto  perfection,  must  root  out  that
feeling  utterly.

3.  I  knew  a  person  who  for  more  than  ten  years^  used
continually,  without  interruption,  a  cross  rudely  formed  of
a  piece  of  blessed  palm,  and  fastened  together  with  a
common  pin  bent  backwards,  until  I  took  it  away.  This
was  a  person  not  deficient  in  sense  and  understanding.  I
knew  another  who  had  a  rosary  made  of  the  backbones  of
fish,  and  whose  devotion,  I  am  certain,  was  not  on  that
account  of  less  value  in  the  eyes  of  God  ;  for  it  is  clear
that  the  cost  or  workmanship  of  these  contributed
nothing  to  it.

4.  Those  beginners,  therefore,  who  go  on  well,  do  not
rely  on  visible  instruments,  neither  do  they  burden
themselves  with  them,  nor  do  they  seek  to   know  more


14  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK  I.

than  is  necessary  for  acting  rightly  ;  their  sole  object  is
to  be  well  with  God  and  to  please  Him  ;  their  avarice
consists  in  that.  With  a  noble  generosity  they  give  up  all
they  possess  ;  and  their  delight  is  to  be  poor  for  the  love
of  God  and  their  neighbour,  disposing  of  everything
according  to  the  laws  of  this  virtue  ;  because,  as  I  have
said,  their  sole  aim  is  real  perfection,  to  please  God  in  all
things  and  themselves  in  nothing.

5.  The  soul,  however,  cannot  be  perfectly  purified
from  these  imperfections,  any  more  than  from  the  others,
until  God  shall  have  led  it  into  the  passive  purgation  ot
the  dark  night,  of  which  I  shall  speak  immediately.*  But
it  is  expedient  that  the  soul,  so  far  as  it  can,  should
labour,  on  its  own  part,  to  purify  and  perfect  itself,  that
it  may  merit  from  God  to  be  taken  under  His  divine  care,
and  be  healed  from  those  imperfections  which  of  itself  it
cannot  remedy.  For,  after  all  the  efforts  of  the  soul,  it
cannot  by  any  exertions  of  its  own  actively  purify  itself  so
as  to  be  in  the  slightest  degree  fit  for  the  di^•ine  union  of
perfection  in  the  love  of  God,  if  God  Himself  does  not
take  it  into  His  own  hands  and  purify  it  in  the  fire,  dark
to  the  soul,  in  the  way  I  am  going  to  explain.!


CHAPTER  IV.  ]

Of  other  imperfections  into  which  some  beginners  are  wont  to

fall,  in  the  matter  of  the  third  sin,  which  is  luxury,  spiritually

understood.

Many   beginners   fall   into   other   imperfections,  over   and

above  those  belonging  to  each  capital  sin  of  which  I  am

*  Ch.  viii,  g  5  •}•  Bk.  ii.  ch.  10


CHAP.   IV.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  15

speaking.  I  pass  them  by  now,  to  avoid  prolixity,  and
treat  of  some  of  the  chiefest,  which  are,  as  it  were,  the
source  and  origin  of  the  rest.

2.  As  to  the  sin  of  luxury,  putting  aside  the  com-
mission of  the  sin — my  object  being  to  speak  of  those
imperfections  which  have  to  be  purged  away  in  the  dark
night — beginners  fall  into  many  imperfections,  which  may
be  called  spiritual  luxury ;  not  that  it  is  so  in  fact,  but
because  it  is  felt  and  experienced  sometimes  in  the  flesh,
because  of  its  frailty,  when  the  soul  is  the  recipient  of
spiritual  communications.  For  very  often,  in  the  midst
of  their  spiritual  exercises,  and  when  they  cannot  help
themselves,  the  impure  movements  of  sensuality  are  felt ;
and  sometimes  even  when  the  mind  is  absorbed  in  prayer,
or  when  they  are  receiving  the  sacraments  of  penance  and
the  eucharist.  These  movements  not  being  in  their
power,  proceed  from  one  of  three  sources.

3.  They  proceed  occasionally — though  but  rarely,  and
in  persons  of  delicate  constitutions — from  sensible  sweet-
ness in  spiritual  things.  For  when  sense  and  spirit  are
both  delighted  together,  the  whole  nature  of  man  is
moved  in  that  delectation  according  to  its  measure  and
character.  For  then  the  spirit,  that  is,  the  higher  part  of
our  nature  is  moved  to  delight  itself  in  God ;  and  sensualit}-,
which  is  the  lower  part,  is  moved  towards  sensible
gratification,  because  it  knows,  and  admits  of,  none  other.
And  so  it  happens  that  the  soul  is  in  spirit  praying,  and  on
the  other  hand  in  the  senses  troubled,  to  its  great  disgust,
with  the  rebellious  movements  of  the  flesh  passiveh'.
But  inasmuch  as  these  two  parts  form  but  one  subject,
man,  they  ordinarily  share    in    their  respective  passions,


16  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [p.OOK    I.

each  in  its  own  way  ;  for,  as  the  philosopher  tells  us,  all
that  is  received  is  received  according  to  the  condition  of
the  recipient.

3.  Thus  in  these  beginnings,  and  even  when  the  soul
has  made  some  progress,  the  sensual  part,  being  still  im-
perfect, when  spiritual  delight  flows  into  the  soul,  mingles
occasionally  of  its  own  therewith.  But  when  the  sensual
part  is  already  renewed  in  the  purgation  of  the  dark  night,
it  is  no  longer  subject  to  these  infirmities,  because  it
receives  so  abundantly  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  it  seems
rather  to  be  received  into  that  Spirit  itself,  as  into  that
which  is  greater  and  grander.  Thus  it  possesses  ever\'-
thing  according  to  the  measure  of  the  Spirit,  in  an
admirable  manner,  of  Whom  it  is  a  partaker,  united  with
God.

4.  The  second  source  of  these  rebellious  movements  is
satan,  who,  in  order  to  disquiet  the  soul  during  prayer,  or
when  preparing  for  it,  causes  these  filthy  movements  of
our  lower  nature,  and  these,  when  in  any  degree  admitted,
are  injury  enough.  Some  persons  not  only  relax  in  their
prayers  through  fear  of  these  movements,  which  is  the
object  of  satan  when  he  undertakes  to  assail  them,  but
even  abandon  them  altogether,  for  they  imagine  that  they
are  more  liable  to  these  assaults  during  prayer  than  at
other  times.  This  is  certainly  true  ;  for  the  devil  then
assails  them  more  than  at  other  times,  that  they  may
cease  from  prayer.

5.  This  is  not  all ;  for  he  represents  before  them
then,  most  vividly,  the  most  foul  and  filthy  images,  and
occasionally  in  close  relation  with  certain  spiritual  things
and  persons,  by  whom  their  souls  are  profited,  that  he  may


CHAP.   IV.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  17

terrify  and  crush  them.  Some  are  so  grievously  assailed
that  they  dare  not  dwell  upon  anything,  for  it  becomes  at
once  a  stumbling-block  to  them,  especially  those  who  are
of  a  melancholy  temperament ;  these  are  so  vehemently
and  effectually  assailed  as  to  be  objects  of  the  deepest
pity.  When  melancholy  is  the  occasion  of  these  visita-
tions of  satan,  men  in  general  cannot  be  delivered  from
them  till  their  bodily  health  is  improved,  unless  they  shall
have  entered  on  the  dark  night  which  puriiies  them
wholly.

6.  The  third  source  of  these  depraved  movements
which  war  against  the  soul  is  usually  the  fear  of  them,
for  this  fear  which  is  brought  about  by  a  sudden  re-
membrance of  them,  in  a  look,  a  word,  or  thought,  makes
souls  suffer  from  them,  but  without  fault  on  their  part.

7.  Sometimes,  spiritual  persons,  when  either  speaking
of  spiritual  things,  or  doing  good  works,  display  a  certain
energy  and  strength  arising  out  of  their  consideration  for
persons  present,  and  that  with  a  certain  measure  of  vain
joy.  This  also  proceeds  from  spiritual  luxury  in  the
sense  in  which  I  use  the  word,  and  is  accompanied  at
times  by  a  certain  complacency  of  the  will.

8.  Some,  too,  form  spiritual  friendships  with  others,
the  source  of  which  is  luxury,  and  not  spirituality.  We
may  know  it  to  be  so  by  observing  whether  the  re-
membrance of  that  affection  increases  our  recollection  and
love  of  God,  or  brings  remorse  of  conscience.  When  this
affection  is  purely  spiritual,  the  love  of  God  grows  with  it,
and  the  more  we  think  of  it  the  more  we  think  of  God,
and  the  greater  our  longing  for  Him  ;  for  the  one  grows
with  the  other.     The  spirit  of  God  has  this  propert}-,  that

c


18  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

it  increases  good  by  good,  because  there  is  a  likeness  and
conformity  between  them.  But  when  this  affection  springs
out  of  the  vice  of  sensuaUty,  its  effects  are  quite  opposite  ;
for  the  more  it  grows,  the  more  is  the  love  of  God
diminished,  and  the  remembrance  of  Him  also ;  for  if
this  earthly  love  grows,  that  of  God  cools  down  :  the
remembrance  of  that  love  brings  forgetfulness  of  God
and  a  certain  remorse  of  conscience.

g.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  love  of  God  grows  in  the
soul,  the  human  love  cools,  and  is  forgotten  ;  for  as  they
are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other,  not  only  do  the}-  not
help  each  other,  but  the  one  which  predominates  sup-
presses the  other,  and  strengthens  itself,  as  philosophers
say.  And  so  our  Saviour  tells  us  in  the  gospel,  saying,
'  that  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  that  which  is
born  of  the  spirit  is  spirit ;  '*  that  love  which  grows  out  of
sensuality  ends  in  the  same,  and  that  which  is  spiritual
ends  in  the  spirit  of  God,  and  makes  it  grow.  This  is  the
difference  between  these  two  loves,  whereby  we  may
know  them.  When  the  soul  enters  the  dark  night,  these
affections  are  ruled  by  reason ;  that  night  strengthens
and  purifies  the  affection  which  is  according  to  God,
and  removes,  destroys,  or  mortifies  the  other.  In  the
beginning  both  are  b}'  it  put  out  of  sight,  as  I  shall  explain
hereafter.!

*  S.  John  iii.    6.  f  Ch.  xiii.  ii.


CHAP,  v.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  19

CHAPTER  V.

Of  the  imperfections  of  beginners  in  the  matter  of  anger.

Many  beginners,  because  of  their  inordinate  appetite  for
spiritual  sweetness,  generally  fall  into  many  imperfections
in  the  matter  of  anger  ;  for  when  spiritual  things  minister
to  them  no  more  sweetness  and  delight,  they  naturally
become  pee\'ish,  and  in  that  bitterness  of  spirit  prove  a
burden  to  themselves  in  all  they  do  :  trifles  make  them
angry,  and  they  are  at  times  intolerable  to  all  about  them.
This  happens  generally  after  great  sweetness  in  prayer ;
and  so,  when  that  sensible  sweetness  is  past,  their  natural
temper  is  soured  and  rendered  morose.  They  are  like  a
babe  weaned  from  the  breast,  which  he  found  so  sweet.
When  this  natural  feeling  of  displeasure  is  not  permitted
to  grow,  there  is  no  sin,  but  only  imperfection,  which  will
have  to  be  purged  away  in  the  severity  and  aridities  of
the  dark  night.

2.  There  are  other  spiritual  persons,  too,  among  these
who  fall  into  another  kind  of  spiritual  anger.  They  are
angry  with  other  people  for  their  faults,  with  a  sort  of
unquiet  zeal,  and  watch  them ;  they  are  occasionally
moved  to  blame  them,  and  even  do  so  in  anger,
constituting,  themselves  guardians  of  virtue.  All  this  is
contrary  to  spiritual  meekness.

3.  Others,  again,  seeing  their  own  imperfections,
become  angry  with  themselves  with  an  impatience  that  is
not  humble.  They  are  so  impatient  with  their  short-
comings as  if  they  would  be  saints  in  one  day.      Man}'  of

C2


20  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

these  make  many  and  grand  resolutions,  but,  being  self-
confident  and  not  humble,  the  more  they  resolve,  the
more  they  fall,  and  the  more  angry  they  become  ;  not
having  the  patience  to  wait  for  God's  time ;  this  is  also
opposed  to  spiritual  meekness.  There  is  no  perfect
remedy  for  this  but  in  the  dark  night.  There  are,
however,  some  people  who  are  so  patient,  and  who
advance  so  slowly  in  their  spiritual  progress,  that  God
wishes  they  were  not  so  patient.


CHAPTER    VI.

Of  the  imperfections  in  the  matter  of  spiritual  gluttony.

There  is  much  to  sa}-  of  the  fourth  capital  sin,  which
is  spiritual  gluttony,  for  there  is  scarcely  one  among
beginners,  however  good  his  progress,  who,  in  the  matter
of  this  sin,  does  not  fall  into  some  of  the  many
imperfections  to  which  beginners  are  liable,  because  of
that  sweetness  which  in  the  beginning  they  find  in
spiritual  exercises.

2.  Many  beginners,  delighting  in  the  sweetness  and
joy  of  their  spiritual  occupations,  strive  after  spiritual
sweetness  rather  than  after  pure  and  true  devotion,  which
is  that  which  God  regards  and  accepts  in  the  whole  course
of  the  spiritual  way.  For  this  reason,  over  and  above
their  imperfection  in  seeking  after  sweetness  in  devotion,
that  spirit  of  gluttony,  which  has  taken  possession  of
them,  forces  them  to  overstep  the  limits  of  moderation,
within  which  virtue  is  acquired  and  consists.      For  allured


CHAP.  VI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  21

by  the  delights  they  then  experience,  some  of  them  kill
themselves  by  penances,  and  others  weaken  themselves
by  fasting.  They  take  upon  themselves  more  than  they
can  bear,  without  rule  or  advice  ;  they  try  to  conceal  their
austerities  from  those  whom  they  are  bound  to  obey,  and
some  even  venture  to  practise  them  though  commanded
to  abstain.  These  are  full  of  imperfections — unreasonable
people,  who  undervalue  submission  and  obedience,  which
is  the  penance  of  the  reason  and  judgment,  and  therefore
a  more  acceptable  and  sweet  sacrifice  unto  God  than  all
the  acts  of  bodily  penance.  Bodily  penance  is  full  of
imperfections  when  the  penance  of  the  will  is  neglected,
for  men  undertake  it  merely  because  they  like  it,  and  for
the  sweetness  which  they  find  in  it.

3.  Inasmuch  then  as  all  extremes  are  vicious,  and  as
in  this  course  of  conduct  men  follow  their  own  will,  the
consequences  are  that  they  grow  in  vice  and  not  in  virtue ;
at  least  they  minister  to  their  spiritual  gluttony  and  pride,
for  they  do  not  walk  in  the  way  of  obedience.  The  devil
so  deceives  many  of  them  by  exciting  their  glutton}'
through  this  sweetness  which  he  increases,  that,  since
they  cannot  obey,  they  either  change,  or  vary,  or  add  to,
what  is  commanded  them ;  so  hard  and  bitter  is  obedience
become.  The  evil  has  so  grown  upon  some,  that  they
lose  all  desire  to  do  their  spiritual  duties  the  instant
obedience  enjoins  them ;  because  all  their  satisfaction
consists  in  doing  that  which  pleases  them,  and  perhaps
it  would  be  better  for  them  to  leave  it  undone.

4.  Many  of  these  importune  their  spiritual  directors
to  allow  them  to  do  their  own  will:  they  extort  that
permission  as  if  by  force,  and  if  it  be  refused,  they  mope


22  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

like  children,  and  become  discontented,  and  think  they
are  not  serving  God  whenever  they  are  thwarted.  These
persons  clinging  to  sweetness  and  their  own  will,  the
moment  they  are  contradicted,  and  directed  according  to
the  will  of  God,  become  fretful,  fainthearted,  and  then  fall
away.  They  imagine  that  to  please  and  satisfy  them-
selves, is  to  serve  and  please  God.

5.  Others  also  there  are,  who,  by  reason  of  this
spiritual  gluttony,  are  so  ignorant  of  their  own  meanness
and  misery,  and  so  insensible  to  that  loving  fear  and
reverence  due  to  the  majesty  of  God,  that  they  are  not
afraid  to  insist  on  being  allowed  by  their  confessors  to
confess  and  communicate  frequently.  And  what  is  much
worse,  they  very  often  dare  to  communicate  without  the
leave  and  sanction  of  the  minister  and  steward  of  Christ,
purely  out  of  their  own  head,  and  hide  the  truth  from
him.  This  eagerness  for  communion  makes  them  confess
carelessly,  for  they  are  more  anxious  to  communicate
anyhow  than  to  communicate  in  pureness  and  perfection.
It  would  be  more  proiitable  for  them,  and  a  holier  course,
to  beg  their  confessors  not  to  enjoin  such  frequent  com-
munions; though  the  better  way  between  these  two
extremes  is  to  be  humble  and  resigned.  This  excessive
boldness  leads  to  great  evil,  and  men  may  well  be  in  fear
of  chastisement  for  such  rashness.

6.  These  persons,  when  they  communicate,  strive
with  all  their  might  for  sensible  sweetness,  instead  of
worshipping  in  humility  and  praising  God  within  them-
selves. So  much  are  they  given  to  this,  that  they  think,
when  they  derive  no  sensible  sweetness,  they  ha^•e  done
nothing,  so  meanly  do  they  think  of  God ;  neither  do  they


CHAP.  VI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  23

understand  that  the  least  of  the  blessings  of  the  Most
Holy  Sacrament  is  that  which  touches  the  senses,  and
that  the  invisible  grace  It  confers  is  far  greater;  for  God
frequently  withholds  these  sensible  favours  from  men,  that
they  may  fix  the  eyes  of  faith  upon  Himself.  But  these
persons  will  feel  and  taste  God,  as  if  He  were  palpable
and  accessible  to  them,  not  only  in  communion,  but  in  all
their  other  acts  of  devotion.  All  this  is  a  very  great
imperfection,  and  directly  at  variance  with  the  nature  of
God,  Who  demands  the  purest  faith.

7.  They  conduct  themselves  in  the  same  way  when
they  are  praying;  for  they  imagine  that  the  whole
business  of  prayer  consists  in  sensible  devotion,  and  this
they  strive  to  obtain  with  all  their  might,  wearying  out
their  brains  and  perplexing  all  the  faculties  of  their  souls.
When  thev  miss  that  sensible  devotion,  they  are  cast
down,  thinking  they  have  done  nothing.  This  effort  after
sweetness  destroys  true  devotion  and  spirituality,  which
consist  in  perseverance  in  prayer  with  patience  and
humility,  mistrusting  self,  solely  to  please  God.  There-
fore, when  they  once  miss  sweetness  in  prayer,  or  in  any
other  act  of  religion,  they  feel  a  sort  of  repugnance  to
resume  it,  and  sometimes  cease  from  it  altogether.

8.  In  this  they  are,  as  we  said  just  now,  Hke  children
who  are  not  influenced  by  reason,  but  by  their  inclinations.
They  waste  their  time  in  the  search  after  spiritual  con-
solation, and  are  never  satisfied  with  reading  good  books,
taking  up  one  meditation  after  another,  in  the  pursuit  of
sensible  sweetness  in  the  things  of  God.  God  refuses  it  to
them  most  justly,  wisely,  and  lovingly,  for  if  He  did  not,
this  spiritual  gluttony  on  their  part  would  grow  into  great


24  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [  BOOK    I.

evils.  For  this  reason,  it  is  most  necessary  that  they
should  enter  into  the  dark  night,  that  they  may  be
cleansed  from  this  childishness.

g.  They  who  are  bent  on  sensible  sweetness,  labour
also  under  another  very  great  imperfection:  excessive
weakness  and  remissness  on  the  rugged  road  of  the  cross ;
for  the  soul  that  is  given  to  sweetness  naturally  sets  its
face  against  all  the  pain  of  self-denial.  They  labour  under
many  other  imperfections,  which  have  their  origin  here,
of  which  our  Lord  will  heal  them  in  due  time,  through
temptations,  aridities  and  trials,  elements  of  the  dark
night.  I  will  not  enlarge  upon  them  here,  that  I  may
avoid  prolixity ;  but  this  will  I  say,  that  spiritual  sober-
ness and  temperance  produce  a  far  different  temper,  that
of  mortification,  of  fear  and  submission  in  all  things;
showing  us  that  the  perfection  and  value  of  things  consist
not  in  the  multitude  thereof,  but  in  our  knowing  how  to
deny  ourselves  in  them.  Spiritual  men  must  labour  after
this  with  all  their  might,  until  it  shall  please  God  to
purify  them  by  leading  them  into  the  dark  night.  I
hasten  on  with  the  description  of  these  imperfections,  that
I  may  enter  on  the  explanation  of  it.


CHAPTER    VII.

Of  the  imperfections  in  the  matter  of  envy  and  spiritual  sloth.

Beginners  are  not  free  from  many  imperfections  in  the
matter  of  the  two  other  vices,  envy  and  spiritual  sloth.
Many  of  them  are  often  vexed  because  of  other  men's
goodness.  The}-  are  sensibly  afflicted  when  others  out-
strip them  on  the  spiritual  road,  and  will  not  endure  to


CHAP.  VII,]  OF    THE    SOUL.  25

hear  them  praised.  They  become  fretful  over  other  men's
virtues,  and  are  sometimes  unable  to  refrain  from
contradiction  when  they  are  commended ;  they  depreciate
them  as  much  as  they  can,  and  feel  acutely  because
they  themselves  are  not  thought  so  well  of,  for  they  wish
to  be  preferred  above  all  others.  This  is  most  opposed  to
that  charity  of  which  S.  Paul  says,  it  '  rejoiceth  with  the
truth.'  *  If  charity  admits  of  envy  at  all,  it  is  a  holy
envy  that  makes  us  grieve  that  we  have  not  the  virtues
that  others  have;  but  still  rejoicing  that  they  have  them,-
and  glad  that  others  outstrip  us  in  the  race  that  they  may
serve  God,  we  being  so  full  of  imperfection  ourselves.

2.  As  to  spiritual  sloth,  beginners  are  wont  to  find
their  most  spiritual  occupations  irksome,  and  avoid  them
as  repugnant  to  their  taste,  for  being  so  given  to
sweetness  in  spiritual  things,  they  loathe  them  when  they
find  none.  If  they  miss  once  this  sweetness  in  prayer
which  is  their  jo}- — it  is  expedient  that  God  should
deprive  them  of  it  in  order  to  try  them — they  will  not
resume  it;  at  other  times  they  omit  it,  or  return  to  it
with  a  bad  grace.  Thus,  under  the  influence  of  sloth
they  neglect  the  way  of  perfection — which  is  the  denial  of
their  will  and  pleasure  for  God — for  the  gratification  of
their  own  will,  which  they  serve  rather  than  the  will
of  God.

3.  Many  of  these  will  have  it  that  God  should  will
that  which  they  will,  and  are  afflicted  when  they  must
will  that  which  He  wills,  reluctantly  submitting  their  own
to  the  divine  will.  The  result  is  that  they  frequently
imagine  that  what  is  not  according  to  their  will  is  also

*  I  Cor.  xiii.  6.


26  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

not  according  to  the  will  of  God;  and,  on  the  other  hand,
when  they  are  pleased,  they  believe  that  God  is  pleased.
They  measure  Him  by  themselves,  and  not  themselves  by
Him,  in  direct  contradiction  to  His  teaching  in  the
gospel;  '  He  that  shall  lose  his  life  for  My  sake,  shall  find
it.'  *  That  is,  he  who  shall  give  up  his  will  for  God  shall
have  it,  and  he  who  wall  have  it,  he  shall  have  it  never.

4.  They  also  find  it  wearisome  to  obey  when  they  are
commanded  to  do  that  which  they  like  not;  and  because
they  walk  in  the  wa}-  of  consolation  and  spiritual  sweet-
ness, thev  are  too  weak  for  the  rough  trials  of  perfection.
They  are  like  persons  delicately  nurtured  who  avoid  with
heavy  hearts  all  that  is  hard  and  rugged,  and  are  offended
at  the  Cross  w^herein  the  joys  of  the  spirit  consist.  The
more  spiritual  the  work  they  have  to  do,  the  more
irksome  do  they  feel  it  to  be.  x\nd  because  they  insist  on
having  their  own  way  and  will  in  spiritual  things,  they
enter  on  the  '  strait  way  that  leadeth  unto  life,'  t  of  which
Christ  speaks,  with  repugnance  and  heaviness  of  heart.

5.  Let  this  reference  to  these  imperfections  among  the
many  under  which  they  labour,  who  are  in  the  first  state
of  beginners,  suffice  to  show  them  how  necessar}-  it  is
for  them  that  God  should  bring  them  to  the  state  of
proficients,  which  He  effects  when  He  leads  them  into  the
dark  night  of  which  we  shall  now  speak.  In  that  night
He  weans  them  from  the  breasts  of  sweetness,  in  pure
aridities  and  interior  darkness,  cleanses  them  from  all
these  imperfections  and  childish  ways,  and  by  ways  most
different,  makes  them  grow  in  virtue.  For  after  all  the
exertions    of    beginners    to    mortify  themselves    in    their

*  S.  Matt.  xvi.  25.  t  S.  Matt.  vii.  14.


CHAP.  VIII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  27

actions  and  passions,  their  success  will  not  be  perfect,  or
even  great,  until  God  Himself  shall  do  it  for  them  in  the
purgation  of  the  dark  night.  May  God  be  pleased  to  give
me  His  light,  that  I  may  speak  profitably  of  this  ;  for  I
have  great  need  of  it  while  treating  of  a  night  so  dark  and
a  subject  so  difficult.


CHAPTER  VIII.

Explanation  of  the  first  line  of  the  first  stanza.    '  Beginning  of
the  explanation  of  the  dark  night.'

'  In  a  dark  night.'  This  night — it  is  contemplation —
produces  in  spiritual  men  two  sorts  of  darkness  or
purgations  conformable  to  the  two  divisions  of  man's
nature  into  sensual  and  spiritual.  Thus  the  first  night,
or  sensual  purgation,  wherein  the  soul  is  purified  or
detached,  will  be  of  the  senses,  subjecting  them  to  the
spirit.  The  other  is  that  night  or  spiritual  purgation
wherein  the  soul  is  purified  and  detached  in  the  spirit,
and  which  subdues  and  disposes  it  for  union  with  God  in
love.  The  night  of  sense  is  common,  and  the  lot  of
many :  these  are  the  beginners,  of  whom  I  shall  first
speak.  The  spiritual  night  is  the  portion  of  very  few ;
and  they  are  those  who  have  made  some  progress,
exercised  therein,  of  whom  I  shall  speak  hereafter.*

2.  The  first  night,  or  purgation,  is  bitter  and  terrible
to  sense.  The  second  is  not  to  be  compared  with  it,  for
it  is  much  more  awful  to  the  spirit,  as  I  shall  soon  show.t
But  as  the  night  of  sense  is  the  first  in  order  and  the  first

*  Bk.  ii.  ch.  i.  t  Bk.  ii.  ch.  v.


28  THE    DARK   NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

to  be  entered,  I  shall  speak  of  it  briefly — for  being  of
ordinary  occurrence,  it  is  the  matter  of  many  treatises —
that  I  may  pass  on  to  treat  more  at  large  of  the  spiritual
night ;  for  of  that  very  little  has  been  said,  either  by
word  of  mouth  or  in  writing,  and  little  is  known  of  it  even
by  experience.

3.  But  the  behaviour  of  these  beginners  on  the  way  of
God  is  not  noble,  and  very  much  according  to  their  own
liking  and  self-love,  as  I  have  said  before.*  Meanwhile,
God  seeks  to  raise  them  higher,  to  draw  them  out  of  this
miserable  manner  of  loving  to  a  higher  state  of  the  love  of
God,  to  deliver  them  from  the  low  usage  of  the  senses
and  meditation  whereby  they  seek  after  God,  as  I  said
before,  t  in  ways  so  miserable  and  so  unworthy  of  Him.
He  seeks  to  place  them  in  the  way  of  the  spirit  wherein
they  may  the  more  abundantly,  and  more  free  from
imperfections,  commune  with  God  now  that  they  have
been  for  some  time  tried  in  the  way  of  goodness,
persevering  in  meditation  and  pra3er,  and  because  of  the
sweetness  they  found  therein  have  withdrawn  their
affections  from  the  things  of  this  world,  and  gained  a
certain  spiritual  strength  in  God,  whereby  they  in  some
measure  curb  their  love  of  the  creature,  and  are  able  for
the  love  of  God,  to  carry  a  slight  burden  of  dr3mess,
without  going  back  to  that  more  pleasant  time  when  their
spiritual  exercises  abounded  in  delights,  and  when  the  sun
of  the  divine  graces  shone  as  the}'  think,  more  clearly  upon
them.  God  is  now  changing  that  light  into  darkness,  and
sealing  up  the  door  of  the  fountain  of  the  sweet  spiritual
waters,  which  they  tasted  in  God  as  often  and  as  long  as
*  Ch.  i.  tCh.  vi.,i$7.


CHAP.  VIII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  29

they  wished.  For  when  they  were  weak  and  tender,  this
door  was  then  not  shut,  as  it  is  written,  '  Behold,  I  have
given  before  thee  an  opened  door,  which  no  man  can
shut ;  because  thou  hast  a  httle  strength,  and  hast  kept
My  word,  and  hast  not  denied  My  name.'"

4.  God  thus  leaves  them  in  darkness  so  great  that
they  know  not  whither  to  betake  themselves  with  their
imaginations  and  reflections  of  sense.  They  cannot
advance  a  single  step  in  meditation,  as  before,  the  inward
sense  now  being  overwhelmed  in  this  night,  and
abandoned  to  dryness  so  great  that  they  have  no  more
any  joy  or  sweetness  in  their  spiritual  exercises,  as  they
had  before ;  and  in  their  place  they  find  nothing  but
insipidity  and  bitterness.  For,  as  I  said  before,!  God
now,  looking  upon  them  as  somewhat  grown  in  grace,
weans  them  from  the  breasts  that  they  may  become
strong,  and  cast  their  swaddling-clothes  aside  :  He  carries
them  in  His  arms  no  longer,  and  shows  them  how  to  walk
alone.  All  this  is  strange  to  them,  for  all  things  seem  to
go  against  them.

5.  Recollected  persons  enter  the  dark  night  sooner
than  others,  after  they  have  begun  their  spiritual  course  ;
because  they  are  kept  at  a  greater  distance  from  the
occasions  of  falling  away,  and  because  they  correct  more
quickly  their  worldly  desires,  which  is  necessary  in  order
to  begin  to  enter  the  blessed  night  of  sense.  In  general,
there  elapses  no  great  length  of  time  after  they  have
begun  before  they  enter  the  night  of  sense,  and  most  of
them  do  enter  it,  for  they  generally  suffer  aridities.  The
Holy  Scriptures  throughout,  but    especially  the    Psalms

*  Apoc.  iii.  S.  t  Ch.  i.


30  THE  DARK  NIGHT  [bOOK  I.

and  the  prophetical  books,  furnish  many  illustrations  of
the  night  of  sense,  for  it  is  so  common  ;  but,  to  avoid
prolixity,  I  omit  them  for  the  present,  though  I  shall
make  use  of  some  of  them  later  on.


CHAPTER    IX.

Of  the  signs  by  which  it  ma}'  be  known  that  the  spiritual  man
is  walking  in  the  way  of  this  night  or  purgation  of  sense.

But  as  these  aridities  frequently  proceed,  not  from  this
night  and  purgation  of  the  sensitive  appetite,  but  from
sins  or  imperfections,  from  weakness  or  lukewarmness,
from  some  physical  derangement  or  bodily  indisposition,
I  shall  here  propose  certain  tests  by  which  we  may
ascertain  whether  a  particular  aridity  proceeds  from  the
purgation  of  sense,  or  from  any  one  of  the  vices  I  have
just  enumerated.  There  are  three  chief  tests  for  this
purpose :

2.  The  first  is  this  :  when  we  find  no  comfort  in  the
things  of  God,  and  none  also  in  created  things.  For
when  God  brings  the  soul  into  the  dark  night  in  order  to
wean  it  from  sweetness  and  to  purge  the  desire  of  sense,
He  does  not  allow  it  to  find  sweetness  or  comfort
anywhere.  It  is  then  probable,  in  such  a  case,  that  this
dryness  is  not  the  result  of  sins  or  of  imperfections
recently  committed  :  for  if  it  were,  we  should  feel  some
inclination  or  desire  for  other  things  than  those  of  God.
Whenever  we  give  the  reins  to  our  desires  in  the  way  of
any  imperfection,  our  desires  are  instantly  attracted  to  it,
much  or  little,  in  proportion  to  the  affection  for  it.  Rut
still,  inasmuch  as  this  absence  of  pleasure  in  the  things  of


CHAP,  IX.]  OF    THE    SOUfc.  31

heaven  and  of  earth  may  proceed  from  bodily  indisposition
or  a  melancholy  temperament,  which  frequently  cause
dissatisfaction  with  all  things,  the  second  test  and
condition  become  necessary.

3.  The  second  test  and  condition  of  this  purgation  are
that  the  memory  dwells  ordinarily  upon  God  with  a
painful  anxiety  and  carefulness,  the  soul  thinks  it  is  not
serving  God,  but  going  backwards,  because  it  is  no  longer
conscious  of  any  sweetness  in  the  things  of  God.  In  that
case  it  is  clear  that  this  weariness  of  spirit  and  aridity  are.
not  the  results  of  weakness  and  lukewarmness  ;  for  the
peculiarity  of  lukewarmness  is  the  want  of  earnestness
in,  and  of  interior  solicitude  for,  the  things  of  God.

4.  There  is,  therefore,  a  great  difference  between
dryness  and  lukewarmness,  for  the  latter  consists  in  great
remissness  and  weakness  of  will  and  spirit,  in  the  want  of
all  solicitude  about  serving  God.  The  true  purgative
aridity  is  accompanied  in  general  by  a  painful  anxiety,
because  the  soul  thinks  that  it  is  not  serving  God.
Though  this  be  occasionally  increased  by  melancholy  or
other  infirmity — so  it  sometimes  happens — yet  it  is  not
for  that  reason  without  its  purgative  effects  on  the  desires,
because  the  soul  is  deprived  of  all  sweetness,  and  its  sole
anxieties  are  referred  to  God.  For  when  mere  bodily
indisposition  is  the  cause,  all  that  it  does  is  to  produce
disgust  and  the  ruin  of  bodily  health,  without  the  desire
of  serving  God  which  belongs  to  the  purgative  aridity.
In  this  aridity,  though  the  sensual  part  of  man  be  greatly
depressed,  weak  and  sluggish  in  good  works,  by  reason  of
the  little  satisfaction  they  furnish,  the  spirit  is,  never-
theless, ready  and  strong.


32  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

5.  The  cause  of  this  dryness  is  that  God  is  transferring
to  the  spirit  the  goods  and  energies  of  the  senses,  which,
having  no  natural  fitness  for  them,  become  dry,  parched
up,  and  empty  ;  for  the  sensual  nature  of  man  is  helpless
in  those  things  which  belong  to  the  spirit  simply.  Thus
the  spirit  having  been  tasted,  the  flesh  becomes  weak
and  remiss ;  but  the  spirit,  having  received  its  proper
nourishment,  becomes  strong,  more  vigilant  and  careful
than  before,  lest  there  should  be  any  negligence  in  ser\-ing
God.  At  first  it  is  not  conscious  of  any  spiritual
sweetness  and  delight,  but  rather  of  aridities  and  distaste,
because  of  the  novelty  of  the  change.  The  palate
accustomed  to  sensible  sweetness  looks  for  it  still.  And
because  the  spiritual  palate  is  not  prepared  and  purified
for  so  delicious  a  taste  until  it  shall  have  been  for  some
time  disposed  for  it  in  this  arid  and  dark  night,  it  cannot
taste  of  the  spiritual  good,  but  rather  of  aridity  and
distaste,  because  it  misses  that  which  it  enjoyed  so  easily
before.

6.  These,  whom  God  begins  to  lead  through  the
solitudes  of  the  wilderness,  are  like  the  children  of  Israel,
who,  though  God  began  to  feed  them,  as  soon  as  they
were  in  the  wilderness,  with  the  manna  of  heaven,  which
was  so  sweet  that  as  it  is  written,  it  turned  to  what  every
man  liked,"''  were  more  sensible  to  the  loss  of  the  onions
and  flesh  of  Egypt — for  they  liked  them  and  had  revelled
in  them — than  to  the  delicious  sweetness  of  the  angelical
food.  So  they  wept  and  bewailed  the  flesh-pots  of  Egypt,
saying,  '  We  remember  the  fish  that  we  ate  in  Egypt
free-cost :  the  cucumbers  come  into  our  mind,   and    the

*  Exod.  xvi.  15,  W'isil.  xvi.  21.


CHAP.  IX.]  OF    THE    SOUL.        .  33

melons,  and  the  leeks,  and  the  onions,  and  the  garlic.'*
Our  appetite  becomes  so  depraved  that  we  long  for
miserable  trifles,  and  loathe  the  priceless  gifts  of  heaven.

7.  But  when  these  aridities  arise  in  the  purgative  way
of  the  sensual  appetite,  the  spirit  though  at  first  without
any  sweetness,  for  the  reasons  I  have  given,  is  conscious
of  strength  and  energy  to  act  because  of  the  substantial
nature  of  its  interior  food,  which  is  the  commencement
of  contemplation,  dim  and  dry  to  the  senses.  This
contemplation  is  in  general  secre4:,  and  unknown  to  him
who  is  admitted  into  it,  and  with  the  aridity  and
emptiness  which  it  produces  in  the  senses,  it  makes
the  soul  long  for  solitude  and  quiet,  without  the  power  of
reflecting  on  anything  distinctly,  or  even  desiring  to
do  so.

8.  Now,  if  they  who  are  in  this  state  knew  how  to  be
quiet,  to  disregard  every  interior  and  exterior  work, — for
the  accomplishment  of  which  they  labour, — to  be  without
solicitude  about  everything,  and  resign  themselves  into
the  hands  of  God,  with  a  loving  interior  obedience  to  His
voice,  they  would  have,  in  this  tranquillity,  a  most
delicious  sense  of  this  interior  food.  This  food  is  so
delicate  that,  in  general,  it  eludes  our  perceptions  if  we
make  any  special  effort  to  feel  it,  for,  as  I  am  saying,  it
does  its  work  when  the  soul  is  most  tranquil  and  free ;  it
is  like  the  air  which  vanishes  when  we  shut  our  hands  to
grasp  it.

9.  The  words  of  the  bridegroom  which,  addressed
to  the  bride,  in  the  Canticles,  are  applicable  to  this  matter  :
'  Turn  away  thine  eyes  from  me,  for  they  have  made  me

*  Numb.  xi.  5.


•34  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

flee  away.'*  For  this  is  God's  way  of  bringing  the  soul
into  this  state ;  the  road  by  which  He  leads  it  is  so
different  from  the  first,  that  if  it  will  do  anything  in  its
own  strength,  it  will  hinder  rather  than  aid  His  work.  It
was  far  otherwise  once.

10.  The  reason  is  this :  God  is  now  working  in  the
soul,  in  the  state  of  contemplation,  that  is,  when  it
advances  from  meditation  to  the  state  of  proficients,  in
such  a  way  as  to  seem  to  have  bound  up  all  the  interior
faculties,  leaving  no  help  in  the  understanding,  no
sweetness  in  the  will,  no  reflections  in  the  memory.
Therefore,  at  this  time,  all  that  the  soul  can  do  of  itself
ends,  as  I  have  said,  in  disturbing  the  peace  and  the
work  of  God  in  the  spirit  amid  the  dryness  of  sense.
This  peace,  being  spiritual  and  delicate,  effects  a  work
that  is  quiet  and  delicate,  pacific  and  utterly  alien  from
the  former  delights,  which  were  most  gross  and  sensual.
This  is  that  peace,  according  to  the  Psalmist,  which  God
speaks  in  the  soul  to  make  it  spiritual.  '  He  will  speak
peace  upon  His  people.'!  This  brings  us  to  the  third
test.

11.  The  third  sign  we  have  for  ascertaining  whether
this  dryness  be  the  purgation  of  sense,  is  inability
to  meditate  and  make  reflections,  and  to  excite  the
imagination,  as  before,  notwithstanding  all  the  efforts
we  may  make ;  for  God  begins  now  to  communicate
Himself,  no  longer  through  the  channel  of  sense,
as  formerly,  in  consecutive  reflections,  by  which  we
arranged  and  divided  our  knowledge,  but  in  pure
spirit,   which   admits    not    of   successive   reflections,   and

*  Cant,  vi.  4.  t  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  9.


CHAP,  IX.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  85

in  the  act  of  pure  contemplation,  to  which  neither  the
interior  nor  the  exterior  senses  of  our  lower  nature  can
ascend.  Hence  it  is  that  the  fancy  and  the  imagination
cannot  help  or  suggest  any  reflections,  nor  use  them  ever
afterwards.

12.  It  is  understood  here  that  this  embarrassment  and
dissatisfaction  of  the  senses  do  not  arise  out  of  any  bodily
ailment.  When  they  arise  from  this,  the  indisposition,
which  is  always  changeable,  having  ceased,  the  powers  of
the  soul  recover  their  former  energies,  and  find  their-
previous  satisfactions  at  once.  It  is  otherwise  in  the
purgation  of  the  appetite,  for  as  soon  as  we  enter  upon
this,  the  inability  to  make  our  meditations  continually
grows.  It  is  true  that  this  purgation  at  first,  is  not
continuous  in  some  persons,  for  they  are  not  altogether
without  sensible  sweetness  and  comfort — their  weakness
renders  their  rapid  weaning  inexpedient — nevertheless,  it
grows  upon  them  more  and  more,  and  the  operations  of
sense  diminish ;  if  they  are  going  on  to  perfection.
They,  however,  who  are  not  walking  in  the  way  of
contemplation,  meet  with  a  very  different  treatment,  for
the  night  of  aridities  is  not  continuous  with  them,  they
are  sometimes  in  it,  and  sometimes  not ;  they  are
at  one  time  unable  to  meditate,  and  at  another  able  as
before.

13,  God  leads  these  persons  into  this  night  only  to  tr}'
them  and  to  humble  them,  and  to  correct  their  desires,
that  they  may  not  grow  up  spiritual  gluttons,  and  not
for  the  purpose  of  leading  them  into  the  way  of  the  spirit,
which  is  contemplation.  God  does  not  raise  to  perfect
contemplation  everyone  that  is  tried   in  the  way  of  the

D  2


36  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK  I.

spirit,  and  He  alone  knoweth  why.  Hence  it  is  that
these  persons  are  never  whohy  weaned  from  the  breasts
of  meditations  and  reflections,  but  only,  as  I  have  said,  at
intervals  and  at  certain  seasons.


CHAPTER  X.

How  they  are  to  conduct  themselves  who  have  entered  the
dark  night.

During  the  aridities,  then,  of  the  night  of  sense — when
God  effects  the  change  of  which  I  have  spoken,*  drawing
the  soul  out  of  the  way  of  sense  into  that  of  the  spirit,
from  meditation  to  contemplation,  where  it  is  helpless  in
the  things  of  God,  so  far  as  its  own  powers  are  concerned,
as  I  have  said,t — spiritual  persons  have  to  endure  great
afflictions,  not  so  much  because  of  aridity,  but  because
they  are  afraid  that  they  will  be  lost  on  this  road ;
thinking  that  they  are  spiritually  ruined,  and  that  God
has  forsaken  them,  because  they  find  no  help  or
consolation  in  holy  things.  Under  these  circumstances,
they  weary  themselves,  and  strive,  as  they  were  wont,  to
fix  the  powers  of  the  soul  with  some  satisfaction  upon
some  matter  of  meditation,  imagining  when  they  cannot
do  this,  and  are  conscious  of  the  effort,  that  they  are
doing  nothing.  This  they  do  not  without  great  dislike
and  inward  unwillingness  on  the  part  of  the  soul,  which
enjoys  its  state  of  quietness  and  rest.

2,  In  thus  turning  away  from  this  state  they  make  no
progress  in  the  other,  because,  by  exerting  their  own
spirit,    they   lose   that    spirit    which    they    had,    that   of

*  Ch,  ix.,  §  5.  t  Ch.  viii..  §  4.


CHAP.  X.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  37

tranquillity  and  peace.  They  are  like  a  man  who  does  his
work  over  again  ;  or  who  goes  out  of  a  city  that  he  may
enter  it  once  more ;  or  who  lets  go  what  he  has  caught  in
hunting  that  he  may  hunt  it  again.  Their  labour  is  in
vain ;  for  they  will  find  nothing,  and  that  because  they
are  turning  back  to  their  former  ways,  as  I  have  said
already.  "'■'

3.  Under  these  circumstances,  if  they  meet  with  no  one
who  understands  the  matter,  these  persons  fall  away,  and
abandon  the  right  road ;  or  become  weak,  or  at  least  put
hindrances  in  the  way  of  their  further  advancement,
because  of  the  great  efforts  they  make  to  proceed  in  their
former  way  of  meditation,  fatiguing  their  natural  powers
beyond  measure.  They  think  that  their  state  is  the
result  of  negligence  or  of  sin.  All  their  own  efforts  are
now  in  vain,  because  God  is  leading  them  by  another  and
a  very  different  road,  that  of  contemplation.  Their  first
road  was  that  of  discursive  reflection,  but  the  second
knows  no  imagination  or  reasoning.

4.  It  behoves  those  who  find  themselves  in  this
condition  to  take  courage,  and  persevere  in  patience.
Let  them  not  afflict  themselves,  but  put  their  confidence
in  God,  who  never  forsakes  those  who  seek  Him  with  a
pure  and  upright  heart.  Neither  will  He  withhold  from
them  all  that  is  necessary  for  them  on  this  road  until  He
brings  them  to  the  clear  and  pure  light  of  love,  which  He
will  show  them  in  that  other  dark  night  of  the  spirit,  if
they  shall  merit  an  entrance  into  it.

5.  The  conduct  to  be  observed  in  the  night  of  sense  is
this :  -  in  nowise  have  recourse  to  meditations,  for,  as  I

*  Ascent  of  Mount  Carmel,  bk.  ii.,  ch.  xii.  §  10.


38  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

have  said,  the  time  is  now  past,  let  the  soul  be  quiet  and
at  rest,  though  they  may  think  they  are  doing  nothing,
that  they  are  losing  time,  and  that  their  lukewarmness  is
the  reason  of  their  unwillingness  to  employ  their  thoughts.
They  will  do  enough  if  they  keep  patience,  and  persevere
in  prayer ;  all  they  have  to  do  is  to  keep  their  soul  free,
unembarrassed,  and  at  rest  from  all  thoughts  and  all
knowledge,  not  anxious  about  their  meditation,  contenting
themselves  simply  with  directing  their  attention  lovingly
and  calmly  towards  God  ;  and  all  this  without  anxiety  or
effort,  or  immoderate  desire  to  feel  and  taste  His  presence.
For  all  such  efforts  disquiet  the  soul,  and  distract  it  from
the  calm  repose  and  sweet  tranquillity  of  contemplation  to
which  they  are  now  admitted.

6.  And  though  they  may  have  many  scruples  that
they  are  wasting  time,  and  that  it  may  be  better  for  them
to  betake  themselves  to  some  other  good  work,  seeing
that  in  prayer  and  meditation  they  are  become  helpless ;
yet  let  them  be  patient  with  themselves,  and  remain
quiet,  for  that  which  they  are  uneasy  about  is  their  own
satisfaction  and  liberty  of  spirit.  If  they  were  now  to
exert  their  interior  faculties,  they  would  simply  hinder
and  ruin  the  good  which,  in  that  repose,  God  is  working
in  the  soul ;  for  if  a  man  while  sitting  for  his  portrait
cannot  be  still,  but  moves  about,  the  painter  will  never  depict
his  face,  and  even  the  work  already  done  will  be  spoiled.

7.  In  the  same  way  when  the  soul  interiorly  rests,
every  action  and  passion,  or  anxious  consideration  at  that
time,  will  distract  and  disturb  it,  and  make  it  feel  the
dryness  and  emptiness  of  sense.  The  more  it  strives  to
hnd  help  in  affections  and  knowledge,  the  more  will  it  feel


CHAP.  XI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  39

the  deficiency  which  cannot  now  be  suppHed  in  that  way.
It  is  therefore  expedient  for  the  soul  which  is  in  this
condition  not  to  be  troubled  because  its  faculties  have
become  useless,  yea,  rather  it  should  desire  that  they  may
become  so  quickly ;  for  by  not  hindering  the  operation  of
infused  contemplation,  to  which  God  is  now  admitting  it,
the  soul  is  refreshed  in  peaceful  abundance,  and  set  on
fire  with  the  spirit  of  love,  which  this  contemplation,  dim
and  secret,  induces  and  establishes  within  it.

8.  Still,  I  do  not  mean  to  lay  down  a  general  rule  for-
the  cessation  from  meditation  ;  that  should  occur  when
meditation  is  no  longer  feasible,  and  only  then,  when  our
Lord,  either  in  the  way  of  purgation  and  affliction,  or  of
the  most  perfect  contemplation,  shall  make  it  impossible.
At  other  times,  and  on  other  occasions,  this  help  must  be
had  recourse  to,  namely,  meditation  on  the  life  and
passion  of  Christ,  which  is  the  best  means  of  purification
and  of  patience  and  of  security  on  the  road,  and  an
admirable  aid  to  the  highest  contemplation.  Contem-
plation is  nothing  else  but  a  secret,  peaceful,  and  loving
infusion  of  God,  which,  if  admitted,  will  set  the  soul  on
fire  with  the  spirit  of  love,  as  I  shall  show  in  the
explanation  of  the  following  verse.


CHAPTER    XI.

STANZA  I.
IVit/i  anxious  love  inflamed.

The  burning  fire  of  love,  in  general,  is  not  felt  at  first,  for
it  has  not  begun  to  burn,  either  because  of  our  natural
impurity,  or  because  the  soul,  not  understanding  its  own


40  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

state,  has  not  given  it,  as  I  have  said,*  a  peaceful  rest  within.

Sometimes,  however,  whether  it  be  so  or  not,  a  certain

longing   after    God   begins   to  be   felt ;    and  the  more  it

grows,  the  more  the  soul  feels  itself  touched  and  inflamed

with  the  love  of  God,  without  knowing  or  understanding

how  or  whence  that  love  comes,  except  that  at  times  this

burning  so  inflames  it  that  it  longs  earnestly  after  God.

David  in  this  night  said  of  himself,  '  My  heart  is  inflamed,

and  my  reins  are  changed,  and  I  am  brought  to  nothing,

and  knew  not.'t     That  is,  '  my  heart  hath  been  inflamed '

in  the    love  of  contemplation ;    '  my    reins,'    that  is,   my

tastes  and  affections  also,  have  been  changed  from  the

sensual  to  the  spiritual  way  by  this  holy  dryness,  and  in

my  denial  of  them,  and  '  I  am  brought  to  nothing,  and  I

knew  not.'     The  soul,  as  I  have  just  said,  not  knowing

the  way  it  goeth,  sees  itself  brought  to  nothing  as  to  all

things  of  heaven  and  earth,  wherein  it  delighted  before,

and  on  fire  with  love,  not  knowing  how.

2.     And   because   occasionally  this  fire  of  love    grows

in  the    spirit  greatly,  the   longings  of  the  soul  for  God

are    so    deep    that    the   very  bones  seem    to    dry    up    in

that    thirst,    the    bodily   health    to    wither,    the    natural

warmth     and    energies    to    perish    in    the    intensity    of

that    thirst  of  love.      The    soul  feels    it  to  be    a    living

thirst.      So  was  it  with    David  when  he  said,   '  My  soul

hath  thirsted  after   God,  the  strong,  living.'l      It    is   as

if  he  had  said,  the  thirst  of  my  soul    is   a   living  thirst.

We  may  say  of  this  thirst,  that  being  a  living  thirst,  it

kills.     Though  this  thirst  is  not    continuously,   but    only

*  Ascent  of  Mount  Carmel,  bk.  ii.,  ch.  i3/'§  4.
t  Ps.  Ixxii.  21,  22.  J  Ps.  xli.  3.


CHAP.  XI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  41

occasionally,    violent,    nevertheless    it    is    always    felt    in
some  degree.

3.  I  conimenced  by  observing  that  this  love,  in
general,  is  not  felt  at  first,  but  only  the  dryness  and
emptiness  of  which  I  am  speaking ;  and  then,  instead  of
love,  which  is  afterwards  enkindled,  what  the  soul  feels  in
the  dryness  and  the  emptiness  of  its  faculties  is  a  general
painful  anxiety  about  God,  and  a  certain  painful  misgiving
that  it  is  not  serving  Him.  But  a  soul  anxious  and
afflicted  for  His  sake,  is  a  sacrifice  not  a  little  pleasing
unto  God.  Secret  contemplation  keeps  the  soul  in  this
state  of  anxiety,  until,  in  the  course  of  time,  having
purged  the  sensual  nature  of  man,  in  some  degree,  of  its
natural  forces  and  affections  by  means  of  the  aridities  it
occasions,  it  shall  have  kindled  within  it  this  divine  love.
But  in  the  meantime,  like  a  sick  man  in  the  hands  of  his
phj^sician,  all  it  has  to  do,  in  the  dark  night  and  dry
purgation  of  the  desire,  is  to  suffer,  healing  its  many
imperfections  and  practising  many  virtues,  that  it  may
become  meet  for  the  divine  love,  of  which  I  shall  speak
while  explaining  the  following  line  :

O  happy  lot !

4.  When  God  establishes  the  soul  in  the  dark  night
of  sense,  that  He  may  purify,  prepare,  and  subdue  its
lower  nature,  and  unite  it  to  the  spirit,  by  depriving  it
of  light,  and  causing  it  to  cease  from  meditation — as  He
afterwards  establishes  it  also  in  the  spiritual  night,  that
He  may  purify  the  spirit,  and  prepare  it  for  union  with
Himself — the  soul  makes  a  gain  so  great,  though  it  does
not  think  so,  that  it  looks  upon  it  as  great  happiness  to


42  .  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

have  escaped  from  the  bondage  of  the  senses  of  its  lower
nature  in  that  happy  night,  and  therefore  it  sings — '  O
happy  lot !  '

5.  It  is  necessary  now  for  us  to  point  out  the  benefits
which  accrue  to  the  soul  in  this  night,  and  for  the  sake  of
which  it  pronounces  itself  happy  in  having  passed  through
it.     All  these  benefits  are  comprised  in  these  words  :

Forth  unobserved  I  went.

6.  This  going  forth  of  the  soul  is  to  be  understood  of
that  subjection  to  sense  under  which  it  laboured  when  it
was  seeking  after  God  in  weak,  narrow,  and  fitful  ways,
for  such  are  the  ways  of  man's  lower  nature.  It  then
fell  at  every  step  into  a  thousand  imperfections  and
ignorances,  as  I  showed  while  speaking  of  the  seven
capital  sins,  from  all  of  which  the  spiritual  man  is
delivered  in  the  dark  night  which  quenches  all  desire  in
all  things  whatsoever,  and  deprives  him  of  all  his  lights  in
meditation,  and  brings  with  it  other  innumerable  blessings
in  the  acquirement  of  virtue,  as  I  shall  now  show.

7.  It  will  be  a  great  joy  and  comfort  to  him  who
travels  on  this  road,  to  observe  how  that  which  seemed  so
rugged  and  harsh,  so  contrary  to  spiritual  sweetness,
works  in  him  so  great  a  good.  This  good  flows  from
going  forth,  as  I  am  saying,  as  to  all  affections  and
operations  of  the  soul,  from  all  created  things,  in  this
night,  and  journeying  towards  those  which  are  eternal,
which  is  a  great  happiness  and  a  great  good.  In  the  first
place,  because  the  desires  are  extinguished  in  all  things  ;
and  in  the  second  place,  because  they  are  few  who
persevere  and  enter  in  through  the  narrow  gate,    b\-  the


CHAP.  XII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  -43

strait  way  that  leadeth  to  life  :  '  How  narrow  is  the  gate
and  strait  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to  life,  and  few  there
are  that  lind  it !  '*  are  words  of  our  Lord.

8.  The  narrow  gate  is  this  night  of  sense.  The
soul  detaches  itself  from  sense  that  it  may  enter  on  it,
directing  itself  by  faith,  which  is  a  stranger  to  all  sense,
that  it  may  afterwards  travel  along  the  strait  road  of  the
other  night  of  the  spirit,  by  which  it  advances  towards
God  in  most  pure  faith,  which  is  the  means  of  union  with
Him.  This  road,  because  so  strait,  dark,  and  terrible — '
for  there  is  no  comparison,  as  I  shall  show,t  between  its
trials  and  darkness  and  those  of  the  night  of  sense — is
travelled  by  very  few,  but  its  blessings  are  so  much  the
more.  I  shall  begin  now  to  say  somewhat,  with  the
utmost  brevity,  of  the  blessings  of  the  night  of  sense,  that
I  may  pass  on  to  the  other.


CHAPTER  Xn.

Of  the  benefits  which  the  night  of  sense  brings  to  the  soul.

This  night  and  purgation  of  the  appetite  is  full  of
happiness  to  the  soul,  involving  grand  benefits,  though,
as  I  have  said,+  it  seems  to  it  as  if  all  were  lost.  As
Abraham  made  a  great  feast  on  the  day  of  Isaac's
weaning,§  so  there  is  joy  in  heaven  when  God  takes  a
soul  out  of  its  swaddling-clothes ;  when  He  takes  His
arms  from  under  it,  and  makes  it  walk  alone ;  when  He
denies  it  the  sweet  milk  of  the  breast  and  the  delicate
food  of  children,  and  gives  it  bread  with  the  crust  to  eat ;
*  S.  Matt.  vii.  14.        f  Bk.  ii.  ch.  xii.        X  Ch.  x.  §  3.        §  Gen.  xxi.  8.


■ii  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

when  it  begins  to  taste  the  bread  of  the  strong,  which,  in
the  aridities  and  darkness  of  sense,  is  given  to  the  spirit
emptied  and  dried  of  all  sensible  sweetness ;  namely,  the
bread  of  infused  contemplation,  of  which  I  have  spoken. "'■'
This  is  the  first  and  chief  benefit  which  the  soul  gains
here,  and  from  which  almost  all  the  others  flow,

2.  Of  these,  the  first  is  the  knowledge  of  self  and  its
own  vileness.  For  over  and  above  that  those  graces
which  God  bestows  on  the  soul,  are  ordinarily  included  in
this  knowledge  of  self,  these  aridities  and  the  emptines
of  the  faculties  as  to  their  former  abounding,  and  the
difiiculty  which  good  works  present,  bring  the  soul  to  a
knowledge  of  its  own  vileness  and  misery,  which  in  the
season  of  prosperity  it  saw  not.  This  truth  is  vividly
shadowed  forth  in  the  book  of  Exodus.  There  we  read
that  God,  about  to  humble  the  children  of  Israel  and
bring  them  to  a  knowledge  of  themselves,  commanded
them  to  lay  aside  their  ornaments  and  festival  attire,
which  they  ordinarily  wore  in  the  wilderness,  saying,t
'  Now,  lay  aside  thy  ornaments  ; '  that  is,  lay  aside  thy
festival  attire,  and  put  on  thy  working  dress,  that  thou
mayest  know  what  treatment  thou  hast  deserved.

3.  It  is  as  if  He  said  to  the  people  :  '  Inasmuch  as  the
ornaments  you  wear,  being  those  of  joy  and  festivity,  are
the  cause  why  you  think  not  meanly  of  yourselves — you
really  are  mean — lay  them  aside  ;  so  that  henceforth  clad
in  vile  garments,  you  may  acknowledge  that  you  deserve
nothing  better,  and  also  who  and  what  you  are.'

4.  Hereby  the  soul  learns  the  reality  of  its  own  misery,
which  before  it  knew  not.      For  in  the  day  of  festivit}-,

*  Ch.  vii.  §  S.  t  Exod.  wxiii.  5.


CHAP.  XII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  45

when  it  found  great  sweetness,  comfort,  and  help  in  God,
it  was  highly  satisfied  and  pleased,  thinking  that  it
rendered  some  service  to  God.  For  though  it  may  not
then  explicitly  say  so,  yet,  on  account  of  the  satisfaction
it  finds,  it  is  not  wholly  free  from  feeling  it.  But  when  it
has  put  on  the  garments  of  heaviness,  of  aridity  and
abandonment,  when  its  previous  lights  have  become
darkness,  it  possesses  and  retains  more  truly  that  excellent
and  necessary  virtue  of  self-knowledge,  counting  itself  for
nothing,  and  having  no  satisfaction  in  itself,  because  it  ■
sees  that  of  itself  it  does  and  can  do  nothing.

5.  This  diminished  satisfaction  with  self,  and  the
affliction  it  feels  because  it  thinks  that  it  is  not  serving
God,  God  esteems  more  highly  than  all  its  former
delights  and  all  its  good  works,  however  great  they  may
have  been  ;  for  they  were  occasions  of  many  imperfections
and  ignorances.  But  in  this  garb  of  aridity,  not  only
these,  of  which  I  am  speaking,  but  other  benefits  also  of
which  I  shall  presently  speak,  and  many  more  than  I  can
speak  of,  flow  as  from  their  proper  source  and  fount,  that  of
self-knowledge.

6.  In  the  first  place,  the  soul  learns  to  commune  with
God  with  more  respect  and  reverence ;  always  necessary
in  converse  with  the  Most  High.  Now,  in  its  prosperous
days  of  sweetness  and  consolation,  the  soul  was  less
observant  of  reverence,  for  the  favours  it  then  received,
rendered  the  desire  somewhat  bold  with  God,  and  less
reverent  than  it  should  have  been.  Thus  it  was  with
Moses,  when  he  heard  the  voice  of  God  ;  for  carried  away
by  the  delight  he  felt,  he  was  venturing,  without  further
consideration,  to  draw  near,  if  God  had  not  commanded


46  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [hOOK    I.

him  to  stop,  and  put  off  his  shoes,  saying,  '  Come  not
nigh  hither ;  put  off  the  shoes  from  thy  feet.'*  This
teaches  us  how  reverently  and  discreetly  in  spiritual
detachment  we  are  to  converse  with  God.  When  Moses
had  become  obedient  to  the  voice,  he  remained  so
reverent  and  considerate,  that  not  only  did  he  not  venture  to
draw  near,  but,  in  the  words  of  Scripture,  '  durst  not  look
at  God.'  t  For  having  put  off  the  shoes  of  desire  and
sweetness,  he  recognised  profoundly  his  own  wretchedness
in  the  sight  of  God,  for  so  it  became  him  when  about  to
listen  to  the  words  of  God.

7.  The  condition  to  vv^hich  God  brought  Job  in  order
that  he  might  converse  with  God,  was  not  that  of  delight
and  bliss,  of  which  he  there  speaks,  and  to  which  he  had
been  accustomed.  God  left  him  in  misery,  naked  on  a
dung-hill,  abandoned  and  even  persecuted  by  his  friends,
filled  with  bitterness  and  grief,  covered  with  worms  :t
then  it  was  that  the  Most  High,  Who  lifteth  up  '  the  poor
out  of  the  dung-hill, '§  was  pleased  to  communicate
Himself  to  Job  in  greater  abundance  and  sweetness,
revealing  to  him  '  the  deep  m3^steries  of  His  wisdom, '||  as
He  had  never  done  before  in  the  days  of  Job's  prosperity.

8.  And  now  that  I  have  to  speak  of  it,  I  must  here
point  out  another  great  benefit  of  the  dark  night  and
aridity  of  the  sensual  appetite ;  the  fulfilment  of  the
words  of  the  prophet,  '  Thy  light  shall  rise  up  in
darkness, 'H  God  enlightens  the  soul,  making  it  see  not
only  its  own  misery  and  meanness,  as  I  have  said,  but
also  His  grandeur  and  majesty.     When  the  desires  are

*  Exod.  iii.  5.  f  lb.  6.  J  Job  ii.  8  ;  xxx.  17,  18.

§  Ps.  cxii.  7.  !1  Job  xxxviii.  ^  Is.  Iviii.  10.


CHAP.  XII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  47

quelled,  and  sensible  joy  and  consolation  withdrawn,  the
understanding  remains  free  and  clear  for  the  reception  of
the  truth,  for  sensible  joy  and  the  desire  even  of  spiritual
things  darken  and  perplex  the  mind,  but  the  trials  and
aridities  of  sense  also  enlighten  and  quicken  the  under-
standing in  the  words  of  Isaias,*  '  Vexation  alone  shall
give  understanding  in  the  hearing.'  Vexation  shall  make
us  understand  how  God  in  His  divine  wisdom  proceeds  to
instruct  a  soul,  emptied  and  cleansed — for  such  it  must

be  before  it  can  be  the  recipient  of  the  divine  inflowing

in  a  supernatural  way,  in  the  dark  and  arid  night  of  contem-
plation, which  He  did  not  do,  because  it  was  given  up  to
its  former  sweetness  and  joy.

9.  The  same  prophet  Isaias  sets  this  truth  before  us
with  great  clearness,  saying,  '  Whom,  shall  he  teach
knowledge  ?  and  whom  shall  he  make  to  understand  the
thing  heard  ?  Them  that  are  weaned  from  the  milk,  that
are  plucked  away  from  the  breasts. 't  The  temper  of
mind,  then,  meet  for  the  divine  inflowing  is  not  so  much
the  milk  of  spiritual  sweetness,  nor  the  breasts  of  sweet
reflections  in  the  powers  of  sense,  which  the  soul  once  had,
as  the  failure  of  the  first  and  withdrawal  from  the  other.
Therefore,  if  we  would  listen  to  the  voice  of  the  great
King  with  due  reverence,  the  soul  must  stand  upright,
and  not  lean  on  the  affections  of  sense  for  support.  As
the  prophet  Habacuc  said  of  himself,  '  I  will  stand  upon
my  watch,  and  fix  my  step  upon  the  munition,  and  I  will
behold  to  see  what  may  be  said  to  me.'t  To  stand  upon
the  watch,  is  to  cast  off  all  desires ;  to  fix  the  step,  is  to
cease  from  reflections  of  sense,  that  I  may  behold  and

*  Is.  xxviii.  ig.  f  lb.  g.  +  Habac.  ii.  i.


■iy  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

understand  what  God  will  speak  to  me.  Thus  out  of  this
night  springs  first  the  knowledge  of  one's  self,  and  on  that,
as  on  a  foundation,  is  built  up  the  knowledge  of  God.
'  Let  me  know  myself,'  saith  St.  Augustin,  'and  I  shall  then
know  Thee,  O  my  God,'  for,  as  the  philosophers  say,  one
extreme  is  known  by  another.

10.  In  order  to  show  more  fully  how  effectual  is  the
night  of  sense,  in  its  aridity  and  desolation,  to  enlighten
the  soul  more  and  more,  I  produce  here  the  words  of  the
Psalmist,  which  so  clearly  explain  how  greatly  efficacious
is  this  night  in  bringing  forth  the  knowledge  of  God  :  '  In
a  desert  land,  and  inaccessible,  and  without  water ;  so  in
the  holy  have  I  appeared  to  Thee,  that  I  might  see  Thy
strength  and  Thy  glory.'*  The  Psalmist  does  not  say
here — and  it  is  worthy  of  observation — that  his  previous
sweetness  and  delight  were  any  dispositions  or  means
whereby  he  might  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of
God,  but  rather  that  aridity  and  emptying  of  the  powers
of  sense  spoken  of  here  as  the  barren  and  dry  land.

11.  Moreover,  he  does  not  say  that  his  reflections  and
meditations  on  divine  things,  with  which  he  was  once
familiar,  had  led  him  to  the  knowledge  and  contemplation
of  God's  power,  but,  rather,  his  inability  to  meditate  on
God,  to  form  reiiections  by  the  help  of  his  imagination  ;
that  is  the  inaccessible  land.  The  means,  therefore,  of
attaining  to  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  ourselves,  is
the  dark  night  with  all  its  aridities  and  emptiness ;
though  not  in  the  fulness  and  abundance  of  the  other
night  of  the  spirit ;  for  the  knowledge  that  comes  by  this
is,  as  it  were,  the  beginning  of  the  other.

*  Ps.  Ixii.  3.


CHAP.  XII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  49

12.  Amid  the  aridities  and  emptiness  of  this  night  of
the  desires,  the  soul  acquires  also  spiritual  humility,
which  is  the  virtue  opposed  to  the  first  capital  sin,  which,
I  said,*  is  spiritual  pride.  The  humility  acquired  by
self-knowledge  purifies  the  soul  from  all  the  imperfections
into  which  it  fell  in  the  day  of  its  prosperity.  For  now,
seeing  itself  so  parched  and  miserable,  it  does  not  enter
into  its  thoughts,  even  for  a  moment,  to  consider  itself
better  than  others,  or  that  it  has  outstripped  them  on  the
spiritual  road,  as  it  did  before ;  on  the  contrary,  it
acknowledges  that  others  are  better.

13.  Out  of  this  grows  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  for  it
now  esteems  them,  and  no  longer  judges  them  as  it  used
to  do,  when  it  looked  upon  itself  as  exceedingly  fervent,
and  upon  others  as  not.  Now  it  sees  nothing  but  its  own
misery,  which  it  keeps  so  constantly  before  its  eyes  that
it  can  look  upon  nothing  else.  This  state  is  admirably
shown  by  David  himself,  when  in  this  dark  night,  saying,
'  I  was  dumb,  and  was  humbled,  and  kept  silence  from
good  things,  and  my  sorrow  was  renewed.'!  All  the  good
of  his  soul  seemed  to  him  so  mean  that  he  could  not
speak  of  it ;  he  was  silent  as  to  the  good  of  others,
because  of  the  pain  of  the  knowledge  of  his  own
wretchedness.

14.  In  this  state,  too,  men  are  submissive  and  obedient
in  the  spiritual  way,  for  when  they  see  their  own
wretchedness  they  not  only  listen  to  instruction,  but
desire  to  have  it  from  any  one  who  will  guide  their  steps
and  tell  them  what  they  ought  to  do.  That  presumption
which  sometimes  possessed  them   in  their  prosperity  is

*  Ch.  ii.  t  Ps.  xxxviii.  3.


50  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [BOOK    I.

now  gone  ;  and,  finally,  all  those  imperfections  are  swept
clean  away  to  which  I  referred  when  I  was  treating  of
spiritual  pride.


CHAPTER  XIII.

Of  other  benefits  which  the  night  of  sense  brings  to  the  soul.

The  imperfections  of  spiritual  avarice,  under  the  influence
of  which  the  soul  coveted  this  and  that  spiritual  good,
and  was  never  satisfied  with  this  or  that  practice  of
devotion,  because  of  its  eagerness  for  the  sweetness  it
found  therein,  become  now,  in  this  arid  and  dark  night,
sufficiently  corrected.  For  when  the  soul  finds  no
sweetness  and  delight,  as  it  was  wont  to  do,  in  spiritual
things,  but  rather  bitterness  and  vexation,  it  has  recourse
to  them  with  such  moderation  as  to  lose  now,  perhaps,
through  defect,  what  it  lost  before  through  excess.
Though,  in  general,  to  those  who  are  brought  to  this
night,  God  gives  humility  and  readiness,  but  without
sweetness,  in  order  that  they  may  obey  Him  solely
through  love.  Thus  they  detach  themselves  from  many
things,  because  they  find  no  sw^eetness  in  them.

2.  The  soul  is  purified,  also,  from  those  impurities  of
spiritual  luxury  of  which  I  have  spoken  before,"*  in  this
aridity  and  bitterness  of  sense  which  it  now  finds  in
spiritual  things ;  for  those  impurities  are  commonly  said
to  proceed  generally  from  the  sw^eetness  which  flowed
occasionally  from  the  spirit  into  the  sense.

3.  The  imperfections  of  the  fourth  sin,  spiritual
glutton)',  from  which  the   soul  is  delivered   in  the  dark

*  Ch.  iv.


CHAP.  XIII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  51

night,  have  been  discussed  in  a  former  chapter,*  though
not  all,  because  they  cannot  be  numbered.  Nor  shall  I
speak  of  them  here,  for  I  wish  to  conclude  the  subject  of
this  night,  that  I  may  pass  on  to  the  other,  with  regard
to  which  I  have  serious  things  to  write.  Let  it  suffice
for  a  knowledge  of  the  innumerable  advantages  which
the  soul,  in  addition  to  those  already  mentioned,  gains,  in
this  night,  wherewith  to  resist  spiritual  gluttony,  to  say
that  it  is  set  free  from  the  imperfections  there  enumerated,
and  from  many  other  and  greater  evils  than  those
described,  into  which  many  fall,  as  we  learn  by  experience,
because  they  have  not  corrected  their  desires  in  the
matter  of  spiritual  gluttony.

4.  For  when  God  has  brought  the  soul  into  this
arid  and  dark  night.  He  so  curbs  desire  and  bridles
concupiscence  that  it  can  scarcely  feed  at  all  upon  the
sensible  sweetness  of  heavenly  or  of  earthly  things,  and
this  so  continuously  that  it  corrects,  mortifies,  and
controls  its  concupiscence  and  desires,  so  that  the  forces
of  its  passions  seem  to  be  destroyed.  Marvellous  benefits
flow  from  that  spiritual  soberness,  in  addition  to  those  I
have  mentioned  ;  for  because  it  mortifies  concupiscence
and  desire,  the  soul  dwells  in  spiritua.1  tranquillity  and
peace  ;  for,  where  concupiscence  and  desire  have  no  sway,
there  is  no  trouble,  but,  rather,  the  peace  and  consolation
of  God.

5.  Another    benefit     comes     from    this ;    a    constant

remembrance  of  God,  with  the  fear  and  dread  that  it  is,

as  I  have  said,t  going  back  on  the  spiritual  way.     This  is

a  great  benefit,  and  not  one  of  the  least,  of  aridity  and

*  Ch.  vi.  t  Ch.  ix  §  3.

E2


•~>2  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

purgation  of  the  appetite,  for  the  soul  is  purified  and
cleansed  thereby,  from  those  imperfections  which  clung
to  it  because  of  the  affections  and  desires,  the  effect  of
which  is  to  darken  and  deaden  the  soul.
■  6.  Another  very  great  benefit  to  the  soul  in  this  night
is,  that  it  practices  many  virtues  at  once,  as  patience  and
longsuffering,  which  are  well  tried  in  these  aridities,
the  soul  persevering  in  its  spiritual  exercises  without
sweetness  or  comfort.  The  love  of  God  is  practised,
because  it  is  no  longer  attracted  by  sweetness  and
consolation,  but  by  God  only.  The  virtue  of  fortitude
also  is  practised,  because  amid  these  difficulties,  and  the
absence  of  sweetness  in  good  works  from  which  the  soul
now  suffers,  it  gathers  strength  from  weakness,  and
so  becomes  strong :  finally,  all  the  virtues,  cardinal,
theological,  and  moral,  are  practised  amidst  these
aridities.

7.  In  this  night  the  soul  obtains  these  four  benefits
here  mentioned,  namely,  delight  of  peace,  constant
remembrance  of  God,  purity  and  cleanness  of  soul,  the
practice  of  all  the  virtues  of  which  I  have  just  spoken.
So  David  speaks  from  his  own  experience  when  he  was  in
this  night.  '  My  soul,'  he  saith,  'refuses  to  be  comforted;
I  was  mindful  of  God  and  was  delighted,  and  was
exercised,  and  my  spirit  fainted."  He  adds  forthwith  :  '  I
meditated  in  the  night  with  my  own  heart,  and  I  was
exercised,  and  I  swept  my  spirit  '*  clean  of  all  affections.

8.  The  soul  is  purified  also  in  this  aridity  of  the
desires  from  the  imperfections  of  the  other  three  capital
sins  of  which  I  have  spoken, t  envy,  anger,  and  sloth,  and

*  Ps.  Ixxvi.  3,  4,  7.  t  Ch.  vii.


CHAP.  XIII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  53

acquires  the  opposite  virtues.  Softened  and  humbled  by
these  aridities,  by  the  hardships,  temptations,  and
afflictions  which  in  this  night  try  it,  it  becomes  gentle
with  God,  with  itself,  and  with  its  neighbour.  It  is  no
longer  impatiently  angry  with  itself  because  of  its  own
faults,  nor  with  its  neighbour  because  of  his  ;  neither  is  it
discontented  or  given  to  unseemly  complaints  against
God  because  He  does  not  sanctify  it  at  once.  As  to  envy,
the  soul  is  in  charity  with  everyone,  and  if  any  envy
remain,  it  is  no  longer  vicious  as  before,  when  the  soul
was  afflicted  when  it  saw  others  preferred  to  it,  and  raised
higher ;  for  now  it  yields  to  everyone  considering  its  own
misery,  and  the  envy  it  feels,  if  it  feels  any,  is  a  virtuous
envy,  a  desire  to  emulate  them,  which  is  great  virtue.

9.  The  sloth  and  weariness  now  felt  in  spiritual  things
are  no  longer  vicious  as  they  were  once.  They  were  once
the  fruit  of  spiritual  dehghts  which  the  soul  experienced
at  times,  and  sought  after  when  it  had  them  not.  But
this  present  weariness  proceeds  not  from  the  failure  of
sweetness,  for  God  has  taken  it  all  away  in  this  purgation
of  the  desire.

10.  Other  innumerable  benefits  beside  these,  flow
from  this  arid  contemplation ;  for,  in  the  midst  of  these
aridities  and  hardship,  God  communicates  to  the  soul,
when  it  least  expects  it,  spiritual  sweetness,  most  pure
love,  and  spiritual  knowledge  of  the  most  exalted  kind,  of
greater  worth  and  profit  than  any  of  which  it  had  previous
experience,  though  at  first  the  soul  may  not  think  so,  for
the  spiritual  influence  now  communicated  is  most  delicate,
and  imperceptible  by  sense.

11.  Finally,   as   the   soul   is  purified   from   all   sensual


54  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

affections  and  desires,  it  attains  to  liberty  of  spirit,
wherein  the  twelve  fruits  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  had.  It
is  also  delivered  in  a  most  wonderful  way  from  the  hands
of  its  three  enemies — the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh  ;
for  when  all  the  delight  and  sweetness  of  sense  are
quenched,  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh  have  no
weapons  and  no  strength  wherewith  to  assail  it.

12.  These  aridities,  then,  make  the  soul  love  God  in  all
pureness,  for  now  it  is  influenced  not  by  the  pleasure  and
sweetness  which  it  found  in  its  works — as  perhaps  it  was
when  that  sweetness  was  present — but  by  the  sole  desire
to  please  God.  It  is  not  presumptuous  and  self-satisfied,
as  perhaps  it  may  have  been  in  the  day  of  its  prosperity,
but  timid  and  diffident,  without  any  self-satisfaction.
Herein  consists  that  holy  fear  by  which  virtues  are
preserved  and  grow.  This  aridity  quenches  concupiscence,
and  our  natural  spirits,  as  I  said  before  ;*  for  now,  when
God  infuses,  from  time  to  time,  His  own  sweetness  into
the  soul,  it  would  be  strange  if  it  found  by  any  efforts
of  its  own  as  has  been  already  said,t  any  comfort  or
sweetness  in  any  spiritual  act  or  practice.

13.  The  fear  of  God  and  the  desire  to  please  Him
increase  in  this  arid  night ;  for  as  the  breasts  of  sensuality
which  nourished  and  sustained  the  desires  which  the
soul  followed  after,  become  dry,  nothing  remains  in  that
aridity  and  detachment  but  an  anxious  desire  to  serve
God,  which  is  most  pleasing  unto  Him,  as  it  is  written  :
'  a  sacrifice  to  God  is  an  afflicted  spirit.'!

14.  When  the  soul  beholds  the  many  and  great
benefits  which  have  fallen  to  its  lot  in  this  arid  purgation

*  Ch.  iv.  §  g.  t  Ch.  i.\.  !^  11.  +  i's.  1.  19.


CHAP.  XIV.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  55

through  which  it  passed,  it  cries  out  with  truth,  '  oh,
happy  lot,  forth  unobserved  I  went.'  I  escaped  from
the  bondage  and  thraldom  of  my  sensual  desires  and
affections,  unobserved,  so  that  none  of  my  three  enemies
were  able  to  hinder  me.  These  enemies  of  the  soul
already  spoken  of*  so  bind  and  imprison  it  in  sensual
desires  and  affections,  that  it  cannot  go  forth  out  of  itself
to  the  liberty  of  the  perfect  love  of  God ;  without  them
they  cannot  attack  it.

15.  Hence,  when  by  continual  mortification  the  four-
passions  of  the  soul  are  calmed,  that  is,  joy,  grief,  hope,
and  fear,  when  the  natural  desires  are  lulled  to  sleep  in
our  sensual  nature  by  persistent  aridities,  when  the
senses  and  the  interior*  powers  of  the  soul  cease  to  be
active,  and  meditation  no  longer  pursued,  as  has  been
already  said,t  which  is  the  household  of  the  lower  part  of
the  soul,  then  the  liberty  of  the  spirit  is  unassailable  by
these  enemies  and  the  house  remains  calm  and  tranquil
as  the  words  that  follow  show.


CHAPTER    XIV.

The  last  line  of  the  first  stanza  explained.

'  My  house  being  now  at  rest.'  When  the  house  of
sensuality  was  at  rest,  that  is,  when  the  passions  were
mortified,  concupiscence  quenched,  the  desires  subdued
and  lulled  to  sleep  in  the  blessed  night  of  the  purgation
of  sense,  the  soul  began  to  set  out  on  the  way  of  the
spirit,  the  way  of  proficients,  which  is    also    called  the

*  ^  II.  t  Ch.  ix.  8.


56  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    I.

illuminative  way,  or  the  way  of  infused  contemplation,
wherein  God  Himself  teaches  and  refreshes  the  soul
without  meditation  or  any  active  efforts  that  itself  may
deliberately  make.  Such,  as  I  have  said,  is  this  night
and  purgation  of  the  senses.

2.  But  this  night,  in  their  case  who  are  to  enter  into
that  other  more  awful  night  of  the  spirit,  that  they  may
go  forward  to  the  divine  union  of  the  love  of  God — it  is
not  everyone,  but  only  a  few  who  do  so  in  general — is
attended  with  heavy  trials  and  temptations  of  sense  of
long  continuance,  in  some  longer  than  in  others ;  for  to
some  is  sent  the  angel  of  satan,  the  spirit  of  impurity,  to
buffet  them  with  horrible  and  violent  temptations  of  the
flesh,  to  trouble  their  minds  with  filthy  thoughts,  and
their  imaginations  with  representations  of  sin  most
vividly  depicted  ;  which,  at  times,  becomes  an  affliction
more  grievous  than  death.

3.  At  other  times  this  night  is  attended  by  the  spirit
of  blasphemy  ;  the  thoughts  and  conceptions  are  overrun
with  intolerable  blasphemies,  which  now  and  then  are
suggested  to  the  imagination  with  such  violence  as
almost  to  break  forth  in  words ;  this,  too,  is  a  heavy
affliction.

4.  Again,  another  hateful  spirit,  called  by  the  prophet,
'  the  spirit  of  giddiness,'*  comes  to  torment  them.  This
spirit  so  clouds  their  judgment  that  they  are  filled  with  a
thousand  scruples  and  perplexities  so  embarrassing  that
they  can  never  satisfy  themselves  about  them,  nor  submit
their  judgment  therein  to  the  counsel  and  direction  of
others.      This    is    one   of  the  most  grievous   stings  and

*  Is.  xix.  14.


CHAP.  XIV.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  57

horrors  of  this   night,   approaching  very  nearly  to  that
which  takes  place  in  the  night  of  the  spirit.

5.  God  ordinarily  sends  these  violent  storms  and
temptations,  in  the  night  of  the  purgation  of  the  sense  to
those  whom  He  is  about  to  lead  afterwards  into  the  other
night — though  all  do  not  enter  in — that  being  thus
chastened  and  buffeted  they  may  prove  themselves,
dispose  and  inure  sense  and  faculties  for  the  union  of  the
divine  wisdom  to  which  they  are  to  be  then  admitted.
For  if  the  soul  be  not  tempted,  tried,  and  proved  in
temptations  and  afflictions,  sense  will  never  attain  to
wisdom.  That  is  why  it  is  said  in  Ecclesiasticus,*  '  What
doth  he  know,'  asks  the  wise  man,  '  that  hath  not  been
tried  ?  ...  he  that  hath  no  experience  knoweth
little.  ...  he  that  hath  not  been  tried,  what  manner
of  things  doth  he  know  ? '  Jeremias  also  bears  witness
to  the  same  truth,  saying :  '  thou  hast  chastised  me,  and
I  was  instructed. 't  The  most  proper  form  of  this
chastening,  for  him  who  will  apply  himself  unto  wisdom,
are  those  interior  trials  of  which  I  am  now  speaking.
They  are  that  which  most  effectually  purges  sense  of  all
sweetness  and  consolations,  to  which,  by  reason  of  our
natural  weakness,  we  are  addicted,  and  by  them  the  soul
is  really  humbled  that  it  may  be  prepared  for  its  coming
exaltation.

6.  But  how  long  the  soul  will  continue  in  this  fast  and
penance  of  sense,  cannot  with  certainty  be  told,  because
it  is  not  the  same  in  all,  neither  are  all  subjected  to  the
same  temptations.  These  trials  are  measured  by  the
divine  will,   and  are  proportioned    to  the  imperfections,

*  Eccles.  xxxiv.  g,  10,  11.  t  Jerem.  xxxi.  18.


58  THE    DARK    NIGHT  BOOK    I.

many  or  few,  to  be  purged  away :  and  also  to  the  degree
of  union  in  love  to  which  God  intends  to  raise  the  soul ;
that  is  the  measure  of  its  humiliations,  both  in  their
intensity  and  duration.

7.  Those  who  are  strong  and  more  able  to  bear
suffering,  are  purified  in  more  intense  trials,  and  in  less
time.  But  those  who  are  weak  are  purified  very  slowly,
with  weak  temptations,  and  the  night  of  their  purgation
is  long :  their  senses  are  refreshed  from  time  to  time  lest
they  should  fall  away ;  these,  however,  come  late  to  the
pureness  of  their  perfection  in  this  life,  and  some  of  them
never.  These  persons  are  not  clearly  in  the  purgative
night,  nor  clearly  out  of  it ;  for  though  they  make  no
progress,  yet  in  order  that  they  may  be  humble  and  know
themselves,  God  tries  them  for  a  season  in  aridities  and
temptations,  and  visits  them  with  His  consolations  at
intervals  lest  they  should  become  faint-hearted,  and  seek
for  comfort  in  the  ways  of  the  world.

8.  From  other  souls,  still  weaker,  God,  as  it  were,
hides  Himself,  that  He  may  try  them  in  His  love,  for
without  this  hiding  of  His  face  from  them  they  would
never  learn  how  to  approach  Him.  But  those  souls  that
are  to  enter  so  blessed  and  high  a  state  as  this  of  the
union  of  love,  however  quickly  God  may  lead  them,  tarry
long,  in  general,  amidst  aridities,  as  we  see  by  experience.
Having  now  brought  the  first  book  to  a  close,  I  proceed
to  treat  of  the  second  night.


CHAP.  1.1  OF    THE    SOUL.  59


BOOK  II.


OF    THE    NIGHT    OF    THE    SPIRIT.


CHAPTER  I.

The  Second  Night;  that  of  the  spirit.     When  it  begins.

The  soul,  which  God  is  leading  onwards,  enters  not  into
the  union  of  love  at  once  when  it  has  passed  through  the
aridities  and  trials  of  the  first  purgation  and  night  of
sense ;  yea,  rather  it  must  spend  some  time,  perhaps
years,  after  quitting  the  state  of  beginners,  in  exercising
itself  in  the  state  of  proficients.  In  this  state — as  one
released  from  a  rigorous  imprisonment  —  it  occupies
itself  in  divine  things  with  much  greater  freedom  and
satisfaction,  and  its  joy  is  more  abundant  and  interior
than  it  was  in  the  beginning  before  it  entered  the  night  of
sense ;  its  imagination  and  faculties  are  not  held,  as
hitherto,  in  the  bonds  of  meditation  and  spiritual
reflections ;  it  now  rises  at  once  to  most  tranquil  and
loving  contemplation,  and  finds  spiritual  sweetness
without  the  fatigue  of  meditation.

2.  However,  as  the  purgation  of  the  soul  is  still
somewhat  incomplete — the  chief  part,  the  purgation  of
the  spirit,  being  wanting,  without  which,  by  reason  of  the
union  of  our  higher  and  lower  nature,  man  being  an
individual,  the  purgation  of  sense,  however  violent  it  may
have  been,  is  not  finished  and  perfect — the  soul  will  never


60  '  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

be  free  from  aridities,  darkness,  and  trials,  sometimes
much  more  severe  than  in  the  past,  which  are,  as  it  were,
signs  and  heralds  of  the  coming  night  of  the  spirit,  though
not  so  lasting  as  that  expected  night  ;  for  when  the  days
or  the  season  of  this  tempestuous  night  have  passed,  the
soul  recovers  at  once  its  wonted  serenity.  It  is  in  this
way  that  God  purifies  some  souls  who  are  not  to  rise  to
so  high  a  degree  of  love  as  others.  He  admits  them  at
intervals  into  the  night  of  contemplation  or  spiritual
purgation,  causing  the  sun  to  shine  upon  them,  and  then
to  hide  its  face,  according  to  the  words  of  the  Psalmist :
'He  sendeth  His  crystal,'  that  is  contemplation,  'like
morsels.'*  These  morsels  of  dim  contemplation  are,
however,  never  so  intense  as  is  that  awful  night  of
contemplation  of  which  I  am  speaking,  and  in  which  God
purposely  places  the  soul,  that  He  may  raise  it  to  the
divine  union.

3.  That  sweetness  and  interior  delight,  which
proficients  find  so  easily  and  so  plentifully,  come  now  in
greater  abundance  than  before,  overflowing  into  the
senses  more  than  they  were  wont  to  do  previous  to  the
purgation  of  sense.  The  senses  now  being  more  pure,
can  taste  of  the  sweetness  of  the  spirit  in  their  wa}^  with
greater  ease.  But  as  the  sensual  part  of  the  soul  is  weak,
without  any  capacity  for  the  strong  things  of  the  spirit,
they  who  are  in  the  state  of  proficients  by  reason  of  the
spiritual  communications  made  to  the  sensual  part,  are
subject  therein  to  great  infirmities  and  sufferings,  and
physical  derangements,  and  consequently  weariness  of
mind,  as  it  is  written :  '  the  corruptible  body  .  .  .  presseth
*  Ps.  cxlvii.   17.


CHAP.   II.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  61

down  the  mind.'*  Hence  the  communications  made  to
these  cannot  be  very  strong,  intense,  or  spiritual,  such  as
they  are  required  to  be  for  the  divine  union  with  God,
because  of  the  weakness  and  corruption  of  the  sensual
part  which  has  a  share  in  them.

4.  Here  is  the  source  of  ecstasies,  raptures,  and
dislocation  of  the  bones  which  always  happen  whenever
these  communications  are  not  purely  spiritual ;  that  is,
granted  to  the  mind  alone,  as  in  the  case  of  the  perfect,
already  purified  in  the  second  night  of  the  spirit.  In
these,  raptures  and  physical  sufferings  have  no  place,  for
they  enjoy  liberty  of  spirit  with  unclouded  and
unsuspended  senses.  To'  make  it  clear  how  necessary
it  is  for  proficients  to  enter  into  the  night  of  the  spirit,  I
will  now  proceed  to  point  out  certain  imperfections  and
dangers  which  beset  them.


CHAPTER  II.

Of  certain  imperfections  of  proficients.

Proficients  labour  under  two  kinds  of  imperfections ;
one  habitual,  the  other  actual.  The  habitual  imper-
fections are  their  affections  and  imperfect  habits  which
still  remain,  like  roots,  in  the  mind,  where  the  purgation
of  sense  could  not  penetrate.  The  difference  between
the  purgation  of  these  and  of  the  others,  is  like  the
difference  between  plucking  out  a  root,  and  tearing  off
a  branch,  or  removing  a  fresh,  and  an  old  stain.  For,
as    I    have    said,t    the    purgation    of    sense    is,    for   the

*  Wisd.  ix.   15.  t  Bk.  i,  ch.  xi.,  §  3.


62  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

spirit,  merely  the  gate  and  entrance  of  contemplation,
and  serves  rather  to  bend  sense  to  the  spirit  than  to  unite
the  latter  with  God.  The  stains  of  the  old  man  still
remain  in  the  spirit,  though  not  visible  to  it,  and  if  they
be  not  removed  by  the  strong  soap  and  lye  of  the
purgation  of  this  night,  the  spirit  cannot  attain  to  the
pureness  of  the  divine  union.

2.  They  suffer  also  from  dulness  of  mind,  and  natural
rudeness  which  every  man  contracts  by  sin  ;  from
distraction  and  dissipation  of  mind,  which  must  be
refined,  enlightened,  and  made  recollected  in  the  sufferings
and  hardships  of  this  night.  All  those  who  have  not
advanced  beyond  the  state  of  proficients  are  subject  to
these  habitual  imperfections,  which  cannot  co-exist  with
the  perfect  state  of  union  with  God  in  love.

3.  But  all  are  not  subject  to  actual  imperfections  in
the  same  way ;  some,  whose  spiritual  good  is  so  much  on
the  surface,  and  so  much  under  the  influence  of  sense,
fall  into  certain  unseemlinesses  and  dangers,  of  which  I
spoke  in  the  beginning  of  this  book.  For  as  their  mind
and  sense  and  feelings  are  full  of  fancies  whereby  they
very  often  see  imaginary  and  spiritual  visions— all  this,
together  with  other  pleasurable  impressions,  befall  many  of
them  in  this  state,  wherein  the  devil  and  their  own  proper
fancy  most  frequently  delude  the  soul — and  as  satan  is
wont  with  so  much  sweetness  to  insinuate,  and  impress
these  imaginations,  they  are  easily  deluded  and  influenced
by  him,  because  they  do  not  take  the  precaution  to  resign
themselves  into  the  hands  of  God,  and  defend  themselves
vigorously  against  these  visions  and  impressions.  For
now  the  devil  causes  them  both  to  believe  in  many  vain


CHAP.   II.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  63

visions  and  false  prophecies,  and  to  presume  that  God
and  His  saints  are  speaking  to  them  :  they  also  frequently
believe  in  their  own  fancies.

4.  Now,  too,  satan  is  wont  to  fill  them  with  pride  and
presumption  ;  and  they,  led  on  by  vanity  and  arrogance
make  a  show  of  themselves  in  the  performance  of  exterior
acts  which  have  an  air  of  sanctity,  such  as  ecstasies  and
other  appearances.  They  thus  become  bold  with  God,
losing  holy  fear,  which  is  the  key  and  guard  of  all  virtue.
Some  of  them  become  so  entangled  in  manifold  falsehoods
and  delusions,  and  so'persist  in  them,  that  their  return  to
the  pure  road  of  virtue  and  real  spirituality  is  exceedingly
doubtful.  They  fall  into  this  miserable  condition  because
they  gave  way  to  these  spiritual  imaginations  and  feelings
with  over  much  confidence  when  they  began  to  advance
on  the  road  of  spiritualit}-.

5.  I  have  much  to  say  of  these  imperfections  of  theirs,
and  how  much  more  incurable  these  are  than  the  others,
because  they  consider  them  as  more  spiritual  than  those ;
but  I  shall  pass  on.  One  thing,  however,  I  must  say,  to
establish  the  necessity  of  the  spiritual  night  which  is  the
purgation  of  the  soul  that  is  to  go  on  to  perfection,  that
there  is  not  one  among  the  proficient,  however  great  may
be  his  exertions,  who  can  be  free  from  many  of  these
natural  affections  and  imperfect  habits,  the  purification  of
which  must,  as  I  have  said,  necessarily  precede  the
divine  union.

6.  Besides,  and  I  have  said  it  before,*  because  the
spiritual  communications  reach  also  to  the  lower  part  of
the  soul,  they  cannot  be  as  intense,  pure,  and  strong,  as

*  Bk,  ii.,  ch.  ii.,  §  3  :     Bk.  i.,  ch.  i.,  §  4.


64  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

the  divine  union  demands,  and,  therefore,  if  that  is  to  be
attained,  the  soul  must  enter  the  second  night  of  the
spirit  where — perfectly  detaching  sense  and  spirit  from  all
sweetness  and  from  all  imaginations — it  will  travel  on  the
road  of  faith  dark  and  pure,  the  proper  and  adequate
means  of  union,  as  it  is  written  :  '  I  will  espouse  thee  to
Me  in  faith,"''  that  is,  I  will  unite  Myself  to  thee  in  faith.


CHAPTER  III.

Notes  on  that  which  is  to  follow.

Proficients,  then,  experienced  during  the  past  time
these  sweet  communications,  in  order  that  the  sensual
part  of  the  soul,  allured  and  attracted  by  the  spiritual
sweetness  overflowing  from  the  spirit,  may  be  united  and
made  one  with  the  spiritual  part ;  both  parts  eating  the
same  spiritual  food,  each  in  its  own  way,  off  the  same
dish  of  their  one  being,  that,  thus  in  a  certain  way  become
one  and  concordant,  they  might  be  prepared  for  the
sufferings  of  the  sharp  and  rough  purgation  of  the  spirit
which  is  before  them.  In  that  purgation  the  two  parts  of
the  soul,  the  spiritual  and  the  sensual,  are  to  be  wholly
purified,  for  neither  of  them  can  be  perfectly  purified
without  the  other,  and  the  purgation  of  sense  is  then
effectual  when  that  of  the  spirit  commences  in  earnest.

2.  Hence  it  is  that  the  night  of  sense  may  and  should
be  called  a  certain  re-formation  and  bridling  of  desire,
rather  than  purgation,  because  all  the  imperfections  and
disorders  of  the  sensual  part  having  their  strength  and

*  Os.  ii.,  20.


CHAP.   III.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  65

roots  in  the  mind,  can  never  be  wholly  purged  away  until
the  evil  habits,  rebelliousness  and  perverseness  of  the
mind  are  corrected.  Therefore,  in  this  night  ensuing,
both  parts  of  the  soul  are  purified  together :  this  is  the
end  for  which  it  was  necessary  to  have  passed  through
the  re-formation  of  the  first  night,  and  to  have  attained
to  that  tranquillity  which  is  its  fruit,  in  order  that  sense
and  spirit,  made  one,  may  both  be  purified  and  suffer
together  with  the  greater  courage,  most  necessary  for  so
violent  and  sharp  a  purgation.  For  if  the  weakness  of
the  lower  part  be  not  redressed,  and  if  it  have  acquired  no
courage  in  God,  in  the  sweet  communions  with  Him
subsequently  enjoyed,  nature  would  have  been  unprepared
and  without  strength  for  the  trials  of  this  night.

3.  The  intercourse  of  proficients  with  God  is,  however,
still  most  mean,  because  the  gold  of  the  spirit  is  not
purified  and  refined.  They  think,  therefore,  and  speak  of
Him  as  children,  and  their  feelings  are  those  of  children,
as  described  by  the  Apostle :  '  When  I  was  a  child,  I
spake  as  a  child,  I  understood  as  a  child,  I  thought  as  a
child  ;  '*  because  they  have  not  reached  perfection,  which
is  union  with  God  in  love.  But  in  the  state  of  union,
having  grown  to  manhood,  they  do  great  things  in  spirit
— all  their  actions  and  all  their  faculties  being  now  rather
divine  than  human,  as  I  shall  hereafter  explainf — for  God
is  stripping  them  of  the  old  man,  and  clothing  them  with
the  new,  as  it  is  written  :  '  Put  on  the  new  man,  who  is
created  according  to  God; 'J  and  again,  'Be  reformed  in
the  newness  of  your  mind.'>

*  I  Cor.  xiii.  11.  f  Ch.  iv.  §  2.

X  Ephes.  iv.  24.  §  Rom.  xii.  2.

F


66  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

4.  He  now  denudes  the  faculties,  the  affections,  and
feeHngs,  spiritual  and  sensual,  interior  and  exterior,
leaving  the  understanding  in  darkness,  the  will  dry,  the
memory  empty,  the  affections  of  the  soul  in  the  deepest
affliction,  bitterness,  and  distress ;  withholding  from  it
the  former  sweetness  it  had  in  spiritual  things,  in  order
that  this  privation  may  be  one  of  the  principles,  of  which
the  mind  has  need,  that  the  spiritual  form  of  the  spirit,
which  is  the  union  of  love,  may  enter  into  it  and  be  one
with  it.

5.  All  this  our  Lord  effects  in  the  soul  by  means  of
contemplation,  pure  and  dark,  as  it  is  described  by  it  in
the  first  stanza.  That  stanza,  though  explained  in  the
beginning  of  the  night  of  sense,  the  soul  understands  it
principally  of  this  second  night  of  the  spirit,  because  that
is  the  chief  part  of  the  purification  of  the  soul.  I  shall,
therefore,  apply  it  in  this  sense,  and  explain  it  here  again.


CHAPTER    IV.

Explanation  of  the  first  stanza.

In  a  dark  night,

Wtth  anxious  love  inflamed.

0,  happy  lot !

Forth  U'lobservfd  I  went,

My  house  being  no7v  at  rest.

Taking  these  words,  then,  with  reference  to  purgation,
contemplation,  or  detachment,  or  poverty  of  spirit — these
are,   as  it  were,  one  and   the   same  thing — the\'  ma\-  be


CHAP.   IV.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  67

thus  explained  in  this  way,  as  if  the  soul  were  saying:  In
poverty,  without  help  in  all  my  powers,  the  understanding
in  darkness,  the  will  under  constraint,  the  memory  in
trouble  and  distress,  in  the  dark,  in  pure  faith,  which  is
the  dark  night  of  the  natural  faculties,  the  will  alone
touched  by  grief  and  affliction,  and  the  anxieties  of  the
love  of  God,  I  went  forth  out  of  myself,  out  of  my  low
conceptions  and  lukewarm  love,  out  of  my  scanty  and
poor  sense  of  God,  without  being  hindered  by  the  flesh  or
the  devil.

2.  This  was  to  me  a  great  blessing,  a  happy  lot,  for  by
annihilating  and  subduing  my  faculties,  passions,  and
affections — the  instruments  of  my  low  conceptions  of  God
— I  went  forth  out  of  the  scant}'  works  and  ways  of  m\-
own  to  those  of  God  :  that  is,  my  understanding  went
forth  out  of  itself,  and  from  human  became  divine  ;  for
united  to  God  in  that  purgation,  it  understands  no  more
within  its  former  limits  and  narrow  bounds,  but  in  the
divine  wisdom  to  which  it  is  united.

3.  My  will  went  forth  out  of  itself  becoming  divine,
for  now,  united  with  the  divine  love,  it  loves  no  more
with  its  former  scant}-  powers  and  circumscribed  capacity,
but  with  the  energy  and  pureness  of  the  divine  spirit.
Thus  the  will  acts  now  in  the  things  of  God,  not  in  a
human  way,  and  the  memory  also  is  transformed  in
eternal  apprehensions  of  glory.  Finally,  all  the  energies
and  affections  of  the  soul  are  in  this  night  and  purgation
of  the  old  man,  renewed  into  a  divine  temper  and  delight.


F  2


G(S  THE    DARK    NICxHT  [bOOK    II.

CHAPTER  V.

Explains  how  this  dim  contemplation  is  not  a  night  only,  but
pain  and  torment  also  for  the  soul.

In  a  dark  flight.

The  dark  night  is  a  certain  inflowing  of  God  into  the
soul,  which  cleanses  it  of  its  ignorances  and  imperfections,
habitual,  natural,  and  spiritual.  Contemplatives  call  it
infused  contemplation,  or  mystical  theology,  whereby
God  secretly  teaches  the  soul  and  instructs  it  in  the
perfection  of  love,  without  efforts  on  its  own  part  beyond
a  loving  attention  to  God,  listening  to  His  voice  and
admitting  the  Hght  He  sends,  but  without  understanding
how  this  is  infused  contemplation.  And  inasmuch  as  it
is  the  loving  wisdom  of  God,  it  produces  special  effects  in
the  soul,  for  it  prepares  it,  by  purifying  and  enlightening  it,
for  union  with  God  in  love :  it  is  the  same  loving  wisdom,
which  by  enlightening  purifies  the  blessed  spirits,  that
here  purifies  and  enlightens  the  soul.

2.  But  it  may  be  asked  :  Why  does  the  soul  call  the
divine  Hght,  which  enlightens  the  soul  and  purges  it  of  its
ignorances,  the  dark  night  ?  I  reply,  that  the  divine
wisdom  is,  for  two  reasons,  not  night  and  darkness  only,
but  pain  and  torment  also  to  the  soul.  The  first  is,  the
divine  wisdom  is  so  high  that  it  transcends  the  capacity
of  the  soul,  and  therefore  is,  in  that  respect,  darkness.
The  second  reason  is  based  on  the  meanness  and  impurity
of  the  soul,  and  in  that  respect  the  divine  wisdom  is
painful  to  it,  afflictive  and  dark  also,

3.  To  prove  the  truth  of  the  first  reason,  we  take  for
granted  a  principle  of  the  philosopher,  namely,  the  more


CHAP,  v.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  69

clear  and  evident  divine  things  are,  the  more  dark  and
hidden  they  are  to  the  soul,  naturally.  Thus  the  more
clear  the  light  the  more  does  it  blind  the  eyes  of  the  owl,*
and  the  stronger  the  sun's  rays  the  more  it  blinds  the
visual  organs ;  overcoming  them,  by  reason  of  their
weakness,  and  depriving  them  of  the  power  of  seeing.  So
the  divine  light  of  contemplation,  when  it  beats  on  the
soul,  not  yet  perfectly  enlightened,  causes  spiritual
darkness,  because  it  not  only  surpasses  its  strength,
but  because  it  blinds  it  and  deprives  it  of  its  natural
perceptions.

4.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  St.  Dionysius  and  other
mystic  theologians  call  infused  contemplation  a  ray  of
darkness,  that  is,  for  the  unenlightened  and  unpurified
soul,  because  this  great  supernatural  light  masters  the
natural  power  of  the  reason  and  takes  away  its  natural
way  of  understanding.  Therefore,  David  also  said :
'  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Him ;  'f  not
that  this  is  so  in  reality,  but  in  reference  to  our  weak
understanding,  which,  in  light  so  great,  becomes  dimmed
and  blind,  unable  to  ascend  so  high.  He  repeats  it,
saying :  '  At  the  brightness  that  was  before  Him  the
clouds  passed,'!  that  is,  between  Him  and  our  under-
standing. This  is  the  reason  why  the  illuminating  ray  of
hidden  wisdom,  when  God  sends  it  from  Himself  into  the
soul  not  yet  transformed,  produces  thick  darkness  in  the
understanding.

*  [Aristot.  Metaphysic.  lib.  \.  propcfaicni.  '  ilarrep  ydp  to.  tmv  vvk-
T€p[8(])v  ojijiara  irpos  to  c^eyyos  ^X^*^  ''"^  /xeii-'  ij/j.epav,  ovrw  Km  TrjS
7yjU,€T€pa?  xpvyjqs  o  I'ous  Trpbs  to,  tyj  (f)vcr€L  cfiavepwrara  TravTOJV.']

t  Ps.  xcvi.  2.  t  lb.  xvii.  13.


70  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

5.  This  dim  contemplation  is,  in  its  beginnings,
painful  also  to  the  soul.  For  as  the  infused  divine
contemplation  contains  many  excellences  in  the  highest
degree,  and  the  soul,  which  is  the  recipient,  because  not
yet  pure,  is  involved  in  many  miseries  the  result  is — as
two  contraries  cannot  co-exist  in  the  same  subject — that
the  soul  must  suffer  and  be  in  pain,  being  the  subject  in
which  the  two  contraries  meet,  and  resist  each  other
because  of  the  purgation  of  the  soul  from  its  imperfections,
which  is  being  wrought  by  contemplation.  I  shall  show
it  to  be  so  by  the  following  induction.

6.  In  the  first  place,  because  the  light  and  wisdom  of
contemplation  is  most  pure  and  bright,  and  because  the
soul,  on  which  it  beats,  is  in  darkness  and  impure,  that
soul  which  is  the  recipient  must  greatly  suffer.  As  eyes
weakened  and  clouded  by  humours  suffer  pain  when  the
clear  light  beats  upon  them,  so  the  soul,  by  reason
of  its  impurity,  suffers  exceedingly  when  the  divine  light
really  shines  upon  it.  And  when  the  rays  of  this  pure
light  strike  upon  the  soul,  in  order  to  expel  its  impurities,
the  soul  perceives  itself  to  be  so  unclean  and  miserable
that  it  seems  as  if  God  had  set  Himself  against  it,  and
itself  were  set  against  God.  So  grievous  and  painful  is
this  feeling — for  it  thinks  now  that  God  has  abandoned  it
— that  it  was  one  of  the  heaviest  afflictions  of  Job  during
his  trial.  '  Why  hast  Thou  set  me  contrary  to  Thee,  and
I  become  burdensome  to  myself?  "■'  The  soul  seeing
distinctly  in  this  bright  and  pure  light,  though  dimly,  its
own  impurity,  acknowledges  its  own  unworthiness  before
God  and  all  creatures.

7.  That  which  pains  it  still  more  is  the  fear  it  has  that

*  Job.  vii.  20.


CHAP,  v.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  71

it  never  will  be  worthy,  and  that  all  its  goodness  is  gone.
This  is  the  fruit  of  that  deep  impression,  made  on  the
mind,  in  the  knowledge  and  sense  of  its  own  wickedness
and  misery.  For  now  the  divine  and  dim  light  reveals
to  it  all  its  wretchedness,  and  it  sees  clearly  that  of  itself
it  can  never  be  other  than  it  is.  In  this  sense  we  can
understand  the  words  of  the  Psalmist :  '  For  iniquities
Thou  hast  chastised  man,  and  Thou  hast  made  his  soul
pine  away  as  a  spider.''''

8.  In  the  second  place,  the  pain  of  the  soul  comes
from  its  natural  and  spiritual  weakness ;  for  when  this
divine  contemplation  strikes  it  with  a  certain  vehemence,
in  order  to  strengthen  it  and  subdue  it,  it  is  then  so
pained  in  its  weakness  as  almost  to  faint  away,  particularly
at  times  when  the  divine  contemplation  strikes  it  with
greater  vehemence ;  for  sense  and  spirit,  as  if  under  a
heavy  and  gloomy  burden,  suffer  and  groan  in  agony  so
great  that  death  itself  would  be  a  desired  relief.

g.  This  was  the  experience  of  Job,  and  he  said,  '  I  will
not  that  He  contend  with  me  with  much  strength,  nor
that  He  oppress  me  with  the  weight  of  his  greatness.'!
The  soul  under  the  burden  of  this  oppression  feels  itself
so  removed  out  of  God's  favour  that  it  thinks — and  so  it
is — that  all  things  which  consoled  it  formerly  have  utterly
failed  it,  and  that  no  one  is  left  to  pity  it.  Job  also
speaks  to  the  same  purport,  '  Have  mercy  upon  me,  have
mercy  upon  me,  at  the  least  you  my  friends,  because  the
hand  of  our  Lord  hath  touched  me.'t  Wonderful  and
piteous  sight !  So  great  are  the  weakness  and  impurity
of  the  soul  that  the  hand  of  God,  so  soft  and  so  gentle,  is

*  Ps.  xxxviii.  12.         t  Job  xxiii.  6.         J  Job.  xix.  21.


72  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

felt  to  be  so  heavy  and  oppressive,  though  neither  pressing
nor  resting  on  it,  but  merely  touching  it,  and  that,  too,
most  mercifully ;  for  He  touches  the  soul  not  to  chastise
it,  but  to  load  it  with  His  graces.


CHAPTER   VI.

Of  other  sufferings  of  the  soul  in  this  night.

The  third  kind  of  suffering  and  pain  for  the  soul  comes
from  the  meeting  of  two  extremes,  the  human  and  the
divine :  the  latter  is  the  purgative  contemplation ;  the
human,  is  the  soul  itself.  The  divine  touches  the  soul  to
renew  it  and  to  ripen  it,  in  order  to  make  it  divine,  to
detach  it  from  the  habitual  affections  and  qualities  of  the
old  man,  to  which  it  clings  and  conforms  itself.  The
divine  extreme  so  breaks  and  bruises  the  soul,  swallowing
it  up  in  profound  darkness,  that  the  soul,  at  the  sight  of
its  own  wretchedness,  seems  to  perish  and  waste  away,
by  a  cruel  spiritual  death,  as  if  it  were  swallowed  up  and
devoured  by  a  wild  beast,  suffering  the  pangs  of  Jonas  in
the  belly  of  the  whale.  For  it  must  lie  buried  in  the  grave
of  a  gloomy  death  that  it  may  attain  to  the  spiritual
resurrection  for  which  it  hopes.  David  describes  this
kind  of  pain  and  suffering — though  it  really  baffles
description — when  he  says,  '  The  sorrows  of  death  have
compassed  me  .  .  .  the  sorrows  of  hell  have  compassed
me.  .  .  .  In  my  tribulation  I  have  called  upon  our
Lord,  and  have  cried  to  my  God.'*
*  Ps.  xvii.  5,  6,  7.


CHAP.  VI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  73

2.  But  the  greatest  affliction  of  the  sorrowful  soul  in
this  state  is  the  thought  that  God  has  abandoned  it,  of
which  it  has  no  doubt ;  that  He  has  cast  it  away  into
darkness  as  an  abominable  thing.  The  thought  that  He  has
abandoned  it  is  a  grievous  and  pitiable  affliction.  David
experienced  the  same  trials  when  he  said,  '  As  the
wounded  sleeping  in  the  sepulchres,  of  whom  Thou  art
mindful  no  more ;  and  they  are  cast  off  from  Thy  hand.
They  have  put  me  in  the  lower  lake,  in  the  dark  places,
and  in  the  shadow  of  death.  Thy  fury  is  confirmed  upon
me  ;  and  all  Thy  waves  Thou  hast  brought  in  upon  me.'*

3.  For,  in  truth,  when  the  soul  is  in  the  pangs  of  the
purgative  contemplation,  the  shadow  of  death  and  the
pains  and  torments  of  hell  are  most  acutely  felt,  that  is,
the  sense  of  being  without  God,  being  chastised  and
abandoned  in  His  wrath  and  heavy  displeasure.  All
this  and  even  more  the  soul  feels  now,  for  a  fearful
apprehension  has  come  upon  it  that  thus  it  will  be  with  it
for  ever.  It  has  also  the  same  sense  of  abandonment
with  respect  to  all  creatures,  and  that  it  is  an  object  of
contempt  to  all,  especially  to  its  friends ;  and  so  the
Psalmist  continues,  saying,  '  Thou  hast  put  away  my
acquaintance  far  from  me ;  they  have  set  me  an
abomination  to  themselves.'!

4.  The  prophet  Jonas  also,  as  one  who  had  experience
of  this,  both  bodily  and  spiritually,  witnesses  to  the  same
truth,  saying,  '  Thou  hast  cast  me  forth  into  the  depth,  in
the  heart  of  the  sea,  and  a  flood  hath  compassed  me  :  all
Thy  surges  and  Thy  waves  have  passed  over  me.  And  I
said,  I  am  cast  away  from  the  sight  of  Thine  eyes :  but

*  lb.  Ixxxvii.  6,  7,  8.  t  lb.  9.


74  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

yet  I  shall  see  Thy  holy  temple  again,' — this  is  the
purgation  of  the  soul  that  it  may  see  God — '  the  waters
have  compassed  me  even  to  the  soul,  the  depth  hath
enclosed  me,  the  sea  hath  covered  my  head.  I  am
descended  to  the  extreme  parts  of  the  mountains  :  the
bars  of  the  earth  have  shut  me  up  for  ever."'''  The  bars  of
the  earth  here  are  the  imperfections  of  the  soul  which
hinder  it  from  having  any  joy  in  this  sweet  contemplation.

5.  The    fourth    kind    of    pain    is    caused    by    another
«  excellence  peculiar  to  this  dim  contemplation,  a  sense  of

God's  majesty  and  greatness,  which  makes  it  conscious  of
the  other  extreme,  its  own  poverty  and  misery ;  this  is
one  of  the  chief  sufferings  of  this  purgation.  The  soul  is
conscious  of  a  profound  emptiness,  and  destitution  of  the
three  kinds  of  goods,  natural,  temporal,  and  spiritual,
which  are  ordained  for  its  comfort ;  it  sees  itself  in  the
midst  of  the  opposite  evils,  miserable  imperfections
and  aridities,  emptiness  of  the  understanding,  and
abandonment  of  the  spirit  in  darkness.

6.  Inasmuch  as  God  is  now  purifying  the  soul  in  its
sensual  and  spiritual  substance,  its  interior  and  exterior
powers,  it  is  necessary  for  it  that  it  should  be  in  all
its  relations  empty,  poor  and  abandoned,  in  aridity,
emptiness,  and  darkness.  For  the  sensual  part  is  purified
in  aridities,  the  faculties  in  the  emptiness  of  their  powers,
and  the  spirit  in  the  thick  darkness.

7.  All  this  God  brings  about  b}-  means  of  this  dim
contemplation,  in  which  the  soul  is  made  to  suffer  from
the  failure  and  withdrawal  of  its  natural  powers,  which  is
a    most    distressing    paiu,     It    is    like    that    of    a    person

*  Jon.  ii.  4 — 7.


CHAP.  VI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  75

bein^  suffocated,  or  hindered  from  breathing.  But  this
contemplation  is  also  purifying  the  soul,  undoing  or
emptying  it,  or  consuming  in  it,  as  fire  consumes  the  rust
and  mouldiness  of  the  metal,  all  the  affections  and  habits
of  imperfection  which  it  had  contracted  in  the  whole
course  of  its  life.  But  inasmuch  as  these  habits  are
deeply  rooted  in  the  soul,  the  interior  sufferings  and  trials
it  has  to  undergo  are  heavy,  and  are,  in  addition  to  the
destitution  and  emptiness,  natural  and  spiritual,  of  which
I  have  spoken.

8.  The  words  of  the  prophet  Ezechiel  are  now  fulfilled :
Heap  together  the  bones  which  I  will  burn  with  fire :
the  flesh  shall  be  consumed,  and  the  whole  composition
shall  be  sodden,  and  the  bones  shall  dry  away."''  This
describes  the  pain  which  the  soul  suffers  in  the  sensual
and  spiritual  parts  when  in  this  state  of  emptiness  and
poverty.  Then  the  prophet  proceeds,  saying:  'Set  it
also  upon  hot  burning  coals  empty,  that  the  brass  thereof
may  wax  hot  and  be  melted ;  and  let  the  filth  of  it  be
melted  in  the  midst  thereof,  and  let  the  rust  thereof  be
consumed.'!

g.  This  is  the  heavy  trial  of  the  soul  in  the  purifying
fires  of  contemplation.  The  prophet  says  that,  in  order
to  purge  away  and  consume  the  filth  of  the  affections
which  are  within  the  soul,  it  is  necessary  for  it,  in  a
certain  way  to  be  annihilated  and  undone,  because  its
passions  and  affections  have  become  natural  to  it.  The
soul,  therefore,  because  it  is  purified  in  this  furnace,  like
gold  in  a  crucible,  according  to  the  words  of  Wisdom,  '  as
gold  in  the  furnace  He  hath  proved  them,'!  feels  itself
•*  Ezech.  xxiv.  lo.  t  lb.  xxiv.  ii.  +  Wisd.  iii.  6.


76  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

utterly  consumed  in  its  innermost  substance  in  this
absolute  poverty  wherein  it  is  as  it  were  lost.  This  is
taught  us  by  the  Psalmist,  saying  of  himself:  '  Save  me,
O  God,  because  waters  are  entered  unto  my  soul.  I  stick
fast  in  the  mire  of  the  depth ;  and  there  is  no  sure
standing.  I  am  come  into  the  depth  of  the  sea  :  and  a
tempest  hath  overwhelmed  me.  I  have  laboured  crying,
my  jaws  are  made  hoarse,  my  eyes  have  failed,  whilst  I
hope  in  my  God.'*

10.  Here  God  is  humbling  the  soul  that  He  may  exalt
it  much  hereafter,  and  if  it  were  not  His  will  that  these
feelings,  when  they  rise,  should  be  quickly  lulled  again,
the  soul  would  almost  immediately  depart  from  the  body,
but  they  occur  only  at  intervals  in  their  greatest  violence.
They  are  occasionally  felt  so  acutely  that  the  soul  seems
to  see  hell  and  perdition  open  before  it.  Of  these,  are
they  who  go  down  alive  into  hell,  and  have  their
purgatory  in  this  life ;  for  this  is  the  purgation  to  be
endured  there  for  venial  sins.  And  thus  the  soul  which
passes  through  this  state  in  the  present  life,  and  is
perfectly  purified,  either  enters  not  into  purgatory,  or  is
detained  there  but  a  moment,  for  one  hour  here  is  of
greater  profit  than  many  there.


CHAPTER   Vn.

The  same  subject  continued.       Other  afflictions  and  trials  of

the  will.

The  afflictions  and  distress  of  the  will  now  are  also  very

great ;    they  occasionally  pierce  the  soul  with  a  sudden

*  Ps.  Ixviii.  2 — 4.


CHAP.  VII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  77

recollection  of  the  evils  that  environ  it,  and  of  the
uncertainty  of  relief.  To  this  is  superadded  the  memory
of  past  happiness  ;  for  they  who  enter  this  night  have,
generally,  had  much  sweetness  in  God,  and  served  Him
greatly ;  but  now,  to  see  themselves  strangers  to  so  much
happiness,  and  unable  to  recover  it,  causes  them  the
greatest  affliction.

2.  Job  also,  having  learnt  this  by  experience,  declares
it  in  these  words  :  '  I  sometime  that  wealthy  one,  suddenly
am  broken  ;  He  hath  held  my  neck,  broken  me,  and  set
me  to  Himself  as  it  were  a  mark.  He  hath  compassed
me  with  His  spears,  He  hath  wounded  my  loins,  He  hath
not  spared,  and  hath  poured  out  on  the  earth  my  bowels.
He  hath  cut  me  with  wound  upon  wound  :  He  hath  come
violently  upon  me  as  it  were  a  giant.  I  have  sewed
sackcloth  upon  my  skin,  and  have  covered  my  flesh  with
ashes.  My  face  is  swollen  with  weeping,  and  my  eyelids
are  dim.'*  So  many  and  so  great  are  the  torments  of
this  night,  and  so  many  the  places  in  the  Holy  Writings,
which  may  be  quoted  to  this  effect,  that  time  and  strength
would  fail  me  were  I  to  enumerate  them.  For  no  doubt,
all  that  can  be  said  will  fall  short ;  something  may  be
gathered  on  the  matter  from  the  texts  already  before  us,

2.  And  now  to  conclude  the  subject  of  the  first  line  of
the  stanza,  and  to  show  what  this  night  is  to  the  soul,  I
will  repeat  how  it  was  felt  by  the  prophet  Jeremias :
'  I,  the  man  that  see  my  poverty  in  the  rod  of  His
indignation.  He  hath  led  me  and  brought  me  into
darkness,  and  not  into  light.  Only  against  me  He  hath
turned,  and  hath  converted   His  hand  all  the  day.     He

*  Job  xvi.  13 — 17.


78  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

hath  made  my  skin  old  and  my  flesh  ;  He  hath  broken
my  bones.  He  hath  built  round  about  me,  and  He  hath
compassed  me  with  gall  and  labour.  In  dark  places  He
hath  placed  me  as  the  everlasting  dead.  He  hath  built
round  about  against  me,  I  go  not  forth.  He  hath
aggravated  my  fetters.  Yea,  and  when  I  shall  cry  and
ask,  He  hath  excluded  my  prayer.  He  hath  shut  up  my
ways  with  square  stones.  He  hath  subverted  my  paths.
He  is  become  unto  me  a  bear  lying  in  wait ;  a  lion  in
secret  places.  He  hath  subverted  my  paths,  and  hath
broken  me ;  He  hath  made  me  desolate.  He  hath  bent
His  bow,  and  set  me  as  a  mark  for  the  arrow.  He  hath
shot  in  my  reins  the  daughters  of  His  quiver.  I  am
made  a  derision  to  all  my  people,  their  song  all  the
day.  He  hath  replenished  me  with  bitterness,  He  hath
inebriated  me  with  wormwood.  And  He  hath  broken  my
teeth  by  number ;  He  hath  fed  me  with  ashes.  And  my
soul  is  repelled  from  peace  ;  I  have  forgotten  good  things.
And  I  said :  Mine  end  is  perished  and  mine  hope  from
our  Lord.  Remember  my  poverty  and  transgression,
the  wormwood  and  the  gall.  Remembering  I  will  be
mindful ;  and  my  soul  shall  languish  in  me.'*

3.  These  are  the  lamentations  of  the  prophet  over
these  pains  and  trials,  whereby  he  most  vividly  depicts
the  sufferings  of  the  soul,  which  come  upon  it  in  this
purgation  and  spiritual  night.  That  soul  is  worthy  of  all
compassion  which  God  leads  into  this  dreadful  and
horrible  night.  For,  although  it  is  well  with  it  because
of  the  great  blessing  of  which  this  night  is  the  source,  for
as  Job  saith,  God  will  raise  up  good  things  for  it  out  of
*  Lament,  iii,  i — 20.


CHAP.  VII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  79

this  darkness,  and  bring  light  over  the  shadow  of  death  :
'  Who  revealeth  profound  things  out  of  darkness,  and
bringeth  forth  the  shadow  of  death  into  hght ;  '*  so  that
His  Hght  shall  be  as  the  darkness  ;  '  the  darkness  thereof
so  also  the  light  thereof,'  as  David  speaks. t  Nevertheless,
because  of  the  excessive  pain  it  endures,  and  the  great
uncertainty  of  relief,  it  imagines  now,  as  the  prophet
says,  that  its  calamities  will  never  come  to  an  end.  God,
in  the  words  of  David,  having  made  it  to  '  dwell  in
darkness  as  those  that  have  been  dead  of  old,'  the  spirit
being  in  anguish  within  it,  and  '  the  heart  within  '  it
'  troubled,'  it  is  a  very  painful  and  pitiable  state.

4.  Besides,  the  soul  derives  no  consolation  now  in  the
advice  that  may  be  given  it,  or  from  its  spiritual  director,
because  of  the  loneliness  and  desolation  of  this  dark
night.  Though  its  confessor  may  set  before  it  in  many
ways  good  reasons  why  it  should  be  comforted  because  of
the  blessings  which  these  pains  supply,  the  soul  will  not
believe  him.  For  as  it  is  so  filled  with  and  overwhelmed
by  its  sense  of  these  evils,  whereby  it  discerns  so  clearly
its  own  misery,  it  imagines  that  its  spiritual  director,  not
seeing  that  which  itself  sees  and  feels,  speaks  as  he  does
without  comprehending  its  state,  and,  instead  of  being
comforted,  is  pained  anew,  for  it  considers  that  his
counsel  cannot  relieve  its  misery ;  and  in  truth  so  it  is,
for  until  our  Lord  shall  have  perfected  the  purification  of
the  soul,  according  to  His  will,  no  help  and  no  remedy
can  be  of  any  service  or  profit  in  this  pain.

5.  Moreover,  the  soul  can  do  so  little  in  this  state :
like  a  prisoner  in   a  gloomy  dungeon,  bound  hand  and

*  Job  xii.  22.  t  Ps.  cxxxviii.  12.


80  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [BOOK  II.

foot,  it  cannot  stir,  neither  can  it  see  or  feel  any  relief,
either  from  above  or  below,  until  the  spirit  is  softened,
humbled,  and  purified ;  until  it  becomes  so  refined,
simple,  and  pure,  as  to  become  one  with  the  Spirit  of
God  in  that  degree  of  the  union  of  love  which  He  in  His
mercy  intends  for  it,  and  corresponding  to  which  is  the
greater  or  less  violence,  the  longer  or  shorter  duration,  of
this  purgation.

6.  But  if  this  purgation  is  to  be  real  it  will  last,
notwithstanding  its  vehemence,  for  some  years,  but
admitting  of  intermissions  and  relief,  during  which,  by
the  dispensation  of  God,  the  dim  contemplation  divested
of  its  purgative  form  and  character  assumes  that  of  the
illuminative  and  of  love.  Under  this  form  of  it,  the  soul,
like  one  escaped  from  the  dungeons  of  its  prison  into  the
comfort  of  space  and  freedom,  enjoys  the  sweetness  of
peace,  and  the  loving  tenderness  of  God  in  the  flowing
abundance  of  spiritual  communications.  This  is  to  the
soul  a  sign  of  the  spiritual  health  which  is  being  wrought
within  by  this  purgation,  and  a  foretaste  of  the  abundance
it  hopes  for.  So  much  so  is  this  at  times  that  it  thinks
all  its  trials  are  over.  For  such  is  the  nature  of  spiritual
things  in  the  soul,  when  they  are  most  purely  spiritual,
that  the  soul  thinks  when  trials  return,  they  will  never
end,  and  that  all  its  blessings  have  perished ;  and  when  it
prospers  in  its  spiritual  course  it  thinks  all  its  calamities
are  past,  and  that  it  shall  always  abound  in  good  things.
Thus  it  was  with  David  when  he  said  :  '  In  my  abundance
I  said :  I  shall  never  be  moved.'*

7.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  the  actual  presence  of

*  Ps.  xxix.  7.


CHAP.  VII,]  OF    THE    SOUL.  81

one  thing  in  the  mind  is  naturally  inconsistent  with  the
presence  and  sense  of  its  contrary ;  this  is  not  so  much  so
in  the  sensual  part  of  the  soul,  because  of  the  weakness  of
its  apprehension.  But  as  the  spirit  is  not  vet  wholly
purified  and  cleansed  from  the  imperfections  contracted
by  its  lower  nature,  though  more  resolute  and  consistent
now,  it  is  liable  to  further  sufferings,  so  far  as  it  is  under
the  dominion  of  these  affections,  as  we  see  in  the  many
afflictions  and  distress  of  David  after  the  change,  though
he  had  said  in  the  day  of  his  prosperity,  '  I  shall  never  be
moved.'

8.  In  the  same  way  the  soul,  amidst  the  abundance
of  spiritual  blessings,  but  not  observing  the  root  of
imperfection  and  impurity  which  still  remains,  thinks  that
all  its  trials  are  over.  This  thought,  however,  is  of  rare
occurrence,  for  until  the  spiritual  purgation  is  complete,
the  sweet  communications  are  rarely  so  abundant  as  to
conceal  the  root  that  remains  behind,  in  such  a  wa\'
that  the  soul  shall  not  be  inwardly  conscious  of  some
deficiency,  or  that  something  still  is  to  be  done.  Nor  is
the  communication  such  as  to  allow  it  to  enjoy  the  relief
that  is  offered  it  perfectl}-,  for  it  feels  as  if  an  enemy
were  lurking  within,  who,  though  he  may  be  as  if  subdued
and  asleep,  the  soul  fears  it  may  yet  return  in  his  strength
and  assault  it  as  before.

9.  And  so  it  comes  to  pass,  for  when  the  soul  is  most
secure  it  returns,  drags  down  the  soul  and  then  plunges  it
at  once  into  another  affliction  heavier,  darker,  and  sadder
than  the  previous  one,  and  which,  perhaps,  will  be  of
longer  continuance.  The  soul  again  is  convinced  that  all
its  good   is  gone   from   it   for  ever.     Experience   cannot

G


82  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

teach  it :  the  blessings  that  followed  its  former  trials,
during  which  it  thought  that  its  sufferings  would  never
end,  cannot  hinder  it  from  beheving,  during  its  present
trials,  that  all  its  good  has  perished,  and  that  it  will  never
be  again  with  it  as  it  was  before.  For,  as  I  am  saying,
this  belief,  so  persistent,  is  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the
present  impression  made  on  the  mind,  which  destroys
within  it  all  the  occasions  of  joy.

10.  Thus  the  soul  in  this  purgation,  though  it  seems  to
love  God  greatly,  and  is  ready  to  die  for  Him  a  thousand
deaths — and  that  is  true,  for  souls  thus  tried  love  God
with  great  sincerity,  nevertheless  they  find  no  relief,  but
rather  an  increase  of  pain  herein.  For  seeking  God  alone,
and  nought  else,  seeing  also  its  own  great  misery,  it
doubts  whether  God  be  not  angry  with  it.  It  cannot  then
persuade  itself  that  there  is  anything  in  it  worthy  of  love,
but  rather  is  convinced  that  there  is  that  in  it  which
should  make  it  hated  not  only  of  God,  but  of  all  creatures
also  for  ever ;  it  grieves  to  see  that  of  itself  it  deserves  to
be  abandoned  of  Him  Whom  it  so  loves  and  so  longs  for.


CHAPTER    Vni.

Of  other  sufferings  which  distress  the  soul  in  this  state.

Another  source  of  much  affliction  and  distress  to  the
soul  in  this  state  is  that,  as  the  dark  night  hinders  the
exercise  of  the  faculties  and  affections,  it  cannot  lift  up
the  heart  and  mind  to  God  as  before,  nor  pray  to  Him.


CHAP.  VIII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  83

It  thinks  itself  to  be  in  that  state  described  by  Jeremias
when  he  said,  '  Thou  hast  set  a  cloud  before  Thee,  that
prayer  may  not  pass.'*  This  is  the  meaning  of  the
words  quoted  beforet — '  He  hath  shut  up  my  ways  with
square  stones. 't  If  at  any  time  it  prays,  it  prays  with  so
much  aridity,  and  without  sweetness,  so  as  to  think  that
God  neither  hears  nor  regards  it ;  as  the  prophet  tells  us
in  the  same  place,  saying,  '  Yea,  and  when  I  shall  cry,
and  ask,  He  excludeth  my  prayer. '§  And,  in  truth,  this
is  the  time  for  the  soul,  in  the  words  of  Jeremias,  to  put
its  'mouth  in  the  dust,'||  suffering  in  patience  this
purgation.

2.  It  is  God  Himself  Who  is  now  working  in  the  soul,
and  the  soul  is  therefore  powerless.  Hence  it  comes  that
it  cannot  pray  or  give  much  attention  to  divine  things.
Neither  can  it  attend  to  temporal  matters,  for  it  falls  into
frequent  distractions,  and  the  memory  is  so  profoundly
weakened,  that  many  hours  pass  by  without  its  knowing
what  it  has  done  or  thought,  what  it  is  doing  or  is  about
to  do  ;  nor  can  it  give  much  heed  to  what  it  is  occupied
with,  notwithstanding  all  its  efforts.

3.  Inasmuch,  then,  as  not  only  the  understanding  is
purified  from  its  imperfect  perceptions,  and  the  will  from
its  affections,  but  the  memory,  also,  from  all  its  knowledge
and  reflections,  it  is  necessary  that  the  soul  should  be
annihilated  herein,  that  the  words  of  the  Psalmist,  when
he  was  in  this  purgation  may  be  fulfilled  :  '  I  am  brought
to  nothing,  and  I  knew  not.'^  This  '  knowing  not '
extends   to    these    follies    and    failures    of  the    memor}-.

*  Lam.  iii.  44.  t  Ch.  vii.  §  2.  J  lb.  iii.  9.

§  lb.  iii.  8.  II  lb.  iii.  29.  H  Ps   Ixxii.  22.

G  2


84  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

These  wanderings  and  failures  of  the  memory  are  the
result  of  interior  recollection,  by  which  the  soul  is
absorbed  in  contemplation.  For  in  order  to  prepare  the
soul,  and  temper  it  divinely  in  all  its  powers  for  the
divine  union  of  love,  it  must,  first  of  all,  be  absorbed  with
all  its  powers  in  the  divine  and  dim  spiritual  light  of
contemplation,  and  be  thus  detached  from  all  affection
for,  and  apprehension  of,  created  things.  This  continues
ordinarilv  in  proportion  to  the  intensity  of  its  contem-
plation.

4.  Thus,  then,  the  more  pure  and  simple  the  divine
light  when  it  beats  on  the  soul,  the  more  does  it  darken
it,  empty  it,  and  annihilate  it,  as  to  all  its  apprehensions
and  affections,  whether  they  regard  heavenly  or  earthly
things.  And  also,  the  less  pure  and  simple  the  light,  the
less  is  the  soul  darkened  and  annihilated.  It  seems
strange  to  say,  that  the  purer  and  clearer  the  supernatural
and  divine  light  the  more  is  it  in  the  soul,  and  that  it  is
less  so  when  less  pure.

5.  But  this  may  be  easily  explained ;  if  we  keep  in
mind  the  saying  of  the  philosopher  that  supernatural
things  are  more  dark  to  the  understanding  the  more  clear
and  evident  they  are  in  themselves.  Thus  the  ray  of  high
contemplation,  transcending  as  it  does  the  natural  powers,
striking  the  soul  with  its  divine  light,  makes  it  dark,  and
deprives  it  of  all  the  natural  affections  and  apprehensions
which  it  previously  entertained  in  its  own  natural  light.
Under  these  circumstances,  the  soul  is  left  not  only  in
darkness  but  in  emptiness  also,  as  to  its  powers  and
desires,  both  natural  and  spiritual,  and  in  this  emptiness
and   darkness  is   purified    and   enlightened   by  the  divine


CHAP.  VIII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  85

spiritual  light,  but  it  does  not  imagine  that  it  has  it ;  yea,
rather,  it  thinks  itself  to  be  in  darkness.

6.  As  a  ray  of  light,  if  pure,  and  if  there  be  nothing  to
reflect  it,  or  against  which  it  strikes,  is  almost  invisible,
and  is  by  reflection  better  seen,  so  the  spiritual  light,
which  beats  on  the  soul  is,  of  itself,  neither  visible  nor
perceptible,  because  it  is  so  pure,  but  when  it  beats  upon
anything  that  reflects  it,  that  is,  upon  any  matter  of
perfection  which  presents  itself  to  the  understanding  or  a
decision  to  be  made  as  to  the  truth  or  falsehood  of
anything,  the  soul  sees  it  at  once,  and  understands  the
matter  more  clearly  than  it  ever  did  before  it  entered  into
this  darkness.  In  the  same  way  the  soul  discerns  the
spiritual  light  which  is  given  it  that  it  may  easily
recognize  its  own  imperfection  ;  thus,  when  a  ray  of  light
is  of  itself  not  so  visible,  but  when  the  hand  or  any  other
object  is  held  before  it,  the  hand  is  seen  forthwith,  and
the  light  of  the  sun  is  known  to  be  there.

7.  Then,  because  this  spiritual  light  is  so  clear,  pure
and  diffused,  neither  confined  to,  nor  specially  related  to,
any  particular  matter  of  the  understanding — seeing  that
with  respect  to  all  such  matters  the  powers  of  the  soul
are  empty  and  as  if  they  did  not  exist — the  soul  in  great
ease  and  freedom  discerns  and  searches  into  every  thing
high  or  low,  that  is  presented  to  it ;  and  for  that  reason
the  Apostle  said,  '  The  Spirit  searcheth  all  things,  even  the
profundities  of  God  ; ''''  for  it  is  of  this  pure  and  diffused
wisdom  that  we  are  to  understand  that  which  the  Holy
Ghost  spake  by  the  mouth  of  the  wise  man,  '  Wisdom
reacheth  everywhere  by  reason  of  her  clearness  ;  "t  that  is,

*  I  Cor.  ii.  10.  t  Wisd.  vii.  24.


86  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

because  not  connected  with  any  particular  object  of  the
understanding  or  affection.  The  characteristic  of  a  mind
purified  and  annihilated  as  to  all  particular  objects  of
affection  and  of  the  understanding,  is  to  have  no  pleasure
in,  or  knowledge  of,  anything  in  particular  ;  to  abide  in
emptiness  and  darkness ;  to  embrace  all  things  in  its
grand  comprehensiveness,  that  it  may  fulfil  mystically  the
words  of  the  Apostle,  '  having  nothing  and  possessing  all
things,'*  for  such  poverty  of  spirit  merits  such  a  blessing.


CHAPTER   IX.

How  this  night  enlightens  the  mind  though  it  brings  darkness

over  it.

It  remains  for  me  now  to  explain  that  this  blessed  night,
though  it  darkens  the  mind,  does  so  only  to  give  it  light
in  every  thing  ;  and  though  it  humbles  it  and  makes  it
miserable,  does  so  only  to  raise  it  up  and  set  it  free ;  and
though  it  impoverishes  it  and  empties  it  of  all  its  natural
self  and  liking,  it  does  so  only  to  enable  it  to  reach
forward  divinely  to  the  possession  and  fruition  of  all
things,  both  of  heaven  and  earth,  in  perfect  liberty  of
spirit.  As  it  is  fitting  that  the  primary  elements,  that
they  may  enter  into  the  composition  of  all  natural
substances,  should  have  no  colour,  taste,  nor  smell
peculiar  to  themselves,  in  order  that  they  may  combine
with  all  colours,  all  tastes,  and  all  smell,  so  the  mind
must    be  pure,   simple,  and  detached    from  all    kinds  of

*  2  Cor.  vi.  10.


CHAP.  IX.]  OF    THE    SOUL,  87

natural  affections,  actual  and  habitual,  in  order  that  it
may  be  able  to  participate  freely  in  the  largeness  of  spirit
of  the  divine  wisdom,  wherein  by  reason  of  its  pureness
it  tastes  of  the  sweetness  of  all  things  in  a  certain
pre-eminent  way.  And  without  this  purgation  it  is
altogether  impossible  to  taste  of  the  abundance  of  these
spiritual  delights.  For  one  single  affection  remaining  in
the  soul,  or  any  one  matter  to  which  the  mind  clings
either  habitually  or  actually,  is  sufficient  to  prevent  all
perception  and  all  communication  of  the  tender  and
interior  sweetness  of  the  spirit  of  love,  which  contains
within  itself  all  sweetness  supremely.

2.  As  the  children  of  Israel,  merely  on  account  of  that
single  affection  for,  and  remembrance  of,  the  fleshpots  of
Egypt,  could  not  taste  the  delicious  bread  of  angels,  the
manna  in  the  desert,  which  as  the  divine  writings  tell  us,
had  '  the  sweetness  of  all  taste,'  and  '  turned  to  that  every
man  would,'*  so  the  mind  which  is  still  subject  to  any
actual  or  habitual  affection  or  particular  or  narrow  mode
of  apprehending,  or  understanding  anything,  cannot  taste
the  sweetness  of  the  spirit  of  liberty,  according  to  the
desire  of  the  will.  The  reason  is  this :  the  affections,
feelings,  and  apprehensions  of  the  perfect  spirit,  being  of
so  high  an  order  and  specially  divine,  are  of  another  kind
and  different  from  those  which  are  natural ;  and  in  order
to  be  actually  and  habitually  enjoyed,  require  the
annihilation  of  the  latter.

3.  It  is  therefore  very  expedient  and  necessary,  if  the
soul  is  to  advance  to  these  heights,  that  the  dark  night  of
contemplation  should  first  bring  it  to  nothing,  and  undo

*  Wisd.  xvi.  20,  21.


88  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

it  in  all  its  meannesses,  bringing  it  into  darkness,
aridities,  loneliness,  and  emptiness ;  for  the  light  that  is
to  be  given  it  is  a  certain  divine  light  of  the  highest
nature,  surpassing  all  natural  light,  and  not  naturally
cognisable  by  the  understanding.  If  the  understanding
is  to  be  united  with  that  light,  and  become  divine  in  the
Stat?  of  perfection,  it  must  first  of  all  be  purified  and
annihilated  as  to  its  natural  light,  which  must  be
brought  actually  into  darkness  by  means  of  this  dim
contemplation.

4.  This  darkness  must  continue  so  long  as  it  is
necessary  to  destroy  the  habit,  long  ago  contracted,  of
understanding  things  in  a  natural  way,  and  until  the
divine  enlightening  shall  have  taken  its  place.  And
therefore  inasmuch  as  the  power  of  understanding,
previously  exerted,  is  natural,  the  result  is  that  the
darkness  now  endured  is  awful,  and  most  afflictive,
because  it  reaches  to,  and  is  felt  in,  the  innermost  depths
of  the  spirit.  In  the  same  way,  inasmuch  as  the
affection  of  love,  communicated  in  the  divine  union,  is
divine,  and  therefore  most  spiritual,  subtile,  delicate,  and
most  interior,  surpassing  all  sense  and  affection,  natural
and  imperfect,  of  the  will  and  every  desire  of  the  same,
it  is  necessary  for  the  fruition,  in  the  union  of  love,  of
this  divine  affection  and  most  exquisite  delight,  that  the
will  should  be  first  purified  and  annihilated,  as  to  all  its
affections  and  feelings,  left  in  darkness  and  distress
proportional  to  the  intensity  of  the  habit  of  natural
affections  it  had  acquired,  in  respect  both  of  human  and
divine  things.

5.  And  this  must  be  done,  in  order  that  the  will,  in


CHAP.   IX.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  89

the  fire  of  dim  contemplation,  wasted,  withered,  and
deprived  of  all  selfishness- — like  the  liver  of  the  fish  which
Tobias  laid  on  the  burning  coals* — may  acquire  a  pure
and  simple  disposition,  a  purified  and  sound  taste,  so  as
to  feel  those  sublime  and  wonderful  touches  of  divine
love  when  it  shall  be  divinely  transformed  ;  all  its  former
contrarieties  actual  and  habitual  being  expelled.

6.  Moreover,  in  order  to  attain  to  the  divine  union,
for  which  the  dark  night  disposes  it,  the  soul  must  be
endowed  and  replenished  with  a  certain  glorious  magnifi-
cence in  the  divine  communication,  which  includes
innumerable  blessings  and  joys,  surpassing  all  the
abundance  which  the  soul  can  naturally  possess — so
speak  the  prophet  Isaias  and  S.  Paul,  '  Eye  hath  not
seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart
of  man  what  thmgs  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love
Him  't  it  is  necessary  for  it  that  it  should  be  first  brought
into  a  state  of  emptiness  and  spiritual  poverty,  detached
from  all  help  and  consolation  in  all  the  things  of  heaven
and  earth,  that  being  thus  empty  it  may  be  really  poor  in
spirit  and  divested  of  the  old  man,  and  may  live  that  new
and  blessed  life  to  which  it  attains  in  this  dark  night
which  is  the  state  of  union  with  God.

7.  x\nd  because  the  soul  is  to  attain  to  the  possession
of  a  certain  sense,  and  divine  knowledge,  most  generous
and  full  of  sweetness,  of  all  human  and  divine  things
which  do  not  fall  within  the  common-sense  and  natural
perceptions  of  the  soul — it  views  them  with  different  eyes
now ;  as  the  light  and  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost  differ  from
those  of  sense,  the  divine  from  the  human — it  is  necessary

*  Tob.  viii.  2.  t  Is.  Ixiv.  4  ;   i  Cor.  ii.  g.


90  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

that  the  spirit  should  be  brought  low,  and  inured  to
hardships  in  all  that  relates  to  the  natural  and  common
sense.  It  must  suffer  hardships  and  afflictions  in  the
purgative  contemplation,  and  the  memory  must  become
a  stranger  to  all  pleasing  and  peaceful  knowledge,  with  a
most  interior  sense  and  feeling  of  being  a  stranger  and  a
pilgrim  here,  so  that  all  things  shall  seem  strange  to  it,
and  other  than  they  were  wont  to  seem.

8.  For  this  night  is  drawing  the  spirit  away  from  its
ordinary  and  common  sense  of  things,  that  it  may  draw
it  towards  the  divine  sense,  which  is  a  stranger  and  an
alien  to  all  human  ways ;  so  much  so  that  the  soul  seems
to  be  carried  out  of  itself.  At  other  times  it  looks  upon
itself  as  if  under  the  influence  of  some  charm  or  spell,
and  is  amazed  at  all  that  it  hears  and  sees,  which  seem  to
it  to  be  most  strange  and  out  of  the  way,  though  in  reality
they  are  as  they  usually  are,  the  same.  The  reason  is
this :  the  soul  has  become  a  stranger  to  the  ordinary
sense  of  things,  in  order  that  being  brought  to  nothing
therein,  it  might  be  informed  in  the  divine.  Now  this
belongs  more  to  the  next  life  than  to  this.

g.  The  soul  suffers  all  these  afflictive  purgations  of  the
spirit  that  it  may  be  born  again  to  the  life  of  the  spirit
through  the  divine  inflowing,  and  in  these  pangs  bring
forth  the  spirit  of  salvation,  fulfilling  the  words  of  Isaias  :
'  So  are  we  become  in  Thy  presence,  O  Lord.  We  have
conceived,  and  been  as  it  were  in  labour,  and  have
brought  forth  the  spirit  '*  of  salvation.  Moreover,  as
in  the  night  of  contemplation  the  soul  is  prepared
for  that  tranquillity  and  inward  peace  which  is  such  and

*  Is.  xxvi.  17,  18.


CHAP.  IX.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  01

SO  full  of  delight  as,  in  the  words  of  Scripture,  to  '  pass
all  understanding,'*  it  is  necessary  for  the  soul  that  all
its  former  peace,  which,  because  involved  in  so  many
imperfections,  was  no  peace,  though  it  seemed  to  be  a
twofold  peace,  namely,  of  sense  and  spirit,  because  it  was
pleasing,  should  first  of  all  be  purified,  and  the  soul
withdrawn  from  and  disturbed  in  that  imperfect  peace,  as
Jeremias  felt  and  lamented  in  the  words  cited  before  to
express  the  trials  of  the  night  that  is  now  past,  namely  :
'  My  soul  is  repelled  from  peace. 't

10.  This  is  a  painful  unsettling,  full  of  misgivings,
imaginations,  and  inward  struggles,  in  which  the  soul,  at
the  sight  and  in  the  consciousness  of  its  own  misery,
imagines  itself  to  be  lost,  and  all  its  good  to  have  perished
for  ever.  In  this  state  the  spirit  is  pierced  by  sorrow  so
profound  as  to  occasion  strong  spiritual  groans  and  cries,
to  which  at  times  it  gives  utterance,  and  tears  break
forth,  if  there  be  any  strength  left  for  them,  though  this
relief  is  but  rarely  granted.  The  royal  prophet  David  has
well  described  this  state,  being  one  who  had  great
experience  of  it,  saying,  '  I  am  afflicted  and  humbled
exceedingly;  I  roared  with  the  groaning  of  my  heart. 't
This  roaring  proceeds  from  great  pain  ;  for  sometimes  the
sudden  and  sharp  recollection  of  the  miseries  that  environ
the  soul,  makes  it  feel  such  pain  and  grief  that  I  know  not
how  it  can  be  explained  otherwise  than  by  the  words  of
Job:  'as  overflowing  waters  so  is  my  roaring. '§  For  as
waters  sometimes  overflow,  drown  and  fill  all  places,  so
this  roaring,  and  sense  of  pain,  become  occasionally  so

*  Phil.  iv.  7.  t    Lam.  iii.  17.  X  Ps.  xxxvii.  9.

§  Job  iii.  24.


92  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

strong  as  to  flow  over  and  into  the  soul,  filling  all  its
deepest  affections  and  energies  with  spiritual  pain  and
sorrow  which  defy  all  exaggeration.

11.  Such  is  the  work  wrought  in  the  soul  by  this
night  that  hideth  the  hopes  of  the  light  of  da}-.  It  was  in
reference  to  it  that  Job  said,  '  In  the  night  my  mouth  is
pierced  with  sorrows,  and  they  that  feed  upon  me  do  not
sleep.'"  The  mouth  here  is  the  will,  pierced  by  these
sorrows  which  cease  not  to  tear  the  soul,  neither  do  they
sleep,  for  the  doubts  and  misgivings  which  harass  it  are
never  at  rest.

12.  This  warfare  and  combat  are  deep,  because  the
peace  hoped  for  is  most  deep :  the  spiritual  sorrow  is
interior,  refined,  and  pure,  because  the  love  to  be  enjoyed
must  be  also  most  interior  and  pure.  The  more  interior
and  perfect  the  work,  the  more  interior,  perfect,  and  pure
must  the  labour  be  that  produces  it ;  and  the  stronger
the  building,  the  more  solid  it  is.  '  My  soul  fadeth
within  myself,'  saith  Job,  '  and  the  days  of  affliction
possess  me.t  So,  in  the  same  way,  because  the  soul  has
to  attain  to  the  enjoyment  and  possession,  in  the  state  of
perfection  to  which  it  journeys  in  this  purgative  night,  of
innumerable  blessings,  of  gifts,  and  virtues,  both  in  the
substance  of  the  soul  and  in  the  powers  thereof,  it  is
necessary  that  it  should  first  consider  and  feel  itself
generally  a  stranger  to  and  deprived  of  them  all,  and
regard  them  as  so  far  beyond  its  reach  as  to  be  persuaded
that  it  never  can  attain  to  them,  and  that  all  goodness  is
perished  from  it.  This  is  the  meaning  of  those  words  of
Jeremias,  '  I  have  forgotten  good  things.';

*  Job  XXX.  17.  t  lb.  .\xx.  16.  i  Lam.  iii.  17.


CHAP.  X.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  l).'!

13.  Let  US  now  see  why  the  h^ht  of  contemplation,  so
sweet  and  lovely  to  the  soul  that  nothing  is  more  desirable
— for  it  is  that,  as  I  said  before,*  whereby  the  divine
union  takes  place,  and  whereby  the  soul  in  the  state  of
perfection  finds  all  the  good  it  desires — produces,  when  it
strikes  the  soul,  these  painful  beginnings  and  terrible
effects  ?  The  answer  is  easy,  and  is  already  given  in
part ;  there  is  nothing  in  contemplation  and  the  divine
inflowing,  to  cause  pain,  but  rather  much  sweetness  and
joy,  as  the  soul  will  find  later.  The  cause  is  the
imperfection  and  weakness  of  the  soul,  and  dispositions
not  fit  for  the  reception  of  this  sweetness.  And  so,  when
the  divine  light  beats  upon  the  soul,  it  makes  it  suffer  in
the  wa\'  described.


CHAPTER  X.

Explanation  of  this  purgation  by  a  comparison.

To  make  what  I  have  said,  and  what  I  have  still  to  say,
more  clear,  it  is  well  to  observe  here  that  this  purgative
and  loving  knowledge,  or  divine  light,  of  which  I  have
spoken,  is  to  the  soul  which  it  is  purifying,  in  order  to
unite  it  perfectly  to  itself,  as  fire  is  to  fuel  which  it  is
transforming  into  itself.  The  first  action  of  material  fire
on  fuel  is  to  dry  it,  to  expel  from  it  all  water  and  all
moisture.  It  blackens  it  at  once  and  soils  it,  and  drying
it  by  little  and  little,  makes  it  light  and  consumes  all  its
foulness  and  blackness  which  are  contrar}-  to  itself.
Finally,  having  heated  and  set  on  fire  its  outward  surface,
*  Bk.  ii.  ch.  V.  §§  i,  2.


94  THE    DARK   NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

it  transforms  the  whole  into  itself,  and  makes  it  beautiful
as  itself.  The  fuel  under  these  conditions  retains  neither
active  nor  passive  qualities  of  its  own,  except  bulk  and
weight,  and  assumes  all  the  properties  and  acts  of  iire.
It  becomes  dry,  being  dry  it  glows,  and  glowing,  burns ;
luminous,  it  gives  light,  and  burns  more  quickly  than
before.     All  this  is  the  property  and  eifect  of  fire.

2.  It  is  in  this  way  we  have  to  reason  about  the  divine
fire  of  contemplative  love  which,  before  it  unites  with,  and
transforms  the  soul  into,  itself,  purges  away  all  its
contrary  qualities.  It  expels  its  impurities,  blackens  it
and  obscures  it,  and  thus  its  condition  is  apparentl}-
worse  than  it  was  before.  For  while  the  divine  purgation
is  removing  all  the  evil  and  vicious  humours,  which,
because  so  deeply  rooted  and  settled  in  the  soul,  were
neither  seen  nor  felt,  but  now  in  order  to  their  expulsion
and  annihilation,  are  rendered  clearly  visible  in  the  dim
light  of  the  divine  contemplation,  the  soul — though  not
worse  in  itself,  nor  in  the  sight  of  God— seeing  at  last
what  it  never  saw  before,  looks  upon  itself  not  only  as
unworthy  of  His  regard,  but  even  as  a  loathsome  object
and  that  God  does  loathe  it.  By  this  comparison  we
shall  be  able  to  understand  much  that  I  have  said,  and
purpose  to  say.

3.  In  the  first  place,  we  can  see  how  that  very  light,
and  that  loving  knowledge  which  unites  the  soul  and
transforms  it  into  itself,  is  the  same  which  purifies  and
prepares  it :  for  the  fire  that  transforms  the  fuel  and
incorporates  it  with  itself,  is  the  very  same  which  also  at
the  first  prepared  it  for  that  end.

4.  In    the    second    place,    we    may    see    that    these


CHAP.  X.]  OF  thp:  soul.  95

sufferings  of  the  soul  do  not  proceed  from  the  divine
wisdom — it  being  written,  'All  good  things  came  to  me
together  with  her,'*^ — but  from  its  own  weakness  and
imperfection,  being  incapable,  previous  to  its  purgation,
of  receiving  this  divine  light,  sweetness,  and  delight ;  and
that  is  the  reason  why  its  sufferings  are  so  great.  The
fuel  is  not  transformed  into  fire,  at  the  instant  of  their
contact,  if  it  be  not  previously  prepared  for  burning.

5.  This  is  the  experience  of  the  Wise  Man,  who  thus
describes  his  sufferings  before  his  union  with,  and  posses-
sion of,  wisdom  :  '  My  soul  hath  wrestled  in  it.  .  .  My
belly  was  troubled  in  seeking  it ;  therefore  shall  I  possess
a  good  possession.'!

6.  In  the  third  place  we  learn  by  the  way  how  souls
suffer  in  purgatory.  The  fire  would  have  no  power  over
them  if  they  were  perfectly  prepared  for  the  kingdom  of
God,  and  union  with  Him  in  glory,  and  if  they  had  no
faults  for  which  they  must  suffer,  for  these  are  the  matter
on  which  that  fire  seizes ;  when  that  matter  is  consumed
there  is  nothing  more  to  burn.  So  is  it  here,  when  all
imperfections  are  removed,  the  suffering  of  the  soul
ceases,  and  in  its  place  comes  joy  as  deep  as  it  is  possible
for  it  to  be  in  this  life.

7.  In  the  fourth  place,  we  learn  that  the  soul,  the
more  it  is  purified  and  cleansed  in  the  fire  of  love,  the
more  it  glows  with  it.  The  better  the  fuel  is  prepared  for
the  fire  the  better  it  burns.  The  soul,  how^ever,  is  not
always  conscious  of  this  burning  of  love  within  it,  but
only  now  and  then,  when  the  contemplation  is  less
profound,  for  the  soul  is  then  able  to  observe,  and  even  to

*  Wisd,  vii,  II.  t  Ecclus.  H.  25 — 29.


96  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

delight  in,  the  work  that  is  being  wrought,  because  it  is
visible  ;  the  hand  of  the  artificer  seems  to  be  withdrawn
from  the  work,  and  the  iron  taken  out  of  the  furnace,  so
as  to  show  in  some  measure  the  work  that  is  being
wrought.  Then,  too,  the  soul  is  able  to  see  in  itself  that
good  which  it  did  not  see  while  the  process  was  going
on.  Thus,  when  the  flame  ceases  to  envelope  the  fuel,
it  is  possible  to  see  clearly  how  much  of  it  has  been
burnt.

8.  In  the  fifth  place,  we  shall  also  find  by  this
comparison  that  which  has  been  said  before,*  namely,
how  true  it  is  that  after  these  consolations,  the  soul  suffers
again  more  intensely  and  keenly  than  it  did  before.  For
after  the  manifestation  of  the  work  that  has  been  done,
when  the  more  outward  imperfections  have  been  expelled,
the  fire  of  love  returns  again  to  purge  and  consume  that
which  is  more  interior.  The  suffering  of  the  soul  herein
becomes  more  penetrating,  deep,  and  spiritual,  according
as  it  refines  away  the  more  profound,  subtle,  and  deeply
rooted  interior  imperfections  of  the  spirit.  It  is  here  as
with  the  fuel  in  the  fire,  the  deeper  the  fire  penetrates  the
greater  is  its  force  and  energy  in  disposing  the  inmost
substance  of  the  fuel  for  its  own  possession  of  it.

g.  In  the  sixth  place,  we  shall  learn  that  the  soul,
though  it  rejoices  intensely  in  these  intervals  of  peace — so
much  so  that  it  seems  at  times,  as  we  have  said,  to  think
its  trials  over,  never  to  return,  even  while  it  is  certain
that  they  will  soon  return — cannot  but  feel,  if  it  observes
a  single  root  of  imperfection  behind — and  sometimes  it
must   do  so — that   its  joy  is  not   full.     It  seems  as  if  that

*  Ch.  vii.  §  9.


CHAP.  XI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  97

root  threatened  to  spring  up  anew,  and  when  that  is  so,
it  does  so  quickly.

10.  Finally,  that  which  still  remains  to  be  purified  and
enlightened  within  cannot  well  be  concealed  from  the  soul
in  the  presence  of  that  which  has  been  already  purified  ;
so  also  that  portion  of  the  fuel  which  is  still  to  be  set  on
fire  is  very  different  from  that  which  the  flame  has
purified.  And  when  this  purgation  commences  anew  in
the  inmost  soul,  it  is  not  strange  that  it  should  consider
all  its  goodness  to  have  perished,  and  think  that  it  can
never  recover  its  former  prosperity  ;  for  in  most  interior
sufferings  all  outward  goodness  is  hidden  from  it.

11.  Keeping  this  comparison,  then,  before  our  eyes,
with  that  which  I  have  already  said,"^'  on  the  first  line
of  this  stanza,  concerning  this  dark  night  and  its
fearful  characteristics,  it  may  be  well  to  leave  the  subject
of  these  afflictions  of  the  soul,  and  to  enter  on  the  matter
of  the  fruit  of  its  tears  and  their  blessed  properties,  of
which  the  soul  sings  in  the  second  line.


CHAPTER  XI.

Begins  the  explanation  of  the  second  line  of  the  first,  and

shows  how  a  vehement  passion  of  divine  love  is  the  fruit  of

these  sharp  afflictions  of  the  soul.

fVitA  anxious  love  inflamed.

In  this  line  the  soul  speaks  of  the  fire  of  love  of  which
we  have  spoken, t  and  which,  in  the  night  of  painful
contemplation,  seizes  upon  it  as  material  fire  on  the  fuel
it    burns.       This    burning,    though    in    a    certain    way

*  Ch.  iii.  t  Ch.  X,


98  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

resembling  that  which,  as  we  explained  before,*  takes
place  in  the  sensual  part  of  the  soul,  is  still,  in  one  sense,
as  different  from  this,  of  which  I  am  now  speaking,  as  the
soul  is  from  the  body,  the  spiritual  from  the  sensual.  For
this  is  a  certain  fire  of  love  in  the  spirit  whereby  the  soul,
amidst  these  dark  trials,  feels  itself  wounded  to  the
quick  by  this  strong  love'  divine  with  a  certain  sense
and  foretaste  of  God,  though  it  understands  nothing
distinctly,  because,  as  I  have  said,t  the  understanding  is
in  darkness,

2.  The  spirit  is  now  conscious  of  deep  love,  for  this
spiritual  burning  produces  the  passion  of  it.  And
inasmuch  as  this  love  is  infused  in  a  special  way,  the  soul
corresponds  only  passively  with  it,  and  thus  a  strong
passion  of  love  is  begotten  within  it.  This  love  has  in  it
something  of  the  most  perfect  union  with  God,  and  thus
partakes  in  some  measure  of  its  properties,  which  are
more  especially  actions  of  God  received  in  the  soul  rather
than  of  the  soul,  consenting  unto  them  in  simplicity  and
love.

3.  But  this  warmth  and  force  and  temper  and  passion
of  love,  or  burning,  as  the  soul  calls  it,  are  solely  the
work  of  God  Who  is  entering  into  union  with  it.  The
more  the  desires  are  restrained,  subdued,  and  disabled  for
the  enjoyment  of  the  things  of  heaven  and  earth,  the
more  room  does  this  love  find  in  the  soul,  and  better  the
dispositions  for  its  reception,  so  that  it  may  unite  itself
with  that  soul,  and  wound  it.  This  takes  place,  as  has
been  said  before,!  during  the  dark  purgation  in  a
wonderful  way,  for  God  has  so  weaned  the  faculties,  and

*  Bk.  I,  ch.  viii.  {i  i.  t  Ch.  ix.  §  3.  X  Bk.  i,  ch.  i.,  §  2.


CHAP.   XI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  99

they  are  now  so  recollected  in  Him,  that  they  are  unable
to  take  pleasure  as  they  like  in  anything  whatever.

4.  All  this  is  the  work  of  God ;  wrought  with  a  view
to  withdraw  the  faculties  of  the  soul  from  all  objects
whatever,  and  to  concentrate  them  upon  Himself,  that
the  soul  may  acquire  greater  strength  and  fitness  for  the
strong  union  of  love  of  God  which  He  is  communicating
in  the  purgative  way ;  and  in  which  the  soul  must  love
Him  with  all  its  strength  and  desire  of  sense  and  spirit,
which  it  could  never  do  if  the  faculties  thereof  were
dissipated  by  other  satisfactions.  The  Psalmist,  therefore,
that  he  might  be  able  to  receive  this  strong  love  of  the
union  with  God,  said  unto  Him, '  I  will  keep  my  strength  for
Thee ; '  *  that  is,  all  my  capacity  and  desires,  the  strength
of  my  faculties,  neither  will  I  suffer  them  to  do  or  rejoice
in  anything  but  Thee,

5.  Here  we  may  perceive,  in  some  degree,  how  great
and  how  vehement  is  this  burning  of  love  in  the  spirit
when  God  gathers  and  collects  together  all  the  strength,
faculties,  and  desires  of  the  soul,  both  spiritual  and
sensual,  so  that  all  this  unison  may  use  all  its  energies
and  all  its  forces  in  this  love,  and  so  come  to  satisfy
truly,  and  in  perfection,  the  first  commandment,  which,
neglecting  nothing  that  belongs  to  man,  and  shutting
out  nothing  that  is  his  from  this  love,  saith,  namely,
'  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  thy  whole
heart,  and  with  thy  whole  soul,  and  with  thy  whole
strength.'!

6.  When  all  the  desires  and  energies  of  the  soul  are
thus   recollected   in  this   burning  of  love,   and    the   soul

*  Ps.  Iviii.  10.  t  Deut.  vi.  5.

H  2


100  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

itself  touched,  wounded,  and  set  on  fire  with  love,  in
them  all,  what  must  the  movements  and  affections  of
these  desires  and  energies  be  when  they  are  thus  wounded
and  burning  in  this  strong  love,  when  that  love  does
not  satiate  them,  when  they  are  in  darkness  and  doubt
about  it,  and  suffering  also,  beyond  all  question,  a  more
grievous  hunger,  in  proportion  to  the  past  experience  of
God  ?  For  the  touch  of  this  love  and  of  the  divine  fire  so
dries  up  the  spirit,  and  enkindles  its  longing  to  satisfy  its
thirst,  that  it  turns  upon  itself  a  thousand  times,  and
longs  for  God  in  a  thousand  ways,  as  David  did  when  he
said,  *  For  Thee  my  soul  hath  thirsted,  for  Thee  my  flesh,
O  how  many  ways ;  '*  that  is,  in  desire.  Another  version
reads,  '  My  soul  thirsteth  after  Thee,  my  soul  is  dying  for
Thee.'

7.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  soul  says,  '  With
anxious  love  inflamed.'  In  all  its  works  and  thoughts,
in  all  its  employments  and  on  every  occasion,  the  soul
loves  and  longs  in  many  ways,  and  this  longing  also  is
manifold  in  its  forms,  always  and  everywhere  present  ;
the  soul  has  no  rest,  feeling  itself  to  be  wounded,  and  on
fire  with  anxious  love ;  its  state  is  thus  described  by  hoty
Job :  '  As  a  servant  desireth  the  shadow,  as  the  hired  man
tarrieth  for  the  end  of  his  work,  so  I  also  have  had  vain
months,  and  have  numbered  to  myself  laborious  nights.
If  I  sleep,  I  shall  say.  When  shall  I  arise  ?  and  again  I
shall  expect  the  evening,  and  shall  be  replenished  with
sorrows  even  until  darkness.'  t  The  soul  is  discontented
with  itself,  with  heaven  and  with  earth,  being  replenished
with  sorrows  even  until  the  darkness  of  which  Job  is  here

*  Ps.  Ixii.  2.  t  Job  vii.  2 — 4.


CHAP.  XI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  101

speaking.  That  darkness,  speaking  in  a  spiritual  sense,
and  according  to  the  matter  which  I  am  discussing,  is
distress  and  suffering  without  the  comfort  of  any  certain
hope  of  any  Hght  and  spiritual  good.

8.  The  anxieties  and  sufferings  of  the  soul  while  thus
on  lire  with  love  are  the  greater,  because  of  their  twofold
origin  :  the  spiritual  darkness  which  envelopes  it  is  one,
and  that  afflicts  it  with  doubts  and  misgivings.  The  love
of  God  which  sets  it  on  fire  is  the  other,  which  stirs  it
with  the  wound  of  love  and  makes  it  burn  marvellously.
These  two  kinds  of  suffering  are  thus  referred  to  by
Isaias,  being  in  a  like  condition  :  '  My  soul  hath  desired
Thee  in  the  night ; '  that  is,  in  misery.  This  is  one  kind
of  pain  which  proceeds  from  the  dark  night,  '  Yea,  and
with  my  spirit  in  my  heart  I  will  watch  to  Thee  in  the
morning.'*  This  is  the  other  kind  of  suffering  in  desire
and  anxiety,  which  proceed  from  love,  in  the  bowels  of
the  spirit ;  that  is,  the  spiritual  affections.  The  soul,
however,  amidst  these  gloomy  and  loving  pains,  is
conscious  of  a  certain  companionship  and  inward  strength
which  attends  upon  it  and  so  invigorates  it  that  if  the
burden  of  this  oppressive  darkness  be  removed,  it  often-
times feels  itself  desolate,  empty,  and  weak.  The  reason
is  that  the  force  and  courage  communicated  to  the  soul
flow  passively  from  the  dark  fire  of  love  which  assails  it,
and  so,  when  that  fire  ceases  to  assail  it,  the  darkness,
the  strength,  and  fire  of  love  at  the  same  time  cease  in
the  soul.

•  Is.  xxvi.  g.


102  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOUK    II.


CHAPTER    XII.

Shows  how  this  awful  night  is  a  purgatory,  and  how  in  it  the

divine  wisdom   illuminates  men   on   earth   with  that  light  in

which  the  angels  are  purified  and  enlightened  in  heaven.

What  I  have  said  will  enable  us  to  see  how  the  dark
night  of  loving  fire  purifies  in  the  darkness,  and  how  the
soul  in  the  darkness  is  set  on  fire.  We  shall  also  see
that,  as  the  dark  and  material  fires  in  the  next  life,  so  the
loving,  dark,  and  spiritual  fires  here,  purify  and  cleanse
the  predestinate.  The  difference  is  that  in  the  next
world  they  are  purified  by  fire,  and  here,  purified  and
enlightened  by  love.  David  prayed  for  this  love  when
he  said,  '  Create  a  clean  heart  in  me,  O  God !  "*  for
cleanness  of  heart  is  nothing  else  but  the  love  and  grace
of  God.  '  The  clean  of  heart,'  are  called  blessed  by  our
Saviour,  and  it  is  as  if  He  had  said,  blessed  are  those  who
love,  for  blessedness  can  come  of  nothing  less  than  love.

2.  The  following  words  of  Jeremias,  '  From  on  high
He  hath  cast  a  fire  in  my  bones,  and  hath  taught  me,'t
show  plainly  that  the  soul  is  purified  when  it  is  enlightened
in  the  fire  of  loving  wisdom,  for  God  never  grants  the
mystical  wisdom  without  love ;  it  being  love  itself  that
infuses  it  into  the  soul.  David  also  saith  that  the  wisdom
of  God  is  silver  tried  in  the  purifying  fire  of  love  ;  '  words
of  our  Lord  are  chaste  words,  silver  examined  by  fire,'t
for  the  dim  contemplation  infuses  into  the  soul  love  and
wisdom,  in  everyone  according  to  its  necessity  and  capacity-,
enlightening  the  soul,  and  cleansing  it  of  all  its  ignorances.
*  Ps.  1.  12.  t  Lan'.  i.  13.  X  Ps.  xi.  7.


CHAP.  XII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  103

according    to    the    words    of  the   Wise    Man,    '  He   hath
enlightened  my  ignorances.'*

3.  Here,  also,  we  learn  that  the  wisdom  which  purities
the  ignorances  of  the  angels,  flowing  from  God  through
the  highest,  down  to  the  lowest,  in  the  order  of  the
heavenly  hierarchy,  and  thence  to  men,  is  that  very
wisdom  which  purities  these  souls  and  enlightens  them.
All  the  works  of  the  angels,  and  all  the  inspirations  they
suggest,  are,  therefore,  in  Holy  Scripture,  truly  and
properly  said  to  be  their  work  and  God's  work :  for,
ordinarily,  His  inspirations  come  through  the  angels ;
they  receiving  them  one  from  another  instantaneously,!
as  the  light  of  the  sun  penetrates  many  windows  at  once,
arranged  one  behind  the  other.  For  though  it  is  true
that  the  light  of  the  sun  pierces  all,  yet  each  window
conveys  and  pours  that  light  into  the  next,  somewhat
modified,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  glass,  somewhat
weaker  and  fainter,  according  to  the  distance  from  the
sun.

4.  Hence  it  follows,  with  respect  to  the  higher  and
lower  angels,  the  nearer  they  are  to  God  the  more  they
are  purified  and  enlightened  in  the  general  purgation  ;  the
lowest  in  rank  receiving  their  illumination  in  a  less  perfect
degree.  But  man,  being  lower  than  the  angels,  must,
when  God  raises  him  to  the  state  of  contemplation,
receive  that  enlightenment  according  to  his  capacity  in  a

[*  '  Ignorantias  meas  illuminavit.'  These  words  have  been  expunged
from  Ecclus.  li.  26,  by  the  Roman  censure.]

[t  Scot.  2.     Sent,  dist  10,  qu  unic.     Secundum  communem  processum
et   ordinem     revelantur     majora   Dei   mysteria    superioribus    priusquam  ■
inferioribus,    et    ita    superiores      mittuntur    ad    inferiores,     loquendo    et
illuminando   eos   interius,    et    aUi    inferiores    mittuntur    exterius   ad    ilia
revelata  nuncianda  hominibus  vel  explenda.]


104  THE  DARK  NIGHT  [bOOK  II.

limited  degree,  and  with  suffering.  For  the  hght  of  God
which  illumines  an  angel  enlightens  him,  and  sets  him  on
fire  with  love,  for  he  is  a  spirit  already  prepared  for  the
infusion  of  that  light ;  but  man,  being  impure  and  weak,
is  ordinarily  enlightened,  as  I  said  before,*  in  darkness,  in
distress  and  pain — the  sun's  rays  are  painful  in  their  light
to  weak  eyes — till  the  fire  of  love,  purifying  him,  shall
have  spiritualised  and  refined  him,  so  that  being  made
pure  he  may  be  able  to  receive  with  sweetness,  like  the
angels,  the  union  of  this  inflowing  love ;  for,  as  we  shall
explain,  with  the  help  of  our  Lord,  there  are  souls  who,  in
this  life,  are  more  perfectly  enlightened  than  even  the
angels.  But,  in  the  meantime,  this  contemplation  and
loving  knowledge  come  upon  the  soul  through  trials  and
loving  anxiety,  of  which  I  am  now  speaking.

5.  The  soul  is  not  always  conscious  of  this  burning
and  anxious  love ;  for  in  the  beginning  of  the  spiritual
purgation  all  the  divine  fire  is  employed  in  drying  up  and
preparing  the  soul,  rather  than  in  setting  it  on  fire.  But
when  the  soul  has  become  heated  in  the  fire,  it  then  feels
most  commonly  this  burning  and  warmth  of  love.  And
now,  as  the  understanding  is  being  purified  more  and
more  in  this  darkness,  it  happens  occasionally  that  this
mystical  and  affective  theology,  while  inflaming  the  will,
wounds  also  by  enlightening  the  other  faculty  of  the
understanding  with  a  certain  divine  light  and  knowledge,
so  sweetly  and  so  divinely,  that  the  will,  aided  by  it,  glows
in  a  marvellous  manner,  the  divine  fire  of  love  burning
within  it  with  living  flames,  so  that  the  soul  appears  to
have  received  a  living  fire  with  a  living  understanding.

*  Ch.  x.§  I.


CHAP.  XIII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  105

This  is  what  David  referred  to  when  he  said,  '  My  heart
waxed  hot  within  me,  and  in  my  meditation  a  fire  shall
burn,''-  so  vehemently  that  I  thought  it  to  be  already  on
fire.'

6.  This  kindling  of  love,  in  the  union  of  these  two
powers,  the  understanding  and  the  will,  is  to  the  soul  a
great  treasure  and  delight,  because  it  is  certain  that  the
foundations  of  the  perfection  of  the  union  of  love,  for
which  the  soul  hopes,  are  now  laid  in  that  darkness.
Thus  the  soul  does  not  reach  this  sublime  sense  and  love
of  God  without  passing  through  many  tribulations,  and
accomplishing  a  great  part  of  its  purgation.  But  for
other  degrees  of  this  union,  lower  than  this,  which  are
of  ordinary  occurrence,  so  intense  a  purgation  is  not
required.


CHAPTER  XIII.

Other  sweet  effects  wrought  in  the  soul  in  the  dark  night  of
contemplation.

By  the  expression  '  burning '  we  understand  some  of  the
sweet  effects  which  are  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  dark
night  of  contemplation ;  for  occasionally,  amid  the
darkness,  the  soul  receives  light — '  light  shineth  in
darkness 't — the  mystical  inflowing  streaming  directly
into  the  understanding,  and  the  will  in  some  measure
partaking  of  it,  with  a  calmness  and  pureness  so  exquisite
and  so  delicious  to  the  soul  as  to  be  utterly  indescribable  :
now  God  is  felt  to  be  present  in  one  way,  and  again  in
another.     Sometimes,  too,  it  wounds  the  will  at  the  same

*  Ps.  xxxviii.  4.  t  St.  John  i.  5.


106  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

time,  and  enkindles  love  deeply,  tenderly,  and  strongly  ;
for,  as  I  have  said,  the  more  the  understanding  is
purified  the  more  perfectly  and  delicate,  at  times,  is  the
union  of  the  understanding  and  the  will.  But,  before  the
soul  attains  to  this  state,  it  is  more  common  for  the
touch  of  the  fire  of  love  to  be  felt  in  the  will  than  for
the  touch  of  the  perfect  intelligence  to  be  felt  in  the
understanding.

2.  This  burning,  and  thirst  of  love,  inasmuch  as  it
now  proceeds  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  very  different  from
that  of  which  I  spoke  in  describing  the  night  of  sense.*
For  though  sense  also  has  now  its  part  in  this,  because
it  cannot  but  share  in  the  afflictions  of  the  spirit ;  yet  the
root  and  living  force  of  the  thirst  of  love  are  felt  in  the
higher  part  of  the  soul,  that  is,  in  the  spirit.  The  spirit
perceives  and  understands  what  it  feels,  and  that  it
possesses  not  that  which  it  longs  for,  so  that  it  counts
as  nothing  all  the  pain  it  feels,  though  it  is  beyond
comparison  greater  than  the  pain  of  the  first  night,  which
is  the  night  of  sense ;  for  it  thoroughly  understands  that
one  great  good  is  absent,  and  that  there  is  no  remedy
possible.

3.  It  may  be  observed  here  that,  although  at  first,  in
the  beginning  of  the  spiritual  night,  this  burning  love  is
not  felt  because  the  fire  of  love  has  not  yet  done  its  work,
God  communicates  to  the  soul,  instead  of  it,  a  reverent
love  of  Himself  so  great  that,  as  I  have  said,t  the
heaviest  trials  and  deepest  afflictions  of  this  night  are  the
distressing  thought  that  it  has  lost  God,  and  that  He  has
abandoned   it.      It    may,   therefore,   be   always    said    that

*   Bk.  1,  ch.  xi.  g  2.  t  Ch.  v.  §  7.


CHAP.  XIII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  107

rroni  the  beginning  of  this  night  the  soul  is  full  of  the
anxieties  of  love,  at  one  time  that  of  reverence,  at  another
that  of  burning.  It  is  evident  that  the  greatest  of  its
sufferings  is  this  doubt :  for  if  it  could  be  persuaded  that
all  is  not  lost  and  over,  and  that  the  trials  it  undergoes
are,  as  in  truth  they  are,  for  its  greater  good,  and  that
God  is  not  angry,  it  would  make  no  account  whatever  of
all  these  afflictions ;  on  the  contrary,  it  would  rejoice,
knowing  that  by  them  it  is  serving  God.

4.  This  reverential  love  of  God  is  so  strong  in  the
soul — though  in  the  darkness  and  unaware  of  it — that  it
would  be  glad  not  only  to  endure  its  trials,  but  also  to  die
a  thousand  deaths  to  serve  Him.  But  when  the  fire  of
love  and  the  reverent  love  of  God  together  have  set  the
soul  in  a  flame,  it  is  wont  to  gain  such  strength  and
energy,  and  such  eager  longing  after  God — effects  of  this
glowing  love— that  it  boldly  disregards  all  considerations,
and  sets  everything  aside,  in  the  inebriating  force  of  love,
and,  without  much  consideration  of  its  acts,  it  conducts
itself  strangely  and  extravagantly  in  every  way  that  it
may  come  to  Him  whom  the  soul  loveth.

5.  This  is  the  reason  why  Mary  Magdalene,  though
so  noble,  heeded  not  the  many  guests,  high  and  low,
who  were  feasting,  as  we  read  in  St.  Luke,  in  the
house  of  the  Pharisee.  She  considered  not  that  she
was  not  welcome,  and  that  tears  were  unseemly  at  the
feast,  provided  she  could,  without  an  hour's  delay,  or
waiting  for  another  occasion,  reach  Him  for  whom  her
soul  was  wounded  and  on  fire.*  This  is  that  inebriating
and    daring    force  of  love,  which,  when  she   knew    that

*  St.  Luke  vii.  37.


108  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

her  Love  was  in  the  sepulchre,  guarded  by  soldiers,
and  a  stone  rolled  over  it  and  sealed,  allowed  none
of  these  things  to  move  her ;  for  she  went  thither
before  dawn  with  the  ointments  to  anoint  her  Beloved.
And,  finally,  it  was  under  the  inebriating  influence
and  anxieties  of  love  that  she  asked  Himself,  Whom
she  took  for  the  gardener,  who,  she  thought,  had
robbed  the  sepulchre,  to  tell  her,  if  he  had  taken  Him
away,  where  he  had  laid  Him.  '  If  thou  hast  carried
Him  away,  tell  me  where  thou  hast  laid  Him,  and  I
will  take  Him  away.'*  She  did  not  reflect  upon  the
imprudence  of  her  words ;  for  it  is  clear  that  if  the
gardener  had  stolen  the  Body  he  would  not  have  told
her,  still  less  would  he  have  allowed  her  to  take  Him
away.

6.  This  conduct  of  Mary  Magdalene  proceeded  from
the  vehemence  and  energy  of  her  love :  for  love  thinks
all  things  possible,  and  that  all  are  of  the  same  mind
with  itself;  for  it  cannot  believe  that  there  is  anything
to  occupy  men,  or  anything  to  be  sought  for  by  them,
except  that  which  itself  seeks  and  loves ;  it  considers
that  there  can  be  no  other  occupation  or  desire  except
its  own.  Thus,  when  the  bride  went  out  into  the
streets  and  highways  seeking  her  beloved,  she,  believing
that  all  were  employed,  like  herself,  in  searching  for
him,  adjured  them,  if  they  found  him,  to  tell  him  that
she  languished  with  love.t

7.  So  strong  was  Mary's  love  that  she  intended,  if  the
gardener  had  told  her  where  he  had  hidden  our  Lord,  to
go  and  take  Him  away,  in  spite  of  any  prohibition.     Of

*  St.  John  XX.  15.  I  Cant.  iii.  2  v.  8.


CHAP,  xrrr.]  of  the  soul.  109

this  kind  are  those  anxieties  of  love  which  the  soul  feels
when  it  has  made  some  progress  in  the  spiritual  purgation.
The  soul  rises  by  night — that  is,  in  the  purifying  darkness
— in  the  affections  of  the  will.  As  a  lioness  or  a  bear,
robbed  of  its  whelps,  whom  it  cannot  find,  seeks  them
anxiously  and  earnestly,  so  does  the  wounded  soul  seek
after  God.  Being  in  darkness,  it  feels  His  absence,  and
is  dying  of  love.  This  is  that  impatient  love  which  no
man  can  endure  long  without  obtaining  his  wishes  or
dying.  It  is  like  Rachel's  longing  for  children,  when  she
said  to  Jacob,  '  Give  me  children,  otherwise  I  shall  die.'*

8.  We  have  now  to  consider  how  it  is  that  the  soul,
conscious  of  its  own  misery  and  unworthiness  before  God,
can  be  so  bold,  amid  the  purifying  darkness,  as  to  aspire
after  union  with  Him.  The  reason  is,  that  love  gives  it
strength  to  love  in  earnest,  it  being  the  nature  of  love  to
seek  for  union,  companionship,  equality  with,  and  likeness
to  the  object  beloved,  so  as  to  attain  to  the  perfection  of
itself.  Hence  it  is  that  the  soul  not  yet  made  perfect  in
love,  because  it  has  not  attained  to  union,  hungers  and
thirsts  for  that  which  it  has  not — namely,  union ;  and  the
strength  which  love  communicates  to  the  will,  which  is
on  fire,  renders  it  bold  and  daring  as  to  the  will,  though
as  to  the  understanding,  because  that  is  in  darkness,  it
feels  itself  to  be  an  unworthy  and  miserable  object.

9.  I  must  not  omit  here  to  say  why  it  is  that  the
divine  light,  being  always  light  to  the  soul,  does  not
illumine  it  the  moment  it  strikes  it,  as  it  does  at  a  later
time,  instead  of  bringing  with  it  the  darkness  and  miser}-
of  which  I  am  speaking. t     Something  has  been  already

*  Gen.  XXX.  i.  t  Ch.  ix.  §  i.


110  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

said,  but  I  now  speak  of  it  directly.  The  darkness  and
other  miseries  of  which  the  soul  is  conscious  proceed  not
from  the  divine  light  when  it  strikes  the  soul,  but  from
the  soul  itself,  and  it  is  the  light  which  enables  it  to  see
them.  The  divine  light  gives  light  at  once,  but  the  soul
sees  nothing  at  first  but  that  which  is  immediately  before
it,  or  rather  within  itself;  its  own  darkness  and  misery,
which,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  it  sees  now,  and  formerly  saw
not,  because  this  supernatural  light  had  not  been  granted  it.

10.  This  is  the  reason  why,  in  the  beginning,  the  soul
is  conscious  of  nothing  but  of  darkness  and  misery.  But
when  it  has  been  purified  by  the  knowledge  and  sense  of
its  misery  it  will  have  eyes  to  discern  the  blessings  of  the
divine  light,  and  being  delivered  and  set  free  from  all
darkness  and  imperfections,  the  great  blessings  and  profit
will  become  known  which  the  soul  is  gaining  for  itself  in
this  blessed  night.

11.  This  shows  how  great  is  the  mercy  of  God  to  the
soul  when  He  thus  purifies  it  in  this  strong  lye  and  bitter
purgation,  as  to  its  sensual  and  spiritual  part,  from  all  its
affections  and  imperfect  habits  in  all  that  relates  to  time,
nature,  sense,  and  spirit ;  by  darkening  its  interior
faculties,  and  emptying  them  of  all  objects,  by  correcting
and  drying  up  all  affections  of  sense  and  spirit,  b}-
weakening  and  wasting  the  natural  forces  which  the  soul
never  could  have  done  of  itself  as  we  shall  immediatelv
show.  God  makes  it  die,  in  this  way,  to  all  that  is  not
God,  that,  being  denuded  and  stripped  of  its  former
clothing,  it  may  clothe  itself  anew.  Thus  the  soul's
'  youth  shall  be  renewed  like  the  eagle's,'*  clothed  with

*  Ps.  cii.  5.


CHAP.  XIV.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  Ill

'  the  new  man,   which,  in  the  words  of  the  Apostle,  is
created  according  to  God  in  justice.'*

12.  Now  this  is  nothing  else  but  the  supernatural
light  giving  light  to  the  understanding,  so  that  the  human
understanding  becomes  divine,  made  one  with  the  divine.
In  the  same  way  divine  love  inflames  the  will  so  that  it
becomes  nothing  less  than  divine,  loving  in  a  divine  way,
united  and  made  one  with  the  divine  will  and  divine  love.
The  memory  is  affected  in  like  manner ;  all  the  desires
and  affections  also  are  changed  divinely  according  to  God.
Thus  the  soul  will  be  of  heaven,  heavenly,  divine  rather
than  human.

13.  All  this,  as  is  clear  from  what  I  have  said,  is  the
work  of  God  in  the  soul,  during  this  night,  enlightening
it  and  setting  it  on  fire  in  a  divine  way  with  an  anxious
solicitude  for  God  alone,  and  for  nought  besides.

14.  It  is  with  great  propriety  and  justice,  therefore,
that  the  soul  repeats  the  third  line  of  the  stanza,  which,
together  with  those  that  follow,  I  repeat  again  and  explain
in  the  following  chapter.


CHAPTER  XIV.

Repeats  and  explains  the  last  three  lines  of  the  first  stanza.

O  happy  lot !

Forth  unobserved  I  went.

My  house  being  now  at  rest.

The  happy  lot  of  which  the  soul  is  singing  in  the  first  of
these  three  lines  befel  it  through  those  means  of  which  it
speaks  in  the  two  lines  that  follow  it ;  making  use  of  a
metaphor,  it  describes  itself  as  one  who,  for  the  better

*  Ephes.  iv.  24.


112  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [BOOK  II.

execution  of  his  purpose,  goes  out  of  his  house  by  night,
in  the  dark,  the  inmates  of  which  are  at  rest,  in  order
that  none  might  hinder  him.  The  soul  having  to  perform
so  heroic  and  so  rare  an  act,  that  of  being  united  to
the  divine  Beloved,  sallies  forth,  because  the  Beloved
is  to  be  found  only  without,  in  solitude.  The  bride
therefore  desired  to  find  him  alone,  saying :  '  Who  shall
give  Thee  to  me  for  my  brother,  sucking  the  breasts  of
my  mother,  that  I  may  find  Thee  without  and  kiss
Thee  ?  '*  It  is  necessary  for  the  enamoured  soul,  in  order
to  obtain  the  end  desired,  to  act  in  the  same  way ;  to  go
out  by  night  when  all  the  inmates  of  its  house  repose  and
sleep ;  that  is,  when  its  lower  operations,  passions,  and
desires  are  at  rest  and  asleep  in  this  night.  These  are
the  inmates  of  its  house  which  when  awake  ever  hinder
its  good,  enemies  of  its  freedom.  These  are  they  of
whom  our  Saviour  said  in  the  holy  gospel,  '  A  man's
enemies  shall  be  they  of  his  own  household, 't

2.  Thus  it  is  necessary  that  their  operations  and
motions  should  be  lulled  to  sleep  in  this  night  in  order
that  they  may  be  no  hindrance  to  the  supernatural
blessings  of  union  with  God  in  love,  for  while  they
continue  to  energise  and  act,  that  is  unattainable.  All
movement  and  action  on  their  part,  instead  of  helping,
hinder  the  reception  of  the  spiritual  blessings  of  the  union
of  love,  because  all  natural  exertion  is  defective  with
regard  to  those  supernatural  blessings  which  God  alone
secretly  and  silently  infuses  into  the  passive  soul.  Hence
it  is  necessary  that  the  powers  of  the  soul  should  be  at
rest,  if  it  is  to  receive  what  God  infuses,  and  should  not

*  Cant.  viii.  i.  t  St.  Matt.  x.  36.


CHAP.  XV.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  llo

interfere    with    their    own    inferior     actions    and     base
inchnations.

3.  It  was  a  happy  lot  for  the  soul  when  God  in  this
night  put  all  its  household  to  sleep,  that  is,  all  the  powers,
passions,  affections,  and  desires  of  the  sensual  and
spiritual  soul,  that  it  may  attain  to  the  spiritual  union  of
the  perfect  love  of  God  '  unobserved,'  that  is,  unhindered
by  them,  because  they  were  all  asleep  and  mortified  in
that  night.  O  how  happy  must  the  soul  then  be,  when  it
can  escape  from  the  house  of  its  sensuality !  None  can
understand  it,  I  think,  except  that  soul  which  has
experienced  it.  That  soul  clearly  sees  how  wretched  was
its  former  slavery,  and  how  great  its  misery  when  it  lay  at
the  mercy  of  its  passions  and  desires ;  it  learns  now  that
the  life  of  the  spirit  is  true  liberty  and  riches,  with
innumerable  blessings  in  its  train,  some  of  which  I  shall
speak  of  while  explaining  the  following  stanzas,  when  it
will  more  clearly  appear,  what  good  reasons  the  soul  has
for  describing  the  passage  of  this  awful  night  as  a  happy
lot.


CHAPTER  XV.

The  second  stanza  and  its  explanation.

In  darkness  and  in  safety.
By  the  secret  ladder,  disguised,
0  happy  lot !

In  durkness  and  concealment.
My  ho7ise  being  now  at  rest.

In  this  stanza  the  soul  goes  on  singing  still  of  certain
properties  of  the  darkness  of  this  night,  speaking  again  of
the  happy  lot  which  befel  it  through  them.  It  speaks  of
them  in  answering  an  implied  objection,  observing  that

I


114  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II,

no  one  is  to  think  that  because  in  this  dark  night  it
passed  through  so  many  storms  of  affliction,  doubt,  fear
and  horror,  as  I  said  before^,  it  had  therefore  run  any  risk
of  being  lost ;  yea  rather,  it  found  safety  in  the  darkness,
because  in  the  darkness  it  was  free  and  skilfully  escaped
from  its  enemies  who  were  ever  hindering  its  departure.

2.  In  the  darkness  of  the  night  it  changed  its
garments,  and  disguised  itself  in  three  colours,  of  which
I  shall  speak  hereafter.!  It  sallied  forth  unknown  to
the  whole  of  its  household  by  a  most  secret  ladder,  which,
as  I  shall  show  in  the  proper  place,  is  a  living  faith — in
such  secrecy  and  silence,  for  the  better  execution  of  its
purpose,  that  it  could  not  possibly  be  in  greater  security ;
especially  now,  because  in  the  purgative  night,  the  desires,
passions,  and  affections  of  the  soul  are  asleep,  mortified,
and  subdued  ;  and  these  are  they  which,  awake  and  active,
would  never  have  consented  to  that  departure.


CHAPTER  XVI.

Showeth  how  the  soul  journeys  securely  when  in  darkness.

In  darkness  and  in  safety.

The  darkness  of  which  the  soul  here  speaks,  relates,  as  I
have  said, J  to  the  desires  and  powers  of  sense,  interior
and  spiritual,  all  of  which  are  deprived  of  their
natural  light  in  this  night,  that,  being  purified  as  to  this,
they  may  be  supernaturally  enlightened.  The  desires  of
sense  and  spirit  are  lulled  to  sleep  and  mortified,  unable
to  relish  anything  either  human  or  divine  :  the  affections
of    the    soul    are    thwarted    and    brought    low,    become

*  Ch.  V.  §  8.  t  Ch.  xxi.  %  Ch.  iii.


CHAP.  XVI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  115

helpless,  and  have  nothing  to  rest  upon  ;  the  imagination
is  fettered,  and  unable  to  make  any  profitable  reflections,
the  memory  is  gone,  and  the  will,  too,  is  dry  and  afflicted,
and  all  the  faculties  are  empty,  and,  moreover,  a  dense
and  heavy  cloud  overshadows  the  soul,  distresses  it  and
holds  it  as  if  it  were  far  away  from  God.  This  is  the
darkness  in  which  the  soul  says  that  it  travels  in  safety.

2.  The  reason  of  this  safety  has  been  clearly  shown  :
for  usually  the  soul  never  errs,  except  under  the  influence
of  its  desires,  or  tastes,  or  reflections,  or  understanding,
or  affections,  wherein  it  generally  is  overabundant,  or
defective,  changeable,  or  inconsistent ;  hence  the  in-
clination to  that  which  is  not  becoming.  It  is  therefore
clear  that  the  soul  is  secure  against  being  led  astray  by
them,  when  all  these  operations  and  movements  have
ceased.  Because  then  the'  soul  is  delivered,  not  only
from  itself,  but  also  from  its  other  enemies — the  world
and  the  devil — who,  when  the  affections  and  operations  of
the  soul  have  ceased,  cannot  assault  it  by  any  other  way
or  by  any  other  means.

3.  It  follows  from  this,  that  the  greater  the  darkness
and  emptiness  of  its  natural  operations  in  which  the  soul
travels,  the  greater  is  its  security.  For  as  the  prophet
saith,  '  Perdition  is  thine  own,  O  Israel ;  only  in  Me  is
thy  help.'*  The  perdition  of  the  soul  is  exclusively  its
own  work—  the  result  of  its  own  operations,  of  its
unsubdued  desires,  interior  and  sensual — and  its  salvation,
saith  God,  cometh  from  Me  only.  When  the  soul  is
hindered  from  giving  way  to  its  imperfections  there
descend  upon  it  forthwith  the  blessings  of  union  with  God,

*  Os.  xiii.  g.


116  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

in  its  desires  and  faculties  which  that  union  will  render
heavenly  and  divine.

4.  If,  therefore,  while  this  darkness  lasts,  the  soul  will
look  within,  it  will  very  clearly  see  how  slightly  the
desires  and  the  faculties  have  been  diverted  towards  vain
and  unprofitable  matters,  and  that  it  is  secure  itself
against  vainglory,  pride  and  presumption,  empty  rejoicing,
and  many  other  evils.  It  is  quite  clear,  therefore,  that
the  soul  which  is  in  this  darkness  is  not  onl}'  not  lost,  but
that  it  gains  much,  for  now  it  acquires  virtue.

5.  But  here  a  question  arises :  Why  is  it — seeing  that
the  things  of  God  are  profitable  and  beneficial  to  the  soul,
and  a  source  of  security — that  the  desires  and  faculties
are  so  darkened  by  Him  in  this  night  that  they  cannot
have  any  joy  in  spiritual  things  or  occupy  themselves  with
them  as  with  other  things,  but  are,  in  some  way,  less  able
to  do  so  ?  To  this  I  reply,  that  it  is  then  very  necessary
for  the  soul  not  to  act  and  be  devoid  of  pleasure  even  in
spiritual  things,  seeing  that  its  faculties  and  desires  are
base  and  impure  ;  and  even  if  the}-  have  pleasure  in,  and
are  familiar  with,  divine  and  supernatural  things,  that  can
be  only  in  a  mean  way.'

6.  It  is  a  philosophical  axiom  that  all  that  is  received
is  received  according  to  the  condition  of  the  recipient.
From  this  it  follows  that  the  natural  faculties — being
without  the  requisite  purity,  strength,  and  capacit}'  for  the
reception  and  fruition  of  divine  things  in  their  way,  which
is  divine,  but  only  in  their  own,  which  is  mean  and  vile —
must  be  in  darkness  with  regard  to  the  divine  way,  so  as
to  secure  their  perfect  purgation.  That  being  weaned,
purified,  and  brought  to  nothing,  they  may  lose  their  own


CHAP.  XVI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  117

mode  of  acting  and  receiving,  and  may  be  thus  disposed
and  tempered  for  the  reception  and  fruition  of  that  which
is  divine  in  a  high  and  noble  way  ;  which  cannot  be  if  the
old  man  do  not  die  lirst.  Hence  it  is  that  all  spiritual
graces  if  they  do  not  descend  from  the  Father  of  lights
upon  the  human  will  and  desire,  however  much  a  man
may  exercise  his  taste,  desire,  and  faculties  about  God,
and  however  much  he  may  seem  to  succeed,  are  still  not
divinely  nor  perfectly  enjoyed.

7.  As  to  this  I  might  here  show,  were  this  the  proper
place,  that  there  are  many  whose  tastes  and  affections,
and  the  operations  of  whose  faculties  are  directed  to  God
and  to  spiritual  things,  who  may  imagine  all  this  to  be
supernatural  and  spiritual,  when  in  reality  it  is  nothing
more,  perhaps,  than  acts  and  desires  most  natural  and
human.  As  they  regard  ordinary  matters,  so  also  do
they  regard  good  things,  with  a  certain  natural  facility
which  they  have  in  directing  their  faculties  and  desires
to  anything,  whatever  it  may  be.  If  I  can  find  an
opportunity  in  the  course  of  this  discussion,  I  propose  to
enter  upon  this  question,*  and  describe  some  of  the  signs
by  which  we  may  know  when  the  motives  and  interior
acts  of  the  soul  in  the  things  of  God  are  natural  only,
when  they  are  spiritual  only,  and  when  they  are  natural
and  spiritual  together.  It  is  enough  for  us  here  to  know
that  the  interior  acts  and  movements  of  the  soul,  if  they
are  to  be  divinely  influenced  by  God,  must  be  first  of  all
lulled  to  sleep,  darkened  and  subdued,  in  their  natural
state,  so  far  as  their  capacity  and  operations  are  concerned,
until  they  lose  all  their  strength.

*  Living  Flame,  St.  iii.  Bk.  4.


118  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

8.  O  spiritual  soul,  when  thou  seest  thy  desire
obscured,  thy  will  arid  and  constrained,  and  thy  faculties
incapable  of  any  interior  act,  be  not  grieved  at  this,  but
look  upon  it  rather  as  a  great  good,  for  God  is  delivering
thee  from  thyself,  taking  the  matter  out  of  thy  hands  ;
for  however  strenuously  thou  mayest  exert  thyself,  thou
wilt  never  do  anything  so  faultlessly,  perfectly,  and
securely  as  now — because  of  the  impurity  and  torpor  of
thy  faculties — when  God,  taking  thee  by  the  hand,  is
guiding  thee  in  the  dark  as  one  that  is  blind,  along  a  road
and  to  an  end  thou  knowest  not,  and  whither  thou  couldst
never  travel  by  the  help  of  thine  own  eyes  and  thine  own
feet,  however  strong  thou  mayest  be.

g.  The  reason  why  the  soul  not  only  travels  securely
when  it  thus  travels  in  the  dark,  but  makes  even  greater
progress,  is  this :  In  general  the  soul  makes  greater
progress  when  it  least  thinks  so,  yea,  most  frequently
when  it  imagines  that  it  is  losing.  Having  never  before
experienced  the  present  novelty  which  dazzles  it,  and
disturbs  its  former  habits,  it  considers  itself  as  losing,
rather  than  as  gaining  ground,  when  it  sees  itself  lost  in
a  place  it  once  knew,  and  in  which  it  delighted,  travelling
by  a  road  it  knows  not,  and  in  which  it  has  no  pleasure.
As  a  traveller  into  strange  countries  goes  by  ways  strange
and  untried,  relying  on  information  derived  from  others,
and  not  upon  any  knowledge  of  his  own — it  is  clear  that
he  will  never  reach  a  new  country  but  by  new  ways  which
he  knows  not,  and  by  abandoning  those  he  knew — so  in
the  same  way  the  soul  makes  the  greater  progress  when  it
travels  in  the  dark,  not  knowing  the  way.  But  inasmuch
as   God   Himself    is  here   the   guide   of  the  soul  in   its


CHAP.  XVI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  119

blindness,  the  soul  may  well  exult  and  say,  '  In  darkness
and  in  safety,'  now  that  it  has  come  to  a  knowledge  of  its
state.

10.  There  is  another  reason  also  why  the  soul  has
travelled  safely  in  this  obscurity ;  it  has  suffered  :  for  the
way  of  suffering  is  safer,  and  also  more  j^ofitable,  than
that  of  rejoicing  and  of  action.  In  suffering  God  gives
strength,  but  in  action  and  in  joy  the  soul  does  but  show
its  own  weakness  and  imperfections.  x\nd  in  suffering,
the  soul  practises  and  acquires  virtue,  and  becomes  pure,
wiser,  and  more  cautious.

11.  There  is  another  and  stronger  reason  why  the  soul
travels  securely  when  in  darkness.  This  reason  is  derived
from  the  consideration  of  the  light  itself,  or  dark  wisdom.
The  dark  night  of  contemplation  so  absorbs  the  soul,  and
brings  it  so  near  unto  God,  that  He  defends  it,  and
delivers  it  from  all  that  is  not  God.  For  the  soul  is  now,
as  it  were,  under  medical  treatment  for  the  recovery  of
its  health,  which  is  God  Himself:  God  compels  it  to
observe  a  particular  diet,  and  to  abstain  from  all  hurtful
things,  the  very  desire  for  them  being  subdued.  The  soul
is  treated  like  a  sick  man  respected  by  his  household,
who  is  so  carefully  tended  that  the  air  shall  not  touch
him,  nor  the  light  shine  upon  him,  whom  the  noise  of
footsteps  and  the  tumult  of  servants  shall  not  disturb,  and
to  whom  the  most  delicate  food  is  given  most  cautiously
by  measure,  and  that  nutritious  rather  than  savoury.

12.  All  these  advantages  —  they  all  minister  to  the
safe-keeping  of  the  soul — are  the  effects  of  this  dim
contemplation,  for  it  brings  the  soul  nearer  to  God.  The
truth   is,    that   the    nearer   the   soul    comes   to    Him    it


120  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

perceives  that  darkness  is  greater  and  deeper  because  of
its  own  weakness  ;  thus  the  nearer  the  sun  the  greater  the
darkness  and  distress  wrought  by  its  great  brightness,
because  our  eyes  are  weak,  imperfect,  and  defective.
Hence  it  is  that  the  spiritual  hght  of  God  is  so
immeasurable,  so  far  above  the  understanding,  that  when
it  comes  near  to  it,  it  dims  and  blinds  it.

13.  This  is  the  reason  why  David  said  that  God  made
darkness  His  hiding-place  and  covert.  His  tabernacle
around  Him,  dark  water  in  the  clouds  of  the  air."  The
dark  water  in  the  clouds  of  the  air  is  the  dim  contempla-
tion and  divine  wisdom  in  souls,  as  I  am  going  to  explain,  of
which  they  have  experience  as  a  thing  near  to  the  pavilion
where  He  dwells,  when  God  brings  them  nearer  to
Himself.  Thus,  that  which  in  God  is  light  and  supreme
splendour,  is  to  man  thick  darkness,  as  S.  Paul  saith,t
and  as  the  royal  prophet  David  explains  it  in  the  same
psalm,  saying  :  '  Because  of  the  brightness  of  His  presence
the  clouds  passed, 't  that  is,  clouds  and  darkness  over  the
natural  understanding,  'the  light  of  w^hich,'  saith  the
prophet  Isaias,  'is  darkened  in  the  mist  thereof.'§

14.  O  wretched  condition  of  this  life  wherein  it  is  so
difficult  to  find  the  truth  !  That  which  is  most  clear  and
true,  is  to  us  most  obscure  and  doubtful,  and  we  therefore
avoid  it  though  it  is  most  necessary  for  us.  That  which
shines  the  most,  and  dazzles  our  eyes,  that  we  embrace
and  follow  after,  though  it  is  most  hurtful  to  us,  and
makes  us  stumble  at  every  step.  In  what  fear  and  danger
then  must  man  be  living,  seeing  that  the  very  light  of  his

*  Ps.  xvii.  12.

t  Acts  xxii.  II.     'I  did  not  see  for  the  brightness  of  that  Hght.'

X  Ps.  xvii.  13.  §  Is.  V.  30.


CHAP.  XVI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  121

natural  eyes,  by  which  he  directs  his  steps,  is  the  very
first  to  bewilder  and  deceive  him  when  he  would  draw
near  unto  God.  If  he  wishes  to  be  sure  of  the  road  he
travels  on,  he  must  close  his  eyes  and  walk  in  the  dark,  if
he  is  to  journey  in  safety  from  his  domestic  foes,  which
are  his  own  senses  and  faculties.

15.  Well  hidden  and  protected  then  is  the  soul  in  the
dark  waters  close  to  God.  For  as  the  dark  waters  are
a  tabernacle  and  dwelling-place  for  God  Himself,  so  they
are  also  to  the  soul  perfect  safety  and  protection,  though
in  darkness,  where  it  is  hidden  and  protected  from  itself,
as  I  have  said,*  and  from  all  the  injuries  that  created
things  may  inflict.  It  is  of  souls  thus  protected  that
David  spoke  when  he  said  in  another  psalm  :  '  Thou  shalt
hide  them  in  the  secret  of  Thy  face,  from  the  disturbance
of  men.  Thou  shalt  protect  them  in  Thy  tabernacle  from
the  contradiction  of  tongues. 't  These  words  comprehend
all  kinds  of  protection  ;  for  to  be  hidden  '  in  the  secret  of
the  face  '  of  God  '  from  the  disturbance  of  men,'  is  to  be
strengthened  in  the  dim  contemplation  against  all  the
assaults  of  men.  To  be  protected  in  His  '  tabernacle
from  the  contradiction  of  tongues,'  is  to  be  engulfed  in
the  dark  waters,  which  is  the  tabernacle  of  which  David
speaks.  That  soul,  therefore,  whose  desires  and  affections
are  weaned,  and  whose  faculties  are  in  darkness,  is  set
free  from  all  the  imperfections  which  war  against  the
spirit,  whether  they  proceed  from  the  flesh,  or  from  any
other  created  thing.  The  soul,  therefore,  may  well  say,
'  In  darkness  and  in  safety.'

16.  Another  reason,  not  less  conclusive,  why  the  soul,

*  §  I.  ■  t  Ps.  XXX.  21,  22.


122  THE  DARK  NIGHT  [bOOK  II.

though  in  darkness,  travels  securely,  is  derived  from  that
courage  which  it  acquires  as  soon  as  it  enters  within  the
dark,  painful,  and  gloomy  waters  of  God.  Though  it  be
dark,  still  it  is  water,  and  therefore  cannot  but  refresh
and  strengthen  the  soul  in  all  that  is  most  necessary  for
it,  though  it  does  so  painfully  and  in  darkness.  For  the
soul  immediately  discerns  in  itself  a  certain  courage  and
resolution  to  do  nothing  which  it  knows  to  be  displeasing
unto  God,  and  to  leave  nothing  undone  which  ministers
to  His  service,  because  this  love,  which  is  dim,  is  most
watchful  and  careful  of  what  it  is  to  do,  and  what  it  is  to
leave  undone,  for  His  sake,  so  as  to  please  Him.  It  looks
around  and  considers  in  a  thousand  ways  whether  it  has
done  anything  to  offend  Him,  and  all  this  with  much
more  solicitude  and  carefulness  than  it  ever  did  before,  as
I  said  when  speaking  of  this  anxious  love.*  Here  all  the
desires,  all  the  strength,  and  all  the  powers  of  the  soul,
recollected  from  all  besides,  direct  all  their  efforts  and  all
their  energies  to  the  service  of  God  only.  Thus  the  soul
goes  forth  out  of  itself,  away  from  all  created  things,  to
the  sweet  and  delightsome  union  of  the  love  of  God,  '  in
darkness  and  in  safety.'


CHAPTER    XVn.

Gives  the  second  line  and  explains  how  this  dim  contemplation

is  secret.

By  the  Strret  ladder,  disguised.

I  HAVE  three  things  to  explain  in  reference  to  the  three
words  of  this  line.     Two  of  them — '  secret '  and  '  ladder  '

*  Bk.  I  ch.  xi.  §  3,  and  ch.  xi.  supr.


CHAP.  XVII,]  OF    THE    SOUL.  123

— belong  to  the  dark  night  of  contemplation  of  which  I
am  speaking,  but  the  third — '  disguised  ' — belongs  to  the
way  of  the  soul  therein.  As  to  the  first,  the  soul  calls  the
dim  contemplation,  by  which  it  goes  forth  to  the  union  of
love,  a  secret  ladder,  and  that  because  of  two  properties
of  it  which  I  am  going  to  explain.  First,  this  dark
contemplation  is  called  secret,  because  it  is,  as  I  have
said  before,*  the  mystical  theology  which  theologians  call
secret  wisdom,  and  which  according  to  St.  Thomas!  is
infused  into  the  soul  more  especially  by  love.  This
happens  in  a  secret  hidden  way  in  which  the  natural
operations  of  the  understanding  and  the  other  faculties
have  no  share.  And,  therefore,  because  the  faculties
of  the  soul  cannot  compass  it,  it  being  the  Holy
Ghost  Who  infuses  it  into  the  soul,  in  a  way  it
knoweth  not,  as  the  Bride  saith  in  the  Canticle,  t  we
call  it  secret.

2.  And,  in  truth,  it  is  not  the  soul  only  that  knows  it
not,  but  every  one  else,  even  the  devil ;  because  the
Master  who  now  teaches  the  soul  dwells  substantially
within  it.  This  is  not  the  only  reason  why  it  is  called
secret,  for  it  is  secret  also  in  its  effects.  It  is  not  only
secret  beyond  the  powers  of  the  soul  to  speak  of  it,  during
the  darkness  and  sharpness  of  the  purgation,  when  the
secret  wisdom  is  purifying  the  soul,  but  afterwards  also,

*  Ch.  V.  §  I.

t  [S.    Thom.    2da3     qu.    i8o,    art    i.       Et    propter    hoc    Gregorius —
Horn.    14    in    Ezech.    ante    med.    constituit    vitam    con  templativam   in

charitate    Dei ideo    vita    contemplativa  terminatur    ad

dilectionem,  quae  est   in  affecta,   ex  quo  etiam  amor  intenditur.]

I  Cant.  vi.  11.


124  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II,

during  the  illumination,  when  that  wisdom  is  most  clearly
communicated,  it  is  so  secret  that  it  cannot  be  discerned
or  described.  Moreover,  the  so.ul  has  no  wish  to  speak  of
it,  and  besides,  it  can  discover  no  way  or  proper  similitude
to  describe  it  by,  so  as  to  make  known  a  knowledge  so
high,  a  spiritual  impression  so  delicate  and  infused.  Yea,
and  if  it  could  have  a  wish  to  speak  of  it,  and  find  terms
to  describe  it,  it  would  always  remain  secret  still.

3.  Because  this  interior  wisdom  is  so  simple,  general,
and  spiritual,  that  it  enters  not  into  the  understanding
under  any  form  or  image  subject  to  sense,  as  is  sometimes
the  case,  the  imagination,  therefore,  and  the  senses—  as  it
has  not  entered  in  by  them,  nor  is  modified  by  them  —
cannot  account  for  it,  nor  form  any  conception  of  it,  so  as
to  speak  in  any  degree  correctly  about  it,  though  the  soul
be  distinctly  conscious  that  it  feels  and  tastes  this  sweet
and  strange  wisdom.  The  soul  is  like  a  man  who  sees  an
object  for  the  first  time,  the  like  of  which  he  has  never
seen  before  ;  he  handles  it  and  feels  it,  yet  he  cannot  say
what  it  is,  or  tell  its  name,  do  what  he  can,  though  it  be
at  the  same  time  an  object  cognisable  by  the  senses.
How  much  less  then  can  that  be  described  which  does  not
enter  in  by  the  senses  ?

4.  Such  is  the  nature  of  the  divine  language  that
the  more  interior,  infused,  and  spiritual  it  is,  the  more  it
transcends  every  sense ;  the  powers  of  the  senses,
interior  and  exterior,  cease,  and  their  harmonies  become
mute.

5.  The  Holy  Writings  supply  both  proofs  and  illustra-
tions of  this  principle.  Jeremias  shows  the  impossibility
of  manifesting   and   expressing  it    in    words :    for   when


CHAP.  XVII,]  OF    THE    SOUL.  125

God  had  spoken  to  him  he  knew  not  what  to  say,  except,
'  Ah,  ah,  ah,  Lord  God.'*  Moses,  also,  is  an  instance  of
the  interior  helplessness,  that  is,  of  the  interior  imaginative
sense,  and  of  the  exterior  also  at  the  same  time  :  for  when
God  spoke  to  him  out  of  the  bush,  he  not  only  saw  that
he  could  not  speak,  but  as  is  said  in  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,!  he  '  durst  not  behold  ;  '|  that  is,  the  imagination
itself  was  weak  and  silent.  The  wisdom  of  this  contem-
plation is  the  language  of  God  addressed  to  the  soul,  as
pure  spirit,  and  as  the  senses  are  not  spiritual,  so  they  do
not  perceive  it ;  it  remains  therefore  a  secret  from  them,
they  cannot  understand  it  nor  express  it.

6.  This  explains  why  some  persons,  walking  in  this
way,  good  and  timid  souls,  who,  when  they  would  give  an
account  of  their  interior  state  to  their  directors,  know  not
how  to  do  it,  neither  have  they  the  power  to  do  it,  and  so
feel  a  great  repugnance  to  explain  themselves,  especially
when  contemplation  is  the  more  simple  and  with  difficulty
discernible  by  them.  All  they  can  say  is  that  their  soul
is  satisfied,  calm,  or  contented,  that  they  have  a  sense  of
the  presence  of  God,  and  that  all  goes  well  with  them,  as
they  think  ;  but  they  cannot  explain  their  state,  except  by
general  expressions  of  this  kind.  But  it  is  a  different
matter  when  they  have  a  consciousness  of  particular
things,  such  as  visions,  impressions,  and  the  like  ;  these  in
general  are  communicated  under  some  species,  in  which  the
senses  participate  ;  in  that  case  they  are  able  to  describe
them.  But  it  is  not  in  the  nature  of  pure  contemplation
that  it  can  be  described  ;  for  it  can  scarcely  be  spoken  of
in  words,  and  therefore  w^e  call  it  secret.

*  Jerem.  i.  6.  f  Exod.  iv.  lo.  J  Acts.  vii.  32.


126  THE    DARK   NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

7,  This  is  not  the  only  reason  why  it  is  called  secret,
and  why  it  is  so.  There  is  another,  namely  the  mystical
wisdom  has  the  property  of  hiding  the  soul  within  itself.
For  beside  its  ordinary  operation,  it  sometimes  so  absorbs
the  soul  and  plunges  it  in  this  secret  abyss  that  the  soul
sees  itself  distinctly  as  far  away  from,  and  abandoned  by,
all  created  things  ;  it  looks  upon  itself  as  one  that  is
placed  in  a  wild  and  vast  solitude  whither  no  human
being  can  come,  as  in  an  immense  wilderness  without
limits  ;  a  wilderness,  the  more  delicious,  sweet,  and
lovely,  the  more  it  is  wide,  vast,  and  lonely,  where  the
soul  is  the  more  hidden,  the  more  it  is  raised  up  above  all
created  things.

8.  This  abyss  of  wisdom  now  so  exalts  and  elevates
the  soul — orderly  disposing  it  for  the  science  of  love — that
it  makes  it  not  only  understand  how  mean  are  all  created
things  in  relation  to  the  supreme  wisdom  and  divine
knowledge,  but  also,  how  low,  defective,  and,  in  a  certain
sense,  improper,  are  all  the  words  and  phrases  by  which
in  this  life  we  discuss  divine  things,  and  how  utterly
impossible  by  any  natural  means,  however  profoundly  and
learnedly  we  may  speak,  to  understand  and  see  them  as
they  are,  except  in  the  light  of  mystical  theology.  And  so
the  soul  in  the  light  thereof,  discerning  this  truth,  namely,
that  it  cannot  reach  it,  and  still  less  explain  it  by  the
terms  of  ordinary  speech,  justly  calls  it  secret.

g.  This  property  of  being  secret,  and  of  surpassing  all
natural  capacity,  belongs  to  divine  contemplation,  not
only  because  it  is  itself  supernatural,  but  also  because  it  is
the  guide  of  the  soul  to  the  perfections  of  union  with  God,
which  not  being  humanly  known,  we  must  reach  by  not


CHAP.  XVII,]  OF    THE    SOUL.  127

knowing  the  way,  and  being  divinely  ignorant.  For,  to
use  the  language  of  mystical  theology,  as  we  are  doing,
these  things  are  neither  understood  nor  known  when  the}^
are  sought,  but  when  they  are  found  and  practised.  For
thus  the  prophet  Baruch  speaks  of  the  divine  wisdom  :
'  There  is  none  that  can  know  her  ways,  nor  that  can
search  out  her  paths."''  The  royal  prophet  also,  speaking
of  this  way  of  the  soul,  says  unto  God  :  '  Thy  lightnings
enlightened  the  round  world,  the  earth  was  moved
and  trembled.  Thy  way  is  in  the  sea,  and  Thy  paths
in  many  waters,  and  Thy  steps  shall  not  be  known. 't
All  this  in  a  spiritual  sense  explains  the  matter  I  am
discussing.

10.  The  lightnings  that  enlightened  the  round  world
is  the  illumination  of  the  faculties  of  the  soul  in  the
divine  contemplation,  the  moving  and  trembling  of  the
earth  is  the  painful  purgation  of  which  it  is  the  cause.
To  say  that  the  way  of  God,  by  which  the  soul  draws
near  unto  Him,  is  in  the  sea,  and  His  paths  in  many
waters,  and  therefore  not  known,  is  to  say  that  this  way
to  God  is  as  secret,  and  as  hidden  from  the  senses  of  the
soul,  as  the  way  of  one  who  walks  on  the  waters  is  from
the  senses  of  the  body,  and  whose  paths  and  steps  are  not
known.  The  paths  and  steps  of  God  in  those  souls
which  He  is  drawing  to  Himself,  making  them  great  in
the  union  of  His  wisdom,  have  this  property,  that  they
are  not  known.  That  is  the  meaning  of  these  words  in
the  book  of  Job,  impressing  upon  us  this  truth,  '  Knowest
thou  the  great  paths  of  the  clouds,  and  perfect
knowledges  ?  't   that  is,  the  paths  and  ways  of  God,  in

*  Baruch  iii.  31.  f  Ps.  Ixxvi.  19,  20.  X  Job  xxxvii.  16.


128  THE    DARK   NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

which  He  makes  souls  great  and  perfect  in  His  wisdom  ;
these  are  the  clouds.  This  contemplation,  therefore,
which  guides  the  soul  to  God  is  secret  wisdom.


CHAPTER  XVni.

Shows  how  this  secret  wisdom  is  also  a  ladder.

It  remains  for  me  to  explain  the  second  property,  namely,
how  this  secret  wisdom  is  also  a  ladder.  There  are  many
reasons  for  calling  secret  contemplation  a  ladder.  In  the
first  place,  as  men  employ  ladders  to  mount  up  to  those
strong  places  where  treasures  are  laid  up,  so  also  by
secret  contemplation,  without  knowing  how,  the  soul
ascends,  and  mounts  upwards,  to  the  knowledge  and
possession  of  the  goods  and  treasures  of  heaven.  This  is
well  expressed  by  the  royal  prophet  David  when  he  says,
'  Blessed  is  the  man  whose  help  is  from  Thee :  he  hath
disposed  ascensions  in  his  heart,  in  the  vale  of  tears,  in
the  place  which  he  hath  appointed.  For  the  Lawgiver
shall  give  blessing ;  they  shall  go  from  virtue  into  virtue  :
the  God  of  gods  shall  be  seen  in  Sion ;  "■'  He  is  the
treasure  of  the  citadel  of  Sion  which  is  blessedness.

2.  We  may  also  call  it  a  ladder,  for  as  the  steps  of  one
and  the  same  ladder  serve  to  descend  as  well  as  to  ascend
by,  so,  too,  those  very  communications  which  the  soul
receives  in  secret  contemplation  raise  it  up  to  God  and
make  it  humble.  For  the  communications  which  really
come  from  God  have  this  property  :  they  humble  and
exalt  the  soul  at  one  and  the  same  time.     In  the  spiritual

*  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  6,  7,  8.


CHAP.  XVIII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  129

way,  to  descend  is  to  ascend,  and  to  ascend  is  to  descend,
'  because  everyone  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  humbled,
and  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted.''''  Moreover,
as  the  virtue  of  humility  is  an  exaltation,  for  the  trial  of
the  soul  therein,  God  is  wont  to  make  it  ascend  by  this
ladder  that  it  may  descend,  and  make  it  descend  that  it
may  ascend ;  for  thus  are  fulfilled  the  words  of  the  Wise
Man,  '  Before  he  be  broken  the  heart  of  a  man  is  exalted,
and  before  he  be  glorified  it  is  humbled. 't

3.  If  the  soul  will  reflect  on  the  nature  of  a  ladder — I
omit  the  spiritual  which  is  not  perceptible — it  will  easily
see  how  uneven  is  the  road ;  how  after  prosperity,  which
makes  it  glad,  storms  and  trials  follow  at  once,  so  that  its
previous  repose  seems  to  have  been  given  it  to  prepare  it
and  strengthen  it  for  its  present  sufferings ;  how  also,
after  misery  and  distress,  come  abundance  and  ease,  so
that  the  soul  shall  seem  to  have  kept  a  vigil  before
the  feast.  This  is  the  ordinary  course  of  the  state  of
contemplation,  for  until  the  soul  attains  to  repose  it  never
continues  in  one  state ;  for  all  is  ascending  and
descending.  The  reason  is  this  ;  the  state  of  perfection,
which  consists  in  the  perfect  love  of  God  and  contempt  of
self,  can  only  subsist  on  two  conditions,  the  knowledge
of  God  and  of  oneself.  The  soul,  therefore,  must  of
necessity  be  tried  in  the  one  and  the  other,  in  the  first
which  exalts  it,  by  giving  it  to  taste  the  sweetness  of  God,
in  the  second  which,  by  trials,  humbles  it,  until,  perfect
habits  having  been  acquired,  it  ceases  to  ascend  and
descend,  having  arrived  at  the  summit,  united  with  God,
Who  is  at  the  top  of  it,  and  on  Whom,  too,  the  ladder  rests.

*  St.  Luke  xiv.  11.  f  Prov.  xviii.  12.

K


130  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK  II.

4.  The  ladder  of  contemplation,  which,  as  I  have  said,
comes  down  from  God,  is  shadowed  forth  by  that  ladder
which  Jacob  saw  in  a  dream,  and  the  angels  ascending
and  descending  by  it,  from  God  to  man  and  from  man  to
God,  Who  was  Himself  leaning  upon  it.*  This  took
place  by  night,  when  Jacob  slept,  as  the  Scriptures
declare,  that  we  may  learn  from  it  how  secret  is  the  way
and  ascent  unto  God,  and  how  different  from  all  human
conception.  This  is  plain  enough,  for,  in  general,  that
which  is  to  our  greater  profit — the  loss  and  annihilation
of  self — we  esteem  a  calamity  ;  and  that  which  is  of  but
little  value —comfort  and  sweetness,  where,  in  general,  we
lose  instead  of  gaining — we  look  upon  as  the  more
advantageous  for  us.

5.  But,  to  speak  with  more  accuracy,  and  to  the
purpose,  of  the  ladder  of  secret  contemplation,  I  must
observe  that  the  chief  reason  why  it  is  called  a  ladder  is,
that  contemplation  is  the  science  of  love,  which  is  an
infused  loving  knowledge  of  God,  and  which  enlightens
the  soul  and  at  the  same  time  kindles  within  it  the  fire
of  love  till  it  shall  ascend  upwards  step  by  step  unto
God  its  Creator ;  for  it  is  love  only  that  unites  the  soul
and  God.  With  a  view  to  the  greater  clearness  of  this
matter,  I  shall  mark  the  steps  of  this  divine  ladder,
explaining  concisely  the  signs  and  effects  of  each,  that  the
soul  may  be  able  to  form  some  conjecture  on  which  of
them  it  stands.  I  shall  distinguish  between  them  by
their   effects   with    St.    Bernard    and    St.   Thomas,t   and

*  Gen.  xxviii.  12,  13.
t[S.  Thom.  de  dilectione  Dei  et  Proximi,  cap.  xxvii.  Ut  dicit  Bernardus,
magna  res  est  amor,  sed  sunt  in  eo  gradus,  Loquendo  ergo  aliquantulum
magic  moraliter  quam  realiter  decem  amoris  gradus  distinguere  possumus,
per  quos  contingit  a  statu  viae  ad  statum  patriae  scandere  ordinate,  quos
gradus  cognosces  per  actus.]


CHAP.  XIX.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  131

because  it  is  not  naturally  possible  to  know  them  as  they
are  in  themselves,  because  the  ladder  of  love  is  so  secret
that  it  can  be  weighed  and  measured  by  God  only.


CHAPTER    XIX.

Begins  the  explanation  of  the  ten  degrees  of  the  mystic  ladder
according  to  St.  Bernard  and  St.  Thomas.

The  steps  of  the  ladder  of  love,  by  which  the  soul,
ascending  from  one  to  another,  rises  upwards  to  God,  we
say  .are  ten.  The  first  degree  of  love  makes  the  soul
languish  to  its  great  profit.  On  this  the  bride  is  speaking
when  she  says,  '  I  adjure  you,  O  daughters  of  Jerusalem,
if  you  find  my  beloved,  that  you  tell  him  that  I  languish
with  love.'*  This  languishing  is  not  unto  death,  but  to
the  glory  of  God ;  for  the  soul  faints  away  as  to  sin  and
all  things  whatsoever  that  are  not  God,  for  God's  sake,  as
the  Psalmist  testifies,  saying :  '  My  spirit  hath  fainted
away'f  from  all  things  after  Thy  salvation;  as  he  says
in  another  place :  '  My  soul  hath  fainted  after  Thy
salvation. 'J

2.  As  a  sick  man  loses  the  desire  for,  and  the  taste  of
all  food,  and  the  colour  vanishes  from  his  face,  so  the  soul
in  this  degree  of  love  loses  all  pleasure  in  earthly  things,
and  all  desire  of  them,  and,  like  one  in  love,  changes  its
colour.  The  soul  does  not  fall  into  this  languishing  state
if  the  vehement  heat  descends  not  into  it  from  above,
which  is  the  mystic  fever,  according  to  the  words  of  the

*  Cant.  V.  8.  f  Ps.  cxlii.  7.  j  Ps.  cxviii.  81,

H  2


132  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

Psalmist,   '  Voluntary  rain  shalt  Thou  separate,  O  God,

to  thine  inheritance,  and  it  was  weakened,  but  Thou  hast

perfected  it.'*     This  languishing  and  fainting  away  as  to

all  things — it  is  the  first  and  earliest  step  to  God — I  have

already  explained,!  when  I  spoke  of  that  annihilation  to

which  the  soul  is  brought  when  it  begins  to  stand  upon

the  ladder  of  contemplative  purgation,  when  it  finds  no

comfort,  pleasure,  nor  support  anywhere.     In  consequence

of  which  it  begins  immediately  to  climb  the  other  steps  of

the  ladder.

3.     On  the  second  step  the  soul  is  unremitting  in  its

search  after  God.     Thus  the  bride  speaks  of  her  seeking

Him  in  her  bed  by  night — she  had  fainted  away  when  on

the  first  step  of  the  ladder — and  had  not  found  Him,  says  :

'I  will  rise;  I  will  seek  Him  whom   my   soul   loveth.'t

This  is  now  the  unceasing  occupation  of  the  soul,  '  Seek

ye  the  Lord,  seek  His  face  evermore, '§  is  the  counsel  of

the  Psalmist,  and  never  rest  until  He  be  found ;  like  the

bride   who,    when    she   had    questioned    the   watchmen,

passed  on  in  her  search,  |i  and  left  them.     Mary  Magdalene

did  not  remain  even  with  the  angels  at  the  sepulchre.^

So  anxious  is  the  soul  now  that  it  seeks  the  Beloved  in  all

things ;  all  its  thoughts,  words,  and  works  are  referred  to

Him ;  in  eating,  sleeping,  and  waking,  all  its  anxieties  are

about  Him,  as  I  have  already  described  it  when  speaking

of   the    anxieties   of  love.'''*     As   love   becomes    strong,

regaining  health,  it  commences  the  ascent  to  the  third

step  by  a  new  purgation  in  the  night — as  I  shall  hereafter

explainft — and  which  issues  in  the  effects  that  follow.

*  Ps.  Ixvii.  10.  t  Bk.  I  ch.  xi.  J  Cant.  iii.  i,  2.  §  Ps.  civ.  4.

II  Cant.  iii.  4.  ^  St.  John  xx.  14.  **  Bk.  2  ch.  xi.  §  7.

ft  Spirit.  Cant,  stanza  xiii.


CHAP.  XIX.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  133

4.  The  third  step  of  the  ladder  of  love  renders  the
soul  active  and  fervent,  so  that  it  faints  not.  Of  this
step  the  royal  prophet  said,  '  Blessed  is  the  man  that
feareth  our  Lord,  he  shall  delight  exceedingly  in  His
commandments.'*  If  then,  fear,  being  the  fruit  of  love,
produces  this  delight,  what  will  be  the  effect  of  love  itself?
On  this  step  the  soul  looks  on  great  things  as  little,  on
many  as  few,  its  long  service  as  short,  by  reason  of  the
fire  of  love  which  is  burning.  It  is  with  the  soul  as  it
was  with  Jacob,  who  '  served  seven  years  for  Rachel,  and
they  seemed  but  a  few  days,  because  of  the  greatness  of
his  love.'f  If  the  love  of  a  created  being  did  so  much  in
Jacob,  what  will  the  love  of  the  Creator  Himself  do,  when
it  shall  have  taken  possession  of  the  soul  on  the  third  step
of  the  ladder  ?

5.  Here  the  soul,  because  of  the  great  love  it  has
for  God,  is  in  great  pain  and  suffering  because  of  the
scantiness  of  its  service ;  if  it  could  lawfully  die  for  Him
a  thousand  times  it  would  be  comforted.  It  looks  upon
itself  therefore  as  unprofitable  in  all  it  does,  and  on  its
life  as  worthless.  Another  most  wonderful  effect  is  that
it  looks  upon  itself  as  being  in  truth  the  very  worst  of  all,
because  its  love  continues  to  show  it  what  is  due  to  God ;
and  then,  because  as  it  labours  much  in  the  service  of
God  and  sees  how  faulty  and  imperfect  are  its  works,  it  is
ashamed  and  distressed,  seeing  that  the  service  it  renders
to  God  Who  is  so  high,  is  so  exceedingly  mean.  On  this
third  step  the  soul  is  very  far  from  giving  way  to  vainglory
or  presumption,  or  from  condemning  others.  These
anxious  effects  and  other  of  the  same  kind  are  wrought  in

*  Ps.  cxi.  I.  t  Gen.  xxix.  20.


134  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

the  soul  when  on  the  third  step  of  the  ladder,  and  so  the
soul  acquires  strength  and  courage  to  ascend  to  the  fourth.

6.  When  the  soul  is  on  the  fourth  step  of  the  ladder
of  love,,  it  falls  into  a  state  of  suffering,  but  without
weariness,  on  account  of  the  Beloved ;  for,  as  St.  Augustine
saith,  love  makes  all  that  is  grievous  and  heavy  to  be
light  as  nothing.'''  It  was  on  this  step  that  the  bride
stood  when  longing  for  the  last,  she  said :  '  Put  me  as  a
seal  upon  Thy  heart,  as  a  seal  upon  Thy  arm ;  for  love '
— that  is,  the  acts  and  operations  of  love — '  is  strong  as
death  ;  jealousy  is  hard  as  hell.'t

7.  The  spirit  is  now  so  strong,  and  has  so  subdued
the  flesh,  and  makes  so  little  of  it,  that  it  is  as  regardless
of  it  as  a  tree  is  of  one  of  its  leaves.  It  seeks  not  for
consolation  or  sweetness  either  in  God  or  elsewhere,
neither  does  it  pray  for  God's  gifts  through  any  motive  of
self-interest,  or  its  own  satisfaction.  For  all  it  cares
for  now  is  how  it  shall  please  God,  and  serve  Him  in
some  measure  in  return  for  His  goodness,  and  for  the
graces  it  has  received,  and  this  at  any  and  every  cost.

8.  It  is  now  saying  with  heart  and  mind,  my  God  and

my  Lord,  how  many  there  are  who  seek  their  own  comfort

and  joy  in  Thee  and  who  pray  for  gifts  and  graces,  but

those  who    strive  to  please  Thee,  who  offer  Thee   that

which   costs  them  something,  and  who   cast    their  own

interests  aside,  are  very  few ;  it  is  not  Thy  will  to  show

mercy  that  fails,   O   my  God  !    but  it  is  we  who  fail  in

using  Thy  mercies  in  Thy  service,  so  as  to  bind  Thee  to

show  us  Thy  mercy  continually.

*  Serm.  LXX.  de  Verb.  Evan.  Matth.  Opp.  torn.  v.  p.  383.     Lib.  de
Viduitate,  Cap.  21,  Tom.  vi.  p.  384.     Ed.  Ben.
t  Cant.  viii.  6.


CHAP.  XIX.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  135

g.  This  degree  of  love  is  exceedingly  high,  for  now  as
the  soul,  earnest  in  its  love,  always  follows  after  God  in
the  spirit  of  suffering  for  His  sake,  God  frequently  and,  as
it  were,  continually  gives  it  joy,  visiting  it  sweetly  in
spirit,  for  the  boundless  love  of  Christ,  the  Word,  cannot
look  on  tho  sufferings  of  the  souls  that  love  without
coming  to  their  relief.  He  has  promised  this  by
the  mouth  of  the  prophet  Jeremias,  saying,  '  I  have
remembered  thee,  pitying  thy  youth  .  .  .  when  thou
followedst  me  in  the  desert,'*  which  in  its  spiritual  sense
is  that  detachment  of  the  soul  from  all  created  things,  not
resting  upon  them  nor  at  ease  among  them.  On  this
fourth  step  of  the  ladder  the  soul  is  so  inflamed  with  love,
and  so  set  on  fire  with  the  desire  after  God,  that  it
ascends  upwards  to  the  fifth,  which  is  the  next.

10.  On  the  fifth  step  of  the  ladder  the  soul  longs  after
God,  and  desires  Him  with  impatience.  So  great  is  the
eagerness  of  the  soul  on  this  step  to  embrace,  and  be
united  to,  the  Beloved,  that  all  delay,  how  slight  soever,
seems  to  it  long,  tedious,  and  oppressive,  and  it  is  ever
thinking  that  it  has  found  its  love ;  but  when  it  sees  that
its  desires  are  disappointed — which  is  almost  continually
the  case — it  faints  away  through  its  longing,  as  the
Psalmist  says,  speaking  of  this  step  :  '  My  soul  longeth
and  fainteth  for  the  courts  of  our  Lord.'t  On  this  step
the  soul  must  either  obtain  its  desires  or  die,  as  Rachel,
because  of  her  great  longing  for  children  said  to  Jacob,
her  husband,  '  Give  me  children,  otherwise  I  shall  die.'t
The  soul  is  now  nourished  by  love,  for  as  was  its  hunger
so  is  its  abundance,  and  so  it  ascends  to  the  sixth  step,
the  effects  of  which  are  as  follows.

*  Jerem.  ii.  2.  f  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  2.  X  Gen.  xxx.  i.


136  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

CHAPTER  XX.

Of  the  other  five  degrees.

When  the  soul  has  ascended  to  the  sixth  step,  it  runs
swiftly  to  God ;  and  hope  too  runs  without  fainting,  for
love  that  has  made  it  strong  makes  it  fly  rapidly.  Of  this
step  also  Isaias  speaks,  saying :  '  They  that  hope  in  our
Lord  shall  change  their  strength,  they  shall  take  wings  as
eagles,  they  shall  run  and  not  labour,  they  shall  walk  and
not  faint, '*"  to  this  step  also  the  Psalmist  refers  :  '  As  the
hart  panteth  after  the  fountains  of  waters,  so  my  soul
panteth  after  Thee,  O  God.'t  The  hart  when  thirsty
runs  very  swiftly  to  the  water.  The  cause  of  this
swiftness  which  the  soul  experiences  on  this  step  is,  that
charity  is  enlarged,  and  the  soul  is'  now  almost  wholly
purified,  as  it  is  written  in  the  psalm  :  '  without  iniquity
have  I  run,'t  and  in  another  psalm,  '  I  ran  the  way  of
Thy  commandments,  when  Thou  didst  dilate  my  heart,'§
and  thus  the  soul  ascends  immediately  from  the  sixth
to  the  seventh  degree  which  follows.

2.  On  the  seventh  step  the  soul  becomes  vehemently
bold,  in  this  intense  and  loving  exaltation,  no  prudence
can  withhold  it,  no  counsel  control  it,  no  shame  restrain
it ;  for  the  favour  which  God  hath  shown  it  has  made  it
vehemently  bold.  This  explains  to  us  those  words  of  the
Apostle,  that  charity  '  believeth  all  things,  hopeth  all
things,  endureth  all  things.' |i  It  was  on  this  step  that
Moses  spoke,  when   he  said  unto   God  :  '  Either  forgive

*  Is.  xl.  31.  t  Ps.  xli.  I.  +  lb.  Iviii.  5.

§  Ps.  cxviii.  32.  II   I  Cor.  xiii.  7.


CHAP.  XX.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  137

them  this  trespass,  or  if  Thou  do  not,  strike  me  out  of  the
book  that  Thou  hast  written.'*  Men  of  this  spirit  obtain
from  God  what  they  so  lovingly  pray  for.  Hence  the
words  of  David ;  '  Delight  in  the  Lord,  and  He  will  give
thee  the  requests  of  thy  heart  'f

3.  Standing  on  this  step,  the  bride  was  bold,  and  said
'  Let  Him  kiss  me  with  the  kiss  of  His  mouth.' |  But
consider  well  here,  it  is  not  lawful  to  be  thus  bold,  unless
the  soul  feels  that  the  interior  favour  of  the  king's  sceptre
is  extended  to  it,§  lest  it  should  fall  down  the  steps
already  ascended  ;  in  all  of  which  humility  must  ever  be
preserved.  From  this  boldness  and  courage  which  God
grants  to  the  soul  on  the  seventh  step,  that  it  may  be  bold
with  Him  in  the  vehemence  of  its  love,  the  soul  ascends
to  the  eighth,  where  it  lays  hold  of  the  Beloved  and  is
united  to  Him.

4.  On  the  eighth  step  the  soul  embraces  the  Beloved
and  holds  Him  fast,  according  to  the  words  of  the  bride  :
'  I  found  Him  whom  my  soul  loveth  ;  I  held  Him  ;  and  I
will  not  let  Him  go.'IJ  On  this  step  of  union  the  desires
of  the  soul  are  satisfied,  but  not  without  interruption.
Some  souls  ascend  to  this  step  and  at  once  fall  back,  if
they  did  not,  and  remained  there,  they  would  have
attained  to  a  certain  state  of  blessedness  in  this  life,  and
thus  the  soul  tarries  but  briefly  on  this  step  of  the  ladder.
Daniel,  being  a  man  of  desires,  was  bidden,  on  the  part  of
God,  to  remain  here  :  '  Daniel  thou  man  of  desires,  stand
upright. '11  After  this  comes  the  ninth  step,  which  is  that
of  the  perfect.

*  Ex.  xxxii.  31,  32.  t  Ps.  xxxvi.  4.  +  Cant.  i.  i.

§  Esth.  V.  2  ;  viii.  4.  ||  Cant.  iii.  4.  11   Dan.  x.  11.


138  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

5.  On  the  ninth  step  the  soul  is  on  fire  sweetly.  This
step  is  that  of  the  perfect  who  burn  away  sweetly  in  God,
for  this  sweet  and  delicious  burning  is  the  work  of  the
Holy  Ghost  because  of  the  union  of  the  soul  with  God.
St.  Gregory  says  of  the  Apostles,  that  they  burned
interiorly  with  love  sweetly,  when  the  Holy  Ghost
descended  upon  them.*  The  blessings  and  the  riches  of
God  which  the  soul  now  enjoys  cannot  be  described.
And  if  we  were  to  write  many  books  on  the  subject  there
would  still  be  more  to  say.  For  this  reason,  and  because
I  intend  to  speak  of  it  hereafter!,  I  shall  now  say  no  more
of  this  step,  except  that  it  is  immediately  followed  by  the
tenth  and  the  last,  which  does  not  belong  to  this  life.

6.  On  the  tenth  step  of  the  ladder  the  soul  becomes
wholly  assimilated  unto  God  in  the  beatific  vision  which
it  then  enjoys ;  for  having  ascended  in  this  life  to  the
ninth,  it  goeth  forth  out  of  the  body.  Love  works  in  such
souls — they  are  few,  and  perfectly  purified  in  this  life —
that  which  purgatory  works  in  others  in  the  next.  For
according  to  St.  Matthew  '  Blessed  are  the  clean  in  heart,
for  they  shall  see  God.'t  As  I  have  said,  the  vision  is  the
cause  of  the  soul's  perfect  likeness  unto  God.  '  We  know,'
saith  St.  John,  '  that,  when  He  shall  appear,  we  shall  be
like  to  Him,  because  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.'§  And
thus,  whatever  the  soul  is,  it  will  be  like  unto  God,  and
so  is  called,  and  is,  by  participation,  God.

7.  This  is  the  secret  ladder  of  which  the  soul  speaks,
though  in  the  higher  steps  no  longer  secret,  for  love
reveals  itself  exceedingly  in  the  great  effects  it  produces.

*  Horn.  30,  in  Evang.  t  Spirit.  Cant.  Stanza  xiv.

+  St.  Matt.  V.  8.  §  I  St.  John  iii.  2.


CHAP.  XXI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  139

But  on  the  highest  step,  the  beatific  vision,  the  last  of
the  ladder,  where  God  is  leaning,  as  I  said  before,*  nothing
remains  secret  from  the  soul,  by  reason  of  its  perfect
likeness.  And,  therefore,  our  Saviour  saith,  '  In  that  day
you  shall  not  ask  me  anything.'!  Until  that  day  come,
notwithstanding  the  heights  to  which  the  soul  ascends,
something  still  remains  secret  from  it,  and  that  in
proportion  to  the  distance  from  its  perfect  likeness  to  the
Divine  Essence.  In  this  way,  then,  by  means  of  mystical
theology  and  secret  love,  the  soul  goeth  forth  from  all
things  and  from  itself,  ascending  upwards  unto  God.  For
love  is  like  fire,  which  ever  ascends,  hastening  to  be
absorbed  in  the  centre  of  its  sphere.


CHAPTER  XXI.

The  meaning  of  '  disguised.'      The   colours  in  which  the  soul
disguises  itself  in  this  night.

Having  now  explained  why  contemplation  is  called  a
secret  ladder,  I  have  further  to  explain  what  is  meant  by
the  word  '  disguised ; '  for  the  soul  says  that  it  went  forth
by  the  secret  ladder  '  disguised.'

2.  For  the  understanding  of  the  whole  matter  it  is
necessary  to  keep  in  mind  that  to  be  disguised  is  nothing
else  but  to  hide  oneself  under  another  form  than  our  own,
either  for  the  purpose  of  showing,  under  that  concealment
the  will  and  purpose  of  the  heart  with  a  view  to  gain  the
goodwill  and  affection  of  the  person  beloved,  or  for  the
purpose  of  escaping  the  observation  of  rivals,  and  thereby

*  Ch.  xviii.  §  4.  f  S.  John  xvi.  23.


140  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

the  better  effect  our  object.  Such  a  person  assumes  the
disguise  which  shall  most  represent  and  manifest  the
affection  of  his  heart,  and  which  shall  the  best  conceal
him  from  his  rivals.

3.  The  soul,  then,  touched  with  the  love  of  its
Bridegroom  Christ,  that  it  may  gain  His  favour  and
goodwill,  sallies  forth  in  that  disguise  which  shall  most
vividly  represent  the  affections  of  the  mind  and  secure  it
against  the  assaults  of  its  enemies,  the  devil,  the  world,
and  the  flesh.  The  disguise  it  assumes  is,  therefore,  a
garment  of  three  principal  colours,  white,  green,  and
purple,  emblems  of  the  three  theological  virtues,  faith,
hope,  and  charity  ;  by  the  help  of  which  it  shall  not  only
enter  into  the  good  graces  of  the  Beloved,  but  shall  also
be  most  secure  and  protected  against  its  three  enemies.

4.  The  faith  is  a  garment  of  such  surpassing
whiteness  as  to  dazzle  the  eyes  of  every  understanding :
for  when  the  soul  has  put  on  faith  it  becomes  invisible
and  inaccessible  to  the  devil,  because  it  is  then  most
securely  defended  against  him,  its  strongest  and  most
cunning  foe.

5.  St.  Peter  knew  of  no  better  defence  against  the
devil  than  faith,  for  he  said,  '  whom  resist,  stedfast  in
faith.'"  And  with  a  view  of  entering  into  favour  and
union  with  the  Beloved,  the  soul  cannot  put  on  a  better
garment,  as  the  ground  of  the  other  virtues,  than  the
white  garment  of  faith,  for  without  it,  the  Apostle  saith,
'  it  is  impossible  to  please  God.'t  But  with  a  living  faith
the  soul  is  pleasing  and  acceptable  unto  God,  for  He  says
so  Himself  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet :  '  I  will  espouse

*  I  S.  Pet.  V.  9  t  Heb.  xi.  6.


CHAP.  XXI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  141

thee  to  Me  in  faith.'*  It  is  as  if  He  said  to  the  soul,  If
thou  wilt  be  united  and  betrothed  to  Me,  thou  must  draw
near  inwardly  clad  in  faith,

6.  The  soul  put  on  the  white  robe  of  faith  on  its  going
forth  in  this  dark  night,  when  walking  in  the  darkness
amidst  interior  trials,  as  I  said  before,!  it  received  no  ray
of  light  from  the  understanding  ;  not  from  above,  because
heaven  seemed  shut  and  God  hidden  ;  not  from  below,
because  its  spiritual  directors  gave  it  no  comfort.  It  bore
its  trials  patiently  and  persevered,  without  fainting,  or
falling  away  from  the  Beloved,  Who  by  these  crosses  and
tribulations  tried  the  faith  of  His  bride,  that  it  might  be
able'  hereafter  truly  to  say  with  the  Psalmist,  '  For  the
words  of  Thy  lips,  I  have  kept  hard  ways.'t

7.  Over  the  white  robe  of  faith  the  soul  puts  on  forth-
with that  of  the  second  colour,  green,  emblem  of  the  virtue
of  hope,  by  which  it  is  delivered  and  protected  from  its
second  enemy,  the  world.  The  freshness  of  a  living  hope
in  God  fills  the  soul  with  such  energy  and  resolution,
with  such  aspirations  after  the  things  of  eternal  life,  that  all
this  world  seems  to  it — as  indeed  it  is — in  comparison
with  that  which  it  hopes  for,  dry,  withered,  dead,  and
worthless.  The  soul  now  denudes  itself  of  the  garments
and  trappings  of  the  world,  by  setting  the  heart  upon
nothing  that  is  in  it,  and  hoping  for  nothing  that  is,  or
may  be,  in  it,  living  only  in  the  hope  of  everlasting  life.
And,  therefore,  when  the  heart  is  thus  lifted  up  above  the
world,  the  world  cannot  touch  it  or  lay  hold  of  it,  nor
even  see  it.  ,

8.  The    soul   then,    thus    disguised    and    clad    in    the

*  Os.  ii.  20.  f  Ch.  vii.  §4.  J  Ps.  xvi.  4.


142  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

vesture  of  hope,  is  secure  from  its  second  foe,  the  world,
for  St.  Paul  calls  hope  the  helmet  of  salvation.*  Now  a
helmet  is  armour  which  protects  and  covers  the  whole
head,  and  has  no  opening  except  in  one  place,  where  the
eyes  may  look  through.  Hope  is  such  a  helmet,  for  it
covers  all  the  senses  of  the  head  of  the  soul  in  such  a  way
that  they  cannot  be  lost  in  worldly  things,  and  leaves  no
part  of  them  exposed  to  the  arrows  of  the  world.  It  has
one  loophole  only  through  which  the  eyes  may  look
upwards  only ;  this  is  the  ordinary  work  of  hope,  to
direct  the  eyes  of  the  soul  to  God  alone ;  as  David  saith,
'  My  eyes  are  always  to  our  Lord,'t  looking  for  succour
nowhere  else  ;  as  he  saith  in  another  Psalm,  '  As  the  eyes
of  the  handmaid  on  the  hands  of  her  mistress,  so  are  our
eyes  to  our  Lord  God  until  he  have  mercy  on  us,'t
hoping  in  Him.

g.  The  green  vesture  of  hope — for  the  soul  is  then  ever
looking  upwards  unto  God,  disregarding  all  else,  and
delighting  only  in  Him — is  so  pleasing  to  the  Beloved
that  the  soul  obtains  from  Him  all  it  hopes  for.  This  is
why  He  tells  the  soul  in  the  Canticle,  '  Thou  hast
wounded  My  heart  in  one  of  thine  eyes,'§  It  would  have
been  useless  for  the  soul,  if  it  had  not  put  on  the  green
robe  of  hope  in  God,  to  claim  such  love,  for  it  would  not
have  succeeded,  because  that  which  influences  the
Beloved,  and  prevails,  is  persevering  hope.  It  is  in  the
vesture  of  hope  that  the  soul  goes  forth  disguised  in  this
secret  and  dark  night ;  seeing  that  it  goes  forth  so
detached   from   all  possession,  without  any  consolations,

*   I  Thess.  V.  8.  f  Ps.  xxiv.  15.

I  Ps.  cxxii.  2.  §  Cant.  iv.  9.


CHAP.  XXI.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  143

that  it  regards  nothing,  and  that  its  sole  anxiety  is  about
God,  putting  its  '  mouth  in  the  dust  if  so  be  there  may  be
hope,'  in  the  words  of  Jeremias  quoted  already.*

10.  Over  the  white  and  green  robes,  as  the  crown  and
perfection  of  its  disguise,  the  soul  puts  on  the  third,  the
splendid  robe  of  purple.  This  is  the  emblem  of  charity,
which  not  only  enhances  the  beauty  of  the  others,  but
which  so  elevates  the  soul  and  renders  it  so  lovely  and
pleasing  in  His  eyes  that  it  ventures  to  say  to  Him,  '  I
am  black  but  beautiful,  O  daughters  of  Jerusalem,
therefore  hath  the  king  loved  me  and  brought  me  into
His  secret  chamber.'!  This  robe  of  charity,  which  is  that
of  love,  not  only  defends  and  protects  the  soul  from  its
third  enemy,  the  flesh — for  where  the  true  love  of  God  is
there  is  no  room  for  self-love  or  for  selfishness — but
strengthens  the  other  virtues  also,  and  makes  them
flourish  for  the  protection  of  the  soul,  beautifying  it  and
adorning  it  with  grace,  so  that  it  shall  please  the  Beloved  ;
for  without  charity  no  virtue  is  pleasing  unto  God.  This
is  the  purple,  spoken  of  in  the  Canticle,  by  which  the  soul
ascends  to  the  seat  where  God  reposes  :  '  the  seat  of  gold,
the  going  up  of  purple.' t  It  is  vested  in  this  robe  of
purple  that  the  soul  journeys,  as  the  first  stanza  declares,
when  in  the  dark  night  it  went  out  of  itself,  and  from
all  created  things,  with  anxious  love  inflamed,  by  the
secret  ladder  of  contemplation  to  the  perfect  union  of
the  love  of  God  its  beloved  Saviour.

11.  This,  then,  is  that  disguise  which  the  soul  says  it
puts  on  in  the  night  of  faith  on  the  secret  ladder ;  and

*  Ch.  viii.  §  I.
t  Cant.  i.  4.     Off.  B.  M.  V.  ant.  ad  Vesp.  J  Cant.  iii.  10.


144  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

these  are  the  three  colours  of  it,  namely,  a  certain  most
fitting  disposition  for  its  union  with  God  in  its  three
powers,  memory,  understanding  and  will.  Faith  blinds
the  understanding,  and  empties  it  of  all  natural  in-
telligence, and  thereby  disposes  it  for  union  with  the
divine  wisdom.  Hope  empties  the  memory  and  withdraws
it  from  all  created  things  which  can  possess  it ;  for  as
St.  Paul  saith,  '  Hope  that  is  seen  is  not  hope.'*  Thus
the  memory  is  withdrawn  from  all  things  on  which  it
might  dwell  in  this  life,  and  is  fixed  on  what  the  soul
hopes  to  possess.  Hope  in  God  alone,  therefore,  purely
disposes  the  memory  according  to  the  measure  of  the
emptiness  it  has  wrought  for  union  with  Him.

12.  Charity  in  the  same  way  empties  the  affections
and  desires  of  the  will  of  everything  that  is  not  God,  and
fixes  them  on  Him  alone.  This  virtue  of  charity,  then,
disposes  the  will  and  unites  it  with  God  in  love.  And
because  these  virtues — it  being  their  special  work —
withdraw  the  soul  from  all  that  is  not  God,  so  also  do
they  serve  to  unite  the  soul  to  Him.  It  is  impossible  for
the  soul  to  attain  to  the  perfection  of  the  love  of  God
unless  it  journeys,  in  earnest,  in  the  robes  of  these  three
virtues.  This  disguise,  therefore,  which  the  soul  assumed
when  it  went  forth  in  order  to  obtain  that  which  it  aimed
at,  the  loving  and  delightful  union  with  the  Beloved,  was
most  necessary  and  expedient.  And  it  was  also  a  great
happiness  to  have  succeeded  in  thus  disguising  itself  and
persevering  in  it  until  it  obtained  the  desired  end,  the
union  of  love,  as  it  declares  in  the  next  line.

*  Rom.  viii.  24.


CHAP.  XXII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  145

CHAPTER  XXII.

Explains  the  third  Hne  of  the  second  stanza.

O  happy  lot  I

It  is  very  evident  that  it  was  a  blessed  thing  for  the  soul
to  have  succeeded  in  such  an  enterprise  as  this,  by  which
it  was  delivered  out  of  the  hands  of  satan,  from  the  world,
and  from  its  own  sensuality,  in  which,  having  gained  that
liberty  of  spirit  so  precious  and  desirable,  it  rose  from
meanness  to  dignity,  from  being  earthly  and  human
became  heavenly  and  divine,  having  its  '  conversation  in
Heaven,'*  like  unto  those  who  are  in  a  state  of  perfection,
as  I  shall  proceed  to  explain.

2.  I  shall,  however,  be  brief,  because  the  most
important  point — that  which  chiefly  determined  me  to
explain  this  dark  night  to  many  souls  who  enter  on  it
without  knowing  it,  as  I  said  in  the  preface — has  been
already  in  some  degree  explained,  and  I  have  also  shown,
though  not  in  adequate  terms,  how  great  are  the  blessings
that  descend  upon  the  soul  in  this  night,  and  what  a  great
happiness  it  is  to  be  passing  through  it.  This  I  did  that
when  such  souls  are  alarmed  at  the  trials  that  have  come
upon  them,  they  may  be  encouraged  by  the  certain  hope
of  the  numerous  and  great  blessings  of  God  which  they
receive  in  this  night.  Beside  this,  it  was  a  happy  lot  for
the  soul  for  the  reason  assigned  in  the  following  hne.

*  Philipp.  iii.  20.


14G  THE    DARK   NIGHT  [  B    <  (  ]


CHAPTER   XXIII.

Explains  the  fourth  line — describes  the  wonderful  hiding
place  of  the  soul  in  this  night,  and  how  the  devil,  though
he  enters  other  most  secret  places,  enters  not  this.

In  darkness  aud  concealvient.

'In  concealment,'  that  is,  secretly  or  hidden.  So  when
the  soul  says  that  it  went  forth  in  darkness  and  conceal-
ment, it  explains  more  clearly  the  great  safety  spoken  of
in  the  first  line  of  this  stanza — which  it  finds  in  this  dim
contemplation  on  the  road  of  the  union  of  the  love  of
God.

2.  The  words  of  the  soul  '  darkness  and  concealment '
mean  here  that  the  soul,  because  it  went  forth  in  the  dark,
travelled  in  secret,  undiscovered  by  the  evil  one,  beyond  the
reach  of  his  wiles  and  stratagems.  The  reason  why  the
soul  is  free,  concealed  from  the  devil  and  his  wiles  in  the
dimness  of  this  contemplation,  is,  that  infused  contempla-
tion, to  which  it  is  now  admitted,  is  passively  infused
into  it,  in  secret,  without  the  cognisance  of  the  senses,  and
of  the  interior  and  exterior  powers  of  the  sensual  part.
And  that,  too,  is  the  reason  why  it  escapes,  not  only  from
the  embarrassments  which  the  faculties,  and  naturally,
through  their  weakness,  present  before  it,  but  also  from  the
evil  one  who,  were  it  not  for  the  sensual  faculties,  could
never  know  what  is  passing  in  the  soul.  The  more
spiritual  therefore  the  communication  is,  and  the  further]
it  is  removed  beyond  the  reach  of  sense,  the  less  able]
is  the  devil  to  perceive  it.

3.  This  being  so,  it  greatly  concerns  the  soul's  security,


CHAP.  XXIII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  147

that  the  lower  senses  should  be  in  the  dark,  and  have  no
knowledge  of  the  interior  conversation  of  the  soul  with
God,  and  that  for  two  reasons ;  first,  that  the  spiritual
communication  may  be  the  more  abundant,  for  then  the
weakness  of  the  sensual  part  hinders  not  liberty  of  spirit.
The  second  is,  that  the  soul  is  more  secure  because  the
evil  one  cannot  know  what  is  passing  within  it.  The
words  of  our  Lord,  '  Let  not  thy  left  hand  know  what  thy
right  hand  doth,'*  may  be,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  understood
of  this,  and  we  may  understand  Him  to  say :  Let  not  thy
left  hand,  that  is  man's  lower  nature,  know  what  is
passing  in  the  higher  and  spiritual  part  of  the  soul.  That
is,  let  the  divine  communications  remain  unknown  to  the
lower  senses,  and  a  secret  between  the  spirit  and  God.

4.  It  is  very  true,  that  oftentimes  when  these  interior
and  most  secret  spiritual  communications  are  made  to  the
soul,  the  devil,  though  he  knows  neither  their  nature
nor  their  form,  ascertains  their  presence,  and  that  the
soul  is  then  receiving  some  great  blessings,  merely  from
observing  the  silence  and  repose  some  of  them  effect  in
the  senses,  and  in  the  powers  of  our  lower  nature.  And
then,  when  he  sees  that  he  cannot  thwart  them  in  the
inmost  depth  of  the  soul,  he  does  all  he  can  to  disquiet
and  disturb  the  sensual  part  which  is  accessible  to  him,
now  by  pain  and  at  another  time  by  horrible  dread,
intending  thereby  to  trouble  the  higher  and  spiritual  part
of  the  soul,  and  to  frustrate  the  blessings  it  then  receives
and  enjoys.

5.  But  very  often  when  this  contemplation  pours  its
light  purely  into  the  spirit  and  exerts  its  strength  therein,

*  St.  Matt.  vi.  3.

L  2


148  THE    DARK   NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

the  devil,  with  all  his  efforts,  is  not  able  to  disturb  it,  for
then  the  soul  becomes  the  recipient  of  renewed  benefits,
love,  and  a  more  secure  peace  ;  for,  wonderful  to  tell !  in
its  consciousness  of  the  disturbing  presence  of  the  foe,  it
enters  deeply  into  itself,  without  knowing  how  it  comes  to
pass,  and  feels  assured  of  a  certain  refuge  where  it  can
hide  itself  beyond  the  reach  of  the  evil  one ;  and  thus  its
peace  and  joy  are  increased,  of  which  the  devil  attempted
to  rob  it.  All  those  terrors  assail  it  only  from  without ;  it
sees  clearly,  and  exults,  that  it  can  in  the  meanwhile
securely  enjoy  in  secret  the  calm  peace  and  sweetness  of
the  Bridegroom,  which  the  world  and  the  devil  can
neither  give  nor  take  away.  The  soul  is  now  experiencing
the  truth  of  that  which  the  bride  says  in  the  Canticle,
'  Behold,  threescore  valiants  .  .  .  compass  the  bed  of
Solomon  .  .  .  for  fears  by  night.'*  Strength  and  peace
abound  within  the  soul,  though  it  feels  the  flesh  and  the
bones  frequently  tormented  without.

6.  At  other  times,  when  the  spiritual  communications
flow  over  into  the  senses,  the  devil  succeeds  the  more
easily  in  disquieting  the  mind,  and  in  disturbing  it  with
the  terrors  with  which  he  assails  it  through  the  senses.
At  that  time  the  mental  agonies  are  great,  and  occasionall}'
surpassing  all  description  ;  for  when  spirit  has  to  do  with
spirit,  the  evil  one  causes  an  intolerable  horror  in  the
good  one,  that  is,  in  the  soul,  when  it  succeeds  in
disturbing  it.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  bride  in  her
account  of  that  which  happened  to  her  when  she  tried  to
be  interiorly  recollected,  so  as  to  have  the  fruition  of  these
goods  :  '  I  came  down,'  she  says,  '  into  the  garden  of  nuts

*^Cant.  iii.  7,  8.


CHAP,  XXIII.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  149

to  see  the  fruits  of  the  valleys,  and  to  look  if  the  vineyard
had  flourished  ...  I  knew  not ;  my  soul  troubled  me  for
the  chariots  and  the  noise  of  Aminadab,'  that  is  the  devil,*

7.  This  attack  of  the  devil  takes  place  also  when  God
bestows  His  favours  upon  a  soul  by  the  instrumentality  of
a  good  angel.  The  devil  sees  this  occasionally,  because
God  in  general  permits  it  to  become  known  to  the  enemy,
that  he  may  do  what  he  can,  according  to  the  measure  of
justice,  against  that  soul,  and  that  he  may  be  debarred
from  pleading  that  he  had  no  opportunity  of  seizing  on
that  soul  as  he  did  in  the  case  of  Job.  It  is,  therefore,
expedient  that  God  should  place  these  two  combatants,
the  good  angel  and  the  devil,  on  an  equality  when  they
contend  for  the  soul,  in  order  that  the  victory  may  be
of  greater  worth,  and  that  the  soul,  triumphant  and
faithful  in  temptation,  may  be  the  more  abundantly
rewarded,

8,  This  is  the  reason — and  it  is  right  we  should
observe  it — why  God,  in  the  order  of  grace,  permits  satan
to  disquiet  and  tempt  the  soul  which  He  is  guiding
therein.  When  such  a  soul  has  real  visions,  through  the
instrumentality  of  an  angel,  God  suffers  the  evil  spirit  to
represent  false  visions  of  the  same  kind,  in  such  a  way
that  an  incautious  soul  may  be  very  easily  deluded,  as  it
has  happened  to  many.  We  have  an  instance  of  this  in
Exodus,  where  we  read  that  the  magicians  of  Pharao
wrought  apparently  signs  and  wonders  resembling  those
really  wrought  by  Moses,  For  when  Moses  turned  water
into  blood,  the  magicians  of  Egypt  did  the  same ;  and
when  he  brought  forth  frogs,  so  did  the  magicians.!

*  Cant.  vi.  10,  11.  f  Ex.  vii.  11,  22  ;  viii.  6,  7.


150  THE    DARK   NIGHT  [bOOK   II.

9.  It  is  not  in  bodily  visions  only  that  the  evil  spirit
apes  God,  but  in  spiritual  communications  also,  which  are
effected  through  the  instrumentality  of  an  angel,  whenever
he  succeeds  in  discovering  them.  For  as  Job  saith,  '  He
seeth  every  high  thing,'*  that  is,  he  apes  them,  and
insinuates  himself  among  them  as  well  as  he  can.
Spiritual  visions  have  neither  form  nor  figure — that  is  the
characteristic  of  spirit — and,  therefore,  satan  cannot
imitate  them,  nor  occasion  others  which  shall  in  any  way
represent  them.  And  so  when  the  good  angel  communi-
cates spiritual  contemplation,  the  evil  spirit,  in  order  to
attack  it  while  the  soul  is  being  thus  visited,  presents
himself  before  it  with  a  certain  horror  and  spiritual
confusion,  which  is  occasionally  exceedingly  painful.
Sometimes  the  soul  can  quickly  disembarrass  itself,  so
that  the  terror  of  the  evil  spirit  shall  have  no  time  to
make  any  impression  upon  it,  and  recollects  itself,
favoured  herein  by  that  spiritual  grace  which  the  good
angel  then  communicates.

10.  Sometimes,  too,  God  permits  this  horror  and
trouble  to  last  a  long  time,  and  this  is  a  greater  torment
to  the  soul  than  all  the  evils  of  this  life  can  be ;  the
remembrance  of  which  afterwards  is  sufficient  to  produce
great  pain.  All  this  passes  in  the  soul  without  its  doing
or  undoing  anything  of  itself  to  bring  about  these
representations  or  impressions.  But  we  must  remember
that,  when  God  suffers  the  evil  spirit  thus  to  afflict  the
soul,  it  is  with  a  view  to  purify  and  prepare  it  by  that
spiritual  vigil  for  some  great  festival  and  spiritual  grace
which  it  is  His  will  to  bestow   upon  it,   for    He    never

*  Job  xli.  25.


CHAP.  XXIII.]  OF   THE    SOUL.  151

mortifies  but  to  give  life,  and  never  humbles  but  to  exalt.
This  speedily  ensues ;  for  the  soul,  according  to  the
measure  of  the  dark  purgation  it  has  undergone,  enters  on
the  fruition  of  sweet  spiritual  contemplation,  and  that  so
sublime  at  times  that  no  language  can  describe  it.  This
is  to  be  understood  of  those  visitations  which  God  makes
by  the  ministry  of  an  angel,  and  wherein  the  soul,  as  I
said  before,*  is  not  wholly  secure,  nor  in  such  darkness  and
concealment  as  to  be  altogether  unobserved  by  the  enemy.

11.  But  when  God  visits  the  soul  Himself,  the  words
of  the  stanza  are  then  true,  for,  in  perfect  darkness,
hidden  from  the  enemy,  it  receives,  at  such  times,  the
spiritual  graces  of  God.  The  reason  of  the  difference  is
that  God,  being  the  sovereign  Lord,  dwells  substantially
•in  the  soul,  and  that  neither  angel  nor  devil  can  discover
what  is  going  on  there,  nor  penetrate  the  profound  and
secret  communications  which  take  place  between  Him
and  the  soul.  These  communications,  because  the  work
of  our  Lord  Himself,  are  wholly  divine  and  supreme,  and,
as  it  were,  substantial  touches  of  the  divine  union  between
Himself  and  the  soul ;  in  one  of  these,  because  it  is  the
highest  possible  degree  of  prayer,  the  soul  receives  greater
good  than  in  all  the  rest.  These  are  the  touches  for
which  the  bride  in  the  Canticle  prayed,  saying,  '  Let  Him
kiss  me  with  the  kiss  of  His  mouth. 't

12.  This  being  a  state  so  near  unto  God,  into  which
the  soul  so  anxiously  longs  to  enter,  one  touch  of  the
Godhead  is  prized  and  desired  by  it  above  all  the  other
gifts  which  God  grants  it.  For  this  reason  the  bride  in
the  Canticle,  after  the  great  things  wrought  in  her,  of

*  §  8.  t  Cant.  i.  i.


152  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

which  she  there  sings,  not  finding  them  enough,  prays  for
the  divine  touches,  saying :  '  Who  shall  give  to  me  Thee
my  brother,  sucking  the  breasts  of  my  mother,  that  I
may  find  Thee  without,  and  kiss  Thee '  with  the  mouth
of  my  soul,  '  and  now  no  man  despise  me  '*  or  presume  to
assail  me.  These  words  relate  to  that  communication
which  God  makes  alone,  without,  and  hidden  from  all
creatures;  that  is  the  meaning  of  the  words  'alone,'
'  without,'  and  '  sucking.'  This  occurs  when  the  soul  in
liberty  of  spirit  enjoys  these  blessings  in  sweetness  and
inward  peace,  the  sensual  part  thereof  unable  to  hinder  it,
and  the  devil  by  means  of  it  not  able  to  disturb  it.

13.  Then  indeed,  the  evil  spirit  would  not  venture  to
assail  the  soul,  because  he  could  not  succeed,  neither  can
he  know  of  those  divine  touches  in  the  substance  of  the
soul  with  the  substance  of  God,  which  is  wrought  by
loving  knowledge.  No  man  can  arrive  at  this  blessed
condition  but  by  the  most  perfect  purgation  and
detachment,  by  being  spiritually  hidden  from  all  created
things.  It  is  a  work  wrought  in  the  dark,  in  the  hiding
place,  wherein  the  soul  is  confirmed  more  and  more  in
union  with  God  by  love ;  and,  therefore,  the  soul  sings,
'  In  darkness  and  concealment.'

14.  When  these  favours  are  granted  to  the  soul  in
secret,  that  is,  in  the  spirit  only,  the  higher  and  lower
portions  of  the  soul  seem  to  it  during  some  of  them — it
knows  not  how — to  be  so  far  apart  that  it  recognises  two
parts  in  itself,  each  so  distinct  from  the  other,  that  neither
seems  to  have  anything  in  common  with  the  other,  being
in  appearance  so  far  removed  and  apart.     And,  in  reality,

*  Cant.  viii.  i.


CHAP.  XXIV.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  153

this  is  in  a  certain  manner  true,  for  in  its  present
operations,  which  are  wholly  spiritual,  it  has  no  commerce
with  the  sensual  part.

15.  Thus  the  soul  becomes  wholly  spiritual,  and  the
spiritual  passions  and  desires  are  in  a  high  degree
suppressed  in  this  hiding  place  of  unitive  contemplation.
The  soul  then,  speaking  of  its  higher  part,  sings  the  last
line  of  this  stanza,  '  My  house  being  now  at  rest.'


CHAPTER    XXIV.

Concludes  the  explanation  of  the  second  stanza.
My  house  being  now  at  rest.

This  is  as  much  as  saying,  My  higher  nature  and  my
lower  nature  also,  each  in  its  desires  and  powers,  being
now  at  rest,  I  went  forth  to  the  divine  union  of  the  love
of  God.

2.  As  in  the  warfare  of  the  dark  night,  as  I  said
before,*  the  soul  undergoes  a  twofold  contest  and
purgation  :  that  is,  in  the  sensual  and  the  spiritual  part,
with  their  senses,  powers,  and  passions,  so  also,  in  the
sensual  and  spiritual  parts,  with  all  their  powers  and
desires,  does  it  attain  to  a  twofold  peace  and  rest.  For
this  reason  it  repeats  the  words,  as  I  said  before,!  '  My
house  being  now  at  rest,'  at  the  end  of  the  second  stanza,
because  of  the  two  parts  of  the  soul,  spiritual  and
sensual,  which,  if  they  are  to  go  forth  into  the  divine
union  of  love,  must  first  of  all  be  changed,  ordered,  and
*  Bk.  I  ch.  viii.  §  i,  Bk.  2,  ch..  i.  §  i  f  Ch,  xiv.  §.  i.


154  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II,

tranquillised  with  regard  to  all  the  things  of  sense  and
spirit,  after  the  likeness  of  the  state  of  innocence  in  Adam,
notwithstanding  that  the  soul  be  not  wholly  delivered
from  the  temptations  of  the  lower  part.  These  words,
therefore,  which  in  the  first  stanza  are  understood  of  the
tranquillity  of  the  lower  and  sensual  part,  now,  in  the
second  stanza,  are  understood  particularly  of  the  higher
and  spiritual  part ;  and  this  is  the  reason  of  the  repetition,

3.  The  soul  obtains  this  tranquillity  and  rest  of  the
spiritual  house,  habitually  and  perfectly — so  far  as  it  is
possible  in  this  life — ^through  the  substantial  touches  of
the  divine  union,  of  which  I  have  just  spoken,*  and
which,  in  secret,  hidden  from  the  turmoil  of  satan,  sense,
and  passion,  it  receives  from  the  Divinity,  whereby  it  has
been  tranquillised,  purified,  strengthened,  and  confirmed,
so  as  to  become  an  effectual  partaker  of  that  union  which
is  its  divine  betrothal  to  the  Son  of  God.  The  instant
the  two  houses  of  the  soul  are  tranquil  and  confirmed,
with  the  whole  household  of  its  powers  and  desires  sunk
in  sleep  and  silence,  as  to  all  things  of  heaven  and  earth,
the  divine  Wisdom,  immediately  in  a  new  bond  of  loving
possession,  unites  itself  to  the  soul,  and  that  is  fulfilled
which  is  written,  '  While  quiet  silence  contained  all  things
and  the  night  was  in  the  mid- way  of  her  course.  Thy
omnipotent  Word  sallying  out  of  heaven  from  the  ro3^al
seats.'!  The  same  truth  is  set  before  us  in  the  Canticle,
where  the  bride,  after  passing  by  those  who  took  her  veil
away  and  wounded  her,  saith,  '  When  I  had  a  little  passed
by  them,  I  found  Him  whom  my  soul  loveth.'t

4.  This  union    is    unattainable  without  great  purity,
*  Ch.  xxiii.  §  II.  t  Wisd.  xviii.  14.  J  Cant.  iii.  4.


CHAP.  XXV.]  OF    THE    SOUL.  155

and  this  purity  is  attainable  only  by  detachment  from  all
created  things  and  sharp  mortifications.  This  is  signified
by  the  robbery  of  the  veil  and  the  wounding  of  the  bride
in  the  night  when  she  went  forth  searching  after  her
beloved  ;  for  the  new  veil  of  the  betrothal  cannot  be  put
on  till  the  old  veil  be  taken  away.  He,  therefore,  who
will  not  go  out  in  this  dark  night  to  seek  the  Beloved,  who
will  not  deny  and  mortify  his  own  will,  but  seek  Him  at
his  ease  on  his  bed,  as  the  bride  once  did,"  will  never  find
Him.  The  soul  says  here  that  it  found  Him,  as  the  soul
says  of  itself  that  it  found  him  by  going  forth  in  the  dark,
and  in  the  anxieties  of  love.


CHAPTER  XXV.

In  which  the  third  stanza  is  briefly  explained.

In  that  happy  night,

III  secret,  seen  of  none,

Seeing  nought  myself,

Without  other  light  or  gtcide

Save  that  which  in  my  heart  was  burning.

The  soul  still  continues  the  metaphor  of  natural  night  in
celebrating  and  magnifying  the  blessings  of  the  night  of
the  spirit,  by  means  of  which  it  has  been  able  quickly  and
securely  to  compass  the  desired  end.  Three  of  these
blessings  are  set  before  us  in  this  stanza.

2.  The  first  is  that  in  this  blessed  night  of  contemplation
God  is  guiding  the  soul  by  a  road  so  solitary  and  so  secret,
so  remote  and  alien  from  sense,  that  nothing  belonging
thereto,  nor  any  created  thing,  can  approach  it  so  as  to
disturb  it  or  detain  it  on  the  road  of  the  union  of  love.

*  Cant.  iii.  i.


156  THE    DARK    NIGHT  [bOOK    II.

3.  The  second  blessing  is  that  because  of  the  spiritual
darkness  of  this  night,  in  which  all  the  faculties  of  the
higher  part  of  the  soul  are  in  darkness,  the  soul,  seeing
nothing,  and  unable  to  see,  is  not  detained  by  anything
which  is  not  God  from  drawing  near  unto  Him,  and,
therefore,  advances  unhindered  by  forms  and  figures  and
natural  apprehensions :  for  these  are  the  things  which
usually  hinder  the  soul,  from  being  always  in  union  with
God.

4.  The  third  blessing  is,  that  though  the  soul  is
supported  by  no  particular  interior  light  of  the  under-
standing, nor  by  any  exterior  guide  comforting  it  on  this
high  road — the  thick  darkness  has  deprived  it  of  all  this —
yet  love  and  faith,  now  burning  within  it,  drawing  the
heart  towards  the  Beloved,  influence  and  guide  it,  and
make  it  fly  upwards  to  God  along  the  road  of  solitude,
while  it  knows  neither  how  nor  by  what  means  that  is
done.


END    OF    THE    DARK    NIGHT.


A

SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  OF  THE  SOUL
AND  THE  BRIDEGROOM  CHRIST.*


PROLOGUE.

Inasmuch  as  this  canticle  seems  to  have  been  written
with  some  fervour  of  love  of  God,  whose  wisdom  and  love
are,  as  is  said  in  the  book  of  Wisdom,!  so  vast  that  they
reach  "  from  end  unto  end  "  and  as  the  soul,  taught  and
moved  by  Him  manifests  the  same  abundance  and
strength  in  the  words  it  uses,  I  do  not  purpose  here  to
set  forth  all  that  greatness  and  fulness  the  spirit  of  love,
which  is  fruitful,  embodies  in  it.  Yea,  rather  it  would  be
foolishness  to  think  that  the  language  of  love  and  the
mystical  intelligence — and  that  is  what  these  stanzas  are
— can  be  at  all  explained  in  words  of  any  kind,  for  the
Spirit  of  our  Lord  who  helps  our  weakness, — as  St.  Paul
saitht— dwelling  in  us  makes  petitions  for  us  with
groanings   unutterable    for   that   which    we    cannot    well

*  [This  canticle  was  made  by  the  Saint  when  he  was  in  the  prison  of  the
Mitigation,  in  Toledo.  It  came  into  the  hands  of  the  Venerable  Anne  of
Jesus,  at  whose  request  he  wrote  the  following  commentary  on  it,  and
addressed  it  to  her.]

t  Wisdom,  viii.  i.  |  Rom.  viii.  26.


158  A    SPIRITUAL    CANTICLE.

understand  or  grasp  so  as  to  be  able  to  make  it  known.
'  The  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmity  ...  the  Spirit  Himself
requesteth  for  us  with  groanings  unspeakable.'  For  who
can  describe  that  which  He  shows  to  loving  souls  in
whom  He  dwells  ?  Who  can  set  forth  in  words  that
which  He  makes  them  feel  ?  and  lastly  who  can  explain
that  for  which  they  long  ?

2.  Assuredly  no  one  can  do  it ;  not  even  they  them-
selves who  experience  it.  That  is  the  reason  why  they
use  figures  of  special  comparisons  and  similitudes ;  they
hide  somewhat  of  that  which  they  feel  and  in  the  abundance
of  the  Spirit  utter  secret  mysteries  rather  than  express
themselves  in  clear  words.

3.  And  if  these  similitudes  be  not  received  in  the
simphcity  of  a  loving  mind,  and  in  the  sense  in  which
they  are  uttered,  they  will  seem  to  be  effusions  of  folly
rather  than  the  language  of  reason ;  as  any  one  may  see
in  the  divine  Canticle  of  Solomon,  and  in  others  of  the
sacred  books,  wherein  the  Holy  Ghost,  because  ordinary
and  common  speech  could  not  convey  His  meaning,
uttered  His  mysteries  in  strange  terms  and  similitudes.
It  follows  from  this,  that  after  all  that  the  holy  doctors
have  said,  and  may  say,  no  words  of  theirs  can  explain  it ;
nor  can  words  do  it ;  and  so,  in  general,  all  that  is  said
falls  far  short  of  the  meaning.

4.  The  stanzas  that  follow  having  been  written  under
the  influence  of  that  love  which  proceeds  from  the  over-
flowing mystical  intelligence,  cannot  be  fully  explained.
Indeed  I  do  not  purpose  any  such  thing,  for  my  sole
object  is  to  throw  some  general  light  over  them,  which  in
my  opinion  is  the  better  course.     It  is  better  to  leave  the


OF    THE    SOUL    AND    ITS    BRIDEGROOM.  159

outpourings  of  love  in  their  own  fulness,  that  every  one
may  apply  them  according  to  the  measure  of  his  spirit
and  power,  than  to  pare  them  down  to  one  particular
sense  which  is  not  suited  to  the  taste  of  every  one.  And
though  I  do  put  forth  a  particular  explanation,  still  others
are  not  to  be  bound  by  it.  The  mystical  wisdom — that
is,  the  love,  of  which  these  stanzas  speak — does  not
require  to  be  distinctly  understood  in  order  to  produce
the  effect  of  love  and  tenderness  in  the  soul,  for  it  is  in
this  respect  like  faith,  by  which  we  love  God  without  a
clear  comprehension  of  Him.

5.  I  shall  therefore  be  very  concise,  though  now  and
then  unable  to  avoid  some  prolixity  where  the  subject
requires  it,  and  when  the  opportunity  is  offered  of
discussing  and  explaining  certain  points  and  effects  of
prayer  :  many  of  which  being  referred  to  in  these  stanzas,
I  must  discuss  some  of  them.  I  shall,  however,  pass  over
the  more  ordinary  ones,  and  treat  briefly  of  the  more
extraordinary  to  which  they  are  subject  who,  by  the
mercy  of  God,  have  advanced  beyond  the  state  of
beginners.  This  I  do  for  two  reasons  :  the  first  is,  that
much  is  already  written  concerning  beginners ;  and  the
second  is,  that  I  am  addressing  those  who  have  received
from  our  Lord  the  grace  of  being  led  on  from  the
elementary  state  and  are  led  inwards  to  the  bosom  of  His
divine  love.

6.  I  therefore  trust,  though  I  may  discuss  some  points
of  scholastic  theology  relating  to  the  interior  commerce  of
the  soul  with  God,  that  I  am  not  using  such  language
altogether  in  vain,  and  that  it  wall  be  found  profitable  for
pure  spirituality.     For  though  some  may  be  altogether


160  A    SPIRITUAL    CANTICLE.

ignorant  of  scholastic  theology  by  which  the  divine
verities  are  explained,  yet  they  are  not  ignorant  of
mystical  theology,  the  science  of  love,  by  which  those
verities  are  not  only  learned,  but  at  the  same  time  are
relished  also.

7.  And  in  order  that  what  I  am  going  to  say  may  be
the  better  received,  I  submit  myself  to  higher  judgments,
and  unreservedly  to  that  of  our  holy  mother  the  Church,
intending  to  say  nothing  in  reliance  on  my  own  personal
experience,  or  on  what  I  have  observed  in  other  spiritual
persons,  nor  on  what  I  have  heard  them  say — though  I
intend  to  profit  by  all  this — unless  I  can  confirm  it  with
the  sanction  of  the  divine  writings,  at  least  on  those  points
which  are  most  difficult  of  comprehension.

8.  The  method  I  propose  to  follow  in  the  matter  is
this,  first  of  all,  to  cite  the  words  of  the  text,  and  then
to  give  that  explanation  of  them  which  belongs  to  the
subject  before  me.  I  shall  now  transcribe  all  the  stanzas,
and  place  them  at  the  beginning  of  this  treatise.  In  the
next  place  I  shall  take  each  of  them  separately,  and
explain  them  fine  by  line,  each  line  in  its  proper  place
before  the  explanation.


SONG  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  THE  BRIDEGROOM.


THE    BRIDE.

"Where  hast  Thou  hidden  Thyself,

And  abandoned  me  in  my  groaning,  O  my  Beloved  ?

Thou  has  iied  like  the  hart,

Having  wounded  me.

I  ran  after  Thee,  crying  ;  but  Thou  wert  gone.


OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  161


0  shepherds,  you  who  go
Through  the  sheepcots  up  the  hill,
If  you  shall  see  Him

Whom  I  love  the  most,

Tell  Him  I  languish,  suffer,  and  die.

Ill

In  search  of  my  Love

1  will  go  over  mountains  and  strands  ;
I  will  gather  no  flowers,

I  will  fear  no  wild  beasts;

And  pass  by  the  mighty  and  the  frontiers.

IV

O  groves  and  thickets

Planted  by  the  hand  of  the  Beloved  ;

O  verdant  meads

Enamelled  with  flowers

Tell  me  has  He  passed  by  you  ?


ANSWER    OF    THE    CREATURES.

A  thousand  graces  diffusing

He  passed  through  the  groves  in  haste.

And  merely  regarding  them

As  He  passed

Clothed  them  with  His  beauty.

VI
THE  BRIDE.

Ah  !  who  can  heal  me  ?

Give  me  at  once  Thyself,

Send  me  no  more

A  messenger

Who  cannot  tell  me  what  I  wish.


All  they  who  serve  are  telling  me

Of  Thy  unnumbered  graces  ;

And  all  wound  me  more  and  more,  '

And  something  leaves  me  dying,

I  know  not  what,  of  which  they  are  darkly  .speaking.

M


162  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE

VIII

But  how  thou  perseverest,  O  life

Not  hving  where  thou  livest ;

The  arrows  bring  death

Which  thou  receivest

From  thy  conceptions  of  the  Beloved.


Why,  after  wounding

This  heart,  hast  Thou  not  healed  it  ?

And  why  after  stealing  it,

Hast  Thou  thus  abandoned  it,

And  not  carried  away  the  stolen  prey  ?


Quench  Thou  my  troubles.

For  no  one  else  can  soothe  them  ;

And  let  mine  eyes  behold  Thee

For  Thou  art  their  light,

And  I  will  keep  them  for  Thee  alone.


Reveal  Thy  presence,

And  let  the  vision  and  Thy  beauty  kill  me.

Behold  the  malady

Of  love  is  incurable

Except  in  Thy  presence  and  before  Thy  face.


O  crystal  well !

O  that  on  Thy  silvered  surface

Thou  wouldest  mirror  forth  at  once

Those  eyes  desired

Which  are  outlined  in  my  heart !


Turn  them  away,  O  my  Beloved !
I  am  on  the  wing  :

THE    BRIDEGROOM.

Return,  My  Dove  !

The  wounded  hart

Looms  on  the  hill

In  the  air  of  thy  flight  and  is  refreshed.


OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  163


THE    BRIDE.

My  Beloved  is  the  mountains,

The  solitary  wooded  valleys,

The  strange  islands.

The  roaring  torrents,

The  whisper  of  the  amourous  gales  ;


The  tranquil  night

At  the  approaches  of  the  dawn,

The  silent  music,

The  murmuring  solitude,

The  supper  which  revives,  and  enkindles  love.

XVI

Catch  us  the  foxes,

For  our  vineyard  hath  flourished  ;

While  of  roses

We  make  a  nosegay,

And  let  no  one  appear  on  the  hill.

XVII

O  killing  north  wind  cease !

Come,  south  wind,  that  awakenest  love  !

Blow  through  my  garden,

And  let  its  odours  flow.

And  The  Beloved  shall  feed  among  the  flowers.


O  nymphs  of  Judea  !

While  amid  the  flowers  and  the  rose-trees

The  amber  sends  forth  its  perfume,

Tarry  in  the  suburbs.

And  touch  not  our  thresholds.


Hide  thyself,  O  my  Beloved  !

Turn  Thy  face  to  the  mountains.

Do  not  speak.

But  regard  the  companions

Of  her  who  is  travelling  amidst  strange  islands.

M


164  -  A  SPITITUAL  CANTICLE


THE    BRIDEGROOM.

Light-winged  birds,

Lions,  fawns,  bounding  does,

Mountains,  valleys,  strands,

Waters,  winds,  heat,

And  the  terrors  that  keep  watch  by  night ;

XXI

By  the  soft  lyres

And  the  siren  strains,  I  adjure  you,

Let  your  fury  cease.

And  touch  not  the  wall,

That  the  bride  may  sleep  in  greater  security.


The  bride  has  entered

The  pleasant  and  desirable  garden,

And  there  reposes  to  her  heart's  content ;

Her  neck  reclining

On  the  sweet  arms  of  the  Beloved.


Beneath  the  apple-tree
There  wert  thou  betrothed  ;
There  I  gave  thee  My  hand.
And  thou  wert  redeemed
Where  thy  mother  was  corrupted.


THE    BRIDE.

Our  bed  is  of  flowers

By  dens  of  lions  encompassed,

Hung  with  purple,

Made  in  peace,

And  crowned  with  a  thousand  shields  of  gold.

x«v

In  Thy  footsteps
The  young  ones  run  Thy  way  ;
At  the  touch  of  the  fire,
And  by  the  spiced  wine,
The  divine  balsam  flows.


OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  165

XXVI

In  the  inner  cellar

Of  my  Beloved  have  I  drunk  ;  and  when  I  went  forth

Over  all  the  plain

I  knew  nothing,

And  lost  the  flock  I  followed  before.


There  He  gave  me  His  breasts,

There  He  taught  me  the  science  full  of  sweetness.

And  there  I  gave  to  Him

Myself  without  reserve ;

There  I  promised  to  be  His  bride.


My  soul  is  occupied,

And  all  my  substance  in  His  service

Now  I  guard  no  flock,

Nor  have  I  any  other  employment :

My  sole  occupation  is  love.


If,  then,  on  the  common  land
I  am  no  longer  seen  or  found,
You  will  say  that  I  am  lost ;
That,  being  enamoured,
I  lost  myself;  and  yet  was  found.


Of  emeralds,  and  of  flowers

In  the  early  morning  gathered.

We  will  make  the  garlands,

Flowering  in  Thy  love,

And  bound  together  with  one  hair  of  my  head.


By  that  one  hair

Thou  hast  observed  fluttering  on  my  neck.

And  on  my  neck  regarded.

Thou  wert  captivated ;

And  wounded  by  one  of  my  eyes.


166  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE


When  Thou  didst  regard  me,
Thine  eyes  imprinted  in  me  Thy  grace  ;
For  this  didst  Thou  love  me  again,
And  thereby  mine  eyes  did  merit
To  adore  what  in  Thee  they  saw.

XXXIII

Despise  me  not,

For  if  I  was  swarthy  once

Thou  canst  regard  me  now  ;

Since  Thou  hast  regarded  me,

Grace  and  beauty  hast  Thou  given  me.

XXXIV

THE    BRIDEGROOM.

The  Httle  white  dove

Has  returned  to  the  ark  with  the  bough

And  now  the  turtle-dove

Its  desired  mate

On  the  green  banks  has  found.

XXXV

In  solitude  she  lived,

And  in  solitude  built  her  nest ;

And  in  solitude,  alone

Hath  the  Beloved  guided  her,

In  solitude  also  wounded  with  love.


THE    BRIDE.

Let  us  rejoice,  O  my  Beloved !

Let  us  go  forth  to  see  ourselves  in  Thy  beauty.

To  the  mountain  and  the  hill.

Where  the  pure  water  flows  ;

Let  us  enter  into  the  heart  of  the  thicket.

XXXVII

We  shall  go  at  once

To  the  deep  caverns  of  the  rock

Which  are  all  secret.

There  we  shall  enter  in

And  taste  of  the  new  wine  of  the  pomegranate.


OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  167

XXXVIII

There  thou  wilt  show  me

That  which  my  soul  desired ;

And  there  Thou  wilt  give  at  once,

O  Thou,  my  life !

That  which  Thou  gavest  me  the  other  day.


The  breathing  of  the  air,

The  song  of  the  sweet  nightingale.

The  grove  and  its  beauty

In  the  serene  night.

With  the  flame  that  consumes,  and  gives  no  pains.

XL

None  saw  it ;

Neither  did  Aminadab  appear.
The  siege  was  intermitted.
And  the  cavalry  dismounted
At  the  sight  of  the  waters.


ARGUMENT.

These  stanzas  describe  the  career  of  a  soul  from  its
first  entrance  on  the  service  of  God  till  it  comes  to  the
final  state  of  perfection — the  spiritual  marriage.  They
refer  accordingly  to  the  three  states  or  ways  of  the
spiritual  training — the  purgative,  illuminative,  and  unitive
ways;  some  properties  and  effects  of  which  they  explain.

The  first  stanzas  relate  to  beginners — to  the  purgative
way.  The  second  to  the  advanced — to  the  state  of
spiritual  betrothal,  that  is,  the  illuminative  way.  The
next  to  the  unitive  way — that  of  the  perfect,  the  spiritual
marriage.     The  unitive  way,  that  of  the  perfect,  follows


168  .  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  I.]

the  illuminative,  which  is  that  of  the  advanced.  The  last
stanzas  treat  of  the  beatific  state,  which  only  the  already
perfect  soul  aims  at.


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  STANZAS.
NOTE.

The  soul,  considering  the  obligations  of  its  state,
seeing  that  '  the  days  of  man  are  short ;  '*  that  the  way
of  eternal  life  is  strait  ;t  that  'the  just  man  shall  scarcely
be  saved;'!  that  the  things  of  this  world  are  empty
and  deceitful ;  that  all  die  and  perish  like  water  poured
on  the  ground  ;§  that  time  is  uncertain,  the  last
account  strict,  perdition  most  easy,  and  salvation
most  difficult :  and  recognising  also,  on  the  other  hand,
the  great  debt  that  is  owing  to  God,  Who  has  created  it
solely  for  Himself,  for  which  the  service  of  its  whole
life  is  due.  Who  has  redeemed  it  for  Himself  alone,  for
which  it  owes  Him  all  else,  and  the  correspondence  of  its
will  to  His  love ;  and  remembering  other  innumerable
blessings  for  which  it  acknowledges  itself  indebted  to  God
even  before  it  was  born  :  and  also  that  a  great  part  of  its  life
has  been  wasted,  and  that  it  will  have  to  render  an
account  of  it, all  from  the  beginning  unto  the  end,  to  the
payment  of  'the  last  farthing,'|i  when  God  shall  'search
Jerusalem  with  lamps;' IT  that  it  is  already  late,  and
perhaps  the  end  of  the  day  :**  in  order  to  remedy  so  great

*  Job  xiv.  5.  t  St.  Matt.  vii.  14,  +  i  St.  Pet.  iv.  18.

§  2  Kings  xiv.  14.        ||  St.  Matt.  v.  26.  ^1  Sophon.  i.  12.

**  St.  Matt.  XX.  6.


[STAN.  I.]        OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  169

an  evil,  especially  when  it  is  conscious  that  God  is
grievously  offended,  and  that  He  has  hidden  His  face
from  it,  because  it  would  forget  Him  for  the  creature.
The  soul,  now  touched  with  sorrow  and  inward  sinking  of
the  heart  at  the  sight  of  its  imminent  risks  and  ruin,
renouncing  everything  and  casting  them  aside  without
delaying  for  a  day,  or  even  an  hour,  with  fear  and
groanings  uttered  from  the  heart,  and  wounded  with  the
love  of  God,  begins  to  invoke  the  Beloved  and  says :

STANZA  I.

THE  BRIDE.

Where  hast  Thou  hidden  Thyself,
And  left  me  to  my  sort  ow,  O  my  Beloved !

Thon  hast  fled  like  the  hart.

Having  wounded  me.

I  ran  after  Thee,  C7ying ;  but  Thou  wert  gone.

In  this  first  stanza  the  soul  enamoured  of  the  Word,  the
Son  of  God,  the  Bridegroom,  desiring  to  be  united  to
Him  in  the  clear  and  substantial  vision,  sets  before  Him
the  anxieties  of  its  love,  complaining  of  His  absence.  And
this  the  more  so  because,  now  pierced  and  wounded  with
love,  for  which  it  had  abandoned  all  things,  even  itself,  it
has  still  to  endure  the  absence  of  the  Beloved  Who  has
not  released  it  from  its  mortal  flesh,  that  it  might  have
the  fruition  of  Him  in  the  glory  of  eternity.  Hence  it
cries  out,

'Where  hast  Thou  hidden  Thyself?  '

2.     It  is  as  if  the  soul  said,  show  me  O  thou  the  Word,

my  Bridegroom,  the  place  where  Thou  art  hidden.     It

asks  for  the  revelation  of  the    divine  Essence  ;    for  the

place  where  the  Son  of  God  is  hidden  is,  according  to


170  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  I.]

St.  John,  '  the  bosom  of  the  Father,'"''  which  is  the  divine
Essence,  transcending  all  mortal  vision,  and  hidden  from
all  human  understanding,  as  Isaias  saith,  speaking  to  God,
'  Verily  Thou  art  a  hidden  God.'t  From  this  we  learn
that  the  communication  and  sense  of  His  presence,
however  great  they  may  be,  and  the  most  sublime  and
profound  knowledge  of  God  which  the  soul  may  have  in
this  life,  are  not  God  essentially,  neither  have  they  any
affinity  with  Him,  for  in  very  truth  He  is  still  hidden
from  the  soul ;  and  it  is  therefore  expedient  for  it,  amid
all  these  grandeurs,  always  to  consider  Him  as  hidden,
and  to  seek  Him  in  His  hiding  place,  saying,

'  Where  hast  Thou  hidden  Thyself? '
3.  Neither  sublime  communications  nor  sensible
presence  furnish  any  certain  proof  of  His  gracious
presence ;  nor  is  the  absence  thereof,  and  aridity,  any
proof  of  His  absence  from  the  soul.  '  If  He  come
to  me,  I  shall  not  see  Him ;  if  He  depart,  I  shall
not  understand.'!  That  is,  if  the  soul  have  any  great
communication,  or  impression,  or  spiritual  knowledge,
it  must  not  on  that  account  persuade  itself  that  what  it
then  feels  is  to  enjoy  or  see  God  clearly  and  in  His
Essence,  or  that  it  brings  it  nearer  to  Him,  or  Him  to  it,
however  deep  such  feelings  may  be.  On  the  other  hand,
when  all  these  sensible  and  spiritual  communications  fail
it,  and  is  itself  in  dryness,  darkness,  and  desolation,  it
must  not  on  that  account  suppose  that  God  is  far  from  it ;
for  in  truth  the  former  state  is  no  sign  of  its  being  in  a
state  of  grace,  nor  is  the  latter  a  sign  that  it  is  not ;  for

*  St.  John  i.  18.  t  Is.  xlv.  15.

I  Job  ix.  II.


[STAN.  I.]        OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  171

'  man    knoweth    not    whether   he    be    worthy  of  love    or
hatred  '*  in  the  sight  of  God.

4.  The  chief  object  of  the  soul  in  these  words  is  not
to  ask  only  for  that  affective  and  sensible  devotion,
wherein  there  is  no  certainty  or  evidence  of  the  posses-
sion of  the  Bridegroom  in  this  life  ;  but  principally  for
that  clear  presence  and  vision  of  His  Essence,  of  which
it  longs  to  be  assured  and  satisfied  in  the  next.  This,
too,  was  the  object  of  the  bride  who,  in  the  divine  song
desiring  to  be  united  to  the  Divinity  of  the  Bridegroom
Word,  prayed  to  the  Father,  saying,  '  Show  me  where
Thou  feedest,  where  Thou  liest  in  the  midday.' t  For  to
ask  to  be  shown  the  place  where  He  fed  was  to  ask  to  be
shown  the  Essence  of  the  Divine  Word,  the  Son  ;  because
the  Father  feedeth  nowhere  else  but  in  His  only  begotten
Son,  Who  is  the  glory  of  the  Father.  In  asking  to  be
shown  the  place  where  he  lieth  in  the  midday,  was  to  ask
for  the  same  thing,  because  the  Son  is  the  sole  delight  of
the  Father,  Who  lieth  in  no  other  place,  and  is  com-
prehended by  no  other  thing,  but  in  and  by  His  beloved
Son,  in  Whom  He  reposeth  wholly,  communicating  to
Him  His  whole  Essence,  in  the  '  midday '  which  is
eternity,  where  the  Father  is  ever  begetting  and  the  Son
ever  begotten.

5.  This  pasture,  then,  is  the  Bridegroom  Word,  where
the  Father  feedeth  in  infinite  glory.  He  is  also  the  bed
of  flowers  whereupon  He  reposes  with  infinite  delight  of
love,  profoundly  hidden  from  all  mortal  vision  and  every
created  thing.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  bride-soul
when  she  says,

'Where  hast  Thou  hidden  Thyself?  '
*  Eccles.  ix.  I.  f  Cant.  i.  6.


172  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  I.]

6.  That  the  thirsty  soul  may  find  the  Bridegroom,
and  be  one  with  Him  in  the  union  of  love  in  this  life —
so  far  as  that  is  possible — and  quench  its  thirst  with  that
drink  which  it  is  possible  to  drink  of  at  His  hands  in
this  life,  it  will  be  as  well — since  that  is  what  the  soul
asks  of  Him — that  we  should  answer  for  Him,  and  point
out  the  special  spot  where  He  is  hidden,  that  He  may  be
found  there  in  that  perfection  and  sweetness,  of  which
this  life  is  capable,  and  that  the  soul  may  not  begin  to
loiter  uselessly  in  the  footsteps  of  its  companions.

7.  We  must  remember  that  the  Word,  the  Son  of
God,  together  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  is
hidden  in  essence  and  in  presence,  in  the  inmost  being  of
the  soul.  That  soul,  therefore,  that  will  find  Him,  must
go  out  from  all  things  in  will  and  affection,  and  enter  into
the-  profoundest  self  recollection,  and  all  things  must  be
to  it  as  if  they  existed  not.     Hence,  St.  Augustin  saith  :

I  found  Thee  not  without,  O  Lord,  I  sought  Thee
without  in  vain,  for  thou  art  within.'*  God  is  therefore
hidden  within  the  soul,  and  the  true  contemplative  will
seek  Him  there  in  love,  saying,

'  Where  hast  Thou  hidden  Thyself? '

8.  O  thou  soul,  then,  most  beautiful  of  creatures,  who
so  longest  to  know  the  place  where  thy  Beloved  is,  that
thou  mayest  seek  Him,  and  be  united  to  Him.  Thou
knowest  now  that  thou  art  thyself  that  very  tabernacle
where  He  dwells,  the  secret  chamber  of  His  retreat  where
He  is  hidden.  Rejoice,  therefore  and  exult,  because  all
thy  good  and  all  thy  hope  is  so  near  thee  as  to  be  within
thee  ;  or  to  speak  more  accurately  that  thou  canst  not  be

*  Soliloq.  c.  31.  Opp.  Ed.  Ben.  torn.  vi.  app.  p.  98.


[STAN.  I.]        OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  173

without  it,  'for  lo,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you.'*
So  saith  the  Bridegroom  Himself,  and  His  servant,
St.  Paul,  adds  :  '  You  are  the  temple  of  the  living  God.'t
What  joy  for  the  soul  to  learn  that  God  never  abandons
it  even  in  mortal  sin,  how  much  less  in  a  state  of
grace  ?  I

g.  What  more  canst  thou  desire,  what  more  canst
thou  seek  without,  seeing  that  within  thou  hast  thy  riches,
thy  delight,  thy  satisfaction,  thy  fulness  and  thy  kingdom,
that  is,  thy  Beloved  whom  thou  desirest  and  seekest.
Rejoice  then  and  be  glad  in  Him  with  interior  recollec-
tion, seeing  that  thou  hast  Him  so  near.  Then  love
Him,  then  desire  Him,  then  adore  Him,  and  go  not  to
seek  Him  out  of  thvself,  for  that  will  be  but  distraction
and  weariness,  and  thou  shalt  not  find  Him ;  because
there  is  no  fruition  of  Him  more  certain,  more  ready,
or  more  intimate  than  that  which   is  within.

10.  One  difficulty  alone  remains  :  though  He  is  within,
yet  He  is  hidden.  But  it  is  a  great  matter  to  know  the
place  of  His  secret  rest,  that  He  may  be  sought  there
with  certainty.  The  knowledge  of  this  is  that  which
thou  askest  for  here,  O  soul,  when  with  loving  affection
thou  criest :

'  Where  hast  Thou  hidden  Thyself? '

11.  You  will  still  urge  and  say,  How  comes  it,  then",
that  I  find  Him  not,  nor  feel  Him,  if  He  is  within  my
soul  ?  It  is  because  He  is  hidden,  and  because  thou
hidest  not  thyself  also  that  thou  mayest  find  Him  and
feel  Him ;  for  he  that  will  seek  that  which  is  hidden  must

*  St.  Luke  xvii.  21.  f  2  Cor,  vi.  16.  l  Mt.  Carmel,  Bk.  2,  c.  5.


174  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  I.]

enter  secretly  into  the  secret  place  where  it  is  hidden,  and
when  he  finds  it,  he  is  himself  hidden  like  the  object  of
his  search.  Seeing,  then,  that  the  Bridegroom  whom
thou  lovest  is  '  the  treasure  hidden  in  the  field  '*  of  thy
soul,  for  which  the  wise  merchant  gave  all  that  he  had,  so
thou,  if  thou  will  find  Him,  must  forget  all  that  is  thine,
withdraw  from  all  created  things,  and  hide  thyself  in  the
secret  retreat  of  the  spirit,  shutting  the  door  upon  thyself
— that  is,  denying  thy  will  in  all  things — and  praying  to
thy  Father  in  secret.!  Then  thou,  being  hidden  with
Him,  wilt  then  be  conscious  of  His  presence  in  secret,  and
wilt  love  Him,  possess  Him  in  secret,  and  delight  in  Him
in  secret,  in  a  way  that  no  tongue  or  language  can
express.

12.  Courage,  then,  O  soul  most  beautiful,  thou
knowest  now  that  thy  Beloved,  Whom  thou  desirest,
dwelleth  hidden  within  thy  breast ;  strive,  therefore,  to  be
truly  hidden  with  Him,  and  then  thou  shalt  embrace
Him,  and  be  conscious  of  His  presence  with  loving
affection.  Consider  also  that  He  bids  thee,  by  the  mouth
of  Isaias,  to  come  to  His  secret  hiding-place,  saying,  '  Go,

,  .  enter  into  thy  chambers,  shut  thy  doors  upon
thee ; '  that  is,  all  thy  faculties,  so  that  no  created  thing
shall  enter:  'be  hid  a  little  for  a  moment,' t  that  is,  for
the  moment  of  this  mortal  life ;  for,  if  now  during  this
life  which  is  short,  thou  wilt  '  with  all  watchfulness  keep
thy  heart,' §  as  the  Wise  man  saith,  God  will  most
assuredly  give  thee,  as  He  hath  promised  by  the  prophet
Isaias,  '  hidden  treasures  and  mysteries  of  secrets.' ii     The

*  St.  Matt.  xiii.  44.  t  lb.  vi.  6.  I  Is.  xxvi.  20.

§  Prov.  iv.  23.  II  Is.  xlv.  3.


OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  175

substance  of  these  secrets  is  God  Himself,  for  He  is  the
substance  of  the  faith,  and  the  object  of  it,  and  the  faith
is  the  secret  and  the  mystery.  And  when  that  which  the
faith  conceals  shall  be  revealed  and  made  manifest,  that
is  the  perfection  of  God,  as  St.  Paul  saith,  '  When  that
which  is  perfect  is  come,'*  then  shall  be  revealed  to  the
soul  the  substance  and  mysteries  of  these  secrets.

13.  Though  in  this  mortal  life  the  soul  will  never
reach  to  the  interior  secrets  as  it  will  in  the  next,  however
much  it  may  hide  itself,  still,  if  it  will  hide  itself  with
Moses,  '  in  the  hole  of  the  rock  ' — which  is  a  real  imitation
of  the  perfect  life  of  the  Bridegroom,  the  son  of  God —
protected  by  the  right  hand  of  God,  it  will  merit  the
vision  of  the  'back  parts' '+  that  is,  it  will  reach  to  such
perfection  here,  as  to  be  united,  and  transformed  by  love,
in  the  son  of  God,  its  Bridegroom.  So  effectually  will
this  be  wrought  that  the  soul  will  feel  itself  so  united  to
Him,  so  learned  and  so  instructed  in  His  secrets,  that,  so
far  as  the  knowledge  of  Him  in  this  life  is  concerned,  it
will  be  no  longer  necessary  for  it  to  say :  '  Where  hast
Thou  hidden  Thyself?  '

14.  Thou  knowest  then,  O  soul,  how  thou  art  to
demean  thyself  if  thou  wilt  find  the  Bridegroom  in  His
secret  place.  But  if  thou  wilt  hear  it  again,  hear  this  one
word  full  of  substance  and  unapproachable  truth  :  Seek
Him  in  faith  and  love,  without  seeking  to  satisfy  thyself
in  aught,  or  to  understand  more  than  is  expedient  for  thee
to  know ;  for  faith  and  love  are  the  two  guides  of  the
blind,  they  will  lead  thee  by  a  way  thou  knowest  not  to
the  secret  chamber  of  God.     Faith,  the  secret  of  which  I

*  I  Cor.  xiii.  10.  f  Exod.  xxxiii.  22,  23.


176  .  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.   I.]

am  speaking,  is  the  foot  that  journeys  onwards  to  God,
and  love  is  the  guide  that  directs  its  steps.  And  while
the  soul  meditates  on  the  mysterious  secrets  of  the  faith,
it  will  merit  the  revelation,  on  the  part  of  love,  of  that
which  the  faith  involves,  namely,  the  Bridegroom  whom
it  longs  for,  in  this  life  by  spiritual  grace,  and  the  divine
union,  as  we  said  before,*  and  in  the  next  in  essential
glory,  face  to  face,  hidden  now.

15.  But  meanwhile,  though  the  soul  attains  to  union,
the  highest  state  possible  in  this  life,  yet  inasmuch  as  He
is  still  hidden  from  it  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  as  I
have  said,  the  soul  longing  for  the  fruition  of  Him  in  the
life  to  come,  ever  cries :  '  Where  hast  Thou  hidden
Thyself?'

16.  Thou  doest  well,  then,  O  soul,  in  seeking  Him
always  in  His  secret  place ;  for  thou  greatly  magnifiest
God,  and  drawest  near  unto  Him,  esteeming  Him  as  far
beyond  and  above  all  thou  canst  reach.  Rest,  therefore,
neither  wholly  nor  in  part,  on  what  thy  faculties  can
embrace ;  never  seek  to  satisfy  thyself  with  what  thou
comprehendest  of  God,  but  rather  with  what  thou
comprehendest  not ;  and  never  rest  on  the  love  of,  and
delight  in,  that  which  thou  canst  understand  and  feel,  but
rather  on  that  which  is  beyond  thy  understanding  and
feeling :  this  is,  as  I  have  said,  to  seek  Him  by  faith.

17.  God  is,  as  I  said  before, t  inaccessible  and  hidden,
and  though  it  may  seem  that  thou  hast  found  Him,  felt
Him,  and  comprehended  Him,  yet  thou  must  ever  regard
Him  as  hidden,  serve  Him  as  hidden,  in  secret.  Be  not
thou    like  many  unwise,  who,  with    low  views  of  God,

*  §  4-  t  §  2.


[STAN.  I.]        OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  177

think  that  when  they  cannot  comprehend  Him,  or  be
conscious  of  His  presence,  that  He  is  then  farther  away
and  more  hidden,  when  the  contrary  is  true,  namely,  that
He  is  nearer  to  them  when  they  are  least  aware  of  it ;  as
the  prophet  David  saith,  '  He  put  darkness  his  covert.'*
Thus,  when  thou  art  near  unto  Him,  the  very  infirmity  of
thy  vision  makes  the  darkness  palpable ;  thou  doest  well,
therefore,  at  all  times,  in  prosperity  as  well  as  in
adversity,  spiritual  or  temporal,  to  look  upon  God  as
hidden,  and  to  say  unto  Him, '  Where  hast  Thou  hidden
Thyself?

And  left  me  to  my  sorrow,  O  my  Beloved  ? '
i8.  The  soul  calls  Him  '  my  Beloved,'  the  more  to
move  Him  to  listen  to  its  cry,  for  God,  when  loved,  most
readily  listens  to  the  prayer  of  him  who  loves  Him.  Thus
He  speaks  Himself:  'If  you  abide  in  Me  .  .  .  you
shall  ask  what  thing  soever  you  will,  and  it  shall  be  done
to  you.'t  The  soul  may  then  with  truth  call  Him
Beloved,  when  it  is  wholly  His,  when  the  heart  has  no
attachments  but  Him,  and  when  all  the  thoughts  are
continually  directed  to  Him.  It  was  the  absence  of  this
that  made  Delila  say  to  Samson,  '  How  dost  thou  say
thou  lovest  me  when  thy  mind  is  not  with  me?  't  The
mind  comprises  the  thoughts  and  the  feelings.  Some
there  are  who  call  the  Bridegroom  their  beloved,  but  He
is  not  really  beloved,  because  their  heart  is  not  wholly
with  Him.  Their  prayers  are,  therefore,  not  so  effectual
before  God,  and  they  shall  not  obtain  their  petitions  until,
persevering  in  prayer,  they  fix  their  minds  more  constantly
upon    God    and    their    hearts    more    wholly    in    loving

*  Ps.  xvii.  12.  t  St.  John  xv.  7.  ^  Judg.  xvi.  15.

N


178  .  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  I.]

affection  upon  Him,  for  nothing  can  be  obtained  from
God  but  by  love.

ig.  The  words,  '  And  left  me  to  my  sorrow,'  tell
us  that  the  absence  of  the  Beloved  is  the  cause  of
continual  sadness  in  him  who  loves ;  for  as  such  an  one
loves  none  else,  so,  in  the  absence  of  the  object  beloved,
nothing  can  console  or  relieve  him.  This  is,  therefore,
a  test  to  discern  the  true  lover  of  God.  Is  he  satisfied
with  anything  less  than  God  ?  Do  I  say  satisfied  ?
Yea,  if  a  man  possess  all  things  he  cannot  be  satisfied ;
the  greater  his  possessions  the  less  will  be  his  satis-
faction, for  the  satisfaction  of  the  heart  is  not  found  in
possessions,  but  in  detachment  from  all  things  and  in
poverty  of  spirit.  This  being  so,  the  perfection  of  love  in
which  we  possess  God,  by  a  grace  most  intimate  and
special,  lives  in  the  soul  in  this  life  when  it  has  reached  it,
with  a  certain  satisfaction,  which  however  is  not  full,  for
David,  notwithstanding  all  his  perfection,  hoped  for  that
in  heaven,  saying,  '  I  shall  be  satisfied  when  Thy  glory
shall  appear.'*

20.  Thus,  then,  the  peace  and  tranquillity,  and  satisfac-
tion of  heart,  to  which  the  soul  may  attain  in  this  life,  are
not  sufficient  to  relieve  it  from  its  groaning,  peaceful  and
painless  though  they  be,  while  it  hopes  for  that  which  is
still  wanting.  Groaning  belongs  to  hope,  as  the  Apostle
says  of  himself  and  others,  though  perfect,  '  Ourselves
also,  who  have  the  first  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  even  we
ourselves  groan  within  ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption
of  the  sons  of  God.'t  The  soul  groans  when  the  heart  is
enamoured,   for  where   love  wounds   there  is  heard   the

*  Ps.  xvi.  15.  t  Rom.  viii.  23.


[STAN.  I.]        OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  179

groaning  of  the  wounded  one,  complaining  feelingly  of  the
absence  of  the  Beloved,  especially  when,  after  tasting  of
the  sweet  converse  of  the  Bridegroom,  it  finds  itself
suddenly  alone,  and  in  aridity,  because  He  has  gone
away.     That  is  why  it  cries,

'  Thou  hast  fled  like  the  hart.'

21.  Here  it  is  to  be  observed  that  in  the  Canticle  of
Canticles  the  bride  compares  the  bridegroom  to  the  roe
and  the  hart  on  the  mountains,  '  My  beloved  is  like  unto
a  roe  and  to  a  fawn  of  harts,'*  not  only  because  he  is  shy,
solitary,  and  avoids  companions  as  the  hart,  but  also  for
his  sudden  appearance  and  disappearance.  That  is  His
way  in  His  visits  to  devout  souls  in  order  to  comfort  and
encourage  them,  and  in  the  withdrawing  and  absence
which  He  makes  them  feel  after  those  visits  in  order  to
try,  humble  and  teach  them.  For  that  purpose  he  makes
them  feel  the  pain  of  His  absence  most  keenly,  as  the
following  words  show,

'  Having  wounded  me.'

22.  It  is  as  if  it  had  said,  it  was  not  enough  that  I
should  feel  the  pain  and  grief  which  Thy  absence  causes,
and  from  which  I  am  continually  suffering,  but  Thou
must,  after  wounding  me  with  the  arrow  of  Thy  love,  and
increasing  my  longing  and  desire  to  see  Thee,  run  away
from  me  with  the  swiftness  of  the  hart,  and  not  permit
me  today  hold  of  Thee,  even  for  a  mbment.

23.  For  the  clearer  understanding  of  this  we  are  to
keep  in  mind  that  beside  the  many  kinds  of  God's  visits
to  the  soul,  in  which  He  wounds  it  with  love,  there  are
commonly  certain   secret   touches  of  love,  which,  like  a

*  Cant.  ii.  g.

N   2


180  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  I.]

fiery  arrow,  pierce  and  penetrate  the  soul,  and  burn  it
with  the  fire  of  love.  These  are  properly  called  the
wounds  of  love,  and  it  is  of  these  the  soul  is  here  speaking.
These  wounds  so  inflame  the  will,  that  the  soul  becomes
so  enveloped  with  the  fire  of  love  as  to  appear  consumed
thereby.  They  make  it  go  forth  out  of  itself,  and  be
renewed,  and  enter  on  another  life,  as  the  phoenix  from
the  fire.

24.  David,  speaking   of  this,   saith,   '  My  heart  hath

been  inflamed,  and  my  reins  have  been  changed ;  and  I

am  brought  to  nothing,  and  I   knew  not.'*     The  desires

and  affections,  called  the  reins   by  the  prophet,  are  all

stirred  and  divinely  changed  in  this  burning  of  the  heart,

and  the  soul  through  love,  melts  into  nothing,  knowing

nothing  but  love.     At  this  time  the  changing  of  the  reins

is  a  great  pain,  and  longing  for  the  vision  of  God  ;  it  seems

to  the  soul  that  God  treats  it  with  intolerable  severity,  so

much  so  that  the  severity  with  which  love  treats  it  seems

to  the  soul  unendurable,  not  because  it  is  wounded — for  it

considers  such  wounds  to  be  its  salvation — but  because  it

is  thus  suffering  from  its  love,  and  because   He  has  not

wounded  it  more  deeply  so  as  to  cause  death,  that  it  may

be  united  to  him  in  the  life  of  perfect  love.     The  soul,

therefore,    magnifying   its    sorrows,    or    revealing    them,

says,

'  H^-ving  wounded  me.'

25.  The  soul  says  in  effect.  Thou  hast  abandoned  me
after  wounding  me,  and  Thou  hast  left  me  dying  of  love ;
and  then  Thou  hast  hidden  Thyself  as  a  hart  swiftly
running  away.     This  impression  is  most  profound  in  the

*  Ps.  Ixxii.  21,  22.


[STAN.  I.]        OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  181

soul ;  for  by  this  wound  of  love,  made  in  the  soul  by  God,
the  affections  of  the  will  lead  most  rapidly  to  the  posses-
sion of  the  Beloved,  whose  touch  it  felt,  and  as  rapidly
also.  His  absence,  and  its  inability  to  have  the  fruition  of
Him  here  as  it  desires.  Thereupon  succeed  the  groaning
because  of  His  absence ;  for  these  visitations  of  God  are
not  like  those  which  recreate  and  satisfy  the  soul,  because
they  are  rather  for  wounding  than  for  healing — more  for
afflicting  than  for  satisfying  it,  seeing  that  they  tend
rather  to  quicken  the  knowledge,  and  increase  the  longing,
and  consequently  pain  with  the  longing  for  the  vision  of
God.  They  are  called  the  spiritual  wounds  of  love,  most
sweet  to  the  soul  and  desirable ;  and,  therefore,  when  it
is  thus  wounded  the  soul  would  willingly  die  a  thousand
deaths,  because  these  wounds  make  it  go  forth  out  of
itself,  and  enter  into  God,  which  is  the  meaning  of  the
words  that  follow  :

'  I  ran  after  Thee,  crying ;  but  Thou  wert  gone.'
26.  There  can  be  no  remedy  for  the  wounds  of  love
but  from  Him  who  inflicted  them.  And  so  the  wounded
soul,  urged  by  the  vehemence  of  that  burning  which  the
wounds  of  love  occasion,  runs  after  the  Beloved,  crying
unto  Him  for  relief.  This  spiritual  running  after  God
has  a  twofold  meaning.  The  first  is  a  going  forth  from
all  created  things,  which  is  effected  by  hating  and
despising  them ;  the  second,  a  going  forth  out  of  oneself,
by  forgetting  self,  which  is  brought  about  by  the  love  of
God.  For  when  the  love  of  God  touches  the  soul  with
that  vividness  of  which  we  are  here  speaking,  it  so
elevates  it,  that  it  goes  forth  not  only  out  of  itself  by  self-
forgetfulness,    but    is    also    drawn    away    from    its    own


182  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  I]

judgment,    natural    ways    and    inclinations,    crying    after

God,   O   my   Bridegroom,  as   if  saying,  by  this  touch  of

Thine  and  wound  of  love  hast  Thou  drawn  me  away  not

only  from  all  created  things,  but  also  from  myself — for,  in

truth,  soul  and  body  seem  now  to  part — and  raised  me  up

to  Thyself,   crying   after   Thee   in    detachment  from   all

things  that  I  might  be  attached  to  Thee :

'  Thou  wert  gone.'

27.     As  if  saying,  when  I  sought  Thy  presence,  I  found

Thee   not  ;  and  I  was  detached  from  all  things  without

being  able  to  cling  to  Thee — borne  painfully  by  the  gales

of  love  without  help  in  Thee  or  in  myself.     This  going

forth  of  the  soul  in  search  of  the  Beloved  is  the  rising  of

the  bride  in  the  Canticle  :  '  I  will  rise  and  go  about  the

city  ;  in  the  streets  and  the  high  ways  I  will   seek   him

whom  my  soul  loveth.     I  have  sought  him  and  have  not

found  .  .  .  they  wounded  me.'*     The  rising  of  the  bride

— speaking  spiritually — is    from  that   which   is  mean  to

that  which  is  noble  ;  and  is  the  same  with  the  going  forth

of  the  soul  out  of  its  own  ways  and  inferior  love  to  the

ennobling   love   of  God.     The   bride    says  that  she  was

wounded  because  she  found  him  not  ;t  so  the  soul  also

says  of  itself  that  it  is  wounded  with  love  and  forsaken ;

that  is,  the  loving  soul  is  ever  in  pain  during  the  absence

of  the  Beloved,  because  it  has  given  itself  up  wholly  unto

Him,   hoping   for   the   reward   of  its   self-surrender,   the

possession   of  the  Beloved ;    still  the  Beloved  withholds

Himself  while  the  soul  has  lost  all  things,  and  even  itself,

for  Him  ;  it  obtains  no  compensation  for  its  loss,  seeing

that  it  is  deprived  of  Him  whom  it  loveth.

*  Cant.  iii.  2,  v.  7.  f  lb.  v.  6,  7.


[STAN.  II.]      OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  183

28.  This  pain  and  sense  of  the  absence  of  God,  is
wont  to  be  so  oppressive  in  those  who  are  going  onwards
to  the  state  of  perfection,  that  they  would  di£  if  God  did
not  interpose  when  the  divine  wounds  are  inflicted  upon
them.  As  they  have  the  palate  of  the  will  wholesome,
and  the  mind  pure  and  disposed  for  God,  and  as  they
taste  in  some  degree  of  the  sweetness  of  divine  love,
which  they  supremely  desire,  so  they  also  suffer  supremely  ;
for  having  but  a  glimpse  of  an  infinite  good  which  they
are  not  permitted  to  enjoy,  that  is  to  them  an  ineffable
pain  and  torment.


STANZA    II.

O  shepherds,  you  who  go

Through  the  sheepcots  up  the  hill.

If  you  shall  see

Him  whom  I  love,

Tell  Him  I  languish,  suffer,  and  die.

The  soul  would  now  employ  intercessors  and  mediators
between  itself  and  the  Beloved,  praying  them  to  make  its
sufferings  and  afflictions  known.  One  in  love,  when  he
cannot  converse  personally  with  the  object  of  his  love,
will  do  so  in  the  best  way  he  can.  Thus  the  soul  employs
its  affections,  desires,  and  groanings  as  messengers  well
able  to  manifest  the  secret  of  its  heart  to  the  Beloved.
Accordingly,  it  calls  upon  them  to  do  this,  saying :
'  O  shepherds,  you  who  go.'
2.  The  shepherds  are  the  affections,  and  desires,  and
groanings  of  the  soul,  for  they  feed  it  with  spiritual  good
things.     A  shepherd  is  one  who  feeds :  and  by  means  of


184  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  II.]

such  God  communicates  Himself  to  the  soul  and  feeds  it
in  the  divine  pastures ;  for  without  these  groans  and
desires  He  communicates  but  slightly  with  it.

'You  who  go.'
You   who   go    forth    in   pure   love;     for   all   desires   and
affections  do  not  reach  God,  but  only  those  which  proceed
from  sincere  love.

'  Through  the  sheepcots  up  the  hill.'

3.  The  sheepcots  are  the  heavenly  hierarchies,  the
angelic  choirs,  by  whose  ministry,  fromi  choir  to  choir,  our
prayers  and  sighs  ascend  to  God ;  that  is,  to  the  '  hill,'
for  He  is  the  highest  eminence,  and  because  in  Him,  as
on  a  hill,  we  observe  and  behold  all  things,  the  higher  and
the  lower  sheepcots.  To  Him  our  prayers  ascend,  offered
by  angels,  as  I  have  said  ;  so  the  angel  said  to  Tobias :
'  When  thou  didst  pray  with  tears,  and  didst  bury  the
dead     ...     I  offered  thy  prayer  to  our  Lord.'*

4.  The  shepherds  also  are  the  angels  themselves,
who  not  only  carry  our  petitions  to  God,  but  also  bring
down  the  graces  of  God  to  our  souls,  feeding  them  like
good  shepherds  with  the  sweet  communications  and
inspirations  of  God,  Who  employs  them  in  that  ministry.
They  also  protect  us  and  defend  us  against  the  wolves,
which  are  the  evil  spirits.  And  thus,  whether  we
understand  the  affections  or  the  angels  by  the  shepherds,
the  soul  calls  upon  both  to  be  its  messengers  to  the
Beloved,  and  thus  addresses  them  all :

'  If  you  shall  see  him.'
That  is  to  say  :

5.  If,  to  my  great  happiness,  you  shall  come  into  His

*  Tob.  xii.  12.


[STAN.  II.]      OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  185

presence,  so  that  He  shall  see  you  and  hear  your  words.
God,  indeed,  knoweth  all  things,  even  the  very  thoughts
of  the  soul,  as  He  said  unto  Moses,*  but  it  is  then  He
beholds  our  necessities  when  He  relieves  them,  and  hears
our  prayers  when  He  grants  them.  God  does  not  see  all
necessities  and  hear  all  petitions  until  the  time  appointed
shall  have  come ;  it  is  then  that  He  is  said  to  hear  and
see,  as  we  learn  in  the  book  of  Exodus.  When  the
children  of  Israel  had  been  afflicted  for  four  hundred
years  as  serfs  in  Egypt,  God  said  unto  Moses  '  I  have
seen  the  affliction  of  my  people  in  Egypt,  and  I  have
heard  their  cry,  and  ...  I  am  come  down  to  deliver
them.'t  And  yet  He  had  seen  it  always.  So  also  St.
Gabriel  bade  Zacharias  not  to  fear,  because  God  had
heard  his  prayer,  and  would  grant  him  the  son,  for  whom
he  had  been  praying  for  many  years ;  I  yet  God  had
always  heard  him.  Every  soul  ought  to  consider  that
God,  though  He  does  not  at  once  help  us  and  grant  our
petitions,  will  still  succour  us  in  His  own  time,  for  He  is,
as  David  saith,  'a  helper  in  due  time  in  tribulation, '§  if
we  do  not  become  faint-hearted  and  cease  to  pra}'.  This
is  what  the  soul  means  by  saying,  '  If  you  shall  see  Him,'
that  is  to  say,  if  the  time  is  come  when  it  shall  be  His
good  pleasure  to  grant  my  petitions.

6.  '  Whom  I  love  the  most : '  that  is,  whom  I  love
more  than  all  creatures.  This  is  true  of  the  soul  when
nothing  can  make  it  afraid  to  do  and  suffer  all  things  in
His  service.  And  when  the  soul  can  also  truly  say  that
which  follows,  it  is  a  sign  that  it  loves  Him  above  all  things.
'  Tell  Him  I  languish,  suffer,  and  die."

*  Deut.  xxxi.  21.  t  Exod.  iii.  7,  8.

X  St.  Luke  i.  13.  §  Ps.  ix.  10.


186  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  II,]

7.  Here  the  soul  speaks  of  three  things  that  distress
it :  namely,  langour,  suffering,  and  death  ;  for  the  soul
that  truly  loves  God  with  a  love  in  some  degree  perfect,
suffers  in  three  ways  in  His  absence,  in  its  three  powers
ordinarily — the  understanding,  the  will,  and  the  memory.
In  the  understanding  it  languishes  because  it  does  not  see
God,  Who  is  the  salvation  of  it,  as  the  Psalmist  saith  :  '  I
am  thy  salvation.'*  In  the  will  it  suffers,  because  it
possesses  not  God,  Who  is  its  comfort  and  delight,  as
David  also  saith  :  '  Thou  shalt  make  them  drink  of  the
torrent  of  Thy  pleasure.'!  In  the  memory  it  dies,
because  it  remembers  its  privation  of  all  the  blessings  of
the  understanding,  which  are  the  vision  of  God,  and  of
the  delights  of  the  will,  which  are  the  fruition  of  Him,
and  that  it  is  very  possible  also  that  it  may  lose  Him  for
ever,  because  of  the  dangers  and  chances  of  this  life.  In
the  memory,  therefore,  the  soul  labours  under  a  sensation
like  that  of  death,  because  it  sees  itself  without  the  certain
and  perfect  fruition  of  God,  Who  is  the  life  of  the  soul,  as
Moses  saith,  '  He  is  thy  life.'t

8.  Jeremias  also,  in  the  Lamentations,  speaks  of  these
three  things,  praying  unto  God,  and  sajang  :  '  Remember
my  poverty  .  .  .  the  wormwood  and  the  gall.'§
Poverty  relates  to  the  understanding,  to  which  appertain
the  riches  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,'  in  Whom
all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  are  hid.'i;
The  wormwood,  which  is  a  most  bitter  herb,  relates  to
the  will,  to  which  appertains  the  sweetness  of  the  fruition
of  God,  deprived  of  which  it  abides  in  bitterness.  We
learn    in    the    Apocalypse     that     bitterness     appertains

*  Ps.  xxxiv.  3.  t  lb.  XXXV.  9.  +  Deut.  xxx.  20.

§  Lair.  iii.  ig.  ||  Coloss.  ii.  3.


[STAN.  II.]       OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  187

spiritually  to  the  will,  for  the  angel  said  to  St.  John  :
'  Take  the  book  and  eat  it  up  ;  and  it  shall  make  thy
belly  bitter.'*  Here  the  belly  signifies  the  will.  The
gall  relates  not  only  to  the  memory,  but  also  to  all  the
powers  and  faculties  of  the  soul,  for  it  signifies  the  death
thereof,  as  we  learn  from  Moses  speaking  of  the  damned :
'  Their  wine  is  the  gall  of  dragons,  and  the  venom  of  asps,
which  is  incurable. 't  This  signifies  the  loss  of  God,
which  is  the  death  of  the  soul.

g.  These  three  things  which  distress  the  soul  are
grounded  on  the  three  theological  virtues,  faith,  charity,
and  hope,  which  relate,  in  the  order  here  assigned  them,
to  the  three  faculties  of  the  soul,  understanding,  will,  and
memory.  Observe  here  that  the  soul  does  no  more  than
represent  its  miseries  and  pain  to  the  Beloved:  for  he
who  loves  wisely  does  not  care  to  ask  for  that  which  he
wants  and  desires,  being  satisfied  with  hinting  at  his
necessities,  so  that  the  beloved  one  may  do  what  shall  to
him  seem  good.  Thus  the  Blessed  Virgin  at  the  marriage
feast  of  Cana  asked  not  directly  for  wine,  but  only  said  to
her  beloved  Son,  '  They  have  no  wine.'t  The  sisters  of
Lazarus  sent  to  Him,  not  to  ask  Him  to  heal  their
brother,  but  only  to  say  that  he  whom  He  loved  was  sick :
'  Lord,  behold,  he  whom  Thou  lovest  is  sick.'§

10.  There  are  three  reasons  for  this.  Our  Lord
knows  what  is  expedient  for  us  better  than  we  do
ourselves.  Secondly,  the  Beloved  is  more  compassionate
towards  us  when  He  sees  our  necessities  and  our
resignation.  Thirdly,  we  are  more  secured  against
self-love  and  self-seeking  when  we  represent  our  necessity,

*  Apoc.  X.  9.  t  Deut.  xxxii.  33.  +  St.  John  ii.  3.  §  lb.  xi.  3.


188  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  III.]

than  when  we  ask  for  that  which  we  think  we  need.  It  is
in  this  way  that  the  soul  represents  its  three  necessities ;
as  if  it  said  :  Tell  my  Beloved,  that  as  I  languish,  and  as
He  only  is  my  salvation,  to  save  me ;  that  as  I  am
suffering,  and  as  He  only  is  my  joy,  to  give  me  joy;  that
as  I  am  dying,  and  as  He  only  is  my  life,  to  give  me  life.


STANZA  in.

In  search  of  my  Love,

I  will  go  over  mojintains  and  strands ;

I  will  gather  7to  flowers,

I  will  fear  no  wild  beasts  ;

And  pass  by  the  mighty  and  the  frontiers.

The  soul,  observing  that  its  sighs  and  prayers  suffice  not
to  iind  the  Beloved,  and  that  it  has  not  been  helped  by
the  messengers  it  invoked  in  the  first  and  second  stanzas,
will  not,  because  its  searching  is  real  and  its  love  great,
leave  undone  anything  itself  can  do.  The  soul  that  really
loves  God  is  not  dilatory  in  its  efforts  to  find  the  Son  of
God,  its  Beloved ;  and,  even  when  it  has  done  all  it  could
it  is  still  not  satisfied,  thinking  it  has  done  nothing.
Accordingly,  the  soul  is  now,  in  this  third  stanza,  actively
seeking  the  Beloved,  and  sa3ang  how  He  is  to  be  found  ;
namely,  in  the  practice  of  all  virtue  and  in  the  spiritual
exercises  of  the  active  and  contemplative  life  ;  for  this  end
it  rejects  all  delights  and  all  comforts ;  and  all  the  power
and  wiles  of  its  three  enemies,  the  world,  the  devil  and
the  flesh,  are  unable  to  delay  it  or  hinder  it  on  the
road.

'  In  search  of  my  Love.'
2.     Here  the  soul  makes  it  known  that  to  find  God  it  is


[STAN.  III.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  189

not  enough  to  pray  with  the  heart  and  the  tongue,  or  to
have  recourse  to  the  help  of  others ;  we  must  also  work
ourselves,  according  to  our  power.  God  values  one  effort  of
our  own  more  than  many  of  others  on  our  behalf;  the
soul,  therefore,  remembering  the  saying  of  the  Beloved,
'  Seek  and  you  shall  find,'*  is  resolved  on  going  forth,  as  I
said  just  now,  to  seek  Him  actively,  and  not  rest  till  it
finds  Him,  as  many  do  who  will  not  that  God  should  cost
them  'anything  but  words,  and  even  those  carelessly
uttered,  and  for  His  sake  will  do  nothing  that  will  cost
them  anything.  Some,  too,  will  not  leave  for  His  sake  a
place  which  is  to  their  taste  and  liking,  expecting  to
receive  all  the  sweetness  of  God  in  their  mouth  and  in
their  heart  without  moving  a  step,  without  mortifying
themselves  by  the  abandonment  of  a  single  pleasure  or
useless  comfort.

3.  But  until  they  go  forth  out  of  themselves  to  seek
Him,  however  loudly  they  may  cry  they  will  not  find
Him ;  for  the  bride  in  the  Canticle  sought  Him  in  this
way,  but  she  found  Him  not  until  she  went  out  to  seek
Him — '  In  my  little  bed  in  the  nights  I  have  sought  Him
whom  my  soul  loveth :  I  have  sought  Him  and  have
not  found  Him'.  I  will  rise  and  will  go  about  the
city :  by  the  streets  and  high  ways  I  will  seek  Him
whom  my  soul  loveth.' f  She  afterwards  adds,  that  when
she  had  endured  certain  trials  she  '  found  Him.'t

4.  He,  therefore,  who  seeks  God,  consulting  his  own
ease  and  comfort,  seeks  Him  by  night,  and  therefore  finds
Him  not.  But  he  who  seeks  Him  in  the  practice  of
virtue  and  of  good  works,  casting  aside  the  comforts  of

*  S.  Luke  xi.  9.  f  Cant.  iii.  i.  +  lb.  iii.  4.


190  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  III.]

his  own  bed,  seeks  Him  by  day ;  such  an  one  shall  find
Him,  for  that  which  is  not  seen  by  night  is  visible  by  day.
The  Bridegroom  Himself  teaches  us  this,  saying, '  Wisdom
is  clear  and  never  fadeth  away,  and  is  easily  seen  of  them
that  love  her,  and  is  found  of  them  that  seek  her.  She
preventeth  them  that  covet  her,  that  she  first  may  shew
herself  unto  them.  He  that  awaketh  early  to  seek  her
shall  not  labour  ;  for  he  shall  find  her  sitting  at  his  doors.'*
The  soul  that  will  go  out  of  the  house  of  its  own  will,  and
abandon  the  bed  of  its  own  satisfaction,  will  find  the
divine  Wisdom,  the  Son  of  God,  the  Bridegroom  waiting
at  the  door  without,  and  so  the  soul  says ;

'  I  will  go  over  mountains  and  strands.'

5.  Mountains  which  are  lofty,  signify  virtues,  partly
on  account  of  their  height,  and  partly  on  account  of  the
toil  and  labour  of  ascending  them  ;  the  soul  says  it  will
ascend  to  them  in  the  practice  of  the  contemplative
life.  Strands  which  are  low,  signify  mortifications,
penances,  and  the  spiritual  exercises,  and  the  soul  will  add
to  the  active  life  that  of  contemplation ;  for  both  are
necessary  in  seeking  after  God  and  in  acquiring  virtue.
The  soul  says,  in  effect.  In  searching  after  my  Beloved  I
will  practice  great  virtue,  and  abase  myself  by  lowly
mortifications  and  acts  of  humility  ;  for  the  wa}^  to  seek
God  is  to  do  good  works  in  Him,  and  to  mortify  the  evil
in  ourselves,  as  it  is  said  in  the  words  that  follow :

'  I  will  gather  no  flowers.'

6.  He  that  will  seek  after  God  must  have  his  heart
detached,  resolute,  and   free  from  all  evils,  and   from  all

*  Wisd.  vi.  13.


[STAN.  III.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  191

goods  which  are  not  simply  God ;  that  is  the  meaning
of  these  words.  The  words  that  follow  describe  the
liberty  and  courage  which  the  soul  must  possess  in
searching  after  God.  Here  it  declares  that  it  will
gather  no  flowers  by  the  way — the  flowers  are  all  the
delights,  satisfactions,  and  pleasures  which  this  life
offers,  and  which,  if  the  soul  sought  or  accepted,  would
hinder  it  on  the  road.

7.  These  flowers  are  of  three  kinds — temporal,  sensual,
and  spiritual.  All  of  them  occupy  the  heart,  and  stand  in
the  way  of  the  spiritual  detachment  required  in  the  way
of  Christ,  if  we  regard  them  or  rest  in  them.  The  soul,
therefore,  says,  that  it  will  not  stop  to  gather  any  of  them,
that  it  may  seek  after  God.  It  seems  to  say,  I  will  not
set  my  heart  upon  riches  or  the  goods  of  this  world ;  I
will  not  indulge  in  the  satisfactions  and  ease  of  the  flesh,
neither  will  I  consult  the  taste  and  comforts  of  my  spirit,
in  order  that  nothing  may  detain  me  in  my  search  after
my  Love  on  the  toilsome  mountains  of  virtue.  This
means  that  it  accepts  the  counsel  of  the  prophet  David  to
those  who  travel  on  this  road  :  '  If  riches  abound,  set  not
your  heart  upon  them.'*  This  is  applicable  to  sensual
satisfactions,  as  well  as  to  temporal  goods  and  spiritual
consolations.

8.  From  this  we  learn  that  not  only  temporal  goods
and  bodily  pleasures  hinder  us  on  the  road  to  God,  but
spiritual  delight  and  consolations  also,  if  we  attach
ourselves  to  them  or  seek  them ;  for  these  things  are
hindrances  on  the  way  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  the
Bridegroom.     He,  therefore,  that  will  go  onwards  must

*  Ps.  Ixi.  II.


192  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  III.]

not  only  not  stop  to  gather  flowers,  but  must  also  have
the  courage  and  resolution  to  say  as  follows  :  —

'  I  will  fear  no  wild  beasts ;  and  I  will  go  over
the  mighty  and  the  frontiers.'

Here  we  have  the  three  enemies  of  the  soul  which  make
war  against  it,  and  make  its  way  full  of  difficulties.  The
wild  beasts  are  the  world  ;  the  mighty,  the  devil ;  and  the
frontiers  are  the  flesh.

g.  The  world  is  the  wild  beasts,  because  in  the
beginning  of  the  heavenly  journey  the  imagination
pictures  the  world  to  the  soul  as  wild  beasts,  threatening
and  fierce,  principally  in  three  ways.  The  first  is,  we
must  forfeit  the  world's  favour,  lose  friends,  credit,
reputation,  and  property ;  the  second  is  not  less  cruel  :
we  must  suffer  the  perpetual  deprivation  of  all  the
comforts  and  pleasures  of  the  world  ;  and  the  third  is
still  worse  :  evil  tongues  will  rise  against  us,  mock  us,  and
speak  of  us  with  contempt.  This  strikes  some  persons  so
vividly,  that  it  becomes  most  difficult  for  them,  I  do  not
say  to  persevere,  but  even  to  enter  on  this  road  at  all.

10.  But  there  are  generous  souls  who  have  to
encounter  wild  beasts  of  a  more  interior  and  spiritual
nature — trials,  temptations,  tribulations,  and  afflictions
of  divers  kinds,  through  which  they  must  pass.  This  is
what  God  sends  to  those  whom  He  is  raising  upwards  to
high  perfection,  proving  them  and  trying  them  as  gold  in
the  fire  ;  as  David  saith  :  '  Many  are  the  tribulations  of
the  JQst  ;  and  out  of  all  these  our  Lord  will  deliver
them.'*     But  the  truly  enamoured    soul,   preferring  the

*  Ps.  xxxiii.  20.


[STAN.  III.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  193

Beloved   above  all   things,  and  relying   on   His   love  and
favour,  finds  no  difficulty  in  saying  :

'  I  will  fear  no  wild  beasts.'
'  And  pass  over  the  mighty  and  the  frontiers."

11.  Evil  spirits,  the  second  enemy  of  the  soul,  are
called  the  mighty,  because  they  strive  with  all  their  might
to  seize  on  the  passes  of  the  spiritual  road ;  and  because
the  temptations  they  suggest  are  harder  to  overcome,  and
the  craft  they  employ  more  difficult  to  detect,  than  all  the
seductions  of  the  world  and  the  flesh ;  and  because,  also,
they  strengthen  their  own  position  by  the  help  of  the
world  and  the  flesh  in  order  to  fight  vigorously  against
the  soul.  Hence  the  Psalmist  calls  them  mighty,  saying :
'  The  mighty  have  sought  after  my  soul.'*  The  prophet
Job  also  speaks  of  their  might :  '  There  is  no  power  upon
the  earth  that  may  be  compared  with  him  who  was  made
to  fear  no  man.'t

12.  There  is  no  human  power  that  can  be  compared
with  the  power  of  the  devil,  and  therefore  the  divine
power  alone  can  overcome  him,  and  the  divine  light
alone  can  penetrate  his  devices.  No  soul  therefore  can
overcome  his  might  without  prayer,  or  detect  his
illusions  without  humility  and  mortification.  Hence  the
exhortation  of  St.  Paul  to  the  faithful :  '  Put  you  on  the
armour  of  God,  that  you  may  stand  against  the  deceits  of
the  devil :  for  our  wrestling  is  not  against  flesh  and
blood. 't  Blood  here  is  the  world,  and  the  armour  of  God
is  prayer  and  the  cross  of  Christ,  wherein  consist  the
humility  and  mortification  of  which  I  have  spoken.

13.  The  soul  says  also  that  it  will  cross  the  frontiers  :

*  Ps.  liii.  5.  f  Job  xli.  24.  I  Eph.  vi.  11.


194  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  IV.]

these  are  the  natural  resistance  and  rebellion  of  the  flesh
against  the  spirit,  for,  as  St.  Paul  saith,  the  '  flesh  lusteth
against  the  spirit,'*  and  sets  itself  as  a  frontier  against  the
soul  on  its  spiritual  road.  This  frontier  the  soul  must
cross,  surmounting  difficulties,  and  trampling  under  foot
all  sensual  appetites  and  all  natural  affections  with  great
courage  and  resolution  of  spirit :  for  while  they  remain
in  the  soul,  the  spirit  will  be  by  them  hindered  from
advancing  to  the  true  life  and  spiritual  delight.  This  is
set  clearly  before  us  by  St.  Paul,  saying :  '  If  by  the  spirit
you  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  flesh,  you  shall  live.'t  This,
then,  is  the  process  which  the  soul  in  this  stanza  says  it
becomes  it  to  observe  on  the  way  to  seek  the  Beloved  :
which  briefly  is  a  firm  resolution  not  to  stoop  to  gather
flowers  by  the  way ;  courage  not  to  fear  the  wild  beasts,
and  strength  to  pass  by  the  mighty  and  the  frontiers  ;
intent  solely  on  going  over  the  mountains  and  the  strands
of  the  virtues,  in  the  way  just  explained.


STANZA  IV.

0  groves  and  thickets.

Planted  by  the  hand  of  the  Beloved.

O  verdant  meads

Enamelhd  vith  floioers,

Tell  ftf,  has  He  passed  by  yon?

The  disposition  requisite  for  entering  on  the  spiritual
journey,  abstinence  from  joys  and  pleasure,  being  now
described ;  and  the  courage  also  with  which  to  overcome
temptations  and  trials,  wherein  consists  the  practice  of

*  Galat.  V.  17.        ■      -  t  Rom.  viii.  13.


[STAN.  IV.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  195

self-knowledge,  which  is  the  first  step  of  the  soul  to  the
knowledge  of  God.  Now,  in  this  stanza  the  soul  begins
to  advance  through  consideration  and  knowledge  of
creatures  to  the  knowledge  of.  the  Beloved  their  Creator.
For  the  consideration  of  the  creature,  after  the  practice
of  self-knowledge,  is  the  first  in  order  on  the  spiritual
road  to  the  knowledge  of  God,  Whose  grandeur  and
magnificence  they  declare,  as  the  Apostle  saith  :  '  For  His
invisible  things  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  seen,
being  understood  by  these  things  that  are  made.'"  It  is
as  if  he  said,  '  The  invisible  things  of  God  are  made
known  to  the  soul  by  created  things,  visible  and  invisible.'

2.  The  soul,  then,  in  this  stanza  addresses  itself  to
creatures  inquiring  after  the  Beloved.  And  we  observe,
as  St.  Augustin  says,  that  the  inquiry  made  of  creatures
is  a  meditation  on  the  Creator,  for  which  they  furnish  the
matter.  Thus,  in  this  stanza  the  soul  meditates  on  the
elements  and  the  rest  of  the  lower  creation ;  on  the
heavens,  and  on  the  rest  of  created  and  material  things
which  God  has  made  therein ;  also  on  the  heavenly
spirits,  saying :

'  O  groves  and  thickets.'

3.  The  groves  are  the  elements,  earth,  water,  air,  and

fire.    As  the  most  pleasant  groves  are  studded  with  plants

and  shrubs,  so  the  elements  are  thick  with  creatures,  and

here  are  called  thickets  because  of  the  number  and  variety

of  creatures  in  each.     The  earth   contains    innumerable

varieties  of  animals  and  plants,  the  water  of  fish,  the  air

of  birds,    and    fire    concurs   with    all    in    animating   and

sustaining  them.     Each  kind  of  animal  lives  in  its  proper

*  Rom.  i.  20.

0    2


196  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  IV.]

element,  placed  and  planted  there,  as  in  its  own  grove
and  soil  where  it  is  born  and  nourished  ;  and,  in  truth,
God  so  ordered  it  when  He  made  them  ;  He  commanded
the  earth  to  bring  forth  herbs  and  animals ;  the  waters
and  the  sea,  fish  ;  and  the  air  He  gave  as  an  habitation  to
birds.  The  soul,  therefore,  considering  that  this  is  the
effect  of  His  commandment,  cries  out,

'  Planted  by  the  hand  of  the  Beloved.'

4.  That  which  the  soul  considers  now  is  this :  the
hand  of  God  the  Beloved  onty  could  have  created  and
nurtured  all  these  varieties  and  wonderful  things.  The
soul  says  deliberately,  '  by  the  hand  of  the  Beloved,'
because  God  doeth  many  things  b}-  the  hands  of  others,
as  of  angels  and  men  ;  but  the  work  of  creation  has  never
been,  and  never  is,  the  work  of  any  other  hand  than
His  own.  Thus  the  soul,  considering  the  creation,  is
profoundly  stirred  up  to  love  God  the  Beloved,  for  it
beholds  all  things  to  be  the  work  of  His  hands,  and  goes
on  to  say :

'  O  verdant  meads.'

5.  These  are  the  heavens ;  for  the  things  which  He
hath  created  in  the  heavens  are  of  incorruptible  freshness,
which  neither  perish  nor  wither  with  time,  where  the  just
are  refreshed  as  in  the  green  pastures.  The  present
consideration  includes  all  the  varieties  of  the  stars  in
their  beauty,  and  the  other  works  in  the  heavens.

6.  The   Church   also    applies   the    term    '  verdure '    to
•  heavenly    things ;    for    while    praying    to    God    for    the

departing  soul,  it  addresses   it  as  follows  :   '  May  Christ,
the  Son  of  the  living  God,  gi\'e  thee  a  place  in  the  ever


[STAN,  v.]       OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  197

pleasant  verdure  of  His  paradise."''     The  soul  also  says
that  this  verdant  mead  is

'  Enamelled  with  flowers.'

7.  The  flowers  are  the  angels  and  the  holy  souls  who
adorn  and  beautify  that  place  as  costly  and  fine  enamel
on  a  vase  of  pure  gold.

'  Tell  me,  has  He  passed  by  you  ? '

8,  This  inquiry  is  the  consideration  of  the  creature
just  spoken  of,  and  is  in  effect :  Tell  me,  what  perfections
has  He  created  in  vou  ?


STANZA  V.

ANSWER    OF    THE    CREATURES.

A  thousand  graces  diffusing

He  passed  through  the  groves  in  haste.,

And  merely  regardivg  them.

As  He  passed.

Clothed  them  with  His  beauty.

This  is  the  answer  of  the  creatures  to  the  soul,  which,
according  to  St.  Augustin  in  the  same  place,  is  the
testimony  which  they  furnish  to  the  majesty  and
perfections  of  God,  for  which  it  asked  in  its  meditation
on  created  things.  The  meaning  of  this  stanza  is,  in
substance,  as  follows  :  God  created  all  things  with  great
ease  and  rapidity,  and  left  in  them  some  tokens  of
Himself,  not  only  by  creating  them  out  of  nothing,  but
also  by  endowing  them  with  innumerable  graces  and
qualities,  making  them  beautiful  in  admirable  order  and
unceasing  mutual  dependence.     All  this  He  wrought  in

*  Ordo  commendationis  animas.


198  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  V.]

wisdom,  by  which  He  created  them,  which  is  the  Word,
His  only  begotten  Son.     Then  the  soul  says :
'A  thousand  graces  diffusing.'

2.  These  graces  are  the  innumerable  multitude  of
His  creatures.  The  term  '  thousand,'  which  the  soul
makes  use  of,  denotes  not  their  number,  but  the
impossibility  of  numbering  them.  They  are  called  graces,
because  of  the  qualities  with  which  He  has  endowed
them.  He  is  said  to  diffuse  them  because  He  fills  the
whole  world  with  them.

'  He  passed  through  the  groves  in  haste.'

3.  To  pass  through  the  groves  is  to  create  the
elements ;  here  called  groves,  through  which  He  is  said
to  pass,  diffusing  a  thousand  graces,  because  He  adorned
them  with  creatures  which  are  all  beautiful.  Moreover,
He  diffused  among  them  a  thousand  graces,  giving  the
power  of  generation  and  self-conservation.  He  is  said  to
pass  through,  because  the  creatures  are,  as  it  were,  traces
of  the  passage  of  God,  revealing  His  majesty,  power,  and
wisdom,  and  His  other  divine  attributes.  He  is  said  to
pass  in  haste,  because  the  creatures  are  the  least  of  the
works  of  God  :  He  made  them,  as  it  were,  in  passing.
His  greatest  works,  wherein  He  is  most  visible  and  at
rest,  are  the  incarnation  of  the  Word  and  the  mysteries
of  the  Christian  faith,  in  comparison  with  which  all
His  other  works  were  works  wrought  in  passing  and  in
haste.

'  And  thereby  regarding  them
As  He  passed.
Clothed  them  with  His  beauty.'

4.  The  Son  of  God  is,  in  the  words  of  St.  Paul,  the


[STAN,  v.]       OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  199

'  brightness  of  His  glory  and  the  figure  of  His  substance.'*
God  saw  all  things  only  in  the  face  of  His  Son.  This
was  to  give  them  their  natural  being,  bestowing  upon
them  many  graces  and  natural  gifts,  making  them  perfect,
as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Genesis,  '  God  saw  all  the
things  that  He  had  made :  and  they  were  very  good.'t
To  see  all  things  very  good  was  to  make  them  very  good
in  the  Word  His  Son.  He  not  only  gave  them  their
being  and  their  natural  graces  when  He  beheld  them,  but
He  also  clothed  them  with  beauty  in  the  face  of  His  Son,
communicating  to  them  a  supernatural  being  when  He
made  man,  and  exalted  him  to  the  beauty  of  God,  and,
by  consequence,  all  creatures  in  him,  because  He  united
Himself  to  the  nature  of  them  all  in  man.  For  this
cause  the  Son  of  God  Himself  said,  '  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted
up  from  the  earth  will  draw  all  things  to  Myself.' t  And
thus  in  this  exaltation  of  the  incarnation  of  His  Son,  and
the  glory  of  His  resurrection  according  to  the  flesh,  the
Father  not  only  made  all  things  beautiful  in  part,  but
also,  we  may  well  say,  clothed  them  wholly  with  beauty
and  dignity.


NOTE.

But  beyond  all  this — speaking  now  of  contemplation  as  it
affects  the  soul  and  makes  an  impression  on  it, — in  the
vivid  contemplation  and  knowledge  of  created  things,  the
soul  beholds  such  a  multiplicity  of  graces,  powers,  and
beauty  wherewith  God  has  endowed  them,  that  they  seem
to  it  to  be  clothed  with  admirable  beauty,  and  super-
natural virtue  derived  from  the  infinite  supernatural
*  Heb.  i.  3.  f  Gen.  i.  31.  J  St.  John  xii.  32.


■200  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  VL]

beauty  of  the  face  of  God,  Whose  beholding  of  them
clothed  the  heavens  and  the  earth  with  beauty  and  joy ;
as  it  is  written  :  '  Thou  openest  Thy  hand  and  fillest  with
blessing  every  living  creature.'*  Hence  the  soul  wounded
with  love  of  that  beauty  of  the  Beloved  which  it  traces  in
created  things,  and  anxious  to  behold  that  beauty  which
is  the  source  of  this  visible  beauty,  sings  as  in  the
following  stanza  : —


STANZA  VI.

THE    BRIDE.

0  who  can  heal  me  '

Give  me  perfectly  Thyself,
Send  me  no  more
A  messenger

Who  cannot  tell  me  ivhat  I  %vish  :

As  created  things  furnish  to  the  soul  traces  of  the  Beloved,
and  exhibit  the  impress  of  His  beauty  and  magnificence,
the  love  of  the  soul  increases,  and  consequently  the  pain
of  His  absence  :  for  the  greater  the  soul's  knowledge  of
God  the  greater  its  desire  to  see  Him,  and  its  pain  when
it  cannot :  and  as  it  sees  there  is  no  remedy  for  this  pain
except  in  the  presence  and  vision  of  the  Beloved,
distrustful  of  every  other  remedy,  it  prays  in  this  stanza
for  the  fruition  of  His  presence,  saying  :  Entertain  me  no
more  with  any  knowledge  or  communications,  or  impres-
sions of  Thy  grandeur,  for  these  do  but  increase  my
longing,  and  the  pain  of  Thy  absence ;  Thy  presence
alone  can  satisfy  my  will  and  desire.  The  will  cannot  be
satisfied  with  anything  less  than  the  vision  of  God,  and
*  Ps.  cxliv.  i6.


[STAN.  VI.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  201

therefore  the  soul  prays  that  He  may  be  pleased  to  give
Himself  to  it  in  truth,  in  perfect  love.

'  Ah  !  who  can  heal  me  ? '

2.  That  is,  there  is  nothing  in  all  the  delights  of  the
world,  nothing  in  the  satisfaction  of  the  senses,  nothing  in
the  sweet  taste  of  the  spirit  that  can  heal  or  content  me,
and  therefore  it  adds  :

'  Give  me  at  once  Thyself.'

3.  No  soul  that  really  loves  can  be  satisfied  or  content
short  of  the  fruition  of  God.  For  everything  else,  as  I
have  just  said,  not  only  does  not  satisfy  the  soul,  but
rather  increases  the  hunger  and  thirst  of  seeing  Him  as
He  is.  Thus  every  glimpse  of  the  Beloved,  every
knowledge  and  impression,  or  communication  from  Him
— these  are  the  messengers  suggestive  of  Him — increase
and  quicken  the  soul's  desire  after  Him,  as  crumbs  of  food
in  hunger  stimulate  the  appetite.  The  soul,  therefore,
mourning  over  the  misery  of  being  entertained  by  matters
of  so  little  moment,  cries  out :

'  Give  me  perfectly  Thyself.'

4.  Now  all  our  knowledge  of  God  in  this  life,  how
great  soever  it  may  be,  is  not  a  perfectl}^  true  knowledge
of  Him,  because  it  is  partial  and  incomplete  ;  but  to  know
Him  essentially  is  true  knowledge,  and  that  is  it  which
the  soul  prays  for  here,  not  satisfied  with  any  other  kind.
Hence  it  says  : —

'  Send  me  no  more  a  messenger.'

5.  That  is,  grant  that  I  may  no  longer  know  Thee  in
this  imperfect  way  by  the  messengers  of  knowledge  and
impressions,  which  are  so  distant  from  that  which  my
soul  desires ;  for  these  messengers,  as  Thou  well  knowest,


202  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  VI, ]

O  my  Bridegroom,  do  but  increase  the  pain  of  Thy
absence.  They  renew  the  wound  which  Thou  hast
inflicted  by  the  knowledge  of  Thee  which  they  convey,
and  they  seem  to  delay  Thy  coming.  Henceforth  do
Thou  send  me  no  more  of  these  inadequate  communica-
tions, for  if  I  have  been  hitherto  satisfied  with  them,  it
was  owing  to  the  slightness  of  my  knowledge  and  of  my
love  :  now  that  my  love  has  become  great,  I  cannot
satisfy  myself  with  them  ;  do  Thou,  therefore,  give  me  at
once  Thyself.

6.  This,  more  clearly  expressed,  is  as  follows  :  O  Lord,
my  Bridegroom,  Who  didst  give  me  Thyself  partially
before,  give  me  Thyself  wholly  now :  Thou  who  didst
show  glimpses  of  Thyself  before,  show  Thyself  clearly
now  :  Thou  who  didst  communicate  Thyself  hitherto  by

?^*  the  instrumentality  of  messengers — it  was  as  if  Thou  didst

mock  me— give  Thyself  by  Thyself  now.  Sometimes
when  Thou  didst  visit  me  Thou  didst  give  me  the  pearl
of  Thy  possession,  and  when  I  began  to  examine  it,  lo,  it
was  gone,  for  Thou  hadst  hidden  it  Thyself:  it  was  like  a
mockery.  Give  me  then  Thyself  in  truth,  Thy  whole  self,
that  I  may  have  Thee  wholly  to  myself  wholly,  and  send
me  no  messengers  again.

'  Who  cannot  tell  me  what  I  wish.'

7.  I  wish  for  Thee  wholly,  and  Thy  messengers
neither  know  Thee  wholly,  nor  can  they  speak  of  Thee
wholly,  for  there  is  nothing  in  earth  or  heaven  that  can
furnish  that  knowledge  to  the  soul  which  it  longs  for.
They  cannot  tell  me  therefore  what  I  wish.  Instead  then,
of  these  messengers,  be  Thou  the  messenger  and  the
messaere.


[STAN.  VII.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  203

STANZA  VII.

All  they  who  serve  are  telling  vie
Of  Thy  tmnumbered  graces ;
And  all  wound  me  mofe  and  more
And  something  leaircs  me  dying,  I  know  not  what,
Of  which  they  are  darkly  speaking.

The  soul  describes  itself  in  the  foregoing  stanza  as
wounded,  or  sick  with  love  of  the  Bridegroom,  because
of  the  knowledge  of  Him  which  the  irrational  creation
supplies,  and  in  the  present,  as  wounded  with  love  because
of  the  other  and  higher  knowledge  which  it  derives  from
the  rational  creation,  nobler  than  the  former,  that  is,
angels  and  men.  This  is  not  all,  for  the  soul  says  also
that  it  is  dying  of  love,  because  of  that  marvellous
immensity  not  wholly  but  partially  revealed  to  it  through
the  rational  creation.  This  it  calls  '  I  know  not  what,'
because  it  cannot  be  described,  and  because  it  is  such
that  the  soul  dies  of  it.

2.  It  seems  from  this  that  there  are  three  kinds  of
pain  in  the  soul's  love  of  the  Beloved  corresponding  to
the  three  kinds  of  knowledge  that  can  be  had  of  Him.
The  first  is  called  a  wound  ;  not  deep,  but  slight,  like  a
wound  which  heals  quickly,  because  it  comes  from  its
knowledge  of  the  creatures,  which  are  the  lowest  works  of
God.  This  wounding  of  the  soul,  called  also  sickness,  is
thus  spoken  of  by  the  bride  in  the  Canticle  :  '  I  adjure
you,  O  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  if  you  find  m}-  Beloved,
that  you  tell  Him  that  I  languish  with  love.'*  The
daughters  of  Jerusalem  are  the  creatures.

3.  The  second  is  called   a  sore  which  enters  deeper

*  Cant.  V.  S.


204  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  VIL]

than  a  wound  in  the  soul,  and  is,  therefore,  of  longer
continuance,  because  it  is  as  a  wound  festering,  on
account  of  which  the  soul  feels  that  it  is  really  dying  of
love.  This  sore  is  the  effect  of  the  knowledge  of  the
works  of  God,  the  incarnation  of  the  Word,  and  the
mysteries  of  the  faith.  These  being  the  greatest  works  of
God,  and  involving  a  greater  love  than  those  of  creation,
produce  a  greater  effect  of  love  in  the  soul.  If  the  first
kind  of  pain  be  as  a  wound,  this  must  be  like  a  festering
continuous  sore.  Of  this  speaks  the  Bridegroom,
addressing  Himself  to  the  bride,  saying :  '  Thou  hast
wounded  my  heart,  my  sister,  my  bride,  thou  hast
wounded  my  heart  with  one  of  thy  eyes,  and  with  one
hair  of  thy  neck.'*  The  eye  signifies  faith  in  the
incarnation  of  the  Bridegroom,  and  the  one  hair  is  the
love  of  the  same.

4.  The  third  kind  of  pain  is  like  dying ;  it  is  as  if  the
whole  soul  were  festering  because  of  its  wound.  It  is
dying  a  living  death  until  love,  having  slain  it,  shall  make
it  live  the  life  of  love,  transforming  it  in  love.  This  dying
of  love  is  effected  by  a  single  touch  of  the  knowledge  of
the  Divinity ;  it  is  the  '  I  know  not  what,'  of  which  the
creatures,  as  in  the  stanza  is  said,  are  speaking  indistinctly.
This  touch  is  not  continuous  nor  great,  for  then  soul  and
body  would  part,  but  soon  over,  and  thus  the  soul  is  dying
of  love,  and  dying  the  more  when  it  sees  that  it  cannot
die  of  love.+  This  is  called  impatient  love,  which  is
spoken  of  in  the  book  of  Genesis  where  the  Scripture  saith
that  Rachel's  love  of  children  was  so  great  that  she  said
to  Jacob,  her  husband,  '  Give  me  children,  otherwise  I
*  Cant.  iv.  9.  f  See  Living  Flange,  stanza  iv.,  line  3,  §  20.


[STAN.  VII.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  205

shall  die/     And  the  prophet  Job  said,  '  Who  will  grant
that    .     .     He  that  hath  begun  the  same  would  cut  me  off.'*

5.  These  twofold  pains  of  love,  that  is,  the  wound  and
the  dying,  are  in  the  stanza  said  to  be  merely  the  rational
creation.  The  wound,  when  it  speaks  of  the  unnumbered
graces  of  the  Beloved  in  the  mysteries  and  wisdom  of
God  taught  by  the  faith.  The  dying,  when  it  is  said  that
the  rational  creations  speaks  indistinctly.  This  is  a  sense
and  knowledge  of  the  Divinity  sometimes  revealed  when
the  soul  hears  God  spoken  of.     Therefore  it  says :

'  All  they  who  serve.'

6.  That  is,  the  rational  creation,  angels  and  men  ;  for
these  alone  are  they  who  serve  God,  understanding  by
that  word  intelligent  service.  That  is  to  say,  all  they
who  serve  God :  some  serve  Him  by  contemplation  and
fruition  in  heaven  ;  these  are  the  angels  ;  others  by  loving
and  longing  for  Him  on  earth ;  these  are  men.  And
because  the  soul  learns  to  know  God  more  distinctly
through  the  rational  creation,  whether  by  considering  its
superiority  over  the  rest  of  creation,  or  by  what  it  teaches
us  of  God ;  the  angels  interiorly  by  secret  inspirations,
and  men  exteriorly  by  the  truths  of  Scripture — it  says :

'Telling  me  of  Thy  unnumbered  graces.'

7.  That  is,  they  speak  of  the  wonders  of  Thy  grace
and  mercy  in  the  incarnation,  and  in  the  truths  of  the
faith  which  they  show  forth  and  are  ever  telling  more
distinctly ;  for  the  more  they  say,  the  more  do  they  reveal
Thy  graces.

'  And  all  wound  me  more  and  more.'

8.  The  more   the    angels  inspire  me,  the    more  men

*  Job  vi.  S,  9.


206  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  VII.]

teach  me,  the  more  do  I  love  Thee ;  and  thus  all  wound
me  more  and  more  with  love.

'  And  something  leaves  me  dying,
I  know  not  what,  of  which  they  are  darkly  speaking.'

g.  It  is  as  if  it  said  :  but  beside  the  wound  which  the
creatures  inflict  when  they  tell  me  of  Thy  unnumbered
graces,  there  is  yet  something  which  remains  to  be  told,
one  thing  unknown  to  be  uttered,  a  most  clear  trace  of
the  footsteps  of  God  revealed  to  the  soul,  which  it  should
follow,  a  most  profound  knowledge  of  God,  which  is
ineffable,  and  therefore  spoken  of  as  '  I  know  not  what.'
If  that  which  I  comprehend  inflicts  the  wound  and
festering  sore  of  love,  that  which  I  cannot  comprehend
but  yet  feel  profoundly,  kills  me.

10.  This  happens  occasionally  to  souls  advanced,
whom  God  favours  in  what  they  hear,  or  see,  or  under-
stand— and  sometimes  without  these  or  other  means —
with  a  certain  profound  knowledge,  in  which  they  feel  or
apprehend  the  greatness  and  majesty  of  God.  In  this
state  they  think  so  highly  of  God  as  to  see  clearly  that
they  know  Him  not,  and  in  their  perception  of  His
greatness  they  recognise  that  not  to  comprehend  Him  is
the  highest  comprehension.  And  thus,  one  of  the
greatest  favours  of  God,  bestowed  transiently  on  the  soul
in  this  life,  is  to  enable  it  to  see  so  distinctly,  and  to  feel
so  profoundly,  that  it  clearly  understands  it  cannot
comprehend  Him  at  all.  These  souls  are  herein,  n  some
degree,  like  the  saints  in  heaven,  where  they  who  know
Him  most  perfectly  perceive  most  clearly  that  He  is
infinitely  incomprehensible,  for  those  who  have  the  less
clear  vision,  do  not  perceive  so  distinctly  as  the  others,


[STAN.  VIII.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  207

how  greatly  He  transcends  their  vision.  This  is  clear  to
none  who  have  not  had  experience  of  it.  But  the
experienced  soul,  comprehending  that  there  is  something
further  of  which  it  is  profoundly  sensible,  calls  it,  '  I
know  not  what.'  As  that  cannot  be  understood,  so
neither  can  it  be  described,  though  it  be  felt,  as  I  have
said.  Hence  the  soul  says  that  the  creatures  speak
indistinctly,  because  they  cannot  distinctly  utter  that
which  they  would  say :  it  is  the  speech  of  infants,  who
cannot  explain  distinctly  or  speak  intelligibly  that  which
they  would  convey  to  others.

II.  The  other  creatures  also,  are  in  some  measure  a
revelation  to  the  soul  in  this  way,  but  not  of  an  order  so
high,  whenever  it  is  the  good  pleasure  of  God  to  manifest
to  it  their  spiritual  sense  and  significance ;  they  are
seemingly  on  the  point  of  making  us  understand  the
perfections  of  God,  and  cannot  compass  it;  it  is  as  if  one
were  about  to  explain  a  matter  and  the  explanation  is  not
given  ;  and  thus  they  stammer  '  I  know  not  what.'  The
soul  continues  to  complain,  and  addresses  its  own  life,
saying  in  the  stanza  that  follows.


STANZA  VIII.

Bid  how  thou  perseverest,  0  life  !

Not  liviw^  -where  thou  livest ;

The  arrows  bring  death

Which  thou  receivest

From  iky  conceptions  of  the  Beloved.

The  soul,  perceiving  itself  to  be  dying  of  love,  as  it  has
just  said,  and  yet  not  dying  so  as  to  have  the  free  enjoy-


208  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  VIII.]

ment  of  its  love,  complains  of  the  continuance  of  its
bodily  life,  by  which  the  spiritual  life  is  delayed.  Here
the  soul  addresses  itself  to  the  life  it  is  living  upon  earth,
magnifying  the  sorrows  of  it.  The  meaning  of  the  stanza
therefore  is  as  follows : — O  life  of  my  soul,  how  canst
thou  persevere  in  this  life  of  the  flesh  ;  seeing  that  it  is
thy  death  and  the  privation  of  the  true  spiritual  life  in
God,  in  Whom  thou  livest  in  substance,  love,  and  desire,
more  truly  than  in  the  body  ?  And  if  this  were  not  reason
enough  to  depart,  and  free  thyself  from  the  body  of  this
death,  so  as  to  live  and  enjoy  the  life  of  God,  how  canst
thou  still  remain  in  a  body  so  frail  ?  Besides,  these  wounds
of  love  made  by  the  Beloved  in  the  revelation  of  His
majesty  are  by  themselves  alone  sufficient  to  put  an  end
to  thy  life,  for  they  are  very  deep  ;  and  thus  all  thy  feelings
towards  Him,  and  all  thou  knowest  of  Him,  are  so  many
touches  and  wounds  of  love  that  kill.

'  But  how  thou  perseverest,  O  life  !
Not  living  where  thou  livest.'

2.  We  must  keep  in  mind,  for  the  better  understanding
of  this,  that  the  soul  lives  there  where  it  loves,  rather  than
in  the  body  which  it  animates.  The  soul  does  not  live  by
the  body,  but,  on  the  contrary,  gives  it  life,  and  lives  by
love  in  that  which  it  loves.  For  beside  this  life  of  love
which  it  lives  in  God  W^ho  loves  it,  the  soul  has  its
radical  and  natural  life  in  God,  like  all  created  things,
according  to  the  saying  of  St.  Paul :  '  In  Him  we  live  and
move  and  are ;  '*  that  is,  our  life,  motion,  and  being  is  in

*  Acts  xvii.  28.


[STAN.  VIII.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  209

God.     St,  John  also  says  that  all  that  was  made  was  life
in  God  :  '  that  which  was  made,  in  Him  was  life.'^    *^


j.  When  the  soul  sees  that  its  natural  life  is  in  Gwf^ '^
through  the  being  He  has  given  it,  and  its  spiritual  life
also  because  of  the  love  it  bears  Him,  it  breaks  forth  into
lamentations,  complaining  that  so  frail  a  life  in  a  mortal
body  should  have  the  power  to  hinder  it  from  the  fruition
of  the  true,  real,  and  delicious  life,  which  it  lives  in  God
by  nature  and  by  love.  Earnestly,  therefore,  does  the
soul  insist  upon  this  :  it  tells  us  that  it  suffers  between
two  contradictions — its  natural  life  in  the  body,  and  its
spiritual  life  in  God  ;  contrary  the  one  to  the  other,
because  of  their  mutual  repugnance.  The  soul  living
this  double  life  is  of  necessity  in  great  pain ;  for  the
painful  life  hinders  the  delicious,  so  that  the  natural  life  is
as  death,  seeing  that  it  deprives  the  soul  of  its  spiritual
life,  wherein  is  its  whole  being  and  life  by  nature,  and  all
its  operations  and  feelings  by  love.  The  soul,  therefore,  to
depict  more  vividly  the  hardship  of  this  fragile  life,  sa3's: —

'  The  arrows  bring  death
which  thou  receivest.'

4.  That  is  to  say,  besides,  how  canst  thou  continue  in
the  body,  seeing  that  the  touches  of  love — these  are  the
arrows — with  which  the  Beloved  pierces  thy  heart,  are
alone  sufficient  to  deprive  thee  of  life  ?  These  touches  of
love   make   the    soul   and    the    heart    so    fruitful   of    the

*  The  Saint  adopts  an  old  punctuation  different  from  the  usual
one.  He  reads  thus  :  Omnia  per  Ipsum  facta  sunt,  et  sine  Ipso  factum
est  nihil :  Quod  factum  est,  in  Ipso  vita  erat.  All  things  were  made
by  Him,  and  without  Him  nothing  was  made  ;  What  was  made  in  Him
was  life.


210  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  IX]

knowledge  and  love  of  God,  that  they  may  well  be  called
conceptions  of  God,  as  in  the  words  that  follow :
'  From  thy  conceptions  of  the  Beloved.'
5.     That  is,  of  the  majesty,  beauty,  wisdom,  grace,  and
power,  which  thou  knowest  to  be  His.


NOTE.

As  the  hart  wounded  with  a  poisoned  arrow  cannot  be  easy
and  at  rest,  but  seeks  relief  on  all  sides,  plunging  into  the
waters  here  and  again  there,  whilst  the  poison  spreads
notwithstanding  all  attempts  at  relief,  till  it  reaches  the
heart,  and  occasions  death  ;  so  the  soul,  pierced  by  the
arrow  of  love,  never  ceases  from  seeking  to  alleviate  its
pains.  Not  only  does  it  not  succeed,  but  its  pains
increase,  let  it  think,  and  say,  and  do  what  it  may  ;  and
knowing  this,  and  that  there  is  no  other  remedy  but  the
resignation  of  itself  into  the  hands  of  Him  Who  wounded
it,  that  He  may  relieve  it,  and  effectually  slay  it  through  the
violence  of  its  love  ;  it  turns  towards  the  Bridegroom,
Who  is  the  cause  of  all,  and  says  : —


STANZA  IX.

Why,  after  woiuiditig

This  heatt,  hast  Thou  not  healed  it?

And  why,  aftci-  stealing  it,

Hast  Than  thus  abandoned  it.

And  not  carried  away  the  stolen  prey  ?

Here  the  soul  returns  to  the  Beloved,  still  complaining    I
of  its  pain ;  for  that   impatient  love  which  the  soul  now
exhibits  admits  of  no  rest  or  cessation  from  pain ;  so  it


[STAN.  IX. 1      OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  211

sets  forth  its  griefs  in  all   manner  of  ways  until  it  finds

relief.     The  soul  seeing  itself  wounded  and  lonely,  and  as

no  one  can  heal  it  but  the  Beloved  Who  has  wounded  it,

asks  why  He,  having  wounded  its  heart  with  that  love

which  the  knowledge  of  Him  brings,  does  not  heal  it  in

the  vision  of  His  presence ;  and  why  He  thus  abandons

the  heart  which   He  has  stolen  through  the  love  which

inflames  it,  after  having  deprived  the  soul  of  all  power

over  it.     The  soul  has  now  no  power  over  its  heart — for

he  who  loves  has  none — because  it  is  surrendered  to  the

Beloved,  and  yet  He  has  not  taken  it  to  himself  in  the

pure  and  perfect  transformation  of  love  in  glory.

'  Why,  after  wounding  this  heart,

hast  Thou  not  healed  it  ?  '

2.     The  enamoured  soul  is  complaining  not  because  it

is  wounded,  for  the  deeper  the  wound  the  greater  the  joy,

but  because,  being  wounded,  it   is   not  healed   by  being

wounded    unto    death.     The    wounds    of    love    are    so

deliciously  sweet,  that  if  they  do  not   kill,  they  cannot

satisfy  the  soul.     They  are  so  sweet  that  it  desires  to  die

of    them,    and    hence    it    is   that    it    says  :    '  Why,    after

wounding  this  heart,  hast  Thou  not  healed  it  ?  '     That  is,

why  hast  Thou  struck  it  so  sharply  as  to  wound  it  so

deeply,  and  yet  not  healed  it  by  killing  it  utterly  with

love  ?     As  Thou  art  the  cause  of  its  pain  in  the  affliction

of  love,  be  Thou  also  the  cause  of  its  health  by  a  death

from  love ;  so  the  heart,  wounded  by  the  pain  of  Thy

absence,  shall  be  healed  in  the  delight  and  glory  of  Thy

sweet  presence.     Therefore  it  goes  on  :

'  And  why,  after  stealing  it,

hast  Thou  thus  abandoned  it  ?  '

p  2


212  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  IX.]

3.  Stealing  is  nothing  else  but  the  act  of  a  robber  in
dispossessing  the  owner  of  his  goods,  and  possessing  them
himself.  Here  the  soul  complains  to  the  Beloved  that  He
has  robbed  it  of  its  heart  lovingly,  and  taken  it  out  of  its
power  and  possession,  and  then  abandoned  it,  without
taking  it  into  His  own  power  and  possession  as  the  thief
does  with  the  goods  he  steals,  carrying  them  away  with
him.  He  who  is  in  love  is  said  to  have  lost  his  heart,  or
to  have  it  stolen  by  the  object  of  his  love  ;  because  it  is
no  longer  in  his  own  possession,  but  in  the  power  of  the
object  of  his  love,  and  so  his  heart  is  not  his  own,  but  the
property  of  the  person  he  loves.

.4  This  consideration  will  enable  the  soul  to  determine
whether  it  loves  God  simply  or  not.  If  it  loves  Him  it
will  have  no  heart  for  itself,  nor  for  its  own  pleasure  or
profit,  but  for  the  honour,  glory,  and  pleasure  of  God  ;
because  the  more  the  heart  is  occupied  with  self,  the  less
is  it  occupied  with  God.  Whether  God  has  really  stolen
the  heart,  the  soul  may  ascertain  by  either  of  these  two
signs  : — Is  it  anxiously  seeking  after  God  ?  and  has  it  no
pleasure  in  anything  but  in  Him,  as  the  soul  here  says  ?
The  reason  of  this  is  that  the  heart  cannot  rest  in  peace
without  the  possession  of  something;  and  when  its
affections  are  once  placed,  it  has  neither  the  possession
of  itself  nor  of  anything  else ;  neither  does  it  perfectly
possess  what  it  loves.  In  this  state  its  weariness  is  in
proportion  to  its  loss,  until  it  shall  enter  into  possession
and  be  satisfied ;  for  until  then,  the  soul  is  as  an  empty
vessel  waiting  to  be  filled,  as  a  hungry  man  eager  for  food,
as  a  sick  man  sighing  for  health,  and  as  a  man  suspended
in  the  air  without  support  to  his  feet.     Such  is  the  state  of


[STAN.  IX.J      OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  213

the  loving  heart,  and  the  soul  through  experience  of  it
cries  out :  '  Why  hast  thou  thus  abandoned  it  ?  ' — that  is,
empty,  hungry,  lonely,  wounded,  in  the  pangs  of  love,
suspended  in  air.

'  And  not  carried  away  the  stolen  prey  ?  '

5.  Why  dost  Thou  not  carry  away  the  heart  which
Thy  love  has  stolen,  to  fill  it,  to  heal  it,  and  to  satiate  it
by  giving  it  perfect  rest  in  Thyself?

5.  The  loving  soul,  for  the  sake  of  greater  conformity
with  the  Beloved,  cannot  cease  to  desire  the  recompense
and  reward  of  its  love  for  the  sake  of  which  it  serves  the
Beloved,  otherwise  it  could  not  be  true  love,  for  the
recompense  of  love  is  nothing  else,  and  the  soul  seeks
nothing  else,  but  greater  love,  until  it  reaches  the
perfection  of  love  ;  for  the  sole  reward  of  love  is  love,  as
we  learn  from  the  prophet  Job,  who,  speaking  of  his  own
distress,  which  is  that  of  the  soul  now  referred  to,  says :
'  As  a  servant  longeth  for  the  shade,  as  the  hireling
looketh  for  the  end  of  his  work ;  so  I  also  have  had
empty  months,  and  have  numbered  to  myself  wearisome
nights.  If  I  sleep,  I  shall  say.  When  shall  I  arise  ?  and
again,  I  shall  look  for  the  evening,  and  shall  be  filled  with
sorrows  even  till  darkness.'*

7.  Thus,  then,  the  soul  on  fire  with  the  love  of  God
longs  for  the  perfection  and  consummation  of  its  love,
that  it  may  be  completely  refreshed.  As  the  servant
wearied  by  the  heat  of  the  day  longs  for  the  cooling
shade,  and  as  the  hireling  looks  for  the  end  of  his  work,
so  the  soul  for  the  end  of  its  own.     Observe,  Job  does

*  Job  vii.  2 — 4.


214  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  IX.]

not  say  that  the  hirehng  looks  for  the  end  of  his  labour,
but  only  for  the  end  of  his  work.  He  teaches  us  that  the
soul  which  loves  looks  not  for  the  end  of  its  labour,  but
for  the  end  of  its  work ;  because  its  work  is  to  love,  and
it  is  the  end  of  this  work,  which  is  love,  that  it  hopes  for,
namely,  the  perfect  love  of  God.  Until  it  attains  to  this,
the  words  of  Job  will  be  always  true  of  it— its  months
will  be  empty,  and  its  nights  wearisome  and  tedious.  It
is  clear,  then,  that  the  soul  which  loves  God  seeks  and
looks  for  no  other  reward  of  its  service  than  to  love  God
perfectly.


NOTE.


The  soul,  having  reached  this  degree  of  love,  resembles  a
sick  man  exceedingly  wearied,  whose  appetite  is  gone,  and
to  whom  his  food  is  loathsome ;  and  all  things  annoyance
and  trouble  ;  amidst  all  things  that  present  themselves  to
his  thoughts,  or  feelings,  or  sight,  his  onl}'  wish  and
desire  is  health  ;  and  everything  that  does  not  contribute
thereto  is  wearisome  and  oppressive.  The  soul,  therefore,
in  pain  because  of  its  love  of  God,  has  three  peculiarities  :
— under  all  circumstances,  and  in  all  affairs,  the  thought
of  its  health — that  is  the  Beloved — is  ever  present  to  it ;
and"  though  it  is  obliged  to  attend  to  them  because  it
cannot  help  it,  its  heart  is  ever  with  Him.  The  second
peculiarity,  namely,  a  loss  of  pleasure  in  everything,
arises  from  the  first.  The  third  also,  a  consequence  of
the  second,  is  that  all  things  become  wearisome,  and  all
affairs  full  of  vexation  and  annoyance.

2.     The  reason  is,  that  the  palate  of  the  will  having


[STAN.  IX.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  TfS  BRIDEGROOM.  2l5

touched  and  tasted  of  the  food  of  the  love  of  God,  the
will  instantly,  under  all  circumstances,  regardless  of  every
other  consideration,  seeks  the  fruition  of  the  Beloved.  It
is  with  the  soul  now  as  it  was  with  Mary  Magdalene,
when  in  her  burning  love  she  sought  Him  in  the  garden.
She,  thinking  Him  to  be  the  gardener,  spoke  to  Him
without  further  reflection,  saying :  '  If  thou  hast  taken
Him  hence,  tell  me  where  thou  hast  laid  Him,  and  I  will
take  Him  away.'*  The  soul  is  under  the  influence  of  a
like  anxiety  to  find  Him  in  all  things,  and  not  finding
Him  immediately,  as  it  desires — but  rather  the  very
reverse — not  only  has  no  pleasure  in  them,  but  is  even
tormented  by  them,  and  sometimes  exceedingly  so :  for
such  souls  suffer  greatly  in  their  intercourse  with  men
and  in  the  transactions  of  the  world,  because  these  things
hinder  rather  than  help  them  in  their  search.

3.  The  bride  in  the  Canticle  shows  us  that  she  had
these  three  peculiarities  when  seeking  the  Bridegroom.
'  I  sought  Him  and  found  Him  not :  the  keepers  that  go
about  the  city  found  me,  they  struck  me  and  wounded
me  :  the  keepers  of  the  walls  took  away  my  cloak. 't  The
keepers  that  go  about  the  city  are  the  affairs  of  this  world,
which,  when  they  '  find '  a  soul  seeking  after  God,  inflict
upon  it  much  pain,  and  grief,  and  loathing ;  for  the  soul
not  only  does  not  find  in  them  what  it  seeks,  but  rather  a
hindrance.  They  who  keep  the  wall  of  contemplation,
that  the  soul  may  not  enter — that  is,  evil  spirits  and
worldly  affairs — take  away  the  cloak  of  peace  and  the
quiet  of  loving  contemplation.  All  this  inflicts  infinite
vexation  on  the   soul  enamoured   of  God ;  and   while  it

*  St.  John  XX.  15.  t  Cant.  v.  6,  7.


216  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  X.]

remains  on  earth  without  the  vision  of  God,  there  is  no
rehef,  great  or  small,  from  these  afflictions,  and  the  soul
therefore  continues  to  complain  to  the  Beloved,  saying : —


STANZA   X.

Quench  Thou  my  troubles.

For  no  one  else  can  soothe  them  ;

And  let  mine  eyes  behold  Thee

For  Thou  art  their  light.

And  I  will  keep  them  for  Thee  alone.

Here  the  soul  continues  to  beseech  the  Beloved  to  put
an  end  to  its  anxieties  and  distress — none  other  than  He
can  do  so — and  that  in  such  a  way  that  its  eyes  may
behold  Him  ;  for  He  alone  is  the  light  b}'  which  they  see,
and  there  is  none  other  but  He  on  whom  it  will  look.
'  Quench  Thou  my  troubles.'

2.  The  desire  of  love  has  this  property,  that  everything
said  or  done  which  does  not  become  that  which  the  will
loves,  wearies  and  annoys  it,  and  makes  it  peevish  when
it  sees  itself  disappointed  in  its  desires.  This  and  its
weary  longing  after  the  vision  of  God  is  here  called
'  troubles.'  These  troubles  nothing  can  remove  except
the  possession  of  the  Beloved ;  hence  the  soul  prays
Him  to  quench  them  with  His  presence,  to  cool  their
feverishness,  as  the  cooling  water  him  who  is  wearied  by
the  heat.  The  soul  makes  use  of  the  expression  '  quench,'
to  denote  its  sufferings  from  the  fire  of  love.

'  For  no  one  else  can  soothe  them.'

3.  The  soul,  in  order  to  move  and  persuade  the
Beloved  to  grant  its  petition,  says :  As  none  other  but
Thou  can  satisfy  my  needs,  do  Thou  quench  my  troubles.


[STAN.  X.]       OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  217

Remember  here  that  God  is  then  close  at  hand,  to
comfort  the  soul  and  to  satisfy  its  wants,  when  it  has  and
seeks  no  satisfaction  or  comfort  out  of  Him.  The  soul
that  finds  no  pleasure  out  of  God  cannot  be  long  unvisited
by  the  Beloved.

'  And  let  mine  eyes  behold  Thee.'

4.  Let  me  see  Thee  face  to  face  with  the  eyes  of  the
soul,

'  For  Thou  art  their  light.'

5.  God  is  the  supernatural  light  of  the  soul ;  without
which  it  abides  in  darkness.  And  now,  in  the  excess  of
its  affection,  it  calls  Him  the  light  of  its  eyes,  as  an
earthly  lover,  to  express  his  affection,  calls  the  object  of
his  love  the  light  of  his  eyes.  The  soul  says  in  effect  in
the  foregoing  terms :  Since  my  eyes  have  no  other  light,
either  of  nature  or  of  love,  but  Thee,  let  them  behold  Thee,
Who  in  every  way  art  their  light.  David  was  regretting
this  light  when  he  said  in  his  trouble  :  '  The  light  of  mine
eyes,  and  the  same  is  not  with  me ;  '*  and  Tobias,  when
he  said  :  '  What  manner  of  joy  shall  be  to  me  who  sit  in
darkness,  and  see  not  the  light  of  heaven  ?  '  t  He  was
longing  for  the  clear  vision  of  God ;  for  the  light  of
heaven  is  the  Son  of  God ;  as  St.  John  saith  in  the
Apocalypse  :  '  And  the  city  needeth  not  sun,  nor  moon  to
shine  in  it ;  for  the  glory  of  God  hath  illuminated  it,  and
the  Lamb  is  the  lamp  thereof.' t

'  And  I  will  keep  them  for  Thee  alone.'

6.  The  soul  seeks  to  constrain  the  Bridegroom  to  let
it  see  the  light  of  its  eyes,  not  only  because  it  would  be  in
darkness  without  it,  but  also  because  it  will  not  look  upon

*  Ps.  xxxvii.  II.  t  Tob.  v.  12.  I  Apoc.  xxi.  23.


218  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  X.]

anything  but  on  Him.  For  as  that  soul  is  justly  deprived
of  this  divine  light  if  it  fixes  the  eyes  of  the  will  on  any
other  light,  proceeding  from  anything  that  is  not  God,  for
then  its  vision  is  confined  to  that  object ;  so  also  the  soul,
by  a  certain  fitness,  deserves  the  divine  light,  if  it  shuts
its  eyes  against  all  objects  whatever,  to  open  them  only
for  the  vision  of  God.


NOTE.


But  the  loving  Bridegroom  of  souls  cannot  bear  to  see
them  suffer  long  in  the  isolation  of  which  I  am  speaking,
for,  as  He  saith  by  the  mouth  of  Zacharias,  '  he  that  shall
touch  you,  toucheth  the  apple  of  Mine  eye ;  '*  especially
when  their  sufferings,  as  those  of  this  soul,  proceed  from
their  love  for  Him.  Therefore  doth  He  speak  through
Isaias,  '  it  shall  be  before  they  call,  I  will  hear ;  as  they
are  yet  speaking,  I  will  hear.'t  And  the  wise  man  saith
that  the  soul  that  seeketh  Him  as  treasure  shall  find
Him4  God  grants  a  certain  spiritual  presence  of
Himself  to  the  fervent  prayers  of  the  loving  soul  which
seeks  Him  more  earnestly  than  treasure,  seeing  that  it
has  abandoned  all  things,  and  even  itself,  for  His  sake.

2.  In  that  presence  He  shows  certain  profound
glimpses  of  His  divinity  and  beauty,  whereby  He  still
increases  the  soul's  anxious  desire  to  behold  Him.  For
as  men  throw  water  on  the  coals  of  the  forge  to  cause
intenser  heat,  so  our  Lord  in  His  dealings  with  certain
souls,  in  the  intermission  of  their  love,  makes  some
revelations  of  His  majesty,  to  quicken  their  fervour,  and

*  Zach.  ii.  S.  f  Is.  Ixv.  24.  +  Prov.  ii.  4,  5.


[STAN.  XL]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  219

to  prepare  them  more  and  more  for  those  graces  which
He  will  give  them  afterwards.  Thus  the  soul,  in  that
obscure  presence  of  God,  beholding  and  feeling  the
supreme  good  and  beauty  hidden  there,  is  dying  in  desire
of  the  vision,  saying  in  the  stanza  that  follows.


STANZA    XL

Reveal  Thy  presence.

And  let  the  vision  and  Thy  beauty  kill  we.

Behold,  the  malady

Of  love  is  incurable

Except  in  Thy  presence  and  before  Thy  face.

The  soul,  anxious  to  be  possessed  by  God,  Who  is  so
great,  Whose  love  has  wounded  and  stolen  its  heart,  and
unable  to  suffer  more,  beseeches  Him  directly,  in  this
stanza,  to  reveal  His  beauty — that  is,  the  divine  essence —
and  to  slay  it  in  that  vision,  separating  it  from  the  body,
in  which  it  can  neither  see  nor  possess  Him  as  it  desires.
And  further,  setting  before  Him  the  distress  and  sorrow
of  heart,  in  which  it  continues,  suffering  it  because  of  its
love,  and  unable  to  find  any  other  remedy  than  the
glorious  vision  of  the  divine  essence,  cries  out  :
'  Reveal  Thy  presence.'
2.  To  understand  this  clearly  we  must  remember  that
there  are  three  ways  in  which  God  is  present  in  the  soul.
The  first  is  His  presence  in  essence,  not  in  holy  souls
only,  but  in  wretched  and  sinful  souls  as  well,  and  also  in
all  created  things ;  for  it  is  by  this  presence  that  He  gives
life  and  being,  and  were  it  once  withdrawn  all  things  would
return  to  nothing.*  This  presence  never  fails  in  the  soul.
*  See  Ascent  of  Mount  Carmel,  bk.  ii.  ch.  v.  §  2.


220  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XL]

3.  The  second  is  His  presence  by  grace,  whereby  He
dwells  in  the  soul,  pleased  and  satisfied  with  it.  This
presence  is  not  in  all  souls  ;  for  those  who  fall  into  mortal
sin  lose  it,  and  no  soul  can  know  in  a  natural  way  whether
it  has  it  or  not.  The  third  is  His  presence  by  spiritual
affection.  God  is  wont  to  show  His  presence  in  many
devout  souls  in  divers  ways,  in  refreshment,  joy,  and
gladness ;  yet  this,  like  the  others,  is  all  secret,  for  He
does  not  show  Himself  as  He  is,  because  the  condition  of
our  mortal  life  does  not  admit  of  it.  Thus  this  prayer  of
the  soul  may  be  understood  of  any  one  of  them.

'  Reveal  Thy  presence.'

4.  Inasmuch  as  it  is  certain  that  God  is  ever  present
in  the  soul,  at  least  in  the  first  way,  the  soul  does  not
say  :  Be  Thou  present ;  but,  Reveal  and  manifest  Thy
hidden  presence,  whether  natural,  spiritual,  or  affective,
in  such  a  way  that  I  may  behold  Thee  in  Thy  divine
essence  and  beauty.  The  soul  prays  Him  that  as  He  by
His  essential  presence  gives  it  its  natural  being,  and
perfects  it  by  His  presence  of  grace,  so  also  He  would
glorify  it  by  the  manifestation  of  His  glory.  But  as  the
soul  is  now  loving  God  with  fervent  affections,  the
presence,  for  the  revelation  of  which  it  prays  the  Beloved
to  manifest,  is  to  be  understood  chiefly  of  the  affective
presence  of  the  Beloved.  Such  is  the  nature  of  this
presence  that  the  soul  felt  there  was  an  infinite  being
hidden  there,  out  of  which  God  communicated  to  it
certain  obscure  visions  of  His  own  divine  beauty.  Such
was  the  effect  of  these  visions  that  the  soul  longed  and
fainted  away  with  the  desire  of  that  which  is  hidden  in
that  presence.


[STAN.  XI.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  221

5.  This  is  in  harmony  with  the  experience  of  David,
when  he  said  :  '  My  soul  longeth  and  fainteth  for  the
courts  of  our  Lord,'*  The  soul  now  faints  with  desire  of
being  absorbed  in  the  Sovereign  Good  which  it  feels  to  be
present  and  hidden ;  for  though  it  be  hidden,  the  soul  is
most  profoundly  conscious  of  the  good  and  delight  which
are  there.  The  soul  is  therefore  attracted  to  this  good
with  more  violence  than  matter  is  to  its  centre,  and  is
unable  to  contain  itself,  by  reason  of  the  force  of  this
attraction,  from  saying :

'  Reveal  Thy  presence.'

6.  Moses,  on  mount  Sinai  in  the  presence  of  God,  saw
such  glimpses  of  the  majesty  and  beauty  of  His  hidden
Divinity,  that,  unable  to  endure  it,  he  prayed  twice  for
the  vision  of  His  glory,  saying :  '  Whereas  Thou  hast
said :  I  know  thee  by  name,  and  thou  hast  found  grace  in
my  sight.  If,  therefore,  I  have  found  grace  in  Thy  sight,
shew  me  Thy  face,  that  I  may  know  Thee  and  may  find
grace  before  Thine  eyes;'t  that  is  the  grace  which  he
longed  for, — to  attain  to  the  perfect  love  of  the  glory  of
God.  The  answer  of  our  Lord  was  :  '  Thou  canst  not
see  My  face,  for  man  shall  not  see  Me  and  live.'t  It  is
as  if  God  had  said :  Moses,  thy  prayer  is  difficult  to
grant ;  the  beauty  of  My  face,  and  the  joy  in  seeing  Me  is
so  great,  as  to  be  more  than  thy  soul  can  bear  in  a  mortal
body  that  is  so  weak.  The  soul,  accordingly,  conscious
of  this  truth,  either  because  of  the  answer  made  to  Moses
or  also  because  of  that  which  I  spoke  of  before,  §  namely,
the  feeling  that  there  is  something  still  in  the  presence  of
God  here  which  it  could  not  see  in  its  beauty  in  the  life  it

*  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  I.        t  Exod.  xxxiii.  12,  13.       I  Exod.  xxxiii.  20.       §  §2.


222  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XL]

is  now  living,  because,  as  I  said  before,*  it  faints  when
it  sees  but  a  glimpse  of  it.  Hence  it  comes  that  it
anticipates  the  answer  that  may  be  given  to  it,  as  it  was
to  Moses,  and  says  :

'  Let  the  vision  and  Thy  beauty  kill  me.'

7.  That  is,  since  the  vision  of  Thee  and  Thy  beauty  is
so  full  of  delight  that  I  cannot  endure,  but  must  die  in
the  act  of  beholding  them,  let  the  vision  and  Thy  beauty

kill  me.

8.  Two  visions  are  said  to  be  fatal  to  man,  because  he

cannot  bear  them  and  live.  One,  that  of  the  basilisk,  at
the  sight  of  which  men  are  said  to  die  at  once.  The
other  is  the  vision  of  God  ;  but  there  is  a  great  difference
between  them.  The  former  kills  by  poison,  the  other
with  infinite  health  and  bliss.  It  is,  therefore,  nothing
strange  for  the  soul  to  desire  to  die  by  beholding  the
beauty  of  God  in  order  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever.  If  the
soul  had  but  one  single  glimpse  of  the  majesty  and  beauty
of  God,  not  only  would  it  desire  to  die  once  in  order  to  see
Him  for  ever,  as  it  desires  now,  but  would  most  joyfully
undergo  a  thousand  most  bitter  deaths  to  see  Him  even
for  a  moment,  and  having  seen  Him  would  suffer  as  many
deaths  again  to  see  Him  for  another  moment.

g.  It  is  necessary  to  observe  for  the  better  explanation
of  this  line,  that  the  soul  is  now  speaking  conditionally,
when  it  prays  that  the  vision  and  beauty  may  slay  it  ;  it
assumes  that  the  vision  must  be  preceded  by  death,  for  if
it  were  possible  before  death,  the  soul  would  not  pray  for
death,  because  the  desire  of  death  is  a  natural  imperfec-
tion.    The  soul,  therefore,  takes  it  for  granted,  that  this

*  §  2.


[STAN.  XL]      OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  -22?,

corruptible  life  cannot  coexist  with  the  incorruptible  life
of  God,  and  says  :

'  Let  the  vision  and  Thy  beauty  kill  me.'

10.  St.  Paul  teaches  this  doctrine  to  the  Corinthians
when  he  says  :  '  We  would  not  be  spoiled,  but  over-clothed,
that  that  which  is  mortal  may  be  swallowed  up  of  life.'*
That  is,  we  would  not  be  divested  of  the  flesh,  but  invested
with  glory.  But  reflecting  that  he  could  not  live  in  glory
and  in  a  mortal  body  at  the  same  time,  he  says  to  the
Philippians  :  '  having  a  desire  to  be  dissolved  and  to  be
with  Christ.'!

11.  Here  arises  this  question,  Why  did  the  people  of
Israel  of  old  dread  and  avoid  the  vision  of  God,  that  they
might  not  die,  as  it  appears  they  did  from  the  words  of
Manue  to  his  wife,  '  We  shall  die  because  we  have  seen
God,'t  when  the  soul  desires  to  die  of  that  vision?  To
this  question  two  answers  may  be  given.

12.  In  those  days  men  could  not  see  God,  though
dying  in  the  state  of  grace,  because  Christ  had  not  come.
It  was  therefore  more  profitable  for  them  to  live  in  the
flesh,  increasing  in  merit,  and  enjoying  their  natural  life,
than  to  be  in  Limbus,  incapable  of  meriting,  suffering  in
the  darkness  and  in  the  spiritual  absence  of  God.  They
therefore  considered  it  a  great  grace  and  blessing  to  live
long  upon  earth.

13.  The  second  answer  is  founded  on  considerations
drawn  from  the  love  of  God.  They  in  those  .days,  not
being  so  confirmed  in  love,  nor  so  near  to  God  by  love
were  afraid  of  the  vision  :  but  now,  under  the  law  of  grace,
when,  on  the  death  of  the  body,  the  soul  may  behold  God,

*  2  Cor.  V.  4.  t  Phil.  i.  23.  j  Judg.  xiii.  22.


224  .  '         A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XL]

it  is  more  profitable  to  live  but  a  short  time,  and  then  to
die  in  order  to  see  Him.  And  even  if  the  vision  were
withheld,  the  soul  that  really  loves  God  will  not  be  afraid
to  die  at  the  sight  of  Him ;  for  true  love  accepts  with
perfect  resignation,  and  in  the  same  spirit,  and  even  with
joy,  whatever  comes  to  it  from  the  hands  of  the  Beloved,
whether  prosperity  or  adversity — yea,  and  even  chastise-
ments such  as  He  shall  be  pleased  to  send,  for,  as  St.  John
saith,  '  perfect  charity  casteth  out  fear.'*

14.  Thus,  then,  there  is  no  bitterness  in  death  to  the
soul  that  loves,  when  it  brings  with  it  all  the  sweetness  and
delights  of  love ;  there  is  no  sadness  in  the  remembrance
of  it  when  it  opens  the  door  to  all  joy  ;  nor  can  it  be
painful  and  oppressive,  when  it  is  the  end  of  all  unhappi-
ness  and  sorrow,  and  the  beginning  of  all  good.  Yea,  the
soul  looks  upon  it  as  a  friend  and  its  bride,  and  exults  in
the  recollection  of  it  as  the  day  of  espousals  ;  it  yearns  for
the  day  and  hour  of  death  more  than  the  kings  of  the
earth  for  principalities  and  kingdoms.

15.  It  was  of  this  kind  of  death  that  the  wise  man
said  :  '  O  death,  thy  judgment  is  good  to  the  needy  man.'!
If  it  be  good  to  the  needy  man,  though  it  does  not  supply
his  wants,  but  on  the  contrary  deprives  him  even  of  what
he  hath,  how  much  more  good  will  it  be  to  the  soul  in
need  of  love  and  which  is  cr3'ing  for  more,  when  it  will  not
only  not  rob  it  of  the  love  it  hath  already,  but  will  be  the
occasion  of  that  fulness  of  love  which  it  yearns  for,  and  is
the  supply  of  all  its  necessities.  It  is  not  without  reason
then,  that  the  soul  ventures  to  say  :

'  Let  the  vision  and  Thy  beauty  kill  me  ; '
*  I  St.  John  iv.  18.  f  Ecclus.  xli.  3.


[STAN.  XL]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  225

i6.  The  soul  knows  well  that  in  the  instant  of  that
vision  it  will  be  itself  absorbed  and  transformed  into  that
beauty,  and  be  made  beautiful  like  it,  enriched,  and
abounding  in  beauty  as  that  beauty  itself.  This  is  why
David  said,  '  Precious  in  the  sight  of  our  Lord  is  the
death  of  His  saints,'*  but  that  could  not  be  if  they  did
not  become  partakers  of  His  glory,  for  there  is  nothing
precious  in  the  eyes  of  God  except  that  which  He  is
Himself,  and  therefore  the  soul,  when  it  loves,  fears  not
death,  but  rather  desires  it.  But  the  sinner  is  always
afraid  to  die,  because  he  suspects  that  death  will  deprive
him  of  all  good,  and  inflict  upon  him  all  evil ;  for  in  the
words  of  David,  'the  death  of  the  wicked  is  very  evil,'  +
and  therefore,  as  the  wise  man  saith,  the  very  thought  of
it  is  bitter  :  '  O  death,  how  bitter  is  thy  memory  to  a  man
that  hath  peace  in  his  riches  !'t  The  wicked  love  this
life  greatly,  and  the  next  but  little,  and  are  therefore
afraid  of  death ;  but  the  soul  that  loves  God  lives  more  in
the  next  life  than  in  this,  because  it  lives  rather  where  it
loves  than  where  it  dwells,  and  therefore  esteeming  but
lightly  its  present  bodily  life,  cries  out :  '  Let  the  vision
and  Thy  beauty  kill  me.'

'  Behold  the  malady  of  love  is  incurable,
except  in  Thy  presence  and  before  Thy  face.'

17.  The  reason  why  the  malady  of  love  admits  of  no
other  remedy  than  the  presence  and  countenance  of  the
the  Beloved  is,  that  the  malady  of  love  differs  from  every
other  sickness,  and  therefore  requires  a  different  remedy.
In  other  diseases,  according  to  sound  philosophy,  con-
traries are  cured  by  contraries  ;  but  love  is  not  cured  but
*  Ps.  cxv.  15.  f  Ps.  xxxiii.  22.  I  Ecclus.  xli.  i.


226  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XL]

by  that  which  is  in  harmony  with  itself.  The  reason  is,
that  the  health  of  the  soul  consists  in  the  love  of  God,
and  so  when  that  love  is  not  perfect,  its  health  is  not
perfect,  and  the  soul  is  therefore  sick,  for  sickness  is
nothing  else  but  a  failure  of  health.  Thus,  that  soul
which  loves  not  at  all  is  dead ;  but  when  it  loves  a  little,
how  little  soever  that  may  be,  it  is  then  alive,  though
exceedingly  weak  and  sick  because  it  loves  God  so  little.
But  the  more  its  love  increases,  the  greater  will  be  its
health,  and  when  its  love  is  perfect,  then,  too,  its  health
also  is  perfect.  Love  is  not  perfect  until  the  lovers  become
so  on  an  equality  as  to  be  mutually  transformed  into  one
another;  then  love  is  wholly  perfect.

i8.  And  because  the  soul  is  now  conscious  of  a  certain
adumbration  of  love,  which  is  the  malady  of  which  it  here
speaks,  yearning  to  be  made  like  to  Him  of  whom  it  is
a  shadow,  that  is  the  Bridegroom,  the  Word,  the  Son  of
God,  Who,  as  St.  Paul  saith,  is  the  '  splendour  of  His
glory,  and  the  figure  of  His  substance ; '  *  and  because  it
is  into  this  figure  it  desires  to  be  transformed  by  love,
cries  out :  '  Behold  the  malady  of  love  is  incurable  except
in  Thy  presence,  and  in  the  light  of  Thy  countenance.'
The  love  that  is  imperfect  is  rightly  called  a  malady,
because  as  a  sick  man  is  enfeebled  and  cannot  work,  so
the  soul  that  is  weak  in  love  is  also  enfeebled  and  cannot
practise  heroic  virtue.

ig.  Another  explanation  of  these  words  is  this :  he
who  feels  this  malady  of  love,  that  is,  a  failure  of  it,  has
an  evidence  in  himself  that  he  has  some  love,  because  he
ascertains  what  is  deficient    in    him   by  that   which   he

*  Heb.  i.  3.


[STAN.  XII,]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  227

possesses.  But  he  who  is  not  conscious  of  this  malady
has  evidence  therein  that  he  has  no  love  at  all,  or  that  he
has  already  attained  to  perfect  love.


NOTE.


The  soul  now  conscious  of  a  vehement  longing  after  God,
like  a  stone  rushing  to  its  centre,  and  like  wax  which  has
begun  to  receive  the  impression  of  the  seal  which  it
cannot  perfectly  represent,  and  knowing,  moreover,  that
it  is  like  a  picture  lightly  sketched,  crying  for  the  artist  to
finish  his  work,  and  having  its  faith  so  clear  as  to  trace
most  distinctly  certain  divine  glimpses  of  the  majesty  of
God,  knows  not  what  else  to  do  but  to  turn  inward  to
that  faith — as  involving  and  veiling  the  face  and  beauty
of  the  Beloved — from  which  it  hath  received  those
impressions  and  pledges  of  love,  and  which  it  thus
addresses : —

STANZA  XII.

O  crystal  toe II!

0  that  on  thy  silvered  surface

Thou  would  est  mirror  forth  at  once

Those  desired  eyes

Which  ai e  outlived  in  try  heart.

The  soul  vehemently  desiring  to  be  united  to  the
Bridegroom,  and  seeing  that  there  is  no  help  or  succour
in  created  things,  turns  towards  the  faith,  as  to  that
which  gives  it  the  most  vivid  vision  of  the  Beloved,  and
adopts  it  as  the  means  to  that  end.  And,  indeed,  there  is
no  other  way  of  attaining  to  true  union,  to  the  spiritual

Q  2


228  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XII.]

betrothal  of  God,  according  to  the  words  of  Oseas  :  '  I
will  betrothe  thee  to  Me  in  faith.'*  In  this  fervent  desire
it  cries  out  in  the  words  of  this  stanza,  which  are  in  effect
this :  O  faith  of  Christ,  my  Bridegroom  !  O  that  thou
wouldest  manifest  clearly  those  truths  concerning  the
Beloved,  secretly  and  obscurely  infused — for  faith  is,  as
theologians  say,  an  obscure  habit—  so  that  thy  informal
and  obscure  communications  may  be  in  a  moment  clear ;
O  that  thou  wouldest  withdraw  Thyself  formally  and
completely  from  these  truths — for  faith  is  a  veil  over  the
truths  of  God — and  reveal  them  perfectly  in  glory.
Accordingly  it  says  :

'  O  crystal  well !  '

2.  Faith  is  called  crystal  for  two  reasons :  because  it
is  of  Christ  the  Bridegroom  ;  because  it  has  the  property
of  crystal,  pure  in  its  truths,  a  limpid  well  clear  of  error,
and  of  natural  forms.  It  is  a  well  because  the  waters  of
all  spiritual  goodness  flow  from  it  into  the  soul.  Christ
our  Lord,  speaking  to  the  woman  of  Samaria,  calls  faith
a  well,  saying :  '  the  water  that  I  will  give  him  shall
become  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  life
everlasting.'!  This  water  is  the  Spirit,  which  they  who
believe  shall  receive  by  faith  in  Him.  '  Now  this  He  said
of  the  Spirit  which  they  who  believed  in  Him  should
receive."  t

'  O  that  on  thy  silvered  surface.'

3.  The  articles  and  definitions  of  the  faith  are  called
silvered  surfaces.  In  order  to  understand  these  words
and  those  that  follow,  we  must  know  that  faith  is
compared  to  silver  because  of  the  propositions  it  teaches

*  Os.  ii.  20.  t  S.  John  iv.  14.  ^  John  vii.  39.


[STAN.  XII.}  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  229

US,  the  truth  and  substance  it  involves,  being  compared
to  gold.  This  very  substance  which  we  now  believe,
hidden  behind  the  silver  veil  of  faith,  we  shall  clearly
behold  and  enjoy  hereafter ;  the  gold  of  faith  made
manifest.  Hence  the  Psalmist,  speaking  of  this,  saith  :
'  If  ye  sleep  amidst  the  lots,  the  wings  of  the  dove  are
laid  over  with  silver,  and  the  hinder  parts  of  the  back  in
the  paleness  of  gold.'*  That  means,  if  we  shall  keep  the
eyes  of  the  understanding  from  regarding  the  things  of
heaven  and  of  earth — this  the  Psalmist  calls  sleeping  in
the  midst — we  shall  be  firm  in  the  faith,  here  called  dove,
the  wings  of  which  are  the  truths  laid  over  with  silver,
because  in  this  life  the  faith  puts  these  truths  before  us
obscurely  beneath  a  veil.  This  is  the  reason  why  the
soul  calls  them  silvered  surface.  But  when  faith  shall
have  been  consummated  in  the  clear  vision  of  God,  then
the  substance  of  faith,  the  silver  veil  removed,  will  shine
as  gold.

4.  As  the  faith  gives  and  communicates  to  us  God
Himself,  but  hidden  beneath  the  silver  of  faith,  yet  it
reveals  Him  none  the  less.  So  if  a  man  gives  us  a  vessel
made  of  gold,  but  covered  with  silver,  he  gives  us  in
reality  a  vessel  of  gold,  though  the  gold  be  covered  over.
Thus,  when  the  bride  in  the  Canticle  was  longing  for  the
fruition  of  God,  He  promised  it  to  her  so  far  as  the  state
of  this  life  admitted  of  it,  saying  :  '  We  will  make  thee
chains  of  gold  inlaid  with  silver.' t  He  thus  promised  to
give  Himself  to  her  under  the  veil  of  faith.  Hence  the
soul  addresses  the  faith,  saying :  '  O  that  on  thy  silvered
surface' — the  definitions  of  faith — in  which  thou  hidest

*  Ps.  Ixvii.  14.  t  Cant.  i.  10.


230  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XII.]

the  gold  of  the  divine  rays  which  are  the  desired  eyes, —

instantly  adding  :

'  Thou  wouldest  mirror  forth  at  once  those  desired  eyes  ! '

5.  By  the  eyes  are  understood,  as  I  have  said,  the
rays  and  truths  of  God,  which  are  set  before  us  hidden
and  informal  in  the  definitions  of  the  faith.  Thus  the
words  say  in  substance  :  O  that  thou  wouldest  formally
and  explicitly  reveal  to  me  those  hidden  truths  which
Thou  teachest  implicitly  and  obscurely  in  the  definitions
of  the  faith ;  according  to  my  earnest  desire.  Those
truths  are  called  eyes,  because  of  the  special  presence  of
the  Beloved,  of  which  the  soul  is  conscious,  believing  Him
to  be  perpetually  regarding  it :  and  so  it  says  :

'  Which  are  outlined  in  my  heart.'

6.  The  soul  here  says  that  these  truths  are  outlined  in
the  heart,  that  is,  in  the  understanding  and  the  will.  It
is  through  the  understanding  that  these  truths  are  infused
into  the  soul  by  faith.  They  are  said  to  be  outlined
because  the  knowledge  of  them  is  not  perfect.  xA.s  a
sketch  is  not  a  perfect  picture,  so  the  knowledge  that
comes  by  faith  is  not  a  perfect  understanding.  The
truths,  therefore,  infused  into  the  soul  by  faith,  are  as  it
were  in  outline,  and  when  the  clear  vision  shall  be
granted,  then  they  will  be  as  a  perfect  and  finished
picture,  according  to  the  words  of  the  Apostle :  '  When
that  shall  come  which  is  perfect,  that  shall  be  made  void
which  is  in  part.'*  '  That  which  is  perfect '  is  the  clear
vision,  and  '  that  which  is  in  part '  is  the  knowledge  that
comes  by  faith.

7.  Besides  this  outline  which  comes  by  faith,  there  is

*  I  Cor.  xiii.  10.


[STAN.  XII.]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  iTS  BRIDEGROOM.  23l

another  by  love  in  the  soul  that  loves,  that  is,  in  the  will,
in  which  the  face  of  the  Beloved  is  so  deeply  and  vividly
pictured,  when  the  union  of  love  occurs,  that  it  may  be
truly  said,  the  Beloved  lives  in  the  loving  soul,  and  the
loving  soul  in  the  Beloved.  Love  produces  such  a
resemblance  by  the  transformation  of  those  who  love  that
one  may  be  said  to  be  the  other,  and  both  but  one.  The
reason  is,  that  in  the  union  and  transformation  of  love,
one  gives  himself  up  to  the  other  as  his  possession,  and
each  resigns,  abandons,  and  exchanges  himself  for  the
other,  and  both  become  but  one  in  the  transformation
wrought  by  love.

8.  This  is  the  meaning  of  St.  Paul  when  he  said  :  '  I
live,  now,  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me.'*  In  that  He
saith  :  '  I  live,  now,  not  I,'  his  meaning  is,  that  though  he
lived,  yet  the  life  he  lived  was  not  his  own,  because  he
was  transformed  in  Christ :  that  his  life  was  divine  rather
than  human ;  and  for  that  reason,  he  said  :  it  was  not  he
that  lived,  but  Christ  Who  lived  in  him.  We  may
therefore  say,  according  to  this  likeness  of  transformation,
that  his  life  and  the  life  of  Christ  were  one  by  the  union
of  love.  This  will  be  perfect  in  heaven  in  the  divine  life
of  all  those  who  shall  merit  the  beatific  vision ;  for,
transformed  in  God,  they  will  live  the  life  of  God  and  not
their  own,  since  the  life  of  God  will  be  theirs.  Then  they
will  say  in  truth  :  We  live,  but  not  we  ourselves,  for  God
liveth  in  us.

9.  Now  this  may  take  place  in  this  life,  as  in  the  case
of  St.  Paul,  but  not  perfectly  and  completely,  though  the
soul  should  attain   to  such  a  transformation  of  love  as

*  Galat.  ii.  20.


232  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XII.]

shall  be  spiritual  marriage,  which  is  the  highest  state  it
can  reach  in  this  life  ;  because  all  this  is  but  an  outline  of
love  compared  with  the  perfect  image  of  transformation
in  glory.  Yet,  when  this  outline  of  transformation  is
attained  in  this  life,  it  is  a  grand  blessing,  because  the
Beloved  is  so  greatly  pleased  therewith.  He  desires,
therefore,  that  the  bride  should  have  Him  thus  delineated
in  her  soul,  and  saith  unto  her :  '  Put  Me  as  a  seal  upon
thy  heart,  as  a  seal  upon  thy  arm.'*  The  heart  here
signifies  the  soul,  wherein  God  in  this  life  dwells  as  an
impression  of  the  seal  of  faith,  and  the  arm  is  the  resolute
will,  where  He  is  as  the  impressed  token  of  love.

10.  Such  is  the  state  of  the  soul  at  that  time.  I  speak
but  little  of  it,  not  willing  to  leave  it  altogether  untouched,
though  no  language  can  describe  it.

11.  The  very  substance  of  soul  and  body  seems  to  be
dried  up  by  thirst  after  this  living  well  of  God,  for  the
thirst  resembles  that  of  David  when  he  cried  out,  '  As  the
hart  longeth  for  the  fountains  of  waters,  so  my  soul  .
longeth  for  Thee,  O  God.  My  soul  hath  thirsted  after
the  strong  living  God  ;  when  shall  I  come  and  appear
before  the  face  of  God  ?  't  So  oppressive  is  this  thirst  to
the  soul,  that  it  counts  it  as  nothing  to  break  through  the
camp  of  the  Philistines,  like  the  valiant  men  of  David,
to  fill  its  pitcher  with  '  water  out  of  the  cisterns  of
Bethlehem,'!  which  is  Christ.  The  trials  of  this  world,
the  rage  of  the  devil,  and  the  pains  of  hell,  are  nothing  to
pass  through,  in  order  to  plunge  into  this  fathomless
fountain  of  love.

12.  To  this  we  may  appl}'  those  words  in  the  Canticle:

*  Cant.  viii.  6.  f  Ps.  xli.  i,  2.  +1  Paral.  xi.  iS.


[STAN.  XII.]  OF  THE^SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  230

'  Love  is  strong  as  death,  jealousy  is  hard  as  helL'*"  It  is
incredible  how  vehement  are  the  longings  and  sufferings
of  the  soul  when  it  sees  itself  on  the  point  of  tasting  this
good,  and  at  the  same  time  sees  it  withheld ;  for  the
nearer  the  object  desired,  the  greater  the  pangs  of  its
denial :  '  Before  I  eat,'  saith  Job,  '  I  sigh,  and  as  it  were
overflowing  waters  so  my  roaring 't  and  hunger  for  food.
God  is  meant  here  by  food  ;  for  in  proportion  to  the  soul's
longing  for  food,  and  its  knowledge  of  God,  is  the  pain  it
suffers  now.


NOTE.

The  source  of  the  grievous  sufferings  of  the  soul  at  this
time,  is  the  consciousness  of  its  own  emptiness  of  God —
while  it  is  drawing  nearer  and  nearer  to  Him — and  also
the  thick  darkness  vv^ith  the  spiritual  fire,  which  dry  and
purify  it,  that,  its  purification  ended,  it  may  be  united
with  God.  For  when  God  sends  not  forth  a  ray  of
supernatural  light  into  the  soul.  He  is  to  it  intolerable
darkness  when  He  is  even  near  to  it  in  spirit,  for  the
supernatural  hght  by  its  very  brightness  obscures  the
mere  natural  light. .  David  referred  to  this  when  he  said  :
'  Cloud  and  mist  round  about  Him  ...  a  fire  shall
go  before  Him.'t  And  again:  'He  put  darkness  His
covert ;  His  tabernacle  is  round  about  Him,  darksome
waters  in  the  clouds  of  the  air.  Because  of  the  brightness
in  His  sight  the  clouds  passed,  hail  and  coals  of  fire.'§
The  soul  that  approaches  God  feels  Him  to  be  all  this
more  and  more  the  further  it  advances,  until  He  shall

*  Cant.  viii.  6.       f  Job  iii.  24.        J  Ps.  xcvi.  2,  3.        §  Ps.  xvii.  12,  13.


234  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XIII.]

cause  it  to  enter  within  His  divine  brightness  through  the
transformation  of  love.  But  the  comfort  and  consolations
of  God  are,  by  His  infinite  goodness,  proportional  to  the
darkness  and  emptiness  of  the  soul,  as  it  is  written,  '  As
the  darkness  thereof,  so  also  the  light  thereof.'*  And
because  He  humbles  souls  and  wearies  them,  while  He  is
exalting  them  and  making  them  glorious,  He  sends  into
the  soul,  in  the  midst  of  its  weariness,  certain  divine  rays
from  Himself,  in  such  gloriousness  and  strength  of  love  as
to  stir  it  up  from  its  very  depths,  and  to  change  its  whole
natural  condition.  Thus  the  soul,  in  great  fear  and
natural  awe,  addresses  the  Beloved  in  the  first  words  of
the  following  stanza,  the  remainder  of  which  is  His
answer  :


STANZA  XHL

Turn  ihem  away,  0  my  Beloved  I
I  am  on  the  wing.

THE    BRIDEGROOM.

Return,  My  Dove !

The  wounded  kart

Looms  on  the  hill

In  the  air  of  thy  flight  and  is  refreshed.


EXPLANATION.

Amid  those  fervent  affections  of  love,  such  as  the  soul
has  shown  in  the  preceding  stanzas,  the  Beloved  is  wont
to  visit  His  bride,  tenderly,  lovingly,  and  with  great
strength  of  love ;  for  ordinarily  the  graces  and  visits  of
God  are  great  in  proportion  to  the  greatness   of  those

*  Ps.  cxxxviii.  12.


[STAN.  XIII,]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  235

fervours  and  longings  of  love  which  have  gone  before.
And,  as  the  soul  has  so  anxiously  longed  for  the  divine
eyes — as  in  the  foregoing  stanza — the  Beloved  reveals  to
it  some  glimpses  of  His  majesty  and  Godhead,  according
to  its  desires.  These  divine  rays  strike  the  soul  so
profoundly  and  so  vividly,  that  it  is  rapt  into  an  ecstacy
which  in  the  beginning  is  attended  with  great  suffering
and  natural  fear.  Hence  the  soul,  unable  to  bear  the
ecstacies  in  a  body  so  frail,  cries  out.  Turn  away  thine
eyes  from  me.

'  Turn  them  away,  O  my  Beloved  !  '

2.  That  is,  Thy  divine  eyes,  for  they  make  me  fly
away  out  of  myself  to  the  heights  of  contemplation,  and
my  natural  force  cannot  bear  it.  This  the  soul  says
because  it  thinks  it  has  escaped  from  the  burden  of  the
flesh,  which  was  the  object  of  its  desires ;  it  therefore
prays  the  Beloved  to  turn  away  His  eyes ;  that  is,  not  to
show  them  in  the  body,  where  it  cannot  bear  and  enjoy
them  as  it  would,  but  to  show  them  to  it  in  its  flight  from
the  body.  The  Bridegroom  at  once  denies  the  request
and  hinders  the  flight,  saying  :  '  Return,  my  dove  !  '  for
the  communications  I  make  to  thee  now  are  not  those  of
the  state  of  glory  wherein  thou  desirest  to  be ;  but  return
to  me,  for  I  am  He  whom  thou,  wounded  with  love,  art
seeking,  and  I,  too,  as  the  hart,  wounded  with  thy  love,
begin  to  show  Myself  to  thee  on  the  heights  of  con-
templation, and  am  refreshed  and  delighted  by  the  love
which  thy  contemplation  involves.  The  soul  then  says  to
the  Bridegroom  :

'  Turn  them  away,  O  my  Beloved  !  '

3.  The  soul,  because  of  its   intense  longing  after  the


236  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XIII.]

divine  eyes,  that  is,  the  Godhead,  receives  interiorly  from
the  Beloved  such  communications  and  knowledge  of  God
as  compel  it  to  cry  out,  '  Turn  them  away,  O  my
Beloved  !  '  For  such  is  the  wretchedness  of  our  mortal
nature,  that  we  cannot  bear — even  when  it  is  offered  to
us — -but  at  the  cost  of  our  life,  that  which  is  the  very  life
of  the  soul,  and  the  object  of  its  earnest  desires,  namely,
the  knowledge  of  the  Beloved.  Thus  the  soul  is  com-
pelled to  say,  with  regard  to  the  eyes  so  earnestly,  so
anxiously  sought  for,  and  in  so  many  ways — when  they
become  visible — '  Turn  them  away.'

4.  So  great,  at  times,  is  the  suffering  of  the  soul
during  these  ecstatic  visitations — and  there  is  no  other
pain  which  so  wrenches  the  very  bones,  and  which  so
oppresses  our  natural  forces — that,  were  it  not  for  the
special  interference  of  God,  death  would  ensue.  And,  in
truth,  such  is  it  to  the  soul,  the  subject  of  these
visitations,  for  it  feels  as  if  it  were  released  from  the  body
and  a  stranger  to  the  flesh.  Such  graces  cannot  be
perfectly  received  in  the  body,  because  the  spirit  of  man
is  lifted  up  to  the  communion  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  Who
visits  the  soul,  and  must  therefore  of  necessity  be  in  some
measure,  a  stranger  to  the  body.  Hence  it  is  that  the
flesh  has  to  suffer,  and  consequently  the  soul  in  it,  by
reason  of  their  union  in  one  person.  The  great  agony  of
the  soul,  therefore,  in  these  visitations,  and  the  great  fear
that  overwhelms  it  when  God  deals  with  it  in  the  super-
natural way,*  force  it  to  cry  out,  '  Turn  them  away,  O
my  Beloved !  '

5.  But  it  is  not  to  be  supposed,   however,   that   the

*  See  St.  Teresa.     Life,  ch.  xx.  gy,  or  Las  Moradas,  vi.  ch.  xi.


[STAN.    XIII.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  287

If  soul  really  wishes  Him  to  turn  away  His  eyes ;  for  this  is
nothing  else  but  the  expression  of  natural  awe,  as  I  said
before.*  Yea,  rather,  cost  they  what  they  may,  the  soul
would  not  willingly  miss  these  visitations  and  favours  of
the  Beloved ;    for  though    nature    may  suffer,  the    spirit

■  flies  to  this  supernatural  recollection,  in  order  to  enjoy
the  spirit  of  the  Beloved,  the  object  of  its  prayers  and
desires.  The  soul  is  unwilling  to  receive  these  visitations
in  the  body,  when  it  cannot  have  the  perfect  fruition  of
them,  and  only  in  a  slight  degree  and  in  pain ;  but  it
covets  them  in  the  flight  of  the  disembodied  spirit  when
it  can  enjoy  them  freely.  Hence  it  says,  Turn  them
away  my  Beloved,  that  is,  do  not  visit  me  in  the  flesh.
'  I  am  on  the  wang.'

6.  It  is  as  if  it  said,  I  am  taking  my  flight  out  of  the
body,  that  Thou  mayest  show  them  when  I  shall  have
left  it ;  they  being  the  cause  of  my  flight  out  of  the  body.
For  the  better  understanding  of  the  nature  of  this  flight
we  should  consider  that  which  I  said  just  now.+  In  this
visitation  of  the  divine  Spirit  the  spirit  of  the  soul  is  with
great  violence  borne  upwards  into  communion  with  the
divine,  the  body  is  abandoned,  all  its  acts  and  senses  are
suspended,  because  they  are  absorbed  in  God.  Thus  the
Apostle,  St.  Paul,  speaking  of  his  own  ecstacy,  saith  :
'  Whether  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell.'t
But  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  soul  abandons  the
body,  and  that  the  natural  life  is  destroyed,  but  only  that
its  actions  have  then  ceased.

7.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  body  remains  insensible
in  raptures  and  ecstacies,   and  unconcious    of  the    most

*  §1  Supr.  f  §4  Supr  I  2  Cor.  xii.  3.


1


238  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XIII.]

painful  inflictions.  These  are  not  like  the  swoons  and
faintings  of  the  natural  life,  which  cease  when  pain  begins.
They  who  have  not  arrived  at  perfection  are  liable  to
these  visitations,  for  they  happen  to  those  who  are
walking  in  the  way  of  proficients.  They  who  are  already
perfect  receive  these  visitations  in  peace  and  in  the
sweetness  of  love  :  ecstacies  cease,  for  they  were  only
graces  to  prepare  them  for  this  greater  grace.

8.  This  is  a  fitting  place  for  discussing  the  difference
between  raptures,  ecstacies,  other  elevations  and  subtile
flights  of  the  spirit,  to  which  spiritual  persons  are  liable  ;
but,  as  I  intend  to  do  nothing  more  than  explain  briefly
this  canticle,  as  I  undertook  in  the  prologue,  I  leave  the
subject  for  those  who  are  better  qualified  than  I  am.  I  do
this  the  more  readily,  because  our  mother,  the  blessed
Teresa  of  Jesus,  has  written  admirably  on  this  matter,*
whose  writings  I  hope  in  God  to  see  published  soon.
The  flight  of  the  soul  in  this  place,  then,  is  to  be  under-
stood of  ecstacy,  and  elevation  of  spirit  in  God.  The
Beloved  immediately  says  :

'  Return,  My  Dove.'
g.  The  soul  was  joyfully  quitting  the  body  in  its
spiritual  flight,  thinking  that  its  natural  life  was  over,  and
that  it  was  about  to  enter  into  the  everlasting  fruition  of
the  Bridegroom,  and  remain  with  Him  without  a  veil
between  them.  He,  however,  restrains  it  in  its  flight,
saying,

'  Return,  My  Dove.'
10.     It  is  as   if  He   said,  O  My  Dove,  in  thy  high  and
rapid  flight  of  contemplation,  in  the  love  wherewith  thou
*  See  Relation  viii


[STAN.  XIII.]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  239

art  inflamed,  in  the  simplicity  of  thy  regard — these  are
three  characteristics  of  the  dove — return  from  that  flight
in  which  thou  aimest  at  the  true  fruition  of  Myself — the
time  is  not  yet  come  for  knowledge  so  high  —  return,  and
submit  thyself  to  that  lower  degree  of  it  which  I  com-
municate in  this  thy  rapture.

'  The  wounded  hart.'
II.  The  Bridegroom  likens  Himself  to  a  hart,  for  by
the  hart  here  He  means  Himself.  The  hart  by  nature
climbs  up  to  high  places,  and  when  wounded  hastens  to
seek  relief  in  the  cooling  waters.  If  he  hears  his  consort
moan  and  sees  that  she  is  wounded,  he  runs  to  her  at
once,  comforts,  and  caresses  her.  So  the  Bridegroom
now  ;  for,  seeing  the  bridd  wounded  with  His  love.  He,
too,  hearing  her  moaning,  is  wounded  Himself  with  her
love ;  for  with  lovers  the  wound  of  one  is  the  wound  of
the  other,  and  they  have  the  same  feelings  in  common.
The  Bridegroom,  therefore,  saith  in  effect  :  Return,  my
bride,  to  Me  ;  for  as  thou  art  wounded  with  the  love  of
Me,  I  too,  like  the  hart,  am  wounded  by  love  for  thee.
I  am  like  the  hart,  looming  on  the  top  of  the  hill.  There-
fore He  says  :

'  Looms  on  the  hill ; '
12.  That  is,  on  the  heights  of  contemplation,  to  which
thou  hast  ascended  in  thy  flight.  Contemplation  is  a
lofty  eminence  where  God,  in  this  life,  begins  to  commu-
nicate Himself  to  the  soul,  and  to  show  Himself,  but  not
distinctly.  Hence  it  is  said,  '  Looms  on  the  hill,'  because
he  does  not  appear  clearly.  However  profound  the
knowledge  of  Himself  which  God  may  grant  to  the  soul
in  this  life,  it   is,  after  all,  but  an  indistinct  vision.     We


240  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN    XIII.]

now  come  to  the  third  property  of  the  hart,  the  subject  of
the  hne  that  follows  : —

'  In  the  air  of  thy  flight  and  is  refreshed.'

13.  The  flight  is  contemplation  in  the  ecstacy  spoken
of  before,*  and  the  air  is  the  spirit  of  love  produced  in  the
soul  by  this  flight  of  contemplation,  and  this  love  produced
by  the  flight  is  here  with  great  propriety  called  "  air,"  for
the  Holy  Ghost  also  is  likened  to  air  in  the  sacred
writings,  because  He  is  the  breath  of  the  Father  and  the
Son.  And  so  as  He  is  there  the  air  of  the  flight,  that  is,
that  He  proceeds  by  the  will  from  the  contemplation  and
wisdom  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  is  breathed,  so
here  the  love  of  the  soul  is  called  air  by  the  Bridegroom,
because  it  proceeds  from  the  contemplation  of  God  and
the  knowledge  of  Him  which  at  this  time  is  possessed  by
the  soul.

14.  We  must  observe  here  that  the  Bridegroom  does
not  say  that  He  cometh  at  the  flight,  but  at  the  air  of  the
flight,  because  properly  speaking,  God  does  not  commu-
nicate Himself  to  the  soul  because  of  that  flight,  which  is,
as  I  have  said,  the  knowledge  it  has  of  God,  but  because
of  the  love  which  is  the  fruit  of  that  knowledge.  For  as
love  is  the  union  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  so  is  it  also
of  God  and  the  soul.

15.  Hence  it  is  that  notwithstanding  the  most  pro-
found knowledge  of  God,  and  contemplation  itself,
together  with  the  knowledge  of  all  mysteries,  the  soul
without  love  is  nothing  worth,  and  can  do  nothing,  as  the
Apostle  saith,  towards  its  union  with  God.+  In  another
place  he    saith :    '  Have   charity,    which    is    the    bond    of

*  §  I.  t  r  Cor.  xiii.  2.


[STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.       241

perfection.'*     This    charity   then    and    love    of    the    soul
make  the  Bridegroom  run  to  drink  of  the  fountain  of  the
Bride's  love,  as  the  cooling  waters  attract  the  thirsty  and
the  wounded  hart,  to  be  refreshed  therein.
'  And  is  refreshed.'

i6.  As  the  air  cools  and  refreshes  him  who  is
wearied  with  the  heat,  so  the  air  of  love  refreshes  and
comforts  him  who  burns  with  the  fire  of  love.  The  fire
of  love  hath  this  property,  the  air  which  cools  and
refreshes  it  is  an  increase  of  the  fire  itself.  To  him  who
loves,  love  is  a  flame  that  burns  with  the  desire  of  burning
more  and  more,  like  the  flame  of  material  fire.  The  con-
summation of  this  desire  of  burning  more  and  more,  with
the  love  of  the  bride,  which  is  the  air  of  her  flight,  is  here
called  refreshment.  The  Bridegroom  says  in  substance  :
I  burn  more  and  more  because  of  the  ardour  of  thy  flight,
for  love  kindles  love.

17.  God  does  not  establish  His  grace  and  love  in  the
soul  but  in  proportion  to  the  good  will  of  that  soul's  love.
He,  therefore,  that  truly  loves  God  must  strive,  that  his
love  fail  not ;  for  so,  if  we  may  thus  speak,  will  he  move
God  to  show  him  greater  love,  and  to  take  greater  delight
in  his  soul.  In  order  to  attain  to  such  a  degree  of  love,
he  must  practise  those  things  of  which  the  Apostle  speaks,
saying :  '  Charity  is  patient,  is  benign  :  charity  envieth
not,  dealeth  not  perversely ;  is  not  puffed  up,  is  not
ambitious,  seeketh  not  her  own,  is  not  provoked  to  anger,
thinketh  not  evil,  rejoiceth  not  upon  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth
with  the  truth  ;  beareth  all  things,  believeth  all  things,
hopeth  all  things,  beareth  all  things.'!

*Coloss.  iii.  14.  t  I  Cor.  xiii.  4—7.


242  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]

NOTE.
'  When  the  dove  soul  was  flying  on  the  gale  of  love  over
the  waters  of  the  deluge  of  the  weariness  and  longing  of
its  love,  '  not  finding  where  her  foot  might  rest,'*  the
compassionate  father  Noe,  in  this  last  flight,  put  forth  the
hand  of  his  mercy,  caught  her,  and  brought  her  into  the
ark  of  his  charity  and  love.  That  took  place  when  the
Bridegroom,  as  in  the  stanza  now  explained,  said,  return,
my  dove.  In  the  shelter  within  the  ark,  the  soul
finding  all  it  desired,  and  more  than  it  can  ever  express,
begins  to  sing  the  praises  of  the  Beloved,  celebrating  the
magnificence  which  it  feels  and  enjoys  in  that  union,
saying :

STANZAS  XIV.,  XV.

THE    BRIDE.

My  Beloved  is  the  moimtains.

The  solitary  wooded  valleys.

The  strange  islands,

The  roarijig  torrents.

The  whisper  of  the  amorous  gales;

The  tranquil  night

At  the  approaches  of  the  dawn.

The  silent  music.

The  murmtiring  solitude.

The  stepper  which  revives,  and  enkindles  love.

Before  I  begin  to  explain  these  stanzas,  I  must  observe,

in  order  that  they  and  those  which  follow  may  be  better

understood,  that  this  spiritual   flight    signifies  a  certain

high  estate  and    union    of  love,   whereunto,  after  many

spiritual  exercises,  God  is  wont  to  elevate  the  soul :  it  is

called  the  spiritual  betrothal  of  the  Word,  the  Son  of

God.     In  the  beginning,  when  this  occurs  the  first  time,

God   reveals   to    it   great    things   of    Himself,   makes   it
*  Genes,  viii.  9.


[STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM,       243

beautiful  in  majesty  and  grandeur,  adorns  it  with  graces
and  gifts,  and  endows  it  with  honour,  and  with  the
knowledge  of  Himself,  as  a  bride  is  adorned  on  the  day
of  her  betrothal.  On  this  happy  day  the  soul  not  only
ceases  from  its  anxieties  and  loving  complaints,  but  is,
moreover,  adorned  with  all  grace,  entering  into  a  state  of
peace  and  delight,  and  of  the  sweetness  of  love,  as  it
appears  from  these  stanzas,  in  which  it  does  nothing  else
but  recount  and  praise  the  magnificence  of  the  Beloved,
which  it  recognises  in  Him,  and  enjoys  in  the  union  of  the
betrothal.

2.  In  the  stanzas  that  follow,  the  soul  speaks  no  more
of  its  anxieties  and  sufferings,  as  before,  but  of  the  sweet
and  peaceful  intercourse  of  love  with  the  Beloved  ;  for
now  all  its  troubles  are  over.  These  two  stanzas,  which
I  am  about  to  explain,  contain  all  that  God  is  wont  at
this  time  to  bestow  upon  the  soul ;  but  we  are  not  to
suppose  that  all  souls,  thus  far  advanced,  receive  all  that
is  here  described,  either  in  the  same  way  or  in  the  same
degree  of  knowledge  and  of  consciousness.  Some  souls
receive  more,  others  less ;  some  in  one  way,  some  in
another ;  and  yet  all  may  be  in  the  state  of  spiritual
betrothal.  But  in  this  stanza  the  highest  possible  is
spoken  of,  because  that  embraces  all,

EXPLANATION.

3,  As  in  the  ark  of  Noe  there  were  many  chambers  for
the  different  kinds  of  animals,  as  the  Sacred  writings  tell
us,  and  '  all  food  that  may  be   eaten,"'  so  the  soul,  in  its

*  Genes,  vi.  21.

K   2


244  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  ■       [STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]

flight  to  the  divine  ark  of  the  bosom  of  God,  sees  therein
not  only  the  many  mansions  of  which  our  Lord  speaks,
but  also  all  the  food,  that  is,  all  the  magnificence  in  which
the  soul  may  rejoice,  and  which  are  here  referred  to  by
the  common  terms  of  these  stanzas.  These  are  substan-
tially as  follows  :

4.  In  this  divine  union  the  soul  has  a  vision  and
foretaste  of  abundant  and  inestimable  riches,  and  finds
there  all  the  repose  and  refreshment  it  desired  :  it  attains
to  the  secrets  of  God,  and  to  a  strange  knowledge  of  Him,
which  is  the  food  of  those  who  know  Him  most ;  it  is
conscious  of  the  awful  power  of  God  beyond  all  other
power  and  might,  tastes  of  the  wonderful  sweetness  and
delight  of  the  spirit,  finds  its  true  rest  and  divine  light,
drinks  deeply  of  the  wisdom  of  God,  which  shines  forth
in  the  harmony  of  the  creatures  and  works  of  God ;  it
feels  itself  filled  with  all  good,  emptied,  and  delivered
from  all  evil,  and,  above  all,  rejoices  consciously  in  the
inestimable  banquet  of  love  which  confirms  it  in  love.
This  is  the  substance  of  these  two  stanzas.

5.  The  bride  here  saj's  that  her  Beloved  in  Himself
and  to  her  is  all  the  objects  she  enumerates ;  for  in  the
ecstatic  communications  of  God,  the  soul  feels  and
understands  the  truth  of  the  saying  of  St.  Francis  :  '  God'
is  mine  and  all  things  are  mine."  And  because  God  is  all,
and  the  soul,  and  the  good  of  all,  the  communication  in
this  ecstasy  is  explained  by  the  consideration  that  the
goodness  of  the  creatures  referred  to  in  these  stanzas  is  a
reflection  of  His  goodness,  as  will  appear  from  every  line
thereof.  All  that  is  here  set  forth  is  in  God  eminently  in
an  infinite  way,  or  rather,  every  one  of  these  grandeurs  is


[STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        :>45

God,  and  all  of  them  together  are  God.  Inasmuch  as  the
soul  is  one  with  God,  it  feels  all  things  to  be  God
according  to  the  words  of  St.  John,  '  What  was  made,  in
Him  was  life.'*

6.  But  we  are  not  to  understand  this  consciousness  of
the  soul  as  if  it  saw  the  creatures  in  God  as  we  see
material  objects  in  the  light,  but  that  it  feels  all  things  to
be  God  in  this  fruition  of  Him  ;  neither  are  we  to  imagine
that  the  soul  sees  God  essentially  and  clearly  because  it
has  so  deep  a  sense  of  Him  ;  for  this  is  only  a  strong  and
abundant  communication  from  Him,  a  glimmering  light
of  what  He  is  in  Himself,  by  which  the  soul  discerns  this
goodness  of  all  things,  as  I  proceed  to  explain.

'  My  Beloved  is  the  mountains.'

7.  Mountains  are  high,  fertile,  extensive,  beautiful,
lovely,  flowery,  and  odorous.  These  mountains  my
Beloved  is  to  me.

'  The  solitary  wooded  valleys.'

8.  Solitary  valleys  are  tranquil,  pleasant,  cooling,
shady,  abounding  in  sweet  waters,  and  by  the  variety  of
trees  growing  in  them,  and  by  the  melody  of  the  birds
that  frequent  them,  enliven  and  delight  the  senses ;  their
solitude  and  silence  procure  us  a  refreshing  rest.  These
valleys  my  Beloved  is  to  me.

'The  strange  islands.'

9.  Strange  islands  are  girt  by  the  sea ;  they  are  also,
because  of  the  sea,  distant  and  unknown  to  the  commerce
of  men.  They  produce  things  very  different  from  those
with  which  we  are  conversant,  in  strange  ways,  and  with
qualities  hitherto  unknown,  so  as  to   surprise  those  who

*  St.  John  i.  3,  4.     See  Stanza  viii.  p.  209.


246  A  SPITITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN.  XIV,,  XV.]

behold  them,  and  fill  them  with  wonder.  Thus,  then,  by
reason  of  the  great  and  marvellous  wonders,  and  the
strange  things  that  come  to  our  knowledge,  far  beyond
the  common  notions  of  men,  which  the  soul  beholds  in
God,  it  calls  Him  the  strange  islands.  We  say  of  a  man
that  he  is  strange  for  one  of  two  reasons :  either  because
he  withdraws  himself  from  the  society  of  his  fellows,  or
because  he  is  singular  or  distinguished  in  his  life  and
conduct.  For  these  two  reasons  together  God  is  called
strange  by  the  soul.  He  is  not  only  all  that  is  strange  in
undiscovered  islands,  but  His  ways,  judgments,  and
works  are  also  strange,  new,  and  marvellous  to  men.

10.  It  is  nothing  wonderful  that  God  should  be
strange  to  men  who  have  never  seen  Him,  seeing  that  He
is  also  strange  to  the  holy  angels  and  the  souls  who
see  Him;  for  they  neither  can,  nor  shall  ever  see  Him
perfectly.  Yea,  even  to  the  day  of  the  last  judgment
they  will  see  in  Him  so  much  that  is  new  in  His  deep
judgments,  in  His  acts  of  mercy  and  justice,  as  to  excite
their  wonder  more  and  more.  Thus  God  is  the  strange
islands  not  to  men  only  but  to  the  angels  also ;  only  to
Himself  is  He  neither  strange  nor  new.

'  The  roaring  torrents.'

11.  Torrents  have  three  properties,  i.  They  overflow
all  that  is  in  their  course.  2.  They  fill  all  hollows.
3.  They  overpower  all  other  sounds  by  their  own.  And
hence  the  soul,  feeling  most  sweetl}^  that  these  three
properties  belong  to  God,  says :  '  My  Beloved  is  the
roaring  torrents.'

12.  As  to  the  first  property  of  which  the  soul  is
conscious,  it  feels  itself  to  be  so  overwhelmed  with  the


[STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.       247

torrent  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  so  violently  overpowered
by  it,  that  all  the  waters  in  the  world  seem  to  it  to  have
surrounded  it,  and  to  have  drowned  all  its  former  actions
and  passions.  Though  all  this  be  violent,  yet  there  is
nothing  painful  in  it,  for  these  rivers  are  rivers  of  peace,
as  it  is  written,  God  speaking  through  Isaias,  saying :  '  I
will  decline  upon  her,  as  it  were,  a  flood  of  peace,  and  as
a  torrent  overflowing  glory.'*  That  is,  I  will  bring  upon
the  soul,  as  it  were,  a  river  of  peace,  and  a  torrent
overflowing  with  glory.  Thus  this  divine  overflowing,
like  roaring  torrents,  fills  the  soul  with  peace  and  glory.
The  second  property  the  soul  feels  is  that  this  divine
water  is  now  filling  the  vessels  of  its  humility  and  the
emptiness  of  its  desires,  as  it  is  written :  '  He  hath
exalted  the  humble,  and  filled  the  hungry  with  good.'t
The  third  property  of  which  the  soul  is  now  conscious  in
the  roaring  torrents  of  the  Beloved,  is  a  spiritual  sound
and  voice  overpowering  all  other  sounds  and  voices  in  the
world.     The  explanation  of  this  will  take  a  little  time.

13.  This  voice,  or  this  murmuring  sound  of  the  waters,
is  an  overflowing  so  abundant  as  to  fill  the  soul  with  good,
and  a  power  so  mighty  seizing  upon  it  as  to  seem  not
only  the  sound  of  many  waters,  but  a  most  loud  roaring
of  thunder.  But  the  voice  is  a  spiritual  voice,  unattended
by  material  sounds  or  the  pain  and  torment  of  them,  but
rather  with  majesty,  power,  might,  delight,  and  glory  :  it
is,  as  it  were,  a  voice,  an  infinite  interior  sound,  which
endows  the  soul  with  power  and  might.  The  Apostles
heard  in  spirit  this  voice  when  the  Holy  Ghost  descended
upon  them   in  the  sound  'as  of  a  mighty  wind,'t  as  we

*  Is.  Ixvi.  12.  t  S.  Luke  i.  52.  I  Acts  ii,  2.


248  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN,  XIY,  XV.]

read  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  In  order  to  manifest
this  spiritual  voice,  interiorly  spoken,  the  sound  was
heard  exteriorly,  as  of  a  rushing  wind,  by  all  those  who
were  in  Jerusalem.  This  exterior  manifestation  reveals
what  the  Apostles  interiorly  received,  namely,  fulness  of
power  and  might.

14.  So  also  when  our  Lord  Jesus  prayed  to  the  Father
because  of  His  distress  and  the  rage  of  His  enemies,  He
heard  an  interior  voice  from  heaven,  comforting  Him  in
His  Sacred  Humanity.  The  sound,  solemn  and  grave,
was  heard  exteriorly  by  the  Jews,  some  of  whom,  '  said
that  it  thundered,  others  said  an  angel  hath  spoken  to
Him.'*  The  voice  outwardly  heard  was  the  outward
sign  and  expression  of  that  strength  and  power  which
Christ  then  inwardly  received  in  His  human  nature.  We
are  not  to  suppose  that  the  soul  does  not  hear  in  spirit
the  spiritual  voice  because  it  is  also  outwardly  heard.
The  spiritual  voice  is  the  effect  on  the  soul  of  the  audible
voice,  as  material  sounds  strike  the  ear,  and  impress  the
meaning  of  it  on  the  mind.  This  we  learn  from  David
when  he  said,  '  He  will  give  to  His  voice  the  voice  of
strength ;  't  this  strength  is  the  interior  voice.  He  will
give  to  His  voice,  that  is  the  outward  voice,  audibly
heard,  the  voice  of  strength  which  is  felt  within.  God  is
an  infinite  voice,  and  communicating  Himself  thus  to  the
soul  produces  the  effect  of  an  infinite  voice.

15.  This  voice  was  heard  by  St.  John,  saying  in  the
Apocalypse  :  '  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  as  the  voice  of
many  waters,  and  as  the  voice  of  great  thunder.'  And,
lest  it   should   be   supposed  that  a  voice    so  strong  was

*  St.  John  xii.  28,  29.  t  fs.  Ixvii.  34.


[STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        249

distressing  and  harsh,  he  adds  immediately,  '  The  voice
which  I  heard  was  as  the  voice  of  harpers  harping  on
their  harps.'*  Ezechiel  says  that  this  sound  as  of  many
waters  was  '  as  it  were  the  sound  of  the  High  God,'t
profoundly  and  sweetly  communicated  in  it.  This  voice
is  infinite,  because,  as  I  have  said,  it  is  God  who  coin-
municates  Himself,  speaking  in  the  soul ;  but  He  adapts
Himself  to  each  soul,  uttering  the  voice  of  strength
according  to  its  capacity,  in  majesty  and  joy.  And  so  the
bride  sings  in  the  Canticle  :  '  Let  Thy  voice  sound  in  my
ears,  for  Thy  voice  is  sweet.' t

'  The  whisper  of  the  amorous  gales,'

i6.  Two  things  are  to  be  considered  here — gales  and
whisper.  The  amorous  gales  are  the  virtues  and  graces
of  the  Beloved,  which,  because  of  its  union  with  the
Bridegroom,  play  around  the  soul,  and  most  lovingly  sent
forth,  touch  it  in  their  own  substance.  The  whisper  of
the  gales  is  a  most  sublime,  and  sweet  knowledge  of  God
and  of  His  attributes,  which  overflows  into  the  under-
standing from  the  contact  of  the  attributes  of  God  with
the  substance  of  the  soul.  This  is  the  highest  delight  of
which  the  soul  is  capable  in  this  life.

17.  That  we  may  understand  this  the  better,  we  must
keep  in  mind,  that  as  in  a  gale  two  things  are  observable
— the  touch  of  it,  and  the  whisper  or  sound — so  there  are
two  things  observable  also  in  the  communications  of  the
Bridegroom — the  sense  of  delight,  and  the  understanding
of  it.  As  the  touch  of  the  air  is  felt  in  the  sense  of  touch,
and  the  whisper  of  it  heard  in  the  ear,  so  also  the
contact    of  the   perfections   of  the    Beloved    is    felt    and

*  Apoc.  xiv.  2.  f  Ezech.  i.  24.  X  Cant.  ii.  14.


250  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]

enjoyed  in  the  touch  of  the  soul,  that  is,  in  the  substance
thereof,  through  the  instrumentahty  of  the  will,  and  the
knowledge  of  the  attributes  of  God  felt  in  the  hearing  of
the  soul,  that  is,  in  the  understanding.

i8.  The  gale  is  said  to  blow  amorously  when  it  strikes
deliciously,  satisfying  his  desire  who  is  longing  for  the
refreshing  which  it  ministers ;  for  it  then  revives  and
soothes  the  sense  of  touch,  and  while  the  sense  of  touch  is
thus  soothed,  that  of  hearing  also  rejoices  and  delights  in
the  sound  and  whisper  of  the  gale  more  than  the  touch
in  the  contact  of  the  air,  because  the  sense  of  hearing  is
more  spiritual,  or,  to  speak  with  greater  correctness,  is
more  nearly  connected  with  the  spiritual  than  is  that  of
touch,  and  the  delight  thereof  is  more  spiritual  than  is
that  of  the  touch.  So  also,  inasmuch  as  this  touch  of
God  greatly  satisfies  and  comforts  the  substance  of  the
soul,  sweetly  fulfilling  its  longing  to  be  received  into
union ;  this  union,  or  touch,  is  called  amorous  gales,
because,  as  I  said  before,  the  perfections  of  the  Beloved
are  by  it  communicated  to  the  soul  lovingly  and  sweetly,
and  through  it  the  whisper  of  knowledge  to  the  under-
standing. It  is  called  whisper,  because,  as  the  whisper  of
the  air  penetrates  subtilely  into  the  organ  of  hearing,  so
this  most  subtile  and  delicate  knowledge  enters  with
marvellous  sweetness  and  delight  into  the  inmost
substance  of  the  soul,  which  is  the  highest  of  all  delights.

20.  The  reason  is  that  substantial  knowledge  is  now
communicated  intelligibly  and  stripped  of  all  accidents
and  images,  to  the  understanding,  which  philosophers
call  passive  or  passible,  because  inactive  without  any
natural   efforts   of  its  own   during   this    communication.


[STAN.  XIV.,  XV,]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        251

This  is  the  highest  dehght  of  the  soul,  because  it  is  in  the
understanding,  which  is  the  seat  of  fruition,  as  theologians
teach,  and  fruition  is  the  vision  of  God.  Some  theologians
think,  inasmuch  as  this  whisper  signifies  the  substantial
intelligence,  that  our  father  Elias  had  a  vision  of  God  in
the  delicate  whisper  of  the  air,  which  he  heard  on  the
mount  at  the  mouth  of  the  cave.  The  Holy  Scripture
calls  it  '  the  whistling  of  a  gentle  wind,'*  because
knowledge  is  begotten  in  the  understanding  by  the  subtile
and  delicate  communication  of  the  Spirit.  The  soul  calls
it  here  the  whisper  of  the  amorous  gales,  because  it  flows
into  the  understanding  from  the  loving  communication  of
the  perfections  of  the  Beloved.  This  is  why  it  is  called
the  whisper  of  the  amorous  gales.

21.  This  divine  whisper  which  enters  in  by  the  ear  of
the  soul  is  not  only  substantial  knowledge,  but  a  manifesta-
tion also  of  the  truths  of  the  Divinity,  and  a  revelation  of
the  secret  mysteries  thereof.  For  in  general,  in  the  Holy
Scriptures,  every  communication  of  God  said  to  enter  in
by  the  ear  is  a  manifestation  of  pure  truths  to  the  under-
standing, or  a  revelation  of  the  secrets  of  God.  These
are  revelations  or  purely  spiritual  visions,  and  are  com-
municated directly  to  the  soul  without  the  intervention  of
the  senses,  and  thus,  what  God  communicates  through
the  spiritual  ear  is  most  profound  and  most  certain.
When  St.  Paul  would  express  the  greatness  of  the  revela-
tions made  to  him,  he  did  not  say,  I  saw  or  I  perceived
secret  words  :  but,  '  I  heard  secret  words  which  it  is  not
granted  to  man  to  utter.' f  It  is  thought  that  St.  Paul
also  saw  God,  as  our  father  Elias,  in  the  whisper  of  a

*  3  Kings  xix.  12.  j  2  Cor.  xii.  4.


252  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]

gentle  air.  For  as  '  faith  cometh  by  hearing,' — so  the
Apostle  teaches — that  is  by  the  hearing  of  the  material
ear,  so  also  that  which  the  faith  teaches,  the  intelligible
truth,  cometh  by  spiritual  hearing.

22.  The  prophet  Job,  speaking  to  God,  when  He
revealed  Himself  unto  him,  teaches  the  same  doctrine,
saying  :  '  With  the  hearing  of  the  ear  I  have  heard  Thee,
but  now  my  eye  seeth  Thee.'*  It  is  clear  from  this  that
to  hear  with  the  ear  of  the  soul,  is  to  see  with  the  eye  of
the  passive  understanding.  He  does  not  say  I  heard  with
the  hearing  of  my  ears,  but  with  the  hearing  of  my  ear ;
nor,  with  the  seeing  of  my  eyes,  but  with  the  eye  of  my
understanding  ;  the  hearing  of  the  soul  is,  therefore,  the
vision  of  the  understanding.

23.  Still  we  are  not  to  think  that  what  the  soul
perceives,  though  pure  truth,  can  be  the  perfect  and  clear
fruition  of  Heaven.  For  though  it  be  free  from  accidents,
as  I  said  before,  +  it  is  dim  and  not  clear,  because  it  is
contemplation,  which  in  this  life,  as  St.  Dionysius  saith,
'  is  a  ray  of  darkness,' |  and  thus  we  may  say  that  it  is  a
ray  and  an  image  of  fruition,  because  it  is  in  the  under-
standing, which  is  the  seat  of  fruition.  This  substantial
truth,  called  here  a  whisper,  is  the  "eyes  desired  "  which
the  Beloved  showed  to  the  bride,  who  unable  to  bear  the
vision  cried,  '  Turn  them  away,  O  my  Beloved.' §

24.  There    is    a    passage    in    the    book   of  Job   which

greatly  confirms  what  I  have  said  of  rapture  and  betrothal,

and  because  I   consider  it  to  be  much   to  the  purpose,  I

*  Job  xlii.  5.  t  §  20.

[+  De  Mystica  Theologia,  cap.    i,    tt/K)?    ti)v    VTrepovcrLov    rov    Beiov

(TKOTOVS   aKTtl'tt.]

§  Cant.  \i.  4.


[STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        253

will  give  it  here,  though  it  may  delay  us  a  little,  and
explain  those  portions  of  it  which  belong  to  my  subject.
The  explanation  shall  be  short,  and  when  I  shall  have
made  it,  I  shall  go  on  to  explain  the  other  stanza.  The
passage  is  as  follows  :  "  To  me  there  was  spoken  a  secret
word,'  saith  Eliphaz  the  Themanite,  '  and  as  it  were  my
ear  by  stealth  received  the  veins  of  its  whisper.  In  the
horror  of  a  vision  by  night,  when  deep  sleep  is  wont  to
hold  men,  fear  held  me  and  trembling,  and  all  my  bones
were  made  sore  afraid  :  and  when  the  spirit  passed  before
me  the  hair  of  my  flesh  stood  upright.  There  stood  one
whose  countenance  I  knew  not,  an  image  before  mine
eyes,  and  I  heard  the  voice  as  it  were  of  a  gentle
wind.'*

25.  This  passage  contains  almost  all  I  said  about
rapture  in  the  thirteenth  stanza,  where  the  bride  says  :
'  Turn  them  away,  O  my  Beloved.'  The  '  word  spoken  in
secret  '  to  Eliphaz,  is  that  secret  communication  which
by  reason  of  its  greatness  the  soul  was  not  able  to  endure,
and,  therefore,  cried  out  :  '  Turn  them  away,  O  my
Beloved.'  Eliphaz  says  that  his  '  ear  as  it  were  by
stealth  received  the  veins  of  its  whisper.'  By  that  is
meant  the  pure  substance  which  the  understanding
receives,  for  the  '  veins  '  here  denote  the  interior  substance.
The  whisper  is  that  communication  and  touch  of  the
virtues  whereby  the  said  substance  is  communicated  to
the  understanding.  It  is  called  a  whisper  because  of  its
great  gentleness.  And  the  soul  calls  it  the  amorous
gales  because  it  is  lovingly  communicated.  It  is  said  to
be  received  as  it  were  by  stealth,  for  as  that  which  is

*  Job  iv.  12 — 16.


254  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN.  XIV.,  XV.

stolen  is  alienated,  so  this  secret  is  alien  to  man,  speaking
in  the  order  of  nature,  because  that  which  he  received
does  not  appertain  to  him  naturally,  and  thus  it  was  not
lawful  for  him  to  receive  it ;  neither  was  it  lawful  for  St.
Paul  to  repeat  what  he  heard.  For  this  reason  the
prophet  saith  twice :  '  My  secret  to  myself,  my  secret  to
myself.'*

26.  When  Eliphaz  speaks  of  the  horror  of  the  vision
by  night,  and  of  the  fear  and  trembling  that  seized  upon
him,  he  refers  to  the  awe  and  dread  that  comes  upon  the
soul  naturally  in  rapture,  because  in  its  natural  strength  it
is  unable,  as  I  said  before,!  to  endure  the  communica-
tion of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  prophet  gives  us  to  under-
stand that  as  when  sleep  is  about  to  fall  upon  men,  a
certain  vision  which  they  call  a  nightmare  is  wont  to
oppress  and  terrify  them  in  the  interval  between  sleeping
and  waking,  which  is  the  moment  of  the  approach  of  sleep,
so  in  the  spiritual  passage  between  the  sleep  of  natural
ignorance  and  the  waking  of  the  supernatural  understand-
ing, which  is  the  beginning  of  an  ecstasy  or  rapture,  the
spiritual  vision  then  revealed,  makes  the  soul  fear  and
tremble.

27.  '  All  my  bones  were  affrighted,'  that  is,  were
shaken  and  disturbed  ;  by  this  he  meant  a  certain  disloca-
tion of  the  bones  which  takes  place  when  the  soul  falls
into  an  ecstacy.  This  is  clearly  expressed  by  Daniel  when
he  saw  the  angel,  saying :  '  O  my  lord,  at  the  sight  of  thee
my  joints  are  loosed.' t  '  When  the  spirit  passed  before
me,'  that  is  when  my  spirit  was  made  to  transcend  the
ways  and  limitations  of  nature  in  ecstasies  and  raptures.
*  Is.  xxiv.  16.  t  Stan.  xiii.  §1.  |  Dan.  x.  16.


[STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        255

'  The  hair  of  my  flesh  stood  upright,  that  is,  my  body  was
chilled,  and  the  flesh  contracted  like  that  of  a  dead  man.

28.  '  There  stood  One,'  that  is  God,  Who  reveals
Himself  after  this  manner.  '  Whose  countenance  I  knew
not ; '  in  these  communications  or  visions,  however  high
they  may  be,  the  soul  neither  knows  nor  beholds  the  face
and  being  of  God.  '  An  image  before  my  eyes  ;  '  that  is,
the  knowledge  of  the  secret  words  was  most  deep,  as  it
were  the  image  and  face  of  God  ;  but  still  this  is  not  the
essential  vision  of  God.  '  I  heard  the  voice  as  it  were  of
a  gentle  wind,'  this  is  the  whisper  of  the  amorous  gales —
that  is,  of  the  Beloved  of  the  soul.

29.  But  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  these  visits  of
God  are  always  attended  by  such  terrors  and  distress  of
nature ;  that  happens  to  them  only  who  are  entering  the
state  of  illumination  and  perfection,  and  in  this  kind  of
communications ;  for  in  others  they  come  with  great
sweetness.


STANZA    XV.

'  The  tranquil  night.'  In  this  spiritual  sleep  in  the  bosom
of  the  Beloved  the  soul  is  in  possession  and  fruition  of
all  the  calm,  repose,  and  quiet  of  a  peaceful  night,
and  receives  at  the  same  time  in  God  a  certain  dim
unfathomable  divine  intelligence.  This  is  the  reason
why  it  says  that  the  Beloved  is  to  it  the  tranquil  night.

2.     '  At  the  approaches  of  the  dawn.'     This  tranquil
night  is  not  like  a  night  of  darkness,  but  rather  like  the


256  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XVL]

night  when  the  sunrise  is  drawing  nigh.  This  tranquilHty
and  repose  in  God  is  not  all  darkness  to  the  soul,  as  the
dark  night  is,  but  rather  tranquilhty  and  repose  in  the
divine  light  and  in  a  new  knowledge  of  God,  whereby  the
mind,  most  sweetly  tranquil,  is  raised  to  a  divine  light.

3.  This  divine  light  is  here  very  appropriately  called
the  approaches  of  the  dawn,  that  is,  the  twilight ;  for  as
the  twilight  of  the  morn  disperses  the  darkness  of  the
night  and  reveals  the  light  of  day,  so  the  mind,  tranquil
and  reposing  in  God,  is  raised  up  from  the  darkness  of
natural  knowledge  to  the  morning  light  of  the  supernatural
knowledge  of  God,  not  clear,  indeed,  as  I  have  said,  but
dim,  like  the  night  at  the  approaches  of  the  dawn.  For
as  it  is  then  neither  wholly  night  nor  wholly  day,  but  as
they  say  twilight,  so  this  solitude  and  divine  repose  is
neither  perfectly  illumined  by  the  divine  light,  nor  yet
perfectly  alien  from  it.

4.  In  this  tranquillity  the  understanding  is  lifted  up
in  a  strange  way  above  its  natural  comprehension  to  the
divine  light :  it  is  like  a  man  who,  after  a  profound  sleep,
opens  his  eyes  to  unexpected  light.  This  knowledge  is
referred  to  by  David  when  he  says :  '  I  have  watched,  and
am  become  as  the  lonely  sparrow  on  the  housetop :  '*
that  is,  I  opened  the  eyes  of  my  understanding,  and  was
raised  up  above  all  natural  comprehension,  lonely,  without
them,  on  the  housetop,  lifted  up  above  all  earthly
considerations.  He  says  that  he  was  '  become  as  the
lonely  sparrow,'  because  in  this  kind  of  contemplation  the
spirit  has  the  properties  of  the  sparrow.  These  are  five
in  number  :

*  Ps.  ci.  8.


'  [STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        257

1.  It  frequents  in  general  high  places,  and  the  spirit
in  this  state  rises  to  the  highest  contemplation.

2.  It  is  ever  turning  its  face  in  the  direction  of  the
wind,  and  the  spirit  turns  its  affections  thither  whence
the  spirit  of  love,  which  is  God.

3.  It  is  in  general  solitary,  abstaining  from  the
companionship  of  others,  and  flying  away  when  any
approach  it :  so  the  spirit  in  contemplation  is  far  away
from  all  worldly  thoughts,  lonely  in  its  avoidance  of  them ;
neither  does  it  consent  to  anything  except  to  this  solitude
in  God.

4.  It  sings  most  sweetly,  and  so  also  does  the  spirit  at
this  time  sing  unto  God ;  for  the  praises  which  it  offers
up  proceed  from  the  sweetest  love,  most  pleasing  to  itself,
and  most  precious  in  the  sight  of  God.

5.  It  is  of  no  definite  colour  ;  so  also  is  the  perfect
spirit,  which  in  this  ecstacy  is  not  only  without  any  tinge
of  sensual  affection  or  self-love,  but  also  without  an^^
particular  consideration  of  the  things  of  heaven  or  earth  ;
neither  can  it  give  any  account  whatever  of  them,  because
it  has  entered  into  the  abyss  of  the  knowledge  of  God.

'The  silent  music'
5.  In  this  silence  and  tranquillity  of  the  night,  and  in
this  knowledge  of  the  divine  light,  the  soul  discerns  a
marvellous  arrangement  and  disposition  of  God's  wisdom
in  the  diversities  of  His  creatures  and  operations.  All
these,  and  each  one  of  them,  have  a  certain  corres-
pondence with  God,  whereby  each,  by  a  voice  peculiar  to
itself,  proclaims  what  there  is  in  itself  of  God,  so  as  to
form  a  concert  of  sublimest  melody,  transcending  all  the
harmonies  of  the  world.    This  is  the  silent  music,  because


258  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]

it  is  knowledge  tranquil  and  calm,  without  audible  voice ;
and  thus  the  sweetness  of  music  and  the  repose  of  silence
are  enjoyed  in  it.  The  soul  says  that  the  Beloved  is  silent
music,  because  this  harmony  of  spiritual  music  is  in  Him
understood  and  felt.  He  is  not  this  only,  He  is  also —
'  The  murmuring  solitude.'

6.  This  is  almost  the  same  as  the  silent  music.  For
though  the  music  is  inaudible  to  the  senses  and  the
natural  powers,  it  is  a  solitude  most  full  of  sound  to  the
spiritual  powers.  These  powers  being  in  solitude,
emptied  of  all  forms  and  natural  apprehensions,  may  well
receive  in  spirit,  like  a  resounding  voice,  the  spiritual
impression  of  the  majesty  of  God  in  Himself  and  in  His
creatures ;  as  it  happened  to  St.  John,  who  heard  in
spirit  as  it  were  '  the  voice  of  harpers  harping  on  their
harps.'*  St.  John  heard  this  in  spirit :  it  was  not
material  harps  that  he  heard,  but  a  certain  knowledge
that  he  had  of  the  praises  of  the  blessed,  which  every  one
of  them,  each  in  his  own  degree  of  glory,  is  continually
singing  before  God.  It  is  as  it  were  music.  For  as
everyone  of  the  saints  had  the  gifts  of  God  in  a  different  way,
so  every  one  of  them  sings  His  praises  in  a  different  way,
and  yet  all  harmonise  in  one  concert  of  love,  as  in  music.

7.  In  the  same  way,  in  this  tranquil  contemplation,
the  soul  beholds  all  creatures,  not  only  the  highest,  but  the
lowest  also,  each  one  according  to  the  gift  of  God  to  it,
sending  forth  the  voice  of  its  witness  to  what  God  is.  It
beholds  each  one  magnifying  Him  in  its  own  way,  and
possessing  Him  according  to  its  particular  capacity ;  and
thus  all  these  voices  together  unite  in  one  strain  in  praise

*  Apoc.  xiv.  2.


[STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        259

of  God's  greatness,  wisdom,  and  marvellous  knowledge.
This  is  the  meaning  of  those  words  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in
the  book  of  Wisdom  :  '  The  Spirit  of  our  Lord  hath
replenished  the  whole  world,  and  that  which  containeth
all  things  hath  the  knowledge  of  the  voice.'*  '  The
voice '  is  the  murmuring  solitude,  which  the  soul  is  said
to  know,  namety,  the  witness  which  all  things  bear  to
God.  Inasmuch  as  the  soul  hears  this  music  only  in
solitude  and  in  estrangement  from  all  outward  things,  it
calls  it  silent  music  and  murmuring  solitude.  These  are
the  Beloved.

'  The  supper  which  revives,  and  enkindles  love.'

8.  Lovers  find  recreation,  satisfaction,  and  love  in
feasts.  And  because  the  Beloved  in  this  sweet  com-
munication produces  these  three  effects  in  the  soul.  He  is
here  said  to  be  the  supper  that  revives,  and  enkindles
love.  In  Holy  Scripture  supper  signifies  the  divine
vision,  for  as  supper  is  the  conclusion  of  the  da3^'s  labours,
and  the  beginning  of  the  night's  repose,  so  the  soul  in
this  tranquil  knowledge  is  made  to  feel  that  its  trials  are
over,  the  possession  of  good  begun,  and  its  love  of  God
increased.  Hence,  then,  the  Beloved  is  to  the  soul  the
supper  that  revives,  in  being  the  end  of  its  trials,  and  that
enkindles  love,  in  being  the  beginning  of  the  fruition  of  all
good.

g.  That  we  may  see  more  clearly  how  the  Bridegroom
is  the  supper  of  the  soul,  we  must  refer  to  those  words  of
the  Beloved  in  the  Apocalypse :  '  Behold,  I  stand  at  the
door  and  knock.  If  any  man  shall  hear  my  voice,  and
open  to  me  the  gate,  I  will  enter  in  to  him,  and  will  sup

*  Wisd.  i.  7.

S    2


260  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN.  XIV.  XV.]

with  him,  and  he  with  Me.'*  It  is  evident  from  these
words,  that  He  brings  the  supper  with  Him,  which  is
nothing  else  but  His  own  sweetness  and  dehghts,  wherein
He  rejoiceth  Himself,  and  which  He,  uniting  Himself  to
the  soul,  communicates  to  it,  making  it  a  partaker  of  His
joy  :  for  this  is  the  meaning  of  '  I  will  sup  with  him,  and
he  with  Me.'  These  words  describe  the  effect  of  the
divine  union  of  the  soul  with  God,  wherein  it  shares  the
very  goods  of  God  Himself,  Who  communicates  them
graciously  and  abundantly  to  it.  Thus  the  Beloved  is
Himself  the  supper  which  revives,  and  enkindles  love,
refreshing  the  soul  with  His  abundance,  and  enkindling
its  love  in  His  graciousness.

10.  But  before  I  proceed  to  explain  the  stanzas  which
follow,  I  must  observe  that,  in  the  state  of  betrothal,
wherein  the  soul  enjoys  this  tranquillity,  and  wherein  it
receives  all  that  it  can  receive  in  this  life,  we  are  not  to
suppose  its  tranquillity  to  be  perfect,  but  that  the  higher
part  of  it  is  tranquil ;  for  the  sensual  part,  except  in  the
state  of  spiritual  marriage,  never  loses  all  its  imperfect
habits,  and  its  powers  are  never  wholly  subdued,  as  I
shall  show  hereafter,  f  What  the  soul  receives  now,  is  all
that  it  can  receive  in  the  state  of  betrothal,  for  in  that  of
the  marriage  the  blessings  are  greater.  Though  the
bride-soul  has  great  joy  in  these  visits  of  the  Beloved  in
the  state  of  betrothal,  still  it  has  to  suffer  from  His  absence,
to  endure  trouble  and  afflictions  in  the  lower  part,  and  at
the  hands  of  the  devil.  But  all  this  ceases  in  the  state  of
spiritual  marriage.

*  Apoc.  iii.  20.  t  Stanza  xxvi.


[STAN.  XIV.,  XV.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.       261

.  NOTE.

The  bride  now  in  possession  of  the  virtues  in  their
perfection  whereby  she  is  ordinarily  rejoicing  in  peace
when  the  Beloved  visits  her,  is  now  and  then  in  the
fruition  of  the  fragrance  and  sweetness  of  those  virtues  in
the  highest  degree,  because  the  Beloved  touches  them
within  her,  just  as  the  sweetness  and  beauty  of  the  lilies
and  other  flowers  when  in  their  bloom  are  perceived
when  we  handle  them.  For  in  many  of  these  visits  the
soul  discerns  within  itself  all  its  virtues  which  God  has
given  it  ;  He  shedding  light  upon  them.  The  soul  now,
with  marvellous  joy  and  sweetness  of  love,  binds  them
together  and  presents  them  to  the  Beloved  as  a  nosegay
of  beautiful  flowers,  and  the  Beloved  in  accepting  them
— for  He  truly  accepts  them  then — and  accepts  thereby  a
great  service.  All  this  takes  place  within  the  soul,  feeling
that  the  Beloved  is  within  it  as  on  His  own  couch,  for  the
soul  presents  itself  with  the  virtues  which  is  the  greatest
service  it  can  render  Him,  and  thus  this  is  one  of  the
greatest  joys  which  in  its  interior  converse  with  God,  the
soul  is  wont  to  receive  in  presents  of  this  kind  made  to
the  Beloved.

2.  The  devil,  beholding  this  prosperity  of  the  soul,  and
in  his  great  malice  envying  all  the  good  he  sees  in  it,  now
uses  all  his  power,  and  has  recourse  to  all  his  devices,  in
order  to  thwart  it  if  possible,  even  in  the  slightest  degree.
He  thinks  it  of  more  consequence  to  keep  back  the  soul,
even  for  an  instant,  from  this  abundance,  bliss,  and
delight,  than  to  make  others  fall  into  many  and  mortal
sins.     Other   souls  have   little   or  nothing  to  lose,  while


262  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XVI.]

this  soul  has  much,  having  gained  many  and  great
treasures ;  for  the  loss  of  one  grain  of  refined  gold  is
greater  than  the  loss  of  many  of  the  baser  metals.

3.  The  devil  here  has  recourse  to  the  sensual  appetites,
though  now  they  can  give  him  generally  but  little  or  no
help  because  they  are  mortified,  and  because  he  cannot
turn  them  to  any  great  account  in  distracting  the  imagina-
tion. Sometimes  he  stirs  up  many  movements  in  the
sensitive  part  of  the  soul,  and  causes  other  vexations,
spiritual  as  well  as  sensual,  from  which  the  soul  is  unable
to  deliver  itself  until  our  Lord  shall  send  His  angel,  as  it
is  written,  '  The  angel  of  our  Lord  shall  put  in  himself
about  them  that  fear  Him,  and  shall  deliver  them  ;  '*  and
so  establish  peace,  both  in  the  spiritual  and  sensitive  parts
of  the  soul.  With  a  view  to  show  forth  this  truth,  and  to
ask  this  favour,  the  soul,  apprehensive  by  experience  of
the  craft  which  the  devil  makes  use  of  to  thwart  this  good,
addressing  itself  to  the  angels,  whose  function  it  is  to
succour  it  at  this  time  by  putting  the  evil  spirits  to  flight,
speaks  as  in  the  following  stanza  : —

STANZA  XVL

Catch  us  the  foxes.

For  our  viveyarcL  hath  flourished ;

While  of  roses

We  tnake  a  nosegay,
And  let  no  one  appear  on  the  hill.

The  soul,  anxious  that  this  interior  delight  of  love,  which
is  the  flowers  of  the  vineyard,  should  not  be  interrupted,
either  by  envious  and  malicious  devils,  or  the  raging
desires  of  sensuality,  or  the  various  comings  and  goings  of

*   Ps.  xxxiii.  S.


[STAN.  XVI.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  263

the  imagination,  or  any  other  consciousness  or  presence
of  created  things,  calls  upon  the  angels  to  seize  and
hinder  all  these  from  interrupting  its  practice  of  interior
love,  in  the  joy  and  sweetness  of  which  the  soul  and  the
Son  of  God  communicate  and  delight  in  the  virtues  and
graces.
'Catch  us  the  foxes,  for  our  vineyard  hath  flourished.'

2.  The  vineyard  is  the  plantation  in  this  holy  soul  of
all  the  virtues  which  minister  to  it  the  wine  of  sweet  taste.
The  vineyard  of  the  soul  is  then  flourishing  when  it  is
united  in  will  to  the  Bridegroom,  and  delights  itself  in
Him  in  all  the  virtues.  Sometimes,  as  I  have  just  said,
the  memory  and  the  fancy  are  assailed  by  various  forms
and  imaginings,  and  divers  motions  and  desires  trouble
the  sensual  part.  The  great  variety  and  diversity  of  these
made  David  say,  when  he  felt  the  inconvenience  and  the
trouble  of  them  as  he  was  drinking  of  the  sweet  wine  of
the  spirit,  thirsting  greatly  after  God :  '  For  Thee  my
soul  hath  thirsted,  for  Thee  my  flesh,  O  how  many
ways.'*

3.  Here  the  soul  calls  the  whole  troop  of  desires  and
stirrings  of  sense,  foxes,  because  of  the  great  resemblance
between  them  at  this  time.  As  foxes  pretend  to  be  asleep
that  they  may  pounce  upon  their  prey  when  it  comes  in
their  way,  so  all  the  desires  and  powers  of  sense  in  the
soul  are  asleep  until  the  flowers  of  virtue  grow,  flourish,
and  bloom.  Then  the  desires  and  powers  of  sense  awake
to  resist  the  Spirit  and  domineer.  '  The  flesh  lusteth
against  the  spirit,'!  and  as  the  inclination  of  it  is  towards
the  sensual  desires,  it  is  disgusted  as  soon  as  it  tastes  of

*  Ps,  Ixii.  2.  f  Gal.  v.  17.


264  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XVI.]

the    Spirit,    and    herein    the    desires    prove     extremely
troublesome  to  spiritual  sweetness.

'  Catch  us  the  foxes.'

4.  The  evil  spirits  now  molest  the  soul  in  two  ways.
They  vehemently  excite  the  desires,  and  employ  them
with  other  imaginations  to  assail  the  peaceful  and
flourishing  kingdom  of  the  soul.  Then,  and  this  is  much
worse,  when  they  do  not  succeed  in  stirring  up  the
desires,  they  assail  the  soul  with  bodily  pains  and  noises
in  order  to  distract  it.  And,  what  is  still  more  serious,
they  fight  with  spiritual  horror  and  dread,  and  sometimes
with  fearful  torments,  which,  at  this  time,  if  God  permits
them,  they  can  most  effectually  bring  about,  for  inasmuch
as  the  soul  is  now  spiritually  detached,  so  as  to  perform
its  spiritual  exercises,  the  devil  being  himself  a  spirit
presents  himself  before  it  with  great  ease.

5.  At  other  times  the  evil  spirit  assails  the  soul  with
other  horrors,  before  it  begins  to  have  the  fruition  of  the
sweet  flowers,  when  God  is  beginning  to  draw  it  forth  out
of  the  house  of  sense  that  it  may  enter  on  the  interior
exercises  in  the  garden  of  the  Bridegroom,  for  he  knows
well  that  once  entered  into  this  state  of  recollection  it  is
there  so  protected  that,  notwithstanding  all  he  can  do,
he  cannot  hurt  it.  Very  often,  too,  when  the  devil  goes
forth  to  meet  the  soul,  the  soul  becomes  quickly  re-
collected in  the  secret  depths  of  its  interior,  where  it  finds
great  sweetness  and  protection  ;  then  those  terrors  of
satan  are  so  far  off  that  they  not  only  produce  no  fear,
but  are  even  the  occasion  of  peace  and  joy.  The  bride,
in  the  canticle,  speaks  of  these  terrors  saying :   '  My  soul


[STAN.  XVI.]       OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.         265

troubled  me  for  the  chariots  of  Aminadab.'*  Aminadab
is  the  evil  spirit,  and  his  chariots  are  his  assaults  upon
the  soul,  which  he  makes  with  great  violence,  noise,  and
confusion.

6.  The  bride  also  says  what  the  soul  says  here,
namely  :  '  Catch  us  the  little  foxes  that  destroy  the  vine-
yards ;  for  our  vineyard  hath  flourished,'!  She  does  not
say,  catch  me,  but  catch  us,  because  she  is  speaking  of
herself  and  the  Beloved ;  for  they  are  one,  and  enjoy  the
flourishing  of  the  vineyard  together.

•  7.  The  reason  why  the  vineyard  is  said  to  be
flourishing  and  not  bearing  fruit  is  this  :  the  soul  in  this
life  has  the  fruition  of  virtues,  however  perfect  they  may
be,  only  in  their  flower,  because  the  fruit  of  them  is
reserved  for  the  life  to  come.

'  While  of  roses  we  make  a  nosegay.'

8.  Now,  at  this  time,  while  the  soul  is  rejoicing  in  the
flourishing  of  the  vineyard,  and  delighting  itself  in  the
bosom  of  the  Beloved,  all  its  virtues  are  perfect,
exhibiting  themselves  to  the  soul,  and  sending  forth  great
sweetness  and  delight.  The  soul  feels  them  to  be  in
itself  and  in  God  so  as  to  seem  to  be  one  vineyard  most
flourishing  and  pleasing  belonging  to  both,  wherein  they
feed  and  delight.  Then  the  soul  binds  all  its  virtues
together,  makes  acts  of  love  in  each  of  them  separately,
and  in  all  together,  and  then  offers  them  all  to  the
Beloved,  with  great  tenderness  of  love  and  sweetness,  and  in
this  the  Beloved  helps  it,  for  without  His  help  and  favour,
it  cannot  make  this  union  and  oblation  of  virtue  to  the

*  Cant.  vi.  11.  f  Cant.  ii.  15.


266  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAX.  XVI.]

Beloved.     Hence  it  says  :   '  we  make   a  nosegay,'  that  is
the  Beloved  and  myself.

g.  This  union  of  the  virtues  is  called  a  nosegay ;  for
as  a  nosegay  is  cone-like  in  form,  and  a  cone  is  strong,
containing  and  embracing  many  pieces  firmly  joined
together,  so  this  cone-like  nosegay  of  the  virtues  which
the  soul  makes  for  the  Beloved,  is  the  uniform  perfection
of  the  soul  which  firmly  and  solidly  contains  and
embraces  many  perfections,  great  virtues,  and  rich
endowments  ;  for  all  the  perfections  and  virtues  of  the
soul  unite  together  to  form  but  one.  And  while  this
perfection  is  being  accomplished,  and  when  accomplished,
offered  to  the  Beloved  on  the  part  of  the  soul,  it  becomes
necessary  to  catch  the  foxes  that  they  may  not  hinder
this  mutual  interior  communication.  The  soul  prays
not  only  that  this  nosegay  may  be  carefully  made,  but
also  adds  :   '  And  let  no  one  appear  on  the  hill.'

10.  This  divine  interior  exercise  requires  solitude  and
detachment  from  all  things,  whether  in  the  lower  part  of
the  soul,  which  is  that  of  sense,  or  in  the  higher,  which  is
the  rational.  These  two  divisions  comprise  all  the
faculties  and  senses  of  man,  and  are  here  called  the  hill ;
because  all  our  natural  notions  and  desires  being  in  them,
as  quarry  on  a  hill,  the  devil  lays  in  wait  among  these
notions  and  desires,  in  order  that  he  may  injure  the  soul.

'  And  let  no  one  appear  on  the  hill.'

11.  That  is,  let  no  representation  or  image  of  an}'
object  whatever,  appertaining  to  any  of  these  faculties  or
senses,  appear  in  the  presence  of  the  soul  and  the  Bride-
groom :  in  other  words,  let  the  spiritual  powers  of  the
soul,  memory,  understanding,  and  will,  be  divested  of  all


[STAN.  XVI,]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  267

notions,  particular  inclinations  or  considerations  what-
soever ;  and  let  all  the  senses  and  faculties  of  the  body,
interior  as  well  as  exterior,  the  imagination,  the  fancy,
the  sight  and  hearing,  and  the  rest,  be  divested  of  all
occasions  of  distractions,  of  all  forms,  images,  and
representations,  and  of  all  other  natural  operations.

12.  The  soul  speaks  in  this  way  because  it  is  necessary
for  the  perfect  fruition  of  this  communication  of  God,
that  all  the  senses  and  powers,  both  interior  and  exterior,
should  be  disencumbered  and  emptied  of  their  proper
objects  and  operations  ;  for  the  more  active  they  are,
the  greater  will  be  the  hindrance  which  they  will
occasion.  The  soul,  having  attained  to  a  certain
interior  union  of  love,  the  spiritual  faculties  of  it  are  no
longer  active,  and  still  less  those  of  the  body  ;  for  now  that
the  union  of  love  is  actually  wrought  in  love,  the  faculties
of  the  soul  cease  from  their  exertions,  because  now  that
the  goal  is  reached,  all  employment  of  means  is  at  an  end.
What  the  soul  at  this  time  has  to  do  is  to  wait  lovingly
upon  God,  and  this  waiting  is  love  in  a  continuation  of
unitive  love.  Let  no  one,  therefore,  appear  on  the  hill,
but  the  will  only  waiting  on  the  Beloved  in  the  offering
up  of  self  and  of  all  the  virtues  in  the  way  described.


NOTE.

For  the  clearer  understanding  of  the  following  stanza,  we
must  keep  in  mind  that  the  absence  of  the  Beloved,  from
which  the  soul  suffers  in  the  state  of  spiritual  betrothal,  is
an  exceedingly  great  affliction,  and  at  times  greater  than
all  other  trials  whatever.     The  reason  is  this  :  the  love  of


268  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XVII.]

the  soul  for  God  is  now  so  vehement  and  deep,  that  the
pain  of  His  absence  is  vehement  and  deep  also.  This
pain  is  increased  also  by  the  annoyance  which  comes
from  intercourse  with  creatures,  which  is  very  great ;  for
the  soul,  under  the  pressure  of  its  quickened  desire  of
union  with  God,  finds  all  other  conversation  most  painful
and  difficult  to  endure.  It  is  like  a  stone  in  its  flight  to
the  place  whither  it  is  rapidly  tending ;  every  obstacle  it
meets  with  occasions  a  violent  shock.  And  as  the  soul
has  tasted  of  the  sweetness  of  the  Beloved's  visits,  which
are  more  desirable  than  gold  and  all  that  is  beautiful,  it
therefore  dreads  even  a  momentary  absence,  and  addresses
itself  as  follows  to  aridities,  and  to  the  Spirit  of  the
Bridegroom  : —


STANZA    XVn.

Killing  north  wind  cease.

Come,  south  wind,  that  awakcnest  love  I

Blow  through  my  gard,  n,

A)id  l:!t  lis  oaoiiis  jlozv.

And  the  Beloved  shall  feed  among  the  flowers.

Beside  the  causes  mentioned  in  the  foregoing  stanza,
spiritual  dryness  also  hinders  the  fruition  of  this  interior
sweetness  of  which  I  have  been  speaking,  and  afraid  of  it
the  soul  has  recourse  to  two  expedients,  to  which  it  refers
in  the  present  stanza.  The  iirst  is  to  shut  the  door
against  it  by  unceasing  prayer  and  devotion.  The  second,
to  invoke  the  Holy  Ghost;  it  is  He  Who  drives  away
dryness  from  the  soul,  maintains  and  increases  its  love  of
the  Bridegroom — that  He  may  establish  in  it  the  practice


[STAN.  XVII.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  269

of  virtue,  and  all  this  to  the  end  that  the  Son  of  God,  its
bridegroom,  may  rejoice  and  delight  in  it  more  and  more,
for  its  only  aim  is  to  please  the  Beloved.
'  Killing  north  wind  cease.'

2.  The  north  wind  is  exceedirigl}^  cold  ;  it  dries  up
and  parches  flowers  and  plants,  and  at  the  least,  when  it
blows,  causes  them  to  draw  in  and  shrink.  So,  dryness
of  spirit  and  the  sensible  absence  of  the  Beloved,  because
they  produce  the  same  effect  on  the  soul,  exhausting  the
sweetness  and  fragrance  of  virtue,  are  here  called  the
killing  north  wind ;  for  all  the  virtues  and  affective
devotions  of  the  soul  are  then  dead.  Hence  the  soul
addresses  itself  to  it,  saying:  'Killing  north  wind  cease.'
These  words  mean  that  the  soul  applies  itself  to  spiritual
exercises,  in  order  to  escape  aridity.  But  the  communi-
cations of  God  are  now  so  interior  that  by  no  exertion  of
its  faculties  can  the  soul  attain  to  them  if  the  Spirit  of
the  Bridegroom  do  not  cause  these  movements  of  love.
The  soul,  therefore,  addresses  Him,  saying :

'  Come,  south  wind,  that  awakenest  love.'

3.  The  south  wind  is  another  wind  commonly  called
the  south-west  wind.  It  is  soft,  and  brings  rain ;  it
makes  the  grass  and  plants  grow,  flowers  to  blossom  and
scatter  their  perfume  abroad ;  in  short,  it  is  the  very
opposite  in  its  effects  of  the  north  wind.  By  it  is  meant
here  the  Holy  Ghost,  Who  awakeneth  love ;  for  when
this  divine  Breath  breathes  on  the  soul,  it  so  inflames  and
refreshes  it,  so  quickens  the  will,  and  stirs  up  the  desires,
which  were  before  low  and  asleep  as  to  the  love  of  God,
that    we    may    well    say  of  it  that   it   quickens  the    love


270  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN,  XVII]

between  Him  and  the  soul.  The  prayer  of  the  soul  to
the  Holy  Ghost  is  thus  expressed,  '  Blow  through  my
garden.'

4.  This  garden  is  the  soul  itself.  For  as  the  soul  said
of  itself  before,  that  it  was  a  flourishing  vineyard,  because
the  flowers  of  virtue  which  are  in  it  give  forth  the  wine  of
sweetness,  so  here  it  says  of  itself  that  it  is  a  garden,
because  the  flowers  of  perfection  and  the  virtues  are
planted  in  it,  flourish,  and  grow.

5.  Observe,  too,  that  the  expression  is  '  blow  through
my  garden,'  not  blow  in  it.  There  is  a  great  difference
between  God's  breathing  into  the  soul,  and  through  it.
To  breathe  into  the  soul  is  to  infuse  into  it  graces,  gifts,
and  virtues ;  to  breathe  through  it  is,  on  the  part  of  God,
to  touch  and  move  its  virtues  and  perfections  now
possessed,  renewing  them  and  stirring  them  in  such  a
way  that  they  send  forth  their  marvellous  fragrance  and
sweetness.  Thus  aromatic  spices,  when  shaken  or
touched,  give  forth  the  abundant  odours  which  are  not
otherwise  so  distinctly  perceived.  The  soul  is  not  always
in  the  conscious  fruition  of  its  acquired  and  infused
virtues,  because,  in  this  life,  they  are  like  flowers  in  seed,
or  in  bud,  or  like  aromatic  spices  covered  over,  the
perfume  of  which  is  not  perceived  till  they  are  exposed
and  shaken.

6.  But  God  sometimes  is  so  merciful  to  the  bride-soul,
as — the  Holy  Ghost  breathing  meanwhile  through  the
flourishing  garden — to  open  these  buds  of  virtue  and
expose  the  aromatic  herbs  of  the  soul's  gifts,  perfections,
and  riches,  to  manifest  to  it  its  interior  treasures  and  to
reveal  to  it  all  its  beauty.     It  is  then  marvellous  to  behold,


[STAN.  XVII.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  271

and  sweet  to  feel,  the  abundance  of  the  gifts  now  revealed
in  the  soul,  and  the  beauty  of  the  flowers  of  virtue  now
flourishing  in  it.  No  language  can  describe  the  fragrance
which  every  one  of  them  diffuses,  each  according  to  its
kind.  This  state  of  the  soul  is  referred  to  in  the  words,
'  Let  its  odours  flow.'

7.  So  abundant  are  these  odours  at  times,  that  the
soul  seems  enveloped  in  delight  and  bathed  in  inestimable
bliss.  Not  only  is  it  conscious  itself  of  them,  but  they
even  overflow  it,  so  that  those  who  know  how  to  discern
these  things  can  perceive  them.  The  soul  in  this  state
seems  to  them  as  a  delectable  garden,  full  of  the  joys  and
riches  of  God.  This  is  observable  in  holy  souls,  not  only
when  the  flowers  open,  but  almost  always  ;  for  they  have
a  certain  air  of  grandeur  and  dignity  which  inspires  the
beholders  with  awe  and  reverence,  because  of  the  super-
natural effects  of  their  close  and  familiar  converse  with
God.  We  have  an  illustration  of  this  in  the  life  of  Moses,
the  sight  of  whose  face  the  people  could  not  bear,  by
reason  of  the  glory  that  rested  upon  it — the  effect  of  his
speaking  to  God  face  to  face.*

8.  While  the  Holy  Ghost  is  breathing  through  the
garden — this  is  His  visitation  of  the  soul — the  Bridegroom
Son  of  God  communicates  Himself  to  it  in  a  profound
way,  enamoured  of  it.  It  is  for  this  that  He  sends  the
Holy  Spirit  before  Him — as  He  sent  the  apostlesf — to
make  ready  the  chamber  of  the  soul  His  bride,  comforting
it  with  delight,  setting  its  garden  in  order,  opening  its
flowers,  revealing  its  gifts,  and  adorning  it  with  the
tapestry  of  graces.     The  bride-soul  longs  for  this  with  all

*  Exod.  xxxiv.  30.  t  St.  Luke  xxii.  8.


272  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XVII.]

its  might,  and  therefore  bids  the  north  wind  not  to  blow,
and  invokes  the  south  wind  to  blow  through  the  garden,
because  she  gains  much  here  at  once.

g.  The  bride  now  gains  the  fruition  of  all  her  virtues
in  their  sweetest  exercise.  She  gains  the  fruition  of  her
Beloved  in  them,  because  it  is  through  them  that  He
converses  with  her  in  most  intimate  love,  and  grants  her
favours  greater  than  any  of  the  past.  She  gains,  too,
that  her  Beloved  dehghts  more  in  her  because  of  the
actual  exercise  of  virtue,  which  is  what  pleases  her  most,
namely,  that  her  Beloved  should  be  pleased  with  her.
She  gains  also  the  permanent  continuance  of  the  sweet
fragrance  which  remains  in  the  soul  while  the  Bridegroom
is  present,  and  the  bride  entertains  Him  with  the  sweet-
ness of  her  virtues,  as  it  is  written  :  '  While  the  king  was
at  His  repose,'  that  is,  in  the  soul,  '  my  spikenard  sent
forth  its  odour.'*  The  spikenard  is  the  soul,  which
from  the  flowers  of  its  virtues  sends  forth  sweet
odours  to  the  Beloved,  Who  dwells  within  it  in  the
union  of  love,    •

10.  It  is  therefore  very  much  to  be  desired  that  every
soul  should  pray  the  Holy  Ghost  to  blow  through  its
garden,  that  the  divine  odours  of  God  may  flow.  And  as
this  is  so  necessary,  so  blissful  and  profitable  to  the  soul,
the  bride  desires  it,  and  prays  for  it,  in  the  words  of  the
canticle,  saying :  '  Arise,  north  wind,  and  come,  south
wind ;  blow  through  my  garden,  and  let  the  aromatical
spices  thereof  flow.'t  The  soul  prays  for  this,  not  because
of  the  delight  and  bliss  consequent  upon  it,  but  because  of
the  delight  it  ministers  to  the  Beloved,  and  because  it
*  Cant.  i.  II.  t  Cant.  iv.  i6.


[STAN.  XVII.]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  273

prepares  the  way  and  announces  the  presence  of  the
Son  of  God,  Who  cometh  to  rejoice  in  it.  Hence  the
soul  adds  : —

'  And  my  Beloved  shall  feed  among  the  flowers.'

11.  The  delight  which  the  Son  of  God  finds  now  in
the  soul  is  described  as  pasture.  This  word  expresses
most  forcibly  the  truth,  because  pasture  not  only
gladdeneth,  but  also  sustaineth.  Thus  the  Son  of  God
delights  in  the  soul,  in  the  delights  thereof,  and  is
sustained  in  them,  that  is.  He  abides  within  it  as  in  a
place  which  pleases  Him  exceedingly,  because  the  place
itself  really  delights  in  Him,  This,  I  believe,  is  the
meaning  of  those  words  recorded  in  the  proverbs  of
Solomon  :  '  My  delights  were  to  be  with  the  children  of
men  ;  '*  that  is,  when  thev  delight  to  be  with  Me,  Who
am  the  Son  of  God.

12.  Observe,  here,  that  it  is  not  said  that  the  Beloved
shall  feed  on  the  flowers,  but  that  He  shall  feed  among  the
flowers.  For,  as  the  communications  of  the  Beloved  are
in  the  soul  itself,  through  the  adornment  of  the  virtues,  it
follows  that  what  He  feeds  on  is  the  soul  which  He  trans-
formed into  Himself,  now  that  it  is  prepared  and  adorned
with  these  flowers  of  virtues,  graces,  and  perfections,
which  are  the  things  whereby,  and  among  which.  He
feeds.  These,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  are
sending  forth  in  the  soul  the  odours  of  sweetness  to  the
Son  of  God,  that  He  may  feed  there  the  more  in  the  love
thereof;  for  this  is  the  love  of  the  Bridegroom,  to  be
united  to  the  soul  amid  the  fragrance  of  the  flowers.

13.  The  bride  in   the  Canticle   has  observed  this,  for

*   Prov.  viii.  31.

-      T


274  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XVII.]

she  had  experience  of  it,  saying :  '  My  Beloved  is  gone
down  into  His  garden,  to  the  bed  of  aromatical  spices,  to
feed  in  the  gardens,  and  to  gather  hhes.  I  to  my  Beloved,
and  my  Beloved  to  me.  Who  feedeth  among  the  lilies,'*
that  is,  Who  feedeth  and  delighteth  in  my  soul,  which  is
His  garden,  among  the  lilies  of  my  virtues,  perfections,
and  gfraces.


NOTE.


In  the  state  of  spiritual  espousals,  the  soul  contemplating
its  great  riches  and  excellence,  but  unable  to  enter  into
the  possession  and  fruition  of  them  as  it  desires,  because
it  is  still  in  the  flesh,  often  suffers  exceedingly,  and  then
more  particularly  when  its  knowledge  of  them  becomes
more  profound.  It  then  sees  itself  in  the  body,  like  a
prince  in  prison,  subject  to  all  misery,  whose  authority  is
disregarded,  whose  territories  and  wealth  are  confiscated,
and  who,  of  his  former  substance  receives  but  a  miserable
dole.  How  greatly  he  suffers  any  one  may  see,  especially
when  his  household  is  no  longer  obedient,  and  his  slaves
and  servants,  forgetting  all  respect,  plunder  him  of  the
scanty  provisions  of  his  table.  Thus  is  it  with  the  soul  in
the  body,  for  when  God  mercifully  admits  it  to  a  foretaste
of  the  good  things  which  He  has  prepared  for  it,  the
wicked  servants  of  desire  in  the  sensual  part,  now  a  slave
of  disorderly  motions,  now  other  rebellious  movements,
rise  up  against  it  in  order  to  rob  it  of  its  good.

2.     The  soul  feels  itself  as  if  it  were  in  the   land   of
*  Cant.  vi.  i,  2.


[STAN.   XVIII.]      OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.      275

enemies,  tyrannised  over  by  the  stranger,  like  the  dead
among  the  dead.  Its  feehngs  are  those  which  the
prophet  Baruch  gave  vent  to  when  he  described  the
misery  of  Jacob's  captivity :  '  How  happeneth  it,  O
Israel,  that  thou  art  in  thy  enemies'  land ;  thou  art
grown  old  in  a  strange  country,  thou  art  defiled  with  the
dead  :  thou  art  counted  with  them  that  go  down  into
hell.'*  This  misery  of  the  soul,  in  the  captivity  of  the
body  is  thus  spoken  of  by  Jeremias,  saying :  '  Is  Israel  a
bondman  or  a  home-born  slave  ?  Why  then  is  he  become
a  prey  ?  The  lions  have  roared  upon  him,  and  have  made
a  noise.' f  The  lions  are  the  desires  and  the  rebellious
motions  of  the  tyrant  king  of  sensuality.  In  order  to
express  the  trouble  which  this  tyrant  occasions,  and  the
desire  of  the  soul  to  see  this  kingdom  of  sensuality  with
all  its  hosts  destroyed,  or  wholly  subject  to  the  spirit,  the
soul  lifting  up  its  eyes  to  the  Bridegroom,  as  to  one  who
can  effect  it,  speaks  against  those  rebellious  motions  in
the  words  of  the  next  stanza.


STANZA  XVIII.

0  nymphs  of  Judea  !

While  amid  the  flowers  and  the  rose-trees

The  amber  sends  forth  its  ■perfume.

Tarry  in  the  suburbs,

And  touch  not  our  thresholds.

It  is  the  bride  that  speaks ;  for  seeing  herself,  as  to  the

higher  part  of  the  soul,  adorned  with  the  rich  endowments

of  her  Beloved,  and   seeing   Him  delighting  in  her,  she

*  Baruch  iii.  lo,  ii.  t  Jerem.  ii.  14,  15.

T   2


276  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XVIII.]

desires  to  preserve  herself  in  security,  and  in  the  continued
fruition  of  them.  Seeing  also  that  hindrances  will  arise,
as,  in  fact,  they  do,  from  the  sensual  part  of  the  soul,
which  will  disturb  so  great  a  good,  she  bids  the  operations
and  motions  of  the  soul's  lower  nature  to  cease,  in  the
senses  and  faculties  of  it,  and  sensuality  not  to  overstep
its  boundaries  to  trouble  and  disquiet  the  higher  and
spiritual  portion  of  the  soul :  not  to  hinder  even  for  a
moment  the  sweetness  she  enjoys.  The  motions  of  the
lower  part,  and  their  powers,  if  they  show  themselves
during  the  enjoyment  of  the  spirit,  are  so  much  more
troublesome  and  disturbing,  the  more  active  they  are.

'  O  nymphs  of  Judea.'

2.  The  lower,  that  is  the  sensual  part  of  the  soul,  is
called  Judea.  It  is  called  Judea  because  it  is  weak,  and
carnal,  and  blind,  like  the  Jewish  people.  All  the  imagi-
nations, fancies,  motions,  and  inclinations  of  the  lower
part  of  the  soul  are  called  nymphs ;  for  as  nymphs  with
their  beauty  and  attractions  entice  men  to  love  them,  so
the  operations  and  motions  of  sensuality  softly  and
earnestly  strive  to  entice  the  will  from  the  rational  part,
in  order  to  withdraw  it  from  that  which  is  interior,  and  to
fix  it  on  that  which  is  exterior,  to  which  they  are  prone
themselves.  They  also  strive  to  influence  the  understand-
ing to  join  with  them  in  their  low  views,  and  to  bring
down  reason  to  the  level  of  sense  by  the  attractions  of  the
latter.  The  soul,  therefore,  says  in  effect :  O  sensual
operations  and  motions.

'  While  amid  the  flowers  and  the  rose-trees.'

3.  The  flowers,  as  I   have  said,  are  the  virtues  of  the


[STAN,  XVIII,]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        277

soul,  and  the  rose-trees  are  its  powers,  memory,  under-
standing, and  will,  which  produce  and  nurture  the  flowers
of  divine  conceptions,  acts  of  love  and  the  virtues,  while
the  amber  sends  forth  its  perfume  in  the  virtues  and
powers  of  the  soul.

'  The  amber  sends  forth  its  perfume.'

4.  The  amber  is  the  divine  spirit  of  the  Bridegroom
Who  dwells  in  the  soul.  To  send  forth  the  perfume
among  the  flowers  and  the  rose-trees,  is  to  difl"use  and
communicate  Himself  most  sweetly  in  the  powers  and
virtues  of  the  soul,  thereby  filling  it  with  the  perfume  of
divine  sweetness.  Meanwhile,  then,  when  the  Divine
Spirit  is  filling  my  soul  with  spiritual  sweetness,

'  Tarry  in  the  suburbs.'

5.  In  the  suburbs  of  Judea,  which  is  the  inferior  or
sensual  part  of  the  soul.  The  suburbs  are  the  interior
senses,  namely,  memory,  fancy,  and  imagination,  where
forms  and  images  of  things  collect,  by  the  help  of  which
sensuality  stirs  up  concupiscence  and  desires.  These
forms  are  the  nymphs,  and  while  they  are  quiet  and
tranquil  the  desires  are  also  asleep.  They  enter  into
the  suburbs  of  the  interior  senses  by  the  gates  of  the
outward  senses,  of  sight,  hearing,  smell,  &c.  We  can
thus  give  the  name  of  suburbs  to  all  the  powers  and
interior  or  exterior  senses  of  the  sensual  part  of  the  soul,
because  they  are  outside  the  walls  of  the  city.

6.  That  part  of  the  soul  which  may  be  called  the  city
is  that  which  is  most  interior,  the  rational  part,  which  is
capable  of  converse  with  God,  the  operations  of  which  are
contrary  to  those  of  sensuality.  But  there  is  a  natural
intercourse  between  those  who  dwell  in  the  suburbs  of


278  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XVIII.]

the  sensual  part — that  is  the  nymphs — and  those  who
dwell  in  the  higher  part,  which  is  the  city  itself;  and,
therefore,  what  takes  place  in  the  lower  part  is  ordinarily
felt  in  the  higher,  and  consequently  compels  attention  to
itself  and  disturbs  the  spiritual  operation  which  is  con-
versant with  God.  Hence  the  soul  bids  the  nymphs  tarry
in  the  suburbs,  that  is,  to  remain  at  rest  in  the  exterior
and  interior  senses  of  the  sensual  part,

'  And  touch  not  our  thresholds.'
7.  Let  not  even  your  first  movements  touch  the  higher
part,  for  the  first  movements  of  the  soul  are  the  entrance
and  thresholds  of  it.  When  the  first  movements  have
passed  into  the  reason,  they  have  crossed  the  threshold,
but  when  they  remain  as  first  movements  only  they  are
then  said  merely  to  touch  the  threshold,  or  to  cry  at  the
gate,  which  is  the  case  when  reason  and  sense  contend
over  an  unreasonable  act.  The  soul  here  not  only  bids
these  not  to  touch  it,  but  also  charges  all  considerations
whatever  which  do  not  minister  to  its  repose  and  the
good  it  enjoys  to  keep  far  away.


NOTE.


The  soul  in  this  state  is  become  so  great  an  enemy  of  the
lower  part,  and  its  operations,  that  it  would  have  God
communicate  nothing  to  it  when  He  communicates  with
the  higher.  If  He  will  communicate  with  the  lower,  it
must  be  in  a  slight  degree,  or  the  soul,  because  of  its
natural  weakness,  will  be  unable  to  endure  it  without
fainting,  and    consequently  the    spirit    cannot  rejoice  in


[STAN.  XIX.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  279

peace,  because  it  is  then  troubled.  '  For,'  as  the  wise
man  says,  '  the  body  that  is  corrupted  burdeneth  the
soul.'*  And  as  the  soul  longs  for  the  highest  and  noblest
converse  with  God,  which  is  impossible  in  the  company
of  the  sensual  part,  it  begs  of  God  to  deal  with  it  without
the  intervention  of  the  senses.  That  sublime  vision  of
St.  Paul  in  the  third  heaven,  wherein,  he  says,  he  saw
God,  but  yet  knew  not  whether  he  was  in  the  body  or  out
of  the  body,  must  have  been,  be  it  what  it  may,  inde-
pendent of  the  body  :  for  if  the  body  had  any  share  in  it,
he  must  have  known  it,  and  the  vision  could  not  have
been  what  it  was,  seeing  that  he  '  heard  secret  words  which
it  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  speak. 'f  The  soul,  therefore,
knowing  well  that  graces  so  great  cannot  be  received  in  a
vessel  so  mean,  and  longing  to  receive  them  out  of  the
body,  or  at  least  without  it,  addresses  the  Bridegroom  in
the  words  that  follow  : —

STANZA  XIX.

Hide  Thyself,  0  my  Beloved !

Turn  Thy  face  to  the  mountains.

Do  not  speak.

But  regard  the  companions

Of  her  who  is  travelling  amidst  strange  islands.

Here  the  bride  presents  four  petitions  to  the  Bridegroom  :
She  prays  that  He  would  be  pleased  to  converse  with
her  most  interiorly  in  the  secret  chamber  of  the  soul.
The  second,  that  He  would  invest  and  inform  her
faculties  with  the  glory  and  excellence  of  His  Divinity.
The  third,  that  He  would  converse  with  her  so  profoundly
as  to  surpass  all  knowledge  and  expression,  and  in  such  a

*  Wisd.  ix.  15.  t  2  Cor.  xii.  2 — 4.


280  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XIX]

way  that  the  exterior  and  sensual  part  may  not  perceive
it.  The  fourth,  that  He  would  love  the  many  virtues  and
graces  which  He  has  implanted  in  her,  adorned  with
which  she  is  ascending  upwards  to  God  in  the  highest
knowledge  of  the  Divinity,  and  in  transports  of  love  most
strange  and  singular,  surpassing  those  of  ordinary
experience.

'  Hide  Thyself,  O  my  Beloved  ! '

2.  O  my  Bridegroom,  most  beloved,  hide  Thyself  in
the  inmost  depths  of  my  soul,  communicating  Thyself  to
it  in  secret,  and  manifesting  Thy  hidden  wonders  which  no
mortal  eyes  may  see.

'  Turn  Thy  face  to  the  mountains.'

3.  The  face  of  God  is  His  Divinity.  The  mountains
are  the  powers  of  the  soul,  memory,  understanding,  and
will.  Thus  the  meaning  of  these  words  is :  Enlighten
my  understanding  with  Thy  Divinity,  and  give  it  the
divine  intelligence,  fill  my  will  with  divine  love,  and  my
memory  with  divine  possession  of  glory.  The  bride  here
prays  for  all  that  may  be  prayed  for ;  for  she  is  not
content  with  that  knowledge  of  God  once  granted  to
Moses* — the  knowledge  of  Him  by  His  works — for  she
prays  to  see  the  face  of  God,  which  is  the  essential
communication  of  His  Divinity  to  the  soul,  without  any
intervening  medium,  by  a  certain  knowledge  thereof  in  the
Divinity.  This  is  something  beyond  sense,  and  divested
of  accidents,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  contact  of  pure
substances,  that  is,  of  the  soul  and  the  Divinity.

'  Do  not  speak.'

4.  That  is,  do  not  speak  as  before,  when  Thy  converse

*  Exod.  xxxiii.  23.


[STAN.  XIX.]      OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  281

with  me  was  known  to  the  outward  senses,  for  it  was
once  such  as  to  be  comprehended  by  them ;  it  was  not  so
profound  but  they  could  fathom  it.  Now  let  Thy
converse  with  me  be  so  deep  and  so  substantial,  and  so
interior,  as  to  be  above  the  reach  of  the  senses  ;  for  the
substance  of  the  spirit  is  incommunicable  to  sense,  and
the  communication  made  through  the  senses,  especially
in  this  life,  cannot  be  purely  spiritual,  because  the  senses
are  not  capable  of  it.  The  soul,  therefore,  longing  for
that  substantial  and  essential  communication  of  God,  of
which  sense  cannot  be  cognizant,  prays  the  Bridegroom
not  to  speak  :  that  is  to  say,  let  the  deep  secret  of  the
spiritual  union  be  such  as  to  escape  the  notice  of  the
senses,  like  the  secret  which  St.  Paul  heard,  and  which  it
is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  speak.*

'  But  regard  the  companions.'

5.  The  regard  of  God  is  love  and  grace.  The
companions  here  are  the  many  virtues  of  the  soul,  its
gifts,  perfections,  and  other  spiritual  graces  with  which
God  has  endowed  it  ;  pledges,  tokens,  and  presents  of  its
betrothal.  Thus  the  meaning  of  the  words  seems  to  be
this :  Turn  Thou  Thy  face  to  the  interior  of  my  soul,  O
my  Beloved,  be  enamoured  of  the  treasures  which  Thou
hast  laid  up  there,  so  that,  enamoured  of  them,  Thou
mayest  hide  Thyself  among  them  and  there  dwell ;  for
in  truth,  though  they  are  Thine,  they  are  mine  also,
because  Thou  hast  given  them.

'  Of  her  who  travels  amidst  strange  islands.'

6.  That  is,  of  my  soul  tending  towards  Thee  through
strange  knowledge  of  Thee,  by  strange  ways — strange  to

*  2  Cor.  xii.  4.


282  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XIX.]

sense  and  to  the  ordinary  perceptions  of  nature.  It  is  as
if  the  bride  said,  by  way  of  constraining  Him  to  yield  :
Seeing  that  my  soul  is  tending  towards  Thee  through
knowledge  which  is  spiritual,  strange,  unknown  to  sense,
do  Thou  also  communicate  Thyself  to  it  so  interiorly  and
so  profoundly  that  the  senses  may  not  observe  it.


NOTE.


In  order  to  the  attainment  of  a  state  of  perfection  so  high
as  this  of  the  spiritual  marriage,  the  soul  that  aims  at  it
must  not  only  be  purified  and  cleansed  from  all  the
imperfections,  rebellions,  and  imperfect  habits  of  the
inferior  part,  which  is  now — the  old  man  being  put  away
— subject  and  obedient  to  the  higher,  but  it  must  also
have  great  courage  and  most  exalted  love  for  so  strong
and  close  an  embrace  of  God.  For  in  this  state  the  soul
not  only  attains  to  exceeding  pureness  and  beauty,  but
also  acquires  a  terrible  strength  by  reason  of  that  strict
and  close  bond  which  in  this  union  binds  it  to  God.
The  soul,  therefore,  in  order  to  reach  this  state,  must
have  purity,  strength  and  adequate  love.  The  Holy
Ghost,  the  author  of  this  spiritual  union,  desirous  that  the
soul  should  attain  thus  far  in  order  to  merit  it,  addresses
Himself  to  the  Father  and  the  Son,  saying:  '  Our  sister
is  little,  and  hath  no  breasts.  What  shall  we  do  to  our
sister  in  the  day  when  she  is  to  be  spoken  to  ?  If  she  be
a  wall,  let  us  build  upon  it  bulwarks  of  silver  ;  if  she  be  a
door,  let  us  join  it  together  with  boards  of  cedar.'*

*  Cant.  viii.  8.


[STAN.  XIX. J      OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  283

2.  The  '  bulwarks  of  silver '  are  the  strong  heroic
virtues  comprised  in  the  faith,  which  is  signified  by  silver,
and  these  heroic  virtues  are  those  of  the  spiritual
marriage,  which  are  built  upon  the  soul,  signified  by  the
wall,  relying  on  the  strength  of  which,  the  peaceful
Bridegroom  reposes  undisturbed  by  any  infirmities.  The
'  boards  of  cedar '  are  the  affections  and  accessories  of
this  deep  love  which  is  signified  by  the  cedar-tree,  and
this  is  the  love  of  the  spiritual  marriage.  In  order  '  to
join  it  together,'  that  is,  to  adorn  the  bride,  it  is  necessary
she  should  be  the  door  for  the  Bridegroom  to  enter
through,  keeping  the  door  of  the  will  open  in  a  perfect
and  true  consent  of  love,  which  is  the  consent  of  the
betrothal  given  previous  to  the  spiritual  marriage.  The
breasts  of  the  bride  are  also  this  perfect  love  which  she
must  have  in  order  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  Christ
her  Bridegroom  for  the  perfection  of  such  a  state.

3.  It  is  written  in  the  Canticle  that  the  bride  in  her
longing  for  this  presence,  immediately  replied,  saying  :
'  I  am  a  wall :  and  my  breasts  are  as  a  tower.'  That  is,
my  soul  is  strong  and  my  love  most  deep  ;  that  He  may
not  fail  her  on  that  ground.  The  bride,  too,  had
expressed  as  much  in  the  preceding  stanzas,  out  of  the
fulness  of  her  longing  for  the  perfect  union  and  trans-
formation, and  particularly  in  the  last,  wherein  she  set
before  the  Bridegroom  all  the  virtues,  graces,  and  good
dispositions  with  which  she  was  adorned  by  Him,  and
that  with  the  object  of  making  Him  the  prisoner  of  her
love.

4.     Now  the   Bridegroom,   to  bring  this  matter  to   a
close,    replies    in    the    two    stanzas    that    follow,    which


284  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE      [STAN.  XX.,  XXL]

describe  Him  as  perfectly  purifying  the  soul,  strengthening
and  disposing  it,  both  as  to  its  sensual  and  spiritual  part
for  this  state  and  charging  all  resistance  and  rebellion,
both  ofthe  flesh  and  of  the  devil,  to  cease,  saying  : —


STANZAS  XX.,  XXI.

THE  BRIDEGROOM.

Light-winged  birds.
Lions,  fawns,  honndin^  does,
mountains,  valleys,  strands.
Waters,  ivinds,  heat.
And  the  terrors  that  keep  watch  by  night ;

By  the  soft  lyres

And  siren  strains,  I  adjure  you.

Let  yoiir fiery  cease.

And  touch  not  the  wall.

That  the  bride  may  sleep  i7i  greater  security.

Here  the  Son  of  God,  the  Bridegroom,  leads  the  bride
into  the  enjoyment  of  peace,  and  tranquillity  in  the  con-
formity of  her  lower  to  her  higher  nature,  purging  away
all  her  imperfections,  subjecting  the  natural  powers  of  the
soul  to  reason,  and  mortifying  all  her  desires,  as  it  is
expressed  in  these  two  stanzas,  the  meaning  of  which  is
as  follows.  In  the  first  place  the  Bridegroom  adjures  and
commands  all  vain  distractions  of  the  fancy  and  imagina-
tion from  henceforth  to  cease,  and  controls  the  irascible
and  concupiscible  faculties  which  were  hitherto  the
sources  of  so  much  affliction.  He  brings,  so  far  as  it  is
possible  in  this  life,  the  three  powers  of  memory,  under-
standing, and  will,  to  the  perfection   of  their  objects,  and


[STAN.  XX.,  XXL]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.     285

then  adjures  and  commands  the  four  passions  of  the  soul,
joy,  hope,  grief,  and  fear,  to  be  still,  and  bids  them  from
henceforth  be  moderate  and  calm.

2.  All  these  passions  and  faculties  are  comprehended
under  the  expressions  employed  in  the  first  stanza,  the
operations  of  which,  full  of  trouble,  the  Bridegroom
subdues  by  that  great  sweetness,  joy,  and  courage,  which
the  bride  enjoys  in  the  spiritual  surrender  of  Himself  to
her  which  God  makes  at  this  time ;  under  the  influence
of  which,  because  God  transforms  the  soul  effectually  in
Himself,  all  the  faculties,  desires  and  movements  of
the  soul  lose  their  natural  imperfection  and  become
divine.

'  Light-winged  birds.'

3.  These  are  the  distractions  of  the  imagination,  light
and  rapid  in  their  flight  from  one  subject  to  another.
When  the  will  is  tranquilly  enjoying  the  sweet  converse
of  the  Beloved,  these  distractions  produce  weariness,  and
in  their  swift  flight  quench  its  joy.  The  Bridegroom
adjures  them  by  the  soft  lyres.  That  is,  now  that  the
sweetness  of  the  soul  is  so  abundant  and  so  continuous
that  they  cannot  interfere  with  it,  as  they  did  before  when
it  had  not  reached  this  state,  He  adjures  them,  and  bids
them  cease  from  their  disquieting  violence.  The  same
explanation  is  to  be  given  of  the  rest  of  the  stanza.

.   '  Lions,  fawns,  bounding  does.'

4.  By  the  lions  is  meant  the  raging  violence  of  the
irascible  faculty,  which  in  its  acts  is  bold  and  daring  as  a
lion.  The  '  fawns  and  bounding  does '  are  the  concu-
piscible  faculty,  that  is,  the  power  of  desire,  the  qualities
of  which    are    two,    timidity    and    rashness.      Timidity


286  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE     [STAN.  XX.,  XXI.]

betrays  itself  when  things  do  not  turn  out  according
to  our  wishes,  for  then  the  mind  retires  within  itself
discouraged,  and  in  this  respect  the  soul  resembles  the
fawns.  For  as  fawns  have  the  concupiscible  faculty
stronger  than  many  other  animals,  so  are  they  more
retiring  and  more  timid.  Rashness  betrays  itself  when
we  have  our  own  way,  for  the  mind  is  then  neither
retiring  nor  timid,  but  desires  boldly,  and  gratifies  all  its
inclinations.  This  quality  of  rashness  is  compared  to  the
does,  who  so  eagerly  seek  what  they  desire  that  they  not
only  run  but  even  leap  after  it  ;  hence  they  are  described
as  bounding  does.

5.  Thus  the  Bridegroom,  in  adjuring  the  lions,
restrains  the  violence  and  controls  the  fury  of  rage  ;  in
adjuring  the  fawns.  He  strengthens  the  concupiscible
faculty  against  timidity  and  irresolution  ;  and  in  adjuring
the  does,  He  satisfies  and  subdues  the  desires  which  were
restless  before,  leaping,  like  deer,  from  one  object  to
another,  to  satisfy  that  concupiscence  which  is  now
satisfied  by  the  soft  lyres,  the  sweetness  of  which  it
enjoys,  and  by  the  siren  strains,  in  the  delight  of  which
it  revels.

6.  But  the  Bridegroom  does  not  adjure  anger  and
concupiscence  themselves,  because  these  passions  never
cease  from  the  soul — but  their  vexatious  and  disorderly
acts,  signified  by  the  '  lions,  fawns,  and  bounding  does,'
for  it  is  necessary  that  these  disorderly  acts  should  cease
in  this  state.

'  Mountains,  valleys,  strands.'

7.  These  are  the  vicious  and  disorderly  actions  of  the
three  faculties  of  the  soul — memory,  understanding,  and


[STAN.  XX.,  XXI.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.      287

will.  These  actions  are  disorderly  and  vicious  when  they
are  in  extremes,  or,  if  not  in  extreme,  tending  to  one
extreme  or  other.  Thus  the  mountains  signify  those
actions  which  are  vicious  in  excess,  mountains  being  high  ;
the  valleys,  being  low,  signify  those  which  are  vicious  in
the  extreme  of  defect.  Strands,  which  are  neither  high
nor  low,  but  inasmuch  as  they  are  not  perfectly  level,
tend  to  one  extreme  or  other,  signify  those  acts  of  the
three  powers  of  the  soul  which  depart  slightly  in  either
direction  from  the  true  mean  and  equality  of  justice.
These  actions,  though  not  disorderly  in  the  extreme,  as
they  would  be  if  they  amounted  to  mortal  sin,  are
nevertheless  disorderly  in  part,  tending  towards  venial
sin  or  imperfection,  however  slight  that  tendency  may  be,
in  the  understanding,  memory,  and  will.  He  adjures  also
all  these  actions  which  depart  from  the  true  mean,  and
bids  them  cease  before  the  soft  lyres  and  the  siren  strains,
which  so  effectually  charm  the  powers  of  the  soul  as  to
occupy  them  completely  in  their  true  and  proper  functions,
so  that  they  avoid  not  only  all  extremes,  but  also  the
slightest  tendency  to  them.

'  Waters,  winds,  heat,  and  the  terrors
that  keep  watch  by  night.'
8.  These  are  the  affections  of  the  four  passions,  grief,
hope,  joy,  and  fear.  The  waters  are  the  affections  of
grief  which  afflict  the  soul,  for  they  rush  into  it  like  water.
'  Save  me,  O  God,'  saith  the  Psalmist,  '  for  the  waters  are
come  in  even  unto  my  soul.'*  The  winds  are  the  affec-
tions of  hope,  for  they  rush  forth  like  wind,  desiring  that
which  is  not  present  but  hoped  for,  as  the  Psalmist  saith  :

*  Ps.  Ixviii,  2.


288  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE     [STAN.  XX.,  XXL]

'  I  opened  my  mouth  and  drew  breath  :  because  I  longed
for  Thy  commandments.'*  That  is,  I  opened  the  mouth
of  my  hope,  and  drew  in  the  wind  of  desire,  because  I
hoped  and  longed  for  Thy  commandments.  Heat  is  the
affections  of  joy  which,  like  fire,  inflame  the  heart,  as  it  is
written  :  '  My  heart  waxed  hot  within  me  ;  and  in  my
meditation  a  fire  shall  burn  ;'t  that  is,  while  I  meditate  I
shall  have  joy.

g.  The  '  terrors  that  keep  watch  by  night '  are  the
affections  of  fear,  which  in  spiritual  persons  who  have  not
attained  to  the  state  of  spiritual  marriage  are  usually
exceedingly  strong.  They  come  sometimes  from  God
when  He  is  going  to  bestow  certain  great  graces  upon
souls,  as  I  said  before ;+  He  is  wont  then  to  fill  the  mind
with  dread,  to  make  the  flesh  tremble  and  the  senses  numb,
because  nature  is  not  made  strong  and  perfect  and
prepared  for  these  graces.  They  come  also  at  times  from
the  evil  spirit,  who,  out  of  envy  and  malignity,  when  he
sees  a  soul  sweetly  recollected  in  God,  labours  to  disturb
its  tranquillity  by  exciting  horror  and  dread,  in  order  to
destroy  so  great  a  blessing,  and  sometimes  utters  his
threats,  as  it  were  in  the  interior  of  the  soul.  But
when  he  finds  that  he  cannot  penetrate  within  the  soul,
because  it  is  so  recollected,  and  so  united  with  God,  he
strives  at  least  in  the  province  of  sense,  to  produce
exterior  distractions  and  inconstancy,  sensible  pains  and
horrors,  if  perchance  he  may  in  this  way  disturb  the  soul
in  the  bridal  chamber.

lo.  These  are  called  terrors  of  the  night,  because  the)-
are  the  work  of  evil  spirits,  and  because  satan  labours,  by
the  help  thereof,  to  involve  the   soul   in   darkness,  and  to

*   I's.  cxviii.  131.  f   Ps.  xxxviii.  4.  \  Stanza  xiii.  S  4-


[STAN.  XX.,  XXL]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.      289

obscure  the  divine  light  wherein  it  rejoiceth.  These
terrors  are  called  watchers,  because  they  awaken  the  soul
and  rouse  it  from  its  sweet  interior  slumber,  and  also
because  satan,  their  author,  is  ever  on  the  watch  to
produce  them.  These  terrors  strike  the  soul  of  persons
who  are  already  spiritual,  passively,  and  come  either  frorh
God  or  the  evil  spirit.  I  do  not  refer  to  temporal  or
natural  terrors,  because  spiritual  men  are  not  subject  to
these,  as  they  are  to  those  of  which  I  am  speaking.

II.  The  Beloved  adjures  the  affections  of  these  four
passions,  compels  them  to  cease  and  to  be  at  rest,  because
He  supplies  the  bride  now  with  force,  and  courage,  and
satisfaction,  by  the  soft  lyres  of  His  sweetness  and  the
siren  strains  of  His  delight,  so  that  not  only  they  shall
not  domineer  over  the  soul,  but  shall  not  occasion  it  any
distaste  whatever.  Such  is  the  grandeur  and  stability  of
the  soul  in  this  state,  that,  although  formerly  the  waters
of  grief  overwhelmed  it,  because  of  its  own  or  other  men's
sins — which  is  what  spiritual  persons  most  feel — the
consideration  of  them  now  excites  neither  pain  nor
annoyance ;  even  the  sensible  feeling  of  compassion
exists  not  now,  though  the  effects  of  it  continue  in
perfection.  The  weaknesses  of  its  virtues  are  no  longer  in
the  soul,  for  they  are  now  constant,  strong,  and  perfect.
As  the  angels  perfectly  appreciate  all  sorrowful  things
without  the  sense  of  pain,  and  perform  acts  of  mercy
without  the  sentiment  of  pity,  so  the  soul  in  this
transformation  of  love.  God,  however,  dispenses  some-
times, on  certain  occasions,  with  the  soul  in  this  matter,
allowing  it  to  feel  and  suffer,  that  it  may  become  more
fervent  in  love,  and    grow  in  merit,   or  for  some    other


290  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE     [STAN.  XX.,  XXL]

reasons,  as  He  dispensed  with  His  Virgin  Mother,  St.
Paul,  and  others.  This,  however,  is  not  the  ordinary
condition  of  this  state.

12.  Neither  do  the  desires  of  hope  afflict  the  soul  now,
because,  satisfied  in  its  union  with  God,  so  far  as  it  is
possible  in  this  life,  it  has  nothing  of  this  world  to  hope
for,  and  nothing  spiritual  to  desire,  seeing  that  it  feels
itself  to  be  full  of  the  riches  of  God,  though  it  ma}-
grow  in  charity,  and  thus,  whether  living  or  dying,  it  is
conformed  to  the  will  of  God,  saying  with  the  sense  and
spirit,  'Thy  will  be  done,'  free  from  the  violence  of
inclination  and  desires ;  and  accordingly  even  its  longing
for  the  beatific  vision  is  without  pain.

13.  The  affections  of  joy,  also,  which  were  wont  to
move  the  soul  with  more  or  less  vehemence,  are  not
sensibly  diminished ;  neither  does  their  abundance
occasion  any  surprise.  The  joy  of  the  soul  is  now  so
abundant,  that  it  is  like  the  sea,  which  is  not  diminished
by  the  rivers  that  flow  out  of  it,  nor  increased  by  those
that  empty  themselves  into  it ;  for  the  soul  is  now  that
fountain  of  which  our  Lord  said,  that  it  is  '  springing  up
into  life  everlasting.'*

14.  I  have  said  that  the  soul  receives  nothing  new  or
unusual  in  this  state  of  transformation  ;  it  seems  to  lose
all  accidental  joy,  which  is  not  withheld  even  from  the
glorified.  That  is,  accidental  joys  and  sweetness  are
indeed  no  strangers  to  this  soul ;  yea,  rather,  those  which
it  ordinarily  has  cannot  be  numbered ;  yet,  for  all  this,
as  to  the  substantial  communication  of  the  spirit,  there  is
no  increase  of  joy,  for  that  which  ma}'  occur  anew  the

*  St.  John  iv.  14.


[STAN.  XX.,  XXI.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.      291

soul  possesses  already,  and  thus  what  the  soul  has  already
within  itself  is  greater  than  anything  that  comes  anew.
Hence,  then,  whenever  any  subject  of  joy  and  gladness,
whether  exterior  or  spiritually  interior,  presents  itself  to
the  soul,  the  soul  betakes  itself  forthwith  to  rejoicing  in
the  riches  it  possesses  already  within  itself,  and  the  joy  it
has  in  them  is  far  greater  than  any  which  these  new
accessions  minister,  because,  in  a  certain  sense,  God  is
become  its  possession.  Who,  though  He  delights  in  all
things,  yet  in  nothing  so  much  as  in  Himself,  seeing  that
He  has  all  good  eminently  in  Himself.  Thus  all
accessions  of  joy  serve  to  remind  the  soul  that  its  real
joy  is  in  its  interior  possessions,  rather  than  in  these
accidental  causes,  because,  as  I  have  said,  the  former  are
greater  than  the  latter.

15.  It  is  very  natural  for  the  soul,  even  when  a
particular  matter  gives  it  pleasure,  that,  possessing
another  of  greater  worth  and  gladness,  it  should  remember
it  at  once  and  take  its  pleasure  in  it.  The  accidental
character  of  these  spiritual  accessions,  and  the  new
impressions  they  make  on  the  soul,  may  be  said  to  be  as
nothing  in  comparison  with  that  substantial  source  w^hich
it  has  within  itself;  for  the  soul  which  has  attained  to  the
perfect  transformation,  and  is  fullgrown,  grows  no  more
in  this  state  by  means  of  these  spiritual  accessions,  as
those  souls  do  who  have  not  yet  advanced  so  far.  It  is  a
marvellous  thing  that  the  soul,  while  it  receives  no
accessions  of  delight,  should  still  seem  to  do  so  and  also
to  have  been  in  possession  of  them.  The  reason  is  that
it  is  always  tasting   them    anew,  because  they  are  ever

renewed  ;  and  thus  it  seems  to  be  continually  the  recipient

u  2


292  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE     [STAN.  XX.,  XXL]

of  new  accessions,  while  it  has  no  need  of  them  whatever.

i6.  But  if  we  speak  of  that  hght  of  glory  which  in
this,  the  soul's  embrace,  God  sometimes  produces  within
it,  and  which  is  a  certain  spiritual  communion  wherein
He  causes  it  to  behold  and  enjoy  at  the  same  time  the
abyss  of  delight  and  riches  which  He  has  laid  up  within
it,  there  is  no  language  to  express  any  degree  of  it.  As
the  sun  when  it  shines  upon  the  sea  illumines  its  great
depths,  and  reveals  the  pearls,  and  gold,  and  precious
stones  therein,  so  the  divine  sun  of  the  Bridegroom,
turning  towards  the  bride,  reveals  in  a  way  the  riches  of
her  soul,  so  that  even  the  angels  behold  her  with
amazement  and  say :  '  Who  is  she  that  cometh  forth  as
the  morning  rising,  fair  as  the  moon,  bright  as  the  sun,
terrible  as  the  army  of  a  camp  set  in  array.'*  This
illumination  adds  nothing  to  the  grandeur  of  the  soul,
notwithstanding  its  greatness,  because  it  merely  reveals
that  which  the  soul  already  possessed  in  order  that  it
might  rejoice  in  it.

17.  Finally,  the  terrors  that  keep  watch  by  night  do
not  come  nigh  unto  her,  because  of  her  pureness,  courage,
and  confident  trust  in  God  ;  the  evil  spirits  cannot  shroud
her  in  darkness,  nor  alarm  her  with  terrors,  nor  disturb
her  with  their  violent  assaults.  Thus  nothing  can
approach  her,  nothing  can  molest  her,  for  she  has  escaped
from  all  created  things  and  entered  in  to  God,  to  the
fruition  of  perfect  peace,  sweetness,  and  delight,  so  far  as
that  is  possible  in  this  life.  It  is  to  this  state  that  the
words  of  Solomon  are  applicable  :  '  A  secure  mind  is  as  it
were  a  continual  feast. 'f  As  in  a  feast  we  have  the
*  Cant.  vi.  9.  f  Prov.  xv.  15.


[STAN.  XX.,  XXI.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.     293

savour  of  all  meat,  and  the  sweetness  of  all  music,  so  in
this  feast,  which  the  bride  keeps  in  the  bosom  of  her
Beloved,  the  soul  rejoices  in  all  delight,  and  has  the
taste  of  all  sweetness.  All  that  I  have  said,  and  all  that
may  be  said,  on  this  subject,  will  always  fall  short  of  that
which  passeth  in  the  soul  which  has  attained  to  this  blessed
state.  For  when  it  shall  have  attained  to  the  peace  of
God,  '  which,'  in  the  words  of  the  Apostle,  '  surpasseth  all
understanding,'*  no  description  of  its  state  is  possible.
•  '  By  the  soft  lyres  and  the  siren  strains  I  adjure  you.'

i8.  The  soft  lyres  are  the  sweetness  which  the
Bridegroom  communicates  to  the  soul  in  this  state,  and
by  which  He  makes  all  its  troubles  to  cease.  As  the
music  of  lyres  fills  the  soul  with  sweetness  and  delight,
carries  it  rapturously  out  of  itself,  so  that  it  forgets  all  its
weariness  and  grief,  so  in  like  manner  this  sweetness  so
absorbs  the  soul  that  nothing  painful  can  reach  it.  The
Bridegroom  says,  in  substance  :  By  that  sweetness  which
I  give  thee,  let  all  thy  bitterness  cease.  The  siren  strains
are  the  ordinary  joys  of  the  soul.  These  are  called  siren
strains  because,  as  it  is  said,  the  music  of  the  sirens  is  so
sweet  and  delicious,  that  he  who  hears  it  is  so  rapt  and
so  carried  out  of  himself,  that  he  forgets  everything.  In
the  same  way  the  soul  is  so  absorbed  in,  and  refreshed  by,
the  delight  of  this  union,  that  it  becomes,  as  it  were,
charmed  against  all  the  vexations  and  troubles  that  may
assail  it ;  it  is  to  these  the  next  words  of  the  stanza  refer :
'  Let  your  fury  cease.'
19.  This  is  the  troubles  and  anxieties  which  flow  from
unruly  acts  and  affections.     As  anger  is  a  certain  violence

*  Philipp.  iv.  7.


294  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE     [STAN.  XX.,  XXI.]

which  disturbs  peace,  overleaping  its  bounds,  so  also  all
these  affections  in  their  motions  transgress  the  bounds
of  the  peace  and  tranquillity  of  the  soul,   disturbing  it
whenever  they  touch  it.     Hence  the  Bridegroom  says  :
'  And  touch  not  the  wall.'

20.  The  wall  is  the  territory  of  peace  and  the  fortress
of  virtue  and  perfections,  which  are  the  defences  and
protection  of  the  soul.  The  soul  is  the  garden  wherein
the  Beloved  feeds  among  the  flowers,  defended  and
guarded  for  Him  alone.  Hence  it  is  called  in  the  Canticle
'  a  garden  enclosed.'*  The  Bridegroom  bids  all  disorderly
emotions  not  to  touch  the  territory  and  wall  of  His
garden.

21.  'That  the  bride  may  sleep  in  greater  security.'
That  is,  that  she  is  delighting  herself  with  more  sweetness
in  the  tranquilhty  and  sweetness  she  has  in  the  Beloved.
That  is  to  say,  that  now  no  door  is  shut  against  the  soul,
and  that  it  is  in  its  power  to  abandon  itself  whenever  it
wills  to  this  sweet  sleep  of  love,  according  to  the  words
of  the  Bridegroom  in  the  Canticle,  '  I  adjure  you,  O
daughters  of  Jerusalem,  by  the  roes  and  the  harts  of  the
fields,  that  you  raise  not  up  nor  make  the  beloved  to
awake  till  herself  will. 't


NOTE.

The  Bridegroom  was  so  anxious  to  rescue  His  bride  from

the  power  of  the  flesh  and  the  devil  and  to  set  her  free,

that,  having  done  so.  He  rejoices  over  her  like  the  good

*  Cant.  iv.  12.  f  Cant.  iii.  5.


[STAN.  XXII,]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.         295

shepherd,  who,  having  found  the  sheep  that  was  lost,  laid
it. upon  his  shoulders  rejoicing;  like  the  woman  who,
having  found  the  money  she  had  lost,  after  lighting  a
candle  and  sweeping  the  house,  called  '  together  her
friends  and  neighbours,  saying  :  Rejoice  with  me.'*"  So
this  loving  Shepherd  and  Bridegroom  of  souls  shows  a
marvellous  joy  and  delight  when  He  beholds  a  soul  gained
to  perfection  lying  on  His  shoulders,  and  by  His  hands
held  fast  in  the  longed-for  embrace  and  union.  He  is  not
alone  in  His  joy,  for  He  makes  the  angels  and  the  souls
of  the  blessed  partakers  of  His  glory,  saying,  as  in  the
Canticle,  '  Go  forth,  ye  daughters  of  Sion,  and  see  king
Solomon  in  the  diadem  wherewith  his  mother  crowned
him  in  the  day  of  this  betrothal,  and  in  the  day  of  the  joy
of  his  heart.'!  He  calls  the  soul  His  crown,  His  bride,
and  the  joy  of  His  heart :  He  carries  it  in  His  arms,  and
as  a  bridegroom  leads  it  into  His  bridal  chamber,  as  we
shall  see  in  the  following  stanza  : —


STANZA  XXII.

The  bride  has  entered

The  pleasant  and  desi7-able  ga>  den,

And  there  reposes  to  her  heart's  content ;

Her  7ieck  reclining

On  the  sweet  arms  of  the  Beloved.

The  bride  having  done  what  she  could  in  order  that  the
foxes  may  be  caught,  the  north  wind  cease,  the  nymphs,
hindrances  to  the  desired  joy  of  the  state  of  spiritual
marriage,  forego  their  troublesome  importunities,  and
having  also  invoked  and  obtained  the  favourable  wind  of
*  St.  Luke  XV.  5,  8,  9.  f  Cant.  iii.  11.


296  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXII.]

the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  the  right  disposition  and  means
for  the  perfection  of  this  state,  it  remains  for  me  now  to
speak  of  it  in  the  stanza  in  which  the  Bridegroom  calls
the  soul  His  bride,  and  speaks  of  two  things  : — i.  He
says  that  the  soul  having  gone  forth  victoriously,  has
entered  the  delectable  state  of  spiritual  marriage,  which
they  had  both  so  earnestly  desired.  2.  He  enumerates
the  properties  of  that  state,  into  the  fruition  of  which  the
soul  has  entered,  namely,  perfect  repose,  and  the  resting
of  the  neck  on  the  arms  of  the  Beloved.

'  The  bride  has  entered.'

2.  For  the  better  understanding  of  the  arrangement  of
these  stanzas,  and  of  the  way  by  which  the  soul  advances
till  it  reaches  the  state  of  spiritual  marriage,  which  is  the
very  highest,  and  of  which,  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  am
now  about  to  treat,  we  must  keep  in  mind  that  the  soul,
before  it  enters  it,  must  be  tried  in  tribulations,  in  sharp
mortifications,  and  in  meditation  on  spiritual  things.
This  is  the  subject  of  this  canticle  till  we  come  to  the
fifth  stanza,  beginning  with  the  words :  '  A  thousand
graces  diffusing.'  Then  the  soul  enters  on  the  contemplative
life,  passing  through  those  ways  and  straits  of  love  which
are  described  in  the  course  of  the  canticle,  till  we  come
to  the  thirteenth,  beginning  with '  Turn  them  away,  O  my
Beloved  ! '  This  is  the  moment  of  the  spiritual  betrothal;
and  then  the  soul  advances  by  the  unitive  way,  the
recipient  of  many  and  very  great  communications,  jewels
and  gifts  from  the  Bridegroom  as  to  one  betrothed,  and
grows  into  perfect  love,  as  appears  from  the  stanzas  which
follow  that    beginning  with    '  Turn   them   away,  O    my


[STAN.  XXII.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  297

Beloved !  '   the    moment   of    betrothal,    to    the    present,
beginning  with  the  words  :

'  The  bride  has  entered.'

3.  The  spiritual  marriage  of  the  soul  and  the  Son  of
God  now  remains  to  be  accomplished.  This  is,  beyond
all  comparison,  a  far  higher  state  than  that  of  betrothal,
because  it  is  a  complete  transformation  into  the  Beloved  ;
whereby  they  surrender  each  to  the  other  the  entire
possession  of  themselves  in  the  perfect  union  of  love,
wherein  the  soul  becomes  divine,  and,  by  participation,
God,  so  far  as  it  is  possible  in  this  life.  I  believe  that  no
soul  ever  attains  to  this  state  without  being  confirmed  in
grace,  for  the  faithfulness  of  both  is  confirmed ;  that  of
God  being  confirmed  in  the  soul.  Hence  it  follows,  that
this  is  the  very  highest  state  possible  in  this  life.  As  by
natural  marriage  there  are  '  two  in  one  flesh,'*  so  also  in
the  spiritual  marriage  between  God  and  the  soul  there  are
two  natures  in  one  spirit  and  love,  as  we  learn  from
St.  Paul,  who  made  use  of  the  same  metaphor,  saying  :  '  He
that  cleaveth  to  our  Lord  is  one  spirit.'!  So,  when  the
light  of  a  star,  or  of  a  candle,  is  united  to  that  of  the  sun,
the  light  is  not  that  of  the  star,  nor  of  the  candle,  but  of
the  sun  itself,  which  absorbs  all  other  light  in  its  own.

4.  It  is  of  this  state  that  the  Bridegroom  is  now
speaking,  saying :  '  The  bride  has  entered ; '  that  is,  out
of  all  temporal  and  natural  things,  out  of  all  spiritual
affections,  ways,  and  methods,  having  left  on  one  side,
and  forgotten,  all  temptations,  trials,  sorrows,  anxieties,
and  cares,  transformed  in  this  embrace.

*  Genes,  ii.  24.  t  i  Cor.  vi.  17.


29(S  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXII.]

'  The  pleasant  and  desirable  garden.'

5.  That  is,  the  soul  is  transformed  in  God,  Who  is
here  called  the  pleasant  garden  because  of  the  delicious
and  sweet  repose  which  the  soul  finds  in  Him.  But  the
soul  does  not  enter  the  garden  of  perfect  transformation,
the  glory  and  the  joy  of  the  spiritual  marriage,  without
passing  first  through  the  spiritual  betrothal,  the  mutual
faithful  love  of  the  betrothed.  When  the  soul  has  lived
for  some  time  as  the  bride  of  the  Son,  in  perfect  and
sweet  love,  God  calls  it  and  leads  it  into  His  flourishing
garden  for  the  celebration  of  the  spiritual  marriage.
Then  the  two  natures  are  so  united,  what  is  divine  is  so
communicated  to  what  is  human,  that,  without  under-
going any  essential  change,  each  seems  to  be  God — yet
not  perfectly  so  in  this  life,  though  still  in  a  manner
which  can  neither  be  described  nor  conceived.

6.  We  learn  this  truth  very  clearly  from  the
Bridegroom  Himself  in  the  Canticle,  where  He  invites
the  soul,  now  His  bride,  to  enter  this  state,  saying :  '  I
am  come  into  my  garden,  O  my  sister,  my  bride  :  I
have  gathered  my  myrrh  with  my  aromatical  spices.'*
He  calls  the  soul  His  sister.  His  bride,  for  it  is  such  in
love  by  that  surrender  which  it  has  made  of  itself  before
He  had  called  it  to  the  state  of  spiritual  marriage,  when,
as  He  says.  He  gathered  His  myrrh  with  His  aromatical
spices ;  that  is,  the  fruits  of  flowers  now  ripe  and  made
ready  for  the  soul,  which  are  the  delights  and  grandeurs  com-
municated to  it  by  Himself  in  this  state,  that  is  Himself,
and  for  which  He  is  the  pleasant  and  desirable  garden.

7.  The  whole  aim  and  desire  of  the  soul  and  of  God,

*  Cant.  V.  I.


[STAN.  XXII.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  299

in  all  this,  is  the  accomplishment  and  perfection  of  this
state,  and  the  soul  is  therefore  never  weary  till  it  reaches
it ;  because  it  finds  there  a  much  greater  abundance  and
fulness  in  God,  a  more  secure  and  lasting  peace,  and  a
sweetness  incomparably  more  perfect  than  in  the  spiritual
betrothal,  seeing  that  it  reposes  between  the  arms  of  such
a  Bridegroom,  whose  spiritual  embraces  are  so  real  that
it,  through  them,  lives  the  life  of  God.  Now  is  fulfilled
what  St.  Paul  referred  to  when  he  said  :  '  I  live  ;  now  not
I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me.'*  And  now  that  the  soul  lives
a  life  so  happy  and  so  glorious,  as  it  is  the  life  of  God,
consider  what  a  sweet  life  it  must  be — a  life  where  God
sees  nothing  displeasing,  and  where  the  soul  finds  nothing
irksome,  but  rather  the  glory  and  delight  of  God  in  the
very  substance  of  itself,  now  transformed  in  Him.

'  And    there    reposes    to    her    heart's    content ;
her  neck  reclining  on  the  sweet  arms  of  the  Beloved.'

8.  The  neck  is  the  soul's  strength,  by  means  of  which  its
union  with  the  Beloved  is  wrought  ;  for  the  soul  could
not  endure  so  close  an  embrace  if  it  had  not  been  very
strong.  And  as  the  soul  has  laboured  in  this  strength,
practised  virtue,  evercome  vice,  it  is  fitting  that  it  should
rest  there  from  its  labours,  '  her  neck  reclining  on  the
sweet  arms  of  the  Beloved.'

g.  This  reclining  of  the  neck  on  the  arms  of  God  is
the  union  of  the  soul's  strength,  or,  rather,  of  the  soul's
weakness,  with  the  strength  of  God,  in  Whom  our
weakness,  resting  and  transformed,  puts  on  the  strength
of  God  Himself.  The  state  of  spiritual  matrimony  is
therefore  most  fitly  designated  by  the  reclining  of  the
*  Galat.  ii.  20.


300  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN    XXII.]

neck  on  the  sweet  arms  of  the  Beloved  ;  seeing  that  God
is  the  strength  and  sweetness  of  the  soul,  Who  guards
and  defends  it  from  all  evil,  and  gives  it  to  taste  of  all  good.

10.  Hence  the  bride  in  the  Canticle,  longing  for  this
state,  saith  to  the  Bridegroom  :  '  Who  shall  give  to  me
Thee  my  brother,  sucking  the  breast  of  my  mother,  that  I
may  find  Thee  without,  and  kiss  Thee,  and  now  no  man
despise  me.'*  By  addressing  Him  as  her  Brother  she
shows  the  equality  between  them  in  the  betrothal  of  love,
before  she  entered  the  state  of  spiritual  marriage.
'  Sucking  the  breast  of  my  mother  '  signifies  the  drying
up  of  the  passions  and  desires,  which  are  the  breasts  and
milk  of  our  mother  Eve  in  our  flesh,  which  are  a  bar  to
this  state.  The  '  finding  Him  without  '  is  to  find  Him  in
detachment  from  all  things  and  from  self  when  the  bride
is  in  solitude,  spiritually  detached,  which  takes  place
when  all  the  desires  are  quenched.  '  And  kiss  Thee,'
that  is,  be  united  with  the  Bridegroom,  alone  with  Him
alone.

11.  This  is  the  union  of  the  nature  of  the  soul,  in
solitude,  cleansed  from  all  impurity,  natural,  temporal,
and  spiritual,  with  the  Bridegroom  alone,  with  His
nature,  by  love  only — of  that  love  which  is  the  only  love
of  the  spiritual  marriage,  wherein  the  soul,  as  it  were,
kisses  God  when  none  despises  it  nor  makes  it  afraid.
For  in  this  state  the  soul  is  no  longer  molested,  either  by
the  devil,  or  the  flesh,  or  the  world,  or  the  desires,  seeing
that  here  is  fulfilled  what  is  wTitten  in  the  Canticle :
'  Winter  is  now  past,  the  rain  is  over  and  gone.  The
flowers  have  appeared  in  our  land.'!

*  Cant.  viii.  i.  f  Cant.  ii.  ii,  12.


[STAN.  XXIII.]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  oOl


NOTE.

When  the  soul  has  been  raised  to  the  high  state  of
spiritual  marriage,  the  Bridegroom  reveals  to  it,  as  His
faithful  consort,  His  own  marvellous  secrets  most  readily
and  most  frequently,  for  he  who  truly  and  sincerely  loves
hides  nothing  from  the  object  of  his  affections.  The
chief  matter  of  His  communications  are  the  sweet
mysteries  of  His  incarnation,  the  ways  and  means  of
redemption,  which  is  one  of  the  highest  works  of  God,
and  so  is  to  the  soul  one  of  the  sweetest.  Though  He
communicates  many  other  mysteries,  He  speaks  in  the
following  stanza  of  His  incarnation  only,  as  being  the
chief:  and  thus  addresses  the  soul  in  the  words  that  follow  :


STANZA  XXni.

Beneatk  the  apple-tree.

There  weii  thoti.  betrothed,

7 here  I  gave  thee  My  hand.

And  thou  weii  redeemed

Where  thy  mother  was  corrupted.

The  Bridegroom  tells  the  soul  of  the  wondrous  way  of  its
redemption  and  betrothal  to  Himself,  by  referring  to  the
way  in  which  the  human  race  was  lost.  As  it  was  by  the
forbidden  tree  of  paradise  that  our  nature  was  corrupted
in  Adam  and  lost,  so  it  was  by  the  tree  of  the  Cross  that
it  was  redeemed  and  restored.  The  Bridegroom  there
stretched  forth  the  hand  of  His  grace  and  mercy,
in  His  death    and    passion,    '  making  void    the    law   of


302  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXIIL]

commandments '  '■'  which  original  sin  had  placed  between
us  and  God.

'  Beneath  the  apple-tree.'

2.  That  is  the  wood  of  the  Cross,  where  the  Son  of
God  was  conqueror,  and  where  He  betrothed  our  human
nature  to  Himself,  and,  by  consequence,  every  soul  of
man.  There,  on  the  Cross,  He  gave  us  grace  and  pledges
of  His  love.

'  There  wert  thou  betrothed,
there  I  gave  thee  My  hand  ;  '

3.  Help  and  grace,  lifting  thee  up  out  of  thy  base
and  miserable  condition  to  be  My  companion  and  My
bride.

'  And  thou  wert  redeemed

where  thy  mother  was  corrupted.'

4.  Thy  mother,  human  nature,  was  corrupted  in  her
first  parents  beneath  the  forbidden  tree,  and  thou  wert
redeemed  beneath  the  tree  of  the  Cross.  If  thy  mother
at  that  tree  sentenced  thee  to  die,  I  from  the  Cross  have
given  thee  hfe.  It  is  thus  that  God  reveals  the  order  and
dispositions  of  His  wisdom  :  eliciting  good  from  evil,  and
turning  that  which  has  its  origin  in  evil  to  be  an  instru-
ment of  greater  good.  This  stanza  is  nearly  word  for
word  what  the  Bridegroom  in  the  Canticle  saith  to  the
bride:  '  Under  the  apple-tree  I  raised  thee  up:  there  thy
mother  was  corrupted  :  there  she  was  defloured  that  bare
thee.'-f-

5.  It  is  not  the  betrothal  of  the  Cross  that  I  am
speaking  of  now — that  takes  place,   once   for  all,  when

*  Ephes.  ii.  15.  f  Cant.  viii.  5.


[STAN.  XXIII.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.         oOo

God  gives  the  first  grace  to  the  soul  in  baptism.  I  am
speaking  of  the  betrothal  in  the  way  of  perfection,  which
is  a  progressive  work.  And  though  both  are  but  one,  yet
there  is  a  difference  between  them.  The  latter  is  effected
in  the  way  of  the  soul,  and  therefore  slowly ;  the  former
in  the  way  of  God,  and  therefore  at  once.

6.  The  betrothal  of  which  I  am  speaking  is  that  of
which  God  speaks  Himself  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet
Ezechiel,  saying  :  '  Thou  wert  cast  out  upon  the  face  of
the  earth  in  the  abjection  of  thy  soul,  in  the  day  that
thou  wert  born.  And  passing  by  thee,  I  saw  that  thou
wert  trodden  under  foot  in  thy  blood ;  and  I  said  to  thee
when  thou  wert  in  thy  blood  :  Live  :  I  said  to  thee,  I  say  ;
in  thy  blood  live.  Multiplied  as  the  spring  of  the  field
have  I  made  thee ;  and  thou  wert  multiplied  and  made
great,  and  thou  wentest  in,  and  camest  to  the  ornaments
of  women  ;  thy  breasts  swelled  and  thy  hair  budded  :  and
thou  wert  naked  and  full  of  confusion.  And  I  passed  by
thee  and  saw  thee,  and  behold  thy  time,  the  time  of
lovers  ;  and  I  spread  My  garment  over  thee,  and  covered
thy  ignominy.  And  I  swore  to  thee ;  and  I  entered  a
covenant  with  thee,  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  and  thou  wert
made  Mine.  And  I  washed  thee  with  water,  and  made  clean
thy  blood  from  off  thee :  and  I  anointed  thee  with  oil.
And  I  clothed  thee  with  divers  colours,  and  shod  thee
with  hyscinth,  and  I  girded  thee  with  silk  and  clothed
thee  with  fine  garments.  And  I  adorned  thee  with
ornaments,  and  put  bracelets  on  thy  hands,  and  a  chain
about  thy  neck.  And  I  put  a  jewel  upon  thy  forehead
and  rings  in  thy  ears,  and  a  crown  of  beauty  on  thy  head.
And  thou  wert  adorned   with  gold  and  silver,  and  wert


304  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXIII. ]

clothed  with  silk,  and  embroidered  work,  and  many
colours :  thou  didst  eat  fine  flour,  and  honey,  and  oil,
and  wert  made  beautiful  exceedingly,  and  advanced  to  be
a  queen.  And  thy  name  went  forth  among  the  nations
because  of  thy  beauty,'*  These  are  the  words  of  Ezechiel,
and  this  is  the  state  of  that  soul  of  which  I  am  now
speaking.


NOTE.

After  the  mutual  surrender  to  each  other  of  the  bride
and  the  Beloved,  comes  their  bed.  Thereon  the  bride
enters  into  the  joy  of  Christ.  Thus  the  present  stanza
refers  to  the  bed,  which  is  pure  and  chaste,  and  divine,
and  in  which  the  bride  is  pure,  divine,  and  chaste.  The
bed  is  nothing  else  but  the  Bridegroom  Himself,  the
Word,  the  Son  of  God,  in  Whom,  through  the  union  of
love,  the  bride  reposes.  This  bed  is  said  to  be  of  flowers,
for  the  Bridegroom  is  not  only  that,  but,  as  He  says
Himself  of  Himself,  '  I  am  the  flower  of  the  field  and  the
lily  of  the  valleys.' +  The  soul  reposes  not  only  on  the
bed  of  flowers,  but  on  that  very  flower  which  is  the  Son
of  God,  and  which  contains  in  itself  the  divine  odour,
fragrance,  grace,  and  beauty,  as  He  saith  by  the  mouth  of
David  :  '  With  me  is  the  beauty  of  the  field."!  The  soul,
therefore,  in  the  stanza  that  follows,  celebrates  the
properties  and  beauties  of  its  bed,  saying  : —

*  Ezech.  xvi.  5-14.  f  Cant.  ii.  i.  \  Ps.  xlix.  11.


[STAN.  XXIV.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  305


STANZA  XXIV.

THE    BRIDE.

Our  bed  is  of  flowers

By  dens  of  I  tons  enrompassed,

Hung  with  purple,

Mode  in  peace.

And  crowned  with  a  thousand  shields  of  gold.

In  two  of  the  foregoing  stanzas — the  fourteenth  and
the  fifteenth — the  bride-soul  celebrated  the  grace  and
magnificence  of  the  Beloved,  the  Son  of  God.  In  the
present  stanza  she  not  only  pursues  the  same  subject,  but
also  sings  of  her  high  and  blessed  state,  and  her  own
security  in  it.  She  then  proceeds  to  the  virtues  and  rich
gifts  with  which  she  is  endowed  and  adorned  in  the
chamber  of  the  Brideerroom ;  for  she  says  that  she  is  in
union  with  Him,  and  is  strong  in  virtue.  Next  she  says
that  she  has  attained  to  the  perfection  of  love,  and  then
that  she  enjoys  perfect  spiritual  peace,  endowed  and
adorned  with  gifts  and  graces,  so  far  as  it  is  possible  to
have  them  in  this  life.  The  first  subject  of  the  stanza  is
the  joy  which  the  bride  feels  in  her  union  with  the
Beloved,  saying  :  —

'  Our  bed  is  of  flowers.'
2.  I  have  already  said  that  this  bed  of  the  soul  is  the
bosom  and  love  of  the  Son  of  God,  full  of  flowers  to  the  soul,
which  now  united  to  God  and  reposing  in  Him,  as  His  bride,
shares  the  bosom  and  love  of  the  Beloved.  That  is,  the  soul
is  admitted  to  a  knowledge  of  the  wisdom,  secrets  and
graces,  and  gifts  and  powers  of  God,  whereby  it  is  made  so
beautiful,  so  rich,  so  abounding  in  delights,  that  it  seems


;]06  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXIV.]

to  be  lying  on  a  bed  of  many-coloured  divine  flowers,  the
touch  of  which  makes  it  thrill  with  joy,  and  the  odours
of  which  refresh  it.

3.  This  union  of  love  with  God  is  therefore  most
appropriately  called  a  bed  of  flowers,  and  is  so  called  by
the  bride  in  the  Canticle,  saying  to  the  Beloved :  '  Our
bed  is  of  flowers.'*  She  speaks  of  it  as  ours,  because  the
virtues  and  the  love,  one  and  the  same,  of  the  Beloved
are  common  to  both  together,  and  the  delight  of  both  is
one  and  the  same ;  as  it  is  written  :  '  My  delights  were  to
be  with  the  children  of  men.'f  The  bed  is  said  to  be  of
flowers,  because  in  this  state  the  virtues  in  the  soul  are
perfect  and  heroic,  which  they  could  not  be  until  the  bed
had  flowered  in  perfect  union  with  God.

'  By  dens  of  lions  encompassed.'

4.  The  dens  of  lions  signify  the  virtues  with  which  the
soul  is  endowed  in  the  state  of  union.  The  dens  of  lions  are
safe  retreats,  protected  from  all  other  animals,  who,  afraid
of  the  boldness  and  strength  of  the  lion  within,  are  afraid
not  only  to  enter,  but  even  to  appear  in  sight.  So  each
virtue  of  the  soul  in  the  state  of  perfection  is  like  a  den  of
lions  where  Christ  dwells  united  to  the  soul  in  that  virtue;
and  in  every  one  of  them  as  a  strong  lion.  The  soul  also,
united  to  Him  in  those  very  virtues,  is  as  a  strong  lion,
because  it  then  partakes  of  the  perfections  of  God.

5.  Thus,  then,  the  perfect  soul  is  so  defended,  so
strong  in  virtue,  and  in  all  virtues  together,  reposing  on
the  flowery  bed  of  its  union  with  God,  that  the  evil  spirits
are  not  only  afraid  to  assault  it,  but  even  dare  not  appear
before  it  ;    such  is  their  dread  of  it,  when  they  behold  it

*  Cant.  i.  15.  t  Prov.  viii.  31.


[STAN.  XXIV.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  307

strong,  courageous,  and  mature  in  its  perfect  virtues,  on
the  bed  of  the  Beloved.  The  evil  spirits  fear  a  soul
transformed  in  the  union  of  love  as  much  as  they  fear  the
Beloved  Himself,  and  they  dare  not  look  upon  it,  for
satan  is  in  great  fear  of  that  soul  which  has  attained  to
perfection.

6.  The  soul's  bed  is  encompassed  by  virtues  :  they  are
the  dens,  for  when  the  soul  has  advanced  to  perfection,
its  virtues  are  so  perfectly  ordered,  and  so  joined  together
and  bound  up  one  with  another,  each  supporting  the
other,  that  no  part  of  it  is  weak  or  exposed ;  not  only  is
satan  unable  to  penetrate  within  it,  but  even  worldly
things,  whether  great  or  little,  fail  to  disturb  or  annoy  it,
or  even  move  it ;  for  being  now  free  from  all  molestation
of  natural  affections,  and  a  stranger  to  the  worry  of
temporal  anxieties,  enjoys  in  security  and  peace  the
participation  of  God.

7.  This  is  that  for  which  the  bride  longed  when  she
said :  '  Who  shall  give  to  me  Thee  my  brother,  sucking
the  breast  of  my  mother,  that  I  may  find  Thee  without,
and  kiss  Thee,  and  now  no  man  despise  me  ?  '*  The
'  kiss '  here  is  the  union  of  which  I  am  speaking,  whereby
the  soul,  by  love,  becomes  in  a  sense  the  equal  of  God.
This  is  the  object  it  desires  when  it  says :  '  Who  shall
give  to  me  Thee  my  brother  ?  '  That  means  and  makes
equality.  '  Sucking  the  breast  of  my  mother ; '  that  is,
destroying  all  the  imperfections  and  desires  of  nature
which  the  soul  inherits  from  its  mother  Eve.  '  That  I
may  find  Thee  without ; '  that  is,  be  united  to  Thee  alone,
away  from   all   things,    in    detachment    of  the   will   and

*  Cant.  viii.  i.

X  2


308  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXIV.]

desires.  '  And  now  no  man  despise  me ; '  that  is,  the
world,  the  devil,  and  the  flesh  will  not  venture  to  assail  it,  for
being  free  and  purified,  and  also  united  to  God,  none  of
these  can  molest  it.  Thus,  then,  the  soul  is  in  the
enjoyment  now  of  habitual  sweetness  and  tranquillity  that
never  fail  it.

8.  But  beside  this  habitual  contentment  and  peace,
the  flowers  of  the  virtues  of  this  garden  so  open  in  the
soul  and  diffuse  their  odours,  that  it  seems  to  be,  and  is,
full  of  the  delights  of  God.  I  say  that  the  flow^ers  open  ;
because  the  soul,  though  filled  with  the  virtues  in  per-
fection, is  not  always  in  the  actual  fruition  of  them,
notwithstanding  its  habitual  perception  of  the  peace  and
tranquillity  which  they  produce.  We  may  say  of  these
virtues  that  they  are  in  this  life  like  the  budding  flowers
of  a  garden  ;  they  offer  a  most  beautiful  sight — opening
under  the  inspirations  of  the  Holy  Ghost — and  diffuse
most  marvellous  perfumes  in  great  variety.

g.  Sometimes  the  soul  will  discern  in  itself  the
mountain  flowers — the  fulness,  grandeur,  and  beauty  of
God — intermingled  with  the  lilies  of  the  valley — rest,
refreshment,  and  defence ;  and  again  among  them,  the
fragrant  roses  of  the  strange  islands — the  strange  know-
ledge of  God ;  and  further,  the  perfume  of  the  water
lilies  of  the  roaring  torrents-  the  majesty  of  God  filling
the  whole  soul.  And  amid  all  this,  it  enjoys  the  exquisite
fragrance  of  the  jasmine,  and  the  whisper  of  the  amorous
gales,  the  fruition  of  which  is  granted  to  the  soul  in  the
estate  of  union,  and  in  the  same  way  all  the  other  virtues
and  graces,  the  calm  knowledge,  silent  music,  murmuring
solitude,  and  the  sweet  supper  of  love ;  and  the  joy  of  all


[STAN.  XXIV.]      OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  309

this  is  such  as  to  make  the  soul  say  in  truth,  '  Our  bed  is
of  flowers,  by  dens  of  lions  encompassed.'  Blessed  is
that  soul  which  in  this  life  deserves  at  times  to  enjoy  the
perfume  of  these  divine  flowers.

'  Hung  with  purple.'

10.  Purple  in  Holy  Scripture  means  charity,  and  kings
are  clad  in  it,  and  for  that  reason  the  soul  says  that  the  bed
of  flowers  is  hung  with  purple,  because  all  the  virtues,
riches,  and  blessings  of  it  are  sustained,  flourish,  and  are
delighted  only  in  charity  and  love  of  the  King  of  heaven  ;
without  that  love  the  soul  can  never  delight  in  the  bed
nor  in  the  flowers  thereof.  All  these  virtues,  therefore,
are,  in  the  soul,  as  if  hung  on  the  love  of  God,  as  on  that
which  preserves  them,  and  they  are,  as  it  were,  bathed  in
love ;  for  all  and  each  of  them  always  make  the  soul  love
God,  and  on  all  occasions,  and  in  all  actions,  they  advance
in  love  to  a  greater  love  of  God.  That  is  what  is  meant
by  saying  that  the  bed  is  hung  with  purple.

11.  This  is  well  expressed  in  the  sacred  Canticle:
'  King  Solomon  hath  made  himself  a  litter  of  the  wood  of
Libanus  :  the  pillars  thereof  he  hath  made  of  silver,  the
seat  of  gold,  the  going  up  of  purple ;  the  midst  he  hath
paved  with  charity.'*  The  virtues  and  graces  which  God
lays  in  the  bed  of  the  soul  are  signified  by  the  wood  of
Libanus :  the  pillars  of  silver  and  the  seat  of  gold  are
love ;  for,  as  I  have  said,  the  virtues  are  maintained  by
love,  and  by  the  love  of  God  and  of  the  soul  are  ordered
and  bring  forth  fruit.

'  Made  in  peace.'

12.  This    is    the    fourth   excellence    of  the    bed,    and

depends   on   the    third,    of   which    I    have   just    spoken.
*  Cant.  iii.  g,  lo.


;:510  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXIV.]

For  the  third  is  perfect  charity,  the  property  of  which
is,  as  the  Apostle  saith,  to  cast  out  fear  ;*  hence
the  perfect  peace  of  the  soul,  which  is  the  fourth  excel-
lence of  this  bed.  For  the  clearer  understanding  of  this
we  must  keep  in  mind  that  each  virtue  is  in  itself  peaceful
gentle,  and  strong,  and  consequently,  in  the  soui  which
possesses  them,  produces  peace,  gentleness,  and  fortitude.
Now,  as  the  bed  is  of  flowers,  formed  of  the  flowers  of
virtues,  all  of  which  are  peaceful,  gentle,  and  strong,  it
follows  that  the  bed  is  wrought  in  peace,  and  the  soul  is
peaceful,  gentle,  and  strong,  which  are  three  qualities
unassailable  by  the  world,  satan,  and  the  flesh.  The
virtues  preserve  the  soul  in  such  peace  and  security  that
it  seems  to  be  wholly  built  up  in  peace.  The  fifth  property
of  this  bed  of  flowers  is  explained  in  the  following  words.
'  Crowned  with  a  thousand  shields  of  gold.'
13.  The  ghields  are  the  virtues  and  graces  of  the  soul,
which,  though  they  are  also  the  flowers,  serve  for  its  crown,
and  the  reward  of  the  toil  by  which  they  are  acquired.  They
serve  also,  like  strong  shields,  as  a  protection  against  the
vices,  which  it  overcame  by  the  practice  of  them  ;  and  the
bridal  bed  of  flowers  therefore,  that  is  the  virtues,  the
crown  and  defence,  is  adorned  with  them  by  way  of
reward,  and  protected  by  them  as  with  a  shield.  The
shields  are  said  to  be  of  gold,  to  show  the  great  worth  of
the  virtues.  The  bride  in  the  Canticle  sets  forth  the  same
truth,  saying :  '  Three  score  valiant  men  of  the  most
valiant  of  Israel  surround  the  little  bed  of  Solomon,  all
holding  swords ;  .  .  .  every  man's  sword  upon  his
thigh,  because  of  fears  in  the  night. 't

*  I  St.  John  iv.  18.  t  Cant.  iii.  7,  8.


[STAN.  XXV.]       OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  311

14.  Thus  in  this  stanza  the  bride  speaks  of  a  thousand
shields,  to  express  the  variety  of  the  virtues,  gifts,  and
graces  wherewith  God  has  endowed  the  soul  in  this  state.
The  Bridegroom  also  in  the  Canticle  has  employed  the
same  expression,  in  order  to  show  forth  the  innumerable
virtues  of  the  soul,  saying :  '  Thy  neck  is  as  the  tower  of
David,  which  is  built  with  bulwarks ;  a  thousand  shields
hang  upon  it,  all  the  armour  of  valiant  men.'*


NOTE.

The  soul,  having  attained  to  perfection,  is  not  satisfied
with  magnifying  and  extolling  the  excellences  of  the
Beloved,  the  Son  of  God,  nor  with  recounting  and  giving
thanks  for  the  graces  received  at  His  hands  and  the  joy
into  which  it  has  entered,  but  recounts  also  the  graces
conferred  on  other  souls.  In  this  blessed  union  of  love
the  soul  is  able  to  contemplate  both  its  own  and  others'
graces  ;  thus  praising  Him  and  giving  Him  thanks  for  the
many  graces  bestowed  upon  others,  it  sings  as  in  the
following  stanza : —

STANZA  XXV.

In  Thy  footsteps,
The  yojiiig  ones  run  Thy  way ;
At  the  touch  of  the  fire.
And  by  the  spiced  wine,
The  divine  balsam  flows.

Here  the  bride  gives  thanks  to  her  Beloved  for  three
graces  which  devout  souls  receive  from  Him,  by  which
they  encourage  and  excite  themselves  to  love  God  more

*  Cant.  iv.  4.


312  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXV.]

and  more.  She  speaks  of  them  here,  because  she  has  had
experience  of  them  herself  in  this  state  of  union.  The
first  is  sweetness,  which  He  gives  them,  and  which  is  so
efficacious  that  it  makes  them  run  swiftly  on  the  road  of
perfection.  The  second  is  a  visit  of  love,  by  which  they
are  suddenly  set  on  fire  with  love.  The  third  is  overflow-
ing charity  infused  into  them,  with  which  He  so  inebriates
them,  that  they  are  as  much  excited  by  it  as  by  the  visit
of  love,  to  utter  the  praises  of  God,  and  to  love  Him  with
all  sweetness.

'  In  Thy  footsteps.'

2.  These  are  the  marks  on  the  ground  by  which  we
trace  the  course  of  one  we  seek.  The  sweetness  and
knowledge  of  Himself  which  God  communicates  to  the
soul  that  seeks  Him,  are  the  footsteps  by  which  it  traces
and  recognises  Him.  Thus  the  soul  says  to  the  Word,
the  Bridegroom,  '  In  Thy  footsteps ; '  in  the  traces  of  Thy
sweetness  which  Thou  diffuset,  and  the  odours  which
Thou  scatterest.

'  The  young  ones  run  Thy  way.'

3.  Devout  souls  run  with  youthful  vigour  in  the
sweetness  which  Thy  footsteps  communicate.  They  run
in  many  ways  and  in  various  directions — each  according
to  the  spirit  which  God  bestows,  and  the  vocation  He
has  given — in  the  diversified  forms  of  spiritual  service  on
the  road  of  everlasting  life,  which  is  evangelical  perfection,
where  they  meet  the  Beloved  in  the  union  of  love,  in
spiritual  detachment  from  all  things.

4.  This  sweetness  and  impression  of  Himself  which
God  leaves  in  the  soul,  render  it  light  and  active,  in
running    after    Him ;     for    the    soul    then    does    little    or


[STAN.  XXV.]        OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  313

nothing  in  its  own  strength  towards  running  along  this
road,  being  rather  attracted  by  the  divine  footsteps,  so
that  it  not  only  advances,  but  even  runs,  as  I  said  before,
in  many  ways.  The  bride  in  the  Canticle,  therefore,
prays  for  the  divine  attraction,  saying :  '  Draw  me,  we
will  run  after  Thee  to  the  odour  of  Thy  ointments  ;  '*  and
David  saith  :  '  I  have  run  the  way  of  Thy  commandments,
when  Thou  didst  dilate  my  heart.' f

'  At  the  touch  of  the  fire,  and  by  the  spiced  wine,
the  divine  balsam  flows.'

5.  I  said,  while  explaining  the  previous  lines,  that
souls  run  in  His  footsteps  in  the  way  of  exterior  works.
But  the  three  lines  I  have  just  quoted  refer  to  the
interior  acts  of  the  will,  when  souls  are  under  the
influence  of  the  other  two  graces  and  interior  visits  of  the
Beloved.  These  are  the  touch  of  fire,  and  spiced  wine  ;
and  the  interior  act  of  the  will,  which  is  the  result  of
these  visits,  is  the  flowing  of  the  divine  balsam.  The
contact  of  the  fire  is  that  most  delicate  touch  of  the
Beloved  which  the  soul  feels  at  times  even  when  least
expecting  it,  and  which  sets  the  heart  on  fire  with  love,
as  if  a  spark  of  fire  had  fallen  upon  it  and  made  it  burn.
Then  the  will,  in  an  instant,  like  one  roused  from  sleep,
burns  with  the  fire  of  love,  longs  for  God,  praises  Him
and  gives  Him  thanks,  worships  and  honours  Him,  and
prays  to  Him  in  the  sweetness  of  love.

6.  This  is  the  flowing  of  the  divine  balsam,  which
obeys  the  touch  of  the  fire  that  issues  forth  from  the
consuming  love  of  God  which  that  fire  kindled  ;  the  divine

*  Cant.  i.  3.  .  t  Ps.  cxviii.  32.


314  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXV.]

balsam  which  comforts  the  soul    and    heals    it  with    its
odour  and  its  substance.

7.  The  bride  in  the  Canticle  speaks  of  this  divine
touch,  saying:  My  Beloved  put  His  hand  through  the
opening,  and  my  belly  trembled  at  His  touch.'*  The
touch  of  the  Beloved  is  the  touch  of  love,  and  His  hand
is  the  grace  He  bestows  upon  the  soul,  and  the  opening
through  which  He  put  His  hand  is  the  vocation  and  the
perfection,  at  least  the  degree  of  perfection  of  the  soul ;
for  according  thereto  will  His  touch  be  heavier  or  lighter,
in  proportion  to  its  spiritual  state.  The  belly  that  troubled
is  the  will,  in  which  the  touch  is  effected,  and  the  trembling
is  the  stirring  up  of  the  desires  and  affections  to  love,  long
for,  and  praise  God,  which  is  the  flowing  of  the  balsam
from  this  touch.

8.  '  The  spiced  wine '  is  that  exceeding  great  grace
which  God  sometimes  bestows  upon  advanced  souls,
when  the  Holy  Spirit  inebriates  them  with  the  sweet,
luscious,  and  strong  wine  of  love.  Hence  it  is  here  called
spiced  wine,  for  as  such  wine  is  prepared  by  fermentation
with  many  and  divers  aromatic  and  strengthening  herbs ;
so  this  love,  the  gift  of  God  to  the  perfect,  is  in  the  soul
prepared  and  seasoned  with  the  virtues  already  acquired.
This  love,  seasoned  with  the  precious  spices,  communi-
cates to  the  soul  such  a  strong  abundant  inebriation  when
God  visits  it,  that  it  pours  forth  with  great  effect  and
force  those  acts  of  rapturous  praise,  love,  and  worship,
which  I  referred  to  before,  and  that  with  a  marvellous
longing  to  labour  and  to  suffer  for  Him.

9.  This  sweet  inebriation  and  grace,  however,  do  not

*  Cant.  V.  4.


[STAN.  XXV,]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        315

pass  quickly  away,  like  the  touch  of  the  fire,  for  they  are
of  longer  continuance.  The  fire  touches  and  passes,  but
the  effects  abide  often ;  and  sometimes  the  spiced  wine
continues  for  a  considerable  time,  and  its  effects  also ;
this  is  the  sweet  love  of  the  soul,  and  continues  occa-
sionally a  day  or  two,  sometimes  even  many  days  together,
though  not  always  in  the  same  degree  of  intensity,  because
it  is  not  in  the  power  of  the  soul  to  control  it.  Sometimes
the  soul,  without  any  effort  of  its  own,  is  conscious  of  a
most  sweet  interior  inebriation,  and  of  the  divine  love
burning  within,  as  David  saith,  '  My  heart  waxed  hot
within  me,  and  in  my  meditation  a  fire  shall  burn.'*

10.  The  outpourings  of  this  inebriation  last  sometimes
as  long  as  the  inebriation  itself.  At  other  times  there  are
no  outpourings ;  and  they  are  more  or  less  intense  when
they  occur,  in  proportion  to  the  greater  or  less  intensity
of  the  inebriation  itself.  But  the  outpourings,  or  effects
of  the  fire,  generally  last  longer  than  (he  fire  which  caused
them ;  yea,  rather  the  fire  leaves  them  behind  in  the  soul,
and  they  are  more  vehement  than  those  which  proceed
from  the  inebriation,  for  sometimes  this  divine  fire  burns
up  and  consumes  the  soul  in  love.

11.  As  I  have  mentioned  fermented  wine,  it  will  be
well  to  touch  briefly  upon  the  difference  between  it,  when
it  is  old,  and  new  wine ;  the  difference  between  old  wine
and  new  wine  is  the  same,  and  will  furnish  a  little  instruc-
tion for  spiritual  men.  New  wine  has  not  settled  on  the
lees,  and  is  therefore  fermenting ;  we  cannot  ascertain  its
quality  or  worth  before  it  has  settled,  and  the  fermentation
has  ceased,  for  until  then  there  is  great  risk  of  its  corrup-

*  Ps.  xxxviii.  4.


316  A  SPITITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXV.]

tion.  The  taste  of  it  is  rough  and  sharp,  and  an  im-
moderate draught  of  it  intoxicates.  Old  wine  has  settled
on  the  lees,  and  ferments  no  more  like  new  wine ;  the
quality  of  it  is  easily  ascertained,  and  it  is  now  very  safe
from  corruption,  for  all  fermentation  which  might  have
proved  pernicious  has  entirely  ceased.  Well  fermented
wine  is  very  rarely  spoiled,  the  taste  of  it  is  pleasant,  and
its  strength  is  in  its  own  substance,  not  in  the  taste,
and  the  drinking  thereof  produces  health  and  a  sound
constitution.

12.  New  lovers  are  compared  to  new  wine;  these  are
beginners  in  the  service  of  God,  because  the  fervour  of
their  love  manifests  itself  outwardly  in  the  senses  ;  because
they  have  not  settled  on  the  lees  of  sense,  frail  and  im-
perfect ;  and  because  they  measure  the  strength  of  love
by  the  sweetness  of  it,  for  it  is  sensible  sweetness  that
ordinarily  gives  them  their  strength  for  good  works,
and  it  is  by  this  they  are  influenced  ;  we  nmst,  therefore,
place  no  confidence  in  this  love  till  the  fermentation  has
subsided,  with  the  coarse  satisfaction  of  sense.

13.  For  as  these  fervours  and  sensible  warmth  may
incline  men  to  good  and  perfect  love,  and  serve  as  an
excellent  means  thereto,  when  the  lees  of  imperfections
are  cleared ;  so  also  is  it  very  easy  at  first,  when  sensible
sweetness  is  fresh,  for  the  wine  of  love  to  fail,  and  the
sweetness  of  the  new  to  vanish.  New  lovers  are  always
anxious,  sensibly  tormented  by  their  love ;  it  is  necessary
for  them  to  put  some  restraint  upon  themselves,  for  if
they  are  very  active  in  the  strength  of  this  wine,  their
natural  powers  will  be  ruined  with  these  anxieties  and
fatigues  of  the  new  wine,  which  is  rough  and  sharp,  and


[STAN.  XXV.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  317

not  made  sweet  in  the  perfect  fermentation,  which  then
takes  place  when  the  anxieties  of  love  are  over,  as  I  shall
show  immediately.

14.  The  Wise  Man  employs  the  same  illustration  ;
saying-,  '  A  new  friend  is  as  new  wine  ;  it  shall  grow
old,  and  thou  shalt  drink  it  with  pleasure.'*  Old  lovers,
therefore,  who  have  been  tried  and  proved  in  the  service  of
the  Bridegroom,  are  like  old  wine  settled  on  the  lees  ;
they  have  no  sensible  emotions,  nor  outbursts  of  exterior
zeal,  but  they  taste  the  sweetness  of  the  wine  of  love,  now
thoroughly  fermented,  not  sweet  to  the  senses  as  was  that
of  the  love  of  beginners,  but  rather  settled  within  the  soul
in  the  substance  and  sweetness  of  the  spirit,  and  in  perfect
good  works.  Such  souls  as  these  do  not  seek  after  sensible
sweetness  and  fervours,  neither  do  they  wish  for  them,  lest
they  should  suffer  from  loathing  and  weariness ;  for  he
who  gives  the  reins  to  his  desires  in  matters  of  sense,
must  of  necessity  suffer  pain  and  loathing,  both  in  mind
and  body.

15.  Old  lovers,  therefore,  free  from  that  spiritual
sweetness  which  has  its  roots  in  the  senses,  suffer  neither
in  sense  nor  spirit  from  the  anxieties  of  love,  and  thus
scarcely  ever  prove  faithless  to  God,  because  they  have
risen  above  that  which  might  be  an  occasion  of  falling,
namely,  the  flesh.  These  now  drink  of  the  wine  of  love,
which  is  not  only  fermented  and  free  from  the  lees,  but
spiced  also  with  the  aromatic  herbs  of  perfect  virtues,
which  will  not  allow  it  to  corrupt,  as  may  happen  to  new
wine.

16.  For  this  cause  an  old  friend  is  of  great  price  in  the

*  Ecclus.  ix.  15.


318  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXV.]

eyes  of  God,  '  Forsake  not  an  old  friend,  for  the  new  will
not  be  like  to  him.'"  It  is  through  this  wine  of  love,  tried
and  spiced,  that  the  divine  Beloved  produces  in  the  soul
that  divine  inebriation,  under  the  influence  of  which  it
sends  forth  to  God  the  sweet  and  delicious  outpourings.
The  meaning  of  these  three  lines,  therefore,  is  as  follows  :
'  At  the  touch  of  the  fire '  by  which  Thou  stirrest  up  the
soul,  and  by  the  spiced  wine  with  which  Thou  dost  so
lovingly  inebriate  it,  the  soul  pours  forth  the  acts  and
movements  of  love  which  are  Thy  work  within  it.


NOTE.


Such,  then,  is  the  state  of  the  blessed  soul  in  the  bed  of
flowers,  where  all  these  blessings,  and  many  more,  are
granted  it.  The  seat  of  that  bed  is  the  Son  of  God,  and
the  hangings  of  it  are  the  charity  and  love  of  the  Bride-
groom Himself.  The  soul  now  may  say,  with  the  bride  :
'  His  left  hand  is  under  my  head,'!  and  we  may  therefore
say,  in  truth,  that  such  a  soul  is  clothed  in  God,  and
bathed  in  the  Divinity,  and  that,  not  as  it  were  on  the
surface,  but  in  the  interior  spirit,  and  filled  with  the
divine  delights  in  the  abundance  of  the  spiritual  waters  of
life ;  for  it  experiences  that  which  David  says  of  those  who
have  drawn  near  unto  God,  '  They  shall  be  inebriated
with  the  plenty  of  Thy  house,  and  Thou  shalt  make  them
drink  in  the  torrent  of  Th}^  pleasure,  for  with  Thee  is  the
fountain  of  life.'t

2.     This  fulness  will  be  in  the  very  being  of  the  soul,
*  Ecclus.  ix.  14.  t  Cant.  ii.  6.  X  Ps.  xxxv.  g.


[STAN.  XXVI.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  319

seeing  that  its  drink  is  nothing  else  but  the  torrent  of
delights,  and  that  torrent  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  it  is  written :
'  And  he  showed  me  a  river  of  living  water,  clear  as
crystal,  proceeding  from  the  throne  of  God  and  the
Lamb.'*  This  water  being  the  very  love  itself  of  God,
flows  into  the  soul,  so  that  it  drinks  of  the  torrent  of  love,
which  is  the  spirit  of  the  Bridegroom  infused  into  the
soul  in  union.  Thence  the  soul  in  the  overflowing  of  its
love  sings  the  following  stanza :


STANZA    XXVI.

lit  the  inner  cellar

Of  my  Bel'ved  have  I  drunk;  and  when  I  we?it  forth

Over  all  the  plai't

I  knew  nothing,

And  lost  the  flock  I  followed  before.

Here  the  soul  speaks  of  that  sovereign  grace  of  God  in
taking  it  to  Himself  into  the  house  of  His  love,  which  is
the  union,  or  transformation  of  love  in  God.  It  describes
two  effects  proceeding  therefrom  :  forgetfulness  of,  and
detachment  from,  all  the  things  of  this  world,  and  the
mortification  of  its  tastes  and  desires.

'  In  the  inner  cellar.'
2.  In  order  to  explain  in  any  degree  the  meaning  of  this,
I  have  need  of  the  special  help  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  direct
my  hand  and  guide  my  pen.  The  cellar  is  the  highest
degree  of  love  to  which  the  soul  may  attain  in  this  life,  and
is  therefore  said  to  be  the  inner.  It  follows  from  this  that
there  are  other  cellars  not  so  interior  ;  that  is,  the  degrees

*  Apoc.  xxii.  I.


320  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.XXVL]

of  love  by  which  souls  reach  this,  the  last.  These  cellars
are  seven  in  number,  and  the  soul  has  entered  into  them  all
when  it  has  in  perfection  the  seven  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
so  far  as  it  is  possible  for  it.  When  the  soul  has  the
spirit  of  fear  in  perfection,  it  has  in  perfection  also  the
spirit  of  love,  inasmuch  as  this  fear,  the  last  of  the  seven
gifts,  is  filial  fear,  and  the  perfect  fear  of  a  son  proceeds
from  his  perfect  love  of  his  father.  Thus  when  the  Holy
Scriptures  speaks  of  one  as  having  perfect  charity,  it  says
of  him  that  he  fears  God.  So  the  prophet  Isaias,
announcing  the  perfections  of  Christ,  saith  of  Him  :  '  The
spirit  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord  shall  replenish  him.'*  Holy
Simeon  also  is  spoken  of  by  the  Evangelist  as  a  'just  man
full  of  fear,'t  and  the  same  applies  to  many  others.

3,  Many  souls  reach  and  enter  the  first  cellar,  each
according  to  the  perfection  of  its  love,  but  the  last  and
inmost  cellar  is  entered  by  few  in  this  world,  because
therein  is  wrought  the  perfect  union  with  God,  the  union
of  the  spiritual  marriage,  of  which  the  soul  is  now
speaking.  What  God  communicates  to  the  soul  in  this
intimate  union  is  utterly  ineffable,  beyond  the  reach  of  all
possible  words- — ^just  as  it  is  impossible  to  speak  of  God
Himself,  so  as  to  convey  any  idea  of  what  He  is — because
it  is  God  Himself  who  communicates  Himself  to  the  soul
now  in  the  marvellous  bliss  of  its  transformation.  In
this  state  God  and  the  soul  are  united,  as  the  window  is
with  the  light,  or  coal  with  the  fire,  or  the  light  of  the
stars  with  that  of  the  sun,  yet,  however,  not  so  essentially
and  completely  as  it  will  be  in  the  life  to  come.  The
soul,  therefore,  to  show  what  it  received  from  the  hands

*  Is.  xi.  3.  t  St.  Luke  ii.  25.     Justus  et  timoratus.


[STAN.  XXVI.]       OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.         321

of  God  in  the  cellar  of  wine,  says  nothing  else,  and  I  do
not  believe  that  anything  could  be  said  but  the  words
which  follow :

'  Of  my  Beloved  have  I  drunk.'

4.  As  a  draught  diffuses  itself  through  all  the  members
and  veins  of  the  body,  so  this  communication  of  God
diffuses  itself  substantially  in  the  whole  soul,  or  rather,  the
soul  is  transformed  in  God.  In  this  transformation  the  soul
drinks  of  God  in  its  very  substance  and  its  spiritual
powers.  In  the  understanding  it  drinks  wisdom  and
knowledge,  in  the  will  the  sweetest  love,  in  the  memory
refreshment  and  delight  in  the  thought  and  sense  of  its
bliss.  That  the  soul  receives  and  drinks  delight  in  its
very  substance,  appears  from  the  words  of  the  bride  in
the  Canticle  :  '  My  soul  melted  as  He  spoke ;  '*  that  is,
when  the  Bridegroom  communicated  Himself  to  the  soul.

5.  That  the  understanding  drinks  wisdom  is  evident
from  the  words  of  the  bride  longing  and  praying  for  the
kiss  of  union  :  '  There  Thou  shalt  teach  me,  and  I  will
give  thee  a  cup  of  spiced  wine.'f  Thou  shalt  teach  me
wisdom  and  knowledge  in  love,  and  I  will  give  Thee  a
cup  of  spiced  wine,  that  is,  my  love  mingled  with  Thine.
The  bride  says  that  the  will  also  drinks  of  love,  saying :
'  He  brought  me  into  the  cellar  of  wine.  He  hath  ordered
in  me  charity,'!  that  is,  He  gave  me  His  love,  embracing
me,  to  drink  of  love ;  or,  to  speak  more  clearly.  He
ordered  in  me  His  charity,  tempering  His  charity  and
to  the  purpose  making  it  mine.  This  is  to  give  the  soul
to  drink  of  the  very  love  of  its  Beloved,  which  the
Beloved  infuses  into  it.

*  Cant.  V.  6.  f  Cant,  viii.  2.  I  Cant.  ii.  4.


322  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXVI.]

6.  There  is  a  common  saying  that  the  will  cannot
love  that  of  which  the  understanding  has  no  knowledge.
This,  however,  is  to  be  understood  in  the  order  of  nature,
it  being  impossible,  in  a  natural  way,  to  love  anything
unless  we  first  know  what  it  is  we  love.  But  in  a
supernatural  way  God  can  certainly  infuse  love  and
increase  it  without  infusing  and  increasing  distinct
knowledge,  as  is  evident  from  the  texts  already  quoted.
Yea,  many  spiritual  persons  have  experience  of  this ;
their  love  of  God  burns  more  and  more,  while  their
knowledge  does  not  grow.  Men  may  know  little  and  love
much,  and  on  the  other  hand,  know  much  and  love  but  little.

7.  In  general,  those  spiritual  persons  whose  knowledge
of  God  is  not  very  great,  are  usually  very  rich  in  all  that
belongs  to  the  will,  and  infused  faith  suffices  them  for
this  knowledge,  by  means  of  which  God  infuses  and
increases  charity  in  them  and  the  acts  thereof,  which  are
to  love  Him  more  and  more  though  knowledge  is  not
increased.  Thus  the  will  may  drink  of  love  while  the
understanding  drinks  in  no  fresh  knowledge.  In  the
present  instance,  however,  all  the  powers  of  the  soul
together,  because  of  the  union  in  the  inner  cellar,  drink  of
the  Beloved.

8.  As  to  the  memory,  it  is  clear  that  the  soul  drinks
of  the  Beloved  in  it,  because  it  is  enlightened  with  the
light  of  the  understanding  in  remembering  the  blessings
it  possesses  and  enjoys  in  union  with  the  Beloved.

'  And  when  I  went  forth,'
g.     That    is    after    this    grace ;     the    divine    draught
having    so    deified    the    soul,   exalted    it,    and    inebriated
it    in    God.      Though    the    soul    be    always    in  the    high


[STAN,  XXVI.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.         82?)

estate  of  marriage  ever  since  God  has  placed  it  there,
nevertheless  actual  union  in  all  its  powers  is  not
continuous,  though  the  substantial  union  is.  In  this
substantial  union  the  powers  of  the  soul  are  most
frequently  in  union,  and  drink  of  His  cellar,  the  under-
standing by  knowledge,  the  will  by  love,  &c.  We  are  not,
therefore,  to  suppose  that  the  soul,  when  saying  that  it
went  out,  has  ceased  from  its  substantial  or  essential
union  with  God,  but  only  from  the  union  of  its  faculties,
which  is  not,  and  cannot  be,  permanent  in  this  life ;  it  is
from  this  7jnion  then  it  went  forth  when  it  wandered  over
all  the  plain,  that  is,  through  the  whole  breadth  of  the  world.
'  I  knew  nothing.'

10.  This  draught  of  God's  most  deep  wisdom  makes  the
soul  forget  all  the  things  of  this  world,  and  consider  all
its  previous  knowledge,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  whole
world  besides,  as  pure  ignorance  in  comparison  with  this
knowledge.

11.  For  a  clearer  understanding  of  this,  we  must
remember  that  the  most  regular  cause  of  the  soul's
ignoring  the  things  of  the  world,  when  it  has  ascended  to
this  high  state,  is,  that  it  is  informed  by  a  supernatural
knowledge,  in  the  presence  of  which  all  natural  and
worldly  knowledge  is  ignorance  rather  than  knowledge.
For  the  soul  in  possession  of  this  knowledge,  which  is
most  profound,  learns  from  it  that  all  other  knowledge
not  included  in  this  knowledge  is  not  knowledge,  but
ignorance,  and  worthless.  We  have  this  truth  in  the
words  of  the  Apostle  when  he  said  that  the  wisdom  of
this  world  is  foolishness  with  God.*

*  I  Cor.  iii.  19.

Y  2


324  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXVI.]

12.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  soul  says  it  knows
nothing,  now  that  it  has  drunk  of  the  divine  wisdom.
The  truth  is  that  the  wisdom  of  men  and  of  the  whole
world  is  mere  ignorance,  and  not  deserving  any  attention,
but  it  is  a  truth  that  can  be  learned  only  in  that  truth  of
the  presence  of  God  in  the  soul  communicating  to  it  His
wisdom  and  making  it  strong  by  this  draught  of  love  that
it  may  see  it  distinctly.  This  is  taught  us  by  Solomon,
saying  :  '  The  vision  that  the  man  spake,  with  whom  God
is,  and  who  being  strengthened  by  God  abiding  with  him,
said :  I  am  the  most  foolish  of  men,  and  the  wisdom  of
men  is  not  with  me.'*

13.  When  the  soul  is  raised  to  this  high  wisdom
of  God,  the  wisdom  of  man  is  in  its  eyes  the  lowest
ignorance :  all  natural  science  and  the  works  of  God,  if
accompanied  by  ignorance  of  Him,  are  as  ignorance ;  for
where  He  is  not  known,  there  nothing  is  known.  'The
deep  things  of  God  are  foolishness  to  men.'f  Thus  the
divinely  wise  and  the  worldly  wise  are  fools  in  the
estimation  of  each  other  ;  for  the  latter  cannot  understand
the  wisdom  and  science  of  God,  nor  the  former  those  of
the  world,  for  the  wisdom  of  the  world  is  ignorance  in
comparison  with  the  wisdom  of  God  ;  and  the  wisdom  of
God  is  ignorance  with  respect  to  that  of  the  world.

14.  Moreover,  this  deification  and  elevation  of  the
spirit  in  God,  whereby  the  soul  is,  as  it  were,  rapt  and
absorbed  in  love,  one  with  God,  suffer  it  not  to  dwell
upon  any  worldly  matter.  The  soul  is  now  detached,  not
only  from  all  outward  things,  but  even  from  itself:  it  is,
as  it  were,  undone,  assumed  by,  and  dissolved  in,  love ;

*  Prov.  XXX.  I,  2,  f  I  Cor.  ii.  14.


[STAN.  XXVI.]      OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.         325

that  is,  it  passes  out  of  itself  into  the  Beloved.  Thus
the  bride,  in  the  Canticle,  after  speaking  of  her  own
transformation  by  love  into  the  Beloved,  expresses  her
state  of  ignorance  by  the  words  '  I  knew  not.'*  The  soul
is  now,  in  a  certain  sense,  like  Adam  in  paradise,  who
knew  no  evil.  It  is  so  innocent  that  it  sees  no  evil ;
neither  does  it  consider  anything  to  be  amiss.  It  will
hear  much  that  is  evil,  and  will  see  it  with  its  eyes,  and
yet  it  shall  not  be  able  to  understand  it,  because  it  has  no
evil  habits  whereby  to  judge  of  it.  God  has  rooted  out  of
it  those  imperfect  habits  and  that  ignorance  resulting
from  the  evil  of  sin,  by  the  perfect  habit  of  true  wisdom.
Thus,  also,  the  soul  knows  nothing  on  this  subject.

15.  Such  a  soul  will  scarcely  intermeddle  with  the
affairs  of  others,  because  it  forgets  even  its  own  ;  for  the
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  soul  in  which  He  dwells
is  to  incline  it  to  ignore  those  things  which  do  not
concern  it,  especially  such  as  do  not  minister  to  edifi-
cation. The  Spirit  of  God  abides  within  the  soul  to
withdraw  it  from  outward  things  rather  than  to  lead  it
among  them ;  and  thus  the  soul  knows  nothing  as  it
knew  it  formerly.  We  are  not,  however,  to  suppose  that
it  loses  the  habits  of  knowledge  previously  acquired,  for
those  habits  are  improved  by  the  more  perfect  habit  of
supernatural  knowledge  infused,  though  these  habits  be
not  so  powerful  as  to  necessitate  knowledge  through  them,
and  yet  there  is  no  reason  why  they  should  not  do  so
occasionally.

16.  In  this  union  of  the  divine  wisdom  these  habits
are  united  with  the  higher  wisdom  of  other  knowledge,  as

*  Cant.  vi.  11.


326  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXVI.]

a  little  light  with  another  which  is  great ;  it  is  the  great
light  that  shines  overwhelming  the  less,  yet  the  latter  is
not  therefore  lost,  but  rather  perfected,  though  it  be  not
the  light  which  shines  pre-eminently.  Thus,  I  imagine,
will  it  be  in  heaven  ;  the  acquired  habits  of  knowledge  in
the  just  will  not  be  destroyed,  though  they  will  be  of  no
great  importance  there,  seeing  that  the  just  will  know  more
in  the  divine  wisdom  than  by  the  habits  acquired  on  earth.

17.  But  the  particular  notions  and  forms  of  things,
acts  of  the  imagination  and  every  other  apprehension
having  form  and  figure,  are  all  lost  and  ignored  in  this
absorbing  love,  and  this  for  two  reasons.  First,  the  soul
cannot  actually  attend  to  any  thing  of  the  kind,  because
it  is  actually  absorbed  by  this  draught  of  love.  Secondly,
and  this  is  the  principal  reason,  its  transformation  in  God
so  conforms  it  to  His  purity  and  simplicity — for  there  is
no  form  or  iinaginary  figure  in  Him— as  to  render  it  pure,
cleansed  and  empty  of  all  the  forms  and  figures  it  enter-
tained before,  being  now  purified  and  enlightened  in
simple  contemplation.  iVll  spots  and  stains  in  the  glass
become  invisible  when  the  sun  shines  upon  it,  but  they
appear  again  as  soon  as  the  light  of  the  sun  is  withheld.

18.  So  is  it  with  the  soul ;  while  the  effects  of  this  act
of  love  continue,  this  ignorance  continues  also,  so  that  it
cannot  observe  anything  in  particular  until  these  effects
have  ceased.  Love  has  set  the  soul  on  fire  and  trans-
muted it  into  love,  has  annihilated  it  and  destroyed  it  as
to  all  that  is  not  love,  according  to  the  words  of  David  :
'  My  heart  hath  been  inflamed,  and  my  reins  have  been
changed ;  and  I  am  brought  to  nothing,  and  I  knew  not.'*

*  Ps.  Ixxii.  21,  22.


[STAN.  XXVI.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.         327

The  changing  of  the  reins,  because  the  heart  is  inflamed,
is  the  changing  of  the  soul,  in  all  its  desires  and  actions,
in  God,  into  a  new  manner  of  life,  the  utter  undoing  and
annihilation  of  the  old  man,  and  therefore  the  prophet
said  that  he  was  brought  to  nothing  and  knew  not.

i8.  These  are  the  two  effects  of  drinking  the  wine  of
the  cellar  of  God ;  not  only  is  all  previous  knowledge
brought  to  nothing,  and  made  to  vanish,  but  the  old  life
also  with  its  imperfections  is  destroyed,  and  into  the  new
man  renewed ;  this  is  the  second  of  the  two  effects
described  in  the  words  that  follow  :

'  And  lost  the  flock  I  followed  before.'

ig.  Until  the  soul  reaches  the  state  of  perfection,
however  spiritual  it  may  be,  there  always  remains  a  troop
of  desires,  likings  and  other  imperfections,  sometimes
natural,  sometimes  spiritual,  after  which  it  runs,  and
which  it  tries  to  feed  while  following  and  satisfying  them.
With  regard  to  the  understanding,  there  are  certain
imperfections  of  the  desire  of  knowledge.  With  regard
to  the  will,  certain  likings  and  peculiar  desires,  at  times
in  temporal  things,  as  the  wish  to  possess  certain  trifles,
and  attachment  to  some  things  more  than  to  others,
certain  prejudices,  considerations,  and  punctilios,  with
other  vanities,  still  savouring  of  the  world  :  and  again  in
natural  things,  such  as  eating  and  drinking,  the  preference
of  one  kind  of  food  over  another,  and  the  choice  of  the
best :  at  another  time,  in  spiritual  things,  such  as  seeking
for  sweetness,  and  other  follies  of  spiritual  persons  not
yet  perfect,  too  numerous  to  recount  here.  As  to  the
memory,  there  are  there  many  inconsistencies,  anxieties,


328  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXVI.]

unseemly  reminiscences,  which  drag  the  soul  captive  after
them.

20.  The  four  passions  of  the  soul  also  involve  it  in
many  useless  hopes,  joys,  griefs  and  fears,  after  which  it
runs.  As  to  this  flock,  some  men  are  more  influenced  by
it  than  others  ;  they  run  after  and  follow  it,  until  they
enter  the  inner  cellar,  where  they  lose  it  altogether,  being
then  transformed  in  love.  In  that  cellar  the  flock  of
imperfections  is  easily  destroyed,  as  rust  and  mould  on
metal  in  the  fire.  Then  the  soul  feels  itself  free  from  the
pettiness  of  self-likings  and  the  vanities  after  which  it  ran
before,  and  may  well  say,  I  have  lost  the  flock  which  I
followed  before.


NOTE.

God  communicates  Himself  to  the  soul  in  this  interior
union  with  a  love  so  intense  that  the  love  of  a  mother,
who  so  tenderly  caresses  her  child,  the  love  of  a  brother,
or  the  affection  of  a  friend,  bear  no  likeness  to  it,  for  so
great  is  the  tenderness,  and  so  deep  is  the  love  with
which  the  Infinite  Father  comforts  and  exalts  the  humble
and  loving  soul.  O  wonders  worthy  of  all  awe  and
reverence  !  He  humbles  Himself  in  reality  before  that
soul  that  He  may  exalt  it,  as  if  He  were  its  servant,  and
the  soul  His  lord.  He  is  as  anxious  to  comfort  it,  as  if
He  were  a  slave,  and  the  soul  God.  So  great  is  the
humility  and  tenderness  of  God.  In  this  communion  of
love  He  renders  in  a  certain  way  those  services  to  the  soul


[STAN.  XXVI.]       OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  329

which  He  says  in  the  Gospel,  He  will  perform  for  the
elect  in  heaven.  '  Amen,  I  say  to  you,  that  He  will  gird
Himself  and  make  them  sit  down  to  meat,  and  passing
will  minister  unto  them.'*

2.  This  very  service  He  renders  now  to  the  soul,
comforting  and  cherishing  it,  as  a  mother  her  child  whom
she  nurtures  in  her  bosom.  And  the  soul  recognises
herein  the  truth  of  the  words  of  Isaias,  '  You  shall  be
carried  at  the  breasts,  and  upon  the  knees  they  shall
caress  you.'f  What  must  the  feelings  of  the  soul  be  amid
these  sovereign  graces  ?  How  it  will  melt  away  in  love,
beholding  the  bosom  of  God  opened  for  it  with  such  over-
flowing love.  When  the  soul  perceives  itself  in  the  midst
of  these  delights,  it  surrenders  itself  wholly  to  God,  gives
to  Him  the  breasts  of  its  own  will  and  love,  and  under  the
influence  thereof  addresses  the  Beloved  in  the  words  of
the  bride  in  the  Canticle,  saying,  '  I  to  my  Beloved,  and
His  turning  is  towards  me.  Come  my  Beloved,  let  us  go
forth  into  the  field,  let  us  abide  in  the  villages.  Let  us
rise  early  to  the  vineyards,  let  us  see  if  the  vineyard
flourish,  if  the  flowers  be  ready  to  bring  forth  fruits,  if  the
pomegranates  flourish  ;  there  will  I  give  Thee  my  breasts,'!
that  is,  I  will  employ  all  the  joy  and  strength  of  my  will
in  the  service  of  Thy  love.  This  mutual  surrender  in  this
union  of  the  soul  and  God  is  the  subject  of  the  stanza
which  follows : —


St.  Luke  xii.  37.  f  Is.  Ixvi.  12.  J  Cant.  vii.  10 — 12.


330  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.XXVIL]


STANZA  XXVII.

Tlici  e  Me  gave  me  His  breasts,

There  He  taiif^kt  me  the  science  full  of  sweetness.

And  there  I  gave  to  Him

My s el/without  reserve ;

There  I  promised  to  be  His  bride.

Here  the  soul  speaks  of  the  two  contracting  parties  in
this  spiritual  betrothal,  itself  and  God.  In  the  inner
cellar  of  love  they  both  met  together,  God  giving  to  the
soul  the  breasts  of  His  love  freely,  whereby  He  instructs
it  in  His  mysteries  and  wisdom,  and  the  soul  also  actually
surrendering  itself,  making  no  reservation  whatever  either
in  its  own  favour  or  in  that  of  others,  promising  to  be  His
for  ever.

'  There  He  gave  me  His  breasts.'

2.  To  give  the  breast  to  another  is  to  love  and  cherish
him  and  communicate  one's  secrets  to  him  as  a  friend.
The  soul  says  here  that  God  gave  it  His  breasts,  that
is.  He  gave  it  His  love  and  communicated  His  secrets
to  it.  It  is  thus  that  God  deals  with  the  soul  in  this
state,  and  more,  too,  as  it  appears  from  the  words  that
follow : —

'  There  He  taught  me  the  science  full  of  sweetness.'

3.  This  science  is  mystical  theology,  which  is  the
secret  science  of  God  and  which  spiritual  men  call
contemplation.  It  is  most  full  of  sweetness  because  it  is
knowledge  by  love,  love  is  the  master  of  it,  and  it  is  love
that  renders  it  all  so  sweet.  Inasmuch  as  this  science
and  knowledge  are  communicated  to  the  soul  in  that  love
with  which  God  communicates  Himself,  it  is  sweet  to  the


[STAN.  XXVII.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        331

understanding,  because  knowledge  belongs  to  it,  and
sweet  to  the  will,  because  it  comes  by  love  which  belongs
to  the  will.

'  There  I  gave  to  Him  myself  without  reserve.'

4.  The  soul,  in  this  sweet  draught  of  God,  surrenders
itself  wholly  to  Him  most  willingly  and  with  great  sweet-
ness ;  it  desires  to  be  wholly  His,  and  never  to  retain  any-
thing which  is  unbecoming  His  Majesty.  God  is  the  author
of  this  union,  and  of  the  purity  and  perfection  requisite  for
it ;  and  as  the  transformation  of  the  soul  in  Himself
makes  it  His,  He  empties  it  of  all  that  is  alien  to  Himself.
Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that,  not  in  will  only,  but  in  act  as
well,  the  whole  soul  is  entirely  given  to  God  without  any
reserve  whatever,  as  God  has  given  Himself  freely  unto
it.  The  will  of  God  and  of  the  soul  are  both  satisfied,
each  given  up  to  the  other,  in  mutual  delight,  so  that
neither  fails  the  other  in  the  faith  and  constancy  of  the
betrothal ;  therefore  the  soul  says  :

'  There  I  promised  to  be  His  bride.'

5.  As  a  bride  does  not  give  her  love  to  another,  and
as  all  her  thoughts  and  actions  are  directed  to  her  bride-
groom only,  so  the  soul  now  has  no  affections  of  the  will,
no  acts  of  the  understanding,  neither  object  nor  occupa-
tion of  any  kind  which  it  does  not  wholly  refer  unto  God,
together  with  all  its  desires.  The  soul,  is  as  it  were,
absorbed  in  God,  and  even  its  first  movements  have
nothing  in  them — so  far  as  it  can  comprehend  them —
which  is  at  variance  with  the  will  of  God.  The  first
movements  of  an  imperfect  soul  in  general  are,  at  least,
inclined  to  evil,  in  the  understanding,  the  memory,  the
will,  the  desires  and  imperfections ;  but  those  of  the  soul,


332  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN.  XXVIL]

which  has  attained  to  the  spiritual  state  of  which  I  am
speaking,  are  ordinarily  directed  to  God,  because  of  the
great  help  and  courage  it  derives  from  Him,  and  its
perfect  conversion  to  goodness.  This  is  set  forth  with
great  clearness  by  David,  when  he  saith  :  '  Shall  not  my
soul  be  subject  to  God  ?  For  from  Him  is  my  salvation.
For  He  is  my  God  and  my  Saviour ;  He  is  my  protector,
I  shall  be  moved  no  more.'*  '  He  is  my  protector '  means,
that  the  soul  being  now  received  under  the  protection  of
God  and  united  to  Him,  is  no  longer  subject  to  any
movements  contrary  to  God.

6.  It  is  quite  clear  from  this  that  the  soul,  which  has
attained  the  spiritual  betrothal,  knows  nothing  else  but
the  love  of  the  Bridegroom  and  the  delights  thereof,
because  it  has  arrived  at  perfection,  the  form  and
substance  of  which  is  love,  according  to  St.  Paul.f  The
more  a  soul  loves,  the  more  perfect  it  is  in  its  love,  and
hence  it  follows,  that  the  soul,  which  is  already  perfect,  is,
if  we  may  say  so,  all  love,  all  its  actions  are  love,  all  its
energies  and  strength  are  occupied  in  love.  It  gives  up
all  it  has,  like  the  wise  merchant,  t  for  this  treasure  of  love
which  it  finds  hidden  in  God,  and  which  is  so  precious  in
His  sight,  and  the  Beloved  cares  for  nothing  else  but
love  ;  the  soul,  therefore,  anxious  to  please  Him  perfectly,
occupies  itself  wholly  in  pure  love  for  God,  not  only
because  love  does  so  occupy  it,  but  also  because  the  love
wherein  it  is  united,  influences  it  towards  love  of  God  in
and  through  all  things.  As  the  bee  draws  honey  from  all
plants,  and  makes  use  of  them  only  for  that  end,  so  the
soul  most  easily  draws  the  sweetness  of  love  from  all  that

*  I's.  Ixi.  2,  3.  f  Coloss.  iii.  14.  +   St.  Matth.  xiii.  44.


[STAN.  XXVII.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        333

happens  to  it  :  makes  all  things  subserve  it  towards
loving  God,  whether  they  be  sweet  or  bitter  ;  and  being
animated  and  protected  by  love,  has  no  sense,  feeling,  or
knowledge,  because,  as  I  have  said,  it  knows  nothing  but
love,  and  in  all  its  occupations,  its  joy  is  its  love  of  God.
This  is  explained  by  the  following  stanza.


NOTE.


I  HAVE  said  that  God  is  pleased  with  nothing  but  love ;
but  before  I  explain  this,  it  will  be  as  well  to  set  forth  the
grounds  on  which  the  assertion  rests.  All  our  works,
and  all  our  labours,  how  grand  soever  they  may  be,  are
nothing  in  the  sight  of  God,  for  we  can  give  Him  nothing,
neither  can  we  by  them  fulfil  His  desire,  which  is  the
growth  of  our  soul ;  as  to  Himself  He  desires  nothing  of
this,  for  He  has  need  of  nothing,  and  so,  if  He  is  pleased
with  anything  it  is  with  the  growth  of  the  soul ;  and  as
there  is  no  way  in  which  the  soul  can  grow ;  but  in
becoming  in  a  manner  equal  to  Him,  for  this  reason  only
is  He  pleased  with  our  love.  It  is  the  property  of  love  to
place  him  who  loves  on  an  equality  with  the  object  of  his
love.  Hence  the  soul,  because  of  its  perfect  love,  is
called  the  bride  of  the  Son  of  God,  -  which  signifies
equality  with  Him.  In  this  equality  and  friendship  all
things  are  common,  as  the  Bridegroom  Himself  said  to
His  disciples  :  '  I  have  called  you  friends,  because  all
things,  whatsoever  I  have  heard  of  my  Father,  I  have
made  known  to  you.'*

*  St.  John  XV.  15.


334.  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXVIII.]


STANZA  XXVIII.

My  soul  is  occupied,

And  all  viy  substance  in  His  seirice;

Now  I  guard  no  flock.

Nor  have  I  any  other  employment :

My  sole  occupation  is  love.

The  soul,  or  rather  the  bride,  having  given  herself
wholly  to  the  Bridegroom  without  any  reserve  whatever,
now  recounts  to  the  Beloved  how  she  fulfils  her  task.
My  soul  and  body  she  says,  all  my  abilities  and  all  my
capacities,  are  occupied  not  with  other  matters,  but  with
those  pertaining  to  the  service  of  the  Bridegroom.  She
is  therefore  not  seeking  her  own  proper  satisfaction,  nor
the  gratification  of  her  own  inclinations,  neither  does  she
occupy  herself  in  anything  whatever  which  is  alien  to
God ;  yea,  even  her  communion  with  God  Himself  is
nothing  else  but  acts  of  love,  inasmuch  as  she  has
changed  her  former  mode  of  conversing  with  Him  into
loving.

'  My  soul  is  occupied.'

2.  This  refers  to  the  soul's  surrender  of  itself  to  the
Beloved  in  this  union  of  love,  wherein  it  devotes  itself,
with  all  its  faculties,  understanding,  will,  and  memory,  to
His  service.  The  understanding  is  occupied  in  con-
sidering what  most  tends  to  His  service,  in  order  that  it
might  be  accomplished ;  the  will,  in  loving  all  that  is
pleasing  to  God,  and  in  desiring  Him  in  all  things ;  the
memory,  in  recalling  what  ministers  to  Him,  and  what
may  be  more  pleasing  unto  Him.

'  And  all  my  substance  in  His  service.'

3.  By  substance  here  is  meant  all  that  relates  to  the


[STAN.  XXVIII.]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.     335

sensual  part  of  the  soul,  which  includes  the  body,  with  all
its  powers,  interior  and  exterior,  together  with  all  its
natural  capacities,  that  is,  the  four  passions,  the  natural
desires,  and  the  whole  substance  of  the  soul,  all  of  which
is  employed  in  the  service  of  the  Beloved,  as  well  as  the
rational  and  spiritual  part,  as  I  explained  in  the  previous
section.  As  to  the  body,  that  is  now  ordered  according
to  God  in  all  its  interior  and  exterior  senses,  all  the  acts
of  which  are  directed  to  God  ;  the  four  passions  of  the
soul  are  also  under  control  in  Him  ;  for  the  soul's  joy,
hope,  fear,  and  grief  are  conversant  with  God  only ;  all
its  appetites,  and  all  its  anxieties  also,  are  directed  unto
Him  only.

4.  The  whole  substance  of  the  soul  is  now  so  occupied
with  God,  so  intent  upon  Him,  that  its  very  first  move-
ments, even  inadvertently,  have  God  for  their  object  and
their  end.  The  understanding,  memory,  and  will  tend
directly  to  God  ;  the  affections,  senses,  desires,  and
longings,  hope  and  joy,  the  whole  substance  of  the  soul,
rise  instantly  towards  God,  though  the  soul  is  making  no
conscious  efforts  in  that  direction.  Such  a  soul  is  very
often  doing  the  work  of  God,  intent  upon  Him  and  the  things
of  God,  without  thinking  or  reflecting  on  what  it  is  doing
for  Him.  The  constant  and  habitual  practice  of  this  has
deprived  it  of  all  conscious  reflection,  and  even  of  that
fervour  which  it  usually  had  when  it  began  to  act.  The
whole  substance  of  the  soul  being  thus  occupied,  what
follows  cannot  be  but  true  also.

'  Now  I  guard  no  flock.'

5.  I  do  not  now  go  after  my  likings  and  desires,  for
having  fixed  them  upon  God,  I  no  longer  feed  or  guard


336  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE       [STAN.  XXVIII.]

them.     The  soul  not  only  does  not  guard  them  now,  but
has  no  other  occupation  than  to  wait  upon  God.

'  Nor  have  I  any  other  employment.'

6.  Before  the  soul  succeeded  in  effecting  this  gift  and
surrender  of  itself,  and  of  all  that  belongs  to  it,  to  the
Beloved,  it  was  entangled  in  many  unprofitable  occupations,
by  which  it  sought  to  please  itself  and  others,  and  it
may  be  said  that  its  occupations  at  this  kind  were  as
many  as  its  habits  of  imperfection.

7.  To  these  habits  belong  that  of  speaking,  thinking,
and  the  doing  of  things  that  are  useless;  and  likewise,  the
not  making  use  of  these  things  according  to  the  require-
ments of  the  soul's  perfection  ;  other  desires  also  the  soul
may  have,  wherewith  it  ministers  to  the  desires  of  others,
to  which  may  be  referred,  display,  compliments,  flatter}',
human  respect,  aiming  at  being  well  thought  of,  and  the
giving  pleasure  to  people,  and  other  useless  actions,  by
which  it  laboured  to  content  them,  wasting  its  efforts
herein,  and  finally  all  its  strength.  All  this  is  over,  says
the  soul  here,  for  all  its  words,  thoughts,  and  works  are
directed  to  God,  and  conversant  with  Him,  freed  from
their  previous  imperfections.  It  is  as  if  it  said  :  I  follow
no  longer  either  my  own  or  other  men's  likings,  neither
do  I  occupy  or  entertain  myself  with  useless  pastimes,  or
the  things  of  this  world.

'  My  sole  occupation  is  love.'

8.  All  my  occupation  now  is  the  practice  of  the  love  of
God,  all  the  powers  of  soul  and  body,  memory,  under-
standing, and  will,  interior  and  exterior  senses,  the  desires
of  spirit  and  of  sense,  all  work  in  and  by  love.     All  I  do


is  done  in  love  ;  all  I  suffer,  I  suffer  in  the  sweetness  of
love.  This  is  the  meaning  of  David  when  he  said  :  '  I  will
keep  my  strength  to  Thee.'*

g.  When  the  soul  has  arrived  at  this  state  all  the  acts
of  its  spiritual  and  sensual  nature,  whether  active  or
passive,  and  of  whatever  kind  they  may  be,  always
occasion  an  increase  of  love  and  delight  in  God  :  even  the
act  of  prayer  and  communion  with  God,  which  was  once
carried  on  by  reflections  and  divers  other  methods,  is  now
wholly  an  act  of  love.  So  much  so  is  this  the  case  that
the  soul  may  always  say,  whether  occupied  with  temporal
or  spiritual  things,  '  My  sole  occupation  is  love.'  Happy
life  !  happy  state  !  and  happy  the  soul  which  has  attained
to  it !  where  all  is  the  very  substance  of  love,  the  joyous
delights  of  the  betrothal,  when  it  may  truly  say  to  the
Beloved  with  the  bride  in  the  Canticle :  '  The  new  and
the  old,  my  Beloved,  have  I  kept  for  Thee.'f  All  that  is
bitter  and  painful  I  keep  for  Thy  sake,  all  that  is  sweet
and  pleasant  I  keep  for  Thee.  The  meaning  of  the
words,  for  my  purpose,  is  that  the  soul,  in  the  state  of
spiritual  betrothal,  is  for  the  most  part  living  in  the
union  of  love,  that  is,  the  will  is  habitually  waiting  lovingly
on  God.


NOTE.


Of  a  truth  the  soul  is  now  lost  to  all  things,  and  gained
only  to  love,  and  the  mind  is  no  longer  occupied  with
anything  else.  It  is,  therefore,  deficient  in  what  concerns
the  active  life,  and  other  exterior  duties,  that  it  may  apply

*  Ps.  Iviii.  lo.  f  Cant,  vii   13.


'338  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE        [STAN.  XXVIII.]

in  earnest  to  the  one  thing  which  the  Bridegroom  has
pronounced  necessary  ;*  and  that  is  waiting  upon  God,
and  the  continuous  practice  of  His  love.  So  precious  is
this  in  the  eyes  of  God  that  He  rebuked  Martha,  because
she  would  withdraw  Mary  from  His  feet  to  occupy  her
actively  in  the  service  of  our  Lord.  Martha  thought  that
she  was  doing  everything  herself,  and  that  Mary  at  the
feet  of  Christ  was  doing  nothing.  But  it  was  far  other-
wise :  for  there  is  nothing  better  or  more  necessary  than
love.  Thus,  in  the  Canticle,  the  Bridegroom  protects  the
bride,  adjuring  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  that  is,  all
created  things,  not  to  disturb  her  spiritual  sleep  of  love,
nor  to  waken  her,  nor  to  let  her  open  her  eyes  to  anything
till  she  pleased.  '  I  adjure  you,  O  daughters  of  Jerusalem,
that  you  stir  not  up,  nor  awake  my  beloved  till  she
please. 't

2.  Observe,  however,  that  if  the  soul  has  not  reached
the  state  of  unitive  love,  it  is  necessary  for  it  to  make  ■
acts  of  love,  as  well  in  the  active  as  in  the  contemplative
life.  But  when  it  has  reached  it,  it  is  not  requisite  it
should  occupy  itself  in  other  and  exterior  duties — unless
they  be  matters  of  obligation  -  which  might  hinder,  were
it  but  for  a  moment,  the  life  of  love  in  God,  though  they
may  minister  greatly  to  His  service ;  because  an  instant
of  pure  love  is  more  precious  in  the  eyes  of  God  and  the
soul,  and  more  profitable  to  the  Church,  than  all  other
good  works  together,  though  it  may  seem  as  if  nothing
were  done.  Thus,  Mary  Magdalene,  though  her  preaching
was  most  edifying,  and  might  have  been  still  more  so
afterwards,  out  of  the  great  desire  she  had  to  please  God

*  St.  Luke  X.  42.  f  Cant.  iii.  5.


k


[STAN.  XXVIII.]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.     339

and  benefit  the  Church,  hid  herself,  nevertheless,  in  the
desert  thirty  years,  that  she  might  surrender  herself
entirely  to  love ;  for  she  considered  that  she  would  gain
more  in  that  way,  because  an  instant  of  pure  love  is  so
much  more  profitable  and  important  to  the  Church.

3.  When  the  soul,  then,  in  any  degree  possesses  the
spirit  of  solitary  love,  we  must  not  interfere  with  it.  We
should  inflict  a  grievous  wrong  upon  it,  and  upon  the
Church  also,  if  we  were  to  occupy  it,  were  it  only  for  a
moment,  in  exterior  or  active  duties,  however  important
they  might  be.  When  God  Himself  adjures  all  not  to
waken  it  from  its  love,  who  shall  venture  to  do  so,  and
be  blameless  ?  In  a  word,  it  is  for  this  love  that  we  are
all  created.  Let  those  men  of  zeal,  who  think  by  their
preaching  and  exterior  works,  to  convert  the  world,
consider  that  they  would  be  much  more  edifying  to  the
Church,  and  more  pleasing  unto  God — setting  aside  the
good  example  they  would  give — if  they  would  spend  at
least  one  half  their  time  in  prayer,  even  though  they  may
have  not  attained  to  the  state  of  unitive  love.  Certainly
they  would  do  more,  and  with  less  trouble,  by  one  single
good  work  than  by  a  thousand  :  because  of  the  merit  of
their  prayer,  and  the  spiritual  strength  it  supplies.  To
act  otherwise  is  to  beat  the  air,  to  do  little  more  than
nothing,  sometimes  nothing  and  occasionally  even  mis-
chief; for  God  may  give  up  such  persons  to  vanity,  so
that  they  may  seem  to  have  done  something,  when  in
reality  their  outward  occupations  bear  no  fruit  ;  for  it  is
quite  certain  that  good  works  cannot  be  done  but  in  the
power  of  God.     O  how  much  might  be  written  on  this

subject !  this,  however,  is  not  the  place  for  it.

z  2


340  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXIX.]

4.  I  have  said  this  to  explain  the  stanza  that  follows,
in  which  the  soul  replies  to  those  who  call  in  question  its
holy  tranquillity,  who  will  have  it  wholly  occupied  with
outward  duties,  that  its  light  may  shine  before  the  world :
these  persons  have  no  conception  of  the  fibres  and  the
unseen  root  whence  the  sap  is  drawn,  and  which  nourish
the  fruit.


STANZA  XXIX.

If  then  oil  the  common  land
I  am  no  longej-  seen  orfonnd.
You  will  say  that  I  am  lost ;
That  heine  enamoured,
I  lost  myself ;  and  yet  was  found.

The  soul  replies  here  to  a  tacit  reproach.  Worldly  people
are  in  the  habit  of  censuring  those  who  give  themselves
up  in  earnest  to  God,  regarding  them  as  extravagant,  in
their  withdrawal  from  the  world,  and  in  their  manner  of
life.  They  say  also  of  them  that  they  are  useless  for  all
matters  of  importance,  and  lost  to  everything  the  world
prizes  and  respects  !  This  reproach  the  soul  meets  in  the
best  way ;  boldly  and  courageously  despising  it  with
everything  else  that  the  world  can  lay  to  its  charge.
Having  attained  to  a  living  love  of  God  it  makes  little
account  of  all  this ;  and  that  is  not  all :  it  confesses  it
itself  in  this  stanza,  and  boasts  that  it  has  committed
that  folly,  and  that  it  is  lost  to  the  world  and  to  itself  for
the  Beloved.

2.     That   which   the    soul    is   saying  here,   addressing
itself  to   the   world,   is  in    substance   this  : — If  you    see


[STAN.  XXIX.]      OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.         341

me  no  longer  occupied  with  the  subjects  that  engrossed
me  once,  with  the  other  pastimes  of  the  world,  say  and
believe  that  I  am  lost  to  them,  and  a  stranger  to  them,
yea,  that  I  am  lost  of  my  own  choice,  seeking  my  Beloved
whom  I  so  greatly  love.  But  that  they  may  see  that  the
soul's  loss  is  gain,  and  not  consider  it  folly  and  delusion,
it  adds,  that  its  loss  was  gain,  and  that  it  therefore  lost
itself  deliberately.

'  If  then  on  the  common  I  am  no  longer  seen  or  found.'

3.  The  common  is  a  public  place  where  people
assemble  for  recreation,  and  where  shepherds  feed  their
flocks.  By  the  common  here  is  meant  the  world  in
general,  where  men  amuse  themselves  and  feed  the  herd
of  their  desires.  The  soul  says  to  the  worldly-minded :
'  If  you  see  me  no  more  where  I  used  to  be  before  I  gave
myself  up  wholly  to  God,  look  upon  me  as  lost,  and  say
so : '  the  soul  rejoices  in  that  and  would  have  men  so
speak  of  it.

*  Say  that  I  am  lost.'

4.  He  who  loves  is  not  ashamed  before  men  of  what
he  does  for  God,  neither  does  he  hide  it  through  shame
though  the  whole  world  should  condemn  it.  He  who
shall  be  ashamed  to  confess  the  Son  of  God  before  men,
neglecting  to  do  His  work,  the  Son  of  God  also  will  be
ashamed  to  acknowledge  him  before  His  Father.  '  He
that  shall  deny  Me  before  men,  I  will  also  deny  him  before
My  Father  Who  is  in  heaven.'  *  The  soul,  therefore,  in
the  courage  of  its  love,  glories  in  what  ministers  to  the
honour  of  the  Beloved,  in  that  it  has  done  anything  for
Him  and  is  lost  to  the  things  of  the  world.

*  St.  Matt.  X.  33,


342  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXIX.

5.  But  few  spiritual  persons  arrive  at  this  perfect
courage  and  resolution  in  their  conduct.  For  though
some  attempt  to  practise  it,  and  some  even  think  them-
selves proficients  therein,  they  never  entirely  lose
themselves  on  certain  points  connected  with  the  world  or
self,  so  as  to  be  perfectly  detached  for  the  sake  of  Christ,
despising  appearances  and  the  opinion  of  the  world.
These  can  never  answer,  '  Say  that  I  am  lost,'  because
they  are  not  lost  to  themselves,  and  are  still  ashamed  to
confess  Christ  before  men  through  human  respect ;  these
do  not  therefore  really  live  in  Christ.

'  That  being  enamoured,'  that  is,  practising  virtues  for
the  love  of  God.

'  I  lost  myself;  and  yet  was  found.'

6,  The  soul  remembers  well  the  words  of  the  Bride-
groom in  the  Gospel :  '  No  man  can  serve  two  masters ;
for  either  he  will  hate  the  one  and  love  the  other,'*  and
therefore,  in  order  not  to  lose  God,  loses  all  that  is  not
God,  that  is,  all  created  things,  even  itself,  being  lost  to
all  things  for  the  love  of  Him.  He  who  truly  loves  makes
shipwreck  of  himself  in  all  else  that  he  may  gain  the
more  in  the  object  of  his  love.  Thus  the  soul  says  that  it
has  lost  itself,  that  is,  deliberately,  of  set  purpose.

7.  This  loss  occurs  in  two  ways.  The  soul  loses
itself,  making  no  account  whatever  of  itself,  but  of  the
Beloved,  resigning  itself  freely  into  His  hands  without
any  selfish  views,  losing  itself  deliberately,  and  seeking
nothing  for  itself.  Secondly,  it  loses  itself  in  all  things,
making  no  account  of  anything  save  that  which  concerns
the  Beloved.     This  is  to  lose  oneself,  that  is,  to  be  willing

*  lb.  vi.  24.


[STAN.  XXIX. J  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  343

that  others  should  have  all  things.  Such  is  he  that  loves
God ;  he  seeks  neither  gain  nor  reward,  but  only  to  lose
all,  even  himself,  according  to  God's  will ;  this  is  what
such  an  one  counts  gain.  This  is  real  gain,  for  the
Apostle  saith,  '  to  die  is  gain ;  '*  that  is,  to  die  for  Christ
is  my  gain  and  profit  spiritually.  This  is  why  the  soul
says  that  it  '  was  found  ; '  for  he  who  knows  not  how  to
lose,  finds  not,  but  rather  loses  himself,  as  our  Saviour
teaches  us  in  the  Gospel,  saying,  '  He  that  will  save  his
life  shall  lose  it ;  and  he  that  shall  lose  his  life  for  my
sake  shall  find  it.'f

8.  But  if  we  wish  to  know  the  deeper  spiritual  meaning
of  this  line,  and  its  peculiar  fitness  here,  it  is  as  follows :
When  a  soul  has  advanced  so  far  on  the  spiritual  road  as
to  be  lost  to  all  the  natural  methods  of  communing  with
God ;  when  it  seeks  Him  no  longer  by  meditation,
images,  impressions,  nor  by  any  other  created  ways,  or
representations  of  sense,  but  only  by  rising  above  them
all,  in  the  joyful  communion  with  Him  by  faith  and  love,
then  it  may  be  said  to  have  found  God  of  a  truth,  because
it  has  truly  lost  itself  as  to  all  that  is  not  God,  and  also
as  to  its  own  self.


NOTE.

The  soul  being  thus  gained,  all  its  works  are  gain,  for  all
its  powers  are  exerted  in  the  spiritual  intercourse  of  most
sweet  interior  love  wdth  the  Beloved.  The  interior
communications   between   God  and  the   soul  are   now  so

*  Phil.  i.  21.  t  St.  Matt.  xvi.  25.


344  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXX.]

delicious,  so  full  of  sweetness,  that  no  mortal  tongue  can
describe  them,  nor  human  understanding  comprehend
them.  As  a  bride  on  the  day  of  her  betrothal  attends  to
nothing  but  to  the  joyous  festival  of  her  love,  and  brings
forth  all  her  jewels  and  ornaments  for  the  pleasure  of  the
bridegroom,  and  as  he  too  in  the  same  way  exhibits  his
own  magnificence  and  riches  for  the  pleasure  of  his  bride,
so  is  it  in  the  spiritual  betrothal  where  the  soul  feels  that
which  the  bride  says  in  the  Canticle,  '  I  to  my  Beloved
and  my  Beloved  to  me.'*  The  virtues  and  graces  of  the
bride-soul,  the  grandeur  and  magnificence  of  the  Bride-
groom, the  Son  of  God,  come  forth  into  the  light,  for  the
celebration  of  the  bridal  feast,  communicating  each  to  the
other  the  goods  and  joys  with  the  wine  of  sweet  love  in
the  Holy  Ghost.  The  present  stanza,  addressed  to  the
Bridegroom  by  the  soul,  has  this  for  its  subject.


STANZA    XXX.

Of  emeralds,  and  ofjiozaers,

III  the  early  morning  gathered.

We  will  make  the  garlands.

Flowering  m  Thy  love.

And  bound  together  with  one  hair  of  my  head.

The  bride  now  turns  to  the  Bridegroom  and  addresses
Him  in  the  intercourse  and  comfort  of  love ;  the  subject
of  the  stanza  being  the  solace  and  delight  which  the
bride-soul  and  the  Son  of  God  find  in  the  possession  of
the  virtues  and  gifts  of  each  other,  and  in  the  exercise
thereof,   both   rejoicing   in  their  mutual   love.     Thus   the

*  Cant.  vi.  2.


[STAN.  XXX.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        345

soul,  addressing  the  Beloved,  says,  that  the}^  will  make
garlands  rich  in  graces  and  acquired  virtues,  obtained  at
the  fitting  and  convenient  season,  beautiful  and  lovely  in
the  love  He  bears  the  soul,  and  kept  together  by  the  love
which  it  itself  has  for  Him.  This  rejoicing  in  virtue  is
what  is  meant  by  making  garlands,  for  the  soul  and  God
rejoice  together  in  these  virtues  bound  up  as  flowers  in  a
garland,  in  the  common  love  which  each  bears  the  other.
'Of  emeralds,  and  of  flowers.'

2.  The  flowers  are  the  virtues  of  the  soul ;  the
emeralds  are  the  gifts  it  has  received  from  God.  Then  of
these  flowers  and  emeralds

'  In  the  early  morning  gathered.'

3.  That  is,  acquired  in  youth,  which  is  the  early
morning  of  life.  They  are  said  to  be  gathered  because
the  virtues  which  we  acquire  in  youth  are  most  pleasing
unto  God  ;  because  youth  is  the  season  when  our  vices
most  resist  the  acquisition  of  them,  and  when  our  natural
inclinations  are  most  prone  to  lose  them.  Those  virtues
also  are  more  perfect  which  we  acquire  in  early  youth.
This  time  of  our  life  is  the  early  morning ;  for  as  the
freshness  of  the  spring  morning  is  more  agreeable  than
any  other  part  of  the  day,  so  also  are  the  virtues  acquired
in  our  youth  more  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God.

4.  By  the  fresh  morning  we  may  understand  those
acts  of  love  by  which  we  acquire  virtue,  and  which  are
more  pleasing  unto  God  than  the  fresh  morning  is  to  the
sons  of  men ;  good  works  also,  wrought  in  the  season  of
spiritual  dryness  and  hardness  ;  this  is  the  freshness  of
the  winter  morning,  and  what  we  then  do  for  God  in
dryness  of  spirit  is  most  precious  in  His  eyes.     Then  it  is


346  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXX.]

that  we  acquire  virtues  and  graces  abundantly ;  and  what
we  thenac  quire,  with  toil  and  labour,  is  for  the  most  part
better,  more  perfect  and  lasting  than  what  we  acquire  in
comfort  and  spiritual  sweetness ;  for  virtue  sends  forth  its
roots  in  the  season  of  dryness,  toil,  and  trial :  as  it  is
written,  '  Virtue  is  made  perfect  in  infirmity.'*  It  is  with
a  view  to  show  forth  the  excellence  of  these  virtues,  of
which  the  garland  is  wrought  for  the  Beloved,  that  the
soul  says  of  them,  that  they  have  been  gathered  in  the
early  morning  :  because  it  is  these  flowers  alone,  with  the
emeralds  of  virtue,  the  choice  and  perfect  graces,  and  not
the  imperfect,  which  are  pleasing  to  the  Beloved,  and  so
the  bride  says  :

'  We  will  make  the  garlands.'

5.  All  the  virtues  and  graces  which  the  soul,  and  God
in  it,  acquire,  are  as  a  garland  of  divers  flowers,  wherewith
the  soul  is  marvellously  adorned,  as  with  a  vesture  of  rich
embroidery.  As  material  flowers  are  gathered,  and  then
formed  into  a  garland,  so  the  spiritual  flowers  of  virtues
and  graces  are  acquired  and  set  in  order  in  the  soul ;  and
when  the  acquisition  is  complete,  the  garland  of  perfection
is  complete  also.  The  soul  and  the  Bridegroom  rejoice
in  it,  both  beautiful,  adorned  with  the  garland,  as  in  the
state  of  perfection.

6.  These  are  the  garlands  which  the  soul  says  they
will  make.  That  is,  it  will  wreathe  itself  with  this  variety
of  flowers,  with  the  emeralds  of  virtues  and  perfect  gifts,
that  it  may  present  itself  worthily  before  the  face  of  the
King,  and  be  on  an  equality  with  Him,  sitting  as  a  queen
on   His  right  hand  ;  for  it  has  merited  this  by  its  beautv.

*  2  Cor.  xii.  g.


[STAN.  XXX.]       OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  347

Thus  David  saith,  addressing  himself  to  Christ :  '  The
queen  stood  on  Thy  right  hand  in  vestments  of  gold,  girt
with  variety.'*  That  is,  at  His  right  hand,  clad  in
perfect  love,  girt  with  the  variety  of  graces  and  perfect
virtues.

7".  The  soul  does  not  say,  I  will  make  garlands,  nor,
Thou  wilt  make  them,  but.  We  will  make  them,  not
separately,  but  both  together ;  because  the  soul  cannot
practice  virtues  alone,  nor  acquire  them  alone,  without
the  help  of  God  ;  neither  does  God  alone  create  virtue  in
the  soul,  without  the  soul's  concurrence.  Though  it  be
true,  as  the  Apostle  saith,  that  '  every  best  gift,  and  every
perfect  gift,  is  from  above,  descending  from  the  Father  of
lights,'!  still  they  enter  into  no  soul  without  that  soul's
concurrence  and  consent.  Thus  the  bride  in  the
Canticle  saith  to  the  Bridegroom :  '  Draw  me ;  we  will
run  after  thee.'t  Every  inclination  to  good  comes  from
God  alone,  as  we  learn  here ;  but  as  to  running,  that  is,
good  works,  they  proceed  from  God  and  the  soul  together,
and  it  is  therefore  written,  '  We  will  run,'  that  is,  both
together,  but  not  God  nor  the  soul  alone.

8.  These  words  may  also  be  fittingly  applied  to  Christ
and  His  Church,  which,  as  His  bride,  says  unto  Him,  We
will  make  the  garlands.  In  this  application  of  the  words
the  garlands  are  the  holy  souls  born  to  Christ  in  the
Church.  Every  such  soul  is  by  itself  a  garland  adorned
with  the  flowers  of  virtues  and  graces,  and  all  of  them
together  a  garland  for  the  head  of  Christ  the  Bridegroom.

9.  We  may  also  understand  by  these  beautiful  garlands
the   crowns  formed  by   Christ  and  the  Church,  of  which

*  Ps.  xliv.  10.  t  St.  James  i.  17.  J  Cant.  i.  3.


348  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXX.]

there  are  three  kinds.  The  first  is  formed  of  the  beauty
and  white  flowers  of  the  virgins,  each  one  with  her
virginal  crown,  and  forming  altogether  one  crown  for  the
head  of  the  Bridegroom  Christ.  The  second,  of  the
brilliant  flowers  of  the  holy  doctors,  each  with  his  crown  of
doctor,  and  all  together  forming  one  crown  above  that  of  the
virgins  on  the  head  of  Christ.  The  third  is  composed  of
the  purple  flowers  of  the  martyrs,  each  with  his  own
crown  of  martyrdom,  and  all  united  into  one,  perfecting
that  on  the  head  of  Christ.  Adorned  with  these  garlands
He  will  be  so  beautiful,  and  so  lovely  to  behold,  that
heaven  itself  will  repeat  the  words  of  the  bride  in  the
Canticle,  saying  :  '  Go  forth,  ye  daughters  of  Sion,  and
see  king  Solomon  in  the  diadem  wherewith  his  mother
crowned  him  in  the  day  of  his  betrothal,  and  in  the  day
of  the  joy  of  his  heart.'*  The  soul  then  says  we  will
make  garlands.

'  Flowering  in  Thy  love.'

10.  The  flowers  of  good  works  and  virtues  is  the  grace
and  power  which  they  derive  from  the  love  of  God,
without  which  they  not  only  flower  not,  but  become  even
dry,  and  worthless  in  the  eyes  of  God,  though  they  may
be  humanly  perfect.  But  if  He  gives  His  grace  and  love
they  flourish  in  His  love.

'  And  bound  together  with  one  hair  of  my  head.'

11.  The  hair  is  the  will  of  the  soul,  and  the  love  it
bears  the  Beloved.  This  love  performs  the  function  of
the  thread  that  keeps  the  garland  together.  For  as  a
thread  binds  the  flowers  of  a  garland,  so  love  knits
together  and  sustains  virtues  in  the  soul.     '  Charity,'  that

*  Cant.  iii.  ii.


[STAN.  XXX.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  349

is,  love,  saith  the  Apostle,  '  is  the  bond  of  perfection,'*
Love,  in  the  same  way,  binds  the  virtues  and  super-
natural gifts  together,  so  that  when  love  fails  by  our
departure  from  God,  all  our  virtue  perishes  also,  just  as
the  flowers  drop  from  the  garland  when  the  thread  that
bound  them  together  is  broken.  It  is  not  enough  for
God's  gift  of  virtues,  that  He  should  love  us,  but  we  too
must  love  Him  in  order  to  receive  them,  and  preserve  them.

12.  The  soul  speaks  of  one  hair,  not  of  many,  to  show
that  the  will  by  itself  is  fixed  on  God,  detached  from  all
other  hairs  ;  that  is,  from  strange  love.  This  points  out
the  great  price  and  worth  of  these  garlands  of  virtues  ;  for
when  love  is  single,  firmly  fixed  on  God,  as  here  described,
the  virtues  also  are  entire,  perfect,  and  flowering  in  the  love
of  God ;  for  the  love  He  bears  the  soul  is  beyond  all  price,
and  the  soul  also  knows  it  well.

13.  Were  I  to  attempt  a  description  of  the  beauty  of
that  binding  of  the  flowers  and  emeralds  together,  or  of
the  strength  and  majesty  which  their  harmonious
arrangement  furnishes  to  the  soul,  or  the  beauty  and  grace
of  its  embroidered  vesture,  expressions  and  words  would
fail  me ;  for  if  God  says  of  the  evil  spirit,  '  His  body  is
like  molten  shields,  shut  close  up  with  scales,  pressing
upon  one  another,  one  is  joined  to  another,  and  not  so
much  as  any  air  can  come  between  them  ;'t  if  the  evil
spirit  be  so  strong,  clad  in  malice  thus  compacted
together,  for  the  scales  that  cover  his  body,  like  molten
shields  are  malice,  and  malice  is  in  itself  but  weakness,
what  must  be  the  strength  of  the  soul  that  is  clothed  in
virtues  so  compacted  and  united  together  that  no  impurity

*  Coloss.  iii.  14.  t  Jot)  xli.  6,  7.


350  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXX.]

,  or  imperfection  can  penetrate  between  them  ;  each  virtue
severally  adding  strength  to  strength,  beauty  to  beauty,
wealth  to  wealth,  and  to  majesty,  dominion  and  grandeur.
12.  What  a  marvellous  vision  will  be  that  of  the
bride-soul,  when  it  shall  sit  on  the  right  hand  of  the
Bridegroom-King,  crowned  with  graces  !  '  How  beautiful
are  thy  steps  in  shoes,  O  prince's  daughter !  ""  The  soul
is  called  a  prince's  daughter  because  of  the  power  it  has ;
and  if  the  beauty  of  the  steps  in  shoes  be  great,  what
must  be  that  of  the  whole  vesture  ?  Not  only  is  the
beauty  of  the  soul  crowned  with  admirable  flowers,  but
its  strength  also,  flowing  from  the  harmonious  order  of
the  flowers,  intertwined  with  the  emeralds  of  its  innumer-
able graces,  is  terrible  :  '  Terrible  as  the  army  of  a  camp
set  in  array.'!  For,  as  these  virtues  and  gifts  of  God
refresh  the  soul  with  their  spiritual  perfume,  so  also,  when
united  in  it,  do  they,  out  of  their  substance,  minister
strength.  Thus,  in  the  Canticle,  when  the  bride  was
weak,  languishing  with  love — because  she  had  not  been
able  to  bind  together  the  flowers  and  the  emeralds  with
the  hair  of  her  love — and  anxious  to  strengthen  herself  by
that  union  of  them,  cries  out :  '  Stay  me  with  flowers,
compass  me  about  with  apples  ;  because  I  languish  with
love.'t  The  flowers  are  the  virtues,  and  the  apples  are
the  other  graces.


NOTE.


I  BELIEVE  I  have  now  shown  how  the  intertwining  of  the
garlands,  and  their  lasting  presence  in  the  soul,  explains

*  Cant,  vii.  i.  f  lb.  vi.  3.  +  lb.  ii.  5.


[STAN.  XXX.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  351

the  divine  union  of  love  which  now  exists  between  the
soul  and  God.  The  Bridegroom,  as  He  saith  Himself,  is
'  the  flower  of  the  field  and  the  lily  of  the  valleys,'*  and
the  soul's  love  is  the  hair  that  unites  to  itself  this  flower
of  flowers.  Love  is  the  most  precious  of  all  things,
because  it  is  the  '  bond  of  perfection,'  as  the  Apostle
saith, f  and  perfection  is  union  with  God.  The  soul  is,  as
it  were,  a  sheaf  of  garlands,  for  it  is  the  subject  of  this
glory,  no  longer  what  it  was  before,  but  the  very  perfect
flower  of  flowers  in  the  perfection  and  beauty  of  all ;  for
the  thread  of  love  binds  so  closely  God  and  the  soul,  and
so  unites  them  that  it  transforms  them  and  makes  them
one  by  love ;  so  that,  though  in  essence  different,  yet  in
glory  and  appearance  the  soul  seems  God  and  God  the
soul.  Such  is  this  marvellous  union,  baffling  all  descrip-
tion.

2.  We  may  form  some  conception  of  it  from  the  love
of  David  and  Jonathan,  whose  '  soul  was  knit  with  the
soul  of  David. 't  If  the  love  of  one  man  for  another  can
be  thus  strong,  so  as  to  knit  two  souls  together,  what
must  that  love  of  God  be  which  can  knit  the  soul  of  man
to  God  the  Bridegroom  ?  God  Himself  is  here  the  suitor
Who  in  the  omnipotence  of  His  unfathomable  love
absorbs  the  soul  with  greater  violence  and  efficacy  than  a
torrent  of  fire  a  single  drop  of  the  morning  dew  which
resolves  itself  into  air.  The  hair,  therefore,  which
accomplishes  such  a  union  must,  of  necessity,  be  most
strong  and  subtile,  seeing  that  it  penetrates  and  binds
together  so  effectually  the  soul  and  God.  In  the  present
stanza  the  soul  declares  the  qualities  of  this  hair.

*  Cant.  ii.  I.  f  Col.  iii.  14.  +  i  Kings  xviii.  i.


352  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN.  XXXI.]


STANZA    XXXI.

By  that  one  hair

Thou  hast  observed  flutteriiig  on  my  neck.

And  on  my  neck  regarded.

Thou  wert  captivated;

And  looinided  by  one  of  my  eyes.

There  are  three  things  mentioned  here.  The  first  is,
that  the  love,  by  which  the  virtues  are  bound  together,  is
nothing  less  than  a  strong  love  ;  for  in  truth  it  need  be
so,  in  order  to  preserve  them.  The  second  is,  that  God
is  greatly  taken  by  this  hair  of  love,  seeing  it  to  be  alone
and  strong.  The  third  is,  that  God  is  deeply  enamoured
of  the  soul,  beholding  the  purity  and  integrity  of  its
faith.

'  By  that  one  hair  Thou  hast  observed  fluttering  on  m}-

neck.'

2.  The  neck  signifies  that  strength  in  which,  it  is  said,
fluttered  the  hair  of  love,  strong  love,  which  bound  the
virtues  together.  It  is  not  sufficient  for  the  preservation
of  virtues  that  love  be  alone,  it  must  be  also  strong,  so
that  no  contrary  vice  may  anywhere  destroy  the  perfection
of  the  garland ;  for  the  virtues  are  so  bound  up  together
in  the  soul  by  the  hair,  that  if  the  thread  be  once  broken,
all  the  virtues  are  lost ;  for  where  one  virtue  is,  all  are,
and  where  one  fails,  all  fail  also.  The  hair  is  said  to
flutter  on  the  neck,  because  its  love  of  God,  without  any
hindrance  whatever,  flutters  strongly  and  lightly  in  the
strength  of  the  soul.

3.  As  the  air  causes  hair  to  wave  and  flutter  on  the
neck,  so  the  breath  of  the  Holy  Ghost  stirs  the  strong


[STAN.  XXXI.]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.         353

love  that  it  may  fly  upwards  to  God ;  for  without  this
divine  wind,  which  excites  the  powers  of  the  soul  to  the
practice  of  divine  love,  all  the  virtues  the  soul  may  possess
become  ineffectual  and  fruitless.  The  Beloved  observed
the  hair  fluttering  on  the  neck,  that  is.  He  considered  it
with  particular  attention  and  regard  ;  because  strong  love
is  a  great  attraction  for  the  eyes  of  God.

'  And  on  my  neck  regarded.'

4.  This  shews  us  that  God  not  only  esteems  this  love,
seeing  it  alone,  but  also  loves  it,  seeing  it  strong ;  for  to
say  that  God  regards  is  to  say  that  He  loves,  and  to  say
that  He  observes  is  to  say  that  He  esteems  what  He
observes.  The  word  neck  is  repeated  in  this  line,  because
it,  being  strong,  is  the  cause  why  God  loves  it  so  much.
It  is  as  if  the  soul  said.  Thou  hast  loved  it,  seeing  it
strong  without  weakness  or  fear,  and  without  any  other
love,  and  flying  upwards  swiftly  and  fervently.

5.  Until  now  God  had  not  looked  upon  this  hair,
so  as  to  be  captivated  by  it,  because  He  had  not  seen
it  alone,  separate  from  the  others,  withdrawn  from
other  loves,  feelings,  and  affections,  which  hindered  it
from  fluttering  alone  on  the  neck  of  strength.  After-
wards, however,  when  mortifications  and  trials,  tempta-
tions and  penance  had  detached  it,  and  made  it  strong,
so  that  nothing  whatever  could  break  it,  then  God
beholds  it,  and  is  taken  by  it,  and  binds  the  flowers  of
the  garlands  with  it ;  for  it  is  now  so  strong  that  it
can  keep  the  virtues  united  together  in  the  soul.

6.  But  what    these    temptations    and    trials  are,  how

they  come,  and  how  far  they  reach,  that  the  soul    may

attain  to  that  strength  of  love  in  which    God    unites  it

AA


354  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXXI.]

to  Himself,  I  have  described  in  the  '  Dark  Night/*
and  in  the  explanation  of  the  four  stanzas  +  which  begin
with  the  words,  '  O  living  flame  of  love  !  '  The  soul
having  passed  through  these  trials,  has  reached  a  degree
of  love  so  high  that  it  has  merited  the  divine  union,
'  Thou  wert  captivated.'

7.  O  joyful  wonder  !  God  captive  to  a  hair.  The
reason  of  this  capture  so  precious  is  that  God  was
pleased  to  observe  the  fluttering  of  the  hair  on  the
soul's  neck ;  for  where  God  regards  He  loves.  If  He  in
His  grace  and  mercy  had  not  first  looked  upon  us  and
loved  us, I  as  St.  John  saith,  and  humbled  Himself,  He
never  could  have  been  taken  by  the  fluttering  of  the  hair
of  our  miserable  love.  His  flight  is  not  so  low  as  that
our  love  could  lay  hold  of  the  divine  bird,  attract  His
attention,  and  fly  so  high  with  a  strength  worthy  of  His
regard,  if  He  had  not  first  looked  upon  us.  He,  however,
is  taken  by  the  fluttering  of  the  hair ;  He  makes  it
worthy  and  pleasing  to  Himself,  and  then  is  captivated
by  it.  '  Thou  hast  seen  it  on  my  neck.  Thou  wert
captivated  by  it.'  This  renders  it  credible  that  a  bird
which  flies  low^  may  capture  the  royal  eagle  in  its  flight ;
if  the  eagle  should  fly  so  low  and  be  taken  by  it  willingly.

'  And  wounded  by  one  of  my  eyes.'

8.  The  eye  is  faith.  The  soul  speaks  of  but  one,  and
and  that  this  has  wounded  the  Beloved.  If  the  faith  and
trust  of  the  soul  in  God  were  not  one,  without  admixture
of  other  considerations,  God  never  could  have  been
wounded  by  love.  Thus  the  eye  that  wounds,  and  the
hair  that  binds,  must  be   one.     So  strong  "is  the  love   of

*  Dark  Night,  Bk.  2,  ch.  xxiv.  f  Stanza  ii.  v.  5.

I   I  St.  John  iv.  10.


[STAN.  XXXI.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.       355

the  Bridegroom  for  the  bride,  because  of  her  simple  faith,
that,  if  the  hair  of  her  love  binds  Him,  the  eye  of  her  faith
imprisons  Him  so  closely  as  to  wound  Him  through  that
most  tender  affection  He  bears  her,  which  is  to  the  bride
a  further  progress  in  His  love.

g.  The  Bridegroom  Himself  speaks  in  the  Canticle  of
the  hair  and  the  eyes,  saymg  to  the  bride,  '  Thou  hast
wounded  my  heart,  my  sister,  my  bride,  thou  hast
wounded  my  heart  with  one  of  thy  eyes,  and  with  one
hair  of  th}^  neck.'*  He  says  twice  that  His  heart  is
wounded,  that  is,  with  the  eye  and  the  hair,  and  therefore
the  soul  in  this  stanza  speaks  of  them  both,  because  they
signify  its  union  with  God  in  the  understanding  and  the
will ;  for  the  understanding  is  subdued  by  faith,  signified
by  the  eye,  and  the  will  by  love.  Here  the  soul  exults  in
this  union,  and  gives  thanks  to  the  Bridegroom  for  it,  it
being  His  gift ;  accounting  it  a  great  matter  that  He  has
been  pleased  to  requite  its  love,  and  to  become  captive  to
it.  We  may  also  observe  here  the  joy,  happiness,  and
delight  of  the  soul  with  its  prisoner,  having  been  for  a
long  time  His  prisoner,  enamoured  of  Him.


NOTE.

Great  is  the  power  and  courage  of  love,  for  God  is  its

prisoner.     Blessed  is  the  soul  that  loves,  for  it  has  made

a  captive  of  God  who  obeys  its  good   pleasure.     Such  is

the  nature  of  love,  that  it   makes  those  who  love  do  what

is  asked  of  them,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  without  love

the  utmost  efforts  will  be  fruitless,  but  one  hair  will  bind

*  Cant.  iv.  9.

AA    2


356  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE        [STAN.  XXXII.]

those  that  love.  The  soul,  knowing  this,  and  conscious
of  blessings  beyond  its  merits,  in  being  raised  up  to  so
high  a  degree  of  love,  through  the  rich  endowments
of  graces  and  virtues,  attributes  all  to  the  Beloved,
saying :


STANZA  XXXII.

When  Thou  didst  regard  me.

Thine  eyes  imprinted  in  me  Thy  grace  :

For  this  didst  Thou  love  me  again.

And  thereby  mine  eyes  did  merit,

To  adore  what  in  Thee  they  saw.

It  is  the  nature  of  perfect  love  to  seek  or  accept  nothing
for  itself,  to  attribute  nothing  to  itself,  but  to  refer  all  to
the  Beloved.  If  this  be  true  of  earthly  love,  how  much
more  so  of  the  love  of  God,  the  reason  of  which  is  so
constraining.  In  the  two  foregoing  stanzas  the  bride
seemed  to  attribute  something  to  herself;  for  she  said
that  she  would  make  garlands  with  her  Beloved,  and  bind
them  with  a  hair  of  her  head ;  that  is  a  great  work,  and
of  no  slight  importance  and  worth  ;  afterwards  she  said
that  she  exulted  in  having  captivated  Him  by  a  hair,  and
wounded  Him  with  one  of  her  eyes.  All  this  seems  as  if
she  attributed  great  merits  to  herself.  Now,  however,
she  explains  her  meaning,  and  removes  the  wTong
impression  with  great  care  and  fear,  lest  any  merit
should  be  attributed  to  herself,  and  therefore  less  to  God
than  His  due,  and  less  also  than  she  desired.  She  now
refers  all  to  Him,  and  at  the  same  time  gives  Him  thanks,
saying,  that  the  cause  of  His  being  the  captive  of  the  hair
of  her  love,  and  of  His  being  wounded  by  the  eye  of  her


[STAN,  XXXII.]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        357

faith,  was  His  mercy  in  looking  lovingly  upon  her,  thereby
rendering  her  lovely  and  pleasing  in  His  sight ;  and
that  the  loveliness  and  worth  she  received  from  Him
merited  His  love,  and  made  her  worthy  to  adore  her
Beloved,  and  to  bring  forth  good  works  worthy  of  His
love  and  favour.

'  When  Thou  didst  regard  me.'

2.  That  is,  with  loving  affection,  for  I  have  already
said,  that  where  God  regards  there  He  loves.

'  Thine  eyes  imprinted  in  me  Thy  grace.'

3.  The  eyes  of  the  Bridegroom  signify  here  His
merciful  divinity,  which  mercifully  inclined  to  the  soul,
imprints  or  infuses  in  it  the  love  and  grace  by  which  He
makes  it  beautiful,  and  so  elevates  it  that  He  makes  it  the
partaker  of  His  divinity.  When  the  soul  sees  to  what
height  of  dignity  God  has  raised  it,  it  says —

'  For  this  didst  Thou  love  me  again.'

4.  To  love  again  is  to  love  much  ;  it  is  more  than
simple  love,  it  is  a  twofold  love,  and  for  two  reasons.
Here  the  soul  explains  the  two  motives  of  the  Bride-
groom's love ;  He  not  only  loved  it  because  captivated  by
the  hair,  but  He  loved  it  again,  because  He  was  wounded
with  one  of  its  eyes.  The  reason  why  He  loved  it  so
deeply  is  that  He  would,  when  He  looked  upon  it,  give  it
the  grace  to  please  Him,  endowing  it  with  the  hair  of
love,  and  animating  with  His  charity  the  faith  of  the  eye.
And  therefore  the  soul  saith  :

'  For  this  didst  Thou  love  me  again.'

5.  To  say  that  God  shows  favour  to  the  soul  is  to  say
that  He  renders  it  worthy  and  capable  of  His  love.  It  is
therefore  as  if  the  soul  said,  having  shown  Thy  favour  to


358  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN.  XXXII.]

me,  worthy  pledges  of  Thy  love,  Thou  hast  therefore
loved  me  again :  that  is,  Thou  hast  given  me  grace  upon
grace  ;  or,  in  the  words  of  St.  John,  '  grace  for  grace  ; '  *
grace  for  the  grace  He  has  given,  that  is  more  grace,  for
without  grace  we  cannot  merit  His  grace.

6.  If  we  could  clearly  understand  this  truth,  we  must
keep  in  mind  that,  as  God  loves  nothing  beside  Himself,
so  loves  He  nothing  more  than  Himself,  because  He  loves
all  things  with  reference  to  Himself.  Thus  love  is  the
final  cause,  and  God  loves  nothing  for  what  it  is  in  itself.
Consequently,  when  we  say  that  God  loves  such  a  soul,
we  say,  in  effect,  that  He  brings  it  in  a  manner  to
Himself,  making  it  His  equal,  and  thus  it  is  He  loves
that  soul  in  Himself  with  that  very  love  with  which  He
loves  Himself.  Every  good  work,  therefore,  of  the  soul
in  God  is  meritorious  of  God's  love,  because  the  soul
in  His  favour,  thus  exalted,  merits  God  Himself  in  every
act.

'  And  thereby  mine  eyes  did  merit.'

7.  That  is,  by  the  grace  and  favour  which  the  eyes  of
Thy  compassion  have  wrought,  when  Thou  didst  look
upon  me,  rendering  me  pleasing  in  Thy  sight  and  worthy
of  Thy  regard.

'  To  adore  what  in  Thee  they  saw.'

8.  That  is  :  The  powers  of  my  soul,  O  my  Bridegroom,
the  eyes  by  which  I  can  see  Thee,  although  once  fallen
and  miserable  in  the  vileness  of  their  mean  occupations,
have  merited  to  look  upon  Thee.  To  look  upon  God  is
to  do  good  works  in  His  grace.  Thus  the  powers  of  the
soul  merit  in  adoring  because  they  adore  in  the  grace  of

*  St.  John  i.  16.


[STAN.  XXXII.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.         359

God,  in  which  every  act  is  meritorious.  Enlightened  and
exalted  by  grace,  they  adored  what  in  Him  they  saw,  and
what  they  saw  not  before,  because  of  their  blindness  and
meanness.  What  then  have  they  now  seen  ?  The  great-
ness of  His  power.  His  overflowing  sweetness,  infinite
goodness,  love,  and  compassion,  innumerable  benefits
received  at  His  hands,  as  well  now  when  so  near  Him,  as
before  when  far  away.  The  eyes  of  the  soul  now  merit  to
adore,  and  by  adoring  merit,  for  they  are  beautiful  and
pleasing  to  the  Bridegroom.  Before  they  were  unworthy,
not  only  to  adore  or  behold  Him,  but  even  to  look  upon
Him  at  all :  great  indeed  is  the  stupidity  and  blindness  of
a  soul  without  the  grace  of  God.

g.  It  is  a  melancholy  thing  to  see  how  far  a  soul
departs  from  its  duty  when  it  is  not  enlightened  by  the
love  of  God.  For  being  bound  to  acknowledge  these  and
other  innumerable  favours  which  it  has  every  moment
received  at  His  hands,  temporal  as  well  as  spiritual,  and
to  worship  and  serve  Him  unceasingly  with  all  its
faculties ;  it  not  only  does  not  do  so,  but  is  unworthy
even  to  think  of  Him ;  nor  does  it  make  any  account  of
Him  whatever.  Such  is  the  misery  of  those  who  are
living,  or  rather  who  are  dead,  in  sin.


NOTE.

For  the  better  understanding  of  this  and  of  what  follows,
we  must  keep  in  mind  that  the  regard  of  God  benefits  the
soul  in  four  ways :  it  cleanses,  adorns,  enriches,  and
enlightens  it,  as  the  sun  when  it  shines,  dries,  warms,
beautifies,    and   brightens    the    earth.      When    God    has


360  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE        [STAN.  XXXII.]

visited  the  soul  in  the  three  latter  ways,  whereby  He
renders  it  pleasing  to  Himself,  He  remembers  its  former
uncleanness  and  sin  no  more  :  as  it  is  written,  '  All  the
iniquities  that  he  hath  wrought,  I  will  not  remember  '*

God  having  once  done  away  with  our  sin  and  unclean-
ness, He  will  look  upon  them  no  more ;  nor  will  He
withhold  His  mercy  because  of  them,  for  He  never
punishes  twice  for  the  same  sin,  according  to  the  words
of  the  prophet :  '  There  shall  not  rise  a  double  affliction.'!

Still,  though  God  forgets  the  sin  He  has  once  forgiven,
we  are  not  for  that  reason  to  forget  it  ourselves ;  for  the
Wise  Man  saith,  'Be  not  without  fear  about  sin  forgiven,'*
There  are  three  reasons  for  this.  We  should  always
remember  our  sin,  that  we  may  not  presume,  that  we  may
have  a  subject  of  perpetual  thanksgiving,  and  because  it
serves  to  give  us  more  confidence  that  we  shall  receive
greater  favours  ;  for  if,  when  we  were  in  sin,  God  showed
Himself  unto  us  so  merciful  and  forgiving,  how  much
greater  mercies  may  we  not  hope  for  when  we  are  clean
from  sin,  and  in  His  love  ?

The  soul,  therefore,  calling  to  mind  all  the  mercies  it
has  received,  and  seeing  itself  united  to  the  Bridegroom
in  such  dignity,  rejoices  greatly  with  joy,  thanksgiving
and  love.  In  this  it  is  helped  exceedingly  by  the
recollection  of  its  former  condition,  which  was  so  mean
and  filthy  that  it  not  only  did  not  deserve  that  God  should
look  upon  it,  but  was  unworthy  that  He  should  even  utter
its  name,  as  He  saith  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet  David :
'  Nor  will   I   be  mindful    of  their    names    by    My   lips.'§

Thus  the  soul   seeing  that  there  was,  and  that  there  can

*  Ezech.  xviii.  22  f  Nahum.  i.  9.

I  Ecclus.  V.  5.  g  Ps.  XV.  4.


[STAN.  XXXIII.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        361

be,  nothing  in  itself  to  attract  the  eyes  of  God,  but  that
all  comes  from  Him  of  pure  grace  and  good-will,
attributes  its  misery  to  itself,  and  all  the  blessings  it
enjoys  to  the  Beloved  ;  and,  seeing  further,  that  because
of  these  blessings  it  can  merit  now  what  it  could  not
merit  before,  it  becomes  bold  with  God,  and  prays  for  the
divine  spiritual  union,  wherein  its  mercies  are  multiplied.
This  is  the  subject  of  the  following  stanza  : —


STANZA  XXXIII.

Despise  me  not,

For  if  I  was  swarthy  once.

Thou  canst  regard  me  now ;

Since  Thou  hast  regarded  me,

Grace  and  beauty  hast  Thou  given  me.

The  soul  now  is  becoming  bold,  and  respects  itself,
because  of  the  gifts  and  endowments  which  the  Beloved
has  bestowed  upon  it.  It  recognises  that  these  things,
while  itself  is  worthless  and  undeserving,  are  at  least
means  of  merit,  and  consequently  it  ventures  to  say  to
the  Beloved  :  '  Do  not  disregard  me  now,  or  despise  me ;'
for  if  before  it  deserved  contempt  because  of  the  filthiness
of  its  sin,  and  the  meanness  of  its  nature,  now  that  He
has  once  looked  upon  it,  and  thereby  adorned  it  with
grace  and  beauty,  He  may  well  look  upon  it  a  second  time
and  increase  its  grace  and  beauty.  That  He  has  once
done  so,  when  the  soul  deserved  it  not,  and  had  no
attractions  for  Him,  is  reason  enough  why  He  should  do
so  again  and  again.

'  Despise  me  not.'
2.     The   soul  does  not   say   this   because  it  desires  in
any  way  to  be  esteemed — for  contempt  and  insult  are  of


362  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE        [STAN.  XXXIII.]

great  price,  and  occasions  of  joy  to  the  soul  that  truly
loves  God — but  because  it  acknowledges  that  in  itself  it
merits  nothing  else,  were  it  not  for  the  gifts  and  graces  it
has  received  from  God,  as  it  appears  from  the  words  that
follow.

'  For  if  I  was  swarthy  once.'

3.  If,  before  Thou  did  graciously  look  upon  me  Thou
didst  find  me  in  my  filthiness,  black  with  imperfections
and  sins,  and  naturally  mean  and  vile,

'  Thou  canst  regard  me  now;  since  Thou  hast  regarded  me.'

4.  After  once  looking  upon  me,  and  taking  away  my
swarthy  complexion,  defiled  by  sin  and  disagreeable  to
look  upon,  when  Thou  didst  render  me  lovely  for  the
first  time.  Thou  mayest  well  look  upon  me  now — that  is,
now  I  may  be  looked  on  and  deserve  to  be  regarded,  and
thereby  to  receive  further  favours  at  Thy  hands.  For
Thine  eyes,  when  they  first  looked  upon  me,  did  not  only
take  away  my  swarthy  complexion,  but  rendered  me  also
worthy  of  Thy  regard  ;  for  in  Thy  look  of  love

'  Grace  and  beauty  hast  Thou  given  me.'

5.  The  two  preceding  lines  are  a  commentary  on  the
words  of  St.  John,  '  grace  for  grace,'*  for  when  God
beholds  a  soul  that  is  lovely  in  His  e3'es.  He  is  moved  to
bestow  more  grace  upon  it  because  He  dwells  well-pleased
within  it.  Moses  knew  this,  and  prayed  for  further
grace  :  he  would,  as  it  were,  constrain  God  to  grant  it
because  he  had  already  received  so  much.  '  Thou  hast
said  :  I  know  thee  by  name,  and  thou  hast  found  favour
in  My  sight :    if  therefore   I  have  found  favour   in  Thy

*  St.  John.  i.  16,


[STAN.  XXXIII.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.      363

sight,  shew  me  Thy  face,  that  I   may  know  Thee,  and
may  find  grace  before  Thine  eyes.'*

6.  Now  a  soul  which  in  the  eyes  of  God  is  thus  exalted
in  grace,  honourable  and  lovely,  is  for  that  reason  an
object  of  His  unutterable  love.  If  He  loved  that  soul
before  it  was  in  a  state  of  grace,  for  His  own  sake,  He
loves  it  now,  when  in  a  state  of  grace,  not  only  for  His
own  sake,  but  also  for  itself.  Thus  enamoured  of  its
beauty,  through  its  affections  and  good  works,  now  that
it  is  never  without  them,  He  bestows  upon  it  continually
further  grace  and  love,  and  the  more  honourable  and
exalted  He  renders  that  soul,  the  more  is  He  captivated
by  it,  and  the  greater  His  love  for  it.

7.  God  Himself  sets  this  truth  before  us,  saying  to
His  people,  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet,  '  since  thou
becamest  honourable  in  My  eyes,  and  glorious,  I  have
loved  thee.'f  That  is,  since  I  have  cast  Mine  eyes
upon  thee,  and  thereby  shewed  thee  favour,  and  made
thee  glorious  and  honourable  in  My  sight,  thou  hast
merited  other  and  further  favours ;  for  to  say
that  God  loves,  is  to  say  that  He  multiplies  His
grace.  The  bride  in  the  Canticle  speaks  to  the  same
effect,  saying :  '  I  am  black  but  beautiful,  O  ye  daughters
of  Jerusalem,' t  and  the  Church  adds,§  saying  :  '  Therefore
hath  the  King  loved  me,  and  brought  me  into  His  secret
chamber.'  This  is  as  much  as  saying  :  O  ye  souls  who
have  no  knowledge  nor  understanding  of  these  favours,
marvel  not  that  the  heavenly  King  has  shown  such  mercy
unto  me  as  to  plunge  me  in  the  depths  of  His  love,  for,

*  Exod.  xxxiii.  12,  13.  t  Is.  xliii.  4.

+  Cant.  i.  4.  §  Antiphon  in  Vesper.     St.  M.  V.


364  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE        [STAN.  XXXIII.]

though  I  am  swarthy,  He  has  so  regarded  me,  after  once
looking  upon  me,  that  He  could  not  be  satisfied  without
betrothing  me  to  Himself,  and  calling  me  into  the  inner
chamber  of  His  love.

8.  Who  can  measure  the  greatness  of  the  soul's  exalta-
tion when  God  is  pleased  with  it  ?  No  language,  no
imagination  is  sufficient  for  this  ;  for  in  truth  God  doeth
this  as  God,  to  show  that  it  is  He  who  does  it.  The
dealings  of  God  with  such  a  soul  may  in  some  degree  be
understood ;  but  only  in  this  way,  namely,  that  He  gives
more  to  him  who  has  more,  and  that  His  gifts  are  multi-
plied in  proportion  to  the  previous  endowments  of  the
soul.  This  is  what  He  teaches  us  Himself  in  the  Gospel,
saying :  '  He  that  hath  to  him  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall
abound  :  but  he  that  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken
away  even  that  which  he  hath.'  ^

g.  Thus  the  talent  of  that  servant,  not  then  in  favour
with  his  lord,  was  taken  from  him  and  given  to  another
who  had  gained  others,  so  that  the  latter  might  have  all,
together  with  the  favour  of  his  lord.f  God  heaps  the
noblest  and  the  greatest  favours  of  His  house,  which  is
the  Church  militant  as  well  as  the  Church  triumphant,
upon  him  who  is  most  His  friend,  ordaining  it  thus  for
His  greater  honour  and  glory,  as  a  great  light  absorbs
many  little  lights.  This  is  the  spiritual  sense  of  those
words  already  cited,  t  the  prophet  Isaias  addressed  to  the
people  of  Israel :  '  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  the  Holy  One
of  Israel,  thy  Saviour  :  I  have  given  Egypt  for  thy  atone-
ment and  Saba  for  thee.  I  will  give  men  for  thee,  and
people  for  thy  life.'§

*  Matt.  xiii.  12  f  lb.  xxv.  28.  +   §  7-  S  Is.  xliii.  3,


[STAN.  XXXIII.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.     365

10.  Well  mayest  Thou  then,  O  God,  gaze  upon  and
prize  that  soul  which  Thou  regardest,  for  Thou  hast
made  it  precious  by  looking  upon  it,  and  given  it  graces
which  in  Thy  sight  are  precious,  and  by  which  Thou  art
captivated.  That  soul,  therefore,  deserves  that  Thou
shouldest  regard  it  not  once  only  but  often,  seeing  that
Thou  hast  once  looked  upon  it  ;  for  so  is  it  written  in  the
book  of  Esther  b}'  the  Holy  Ghost:  'This  honour  is  he
worthy  of,  whom  the  king  hath  a  mind  to  honour.'*


NOTE.


The  gifts  of  love  which  the  Bridegroom  bestows  on  the
soul  in  this  state  are  inestimable ;  the  praises  and
endearing  expressions  of  divine  love  which  pass  so
frequently  between  them  are  beyond  all  utterance.  The
soul  is  occupied  in  praising  Him,  and  in  giving  Him
thanks ;  and  He  in  exalting,  praising,  and  thanking  the
soul,  as  we  see  in  the  Canticle,  where  He  thus  speaks  to
the  bride :  '  Behold,  thou  art  fair,  O  My  love,  behold,
thou  art  fair  ;  thy  eyes  are  as  those  of  doves.'  The  bride
replies:  '  Behold  thou  art  fair  my  Beloved,  and  comely. 'f
These,  and  other  like  expressions,  are  addressed  by  them
each  to  the  other.

2.  In  the  previous  stanza  the  soul  despised  itself,  and
said  it  was  swarthy  and  unclean,  praising  Him  for  His
beauty  and  grace,  Who,  by  looking  upon  the  soul,
rendered  it  gracious  and  beautiful.      He,  whose  way  it  is

*   Esth.  vi.  II.  t  Cant.  iv.  i,  vi.  3.


366  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE        [STAN.  XXXIV.]

to  exalt  the  humble,  fixing  His  eyes  upon  the  soul,  as  He
was  entreated  to  do,  praises  it  in  the  following  stanza.
He  does  not  call  it  swarthy,  as  the  soul  calls  itself,  but
He  addresses  it  as  His  white  dove,  praising  it  for  its  good
dispositions,  those  of  a  dove  and  a  turtle-dove.


STANZA  XXXIV.

THE  BRIDEGROOM.

The  little  white  dove

Has  retjirncd  to  the  ark  with  the  bough  ;

And  nocv  the  tiiHle-do'ne

Its  desired  mate

On  the  green  banks  has  found.

It  is  the  Bridegroom  Himself  who  now  speaks.  He
celebrates  the  purity  of  the  soul  in  its  present  state,  the
rich  rewards  it  has  gained,  in  having  prepared  itself,  and
laboured  to  come  to  Him.  He  also  speaks  of  its  blessed-
ness in  having  found  the  Bridegroom  in  this  union,  and
of  the  fulfilment  of  all  its  desires,  the  delight  and  joy  it
has  in  Him  now  that  all  the  trials  of  life  and  time  are
over.

'  The  little  white  dove  '

2.  He  calls  the  soul,  on  account  of  its  whiteness  and
purity — effects  of  the  grace  it  has  received  at  the  hands
of  God — a  dove,  '  the  little  white  dove,'  for  this  is  the
term    He    applies   to    it    in    the    Canticle,    to    mark    its


[STAN.  XXXIV. ]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.     367

simplicity,  its  natural  gentleness,  and  its  loving  contem-
plation. The  dove  is  not  only  simple,  and  gentle  without
gall,  but  its  eyes  are  also  clear,  full  of  love.  The  Bride-
groom, therefore,  to  point  out  in  it  this  character  of
loving  contemplation,  wherein  it  looks  upon  God,  says
of  it  that  its  eyes  are  those  of  a  dove  :  '  Thy  eyes  are
dove's  eyes."*'

'  Has  returned  to  the  ark  with  the  bough.'

3.  Here  the  Bridegroom  compares  the  soul  to  the
dove  of  Noe's  ark,  the  going  and  returning  of  which  is  a
figure  of  what  befalls  the  soul.  For  as  the  dove  went
forth  from  the  ark,  and  returned  because  it  found  no  rest
for  its  feet  on  account  of  the  waters  of  the  deluge,  until
the  time  when  it  returned  with  the  olive  branch  in  its
mouth — a  sign  of  the  mercy  of  God  in  drying  the  waters
which  had  covered  the  earth — so  the  soul  went  forth  at  its
creation  out  of  the  ark  of  God's  omnipotence,  and  having
traversed  the  deluge  of  its  sins  and  imperfections,  and
finding  no  rest  for  its  desires,  flew  and  returned  on  the
air  of  the  longings  of  its  love  to  the  ark  of  its  Creator's
bosom  ;  but  it  only  effected  an  entrance  when  God  had
dried  the  waters  of  its  imperfections.  Then  it  returned
with  the  olive  branch,  that  is,  the  victory  over  all  things
by  His  merciful  compassion,  to  this  blessed  and  perfect
recollection  in  the  bosom  of  the  Beloved,  not  only
triumphant  over  all  its  enemies,  but  also  rewarded  for
its  merits ;  for  both  the  one  and  the  other  are  symbolised
by  the  olive  bough.  Thus  the  dove-soul  returns  to  the
ark  of  God  not  only  white  and  pure  as  it  went  forth  when

*  Cant.  iv.  i.


368  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN.  XXXIV]

He  created  it,  but  with  the  oHve  branch  of  reward  and
peace  obtained  by  the  conquest  of  itself.

'  And  now  the  turtle-dove  its  desired  mate
on  the  green  banks  has  found.'

4.  The  Bridegroom  calls  the  soul  the  turtle-dove,
because  when  it  is  seeking  after  the  Beloved  it  is  like  the
turtle-dove  when  it  cannot  find  its  desired  mate.  It  is  said
of  the  turtle-dove,  when  it  cannot  find  its  mate,  that  it
sitteth  not  on  the  green  boughs,  nor  drinketh  of  the  cool
refreshing  waters,  nor  retireth  to  the  shade,  nor  mingleth
with  companions  ;  but  when  it  finds  its  mate  then  it  doeth
all  this.

5.  Such,  too,  is  the  condition  of  the  soul,  and
necessarily,  if  it  is  to  attain  to  union  with  the  Bride-
groom. The  soul's  love  and  anxietv  must  be  such  that  it
cannot  rest  on  the  green  boughs  of  any  joy,  nor  drink  of
the  waters  of  this  world's  honour  and  glory,  nor  recreate
itself  with  any  temporal  consolation,  nor  shelter  itself  in
the  shade  of  created  help  and  protection  :  it  must  repose
nowhere,  it  must  avoid  the  society  of  all  its  inclinations,
mourn  in  its  loneliness,  until  it  shall  find  the  Bridegroom
to  its  perfect  contentment.

6.  And  because  the  soul,  before  it  attained  to  this
estate,  sought  the  Beloved  in  great  love,  and  was  satisfied
with  nothing  short  of  Him,  the  Bridegroom  here  speaks
of  the  end  of  its  labours,  and  the  fulfilment  of  its  desires,
saying:  'Now  the  turtle-dove  its  desired  mate  on  the
green  banks  has  found.'  That  is :  Now  the  bride-soul
sits  on  the  green  bough,  rejoicing  in  her  Beloved ;  drinks
of  the  clear  waters  of  the  highest  contemplation  and  of
the  wisdom  of  God  ;   is   refreshed   by  the  consolations  it


[STAN.  XXXIV.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  369

finds  in  Him,  and  is  also  sheltered  under  the  shadow  of
His  favour  and  protection,  which  she  had  so  earnestly
desired.  There  is  she  deliciously  and  divinely  comforted,
refreshed,  and  nourished,  as  she  saith  in  the  Canticle  :  '  I
sat  down  under  His  shadow  Whom  I  desired,  and  His
fruit  was  sweet  to  my  palate.'*


NOTE.


The  Bridegroom  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  satisfaction
which  He  derives  from  the  happiness  which  the  bride  has
found  in  that  solitude  wherein  she  desired  to  live — a
stable  peace  and  unchangeable  good.  For  when  the
bride  is  confirmed  in  the  tranquillity  of  her  soul  and
solitary  love  of  the  Bridegroom,  she  reposes  so  sweetly  in
the  love  of  God,  and  God  also  in  her,  that  she  requires  no
other  means  or  masters  to  guide  her  in  the  way  of  God  ;
for  God  Himself  is  now  her  light  and  guide,  fulfilling  in
her  what  He  promised  by  the  mouth  of  Oseas,  saying :
'  I  will  lead  her  into  the  wilderness,  and  I  will  speak  to
her  heart.'!  That  is,  it  is  in  solitude  that  He  com-
municates Himself,  and  unites  Himself,  to  the  soul,  for
to  speak  to  the  heart  is  to  satisfy  the  heart,  and  no
heart  can  be  satisfied  with  less  than  God.  And  so  the
Bridegroom  says :


*  Cant.  ii.  3.  f  Os.  ii.  14.

BB


370  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXXV.]


STANZA    XXXV.

hi  solitude  she  lived,

And  in  solitude  built  her  nest ;

And  in  solitude,  alone

Hath  the  Beloved  guided  her,

In  solitude  also  wounded  with  love.

In  this  stanza  the  Bridegroom  is  doing  two  things  :  one
is,  He  is  praising  the  solitude  in  which  the  soul  once
lived,  for  it  was  the  means  whereby  it  found  the  Beloved,
and  rejoiced  in  Him,  away  from  all  its  former  anxieties
and  troubles.  For,  as  the  soul  abode  in  solitude,
abandoning  all  created  help  and  consolation,  in  order  to
obtain  the  fellowship  and  union  of  the  Beloved,  it
deserved  thereby  possession  of  the  peace  of  solitude  in
the  Beloved,  in  Whom  it  reposes  alone,  undisturbed  by
any  anxieties.

2.  The  second  is  this  :  the  Bridegroom  is  saying  that,
inasmuch  as  the  soul  has  desired  to  be  alone,  far  away,
for  His  sake,  from  all  created  things.  He  has  been
enamoured  of  it  because  of  i^s  loneliness,  has  taken  care
of  it,  held  it  in  His  arms,  fed  it  with  all  good  things,  and
guided  it  to  the  deep  things  of  God.  He  does  not  merely
say  that  He  is  now  the  soul's  guide,  but  that  He  is  its
only  guide,  without  any  intermediate  help,  either  of  angels
or  of  men,  either  of  forms  or  of  figures  ;  for  the  soul  in
this  solitude  has  attained  to  true  liberty  of  spirit,  and  is
wholly  detached  from  all  subordinate  means.

'  In  solitude  she  lived.'

3.  The  turtle-dove,  that  is,  the  soul,  lived  in  solitude
before  she  found  the  Beloved  in  this  state  of  union ;  for


[STAN.  XXXV.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  371

the  soul  that  longs  after  God  derives  no  consolation  from
any  other  companionship, — yea,  until  it  finds  Him,  every-
thing does  but  increase  its  solitude.

'  And  in  solitude  built  her  nest.'

4.  The  previous  solitude  of  the  soul  was  its  voluntary
privation  of  all  the  comforts  of  this  world,  for  the  sake  of
the  Bridegroom — as  in  the  instance  of  the  turtle-dove —
its  striving  after  perfection,  and  acquiring  that  perfect
solitude  wherein  it  attains  to  union  with  the  Word,  and
in  consequence  to  complete  refreshment  and  repose.
This  is  what  is  meant  by  '  nest ;  '  and  the  words  of  the
stanza  may  be  thus  explained  :  'In  that  solitude,  wherein
the  bride  formerly  lived,  tried  by  afflictions  and  troubles,
because  she  was  not  perfect,  there,  in  that  solitude,  hath
she  found  refreshment  and  rest,  because  she  has  found
perfect  rest  in  God.'  This,  too,  is  the  spiritual  sense  of
these  words  of  the  Psalmist :  '  The  sparrow  hath  found
herself  a  house,  and  the  turtle  a  nest  for  herself,  where
she  may  lay  her  young  ones ;  *  that  is,  a  sure  stay  in
God,  in  Whom  all  the  desires  and  powers  of  the  soul  are
satisfied.'

'  And  in  solitude.'

5.  In  the  solitude  of  perfect  detachment  from  all
things,  wherein  it  lives  alone  with  God — there  He  guides
it,  moves  it,  and  elevates  it  to  divine  things.  He  guides
the  understanding  in  the  perception  of  divine  things,
because  it  is  now  detached  from  all  strange  and  contrar}-
knowledge,  and  is  alone.  He  moves  the  will  freely  to
love  Himself,  because  it  is  now  alone,  disencumbered
from  all  other  affections.     He  fills  the  memory  with  divine

*  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  4.

BB    2


372  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXXV.]

knowledge,  because  that  also  is  now  alone,  emptied  of  all
imaginations  and  fancies.  For  the  instant  the  soul  clears
and  empties  its  faculties  of  all  earthly  objects,  and  from
attachments  to  higher  things,  keeping  them  in  solitude,
God  immediately  fills  them  with  the  invisible  and  divine  ;
it  being  God  Himself  Who  guides  it  in  this  solitude.  St.
Paul  says  of  the  perfect,  that  they  '  are  led  by  the  Spirit
of  God,'  and  that  is  the  same  as  saying :  '  In  solitude
hath  He  guided  her.'

'  Alone  hath  the  Beloved  guided  her.'

6.  That  is,  the  Beloved  not  only  guides  the  soul  in  its
solitude,  but  it  is  He  alone  Who  works  in  it  directly  and
immediately.  It  is  of  the  nature  of  the  soul's  union  with
God  in  the  spiritual  marriage,  that  God  works  directly,
and  communicates  Himself  immediately,  not  by  the
ministry  of  angels,  or  by  the  help  of  natural  capacities.
For  the  exterior  and  interior  senses,  all  created  things,
and  even  the  soul  itself,  contribute  very  little  towards  the
reception  of  those  great  supernatural  favours  which  God
bestows  in  this  state ;  yea,  rather,  inasmuch  as  they  do
not  fall  within  the  cognizance  of  natural  efforts,  ability
and  application,  God  effects  them  alone.

7.  The  reason  is,  that  He  finds  the  soul  alone  in  its
solitude,  and  therefore  will  not  give  it  another  companion,
nor  will  He  entrust  His  work  to  any  other  than  Himself.

8.  There  is  a  certain  fitness  in  this ;  for  the  soul
having  abandoned  all  things,  and  passed  through  all  the
ordinary  means,  rising  above  them  unto  God,  God  Him-
self becomes  the  guide,  and  the  way  to  Himself.  The
soul  in  solitude,  detached  from  all  things,  having  now
ascended    above  all    things,    nothing  now  can    profit   or


[STAN.  XXXV.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.         373

help  it  to  ascend  higher  except  the  Bridegroom  Word
Himself,  Who,  because  enamoured  of  the  bride,  will
Himself  alone  bestow  these  graces  on  the  soul.  And  so  He
says :

'  In  solitude  also  wounded  with  love.'
g.  That  is,  the  love  of  the  bride  ;  for  the  Bridegroom
not  only  loves  greatly  the  solitude  of  the  soul,  but  is  also
wounded  with  love  of  her,  because  the  soul  would  abide
in  solitude  and  detachment,  on  account  of  its  being  itself
wounded  with  love  of  Him.  He  will  not,  therefore,  leave  .
it  alone  ;  for  being  wounded  with  love  because  of  the
soul's  solitude  on  His  account,  and  seeing  that  nothing
else  can  satisfy  it.  He  comes  Himself  to  be  alone  its
guide,  drawing  it  to,  and  absorbing  it  in.  Himself.  But
He  would  not  have  done  so,  if  He  had  not  found  it  in
this  spiritual  solitude.


NOTE.


It  is  a  strange  characteristic  of  persons  in  love,  that  they
take  a  much  greater  pleasure  in  their  loneliness  than  in
the  company  of  others.  For  if  they  meet  together  in  the
presence  of  others  with  whom  they  need  have  no  inter-
course, and  from  whom  they  have  nothing  to  conceal,  and
if  those  others  neither  address  them  nor  interfere  with
them,  yet  the  very  fact  of  their  presence  is  sufficient  to
rob  the  lovers  of  all  pleasure  in  their  meeting.  The  cause
of  this  lies  in  the  fact,  that  love  is  the  union  of  two
persons,  who  will  not  communicate  with  each  other  if
they  are  not  alone.     And  now  the  soul,  having  reached


374  A  SPITITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXXV.]

the  summit  of  perfection,  and  liberty  of  spirit  in  God,  all
the  resistance  and  contradictions  of  the  flesh  being
subdued,  has  no  other  occupation  or  employment  than
indulgence  in  the  joys  of  its  intimate  love  of  the  Bride-
groom. It  is  written  of  holy  Tobias,  after  the  trials  of
his  life  were  over,  that  God  restored  his  sight,  and  that
'  the  rest  of  his  life  was  in  joy.'*  So  is  it  with  the  perfect
soul,  it  rejoices  in  the  blessings  that  surround  it.

2.  The  prophet  Isaias  says  of  the  soul  which,  having
been  tried  in  the  works  of  perfection,  has  arrived  at  the
goal  desired  :  '  Thy  light  shall  arise  up  in  darkness,  and  .
thy  darkness  shall  be  as  the  noonday.  And  our  Lord
will  give  thee  rest  always,  and  will  fill  thy  soul  with
brightness,  and  deliver  thy  bones,  and  thou  shalt  be  as  a
watered  garden,  and  as  a  fountain  of  water  whose  waters
shall  not  fail.  And  the  deserts  of  the  world  shall  be
builded  in  thee  :  thou  shalt  raise  up  the  foundations  of
generation  and  generation ;  and  thou  shalt  be  called  the
builder  of  the  hedges,  turning  the  paths  into  rest.  If  thou
turn  away  thy  foot  from  the  sabbath,  from  doing  thy  will
in  My  holy  day,  and  call  the  sabbath  delicate,  and  the
Holy  of  our  Lord  glorious,  and  glorify  Him  while  thou
doest  not  thine  own  ways,  and  thy  will  be  not  found,  to
speak  a  word :  then  shalt  thou  be  delighted  upon  the
Lord,  and  I  will  lift  thee  up  above  the  heights  of  the
earth,  and  will  feed  thee  with  the  inheritance  of  Jacob  thy
father,' t  Who  is  God  Himself.  The  soul,  therefore,  has
nothing  else  to  do  now  but  to  rejoice  in  the  delights  of
this  pasture,  and  one  thing  only  to  desire,  the  perfect
fruition  of  it  in  everlasting  life.  Thus,  in  the  next  and  the
*  Tob.  xiv.  4.  Is.  Iviii.  10 — 14.


[STAN.  XXXVI.]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.         375

following  stanzas,  it  implores  the  Beloved  to  admit
it  into  this  beatific  pasture  in  the  clear  vision  of  God,
and  says :


STANZA   XXXVI.

THE    BRIDE.

Let  us  rejoice,  O  my  Beloved,

Let  us  go  forth  to  see  ourselves  ;'«  Thy  beauty.

To  the  mountam  and  the  hill.

Where  the  pure  water  flows  ;

Let  us  enter  into  the  heart  of  the  thicket.

The  perfect  union  of  love  between  itself  and  God  being
now  effected,  the  soul  longs  to  occupy  itself  with  those
things  that  belong  to  love.     It  is  the  soul  which  is  now
speaking,  making  three  petitions  to  the  Beloved.     In  the
first  place,   it   asks  for  the  joy  and   sweetness  of  love,
saying:  '  Let  us  rejoice.'      In  the  second  place,  it  prays
to  be  made  like   Him,   saying :    Let  us  go  forth  to  see
ourselves  in  Thy  beauty.'      In  the  third  place,  it  begs  to
be  admitted   to  the  knowledge   of  His    secrets,    saying :
'  Let  us  enter  into  the  heart  of  the  thicket.'
'  Let  us  rejoice,  O  my  Beloved.'
2.     That  is,  in  the  sweetness  of  our  love  ;  not  only  in
that  sweetness  of  ordinary  union,  but  also  in  that  which
flows  from  active  and  affective  love,  whether  in  the  will
by  an  act  of  affection,  or  outwardly,  in  good  works  which
tend  to  the  service  of  the  Beloved.      For  love,  as  I  have
said,  where  it  is  firmly  rooted,  ever  runs  after  those  joys
and  delights  which  are  the  acts  of  exterior  and  interior


376  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXXVI.]

love.     All  this  the  soul  does  that  it  may  be  made  like  to
the  Beloved.

'  Let  us  go  forth  to  see  ourselves  in  Thy  beauty.'

3.  Let  us  so  act,  that,  by  the  practice  of  this  love,  we
may  come  to  see  ourselves  in  Thy  beauty  in  everlasting
life.  That  is  :  Let  me  be  so  transformed  in  Thy  beauty,
that,  being  alike  in  beauty,  we  may  see  ourselves  both  in
Thy  beauty ;  having  Thy  beauty,  so  that,  one  beholding
the  other,  each  may  see  his  own  beaut}^  in  the  other,  the
beauty  of  both  being  Thine  only,  and  mine  absorbed  in  it.
And  thus  I  shall  see  Thee  in  Thy  beauty,  and  myself  in
Thy  beauty,  and  Thou  shalt  see  me  in  Thy  beauty  ;  and
I  shall  see  myself  in  Thee  in  Thy  beauty,  and  Thou  Thy-
self in  me  in  Thy  beauty  ;  so  shall  I  seem  to  be  Thyself
in  Thy  beauty,  and  Thou  myself  in  Thy  beauty  ;  my
beauty  shall  be  Thine,  Thine  shall  be  mine,  and  I  shall
be  Thou  in  it,  and  Thou  myself  in  Thine  own  beauty ;
for  Thy  beauty  will  be  my  beauty,  and  so  we  shall  see,
each  the  other,  in  Thy  beauty.

4.  This  is  the  adoption  of  the  sons  of  God,  who  may
truly  say  what  the  Son  Himself  says  to  the  Eternal
Father :  '  All  my  things  are  Thine,  and  Thine  are  mine,'*
He  by  essence,  being  the  Son  of  God  by  nature,  we  by
participation,  being  sons  by  adoption.  This  He  says  not
for  Himself  only.  Who  is  the  Head,  but  for  the  whole
mystical  body,  which  is  the  Church.  For  the  Church
will  share  in  the  very  beauty  of  the  Bridegroom  in  the
day  of  her  triumph,  when  she  shall  see  God  face  to  face.
And  this  is  the  vision  which  the  soul  prays  that  the  Bride-
groom and  itself  may  go  in  His  beauty  to  see.

*  St.  John  xvii.  10.


[STAN.  XXXVI.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        377

'  To  the  mountain  and  the  hill.'

5.  That  is,  to  the  morning  and  essential  knowledge  of
God,  which  is  knowledge  in  the  Divine  Word,  Who,
because  He  is  so  high,  is  here  signified  by  '  the  moun-
tain.' Thus  Isaias  saith,  calling  upon  men  to  know  the
Son  of  God  :  '  Come,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of
our  Lord  ;  '*  and  before  :  '  In  the  last  days  the  mountain
of  the  house  of  our  Lord  shall  be  prepared.'!

'And  to  the  hill,'

6.  That  is,  to  the  evening  knowledge  of  God,  to  the.
knowledge  of  Him  in  His  creatures,  in  His  works,  and
in  His  marvellous  laws.  This  is  signified  by  the  expres-
sion '  hill,'  because  it  is  a  kind  of  knowledge  lower  than
the  other.  The  soul  prays  for  both  when  it  says  :  '  to  the
mountain  and  the  hill.'

7.  When  the  soul  says :  '  Let  us  go  forth  to  see
ourselves  in  Thy  beauty  to  the  mountain,'  its  meaning  is :
Transform  me,  and  make  me  like  the  beauty  of  the  Divine
Wisdom,  the  Word,  the  Son  of  God.  When  it  says  :  '  to
the  hill,'  the  meaning  is :  Do  Thou  instruct  me  in  the
beauty  of  this  lower  knowledge,  which  is  manifest  in  Thy
creatures  and  mysterious  works.  This  also  is  the  beauty
of  the  Son  of  God,  wherewith  the  soul  desires  to  shine.

8.  But  the  soul  cannot  see  itself  in  the  beauty  of  God
if  it  be  not  transformed  in  His  wisdom,  wherein  all  things
are  seen  and  possessed,  whether  in  heaven  or  in  earth.  It
was  to  this  mountain  and  to  this  hill  the  bride  longed  to
come  when  she  said  :  '  I  will  go  to  the  mountain  of  myrrh,
and  to  the  hill  of  frankincense.'!  The  mountain  of
myrrh    is    the    clear   vision   of    God,    and    the    hill    of

*  Is.  ii.  3.  t  lb.  2.  I  Cant.  iv.  6.


378  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXXVI.]

frankincense  the  knowledge  of  Him  in  His  works,  for  the
myrrh  on  the  mountain  is  of  a  higher  order  than  the
incense  on  the  hill.

'  Where  the  pure  water  flows.'
g.  This  is  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God,  which
cleanse  the  understanding,  and  detach  it  from  all  accidents
and  fancies,  and  which  clear  it  of  the  mist  of  ignorance.
The  soul  is  ever  influenced  by  this  desire  of  perfectly  and
clearly  understanding  the  divine  verities,  and  the  more  it
loves  the  more  it  desires  to  penetrate  them,  and  hence
the  third  petition  which  it  makes,

'  Let  us  enter  into  the  heart  of  the  thicket ;  '

10.  Into  the  depths  of  God's  marvellous  works  and
profound  judgments.  Such  is  their  multitude  and  variety,
that  they  may  be  called  a  thicket.  They  are  so  full  of
wisdom  and  mystery,  that  we  may  not  only  call  them  a
thicket,  but  we  may  even  apply  to  them  the  words  of
David:  'The  mountain  of  God  is  a  rich  mountain,  a
mountain  curdled  as  cheese,  a  rich  mountain.'*  The
thicket  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God  is  so  deep,
and  so  immense,  that  the  soul,  how  much  soever  it  knows
of  it,  can  always  penetrate  further  within  it,  because  it  is
so  immense  and  so  incomprehensible.  '  O  the  depth,  'cries
out  the  Apostle,  '  of  the  riches  of  the  wisdom  and  of  the
knowledge  of  God !  How  incomprehensible  are  His
judgments,  and  how  unsearchable  His  ways  !  't

11.  But  the  soul  longs  to  enter  this  thicket  and
incomprehensibility  of  His  judgments,  for  it  is  moved  by
that  longing  for  a  deeper  knowledge  of  them.  That
knowledge    is    an    inestimable    delight,    transcending    all

*  Ps.  Ixvii.  i6.  f  Rom.  xi.  33.


[STAN.  XXXVI.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.         379

understanding.  David  speaking  of  the  sweetness  of  them,
saith  :  '  The  judgments  of  our  Lord  are  true,  justified  in
themselves,  to  be  desired  above  gold  and  many  precious
stones,  and  sweeter  than  honey  and  the  honey-comb.  For
Thy  servant  keepeth  them.'*  The  soul  therefore  earnestly
longs  to  be  engulfed  in  His  judgments,  and  to  have  a
deeper  knowledge  of  them,  and  for  that  end  would  esteem
it  a  joy  and  great  consolation  to  endure  all  sufferings  and
afflictions  in  the  world,  and  whatever  else  might  help  it  to
that  end,  however  hard  and  painful  it  might  be  ;  it  would .
gladly  pass  through  the  agonies  of  death  to  enter  deeper
into  God.

12.  Hence,  also,  the  thicket,  which  the  soul  desires  to
enter,  may  be  fittingly  understood  as  signifying  the  great
and  many  trials  and  tribulations  which  the  soul  longs  for,
because  suffering  is  most  sweet  and  most  profitable  to  it,
inasmuch  as  it  is  the  way  by  which  it  enters  more  and
more  into  the  thicket  of  the  delicious  wisdom  of  God.
The  most  pure  suffering  leads  to  the  most  pure  and
the  deepest  knowledge,  and  consequently,  to  the  purest
and  highest  joy,  for  that  is  the  issue  of  the  deepest
knowledge.  Thus,  the  soul,  not  satisfied  with  ordinary
suffering,  says :  '  Let  us  enter  into  the  heart  of  the
thicket,'  even  the  anguish  of  death,  that  I  may  see  God.

13.  Job,  desiring  to  suffer  that  he  might  see  God,  thus
speaks :  '  Who  will  grant  that  my  request  may  come,  and
that  God  may  give  me  what  I  look  for  ?  And  that  He
that  hath  be^^'un  may  destroy  me,  that  He  may  let  loose
His  hand  and  cut  me  off?  And  that  this  may  be  my
comfort,  that  afflicting  me  with  sorrow.  He  spare  not.'t

*  Ps,  xviii.  10 — 12.  t  Job  vi.  8 — 10.


380  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE        [STAN.  XXXVI.]

O  that  men  would  understand  how  impossible  it  is  to
enter  the  thicket,  the  manifold  riches  of  the  wisdom  of
God,  without  entering  into  the  thicket  of  manifold
suffering  making  it  the  desire  and  consolation  of  the  soul ;
and  how  that  the  soul  which  really  longs  for  the  divine
wisdom,  longs  first  of  all  for  the  sufferings  of  the  Cross,
that  it  may  enter  in.

14.  For  this  cause  it  was  that  St.  Paul  admonished
the  Ephesians  not  to  faint  in  their  tribulations,  but  to
take  courage  :  '  That  being  rooted  and  founded  in  charity,
you  may  be  able  to  comprehend  with  all  the  saints  what
is  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  height,  and  depth ;  to
know  also  the  charity  of  Christ,  which  surpasseth  all
knowledge,  that  you  may  be  filled  unto  all  the  fullness  of
God.'*  The  gate  by  which  we  enter  into  the  riches  of
the  knowledge  of  God,  is  the  Cross ;  and  that  gate  is
narrow.  They  who  desire  to  enter  in  that  way  are
few,  while  those  who  desire  the  jo3^s  that  come  by  it  are
many.


NOTE.


One  of  the  principal  reasons  why  the  soul  desires  to  be
released  and  to  be  with  Christ,  is,  that  it  may  see  Him
face  to  face,  and  penetrate  to  the  depths  of  His  ways  and
the  eternal  mysteries  of  His  incarnation,  which  is  not  the
least  part  of  its  blessedness  ;  for  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  John
He,  addressing  the  Father,  said  :  'Now  this  is  eternal  life  :
that  they  may  know  Thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus
Christ  Whom  Thou  hast  sent.'f     As  the  first  act  of  a

*  Ephes.  iii.  17 — 19.  f  St.  John  xvii.  3.


[STAN.  XXXVII.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        381

person  who  has  taken  a  long  journey  is  to  see  and
converse  with  him  whom  he  was  in  search  of,  so  the  first
thing  which  the  soul  desires,  when  it  has  attained  to  the
beatific  vision,  is  to  know  and  enjoy  the  deep  secrets  and
mysteries  of  the  incarnation  and  the  ancient  ways  of  God
depending  on  them.  Thus  the  soul,  having  said  that  it
longed  to  see  itself  in  the  beauty  of  God,  sings  as  in  the
followinsf  stanza  :—


STANZA  XXXVII.

IVe  shall  go  at  once

To  the  deep  caverns  of  the  rock

Which  are  all  secret

There  we  shall  enter  in.

And  taste  of  the  new  wine  of  the  pomegranate.

One  of  the  reasons  which  most  influence  the  soul  to
desire  to  enter  into  the  '  thicket '  of  the  wisdom  of  God,
and  to  have  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  the  beauty  of
the  divine  wisdom,  is,  as  I  have  said,  that  it  may  unite
the  understanding  with  God  in  the  knowledge  of  the
mysteries  of  the  Incarnation,  as  of  all  His  works  the
highest  and  most  full  of  sweetness,  and  the  most  delicious
knowledge.  And  here  the  bride  therefore  says,  that  after
she  has  entered  in  within  the  divine  wisdom — that  is,  the
spiritual  marriage,  which  is  now  and  will  be  in  glory,
seeing  God  face  to  face^ — her  soul  united  with  the  divine
wisdom,  the  Son  of  God,  she  will  then  understand  the
deep  mysteries  of  God  and  Man,  which  are  the  highest
wisdom  hidden  in  God.  They,  that  is,  the  bride  and  the
Bridegroom,  will  enter  in — the  soul  ingulfed  and  absorbed
— and  both   together  will  have   the    fruition    of  the   joy


382  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE      [STAN.  XXXVIL]

which    springs    from   the    knowledge   of    mysteries,    and
attributes  and  power  of  God  which  are  revealed  in  those
mysteries,  such  as  His  justice,  His  mercy,  wisdom,  power,
and  love.
'  We  shall  go  at  once  to  the  deep  caverns  of  the  rock.'

2.  'This  rock  is  Christ,'  as  we  learn  from  St.  Paul.*
The  deep  caverns  of  the  rock  are  the  deep  mysteries  of
the  wisdom  of  God  in  Christ,  in  the  hypostatical  union  of
the  human  nature  with  the  Divine  Word,  and  in  the
correspondence  with  it  of  the  union  of  man  with  God,  and
in  the  agreement  of  God's  justice  and  mercy  in  the
salvation  of  mankind,  in  the  manifestation  of  His  judg-
ments. And  because  His  judgments  are  so  high  and  so
deep,  they  are  here  fittingly  called  '  deep  caverns ;  '  deep,
because  of  the  depth  of  His  mysteries,  and  caverns  because
of  the  depth  of  His  wisdom  in  them.  For  as  caverns  are
deep,  with  many  windings,  so  each  mystery  of  Christ  is
of  deepest  wisdom,  and  has  many  windings  of  His  secret
judgments    of    predestination    and    foreknowledge    with

respect  to  men.

'  Which  are  all  secret.'

3.  Notwithstanding  the  marvellous  mysteries  which
holy  doctors  have  discovered,  and  holy  souls  have  under-
stood in  this  life,  many  more  remain  behind.  There  are
in  Christ  great  depths  to  be  fathomed,  for  He  is  a  rich
mine,  with  many  recesses  full  of  treasures,  and  however
deeply  we  may  descend  we  shall  never  reach  the  end,  for
in  every  recess  new  veins  of  new  treasures  abound  in  all
directions  :  '  In  Whom,'  according  to  the  Apostle,  '  are
hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge. '+  But  the
soul  cannot  reach  these  hidden  treasures  unless  it  first

*  I   Cor.  X.  4.  f  Coloss.  ii.  3.


[STAN.  XXXVII.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.      383

passes  through  the  thicket  of  interior  and  exterior  suffer-
ing :  for  even  such  knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of  Christ
as  is  possible  in  this  life,  cannot  be  had  without  great
sufferings,  and  without  many  intellectual  and  moral  gifts,
and  without  previous  spiritual  exercises ;  for  all  these
gifts  are  far  inferior  to  this  knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of
Christ ;  being  only  a  preparation  for  it.

4.  Thus  God  said  to  Moses,  when  he  asked  to  see  His
glory,  '  Man  shall  not  see  Me  and  live.'  God,  however,
said  that  He  would  show  him  all  that  could  be  revealed  in
this  life ;  and  so  He  set  Moses  '  in  a  hole  of  the  rock,'
which  is  Christ,  where  he  might  see  His  '  back  parts ;  '*
that  is  He  made  him  understand  the  mysteries  of  the
Sacred  Humanity.

5.  The  soul  longs  to  enter  in  earnest  into  these
caverns  of  Christ,  that  it  may  be  absorbed,  transformed,
and  inebriated  in  the  love  and  knowledge  of  His  mysteries,
hiding  itself  in  the  bosom  of  the  Beloved.  It  is  into  these
caverns  that  He  invites  the  bride,  in  the  Canticle,  to
enter,  saying :  '  Arise,  my  love,  my  beautiful  one,  and
come ;  my  dove  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,  in  the  hollow
places  of  the  walL't  These  clefts  of  the  rock  are  the
caverns  of  which  we  are  here  speaking,  and  to  which  the
bride  refers,  saying,

'And  there  we  shall  enter  in.'

6.  That  is  in  the  knowledge  of  the  divine  mysteries.
The  bride  says  not,  '  I  will  enter  '  alone,  which  seems  the
most  fitting — seeing  that  the  Bridegroom  has  no  need  to
enter  in  again — but  'we  will  enter,'  that  is,  the  Bridegroom
and  the  bride,  to  show  that  this  is  not  the  work  of  the

*  Exod.  xxxiii.  20 — 23.  f  Cant.  ii.  13,  14.


384  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE        [STAN.  XXXVII.]

bride,  but  of  the  Bridegroom  with  her.  Moreover,  inas-
much as  God  and  the  soul  are  now  united  in  the  state  of
spiritual  marriage,  the  soiil  doeth  nothing  of  itself  without
God.  To  say  '  we  will  enter,'  is  as  much  as  to  say,  there
shall  we  transform  ourselves :  that  is,  I  shall  be  trans-
formed in  Thee  through  the  love  of  Thy  divine  and  sweet
judgments :  for  in  the  knowledge  of  the  predestination  of
the  just,  and  in  the  foresight  of  the  wicked,  wherein  the
Father  prevented  the  just  in  the  benedictions  of  His
sweetness  in  Jesus  Christ  His  Son,  the  soul  is  transformed
in  a  most  exalted  and  perfect  way  in  the  love  of  God
according  to  this  knowledge,  giving  thanks  to  the  Father,
and  loving  Him  again  and  again  with  great  sweetness  and
delight,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son.  This  the
soul  does  in  union  with  Christ  and  together  with  Him.
The  delight  flowing  from  this  act  of  praise  is  ineffably
sweet,  and  the  soul  speaks  of  it  in  the  words  that  follow,
'And  taste  of  the  new  wine  of  the  pomegranates.'
7.  The  pomegranates  here  are  the  mysteries  of
Christ  and  the  judgments  of  the  wisdom  of  God  ;  His
power  and  attributes,  the  knowledge  of  which  we  have
from  these  mysteries ;  and  they  are  infinite.  For  as
pomegranates  have  many  grains  in  their  round  orb,  so  in
each  one  of  the  attributes  and  judgments  and  power  of
God  is  a  multitude  of  admirable  arrangements  and  mar-
vellous works  contained  within  the  sphere  of  power  and
mystery,  appertaining  to  those  works.  Consider  the
round  form  of  the  pomegranate ;  for  each  pomegranate
signifies  some  one  power  and  attribute  of  God,  which
power  or  attribute  is  God  Himself,  symbolized  here  by
the  circular  figure,  which  has  neither  beginning  nor  end.


[STAN.  XXXVII.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.      385

It  was  in  the  contemplation  of  the  judgments  and
mysteries  of  the  wisdom  of  God,  which  are  infinite,  that
the  bride  said  'His  belly  is  of  ivory  set  with  sapphires.'*
The  sapphires  are  the  mysteries  and  judgments  of  the
divine  Wisdom,  which  is  here  signified  by  the  '  belly ' —
the  sapphire  being  a  precious  stone  of  the  colour  of  the
heavens  when  clear  and  serene.

8.  The  wine  of  the  pomegranates  which  the  bride  says
that  she  and  the  Bridegroom  will  taste  is  the  fruition  and
joy  of  the  love  of  God  which  overflows  the  soul  in  the
understanding  and  knowledge  of  His  mysteries.  For  as
the  many  grains  of  the  pomegranate  pressed  together  give
forth  but  one  wine,  so  all  the  marvels  and  magnificence
of  God,  infused  into  the  soul,  issue  in  but  one  fruition
and  joy  of  love,  which  is  the  drink  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  which  the  soul  offers  at  once  to  God  the  Word,  its
Bridegroom,  with  great  tenderness  of  love.

g.  This  divine  drink  the  bride  promised  to  the  Bride-
groom if  He  would  lead  her  into  this  deep  knowledge  :
'There  Thou  shalt  teach  me,'  saith  the  bride,  'and  I  will
give  Thee  a  cup  of  spiced  wine,  and  new  wine  of  mv
pomegranates.'!  The  soul  calls  them  '  my  pomegranates,'
though  they  are  God's  Who  had  given  them  to  it,  and
the  soul  offers  them  to  God  as  if  they  were  its  own,
saying,  '  we  will  taste  of  the  wine  of  the  pomegranates ; '
for  when  He-  tastes  it  He  gives  it  to  the  soul  to  taste,
and  when  the  soul  tastes  it,  the  soul  gives  it  back  to  Him,
and  thus  it  is  that  both  taste  it  together.


C?nt.  V.  14.  f  Cant.  viii.  2.

CC


386  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE        [STAN.  XXXVIII.]

NOTE.

In  the  two  previous  stanzas  the  bride  sung  of  those  good
things  which  the  Bridegroom  is  to  give  her  in  everlasting
bhss,  namely,  her  transformation  in  the  beauty  of  created
and  uncreated  wisdom,  and  also  in  the  beauty  of  the
union  of  the  Word  with  flesh,  wherein  she  shall  behold
His  face  as  well  as  His  back.  Accordingly  two  things
are  set  before  us  in  the  following  stanza.  The  first  is  the
way  in  which  the  soul  tastes  of  the  divine  wine  of  the
pomegranates ;  the  second  is  the  soul's  putting  before  the
Bridegroom  the  glory  of  its  predestination.  And  though
these  two  things  are  spoken  of  separately,  one  after  the
other,  they  are  both  involved  in  the  one  essential  glory  of
the  soul.


STANZA  XXXVni.

There  Tkoji  wilt  shoiv  me

That  which  my  soul  desivrd;

And  thei'e  Thou  wilt  give  me  at  once,

O  Thou,  my  life,

That  which  Thou  gavest  mc  the  other  day,

The  reason  why  the  soul  longed  to  enter  the  caverns  was
that  it  might  attain  to  the  consummation  of  the  love  of
God,  the  object  of  its  continual  desires ;  that  is,  that  it
might  love  God  with  the  pureness  and  perfection  where-
with He  has  loved  it,  so  that  it  might  thereby  requite
His  love.  Hence  in  the  present  stanza  the  bride  saith
to  the  Bridegroom  that  He  will  there  show  her  what  she


[STAN.  XXXVIII.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.       387

had  always  aimed  at  in  all  her  actions,  namely,  that  He
would  show  her  how  to  love  Him  perfectly,  as  He  has
loved  her.  And,  secondly,  that  He  will  give  her  that
essential  glory  for  which  He  has  predestined  her  from  the
day  of  His  eternity.

'  There  Thou  wilt  show  me
That  which  my  soul  desired.'

2.  That  which  the  soul  aims  at  is  equality  in  love  with
God,  the  object  of  its  natural  and  supernatural  desire.
He  who  loves  cannot  be  satisfied  if  he  does  not  feel  that
he  loves  as  much  as  he  is  loved.  And  when  the  soul  sees
that  in  the  transformation  in  God,  such  as  is  possible  in
this  life,  notwithstanding  the  immensity  of  its  love,  it
cannot  equal  the  perfection  of  that  love  wherewith  God
loves  it,  it  desires  the  clear  transformation  of  glory  wherein
it  shall  equal  the  perfection  of  love  wherev\^ith  it  is  itself
beloved  of  God  ;  it  desires,  I  say,  the  clear  transformation
of  glory  wherein  it  shall  equal  His  love.

3.  For  though  in  this  high  state,  which  the  soul
reaches  on  earth,  there  is  a  real  union  of  the  will,  yet  it
cannot  reach  that  perfection  and  strength  of  love  which
it  will  possess  in  the  union  of  glory ;  seeing  that  then,

i  according  to  the  Apostle,  the  soul  will  know  God  as  it  is

I  known    of    Him :    '  Then    I    shall    know   even    as    I    am

known.'*     That  is,  I   shall  then   love  God  even  as  I  am

!  loved  by  Him.     For  as  the  understanding  of  the  soul  will

j  then  be  the  understanding  of  God,  and  its  will  the  will  of
'  .  .  .

God,  so  its  love  will  also  be  His  love.     Though  in  heaven

the  will  of  the  soul  is  not  destroyed,  it  is  so  intimately

united  with  the  power  of  the  will  of  God,  Who  loves  it,

*   I  Cor.  xiii.  12.

cc  2


388  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN.  XXXVIIL]

that  it  loves  Him  as  strongly  and  as  perfectly  as  it  is
loved  of  Him  ;  both  wills  being  united  in  one  sole  will
and  one  sole  love  of  God.

4.  Thus  the  soul  loves  God  with  the  will  and  strength
of  God  Himself,  being  made  one  with  that  very  strength
of  love  wherewith  itself  is  loved  of  God.  This  strength  is
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  Whom  the  soul  is  there  transformed.
He  is  given  to  the  soul  to  strengthen  its  love  ;  ministering
to  it,  and  supplying  in  it,  because  of  its  transformation  in
glory,  that  which  is  defective  in  it.  In  the  perfect  trans-
formation, also,  of  the  state  of  spiritual  marriage,  such  as
is  possible  on  earth,  in  which  the  soul  is  all  clothed  in
grace,  the  soul  loves  in  a  certain  way  in  the  Holy  Ghost,
Who  is  given  to  it  in  that  transformation,

5.  We  are  to  observe  here  that  the  bride  does  not  say.
There  wilt  Thou  give  me  Thy  love,  though  that  be  true —
for  that  means  only  that  God  will  love  her — but  that  He
will  there  show  her  how  she  is  to  love  Him  with  that
perfection  at  which  she  aims,  because  there  in  giving  her
His  love,  He  will  at  the  same  time  show  her  how  to  love
Him  as  He  loves  her.  For  God  not  only  teaches  the  soul
to  love  Himself  purely,  with  a  disinterested  love,  as  He
hath  loved  us,  but  He  also  enables  it  to  love  Him  with
that  strength  with  which  He  loves  the  soul,  transforming
it  in  His  love,  wherein  He  bestows  upon  it  His  own
power,  so  that  it  may  love  Him.  It  is  as  if  He  put  an
instrument  in  its  hand,  taught  it  the  use  thereof,  and
played  upon  it  together  with  the  soul.  This  is  shewing
the  soul  how  it  is  to  love,  and  at  the  same  time  endowing
it  with  the  capacity  of  loving.

6.  The  soul  is  not  satisfied  until  it  reaches  this  point.


[STAN.  XXVIII.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        389

neither  would  it  be  satisfied  even  in  Heaven,  unless  it
felt,  as  St.  Thomas  teaches,*  that  it  loved  God  as  much
as  it  is  loved  of  Him.  And  as  I  said  of  the  state  of
spiritual  marriage  of  which  I  am  speaking,  there  is  now,
at  this  time,  though  it  cannot  be  that  perfect  love  in
glory,  a  certain  vivid  vision  and  likeness  of  that  per-
fection, which  is  wholly  indescribable.
'  And  there  Thou  wilt  give  me  at  once,  O  Thou  my  life,
that  which  Thou  gavest  me  the  other  day.'

7.  What  He  will  give  is  the  essential  glory  which
consists  in  the  vision  of  God.  Before  proceeding  further
it  is  requisite  to  solve  a  question  which  arises  here,
namely,  Why  is  it,  seeing  that  essential  glory  consists
in  the  vision  of  God,  and  not  in  loving  Him,  the  soul
says  that  its  longing  is  for  His  love,  and  not  for  the
essential  glory  ?  Why  is  it  that  the  soul  begins  the
stanza  with  referring  to  His  love,  and  then  introduces
the  subject  of  the  essential  glory  afterwards,  as  if  it  were
something  of  less  importance.

8.  There  are  two  reasons  for  this.  The  first  is  this :
As  the  whole  aim  of  the  soul  is  love,  the  seat  of  which
is  in  the  will,  the  property  of  which  is  to  give  and  not
to  receive ;  the  property  of  the  understanding,  the  subject
of  essential  glory,  being  to  receive  and  not  to  give ;  to
the  soul  inebriated  with  love,  the  first  consideration  is
not  the  essential  glory  which  God  will  bestow  upon  it,
but  the  entire  surrender  of  itself  to  Him  in  true  love,
without  any  regard  to  its  own  advantage.

g.  The  second  reason  is  that  the  second  object  is
included  in  the  first,  and  has  been  taken  for  granted  in

*  Opusc.  de  Beatitudine,  cap.  2.


390  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXXVIII.]

the  previous  stanzas,  it  being  impossible  to  attain  to
the  perfect  love  of  God  without  the  perfect  vision  of  Him.
The  question  is  solved  by  the  first  reason,  for  the  soul
renders  to  God  by  love  that  which  is  His  due,  but  with
the  understanding  it  receives  from  Him  and  does  not  give.

10.  I  now  resume  the  explanation  of  the  stanza,  and
enquire  what  day  is  meant  by  the  '  other  day,'  and  what
is  it  that  God  then  gave  the  soul,  and  what  that  is  which
it  prays  to  receive  afterwards  in  glory  ?  By  '  other  day '  is
meant  the  day  of  the  eternity  of  God,  which  is  other  than
the  day  of  time.  In  that  day  of  eternity  God  predestined
the  soul  unto  glory,  and  determined  the  degree  of  glory
which  He  would  give  it,  and  freely  gave  from  the  beginning
before  He  created  it.  This  now,  in  a  manner,  so  truly
belongs  to  the  soul  that  no  event  or  accident,  high  or  low,
can  ever  take  it  away,  for  the  soul  will  enjoy  for  ever  that
for  which  God  had  predestined  it  from  all  eternity.

11.  This  is  that  which  He  gave  it  'the  other  day ; '  that
which  the  soul  longs  now  to  possess  visibly  in  glory.  And
what  is  that  which  He  gave  it  ?  That  what  '  eye  hath  not
seen  nor  ear  hath  heard,  neither  hath  it  ascended  into  the
heart  of  man.'*  '  The  eye  hath  not  seen,'  saith  Isaias,
'  O  God  beside  Thee,  what  things  Thou  hast  prepared  for
them  that  expect  Thee.'t  The  soul  has  no  word  to
describe  it,  so  it  says  '  What.'  It  is  in  truth  the  vision  of
God,  and  as  there  is  no  expression  by  which  we  can
explain  what  it  is  to  see  God,  the  soul  says  only  '  that
which  Thou  gavest  me.'

12.  But  that  I  may  not  leave  the  subject  without
saying  something  further  concerning  it,  I  will  repeat  what

*  I  Cor.  ii.  9,  f  Is.  Ixiv.  4.


[STAN.  XXXVIII.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.      391

Christ  hath  said  of  it  in  the  Apocalypse  of  St.  John,  in
many  terms,  phrases,  and  comparisons,  because  a  single
word  once  uttered  cannot  describe  it,  for  there  Js  much
still  unsaid,  notwithstanding  all  that  Christ  hath  spoken
at  seven  different  times,  '  To  him  that  overcometh,'
saith  He,  '  I  will  give  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  which  is  in
the  paradise  of  My  God.'*  But  as  this  does  not  perfectly
describe  it,  He  says  again  :  '  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death  ;
and  I  will  give  thee  the  crown  of  life. 't

13.  This  also  is  insufficient,  and  so  He  speaks  again
more  obscurely,  but  explaining  it  more :  '  To  him  that
overcometh  I  will  give  the  hidden  manna,  and  will  give
him  a  white  counter,  and  on  the  counter  a  new  name
written,  which  no  man  knoweth  but  he  that  receiveth  it.'t
And  as  even  this  is  still  insufficient,  the  Son  of  God
speaks  of  great  power  and  joy,  saying :  '  He  that  shall
overcome  and  keep  My  works  unto  the  end,  I  will  give
him  power  over  the  nations,  and  he  shall  rule  them  with
a  rod  of  iron,  and  as  a  vessel  of  the  potter  they  shall  be
broken,  as  I  also  have  received  of  My  Father,  and  I  will
give  him  the  morning  star.'g  Not  satisfied  with  these
words  He  adds :  '  He  that  shall  overcome  shall  thus  be
vested  in  white  garments,  and  I  will  not  put  his  name
out  of  the  book  of  life,  and  I  will  confess  his  name
before  my  Father.' ji

14.  Still,  all  this  falls  short.  He  speaks  of  it  in
words  of  unutterable  majesty  and  grandeur :  '  He  that
shall  overcome  I  will  make  him  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of
My  God,  and  he  shall  go  out  no  more ;  and  I  will  write

*  Apoc.  ii.  7.  t  lb.  10.  I  lb.  17.

§  lb.  26 — 28.  II  lb.  iii,  5.


392  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE         [STAN.  XXXVIII.]

upon  him  the  name  of  My  God,  and  the  name  of  the  city
of  My  God,  the  new  Jerusalem  which  descendeth  out  of
Heaven  from  My  God,  and  My  new  name.'*  The
seventh  time  He  says :  '  He  that  shall  overcome,  I  will
give  unto  him  to  sit  with  Me  in  My  throne :  as  I  also
have  overcome,  and  sat  with  My  Father  in  His  throne.
He  that  hath  an  ear  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith
to  the  Churches. t

15.  These  are  the  words  of  the  Son  of  God;  all  of
which  tend  to  describe  that  which  was  given  to  the  soul.
The  words  correspond  most  accurately  with  it,  but  still
they  do  not  explain  it,  because  it  involves  infinite  good.
The  noblest  expressions  befit  it,  but  none  of  them  reach
it,  no,  not  all  together.

16.  Let  us  now  see  whether  David  hath  said  anything
of  it.  In  one  of  the  Psalms  he  saith  :  '  O  how  great  is
the  multitude  of  Thy  sweetness,  O  Lord,  which  Thou
hast  hidden  for  them  that  fear  Thee.'t  In  another
place  he  calls  it  a  '  torrent  of  pleasure,'  saying,  '  Thou
shalt  make  them  drink  of  the  torrent  of  Thy  pleasure."
And  as  he  did  not  consider  this  enough,  he  says  again,
'Thou  hast  prevented  him  with  blessings  of  sweetness. '|i
The  expression  that  rightly  fits  this  '  that '  of  the  soul,
namely  its  predestined  bliss,  cannot  be  found.  Let  us,
therefore,  rest  satisfied  with  what  the  soul  has  used  in
reference  to  it,  and  explain  the  words  as  follows :

'  That  which  Thou  gavest  me.'

17.  That  is,  that  weight  of  glory  to  which  Thou  didst
predestine   me,  O   my  Bridegroom,    in  the   day  of  Thy

*  lb.  12.  t  lb.  21,  22.  +  Ps.  XXX.  20.

§  lb.  XXXV.  9.  II  lb.  XX.  4.


[STAN.  XXXIX.]    OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.      393

eternity,  when  it  was  Thy  good  pleasure  to  decree  my
creation,  Thou  wilt  then  give  me  in  my  day  of  my
betrothal  and  of  my  nuptials,  in  my  day  of  the  joy  of
my  heart,  when  released  from  the  burden  of  the  flesh,
led  into  the  deep  caverns  of  Thy  bridal  chamber  and
gloriously  transformed  in  Thee  we  drink  the  wine  of  the
sweet  pomegranates.

NOTE.

But  inasmuch  as  the  soul,  in  the  state  of  spiritual
marriage,  of  which  I  am  now  speaking,  cannot  but  know
something  of  this  '  that,'  seeing  that  because  of  its  trans-
formation in  God  something  of  it  must  be  experienced  by
it,  it  will  not  omit  to  say  something  on  the  subject,  the
pledges  and  signs  of  which  it  is  conscious  of  in  itself,  as
it  is  written  :  '  Who  can  withhold  the  words  He  hath
conceived  ?  '*  Hence  in  the  following  stanza  the  soul
says  something  of  the  fruition  which  it  shall  have  in  the
beatific  vision,  explaining  so  far  as  it  is  possible  the
nature  and  the  manner  of  it.


STANZA  XXXIX.

The  breathing  of  the  air,

The  son^  of  the  sweet  nightingale,

The  grove  and  its  beauty

In  the  serene  nte^ht.

With  the  flame  that  consumes  and  gives  no  pain.

The  soul  refers  here,  under  five  diiferent  expressions,  to
that  which  the  Bridegroom  is  to  give  it  in  the  beatific
transformation,     i.  The  aspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of

*  Job  iv.  2.


394  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXXIX.]

God  after  it,  and  its  own  aspiration  after  God.  2.  Joyous
praise  of  God  in  the  fruition  of  Him.  3.  The  knowledge
of  creatures  and  the  order  of  them.  4.  The  pure  and
clear  contemplation  of  the  divine  essence.  5.  Perfect
transformation  in  the  infinite  love  of  God.
'  The  breathing  of  the  air.'

2.  This  is  a  certain  faculty  which  God  will  there  give
the  soul  in  the  communication  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Who,
like  one  breathing,  raises  the  soul  by  His  divine  aspira-
tion, informs  it,  strengthens  it,  so  that  it  too  may  breathe
in  God  with  the  same  aspiration  of  love  which  the  Father
breathes  with  the  Son,  and  the  Son  with  the  Father,
which  is  the  Holy  Ghost  Himself,  Who  is  breathed  into
the  soul  in  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  that  transforma-
tion so  as  to  unite  it  to  Himself;  for  the  transformation
will  not  be  true  and  perfect  if  the  soul  is  not  transformed
in  the  Three  Persons  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity  in  a
clear  manifest  degree.  This  breathing  of  the  Holy  Ghost
in  the  soul,  whereby  God  transforms  it  in  Himself,  is  to
the  soul  a  joy  so  deep,  so  exquisite,  and  so  grand,  that  no
mortal  tongue  can  describe  it,  no  human  understanding,
as  such,  conceive  it  in  any  degree ;  for  even  that  which
passes  in  the  soul  with  respect  to  the  communication
which  takes  place  in  its  transformation  wrought  in  this
life,  cannot  be  described,  because  the  soul  united  with
God  and  transformed  in  Him,  breathes  in  God  that  very
divine  aspiration  which  God  breathes  Himself  in  the  soul
when  transformed  in  Him.

3.  In  the  transformation  which  takes  place  in  this  life,
this  breathing  of  God  in  the  soul,  and  of  the  soul  in
God,  is  of  most  frequent  occurrence,  and  the  source  of


[STAN.  XXXIX.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.     395

the  most  exquisite  delight  of  love  to  the  soul,  but  not
however  in  the  clear  and  manifest  degree  which  it  will
have  in  the  life  to  come.  This,  in  my  opinion,  is  what
St.  Paul  referred  to  when  he  said  :  '  Because  you  are
sons,  God  hath  sent  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  into  your
hearts,  crying  Abba,  Father.'*  The  blessed  in  the  life  to
come,  and  the  perfect  in  this,  thus  experience  it.

4.  Nor  is  it  to  be  thought  impossible  that  the  soul
should  be  capable  of  so  great  a  thing  as  that  it  should
breathe  in  God  as  God  in  it,  in  the  way  of  participation.
For  granting  that  God  has  bestowed  upon  it  so  great  a
favour  as  to  unite  it  to  the  most  Holy  Trinity,  whereby
it  becomes  like  unto  God,  and  God  by  participation,
is  it  altogether  incredible,  that  it  should  exercise  the
faculties  of  its  understanding,  perform  its  acts  of  know-
ledge and  of  love,  or,  to  speak  more  accurately,  should
have  all  done  in  the  Holy  Trinity  together  with  It,  as
the  Holy  Trinity  Itself?  This,  however,  takes  place  by
communication  and  participation,  God  Himself  effecting
it  in  the  soul,  for  this  is  to  be  transformed  in  the  Three
Persons  in  power,  wisdom,  and  love,  and  herein  it  is  that
the  soul  becomes  like  unto  God,  Who,  that  it  might  come
to  this,  created  it  to  His  own  image  and  likeness.

5.  How  this  can  be  so  cannot  be  explained  in  any
other  way  than  by  showing  how  the  Son  of  God  has
raised  us  to  so  high  a  state,  and  merited  for  us  the
'  Power  to  be  made  the  sons  of  God.'f  He  prayed  to
the  Father  saying :  '  Father,  I  will  that  where  I  am,  they
also  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me  may  be  with  Me,  that
they   may  see  My  glory   which  Thou  hast  given   Me.'t

*  Gal.  iv.  6.  .f  St.  John  i.  12.  J  lb.  xvii.  24.


396  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XXXIX.]

That  is,  that  they  may  do  by  participation  in  Us  what  I
do  naturally,  namely,  breathe  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  says
also  :  '  Not  for  them  only  do  I  pray,  but  for  them  also
who  through  their  word  shall  believe  in  Me,  that  they
all  may  be  one,  as  Thou  Father  in  Me,  and  I  in  Thee,
that  they  also  may  be  one  in  Us :  that  the  world  may
believe  that  Thou  hast  sent  Me.  And  the  glory  which
Thou  hast  given  Me,  I  have  given  to  them  :  that  they
may  be  one  as  We  also  are  one.  I  in  them  and  Thou  in
Me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one,  and  the  world
may  know  that  Thou  hast  sent  Me,  and  hast  loved  them
as  Thou  hast  also  loved  Me,'*  that  is  in  bestowing  upon
them  that  love  which  He  bestows  upon  the  Son,  though
not  naturally  as  upon  Him,  but  in  the  way  I  speak  of,
in  the  union  and  transformation  of  love.

6.  We  are  not  to  suppose  from  this  that  our  Lord
prayed  that  the  saints  might  become  one  in  essence  and
nature,  as  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  ;  but  that  they
might  become  one  in  the  union  of  love  as  the  Father
and  the  Son  are  one  in  the  oneness  of  love.  Souls  have
by  participation  that  very  God  which  the  Son  has  by
nature,  and  are  therefore  really  gods  by  participation
like  unto  God  and  of  His  society.

7.  St.  Peter  speaks  of  this  as  follows :  '  Grace  to  you
and  peace  be  accomplished  in  the  knowledge  of  God,
and  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  ;  as  all  things  of  His  divine
power,  which  pertain  to  life  and  godliness,  are  given  us
by  the  knowledge  of  Him  who  hath  called  us  by  His
own  proper  glory  and  virtue,  by  Whom  He  hath  given
us  most  great  and  precious  promises :  that  by  these  you

*  lb.  xvii.  20 — 23.


[STAN.  XXXIX.]   OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.     397

may  be  made  partakers  of  the  divine  nature.'*  Thus
far  St.  Peter,  who  clearly  teaches  that  the  soul  will  be
a  partaker  of  God  Himself,  and  will  do,  together  with
Him,  the  work  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity,  because  of  the
substantial  union  between  the  soul  and  God.  And
though  this  union  be  perfect  only  in  the  life  to  come,
yet  even  in  this,  in  the  state  of  perfection,  which  the
soul  is  said  now  to  have  attained,  some  anticipation  of
its  sweetness  is  given  it,  in  the  way  I  am  speaking  of,
though  in  a  manner  wholly  ineffable.

8.  O  souls  created  for  this  and  called  thereto,  what
are  you  doing?  What  are  your  occupations?  Your  aim
is  meanness,  and  your  enjoyments  misery.  Oh,  wretched
blindness  of  the  children  of  Adam,  blind  to  so  great  a
light,  and  deaf  to  so  clear  a  voice ;  you  see  not  that,
while  seeking  after  greatness  and  glory,  you  are  miserable
and  contemptible,  ignorant,  and  unworthy  of  blessings  so
great.  I  now  proceed  to  the  second  expression  which
the  soul  has  made  use  of  to  describe  that  which  He
gave  it.

'  The  song  of  the  sweet  nightingale.'
g.  Out  of  this  'breathing  of  the  air'  comes  the  sweet
voice  of  the  Beloved  addressing  Himself  to  the  soul,  in
which  the  soul  sends  forth  its  own  sweet  song  of  joy  to
Him.  Both  are  meant  by  the  song  of  the  nightingale.
As  the  song  of  the  nightingale  is  heard  in  the  spring  of
the  year,  when  the  cold,  and  rain,  and  changes  of  winter
are  past,  filling  the  ear  with  melody,  and  the  mind  with
joy;  so,  in  the  true  intercourse  and  transformation  of
love,  which  takes  place  in  this  life,  the  bride  now
*  2  St.  Peter  i.  2 — 4.


398  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE       [STAN.  XXXIX.]

protected  and  delivered  from  all  trials  and  changes  of
the  world ;  detached,  and  free  from  the  imperfections,
sufferings  and  darkness,  both  of  mind  and  body,  becomes
conscious  of  a  new  spring  in  liberty,  largeness  and  joy  of
spirit,  in  which  she  hears  the  sweet  voice  of  the  Bride-
groom, Who  is  her  sweet  nightingale,  renewing  and
refreshing  the  very  substance  of  her  soul,  now  prepared
for  the  journey  of  everlasting  life.

10.  That  voice  is  sweet  to  her  ears,  and  calls  her
sweetly,  as  it  is  written  :  '  Arise,  make  haste,  my  love,
my  dove,  my  beautiful  one,  and  come.  For  winter  is
now  past,  the  rain  is  over  and  gone.  The  flowers  have
appeared  in  our  land,  the  time  of  pruning  is  come :  the
voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  land.'*  When  the  bride
hears  the  voice  of  the  Bridegroom  in  her  inmost  soul,  she
feels  that  her  troubles  are  over  and  her  prosperity  begun.
In  the  refreshing  comfort  and  sweet  sense  of  this  voice
she,  too,  like  the  nightingale,  sends  forth  a  new  song  of
rejoicing  unto  God,  in  unison  with  Him  Who  now  moves
her  to  do  so.

11.  It  is  for  this  that  the  Beloved  sings  ;  that  the
bride  in  unison  with  Him  may  sing  unto  God ;  this  is
the  aim  and  desire  of  the  Bridegroom,  that  the  soul
should  sing  with  the  spirit  joyously  unto  God  ;  and  this  is
what  He  asks  of  the  bride  in  the  Canticle  :  '  Arise,  my
love,  my  beautiful  one,  and  come ;  my  dove  in  the  clefts
of  the  rock,  in  the  hollow  places  of  the  wall,  shew  me
thy  face,  let  thy  voice  sound  in  my  ears.'t

12.  The  ears  of  God  signify  the  desire  He  hath  that
the  soul  should  sing  in  perfect  joy.     And  that  this  song

*  Cant,  ii.  lo — 12.  f  lb.  ii.  13,  14.


[STAN.  XXXIX.]  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.     399

may  be  perfect,  the  Bridegroom  bids  the  soul  to  send
it  forth,  and  to  let  it  sound  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,  that
is,  in  the  transformation  which  is  the  fruit  of  the
mysteries  of  Christ,  of  which  I  spoke  just  now.*  And
because  in  this  union  of  the  soul  with  God,  the  soul  sings
unto  Him  together  with  Him,  in  the  way  I  spoke  of  when
I  was  speaking  of  love,  t  the  song  of  praise  is  most  perfect
and  pleasing  unto  God  ;  for  the  acts  of  the  soul,  in  the
state  of  perfection,  are  most  perfect  ;  and  thus  the  song
of  its  rejoicing  is  sweet  unto  God  as  well  as  to  itself.

13.  '  Thy  voice  is  sweet,'!  saith  the  Bridegroom,  not
only  to  thee,  but  also  to  Me,  for  as  we  are  one,  thy  voice
is  also  in  unison  and  one  with  Mine.  This  is  the  canticle
which  the  soul  sings  in  the  transformation  which  takes
place  in  this  life,  about  which  no  exaggeration  is  possible.
But  as  this  song  is  not  so  perfect  as  the  new  song  in  the
life  of  glory,  the  soul,  having  a  foretaste  of  that  by
what  it  feels  on  earth,  shadows  forth  by  the  grandeur
of  this  the  magnificence  of  that  in  glory,  which  is
beyond  all  comparison  nobler,  and  calls  it  to  mind  and
says  that  what  its  portion  there  will  be,  is  the  song  of
the  sweet  nightingale.

'  The  grove  and  its  beauty.'

14.  This  is  the  third  thing  which  the  Bridegroom  is  to
give  the  soul.  The  grove,  because  it  contains  many
plants  and  animals,  signifies  God  as  the  Creator  and
Giver  of  life  to  all  creatures,  which  have  their  being  and
origin  from  Him,  reveal  Him  and  make  Him  known  as
the  Creator.     The  beauty  of  the  grove,  which   the  soul

*   Stanza  xxxvii.  §  5.  f  Stanza  xxxviii.  §  6,  I  Cant.  ii.  14.


400  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE        [STAN.  XXXIX.]

prays  for,  is  not  only  the  grace,  wisdom,  and  loveliness
which  flow  from  God  over  all  created  things,  whether  in
heaven  or  on  earth,  but  also  the  beauty  of  the  mutual
harmony  and  wise  arrangement  of  the  inferior  creation,
and  the  higher  also,  and  of  the  mutual  relations  of  both.
The  knowledge  of  this  gives  the  soul  great  joy  and  delight.
The  fourth  request  is  : —

'  In  the  serene  night.'

15.  That  is,  contemplation,  in  which  the  soul  desires
to  behold  the  grove.  It  is  called  night,  because  contem-
plation is  dim  ;  and  that  is  the  reason  why  it  is  also
called  mystical  theology,  that  is,  the  secret  or  hidden
wisdom  of  God,  where,  without  the  sound  of  words,  or
the  intervention  of  any  bodily  or  spiritual  sense,  as  it
were  in  silence  and  in  repose,  in  the  darkness  of  sense
and  nature,  God  teaches  the  soul — and  the  soul  knows
not  how — in  a  most  secret  and  hidden  way.

16.  Some  spiritual  writers  call  this  '  understanding
without  understanding,'  because  it  does  not  take  place  in
what  philosophers  call  the  active  understanding,  which  is
conversant  with  the  forms,  fancies,  and  apprehensions  of
the  physical  faculties,  but  in  the  understanding  as  it  is
possible  and  passive,  which  without  receiving  such  forms,
receives  passively  only  the  substantial  knowledge  of  them
free  from  all  imagery.  This  occurs  without  effort  or
exertion  on  its  part,  and  for  this  reason  contemplation  is
called  night,  in  which  the  soul,  through  the  channel  of  its
transformation,  learns  in  this  life  that  it  already  possesses,
in  a  supreme  degree,  this  divine  grove,  together  with  its
beauty.

17.  Still,  however  clear  may  be  its  knowledge,  it  is  dark


STAN.  XXXIX.]     OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.        401

night  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  blessed,  for  which
the  soul  prays.  Hence,  while  it  prays  for  the  clear
contemplation,  that  is,  the  fruition  of  the  grove  and  its
beauty  with  the  other  objects  here  enumerated,  it  says,  let
it  be  in  the  night  now  serene ;  that  is,  in  the  clear  beatific
contemplation  :  let  the  night  of  dim  contemplation  cease
here  below,  and  change  into  the  clear  contemplation  of
the  serene  vision  of  God  above.  Thus  the  serene  night  is
the  clear  and  unclouded  contemplation  of  the  face  of  God.
It  was  to  this  night  of  contemplation  that  David  referred,
when  he  said  :  '  Night  shall  be  my  light  in  my  pleasures; '*
that  is,  when  I  shall  have  my  delight  in  the  essential
vision  of  God,  the  night  of  contemplation  will  have
dawned  in  the  day  and  light  of  my  understanding.

'  With  the  flame  that  consumes,  and  gives  no  pain.'

i8.  This  flame  is  the  love  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
'  Consumes '  means  absolute  perfection.  Therefore,
when  the  soul  says  that  the  Beloved  will  give  it  all  that  is
mentioned  in  this  stanza,  and  that  they  will  be  its  posses-
sion in  love  absolute  and  perfect,  all  of  them  and  itself
with  them  in  perfect  love,  and  that  without  pain,  its
purpose  is  to  show  forth  the  utter  perfection  of  love.
Love,  to  be  perfect,  must  have  these  two  properties,  it
must  consume  and  transform  the  soul  in  God  ;  the  burning
and  transformation  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  flame  must
give  no  pain.  But  this  can  be  only  in  the  state  of  the
blessed,  where  the  flame  is  sweet  love,  for  in  this  trans-
formation of  the  soul  therein  there  is  a  blessed  agreement
and    contentment   on    both    sides,  and    no    change   to   a

*  Ps.  cxxxviii.  II.

DD


402  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE       [STAN.  XXXIX.]

greater  or  less  degree  gives  pain,  as  before,  when  the  soul
had  attained  to  the  state  of  perfect  love.

ig.  But  the  soul  having  attained  to  this  state  abides
in  its  love  of  God,  a  love  so  like  His  and  so  sweet,  God
being,  as  Moses  saith,*  a  consuming  fire,  'the  Lord  thy
God  is  a  consuming  fire,'  perfects  and  renews  it.  But  this
transformation  is  not  like  that  which  is  wrought  in  this
life,  which  though  most  perfect  and  in  love  consummate
was  still  in  some  measure  consuming  the  soul  and  wearing
it  away.  It  was  like  fire  in  burning  coals,  for  though  the
coals  may  be  transformed  into  fire,  and  made  like  it,  and
ceased  from  seething,  and  smoke  no  longer  arises  from
them  as  before  they  were  wholly  transformed  into  fire,
still,  though  they  have  become  perfect  fire,  the  fire
consumes  them  and  reduces  them  to  ashes.

20.  So  is  it  with  the  soul  which  in  this  life  is  trans-
formed by  perfect  love  :  for  though  it  be  wholly  conformed
yet  it  still  suffers,  in  some  measure,  both  pain  and  loss.
Pain,  on  account  of  the  beatific  transformation  which  is
still  wanting ;  loss,  through  the  weakness  and  corruption
of  the  flesh  coming  in  contact  with  love  so  strong  and  so
deep :  for  everything  that  is  grand  hurts  and  pains  our
natural  infirmity,  as  it  is  written  :  '  The  corruptible  body
is  a  load  upon  the  soul.'f  But  in  the  hfe  of  bhss  there
will  be  neither  loss  nor  pain,  though  the  sense  of  the  soul
will  be  most  acute,  and  its  love  without  measure,  for  God
will  give  power  to  the  former  and  strength  to  the  latter,
perfecting  the  understanding  in  His  wisdom  and  the  will
in  His  love.

21.  As,  in  the  foregoing  stanzas,  and  in  the  one  which

*  Deuteron.  iv.  24.  f  Wisd.  ix.  15.


[STAN.  XL.]      OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  403

follows,  the  bride  prays  for  the  boundless  knowledge  of
God,  for  which  she  requires  the  strongest  and  the  deepest
love  that  she  may  love  Him  in  proportion  to  the
grandeur  of  His  communications,  she  prays  now  that  all
these  things  may  be  bestowed  upon  her  in  love  consum-
mated, perfect,  and  strong.


STANZA  XL.

None  saw  it ;

Neither  did  Aminadab  appear.
Th'  siege  was  intermitted,
And  the  cavalry  dismounted
At  the  sight  of  the  waters

The  bride  perceiving  that  the  desire  of  her  will  is  now
detached  from  all  things,  cleaving  unto  God  with  most
fervent  love ;  that  the  sensual  part  of  the  soul,  with  all  its
powers,  faculties,  and  desires,  is  now  conformed  to  the
spirit ;  that  all  rebellion  is  quelled  for  ever ;  that  satan  is
overcome  and  driven  far  away  in  the  varied  contest  of  the
spiritual  struggle  ;  that  her  soul  is  united  and  transformed
in  the  rich  abundance  of  the  heavenly  gifts ;  and  that  she
herself  is  now  prepared,  strong  and  apparelled,  '  leaning
upon  her  Beloved,' to  go  up  '  by  the  desert '*  of  death ;
full  of  joy  to  the  glorious  throne  of  His  bride.  She  is
longing  for  the  end,  and  puts  before  the  eyes  of  her
Bridegroom,  in  order  to  influence  Him  the  more,  all
that  is  mentioned  in  the  present  stanza,  these  five
considerations : —

2.     The  first   is   that   the    soul   is   detached    from    all
things  and  a  stranger  to  them.     The  second  is  that  the

*  Cant.  iii.  6;  viii.  5.

DD    2


404  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XL.]

devil  is  overcome  and  put  to  flight.  The  third  is  that  the
passions  are  subdued,  and  the  natural,  desires  mortified.
The  fourth  and  the  fifth  are  that  the  sensual  and  lower
nature  of  the  soul  is  changed  and  purified,  and  so
conformed  to  the  spiritual,  as  not  only  not  to  hinder
spiritual  blessings,  but  is,  on  the  contrary,  prepared  for
them,  for  it  is  even  a  partaker  already,  according  to  its
capacity,  of  those  which  have  been  bestowed  upon  it.
'  None  saw  it.'

3.  That  is,  my  soul  is  so  detached,  so  denuded,  so
lonely,  so  estranged  from  all  created  things,  in  heaven
and  earth  ;  it  has  become  so  recollected  in  Thee,  that
nothing  whatever  can  come  within  sight  of  that  most
intimate  joy  which  I  have  in  Thee.  That  is,  there  is
nothing  whatever  that  can  cause  me  pleasure  with  its
sweetness,  or  disgust  with  its  vileness ;  for  my  soul  is  so
far  removed  from  all  such  things,  absorbed  in  such
profound  delight  in  Thee,  that  nothing  can  behold  me.
This  is  not  all,  for :

'  Neither  did  Aminadab  appear.'

4.  Aminadab,  in  the  Holy  Writings,  signifies  the
devil ;  that  is  the  enemy  of  the  soul,  in  a  spiritual  sense,
who  is  ever  fighting  against  it,  and  disturbing  it  with  his
innumerable  artillery,  that  it  may  not  enter  into  the
fortress  and  secret  place  of  interior  recollection  with  the
Bridegroom.  There,  the  soul  is  so  protected,  so  strong,
so  triumphant  in  virtue  which  it  then  practises,  so
defended  by  God's  right  hand,  that  the  devil  not  only
dares  not  approach  it,  but  runs  away  from  it  in  great  fear,
and  does  not  venture  to  appear.  The  practice  of  virtue,
and  the  state  of  perfection  to  which  the  soul  has  come,  is


[STAN.  XL,]        OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  405

a  victory  over  satan,  and  causes  him  such  terror,  that  he
cannot  present  himself  before  it.  Thus  Aminadab
appeared  not  with  any  right  to  keep  the  soul  away  from
the  object  of  its  desire.

'  The  siege  was  intermitted.'

5.  By  the  siege  is  meant  the  passions  and  desires,
which,  when  not  overcome  and  mortified,  surround  the
soul  and  fight  against  it  on  all  sides.  Hence  the  term
siege  is  applied  to  them.  This  siege  is  '  intermitted,'
that  is,  the  passions  are  subject  to  reason,  and  the  desires
mortified.  Under  these  circum.stances  the  soul  entreats
the  Beloved  to  communicate  to  it  those  graces  for  which
it  has  prayed,  for  now  the  siege  is  no  hindrance.  Until
the  four  passions  of  the  soul  are  ordered  in  reason
according  to  God,  and  until  the  desires  are  mortified  and
purified,  the  soul  is  incapable  of  seeing  God.

'  The  cavalry  dismounted  at  the  sight  of  the  waters.'

6.  The  waters  are  the  spiritual  joys  and  blessings
which  the  soul  now  enjoys  interiorly  with  God.  The
cavalry  is  the  bodily  senses  of  the  sensual  part,  interior  as
well  as  exterior,  for  they  carry  with  them  the  phantasms
and  figures  of  their  objects.  They  dismount  now  at  the
sight  of  the  waters,  because  the  sensual  and  lower  part  of
the  soul  in  the  state  of  spiritua  marriage  is  purified,  and
in  a  certain  way  spiritualised,  so  that  the  soul  with  its  powers
of  sense  and  natural  forces  becomes  so  recollected  as  to
participate  and  rejoice,  in  their  way,  in  the  spiritual
grandeurs  which  God  communicates  to  it  in  the  spirit
within.  To  this  did  the  Psalmist  refer  when  he  said :
'  My  heart  and  my  flesh  have  rejoiced  in  the  living  God.'*

*  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  2


406  A  SPIRITUAL  CANTICLE  [STAN.  XL.]

7.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  cavalry  did  not
dismount  to  taste  of  the  waters,  but  only  at  the  sight  of
them,  because  the  sensual  part  of  the  soul,  with  its
powers,  is  incapable  of  tasting  substantially  and  properly
the  spiritual  blessings,  not  merely  in  this  life,  but  also  in
the  life  to  come.  Still,  because  of  a  certain  overflowing
of  the  spirit,  they  are  sensibly  refreshed  and  delighted,
and  this  delight  attracts  them — that  is,  the  senses  with
their  bodily  powers — towards  that  interior  recollection
where  the  soul  is  drinking  the  waters  of  the  spiritual
benedictions.  This  condition  of  the  senses  is  rather  a
dismounting  at  the  sight  of  the  waters  than  a  dismounting
for  the  purpose  of  seeing  or  tasting  them.  The  soul  says
of  them  that  they  dismounted,  not  that  they  went,  or  did
anything  else,  and  the  meaning  is  that  in  the  communi-
cation of  the  sensual  with  the  spiritual  part  of  the  soul,
when  the  spiritual  waters  become  its  drink,  the  natural
operations  subside  and  merge  into  spiritual  recollection.

8.  All  these  perfections  and  dispositions  of  the  soul
the  bride  sets  forth  before  her  Beloved,  the  Son  of  God,
longing  at  the  same  time  to  be  translated  by  Him  out  of
the  spiritual  marriage,  to  which  God  has  been  pleased  to
advance  her  in  the  Church  militant,  to  the  glorious
marriage  of  the  Church  triumphant.  Whereunto  may
He  bring  of  His  mercy  all  those  who  call  upon  the  most
sweet  name  of  Jesus,  the  Bridegroom  of  faithful  souls,  to
Whom  be  all  honour  and  glory,  together  with  the  Father
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  scBcula  sceculorum.


THE  LIVING  FLAME  OF  LOVE.


PROLOGUE.

It  is  not  without  some  unwillingness  that,  at  the  requests
of  others,  I  enter  upon  the  explanation  of  the  four  stanzas
because  they  relate  to  matters  so  interior  and  spiritual  as
to  baffle  the  powers  of  language.  The  spiritual  transcends
the  sensual,  and  he  speaks  but  indifferently  of  the  mind  of
the  spirit  who  has  not  a  spiritual  mind  himself.  I  have,
therefore,  in  consideration  of  my  own  defects,  put  off  this
matter  until  now.  But  now  that  our  Lord  seems  in  some
way  to  have  opened  to  me  the  way  of  knowledge  herein,
and  to  have  given  me  some  fervour  of  spirit,  I  have
resolved  to  enter  on  the  subject.  I  know  too  well  that  of
myself  I  can  say  nothing  to  the  purpose  on  any  subject,
how  much  less  then  on  a  matter  of  such  depth  and
substance  as  this  !  What  is  mine  here  will  be  nothing
but  the  defects  and  errors,  and  I  therefore  submit  the
whole  to  the  better  judgment  and  discretion  of  our  Holy
Mother  the  Catholic  Roman  Church,  under  whose
guidance    no   one   goeth    astray.      And  now  having  said


408  THE  LIVING  FLAME

this,  I  will  venture,  in  reliance  on  the  Holy  Writings,  to
give  utterance  to  what  I  may  have  learned,  observing  at
the  same  time,  that  all  I  say  falls  far  short  of  that  which
passes  in  this  intimate  union  of  the  soul  with  God.

2.  There  is  nothing  strange  in  the  fact  that  God
bestows  favours  so  great  and  so  wonderful  upon  those
souls  whom  He  is  pleased  to  comfort.  For  if  we  consider
that  it  is  God  Himself  as  God,  and  with  infinite  love  and
goodness.  Who  bestows  them ;  and  this  being  the  case,
they  will  not  seem  unreasonable,  for  He  hath  said
Himself  that  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy
Ghost  will  come  to  him  that  loves  Him,  and  will  dwell
in  him.*  And  this  is  accomplished  in  making  such  an
one  live  and  abide  in  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy
Ghost,  in  the  life  of  God,  as  it  shall  be  explained  in  the
stanzas  that  follow.

3.  In  the  former  stanzas  I  spoke  of  the  highest  degree
of  perfection  to  which  it  is  possible  to  attain  in  this  life,
transformation  in  God ;  yet  these,  the  explanation  of
which  I  now  propose  to  undertake,  speak  of  that  love
still  more  perfect  and  complete  in  the  same  state  of
transformation.  For  though  it  is  true  that  the  former
and  the  present  stanzas  refer  to  one  and  the  same  state
of  transformation,  and  that  no  soul  can  pass  beyond  it  as
such,  still  with  time  and  habits  of  devotion,  the  soul  is
more  perfected  and  grounded  in  it.  Thus,  when  a  log
of  wood  is  set  on  fire,  and  when  it  is  transformed  into  fire
and  united  with  it,  the  longer  it  burns  and  the  hotter  the
fire,  the  more  it  glows  unti  sparks  and  flames  are  emitted
from  it.

*  St,  John  xiv.  23.


OF  LOVE.  409

4.  So  too  the  soul — and  this  is  the  subject  of  these
stanzas — when  transformed,  and  glowing  interiorly  in  the
tire  of  love,  is  not  only  united  with  the  divine  fire,  but
becomes  a  living  flame,  and  itself  conscious  of  it.  The
soul  speaks  of  this  with  an  intimate  delicious  sweetness
of  love,  burning  in  its  own  flame,  dwelling  upon  the
various  marvellous  effects  wrought  within  it.  These
effects  I  now  proceed  to  describe,  following  the  same
method :  that  is,  I  shall  first  transcribe  the  four  stanzas,
then  each  separately,  and  finally  each  line  by  itself  as  I
explain  them.


STANZAS.*


O  Living  Flame  of  Love,
That  woundest  tenderly
My  soul  in  its  inmost  depth  !
As  thou  art  no  longer  grievous,
Perfect  thy  work,  if  it  be  thy  will,
Break  the  web  of  this  sweet  encounter.


O  sweet  burn !
O  delicious  wound
O  tender  hand  !  O  gentle  touch  !
Savouring  of  everlasting  life,
And  paying  the  whole  debt,
,  By  slaying  Thou  hast  changed  death  into  life.

*  These  stanzas  were  written  after  the  saint's  escape  from  the  prison
of  the  friars  in  Toledo,  and  the  commentary  on  them  was  written  at  the
request  of  dona  Ana  de  Penalosa,  one  of  his  penitents.


410  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  I  ]


O  Lamps  of  fire,

In  the  splendours  of  which

The  deep  caverns  of  sense,

Dim  and  dark,

With  unwonted  brightness

Give  light  and  warmth  together  to  their  Beloved.


How  gently  and  how  lovingly

Thou  wakest  in  my  bosom,

Where  alone  Thou  secretly  dwellest ;

And  in  Thy  sweet  breathing

Full  of  grace  and  glory.

How  tenderly  Thou  fillest  me  with  Thy  love.


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  FIRST  STANZA.

The  bride  of  Christ,  now  feeling  herself  to  be  all  on  fire
in  the  divine  union,  and  that  rivers  of  living  waters  are
flowing  from  her  belly,  as  Christ  our  Lord  said*  they
would  flow  from  the  like  souls,  believes  that,  as  she
is  transformed  in  God  with  such  vehemence  and  so
intimately  possessed  by  Him,  so  richly  adorned  with  gifts
and  graces,  she  is  near  unto  bliss,  and  that  a  slender  veil
only  separates  her  from  it.  Seeing,  too,  that  this  sweet
flame  of  love  burning  within  her,  each  time  it  touches  her,
makes  her  as  it  were  glorious  with  foretaste  of  glory,  so
much  so  that  whenever  it  absorbs  and  assails  her,  it  seems
to  be  admitting  her  to  everlasting  life,  and  to  rend  the
veil  of  her  mortality,  she  addresses  herself,  with  a  great
longing,  to  the  flame,  which  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  prays
Him  to  destroy  her  mortal  life  in  this  sweet  encounter,

*  St.  John  vii.  38.


[STAN.  I.]  OF  LOVE.  411

and  bestow  upon  her  in  reality  what  He  seems  about  to
give,  namely,  perfect  glory,  crying :  '  O  living  flame  of
love.'

'  O  living  flame  of  love.'

2.  In  order  to  express  the  fervour  and  reverence  with
which  the  soul  is  speaking  in  these  four  stanzas,  it  begins
them  with  '  O  '  and  '  How,'  which  are  significant  of  great
earnestness,  and  whenever  altered  show  that  some-
thing passes  within  that  is  deeper  than  the  tongue  can
tell.  O  is  the  cry  of  strong  desire,  and  of  earnest
supplication,  in  the  way  of  persuasion.  The  soul  employs
it  in  both  senses  here,  for  it  magnifies  and  intimates  its
great  desire,  calling  upon  love  to  end  its  mortal  life.

3.  This  flame  of  love  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Bridegroom,
the  Holy  Ghost,  of  whose  presence  within  itself  the  soul
is  conscious,  not  only  as  fire  which  consumes  it,  and
transforms  it  in  sweet  love,  but  as  a  fire  burning  within
it,  sending  forth  a  flame  which  bathes  it  in  glory  and
recreates  it  with  the  refreshment  of  everlasting  life.  The
work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  a  soul  transformed  in  His  love
is  this :  His  interior  action  within  it  is  to  kindle  it  and
set  it  on  fire ;  this  is  the  burning  of  love,  in  union  with
which  the  will  loves  most  deeply,  being  now  one  by  love
with  that  flame  of  fire.  And  thus  the  soul's  acts  of  love
are  most  precious,  and  even  one  of  them  more  meritorious
than  many  elicited  not  in  the  state  of  transformation.
The  transformation  in  love  differs  from  the  flame  of  love
as  a  habit  differs  from  an  act,  or  as  the  glowing  fuel  from
the  flames  it  emits,  the  flames  being  the  effect  of  the  fire
which  is  there  burning.

4.  Hence   then   we    may    say   of  the    soul   which     is


412  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  I.]

transformed  in  love,  that  its  ordinary  state  is  that  of  the
fuel  in  the  midst  of  the  lire ;  that  the  acts  of  such  a  soul
are  the  flames  which  rise  up  out  of  the  fire  of  love,
vehement  in  proportion  to  the  intensity  of  the  fire  of
union,  and  to  the  rapture  and  absorption  of  the  will  in
the  flame  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  rising  like  the  angel  who
ascended  to  God  in  the  flame  which  consumed  the
holocaust  of  Manue.*  And  as  the  soul,  in  its  present
condition,  cannot  elicit  these  acts  without  a  special
inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  all  these  acts  must  be
divine,  in  so  far  as  the  soul  is  under  the  special  influence
of  God.  Hence  then  it  seems  to  the  soul,  as  often  as  the
flame  breaks  forth,  causing  it  to  love  sweetly  with  a
heavenly  disposition,  that  its  life  everlasting  is  begun,  and
that  its  acts  are  divine  in  God.

5.  This  is  the  language  in  which  God  addresses
purified  and  stainless  souls,  namely,  words  of  fire.  '  Thy
word,'  saith  the  Psalmist,  '  is  a  vehement  fire.'t  And  in
Jeremias  we  read,  '  are  not  My  words  as  a  fire  ?  saith  our
Lord.' I  His  '  words,'  we  learn  from  Himself,  '  are  spirit
and  life ;  '§  the  power  and  efficacy  of  which  are  felt  by
such  souls  as  have  ears  to  hear ;  pure  souls  full  of  love.
But  those  souls  whose  palate  is  not  healthy,  whose  desire
is  after  other  things,  cannot  perceive  the  spirit  and  life  of
His  words.  And  therefore  the  more  wonderful  the  words
of  the  Son  of  God,  the  more  insipid  they  are  to  some  who
hear  them,  because  of  the  impurity  in  which  they  live.

6.  Thus,  when  He  announced  the  doctrine  of  the
Holy  Eucharist,  a  doctrine  full  of  sweetness  and  of  love,

*  Judg.  xiii.  20.  f  Ps.  cxviii.  140.

I  Jerem.  xxiii.  29.  §  St.  John  vi.  64.


[STAN.  I,]  OF  LOVE.  413

*  many  of  His  disciples  went  back.'*  If  such  persons  as
these  have  no  taste  for  the  words  of  God  which  He  speaks
inwardly  to  them,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  all  others
are  like  them.  St.  Peter  loved  the  words  of  Christ,  for
he  replied,  '  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  ?  Thou  hast  the
words  of  eternal  life.'!  The  woman  of  Samaria  forgot
the  water,  and  'left  her  waterpot't  at  the  well,  because
of  the  sweetness  of  the  words  of  God.

7.  And  now  when  the  soul  has  drawn  so  near  unto
God  as  to  be  transformed  in  the  flame  of  love,  when  the
Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  are  in
communion  with  it,  is  it  anything  incredible  to  say,  that
it  has  a  foretaste — though  not  perfectly,  because  this  life
admits  not  of  it— of  everlastinglife  in  this  fire  of  the  Holy
Ghost  ?  This  is  the  reason  why  this  flame  is  said  to  be  a
living  flame,  not  because  it  is  not  always  living,  but
because  its  effect  is  to  make  the  soul  live  spiritually  in
God,  and  to  be  conscious  of  such  a  life,  as  it  is  written

'  My  heart  and  my  flesh  have  rejoiced  toward  the  living
God.'§  The  Psalmist  makes  use  of  the  word  '  living,'
not  because  it  was  necessary,  for  God  is  ever-living,  but
to  show  that  the  body  and  the  spirit  had  a  lively  feeling
of  God  ;  that  is  the  rejoicing  in  the  living  God.  Thus,  in
this  flame,  the  soul  has  so  vivid  a  sense  of  God,  and  a
perception  of  Him  so  sweet  and  delicious,  that  it  cries
out :  '  O  living  flame  of  love  !  '

'  That  woundest  tenderly.'

8.  That  is.  Thou  touchest  me  tenderly  in  Thy  love.
For  when  this  flame  of  divine  life  wounds  the  soul  with
the  gentle  languishing  for  the  life  of  God,  it  wounds  it

*  l\  vi,  67.         t  St,  John  vi.  69.         j  lb.  iv.  28.         §  Ps,  Ixxxiii.  3.


414  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  I.]

with  SO  much  endearing  tenderness,  and  softens  it  so  that
it  melts  away  in  love.  The  words  of  the  bride  in  the
Canticle  are  now  fulfilled  in  the  soul.  '  My  soul  melted
when  He  spoke.'*  This  is  the  effect  in  the  soul  when
God  speaks.

g.  But  how  can  we  say  that  it  wounds  the  soul,  when
there  is  nothing  to  wound,  seeing  that  it  is  all  consumed
in  the  fire  of  love  ?  It  is  certainly  marvellous  ;  for  as  fire
is  never  idle,  but  in  continual  movement,  flashing  in  one
direction,  then  in  another,  so  love,  the  function  of  which
is  to  wound,  so  as  to  cause  love  and  joy,  when  it  exists  in
the  soul  as  a  living  flame,  darts  forth  its  most  tender
flames  of  love,  causing  wounds,  exerting  joyously  all  the
arts  and  wiles  of  love  as  in  the  palace  of  its  wedding
feast.  So  Assuerus  exhibited  his  riches,  and  the  glory  of
his  power  at '  the  wedding  and  marriage  of  Esther ;  'f  and
so  is  wrought  in  the  soul  what  is  read  in  the  Proverbs  :  I
'  was  delighted  every  day  .  .  .  playing  in  the  world,
and  My  delights  were  to  be  with  the  children  of  men.'l
that  is  to  give  myself  to  them.  This  wounding,  therefore,
which  is  the  '  playing  '  of  divine  wisdom,  is  the  flames  of
those  tender  touches  which  touch  the  soul  continually,
touches  of  the  fire  of  love  which  is  never  idle.  And  of
these  flashings  of  the  fire  it  is  said  that  they  wound  the
soul  in  its  inmost  substance.

'  My  soul  in  its  inmost  depth.'

10.     The  feast  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  celebrated  in  the

substance  of  the  soul,  which   is  inaccessible  to  the  devil,

the  world,  and  the  flesh ;  and  therefore  the  more  interior

the  feast,  the  more  secure,  substantial,  and  delicious  is  it.

*  Cant.  V.  6.  f  Esth.  ii.  iS.  J  Prov.  viii.  30,  31.


[STAN,  I]  OF  LOVE.  415

For  the  more  interior  it  is,  the  purer  it  is  ;  and  the
greater  the  purity,  the  greater  the  abundance,  frequency,
and  universaHty  of  God's  communication  of  Himself;  and
thus  the  joy  of  the  soul  and  spirit  is  so  much  the  greater,
for  it  is  God  Himself  Who  is  the  author  of  all  this,  and
the  soul  doeth  nothing  of  itself,  in  the  sense  I  shall
immediately  explain.

11.  And  inasmuch  as  the  soul  cannot  work  naturally
here,  nor  make  any  efforts  of  its  own  otherwise  than
through  the  bodily  senses  and  by  their  help — of  which  it
is  in  this  case  completely  free,  and  from  which  it  is  most
detached — the  work  of  the  soul  is  solely  to  receive  what
God  communicates.  Who  alone  in  the  depths  of  the  soul,
without  the  help  of  the  senses,  can  influence  and  direct  it,
and  operate  within  it.  Thus,  then,  all  the  movements  of
such  a  soul  are  divine,  and  though  of  God,  still  they  are
the  soul's,  because  God  effects  them  within  it,  itself  willing
them  and  assenting  to  them.

12.  The  expression,  '  inmost  depth,'  implies  other
depths  of  the  soul  less  profound,  and  it  is  necessary  to
consider  this.  In  the  first  place  the  soul,  regarded  as
spirit,  has  neither  height  nor  depth  of  greater  or  less
degree  in  its  own  nature,  as  bodies  have  which  have  bulk.
The  soul  has  no  parts,  neither  is  there  any  difference
between  its  interior  and  exterior,  for  it  is  uniform  ;  it  has
no  depths  of  greater  or  less  profundity,  nor  can  one  part
of  it  be  more  enlightened  than  another,  as  is  the  case
with  physical  bodies,  for  the  whole  of  it  is  enlightened
uniformly  at  once.

13.  Setting  aside  this  signification  of  depth,  material
and  measurable,  we  say  that  the  inmost  depth  of  the  soul


416  THE  LIVING  FLA.ME  [STAN,  I.]

is  there  where  its  being,  power,  and  the  force  of  its  action
and  movement  penetrate  and  cannot  go  further.  Thus
fire,  or  a  stone,  tend  by  their  natural  force  to  the  centre
of  their  sphere,  and  cannot  go  beyond  it,  or  help  resting
there,  unless  some  obstacle  intervene.  Accordingly,  when
a  stone  lies  on  the  ground  it  is  said  to  be  within  its  centre,
because  within  the  sphere  of  its  active  motion,  which  is
the  element  of  earth,  but  not  in  the  inmost  depth  of  that
centre,  the  middle  of  the  earth,  because  it  has  still  power
and  force  to  descend  thither,  provided  all  that  hinders  it
be  taken  away.  So  when  it  shall  have  reached  the  centre
of  the  earth,  and  is  incapable  of  further  motion  of  its  own,
we  say  of  it  that  it  is  then  in  its  inmost  or  deepest  centre.

14.  The  centre  of  the  soul  is  God.  When  the  soul
shall  have  reached  Him,  according  to  its  essence,  and
according  to  the  power  of  its  operations,  it  will  then  have
attained  to  its  ultimate  and  deepest  centre  in  God.  This
will  be  when  the  soul  shall  love  Him,  comprehend  Him,
and  enjoy  Him  with  all  its  strength.  When,  however,
the  soul  has  not  attained  to  this  state,  though  it  be  in
God,  Who  is  the  centre  of  it  by  grace  and  communion
with  Him,  still  if  it  can  move  further  and  is  not  satisfied,
though  in  the  centre,  it  is  not  in  the  deepest  centre,
because  there  is  still  room  for  it  to  advance.

15.  Love  unites  the  soul  with  God,  and  the  greater  its
love  the  deeper  does  it  enter  into  God,  and  the  more  is  it
centered  in  Him.  According  to  this  way  of  speaking  we
may  say,  that  as  the  degrees  of  love,  so  are  the  centres,
which  the  soul  finds  in  God.  These  are  the  many
mansions  of  the  Father's  house.*    Thus,  a  soul  which  has

*  St.  John  xiv.  2.


[STAN.  I.]  OF  LOVE.  417

but  one  degree  of  love  is  already  in  God,  Who  is  its
centre :  for  one  degree  of  love  is  sufficient  for  our  abiding
in  Him  in  the  state  of  grace.  If  we  have  two  degrees  of
love  we  shall  then  have  found  another  centre,  more
interiorly  in  God ;  and  if  we  have  three  we  shall  have
reached  another  and  more  interior  centre  still,

i6.  But  if  the  soul  shall  have  attained  to  the  highest
degree  of  love,  the  love  of  God  will  then  wound  it  in  its
inmost  depth  or  centre ;  and  the  soul  will  be  transformed
and  enlightened  in  the  highest  degree  in  its  substance,
faculties,  and  strength,  until  it  shall  become  most  like
unto  God,  The  soul  in  this  state  may  be  compared  to
crystal,  lucid  and  pure ;  the  greater  the  light  thrown
upon  it,  the  more  luminous  it  becomes  by  the  concentra-
tion thereof,  until  at  last  it  seems  to  be  all  light  and
undistinguishable  from  it ;  it  being  then  so  illumined,  and
to  the  utmost  extent,  that  it  seems  to  be  one  with  the
light  itself.

17.'  The  flame  wounds  the  soul  in  its  inmost  depth;
that  is,  it  wounds  it  when  it  touches  the  very  depths  of
its  substance,  power  and  force.  This  expression  implies
that  abundance  of  joy  and  bliss,  which  is  the  greater  and
the  more  tender,  the  more  vehemently  and  substantially
the  soul  is  transformed  and  centred  in  God,  It  greatly
surpasses  that  which  occurs  in  the  ordinary  union  of  love,
for  it  is  in  proportion  to  the  greater  heat  of  the  fire  of
love  which  now  emits  the  living  flame.  The  soul  which
has  the  fruition  only  of  the  ordinary  union  of  love  may  be
compared,  in  a  certain  sense,  to  the  '  fire '  of  God  which
is  in  Sion,  that  is  in  the  Church  Militant ;  while  the  soul
which  has  the  fruition  of  glory  so  sweet  may  be  compared

EE


418  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  I.]

to  '  His  furnace  in  Jerusalem,'*  which  means  the  vision
of  peace.

i8.  The  soul  in  the  burning  furnace  is  in  a  more
peaceful,  glorious,  and  tender  union,  the  more  the  flame
of  the  furnace  transcends  the  fire  of  ordinary  love.  Thus
the  soul,  feeling  that  the  living  flame  ministers  to  it  all
good — divine  love  brings  all  blessings  with  it — cries  out  :
'  O  living  flame  of  love,  that  woundest  tenderly.'  The
cry  of  the  soul  is  :  O  kindling  burning  love,  how  tenderly
dost  thou  make  me  glorious  b}^  thy  loving  movements  in
my  greatest  power  and  strength,  giving  me  a  divine
intelligence  according  to  the  capacity  of  my  understanding,
and  communicating  love  according  to  the  utmost  freedom
of  my  will ;  that  is,  thou  hast  elevated  to  the  greatest
height,  by  the  divine  intelligence,  the  powers  of  my
understanding  in  the  most  intense  fervour  and  substantial
union  of  my  will.  This  ineffable  efl"ect  then  takes  place
when  this  flame  of  fire  rushes  upwards  in  the  soul.  The
divine  wisdom  absorbs  the  soul — which  is  now  purified
and  most  clean — profoundly  and  sublimely  in  itself;  for
'wisdom  reacheth  everywhere  by  reason  of  her  purity. 'f
It  is  in  this  absorption  of  wisdom  that  the  Holy  Ghost
effects  those  glorious  quiverings  of  His  flame  of  which  I
am  speaking.  And  as  the  flame  is  so  sweet,  the  soul  says  :
'As  thou  art  no  longer  grievous.'

'  As  Thou  art  no  longer  grievous.'

19.  Thou  dost  not  afflict,  nor  vex,  nor  weary  me  as
before.  This  flame,  when  the  soul  was  in  the  state  of
spiritual  purgation,  that  is,  when  it  was  entering  that  of
contemplation,  was  not  so  peaceful  and  sw^eet  as  it  is  now

*  Is.  xxxi.  9.  t  Wisd.  vii.  24.


STAN.  I.]  OF  LOVE  419

in  the  state  of  union.  For  before  the  divine  fire  enters
into  the  soul  and  unites  itself  to  it  in  its  inmost  depth  by
the  perfect  purgation  and  purity  thereof,  the  flame  wounds
it,  destroys  and  consumes  the  imperfections  of  its  evil
habits.  This  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Who
thereby  disposes  the  soul  for  its  divine  union  and  trans-
formation in  God  by  love.  For  the  flame  which
afterwards  unites  itself  to  the  soul  in  the  bliss  of  love,  is
the  very  same  which  before  assailed  and  purified  it  ;  just
as  the  fire  which  ultimately  penetrates  the  substance  of
the  fuel,  is  the  very  same  which  in  the  beginning  darted
its  flames  around  it,  playing  about  it,  and  depriving  it  of
its  coldness  until  it  prepared  it  with  its  heat  for  its  own
entrance  into  it,  and  transformation  of  it  into  itself.

20.  The  soul  suffers  greatly  in  this  spiritual  exercise,
and  endures  grievous  afflictions  of  spirit  which  occasionally
overflow  into  the  senses  ;  for  then  the  flame  is  felt  to  be
grievous.  As  I  have  described  it  in  the  Treatise  of  the
Dark  Night,  and  in  that  of  the  Ascent  of  Mount  Carmel,
I  shall  therefore  not  pursue  the  subject  further.  It  is
enough  for  us  to  know  that  God,  Who  seeks  to  enter  the
soul  by  union  and  transformation  of  love,  is  He  who
previously  assailed  the  soul,  purifying  it  with  the  light
and  heat  of  His  divine  flame,  which  was  before  grievous
but  is  now  sweet.

21.  The  meaning  of  the  whole  is  as  follows  :  Thou  art
now  not  only  not  darkness  as  before,  but  the  divine  light
of  my  understanding  wherewith  I  behold  Thee  :  not  only
dost  Thou  abstain  from  causing  me  to  faint  in  my
weakness,  but  Thou  art  become  the  strength  of  my  will,
wherein   I  can  love  and  enjoy  Thee,  being  wholly  trans-

EE  2


420  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  I.]

formed  by  divine  love.  Thou  art  no  longer  grief  and
affliction,  but  rather  my  glory,  my  delight,  and  my
liberty,  seeing  that  the  words  of  the  Canticle  may  be  said
of  me,  '  Who  is  this  that  cometh  up  from  the  desert
flowing  with  delights  leaning  upon  her  Beloved,'*
scattering  love  on  this  side  and  on  that  ?  '  Perfect  thy
work,  if  it  be  thy  will.'

'  Perfect  thy  work,  if  it  be  thy  will.'

22.  That  is,  do  Thou  perfect  the  spiritual  marriage  in
the  beatific  vision.  Though  it  is  true  that  the  soul  is
the  more  resigned  the  more  it  is  transformed,  when  it  has
attained  to  a  state  so  high  as  this,  for  it  knows  nothing
and  seeks  nothing  with  a  view  to  itself,  t  but  only  in  and
for  the  3eloved — for  Charity  seeks  nothing  but  the  good
and  glory  of  the  Beloved — still  because  it  lives  in  hope,
and  hope  implies  a  want,  it  groans  deeply — though
sweetly  and  joyfully — because  it  has  not  fully  attained  to
the  perfect  adoption  of  the  sons  of  God,  in  which,  being
perfected  in  glory,  all  its  desires  will  be  satisfied.  How-
ever intimate  the  soul's  union  may  be  with  God,  it  will
never  be  satisfied  here  below  till  His  'glory  shall  appear  ;'|
especially  because  it  has  already  tasted,  by  anticipation,  of
its  sweetness.

23.  That  sweetness  is  such  that  if  God  had  not  had
pity  on  its  natural  frailty  and  covered  it  with  His  right
hand,  as  He  did  Moses,  that  he  might  not  die  when  he
saw  the  glory  of  God — for  the  natural  powers  of  the  soul
receive  comfort  and  delight  from  that  right  hand,  rather
than  hurt — it  would  have  died  at  each  vibration  of  the
flame,  seeing  that  the  inferior  part  thereof  is  incapable  of

*  Cant.  viii.  5  f  i  Cor.  xiii.  5.  J  Ps.  xvi.  15.


STAN.  I.]  OF  LOVE.  421

enduring  so  great  and  so  sharp  a  lire.  This  desire  of  the
soul  is  therefore  no  longer  painful,  for  its  condition  is  now
such  that  all  pain  is  over,  and  its  prayers  are  offered  for
the  object  it  desires  in  great  sweetness,  joy  and  resignation.
This  is  the  reason  why  it  says,  '  if  it  be  thy  will,'  for  the  will
and  desire  are  now  so  united  in  God,  each  in  its  own  way,
that  the  soul  regards  it  as  its  glory  that  the  will  of  God
should  be  done  in  it.  Such  are  now  the  glimpses  of  glory,
and  such  the  love  which  now  shines  forth,  that  it
would  argue  but  little  love  on  its  part  if  it  did  not
pray  to  be  admitted  to  the  perfect  consummation  of
love.

24.  Moreover,  the  soul  in  the  power  of  this  sweet
communication,  sees  that  the  Holy  Ghost  incites  it,  and
invites  it  in  most  wonderful  ways,  and  by  sweet  affections,
to  this  immeasurable  glory,  which  He  there  sets  before
it,  saying,  'Arise,  make  haste,  my  love,  my  dove,  my
beautiful  one,  and  come.  For  winter  is  now  past,  the
rain  is  gone  and  departed.  The  flowers  have  appeared  in
our  land.  .  .  .  The  fig-tree  hath  brought  forth  her
green  figs,  the  flourishing  vineyards  have  given  their
savour.  Arise,  my  love,  my  beautiful  one,  and  come ;
my  dove  in  the  holes  of  the  rock,  in  the  hollow  places  of
the  wall,  show  me  thy  face,  let  thy  voice  sound  in  mine
ears,  for  thy  voice  is  sweet,  and  thy  face  comely."''  The
soul  hears  all  this  spoken  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  this  sweet
and  tender  flame,  and  therefore  answers  Him,  saying,
'  Perfect  Thy  work,  if  it  be  Thy  will,'  thereby  making  the
two  petitions  which  our  Lord  commands,  '  Thy  kingdom
come.  Thy  will  be  done ;  'f  that  is,  give  me  Thy  kingdom

*  Cant.  ii.  10 — 14.  f  St.  Matt,  vi.  10.


422  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  I.]

according  to  Thy  will,  and  that  it  may  be  so  '  Break  the
web  of  this  sweet  encounter.'

*  Break  the  web  of  this  sweet  encounter.'

25.  That  is,  the  hindrance  to  this  so  grand  an  aifair.
It  is  an  easy  thing  to  draw  near  unto  God  when  all
hindrances  are  set  aside,  and  when  the  web  that  divides
us  from  Him  is  broken.  There  are  three  webs  to  be
broken  before  we  can  have  the  perfect  fruition  of  God :

1.  The  temporal  web,  which  comprises  all  created  things.

2.  The  natural  web,  which  comprises  all  mere  natural
actions  and  inclinations.  3.  The  web  of  sense,  which  is
merely  the  union  of  soul  and  body ;  that  is,  the  sensitive
and  animal  life,  of  which  St.  Paul  speaks,  saying,  '  For
we  know  if  our  earthly  house  of  this  habitation  be
dissolved,  that  we  have  a  building  of  God,  a  house  not
made  with  hands,  eternal  in  heaven.'*

26.  The  first  and  second  web  must  of  necessity  have
been  broken  in  order  to  enter  into  the  fruition  of  God  in
the  union  of  love,  when  we  denied  ourselves  in  worldly
things  and  renounced  them,  when  our  affections  and
desires  were  mortified,  and  when  all  our  operations
became  divine.  These  webs  were  broken  in  the  assaults
of  this  flame  when  it  was  still  grievous.  In  the  spiritual
purgation  the  soul  breaks  the  two  webs  I  am  speaking  of,
and  becomes  united  with  God ;  the  third  alone,  the  web
of  the  life  of  sense  remains  now  to  be  broken.  This  is  the
reason  why  but  one  web  is  mentioned  here.  For  now
one  web  alone  remains,  and  this  the  flame  assails  not
painfully  and  grievously  as  it  assailed  the  others,  but
with  great  sweetness  and  delight.

*  2  Cor,  V.  I.


>>


[STAN.  I.T  OF  LOVE.

27.  Thus    the    death    of  such    souls    is    most    .^«^.  .„

...        !b  "^^

sweetness,  beyond  that  of  their  whole  spiritual  lifej-  fo^:^^^^
they  die  of  the  sweet  violence  of  love,  like  the  swan  wnich
sings  more  sweetly  when  death  is  nigh.

28.  This  is  why  the  Psalmist  said,  '  Precious  in  the
sight  of  our  Lord  is  the  death  of  His  saints,'*  for  then
the  rivers  of  the  soul's  love  flow  into  the  sea  of  love,  so
wide  and  deep  as  to  seem  a  sea  themselves  ;  the  beginning
and  the  end  unite  together  to  accompany  the  just
departing  for  His  kingdom.  '  From  the  ends  of  the  earth,'
in  the  words  of  Isaias,  are  '  heard  praises,  the  glory  of  the
just  one,'t  and  the  soul  feels  itself  in  the  midst  of  these
glorious  encounters  on  the  point  of  departing  in  all
abundance  for  the  perfect  fruition  of  the  kingdom,  for  it
beholds  itself  pure  and  rich,  and  prepared,  so  far  as  it  is
possible,  consistently  with  the  faith  and  the  conditions  of
this  life.  God  now  permits  it  to  behold  its  own  beauty,
and  intrusts  it  with  the  gifts  and  graces  He  has  endowed
it  with,  for  all  this  turns  into  love  and  praise  without  the
stain  of  presumption  or  of  vanity,  because  no  leaven  of
imperfection  remains  to  corrupt  it.

29.  When  the  soul  sees  that  nothing  is  wanting  but
the  breaking  of  the  frail  web  of  its  natural  life,  by  which
its  liberty  is  enthralled,  it  prays  that  it  may  be  broken  ;,
for  it  longs  'to  be  dissolved  and  to  be  with  Christ,'  to
burst  the  bonds  which  bind  the  spirit  and  the  flesh
together,  that  both  may  resume  their  proper  state,  for
they  are  by  nature  different,  the  flesh  to  '  return  to  its
earth,  and  the  spirit  unto  God  who  gave  it. 'J  The  mortal
body,  as  St.  John  saith,  '  profiteth  nothing,'§  but  is  rather

*  Ps.  cxv.  15.  f  Is.  xxiv.  16.         I  Eccles.  xii.  7.         §  St.  John.  vi.  64.


424  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  I.]

a  hindrance  to  the  good  of  the  spirit.  The  soul,  there-
fore, prays  for  the  dissolution  of  the  body,  for  it  is  sad
that  a  life  so  mean  should  be  a  hindrance  in  the  way  of  a
life  so  noble.

31.  This  life  is  called  a  web  for  three  reasons:  i.
Because  of  the  connection  between  the  spirit  and  the
flesh,  2.  Because  it  separates  the  soul  and  God.  3.
Because  a  web  is  not  so  thick  but  that  light  penetrates  it.  ■
The  connection  between  soul  and  body,  in  this  state  of
perfection,  is  so  slight  a  web,  that  the  divinity  shines
through  it,  now  that  the  soul  is  so  spiritualised,  subtilised,
and  refined.  When  the  power  of  the  life  to  come  is  felt
in  the  soul,  the  weakness  of  this  hfe  becomes  manifest.
Its  present  life  seems  to  be  but  a  slender  web,  even  a
spider's  web,  in  the  words  of  David,  '  our  years  shall  be
considered  as  a  spider,'*  and  even  less  than  that,  when
the  soul  is  raised  to  a  state  so  high,  for  being  raised  so
high,  it  perceives  things  as  God  does,  in  Whose  sight  '  a
thousand  years  are  as  yesterday  which  is  past,'t  and
before  Whom  '  all  nations  are  as  if  they  had  no  being  at
all. 'I  In  the  same  way  all  things  appear  to  the  soul  as
nothing,  yea,  itself  is  nothing  in  its  own  eyes,  and  God
alone  is  its  all.

30.  It  may  be  asked  here  why  the  soul  prays  for  the
breaking  of  the  web  rather  than  for  its  cutting  or  its
removal,  since  the  effect  would  be  the  same  in  either  case.
There  are  four  reasons  which  determine  it :  i.  The  ex-
pression it  employs  is  the  most  proper,  because  it  is
more  natural  that  a  thing  should  be  broken  in  an
encouter,  than  that  it  should  be  cut  or  taken  away.
2.  Because  love  likes  force,  with  violent  and  impetuous
*  Ps.  Ixxxix.  9.  t  Ps.  Ixxxix.  4.  J  Is.  xl.  17.


[STAN.  I.]  OF  LOVE.  425

contacts,  and  these  result  in  breaking  rather  than  in  cutting
or  taking  away.  3.  Because  its  love  is  so  strong,  it
desires  that  the  act  of  breaking  the  web  may  be  done  in  a
moment ;  the  more  rapid  and  spiritual  the  act,  the  greater
its  force  and  worth.

32.  The  power  of  love  is  now  more  concentrated  and
more  vigorous,  and  the  perfection  of  transforming  love
enters  the  soul,  as  form  into  matter,  in  an  instant.  Until
now  there  was  no  act  of  perfect  transformation,  only  the
disposition  towards  it  in  desires  and  affections  successively
repeated,  which  in  very  few  souls  attain  to  the  perfect  act
of  transformation.  Hence  a  soul  that  is  disposed  may
elicit  many  more,  and  more  intense  acts  in  a  brief  period
than  another  soul  not  so  disposed  in  a  long  time,  for  this
soul  spends  all  its  energies  in  the  preparation  of  itself,  and
even  afterwards  the  fire  does  not  wholly  penetrate  the  fuel
it  has  to  burn.  But  when  the  soul  is  already  prepared,
love  enters  in  continuously,  and  the  spark  at  the  first  con-
tact seizes  on  the  fuel  that  is  dry.  And  thus  the  enamoured
soul  prefers  the  abrupt  breaking  of  the  web  to  its  tedious
cutting  or  waiting  for  its  removal.

33.  4.  The  fourth  reason  why  the  soul  prays  for  the
breaking  of  the  web  of  life  is  its  desire  that  it  may  be
done  quickly  :  for  when  we  cut  or  remove  anything  we  do
it  deliberately,  when  the  matter  is  ripe,  and  then  time  and
thought  become  necessary ;  but  a  violent  rupture  requires
nothing  of  the  kind.  The  soul's  desire  is  not  to  wait  for
the  natural  termination  of  its  mortal  life,  because  the
violence  of  its  love  and  the  disposition  it  is  in  incline  it  with
resignation  towards  the  violent  rupture  of  its  natural  life
in  the  supernatural  assaults  of  love.     Moreover,  it  knows


426  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  I.]

well  that  it  is  the  way  of  God  to  call  such  souls  to  Himself
before  the  time,  that  He  fills  them  with  good,  and  delivers
them  from  evil,  perfecting  them  in  a  short  space,  and
bestowing  upon  them,  through  love,  what  they  could  have
gained  only  by  length  of  time.  '  Pleasing  God,  he  is  made
beloved,  and  living  among  sinners  he  was  translated.  He
was  taken  away  lest  malice  should  change  his  understand-
ing, or  lest  any  guile  deceive  his  soul.  Being  consummate
in  a  short  space,  he  fulfilled  much  time,  for  his  soul
pleased  God ;  for  this  cause  He  hastened  to  bring  him
out  of  the  midst  of  iniquities.'*  The  constant  practice  of
love  is  therefore  a  matter  of  the  last  importance,  for  when
the  soul  is  perfect  therein,  its  detention  here  below  cannot
be  long  before  it  is  admitted  to  see  God  face  to  face.

34.  But  why  is  this  interior  assault  of  the  Holy  Ghost
called  an  encounter  ?  Though  the  soul  is  very  desirous  to
see  the  end  of  its  natural  life,  yet  because  the  time  is  not
yet  come,  that  cannot  be,  and  so  God,  to  make  it  perfect
and  to  raise  it  above  the  flesh  more  and  more,  assails  it
divinely  and  gloriously,  and  these  assaults  are  really
encounters  wherein  God  penetrates  the  soul,  deifies  the
very  substance  of  it,  and  renders  it  as  it  were  divine.
The  substance  of  God  absorbs  the  soul,  because  He
assails  and  pierces  it  to  the  quick  by  the  Holy  Ghost,
whose  communications  are  vehement  when  they  are  of
fire  as  at  present.  The  soul  says  this  encounter  is  sweet,
because  it  has  therein  a  lively  taste  of  God  ;  not  that  many
other  touches  and  encounters  of  God,  of  which  the  soul
is  now  the  object,  cease  to  be  sweet  and  delicious,  but  on
account  of  the  supereminent  sweetness  of  this ;  for  God
effects  it  in  order  to  detach  it  perfectly  and  make  it
*  Wisd.  iv.  10 — 14.


[STAN.  I.]  OF  LOVE.  427

glorious.  Hence  the  soul  relying  on  His  protection
becomes  bold,  and  says,  '  Break  the  web  of  this  sweet
encounter.'

35.  The  whole  stanza  may  be  paraphrased  as  follows  : —
O  flame  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  penetrating  so  profoundly  and
so  tenderly  the  very  substance  of  my  soul,  and  burning  it
with  Thy  heat,  since  Thou  art  now  so  gentle  as  to
manifest  Thy  desire  of  giving  Thyself  wholly  to  me  in
everlasting  life ;  if  formerly  my  petitions  did  not  reach
Thine  ears,  when  I  was  weary  and  worn  with  love,
suffering  through  the  weakness  of  sense  and  spirit,  because
of  my  great  infirmities,  impurity,  and  little  love,  I  prayed
to  be  set  free — for  with  desire  hath  my  soul  desired  Thee
■ — when  my  impatient  love  would  not  suffer  me  to  submit
to  the  conditions  of  this  life  according  to  Thy  will — for  it
was  Thy  will  that  I  should  live — and  when  the  previous
impulses  of  my  love  were  insufficient  in  Thy  sight,
because  there  was  no  substance  in  them ;  now  that  I  am
grown  strong  in  love,  that  body  and  soul  together  do  not
only  follow  after  Thee,  but  that  my  heart  and  my  flesh
rejoice  in  the  living  God  *  with  one  consent,  so  that  I  am
praying  for  that  which  Thou  wiliest  I  should  pray  for,
and  what  Thou  wiliest  not,  that  I  pray  not  for — it  seems
even  that  I  could  not  do  it,  neither  does  it  enter  into
my  mind  to  do  so — and  as  my  prayers  are  now  more
efficacious  and  more  reasonable  in  Thy  sight,  for  they
proceed  from  Thee,  and  Thou  wiliest  I  should  so  pray,
and  as  I  pray  in  the  joy  and  sweetness  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  '  my  judgment  cometh  forth  from  Thy  countenance, 't
when  Thou  art  pleased  with  my  prayer  and  hearkenest  to

*  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  2.  t  Ps.  xvi.  2.


428  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  II.]

it — break  Thou  the  slender  web  of  this  hfe  that  I  may  be
enabled  to  love  Thee  hereafter  with  that  fulness  and
abundanca  which  my  soul  desires,  without  end  for
evermore.


STANZA  II.

0  sweet  hum  I

O  delicious  wound !

0  te7ider  hand !  O  gentle  touch  !

Savouring  of  everlasting  hfe.

And payi7ig  the  whole  debt,

In  destroying  death  Thou  hast  changed  it  into  life.


EXPLANATION.

We  learn  here  that  it  is  the  Three  Persons  of  the  Most
Holy  Trinity,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  Who
accomplish  the  divine  work  of  union  in  the  soul.  The
'  hand,'  the  '  touch,'  and  the  '  burn  '  are  in  substance  one  •
and  the  same ;  and  the  three  terms  are  employed  because
they  express  effects  peculiar  to  each.  The  '  burn  '  is  the
Holy  Ghost ;  the  '  hand  '  is  the  Father  ;  and  the  '  touch  '
is  the  Son.  Thus  the  the  soul  magnifies  the  Father,  the
Son,  and.  the  Holy  Ghost,  extolling  those  three  grand
gifts  and  graces  which  They  perfect  within  it,  in  that
They  have  changed  death  into  life,  transforming  it  in
Themselves.

2.  The  first  of  these  gifts  is  the  delicious  wound,
attributed  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  so  the  soul  calls  it  the
'  burn.'  The  second  is  the  '  taste  of  everlasting  life,'
attributed  to  the  Son,  and  the  soul  calls  it  the  *  gentle


[STAN.  II. J  OF  LOVE.  429

touch.'  The  third  is  that  'gift'  which  is  the  perfect
recompense  of  the  soul,  attributed  to  the  Father,  and  is
therefore  called  the  '  tender  hand.'  Though  the  Three
Persons  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity  are  referred  to  severally,
because  of  the  operations  peculiar  to  Each,  the  soul  is
addressing  itself  to  but  One  Essence,  saying,  '  Thou  hast
changed  it  into  life,'  for  the  Three  Divine  Persons  w^ork
together,  and  the  whole  is  attributed  to  Each,  and
to  All.

'  O  sweet  burn.'

3.  In  the  book  of  Deuteronium,  Moses  saith,  '  Our
Lord  God,  is  a  consuming  fire,'*  that  is,  a  fire  of  love.
And  as  His  power  is  infinite.  He  consumes  infinitely,
burning  with  great  vehemence,  and  transforming  into
Himself  all  He  touches.  But  He  burns  everything
according  to  the  measure  of  its  preparation,  some
more,  others  less  ;  and  also  according  to  His  own  good
pleasure,  as,  and  when,  and  how.  He  will.  And  as  this
is  an  infinite  fire  of  love,  so  when  He  touches  the  soul
somewhat  sharply,  the  burning  heat  within  it  becomes  so
extreme  as  to  surpass  all  the  fires  of  the  world.  This  is
the  reason  why  this  touch  of  God  is  said  to  be  a  '  burn  : '
for  the  fire  there  is  more  intense,  and  more  concentrated,
and  the  effect  of  it  surpasses  that  of  all  other  fires.

4.  When  the  divine  fire  shall  have  transformed  the
soul  into  itself,  the  soul  not  only  feels  the  burn,  but
itself  is  become  wholly  and  entirely  burnt  up  in  this
vehement  fire.  O  how  wonderful  the  fire  of  God  !  though
so  vehement  and  so  consuming,  though  it  can  destroy  a
thousand  worlds  with  more  ease  than  the  material  fire

*  Deut.  iv.  24.


430  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  II  ]

can  destroy  a  single  straw,  it  consumes  not  the  spirit
wherein  it  burns,  but  rather,  in  proportion  to  its  strength
and  heat,  dehghts  and  deifies  it,  burning  sweetly  within
according  to  the  strength  which  God  has  given.  Thus,
on  the  day  of  Pentecost  the  fire  descended  with  great
vehemence  upon  the  Apostles,  who,  according  to  St.
Gregory*,  sweetly  burned  interiorly.  The  Church  also
says,  when  celebrating  that  event :  '  The  divine  fire  came
down,  not  consuming  but  enlightening.'!  For  as  the
object  of  these  communications  is  to  elevate  the  soul,  the
burning  of  the  fire  does  not  distress  it  but  gladdens  it,  does
not  weary  it  but  delights  it,  and  renders  it  glorious  and
rich.     This  is  the  reason  why  it  is  said  to  be  sweet.

5.  Thus  then  the  blessed  soul,  which  by  the  mercy  of
God  has  been  burnt,  knoweth  all  things,  tasteth  all  things,
'whatsoever  it  shall  do  shall  prosper,'!  against  it  nothing
shall  prevail,  nothing  shall  touch  it.  It  is  of  that  soul
that  the  Apostle  said :  '  The  spiritual  man  judgeth  all
things,  and  he  himself  is  judged  of  no  man,'§  for  'the
Spirit  searcheth  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God,'1
because  it  belongs  to  love  to  search  into  all  that  the
Beloved  has.

6.  O,  the  great  glory  of  the  souls  who  are  worthy  of
this  supreme  fire,  which  having  infinite  power  to  consume
and  annihilate  you,  consumes  you  not,  but  makes  you
infinitely  perfect  in  glory !  Wonder  not  that  God  should
elevate  some  souls  to  so  high  a  degree,  for  He  alone  is
wonderful  in  His  marvellous  works.  As  this  burn  then  is
so  sweet — as  it  is  here  said  to  be— how  happ}'  must  that
soul  be  which  this  fire  has  touched  !     The  soul  would

*  Horn.  30,  in  Evangel.  f  Brev.  Rom.  fer.  2  Pent.

J  Ps.  i.  3.  §   I  Cor.  ii.  15.  ||  lb.  10.


[STAN.  II.]  OF  LOVE.  431

speak  of  it,    but   cannot,  so  it  says   only,    '  O    delicious
wound.'

ii.  '  O  delicious  wound.'

7.  He  Who  inflicts  the  wound  relieves,  and  heals
while  He  inflicts  it.  It  bears  some  resemblance  to  the
caustic  usage  of  natural  fire,  which  when  applied  to  a
wound  increases  it,  and  renders  a  wound,  which  iron  or
other  instruments  occasioned,  a  wound  of  fire.  The
longer  the  caustic  is  applied,  the  more  grievous  the  wound,
until  the  whole  matter  be  destroyed.  Thus  the  divine
burn  of  love  heals  the  wound  which  love  has  caused,  and
by  each  application  renders  it  greater.  The  healing  which
love  brings  is  to  wound  again  what  was  wounded  before,
until  the  soul  melts  away  in  the  fire  of  love.  So  when  the
soul  shall  become  wholly  one  wound  of  love  it  will  then
be  transformed  in  love,  wounded  with  love.  For  herein  he
who  is  most  wounded  is  the  most  healthy,  and  he  who  is
all  wound  is  all  health.

8.  And  yet  even  if  the  whole  soul  be  one  wound,  and
consequently  sound,  the  divine  burning  is  not  intermitted  ;
it  continues  its  work,  which  is  to  wound  the  soul  with
love.  But  then,  too,  its  work  is  to  soothe  the  healed
wound,  and  the  soul  therefore  cries  out,  '  O  delicious
wound,'  and  so  much  the  more  delicious  the  more  pene-
trating the  fire  of  love.  The  Holy  Ghost  inflicted  the
wound  that  He  might  soothe  it,  and  as  His  will  and
desire  to  soothe  it  are  great,  great  will  be  the  wound
which  He  will  inflict,  in  order  that  the  soul  He  has
wounded  may  be  greatly  comforted.  O  blessed  wound
inflicted  by  Him  Who  cannot  but  heal  it !

g.     O  happy  and  most  blessed  wound  !     For  thou  art


432  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  II.]

inflicted  only  for  the  joy  and  comfort  of  the  soul.  Great
is  the  wound,  because  He  is  great  Who  has  wrought  it  ;
and  great  is  the  delight  of  it :  for  the  fire  of  love  is  infinite.
O  delicious  wound  then,  and  the  more  delicious  the  more
the  burn  of  love  penetrates  the  inmost  substance  of  the
soul,  burning  all  it  can  burn  that  it  may  supply  all  the
delight  it  can  give.  This  burning  and  wound,  in  my
opinion,  are  the  highest  condition  attainable  in  this  life.
There  are  many  other  forms  of  this  burning,  but  they  do
not  reach  so  far,  neither  are  they  like  unto  this  :  for  this
is  the  touch  of  the  Divinity  without  form  or  figure,  either
natural,  formal,  or  imaginary.

10.  But  the  soul  is  burned  in  another  and  most
excellent  way,  which  is  this :  when  a  soul  is  on  fire  with
love,  but  not  in  the  degree  of  which  I  am  now  speaking —
though  it  should  be  so,  that  it  may  be  the  subject  of  this
— it  will  feel  as  if  a  seraph  with  a  burning  brand  of  love
had  struck  it,  and  penetrated  it  already  on  fire  as  glowing
coal,  or  rather  as  a  flame,  and  burns  it  utterly.  And  then
in  that  burn  the  flame  rushes  forth  and  surges  vehemently
as  in  a  glowing  furnace  or  forge ;  the  fire  revives  and  the
flame  ascends  when  the  burning  fuel  is  disturbed.  Then
when  the  burning  brand  touches  it,  the  soul  feels  that  the
wound  it  has  thus  received  is  delicious  beyond  all  imagina-
tion. For  beside  being  altogether  moved  and  stirred,  at  the
time  of  this  stirring  of  the  fire,  by  the  vehement  movement
of  the  seraph,  wherein  the  ardour  and  the  melting  of  love  is
great,  it  feels  that  its  wound  is  perfect,  and  that  the  herbs
which  serve  to  attemper  the  steel  are  efficacious ;  it  feels
the  very  depths  of  the  spirit  transpierced,  and  its  delight
to  be  exquisite  beyond  the  power  of  language  to  express.


[STAN.  II.]  OF  LOVE.  433

The  soul  feels,  as  it  were,  a  most  minute  grain  of  mustard
seed,  most  pungent  and  burning  in  the  inmost  heart  of  the
spirit ;  in  the  spot  of  the  wound,  where  the  substance  and
the  power  of  the  herb  reside,  diffuse  itself  most  subtilely
through  all  the  spiritual  veins  of  the  soul  in  proportion  to
the  strength  and  power  of  the  heat.  It  feels  its  love  to
■  grow,  strengthen,  and  refine  itself  to  such  a  degree,  as  to
seem  to  itself  as  if  seas  of  fire  were  in  it  filling  it  with  love.

11.  The  fruition  of  the  soul  now  cannot  be  described
otherwise  than  by  saying  that  it  understands  why  the
kingdom  of  heaven  is  compared  in  the  gospel  to  a
mustard  seed,  which  by  reason  of  its  great  natural  heat
grows  into  a  lofty  tree.  '  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like
a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which  a  man  took  and  sowed  in
his  field.  Which  is  the  least  surely  of  all  seeds ;  but
when  it  is  grown  up,  it  is  greater  than  all  herbs,  and  is
made  a  tree,  so  that  the  fowls  of  the  air  come  and  dwell
in  the  branches  thereof.'*  The  soul  beholds  itself  now  as
one  immense  sea  of  fire.  Few  souls,  however,  attain  to
this  state,  but  some  have  done  so,  especially  those  whose
spirit  and  power  is  to  be  transmitted  to  their  spiritual
children ;  since  God  bestows  on  the  founder  gifts  and
graces,  according  to  the  succession  of  the  order  in  the
first-fruits  of  the  Spirit.

12.  To  return  to  the  work  of  the  seraph,  which   in

truth  is  to  strike  and  wound.     If  the  effect  of  the  wound

be  permitted  to  flow  exteriorly  into  the  bodily  senses,  an

effect   corresponding   to   the    interior   wound    itself  will

manifest  itself  without.     Thus  it  was  with  St.  Francis,

for   when   the    seraph  wounded   his  soul  with  love,  the

*  St.  Matth.  xiii.  31,  32.

FF


434  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  II.]

effects  of  that  wound  became  outwardly  visible.  God
confers  no  favours  on  the  body  which  He  does  not  confer
in  the  first  place  chiefly  on  the  soul.  In  that  case,  the
greater  the  joy  and  violence  of  the  love  which  is  the
cause  of  the  interior  wound,  the  greater  will  be  the  pain
of  the  visible  wound,  and  as  the  former  grows  so  does  the
latter.

13.  The  reason  is  this :  such  souls  as  these,  being
already  purified  and  strong  in  God,  their  spirit,  strong
and  sound,  delights  in  the  strong  and  sweet  Spirit  of  God  ;
Who,  however,  causes  pain  and  suffering  in  their  weak
and  corruptible  flesh.  It  is  thus  a  most  marvellous  thing
to  feel  pain  and  sweetness  together.  Job  felt  it  when  he
said,  '  Returning,  Thou  tormentest  me  wonderfully.'*
This  is  marvellous,  worthy  of  the  multitude  of  the  sweet-
ness of  God,  which  He  has  hidden  for  them  that  fear
Him;t  the  greater  the  sweetness  and  delight,  the  greater
the  pain  and  suffering.

14.  O  Infinite  greatness,  in  all  things  showing  Thyself
omnipotent.  Who,  O  Lord,  can  cause  sweetness  in  the
midst  of  bitterness,  and  pleasure  in  the  midst  of  pain  ?
O  delicious  wound,  the  greater  the  delight  the  deeper  the
wound.  But  when  the  wound  is  within  the  soul,  and  not
communicated  to  the  body  without,  it  is  then  much  more
intense  and  keen.  As  the  flesh  is  a  bridle  to  the  spirit,
so,  when  the  graces  of  the  latter  overflow  into  the  former,
the  flesh  draws  in  and  restrains  the  swift  steed  of  the
spirit  and  checks  its  course ;  '  for  the  corruptible  body  is
a  load  upon  the  soul,  and  the  earthly  habitation  presseth
down  the  mind  that  museth  upon  many  things.':^     He,

*  Job  X.  16.  t  Ps.  XXX.  20.  I  Wisd.  ix.  15.


[STAN.  II.]  OF  LOVE.  435

therefore,  who   shall   trust   much  to  the  bodily  senses  will
never  become  a  very  spiritual  man.

15.  This  I  say  for  the  sake  of  those  who  think  they
can  ascend  to  the  heights  and  power  of  the  spirit,  by  the
mere  energy  and  action  of  the  senses,  which  are  mean
and  vile.  We  cannot  become  spiritual  unless  the  bodily
senses  be  restrained.  It  is  a  state  of  things  wholly
different  from  this,  when  the  spirit  overflows  into  the
senses,  for  there  may  be  great  spirituality  in  this ;  as  in
the  case  of  St.  Paul,  whose  deep  sense  of  the  sufferings  of
Christ  overflowed  into  his  body,  so  that  he  said :  '  I  bear
the  marks  of  our  Lord  Jesus  in  my  body.'*'  Thus,  as  the
wound  and  the  burn,  so  the  hand  that  inflicted  it ;  and  as
the  touch,  so  He  who  touched.  O  tender  hand,  O  gentle
touch.

'  O  tender  hand,  O  gentle  touch.'

16.  O  hand,  as  generous  as  Thou  art  powerful  and
rich,  giving  me  gifts  with  power.  O  gentle  hand  !  laid  so
gently  upon  me,  and  yet,  if  Thou  wert  to  press  at  all,  the
whole  world  must  perish;  for  only  at  the  sight  of  Thee  the
earth  trembles, t  the  nations  melt,  and  the  mountains  are
crushed  in  pieces.!  O  gentle  hand,  I  say  it  again,  for
him  thou  didst  touch  so  sharply.  Upon  me  Thou  art  laid
so  softly,  so  lovingly,  and  so  tenderly ;  Thou  art  the  more
gentle  and  sweet  for  me  than  thou  wert  hard  for  him ;
the  loving  sweetness  with  which  Thou  art  laid  upon  me  is
greater  than  the  severity  with  which  he  was  touched.
Thou  killest,  and  Thou  givest  life,  and  there  is  no  one  who
shall  escape  out  of  Thy  hand,

17.  But  Thou,  O  divine  life,  never  killest  but  to  give

*  Gal.  vi.  17.  f  Ps.  ciii.  32.  |  Hab.  iii.  6.

FF    2


436  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  II.]

life,  as  Thou  never  woundest  but  to  heal.  Thou  hast
wounded  me,  O  divine  hand  !  that  Thou  mayest  heal  me.
Thou  hast  slain  in  me  that  which  made  me  dead,  and
without  the  life  of  God  which  I  now  live.  This  Thou
hast  wrought  in  the  liberality  of  Thy  gracious  generosity,
through  that  touch,  wherewith  Thou  dost  touch  me,  of
the  brightness  of  Thy  glory  and  the  figure  of  Thy  sub-
stance,* Thine  only  begotten  Son,  in  Whom,  being  Thy
Wisdom,  Thou  reachest  'from  end  to  end  mightily.' t

i8.  O  gentle,  subtile  touch,  the  Word,  the  Son  of  God,
Who,  because  of  the  pureness  of  Thy  divine  nature,  dost
penetrate  subtilely  the  very  substance  of  my  soul,  and,
touching  it  gently,  absorbest  it  wholly  in  divine  ways  of
sweetness  not  '  heard  of  in  the  land  of  Canaan,'  nor  '  seen
in  Teman.'t  O  touch  of  the  Word,  so  gentle,  so
wonderfully  gentle  to  me ;  and  3^et  Thou  wert  '  over-
throwing mountains,  and  breaking  rocks  in  Horeb,  by  the
shadow  of  Thy  power  going  before,  when  Thou  didst
announce  Thy  presence  to  the  prophet  in  '  the  whisper  of
a  gentle  air.'§  O  soft  air,  how  is  it  that  Thou  touchest  so
softly  when  Thou  art  so  terrible  and  so  strong  ?  O  blessed
soul,  most  blessed,  which  Thou,  who  art  so  terrible  and
so  strong,  touchest  so  gently.  Proclaim  it  to  the  world,
O  my  soul — no,  proclaim  it  not,  for  the  world  knoweth
not  the  '  gentle  air,'  neither  will  it  listen  to  it,  because  it
cannot  comprehend  matters  so  deep.

19.  O  my  God  and  my  life,  they  shall  know  Theeji
and  behold  Thee  when  Thou  touchest  them,  who,  making
themselves  strangers  upon  earth,  shall  purify  themselves,

*  Heb.  i.  3.  t  Wisd.  viii.  i.  J  Bar  iii.  22

§  3  Kings  xix.  11,  12.  ||  St.  John  xiv.  17,


[STAN.  II,]  OF  LOVE.  437

because  purity  corresponds  with  purity.  The  more  gently
Thou  touchest,  the  more  Thou  art  hidden  in  the  purified
soul  of  those  who  have  made  themselves  strangers  here,
hidden  from  the  face  of  all  creatures,  and  whom  '  Thou
shalt  hide  in  the  secret  of  Thy  face  from  the  disturbance
of  men.'*

20.  O,  again  and  again,  gentle  touch,  which  by  the
power  of  its  tenderness,  undoest  the  soul,  removest  it  far
away  from  every  other  touch  whatever,  and  makest  it
Thine  own  ;  Thou  which  leavest  behind  Thee  effects  and
impressions  so  pure,  that  the  touch  of  everything  else
seems  vile  and  low,  the  very  sight  offensive,  and  all
relations  therewith  a  deep  affliction.  The  more  subtile
any  matter  is,  the  more  it  spreads  and  fills,  and  the  more
it  diffuses  itself  the  more  subtile  is  it.  O  gentle  touch,
the  more  subtile  the  more  infused.  And  now  the  vessel
of  my  soul,  because  Thou  hast  touched  it,  is  pure  and
clean  and  able  to  receive  Thee.

21.  O  gentle  touch !  as  in  Thee  there  is  nothing
material,  so  Thy  touch  is  the  more  penetrating,  changing
what  in  me  is  human  into  divine,  for  Thy  Divine  essence,
wherewith  Thou  touchest  me,  is  wholly  unaffected  by
modes  and  manner,  free  from  the  husks  of  form  and
figure.  Finally  then,  O  gentle  touch,  and  most  gentle,
for  Thou  touchest  me  with  Thy  most  simple  and  pure
essence,  which  being  infinite  is  infinitely  gentle ;  therefore
it  is  that  this  touch  is  so  subtile,  so  loving,  so  deep,  and
so  delicious.

'  Savouring  of  everlasting  life.'

22.  What  the  soul  tastes  now  in  this  touch  of  God,  is,

*   Ps.   XXX.    21.


438  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  II.]

in  truth,  though  not  perfectly,  a  certain  foretaste  of  ever-
lasting life,  as  I  said  before.*  It  is  not  incredible  that  it
should  be  so  when  we  believe,  as  we  do  believe,  that  this
touch  is  most  substantial,  and  that  the  substance  of  God
touches  the  substance  of  the  soul.  Many  Saints  have
experienced  it  in  this  life.  The  sweetness  of  delight
which  this  touch  occasions  baffles  all  description.  Neither
will  I  speak  of  it,  lest  men  should  suppose  that  it  is
nothing  beyond  what  my  words  imply,  for  there  are  no
terms  by  which  we  can  designate  or  explain  the  deep
things  of  God  transacted  in  perfect  souls.  The  proper
way  to  speak  of  them  is  for  him  who  has  been  favoured
with  them  to  understand  them,  feel  them,  and  enjoy
them,  and  be  silent.

23.  For  the  soul  now  sees  that  they  are  in  some
measure  like  the  white  counter  of  which  it  is  written,
'  To  him  that  overcometh  I  will  give  ...  a  white
counter,  and  in  the  counter  a  new  name  written,  which
no  man  knoweth  but  he  that  receiveth  it.'f  Thus  it  may
be  truly  said,  '  savouring  of  everlasting  life.'  For  though
the  fruition  of  it  is  not  perfect  in  this  life  as  it  will  be  in
glory ;  nevertheless  the  touch,  being  of  God,  savoureth  of
everlasting  life,  and  accordingly  the  soul  tastes  in  a
marvellous  manner,  and  by  participation,  of  all  the  things
of  God ;  fortitude,  wisdom,  love,  beauty,  grace,  and
goodness  being  communicated  unto  it.

24.  Now  as  God  is  all  this,  the  soul  tastes  of  all  in
one  single  touch  of  God  in  a  certain  eminent  way.  And
from  this  good  bestowed  upon  the  soul,  some  of  the
unction  of  the  Spirit  overflows  at  times  into  the  body  itself,

*  Stanza  i.  §  8.  t  Apoc.  ii.  17.


[STAN.  II.]  OF  LOVE.  439

penetrating  into  the  very  bones,  as  it  is  written,  '  All  my
bones  shall  say  :  Lord,  who  is  like  unto  Thee  ?  '*  But  as
all  I  can  say  falls  short  of  the  subject,  it  is  enough  to
repeat,  '  savouring  of  everlasting  life.'

'  x\nd  paying  the  whole  debt.'

25.  But  what  debts  are  they  to  which  the  soul  here
refers,  and  which  it  declares  to  be  paid  or  satisfied  ?  We
should  know  that  souls  which  attain  to  this  high  state,
to  the  kingdom  of  the  spiritual  betrothal,  have  in  general
passed  through  many  tribulations  and  trials,  because  it  is
'  through  many  tribulations  that  we  enter  into  the  king-
dom of  heaven. 'f     And  these  tribulations  are  now  passed.

26.  What  they  have  to  suffer  who  are  to  attain  unto
union  with  God,  are  divers  afflictions  and  temptations  of
sense,  trials,  tribulations,  temptations,  darkness,  and
distress  of  mind,  so  that  both  the  flesh  and  the  spirit  may
be  purified  together,  as  I  said  in  my  treatise  of  the  Ascent
of  Mount  Carmel,  and  of  the  Dark  Night.  The  reason  is
that  the  joy  and  knowledge  of  God  cannot  be  established
in  the  soul,  if  the  flesh  and  spirit  are  not  perfectly  purified
and  spiritualized,  and  as  trials  and  penances  purify  and
refine  the  senses,  as  tribulations,  temptations,  darkness
and  distress  spiritualize  and  prepare  the  spirit,  so  they
must  undergo  them  who  would  be  transformed  in  God —
as  the  souls  in  purgatory  who  through  that  trial  attain  to
the  beatific  vision — some  more  intensely  than  others,
some  for  a  longer,  others  for  a  shorter  time,  according  to
those  degrees  of  union  to  which  God  intends  to  raise
them,  and  according  to  their  need  of  purification.

27.  It  is  by  these  trials  to  which  God  subjects  the

*  Ps.  xxxiv.  10.  t  Acts  xiv,  21.


440  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  II.]

spirit  and  the  flesh  that  the  soul,  in  bitterness,  acquires
virtues  and  fortitude  and  perfection,  as  the  Apostle  writes,
'  Power  is  made  perfect  in  infirmity;'*  for  virtue  is  made
perfect  in  weakness,  and  refined  by  sufferings.  Iron
cannot  be  fashioned  according  to  the  pattern  of  the
artificer  but  by  fire  and  the  hammer,  and  during  the
process  its  previous  condition  is  injured.  This  is  the
way  in  which  God  taught  Jeremias,  '  From  on  high  He
hath  cast  a  fire  in  my  bones  and  hath  taught  me.'t  The
prophet  speaks  of  the  hammer  also  when  he  saith,  '  Thou
hast  chastised  me,  and  I  am  taught. 't  So,  too,  the  wise
man  asks,  '  He  that  hath  not  been  proved,  what  knoweth
he?'§

28.  Here  comes  the  question,  why  is  it  that  so  few  ever
attain  to  this  state  ?  The  reason  is  that,  in  this  marvellous
work  which  God  Himself  begins,  so  many  are  weak,
shrinking  from  trouble,  and  unwilling  to  endure  the  least
discomfort  or  mortification,  or  to  labour  with  constant
patience.  Hence  it  is  that  God,  not  finding  them  diligent
in  cultivating  the  graces  He  has  given  them  when  He
began  to  try  them,  proceeds  no  further  with  their
purification,  neither  does  He  lift  them  up  out  of  the  dust
of  the  earth,  because  it  required  greater  courage  and
resolution  for  this  than  they  possessed.

29.  Thus  it  may  be  said  to  those  who  desire  to
advance,  but  who  will  not  endure  a  lighter  trial  nor  submit
themselves  thereto,  in  the  words  of  Jeremias,  '  If  with
running  with  footmen  thou  hast  laboured  how  canst  thou
contend  with  horses  ?  and  whereas  in  a  land  of  peace  thou
hast   been    secure,  what    wilt    thou  do   in    the   pride   of

*  2  Cor.  xii,  g.     f  Lam.  i.  13.     +  Jerem.  xxxi.  18.     §  Ecclus  xxxiv.  11.


[STAN.  II.]  OF  LOVE.  441

Jordan?'*  That  is,  if  the  ordinary  trials  of  human  Hfe  which
to  all  men  are  wearisome  and  a  burden,  how  art  thou
to  '  contend  with  horses  ?'  that  is,  how  canst  thou
venture  out  of  the  common  trials  of  life  upon  others  of
greater  violence  and  swiftness  ?  If  thou  hast  been
unwilling  to  make  war  against  the  peace  and  pleasures  of
the  earth,  thine  own  sensuality,  but  rather  seekest  comfort
and  tranquillity  on  it,  what  wilt  thou  do  in  the  pride  of
Jordan  ?  that  is,  how  wilt  thou  stand  against  the  rushing
waters  of  tribulations  and  the  more  interior  trials  of  the  .
spirit  ?

30.  O  souls  that  seek  your  own  ease  and  comfort,  if
you  knew  how  necessary  for  this  high  state  is  suffering,
and  how  profitable  suffering  and  mortification  are  for
attaining  to  these  great  blessings,  you  would  never  seek
for  comfort  anywhere,  but  you  would  rather  take  up  the
cross  with  the  vinegar  and  the  gall,  and  would  count  it  an
inestimable  favour,  knowing  that  by  thus  dying  to  the
world  and  to  your  own  selves,  you  would  live  to  God  in
spiritual  joy;  in  the  patient  endurance  of  your  exterior
afflictions  you  would  merit  at  the  hands  of  God,  that  He
should  look  upon  you,  cleanse  and  purify  you  more  and
more  in  these  spiritual  tribulations.  They  whom  He
thus  blesses  must  have  served  Him  well  and  long,  must
have  been  patient  and  persevering,  and  their  life  most
pleasing  in  His  sight.  The  angel  said  unto  Tobias,
'  Because  thou  wast  acceptable  to  God,  it  was  necessary
that  temptation  should  prove  thee. '  t  Tobias  was  acceptable
to  God,  therefore  He  tried  him  ;  He  gave  him  the  grace
of  tribulation,  the  source  of  greater  graces  still,  and  it  is
written  of  him  that  '  the  rest  of  his  life  was  in  joy.'^

*  Jerem.  xii   5.  f  Tob,  xii.  13.  +  Tob.  xiv.  4.


442  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  II.]

31.  The  same  truth  is  exempHfied  in  the  life  of  Job.
God  acknowledged  him  as  His  faithful  servant  in  the
presence  of  the  angels  good  and  evil,  and  immediately
sent  him  heavy  trials,  that  He  might  afterwards  raise  him
higher,  as  He  did,  both  in  temporal  and  spiritual  things.*

32.  This  is  the  way  God  deals  with  those  whom  it  is
His  will  to  exalt.  He  suffers  them  to  be  tempted,  afflicted,
tormented  and  chastened,  inwardly  and  outwardly,  to  the
utmost  limit  of  their  strength,  that  He  may  deify  them,
unite  them  to  Himself  in  His  wisdom,  which  is  the
highest  state,  purifying  them,  first  in  that  wisdom,  as
David  observed,  saying  that  the  '  words  of  our  Lord  are
chaste  words,  silver,  examined  by  fire,'  tested  in  the  earth
of  our  flesh  and  purified t  seven  times,  that  is,  made
perfectly  pure.

33.  It  is  not  necessary  I  should  stop  here  to  say  how
each  of  these  purgations  tends  to  the  divine  wisdom,
which  in  this  life  is  as  silver,  for  however  pure  it  may  be,
yet  is  not  comparable  to  the  pure  gold,  which  is  reserved
for  everlasting  glory.

34.  But  it  is  very  necessar}^  for  the  soul  to  endure
these  tribulations  and  trials,  inward  and  outward,
spiritual  and  corporal,  great  and  small,  with  great  resolu-
tion and  patience,  accepting  all  as  from  the  hand  of  God
for  its  healing  and  its  good,  not  shrinking  from  them,
because  they  are  for  the  health  of  the  soul.  '  If  the  spirit
of  him  that  hath  power,'  saith  the  wise  man,  '  ascend
upon  thee,  leave  not  thy  place,  because  carefulness' — that
is  healing — '  will  make  the  greatest  sins  to  cease.' I  '  Leave
not  thy  place,'  that  is,  the  place  of  thy  trial,  which  is  thy

*  Job.  i.  8-20  ;  Ps.  xi.  7.  f  Eccles.  x.  4.


[STAN.  II.]  OF  LOVE.  443

troubles  ;  for  the  healing  which  they  bring  will  break  the
thread  of  th}^  sins  and  imperfections,  which  is  evil  habits,
so  that  they  shall  proceed  no  further.  Thus,  interior
trials  and  tribulations  destroy  and  purge  away  the
imperfect  and  evil  habits  of  the  soul.  We  are,  therefore,
to  count  it  a  great  favour  when  our  Lord  sends  us  interior
and  exterior  trials,  remembering  that  they  are  few  in
number  who  deserve  to  be  made  perfect  through  sufferings
so  as  to  attain  to  so  high  a  state  as  this.

35.  I  return  to  the  explanation  of  the  words  before  me.
The  soul  now  remembers  that  its  past  afflictions  are  most
abundantly  recompensed,  for  '  as  the  darkness  so  also  the
light  thereof,'*  and  that  having  once  been  'a  partaker  of
the  sufferings,' it  is  now  '  of  the  consolation, 't  that  its
interior  and  exterior  trials  have  been  recompensed  by  the
divine  mercies,  none  of  them  being  without  its  corres-
ponding reward.  It  therefore  acknowledges  itself  perfectly
satisfied,  and  says,  'paying  the  whole  debt,'  as  David  did,
'  How  great  tribulations  hast  Thou  shown  me,  many  and
evil,  and  turning  Thou  hast  quickened  me,  and  from  the
depths  of  the  earth  Thou  hast  brought  me  back  again.
Thou  hast  multiplied  Thy  magnificence,  and  turning  to
me  Thou  hast  comforted  me.'^

36.  Thus  the  soul  which  once  stood  without  at  the
gates  of  the  palace  of  God — like  Mardocheus  weeping  in
the  streets  of  Susan  because  his  life  was  threatened,
clothed  with  sackcloth  and  refusing  the  garments  which
Esther  sent  him,  unrewarded  for  his  faithful  service  in
defending  the  king's  honour  and  life,§ — finds,  also,  like
Mardocheus,  all  its  trials  and  service  rewarded  in  one  day.

*  Ps.  cxxxviii.  12.         t  2  Cor.  i.  7.         J  Ps.  Ixx.  20.         §  Esth.  iv.  1-6


444  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  II.]

It  is  not  only  admitted  within  the  palace  and  stands  in
royal  robes  before  the  king,  but  has  also  a  diadem  on  its
head,  and  in  its  hand  a  sceptre,  and  sitting  on  the  royal
throne  with  the  king's  signet  on  its  finger,  symbols
of  its  power  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Bridegroom.  For
those  souls  who  attain  to  this  high  state  obtain  all
their  desires ;  the  whole  debt  is  amply  paid  :  the  appetites,
their  enemies  which  sought  their  life,  are  dead,  while  they
are  living  in  God,  '  In  destro3ang  death  Thou  hast
changed  it  into  life/

'  Thou  hast  changed  death  into  life.'
37.  Death  is  nothing  else  but  the  privation  of  life,  for
when  life  cometh  there  is  no  trace  of  death  in  that  which
is  spiritual.  There  are  two  kinds  of  life,  one  beatific,
consisting  in  the  vision  of  God,  and  this  must  be  preceded
by  a  natural  and  bodily  death,  as  it  is  written,  '  We  know
if  our  earthly  house  of  this  habitation  be  dissolved,  that
we  have  a  building  of  God,  a  house  not  made  with  hands,
eternal  in  heaven.'*  The  other  is  the  perfect  spiritual
life,  consisting  in  the  possession  of  God  by  the  union  of
love.  Men  attain  to  this  through  the  mortification  of
their  evil  habits  and  desires.  Until  this  be  done,  the
perfection  of  the  spiritual  life  of  union  with  God  is
unattainable,  '  For,'  as  the  Apostle  saith,  '  if  you  live
according  to  the  flesh,  you  shall  die :  but  if  by  the  spirit
you  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  flesh,  you  shall  live.'t

38.  By  '  death  '  here  is  meant  the  old  man,  that  is  the
employment  of  our  faculties,  memory,  understanding,  and
will,  upon  the  things  of  this  world,  and  the  desire  on  the
pleasure  which  created  things  supply.     All  this  is  the  old

*  2  Cor.  V.  I.  f  Rom.  viii.  13.


[STAN.  II.]  OF  LOVE.  445

life  ;  it  is  the  death  of  the  new  hfe  which  is  spiritual,  and
which  the  soul  cannot  live  perfectly  unless  to  the  old  man
it  be  perfectly  dead,  for  so  the  Apostle  teaches,  when  he
bids  us  put  '  away  according  to  the  old  conversation,
the  old  man  .  .  .  and  put  on  the  new  man,  which,
according  to  God,  is  created  in  justice  and  holiness  of  the
truth.'*  In  this  new  life,  when  the  soul  shall  have
attained  to  perfect  union  with  God,  all  its  affections,
powers,  and  acts,  in  themselves  imperfect  and  vile,
become  as  it  were  divine.  And  as  everything  that  lives,
to  use  the  expression  of  philosophers,  lives  in  its  acts,  so
the  soul,  having  its  acts  in  God  by  virtue  of  its  union
with  Him,  lives  the  life  of  God,  its  death  being  changed
into  life.

39.  This  is  so,  because  the  understanding,  which,
previous  to  its  union  with  God,  understood  but  dimly  by
means  of  its  natural  light,  is  now  under  the  influence  and
direction  of  another  principle,  and  of  a  higher  illumination
of  God.  The  will,  which  previously  loved  but  weakly,  is
now  changed  into  the  life  of  divine  love,  for  now  it  loves
deeply  with  the  affections  of  divine  love,  moved  by  the
Holy  Ghost  in  whom  it  now  lives.  The  memory,  which
once  saw  nothing  but  the  forms  and  figures  of  created
things,  is  now  changed,  and  keeps  in  '  mind  the  eternal
years,'!  as  David  spoke.  The  desire,  which  previously
longed  for  created  food,  now  tastes  and  relishes  the  food
that  is  divine,  influenced  by  another  and  more  efficacious
principle,  the  sweetness  of  God.

40.  Finally,  all  the  motions  and  acts  of  the  soul,
proceeding  from  the  principle  of  its  natural  and  imperfect

*  Ephes.  iv.  22,  24.  t  Ps.  Ixxvi.


446  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  IL]

life,  are  now  changed  in  this  union  with  God  into  motions
divine.  For  the  soul,  as  the  true  child  of  God,  is  moved
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  it  is  written,  '  Whosoever  are  led
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God.'*  The
substance  of  the  soul,  though  it  is  not  the  substance  of
God,  because  inconvertible  into  Him,  yet  being  united  to
Him  and  absorbed  in  Him,  is  by  participation  God.  This
is  accomplished  in  the  perfect  state  of  the  spiritual
life,  but  not  so  perfectly  as  in  the  other ;  hence  is  it
well  said :  '  While  slaying  thou  hast  changed  death  into
life.'!

41.  The  soul,  therefore,  has  good  reason  for  saying
with  St.  Paul,  '  I  live,  now  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me. 'I
What  in  the  soul  is  dead  and  cold,  becomes  changed
into  the  life  of  God,  the  soul  "  swallowed  up  of  life "'
in  fulfilling  the  words  of  the  Apostle,  '  Death  is
swallowed  up  in  victory,'§  and  those  of  Oseea,  '  I  will  be
thy  death,  O  death.' jl

42.  The  soul  being  thus  swallowed  up  of  life,  detached
from  all  secular  and  temporal  things,  and  delivered  from
the  disorderliness  of  nature,  is  led  into  the  chamber  of
the  King,  where  it  rejoices  and  is  glad  in  the  Beloved,
remembering  His  breasts  more  than  wine,  and  saying,
'I  am  black  but  beautiful,  O  ye  daughters  of  Jerusalem, 'I1
for  my  natural  blackness  is  changed  into  the  beauty  of
the  heavenly  King.  O  then,  the  burning  of  the  fire !
infinitely  burning  above  all  other  fires,  O  how  infinitely
beyond  all  other  fires  dost  thou  burn  me,  and  the  more
thou  burnest  the  sweeter  thou  art  to  me.     '  O  delicious

*  Rom.  viii.  14.  f  Galat.  ii.  20.  +  2  Cor.  v.  4.

§   I  Cor.  XV.  54.  II  Os.  xiii.  14.  If  Cant.  i.  3,  4.  ,


[STAN.  II.]  OF  LOVE.  447

wound,'  more  delicious  to  me  than  all  the  delights  and
health  of  the  world.  '  O  tender  hand,'  infinitely  more
tender  than  all  tenderness,  and  the  greater  the  pressure
of  it  the  more  tender  is  it  to  me.  '  O  gentle  touch,'  the
gentleness  of  which  surpasses  infinitely  all  the  gentleness
and  all  the  loveliness  of  created  things,  sweeter  and  more
delicious  than  honey  and  the  honeycomb,  because  thou
savourest  of  everlasting  life ;  and  is  the  more  sweet  the
more  profoundly  thou  dost  touch  me.  Thou  art  infinitely
more  precious  than  gold  and  precious  stones,  for  thou
payest  debts  which  nothing  else  can  pay,  because  thou
changest  marvellously  death  into  life.

43.  In  this  state  of  life,  so  perfect,  the  soul  is,  as  it
were,  keeping  a  perpetual  feast  with  the  praises  of  God  in
its  mouth,  with  a  new  song  of  joy  and  love,  full  of  the
knowledge  of  its  high  dignity.  It  sometimes  exulteth,
repeating  the  words  of  Job,  '  My  glory  shall  always  be
renewed,'  and  '  as  a  palm  tree  '  I  '  will  multiply  days.'*
That  is,  God  will  not  suffer  my  glory  to  grow  old  as
before,  and  He  will  multiply  my  days,  that  is,  my  merits,
unto  heaven,  as  a  palm  tree  multiplies  its  branches.  And
also  the  words  of  David  in  the  twenty-ninth  Psalm,  the
soul  sings  interiorly  to  God,  especially  the  conclusion
thereof,  '  Thou  hast  turned  my  mourning  into  joy  unto
me :  Thou  hast  cut  my  sackcloth  and  hast  compassed
me  with  gladness,  that  my  glory  may  sing  to  Thee,  and  I
be  not  compunct  '■ — for  this  state  is  inaccessible  to  pain —
'  Lord  my  God,  for  ever  will  I  confess  to  Thee.'

44.  Here  the  soul  is  so  conscious  of  God's  soHcitude
to  comfort  it,  feeling  that  He  is  Himself  encouraging  it

*  Job  xxix.  18,  20.


448  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

with  words  so  precious,  so  tender,  so  endearing;  that  He
is  conferring  graces  upon  it,  one  upon  another,  so  that  it
seems  as  if  there  were  no  other  soul  in  the  world  for  Him
to  comfort,  no  other  object  of  His  care,  but  that  every-
thing was  done  for  this  one  soul  alone.  This  truth  is
admitted  by  the  bride  in  the  Canticle  when  she  says,  '  My
Beloved  to  me  and  I  to  Him.'*


STANZA  III.

0  lamps  of  fire,

hi  the  sple7idours  of  zv hick

The  deep  caverns  of  sense,

Dini  and  dark

With  umvouted  brightness

Give  light  and  warvith  together  to  their  Beloved.


EXPLANATION.

I  STAND  greatly  in  need  of  the  help  of  God  to  enter  into
the  deep  meaning  of  this  stanza :  great  attention  also  is
necessary  on  the  part  of  the  reader,  for  if  -he  be  without
experience  of  the  matter  he  will  find  it  very  obscure,  while,
on  the  other  hand,  it  will  be  clear  and  full  of  sweetness  to
him  who  has  had  that  experience.

2.  In  this  stanza  the  soul  most  heartily  thanks  the
Bridegroom  for  the  great  mercies  which,  in  the  state  of
union,  it  has  received  at  His  hands,  for  He  has  given
therein  a  manifold  and  most  profound  knowledge  of
Himself,  which  enlightens  its  powers  and  senses,  and  fills
them  with  love.     These  powers,  previous  to  the  state  of

*  Cant.  ii.  i6.


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  449

union,  were  in  darkness  and  blindness,  but  are  now
illumined  by  the  fires  of  love  and  respond  thereto,  offering
that  very  light  and  love  to  Him  who  has  kindled  and
inspired  them  by  infusing  into  the  soul  gifts  so  divine.
For  he  who  truly  loves  is  satisfied  then  when  his  whole
self,  all  he  is,  all  he  can  be,  all  he  has,  and  all  he  can
acquire,  is  spent  in  the  service  of  his  love  ;  and  the  greater
that  service  the  greater  is  his  pleasure  in  giving  it.  Such  is
the  joy  of  the  soul  now,  because  it  can  shine  in  the  presence
of  the  Beloved  in  the  splendours  with  which  He  has
surrounded  it,  and  love  Him  with  that  love  which  He  has
communicated  to  it.

'  O  Lamps  of  fire.'
3.  Lamps  have  two  properties,  that  of  giving  light  and
of  burning.  If  we  are  to  understand  this  stanza,  we  must
keep  in  mind,  that  God  in  His  one  and  simple  essence  is
all  the  power  and  majesty  of  His  attributes.  He  is
omnipotent,  wise,  good,  merciful,  just,  strong,  loving  ;
He  is  all  the  other  attributes  and  perfections  of  which  we
have  no  knowledge  here  below.  He  is  all  this.  When  the
soul  is  in  union  with  Him,  and  He  is  pleased  to  admit  it
to  a  special  knowledge  of  Himself,  the  soul  sees  in  Him  all
these  perfections  and  majesty  together  in  the  one  and
simple  essence  clearly  and  distinctly,  so  far  as  it  is
consistent  with  the  faith,  and  as  each  one  of  these
attributes  is  the  very  being  of  God,  Who  is  the  Father,
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  As  each  attribute  is  God
Himself,  and  as  God  is  infinite  light,  and  infinite  divine  fire,
it  follows  that  each  attribute  gives  light  and  burns  as  God
Himself.  God  therefore,  according  to  this  knowledge  of
Him  in  unity,  is  to  the  soul  as  many  lamps,  because  it

GG


450  THE  HOLY  FLAME  [STAN.  IH.]

has  the  knowledge  of  each  of  them,  and  because  they
minister  to  it  the  warmth  of  love,  each  in  its  own  way,
and  yet  all  of  one  substance,  all  one  lamp.  This  lamp  is
all  lamps,  because  it  gives  light,  and  burns,  in  all  ways.

4.  The  soul  seeing  this,  the  one  lamp  is  to  it  as  many
lamps,  for  though  but  one,  it  can  do  all  things,  and  has
all  power  and  comprehends  every  spirit.  And  thus  it
may  be  said  that  the  one  lamp  shines  and  burns  many
ways  in  one :  it  shines  and  burns  as  omnipotent,  as  wise,
as  good,  ministering  to  the  soul  knowledge  and  love,  and
revealing  itself  unto  it,  according  to  the  measure  of  its
strength  for  the  reception  of  all.  The  splendour  of  the
lamp  as  omnipotent  gives  to  the  soul  the  light  and
warmth  of  the  love  of  God  as  omnipotent,  and  accordingly
God  is  now  the  lamp  of  omnipotence  to  the  soul,  shining
and  burning  according  to  that  attribute.  The  splendour
of  the  lamp  as  wisdom  produces  the  warmth  of  the  love  of
God  as  all  wise,  and  so  of  the  other  attributes ;  for  the
light  which  emanates  from  each  of  the  attributes  of  God
and  from  all  the  others,  produces  in  the  soul  the  fire  of
the  love  of  God  as  such.  Thus  God  is  to  the  soul  in
these  communications  and  manifestations  of  Himself —
they  are,  I  think,  the  highest  possible  in  this  life — as
innumerable  lamps  from  which  light  and  love  proceed.

5.  These  lamps  revealed  Him  to  Moses  on  mount
Sinai,  where  God  passed  before  Him,  and  where  Moses
fell  prostrate  on  the  earth  in  all  haste.  He  mentions
some  of  the  perfections  of  God  which  he  then  saw,  and,
loving  Him  in  them,  speaks  of  them  separately  in  the
following  words :  '  O  Lord  God,  merciful  and  clement,
patient  and  of  much  compassion,  and  true,  Who  keepest


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  451

mercy  unto  thousands  ;  Who  takest  away  iniquity  and
wicked  deeds  and  sin,  and  no  man  of  himself  is  innocent
before  Thee.'*  It  appears  that  the  principal  attributes  of
God  which  Moses  then  recognised  and  loved  were  those
of  omnipotence,  dominion,  mercy,  justice  and  truth,
which  was  a  most  profound  knowledge,  and  the  deepest
delight  of  love.

6.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  joy  and  rapture  of  love
communicated  to  the  soul  in  the  fire  of  the  light  of  these
lamps  is  admirable,  and  immeasurable :  as  abundant  as  •
from  many  lamps,  each  of  which  burns  with  love,  the  heat
of  one  subserving  that  of  the  other,  as  the  light  of  one
ministers  to  that  of  the  other ;  all  of  them  forming  but
one  light  and  fire,  and  each  of  them  that  one  fire.  The
soul,  too,  infinitely  absorbed  in  these  delicious  flames,  is
subtilely  wounded  by  each  one  of  them,  and  by  all  of  them
more  subtilely  and  more  profoundly,  in  the  love  of  life ;
the  soul  sees  clearly  that  this  love  is  everlasting  life,  which
is  the  union  of  all  blessings,  and  recognises  the  truth  of
those  words,  'The  lamps  thereof  lamps  of  fire  and  flames. '  +

7.  If  '  a  great  and  darksome  horror  seized  upon '  Abram
as  he  saw  one  '  lamp  of  fire  passing  't  before  him,  when
he  learned  with  what  rigorous  justice  God  was  about  to
visit  the  Chananeaus,  shall  not  the  lamps  of  the  know-
ledge of  God  shining  now  sweetly  and  lovingly  produce
greater  light  and  joy  of  love  than  that  one  lamp  produced
of  horror  and  darkness,  when  it  passed  before  Abram  ?  O
my  soul !  how  great,  how  excellent,  and  how  manifold,
will  be  thy  light  and  joy :  seeing  that  in  all,  and  by  all,
thou  shalt  feel  that   He  gives  thee  His  own  jo}^  and  love,

*  Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7.  f  Cant.  viii.  6.  \  Gen.  xv.  12,  17.

GG  2


452  THE  HOLY  FLAME  [STAN.  HI.]

loving  thee  according  to  His  powers,  attributes,  and
properties.  For  he  who  loves  and  does  good  to  another
honours  him  and  does  him  good  according  to  his  own
nature  and  quahties.  Thus  the  Bridegroom  abiding  in
thee,  being  all  powerful,  gives  Himself  to  thee,  and  loves
thee  with  all  power ;  being  wise,  with  wisdom  ;  being
good,  with  goodness  ;  being  holy,  with  holiness.  And  as
He  is  liberal  thou  wilt  feel  also  that  He  loves  thee  with
liberality,  without  self-interest,  only  to  do  thee  good,
showing  joyfully  His  countenance  full  of  grace,  and
saying :  I  am  thine  and  for  thee,  and  it  is  M}^  pleasure  to
be  what  I  am,  that  I  may  give  Myself  to  thee  and  be
thine.

8.  Who  then  shall  describe  thy  feeling,  O  blessed  soul,
when  thus  beloved,  and  so  highly  honoured  ?  '  Thy  belly
as  a  heap  of  wheat  compassed  about  with  lilies.'*  'Thy
belly,'  that  is,  thy  will,  is  like  a  heap  of  wheat  covered
and  compassed  with  lilies ;  for  in  the  grains  of  wheat
which  form  the  bread  of  life,  which  thou  now  art  tasting,
the  lilies  of  virtue,  which  gird  thee  about,  fill  thee  with
delight.  For  the  daughters  of  the  king,  that  is  the  virtues,
will  delight  thee  wondrously  with  the  fragrance  of  their
aromatical  herbs,  which  are  the  knowledge  of  Himself
which  He  gives  thee.  Thou  wilt  be  so  absorbed  in  this
knowledge,  and  it  will  be  so  infused  in  thee,  that  thou
shalt  be  also  '  a  well  of  living  waters  which  run  with  a
strong  stream  from  Mount  Libanus,t  and  Libanus  is  God.
Thy  joy  will  now  be  so  marvellously  complete,  because
the  words  of  the  Psalmist  are  accomplished  in  thee  :
'  The  violence  of  the  river  maketh  the  city  of  God  joyful.' |

*  Cant.  vii.  2.  f  Cant.  iv.  15.  I  Ps.  xlv.  5.


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  453

g.  O  wonder  !  The  soul  is  now  overflowing  with  the
divine  waters,  which  run  from  it  as  from  an  abundant
fountain  unto  everlasting  life.*  It  is  true  that  this  com-
munication is  light  and  fire  of  the  lamps  of  God,  yet  the
fire  is  here  so  sweet,  that  though  an  infinite  fire,  it  is  as
the  waters  of  life  which  satisfy  the  soul,  and  quench  its
thirst  with  that  vehemence  for  which  the  spirit  longs.
Thus,  though  they  are  lamps  of  fire,  they  are  also  the
living  waters  of  the  spirit.  Those  which  descended  on
the  Apostles,  though  lamps  of  fire,  were  also  waters  pure,
and  limpid,  according  to  the  words  of  Ezechiel  who  thus
prophesied  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  :  '  I  will  pour
out  upon  you  clean  water,  and  will  put  a  new  spirit  in  the
midst  of  you.'f  Thus  though  it  be  fire,  it  is  water  also,
a  figure  of  which  we  have  in  the  sacrificial  fire,  hid  by
Jeremias,t  it  was  water  in  the  place  of  concealment,  but  fire
when  it  was  brought  forth  and  sprinkled  upon  the  sacrifice. §

10.  So  in  like  manner  the  Spirit  of  God,  while  hidden
in  the  veins  of  the  soul,  is  sweet  water  quenching  its
spiritual  thirst ;  but  when  the  soul  offers  the  sacrifice  of
love,  the  Spirit  is  then  living  flames  of  fire,  and  these  are
the  lamps  of  the  acts  of  love  which  the  bride  spoke  of  in
the  Canticle  when  she  said,  '  The  lamps  thereof  lamps  of
fire  and  flames.' |!  The  soul  speaks  of  them  thus  because
it  has  the  fruition  thereof  not  only  as  waters  of  wisdom,
but  also  as  the  fire  of  love  in  an  act  of  love,  saying,  '  O
lamps  of  fire.  All  language  now  is  ineffectual  to  express
the  matter.  If  we  consider  that  the  soul  is  now  trans-
formed in  God,  we  shall   in    some  measure   understand

*  St.  John  iv.  14.  t  Ezech.  xxxvi.  25,  26.  \  2  Mac.  ii.  i.

§  lb.  i.  22.  II  Cant.  viii.  6.


454  THE  HOLY  FLAME  [STAN.IIL]

how  it  is  true  that  it  is  also  become  a  fountain  of  hving
waters  boihng  and  bubbhng  upwards  in  the  fire  of  love
which  is  God.

'  In  the  splendours.'

11.  I  have  already  said  that  these  splendours  are  the
communications  of  the  divine  lamps  in  which  the  soul  in
union  shines  with  its  powers,  memory,  understanding,  and
will,  enlightened  and  united  in  this  loving  knowledge.
But  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  light  of  these
splendours  is  like  that  of  material  fire,  when  it  breaks  into
flames  and  heats  objects  external  to  it,  but  rather  when  it
heats  what  is  within  it,  for  the  soul  is  now  within  these
splendours — '  in  the  splendours.'  That  is  to  say,  it  is
within  them,  not  near  them,  within  their  splendours,  in
the  flames  of  the  lamps,  itself  transformed  in  flame.

12.  The  soul  therefore  may  be  said  to  resemble  the
air  which  is  burning  within  the  flame  and  transformed  in
fire,  for  the  flame  is  nothing  else  but  air  inflamed.  The
flickerings  of  the  flame  are  not  those  of  air  only  or  of  fire
only,  but  of  air  and  fire  together  ;  and  the  fire  causes  the
air  which  is  within  to  burn.  It  is  thus  that  the  soul  with
its  powers  is  illumined  in  the  splendours  of  Gcd.  The
movements  of  the  flame,  that  is  its  vibrations  and  its
flickerings,  are  not  the  work  of  the  soul  only,  transformed
in  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  nor  of  the  Holy  Ghost
only,  but  of  the  soul  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  together
Who  moves  the  soul  as  the  fire  moves  the  air  that  is
burning.

13.  Thus,  then,  these  movements  of  God  and  of  the
soul  together  are  as  it  were  the  acts  of  God  by  which  He
renders   the    soul   glorious.     For    these    vibrations    an  d


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  455

movements  are  the  '  playing '  and  the  joyous  feasts  of  the
Holy  Ghost  in  the  soul,  spoken  of  before,*  in  which  He
seems  to  be  on  the  point  of  admitting  it  into  everlasting
life.  And  thus  these  movements  and  quiverings  of  the
flame  are  as  it  w^ere  goads  applied  to  the  soul,  furthering
its  translation  into  His  perfect  glory  now  that  it  is  really
entered  into  Him.  So  with  fire :  all  movements  and
vibrations  which  it  makes  in  the  air  burning  within  it,  are
efforts  to  ascend  to  its  proper  sphere,  and  that  as  quickly
as  possible,  but  they  are  all  fruitless  because  the  air  itself
is  within  its  own  sphere.

14.  In  the  same  way  the  movements  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  though  full  of  fire  and  most  effectual  to  absorb
the  soul  in  great  bliss,  do  not  accomplish  their  work  until
the  time  is  come  when  it  is  to  sally  forth  from  the  sphere
of  the  air  of  this  mortal  life  and  reach  the  centre  of  the
spirit,  the  perfect  hfe  in  Christ.  These  visions  of  the
glory  of  God,  to  which  the  soul  is  now  admitted,  are  more
continuous  than  they  used  to  be,  more  perfect  and  more
stable  ;  but  in  the  life  to  come  they  will  be  most  perfect,
unchanging,  and  uninterrupted.  There,  too,  the  soul  will
see  clearly  how  that  God,  though  here  appearing  to  move
within  it,  yet  in  Himself  moves  not  at  all,  as  the  fire
moves  not  in  its  sphere.  These  splendours  are  in-
estimable graces  and  favours  which  God  bestows  upon
the  soul.  They  are  called  also  overshadowings,  and
are,  in  my  opinion,  the  greatest  and  the  highest  graces
which  can  be  bestowed  in  this  life  in  the  way  of  trans-
formation.

15.     Now  overshadowing  is  the  throwing  of  a  shadow;
*  Stanza  i,  line  2,  §  10.


456  THE  HOLY  FLAME  [STAN.  HI.]

and  to  throw  one's  shadow  over  another  signifies  protec-
tion and  favour,  for  when  the  shadow  of  one  touches  us,
it  is  a  sign  that  he  whose  shadow  it  is  stands  by  us  to
favour  and  protect  us.  Thus  it  was  said  to  the  Virgin,
'  The  power  of  the  Most  High  shall  overshadow  thee,'*
for  the  Holy  Ghost  was  about  to  approach  her  so  closely
as  to  *  come  upon  '  her.  The  shadow  of  every  object
partakes  of  the  nature  and  proportions  of  it,  for  if  the
object  be  dense,  the  shadow  will  be  dense  and  dark ;  if  it
be  light  and  clear,  so  will  be  the  shadow,  as  we  see  in  the
case  of  wood  or  crystal  :  the  former  being  dense,  throws
a  dark  shadow,  and  the  latter  being  clear,  throws  a
shadow  that  is  light.  In  spiritual  things,  too,  death  is  the
privation  of  all  things,  so  the  shadow  of  death  will  be
darkness,  which  in  a  manner  deprives  us  of  all  things.
Thus,  too,  speaks  the  Psalmist,  saying,  '  sitting  in  dark-
ness and  the  shadow  of  death,'!  whether  the  spiritual
darkness  of  , spiritual  death,  or  the  bodily  darkness  of
bodily  death.

i6.  The  shadow  of  life  is  light,  if  divine,  a  divine
light,  and  if  the  shadow  be  human,  the  light  is
natural,  and  so  the  shadow  of  beauty  will  be  as  another
beauty  according  to  the  nature  and  properties  of  that
beauty  of  which  it  is  the  shadow.  The  shadow  of
strength  will  be  as  another  strength,  in  measure  and
proportion.  The  shadow  of  wisdom  will  be  another
wisdom,  or  rather,  beauty,  strength,  and  wisdom  them-
selves will  be  in  the  shadow,  wherein  is  traced  the  form
and  property,  the  shadow  whereof  is  there.

17.     This,  then,  being  so,  what  must  be  the  shadow  of

*  St.  Luke  i.  35.  t  Ps.  cvi.  10.


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  457

the  Holy  Ghost,  the  shadow  of  all  His  power,  might,  and
attributes,  when  He  is  so  near  the  soul  ?  He  touches  the
soul  not  with  His  shadow  only,  for  He  unites  Himself  to
it,  feeling  and  tasting  with  it  the. form  and  attributes  of
God  in  the  shadow  of  God  :  that  is,  feeling  and  tasting
the  property  of  divine  power  in  the  shadow  of  omni-
potence :  feeling  and  tasting  the  divine  wisdom  in  the
shadow  of  the  divine  wisdom ;  and  finally,  tasting  the
glory  of  God  in  the  shadow  of  glory,  which  begets  the
knowledge  and  the  taste  of  the  property  and  form  of  the
glory  of  God.  All  this  takes  place  in  clear  and  luminous
shadows,  because  the  attributes  and  powers  of  God  are
lamps,  which,  being  resplendent  and  luminous  in  their
own  nature,  throw  forth  shadows  resplendent  and  luminous,
and  a  multitude  of  them  in  one  sole  essence.

i8.  O  what  a  vision  for  the  soul  when  it  shall
experience  the  power  of  that  vv'hich  Ezechiel  saw :  '  the
likeness  of  four  living  creatures,'  and  the  'wheel  with
four  faces,'  the  appearance  '  like  that  of  burning  coals  of
fire,  and  like  the  appearance  of  lamps  ;  '*  when  it  shall
behold  that  wheel,  the  wisdom  of  God,  full  of  eyes  within
and  without,  that  is  the  marvellous  knowledge  of  wisdom  ;
when  it  shall  hear  the  noise  of  their  wings  as  they  pass,  a
noise  '  like  the  noise  of  an  army,'  that  is  of  many  things
at  once  which  the  soul  learns  by  one  sole  sound  of  God's
passing  before  it ;  and  finally,  when  it  shall  hear  the
beating  of  the  wings,  which  is  like  the  '  noise  of  many
waters,  as  it  were  the  voice  of  the  Most  High  God,'  +
which  signifies  the  rushing  of  the  divine  waters,  the  over-
flowing  of  which    on    the   descent   of  the    Holy    Ghost

*  Ezech.  i.  5,  13,  15.  ■  f  lb.  i.  24.


458  THE  HOLY  FLAME  [STAN.  HI.]

envelopes  the  soul  in  a  flame  of  love.  Here  the  soul
rejoices  in  the  glory  of  God,  under  the  protection  of  His
shadow,  for  the  prophet  adds :  '  This  was  the  vision  of
the  likeness  of  the  glory  of  our  Lord.'*  O  the  height  to
which  this  blessed  soul  is  raised  !  O  how  exalted  !  O  how
it  marvels  at  the  visions  it  has  within  the  limits  of  the
faith  !  Who  can  describe  them  ?  O  how  it  is  profoundly
immersed  in  these  waters  of  the  divine  splendours  where
the  everlasting  Father  is  pouring  forth  the  irrigating
streams  with  a  bounteous  hand,  for  these  streams
penetrate  soul  and  body.

ig.  O  wonder !  the  lamps  of  the  divine  attributes,
though  one  in  substance,  are  still  distinct,  each  burning
as  the  other,  one  being  substantially  the  other.  O  abyss
of  delights,  and  the  more  abundant,  the  more  their  riches
are  gathered  together  in  infinite  simplicity  and  unity.
There  each  one  is  so  recognised  and  felt  as  not  to  hinder
the  feeling  and  recognition  of  the  other ;  yea,  rather
everything  in  Thee  is  light  which  does  not  impede
anything;  and  by  reason  of  Thy  pureness,  O  divine
Wisdom,  many  things  are  known  in  Thee  in  one,
for  Thou  art  the  treasury  of  the  everlasting  Father,  '  the
brightness  of  eternal  light,  the  unspotted  mirror  of  God's
majesty,  and  the  image  of  His  goodness,'!  'in  the
splendours.'

'  The  deep  caverns  of  sense.'

20.  The  caverns  are  the  powers  of  the  soul,  memory,
understanding,  and  will,  and  their  depth  is  commensurate
with  their  capacity  for  great  good,  because  nothing  less

*  Ezech.  ii.  i,  ,       f  Wisd.  vii.  26.


STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  459

than  the  infinite  can  fill  them.  What  they  suffer  when
they  are  empty,  shows  in  some  measure  the  greatness  of
their  delight  when  they  are  full  of  God  ;  for  contraries  are
known  by  contraries.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  to  be
remembered  that  these  caverns  are  not  conscious  of
their  extreme  emptiness  when  they  are  not  purified  and
cleansed  from  all  affection  for  created  things.  In  this
life  every  trifle  that  enters  them  is  enough  to  perplex
them,  to  render  them  insensible  to  their  loss,  and  unable
to  recognise  the  infinite  good  which  is  wanting,  or  their
own  capacity  for  it.  It  is  assuredly  a  most  wonderful
thing  how,  notwithstanding  their  capacity  for  infinite
good,  a  mere  trifle  perplexes  them,  so  that  they  cannot
become  the  recipients  of  that  for  which  they  are  intended,
till  they  are  completely  emptied.

20.  But  when  they  are  empty  and  cleansed,  the
hunger,  the  thirst,  and  the  anxiety  of  the  spiritual  sense
become  intolerable,  for  as  the  appetite  of  these  caverns  is
large,  so  their  suffering  is  great,  because  the  food  which
they  need  is  great,  namely,  God.  This  feeling  of  pain,  so
deep,  usually  occurs  towards  the  close  of  the  illumination
and  the  purgation  of  the  soul,  previous  to  the  state  of
perfect  union,  during  which  it  is  satisfied.  For  when  the
spiritual  appetite  is  empty,  pure  from  every  creature  and
from  every  affection  thereto,  and  when  the  natural  temper
is  lost  and  the  soul  attempered  to  the  divine,  and  the
emptied  appetite  is  well  disposed — the  divine  communica-
tion in  the  union  with  God  being  still  withheld — the  pain
of  this  emptiness  and  thirst  is  greater  than  that  of  death,
especially  then  when  certain  glimpses  of  the  divine  ray  are
visible,  but  not  communicated.     Souls  in  this  state  suffer


460  THE  HOLY  FLAME  [STAN.  IH.]

from    impatient    love,   and    they    cannot    endure    it    long
without  either  receiving  that  which  they  desire,  or  dying.'*

21.  As  to  the  first  cavern,  which  is  the  understanding,
its  emptiness  is  the  thirst  after  God.  So  great  is  this
thirst,  that  the  Psalmist  compares  it  to  that  of  the  hart,
for  he  knew  of  none  greater,  saying,  '  As  the  hart  desireth
the  fountains  of  waters :  so  doth  my  soul  desire  Thee,  O
God.'t  This  thirst  is  a  thirst  for  the  waters  of  the  divine
Wisdom,  the  object  of  the  understanding.  The  second
cavern  is  the  will,  and  the  emptiness  thereof  is  a  hunger
so  great  after  God,  that  the  soul  faints  away,  as  the
Psalmist  saith,  '  My  soul  longeth  and  fainteth  for  the
courts  of  our  Lord.'t  This  hunger  is  for  the  perfection
of  love,  the  object  of  the  soul's  desires.  The  third  cavern
is  the  memory,  and  the  emptiness  thereof  is  the  soul's
melting  away  and  languishing  for  the  possession  of  God  :
'  I  will  be  mindful  and  remember,'  saith  Jeremias,  '  and
my  soul  shall  languish  within  me :  these  things  I  shall
think  over  in  my  heart,  therefore  will  I  hope.'§

22.  Great,  then,  is  the  capacity  of  these  caverns,
because  that  which  they  are  capable  of  containing  is  great
and  infinite,  that  is,  God.  Thus  their  capacity  is  in  a
certain  sense  infinite,  their  hunger  and  thirst  infinite  also,
and  their  languishing  and  their  pain,  in  their  way,  infinite.
So  when  the  soul  is  suffering  this  pain,  though  the  pain
be  not  so  keen  as  inthe  other  world,  it  seems  to  be  a  vivid
image  of  that  pain,  because  the  soul  is  in  a  measure
prepared  to  receive  that  which  fills  it,  the  privation  of
which  is  the  greatest  pain.  Nevertheless  the  suffering
belongs  to  another  condition,  for  it  abides  in  the  depth  of

*  See  Spirit.  Cant.  Stanza  vii.  §  3.  f  Ps.  xli.  i.

+  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  2.  §  Lam.  iii.  20,  21.


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  461

the  will's  love ;  but  in  this  life  love  does  not  alleviate  the
pain,  because  the  greater  it  is  the  greater  the  soul's
impatience  for  the  fruition  of  God,  for  which  it  hopes
continually  with  intense  desire.

23.  But,  O  my  God,  seeing  it  is  certain  that  when  the
soul  truly  longs  for  God  it  is  already,  as  St.  Gregory
saith,*  entered  into  possession,  how  comes  it  that  it  is  in
pain  ?  If  the  desire  of  the  angels,  of  which  St.  Peter
speaks,  to  look  upon  the  Son  of  Godt  is  free  from  pain
and  anxiety,  because  they  have  the  fruition  of  Him,  it
would  seem  then  that  the  soul  also  having  the  fruition  of
God  in  proportion  to  its  desire  of  Him — and  the  fruition
of  God  is  the  fulness  of  delight — must  in  this  its  desire,
in  proportion  to  its  intensity,  be  conscious  of  that  fulness,
seeing  that  it  longs  so  earnestly  after  God,  and  so  herein
there  ought  not  to  be  any  suffering  or  pain.

24.  But  it  is  not  so,  for  there  is  a  great  difference
between  the  fruition  of  God  by  grace  only,  and  the
fruition  of  Him  in  union ;  the  former  is  one  of  mutual
good  will,  the  latter  one  of  special  communion.  This
difference  resembles  that  which  exists  between  betrothal
and  marriage.  The  former  implies  only  an  agreement
and  consent ;  bridal  presents,  and  ornaments  graciously
given  by  the  bridegroom.  But  marriage  involves  also
personal  union  and  mutual  self-surrender.  Though  in  the
state  of  betrothal,  the  bridegroom  is  sometimes  seen  by
the  bride,  and  gives  her  presents  ;  yet  there  is  no  personal
union,  which  is  the  end  of  betrothal.

25.  In  the  same  way,  when  the  soul  has  become  so
pure  in  itself,  and  in  its  powers,  that  the  will  is  purged

*  Horn.  30  in  Evangel.  f  i  St.  Pet.  i.  12.


462  THE  HOLY  FLAME.  [STAN.  IIL]

completely  from  all  strange  desires  and  inclinations,  in
its  higher  and  lower  nature,  and  is  wholly  given  up  to
God,  the  will  of  both  being  one  in  free  and  ready  concord,
it  has  then  attained  to  the  fruition  of  God  by  grace  in  the
state  of  betrothal  and  conformity  of  will.  In  this  state  of
spiritual  betrothal  of  the  soul  and  the  Word,  the  Bride-
groom confers  great  favours  upon  the  soul,  and  visits  it
oftentimes  most  lovingly  to  its  great  comfort  and  delight,
but  not  to  be  compared  with  those  of  the  spiritual
marriage.

26.  Now,  though  it  is  true  that  this  takes  place  in  the
soul  when  it  is  perfectly  cleansed  of  every  affection  to
creatures — because  that  must  occur  previous  to  the
spiritual  betrothal — still  other  positive  dispositions  on  the
part  of  God,  His  visits  and  gifts  of  greater  excellence,  are
requisite  for  this  union,  and  for  the  spiritual  marriage.  It
is  by  means  of  these  dispositions,  gifts,  and  visits,  that
the  soul  grows  more  and  more  in  purity,  beauty,  and
refinement,  so  as  to  be  meetly  prepared  for  a  union  so
high.  All  this  requires  time,  in  some  souls  more,  in
others  less.  We  have  a  type  of  this  in  the  history  of  the
virgins  chosen  for  king  Assuerus.  These  were  taken  in  all
the  provinces  of  the  kingdom,  and  brought  from  their
fathers'  houses  ;  but  before  they  could  be  presented  to  the
king,  they  were  kept  in  the  palace  a  whole  year.  For  six
months  they  were  anointed  with  oil  of  myrrh,  and  for  the
other  six  with  certain  perfumes  and  sweet  spices  of  a
costlier  nature,  after  which  they  appeared  in  the  presence
of  the  king.*

27.  During  the  time  of  the  betrothal,  and  in  expecta-

*  Esth.  ii.  2,  12.


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  463

tion  of  the  spiritual  marriage  in  the  unction  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  when  the  unction  disposing  the  soul  for  union  is
most  penetrating,  the  anxieties  of  the  caverns  are  wont  to
become  most  pressing  and  keen.  For  as  these  unctions
are  a  proximate  disposition  for  union  with  God,  because
most  near  unto  Him,  they  make  the  soul  more  eager  for
Him,  and  inspire  it  with  a  keener  longing  after  Him.
Thus  this  desire  is  much  more  keen  and  deep,  because
the  desire  for  God  is  a  preparation  for  union  with  Him.

28.  This  is  a  good  opportunity  to  warn  souls  whom
God  is  guiding  to  this  delicate  unction  to  take  care  what
they  are  doing,  and  to  whose  hands  they  commit
themselves,  that  they  may  not  go  backwards,  were  it  not
beside  my  purpose.  But  such  is  the  pain  and  grief  of
heart  which  I  feel  at  the  sight  of  some  souls  who  go
backwards,  not  only  by  withdrawing  themselves  from  the
further  anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  by  losing  the
effects  of  what  they  have  already  received,  that  I  cannot
refrain  from  speaking  on  the  subject,  and  telling  them
what  they  ought  to  do  in  order  to  avoid  so  great  a  loss.
I  will  therefore  leave  my  subject  for  a  moment,  but  I
shall  return  to  it  soon  again.  And  in  truth  the  considera-
tion of  this  matter  tends  to  elucidate  the  property  of
these  caverns,  and  it  is  also  necessary,  not  only  for  those
souls  who  prosper  in  their  work,  but  also  for  all  others
who  are  searching  after  the  Beloved.

29.  In  the  first  place,  if  a  soul  is  seeking  after  God,
the  Beloved  is  seeking  it  much  more ;  if  it  sends  after
Him  its  loving  desires,  which  are  sweet  as  '  a  pillar  of
smoke  of  aromatical  spices,  of  myrrh  and  frankincense,'*

*  Cant.  iii.  6.


464  THE  HOLY  FLAME  [STAN.  IIL]

He  on  His  part  sends  forth  the  odour  of  His  ointments,
which  draw  the  soul  and  make  it  run  after  Him.'*  These
ointments  are  His  divine  inspirations  and  touches,  which
if  they  come  from  Him,  are  always  directed  and  ordered
by  the  motives  of  perfection  according  to  the  law  of  God
and  the  faith,  in  which  perfection  the  soul  must  ever
draw  nearer  and  nearer  unto  God.  The  soul,  therefore,
ought  to  see  that  the  desire  of  God  in  all  the  graces  which
He  bestows  upon  it  by  means  of  the  unction  and  odour  of
His  ointments,  is  to  dispose  it  for  another  and  higher
unction,  and  more  in  union  with  His  nature,  until  it
attains  to  that  simple  and  pure  disposition,  which  is
meritorious  of  the  divine  union,  and  of  its  transformation
in  all  its  powers.

30.  The  soul,  therefore,  considering  that  God  is  the
chief  doer  in  this  matter,  that  it  is  He  who  guides  it  and
leads  it  by  the  hand  whither  it  cannot  come  of  itself,
namely,  unto  supernatural  things  beyond  the  reach  of
understanding,  memory,  and  will,  must  take  especial  care
to  put  no  difficulties  in  the  way  of  its  guide,  who  is  the
Holy  Ghost,  on  that  road  along  which  He  leads  it  by  the
law  of  God  and  the  faith.  Such  a  difficulty  will  be  raised
if  the  soul  intrusts  itself  to  a  blind  guide ;  and  the  blind
guides  which  can  lead  it  astray  are  three,  namely,  the
spiritual  director,  the  devil,  and  its  own  self.

31.  As  to  the  first  of  these,  it  is  of  the  greatest
importance  to  the  soul  desirous  of  perfection  and  anxious
not  to  fall  back,  to  consider  well  into  whose  hands  it
resigns  itself;  for  as  the  master  so  is  the  disciple  ;  as  the
father  so  the  child.     You  will  scarcely  find  one  who  is  in

*  lb.  i.  3.


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  465

all  respects  to  guide  a  soul  in  the  higher  parts  of  this
road,  or  even  in  the  ordinary  divisions  of  it,  for  a  director
must  be  learned,  prudent  and  experienced.  Though  the
foundations  of  good  direction  be  learning  and  discretion,
yet  if  experience  of  the  higher  ways  be  wanting,  there  are
no  means  of  guiding  a  soul  therein  when  God  is  showing
the  way,  and  inexperienced  directors  may  do  great  harm.
Such  directors,  not  understanding  these  ways  of  the
Spirit,  very  frequently  make  souls  lose  the  unction  of  the
delicate  ointments,  by  means  of  which  the  Holy  Ghost
is  preparing  them  for  Himself:  they  are  guiding  them  by
other  means  of  which  they  have  read,  but  which  are
adapted  only  for  beginners.  These  directors,  knowing
how  to  guide  beginners  only — and  God  grant  they  may
know  that — will  not  suffer  their  penitents  to  advance,
though  it  be  the  will  of  God,  beyond  the  mere  rudiments,
acts  of  reflection  and  imagination,  whereby  their  progress
is  extremely  little.

32.  In  order  to  a  better  knowledge  of  the  state  of
beginners,  we  must  keep  in  mind  that  it  is  one  of  medita-
tion and  of  acts  of  reflection.  It  is  necessary  to  furnish
the  soul  in  this  state  with  matter  for  meditation,  that  it
may  make  reflections  and  interior  acts,  and  avail  itself  of
the  sensible  spiritual  heat  and  fervour,  for  this  is
necessary  in  order  to  accustom  the  senses  and  desires  to
good  things,  that,  being  satisfied  by  the  sweetness  thereof,
they  may  be  detached  from  the  world.

33.  When  this  is  in  some  degree  effected,  God  begins
at  once  to  introduce  the  soul  into  the  state  of  contempla-
tion, and  that  very  quickly,  especially  religious,  because
these,  having  renounced   the  world,  quickly  fashion  their

HH


466  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

senses  and  desires  according  to  God ;  they  have  therefore
to  pass  at  once  from  meditation  to  contemplation.  This
passage,  then,  takes  place  when  the  discursive  acts  and
meditation  fail,  when  sensible  sweetness  and  first  fervours
cease,  when  the  soul  cannot  make  reflections  as  before,
nor  find  any  sensible  comfort,  but  is  fallen  into  aridity,
because  the  chief  matter  is  changed  into  the  spirit,  and
the  spirit  is  not  cognisable  by  sense.  As  all  the  natural
operations  of  the  soul,  which  are  within  its  control,
depend  on  the  senses  only,  it  follows  that  God  is  now
working  in  a  special  manner  in  this  state,  that  it  is  He
that  infuses  and  teaches,  that  the  soul  is  the  recipient  on
which  He  bestows  spiritual  blessings  by  contemplation,
the  knowledge  and  the  love  of  Himself  together;  that  is,
He  gives  it  loving  knowledge  without  the  instrumentality
of  its  discursive  acts,  because  it  is  no  longer  able  to  form
them  as  before.

34.  At  this  time,  then,  the  direction  of  the  soul  must
be  wholly  different  from  what  it  was  at  first.  If  formerly
it  was  supplied  with  matter  for  meditation  and  it  did
meditate,  now  that  matter  must  be  withheld  and  medita-
tion must  cease,  because,  as  I  have  said,  it  cannot
meditate,  do  what  it  will,  and  distractions  are  the  result,*
If  before  it  looked  for  fervour  and  sweetness  and  found
them,  let  it  look  for  them  no  more  nor  desire  them ;  and
if  it  attempt  to  seek  them,  not  only  will  it  not  find  them,
but  it  will  meet  with  aridity,  because  it  turns  away  from  the
peaceful  and  tranquil  good  secretly  bestowed  upon  it,  when
it  attempts  to  fall  back  on  the  operations  of  sense.  In  this
way  it  loses  the  latter  without  gaining  the  former,  because
the  senses  have  ceased  to  be  the  channel  of  spiritual  good.

*  Ascent  of  Mount  Carmel,  bk.  ii.,  ch.  xiii.  ch.  xv.  §  i.


STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  467

35.  Souls  in  this  state  are  not  to  be  forced  to  meditate
or  to  apply  themselves  to  discursive  reflections
laboriously  effected,  neither  are  they  to  strive  after
sweetness  and  fervour,  for  if  they  did  so,  they  would  be
thereby  hindering  the  principal  agent,  who  is  God
Himself,  for  He  is  now  secretly  and  quietly  infusing
wisdom  into  the  soul,  together  with  the  loving  knowledge
of  Himself,  without  many  divers  distinct  or  separated
acts.  But  He  produces  them  sometimes  in  the  soul,  and
that  for  some  space  of  time.  The  soul  then  must  be
lovingly  intent  upon  God  without  distinctly  eliciting  other
acts  beyond  these  to  which  He  inclines  it ;  it  must  be  as  it
were  passive,  making  no  efforts  of  its  own,  purely,  simply,
and  lovingly  intent  upon  God,  as  a  man  who  opens  his
eyes  with  loving  attention.  For  as  God  is  now  dealing
with  the  soul  in  the  way  of  bestowing  by  simple  and
loving  knowledge,  so  the  soul  also,  on  its  part,  must
deal  with  Him  in  the  way  of  receiving  by  simple  and
loving  knowledge,  so  that  knowledge  may  be  joined  to
knowledge,  and  love  to  love ;  because  it  is  necessary  here
that  the  recipient  should  be  adapted  to  the  gift,  and  not
otherwise,  and  that  the  gift  may  be  accepted  and
preserved  as  it  is  given.

36.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that   if  the  soul  does  not

now   abandon    its    ordinary   way    of  meditation,    it   will

receive  this  gift  of  God  in  a  scanty  and  imperfect  manner,

not  in  that  perfection  with  which  it  is  bestowed ;  for  the

gift  being  so  grand,  and  an  infused  gift,  cannot  be  received

in  this  scanty  and  imperfect  way.     Consequently,  if  the

soul   will   at   this   time   make    efforts    of    its    own,    and

encourage  another  disposition  than  that  of  passive  loving

HH  2


468  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

attention,  most  submissive  and  calm, and  if  it  does  not  abstain
from  its  previous  discursive  acts,  it  will  place  a  barrier
against  those  graces  which  God  is  about  to  communicate
to  it  in  this  loving  knowledge.  He  gives  His  grace  to
beginners  in  the  exercise  of  purgation,  as  I  have  said,*
and  afterwards  with  an  increase  of  the  sweetness  of
love.

37.  But  if  the  soul  is  to  be  the  recipient  of  His  grace
passively,  in  the  natural  way  of  God,  and  not  in  the
supernatural  way  of  the  soul,  it  follows  that,  in  order  to
be  such  a  recipient,  it  must  be  perfectly  detached,  calm,
peaceful,  and  serene,  as  God  is ;  it  must  be  like  the
atmosphere,  which  the  sun  illumines  and  warms  in
proportion  to  its  calmness  and  purity.  Thus  the  soul
must  be  attached  to  nothing,  not  even  to  meditation,  not
to  sensible  or  spiritual  sweetness,  because  God  requires  a
spirit  free  and  annihilated,  for  every  act  of  the  soul,  even
of  thought,  of  liking  or  disliking,  will  hinder  and  disturb
it,  and  break  that  profound  silence  of  sense  and  spirit
necessary  for  hearing  the  deep  and  soft  voice  of  God,
Who,  in  the  words  of  Oseas,  speaks  to  the  heart  in
solitude  ;t  it  is  in  profound  peace  and  tranquillity  that  the
soul,  like  David,  is  to  listen  to  God,  Who  will  speak  peace
unto  His  people.  I  When  this  takes  place,  when  the  soul
feels  that  it  is  silent  and  listens,  its  loving  attention  must
be  most  pure,  without  a  thought  of  self,  in  a  manner  self-
forgotten,  so  that  it  shall  be  wholly  intent  upon  hearing,
for  thus  it  is  that  the  soul  is  free  and  ready  for  that  which
our  Lord  requires  at  its  hands.

*  Dark  Night,  Bk.  i,  ch.  viii.
t  Os,  ii.  14.  J   Ps.  Ixxxiv.  9.


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  469

38.  This  tranquillity  and  self-forget  fulness  are  ever
attended  with  a  certain  interior  absorption  ;  and,  there-
fore, under  no  circumstances  whatever,  either  of  time  or
place,  is  it  lawful  for  the  soul,  now  that  it  has  began  to
enter  the  state  of  contemplation,  tranquil  and  simple,  to
recur  to  its  previous  meditation,  or  to  cleave  to  spiritual
sweetness,  as  I  have  said,  and  at  great  length,  in  the
tenth  chapter  of  the  first  book  of  the  Dark  Night,  and
previously  in  the  last  chapter  of  the  second,  and  in  the
first  of  the  third  book  of  the  Ascent  of  Mount  Carmel.
It  must  detach  itself  from  all  spiritual  sweetness,  rise
above  it  in  freedom  of  spirit ;  this  is  what  the  prophet
Habacuc  did,  for  he  says  of  himself,  '  I  will  stand  upon
my  watch  '  over  my  senses — that  is,  I  will  leave  them
below — '  and  fix  my  step  upon  the  munition '  of  my
faculties — that  is,  they  shall  not  advance  a  step  even  in
thought — '  and  I  will  behold  to  see  what  will  be  said  to
me,'*  that  is,  I  will  receive  what  God  shall  communicate
to  me  passively.

39.  I  have  already  said  t  that  to  contemplate  is
to  receive,  and  it  is  impossible  to  receive  the  highest
wisdom,  that  is  contemplation,  otherwise  than  in  a  silent
spirit,  detached  from  all  sweetness  and  particular  know-
ledge. So  the  prophet  Isaias  when  he  says,  '  Whom
shall  He  teach  knowledge  ?  and  whom  shall  He  make  to
understand  the  thing  heard  ?  them  that  are  weaned  from
the  milk,'  that  is  from  sweetness  and  personal  likings,
'that  are  plucked  away  from  the  breasts.' |  from  reliance
on  particular  knowledge.  Take  away  O  spiritual  man,  the
mote  and  the  film  from  thine  eye,  and  make  it  clean,  and

*  Habac.  ii.  i.  f  Dark  Night,  Bk.  i,  ch.  ix.  I  Is.  xxviii.  9


470  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

then  the  sun  will  shine  for  thee,  and  thou  shalt  see  clearl}^
establish  thy  soul  in  the  freedom  of  calm  peace,  withdraw
it  from  the  yoke  and  slavery  of  the  miserable  efforts  of
thine  own  strength,  which  is  the  captivity  of  Egypt — for
all  thou  canst  do  is  little  more  than  to  gather  straw  for
the  bricks — and  guide  it  into  the  land  of  promise  flowing
with  milk  and  honey.

40.  O  spiritual  director,  remember  it  is  for  this  liberty
and  holy  rest  of  sons  that  God  calls  the  soul  into  the
wilderness  ;  there  it  journeys  in  festal  robes,  with  orna-
ments of  gold  and  silver,*  for  the  Egyptians  are  spoiled
and  their  riches  carried  away.t  Nor  is  this  all :  the
enemies  of  the  soul  are  drowned  in  the  sea  of  contempla-
tion, where  the  Egyptian  of  sense  finds  no  support  for  his
feet,  leaving  the  child  of  God  free,  that  is  the  spirit,  to
transcend  the  narrow  limits  of  its  own  operations,  of  its
low  views,  rude  perceptions,  and  wretched  likings.  God
does  all  this  for  the  soul  that  He  may  give  it  the
sweet  manna,  which,  though  '  it  contains  all  that  is
delicious  and  the  sweetness  of  every  taste"! — objects  of
desire  for  the  soul  according  to  thy  direction — and  though
it  is  so  delicious  that  it  melts  in  the  mouth,  thy  penitent
shall  not  taste  of  it,  if  he  desires  anything  else,  for  he
shall  not  receive  it,

41.  Strive,  therefore,  to  root  out  of  the  soul  all  desire
of  consolation,  sweetness,  and  meditations ;  do  not
disquiet  it  about  spiritual  things,  still  less  about  earthly
things  ;  establish  it  in  perfect  detachment,  and  in  the
utmost  possible  solitude.  For  the  greater  its  progress  in
this,  and  the  more  rapidly  it  attains  to  this  calm  tran-

*  Exod.  xxxiii.  4.  f  lb.  xii.  35.  J  Wisd.  xvi.  20.


[STAN.  III.]  •  OF  LOVE.  471

quillity,  the  more  abundant  will  be  the  infusion  of  the
spirit  of  divine  wisdom,  the  loving,  calm,  lonely,  peaceful,
sweet  ravisher  of  the  spirit.  The  soul  will  feel  itself  at
times  enraptured,  gently  and  tenderly  wounded,  not
knowing  by  whom,  how,  or  when,  because  the  Spirit
communicates  Himself  to  it  without  effort  on  its  part.
The  least  work  of  God  in  the  soul  in  this  state  of  holy
rest  and  solitude  is  an  inestimable  good,  transcending  the
very  thought  of  the  soul  and  of  its  spiritual  guide,  and
though  it  does  not  appear  so  then,  it  will  show  itself  in
due  time.

42.  What  the  soul  is  now  conscious  of  is  a  certain
estrangement  and  alienation  from  all  things  around  it,  at
one  time  more  than  at  another,  with  a  certain  sweet
aspiration  of  love  and  life  of  the  spirit,  an  inclination  to
solitude,  and  a  sense  of  weariness  in  the  things  of  this
world,  for  when  we  taste  of  the  spirit,  the  flesh  becomes
insipid.  But  the  interior  goods  which  silent  contempla-
tion impresses  on  the  soul  without  the  soul's  consciousness
of  them,  are  of  inestimable  value,  for  they  are  the  most
secret  and  delicious  unctions  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whereby
He  secretly  fills  the  soul  with  the  riches  of  His  gifts  and
graces ;  for  being  God,  He  doeth  the  work  of  God
as  God.

43.  These  goods,  then,  these  great  riches,  these  sublime
and  delicate  unctions,  this  knowledge  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
which,  on  account  of  their  exquisite  and  subtile  pureness,
neither  the  soul  itself,  nor  he  who  directs  it,  can  compre-
hend, but  only  He  Who  infuses  them  in  order  to  render
it  more  pleasing  to  Himself^ are  most  easily,  even  by  the
slightest  application  of  sense  or  desire  to  any   particular


472  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

knowledge  or  sweetness,  disturbed  and  hindered.  This  is
a  serious  evil,  grievous  and  lamentable.  O  how  sad  and
how  wonderful !  The  evil  done  is  not  perceived,  and  the
barrier  raised  between  God  and  the  soul  is  almost  nothing,
and  yet  it  is  more  grievous,  an  object  of  deeper  sorrow,
and  inflicts  a  greater  stain,  than  any  other,  though
seemingly  more  important,  in  common  souls  which  have
not  attained  to  such  a  high  state  of  pureness.  It  is  as  if
a  beautiful  painting  were  roughly  handled,  besmeared
with  coarse  and  vile  colours ;  for  the  injury  done  is
greater,  more  observable,  and  more  deplorable,  than  it
would  be  if  a  multitude  of  common  paintings  were  thus
bedaubed.

44.  Though  this  evil  be  so  great  that  it  cannot  be
exaggerated,  it  is  still  so  common  that  there  is  scarcely
one  spiritual  director  who  does  not  inflict  it  upon  souls
whom  God  has  begun  to  lead  by  this  way  to  contempla-
tion. For,  whenever  God  is  anointing  a  soul  with  the
unction  of  loving  knowledge,  most  delicate,  serene,
peaceful,  lonely,  strange  to  sense  and  imagination  ;  when-
ever He  withholds  all  sweetness  from  it,  and  suspends  its
power  of  meditation — because  He  reserves  it  for  this
lonely  unction,  inclining  it  to  solitude  and  quiet — a
spiritual  director  will  appear,  who,  like  a  rough  black-
smith, knows  only  the  use  of  his  hammer,  and  who,
because  all  his  knowledge  is  limited  to  the  coarser  work,
will  say  to  it  :  Come,  get  rid  of  this,  this  is  waste  of  time
and  idleness :  arise  and  meditate,  resume  thine  interior
acts,  for  it  is  necessary  that  thou  shouldest  make  diligent
efforts  of  thine  own  ;  everything  else  is  delusion  and  folly.
Such  a  director  as  this  does  not   understand  the  degrees


[STAN.  Ill,]  OF  LOVE.  473

of  prayer,  nor  the  ways  of  the  Spirit,  neither  does  he
consider  that  what  he  recommends  the  soul  to  do  is
already  done,  since  it  has  passed  beyond  meditation  and
is  detached  from  the  things  of  sense ;  for  when  the  goal
is  reached,  and  the  journey  ended,  all  further  travelling
must  be  away  from  the  goal.

45.  Such  a  director,  therefore,  is  one  who  understands
not  that  the  soul  has  already  attained  to  the  life  of  the
Spirit,  wherein  there  is  no  reflection,  and  where  the  senses
cease  from  their  work ;  where  God  is  Himself  the  agent
in  a  special  way,  and  is  speaking  in  secret  to  the  solitary
soul.  Directors  of  this  kind  bedaub  the  soul  with  the
coarse  ointments  of  particular  knowledge  and  sensible
sweetness,  to  which  they  bring  it  back ;  they  rob  it  of  its
loneliness  and  recollection,  and  consequently  disfigure  the
exquisite  work  which  God  was  doing  within  it.  The  soul
that  is  under  such  guidance  as  this  fails  and  does  not
profit  by  the  other.

46.  Let  spiritual  directors  of  this  kind  remember,  that
the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  principal  agent  here,  and  the  real
guide  of  souls  ;  that  He  never  ceases  to  take  care  of  them
and  never  neglects  any  means  by  which  they  may  profit
and  draw  near  unto  God  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  in
the  best  way.  Let  them  remember  that  they  are  not  the
agents,  but  instruments  only  to  guide  souls  by  the  rule  of
the  faith  and  the  law  of  God,  according  to  the  spirit  which
God  gives  to  every  one.  Their  aim  therefore  should  be,
not  to  guide  souls  by  a  way  of  their  own  suitable  to  them-
selves, but  to  ascertain,  if  they  can,  the  way  by  which
God  Himself  is  guiding  them.  If  they  cannot  ascertain
it,  let  them  leave  these  souls  alone  and  not  disquiet  them.


474  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN. III.]

Let  them  adapt  their  instructions  to  the  direction  of  God,
and  endeavour  to  lead  their  penitents  into  greater  soUtude,
Hberty,  and  tranquilHty,  and  not  fetter  them  when  God  is
leading  them  on.

47.  The  spiritual  director  must  not  be  anxious  or
afflicted  because  the  soul  is  doing  nothing,  as  he  imagines,
for  provided  the  soul  of  his  penitent  be  detached  from  all
particular  knowledge,  from  every  desire  and  inclination  of
sense ;  provided  it  abide  in  the  self-denial  of  poverty  of
spirit,  emptied  of  darkness  and  sweetness,  weaned  from
the  breast — for  this  is  all  that  the  soul  should  look  to,  and
all  that  the  spiritual  director  is  to  consider  as  within  the
province  of  them  both — it  is  impossible — according  to  the
course  of  the  divine  goodness  and  mercy — that  God  will
not  perform  His  own  work,  yea,  more  impossible  than
that  the  sun  should  not  shine  in  a  clear  and  cloudless  sky.
As  the  sun  rising  in  the  morning  enters  the  house  if  the
windows  are  open,  so  God,  the  unsleeping  keeper  of
Israel,*  enters  the  emptied  soul  and  fills  it  with  good
things.  God  is,  like  the  sun,  above  our  souls  and  ready
to  enter  within  them.

48.  Let  spiritual  directors,  therefore,  be  content  to
prepare  souls  according  to  the  laws  of  evangelical  per-
fection, which  consists  in  detachment,  and  in  the  empti-
ness of  sense  and  spirit.  Let  them  not  go  beyond  this
with  the  building,  for  that  is  the  work  of  our  Lord  alone,
from  Whom  cometh  'every  perfect  gift.'t  For,  'unless
our  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that  build
it.'t  And  as  He  is  the  supernatural  builder.  He  will
build    up    in    every    soul,   according    to    His    own    good

*  Ps.  cxx.  4.  f  St.  James  i.  17.  J  Ps.  cxxvi.  i.


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  475

pleasure,  the  supernatural  building.  Do  thou,  who  art
the  spiritual  director,  dispose  the  natural  faculties  by
annihilating  them  in  their  acts— that  is  thy  work  ;  the
work  of  God,  as  the  wise  man  says,*  is  to  direct  man's
steps  towards  supernatural  goods  by  ways  and  means
utterly  unknown  to  thee  and  thy  penitent.

49.  Say  not,  therefore,  that  thy  penitent  is  making  no"
progress,  or  is  doing  nothing,  for  if  he  have  no  greater
pleasure  than  he  once  had  in  particular  knowledge,  he  is
advancing  towards  that  which  is  above  nature.  Neither
do  thou  complain  that  thy  penitent  has  no  distinct  per-
ceptions, for  if  he  had  he  would  be  making  no  progress,
because  God  is  incomprehensible,  surpassing  all  under-
standing. And  so  the  further  the  penitent  advances,  the
further  from  himself  must  he  go,  walking  by  faith,
believing  and  not  seeing  ;  he  thus  draws  nearer  unto  God
by  not  understanding,  than  by  understanding.  Trouble
not  thyself  about  this,  for  if  the  understanding  goes  not
backwards  occupying  itself  with  distinct  knowledge  and
other  matters  of  this  world,  it  is  going  forwards  ;  for  to
go  forwards  is  to  go  more  and  more  by  faith.  The
understanding,  having  neither  the  knowledge  nor  the
power  of  comprehending  God,  advances  towards  Him  by
not  understanding.!  Thus,  then,  what  thou  judgest
amiss  in  thy  penitent  is  for  his  profit :  namely,  that  he
does  not  perplex  himself  with  distinct  perceptions,  but
walks  onwards  in  perfect  faith.

50.  Or,  you  will  say,  perhaps,  that  the  will,  if  the
understanding  have  no  distinct  perceptions,  will  be  at  the
least  idle,  and  without  love,  because  we  can  love  nothing,

*  Prov.  xvi.  I,  9.  f  St.  Teresa,  Life,  ch,  xviii.  §  18.


476  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

that  we  do  not  know.  That  is  true  as  to  the  natural
actions  of  the  soul,  for  the  will  does  not  love  or  desire
anything  of  which  there  is  no  distinct  conception  in  the
understanding.  But  in  the  matter  of  infused  contempla-
tion, it  is  not  at  all  necessary  for  the  soul  to  have  distinct
knowledge,  or  to  form  many  discursive  acts,  because  God
Himself  is  then  communicating  to  it  loving  knowledge,
which  is  at  the  same  time  heat  and  light  indistinctly,  and
then  according  to  the  state  of  the  understanding  love  also
is  in  the  will.  As  the  knowledge  is  general  and  dim — the
understanding  being  unable  to  conceive  distinctly  what  it
understands — so  the  will  also  loves  generally  and  indis-
tinctly. For  as  God  is  light  and  love  in  this  delicate
communication,  He  informs  equally  the  understanding
and  the  will,  though  at  times  His  presence  is  felt  in  one
more  than  in  the  other.  At  one  time  the  understanding
is  more  filled  with  knowledge  than  the  will  with  love,  and
at  another,  love  is  deeper  than  knowledge.

52.  There  is  no  reason,  therefore,  to  be  afraid  of  the
will's  idleness  in  this  state,  for  if  it  ceases  to  eHcit  acts
directed  by  particular  knowledge,  so  far  as  they  depend
on  itself,  God  inebriates  it  with  infused  love  through  the
knowledge  which  contemplation  ministers,  as  I  have
just  said.

53.  These  acts  of  the  will  which  are  consequent  upon
infused  contemplation  are  so  much  the  nobler,  the  more
meritorious  and  the  sweeter,  the  nobler  the  source,  God,
Who  infuses  this  love  and  kindles  it  in  the  soul,  for  the
will  is  now  near  unto  God,  and  detached  from  other  joys.
Take  care,  therefore,  to  empty  the  will  and  detach  it  from
all    its   inclinations,  for    if  it    is    not    going    backwards,


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  477

searching  after  sweetness  and  comfort,  even  though  it
have  none  in  God  distinctly  felt,  it  is  really  advancing
upwards  above  all  such  things  to  God,  seeing  that  it  is
without  any  particular  pleasure.

54.  And  though  the  penitent  have  no  particular
comfort  in  God  distinctly  apprehended,  though  he  does
not  make  distinct  acts  of  love,  he  does  find  more  comfort
in  Him  in  that  general  secret  and  dim  infusion  than  if  he
were  under  the  influence  of  distinct  acts  of  knowledge,
because  the  soul  sees  clearly  then  that  not  one  of  them
can  furnish  so  much  comfort  and  delight  as  this  calm  and
lonely  infusion.  He  loves  God,  too,  more  than  all  lovely
things,  because  the  soul  has  thrown  aside  all  other  joys
and  pleasures  ;  they  have  become  insipid.

55.  There  is  no  ground  for  uneasiness  here,  for  if  the
will  can  find  no  rest  in  the  joys  and  satisfactions
of  particular  acts,  there  is  then  real  progress,  because  not
to  go  backwards,  embracing  what  is  sensible,  is  to  go
onwards  to  the  unapproachable,  who  is  God.  Hence,
then,  if  the  will  is  to  advance,  it  is  to  do  so  more  by
detachment  from,  than  by  attachment  to,  what  is
pleasurable  and  sweet.  Herein  is  fulfilled  the  precept  of
love,  namely,  that  we  are  to  love  Him  above  all  things.
And  if  this  love  is  to  be  perfect,  we  must  live  in  perfect
detachment,  and  in  a  special  emptiness  of  all  things.

56.  Neither  are  we  to  be  distressed  when  the  memory
is  emptied  of  all  forms  and  figures ;  for  as  God  is  without
form  or  figure,  the  memory  is  safe  when  emptied  of  them,
and  draws  thereby  the  nearer  to  God.  For  the
more  the  memory  relies  on  the  imagination,  the  further  it
departs   from    God,  and   the   greater   the   risks  it  runs ;


X


478  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

because  God,  being  above  our  thoughts,  is  not  cognisable
by  the  imagination.  These  spiritual  directors,  not  under-
standing souls  who  have  already  entered  into  the  state  of
quiet  and  solitary  contemplation,  because  they  know  it
not,  and  perhaps  have  never  advanced  beyond  the
ordinary  state  of  reflection  and  meditation  themselves,
look  upon  the  penitents,  of  whom  I  am  speaking,  as
idle — for  'the  sensual  man,'  the  man  who  still  dwells  with
the  feelings  of  the  sensual  part  of  the  soul,  '  perceiveth
not  these  things  that  are  of  the  Spirit  of  God  '* — disturb
the  peace  of  that  calm  and  tranquil  contemplation  given
them  by  God,  and  force  them  back  to  their  former
meditations.

57.  This  is  followed  by  great  loss,  repugnance,
dryness,  and  distractions  on  the  part  of  penitents,  who
desire  to  abide  in  quiet  and  peaceful  self-recollection.
These  directors  will  have  them  strive  after  sweetness  and
fervours,  though  in  truth  they  should  have  given  them  a
wholly  different  advice.  The  penitents  are  unable  to  follow
their  direction,  being  incapable  of  meditating  as  before  ;
because  the  time  for  that  is  past,  and  because  that  is  not
their  road.  They  are,  therefore,  doubly  disquieted,  and
imagine  themselves  in  the  way  of  perdition.  Their
directors  encourage  them  in  this  supposition,  dry  up  their
spirit,  rob  them  of  the  precious  unctions  which  God  gave
them  in  solitude  and  calm — and  this  is  a  great  evil — and
furnish  them  with  mere  mud  instead,  for  they  lose  the
former,  and  labour  in  vain  with  the  latter.

58.  Such  directors  as  these  do  not  really  know  what
spirituality  is.      They  wrong  God  most  grievously,  and

*  I  Cor.  ii.  14


[STAN.  III.]  OF     LOVE.  479

treat  Him  irreverently,  putting  forth  their  coarse  hands
to  the  work  which  He  is  doing  Himself.  It  has  cost  God
not  a  little  to  have  brought  souls  thus  far,  and  He  greatly
prizes  this  solitude  to  which  He  has  led  them,  this
emptiness  of  their  faculties,  for  He  has  brought  them
thither  that  He  may  speak  to  their  heart,*  that  is  what  He
always  desires.  He  is  now  taking  them  by  the  hand,  and
reigning  in  them  in  the  abundance  of  peace.  He  has
deprived  the  discursive  faculties  of  their  strength,  where-
with they  had  '  laboured  all  the  night '  and  had  taken
nothing.!  He  feeds  them  now  in  spirit,  not  by  the
operation  of  sense,  because  the  senses  together  with  their
acts  cannot  contain  the  spirit.

59.  How  precious  in  His  sight  is  this  calm,  or  sleep,
or  annihilation  of  the  senses,  His  words  in  the  Canticle
show :  '  I  adjure  you,  O  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  by  the
roes  and  harts  of  the  fields,  that  you  stir  not  up  nor
awake  my  beloved  till  she  please.' t  Those  words  tell  us
how  much  He  loves  this  sleep  and  lonely  oblivion  of
the  soul,  by  the  mention  of  those  solitary  and  retiring
animals.  But  the  spiritual  directors  of  whom  I  am
speaking  will  not  suffer  their  penitents  to  rest,  they  insist
upon  continual  labour,  so  that  God  shall  find  no  oppor-
tunity for  doing  His  work  ;  the  work  of  God  they  undo
and  disfigure  by  the  work  of  the  soul,  and  the  little  foxes
that  destroy  the  vines  are  not  driven  away.  God  com-
plains of  these  directors  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet,
saying,  'You  have  devoured  the  vineyard. '§

60.  But  it  may  be  said  that  these  directors  err,
perhaps,  with  good  intentions,  because  their  knowledge  is

*  Os.  ii.  14.  t  St.  Luke  v.  5,  J  Cant.  iii.  5.  §  Is.  iii.  14,


480  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

scanty.  Be  it  so ;  but  they  are  not  therefore  justified  in
giving  the  rash  counsels  they  do,  without  previously
ascertaining  the  way  and  spirit  of  their  penitent.  And  if
they  do  not  understand  the  matter,  it  is  not  for  them  to
interfere  in  what  they  do  not  comprehend,  but  rather  to
leave  their  penitent  to  others  who  understand  him  better
than  they.  It  is  not  a  light  fault  to  cause  by  a  wrong
direction  the  loss  of  inestimable  blessings,  and  to
endanger  a  soul.  Thus,  he  who  rashly  errs,  being  under
an  obligation  to  give  good  advice — for  so  is  every  one  in
the  office  he  assumes — shall  not  go  unpunished  for  the  evil
he  has  done.  The  affairs  of  God  are  to  be  handled  with
great  caution  and  watchful  circumspection,  and  especially
this,  which  is  so  delicate,  and  so  high,  and  where  the  gain
is  infinite  if  the  direction  given  be  right,  and  the  loss  also
infinite  if  it  be  wrong.

6i.  But  if  you  say  that  such  a  director  may  be  excused
— though  for  my  part  I  do  not  see  how — you  must  at
least  admit  that  he  is  inexcusable  who  keeps  a  penitent  in
his  power  for  certain  empty  reasons  and  considerations
known  only  to  himself  :  he  will  not  go  unpunished.  It  is
quite  certain  that  a  soul  which  is  to  make  progress  in  the
spiritual  life,  and  which  God  is  ever  helping,  must  change
its  method  of  prayer,  and  be  in  need  of  a  higher  direction
and  of  another  spirit  than  those  of  such  a  director.  Not
all  directors  have  the  knowledge  which  every  event  on  the
spiritual  road  requires :  neither  are  they  all  qualified  to
determine  how  a  given  soul  is  to  be  directed  under  every
circumstance  of  the  spiritual  life  ;  at  least  they  must  not
presume  that  they  are,  or  that  it  is  God's  will  that  a
particular   soul   shall  not  advance    further.      As  it  is  not


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  481

everyone  who  can  trim  a  block  of  wood,  can  also  carve  an
image  out  of  it ;  nor  can  everyone  form  the  outlines  who
can  carve  ;  nor  can  everyone  who  fashions  the  outlines
paint  them,  as  neither  can  everyone  who  can  paint
perfect  and  complete  the  image  :  for  everyone  of
these  can  do  only  what  he  understands  himself;  and
if  any  one  of  them  were  to  attempt  that  which  is
not  within  the  compass  of  his  skill,  he  would  spoil  the
statue.

62.  So  is  it  in  the  spiritual  life  ;  for  if  a  director  whose
only  work  it  is  to  trim  the  rude  block,  that  is,  to  make
his  penitent  despise  the  world,  and  mortify  his  desires  ;
or  if,  further,  it  be  that  of  the  carver,  who  is  to  guide
the  soul  into  holy  meditations,  and  his  science  extend
no  further,  how  can  he  guide  his  penitent  to  the  highest
perfection  of  the  finished  portrait,  to  that  delicate  colour-
ing which  consists  not  in  the  rough  hewing  of  the  wood,
nor  in  the  carving  thereof,  nor  even  in  the  formation  of
the  outlines,  but  is  rather  a  work  which  God  Himself
perfects  in  the  soul  with  His  own  hand.  It  is  therefore
quite  certain  that  such  a  director  as  this,  whose  teaching
is  ever  the  same,  cannot  help  driving  back  the  penitent
whom  he  subjects  to  it,  or,  at  the  least,  hindering  his
advancement.  For  what  will  be  the  state  of  the  image,
if  nothing  be  done  to  it  but  to  rough-hew  the  wood  and
beat  it  with  a  mallet  ?  What  is  this,  but  the  discipline  of
the  faculties?  When  shall  the  image  be  finished?  When
shall  it  be  ready  for  God  to  colour  it  ?

63.  Is  it  possible  that  any  spiritual  director  can  think
himself  qualified  for  all  this  ?  that  he  looks  upon  himself
as  sufficiently  skilful,  so    as   to    render   the  teaching   of

II


482  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

another  needless  for  his  penitent  ?  Granting  even  that  he
is  quahfied  for  the  whole  direction  of  a  particular  soul,
because,  perhaps,  such  a  soul  has  no  vocation  for  a  higher
walk,  it  is  almost  impossible  that  he  can  be  also  a
sufficient  guide  for  all  whom  he  hinders  from  passing  out
of  his  hands  into  the  hands  of  others.  God  leads  every
soul  by  a  separate  path,  and  you  will  scarcely  meet  with
one  spirit  which  agrees  with  another  in  one  half  of  the
way  by  which  it  advances.  Who  can  be  like  St.  Paul,
who  '  became  all  things  to  all  men,  that  he  might  save
all  ?  '  *

64.     Thou  art  thus  become  a  tyrant  of  souls,  the  robber
of  their  liberties,  claiming  for  thyself  all  the  freedom  of
the  evangelical  doctrine,  and  taking  care  that  none  of  thy
penitents  leave  thee  ;  yea,  still  further,  and  much  worse,
should  it  come  to  thy  knowledge  that  any  of  them  had
gone   elsewhere    for   direction,  or  to  discuss  a  question
which  it  was  not  convenient  to  submit  to  thee ;  or  if  God
had   led   them    for   the   purpose    of  learning   what  thou
teachest  not — I  say  it  with  shame — thou  art  jealous,  like
a  husband  of  his  wife.     This  is  not  zeal  for  the  honour  of
God,  but  the  zeal  which  cometh  out  of  thine  own  pride
and  presumption.     How  couldest  thou  be  sure  that  thy
penitent   had    no   need   of  other   guidance   than    thine  ?
With  such   directors  God   is  angry  and  he  threatens  to
chastise  them,  saying :  '  Woe  to  the  shepherds  of  Israel
.  .  .  you  eat  the   milk  and  you  clothed  yourself  with  the
wool  .   .  .  but    my    flock    you  did   not  feed.   ...   I  will
require  my  flock  at  their  hand.'  +

65.     These  directors,  therefore,   ought   to   leave  their

*  I  Cor.  ix.  22.  t  Ezech.  xxxiv.  2,  10.


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  483

penitents  at  liberty,  yea,  they  lie  under  an  obligation  to
allow  them  to  have  recourse  to  the  advice  of  others,  and
always  to  receive  them  again  with  a  cheerful  countenance  ;
for  they  know  not  by  what  way  God  intends  to  lead  them,
especially  when  their  present  direction  is  not  suited  to
them.  That,  indeed,  is  a  sign  that  God  is  leading  their
penitents  by  another  road,  and  that  they  require  another
director;  they  should,  therefore,  counsel  the  change,  for
a  contrary  course  of  proceeding  springs  from  a  foolish
pride  and  presumption.

66.  Let  me  now  pass  on  from  this  and  speak  of  other
means,  fatal  as  the  plague,  which  these  directors,  or
others  worse  than  they,  make  use  of  in  the  guidance  of
souls.  When  God  sends  into  a  soul  the  unctions  of  holy
desires,  and  leads  it  to  give  up  the  world,  draws  it  on  to
change  its  state  of  life,  and  to  serve  Him  by  despising  the
world — it  is  a  great  matter  in  His  eyes  that  souls  should
have  advanced  to  this,  for  the  things  of  the  world  are  not
according  to  the  heart  of  God — these  directors,  with  their
human  reasonings  and  worldly  motives,  contrary  to  the
doctrine  of  Christ,  at  variance  with  mortification  and
contempt  of  all  things,  consulting  their  own  interest  or
pleasure,  or  fearing  where  no  fear  is,  interpose  delays  or
suggest  difficulties,  or,  what  is  worse,  take  away  all  such
good  thoughts  from  the  hearts  of  their  penitents.  These
directors  have  an  evil  spirit,  are  indevout  and  exceedingly
worldly ;  unaccustomed  to  the  ways  of  Christ,  they  do
not  enter  in  themselves  by  the  strait  gate,  neither  will
they  suffer  others  to  enter.  These  are  they  whom  our
Lord  threatens  in  the  gospel,  saying :  '  Woe  -to  you
lawyers,  for  you  have  taken  away  the  key  of  knowledge :

I  I  2


484  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  HI]

you  yourselves  have  not  entered  in,  and  those  that  were
entering  you  have  hindered.'*

67.  These  directors  are  in  truth  Hke  barriers  before
the  gate  of  heaven,  forgetting  that  God  has  called  them
to  the  functions  they  exercise  that  they  may  compel  those
to  enter  in  whom  He  has  invited.  He  has  given  them
this  charge  in  the  gospel,  but  they,  on  the  contrary,
compel  their  penitents  not  to  enter  in  by  the  narrow  gate
which  leadeth  unto  life.t  Such  a  director  as  this  is  one
of  the  blind  guides  who  thwarts  the  direction  of  the  H0I3'
Ghost.  This  happens  in  many  ways;  some  err  knowingl}';
others  ignorantly  ;  but  both  the  one  and  the  other  shall
be  punished  ;  for  by  taking  upon  themselves  the  office
which  they  fill,  they  are  bound  to  understand  and  consider
what  they  do.

68.  The  other  blind  guide  that  disturbs  the  soul  in
this  interior  recollection  is  satan,  who,  being  blind
himself,  desires  to  render  the  soul  blind  also.  He
labours,  therefore,  when  the  soul  has  entered  into  those
deep  solitudes,  wherein  the  delicate  unctions  of  the  Holy
Ghost  are  infused — he  hates  and  envies  the  soul  for  this,
because  he  sees  it  fly  beyond  his  reach,  adorned  with  the
riches  of  God — to  throw  over  the  soul's  detachment  and
estrangement  from  the  world,  certain  cataracts  of  know-
ledge, and  the  darkness  of  sensible  sweetness,  sometimes
good,  the  more  to  entice  the  soul,  and  to  draw  it  back
to  the  way  of  sense.  He  would  have  it  fix  its  eyes  on
this,  and  make  use  of  it  with  a  view  of  drawing  near  to
God,  relying  upon  this  kind  of  knowledge,  and  sensible
sweetness.     By  this  means  satan  distracts  the  soul,  and

St   Luke  xi.  52.  t  St.  Matth.  vii.  13,  14.


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  485

easily  withdraws  it  from  that  solitude  and  recollection
wherein  the  Holy  Ghost  worketh  secretly  His  great
marvels  within.

69.  And  then  the  soul,  naturally  prone  to  sensible
satisfactions  and  sweetness — especially  if  it  aims  at  them
— is  most  easily  led  to  rely  upon  such  knowledge  and
sweetness,  and  so  draws  back  from  the  solitude  wherein
God  was  working.  For  as  the  soul,  as  it  seemed,  was
doing  nothing  then,  this  new  way  appears  preferable,
because  it  is  something,  while  solitude  seemed  to  be
nothing.  How  sad  it  is  that  the  soul,  not  understanding
its  own  state,  should,  for  one  mouthful,  disqualify  itself
for  feeding  upon  God  Himself;  for  He  offers  Himself  to
be  its  food  when  He  absorbs  it  in  these  spiritual  and
solitary  unctions  of  His  mouth.

70.  In  this  way,  the  evil  spirit,  for  a  mere  nothing,
inflicts  upon  souls  the  very  greatest  injuries,  causing  the
loss  of  great  riches,  and  dragging  them  forth,  like  fish
with  a  trifling  bait,  out  of  the  depths  of  the  pure  waters
of  the  spirit,  where  they  were  engulfed  and  drowned  in
God,  resting  upon  no  created  support.  He  drags  them  to
the  bank,  and  supplies  them  with  objects  whereon  to  rest,
and  makes  them  walk  on  the  earth  painfully,  that  they
may  not  float  on  'the  waters  of  Siloe,  that  run  with
silence.'*  bathed  in  the  unctions  of  God.  It  is  wonderful
how  much  satan  makes  of  this :  and  as  a  slight  injury
inflicted  on  the  soul  in  this  state  is  a  great  one,  you  will
scarcely  meet  with  one  which  has  gone  this  way  that  has
not  suffered  great  injuries,  and  incurred  grievous  losses.
Satan    stations    himself    with     great    cunning     on    the

*  Is.  viii.  6.


486  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

frontiers  between  sense  and  spirit ;  there  he  deludes
the  soul,  and  feeds  the  senses,  interposing  sensible  things
to  keep  it  back,  and  hinder  it  from  escaping  out  of  his
hands.

72.  The  soul,  too,  is  most  easily  taken  by  these  devices,
for  it  knows  as  yet  of  nothing  better;  neither  does  it
dream  that  this  is  a  loss,  yea  rather,  it  looks  on  it  as  a
great  gain,  and  accepts  the  suggestions  of  the  evil  one
gladly,  for  it  thinks  that  God  has  come  to  visit  it ;  conse-
quently it  omits  to  enter  into  the  inner  chamber  of  the
Bridegroom,  and  stands  at  the  door  to  see  what  is  passing
without  in  the  sensual  part  of  itself.

73.  The  devil,  in  the  words  of  Job,  '  seeth  every  high
thing'*  that  relates  to  souls  that  he  may  assail  them.  If,
therefore,  a  soul  becomes  recollected,  he  labours  to  disturb
it  by  horrors  and  fears,  or  by  bodily  pains,  or  outward
noise  and  tumults,  that  he  may  ruin  it ;  he  strives  to  draw
its  attention  to  the  tumult  he  excites,  and  to  fix  it  upon
what  is  passing  without,  and  to  withdraw  it  from  the
interior  spirit,  but  when  he  fails  in  his  efforts  he  leaves  it
alone.  So  easily  does  satan  squander  great  riches  and
bring  about  the  ruin  of  these  precious  souls,  though  he
thinks  this  of  more  consequence  than  the  fall  of  many
others,  that  he  looks  upon  it  as  a  small  matter  because  of
the  ease  with  which  he  affects  it  and  because  of  the  little
trouble  it  costs  him,

74.  We  may  also  understand  in  the  same  sense  the
following  words,  spoken  by  God  to  Job  :t  '  Lo  !  he  shall
sup  up  the  river  and  shall  not  marvel :  and  he  hath  confi-
dence   that   Jordan  ' — the   highest   perfection — '  may  run

*  Job  xli.  25.  t  Job  xl.  18,  19.


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  487

into  his  mouth.  In  his  eyes  as  with  a  hook  he  shall  take
him,  and  with  stakes  he  shall  bore  through  his  nostrils.'
That  is,  he  will  turn  away  the  soul  from  true  spirituality
by  means  of  the  arrows  of  distinct  knowledge  wherewith
he  pierces  it,  for  the  breath  which  goeth  out  through  the
nostrils  in  one  volume  becomes  dispersed  if  the  nostrils
be  pierced,  and  escapes  through  the  divers  perforations.

75.  Again  it  is  said,  '  The  beams  of  the  sun  shall  be
under  him,  and  he  shall  strew  gold  under  as  dirt.'  He
causes  souls  that  have  been  enlightened  to  lose  the
marvellous  beams  of  divine  knowledge,  takes  away  and
disperses  abroad  the  precious  gold  of  the  divine  adorning
by  which  souls  had  been  made  rich.

76.  O  souls,  now  that  God  shows  you  mercies  so  great,
leading  you  into  solitude  and  recollection,  withdrawing
you  from  the  labours  of  sense,  do  not  return  thereto.  If
your  own  exertions  were  once  profitable,  enabling  you  to
deny  the  world  and  your  own  selves  when  you  were  but
beginners,  cease  from  them  now  when  God  of  His  mercy
has  begun  to  work  in  you,  for  now  they  will  only  em-
barrass you.  If  you  will  be  careful  to  lay  no  stress  on
your  own  operations,  withdrawing  them  from"  all  things,
and  involving  them  in  nothing, — which  is  your  duty  in
your  present  state — and  wait  lovingly  and  sincerely  upon
God  at  the  same  time — doing  no  violence  to  yourselves
except  to  detach  yourselves  wholly,  so  as  not  to  disturb
your  tranquillity  and  peace — God  Himself  will  feed  you
with  the  heavenly  food,  since  you  cease  to  hinder  Him.

77.  The  third  blind  guide  of  the  soul  is  the  soul  itself,
which,  not  understanding  its  own  state,  disturbs  and
injures  itself.     For  as  the   soul   knows  of  no  operations


488  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

except  those  of  sense ;  when  God  leads  it  into  sohtude,
where  it  cannot  exert  its  faculties  and  elicit  the  acts  it
elicited  before,  and  as  it  appears  to  itself  then  to  be  doing
nothing,  it  strives  to  elicit  its  previous  acts  more  dis-
tinctly and  more  sensibly.  The  consequence  is  distraction,
dryness,  and  disgust  in  that  very  soul  which  once
delighted  in  the  calm  peace  and  spiritual  silence,  wherein
God  Himself  was  in  secret  infusing  His  sweetness.  It
sometimes  happens  that  God  persists  in  keeping  the  soul
in  this  quiet  calm,  and  that  the  soul  persists  in  crying  out
with  the  imagination,  and  in  walking  with  the  under-
standing. Such  souls  are  like  children  in  their  mothers'
arms,  who,  unable  to  walk,  cry,  and  struggle  with  their
feet,  demanding  to  be  allowed  to  walk  alone,  but  who
cannot  walk  themselves,  and  suffer  not  their  mothers  to
do  so  either.  These  souls  make  God  resemble  a  painter
whose  work  is  hindered  because  the  subject  he  portrays
will  not  be  still.

78.  The  soul,  then,  should  keep  in  mind  that  it  is  now
making  greater  progress  than  it  could  make  by  any  efforts
of  its  own,  though  it  be  wholly  unconscious  of  that
progress.  God  Himself  is  carrying  it  in  His  own  arms,
and  thus  it  happens  that  it  is  not  aware  that  it  is
advancing.  Though  it  thinks  that  it  is  doing  nothing,
yet  in  truth  more  is  done  than  if  itself  were  the  agent  ;
for  God  Himself  is  working.  If  this  work  be  invisible,
that  is  nothing  strange,  for  the  work  of  God  in  the  soul
is  not  cognisable  by  sense,  because  silently  wrought :
'The  words  of  the  wise  are  heard  in  silence.'*  Let  the
soul  abandon  itself  to  the  hands  of  God  and  trust  in  Him.

*  Eccles.  ix.  17.


[STAN.  Ill, J  OF  LOVE.  489

He  that  will  do  so  shall  walk  securely,  for  there  is  no
danger  then  unless  the  soul  should  attempt  anything  in
its  own  strength,  or  by  the  wilful  exercise  of  its  proper
faculties.

7g.  Let  us  now  return  to  the  deep  caverns  of  the
senses,  in  which  I  said  the  sufferings  of  the  soul  are
ordinarily  very  great  when  God  is  anointing  it,  and  pre-
paring it  for  union  with  Himself  by  His  subtile  and
delicate  unctions.  These  unctions  of  God  are  so  subtile
that,  penetrating  into  the  inmost  depths  of  the  soul,  they
so  dispose  it,  and  so  fill  it  with  sweetness,  that  the  suffer-
ings and  fainting  of  the  soul  through  its  great  desire  in
the  immense  void  of  the  caverns  are  immeasurable.  Now
if  the  unction  which  disposes  the  caverns  for  the  union
of  the  spiritual  marriage  be  so  wonderful,  what  shall  the
accomplishment  thereof  be  ?  Certain  it  is  that  as  the
hunger  and  thirst  and  suffering  of  the  caverns,  so  will
be  the  satisfaction,  fulness,  and  delight  thereof.  According
to  the  perfection  of  these  dispositions  will  be  the  delight
of  the  fruition  and  possession  of  the  sense  of  the  soul,
which  is  the  power  and  energy  of  its  very  substance  for
perceiving  and  delighting  in  the  objects  of  its  faculties.

80.  These  faculties  are  with  great  propriety  called
caverns.  For  as  the  soul  is  conscious  that  they  admit
the  profound  intelligence  and  splendours  of  the  lamps,  it
sees  clearly  also,  that  they  are  deep  in  proportion  to  the
depth  of  the  intelligence  and  love  ;  that  they  have  space
and  capacity  commensurate  with  the  distinct  sources  of
the  intelligence,  of  the  sweetness  and  delight  which  it
receives  in  them.  All  this  is  received  and  established  in
the  cavern  of  the  sense  of  the  soul  which  is  the  capacity


490  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

thereof  for  possession,  perception,  and  fruition.  Thus,
as  the  common  sense  of  the  imagination  is  the  place
where  all  the  objects  of  the  outward  senses  are  treasured
up,  so  is  this  common  sense  of  the  soul  enlightened  and
made  rich  by  a  possession  so  grand  and  so  glorious.

'  Dim  and  dark.'

8i.  The  eye  sees  not  for  two  reasons  ;  either  because
it  is  in  darkness  or  is  blind.  God  is  the  light  and  the
true  object  of  the  soul,  and  when  He  does  not  shine  upon
it,  it  is  then  in  darkness,  though  its  power  of  vision  may
be  most  perfect.  When  the  soul  is  in  sin,  or  when  it
occupies  the  desires  with  other  things  than  God,  it  is  then
bhnd.  Though  the  light  of  God  be  not  wanted  to  it  then,
yet,  being  blind,  it  cannot  see  the  light  because  of  its
blindness,  which  is  the  practical  ignorance  in  which  it
lives.  Before  God  enlightened  the  soul  in  its  transforma-
tion it  was  in  darkness  and  ignorant  of  His  great
goodness,  as  was  the  wise  man  before  he  was  enlightened,
for  he  says,  '  He  enlightened  my  ignorance.'*

82.  Speaking  spiritually,  it  is  one  thing  to  be  blind
and  another  to  be  in  darkness.  Blindness  proceeds  from
sin,  but  darkness  does  not  necessarily  involve  sin,  and  it
happens  in  two  ways.  There  is  natural  darkness  where
the  light  of  natural  things  shines  not,  and  there  is  super-
natural darkness  where  there  is  no  knowledge  of  many
supernatural  things.  Here  the  soul  says  with  regard  to
them  both,  that  the  understanding  without  God  abode  in
darkness.  For  until  our  Lord  said,  '  Let  light  be,'t
darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep  of  the  cavern  of

*  Ecclus.  li.  26.      Ignorantias  meas  illuminavit.     See  Dark  Night,
Bk.  ii.  c.  12.  §  2.  t  Genes,  i.  3.


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  491

the  soul's  sense.  The  deeper  the  cavern  when  God  shines
not  upon  it,  the  deeper  is  the  darkness  thereof.  Thus  it
is  impossible  for  it  to  lift  up  the  eyes  to  the  divine  light,
yea  the  divine  light  is  not  even  thought  of,  because  never
seen  or  known  to  exist ;  there  is  therefore  no  desire  for  it.
And  the  soul  desires  darkness  rather  than  light,  and  so
goes  on  from  darkness  to  darkness,  led  by  darkness,  for
darkness  can  lead  only  to  darkness  again.

83.  David  saith,  '  day  to  day  uttereth  word  and
night  to  night  showeth  knowledge,'*  thus  as  the  deep  of
darkness  calleth  another  deep,  and  the  deep  of  light
another  deep  of  light  ;t  like  calling  upon  like,  so  the  light
of  grace  which  God  had  before  given  to  the  soul,  and  by
which  He  opened  the  eyes  of  it  from  the  deep  to  behold
the  divine  light,  and  made  it  pleasing  to  himself,  calls  to
another  deep  of  grace,  namely,  the  divine  transformation
of  the  soul  in  God,  wherein  the  eye  of  sense  is  enlightened
and  rendered  pleasing.

84.  The  eye  was  also  blind  in  that  it  took  pleasure  in
other  than  God.  The  blindness  of  the  higher  and  rational
sense  is  caused  by  the  desire  which,  like  a  cloud  or  a
cataract,  overlies  and  covers  the  eye  of  reason,  so  that  it
shall  not  see  what  is  before  it.  Thus,  then,  the  grandeur
and  magnificence  of  the  divine  beauty  are  rendered
invisible,  so  far  as  the  pleasure  of  sense  is  followed.  For
if  we  cover  the  eye  with  anything,  however  trifling  it  may
be,  that  is  enough  to  obstruct  the  vision  of  objects  before
us  be  they  ever  so  large.  Thus,  then,  a  single  desire
entertained  by  the  soul  suffices  to  hinder  the  vision  of  all
the  divine  grandeurs  which   are  higher  than  its  desires

*  Ps.  xviii.  2.  t  lb.  xli.  8.


492  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

and  longings.  Who  can  say  how  impossible  it  is  for  the
soul,  subject  to  desires,  to  judge  of  the  things  of  God  ?
for  he  that  would  judge  aright  of  these  must  cast  away  all
desires,  because  he  cannot  judge  aright  while  subject
thereto ;  for  in  that  case  he  will  come  to  consider  the
things  of  God  not  to  be  God's,  and  those  things  which  are
not  God's  to  be  the  things  of  God.

85,  While  this  cloud  and  cataract  cover  the  eye  of  the
judgment,  nothing  is  visible  except  the  cloud,  sometimes
of  one  colour,  sometimes  of  another,  according  to
circumstances,  and  men  will  take  the  cloud  for  God,
because  they  see  nothing  beside  the  cloud  which  over-
shadows the  sense,  and  God  is  not  comprehended  by
sense.  Thus,  desire  and  sensual  satisfactions  hinder  the
knowledge  of  high  things,  as  it  is  written, '  The  bewitching
of  vanity  obscureth  good  things,  and  the  inconstancy  of
concupiscence  perverteth  the  understanding,'*  that  is
without  malice.  Those  persons,  therefore,  who  are
not  so  spiritual  as  to  be  purified  from  their  desires  and
inclinations,  but  are  still  sensual,  believe  those  things  to
be  important  which  are  in  truth  of  no  account  in
spirituality,  being  intimately  connected  with  sense ;  they
make  no  account  of  and  despise  the  deep  things  of  the  spirit,
which  are  further  removed  from  sense,  yea  sometimes  they
look  upon  them  as  folly,  as  we  learn  from  St.  Paul,  '  The
sensual  man  perceiveth  not  these  things  that  are  of  the
Spirit  of  God  :  for  it  is  foolishness  to  him  and  he
cannot  understand.'!

86.  The  sensual  man  is  he  who  still  lives  according  to
the  desires  and  inclinations  of  nature,  and  even  though

*  Wisd.  iv.  12  t  I  Cor.  ii.  14.


»


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE  493

these  desires  come  occasionally  into  contact  with  the
things  of  the  spirit,  yet,  if  man  cleaves  to  spiritual  things
with  his  natural  desires,  they  are  still  natural  desires  only.
The  spirituality  of  the  object  is  little  to  the  purpose,  if
the  desire  of  it  proceed  from  itself,  having  its  root  and
strength  in  nature.  What !  you  will  say,  is  it  not  a
supernatural  desire  to  desire  God  ?  No,  not  always  ;  but
only  then  when  the  motive  is  supernatural,  and  when  the
strength  of  the  desire  proceeds  from  God  ;  that  is  a  very
different  thing.  When  the  desire  comes  from  thyself,  so
far  as  it  relates  to  the  manner  thereof,  it  is  nothing  more
than  natural.  So,  then,  when  thou  art  attached  to  thy
spiritual  tastes,  exerting  thine  own  natural  desire,  thou
bringest  a  cataract  over  thine  eye,  thou  art  sensual,
incapable  of  perceiving  or  judging  what  is  spiritual,  for
that  transcends  all  natural  sense  and  desire.

87.  If  thou  still  doubtest,  I  have  nothing  further  to
add  except  to  bid  thee  read  over  again  what  I  have
written,  and  that  done  perhaps  the  doubts  will  vanish.
What  I  have  said  is  the  substance  of  the  truth,  and  I
cannot  now  enlarge  upon  it.  The  sense  of  the  soul
hitherto  in  darkness  without  the  divine  light  and  blinded
by  its  desires,  is  now  such  that  its  deep  caverns,  because
of  the  divine  union,  '  with  unwonted  brightness  give  light
and  warmth  together  to  the  Beloved.

'  With  unwonted  brightness  give  light  and
warmth  together  to  the  Beloved.'

88.  These  caverns  of  the  soul's  faculties  being  now  in
a  wonderful  way  among  the  marvellous  splendours  of  the
lamps  which  burn  within  them,  being  lighted  and  burning
in  God,  remit  back  to  God  in  God,  in  addition  to  their


494  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

self-surrender  to  Him,  those  very  splendours  which  they
receive  from  Him  in  loving  bliss ;  they  also,  turning  to
God  in  God,  being  themselves  lamps  burning  in  the
brightness  of  the  divine  lamps,  return  to  the  Beloved  that
very  light  and  warmth  of  love  which  they  receive  from  Him.
Now,  indeed,  they  give  back  unto  Him,  in  the  way  they
receive  them,  those  very  splendours  which  he  commu-
nicates, as  crystal  reflects  the  rays  of  the  sun  ;  but
in  a  nobler  manner,  because  of  the  intervention  of
the  will.   ■

'  With  unwonted  brightness  ; '

8g.  That  is,  strange  and  surpassing  all  imagination
and  description.  For  the  perfection  of  beauty  wherein
the  soul  restores  to  God  what  it  has  received  from  Him  is
now  in  conformity  with  that  perfection  wherewith  the
understanding — made  one  with  that  of  God — received  the
divine  wisdom :  and  the  perfection  wherewith  the  will
restores  to  God  in  God  that  very  goodness  He  gave  it —
for  it  was  given  only  to  be  restored — is  in  conformity  with
that  perfection  wherein  the  will  is  united  with  the  will  of
God.  In  the  same  way,  proportional  to  the  perfection  of
its  knowledge  of  God's  greatness,  united  therewith,  does
the  soul  shine  and  give  forth  the  warmth  of  love.  And
according  to  the  perfection  of  the  other  divine  attributes
communicated  to  the  soul,  such  as  strength,  beauty,
justice,  are  those  perfections  wherewith  the  spiritual
mind,  now  in  enjoyment,  gives  back  to  the  Beloved
in  the  Beloved  the  very  light  and  warmth  which  it  is
receiving  from  Him.

90.  The  soul  now  being  one  with  God  is  itself  God  by
participation,  and  though  not  so  perfectly  as  it  will  be  in


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  '  495

the  world  to  come,  is  still,  as  I  have  said,  as  God  in  a
shadow.*  Thus,  then,  the  soul,  by  reason  of  its  trans-
formation, being  a  shadow  of  God,  effects  through  God  in
God  what  He  effects  within  it  Himself  by  Himself,
because  the  will  of  both  is  one.  And  as  God  is  giving
Himself  with  a  free  and  gracious  will,  so  the  soul  also
with  a  will,  the  more  free  and  the  more  generous  the
more  it  is  united  with  God  in  God,  is,  as  it  were,  giving
baclf  to  God — in  that  loving  complacency  with  which  it
regards  the  divine  essence  and  perfections — God  Him-
self.

91.  This  is  a  mystic  and  affective  gift  of  the  soul  to
God,  for  then  the  soul  seems  in  truth  to  have  God  for  its
own  possession,  and  that  it  possesses  Him,  as  His
adopted  child,  by  a  right  of  ownership,  by  the  free  gift  of
Himself  made  unto  it.  The  soul  gives  to  the  Beloved,
Who  is  God  Himself,  what  He  had  given  to  it.  Herein
it  pays-  the  whole  debt,  for  the  soul  giveth  as  much
voluntarily  with  inestimable  joy  and  delight,  giving  the
Holy  Spirit  as  its  own  of  its  own  free  will,  so  that  God
may  be  loved  as  He  deserves  to  be.

92.  Herein  consists  the  inestimable  joy  of  the  soul,
for  it  sees  that  it  offers  to  God  what  becomes  Him  in. His
Infinite  Being.  Though  it  be  true  that  the  soul  cannot
give  God  to  God  anew,  because  He  is  always  Himself  in
Himself,  still  it  does  so,  perfectly  and  wisely,  giving  all
that  He  has  given  it  in  requittal  of  His  love  ;  this  is  to
give  as  it  is  given,  and  God  is  repaid  by  this  gift  of  the
soul ;  nothing  less  could  repay  Him.  He  receives  this
gift  of  the  soul  as  if  it  were  its  own,  with  kindness  and

*  See  Spiritual  Canticle,  stanza  xxxix.  §§  6,  7.


496  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

grace,  in  the  sense  I  have  explained ;  and  in  that  gift  He
loves  it  anew,  and  gives  Himself  freely  to  it,  and  the
soul  also  loves  Him  anew.  Thus,  there  is  in  fact  a
mutual  interchange  of  love  between  the  soul  and  God  in
the  conformity  of  the  union,  and  in  the  matrimonial
surrender,  wherein  the  goods  of  both,  that  is  the  divine
essence,  are  possessed  by  both  together,  in  the  voluntary
giving  up  of  each  to  the  other.  God  and  the  soul  say,
the  one  to  the  other,  what  the  Son  of  God  said  to  the
Father,  '  All  My  things  are  Thine,  and  Thine  are  mine,
and  I  am  glorified  in  them.'*  This  will  be  verified  in  the
fruition  of  the  next  life  without  intermission,  and  is
verified  in  the  state  of  union  when  the  soul's  communion
with  God  energises  in  an  act  of  love.

93.  The  soul  can  offer  such  a  gift,  though  far  greater
than  itself,  just  as  he  who  possesses  many  kingdoms  and
nations  as  his  own,  though  greater  than  he,  can  bestow
them  upon  whom  he  will.  This  is  the  soul's  great
delight,  that  it  sees  itself  giving  unto  God  more  than
itself  is  worth,  that  it  gives  Himself  to  God  so  generously,
as  if  God  were  its  own,  in  that  divine  light  and  warmth  of
love  which  He  Himself  has  given  it.  This  is  effected  in
the  life  to  come  through  the  light  of  glory  and  of  love,  and
in  this  life  by  faith  most  enlightened  and  by  love  most
enkindled.  Thus  it  is  that  the  deep  caverns  of  sense,
with  unwonted  brightness  give  light  and  heat  together  to
the  Beloved.  I  say  together,  because  the  communication
of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost
in  the  soul  is  one ;  they  are  the  light  and  the  fire  of  love
therein.

*  St,  John  xvii.  10.


[STAN.  III.]  OF  LOVE.  497

94.  I  must  here  observe  briefly  on  the  perfection  of
beauty  \vherewith  the  soul  makes  this  gift.  In  the  act  of
union,  as  the  soul  enjoys  a  certain  image  of  fruition,
caused  by  the  union  of  the  understanding  and  will  in  God,
it  makes  this  gift  of  God  to  God,  and  of  itself  to  Him,
in  most  wonderful  ways  ;  delighting  itself  therein,  and
constrained  thereto.  As  to  love,  the  soul  stands  before
God  in  strange  beauty,  as  to  the  shadow  of  fruition  in  the
same  way,  and  also  as  to  praise  and  gratitude.

95.  As  to  the  first,  which  is  love,  the  soul  has  three
grand  perfections  of  beauty.  It  loves  God  by  means  of
God.  This  is  an  admirable  perfection,  because,  set  on
fire  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  having  the  Holy  Ghost
dwelling  within  it,  it  loves  as  the  Father  loves  the  Son,
as  it  is  written,  '  that  the  love  wherewith  Thou  hast  loved
Me,  may  be  in  them,  and  I  in  them.'*  The  second
perfection  is  that  it  loves  God  in  God,  for  in  this  union
the  soul  is  vehemently  absorbed  in  the  love  of  God,  and
God  communicates  Himself  with  great  vehemence  to  it.
The  third  perfection  of  beauty  is  that  the  soul  now  loves
God  for  what  He  is ;  for  it  loves  Him  not  mereh'  because
He  is  bountiful,  good,  and  generous  to  it,  but  much  more
earnestly,  because  He  is  all  this  essentially  in  Himself.

96.  There  are  also  three  perfections  of  beauty  in  that
shadow  of  fruition,  marvellously  great.  The  first  is  that
the  soul  enjoys  God  here,  united  with  God  Himself,  for
as  the  understanding  of  the  soul  is  one  with  wisdom  and
goodness,  and  perceives  so  clearly — though  not  perfectly
as  in  the  life  to  come — it  delights  greatly  in  all  these,
clearly    understood,    as    I     said    before.  +       The    second

*  St.  John  xvii.  26.  t  §  4.  supr.

KK


498   •  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  III.]

perfection  of  beauty  is  that  the  soul  dehghts  itself  in  God
alone  without  the  admixture  of  any  created  thing.  The
third  is  that  it  enjoys  Him  alone  as  He  is,  without  the
admixture  of  any  selfish  feeling,  or  of  any  created  object.

97.  There  are  also  three  principal  perfections  of  beauty
in  the  praise  of  God  which  the  soul  offers  to  Him  in  union.
The  first  is  that  the  soul  offers  it  as  an  act  of  duty,  because
it  recognises  this  as  the  end  of  its  creation ;  as  it  is
written,  'This  people  have  I  formed  for  Myself,  they  shall
show  forth  My  praise.'*  The  second  is,  that  it  praises
Him  for  blessings  received,  and  because  of  the  joy  it  has
in  praising  our  Lord  Who  is  so  great.  The  third  is,  that
it  praises  Him  for  what  He  is  in  Himself,  for  if  the  praises
of  God  were  unaccompanied  by  any  pleasure  at  all,  still  it
would  praise  Him  because  He  is  Who  He  is.

98.  Gratitude  also  has  three  principal  perfections.
The  first  is,  thanksgiving  for  all  natural  and  spiritual
blessings,  and  for  all  benefits  received.  The  second  is
the  great  delight  of  praising  God,  in  the  way  of  thanks-
giving, for  the  soul  is  moved  with  great  vehemence  in  the
act.  The  third  is  that  the  soul  gives  thanks  unto  God
only  because  He  is,  which  is  much  more  efficacious  and
more  delightful.


*  Is.  xliii.  21.


[STAN.  IV.]  OF  LOVE.  499


STANZA  IV.


How  gently  and  how  lovingly

Thou  liest  awake  in  my  bosom,

Whey'e  Thou  secretly  dwellest  alone;

And  in  thy  szveet  breathing

Full  of  grace  and  glory.

How  tenderly  Thoufillest  me  with  Thy  love.


EXPLANATION.

Here  the  soul  turns  towards  the  Bridegroom  in  great
love,  magnifying  Him  and  giving  Him  thanks  for  two
marvellous  graces  which  He  sometimes  effects  within  the
soul  through  its  union  with  Himself.  The  soul,  too,
observes  on  the  way  He  produces  them  and  on  their
effects  upon  itself.

2.  The  first  effect  is  the  awakening  of  God  in  the  soul,
and  that  in  gentleness  and  love.  The  second  is  the
breathing  of  God  in  the  soul,  and  that  in  grace  and  bliss
given  in  that  breathing.  The  effect  of  this  upon  the  soul
is  to  make  it  love  Him  sweetly  and  tenderly.  The  stanza
therefore  may  be  paraphrased  as  follows  :  O  how  gently
and  how  lovingly  dost  thou  lie  awake  in  the  depth  and
centre  of  my  soul,  where  Thou  in  secret  and  in  silence
alone,  as  its  sole  Lord,  abidest,  not  only  as  in  Thine  own
house  or  in  Thine  own  chamber,  but  also  as  within  my
own  bosom,  in  close  and  intimate  union  :  O  how  gently
and  how  lovingly  !  Sweet  to  me  is  Thy  breathing  in  that
awakening,  for  it  is  full  of  grace  and  glory.  O  with  what
tenderness  dost  Thou  inspire  me  with  love  of  Thee  !     The

KK   2


500  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  IV.]

figure  is  borrowed  from  one  awaking  from  sleep,  and
drawing  his  breath,  for  the  soul  in  this  state  feels  it  to
be  so.

'  How  gently  and  how  lovingly
Thou  liest  awake  in  my  bosom,'

3.  The  awakenings  of  God  in  the  soul  are  manifold,
and  so  many  that  were  I  to  describe  them  I  should  never
end.  This  awakening,  to  which  the  soul  refers  here,  the
work  of  the  Son  of  God,  is,  in  my  opinion,  of  the  highest
kind,  and  the  source  of  the  greatest  good  to  the  soul.
This  aw^akening  is  a  movement  of  the  Word  in  the  depth
of  the  soul  of  such  grandeur,  authority  and  glory,  and  of
such  profound  sweetness,  that  all  the  balsams,  all  the
aromatic  herbs  and  flowers  of  the  world  seem  to  be
mingled  and  shaken  together  for  the  production  of
that  sweetness :  that  all  the  kingdoms  and  dominions  of
the  world,  all  the  powers  and  virtues  of  heaven  are  moved ;
this  is  not  the  whole,  all  the  virtues,  substance,  perfections
and  graces  of  all  created  things,  shine  forth  and  make  the
same  movement  in  unison  together.  For  as  St.  John  saith,
'  what  was  made  in  Him  was  life,'*  and  in  Him  moves
and  lives  ;  as  the  Apostle  says,  '  In  Him  we  live
and  move  and  arc.'  +

4.  The  reason  is  this ;  when  the  grand  Emperor
would  reveal  Himself  to  the  soul,  moving  Himself  in  the
light  He  gives,  and  yet  not  moving  in  it — He,  upon
whose  shoulder  is  the  principality,  t  that  is,  the  three
worlds  of  heaven,  earth,  and  hell,  and  all  that  is  in  them,
and  who  sustains  all  by  the  word  of  His  power§ — then  all
seem   to    move    together.      As    when   the   earth    moves,

*  St.  John  i.  3  ;  see  p.  209.      f  Acts  xvii.  28.     J  Is.  ix.  6.       §  Heb.  i.  3.


[STAN.  IV.]  OF  LOVE.  501

all  natural  things  upon  it  move  with  it ;  so  is  it  when  the
Prince  moves,  for  He  carries  his  court,  not  the  court  Him.
This,  however,  is  an  exceedingly  imperfect  illustration  ;
for  here  not  only  all  seem  to  move,  but  also  to  manifest
their  being,  their  beauty,  power,  and  loveliness,  the  root
of  their  duration  and  life  in  Him.  There,  indeed,  the
soul  sees  how  all  creatures,  higher  and  lower,  live,
continue,  and  energise  in  Him,  and  understands  the
words  of  the  wise  man,  '  by  Me  kings  reign  .  .  .by
me  princes  rule,  and  the  mighty  decree  justice.'*

5.  Though  it  is  true  that  the  soul  here  sees  that  all
these  things  are  distinct  from  God,  in  that  they  have  a
created  existence ;  it  understands  them  in  Him  with  their
force,  origin  and  strength,  it  knows  also  that  God  in  His
own  essence  is,  in  an  infinitely  pre-eminent  way,  all  these
things,  so  that  it  understands  them  better  in  Him,  their
First  Cause,  than  in  themselves.  This  is  the  great  joy  of
this  awakening,  namely,  to  know  creatures  in  God,  and
not  God  in  His  creatures  :  this  is  to  know  effects  in  their
cause,  and  not  cause  by  its  effects.

6.  This  movement  in  the  soul  is  wonderful,  for  God
Himself  moves  not.  Without  movement  on  the  part  of
God,  the  soul  is  renewed  and  moved  by  Him  ;  the  divine
life  and  being  and  the  harmony  of  creation  are  revealed
with  marvellous  newness,  the  cause  assuming  the
designation  of  the  effect  resulting  from  it.  If  we  regard
the  effect,  we  may  say  with  the  wise  man  that  God  moves,
'  for  wisdom  is  more  moveable  than  all  moveable  things,'
not  because  it  moves  itself  but  because  it  is  the  source
and  principle  of  all  motion,  and  '  permanently  in   herself,

•  Pov.  viii.  15.


k


502  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  IV.]

she  reneweth  all  things  ;  '*  this  is   the    meaning  of  the
words,'  more  moveable  than  all  moveable  things.'

7.  Thus,  then,  strictly  speaking,  in  this  movement  it  is
the  soul  that  is  moved  and  awakened,  and  the  expression
'  awake '  is  correct.  God  however  being  always,  as  the
soul  sees  Him,  the  mover,  the  ruler,  and  the  giver  of  hfe,
power,  graces,  and  gifts  to  all  creatures,  contains  all  in
Himself,  virtually,  actually,  and  supremely.  The  soul
beholds  what  God  is  in  Himself,  and  what  He  is  in
creatures.  So  may  we  see,  when  the  palace  is  thrown
open,  in  one  glance,  both  the  magnificence  of  him  who
inhabits  it,  and  what  he  is  doing.  This,  according  to  my
understanding  of  it,  is  this  awakening  and  vision  of  the
soul ;  it  is  as  if  God  drew  back  some  of  the  many  veils
and  coverings  that  are  before  it,  so  that  it  might  see  what
He  is  ;  then  indeed — but  still  dimly,  because  all  the  veils
are  not  drawn  back,  that  of  faith  remaining — the  divine
face  full  of  grace  bursts  through  and  shines,  which,  as  it
moves  all  things  by  its  power,  appears  together  with  the
effect  it  produces,  and  this  is  the  awakening  of  the
soul.

8.  Though  all  that  is  good  in  man  comes  from  God,
and  though  man  of  himself  can  do  nothing  that  is  good,
it  may  be  said  in  truth,  that  our  awakening  is  the
awakening  of  God,  and  our  rising  the  rising  of  God.
'  Arise,  why  sleepest  Thou,  O  Lord  ?  'f  saith  the  Psalmist.
That  is  in  effect  to  say,  Raise  us  up  and  awake  us,  for  we
are  fallen  and  asleep.  Thus,  then,  because  the  soul  had
fallen  asleep,  and  could  never  rouse  itself  again,  and
because  it  is  God  alone  who  can  open  its  eyes,  and  effect

*  Wisd.  vii.  24.  t  Ps-  xliii.  23.


[STAN.  IV.]  OF  LOVE.  503

its  awakening,  this  awakening  is  most  properly  referred  to
God :  '  Thou  awakest  in  my  bosom.'

'  Thou  awakest  in  my  bosom.'

g.  Awake  us,  O  Lord,  and  enhghten  us,  that  we  may
know  and  love  the  good  things  which  Thou  hast  set
always  before  us,  and  we  shall  know  that  Thou  art  moved
to  do  us  good,  and  hast  had  us  in  remembrance.  It  is
utterly  impossible  to  describe  what  the  soul,  in  this
awakening,  knows  and  feels  of  the  majesty  of  God,  in  the
inmost  depths  of  its  being,  that  is,  its  bosom.  For  in  the
soul  resounds  an  infinite  power,  which  the  voice  of  a
multitude  of  perfections,  of  thousands  and  thousands  of
virtues,  wherein  itself  abiding  and  subsisting,  becomes
'  terrible  as  an  army  set  in  array,'*  sweet  and  gracious  in
Him  who  comprehends  in  Himself  all  the  sweetness,  and
all  the  graces  of  His  creation.

lo.  But  here  comes  the  question,  how  can  the  soul
bear  so  vehement  a  communication  while  in  the  flesh,
when  in  truth  it  has  not  strength  for  it  without  fainting
away  ?  The  mere  sight  of  Assuerus  on  his  throne,  in  his
royal  robe,  glittering  with  gold  and  precious  stones,  was
so  terrible  in  the  eyes  of  Esther,  that  she  fainted  through
fear,  so  awful  was  his  face.  '  I  saw  Thee,  my  lord,  as  an
angel  of  God,  and  my  heart  was  troubled,  for  fear  of  thy
glory.'t  Glory  oppresses  him  who  beholds  it,  if  it  does
not  glorify  him.  How  much  more  then  is  the  soul  now
liable  to  faint  away,  when  it  beholds  not  an  angel  but
God  Himself,  the  Lord  of  the  angels,  with  His  face  full  of
the  beauty  of  all  creatures,  of  terrible  power  and  glory,
and  the  voice  of  the  multitude  of  His  perfections.     It  is

*  Cant.  vi.  3.  t  Esth.  xv.  16.


504  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  IV.]

to  this  that  Job  referred  when  he  said,  '  We  have  heard
scarce  a  little  drop  of  His  word ;  who  shall  be  able  to
behold  the  thunder  of  His  greatness  ?'*  and  again,  '  I  will
not  that  He  contend  with  me  with  much  strength,  nor
that  He  oppress  me  with  the  weight  of  His  greatness.' t

11.  The  soul,  however,  does  not  faint  away  and  tremble
at  this  awakening  so  powerful  and  glorious.  There  are
two  reasons  for  this :  one  is  that  it  is  now  in  the  state  of
perfection,  and  therefore  the  lower  portion  of  it  is  purified
and  conformed  to  the  spirit,  exempt  from  that  pain  and
loss  which  spiritual  communications  involve,  when  the
sense  and  spirit  are  not  purified  and  disposed  for  the
reception  of  them.  2.  The  second  and  the  principal
reason  is  that  referred  to  in  the  first  line  of  this  stanza,
namely,  that  God  shows  Himself  gentle  and  loving.  For
as  He  shows  His  greatness  and  glory  to  the  soul  in  order
to  comfort  and'  exalt  it,  so  does  He  favour  and  strengthen
it  also,  and  sustain  its  natural  powers  while  manifesting
His  greatness  gently  and  lovingly.  This  is  easy  enough
to  Him,  who  with  His  right  hand  protected  Moses  that
he  might  behold  His  glory.  |

12.  Thus  the  soul  feels  God's  love  and  gentleness  to
be  commensurate  with  His  power,  authority,  and  great-
ness, for  in  Him  these  are  all  one.  Its  delight  is  therefore
vehement,  and  the  protection  it  receives  strong  in
gentleness  and  love,  so  that  itself  being  made  strong  may
be  able  without  fainting  away  to  sustain  this  vehement
joy.  Esther,  indeed,  fainted  away,  but  that  was  because
the  king  seemed  unfavourable  towards  her,  for  with
'  burning  eyes  '  he  '  showed  the  wrath  of  his  breast,'§  but

'  Job.  xxvi.  14.       f  lb.  xxiii.  6.        \  Exod.  xxxiii.  22.         §  Esth.  .\v.  10.


[STAN.  IV.]  OF  LOVE.  505

the  moment  he  looked  graciously  upon  her,  touched  her
with  his  sceptre  and  kissed  her,  she  recovered  herself,  for
he  had  said  to  her,  '  I  am  thy  brother,  fear  not.'

13.  So  is  it  with  the  soul  in  the  presence  of  the  King
of  kings,  for  the  moment  He  shows  Himself  as  its  Bride-
groom and  Brother,  all  fear  vanishes  away.  Because  in
showing  unto  it,  in  gentleness  and  not  in  anger,  the
strength  of  His  power  and  the  love  of  His  goodness,  He
communicates  to  it  the  strength  and  love  of  His  breast,
'leaping  from  His  throne  '*  to  caress  it,  as  the  bridegroom
from  his  secret  chamber,  touching  it  with  the  sceptre  of
his  majesty,  and  as  a  brother  embracing  it.  There  the
royal  robes  and  the  fragrance  thereof,  which  are  the
marvellous  attributes  of  God  ;  there  the  splendour  of  gold
which  is  charity,  and  the  glittering  of  the  precious  stones
of  supernatural  knowledge ;  and  there  the  face  of  the
Word  full  of  grace,  strike  the  queenly  soul,  so  that,  trans-
formed in  the  virtues  of  the  King  of  heaven,  it  beholds
itself  a  queen  :  with  the  Psalmist,  therefore,  may  it  be  said
of  it,  and  with  truth,  '  The  queen  stood  on  Thy  right
hand  in  gilded  clothing,  surrounded  with  variety.'!  And
as  all  this  passes  in  the  very  depths  of  the  soul,  it  is  added
immediately,  'Where  Thou  secretly  dwellest  alone.'

'  Where  Thou  secretly  dwellest  alone.'

14.  He  is  said  to  dwell  secretly  in  the  soul's  bosom,
because,  as  I  have  said,  J  this  sweet  embracing  takes  place
in  the  inmost  substance  and  powers  of  the  soul.  We
must  keep  in  mind  that  God  dwells  in  a  secret  and  hidden
way  in  all  souls,  in  their  very  substance,  for  if  He  did
not,  they  could  not  exist  at  all.     This  dwelling  of  God  is

*  lb.  XV.  12.  t  Ps-  xliv.  10.  t  §  9-


506  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  IV.]

very  different  in  different  souls ;  in  some  He  dwells  alone,
in  others  not ;  in  some  He  dwells  contented,  in  others
displeased ;  in  some  as  in  His  own  house,  giving  His
orders,  and  ruling  it :  in  others,  as  a  stranger  in  a  house
not  His  own,  where  He  is  not  permitted  to  command,  or
to  do  anything  at  all.  Where  personal  desires  and  self-
will  least  abound,  there  is  He  most  alone,  most  contented,
there  He  dwells  as  in  His  own  house,  ruling  and  directing
it,  and  the  more  secretly  He  dwells,  the  more  He  is
alone.

15.  So  then  in  that  soul  wherein  no  desire  dwells,  and
out  of  which  all  images  and  forms  of  created  things  have
been  cast,  the  Beloved  dwells  most  secretly  Himself,  and
the  purer  the  soul  and  the  greater  its  estrangement  from
everything  but  God,  the  more  intimate  His  converse  and
the  closer  His  embrace.  He  dwells  there  then  in
secret,  for  satan  cannot  come  near  His  dwelling  place,
nor  see  the  embracing ;  nor  can  any  understanding  explain
it.  But  He  is  not  hidden  from  the  soul  in  the  state  of
perfection,  for  such  a  soul  is  ever  conscious  of  'His
presence.  Only  in  these  awakenings  He  seems  to  awake
who  before  was  asleep  in  the  soul's  bosom ;  and  though  it
felt  and  enjoyed  His  presence,  He  seemed  as  one  sleeping
within.

16.  O  how  blessed  is  that  soul  which  is  ever  conscious
of  God  reposing  and  resting  within  it.  How  necessary  it
is  for  such  a  soul  to  flee  from  the  matters  of  this  world,
to  live  in  great  tranquillity,  so  that  nothing  whatever  shall
disturb  the  Beloved  'at  His  repose.'*

17.  He  is  there  as  it  were  asleep  in  the  embraces  of

*  Cant.  i.  II.


[STAN.  IV.]  OF  LOVE.  507

the  soul,  and  the  soul  is,  in  general,  conscious  of  His
presence,  and,  in  general,  delights  exceedingly  in  it.  If
He  were  always  awake  in  the  soul,  the  communications  of
knowledge  and  love  would  be  unceasing,  and  that  would
be  a  state  of  glory.  If  He  awakes  but  once,  merely
opening  His  eyes,  and  affects  the  soul  so  profoundly,
what  would  become  of  it  if  He  were  continually  awake
within  it  ?

i8.  He  dwells  secretly  in  other  souls,  those  which
have  not  attained  to  this  state  of  union,  not  indeed  dis-
pleased, though  they  are  not  yet  perfectly  disposed  for
union :  these  souls  in  general  are  not  conscious  of  His
presence,  but  only  during  the  time  of  these  sweet
awakenings,  which  however  are  not  of  the  same  kind  with
those  already  described,  neither  indeed  are  they  to  be
compared  with  them.  But  the  state  of  these  souls  is  not
so  secret  from  the  devil,  nor  so  far  above  the  reach  of
the  understanding  as  the  other,  because  the  senses  always
furnish  some  indications  of  it  by  the  excitement  into
which  they  are  thrown.  The  senses  are  not  perfectly
annihilated  before  the  union  is  complete,  and  they  mani-
fest their  power  in  some  degree,  because  they  are  not
yet  wholly  spiritual.  But  in  this  awakening  of  the  Bride-
groom in  the  perfect  soul,  all  is  perfect  because  He  effects
it  all  Himself  in  the  way  I  have  spoken  of.  In  this
awakening,  as  of  one  aroused  from  sleep  and  drawing
breath,  the  soul  feels  the  breathing  of  God,  and  therefore
it  says  :  '  In  Thy  sweet  breathing.'

'  And  in  Thy  sweet  breathing,  full  of  grace  and  glory,  how
tenderly  Thou  fillest  me  with  Thy  love.'

19.     I  would  not  speak  of  this  breathing  of  God,  neither


508  THE  LIVING  FLAME  [STAN.  IV.]

do  I  wish  to  do  so,  because  I  am  certain  that  I  cannot;
and  indeed  were  I  to  speak  of  it,  it  would  seem  then  to
be  something  less  than  what  it  is  in  reality.  This
breathing  of  God  is  in  the  soul,  in  which  in  the
awakening  of  the  deep  knowledge  of  the  Divinity,  He
breathes  the  Holy  Ghost  according  to  the  measure  of
that  knowledge  which  absorbs  it  most  profoundly,  which
inspires  it  most  tenderly  with  love  according  to  what  it
saw.  This  breathing  is  full  of  grace  and  glory,  and  there-
fore the  Holy  Ghost  fills  the  soul  with  goodness  and
glory,  whereby  He  inspires  it  with  the  love  of  Himself,
transcending  all  glory  and  all  understanding.  This  is  the
reason  why  I  say  nothing  more.


INSTRUCTIONS  AND  PRECAUTIONS.


INSTRUCTIONS  AND  PRECAUTIONS

TO  BE  CONTINUALLY  OBSERVED  BY  HIM  WHO  SEEKS  TO
BE  A  TRUE  RELIGIOUS  AND  TO  ARRIVE  QUICKLY  AT
GREAT   PERFECTION.


If  any  religious  desires  to  attain  in  a  short  time  to  holy
recollection,  spiritual  silence,  detachment  and  poverty  of
spirit — where  the  peaceful  rest  of  the  spirit  is  enjoyed,
and  union  with  God  attained ;  if  he  desires  to  be  delivered
from  all  the  hindrances  which  created  things  put  in  his
way,  to  be  defended  against  all  the  wiles  and  illusions  of
satan,  and  to  be  protected  against  himself,  he  must  strictly
practise  the  following  instructions.

If  he  will  do  this,  with  ordinary  attention,  without
other  efforts  or  other  practices,  at  the  same  time  carefully
observing  the  obligations  of  his  state,  he  will  advance
rapidly  to  great  perfection,  acquire  all  virtue  and  attain
unto  holy  peace.

All  the  evils  to  which  the  soul  is  subject  proceed  from
the  three  enemies  already  mentioned :  the  world,  the
devil,  and  the  flesh.  If  we  can  hide  ourselves  from  these
we  shall  have  no  combats  to  fight.  The  world  is  less
difficult,  and  the  devil  more  difficult,  to  understand ;  but
the  flesh  is  the  most  obstinate  of  all,  and  the  last  to  be


512  INSTRUCTIONS

overcome  together  with  the  'old  man.'  If  we  do  not
conquer  the  three,  we  shall  never  perfectly  conquer  one ;
and  if  we  conquer  one,  we  shall  also  conquer  the  others
in  the  same  proportion.

In  order  to  escape  perfectly  from  the  evils  which  the
world  inflicts,  there  are  three  things  to  be  observed.

FIRST  PRECAUTION.

The  first  is,  preserve  an  equal  love  and  an  equal  forget-
fulness  of  all  men  whether  relatives  or  not  ;  withdraw  your
affections  from  the  former  as  well  as  from  the  latter,  yea
even  rather  more  from  the  former,  on  account  of  the  ties
of  blood,  for  the  natural  affections  which  men  feel  for
their  kindred  always  subsists.  You  must  mortify  this
affection  if  you  are  to  attain  unto  spiritual  perfection.
Look  upon  your  kindred  as  strangers,  and  you  will  thereby
the  more  completely  discharge  your  duty  to  them ;  for
by  not  withdrawing  your  heart  from  God  on  their
account,  you  will  fulfil  your  duties  towards  them  better
by  not  giving  to  them  those  affections  which  are  due  unto
God.

Do  not  love  one  man  more  than  another,  for  if  you  do
you  will  fall  into  error.  He  whom  God  loves  most  is  the
most  worthy  of  love,  and  you  do  not  know  who  he  is.  But
if  you  strive  to  forget  all  men  alike — as  holy  recollection
requires  you  to  do — you  will  escape  all  error,  whether
great  or  small.  Do  not  think  about  them  ;  have  nothing
to  say  to  them  either  good  or  bad.  Avoid  them  as  much
as  you  possibly  can.  If  you  do  not  observe  this,  as  things
go,  you  never  will  become  a  good  religious,  you  will  never
attain  to  holy  recollection,  nor  will  you  get  rid  of  your


AND  PRECAUTIONS.  513

imperfections.  If  you  will  indulge  yourself  here,  satan
will  in  some  way  or  other  delude  you,  or  you  will  delude
yourself  under  the  pretence  of  good  or  evil.

If  you  will  observe  this  direction  you  will  be  safe;  and
in  no  other  way  can  you  get  rid  of  the  imperfections  and
escape  the  evils  which  result  to  your  soul  from  intercourse
with  men.

SECOND  PRECAUTION.

The  second  precaution  against  the  world  relates  to
temporal  goods.  If  you  desire  in  earnest  to  escape  the
evils  which  worldly  goods  occasion  and  restrain  your
excessive  desires,  you  must  hold  all  personal  possession
in  abhorrence,  and  cast  from  you  every  thought  about  it.
You  must  not  be  solicitous  about  what  you  eat  or  drink
or  wear,  or  about  any  created  thing  whatever :  you  must
not  be  '  solicitous  for  to-morrow,'  but  occupy  yourself
with  higher  things— with  the  kingdom  of  God,  that  is,
fidelity  unto  Him — for  all  these  things,  as  our  Lord  says
in  the  gospel,  '  shall  be  added  unto  you.'*  He  who  takes
care  of  the  beasts  of  the  field  will  not  forget  you.  If  you
do  this  you  will  attain  unto  silence,  and  have  peace  in  your
senses.

THIRD  PRECAUTION.

The  third  precaution  is  most  necessary,  that  you  may
avoid  all  evil  in  your  relation  with  the  other  religious  of
the  community.  Many  persons  from  not  heeding  this
have  not  only  lost  their  peace  of  mind,  but  have  fallen,
and  fall  daily,  into  great  disorders  and  sin.     Be  especially

*  St.  Matth.  vi.  33.

LL


ol4  INSTRUCTIONS

careful  never  to  let  your  mind  dwell  upon,  still  less  your
tongue  to  speak  of,  what,  is  passing  in  the  community,  its
past  or  present  state.  Do  not  speak  of  any  religious  in
particular,  do  not  discuss  his  condition  or  his  conversation,
or  his  actions,  however  grave,  either  under  the  cloak  of
zeal,  or  of  remedying  what  seems  amiss,  except  only  to
him  who  of  right  should  be  spoken  to,  and  then  at  the
fitting  time.  Never  be  scandalised  or  surprised  at  what
you  see  or  hear,  and  preserve  yourself  in  complete  forget-
fulness  of  all.  If  you  lived  among  the  angels  and  gave
heed  to  what  was  going  on  many  things  would  seem
to  3^ou  not  to  be  good,  because  you  do  not  understand
them.

Take  warning  from  the  example  of  Lot's  wife  who,
because  she  was  disturbed  at  the  destruction  of  Sodom,
turned  back  to  behold  it.  God  punished  her  for  this,  and
she  '  was  turned  into  a  pillar  of  salt.'*  This  teaches  you
that  it  is  the  will  of  God,  even  if  you  were  living  among
devils,  you  should  so  live  as  not  to  turn  back  in  thought
to  consider  what  they  are  doing,  but  forget  them  utterly.
You  are  to  keep  your  soul  wholly  for  God,  and  not  to
suffer  the  thought  of  this  or  that  to  disturb  you.

Be  sure  of  this,  there  is  no  lack  of  stumbling  blocks  in
religious  houses,  because  there  is  no  lack  of  devils  who
are  labouring  to  throw  down  the  saints.  God  permits
this  in  order  to  try  them  and  to  prove  them,  and  if  you
be  not  on  your  guard,  you  will  never  become  a  religious,
do  what  you  may,  neither  will  you  attain  to  holy  detach-
ment and  recollection,  or  avoid  loss.  If  you  live  otherwise,
in  spite  of  your  zeal  and  good  intentions,  satan  will  lay

*  Genes,  xix.  26,


AND  PRECAUTIONS.  515

hold  of  you  in  one  way  or  another,  and  indeed  you  are
already  sufficiently  in  his  power,  when  your  soul  is  allowed
such  distractions  as  these.  Remember  those  words  of  the
apostle  St.  James,  '  If  any  man  think  himself  to  be
religious,  not  bridling  his  tongue,  this  man's  religion  is
vain."*  This  is  applicable  to  the  interior,  quite  as
much  as  to  the  exterior,  tongue — to  thoughts  as  well
as  words.

Three  precautions  necessary  to  be  observed  in  order
to  be  delivered  from  the  devil  in  religion.

If  you  wish  to  escape  from  satan  in  religion,  you  must
give  heed  to  three  things,  without  which  you  cannot  be  in
safety  from  his  cunning.  In  the  first  place  I  would  have
you  take  this  general  advice,  which  you  should  never
forget,  namely,  that  it  is  the  ordinary  practice  of  satan  to
deceive  those  who  are  going  on  unto  perfection  by  an
appearance  of  good  :  he  does  not  tempt  them  by  what
seems  to  be  evil.  He  knows  that  they  will  scarcely
regard  that  which  they  know  to  be  wrong.  You  must
therefore  continually  distrust  that  which  seems  to  be
good,  and  especially  when  obedience  does  not  intervene.
The  remedy  here  is  the  direction  of  one  whom  you  ought
to  consult.     Let  this  then  be  the

FIRST   PRECAUTION.

Never  set  about  anything,  however  good  and  charitable

it  may  seem,  either  to  yourself  or  to  any  other,  whether

in  the  community  or  out  of  it,  except  under  obedience,

unless  you  are  bound  to  do  it  by  the  rule  of  your  order.

•  St,  Jam.  i.  26.

ll2


51 G  INSTRUCTIONS

If  you  do  this  you  will  acquire  merit,  and  be  in  security.
You  will  be  safe  against  yourself  and  against  evil ;  you
will  also  avoid  evils  of  which  you  are  ignorant,  and  of
which  God  will  require  an  account  one  day.  If  you  do
not  observe  this  in  little  things  as  well  as  in  great,  not-
withstanding your  apparent  progress,  satan  will  most
certainly  deceive  you  little  or  much.  Even  if  your  whole
error  consist  in  your  not  being  guided  in  everything  by
obedience,  you  are  plainly  wrong,  because  God  wills
obedience  rather  than  sacrifice,*  and  the  actions  of  a
religious  are  not  his  own,  but  those  of  obedience,  and  if
he  withdraws  them  from  the  control  of  obedience,  he  will
have  to  give  account  of  them  as  lost.

SECOND    PRECAUTION.

The  second  precaution  is  a  very  necessary  one,  because
the  devil  interferes  exceedingly  in  the  matter  to  which  it
refers.  The  observance  of  it  will  bring  great  gain  and
profit,  and  the  neglect  great  loss  and  ruin.  Never  look
upon  your  superior,  be  he  who  he  may,  otherwise  than  if
you  were  looking  upon  God,  because  he  stands  in  His
place.  Keep  a  careful  watch  over  yourself  in  this  matter,
and  do  not  reflect  upon  the  character,  ways,  or  conversa-
tion, or  habits  of  your  superior.  If  you  do,  you  will
injure  yourself,  and  you  will  change  your  obedience  from
divine  into  human,  and  you  will  be  influenced  by  what
you  see  in  your  superior,  and  not  by  the  invisible  God
Whom  you  should  obey  in  him.  Your  obedience  will  be
in  vain,  or  the  more  barren  the  more  you  are  troubled  by
the  untowardness,  or  .  the  more  you  are  pleased  by  the

♦  I  Kings  XV.  22.


AND  PRECAUTIONS.  517

favour,  of  your  superior.  I  tell  you  that  a  great  many
religious  in  the  way  of  perfection  are  ruined  by  not
looking  upon  their  superiors  as  they  ought ;  their  obedience
is  almost  worthless  in  the  eyes  of  God,  because  influenced
by  human  considerations.  Unless  you  force  yourself
therefore  to  be  indifferent  as  to  who  your  superior  may
be,  so  far  as  your  private  feelings  go,  you  will  never  be
spiritual,  neither  will  you  faithfully  observe  your  vows.

THIRD    PRECAUTION.

The  third  precaution  against  satan  is  this :  strive  with
all  your  heart  after  humility  in  thought,  word,  and  deed,
taking  more  pleasure  in  others  than  in  yourself,  giving
way  in  every  thing  to  others,  and  doing  so  as  far  as  you
can  from  a  sincere  heart.  In  this  way  you  will  overcome
evil  with  good,  drive  the  devil  away,  and  have  joy  in  your
heart.  Deal  thus  with  those  who  are  less  agreeable  to
you ;  for  be  assured,  if  you  do  not,  you  will  never  have
true  charity  nor  make  progress  in  it.  Be  always  more
ready  to  receive  instruction  from  any  one  than  to  give  it,
even  to  the  least  of  your  brethren.

Three  precautions  to  be  observed  by  those  who  would
conquer  themselves,  and  master  the  cunning  of  the  flesh.

FIRST    PRECAUTION.

If  you  wish  to  be  delivered  from  the  uneasiness  and
imperfections  of  which  the  habits  and  conversation  of
the  religious  may  be  the  occasion,  and  profit  by  every-
thing that  may  happen,  you  must  keep  in  mind  that  you
entered  the  community  to    be    mortified  and  tried,  and


518  INSTRUCTIONS

that  all  those  in  authority  in  it  are  there,  as  in  truth  they
are,  for  that  purpose.  Some  have  to  mortify  you  by
words,  others  by  deeds,  and  others  by  what  they  think  of
you  ;  in  all  this  you  are  to  submit  yourself,  unresisting
as  a  statue  to  the  polisher,  the  painter,  and  the  gilder  of
it.  If  you  do  not,  you  will  never  be  able  to  live  as  you
ought  with  the  religious  in  the  monastery ;  you  will  not
attain  to  holy  peace,  nor  will  you  escape  from  much  evil.

SECOND    PRECAUTION.

Never  omit  any  practices,  if  they  are  such  as  befit  you,
because  they  are  disagreeable ;  neither  observe  them
because  they  are  pleasant,  unless  they  be  as  necessary  as
those  which  are  not  agreeable.  Otherwise  you  will  find
it  impossible  to  acquire  firmness,  and  conquer  your  weak-
ness.

THIRD    PRECAUTION.

In  all  your  spiritual  exercises  never  set  your  eyes  upon
the  sweetness  of  them  and  cling  to  it,  but  rather  on  that
in  them  which  is  unpleasant  and  troublesome,  and  accept
it.  If  you  do,  you  will  never  destroy  self-love,  nor  acquire
the  love  of  God.


LETTERS


I


LETTERS.


LETTER  I.

to  mother  catherine  of  jesus,  barefooted  carme-
lite and  companion  of  st.  teresa  of  jesus.

Jesus

Be  in  your  soul,  my  daughter  Catherine.  Although  I
know  not  where  you  are,  I  write  you  these  few  lines,
trusting  that  our  Mother  will  forward  them  to  you  if  you
are  not  with  her.  And  even  if  you  are  not  with  her,
comfort  yourself  with  me,  who  am  further  away  and  alone
here.  For  since  I  was  swallowed  by  that  whale,*  and
cast  forth  upon  this  distant  shore,  I  have  not  been  counted
worthy  to  see  her  or  the  saints  who  are  down  there.  God
has  done  it  for  our  good ;  for  loneliness  is  a  file,  and  to
suffer  darkness  is  the  way  to  great  light.

God  grant  that  we  may  not  walk  in  darkness.  Oh  !
how  many  things  would  I  fain  say  to  you  !  But  I  am
writing  very  much  in  the  dark,  fearing  that  you  may  not
receive  this  letter ;  and  therefore  I  break  off  without
finishing  it.  Recommend  me  to  God.  I  will  say  no
more  from  here,  for  I  am  weary.

Your  servant  in  Christ,

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Baeza  :  the  6th  of  July,  1581.

*  The  prison  of  the  Monastery  of  Toledo.


522  LETTERS.


LETTER  II.*

TO  THE  RELIGIOUS  IN  VEAS.

Jesus  be  in  your  souls :  My  daughters  are  thinking  that
I  have  lost  sight  of  them  because  I  do  not  write,  and  that
I  have  ceased  to  consider  how  easily  they  can  become
saints  and  rejoice  in  the  Bridegroom  whom  they  love  with
great  gladness  and  in  strong  security.  I  will  come  to
Veas,  and  you  will  see  that  I  have  not  forgotten  you.
We  shall  then  see  the  treasures  obtained  by  pure  love  and
on  the  pathways  of  everlasting  life ;  the  blessed  progress
you  have  made  in  Christ,  whose  joy  and  crown  are  His
brides.  This  crown  ought  not  to  be  rotting  on  the  ground,
but  rather  borne  by  the  hands  of  the  seraphim,  and  placed
with  respect  and  reverence  on  the  head  of  our  Lord.

When  the  heart  is  grovelling  meanly  on  the  ground  the
crown  rolls  in  the  dust,  and  is  trampled  on  in  every  act  of
meanness.  But  when  man  shall  '  come  to  a  heart  that  is
high,'  according  to  the  words  of  David, t  then  shall  God
be  exalted  with  the  crown  of  the  heart  of  His  bride ;
wherewith  they  crown  Him  in  the  day  of  the  joy  of  His
coronation,  for  His  delight  is  to  be  with  the  children  of
men.t

The  sources  of  the  waters  of  interior  joy  are  not  on  the
earth  ;  the  mouth  of  desire  must  be  opened  heavenwards,
utterly  empty  ;  and  in  order  that  the  mouth  of  desire  may
be  neither  closed  nor  vitiated  by  the  taste  of  anything,  it

*  This  letter  appeared  for  the  first  time,  copied  from  the  original  kept  in
the  Monastery  of  Pastrana,  in  the  Life  of  the  Saint,  by  Don  Manuel  Mufioz
Garnica,  Canon  of  Jaen,  Jaen,  1875,  p.  411.

f  Ps.  Ixiii.  8.  \   Prov.  viii.  31.


LETTERS.  523

should  be  kept  perfectly  empty  and  open  before  Him  who
says,  '  dilate  thy  mouth  and  I  will  fill  it.'*  For  so  it  is,
he  who  seeks  for  satisfaction  in  anything  is  not  keeping
himself  in  a  state  of  emptiness  that  God  may  fill  him  with
this  unspeakable  joy ;  his  hands  are  encumbered,  and  he
cannot  lay  hold  of  that  which  God  is  giving  him ;  as  he
went  to  God,  so  he  returned.  God  save  us  from  these
miserable  embarrassments  by  which  a  freedom  so  sweet
and  so  delightful  is  disturbed.  Serve  God,  my  daughters
beloved  in  Christ,  following  Him  on  the  road  of  mortifica-
tion in  all  patience  and  in  all  silence,  with  all  your  soul
bent  on  suffering,  having  made  yourselves  executioners  of
your  own  will.  Mortify  yourselves,  and  if  there  be  any-
thing still  living  that  hinders  the  interior  resurrection  of
the  spirit  let  it  die  in  your  souls.  Amen.
Your  servant,

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Malaga,  November  i8,  1586.


*  Ps.  Ixxx.  II.


524  LETTERS.


LETTER  III.


TO    THE    RELIGIOUS    OF    VEAS.


He  gives  thrin  some  spiritual  advice,  full  of  heavenly  instruction,  and  worthy  of
perpetual  remembrance.

Jesus,  Mary

Be  in  your  souls,  my  daughters,  in  Christ.

Your  letter  greatly  consoled  me,  and  may  our  Lord
reward  you  for  it.  It  was  not  from  want  of  will  that  I
have  refrained  from  writing  to  you,  for  truly  do  I  wish
you  all  good  ;  but  because  it  seemed  to  me  that  enough
had  been  already  said  to  effect  all  that  was  needful,  and
that  what  is  wanting,  if  indeed  anything  be  wanting,  is
not  writing  or  speaking — whereof  ordinarily  there  is  more
than  enough — but  silence  and  work.  For  whereas  speak-
ing distracts,  silence  and  action  collect  the  thoughts,  and
strengthen  the  spirit.  As  soon  therefore  as  a  person
understands  what  has  been  said  to  him  for  his  good,
he  has  no  further  need  to  hear  or  to  discuss ;  but  to
set  himself  in  earnest  to  practise  what  he  has  learnt
with  silence  and  attention,  in  humility,  charity,  and
contempt  of  self;  not  turning  aside  incessantly  to  seek
after  novelties  which  serve  only  to  satisfy  the  desire  in
outward  things — failing  however  to  satisfy  it  really — and
to  leave  it  weak  and  empty,  devoid  of  interior  virtue.  The
result  is  unprofitable  in  every  way  ;  for  a  man  who,  before
he  has  digested  his  last  meal,  takes  another — the  natural
heat  being  wasted  upon  both— cannot  convert  all  this
food  into  the  substance  of  his  body,  and  sickness  follows.
It  is  most  necessary,  my  daughters,  to  know  how  to  avoid


LETTERS.  52")

the  devil  and  our  own  sensuality,  for  if  we  do  not  we  shall
find  ourselves  to  be  very  unprofitable  servants,  very  far  away
from  the  virtues  of  Christ ;  and  in  the  end  we  shall  awake
from  our  sleep  to  find  our  toil  and  labour  to  have  been
the  reverse  of  what  they  were.    The  lamp  which  we  believed
to  be  alight  will  be  found  extinguished,  because  the  breath
whereby  we  thought  to  kindle  it,  served  perhaps  to  put  it  out.
There  are  no  means  to  avoid  this,  and  preserve  spirituality,
better  than  suffering,  doing  good  works,  silence,  custody
of  the    senses,   the    practice    of,   and    the    inclination  to
solitude,  forgetfulness  of  creatures,  and  of  all  that  is  going
on,  even  if  the  world  were  to  come  to  an  end.     Never  fail,
whatever  may  befall  you  be  it  good  or  evil,  to  keep  your
heart  quiet  and  calm  in  the  tenderness  of  love,  that  it  may
suffer  in  all  circumstances.     For  so  momentous  a  thing  is
perfection,  and  so  priceless  is  spiritual  joy,  and  may  God
grant  that  this  may  be  enough  ;  for  it  is  impossible  to
make    progress    but    by  the   way    of    good    works    and
suffering  courageously,  always  in  silence.     I  have  heard,
my  daughters,  that  the  soul  which  is  ready  to  talk  and  converse
with  creatures,  is  not  very  ready  to  converse  with  God ;  for  if
it  were,  it  would  be  at  once  drawn  forcibly  inwards,  be  silent
and  avoid  all  conversation ;  for  God  would  that  the  soul  shotdd
delight  in  Him  rather  than  in  any  creature,  however  excellent
and  profitable   it   may    be.     I    commend    myself  to    your
charitable  prayers ;  and  do  you  rest  assured  that,  scant  as
my  charity  is,  it  is  so  bound  up  in  you  that  I  never  forget
those  to  whom  I  owe  so  much  in  our  Lord.     May  He  be
with  us  all.     Amen.

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Granada,  the  22nd  of  Nov.  1587,


526  LETTERS.


LETTER  IV.

TO     MOTHER     ELEANORA     BAPTIST,     PRIORESS     OF     THE
CONVENT  OF  VEAS.

The  blessed  father  consoles  her  under  an  affliction.

Jesus

Be  in  your  soul.  Think  not,  my  daughter  in  Christ,  that
I  am  not  sorry  for  you  in  your  troubles,  and  for  those
who  share  them  with  you ;  but  when  I  remember
that  God  has  called  you  to  an  apostolic  life,  which  is  a
life  of  contempt,  I  am  comforted,  for  He  is  leading  you  on
that  road.  God  will  have  a  religious  to  be  a  religious,
that  he  shall  be  dead  to  all  things,  and  all  things  dead  to
him ;  because  He  will  be  his  riches,  his  consolation,  his
glory,  and  his  bliss.  God  has  conferred  a  great  grace
upon  your  reverence,  for  now,  forgetting  all  things,  you
may  rejoice  in  Him  alone,  caring  nothing,  in  your  love  of
God,  for  what  may  come  upon  you,  since  you  are  no
longer  your  own,  but  His.  Let  me  know  whether  your
departure  for  Madrid  is  certain,  and  whether  the
mother  prioress  is  coming.  I  commend  myself  especially
to  my  daughters  Magdalene  and  Ana  and  to  all  the  rest,
not  having  leisure  to  write  to  them.

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Granada  :  the  8th  February,  1588,


LETTERS.  52'


LETTER  V.


TO    MOTHER    ANNE    OF    ST.    ALBERT,    PRIORESS    OF    THE
BAREFOOTED  CARMELITES  OF  CARAVACA.

He  makes  hiown  to  her  by  a  prophetical  inspiration  the  state  of  her  soul,  and
delivers  her  from  scruples.

Jesus

Be  in  your  soul.  How  long,  my  daughter,  must  you  be
carried  in  the  arms  of  others  ?  I  long  to  see  in  you  a
great  detachment  of  spirit,  and  such  a  freedom  from  any
dependence  upon  creatures,  that  all  the  powers  of  hell
may  be  unable  to  disturb  you.  What  useless  tears  have
you  been  shedding  in  these  last  days :  How  much
precious  time,  think  you,  have  these  scruples  caused  you
to  throw  away  ?  If  you  would  communicate  your
troubles  to  me,  go  strait  to  that  spotless  mirror  of  the
Eternal  Father,  His  only  Begotten  Son ;  for  there  do  I
daily  behold  your  soul,  and  without  doubt  you  will  come
away  consoled,  and  have  no  more  need  to  beg  at  the  door
of  poor  people.

Your  servant  in  Christ,

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Granada.


LETTER  VL

TO  THE  SAME  RELIGIOUS.
On  the  same  subject.

Jesus

Be  in  your  soul,  very  dear  daughter  in  Christ.      Though
you  say   nothing  to  me,  I  will  say  something  to  you ;  let


528  LETTERS.

those  vain  fears  which  make  the  spirit  cowardly  find  no
place  in  your  soul.  Leave  to  our  Lord  that  which  He
has  given  and  daily  gives,  you  seem  to  measure  God  by
the  measure  of  your  own  capacity ;  but  that  must  not  be
so.  Prepare  yourself  to  receive  a  great  grace.
Your  servant  in  Christ,

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Granada.


LETTER  VTL

TO  THE  SAME  RELIGIOUS.

Tke  holy  father  informs  her  of  the  foundation  of  the  mviastery  at  Cordova,  and
of  the  removal  of  the  nuns  in  Seville.

Jesus

Be  in  your  soul.  I  wrote  to  you  in  haste  when  I  left
Granada  for  the  foundation  at  Cordova.  I  have  since
received  your  letter  there,  and  those  of  the  gentlemen
who  went  to  Madrid,  thinking  that  they  should  find  me  at
the  council.  You  must  know,  however,  that  it  never
met,  for  we  have  been  waiting  to  finish  these  visitations
and  foundations,  which  our  Lord  is  now  making  such
haste  in  the  matter,  that  we  are  without  strength  to
follow  Him.  The  friars  have  been  received  at  Cordova  with
the  greatest  joy  and  solemnity  on  the  part  of  the  whole
city.  No  order  has  been  better  received  there.  All  the
clergy  and  confraternities  of  Cordova  assembled  on  the
occasion,  and  there  was  a  solemn  procession  of  the  Most


LETTERS.  529

Holy  Sacrament  from  the  Cathedral  Church— all  the
streets  being  decorated — with  great  concourse  of  people,
as  on  the  feast  of  Corpus  Christi.

This  took  place  on  the  Sunday  after  Ascension  day,  and
the  bishop  preached,  praising  us  much  in  his  sermon.
The  house  is  in  the  best  part  of  the  city,  and  belongs  to
the  Cathedral.  I  am  now  busied  at  Seville  with  the
removal  of  our  nuns,  who  have  bought  some  very
considerable  houses,  though  they  cost  about  14,000  ducats,
the\-  are  worth  more  than  20,000.  They  are  now
established  there.  My  lord  Cardinal  is  to  place  the
Blessed  Sacrament  there  with  great  solemnity  on  the
feast  of  St.  Barnabas.  cUfore  my  departure  I  intend  to
establish  another  house  of  friars  here,  so  that  there  will
be  two  of  our  order  in  Seville.  Before  the  feast  of  St.
John  I  shall  set  forth  for  Ecija,  where,  with  the  divine
blessing,  we  shall  found  another ;  thence  to  Malaga,  and
then  to  the  council.  I  wish  I  had  authority  to  make  this
foundation,  as  I  had  for  the  others.  I  do  not  expect  much
from  what  is  going  on  ;  but  I  trust  in  God  that  the  founda-
tion will  be  made,  and  in  the  council  I  will  do  what  I  can ;
and  you  may  say  so  to  these  gentlemen  to  whom  I  am  writing.
Send   me  the  little  book  of  the  Stanzas  of  the  Bride,

which   I  think  Sister of  the  mother  of  God  will  by

this  time  have  copied.      Remember  me  very  specially  to
seiior  Gonzalo   Munoz,  I   do  not  write  for  fear  of  being
troublesome  to  him,  and  because  your  reverence  will  make
known  to  him  that  which  I  have  here  related  to  you.
Dearest  daughter  in  Christ,

Your  servant,
Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Seville  :  June,  1586.

MM


530  LETTERS.


LETTER    VIII.

TO  F.  AMBROSE  MARIANO  OF  ST.  BENEDICT,  PRIOR   OF
MADRID.

Cofitaining  wholesome  instructions  for  the  traijmtg  of  novices.

Jesus

Be  in  your  reverence.  Our  need  of  religious  is  very
great,  as  your  reverence  knows,  because  of  the  many
foundations.  It  is  therefore  necessary  that  your  rever-
ence should  have  patience  until  father  Michael  leave
this  place  to  wait  at  Pastrana  for  the  father  provincial ;
the  foundation  of  the  convent  of  Molina  being  nearly
completed.  It  has  seemed  good  to  the  fathers  also  to
assign  to  your  reverence  a  sub-prior,  and  have  made
choice  of  father  Angelo,  believing  that  he  will  agree
perfectly  with  the  prior,  which  is  most  necessary  in  a
monastery.  Your  reverence  will  give  to  each  of  these  his
letters  patent,  and  will  not  fail  to  take  care  that  no  priest
meddle  or  converse  with  the  novices,  for  as  your  rever-
ence knows,  nothing  is  more  injurious  to  them  than  to
pass  through  many  hands,  or  that  strangers  should
frequent  the  novices.  Since,  however,  you  have  so  many
under  }our  care,  it  is  reasonable  that  you  should  help
and  relieve  father  Angelo.  Give  him  authority,  as  he  is
already  sub-prior,  that  he  may  be  more  considered  in  the
house.

It  does  not  seem  that  father  Michael  is  so  much  needed


LETTERS.  531

here,  and  he  might  do  greater  service  to  the  order  else-
where. Of  father  Gratian  nothing  new,  except  that  father
Antony  is  now  here.

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Segovia  ;  Nov.  g,  1588.

[St.  John  was  now  the  president  of  the  consultors   in   the  absence  of
Doria,  and  therefore  wrote  this  letter  as  a  member  of  the  council.]


\


LETTER   IX.

TO  A  YOUNG  LADY  AT  MADRID,  WHO  DESIRED  TO  BECOME
A  BAREFOOTED  CARMELITE,  AND  WHO  WAS  AFTER
WARDS  PROFESSED  IN  A  CONVENT  AT  ARENAS,  IN  NEW
CASTILE,  AFTERWARDS  TRANSFERRED  TO  GUADA-
LAXARA.

Jesus

Be  in  your  soul.  Your  messenger  came  at  a  time  when  I
was  unable  to  reply  before  he  left  the  place,  and  now,  on
his  return,  he  is  waiting  for  my  letter.  May  God  ever
grant  you,  my  daughter,  His  holy  grace,  that  always  and
in  all  things  you  may  be  wholly  occupied  with  His  holy
love ;  for  to  this  are  you  bound,  and  for  this  onl}-  He
created  and  redeemed  you.  On  the  three  questions  there
is  much  to  say,  more  than  time  and  a  letter  will  allow.  I
will  speak  of  three  other  points  which  may  be  profitable
to  you.

As  to  sins,  God  so  hates  them  that  He  submitted  to
die;  it  is  expedient,  in  order  utterly  to  root  them  out,  and
never  to  commit  any,  to  have  as  little  intercourse  with
people  as  possible,  avoiding  them,  and  never  speaking  an
unnecessary  word  on  any  subject — for  all  conversation,
beyond    what    necessity   or    reason    absolutely   requires,

MM  2


532  LETTERS.

has  never  done  good  to  any  man,  however  holy — and  at
the  same  time  keeping  the  law  of  God  with  great  exact-
ness and  love.

As  to  the  passion  of  Our  Lord,  chastise  your  body
with  discretion,  hate  and  mortify  yourself,  and  never  in
anything  follow  your  own  will  and  your  own  inclination,
for  that  was  the  cause  of  His  death  and  passion.  What-
ever you  may  do,  do  it  all  under  the  advice  of  your
director.  As  to  the  third,  which  is  glory  ;  in  order  to
meditate  well  upon  it,  and  love  it,  you  must  hold  all  the
riches  of  the  world  and  all  its  pleasures  to  be  mere  dross,
and  vanity,  and  weariness,  as,  in  truth,  they  are ;  and
make  no  account  of  anything,  however  great  and  precious
it  may  be,  but  only  to  be  well  with  God  ;  because  the  best
things  here  below,  when  compared  with  the  eternal  good
for  which  God  created  us,  are  vile  and  bitter ;  and  though
the  bitterness  and  deformity  be  but  for  a  moment,  they
shall  abide  for  ever  in  the  soul  which  esteems  them.

I  have  not  forgotten  your  matter ;  but  at  present,
much  as  I  desire  it,  nothing  can  be  done.  Recommend
it  earnestly  to  our  Lord,  and  take  our  Lady  and  St.
Joseph  as  your  advocates  with  Him.

Remember  me  especially  to  your  mother,  to  whom,  as
well  as  to  yourself,  this  letter  is  addressed  ;  and  do  you
both  prav  for  me,  and  in  their  charity  ask  your  friends  to
do  the  same.     May  God  give  you  His  Spirit.

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Skoovia  :   February,  1589.


LETTERS.


LETTER    X.


TO  A  SPIRITUAL  SON  IN  RELIGION,  TEACHING  HIM  HOW  TO
EMPLOY  HIS  WHOLE  WILL  IN  GOD,  WITHDRAWING  IT
FROM  PLEASURE  AND  JOY  IN  CREATED  THINGS.

The  peace  of  Jesus  Christ,  my  son,  be  ever  in  your  soul.

I  have  received  the  letter  of  your  reverence,  wherein
you  tell  me  of  the  great  desire  you  have,  given  you  by
our  Lord,  to  occupy  your  will  with  Him  alone,  loving
Him  above  all  things,  and  wherein  you  also  ask  me  for
some  directions  how  to  obtain  your  end.  I  rejoice  that
God  has  given  you  such  holy  desires,  and  I  shall  rejoice
the  more  at  their  fulfilment.  Remember  then  that  all
pleasure,  joy,  and  affections  come  into  the  soul  through
the  will  and  the  desire  of  those  things  which  seem  good,
befitting,  and  pleasurable,  because  they  seem  to  be
pleasing  and  precious  ;  now  the  affections  of  the  will
are  drawn  to  them,  and  the  will  hopes  for  them,
delights  in  them  when  it  possesses  them,  and  dreads  the
loss  of  them.  The  soul,  therefore,  by  reason  of  these
affections  and  joys,  is  disturbed  and  disquieted.

In  order  then  to  annihilate  and  mortif\-  the  desire  of
sensible  pleasure  in  things  that  are  not  God,  your
reverence  will  observe,  that  everything  in  which  the  will
can  have  a  distinct  joy  is  sweet  and  delectable,  because
pleasant  in  its  eyes ;  but  there  is  no  delectable  thing  in
which  it  can  have  joy  and  delight  in  God,  for  God  is  not
cognisable  by  the  apprehensions  of  the  other  faculties,
and  therefore  not  by  the  pleasure  and  desires  of  the  will.
In  this  life,  as  the  soul  cannot  taste  of  God  essentially,  so


534  LETTERS.

all  the  sweetness  and  delight  of  which  it  is  capable,  and,
however  great  they  may  be,  cannot  be  God,  for  whatever
the  will  takes  pleasure  in  and  desires  as  a  distinct  thing,
it  desires  so  far  as  it  knows  it  to  be  that  which  it  longs
for.  For  as  the  will  has  never  tasted  of  God,  nor  ever
known  Him  under  any  apprehension  of  the  desire,  and
therefore  comprehends  Him  not,  so  by  its  taste  it  can
never  know  Him  ;  its  very  being,  desire,  and  taste  can
never  desire  God,  because  He  is  above  and  beyond  all  its
powers.

It  is,  therefore,  plain  that  no  distinct  object  whatever

that  pleases  the  will  can  be  God  ;  and  for  that  reason,  if

it  is  to  be  united   with   Him,  it   must  empty  itself,  cast

away   every   disorderly    affection    of    the    desire,    every

satisfaction     it     may     distinctly     have,    high    and    low,

temporal   and    spiritual,   so   that,   purified    and    cleansed

from  all  unruly  satisfactions,  joys  and  desires,  it  may  be

wholly  occupied,  with  all  its  affections,   in    loving   God.

For  if  the  will  can  in  any  way  comprehend  God  and  be

united  with  Him,  it  cannot  be  through  any  capacity  of

the  desire,  but  only  by  love  ;  and  as  all  delight,  sweetness,

and  joy,  of  which  the  will  is  sensible,  is  not  love,  it  follows

that  none  of  these  pleasing  impressions  can  be  the  adequate

means  of  uniting  the  will  to  God  :  the  means  are  an  act  of

the  will.     And  because  an  act  of  the  will  is  quite  distinct

from  feeling ;    it  is  by  an  act  that  the  will  is  united  with

God,  and  rests  in  Him ;  that  act  is  love.      This  union  is

never  wrought  by  feeling,  or  exertions  of  the  desire,  for

these  remain  in  the  soul  as  aims  and  ends.     It  is  only  as

motives  of  love  that  feelings  can  be  of  service,  if  the  will

is  bent  on  going  onwards,  and  for  nothing  else.


LETTERS.  ■•lo;)

These  sweet  impressions  of  themselves  do  not  lead  the
soul  to  God,  but  rather  cause  it  to  rest  upon  them  :  by
an  act  of  the  will,  that  is,  by  loving  God,  the  soul
puts  its  whole  affection,  joy,  delight,  contentment,  and
love  in  Him  only,  casting  everything  else  aside,  and  loving
Him  above  all  things.

For  this  reason,  then,  if  anyone  is  moved  to  love  God
by  that  sweetness  he  feels,  he  casts  that  sweetness  away
from  Him,  and  fixes  his  love  upon  God,  Whom  he  does
not  feel ;  but  if  he  allowed  himself  to  rest  in  that  sweet-
ness and  delight  which  he  feels,  dwelHng  upon  them  with
satisfaction,  that  would  be  to  love  the  creature,  and  that
which  is  of  it,  and  to  make  the  motive  an  end,  and  the
act  of  the  will  would  be  vitiated  ;  for  as  God  is  incompre-
hensible and  unapproachable,  the  will,  in  order  to  direct
its  act  of  love  unto  God,  must  not  direct  it  to  that  which
is  tangible  and  capable  of  being  reached  by  the  desire,
but  must  direct  it  to  that  which  it  cannot  comprehend
nor  reach  thereby.  In  this  way  the  will  loves  that  which
is  certain  and  true,  according  to  the  spirit  of  the  faith,  in
emptiness  and  darkness  as  to  its  own  feelings,  above  all  that
it  can  understand  by  the  operations  of  the  understanding;
its  faith  and  love  transcend  all  that  it  can  comprehend.

He,  then,  is  very  unwise,  who,  when  sweetness  and
spiritual  delight  fail  him,  thinks  for  that  reason  that  God
has  abandoned  him,  and  when  he  finds  them  again,
rejoices  and  is  glad,  thinking  that  he  has  in  that  way
come  to  possess  God.

More  unwise  still  is  he  who  goes  about  seeking  for
sweetness  in  God,  rejoices  in  it,  and  dwells  upon  it ;  for,  in
so    doing,    he    is    not    seeking    after    God    with    the   will


r)':5(3  LETTERS.

grounded  in  the  emptiness  of  faith  and  charity,  but  only
in  spiritual  sweetness  and  delight,  which  is  a  created
thing,  following  herein  his  own  will  and  fond  pleasure.
Such  an  one  does  not  love  God  purely  above  all  things
which  is  to  direct  the  whole  strength  of  the  will  to  Him —
for  by  clinging  to  and  resting  on  the  creature  by  desire,
the  will  does  not  ascend  upwards  beyond  it  to  God  Who
is  unapproachable.  It  is  impossible  for  the  will  to  attain
to  the  sweetness  and  delight  of  the  divine  union,  to  feel
the  sweet  and  loving  embraces  of  God,  otherwise  than  in
detachment,  in  refusing  to  the  desire  every  pleasure  in
the  things  of  heaven  and  earth  for  that  is  the  meaning  of
David,  when  he  said  :  '  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will
fill  it.'*  Now,  in  this  place  '  the  mouth  '  of  the  will  is  the
desire  :  the  mouth  opens,  when  not  filled  or  hindered  with
the  morsels  of  its  own  satisfactions  :  for  when  the  desire
is  bent  upon  anything,  it  is  then  restrained,  because  out
of  God  everything  is  a  restraint.

The  soul  then  that  is  to  advance  straightway  unto  God,
and  to  be  united  with  Him,  must  keep  the  mouth  of  the
will  open,  but  only  for  God  Himself,  in  detachment  from
every  morsel  of  desire,  in  order  that  God  may  fill  it  with
His  own  love  and  sweetness :  it  must  hunger  and  thirst
after  God  alone,  seeking  its  satisfaction  in  nothing  else,
seeing  that  in  this  life  it  cannot  taste  Him  as  He  is.
That  which  may  be  tasted  here,  if  there  be  a  desire  for
it,  hinders  the  taste  of  God.

This  is  what  the  prophet  Isaias  teaches  when  he  says  :
'All  you  that  thirst  come  to  the  waters. '+  He  bids  all
who  thirst  for  God  only  to  come  to   the  fulness  of  the

*  Ps.  Ixxx.  II.  f  Is.  Iv.  i.


LETTKRS.  587

divine  waters  of  union  with  Him :  namely,  those  who
have  not  the  money  of  desire.  It  is  most  expedient  then,
for  your  reverence,  if  you  wish  to  have  great  peace  in
your  soul  and  to  reach  perfection,  to  give  up  your  whole
will  to  God,  that  it  may  be  united  to  Him,  and  utterly
detached  from  the  mean  and  vile  occupations  of  earth.
May  His  Majesty  make  you  as  spiritual  and  as  holy  as
I  desire.

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

Segovia,  April  14,  1589.


LETTER   XL

TO    MOTHER   LEONORA  OF  ST.   GABRIEL,  A  BAREFOOTED
CARMELITE  OF  SEVILLE.

The   holy  father  and  the  cuuncil  command  her  to  found  a  monastery   in

Cordova.

Jesus

Be  in  your  soul,  my  daughter  in  Christ.  Your  letter  was
very  welcome  to  me,  and  I  thank  God  that  He  has  been
pleased  to  make  use  of  you  in  this  foundation,  which  His
Majesty  has  made  for  your  greater  profit ;  for  the  more
He  gives,  the  more  does  He  enlarge  our  desires,  till  He
leaves  us  empty  that  He  may  fill  us  with  blessings.  You
shall  be  well  repaid  for  those  which,  for  the  love  of  your
sisters,  you  forego  in  Seville  ;  for  the  immense  benefits  of
God  can  only  be  received  and  contained  by  empty  and
solitary  hearts ;  and,  therefore,  our  Lord  will  have  you  to
be  alone,  and  He  really  wills  it  for  He  desires  to  be  your
only  companion.     Your  reverence  must  therefore  apply


538  LETTERS.

your  mind  to  Him  alone,  and  in  Him  alone  content
yourself,  that  in  Him  you  may  find  all  consolation,  for
if  the  soul  were  in  heaven,  but  the  will  without  love,
that  soul  would  be  still  unsatisfied.  So  also  though  God
be  ever  with  us,  if  our  heart  be  attached  to  other  things
and  not  fixed  on  Him  alone.

I  well  believe  that  those  in  Seville  will  be  very  lonely
without  your  reverence.  But,  perhaps,  you  have  already
done  all  the  good  there  which  you  were  intended  to  do,
and  God  wills  that  you  should  now  work  here,  for  this
is  one  of  our  principal  foundations.  To  this  end,  I  pray
your  reverence  to  afford  all  the  assistance  you  can  to
the  mother  prioress,  with  great  love  and  union  of  heart
in  all  things.  I  know  that  I  need  not  say  this  to  you,  for
you  have  been  so  long  in  the  order  and  so  experienced
that  you  know  all  that  is  usually  done  in  these  founda-
tions. For  this  reason,  we  chose  your  reverence.  There
are  religious  enough  here,  but  not  fitted  for  this  work.
Be  pleased  to  remember  me  particularly  to  sister  Mary  of
the  visitation,  and  to  sister  Juana  of  St.  Gabriel,  to  whom
I  return  thanks  for  her  letter.  May  God  give  your
reverence  His  Holy  Spirit.

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Segovia,  the  8th  of  July,  1589.


LETTERS.  539


LETTER  XII.


TO    MOTHER   MARY   OF    JESUS,    PRIORESS   OF    THE    BARE-
FOOTED CARMELITES  OF  CORDOVA.

Containing  useful  lessons  for  religious  engaged  in  the  foundation  of  a  new
convent,  of^uhich  they  are  to  he  the  first  stones.

Jesus
Be  in  your  soul.  You  are  bound  to  correspond  to  the
grace  of  our  Lord  in  proportion  to  the  welcome  which
you  have  received,  the  tidings  of  which  have  rejoiced  my
heart.  It  was  His  will  that  you  should  enter  so  poor  a
dwelling,  under  the  heat  of  such  a  burning  sun,  that  you
might  give  edification,  and  manifest  your  profession  which
is  the  imitation  of  Christ  in  detachment,  in  order  that  those
who  come  to  you  hereafter  may  learn  in  what  spirit  they
must  come.  I  send  you  all  necessary  faculties.  Be  very
careful  whom  you  receive  at  first,  because  such  will  be  those
who  follow  ;  and  strive  to  preserve  the  spirit  of  poverty  and
contempt  of  all  earthly  things,  being  content  with  God  alone :
otherwise  be  assured  that  you  will  fall  into  a  thousand
temporal  and  spiritual  necessities,  you  will  never,  and  can
never,  experience  greater  necessities  than  those  to  which
you  voluntarily  subject  your  heart :  for  the  poor  in  spirit
is  more  content  and  joyful  when  in  want ;  having  made
very  nothingness  his  all,  and  having  found  therein  fulness
and  freedom  in  all  things.

O  blessed  nothingness,  and  blessed  hiddenness  of
heart,  which  is  of  such  surpassing  virtue  as  to  render  all
things  subject  to  the  soul  that  will  have  nothing  subject
to  itself,  and  casting  away  all  care  to  burn  more  and  more
intensely  with  love !


540  LETTERS.

Salute  all  the  sisters  in  our  Lord.  Tell  them  that  as
our  Lord  has  chosen  them  for  the  lirst  stones  of  this
building,  they  must  consider  well  what  they  ought  to  be,
for  upon  them,  as  on  a  strong  foundation,  those  who
follow  after  them  are  to  be  built.  Let  them  profit  by  the
first  fruits  of  the  spirit  which  God  gives  in  the  beginning
to  make  a  new  start  on  the  way  of  perfection,  in  all
humility  and  detachment,  inward  and  outward,  not  in  a
childish  mind,  but  with  a  strong  will  in  mortification  and
penance.  Let  them  see  that  Christ  costs  them  some-
thing, and  not  be  like  those  who  seek  their  own  ease,  and
look  for  consolation  either  in  God  or  out  of  Him.  But
let  them  suffer  either  in  Him  or  out  of  Him,  by  silence,
hope,  and  loving  remembrance.  Make  this  known  to
Gabriela  and  the  sisters  at  Malaga.  To  the  others  I  have
already  written.     The  grace  of  God  be  with  you.     Amen.

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Segovia  :  the  28th  of  July,  1589.


LETTER  Xni.

to  mother  magdalene  of  the  holy  ghcjst,  a  reel
gious  of  the  same  convent  of  cordova.

Jesus

Be  in  your  soul,  my  daughter  in  Christ.  The  good  resolu-
tions expressed  in  your  letter  make  me  glad.  I  bless  God,
who  provides  for  all  things  !  for  they  will  be  greatly
needed  in  the  beginnings  of  foundations  that  you  may
bear  poverty,  straitness,  heat,  and  labours  of  all  kinds,  in
such  a  manner  that  none  may  perceive  whether  or  not  all


LETTERS.  541

these  things  are  grievous  to  you.  Consider  that  for  such
beginnings  God  will  not  have  delicate  and  feeble  souls,
far  less  such  as  are  lovers  of  themselves  ;  and  to  this  end
His  Majesty  helps  us  more  in  our  beginnings,  that  they,
with  moderate  diligence,  may  advance  in  all  virtues.  It
is  assuredly  a  great  grace,  and  a  sign  of  the  divine  favour,
that,  passing  by  others,  He  has  led  you  hither.  And
though  the  abandonment  may  have  been  painful,  it  is
nothing  ;  for  you  must  in  any  case  have  shortly  left  it  all.
In  order  to  have  God  in  all  things,  we  must  have  nothing
at  all  ;  for  how  can  the  heart,  given  to  one,  be  given  at  all
to  another  ?

I  say  this  also  to  sister  Juana,  and  beg  you  to  pray  to
God  for  me.     May  He  be  in  your  heart.     Amen.

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Segovia  ;  the  28th  of  July,  1589.


LETTER  XIV.

to  dona    juana    de    pedraga,  a  penitent  of  the
holy  father  in  granada.

Jesus

Be  in  your  soul.  I  give  Him  thanks  that  He  has  given
me  the  grace  not  to  forget  the  poor,  and  not  to  take  my
ease,  as  you  say.  It  would  pain  me  much  if  I  thought
you  believe  what  you  say.  It  would  be  an  evil  return
after  so  much  kindness,  when  I  deserve  none.  All  that
is  wanting  now  is  that  I  should  forget  you  ;  but  consider
how  that  is  to  be  forgotten  which  is  ever  present   to  the


542  LETTERS.

soul.  But  as  you  are  now  in  the  darkness  and  emptiness
of  spiritual  poverty,  you  think  that  all  things  and  all  men
are  failing  you ;  nor  is  this  wonderful,  since  you  think  God
Himself  fails  you.  But  nothing  fails  you,  nor  have  you
need  of  any  counsel,  there  is  no  reason  why  you  should,
you  will  learn  nothing,  you  will  find  none,  for  all  is
groundless  suspicion.  He  who  desires  nothing  but  God
does  not  walk  in  darkness,  however  blind  and  poor  he
may  think  himself  to  be ;  and  he  who  indulges  in  no
presumptuous  thoughts,  nor  seeks  his  own  satisfaction
either  in  God  or  in  creatures,  who  does  not  serve  his  own
will  in  anything,  is  in  no  danger  of  falling,  or  in  an\-
need  of  counsel.

You  are  in  the  right  path,  my  daughter ;  be  resigned,
and  be  glad.  What  !  are  you  to  undertake  to  guide
yourself?  You  would  do  it  well,  no  doubt.  You  have
never  been  in  a  better  state  than  now,  for  you  have  never
been  so  humble,  so  submissive ;  you  have  never  held
yourself,  and  the  things  of  the  world,  in  greater  contempt :
you  have  never  seen  yourself  to  be  so  bad,  nor  God  to  be
so  good  ;  you  have  never  served  Him  so  purely  and
disinterestedly  as  now.  You  are  not  running  after  the
imperfections  of  your  own  will,  seeking  self,  as  perhaps
you  once  did.  What  do  you  mean  ?  What  manner  of
life  and  conversation  do  you  propose  to  yourself  in  this
world  ?  In  what  do  you  imagine  the  service  of  God  to
consist,  except  in  abstaining  from  evil,  keeping  His  com-
mandments, and  doing  His  work  as  well  as  we  can.
When  you  do  this,  what  need  have  you  to  seek  here  and
there  for  other  instructions,  other  lights,  other  consola-
tions, in  which   ordinarily  lurk   many  snares  and  dangers


LETTERS.  o4.">

to  the  soul,  which  is  deceived  and  deluded  by  its  appetites
and  perceptions  :  its  very  faculties  lead  it  astray.

It  is  a  great  grace  of  God  when  He  so  darkens  and
impoverishes  the  soul  that  the  senses  cannot  deceive  it.
And  that  it  may  not  go  astray,  it  has  nothing  to  do  but
to  walk  in  the  beaten  path  of  the  law  of  God  and  of  the
Church,  living  solely  by  faith,  dim  and  true,  in  certain
hope  and  perfect  charity,  looking  for  all  its  blessings  in
heaven ;  living  here  as  pilgrims,  beggars,  exiles,  orphans,
desolate,  possessing  nothing,  and  looking  for  everything
above.

Rejoice,  then,  and  put  your  trust  in  God,  who  has
given  you  these  tokens,  you  can  do  so,  nay,  you  ought  to
do  so.  If  not,  you  must  not  be  surprised  if  He  should  be
angry  when  He  finds  you  so  dull,  seeing  that  He  has
placed  you  in  so  safe  a  path,  and  led  you  to  so  secure  a
haven.  Desire  nothing  but  this,  and  bend  your  soul  to
it,  which  is  in  a  good  and  safe  condition,  and  go  to  com-
munion as  usual.  Go  to  confession  when  you  have
some  definite  matter,  and  speak  of  that  only.  When  you
have  anything  to  say  to  me  write,  and  that  promptly  and
frequently,  which  you  can  always  do  through  dofia
Ana,  if  not  through  the  nuns.

I  have  been  somewhat  unwell,  but  am  now  much  better.
Fr.  John  Evangelist,  however,  is  still  suffering.  Recom-
mend him  to  God,  and  me  also,  my  daughter  in  our  Lord.

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Segovia  :  Oct.  12th,  15S9.


445  LETTERS.

LETTER  XV.

TO   MOTHER  MARY  OF  JESUS,  PRIORESS  OF  CORDOVA.

Containing  much  profitable  advice  to  those  whose  office  is  to  goverti  and  provide
for  a  community ,

Jesus

Be  in  your  soul.  My  daughter  in  Christ,  the  cause  of
my  not  having  written  to  you  for  so  long  a  time  has  been
rather  the  remote  position  of  Segovia  than  any  want  of
will.  For  my  good  will  has  ever  been,  and  I  trust  in
God  shall  ever  be,  the  same  towards  you.  I  feel  for
you  in  all  your  trials.  But  I  would  not  have  you  take
too  much  thought  concerning  the  temporal  provision  for
your  house,  lest  God  should  forget  it ;  and  you  should
fall  into  great  temporal  and  spiritual  distress ;  for  it  is
our  over  anxious  solicitude  which  brings  us  to  want.
Cast  all  your  care,  my  daughter,  upon  God,  and  He  will
nourish  you  :  for  He  who  has  given  and  will  give  the
greater,  will  not  fail  to  give  the  less.

Take  care  that  the  desire  to  be  in  want  and  poor  never
fails  you,  for  that  instant  your  courage  will  fail,  and
your  virtues  will  become  weak.  For  if  in  time  past  you
have  desired  poverty,  now  that  you  are  in  authority  you
should  desire  it  still  more,  and  love  it ;  for  the  house
must  be  ruled,  and  furnished  with  virtues  and  heavenly
desires,  rather  than  by  carefulness  and  arrangements  for
temporal  and  earthly  things :  inasmuch  as  our  Lord  hath
bidden  us  to  take  no  thought  for  our  food,  nor  for  our
raiment,    nor  for  to-morrow.       What  you  have  to  do  is


LETTERS.  545

to  train  your  own  soul  and  the  souls  of  your  nuns  in
all  perfection  in  religion,  in  union  with  God,  and  rejoicing
in  Him  alone ;  and  I  will  assure  you  of  the  rest.  It
seems  to  me  very  difficult  to  imagine  that  the  other
houses  will  .come  to  your  help,  when  you  are  settled  in
so  good  a  position,  and  have  such  excellent  nuns.  Never-
theless, if  I  have  an  opportunity,  I  will  not  fail  to  do  what
I  can  for  you.

I  wish  much  consolation  to  the  mother  sub-prioress,
and  I  trust  in  our  Lord  that  He  will  give  it,  and
strengthen  her  to  bear  her  pilgrimage  and  exile  cheerfully
for  love  of  Him.     I  am  writing  to  her.

Many    salutations    in    our    Sovereign    Good,    to    my
daughters   Magdalene  of  St.  Gabriel,   Mary  of  St.  Paul,
Mary  of  the  visitation,  and  Mary  of  St.   Francis.
May  He  be  ever  with  your  spirit,  my  daughter.     Amen.

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Madrid  :  the  20th  of  June,  1590.


LETTER  XVL

to  mother  ANNE  OF  JESUS,  A  BAREFOOTED   CARMELITE
OF  THE  CONVENT  OF  SEGOVIA.

He  consoles  her  on  his  not  having  been  chosen  superior.

Jesus
Be  in  your  soul.  I  thank  you  very  much  for  your  letter  and  I
am  more  your  debtor  than  I  was  before.  Though  things
have  not  come  to  pass  as  you  desired,  you  ought  to  be
glad  and  give  thanks  to  God ;  His  Majesty  has  so
ordained,  and  it  is  best  for  all.  It  remains  only  that  we
submit  our  will,  that  we  may  see  it  in  its  true  light.     For

NN


546  LETTERS.

when  things  befall  us  that  we  do  not  like,  they  seem  to  us

evil  and  contrary,  be  they  never  so  good  and  profitable  to

our  souls.     But  in  this  case  there  is  plainly  no  evil  either

to  me    or   to    any   other.      To    me,    indeed,    it    is    most

favourable ;  for  being  free  and  without  the  care  of  souls,  I

may,  by  God's  help,  if  I  like,  enjoy  peace  and  solitude,

and  the  blessed   fruit  of  forgetfulness  of  self  and  of  all

created  things.

And  others,  also,  will  be   the  better  by    my  being  set

aside  ;  for  so  will  they  escape  the  faults  which  by  reason

of  my  unfittingness  they  would  have  committed.     What  I

beg  of  you,  then,  my  daughter,  is  to  pray  to  God  that  He

will  continue  to  me  this  grace  ;  for  I   fear  that  they  will

send  me  to  Segovia,  and  that  I  shall  not  be  perfectly  free.

However,    I   shall    do    my    utmost    to   escape   from    this

burthen  also ;  but  if  I  fail,  mother  Anne  of  Jesus  will  not

get  out  of  my  hands  as  she  expects,  and  so  will  not  die  of

grief  at  losing  the  opportunity,  as  she  thinks,  of  becoming

a  very  great  saint.     But  whether  I  go  or  stay,  wherever

or  however  I  may  be,  I  wall  never  forget  her  nor  withdraw

from  the  charge  of  her  soul,  of  which  she  speaks,  because

I  really  desire  her  eternal  good.      Now,  therefore,  until

God  gives  it  in  heaven,  let  her  exercise  herself  continually

in  the  virtues  of  patience  and  mortification,  endeavouring

to  become  like  in  some  measure,  through  suffering,  to  our

great    God,    who   was    humbled    and    crucified    for    us,

because  our  life  here  is   not  good    if  we  do  not  imitate

Him.      May  His  Majesty  preserve   you    and    make   you

increase  daily  in  His  love,   as  His  holy  and  well-beloved

child.     Amen.

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Madrid  ;  the  6th  July,  1591.


LETTERS.  547


LETTER  XVII.

TO    MOTHER   MARY    OF   THE   INCARNATION,   PRIORESS  OF
THE    SAME    CONVENT.

On  the  same  subject  as  the  preceding.

Jesus

Be  in  your  soul.  Trouble  not  yourself,  my  daughter,
about  what  concerns  me,  since  it  troubles  me  not.  The
only  thing  which  grieves  me  much  is  to  see  the  blame
laid  upon  those  to  whom  it  does  not  belong ;  for  these
things  are  done  not  by  men,  but  God,  Who  knows  what
is  best  for  us,  and  orders  all  things  for  our  good.  Think
of  this  only,  that  all  is  ordained  by  God.  And  do  you
love  where  there  is  no  love,  and  you  shall  have  love.
May  His  Majesty  preserve  you,  and  make  you  grow  in
His  love.     Amen.

Fr.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Madrid  ;  the  6th  of  July,  1591.


LETTER  XVHL

TO  DONA  ANNA  DE  PENALOSA.
He  ill  forms  her  of  his  recent  illtiess.

Jesus

Be  in  your  soul,  my  daughter.  I  have  received  here  in
Peiiuela  the  letter  brought  me  by  your  servant,  and  I
prize  exceedingly  the  kindness  thus  shown  to  me.      I  am

NN  2


548  LETTERS.

o-oino-  to-morrow  to  Ubeda,   for   the    cure    of  a  feverish
attack,  which,   having  hung  about    me  for  more  than  a
week  past,  makes  me  think  I  require   medical  treatment.
It  is  my  desire,  however,  to  return  here  immediately,  as  I
find  great  good  in   this  holy  solitude.      As  to  the  advice
you  give  me  not  to  go  with  F.  Antony,  be  assured  that  in
this,  as  in  all  other  matters  of  the  kind,  I  will  be  careful.
I  rejoice  greatly  to  hear  that  Don  Luis  is  now  a  priest  of
God ;    may  he  be   so    for   many   a   year,    and    may    His
Majesty  fulfil  all  the  desires  of  his  soul.      Oh,  what  a
blessed  state  for  casting  away  all  solicitude,  and  speedily
enriching  his  soul !     Congratulate  him  from  me.      I  dare
not  venture  to  ask  him  to  remember  me,  some  day,  in  the
mass,  though  I,  as  in  duty  bound,  shall  always  remember
him  ;  for  never  shall  I,  how  forgetful  soever  I   be,  fail  to
recollect    him,  closely    bound    as    he    is   with   the    sister
whom  I  ever  bear  in  my  memory.     I  salute  my  daughter
Dona  Inez  very  heartily  in  our   Lord  ;    and  I  beg  both
brother  and  sister  to  pray   God  for  me,  that  He  will  be
pleased  to  prepare  me  and  take  me  to  Himself.

Now  I  remember  nothing  further  that  I  have  to  write
to  you,  and  besides,  the  fever  will  not  suffer  me  to  add
any  more.  But  for  this,  gladly  would  I  write  at  much
greater  length.

Fk.  John  of  the  Cross.

From  Pf.uuela:  Sept.  21,  1591.


LETTERS.  549


CENSURE  AND  JUDGMENT  OF  THE  BLESSED  FATHER  ON
THE  SPIRIT  AND  METHOD  OF  PRAYER  OF  ONE  OF  THE
NUNS  OF  HIS  ORDER.

In  the  kind  of  affective  prayer  practised  by  this  soul,  there
seem  to  be  five  defects,  so  that  I  cannot  consider  her
spirit  to  be  good.  The  first  is,  that  she  has  a  great
fondness  for  her  own  way  :  and  a  true  spirit  practises
great  detachment  from  all  desire.  The  second  is,  that
she  is  too  confident,  and  has  too  little  fear  of  delusions  ;
the  spirit  of  God  is  never  without  fear,  in  order,  as  the
wise  man  saith,  to  keep  a  soul  from  sin.*  The  third  is,
that  she  wishes  to  persuade  people  into  the  belief  that  she
is  in  a  good  and  high  state :  this  is  not  the  fruit  of  a  true
spirit  :  for  that,  on  the  contrary,  would  wish  to  be  lightly
esteemed,  and  despised,  and  does  despise  itself.  The
fourth  and  the  chief  is,  that  the  fruits  of  humility  are  not
visible  which,  when  the  graces — as  she  says  here— are  real,
are  ordinarily  never  communicated  to  the  soul  without
first  undoing  and  annihilating  it  in  an  interior  abasement
of  humility.  Now,  if  they  had  wrought  this  effect  in  her,
she  could  not  fail  to  say  something,  or  rather  a  good  deal,
about  it ;  because  the  first  subjects  that  would  suggest
themselves  to  her  to  speak  about,  and  make  much  of,  are
the  fruits  of  humility  ;  and  these  in  their  operations  are  so
effectual,  that  it  is  impossible  to  dissemble  them.  Though
they  are  not  equally  observable  in  all  the  dealings  of  God,
yet  these,  which  he  calls  union,  are  never  found  without
them.     Because  a  soul  is  humbled  before  it  is  exalted  ;  t

*  Prov.  XV.  27.  t  Prov.  xviii.  12.


550  LETTERS.

and  *  it  is  good  for  me  that  Thou  hast  humbled  me.'*
The  fifth  is,  that  the  style  and  language  she  uses  do  not
seem  to  me  those  of  the  spirit  she  refers  to ;  for  that
spirit  teaches  a  style  which  is  more  simple,  free  from
affectation,  and  exaggeration  :  and  such  is  not  the  one
before  me.  All  this  that  she  says  :  God  spoke  to  me  :  I
spoke  to  God  :  seems  nonsense.

What  I  would  say  is  this :  she  should  not  be  required
nor  permitted  to  write  anything  on  these  matters :  and
her  confessor  should  not  seem  to  hear  of  them  willingly,
except  to  disparage  and  set  aside  what  she  has  to  say.
Let  her  superiors  try  her  in  the  practice  of  virtue  only,
particularly  in  that  of  contempt  of  self,  humility,  and
obedience  ;  and  then  at  the  sound  of  this  blow  will  come
forth  that  gentleness  of  soul  in  which  graces  so  great
have  been  wrought.  These  tests  must  be  sharp,  for  there
is  no  evil  spirit  that  will  not  suffer  a  good  deal  for  his  own
credit.


*  Psalm  cxviii.  71.


SPIRITUAL    MAXIMS


SPIRITUAL    MAXIMS.


[A.,  Ascent  of  Mount  Carmel.  D.  N.,  Dark  Night.  S.  C,  the  Canticle.
L.  F.,  Living  Flame.  Lett.,  the  Letters.  The  Roman  numerals,  the  number
of  the  sentences  in  the  earlier  editions,  which  contained  only  one  hundred.
Fra  Antonio  Arbiol  wrote  a  commentary  on  this  earlier  collection  with  the
title  of  "  Mystica  Fundamental,  or  El  Religioso  Perfecto."     Madrid,  1761.]


PROLOGUE.

O  MY  God,  sweetness  and  joy  of  my  heart,  behold  how
my  soul  for  love  of  Thee  will  occupy  itself  with  these
maxims  of  love  and  light.  For  though  the  words  thereof
are  mine,  I  have  not  the  meaning  and  the  power,  and
these  are  more  pleasing  to  Thee  than  the  language  and
the  knowledge  thereof.  Nevertheless,  O  Lord,  it  may  be
that  some  may  be  drawn  by  them  to  serve  and  love  Thee,
and  profit  where  I  fail :  that  will  be  a  consolation  to  me,
if  through  me  Thou  shalt  find  in  others  what  Thou  canst
not  find  in  me.  O  my  Lord,  Thou  lovest  discretion,  and
light,  but  love,  more  than  all  the  other  operations  of  the
soul ;  so  then  let  these  maxims  furnish  discretion  to  the
wayfarer,  enlighten  him  by  the  way,  and  supply  him  with
motives  of  love  for  his  journey.  Away,  then,  with  the
rhetoric  of  the  world,  sounding  words  and  the  dry
eloquence  of  human  wisdom,  weak  and  delusive,  never
pleasing  unto  Thee.  Let  us  speak  to  the  heart  words
flowing  with  sweetness  and  love,  and  such  as  Thou
delightest  in.  Thou  wilt  be  pleased  herein,  O  my  God,
and  it  may  be  that  Thou  wilt  also  remove  the  hindrance
and  the  stones  of  stumbling  from  before  many  souls  who


554  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

fall  through  ignorance,  and  who  for  want  of  light  wander
out  of  the  right  way,  though  they  think  they  are  walking
in  it,  and  following  in  all  things  in  the  footsteps  of  Thy
most  sweet  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  and  imitating
Him  in  their  life,  state,  and  virtues  according  to  the  rule
of  detachment  and  poverty  of  spirit.  But,  O  Father  of
mercy,  do  Thou  give  us  this  grace,  for  without  Thee,  O
Lord,  we  shall  do  nothing.

I.
IMITATION  OF  CHRIST.

1.  There  is  no  progress  but  in  the  following  of  Christ,
who  is  the  way  the  truth  and  the  life,  and  the  Gate  by
which  he  who  will  be  saved  must  enter.  Every  spirit,
therefore,  that  will  walk  in  sweetness  at  its  ease,  shunning
the  following  of  Christ,  is,  in  my  opinion,  nothing  worth.
—A.  ii.  7,  7.

2.  Your  first  care  must  be  to  be  anxiously  and  lovingly
earnest  in  your  endeavours  to  imitate  Christ  in  all  your
actions ;  doing  every  one  of  them  to  the  uttermost  of
your  power,  as  our  Lord  Himself  would  have  done  them,
—lb.  i.  13,  3.

3.  Every  satisfaction  offered  to  the  senses  which  is
not  for  God's  honour  and  glory  you  must  renounce  and
reject  for  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  Who  while  upon  earth,
had,  and  sought  for,  no  other  pleasure  than  doing  the
will  of  His  Father ;  this.  He  said,  was  His  meat  and
drink. — A.  i.  13,  4.

4.  In  none  of  your  actions  whatever  should  you  take
any  man,  however  holy  he  may  be,  for  your  example,
because  satan  is  sure  to  put  his  imperfections  forward  so


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  555

as  to  attract  your  attention.  Rather  imitate  Jesus  Christ,
Who  is  supremely  perfect  and  supremely  holy.  So  doing
you  will  never  go  astray.

5.  Inwardly  and  outwardly  live  always  crucified  with
Christ,  and  you  will  attain  unto  peace  and  contentment
of  spirit,  and  in  your  patience  you  shall  possess  your  soul.
— Ixxiv.

6.  Let  Christ  crucified  alone  be  enough  for  you  ;  with
Him  suffer,  with  Him  take  your  rest,  never  rest  nor  suffer
without  Him ;  striving  with  all  your  might  to  rid  yourself
of  all  selfish  affections  and  inclinations  and  annihilation
of  self. — Ixxviii.

7.  He  who  makes  any  account  of  himself,  neither
denies  himself  nor  follows  Christ. — A.  iii.  22,  2.

8.  Love  tribulations  more  than  all  good  things,  and  do
not  imagine  that  you  are  doing  anything  when  you
endure  them ;  so  shall  you  please  Him  who  did  not
hesitate  to  die  for  you.

g.  If  you  wish  to  attain  ^to  the  possession  of  Christ,
never  seek  Him  without  the  cross.

10.  He  who  seeks  not  the  cross  of  Christ,  seeks  not
the  glory  of  Christ.

11.  Desire  to  make  yourself  in  suffering  somewhat  like
our  great  God,  humiliated  and  crucified  ;  for  life,  if  not  an
imitation  of  His,  is  worth  nothing. — Let.  xvi.

12.  What  does  he  know  who  does  not  know  how  to
suffer  for  Christ  ?  The  greater  and  the  heavier  the
sufferings,  the  better  is  his  lot  who  suffers.

13.  All  men  desire  to  enter  into  the  treasures  and
consolations  of  God  ;  but  few  desire  to  enter  into  tribula-
tions and  sorrows  for  the  Son  of  God. — S.  C.  xxxvi.  14.


556  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

14.  Jesus  Christ  is  but  little  known  of  those  who
consider  themselves  His  friends  ;  for  we  see  them  seeking
in  Him  their  own  comfort,  and  not  His  bitter  sorrows. —
A.  ii.  7,  9.

II.
THE    THEOLOGICAL    VIRTUES.

15.  Because  it  is  the  function  of  the  theological
virtues  to  withdraw  the  soul  from  all  that  is  less  than
God,  it  is  theirs,  therefore,  to  unite  with  Him. —
D.  N.  ii.  21.

16.  Without  walking  truly  in  the  practice  of  these
three  virtues,  it  is  impossible  to  attain  to  the  perfect  love
of  God. — D.  N.  ii.  21.

FAITH.

17.  The  way  of  faith  is  sound  and  safe,  and  along  this,
souls  must  journey  on  from  virtue  to  virtue,  shutting  their
eyes  against  every  object  of  sense  and  of  clear  and
particular  perception. — A.  ii.  16,  13.

18.  When  the  inspirations  are  from  God  they  are
always  in  the  order  of  the  motives  of  His  law,  and  of  the
faith,  in  the  perfection  of  which  the  soul  should  ever  draw
nearer  and  nearer  to  God. — L.  F.  Stanza  iii.  §  29.

19.  The  soul  that  travels  in  the  light  and  verities  of
the  faith  is  secured  against  error,  for  error  proceeds
ordinarily  from  our  own  proper  desires,  tastes,  reflections,
and  understanding,  wherein  there  is  generally  too  much
or  too  little  ;  and  hence  the  inclination  to  that  which  is
not  seemly. — D.  N.  ii.  16,  2.

20.  By  the  faith  the  soul  travels  protected  against  the


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  557

devil,  its  strongest  and  craftiest  foe  ;  and  St.  Peter  knew
of  no  stronger  defence  against  him  when  he  said  :  '  Resist
him,  strong  in  the  faith.' — D.  N.  xxi.  4,  5.

21.  The  soul  that  would  draw  near  unto  God  and
unite  itself  with  Him,  must  do  so  by  not  comprehending
rather  than  by  comprehending,  in  utter  forgetfulness  of
created  things  ;  because  it  must  change  the  mutable  and
comprehensible  for  the  immutable  and  the  incompre-
hensible, Who  is  God.^ — A.  iii.  4,  3.

22.  Outward  light  enables  us  to  see  that  we  may  not
fall ;  it  is  otherwise  in  the  things  of  God,  for  there  it  is
better  not  to  see,  and  the  soul  is  in  greater  security.

23.  It  being  certain  that  in  this  life  we  know  God
better  by  what  He  is  not  than  by  what  He  is,  it  is
necessary,  if  we  are  to  draw  near  unto  Him,  that  the  soul
must  deny,  to  the  uttermost,  all  that  may  be  denied  of
its  apprehensions,  both  natural  and  supernatural. —
A.  iii.  I,  I.

24.  All  apprehension  and  knowledge  of  supernatural
things  cannot  help  us  to  love  God  so  much  as  the  least
act  of  living  faith  and  hope  made  in  detachment  from  all
things. — A.  iii.  7,  4.

25.  As  in  natural  generation  no  new  form  results
without  the  corruption  of  the  one  previously  existing — for
this  hinders  the  former  by  reason  of  the  contrariety  between
them — so  while  the  soul  is  under  the  dominion  of  the
sensual  and  animal  spirit,  the  pure  and  heavenly  spirit  can
never  enter. — A.  i.  6,  i.

'l  26.  Let  no  created  thing  have  a  place  in  your  heart  if
you  would  have  the  face  of  God  pure  and  clear  in  your
soul ;  yea,  rather  empty  your  spirit  of  all  created  things,


558  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

and  you  will  walk  in  the  divine  light  ;  for  God  resembles
no  created  thing. — xxiv,

27.  The  greatest  shelter  of  the  soul  is  Faith ;  for  the
Holy  Ghost  gives  it  light :  the  more  pure  and  refined  the
soul  in  a  perfect  living  faith,  the  greater  the  infusion  of
charity,  and  the  greater  the  communication  of  super-
natural gifts  and  light. — A.  ii.  29,  5.

28.  One  of  the  greatest  gifts  of  God  to  the  soul  in  this
life— not  permanent  but  transient — is  that  deep  sense  and
understanding  of  God  by  which  it  feels  and  understands
clearly,  that  it  can  neither  understand  nor  feel  Him  at  all.
— S.  C.  vii.  g.

29.  The  soul  that  leans  upon  its  own  understanding,
sense,  or  feeling  of  its  own — all  this  being  very  little  and
very  unlike  to  God — in  order  to  travel  on  the  right  road,
is  most  easily  led  astray  or  hindered,  because  it  is  not
perfectly  blind  in  faith,  which  is  its  true  guide. — A.  ii.  4,  2.

30.  There  is  one  thing  in  our  day  that  ought  to  make
us  afraid :  persons  who  have  hardly  begun  to  make  their
meditations,  if  the}-  seem  to  hear  anything  in  a  brief
recollection,  pronounce  it  to  have  come  from  God  ;  and
so  imagine,  saying,  God  has  spoken  or  I  have  had  an
answer  from  God,  and  it  is  not  so  :  these  persons  have
been  speaking  to  themselves,  out  of  a  longing  for  such
communications. — A.  ii.  29,  4.

31.  He  who  should  now  enquire  of  God  by  vision  or
revelation  would  offend  Him,  because  he  does  not  fix  his
eyes  upon  Christ  alone.  To  such  an  one  the  answer  of
God  is :  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  Whom  I  am  well
pleased,  hear  Him,  and  do  not  seek  for  new  instructions,
for  in  Him  I  have  spoken  and   revealed  all  that  may  be


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  559

desired  and  asked  for ;  I  have  given  Him  to  be  your
brother,  master,  companion,  ransom,  and  reward. —
A.  ii.  22.

32.  We  must  be  guided  in  all  things  by  the  teaching  of
Christ  and  His  church,  and  thereby  seek  the  remedy  for
our  spiritual  ignorances  and  infirmities :  it  is  thus  that
we  shall  obtain  abundant  relief;  and  all  that  goes  beyond
this  is  not  only  curiosity  but  great  rashness. — A.  ii.  22,  6.

33.  You  are  not  to  believe  that  which  you  hear  in  a
supernatural  way,  but  only  that  which  you  learn  through
the  teaching  of  Christ  and  His  ministers. — A.  ii.  22,  6.

34.  The  soul  that  seeks  after  revelations  sins  venially
at  least  ;  so  does  the  director  who  encourages  or  allows
that  seeking,  be  the  end  sought  never  so  good  ;  there  is
no  necessity  at  all  for  this,  seeing  that  we  have  our
natural  reason  and  the  evangelical  law  to  guide  us  in  all
things. — A.  ii.  21,  4,

35.  The  soul  that  desires  revelations  undermines  the
perfect  guidance  of  the  faith,  and  opens  a  door  for  satan
to  deceive  it  by  false  revelations ;  for  he  knows  well  how
to  disguise  them  so  as  to  make  them  appear  good. —
A.  ii.  II,  5.

36.  The  wisdom  of  the  saints  consists  in  knowing  how
to  direct  the  will  courageously  to  God,  in  the  perfect
fulfilment  of  His  law  and  His  holy  counsels. — A.  ii.  29,  12.

III.
HOPE.

37.  That  which  moves  and  overcomes  God  is  earnest
Hope ;  in  order  to  attain  to  the  union  of  love,  the  soul


560  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

must  journey  in  hope  of  God  alone  ;  for  without  it  nothing
will  be  obtained. — D.  N.  xxi.  7.

38.  A  living  hope  in  God  makes  the  soul  so  courageous
and  so  earnest  in  the  pursuit  of  the  things  of  everlasting
life,  that  it  looks  on  this  world — so  indeed  it  is — as  dry,
weak,  valueless,  and  dead,  in  comparison  with  that  it
hopes  for  hereafter. — D.  N.  ii.  21,  7.

39.  The  soul  in  hope  strips  itself  of  all  the  trappings  of
this  world,  setting  the  heart  upon  nothing,  hoping  for
nothing  in  it  or  of  it,  clad  in  the  vesture  of  the  hope  of
everlasting  life. — D.  N.  ii.,  xxi.  7.

40.  Through  a  living  hope  in  God  the  heart  is  so
raised  up  above  the  world  and  delivered  from  all  its
snares,  that  not  only  it  cannot  come  into  contact  with  it,
and  be  attached  to  it,  but  it  cannot  even  regard  it. —
D.  N.  ii.,  xxi.  7.

41.  In  all  your  trials  have  recourse  at  once  to  God  with
confidence,  and  you  will  be  comforted,  enlightened,  and
instructed. — Ivi.

42.  The  soul  that  retains  the  slightest  desire  for  earthly
things,  is  more  unseemly  and  impure  in  the  way  of  God
than  if  it  were  labouring  under  the  heaviest  and  most
impure  temptations  and  darkness,  provided  the  rational
will  did  not  consent  to  them ;  such  a  soul  may,  with
greater  confidence,  draw  near  to  God  in  obedience  to  the
Divine  will ;  for  our  Lord  hath  said  :  Come  unto  me  all
you  who  labour  and  are  heavily  burdened,  and  I  will
refresh  you. — xv.

43.  Have  an  earnest  desire  that  God  may  give  3-ou  all
He  knows  you  to  be  deficient  in,  for  His  greater  honour
and  glorv.


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  561

44.  Have  a  continual  trust  in  God,  esteeming  in  your-
self and  in  your  brethren  that  which  He  most  esteems ;
namely,  spiritual  graces.— Ixxvi.

45.  The  more  God  gives,  the  more  He  makes  us  desire  ;
until  He  leaves  us  empty  that  He  may  fill  us  with  good
things. — Letter  xi,

46.  So  pleased  is  God  with  the  hope  in  which  the  soul
is  ever  looking  unto  Him  with  eyes  turned  away  from
everything  else,  that  it  may  be  truly  said  of  it  that  it
obtains  all  that  it  hopes  for. — D.  N.,  ii.  x.  21,  g.

FEAR  OF  GOD.

47.  If  you  have  sweetness  and  delight,  draw  near  to
God  in  fear  and  in  truth,  and  you  will  never  be  deceived
nor  entangled  in  vanity. — Ivii.

48.  Do  not  rejoice  in  temporal  prosperity,  because
3-ou  do  not  certainly  know  that  it  makes  eternal  life
secure. — A.  iii.  17,  5.

49.  Though  a  man  prosper  in  all  his  undertakings,
and  though  every  wish  of  his  heart  may  be  gratified,  he
ought  in  such  a  case  to  fear  rather  than  rejoice ;  for  this
multiplies  the  occasions  of  forgetting  God,  and  the  risks
of  offending  Him. — A,  iii.  17,  5.

50.  Do  not  presume  upon  vain  joy;  knowing  how
many  and  how  grievous  are  the  sins  you  have  com-
mitted, and  not  knowing  whether  you  are  pleasing
unto  God.  But  always  fear  and  always  hope  in  Him.
-— Ixvi.

51.  How  can  you  venture  to  live  without  fear,  seeing
that  you  must  appear  before  God  to  give  an  account  of
your  lightest  words  and  thoughts  ? — xcviii.

00


562  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

52.  Remember  that  the  called  are  many,  the  chosen
few  ;  and  if  you  are  not  careful,  your  final  ruin  is  more
certain  than  your  salvation ;  especially  as  the  way  that
leadeth  to  eternal  life  is  so  strait. — xcix.

53.  As  in  the  hour  of  death  you  will  certainly  be  sorry
that  you  have  not  employed  all  your  time  in  the  service
of  God,  why  is  it  that  you  do  not  now  so  employ  your
time,  as  you  will  wish  you  had  done  when  you  are
dying  ?— c.

IV.

CHARITY.

54.  The  strength  of  the  soul  lies  in  its  faculties,
passions,  and  desires ;  if  these  be  directed  towards  God
by  the  will,  and  withdrawn  from  all  that  is  not  God,  the
soul  then  keeps  its  strength  for  Him  and  loves  Him  with
all  its  might,  as  our  Lord  commands  us. — A.  iii.  15,  2.

55.  Charity  is  like  a  fine  robe  of  many  colours,  which
lends  grace,  beauty,  and  freshness,  not  only  to  the  white
garment  of  faith  and  the  green  vesture  of  hope,  but  also
to  all  the  virtues  ;  for  without  charity  no  virtue  is  pleasing
in  the  sight  of  God. — D.  N.  ii.  21,  10.

56.  The  worth  of  love  does  not  consist  in  high  feelings,
but  in  detachment :  in  patience  under  all  trials  for  the
sake  of  God  Whom  we  love. — xci.

57.  God  has  a  greater  esteem  for  the  lowest  degree  of
purity  of  conscience,  than  for  the  greatest  work  you  can
do  for  Him. — x.

58.  To  seek  God  in  Himself  is  to  be  without  every
consolation   for    His    sake  :  an  inclination  to  the  choice


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS,  oGl]

of  all  that  is  most  unpleasing,  whether  in  the  things
of  God  or  in  the  things  of  the  world ;  this  is  to  love  God.
—A.  ii.  7,  4.

59.  Do  not  imagine  that  God  is  pleased  with  many
good  works,  so  much  as  with  the  doing  of  them  with
a  good  will,  without  self-seeking  or  human  respect.
— xlix.

60.  Herein  a  man  may  know  whether  he  really  loves
God  :  is  he  satisfied  with  anything  less  than  God  ? —
S.  C.  i,  19.

6t.  As  the  hair  which  is  frequently  dressed  is  the
cleaner,  and  is  the  more  easily  dressed  upon  all  occasions,
so  is  it  with  the  soul  which  frequently  examines  its
thoughts,  words,  and  works,  doing  all  things  for  the  love
of  God.

62.  As  the  hair  is  to  be  dressed  from  the  top  of  the
head  if  it  is  to  be  thoroughly  cleansed,  so  our  good  works
must  have  their  beginning  in  the  highest  love  of  God,
if  they  are  to  be  thoroughly  pure  and  clean.

63.  To  restrain  the  tongue  and  the  thoughts,  and  to
set  the  affections  regularly  upon  God,  quickly  sets  the
soul  on  fire  in  a  divine  way. — Ixvii.

64.  Study  always  to  please  God ;  pray  that  His  will
may  be  accomplished  in  you  ;  love  Him  much,  for  it  is
His  due. — See  311.

65.  All  our  goodness  is  a  loan  ;  God  is  the  owner ;  God
worketh,  and  His  work  is  God.

66.  We  gain  more  by  the  goods  of  God  in  one  hour,
than  in  our  whole  life  b}^  our  own. — Ixiii.

67.  Our  Lord  has  always  manifested  the  treasures
of   His  wisdom  and   His  Spirit  to  men  :    but   now  that

00  2


564  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

wickedness  manifests  itself  the  more,  He  manifests  them
still  more.

68.  In  one  sense  the  purification  of  a  soul  from  the
contradictions  of  desire  is  a  greater  work  of  God  than  its
creation  out  of  nothing ;  that  nothing  offered  no  resistance
to  His  Majesty :  not  so  the  love  of  the  creature. —
A.  i,  6,  2.

69.  That  which  God  intends  is  to  make  us  God  by
participation,  He  being  God  by  nature;  as  the  fire
changes  everything  into  fire.

70.  At  the  close  of  life  you  will  be  examined  as  to  your
love :  learn  then  to  love  God  as  He  wishes  to  be  loved,
and  give  up  all  that  is  your  own.

71.  The  soul  that  seeks  God  wholly,  must  give  itself
wholly  to  Him.

72.  New  and  imperfect  lovers  are  like  new  wine,  easily
spoiled  until  the  scum  of  imperfections  has  been  cleared
away,  and  the  fervour  with  the  coarse  satisfaction  of
senses  has  died  out. — S.  C.  xxv.  7.

73.  The  passions  rule  over  the  soul  and  assail  it  in
proportion  to  the  weakness  of  the  will  in  God,  and  to  its
dependence  on  creatures  ;  for  then  it  rejoices  so  easily  in
things  which  do  not  deserve  to  be  rejoiced  in ;  hopes  for
that  which  is  of  no  profit,  and  grieves  over  that  in  which
perhaps  it  ought  to  rejoice,  and  fears  where  there  is
nothing  to  be  afraid  of. — A.  iii.  15,  5.

74.  They  provoke  the  divine  Majesty  to  anger  exceed-
ingly, who,  while  seeking  for  spiritual  food,  are  not  content
with  God  only,  but  will  intermingle  therewith  carnal  and
earthly  satisfactions. — A.  i.  5,  3.

75.  He  who  loves  any  other  thing  together  with  God


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  565

makes  light  of  Him,  because  he  puts  into  the  balance
with  Him  that  which  is  at  an  infinite  distance  from  Him.
—A.  i.  5,  4.

76.  As  a  sick  man  is  too  weak  for  work,  so  the  soul
that  is  weak  in  the  love  of  God  is  also  too  weak  for  the
practice  of  perfect  virtue.

77.  To  seek  self  in  God  is  to  seek  for  comfort  and
refreshment  from  God  ;  that  is  contrary  to  the  pure  love
of  God. — A.  ii.  7,  4.

78.  To  regard  the  gifts  of  God  more  than  God
Himself,  is  a  great  evil.

79.  Many  there  are  who  seek  their  own  pleasure  and
comfort  in  God,  and  gifts  and  graces  from  Him  ;  but  they
who  seek  to  please  Him  and  to  give  Him  something  at
their  own  cost — setting  their  own  pleasure  aside — are
very  few. — D.  N.  ii.  19,  8.

80.  Few  spiritual  persons — even  among  those  who  think
themselves  most  advanced— attain  to  a  perfect  resolution
in  well-doing,  for  they  never  entirely  lose  themselves  on
some  point  or  other  connected  with  the  world  or  self,
despising  appearances  and  the  opinions  of  men,  so  as  to
make  their  good  works  perfect  and  in  detachment  from
all  things  for  the  sake  of  Christ. — S.  P.  xxix.  5.

81.  Self-will  and  self-satisfaction  in  the  works  they  do
so  prevail  among  men,  whether  ordinary  or  more
advanced  Christians,  that  scarcely  one  is  to  be  found  who
works  simply  for  God  without  looking  for  some  consolation
or  comfort  or  other  advantage  in  his  work. — A.  iii.  ly,  9.

82.  Some  souls  call  God  their  Bridegroom  and
Beloved  ;  but  He  is  not  really  beloved  by  them,  because
their  heart  is  not  whole  with  Him. — S.  C.  i.  10.


566  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

83.  What  will  it  profit  you  if  you  give  God  one  thing
when  He  asks  something  else  ?  Consider  what  God
wills,  and  do  it,  for  so  will  you  satisfy  your  heart  better
than  by  doing  that  to  which  your  are  inclined  yourself. —
xcvii.

84.  To  find  all  satisfaction  in  God  you  must  be
satisfied  with  Him  only,  for  in  heaven  itself,  if  you  did
not  bend  your  will  to  His  will,  you  would  never  be
satisfied ;  so  is  it  here,  if  your  heart  is  set  upon  anything
else. — Lett,  xi,

85.  As  aromatic  spices  exposed  to  the  air  gradually
lose  their  fragrance  and  the  strength  of  their  perfume,  so
the  soul,  not  recollected  in  the  love  of  God  alone,  loses
the  heat  and  vigour  of  virtue. — A.  i.  10,  i.

86.  He  who  seeks  nothing  but  God  walks  not  in
darkness,  however  mean  and  poor  he  may  be  in  his  own
estimation. — Lett.  xiv.

87.  For  a  man  to  suifer  for  God  is  a  sign  that  he  has
given  himself  up  to  Him,  and  that  he  loves  Him. —
D.  N.  i.  9,  3.

88.  He  who  in  the  midst  of  dryness  and  abandonment
is  painfully  anxious  about  the  service  of  God,  and  afraid
that  He  does  not  serve  Him,  offers  Him  a  sacrifice  that
pleaseth  Him  well. — D,  N.  i.  11,  3.

8g.  When  God  is  really  loved,  He  hears  most  readily
the  cry  of  the  soul  that  loves  Him. — S.  C.  i.  18.

90.  The  soul  defends  itself  against  its  fleshly  enemy
by  charity ;  for  where  there  is  a  real  love  of  God  neither
the  love  of  self  nor  the  love  of  creatures  can  enter  in. —
D.  N.  ii.  21,  10.

91.  The   loving   soul   is    meek,    gentle,    humble,    and


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  567

patient ;  the  soul  that  is  hardened  in  self-love  hardens
itself  still  more.  If  Thou,  O  good  Jesus,  in  Thy  love
dost  not  make  the  soul  gentle,  it  will  persist  in  its  natural
hardness. — xxvii.

92.  The  soul  that  loves  is  neither  wearied  nor  wearies.

93.  Behold  the  infinite  wisdom  and  the  hidden
mysteries ;  Oh !  the  peace,  the  love,  the  silence  of  the  divine
bosom ;  Oh  !  the  deep  science  God  is  teaching  there  ;  it
is  that  which  we  call  anagogic  acts — ejaculatory  prayer
— Oh  !  how  they  set  the  heart  on  fire.

94.  The  perfect  love  of  God  cannot  subsist  without
the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  self. — D.  N.  ii.  18,  3.

95.  Perfect  love  naturally  seeks  nothing,  and  claims
nothing,  for  itself,  but  all  for  the  beloved ;  if  this  be  so
with  earthly  love,  how  much  more  with  the  love  of  God  ?
— S.  C.  xxxii.

96.  The  old  friends  of  God  scarcely  ever  fail  Him,
because  they  are  raised  above  all  occasions  of  failure. —
S.  C.  XXV.  10.

97.  True  love  accepts  prosperity  and  adversity  with
an  even  spirit,  that  of  joy  and  delight.^ — S.  C.  xi.  11.

98.  The  soul  that  labours  to  divest  itself  of  all  that
is  not  God  for  God's  sake  is  immediately  enlightened,
and  transformed  in,  God,  in  such  a  way  that  the  soul
seems  to  be  God  Himself,  and  to  possess  the  things  of
God. — A.  ii.  5,  7.

99.  Satan  fears  a  soul  united  with  God,  as  he  fears
God  Himself. — S.  C.  xxiv.  5.

100.  The  soul,  in  the  union  of  love,  resists  even  the
first  impulses. — S.  C.  xxvii.  5.

loi.     Purity  of  heart  is  nothing  less  than  the   love  and


568  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

grace  of  God.  Hence  our  Lord  says  :  Blessed  are  the
pure  in  heart ;  that  is,  those  who  love ;  for  blessedness  is
given  to  nothing  less  than  love. — D.  N.  ii.  12,  i.

102.  He  who  truly  loves  God  is  not  ashamed  before
men  of  what  he  does  for  God  ;  neither  does  he  hide  his
good  works  out  of  shame,  though  the  whole  world  may
condemn  them. — S.  C.  xxix.  4.

103.  He  who  truly  loves  God  thinks  it  a  great  gain  to
lose  all  he  has,  and  his  own  life,  for  God.

104.  If  the  soul  had  but  one  glimpse  of  the  beauty  of
God,  not  only  would  it  desire  to  die  that  it  might  see
Him  for  ever,  but  it  would  joyfully  undergo  a  thousand
most  bitter  deaths  to  see  Him  again,  if  only  for  a
moment. — S.  C.  xi.  6.

105.  He  who  acts  out  of  the  pure  love  of  God,  not
only  does  not  perform  his  actions  to  be  seen  of  men,  but
does  not  do  them  even  that  God  may  know  of  them.  Such
an  one,  if  he  thought  it  possible  that  his  good  works
might  escape  the  eye  of  God,  would  still  perform  them
with  the  same  joy,  and  in  the  same  pureness  of  love. — xviii.

106.  It  is  a  great  matter  to  be  much  exercised  in  love :
in  order  that  the  soul,  made  perfect  and  consummated
therein,  may  not  be  long  detained,  either  in  this  life  or  the
next,  from  the  vision  of  God. — L.  F.  i.  ^^.

107.  A  pure  and  perfect  work,  wrought  for  God  in  a
pure  heart,  makes  a  perfect  kingdom  for  its  Lord. — xix.

108.  To  the  pure  in  heart  high  things  and  low  are
profitable,  and  minister  to  their  greater  purity ;  while  to
the  impure,  by  reason  of  their  impurity,  both  the  one  and
the  other  are  occasions  of  greater  evil. — A.  iii.  25,  4.

log.  The  pure  in  heart  find  in  all  things  the  knowledge


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  569

of  God,  sweet,  chaste,  pure,  spiritual,  joyous,  and  loving.
—A.  iii.  25,  4.

PEACE.

no.  By  keeping  guard  over  the  senses,  which  are  the
gates  of  the  soul,  we  keep  also  and  increase  its  tranquillity
and  purity. — A.  iii.  22,  3.

111.  Man  would  never  lose  peace  if  he  forgot  and  cast
aside  his  thoughts  and  notions,  and  withdrew  from  the
sight,  hearing,  and  conversation  of  men,  so  far  as  he
well  may. — A.  iii.  55.

112.  If  we  forget  all  created  things,  there  is  then
nothing  to  disturb  our  peace ;  nothing  to  excite  the
desires  that  disturb  it ;  for,  as  the  proverb  says.  What
the  eye  hath  not  seen,  the  heart  doth  not  desire. —
A.  iii.  4,  I.

113.  The  restless  and  perturbed  soul,  the  passions  and
desires  of  which  are  not  wholly  mortified,  is,  as  such,
incapacitated  for  spiritual  good,  for  that  enters  only
into  the  soul  which  is  under  control  and  ordered  in  peace.
—A.  iii.  4,  3.

114.  Be  assured  of  this  ;  God  reigns  only  in  the  peace-
ful and  unselfish  soul. — Ixi.

115.  Be  tranquil ;  put  away  superfluous  thoughts,  and
make  light  of  whatever  may  happen  ;  so  shall  your  service
be  pleasing  unto  God,  and  you  shall  rejoice  in  Him. — Ix.

116.  Keep  your  heart  in  peace;  let  nothing  in  this
world  disturb  it :  all  things  have  an  end.

117.  Be  not  made  sad  by  the  adverse  events  of  this  life,
for  you  know  not  the  good  they  bring  with  them,  ordained
in  the  judgments  of  God,  for  the  everlasting  joy  of  the
elect. — liv.


570  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

ii8.  In  all  circumstances,  however  hard  they  may  be,
we  should  rejoice,  rather  than  be  cast  down,  that  we  may
not  lose  the  greatest  good,  the  peace  and  tranquillity  of
our  soul. — A.  iii.  55.

iig.  If  the  whole  world  and  all  that  is  in  it  were
thrown  into  confusion,  disquietude  on  that  account  would
be  vanity,  because  that  disquietude  would  do  more  harm
than  good. — A.  iii.  5,  4.

120.  To  endure  all  things  with  an  equable  and  peaceful
mind,  not  only  brings  with  it  many  blessings  to  the
soul,  but  also  enables  us,  in  the  midst  of  our  diffi-
culties, to  have  a  clear  judgment  about  them,  and  to
minister  the  fitting  remedy  for  them. — A.  iii.  4,  4.

121.  It  is  not  the  will  of  God  that  the  soul  should  be
troubled  by  anything,  or  that  it  should  be  afflicted  ;  for  if
men  are  afflicted  because  of  the  adversities  of  this  world,
that  is  the  effect  of  their  being  weak  in  virtue ;  for  the
soul  of  the  perfect  rejoices  in  that  which  gives  pain  to  the
soul  of  the  imperfect. — xlvii.

122.  The  heavens  are  stedfast,  not  subject  to  genera-
tion ;  and  souls  which  are  of  a  heavenly  nature  are
stedfast,  not  subject  to  the  generation  of  desires,  nor  of
anything  of  that  kind :  they  are  in  some  measure  like
unto  God,  Who  never  changes. — Ixxxvii.

LOVE  OF  OUR  NEIGHBOUR.

123.  Wisdom  enters  by  love,  silence,  and  mortification.
It  is  great  wisdom  to  know  when  to  be  silent,  when  to
suffer,  and  never  to  regard  the  sayings,  doings,  or  lives  of
others.


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  571

124.  See  that  you  do  not  intermeddle  in  the  affairs  of
other  people,  nor  discuss  them  in  your  own  thoughts  ;  for
perhaps  you  will  not  be  able  to  fulfil  your  own  task. — li.

125.  Suspect  no  evil  of  your  brother,  for  that  takes
away  purity  of  heart. — xlv.

126.  Never  listen  to  accounts  of  the  frailties  of  others  ;
and  if  anyone  should  complain  to  you  of  another,  humbly
ask  him  not  to  speak  about  him  at  all.

127.  Do  not  shrink  from  trouble :  though  it  may  seem
to  you  more  than  you  can  bear.  Let  all  men  find  you
compassionate.

128.  No  one  merits  love  except  for  the  virtue  that  he
has ;  and  when  love  is  so  ordered,  it  is  according  to  God,
and  in  great  freedom. — A.  iii.  22,  i.

129.  When  the  love  and  affection  we  give  to  the  creature
is  purely  spiritual  and  founded  on  God,  the  love  of  God
grows  with  it ;  and  the  more  we  remember  the  earthly
love,  the  more  we  also  remember  God  and  desire  Him  :
the  one  grows  apace  with  the  other. — D.  N.  i.  4,  8.

130.  When  the  love  of  the  creature  springs  from  sensual
vice,  or  from  a  purely  natural  inclination,  in  proportion  to
its  growth  is  the  diminution  of  the  love  of  God  and
forgetfulness  of  Him ;  and  from  the  recollection  of  the
creature,  remorse  of  conscience  comes. — D.  N.  i.  4,  8.

131.  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  that
which  is  born  of  the  spirit  is  spirit,  saith  our  Saviour  in
His  Gospel.  So  the  love  which  grows  out  of  sensuality
ends  in  sensuality  ;  that  which  is  of  the  spirit  ends  in  the
spirit  of  God,  and  makes  it  grow.  This  is  the  difference
between  these  two  loves,  that  men  may  distinguish
between  them. — D.  N.  i.  4,  9.


572  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

V.

DISORDERLY    APPETITES.

132.  He  who  loves  any  creature  out  of  the  order  of
charity  becomes  vile  as  that  creature  itself,  and  in  one
sense  even  viler ;  for  love  not  only  levels  but  subjects  also
the  lover  to  the  object  of  his  love. — A.  i.  4,  2.

133.  The  passions  and  desires,  when  under  control  and
restrained,  are  sources  of  all  virtue,  and  also,  when  they
have  broken  loose,  of  all  the  vices  and  imperfections  of
the  soul, — A.  iii.  15,  5.

134.  Every  desire  hurts  the  soul  in  five  ways,
beside  robbing  it  of  the  Spirit  of  God  :  i.  It  fatigues  it.
2.  Torments  it.  3.  Blinds  it.  4.  Defiles  it.  5.  Weakens
it. — A.  i.  6,  3  ;  cxxxiv.

135.  All  created  things  are  crumbs  which  fall  from  the
table  of  God  ;  and  for  that  reason,  they  who  go  about
feeding  on  the  creature  are  rightly  called  dogs  ;  they  are,
therefore,  always  hungry  like  dogs,  and  justly  so,  because
crumbs  excite,  rather  than  appease,  hunger. — A.  i.  6,  2.

136.  The  desires  are  like  restless  and  dissatisfied
children  begging  of  their  mother,  now  one  thing,  now
another,  never  contented ;  like  one  ill  of  a  burning  fever,
never  at  rest,  and  whose  thirst  increases  while  the  fever
continues. — A.  i.  7,  3.

137.  As  a  man  dragging  a  cart  up  hill,  so  is  that  soul
on  its  way  to  God,  which  does  not  throw  aside  the  cares
of  this  life,  and  does  not  deny  itself. — xlvi.

138.  As  he  is  tormented  who  falls  into  the  hands  of
his  enemies,  so  is  the  soul  afflicted  and  tormented  which
is  carried  away  by  its  desires. — A  i.  7,  i.


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  57o

139.  As  a  man  is  tormented  and  afflicted  who  lies
down  naked  amid  thorns  and  briars,  so  is  the  soul
tormented  and  afflicted  which  lies  down  in  the  midst  of
its  desires :  they  pierce,  torture,  and  tear  it  painfully. —
A.  i.  7,  I.

140.  As  vapours  darken  the  air  and  hide  the  light  of
the  sun,  so  the  soul,  captive  to  its  desires,  is,  as  to  the  un-
derstanding, in  darkness,  so  that  neither  the  sun  of  natural
reason  nor  that  of  the  supernatural  wisdom  of  God  can
reach  it  or  enlighten  it. — A  i.,  viii.  i.

141.  He  who  feeds  his  desires  is  like  a  moth,  or  a  fish
dazzled  by  the  light  which  the  fishermen  throw  over  the
water,  that  it  may  not  see  the  ruin  which  the  fishermen
have  prepared  for  it. — A.  i.  8,  3.

142.  Who  can  tell  how  impossible  it  is  for  the  soul,
subject  to  desires,  to  judge  of  the  things  of  God  ?  for  while
the  film  of  desire  is  over  the  eye  of  its  judgment,  it  sees
nothing  but  that  film,  now  of  one  colour,  now  of  another  ;
and  so  it  comes  to  regard  the  things  of  God  as  not  the
things  of  God,  and  those  which  are  not  the  things  of  God
as  the  things  of  God. — L.  F.  iii.  84.

143.  A  bird  that  has  perched  upon  a  twig  covered  with
birdlime  labours  in  a  twofold  way,  in  setting  itself  free,
and  in  cleaning  itself;  so  a  soul,  that  has  given  way  to
desires ;  it  has  to  set  itself  free  in  the  first  place,  and  then
to  clean  itself  of  that  which  has  clung  to  it.

144.  As  soot  defiles  the  most  beautiful  and  perfect  face,
so  the  unruly  desires  of  the  soul  defile  and  polute  that
soul  which  entertains  them,  and  yet  that  soul  in  itself
is  the  most  beautiful  and  perfect  image  of  God. —
A.  i.  9,  I.


574  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

145.  He  that  toucheth  pitch,  saith  the  Holy  Ghost,
shall  be  defiled  with  it.*  A  soul  touches  pitch  when  it
satisfies  the  desires  of  the  will  in  any  created  thing. —
A.  i.  9,  I.

146.  If  my  object  were  to  describe  the  foul  and
corrupt  condition  to  which  the  desires  reduce  the  soul,  I
should  not  be  able  to  find  anything  so  full  of  cobwebs  and
worms,  not  even  corruption  itself  wherewith  to  compare
it.— A.  i.  9,  3.

147.  The  desires  are  like  the  suckers  which  grow
on  a  tree,  they  sap  its  strength  and  destroy  its  fertility. —
A.  i.  10.  2.

148.  There  are  corrupt  humours  which  so  weaken  a
man's  gait,  and  make  him  loathe  his  food,  as  the  desire  of
the  creature  weakens  the  soul,  indisposing  it  for  the
practice  of  yirtue. — A.  i.  10,  4.

149.  Many  souls  haye  no  inclination  for  yirtue,  because
their  desires  are  not  pure,  and  not  for  God.

150.  As  the  young  yipers,  growing  in  the  womb,  feed
on  their  mother  and  kill  her,  preserving  their  own  lives  at
the  cost  of  hers,  so  the  unmortified  desires  pre}'  on  the
soul  and  kill  in  it  the  life  of  God  ;  they  at  last  are  the
only  things  that  live  in  it,  because  the  soul  has  not  killed
them  first. — A.  i.  10,  3.

151.  As  it  is  necessary  to  till  the  earth  that  it  may
bring  forth  fruit — for  otherwise  it  will  produce  nothing
but  weeds, — so  also  is  it  necessary  to  mortify  our  desires,
that  the  soul  may  be  clean. — A.  i,  8,  4.

152.  As  wood  is  never  transformed  into  fire  if  but  one
degree  of  heat   necessary  for  that  end  be  wanting,  so  the

*  Eccles.  xiii.  i.


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  575

soul   that   has  one    imperfection  can    never  be    perfectly
transformed  in  God, — A.  i.  ii,  g.

153.  Whether  it  be  a  strong  wire  rope,  or  a  slender  and
delicate  thread,  that  holds  the  bird,  it  matters  not  if  it
really  detains  it,  for,  until  the  cord  be  broken,  the  bird
cannot  fly ;  so  the  soul,  held  in  the  bonds  of  human
affections,  however  slight  they  may  be,  cannot,  while  they
last,  make  its  way  to  God. — xxii.

154.  The  desires  and  attachments  of  the  soul  have  the
property  attributed  to  the  remora,  which,  though  it  be
but  a  very  little  fish,  yet  it  arrests  the  progress  of  the
ship  to  which  it  clings. — A.  i.  11,  6.

155.  O  that  spiritual  men  knew  how  they  are  losing
the  blessings  and  fulness  of  the  Spirit,  merely  because
they  will  not  raise  up  their  desires  above  trifles  !  and  how
they  might  have  the  sweetness  of  all  things  in  the  pure
food  of  the  Spirit— of  which  the  manna  was  a  figure — if
they  would  only  abstain  from  tasting  other  food ! — A.  i.  5, 4,

156.  The  children  of  Israel  did  not  find  in  the  manna
all  the  sweetness  and  strength  they  might  have  found  in
it ;  not  because  the  manna  did  not  contain  them,  but
because  they  longed  for  other  meat. — A.  i.  5,  4.

157.  Of  one  spark  cometh  a  great  fire,  and  one
imperfection  is  enough  to  beget  others.  We  shall  never
see  a  soul  negligent  in  resisting  but  one  single  desire,
which  has  not  many  other  desires,  springing  out  of  that
weakness  and  im.perfection  from  which  the  first  proceeds,
—A  i.  II,  8.

158.  Voluntary  and  perfectly  deliberate  desires,  how-
ever slight  they  may  be,  if  only  habitual,  are  those  which
chiefly  hinder  our  progress  to  perfection. — A.  i.  11,  4.


576  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

159.  Any  imperfection  to  which  the  sojjI  is  attached
and  accustomed,  is  a  greater  injury  to  virtue  than  a  daily
fall  into  many  other  and  even  greater  imperfections,
provided  they  do  not  result  from  the  habitual  indulgence
of  an  evil  inclination. — A.  i.  11,  5.

160.  God  is  justly  angry  with  certian  souls  whom  He,
by  His  mighty  arm,  has  delivered  from  the  world,  and
from  the  occasions  of  grievous  sins,  but  who  are  weak
and  negligent  in  mortifying  certain  imperfections ;  for
this  He  permits  them  to  fall  through  their  desires  from
bad  to  worse. — A.  i.  11,  10.

VI.

PRUDENCE.

161.  Give  heed  to  reason,  that  you  may  perform  that
which  it  dictates  to  you  in  the  way  of  God :  and  it  will
serve  you  more  than  all  good  works  heedlessly  done,  and
all  the  spiritual  sweetness  you  aim  at  — xxxviii.

162.  Blessed  is  he  who,  setting  his  own  tastes  and
inclinations  aside,  looks  at  things  according  to  reason  and
justice,  in  order  to  accomplish  them. — xxxix.

163.  He  who  acts  according  to  reason  is  as  one  who
eats  strong  and  substantial  food ;  but  he  who  in  his
works  seeks  the  satisfaction  of  his  own  will,  is  as  one  who
eats  poor  and  unripe  fruit. — xl.

164.  No  creature  may  transgress  the  limits  which  God
has  set  for  it  in  the  order  of  its  nature  :  and  as  He  has
appointed  for  man's  governance  certain  natural  and
rational  laws,  the  transgression  thereof,  by  seeking
knowledge  in  a   supernatural   way,  is   neither   holy    nor


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  577

becoming  :  moreover,  God  is  displeased  ;  and  if  at  any
time  He  vouchsafes  an  answer,  it  is  out  of  condescension
to  the  soul's  weakness. — A.  ii.  21,  i.

165.  Man  knows  not  how  to  order  his  joy  and  grief
reasonably  and  prudently,  because  he  knows  not  the
distance  between  good  and  evil  — liii.

166.  We  know  not  how  to  distinguish  between  our
right  hand  and  our  left  :  for  at  every  step  we  take  evil  for
good  and  good  for  evil,  and  if  this  be  as  it  were  natural  to
us,  what  must  it  be  if  desire  be  added  to  our  natural
blindness  ? — A.  i.  8,  6.

167.  The  desire,  as  desire,  is  blind,  because  in  itself
it  regards  not  reason,  which  is  that  which  ever  guides
and  directs  the  soul  aright  in  its  operations  :  so  the
soul,  whenever  it  is  guided  by  its  desires,  is  blind. —
A.  i.  8,  2.

THE  ANGELS.

168.  The  angels  are  our  shepherds,  because  they  carry
not  only  our  message  to  God,  but  also  those  of  God  to
our  souls,  feeding  them  with  sweet  inspirations  and  divine
communications  :  as  good  shepherds  they  protect  us,  and
defend  us  from  the  wolves,  which  are  the  evil  spirits. —
S.  C.  ii.  4.

i6g.  Through  the  secret  inspirations  which  the  angels
convey  to  the  soul,  they  effect  a  deeper  knowledge  of  God,
and  make  it  love  Him  the  more,  till  they  leave  it  wounded
with  love. — S.  C.  vii.  8.

170.  The  divine  wisdom  which  in  heaven  illumines  the
angels,  and  cleanses  them  of  their  ignorances,  is  the  same
which   illumines  men  upon   earth,  and  cleanses  them  of

pp


578


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS


their  errors  and  imperfections  ;  it  flows  from  God  through
the  first  orders  of  the  hierarchies  down  to  the  lowest,  and
thence  to  men. — D.  N.  ii.  12,  3.

171.  The  hght  of  God,  which  illumines  an  angel,
enlightening  and  setting  him  on  fire  with  love,  as  pure
spirit  disposed  for  that  inflowing,  illumines  man  ordinarily
in  darkness,  pain,  and  distress,  because  of  his  impurity
and  weakness :  so  is  the  sun  to  a  weak  eye ;  the  light  it
gives  is  painful. — D.  N.  ii.  12,  4.

172.  When  man  has  become  spiritualised  and  refined
in  the  fire  of  divine  love  which  purifies  him,  he  is  then
within  the  union  and  inflowing  of  the  loving  illumination
with  the  sweetness  with  which  an  angel  receives  them.
There  are  souls  who  in  this  life  receive  a  more  perfect
illumination  than  the  angels. — D.  N.  ii.  12,  4.

173.  When  God  gives  great  graces  to  a  soul  through
the  hands  of  an  angel,  He  ordinarily  allows  the  devil  to
know  it,  that  he  may  assail  that  soul  with  all  his  might,
according  to  the  measure  of  justice,  in  order  that  the
victory  may  be  the  more  prized,  and  the  soul,  faithful  in
temptation,  may  be  the  more  abundantly  rewarded. —
D.  N.  ii.  23,  7.

174.  Remember  that  your  guardian  angel  does  not
always  move  the  will  to  act,  though  he  always  enlightens
the  reason ;  therefore  do  not  promise  yourself  sensible
sweetness  always  in  your  works,  because  reason  and
understanding  are  sufficient. — xxxi.

175.  When  the  desires  of  man  are  occupied  with  any-
thing that  is  not  God,  they  embarrass  the  soul  and  shut
the  door  against  the  light  by  which  the  angel  moves  it  to
virtue. — xxxii.


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  579

176.  Consider  what  utter  vanity  it  is  to  rejoice  in  any-
thing but  in  the  service  of  God,  how  dangerous  and  how
fatal ;  how  ruinous  it  proved  to  the  angels  who  rejoiced
and  had  complacency  in  their  own  beauty  and  their
natural  endowments ;  for  this  they  fell  deformed  into  the
abyss. — A.  iii.  21,  11.

A  SPIRITUAL  DIRECTOR.

177.  A  soul  without  a  director  is  like  a  kindled  coal,
which,  left  by  itself,  cools  instead  of  burning. — A.  ii.
22,  g,  vi.

178.  He  who  insists  on  being  left  to  himself,  without  a
director  to  guide  him,  is  like  an  unowned  tree  by  the  way-
side ;  however  fruitful  it  may  be,  the  travellers  pick  its
fruit,  and  none  of  it  ripens. — v.

179.  The  tree  that  is  cultivated  and  kept  carefully  by
its  owner  produces  fruit  in  due  season,  and  the  owner  is
not  disappointed. — v.

180.  He  who  falls  alone  remains  alone  in  his  fall ;  he
makes  little  account  of  his  soul,  because  he  trusts  in
himiself  alone. — vii.

181.  He  who  is  carrying  a  burden  when  he  falls,  rises
with  difficulty  under  his  burden. — Ix.

182.  He  who  falls,  being  blind,  cannot  rise,  being  blind
and  alone  ;  and  if  he  should  rise  by  himself,  he  will  walk
in  a  direction  that  is  not  good  for  him. — ix.

183.  If  you  are  not  afraid  to  fall  by  yourself,  how  can
you  venture  to  raise  yourself  alone  ?  Remember  that  two
are  better  than  one. — viii.

184.  Our  Lord  did  not  say  in  His  gospel,  where  one  is
by  himself  there  am  I,  but  where  there  are  at  the  least

pp  2


580  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

two :  this  is  to  show  us  that  no  one  should  beheve  of
himself,  or  confirm  himself  in,  the  things  which  he  thinks
are  those  of  God,  without  the  counsel  and  direction  of  the
Church  and  her  ministers.  -  A.  ii.  22,  9.

185.  Woe  to  him  that  is  alone,  saith  the  Holy  Ghost ;
and  therefore  the  soul  has  need  of  a  director,  for  both  will
resist  the  devil  more  easily,  being  both  together  to  learn
and  practise  the  truth. — A.  ii.  22,  10.

186.  It  is  the  will  of  God  that  the  government  of  one
man  should  be  in  the  hands  of  another,  and  that  we
should  not  give  perfect  credit  to  those  matters  w^hich  He
communicates  supernaturally  Himself,  until  they  shall
have  passed  through  the  human  channel  of  another  man's
mouth. — A.  ii.  22,  6,  vii.

187.  When  God  makes  a  particular  revelation  to  a
soul,  he  also  inclines  that  soul  to  make  it  known  to  the
minister  of  His  Church,  who  stands  in  His  place. — A.  ii.  22, 6.

188.  It  is  not  every  one  who  is  fitted  for  the  direction
of  souls ;  it  being  a  matter  of  the  last  importance  to  give
right  or  wrong  advice  in  so  serious  a  matter  as  that. —
A.  ii.  30,  4.

189.  Let  the  soul  that  would  advance,  and  not  go
back,  take  care  into  whose  hands  it  commits  itself;  for,
as  the  master,  so  the  scholar,  and  as  the  father,  so  the
child. — L.  F.  iii.  31.

190.  The  inclinations  and  tastes  of  the  director  are
easily  impressed  upon  the  penitent. — A.  ii.  18,  6.

191.  The  chief  solicitude  of  spiritual  directors  should
be  to  mortify  every  desire  of  their  penitents  :  to  make
them  deny  themselves  in  all  they  desire,  so  as  to  deliver
them  from  so  great  misery. — A,  i.  12,  6.


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  581

192.  However  high  the  doctrine,  adorned  the  eloquence,
subhme  the  style,  the  fruits  of  the  sermon  will  be,  in
general,  no  better  than  the  spirit  of  the  preacher. —
A.  iii.  44,  2

193.  A  good  style  and  action,  high  doctrines  and
correct  expression,  have  a  greater  effect  when  accompanied
by  true  spirituality  ;  but  without  that  the  will  is  scarcely
or  but  little  inflamed,  though  the  senses  may  be  charmed
and  the  understanding  delighted.—  A.  iii.  44,  4.

194.  God  is  angry  with  those  who  teach  His  law  and
keep  it  not ;  and  who  preach  spirituality  to  others  without
being  spiritual  themselves. — A.  iii.  44,  3.

195.  For  the  highest  parts,  and  even  for  the  ordinary
parts,  of  the  way  of  perfection,  you  will  scarcely  find  one
capable  guide  throughout,  such  as  men  have  need  of:
such  an  one  must  be  wise,  discreet,  and  experienced. —
L.  F.  iii.  31.

196.  For  though  the  foundations  of  direction  be  know-
ledge and  discretion,  yet  if  directors  be  without  experience,
they  will  never  be  able  to  guide  the  soul  in  the  way  in
which  God  is  leading  it ;  they  will  make  it  go  backwards,
ordering  it  after  low  methods  which  they  pick  up  in  books.
— L.  F.  iii.  81.

197.  He  who  shall  presumptuously  err  in  the  direction
of  souls,  being  under  obligation  to  give  good  counsel — as
everyone  is  in  the  office  he  undertakes — shall  not  escape
punishment  according  to  the  evil  he  has  done  ;  for  the
work  of  God — and  such  is  the  direction  of  souls — demands
great  caution  and  counsel. — L.  F.  iii.  61.

98.  Who  can  be  like  St.  Paul,  who  was  all  things  to
all,  that  he  might  save  all  ?  knowing  all  the  ways  by  which


582  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

God  leads  souls,  which  are  so  different  one  from  another,
that  you  can  scarcely  find  one  which  in  half  its  ways
agrees  with  the  ways  of  another. — L.  F.  iii.  63.

RELIGION,  PRAYER.

199.  The  greatest  honour  we  can  render  unto  God,  is
to  serve  Him  in  evangelical  perfection  :  and  whatever  is
beside  this  is  of  no  value  or  advantage  to  man. —
A.  iii.  16,  2.

200.  One  thought  of  man  is  of  more  value  than  the
whole  world ;  God  alone  is,  for  that  reason,  the  worthy
object  of  it,  and  to  Him  alone  is  it  due ;  every  thought  of
man,  therefore,  which  is  not  given  to  God,  is  a  robbery.

201.  In  all  nature  there  are  correspondences  ;  insen-
sible things  correspond  with  those  that  are  insensible  ;
sense  with  things  sensible ;  and  man's  thought's  with  the
Spirit  of  God. — xxx.

NECESSITY     OF     PRAYER.

202.  Never  let  your  heart  waste  its  affections,  not
even  for  a  moment,

203.  The  soul  cannot  overcome  the  devil  without
prayer,  nor  penetrate  his  devices  without  humility  and
mortification  :  for  the  weapons  of  God  are  prayer  and  the
Cross  of  Christ. — S.  C.  iii.  12.

204.  In  all  our  necessities,  trials,  and  afflictions,  there
is  no  better  nor  safer  remedy  than  prayer,  and  hope  that
God  will  provide  for  us  in  His  own  way. — A.  ii.  21,  5.

FRUITS     OF     PRAYER.

205.  Let  God  be  the  Bridegroom  and  the  beloved  of
your  soul ;  remain  always  in  His  presence,  and  so  you  shall


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  583

avoid   sin,  learn  to  love  Him,  and  all  things  will  prosper
with  you. — Ivii.

206.  Enter  into  your  innermost  heart,  and  labour  in
the  presence  of  God,  the  Bridegroom  of  the  soul.  Who  is
ever  present  doing  you  good. — Ixxix.

207.  Strive  to  be  continually  in  the  presence  of  God,
and  to  preserve  the  purity  which  He  teaches.

208.  By  prayer  aridity  is  expelled,  devotion  in-
creased, and  the  interior  practice  of  virtue  is  established
in  the  soul. — S.  C.  xvii.  i.

2og.  By  shutting  the  eyes  to  the  defects  of  others,
keeping  silence,  and  conversing  continually  with  God,
great  imperfections  are  rooted  out  of  your  soul,  which
thereby  becomes  possessed  of  great  virtues. — xciv.

210.  When  prayer  is  made  in  the  pure  and  simple
understanding  of  God,  it  seems  to  the  soul  to  have  lasted
but  a  moment,  though  in  fact  it  occupied  much  time  :
this  is  that  prayer  of  a  moment,  of  which  it  is  said  that  it
pierces  the  clouds. — A.  ii.  14,  10.

THE  PROPERTIES  OF  PRAYER.

211.  The  powers  and  senses  of  the  soul  should  not  be
employed  altogether  upon  anything  unless  it  be  a  matter

,     which  cannot  be  neglected  ;    for  the  rest,  they  should  be
unoccupied  for  God. — xcii.

212.  Wait  lovingly  upon  God,  without  any  desire  to
feel  or  understand  anything  in  particular  of  Him.

213.  Strive  to  attain  to  that  state  in  which  nothing  is
of  importance  to  you,  and  you  of  importance  to  none,  so
that  being  utterly  forgotten  you  may  be  with  God  in
secret  — Ixxx.


584  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

214.  He  who  will  not  allow  his  desires  to  carry  him
away  will  wing  his  flight  like  a  bird  whose  wings  are
strong.^ — xxi.

215.  Do  not  nourish  your  soul  upon  anything  else  but
on  God  :  repel  the  remembrance  of  things,  let  peace  and
recollection  fill  your  heart.

216.  If  you  would  attain  to  holy  recollection,  it  must
be  by  rejecting,  and  not  by  admitting.

217.  Seek  by  reading  and  you  will  find  by  meditating;
cry  in  prayer  and  the  door  will  be  opened  in  contemplation.

218.  True  devotion  and  spirituality  consist  in  perse-
verance in  prayer,  with  patience  and  humilit}-,  distrusting
yourself  that  you  may  please  God  only. — D.  N.  i.  5,  7.

2ig.  They  call  upon  God  in  truth  who  pray  for  that
which  is  most  true  :  namely,  that  which  belongs  to  their
eternal  salvation. — A.  iii  43,  2.

220.  There  is  no  better  way  to  obtain  the  desires  of
our  heart  than  to  pray  with  all  our  might  for  that  which
is  most  pleasing  unto  God  ;  for  then  He  will  grant  us  not
only  our  salvation,  which  we  pray  for,  but  also  that  which
He  sees  expedient  for  us,  though  we  may  never  ask  for  it,
and  though  it  may  have  never  entered  into  our  hearts  to
do  so.

221.  Let  every  soul  understand  that,  although  God
may  not  succour  it  in  its  necessities  when  it  cries.  He
will  not  however  fail  it  when  the  time  comes  ;  provided  it
does  not  lose  heart  and  cease  from  prayer.

MOTIVES     FOR     PRAYER.

222.  When  the  will,  the  moment  it  feels  any  joy  in
sensible  things,  rises  upwards  in  that   joy  to   God,  and


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  585

when  sensible  things  move  it  to  pray,  it  should  not  reject
them,  it  may  and  should  make  use  of  them  for  so  holy  an
exercise  ;  because  sensible  things,  under  these  conditions,
subserve  the  end  for  which  God  created  them  :  namely,
to  be  occasions  of  making  Him  better  known  and  loved. —
A.  iii.  23,  3.

223.  He  whose  senses  are  subject  to  the  Spirit,  purged
from  all  sensible  objects,  even  in  his  first  movements,
elicits  delight  in  the  sweet  knowledge  and  contemplation
of  God. — A.  iii.  25,  3.

224.  As  it  is  a  truth  of  sound  philosophy  that  the  life
of  every  creature  is  in  harmony  with  its  constitution,  so
is  it  clear  beyond  all  contradiction,  that  he  whose  life  is
spiritual — the  animal  life  being  mortified — must  be  wholly
tending  towards  God. — A.  iii.  25,  4.

225.  The  will  of  a  devout  person  rests  chiefly  on  the
invisible  ;  he  requires  but  few  images  for  his  use,  and
these  are  such  as  are  more  conformable  to  divine,  than  to
human,  taste  ;  ordering  himself  herein  after  the  ways  of
the  other  world,  and  not  of  this. — A.  iii.  ^^j ,  6.

226.  The  chief  thing  to  be  regarded  in  images  is
devotion  and  faith  ;  if  these  be  absent,  the  image  will  not
be  sufficient.  What  a  perfect  living  image  our  Lord  was
upon  earth,  and  yet  those  who  had  no  faith,  though  they
were  about  Him,  and  saw  His  wonderful  works,  were
none  the  better. — A.  iii.  35,  2.

PLACE     FOR     PRAYER.

227.  Keep  yourself  apart  for  one  thing  only,  that
which  brings  everything  with  it ;  solitude,  accompanied
by    prayer    and    spiritual    reading :     and     there     abide,


586  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

forgetting  all  things,  if  there  be  no  obligation  upon  you  to
remember  them.  You  will  please  God  more  by  keeping
watch  over,  and  perfecting,  yourself,  than  if  you  gained
everything  :  for  what  doth  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the
whole  world,  if  he  loses  his  own  soul  ?

228.  Pure  spirituality  gives  no  heed  to  matters  which
do  not  concern  it,  or  to  human  respect ;  but  alone  and
apart  from  all  created  forms,  communicates  interiorly  in
sweet  tranquillity  with  God ;  for  the  knowledge  of  Him  lies
in  a  divine  silence. — xxvi.

229.  For  the  purposes  of  prayer  that  place  is  to  be
chosen  in  which  sense  and  spirit  may  be  least  hindered
from  rising  upwards  unto  God — A.  iii.  38,  i.

230.  The  place  of  prayer  must  not  be  pleasant  and
delectable  to  the  senses — some  people  seek  such  a  place
— lest  the  issue  should  be  recreation  of  sense,  and  not
recollection  of  spirit. — A.  iii.  38,  2.

231.  He  who  goes  on  a  pilgrimage  will  do  well  to  do
so  when  others  do  not,  though  it  be  at  an  unusual  season.
When  pilgrims  are  many,  I  would  advise  staying  at  home,
for  in  general  men  return  more  dissipated  than  they  were
before  they  went.  They  who  become  pilgrims  for
recreation,  rather  than  devotion,  are  many  in  number. —
A.  iii.  35,  2.

HINDRANCES  TO  PRAYER.

232.  He  who  interrupts  the  course  of  his  spiritual
exercises  and  prayer,  is  like  a  man  who  allows  a  bird  to
escape  from  his  hand ;  he  can  hardly  catch  it  again. —
xxviii.

233.  God  being,  as  He  is,  inaccessible,  do  not  rest  on


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  587

the  consideration  of  objects  perceptible  by  sense,  and
comprehended  by  the  understanding.  This  is  to  be
satisfied  with  what  is  less  than  God  ;  so  doing  3^ou  will
destroy  that  energy  of  the  soul  which  is  necessary  for
walking  with  Him. — xlv.

234.  Never  admit  into  your  soul  that  which  is  not
substantially  spiritual ;  for  if  you  do  so  you  will  lose  the
sweetness  of  devotion  and  recollection. — Ixxvii.

235.  He  who  relies  much  on  sense  will  never  be  very
spiritual ;  they  deceive  themselves  who  think  they  can,  in
the  sheer  strength  of  our  grovelling  senses,  attain  to  the
power  of  the  spirit.^ — L,  F.  ii.  14.

236.  The  imperfect  destroy  true  devotion,  because
they  seek  sensible  sweetness  in  prayer. — D.  N.  i.  6,  7.

237.  The  fly  that  touches  the  honey  cannot  fly ;  so
the  soul  that  clings  to  spiritual  sweetness  ruins  its  freedom
and  hinders  contemplation. — xxiii.

238.  He  who  will  not  dispose  himself  to  pray  in  every
place,  but  only  there  where  his  own  taste  is  gratified,  v/ill
frequently  fail  in  his  prayer ;  because,  as  they  say,  he  can
pray  only  in  his  own  parish. — A.  iii.  40,  2.

239.  He  who  is  not  conscious  of  liberty  of  spirit  amid
the  things  of  sense  and  sweetness,  which  should  serve  as
motives  to  prayer,  and  whose  will  rests  and  feeds  upon
them,  ought  to  abstain  from  the  use  of  them,  for  to  him
they  are  a  hindrance  on  the  road  to  God. —  A.  iii.  23,  5.

240.  It  is  very  foolish,  when  spiritual  sweetness  and
delight  fail,  to  imagine  that  God  has  failed  us  also ;  and
to  imagine,  that  because  we  have  such  sweetness,  that  we
have  God  also. — Lett.  x.

241.  Very  often  many  spiritual  persons  employ  their


588  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

senses  upon  sensible  things,  under  the  pretext  of  giving
themselves  to  pra3''er,  and  raising  their  hearts  to  God ;
now  this  that  they  do  should  be  called  recreation  rather
than  prayer;  pleasing  themselves  rather  than  God. —
A.  iii.  23,  2.

242.  Meditation  tends  to  contemplation,  as  means  to
an  end.  So  when  the  end  is  attained,  the  means  are  laid
aside;  men  rest  at  the  end  of  their  journey;  thus,  when
the  state  of  contemplation  has  been  attained,  meditation
must  cease.

243.  As  it  is  necessary,  at  the  proper  time,  to  give  up
the  work  of  reflection  and  meditation  in  order  to  draw
near  unto  God,  lest  it  should  prove  an  impediment,  so
also  is  it  necessary  not  to  give  it  up  before  the  time  lest
we  should  go  back. — A.  ii,  13,  i.

244.  There  are  three  signs  of  contemplation  and
interior  recollection  of  the  soul :  i.  When  the  soul  takes
no  pleasure  in  transitory  things.  2.  When  it  seeks
solitude  and  silence,  striving  after  that  which  is  the  more
perfect.  3.  When  meditation,  which  was  once  a  help,
proves  a  hindrance.  These  three  signs  must  be  found
together. — A.  ii.  13,  4,  xciii.

245.  In  the  beginning  of  the  state  of  contemplation
the  loving  knowledge  of  God  is,  as  it  were,  imperceptible:
in  the  first  place,  because  it  is  most  subtile  and  delicate,
and,  as  it  were,  imperceptible ;  in  the  second  place,
because  the  soul  has  been  accustomed  to  the  practice  of
meditation,  which  is  more  cognisable  by  the  senses. —
A.  ii.  13,  5.

246.  The  more  the  soul  is  disposed  for  tranquillity,  the
more  will  the  loving  knowledge  of  contemplation  grow ;


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  589

the  soul  will  feel  it  and  relish  it  more  than  all  other  things
whatever ;  because  it  brings  with  it  peace  and  rest,  sweet-
ness and  delight,  without  trouble. — A.  ii.  13,  6.

247.  They  who  have  entered  the  state  of  contempla-
tion, must  not  for  that  reason  suppose  that  they  are  never
to  make  a  meditation  any  more ;  for  in  the  beginning  the
habit  of  it  is  not  so  established  that  they  can  have  it
whenever  they  will ;  neither  are  they  so  far  removed  from
meditation  as  to  be  unable  to  meditate  as  they  were
accustomed  to  do. — A.  ii.  15,  i.

248.  Except  in  the  act  of  contemplation,  in  all
exercises  and  good  works,  the  soul  must  make  use  of
memory  and  good  meditations  in  such  a  way  as  to
increase  devotion  and  profit,  particularly  dwelling  on  the
life,  passion,  and  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  order
that  its  works,  exercises,  and  life  may  be  conformed  to
His. — A.  ii.  32,  7.

249.  The  conditions  of  the  '  solitary  sparrow  '  are  five :
I.  It  ascends  as  high  as  it  can.  2.  It  admits  none  to  be
its  companion,  even  of  its  own  kind.  3.  It  faces  the
wind.  4.  It  has  no  definite  colour.  5.  It  sings  sweetly.
The  contemplative  soul  should  be  like  it ;  it  must  rise
high  above  transitory  things,  making  no  more  account  of
them  than  if  they  never  existed  ;  it  must  be  so  enamoured
of  solitude  and  silence  as  to  suffer  no  creature  to  be  in  its
company ;  it  must  face  the  wind  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
corresponding  to  His  inspirations,  that  so  doing,  it  may
become  more  worthy  of  His  company ;  it  must  have  no
definite  colour,  bent  upon  nothing  but  on  doing  the  will
of  God  ;  it  must  sing  sweetly  in  the  contemplation  and
love  of  God. — S.  C.  xv.  4.


590  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

250.  Though  occasionally,  in  the  height  of  contempla-
tion and  simple  view  of  the  divinity,  the  soul  may  not
remember  the  most  sacred  humanity  of  Christ,  because
God  elevates  the  spirit  to  knowledge,  the  most  super-
natural, yet  studiously  to  forget  it  is  in  nowise  seemly,
seeing  that  by  the  contemplation  thereof,  and  loving
meditation  thereon,  the  soul  will  ascend  to  the  highest
state  of  union  ;  for  Christ  our  Lord  is  the  truth,  the  gate,
the  way,  and  the  guide  to  all  good. — A.  iii.  i,  13.

VII.

OBEDIENCE.

251.  The  way  of  life  demands  little  trouble  and  care,
it  demands  denial  of  the  will  rather  than  much  knowledge;
he  who  inclines  to  pleasure  and  sweetness  will  be  the  less
able  to  travel  on  it. — xlviii.

252.  He  who  does  not  walk  in  the  way  of  his  own
pleasure,  nor  in  that  of  the  pleasures  which  come  from
God,  nor  in  that  of  those  which  come  from  creatures,  and
never  does  his  own  will,  he  shall  never  stumble. — Lett,
xiv.

253.  Though  you  may  undertake  great  things,  yet,  if
you  will  not  learn  to  deny  your  own  will  and  to  be
obedient,  casting  away  all  anxiety  about  yourself  and  5'our
own  affairs,  you  will  make  no  progress  in  the  way  of
perfection. — Ixii.

254.  Let  others  teach  you,  let  others  order  you,  let
others  rule  over  you,  and  you  will  become  perfect.

255.  God  is  more  pleased  with  that  soul  which,  in
spiritual  aridity  and  trouble,  is  subject  and  obedient,  than


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  591

with  that  which,  without  obedience  performs  all  its  duties
in  great  spiritual  sweetness. — xvi.

256.  God  would  rather  have  from  you  the  lowest
degree  of  obedience  and  subjection,  than  all  those  services
you  attempt  to  render  Him. — xii.

257.  Subjection  and  obedience  is  the  penance  of
reason  and  discretion ;  and  therefore  a  more  pleasing
and  acceptable  sacrifice  in  the  eyes  of  God  than  all  other
bodily  penances. — D.  N.  i.  6,  2.

258.  Bodily  penance,  without  obedience,  is  a  most
imperfect  thing ;  beginners  practise  it  out  of  a  desire  for
it,  and  for  the  pleasure  they  find  in  it,  and  therefore,
because  they  herein  do  their  own  will,  grow  in  vice,  rather
than  in  virtue. — D.  N.  i.  6.

259.  Inasmuch  as  a  double  bitterness  results  from
fulfilling  one's  own  will ;  do  not  fulfil  it,  although  it  may
be  bitterness  to  remain  quiet. — D.  N.  i.  6,  2.

260.  The  devil  prevails  with  ease  over  those  who  are
alone,  and  who  in  the  things  of  God  order  themselves
according  to  their  own  will. — A.  ii.  22,  16.

VIII.

FORTITUDE,  PATIENCE.

261.  It  is  better  when  burdened  to  be  with  the  strong,
than  unburdened  with  the  weak.  When  you  are  loaded
with  afflictions  you  are  with  God,  Who  is  your  strength
and  he  is  with  the  afflicted.  When  you  are  unburdened
you  are  by  yourself,  who  are  weakness  itself,  for  the  virtue
and  fortitude  of  the  soul  grow  and  are  made  strong  in
tribulations. — iv.


592  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

262.  Your  flesh  is  weak,  and  no  worldly  thing  can
strengthen  or  comfort  your  spirit ;  that  which  is  born  of
the  world  is  worldly,  and  that  which  is  born  of  flesh
is  flesh  :  a  good  spirit  is  born  only  of  the  Spirit  of
God,  and  is  communicated  neither  through  the  world  nor
the  flesh. — xxxvii.

263.  The  most  delicate  flower  is  the  first  to  wither,
and  to  lose  its  fragrance  :  therefore  take  care  you  do  not
walk  in  the  way  of  spiritual  sweetness,  for  you  will  never  be
firm.  Choose  rather  a  strong  spirit,  attached  to  nothing,
and  you  will  find  sweetness  and  abundance  of  peace.
Savoury,  sweet,  and  lasting  fruit  is  gathered  only  in  a  dry
and  cold  soil. — xxxvi.

264.  Though  the  road  be  plain  and  pleasant  for  men
of  good  will,  he  who  travels  on  it  will  travel  little,  and
that  with  difficulty,  if  not  possessed  of  courage,  strength,
and  resolution.

265.  Feed  not  in  forbidden  pastures,  which  are  those
of  this  life  :  the  blessed  are  they  who  hunger  and  thirst
after  justice,  for  the}'  shall  be  filled. — Ixxxviii.

266.  Verily  he  has  overcome  all  things  in  whom
pleasure  in  them  excites  no  joy,  and  the  bitterness  of  them
no  sadness.  — xlii.

267.  By  fortitude  the  soul  labours,  practices  virtue,
and  overcomes  vice. — S.  P.  xxii.  8.

268.  Let  your  heart  be  strong  against  everything  that
may  draw  you  to  that  which  is  not  God,  and  be  at  home
in  the  sufferings  of  Christ.

269.  Rejoice  in  God  always,  for  He  is  your  salvation,
and  consider  how  blessed  it  is  to  suffer  whatever  may
come  from  Him  who  is  the  true  good. — Ixx.


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  593

270.  If  you  incline  to  aridities  and  suffering  for  the
love  of  God,  He  will  esteem  that  in  you  of  more  value
than  all  the  spiritual  visions,  meditations,  and  consolations
you  may  ever  have.

271.  Never,  for  good  or  for  evil,  suffer  your  heart  to
be  otherwise  than  calm  in  the  affections  of  love ;  that  you
may  endure  whatever  may  befal  you. — Lett.  iii.

272.  We  are  not  to  measure  our  trials  by  ourselves,
but  ourselves  by  our  trials. — Ixxxiv.

273.  If  souls  knew  how  much  suffering  and  mortifica-
tion help  to  the  attainment  of  great  blessings,  they  would
never  seek  for  consolation  anywhere. — L.  F.  ii.  30.

274.  If  a  soul  has  more  patience  under  suffering,  a
greater  endurance  in  the  absence  of  sweetness,  that  is  a
sign  of  greater  progress  in  virtue. — D.  N.  ii.  16,  g.

275.  The  way  of  suffering  is  more  secure  and  also
more  profitable  than  that  of  joy  and  action.  In  suffering,
the  strength  of  God  is  given  to  the  soul,  while  in  joy
and  action  it  has  to  do  with  its  own  weakness  and
imperfections  :  in  suffering  also  virtues  are  acquired  and
practised ;  the  soul  is  purified,  and  is  rendered  more
prudent  and  cautious. — L.  F.  ii.  16,  10.

276.  The  soul  that  is  tried  and  proved  in  temptations
and  afflictions  can  never  attain  unto  wisdom,  as  it  is
written  in  the  book  Ecclesiasticus  :  '  What  doth  he  know
that  hath  not  been  tried  ? '  * — D.  N.  i.  14,  5.

277.  The  most  perfect  suffering  brings  with  it  the  most
perfect  understanding. — S.  C.  xxxvi.


*  Eccles.  xxxiv.  g.

QQ


594  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

IX.

MODESTY.

278.  The  soul,  by  refraining  from  joy  in  the  objects  of
sense,  recovers  itself  from  the  distractions  into  which  it
has  fallen  through  the  excessive  indulgence  of  the  senses,
and  recollects  itself  in  God  :  spirituality  and  the  virtues  it
has  acquired  are  also  preserved  and  increased. — A.  iii.  25,  i.

279.  As  the  man  who  seeks  pleasure  in  the  things  of
sense,  and  rejoices  in  them,  ought  not,  and  deserves  not,
to  be  called  by  any  other  name  than  sensual,  animal,  and
earthly,  so  he  whose  joy  is  beyond  and  above  these  things,
merits  the  name  of  spiritual,  heavenly,  and  divine. —
A.  iii.  25,  2.

280.  If  you  will  deny  yourself  one  joy  in  the  things  of
sense,  our  Lord  will  repay  you  a  hundred-fold  in  this  life
spiritually  and  temporally ;  and  for  one  joy  indulged  in
the  things  of  sense,  you  shall  have  a  hundred  sorrows  and
afflictions. — A.  iii.  25,  3.

281.  All  the  functions  and  powers  of  his  senses,  who
no  longer  lives  after  the  flesh,  are  directed  to  divine
contemplation. — A.  iii.  25,  4.

282.  Though  the  goods  of  sense  may  deserve  to  be
somewhat  rejoiced  in  when  they  help  a  man  to  raise  his
thoughts  to  God,  yet  this  is  so  uncertain  that  in  general
they  do  a  man  more  harm  than  good. — A.  iii.  26,  i.

283.  Until  a  man  shall  have  so  habituated  his  senses
to  the  purgation  from  sensible  joy,  that  all  things  raise
him  up  to  God,  he  must  refrain  from  all  joy  in  them,  in
order  that  he  may  wean  his  soul  from  the  life  of  sense. —
A.  iii.  25,  5.


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  595

SILENCE.

284.  The  Father  uttered  one  Word  ;  that  Word  is  His
Son  :  and  He  utters  Him  for  ever  in  everlasting  silence,
and  in  silence  the  soul  has  to  hear  It. — Ixxxiii.

285.  That  which  we  most  require  for  our  spiritual
growth  is  the  silence  of  the  desire  and  of  the  tongue  before
God,  Who  is  so  high  :  the  language  He  most  listens  to  is
that  of  silent  love. — Ixv.

286.  Speak  little :  and  do  not  meddle  in  matters  when
you  are  not  desired  to  do  so.

287.  Never  listen  to  accounts  of  the  frailties  of  others  ;
and  if  anyone  should  complain  to  you  of  another,  humbly
ask  him  not  to  speak  about  him  at  all.

288.  Complain  of  no  one  :  ask  for  nothing,  but  if  it
should  be  necessary  to  ask,  do  so  in  few  words.

289.  Abstain  from  contradiction  :  on  no  account  let
your  words  be  other  than  pure.

290.  Let  your  words  be  offensive  to  none ;  and  about
matters  that  will  cause  you  no  trouble  if  everybody  knew
of  them.

291.  Preserve  your  spirit  in  peace,  lovingly  attentive
to  God :  and  when  you  must  speak,  do  so  calmly  and
peaceably. — Ixviii.

292.  Be  silent  about  what  God  may  say  to  you,
remembering  the  words  of  Scripture  :  '  My  secret  to  me.'*

293.  Never  forget  that  of  every  word  uttered  without
the  direction  of  obedience,  God  will  require  a  strict
account. — Ixxiii.

294.  Intercourse  with  people  beyond  what  is  strictly

*  Is.  xxiv.  16.

QQ2


596  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

necessary,  and   required   by  reason,  has  never  been   good
for  any  man,  however  holy  he  may  have  been. — Lett.  iii.

295.  It  is  impossible  to  make  progress  otherwise  than
by  doing  and  suffering  everything  in  silence. — Lett.  iii.

296.  For  growth  in  virtue,  the  important  thing  is  to
be  silent,  and  to  work  :  conversation  distracts,  silence  and
work  bring  recollection. — Lett.  iii.

297.  The  moment  a  person  understands  what  is  told
him  for  his  good,  there  is  no  necessity  for  him  to  ask  for
further  direction,  nor  to  speak  about  it,  but  to  act  upon  it
sincerely  in  silence,  carefully,  in  humility,  charity,  and
contempt  of  self.— Lett.  iii.

298.  I  have  understood  that  the  soul  which  is  ready
for  talking  and  the  commerce  of  the  world  is  but  little
attentive  to  God  :  for  if  it  were  otherwise,  it  would  with-
draw itself  at  once  into  silence  within,  and  avoid  all
conversation  whatever. — Lett.  iii.

299.  It  is  the  will  of  God  that  the  soul  should  delight
in  Him,  rather  than  in  any  created  thing,  however  useful
or  necessary  it  may  be  to  it.  —  Lett.  iii.

X.

HUMILITY.

300.  The  first  thing  the  soul  must  have  in  order  to
attain  to  the  knowledge  of  God  is  the  knowledge  of  itself.
— S.  C.  iv.  I.

301.  God  is  more  pleased  with  certain  actions,  how-
ever few  they  may  be,  done  in  silence  and  in  secret,  and
without  any  desire  that  men  might  see  them,  than  with  a
thousand  grand  actions  undertaken  w^ith  the  intention  of
their  being  seen  by  men. — xvii.


I


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  597

302.  The  secrecy  of  conscience  is  broken  when  a  man
reveals  to  others  the  good  estate  it  is  in,  receiving  for  his
reward  the  praise  of  men. — Ixiv.

303.  The  Wise  Spirit  of  God  Who  dwells  in  humble
souls  inclines  them  to  keep  His  treasures  in  secret,  and  to
cast  out  what  is  amiss.

304.  Perfection  consists  not  in  those  virtues  which
everyone  recognises  in  himself,  but  in  those  which  God
approves  of.  And  as  His  approval  is  hidden  from  the
eyes  of  men,  no  one  has  any  reason  to  presume,  and
everyone  many,  to  make  him  afraid. — xc.

305.  God,  when  He  loves  a  soul,  regards  not  its
greatness,  but  rather  the  greatness  of  its  contempt  of  self
and  its  humility. — Ixxxvi.

306.  What  you  most  seek,  and  most  anxiously  desire,
you  will  never  find  if  you  seek  it  for  yourself,  not  even  in
the  most  profound  contemplation  ;  but  only  in  deep
humility  and  submission  of  heart. — xxxiii.

307.  If  you  will  glory  in  yourself,  cast  away  everything
not  you  own  :  what  remains  will  be  nothing,  and  it  is
nothing  you  should  glory  in.

308.  Do  not  despise  others  because,  as  it  seems  to
you,  they  do  not  possess  the  virtues  you  thought  they
had :  they  may  be  pleasing  to  God  for  other  reasons
which  you  cannot  discover. — Hi.

309.  Never  excuse  yourself:  listen  calmly  to  the
reprimand  and  consider  it  to  come  from  God.

310.  Look  upon  it  as  a  special,  mercy  of  God,  that
people  ever  speak  kindly  to  you  :  you  do  not  deserve  it.

311.  Make  neither  much  nor  little  of  him  who  may  be
against  you,  and  strive  always  to  please  God.      Pray  that


598


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.


His  will  may  be  done,  and  love  Him  much,  for  it  is  His
due.

312.  Love  to  be  unknown  to  yourself  and  others :
never  regard  the  good  nor  the  evil  of  others.

313.  Never  forget  the  life  to  come.  Consider  how
many  in  heaven  are  great,  and  in  great  glory,  who  in  their
own  eyes  were  of  no  account,  humble  and  poor.—  Ixix.

314.  In  order  to  mortify  truly  the  desire  of  honour
from  which  so  many  other  desires  proceed,  you  will  do
those  things  which  will  bring  you  into  contempt,  and  you
will  wish  others  to  despise  you :  you  will  speak  dis-
paragingly of  yourself  and  you  will  contrive  that  others  do
so :  you  will  think  humbly  and  contemptuously  of
yourself,  and  you  will  wish  others  to  do  so  also. —
A.  i.  13,  8.

315.  Humility  and  submission  to  your  spiritual
director,  disclosing  to  him  all  that  passes  in  your  inter-
course with  God,  will  bring  light,  rest,  contentment,  and
security. — A.  ii.  22,  15.

316.  Virtue  consists  not  in  what  you  have  learned,
and  feel  about  God,  however  great  that  may  be,  nor  in
any  personal  experiences  of  this  kind,  but,  on  the  con-
trary, in  that  which  is  not  matter  of  feeling  at  all,  in  great
humility,  contempt  of  self,  and  of  all  that  belongs  to  you
profoundly  rooted  in  the  soul. — A.  iii.  8,  3.

317.  All  visions,  revelations,  and  impressions  of  heaven,
however  much  the  spiritual  man  may  esteem  them,  are
not  equal  in  worth  to  the  least  act  of  humility :  for  this
brings  forth  the  fruits  of  charity,  which  never  esteems  nor
thinks  well  of  self,  but  only  of  others. — A.  iii.  8,  4.

318.  The  communications  which  come  really  from  God


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  599

have  this  property,  that  they  humble  and  exalt  the  soul
at  the  same  time,  for  in  the  way  of  the  Spirit  to  descend
is  to  ascend,  and  to  ascend  is  to  descend. — D.  N.  ii.  i8.

319.  When  God  communicates  His  gifts  and  graces  to
the  soul.  He  excites  in  it  a  repugnance  to  accept  honours
and  distinctions,  but  in  the  way  of  humility  and  self-
abasement.  He  gives  it  ease  and  readiness. — A.  ii.  30,  2.

320.  God  hates  to  see  men  ready  to  accept  dignities,
even  when  it  is  His  will  that  they  should  accept  them,
but  it  is  not  His  will  that  they  should  do  so  eagerly  and
promptly. — A.  ii.  30,  3.

321.  When  the  devil  speaks,  he  makes  men  ready  and
eager  to  accept  dignities,  but  he  makes  them  reject
humiliations  and  self-abasement. — A.  ii.  30,  3.

VANITY.

322.  He  who  loves  superiorities  and  dignities,  or  the
indulgence  of  his  desires,  stands  before  God,  not  as  a  son
who  is  free,  but  as  one  of  mean  condition,  and  slave  of
his  passions.— A.  i.  4,  7.

323.  The  soul  that  is  not  humble,  the  devil  most  easily
deludes,  and  makes  it  believe  a  thousand  lies. — A.  ii.
26,  16.

324.  There  are  many  Christians  in  our  day  who  have
certain  virtues,  and  who  do  great  things,  but  all  of  no  use
to  them  in  the  matter  of  everlasting  life,  because  in  them
they  do  not  seek  that  honour  and  glory  which  belongs  to
God  alone,  but  rather  the  empty  satisfaction  of  their  own
will. — A.  iii.  26,  5.

325.  Empty  joy  in  our  good  works  is  always  attended
by  a  great  esteem  of  them  ;   out  of  this  comes  boasting,


600  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

and  other  faults  such  as  we  see  in  the  Pharisee  in  the
gospel. — A.  iii.  27,  3.

326.  Such  is  the  misery  of  the  children  of  men,  that
so  far  as  I  can  see,  the  greater  part  of  their  good  works
done  in  public  are  either  sinful  or  worthless ;  or  imperfect
and  defective  in  the  sight  of  God,  because  men  will  not
detach  themselves  from  self-interest  and  from  human
respect. — A.  iii.  27,  5.

327.  O  souls  created  for,  and  called  unto,  a  dignity  so
great !  what  are  you  doing,  what  is  it  that  detains  you  ?
O  miserable  blindness  of  the  children  of  Adam,  who  in  a
light  so  great  are  blind,  and  to  such  an  invitation  deaf!
While  they  seek  after  greatness  and  honour  they  are
themselves  miserable  and  base,  and  of  such  blessings
unworthy. — S.  C.  8.

XI.

VOLUNTARY     POVERTY.

328.  If  rejoicing  in  riches  can  be  made  in  any  way
endurable,  it  is  when  men  spend  and  use  them  in  the
service  of  God ;  there  is  no  other  way  of  making  them
profitable :  the  same  principle  applies  to  all  other
temporal  goods,  titles,  rank  and  office. — A.  iii.  17,  3.

329.  The  spiritual  man  must  be  very  careful  of  the
beginnings  of  joy  in  temporal  things,  lest  from  little  it
should  become  great,  increasing  step  by  step ;  out  of
slight  beginnings  great  evils  result.  One  spark  is  enough
to  set  a  mountain  on  fire. — A.  iii.  19,  i.

330.  However  small  an  attachment  may  be,  be  not
too  confident  that  you  can  cut  it  off  at  any  time ;  cut  it


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  601

off  at  once  :  for  if  you  have  not  the  courage  to  destroy  it
when  it  is  but  beginning,  how  can  you  presume  upon
success  when  it  has  taken  root  and  grown  ? — A.  iii.  ig,  i.

331.  He  who  turns  aside  from  what  is  httle,  will  not
stumble  over  what  is  large.  Little  matters  cause  great
evils,  because  the  fences  and  walls  of  the  heart  are  broken
down  when  they  enter  in  ;  for  the  proverb  says  :  he  who
has  begun  his  work  has  accomplished  the  half  of  it. —
A.  iii.  19,  2.

332.  Joy  darkens  the  judgment  as  a  cloud,  for  there
can  be  no  rejoicing  in  created  things  without  the  attach-
ment of  the  will.  The  negation  and  purgation  of  this  joy
leaves  the  judgment  clear  as  the  sky  when  the  mist  has
been  scattered. — A.  iii.  ig,  3.

333.  He  who  is  detached  is  not  molested  when  he
prays,  nor  at  any  other  time,  and  so  without  wasting  his
time  he  gains  with  ease  great  spiritual  treasures. — A,  iii.
ig,  4.

AVARICE,

334.  Although  temporal  goods  are  not,  in  themselves,
necessarily,  occasions  of  sin,  yet  ordinarily,  by  reason  of
our  frailty,  the  heart  of  man  sets  its  affections  upon  them,
and  falls  away  from  God,  which  is  sin  :  for  this  reason
the  wise  man  saith :  the  rich  shall  not  be  free  from  sin. —
A.  iii.  17,  I.

335.  The  things  of  this  world  neither  occupy  nor
injure  the  soul ;  it  is  not  they  that  enter  into  it,  but  rather
the  will,  and  the  desire  of  them,  which  dwell  within  it. —
A.  i.  3,  4.

336.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  gospel,  calls  riches


602  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

thorns,  giving  us  to  understand  that  he  who  sets  his  will
upon  them  shall  be  wounded  by  sin. — A.  iii.  17,  2.

2,^^.  It  is  vanity  to  desire  to  have  children,  as  some
do,  who  weary  the  world  with  their  fretting  for  them  :
they  know  not  if  their  children  will  be  good,  and  servants
of  God  :  neither  do  they  know  whether  the  pleasure  they
expect  from  them  may  not  be  turned  into  disquietude,
pain,  and  trouble. — A,  iii.  17,  4.

338.  The  covetous  man  runs  to  and  fro  within  the
limits  of  the  chain  by  which  his  heart  is  bound,  and  with
all  his  efforts  can  scarcely  set  himself  free,  even  for  a
moment,  from  the  bondage  of  his  thoughts  on  which  his
heart  is  set. — A.  iii.  19,  4.

POVERTY  OF  SPIRIT.

339.  Consider  how  very  necessary  it  is  for  you  to  set
your  face  against  yourself,  and  walk  in  the  way  of  penance
if  you  would  attain  to  perfection. — Ixxiii.

340.  If  any  one  tempts  you  with  lax  opinions,  and
should  even  confirm  them  by  miracles,  trust  him  not ;  but
rely  rather  upon  penance  and  perfect  detachment  from
creatures. — Ixxii.

341.  God  in  His  law  commanded  the  altar  of  sacrifice
should  be  empty  within.  This  is  to  teach  us  that  He
would  have  the  soul  emptied  of  all  things,  that  it  may  be
an  altar  worthy  of  His  Majesty. — A.  i.  5,  7.

342.  One  desire  only  does  God  allow,  and  suffer  in  His
presence  within  the  soul — ^the  desire  of  keeping  the  law
perfectly,  and  carrying  the  cross  of  Christ.  It  is  not  said,
in  the  sacred  writings,  that  God  commanded  anything  to


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  603

be  laid  up  in  the  ark  with  the  manna  except  the  book  of
the  law  and  the  rod  of  Moses,  a  type  of  the  cross  of
Christ. — A.  i,  5,  8.

343.  That  soul  which  has  no  other  aim  than  the
perfect  observance  of  the  law  of  our  Lord,  and  the
carrying  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  will  be  a  true  ark  contain-
ing the  true  manna,  which  is  God. — A.  i.  5,  8.

344.  If  you  wish  devotion  to  be  born  in  your  heart,
the  love  of  God  to  grow,  together  with  the  desire  for
divine  things,  cleanse  your  soul  from  every  desire  and
self-seeking,  so  that  nothing  of  the  kind  remain  with  you.
For  as  a  sick  man,  freed  from  the  evil  humours  which
troubled  him,  feels  instantly  returning  health  and  a  taste
for  his  food,  so  shall  you  recover  your  health  in  God  if
you  rid  yourself  of  your  spiritual  disorders  :  and  if  this  be
not  done,  whatever  you  may  do,  you  will  make  no
progress.

345.  Live  in  this  world  as  if  God  and  your  soul  only  were
in  it;  that  your  heart  maybe  a  captive  to  no  earthly  thing.

346.  Do  not  weary  yourself  to  no  purpose,  nor  seek
spiritual  joy  and  sweetness,  unless  it  be  by  denying
yourself  in  that  which  you  aim  at. — xxxiv.

347.  If  you  would  attain  to  holy  recollection,  it  must
be  by  rejecting,  and  not  by  admitting.

348.  Be  interiorly  detached  from  all  things,  and  do
not  set  your  affection  upon  any  temporal  thing,  and  your
soul  will  gather  in  a  harvest  of  blessings  beyond  its
comprehension.

349.  The  goods  of  God,  which  are  beyond  all  measure,
can  be  contained  only  in  an  empty  and  solitary  heart. —
Let.  xi.


604  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

350.  So  far  as  it  lies  in  your  power,  refuse  nothing
asked  of  you,  though  you  may  have  need  of  it  yourself.

351.  He  will  never  attain  to  perfection  who  will  not
labour  to  be  satisfied  with  this  :  that  all  his  natural  and
spiritual  desires  should  be  satisfied  in  the  absence  of
everything  which  is  not  God.  This  is  most  necessary  for
abiding  peace  and  tranquillity  of  spirit. — xliv.

352.  Let  your  soul  be  always  ordered  by  a  desire  not
for  that  which  is  easy,  but  for  that  which  is  most  difficult;
not  for  that  which  is  most  pleasant,  but  for  that  which  is
most  unpleasant ;  not  for  that  which  is  elevated  and
precious,  but  for  that  which  is  vile  and  depised ;  not  for
great  things,  but  for  little  things :  not  to  seek  for
anything,  but  to  seek  for  nothing ;  not  for  that  which  is
best,  but  for  that  which  is  worst ;  desiring  to  enter,  for
the  love  of  Jesus,  upon  detachment,  emptiness,  and
poverty  in  everything  in  this  world. — A.  i.  13,  6,  iii.

353.  If  you  will  cleanse  your  soul  of  strange  possessions
and  desires,  you  will  understand  all  things  spiritually ;
and  if  you  will  restrain  yourself  from  setting  your  heart
upon  them,  you  will  rejoice  truly  in  them,  and  under-
stand them  certainly. — xli.

354.  All  people  will  be  your  servants,  and  all  things
will  minister  to  you,  if  only  you  will  forget  them  and
yourself.

355.  You  will  never  have  to  do  with  necessities  greater
than  those  to  which  you  made  your  heart  yield  itself:  for
the  poor  in  spirit  are  most  happy  and  joyous  in  a  state  of
privation ;  and  he  who  has  set  his  heart  upon  nothing,
finds  fulness  everywhere. — Lett.  xli.

356.  The  poor  in  spirit  give  generously  all  they  have.


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  605

and  their  pleasure  consists  in  being  thus  deprived  of
everything  for  God's  sake,  and  out  of  love  to  their  neigh-
bour, ordering  all  things  by  the  law  of  this  virtue. —
D.  N.  i.  3,  4.

357.  Poverty  of  spirit  looks  to  the  substance  of
devotion  solely,  and  making  use  only  of  what  is  sufficient
for  it,  is  weary  of  the  multiplicity  and  curiosity  of  visible
means. — D.  N.  i.  3,  2.

358.  A  soul  withdrawn  from  exterior  things,  detached
from  its  own  will,  even  in  divine  things,  will  not  be  raised
by  prosperity  nor  subdued  by  adversity. — xcvi.

359.  The  poor  that  are  naked  shall  be  clothed  :  and
the  soul  that  will  strip  itself  of  all  its  desires,  likings,  and
dislikings,  God  will  clothe  with  His  own  purity.  His  own
joy,  and  His  own  will. — Ixxxii.

360.  The  love  of  God  in  a  pure  and  simple  soul,
detached  from  every  desire,  is  frequently  in  act.

361.  Restrain  your  desires,  and  you  will  find  that  which
your  heart  longs  for :  how  can  you  tell  that  your  desire  is
according  to  the  will  of  God  ? — xiii.

362.  If  you  desire  to  have  your  soul  in  peace  and
comfort,  and  to  serve  God  in  truth,  do  not  rest  satisfied
with  what  you  have  done  in  the  way  of  self-denial,  for  it
may  be  that  on  the  new  road  you  have  entered,  you  may
find  yourself  as  much  hindered,  or  even  more  than  you
were  ;  but  give  up  everything  that  you  have.

363.  If  you  fail  in  the  practice  of  self-denial,  which  is
the  sum  and  root  of  virtue :  every  other  way  is  but
beating  the  air,  and  you  will  make  no  progress,  not-
withstanding most  profound  meditations  and  communi-
cations.— A.  ii.  7,  7.


606  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

364.  Not  only  do  temporal  goods,  the  delights  and  the
tastes  of  sense,  hinder  and  thwart  the  way  of  God,  but
spiritual  delights  and  consolations  also,  if  sought  for,  or
clung  to  eagerly,  disturb  the  way  of  virtue. — S.  C,  iii.  8,

365.  Such  is  the  nature  of  our  vain  concupiscence  that
it  clings  to  everything :  like  the  dry-rot,  which  wastes
away  what  is  sound,  it  has  its  way  both  in  what  is  good
and  what  is  bad. — A.  iii.  34,  7.

XII.

PRAYER  OF  THE  ENAMOURED  SOUL.

O  Lord  God,  my  Love,  if  Thou  art  still  mindful  of  my
sins,  and  wilt  not  grant  my  petitions.  Thy  will  be  done,
for  that  is  my  chief  desire.  Show  Thou  Thy  goodness
and  mercy,  and  Thou  shalt  be  known  by  them.  If  it  be
that  Thou  art  waiting  for  my  good  works,  that  in  them
Thou  mayest  grant  my  petition,  do  Thou  give  them  and
work  them  in  me ;  send  also  the  penalties  which  Thou
wilt  accept,  and  do  Thou  inflict  them.  But  if  Thou  art
not  waiting  for  my  good  works  ;  what  art  Thou  waiting
for,  O  most  merciful  Lord  ?  why  tarriest  Thou  ?  For  if
at  last  it  must  be  grace  and  mercy,  for  which  I  pray  in
Thy  Son,  do  Thou  accept  my  worthless  offering,  according
to  Thy  will,  and  give  me  this  good  also  according  to  Thy
will.  O  Lord  almighty,  my  spirit  has  fainted  within  me
because  it  has  forgotten  to  feed  upon  Thee.  I  knew  Thee
not,  O  my  Lord,  when  I  went  after  vanity.

2.  Who  can  free  himself  from  base  and  mean  ways  if.
Thou  O  my  God,  wilt  not  lift  him  up  to  Thee  in  pure  love  ?
Thou  hastenest  joyfully  and  lovingly,  O  Lord,  to  raise  up


SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.  607

him  who  has  offended  Thee,  but  I  make  no  haste  to
honour  and  raise  him  up  who  has  offended  me.  How
shall  a  man  raise  himself  up  to  Thee,  for  he  is  born  and
bred  in  misery,  if  Thou  wilt  not  lift  him  up  with  the  hand
that  made  him  ?  O  Lord,  almighty,  if  the  shadow  of  the
power  of  Thy  justice  in  earthly  sovereigns  who  govern
and  rule  the  nations  can  do  so  much,  what  cannot  Thy
almighty  justice  do,  dealing  with  the  just  man  and  the
sinner  ?

3.  O  Lord  my  God,  Thou  art  not  estranged  from  him
who  does  not  estrange  himself  from  Thee.  How  is  it
that  men  say  Thou  art  absent  ?  O  Lord  my  God,  who  is
there  that  seeks  Thee  in  pure  and  true  love,  who  does  not
find  Thee  to  be  the  joy  of  his  will  ?  It  is  Thou  who  art
the  first  to  show  Thyself,  going  forth  to  meet  those  who
desire  to  meet  Thee.  Thou  wilt  not  take  away  from  me,
O  my  God,  what  Thou  hast  once  given  me  in  Thy  only
begotten  Son  Jesus  Christ,  in  Whom  Thou  hast  given  me
all  I  desire.  I  will  therefore  rejoice.  Thou  wilt  not  tarry  if  I
wait  for  Thee.  Wait  in  hope  then,  O  my  soul,  for  from
henceforth  thou  mayest  love  God  in  thy  heart.

4.  The  heavens  are  mine,  the  earth  is  mine,  and  the
nations  are  mine  :  mine  are  the  just,  and  the  sinners  are
mine :  mine  are  the  angels,  and  the  Mother  of  God ;  all
things  are  mine,  God  Himself  is  mine  and  for  me,  because
Christ  is  mine,  and  all  for  me.  What  dost  thou  then  ask
for,  what  dost  thou  seek  for,  O  my  soul  ?  All  is  thine,  all
is  for  thee,  do  not  take  less,  nor  rest  with  the  crumbs
which  fall  from  the  table  of  thy  Father,  Go  forth  and
exult  in  thy  glory,  hide  thyself  in  it,  and  rejoice,  and  thou
shalt  obtain  all  the  desires  of  thy  heart.


608  SPIRITUAL  MAXIMS.

5.  O  sweetest  love  of  God,  too  little  known  ;  he  who
has  found  Thee  is  at  rest ;  let  everything  change,  O  my
God,  that  we  may  rest  in  Thee.  Everywhere  with  Thee,
O  my  God,  everywhere  all  things  with  Thee  as  I  wish.
O  my  Love,  all  for  Thee,  nothing  for  me :  nothing  for
Thee,  everything  for  me.  All  sweetness  and  delight  for
Thee,  none  for  me :  all  bitterness  and  trouble  for  me,
none  for  Thee.  O  my  God,  how  sweet  to  me  Thy
presence,  who  art  the  sovereign  Good.  I  will  draw  near
to  Thee  in  silence,  and  will  uncover  Thy  feet,*  that  it
may  please  Thee  to  unite  me  to  Thyself,  making  my  soul
Thy  bride :  I  will  rejoice  in  nothing  till  I  am  in  Thine
arms.  O  Lord,  I  beseech  Thee,  leave  me  not  for  a
moment,  because  I  know  not  the  value  of  my  soul.


*   Ruth  iii.  7,  9.


POEMS


KB


POEMS.

THE    DARK   NIGHT.


I  departed  in  the  darkness
With  the  pains  of  love  oppressed,

Happy  lot !  for  none  observed  me  ;
All  my  house  was  then  at  rest,

;     By  the  ladder  that  is  secret.
In  the  darkness  on  I  pressed,
Through  the  night,  disguised  in  safety,
All  my  house  was  then  at  rest.

Unobserved  and  unobser'ving
In  the  silent  blissful  night ;

And  in  my  heart  the  fire  burning
Was  my  only  guide  and  light.

To  the  place  where  He  was  waiting.

Safely  guided  on  the  way
On  I  went ;  the  light  was  brighter

Than  the  sunshine  of  mid-day.

Night  that  led  to  my  Beloved, —
Guide  and  light  upon  the  way —

And  made  us  one  ;  night  more  lovely
Then  the  dawn  of  coming  day.

On  my  breast  with  flowers  covered,
Which  for  Him  alone  I  kept,

I  caressed  Him  ;  and  the  cedars
Waving  fanned  Him  while  He  slept.

When  His  tresses  were  disordered

By  the  motion  of  the  air.
Then  I  fainted,  and  He  struck  me

With  his  hand  so  soft  and  fair.

Self-forgetting,  there  I  rested
On  my  love  reclined  my  head,

All  anxieties  discarded

Mid  the  lilies  round  me  spread.


RR  2


612


SONG   OF    THE    SOUL   AND   ITS   BRIDE-
GROOM.


0  my  love,  where  art  Thou  hiding  ?
Why  hast  Thou  forsaken  me  ?

Thou  hast  left  me  to  my  sorrow,

To  bewail  my  loss  of  Thee.
Thou  hast  wounded  me  and  swiftlj-

As  the  hart  hast  fled  away,

1  pursued  Thee,  crying  loudly.

Thou  wert  gone,  and  wouldest  not  stay.

0  ye  shepherds,  I  entreat  you.

As  you  wend  your  watchful  way.
To  the  hill,  amid  the  sheepcots

Every  night  and  every  day.
Tell  my  love,  if  you  shall  see  him.

Of  the  state  in  which  I  lie.
Of  my  longing,  and  in  longing

That  I  languish,  pine,  and  die.

In  my  quest  of  Him  no  mountains,
Nor  wide  plains  shall  me  delay  ;

1  will  never  stoop  to  gather
Even  a  flower  on  the  way.

I  will  cross  the  frontiers  boldly,
Nor  shall  giants  hold  me  back.

And  if  savage  beasts  surround  me
,1  shall  dread  not  their  attack.

O  ye  trees  of  trackless  forests.

And  ye  thickets  of  the  land ;
Shade  and  shelter  for  the  weary,

Planted  by  his  loving  hand.
O  ye  meadows,  fresh  and  verdant,

Pictures  of  the  land  above,
Decked  with  flowers  bright  and  fragrant

Tell  me,  have  you  seen  my  Love  ?


SONG  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  613

THE    CREATURES    ANSWER.

5  We  have  seen  Him  !  we  have  seen  him  !

O  !  the  beauty  of  His  face  !
Moving  through  the  groves,  and  pouring

Down  the  treasures  of  His  grace,
Hastening  on.  He  looked  upon  them —

O  !  that  look  !   how  full  of  love —
And  the  groves  became  more  lovely

With  a  beauty  from  above.

THE    BRIDE.

6  I  am  wounded  ;  who  can  heal  me  ?

Sorrow  laden,  lone,  and  sad  ;
Longing  for  Thy  wonted  presence.

That  alone  can  make  me  glad.
Come  Thyself,  and  do  not  tarry  ;

Send  no  messengers  to  me  ;
They  are  powerless  to  tell  me

Aught  that  I  would  know  of  Thee.

7  All  who  serve  Thee — -men  and  angels —

Each  in  his  determined  place  ;
Speak  to  me  with  voice  unceasing,

Of  Thy  comeliness  and  grace.
They  but  make  my  wound  still  greater.

There  is  that  beyond  my  reach
And  leaves  me  dead  ;  what  I  know  not,

For  they  stammer  in  their  speech.

8  O  my  life,  how  thou  persistest

In  continuing  the  strife,
For  by  living  on  thou  livest

Where  is  not  thy  real  life.
All  thou  knowest  of  thy  Lover

Are  as  arrows  in  thy  heart
Sent  to  slay  thee  ;   then  how  is  it

Thou  abidest  as  thou  art  ?

9  My  Beloved,  Thou  hast  planted

In  my  heart  the  darts  of  love  ;
Why  dost  Thou  refuse  to  heal  it

With  the  unction  from  above  ?
Now  that  Thou  hast  robbed  me  of  it —

I  in  desolation  left —
Why  hast  Thou  not  taken  it  with  Thee

And  thus  perfected  the  theft  ?


614  SONG  OF  THE  SOUL

10  Tribulations  overwhelm  me

By  anxieties  oppressed ;
Thou  alone  canst  free  me  from  them,

Therefore  give  me  peace  and  rest.
Let  mine  eyes  then  look  upon  Thee,

For  it  is  by  Thee  they  see  ;
They  are  Thine,  and  Thou  hast  made  them,

I  will  keep  them  all  for  Thee.

11  O  that  Thou  the  clouds  wouldest  scatter

That  between  us  darkly  lie.
Show  Thy  face,  and  in  the  beauty

Of  the  vision  let  me  die.
For  the  beatific  vision

That  makes  glad  the  saints  above,
Is  the  only  perfect  healing

Of  the  malady  of  love.

12  Crystal  spring  of  limpid  waters

Unexhausted  in  its  flow  ;

0  that  on  thy  silvered  surface.

As  a  mirror.  Thou  wouldest  show
Unto  me  those  eyes  so  lovely,

And  which  I  so  long  to  see,
For  their  image  is  already

Outlined  on  my  heart  from  Thee.

13  My  Beloved,  look  not  at  me

With  those  eyes  so  full  of  love  ;

1  am  flying,  overpowered.

THE  BRIDEGROOM.

O  return  to  me,  my  dove ;
On  the  hill  the  hart  is  looming,

And  the  arrow  to  it  clings
In  the  air  refreshed  that  stirreth

By  the  motion  of  thy  wings.

THE   BRIDE.

14  My  Beloved  is  the  mountains —

They  reveal  Him  unto  me —
And  the  lonely  wooded  valleys
With  the  islands  of  the  sea.


AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  615

Strange  and  lovely  ;   and  the  murmur

Of  the  waters  as  they  flow,
And  the  sweet  entrancing  whisper

Of  the  winds  that  softly  blow.

15  My  Beloved  is  the  silent

Tranquil  night  before  the  morn  ;
Ere  the  ruddy  dawn  approaches

And  another  day  is  born.
He  is  music  that  is  soundless  ;

In  the  wilderness  a  voice,
And  the  supper  that  refresheth

Making  hearts  that  love  rejoice.

16  Who  will  catch  for  us  the  foxes

That  so  cunningly  repair
To  the  vineyard  Thou  hast  planted.

Now  so  fruitful  and  so  fair  ?
While  we  move  among  the  flowers

And  our  hands  with  roses  fill,
For  the  making  of  a  garland

Let  none  appear  on  the  hill.

17  Chilling  north  wind,  from  thy  caverns

Send  no  more  the  blasts  that  kill ;
Come,  thou  south  wind,  love  enkindling.

And  the  air  with  odours  fill.
There  among  the  fragrant  flowers

My  Beloved  will  abide,
And  will  feed  among  the  lilies

In  the  garden  of  His  bride.

18  Now  the  rosetrees  and  the  flowers

Bloom  and  blossom  in  their  beds.
And  around  the  fragrant  amber

Its  delicious  perfume  sheds.
Nymphs  of  Juda  come  not  nigh  us,

In  the  suburbs  still  remain  ;
That  ye  may  not  touch  the  threshold

Of  our  house,  your  feet  restrain.


616


SONG  OF  THE  SOUL


19     Hide  Thyself,  then,  my  Beloved,

And  let  none  Thy  presence  trace.
Keep  for  me  alone  the  secret  ;

To  the  mountains  turn  Thy  face ;
,But  with  loving  eyes  regarding.

Look  on  those  who  wait  on  me
On  my  way  among  the  islands
Of  a  strange  and  stormy  sea,


23


THE    BRIDEGROOM.

Cruel  lions  of  the  forest,

Crouching  in  their  secret  lair  ;
Fawns  and  does  so  wild  and  restless.

And  all  the  birds  of  the  air.
Nightly  terrors  that  alarm  us,

Gloomy  valleys,  lowly  plain.
Burning  heat  and  lofty  mountains,

Howling  winds  and  driving  rain.

By  the  music  of  the  viols.

By  the  siren's  soothing  strain,
I  adjure  you  and  command  you

From  j'our  fury  to  refrain.
Cease  your  clamours,  come  not  nigh  us,

At  a  distance,  still  abide,
And  occasion  no  disturbance

Of  the  slumbers  of  the  bride.

Now  the  garden  sheds  its  perfume.

For  the  winter's  cold  is  past,
And  the  bride  in  all  her  beauty

Has  come  into  it  at  last.
There,  content  among  the  lilies,

In  the  everlasting  arms,
She  is  tranquilly  reposing.

Henceforth  free  from  all  alarms.

When  I  saw  thee  wan  and  weary,

Underneath  the  apple  tree  ;
I  held  out  My  hand  in  pity,

And  betrothed  Me  unto  thee.
When  thy  mother  deluded  fell.

In  the  snare  the  traitor  laid,
There  the  price  of  thy  redemption,

In  My  bitter  death  was  paid.


AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  617

THE    BRIDE.

24  Dens  of  lions  are  the  fences

That  protect  the  bridal  bed
Hung  with  purple  :  fragrant  flowers

All  around  their  perfume  shed.
It  was  wrought  in  peace  and  quiet,

Who  will  touch  it  ?  None  so  bold,
For  its  manifold  adornments

Are  a  thousand  shields  of  gold.

25  They  are  running  in  Thy  footsteps.

On  the  road  which  Thou  didst  tread  ;
In  the  odour  of  the  ointment

That  was  poured  upon  Thy  head.
The  burning  fire  now  has  touched  them

And  the  inner  furnace  glows  ;
And  the  strengthening  wine  is  tasted,

While  the  heavenly  balsam  flows,

26  My  Beloved  gently  led  me

By  the  hand,  O  love  divine  !
Placed  me  in  the  inner  cellar

Where  I  drank  the  wondrous  wine.
Coming  forth  I  wandered  lonely

O'er  the  plain,  and  knew  no  more.
Having  lost  the  flock  I  followed

In  the  days  that  went  before.

27  He  embraced  me  there  and  taught  me

Sitting  humbly  at  His  feet.
Wondrous  secrets  of  His  wisdom  :

And  the  learning  is  so  sweet.
There  I  also  made  a  promise

I  would  be  His  faithful  bride,
True  and  constant ;  by  that  promise

I  will  stedfastly  abide.

28  My  Beloved  is  my  Bridegroom

And  my  Lord — O  what  a  joy  !
I  will  henceforth  all  the  powers

Of  my  soul  for  Him  employ.
And  the  flock  that  once  I  tended,

Now  I  tend  not  as  before.
For  my  only  occupation

Is  to  love  Him  more  and  more.


fil8  SONG  OF  THE  SOUL

29  I  have  gone  away  for  ever

From  the  haunts  of  idle  men,
And  a  sharer  in  their  follies

I  will  never  be  again.
They  may  say,  and  say  it  loudly,

I  am  lost  ;   but  I  am  not ;
I  was  found  by  my  Beloved,

O  how  blessed  is  my  lot !

30  We  will  go  in  early  morning

While  the  dew  is  on  the  ground,
To  the  garden  where  the  flowers

In  their  beauty  may  be  found  ;
And  will  make  a  garland  of  them

In  which  emeralds  shall  shine
Knit  and  bound  and  held  together

By  a  single  hair  of  mine.

31  By  that  single  hair  that  fluttered

On  my  neck  and  seen  by  Thee —
Thou  did'st  look  again  upon  it

And  wert  by  it  drawn  to  me.
Thou  wert  made  a  willing  captive.

Weak  and  slender  though  it  be,
And  I  dared  to  look  upon  Thee,

And  in  looking  wounded  Thee.

32  While  on  me  Thine  eyes  were  resting,

Full  of  sweet  and  gracious  love.
They  impressed  on  me  their  beauty  ;

Heavenly  beauty  from  above.
Then  Thy  love  flowed  in  upon  me

And  mine  eyes  obtained  the  grace
What  they  saw  in  Thee  to  worship,

O  the  beauty  of  Thy  face.

33  I  was  once  unclean  and  swarthy.

In  a  miserable  plight ;
Yet  I  pray  Thee  not  to  spurn  me,

Or  to  cast  me  from  Thy  sight.
Of  my  former  degradation.

There  remaineth  not  a  trace,
For  Thine  eyes  have  rested  on  me,

Shedding  comeliness  and  grace.


AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.  619


THE    BRIDEGROOM.

34  The  little  dove,  white  and  stainless,

Wings  her  way,  returning  now,
To  the  ark  of  safety,  bearing

In  her  mouth  the  olive  bough.
Now  her  melancholy  cooings

Will  the  turtle  dove  abate,
On  the  verdant  banks  rejoicing

In  the  presence  of  her  mate.

35  Now  the  little  dove  was  living

In  her  solitude  at  rest ;
For  in  solitxide,  contented

She  had  built  herself  her  nest.
The  Beloved  had  been  leading

Into  solitude  the  dove.
And  in  solitude  was  wounded

With  the  arrows  of  her  love.


THE    BRIDE.

36     In  our  common  love  rejoicing,

My  Beloved,  let  us  go
To  the  summit  of  the  mountain

Whence  the  limpid  waters  flow.
To  the  hill  of  contemplation.

There  each  other  to  behold
In  Thy  beauty  : — Let  us  enter

Into  mysteries  untold.

^j     We  will  go  at  once  together,

My  Beloved  and  His  bride,
To  the  dark  and  secret  caverns

Of  the  rock,  and  there  to  hide.
Into  those  mysterious  caverns

Where  no  earthly  light  can  shine,
We  will  enter — there  in  secret

We  will  taste  the  heavenly  wine.


620  SONG  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  ITS  BRIDEGROOM.

38  For  within  those  secret  caverns

Thou  Thyself  wih  shew  to  me,
That  which  I  am  always  longing

In  my  inmost  heart  to  see.
In  the  innermost  recesses

Of  the  caverns  Thou  wilt  give,
What  the  other  day  Thou  gavest,

O  my  life ;  in  Thee  I  live.

39  I  shall  breathe  the  air  that  quickeneth.

And  the  nightingale  shall  sing  ;
In  my  raptured  ear,  the  music

Of  her  voice  shall  sweetly  ring  ;
Pleasant  grove  and  all  its  beauty,

With  the  marvels  it  contains,
In  the  night ;  with  the  fire  burning

That  consumes  and  never  pains.

40  I  went  in  with  my  Beloved,

Seen  by  no  created  eye.
Nor  with  all  his  strength  and  cunning

Durst  Aminadabad  come  nigh.
Then  the  siege  was  intermitted,

Then  abandoned  by  the  foe ;
And  the  cavalry  dismounted

When  it  saw  the  waters  flow.


621


THE  LIVING  FLAME  OF  LOVE.


O  living  iiame  of  love,

How  painless  is  the  smart,

Thy  tender  wounds  create
Within  my  very  heart ;

O,  end  at  last  the  weary  strife

And  break  the  web  of  this,  my  life.


O  gentle  hand  and  touch,
O  wound  in  sweetness  rife,

O  burning,  a  foretaste
Of  everlasting  life.

The  debt  is  paid  that  long  was  due,

And  death  by  death  brings  life  anew.


O  lamps  of  fire  that  burn,

Illumining  the  night,
Sense  in  its  caverns  glows

With  unaccustomed  light.
They  once  were  dark  but  now  are  bright.
And  to  my  Love  give  warmth  and  light.


How  loving  Thou  dost  lie

Awake  within  my  breast.
And  by  Thyself  alone.

In  secret  there  at  rest.
The  sweetness  of  Thy  blissful  breath
Makes  strong  my  love  ;  and  strong  as  death.


622


A  SOUL  LONGING  FOR  THE  VISION
OF   GOD.


I  LIVE,  and  yet  not  I,

In  a  manner  hoping

That  I  am  dying  because  I  am  not  dead.


I  am  not  now  living  in  myself,

And  without  God  I  cannot  live  ;

For  without  Him,  I  am  also  without  myself.

This  life  of  mine,  what  is  it  ?

A  thousand  deaths  to  me  ;

For  I  am  waiting  for  my  very  life.

Dying  because  I  am  not  dead.


This  life  that  I  am  living

Is  a  lifeless  life.

And  so,  a  death  continuing

Until  I  come  to  live  with  Thee.

0  God,  hear  Thou  my  cry  !
This  life  of  mine  I  will  it  not ;

1  die  because  I  am  not  dead.


When  I  am  away  from  Thee,
What  is  my  life  to  me  ?
The  agony  of  death.
None  greater  have  I  ever  seen.
O,  wretched  that  I  am  !
For  while  I  am  living  on  ;
I  die  because  I  am  not  dead.


A  SOUL  LONGING  FOR  THE  VISION  OF  GOD.  623

IV

The  fish  that  from  the  water  leapeth

Is  not  without  reUef ;

The  death  that  it  endures

Does  end  in  death  at  last.

What  death  can  ever  equal

My  misery  of  life  ?

For  I,  the  more  I  live,  the  more  I  die.


When  I  see  Thee  in  the  Sacrament

And  begin  to  be  relieved,

The  absence  of  fruition

Creates  a  deeper  pang  ;

All  brings  greater  pain,

And  the  pain  is  so  bitter

That  I  am  dying  because  I  am  not  dead.

VI

And  if,  O  Lord,  I  have  a  joy
In  the  hope  of  seeing  Thee  ;
My  sorrow  is  increased,
Because  I  fear  to  lose  Thee.
Living  in  dread  so  great
And  hoping  as  I  hope,
I  die,  because  I  am  not  dead.


From  this  death  deliver  me,

O  God,  and  give  me  life.

Nor  let  these  fetters  hold  me  ;

They  are  so  strong  :

Behold,  I  die  to  see  Thee,

And  in  a  manner  hoping

That  I  am  dying,  because  I  am  not  dead.


My  death  I  will  bewail  then,
And  lament  my  life
By  reason  of  my  sins
Still  here  prolonged.

0  my  God,  when  shall  I  be  there
Where  I  may  truly  say,

1  live  at  last  because  I  am  not  dead  ?


624


ECSTASY   OF   CONTEMPLATION.


I  ENTERED,  but  I  knew  not  where,
And  there  I  stood  nought  knowing.
All  science  transcending.


I  knew  not  where  I  entered,

For,  when  I  stood  within.

Not  knowing  where  I  was,

I  heard  great  things.

What  I  heard  I  will  not  tell :

I  was  there  as  one  who  knew  not,

All  science  transcending.


Of  peace  and  devotion
The  knowledge  was  perfect.
In  solitude  profound  ;
The  right  way  was  clear,
But  so  secret  was  it.
That  I  stood  babbling.
All  science  transcending.


I  stood  enraptured

In  ecstasy,  beside  myself.

And  in  my  every  sense

No  sense  remained.

My  spirit  was  endowed

With  understanding,  understanding  nought.

All  science  transcending.


ECSTASY  OF  CONTEMPLATION.  625

IV

The  higher  I  ascended
The  less  I  understood.
It  is  the  dark  cloud

Illumining  the  night.
Therefore,  he  who  understands,
Knows  nothing  ever
All  science  transcending.

V

He  who  really  ascends  so  high

Annihilates  himself.

And  all  his  previous  knowledge  .

Seems  ever  less  and  less ;

His  knowledge  so  increases

That  he  knoweth  nothing,

All  science  transcending.

VI

This  knowing  that  knows  nothing

Is  so  potent  in  its  might

That  the  prudent  in  their  reasoning

Never  can  defeat  it ;

For  their  wisdom  never  reaches

To  the  understanding  that  understandeth  nothing,

All  science  transcending.

VII

This  sovereign  wisdom

Is  of  an  excellence  so  high

That  no  faculty  nor  science

Can  ever  unto  it  attain.

He  who  shall  overcome  himself

By  the  knowledge  which  knows  nothing,

Will  always  rise  all  science  transcending.

VIII

And  if  you  would  listen  ;

This  sovereign  wisdom  doth  consist

In  a  sense  profound

Of  the  essence  of  God  :

It  is  an  act  of  His  compassion,

To  leave  us,  nought  understanding.

All  science  transcending.

SS


626


THE  SAME  SUBJECT.


In  an  act  of  daring  love,

And  not  of  hope  abandoned,

I  mounted  higher  and  higher,

So  that  I  came  in  sight  of  the  prey.


That  I  might  come  in  sight

Of  that  prey  divine,

I  was  forced  to  fly  so  high

As  to  be  lost  to  sight ;

Yet  in  that  act  supreme

I  grew  weaker  in  my  flight.

But  my  love  was  still  so  strong

That  I  came  in  sight  of  the  prey.


When  I  ascended  higher

My  sight  grew  faint  and  dim ,

And  my  greatest  conquest

Was  in  the  darkness  made  ;

But  as  my  love  was  strong-

Blindly  forth  I  leapt,

I  mounted  higher  and  higher.

So  that  I  came  in  sight  of  the  prey.


In  a  way  most  strange
I  made  a  thousand  flights  in  one,
For  the  hope  that  is  from  heaven,
What  it  hopes,  attains  ;


I


ECSTASY  OF  CONTEMPLATION.  021

This  was  my  only  hope
And  my  Hope  was  not  in  vain,
For  I  mounted  higher  and  higher,
So  that  I  came  in  sight  of  the  prey.


But  the  nearer  I  drew

In  this  act  subhme,

The  more  lowly,  base,  and  vile,

And  humiliated  I  grew.

I  said,  none  can  reach  it  ;

And  abasing  myself  more  and  more

I  mounted  higher  and  higher.

So  that  I  came  in  sight  of  the  prey.


ss2


628


GOD    THE    SUPREME    GOOD.


Without  support,  and  with  support,
Without  Hght  and  in  darkness  hving,
I  see  myself  wasting  away.


My  soul  is  detached

From  every  thing  created,

And  raised  above  itself

Into  a  life  delicious,

Of  God  alone  supported.

And  therefore  I  will  say,

That  what  I  most  esteem

Is  that  my  soul  is  now

Without  support,  and  with  support.


And  though  I  am  in  darkness.

In  this  mortal  life

My  misery  is  not  so  great :

For  if  I  have  not  light

I  have  the  life  celestial ;

For  the  love  of  that  life,

In  the  excess  of  its  blindness.

Keeps  the  soul  submissi\'e.

Without  light  and  in  darkness  living.


Love  is  doing  this ;

I  have  known  it  since,

For  be  it  ill  or  well  with  me

It  makes  all  one  joy.

It  transforms  my  soul ;

And  so  in  its  sweet  flame.

Which  in  myself  I  feel,

I  see  myself  rapidly  burning

And  wasting  away.


629


THE   SAME    SUBJECT.


For  all  the  beauty  of  the  world
Never  will  I  lose  myself,
But  only  for  that  I  know  not,
Which  happily  is  found.


Sweetness  of  good  that  is  finite,

The  utmost  it  can  do

Is  to  pall  upon  the  appetite   ■

And  vitiate  the  taste.

For  all  the  sweetness  in  the  world

Never  will  I  lose  myself,

But  only  for  that  I  know  not.

Which  happily  is  found.

II

The  generous  heart

Will  never  rest

Where  it  can  be  at  ease,

But  only  where  it  meets  with  difficulties

Nought  can  ever  satisfy  it ;

And  its  faith  ascends  so  high

As  to  taste  of  that  I  know  not.

Which  happily  is  found.

Ill

He  that  is  on  fire  with  love
Divinely  touched  of  God
Receives  a  taste  so  new
That  all  his  own  is  gone.
Like  one  who  of  a  fever  ill
Loathes  the  food  before  him,
And  longs  for  that  I  know  not.
Which  happily  is  found.


630  GOD  THE  SUPREME  GOOD.


Be  not  at  this  astonished,

That  the  taste  should  thus  be  changed ;

For  the  cause  of  this  affection

From  all  others  differs.

And  so  every  thing  created

Is  an  alien  to  it ;

And  it  tastes  that  I  know  not,

Which  happily  is  found.


For  when  once  the  will

Has  been  touched  of  God,

It  never  can  be  satisfied

Except  in  God  alone.

But  because  His  beauty

Is  such  that  faith  alone  can  see  it.

It  tastes  it  in  I  know  not  what.

Which  happily  is  found.


And  now  of  Him  enamoured,
Tell  me  if  you  are  in  pain  ;
For  there  is  no  sweetness
In  any  thing  created.
Alone  without  form  and  figure.
Without  support  or  rest,
Tasting  there  I  know  not  what,
Which  happily  is  found.


Do  not  think  the  inner  man,
Which  is  of  priceless  worth.
Rejoices  or  is  glad
In  that  which  here  sweetness  gives
But  rather  above  all  beauty  raised
That  is,  can  be,  or  has  ever  been,
Tastes  there  I  know  not  what,
Which  happily  is  found.


GOD  THE  SUPREME  GOOD.       /      /  631

"^-^

VIII

He  who  seeks  a  greater  gain
Will  rather  turn  his  thoughts
To  that  he  has  not  acquired
Than  to  that  he  has  already.
And  therefore  for  a  greater  venture
I  shall  always  be  inclined.
Neglecting  all  for  that  I  know  not,
Which  happily  is  found.


For  all  that  in  the  way  of  sense
I  may  obtain  on  earth.
And  all  I  may  understand,
However  high  it  may  be —
For  all  grace  and  beauty —
Never  will  I  lose  myself ;
But  only  for  that  I  know  not,
Which  happily  is  found.


632


SONG  OF  THE  SOUL  REJOICING  IN
THE   KNOWLEDGE  OF   GOD  BY  FAITH.


I  KNOW  the  fountain  well  which  flows  and  runs,
Though  it  be  night.


That  everlasting  fountain  is  a  fountain  hid,
And  where  it  is  I  know  well.

Though  it  be  night.

II

Its  source  I  know  not,  because  it  has  none  ;
But  I  know  that  therein  all  things  begin,
Though  it  be  night.


I  know  that  nothing  can  be  in  beauty  like  it,
And  that  of  it  heaven  and  earth  do  drink,
Though  it  be  night.


I  know  well  it  is  of  depths  unfathomable,
And  that  none  can  ever  sound  it,
Though  it  be  night.


Its  brightness  is  never  dimmed.
And  I  know  that  from  it  all  light  proceeds,
Though  it  be  night.

VI

I  know  its  streams  are  so  abundant.
It  waters  hell  and  heaven  and  earth,
Though  it  be  night.


SONG  OF  THE  SOUL  REJOICING.  633


The  torrent  that  from  this  fountain  rises,
I  know  well  is  so  grand  and  so  strong,
Though  it  be  night.


This  everlasting  fountain  lies  concealed
In  the  living  Bread  to  give  us  life.
Though  it  be  night.


It  calls  on  every  creature  to  be  filled
With  its  waters,  but  in  the  dark,
Though  it  be  night.


■This  living  fountain  for  which  I  long ;
I  see  in  this  Bread  of  life,  I  see  it  now.
Though  it  be  night.


634


SONG  OF  CHRIST  AND  THE   SOUL.


A  shepherd  is  alone  and  in  pain,
Deprived  of  all  pleasure  and  joy,
His  thoughts  on  his  shepherdess  intent.
And  his  heart  is  by  love  most  cruelly  torn.


He  weeps,  not  because  he  is  wounded  with  love,

And  his  distress  brings  him  no  pain.

Though  a  wound  is  made  in  his  heart  ;

But  he  weeps  because  he  thinks  he  is  forgot.


His  beautiful  shepherdess,  so  does  he  think.
Has  forgotten  him  :  that  thought  alone
Makes  him  suffer  in  the  land  of  the  stranger,
And  his  heart  is  by  love  most  cruelly  torn.


The  shepherd  exclaims,  ah  wretch  that  I  am  !

For  I  am  abandoned  and  left ;

My  presence  is  shunned  by  my  love.

And  my  heart  for  her  love  is  most  cruelly  torn.


At  last  he  was  raised  on  a  tree.
Where  he  opened  his  beautiful  arms,
And  on  it,  he  died,
His  heart  by  love  most  cruelly  torn.


635


THE  MOST  HOLY  TRINITY.

(Inprincipio  erat  verbum).


In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,
The  Word  was  God,
In  Whom  He  possessed
Bliss  everlasting.


The  Word  was  God,
He  is  the  Beginning  ;
He  was  in  the  Beginning
And  never  began.


He  was  the  Beginning  itself,
And  therefore  had  none  ;
The  Word  is  the  Son,
From  the  beginning  born.


He  has  begotten  for  ever.

And  is  for  ever  begetting  ;

He  gives  Him  of  His  substance  for  ever.

And  has  it  for  ever  Himself.


And  thus  the  glory  of  the  Son
Is  that  He  hath  in  the  Father,
And  all  His  glory  the  Father
Hath  in  the  Son.


6o6  THE  MOST  HOLY  TRINITY.


As  the  lover  with  his  love,
Each  in  the  other  living,
So  this  Love  which  Both  unites
Is  One  in  Both.


In  dignity  and  might
Coequal  with  Them  Both,
Three  Persons,  and  one  Love,
The  Three  are  One.


VIII


And  in  the  Three  one  Love,
One  Lover  makes  of  All ;
The  Lover  is  the  Love
In  Whom  Each  doth  live.


The  Being  which  the  Three  possess
Each  by  Himself  possesses,
And  of  the  Three  Each  loves  the  other
In  that  He  hath  this  Being.


This  Being  is  Each  One,
And  alone  makes  Them  One
In  a  way  ineffable.
Beyond  the  reach  of  words.


And  so  that  Love  which  makes  Them  One

Is  Infinite  Itself ;

For  one  Love  make  One  the  Three,

And  is  their  Being  as  well.

And  that  Love  the  more  it  makes  Them  One

The  more  It  is  Their  Love.


i


637


THE  COMMUNICATION  OF  THE  THREE
PERSONS.


In  the  Love  from  Both  proceeding

It  hath  limits  none.
Words  of  gladness  spoke  the  Father

To  His  only  Son.


Words  they  were  of  joy  profoundest,

Understood  of  none,
But  of  Him  exulting  in  them,

Whose  they  were — the  Son.


Of  these  words  of  gladness,  only

This  was  heard  by  me —
Nought,  my  Son,  can  give  Me  pleasure

When  I  have  not  Thee.


But  if  aught  should  give  Me  pleasure,

That  I  seek  in  Thee,
He  who  gives  to  Thee  most  pleasure

Gives  it  most  to  Me.


He  who  Thee  in  nought  resembleth

Cannot  be  like  Me.
Life  of  Life,  My  whole  rejoicing

Is  alone  in  Thee.


638     THE  COMMUNICATION  OF  THE  THREE  PERSONS.


Thou  art  My  Eternal  Wisdom,
Thou,  Light  of  My  light ;

In  Thee,  Figure  of  My  substance,
Is  My  whole  delight.


Thee,  My  Son,  he  who  loveth

Shall  have  love  of  Me,
And  the  love  wherewith  I  love  him

Is  My  love  of  Thee.
So  great,  then,  is  My  love  of  Thee,  that  he
Who  loveth  Thee  shall  be  also  loved  by  Me.


639


THE   CREATION.


O  My  Son,  I  long  to  give  Thee
In  My  love  a  loving  bride,

Who  shall  by  Thy  goodness  merit
With  Us  ever  to  abide  :


Who  shall,  at  the  heavenly  banquet,
Eating  of  My  bread  with  Me,

Learn  to  know  the  wondrous  treasure.
That  I  have.  My  Son,  in  Thee ;


And  that  in  Thy  grace  and  beauty,
As  a  glory  round  her  shed,

She  with  Me  may  joy  together.

Then  the  Son  gave  thanks  and  said


On  the  bride  which  Thou  wilt  give  Me
I  My  brightness  will  bestow.

So  that  she  My  Father's  goodness
In  its  light  may  love  and  know  ;

Learning  also  how  My  Being
From  His  being  doth  overflow.


With  My  arms  I  will  embrace  her.
And  Thy  love  shall  be  her  light,

So  for  ever  shall  Thy  goodness
Be  exalted  with  delight.


640


THE    SAME    SUBJECT.


For  the  merits  of  Thy  love,  then,
'  Be  it  done,'  the  Father  said  ;

In  the  word  the  Father  uttered
All  created  things  were  made.


In  the  everlasting  wisdom

Rose  the  palace  of  the  bride.

Which  two  substances  created
In  a  twofold  form  divide.


With  varieties  unnumbered
Was  the  lower  part  arrayed,

While  the  higher  glowed  in  beauty,
With  the  wondrous  gems  displayed.


That  the  bride  might  know  the  Bridegroom
Who  her  heavenly  nuptials  graced,

The  Angelic  hosts  in  order

In  the  higher  part  were  placed.


Man  was  placed — his  nature  lower —
In  the  lower  part  on  earth,

Being  fashioned  of  a  substance
Which  was  of  inferior  worth.


THE  CREATION.  641


And  although  both  place  and  nature
God  in  this  way  did  divide,

Yet  the  two  are,  both  together.
But  one  body  of  the  bride.


And  the  two,  although  divided,
Are  one  bride  in  His  one  love.

Who,  in  gladness,  as  the  Bridegroom
Is  possessed  by  those  abo\'e.


Those  below  in  hope  are  living
Of  the  faith  that  He  has  given,

For  one  day  He  will  exalt  them —
He  hath  said  so — unto  heaven.


For  of  those  of  base  condition
He  will  take  away  the  shame,

And  exalt  them,  so  that  nothing
Shall  remain  to  them  of  blame.


He  ill  all  things  with  their  likeness

Will  Himself  one  day  invest  ;
He  will  come  and  dwell  among  them.

As  His  own  elected  rest.

XI

God  Himself  will  be  incarnate,

God  will  have  a  human  birth  ;
Eating,  He  will  come,  and  drinking.

And  converse  with  men  on  earth.

XII

He  will  dwell  Himself  among  them

And  continually  stay.
Till  the  final  consummation —

When  the  ages  melt  away.

TT


642  THE  CREATION.


Then  shall  both  rejoice  together
In  an  endless  life  of  bliss,

For  to  Him  belongs  the  headship
Of  the  bride,  and  she  is  His.


He  shall  bring  the  just  together —
Nought  shall  them  from  her  divide-

For  they  are  the  living  members
Of  the  body  of  the  bride.


He  will  tenderly  embrace  her,
He  will  give  her  of  His  love,

And,  united  with  Him,  take  her,
To  His  Father's  home  above.


Into  joy  shall  she  then  enter :
God  no  greater  joy  can  give  ;

When  absorbed  in  Him  for  ever
She  the  life  of  God  shall  live.


So  the  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit,

Three  in  One  and  One  in  Three,
Live,  Each  living  in  the  Other,

The  most  blessed  Trinity.


643


THE    DESIRES    OF    THE    HOLY
FATHERS.


When  the  ancient  saints  were  waiting,
Hope  came  down  to  their  rehef,

And  made  lighter  by  its  presence
The  sore  pressure  of  their  grief.


But  still,  hope  deferred,  together
With  the  longing  which  thay  had

To  behold  the  promised  Bridegroom,
Made  them  sick  at  heart,  and  sad.


Pouring  forth  their  supplications —

In  their  misery  they  lay.
Sighing,  weeping,  and  lamenting.

With  strong  crying  night  and  day,-

IV

That  He  would  the  times  determine.
And  among  them  come  and  stay  ;

'  O  that  I,'  so  one  entreated,

'  Might  rejoice  to  see  His  day  !  '


'  Hasten,  then,  Thy  work,  and  finish  ;

Send  Him,  Lord,  Whom  Thou  wilt  send,'
Was  the  cry  of  one.     Another's,

'  O  that  He  the  heavens  would  rend  !

TT


644  THE  DESIRES  OF  THE   HOLY  FATHERS.


'  That  I  might  behold  His  coming,
And  my  wail  be  turned  to  mirth  ;

Let  the  clouds  rain  down  the  Just  One,
So  long  desired  on  the  earth  ;'


'  Let  the  earth  which  brought  forth  briers
Now  break  forth,  and  in  their  room

Let  it  bear  the  sacred  flower
Which  shall  ever  on  it  bloom. '


Others  also  :   '  O  how  blessed
Shall  that  generation  be  !

Which  shall  merit  in  time  coming
God's  Most  Holy  Face  to  see  ;  '


'  Men  shall  throng  around,  and  touch,  Him,
They  shall  in  His  sight  remain  ;

In  the  sacraments  rejoicing
He  Himself  shall  then  ordain.'


I


645


THE   SAME   SUBJECT.


These  and  other  supplications,

As  the  centuries  rolled  by,
Men  poured  forth  :   with  greater  fervour

As  the  promised  time  drew  nigh.


Aged  Simeon  in  the  furnace
of  his  longing,  burning  lay,

Praying  God  that  He  would  grant  him
Of  His  grace  to  see  that  day.


And  the  Ever-blessed  Spirit
Condescended  to  his  cry  ;

And  consoled  him  with  the  promise
That  the  old  man  should  not  die


Till  he  saw  the  Ever-living
God,  descending  from  above,

Took  Him  in  his  arms  and  held  Him,
And  embraced  Him  in  His  love.


THE   INCARNATION.


In  the  fulness  of  the  ages
Now  had  come  the  holy  tide,

For  the  payment  of  the  ransom
Of  the  long-expectant  bride,


Groaning  in  the  house  of  bondage

Underneath  the  legal  yoke
Of  the  precepts  given  by  Moses,

When  these  words  the  Father  spoke


I,  my  Son,  have  in  Thy  likeness
And  Thy  image  made  Thy  bride,

And  in  that  resemblance  worthy
To  be  ever  at  Thy  side  ;


But  in  one  respect  unlike  Thee,
For  her  nature  is  not  Thine  :

She  is  flesh — her  nature  human —
While  Thy  nature  is  divine.


Perfect  love  demands  a  likeness

In  the  lovers  it  unites,
For  the  most  complete  resemblance

Most  aboundeth  in  delights.


THE   INCARNATION.  647

VI

Now  the  lo\'e  and  exultation

Of  the  bride  would  greatly  grow
If  she  saw  Thee  in  her  likeness,

In  the  flesh,  on  earth  below.


Then  the  Son  the  Father  answered,
Lo  !  My  will  is  ever  Thine,

And  My  glory  which  I  cherish
Is  that  Thine  is  also  Mine.


I  am  ready  at  Thy  bidding,
For  Thy  will  is  my  dehght,

To  make  known  at  once  Thy  goodness
And  Thy  wisdom  and  Thy  might.


I  will  manifest  Thy  justice,

And  proclaim  throughout  the  earth
Thy  supremacy  and  beauty

And  the  sweetness  of  Thy  worth.


I  will  go  and  seek  My  bride,  then,
And  upon  Myself  will  take

All  the  poverty  and  sorrows
She  now  suffers  for  My  sake.


And  that  I  true  life  may  give  her,
I  will  give  for  her  My  own.

So  shall  I  present  her,  rescued,
From  the  pit,  before  Thy  throne.


648


THE    SAME    SUBJECT


God  then  summoned  the  archangel
Holy  Gabriel — him  He  sent

To  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary
To  obtain  the  maid's  consent.


She  consented  :  in  that  instant
The  mysterious  work  was  done,

And  the  Trinity  a  body
Wrought  and  fashioned  for  the  Son.


In  this  wondrous  operation,

Though  the  Sacred  Three  concurred,
He  who  in  the  womb  of  Mary

Was  incarnate,  is  the  Word.


He  Who  had  a  Father  only-
Had  a  Mother  also  then  :

But  it  was  in  other  fashion
Than  the  manner  is  of  men.


In  the  womb  of  Holy  Mary
He  His  flesh  did  then  receive ;

So  the  Son  of  God  Most  Highest
We  the  Son  of  Man  believe.


i


649


THE    NATIVITY.


I


Now  at  last  the  destined  ages
Their  appointed  course  had  run,

When  rejoicing  from  His  chamber
Issued  forth  the  Bridegroom  Son.


He  embraced  His  bride,  and  held  her
Lovingly  upon  His  breast,

And  the  gracious  Mother  laid  Him
In  the  manger  down  to  rest.


There  He  lay,  the  dumb  beasts  by  Him,
They  were  fitly  stabled  there.

While  the  shepherds  and  the  angels
Filled  with  melody  the  air.


So  the  feast  of  their  espousals
With  solemnity  was  kept ;

But  Almighty  God,  an  infant  ;
In  the  manger  moaned  and  wept.


So  the  bride  at  her  betrothal
Did  the  bridal  gifts  arrange  ;

But  the  Mother  looked  in  wonder
At  the  marvellous  exchange.

VI

Man  gave  forth  a  song  of  gladness,
God  Himself  a  plaintive  moan  ;

Both  possessmg  that  which  never
Had  been  hitherto  their  own.


650


SUPER    FLUMINA    BABYLONIS.


(Ps.  cxxxvi.)


By  the  waters  of  the  river —
Close  by  Babylon  it  swept —

On  the  banks — my  tears  were  flowing
There  I  set  me  down  and  wept.


I  remembered  thee,  O  Sion,
With  thy  love  my  heart  was  sore  :

Sweet  to  me  was  thy  memorial,
So  I  wept  still  more  and  more,


Of  my  festal  robes  divested,
Those  of  woe  around  me  flung

While  my  silent  harp  suspended
From  the  willow  branches  huns


There  I  left  it ;  fondly  trusting.
For  my  hopes  in  thee  still  lay.

Love  my  heart  had  deeply  wounded.
And  had  carried  it  away.


So,  I  said,  my  wound  is  grievous
O  let  love  me  wholly  slay.

Into  its  fires  then  I  threw  me.
That  I  might  be  burned  away.


SUPER  FLUMINA  BABYLONIS.  651


Now  the  silly  moth  I  blame  not,
That  in  the  fire  seeks  its  death

For  I,  while  in  myself  but  dying,
Draw  in  thee  alone  my  breath.


I  for  thee  to  death  submitted,
And  for  thee  to  life  returned  ;

For  in  thy  most  sweet  memorial
Life  and  death  were  both  inurned.

VIII

In  their  merriment  exulting.

Heedless  of  their  captive's  wrongs.

Stranger's  bade  me  rise  and  sing  them
Sion's  old  familiar  songs.


Sing  us  of  the  songs  of  Sion  ;

We  would  hear  them — strange  demand-
How  can  I,  lamenting  Sion,

Sing  them  in  a  foreign  land  ?


In  the  chants  once  so  familiar
How  can  I  uplift  my  voice  ?

May  they  never  be  remembered
If  in  exile  I  rejoice  !


Let  my  tongue  from  speech  refraining.

To  my  palate  silent  cleave ;
If  I,  in  the  land  of  exile,

Where  I  dwell  alone  and  grieve,

XII

Even  amidst  the  verdant  bowers

Of  the  Babylonic  land
Should  forget  thee.     Let  my  right  hand

Cease  its  cunning  to  command


652


SUPER  FLUMINA  BABYLONIS.


If  I  make  not  thee,  O  Sion,
The  beginning  of  my  mirth

Or  if  I  rejoice  in  keeping
Any  festival  of  earth.


I


Thou,  of  Babylon  the  daughter,
Shalt  lie  prostrate  in  the  dust,

Lost  and  wretched  :  but  for  ever
Blest  is  He  in  Whom  I  trust.


In  the  day  of  retribution
He  will  thee  at  last  afflict ;

He  will  lay  on  thee  the  burden
Thou  didst  once  on  me  inflict.


He  will  me,  thy  weeping  captive,
With  thy  little  children  take,

And  to  Christ  the  Rock  will  bring  them-
I  have  left  thee  for  His  sake.


INDEX


PASSAGES    FROM    HOLY    SCRIPTURE.


INDEX    TO    PASSAGES    FROM    HOLY    SCRIPTURE.


GENESIS.

I.  3.  Let  light  be,  490.

—  31.  They  were  very  good,

199.

II.  24.  Two  in  one  flesh,  297.
VI.          21.  All  food  that  may  be

eaten,  243.
VIII.  g.  Where  her  foot  might

rest,  242.
XV.  12.  Darksome  horror,  451.

XIX.        26.  Into   a  pillar  of    salt,

514-
XXI.  8.  Weaning  of  Isaac,  43.

XXVIII.  12.  The  ladder  of  Jacob,

130-

XXIX.  20.  The   greatness   of   his

love,  133.

XXX.  I.  Give  me  children,  109,

135-


EXODUS.

III.  5.  Come  not  nigh  hither,

46.

—  6.  Durst  not  look,  46.

—  7.  The    affliction   of    my

people,  185.

IV.  10.  Not  eloquent,  125.

VII.  II.  Magicians  of    Pharao,

149.

VIII.  6.  Water      turned      into

blood,  149.
XII.         35.  Spoiled  the  Egyptians,

470.
XVI.        15.  The  manna,  32.

XXXII.  31.  Strike   me   out  of  the

book, 137.

XXXIII.  3.  Lay    aside    thy    orna-

ments, 44.

—  4.  Ornaments  of  gold  and

silver,  470.

—  13.  I  know  Thee  by  name,

221,  363.

—  20.  Shall  not  see  Me  and

live,  221.

—  22.  In  a  hole  of  the  rock,

175.  504-
— .  23.  Not  see  My  face,  280,

383-


XXXIV.     6.  O  Lord  God  merciful,

451-

—  30.  The    face    of     Moses,

271.

NUMBERS.

XI.  4.  The    onions    and    the

garlic,  33.

DEUTERONOMIUM.

IV.  24.  A  consuming  fire,  402,

429.
VI.  5.  Love    God    with    thy

whole  heart,  99.

XXX.  20.  He  is  thy  life,  186.

XXXI.  21.  I  know  their  thoughts,

185.

XXXII.  33.  Venom  of  asps,  187.

JUDGES.
XIII.       20.  The       holocaust       of
Manue,  412.

—  22.  We  shall  die,  223.
XVI.        15.  Thy  mind  is  not  with

me,  177.


I.  KINGS.

XV.  22.  Obedience  rather  than

sacrifice,  516.

XVIII.  I.  Soul  knit  with  the  soul,

351-

XIX.  12.  A  gentle  wind,  251.

II.  KINGS.
XIV.         14.  All  die,  168.

III.  KINGS.

XIX.         II.  Whisper   of    a   gentle
air,  436.

I.  PARALIPOMENON.
XI.  18.  Waters  of  Bethlehem,

232.

TOBIAS.

V.  12.  And  see  not  the  light,

217.


(J56


INDEX  TO  PASSAGES


VIII.  2.  Liver  of  the  fish.  89.

XII.  12.  I  offered  thy  prayer.
184.

—  13.  Temptations      should

prove,  441.

XIV.  4.  The  rest  of  his  Hfe  in

joy.  374.  441-

ESTHER.

II.  12.  For  six  months,  462.

—  18.  The  marriage  of  Esther

414.

IV.  1-6.  Mardocheus   weeping,

442.

V.  2.  The    golden     sceptre,

137-

VI.  II.  This    honour     is     he

worthy  of,  365.

VIII.  4.  Stood  before  him,  137

XV.  10.  Shewed  the  wrath  of

His  breast,  503,  504.

—  12.  I  am  thy  brother,  505.

—  16.  As  an  Angel  of  God,

303-

JOB.
I.  8.  My   servant   Job,    46,

442.

III.  24.  Overflowing  waters,  gi

233-

IV.  2.  Withhold    the    words

conceived,  393.

—  12.  A  secret  word,  253.

VI.  8.  Who  will  grant,  205,

379-

VII.  2.  Longeth  for  the  shade,

100,  213.

—  20.  Burdensome        to

myself,  70.

IX.  II.  I  shall  not  see  Him,

170.

X.  16.  Thou  tormentest   me,

434-

XII.  22.  Who  revealeth  pro-
found things,  79.

XIV.  5.  The  days  of  man  are

short,  168.

XVI.  13.  I  that  wealthy  one,  77
XIX.        21.  Have   mercy    on   me,

71-

XXIII.  6.  Weight  of  His  great-
ness, 71,  504.

XXVI.  14.  A  Uttle  drop  of  His
word,  504.

XXIX.  18.  My  glory  shall  always

be  renewed,  447.

XXX.  16.  My  soul  fadeth,  92.
17.  The  days  of  affliction,

46,  92.


XXXVII.  16.   The  path  of  the  clouds


XXXVIII.    I.
XL.  18.

XLI.  6.

—  24.

—  25.


XI.

7

XV.

4

XVI.

2

XVI.

4

XVI.

15

XVII.

5-7

12

13-

XVIII.

3-

XX.

4-

XXIV.

15

XXIX.

7

XXX.

20

—

20.

—

22.

XXXIV.

3

—

10

XXXV.

9

XXXVI.

4

Prosperity  of  Job,  46.
Shall  sop  up  the  river,

486.
Body      like       molten

shields,  349.
Made  to  fear  no  man,

193-
He  seeth   every   high

thing,  150,  486.
My  eye  seeth  thee,  252.

PSALMS.

Shall  prosper,  430

A  helper  in  due  time,

185.
Silver     examined     by

fire,  102,  412.
Mindful  of  their  names,

360.
My  judgment  cometh

forth,  427.
I  have  kept  hard  ways,

141.
When  thy  glory  shall

appear,  178,  420.
The  sorrows  of  death,

72.
The  clouds  passed,  69,

120,  177,  233.
Night  to  night  show-

eth  knowledge,  491.
Sweeter   than    honey,

379-
Blessings  of  sweetness

392.
My  eyes  are  always  to

our  Lord,  142.
I      shall      never      be

moved,  80.
Multitude  of  Thy

sweetness,  392,  434.
In  the  secret  of  Th)-

face,  121,  437.
The  angel  of  our  Lord

262.
Tribulations     of     the

just,  192.
The     death     of     the

wicked,  225.
I    am    thy    salvation,

186.
Who  is  like  unto  thee,

439-
Torrent     of     thy

pleasure,     186,     318,

392.
Delight  in   the    Lord,

137-


FROM  HOLY  SCRIPTURE.


657


XXXVII.  g.

—  II.

XXXVIII.  3.

—  4-

—  12.


—

3-
8.

XLIII.

23-

XLIV.

10.

XLV.

5-

XLIX.

II.

L.

12.

—

19.

LIII.

5-

LVIII.

5-

—

10.

LXVII.       10.

—  14-

—  16.

34-

LXVIII


I     am     afflicted    and

humbled,  91.
The     light     of     mine

eyes,  217.
Kept      silence      from

good  things,  49.
My  hesrt  waxed  hot,

105,  288,  315.
Pined  away  as  a  spi-
der, 71.
As  the  hart   panteth,

136,  232,  460.
My  soul  hath  thirst, 40.
Deep     calleth      upon

deep,  491.
Arise     why      sleepest

thou,  502.
In  vestments  of  gold,

347.  505-
The    violence    of    the

river,  452.
The     beauty    of     the

field,  304,  16.
A  clean  heart,  102.
A  sacrifice  unto  God,

54.
The       mighty       have

sought,  193.
Without  iniquity,  136.
I  will  keep  my  strength

99.  337-.

From  Him  is  my   sal-
vation, 332.
If  riches  abound,  191.
My  soul  hath  thirsted,

100,  263.

In  a  desert  land,  48.
Voluntary  rain,  132.
Laid  over  with  silver,

229.
The  mountain  of  God,

378.
The   voice   of  power.


2.  Save  me,   O   God,  76,
287.
Lxx.        20.   How  great  tribulations

443-
LXXii.     21.  My  heart  is  inflamed,
40,  180,  326.

—  22.   I      am      brought      to

nothing,  83.
Lxxvi.      6.  The  eternal  years,  445.

—  19.  The  lightnings,  127.
Lxxxiii.  2.   My  soul  longeth,  135,

221,  405,  427,  460.

—  3.  Rejoiced    toward    the

living  God,  413.

—  4.  The  turtle  a  nest,  371.


LXXXIII.  6.  Ascensions  in  his  heart

128,
Lxxxiv.    9.  Peace  unto  his  people,

468.
Lxxxvii.  6.  The  wounded  sleeping

73-

—  9.  Thou  hast  put  away,

xcvi.        2.  Clouds  and  darkness,

69.  233-
CI.  8.  The    lonely    sparrow,

256.
cii.  5,   Renewed    like    the

eagle's,  no.
cm.         32.  The    earth    trembles,

435-

CIV.  4.  I  seek  His  face,  132.

cvi.  10.  Sitting  in  darkness,
456.

CXI.  I.  Delight   in    His   com-

mandments, 133.

cxii.  7.  Lifteth    up   the    poor

out  of  the  dunghill,
46.

cxv.  15.  Death  of  His  saints,
225,  438.

cxvii.  32.  The  way  of  Thy  com-
mandments, 136,  313.

cxviii.  Si.  My  soul  hath  fainted,
.131.

—  131.  I  opened  my    mouth,

288.

—  140.   My  word  a  vehement

fire,  412.
cxx.  4.  He  shall  not  slumber,

474-
cxxii.       2.  As    the    eyes    of    the

handmaid,  142.
cxxvi.      I.   Unless  our  Lord  build

the  house,  474.
cxxxviii.  II.  Night    shall   be    my

light,  401.
— »  12.  The   darkness   as   the

light,  79,  234,  443.
CXLii.        7.  My  spirit  hath  fainted

131-

CXLiv.  16.  Thou  openest  thy  hand
200.

CXLVII.  17.  He  sendeth  his  crys-
tals, 60.

PROVERBS.
II.  4.  Seek  Him  as  treasure,

218.
IV.  23.  Keep  thy  heart,  174.

VIII.        15.   Kings  reign,  501.
VIII.        31.   My  delights  with  the

children  of  men,  273,

306,  414.

UU


058


INDEX  TO   PASSAGES


XV.  15    A  secure  mind,  292.

XVI.  I.  It  pertaineth  to  men,

475
—  g.  The  heart  of  man,  475.

XVIII.     12.  Before  he  be  broken,

129.
XXX.         2,  The   wisdom  of  men,

324-


ECCLESIASTIS.

IX.  I.  Worthy    of     love     or

hatred,  171.
—  17.  The  words  of  the  wise

488.

X.  4.  If    the   spirit     of    him

that  hath  power,  442.
XII  7.  Return   to    its    earth,

422.


CANTICLE    OF    CANTICLES.
I.  I.  Kiss  of  his  mouth,  137

151-

—  3.  Draw    me,    313,    347,

446,  463.

—  4.  I  am  blacl<,  142,  363.

—  6.  "Where   thou    liest    in

the  midday,  171.

—  10.  Chains  of  Gold,  229.
— .  II.  My     spikenard      sent

forth  its  odour,  272.
506.

—  15.  Our  bed  is  of  flowers,

306.
II.  I.  The     flower     of    the

field,  304,  351.

—  3.  I  sat  down  under  his

shadow,  349.

—  4.  The    cellar    of    wine,

321.

—  5.  Stay  me  with  flowers,

350-

6.  His  left    hand    under

my  head,  318.

—  9.  My  beloved  is  like  to

a  roe,  179.

—  10.  Arise,   my    dove,  398,

421.

—  II.  Winter  is  now  passed,

300.

—  13.  Arise   mv    dove,    383,

398.

—  14.  Thy   voice    is    sweet,

249.  399-
85.  Catch   us    the    foxes,

265.
16.  My  beloved  to  me,  448.


[II.  I.  I  will  rise,    132,    155,

189.

—  2.  Whom  m)-  soul  loveth

108,  132,  182.

—  4.  The   watchman,    132,

137.  154.  189.

—  5.  I  adjure  you,  294,  338,

479-

—  6.  Goeth  up  by  the  desert

403,  463.

—  7.  Three  score  valiants,

148,  310.

—  g.  A  litter  of   the   w^ood

of  Libanus,  309.

—  10.  The  seat  of  gold,  143.

—  II.  Ye  daughters  of  Sion,

295.
IV.  I.   Thou     art     fair,    365,

367-

—  4.  The  tower  of  David,

311-

—  6.  The       mountain       of

myrrh,  377.

—  9.  Thou    hast    wounded

my  heart,    142,    204,

355-

—  12.  A     garden     enclosed,

294.

—  15.  A  well  of  living  waters

451.

—  16.  Arise  north  wind,  272.
Y.  I.  O  my  sister,  my  bride,

298.

—  6.  I     sought    him,    215,

321.  414-

—  7.  They     wounded     me,

182.

—  8.  I  languish   with  love,

131,  203.

—  14.  Belly  of  ivory,  385.
VI.  2.  Feedeth     among     the

lilies,  274,  344.

—  3.  Terrible  as  an  army,

350,  365.  503-

—  9.  Who      is      she      that

Cometh  ?  292.

—  10.  The   garden    of  nuts,

148.

—  II.  I  knew  not,  123,  149,

265,  325.

VII.  I.  Thy   steps    in    shoes,

350.

—  2.  Cup    of  spiced   wine,

321,  452.

—  10.   I  to  my  beloved,  329.

—  13.  The  new  and  the  old,

337-

VIII.  I    Find  thee  without,  112,

152,  300,  307.


FROM  HOLY  SCRIPTURE.


659


2.  Cup    of    spiced    wine,

3S5.
5.   Under  the  apple  tree,
302,  403.

5.  Cometh   up   from  the

desert,  420.

6.  x\s   a    seal    upon   thy

heart,   134,  232,  233,

451.  453-  .
8.   Our  sister  is  little,  282.


WISDOM.
I.  7.  Knowledgeofthevoice,

259-

III.  6.  Gold  in    the  furnace,

75-

IV.  10.  Pleasing  God,  426.

—  12.  The      bewitching      of

vanity,  402.

VI.  13.  Wisdom  is  clear,  igo.

VII.  II.  All  good  things,  95.

—  24.  Wisdom  reacheth

everywhere,  85,  418.
— •  26.  The  mirror  of  God, 458.

—  27.  The  brightness  of  eter-

nal light,  458.

VIII.  I.  End untoend,  157,436.

IX.  15.  The  corruptible  body,

61,  279,  402,  434.
XVI.  20,  21.  Sweetness  of  all  taste,

32,  87,  470.
XVIII.     14.  Thy  omnipotent  Word,

154-


ECCLESIASTICUS.

5.  Sin  forgiven,  360.
Forsake    not    an    old
friend,  318.
15.  A  new  friend,  317.
g.  What  doth  he  know,

57-
I.  O,  death,  how  bitter,

225.
3.  To    the    needy    man,
224.
26.   Enlightened  my  ignor-
ances, 490.
29.  My  soul  hath  wrestled
in  it,  95.


14.


ISAIAS.

2.  The   mountain  of   the

house,  377.

3.  Let   us   go   up  to  the

mountain,  377.


XXXI.

XL.

XLIII.


LVIII.
LXIV.


LXV.
LXVI.


14


30


III.

V.

VIII.

IX.

XI.

XIX.

XXIV.

XXVI.

—   17.


—         19


31


You     have    devoured
the  vineyard,  479.

Darkened  in  the  midst
thereof,  120.
6.  The  waters   of   Siloe,

485.
6.  The    principality     on
His  shoulder,  500.

3.  The     spirit     of    fear,

320.

4.  A  spirit  of  giddiness,

56.

6.  My  secret  to    myself,
254,  423.

g.  Desired    thee   on    the
night,  loi.

8.  As  it  were  in  labour,
go.

o.  Enter  into  thy  cham-
bers, 174.

g.  Whom  shall  He  teach
knowledge,  47,  45g.
Vexation     shall     give
understanding,  47.
His   furnace   in  Jeru-
salem, 418.
They  that  hope  in  our
Lord,  136.

3.  Egypt  for  thy  atone-

ment, 364.

4.  Honourable

eyes,  363.

3.  Mysteries    of

174.
Thou     art     a
God,  170.
10.  Thy  light  shall  arise,

374-

4.  Eye    hath    not    seen,

89,  3go.
24.  Before  they  call,  218.
12.  A  river  of  peace,  247,

329.


JEREMIAS.
5.  Ah  !  ah,  ah,  125.
2.  Pitying  thy  youth,  135.
Is  Israel  a  bondman,

275-
In  the  pride  of  Jordan,

441.
My    words     are    fire,

412.
Thou   hast   chastened


15


n  my
secret,
hidden


14


me,  440.
This    people    have
formed,  4g8.

UU    2


I


660


INDEX  TO  PASSAGES


LAMENTATIONS.
13.  A   fire   in    my   bones,
102,  440.
I.  I  see  my  poverty,  77.
8.  Excludeth  mj'  prayer,

83.
g.  My  ways  with  square

stones,  83.
My   soul    is    repelled

from  peace,  91,  92.
The    wormwood    and

the  gall,  186.
I  will  be  mindful,  460.
Mouth  in  the  dust,  83.
Thou  hast  set  a  cloud

before  Thee,  83.


17-


19.


29.

44.


BARUCH.
III.  II.  Defiled  with  the  dead,

275-

—  22.  Not  seen  in  Thaman,

436.

—  31.  There  is  none  that  can

know  her  ways,  127.

EZECHIEL.

I.  5.  The   likeness   of  four

living  creatures,  452.

—  24.   Of  many  waters,  249.

II.  I.  The  vision  of  the  like-

ness, 458.
XVI.  5.  Thou   wert    cast    out,

303-
XVIII.     22.  I  will  not  remember,

360.
XXIV.      10.   Heap     together      the

bones,  75.

—  II.   Set  upon  hot  burning

coals,  75.
XXXIV.     2.  Woe  to  the  shepherds

of  Israel,  482.
XXXVI.  25.  Clean  water,  453.

DANIEL.

X.  II    Thou  man  of  desires,

137-

—  16    My  joints  are  loosed,

-     254.

OSEE.
II.  14.   I    will    speak    to    her

heart,  369,  479,  429.

—  20.  I   will    espouse    thee,

64,  141,  228,  468.
XIII.  9.  Perdition  is  thine  own,

115-

—  14.   I   will   be   thy    death,

446.


JONAS.

4.  Thou    hast    cast    me
forth,  73.


NAHUM.
9.   A     double     affliction,
360.


HABACUC.

II.  I.  I  will  stand  upon  my

watch,  48,  469.

III.  6.  The  nations  melt,  435.


SOPHONIAS.

12.   Search  Jerusalem,  168.


ZACHARIAS.
8.   He    that    shall   touch
j'ou,  218.


II.  MACHABEES.
I.  The  hidden  fire,  453.
22.  The  water  turned  into
fire,  453.


ST.   MATTHEW.
8.  Blessed  are  the  clean,
138.
26.   Repay  the  last,  farth-
ing, 168.
3.  Let  not  thy  left  hand

know,  147.
6.   Pray  in  secret,  174.
10.  Thy   kingdom     come,

421.
24.  Serve     two     masters,

342-
33.   Seek  first  the  kingdom
of  God,  513.
3.   Mote  in  the  eye.
14.  How    narrow    is    the
gate,  3,  26,  43,    168,
4S4.
33.  Deny  Me  before  men,

341-

36.  A  man's  enemies,  112.

12.  He  that  hath  to  him
shall  be  given,  364.

31.  A  grain  of  mustard-
seed,  433.

44.  Treasure  hidden  in  a
field,  174,  332.


FROM  HOLY  SCRIPTURE.


661


XVI.        25.  Lose   his   life  for   my

sake,  26,  342.
XVIII.      24.   Who  strain  out  a  gnat,

8.
XX.  6.  The     eleventh     hour,

168.
XXV.         8.  Give  us  of  your  oil,  10.
—  28.   Take  away  the  talent,

364-


ST.  LUKE.
13.  Thy  prayer  is  heard,

185.
16.  Grace  for  grace,  358,

362.
35.  Shall  overshadow  thee,

456.
52.   Exalted    the   humble,

247.
25.  Just  man  full  of  fear,

320.
5.   Labouring      all      the

night,  479.
37.   House  of  the  Pharisee,

107.
42.  One   thing   necessary,

338-
g.  Seek    and    you    shall

find,  1S9.
52.   Woe  to  you  lawyers,


v.

YII.

X.

XI.


XIV,
XV.


XVIII.
XXII.


II.
III.


37.   He  will  gird   himself,

329.
II.   He  that  humbleth,i29.
5.  The   sheep    that    was

lost,  295.
9.   Rejoice  with  me,  295.
21.  The  kingdom  of  God

within,  173.
II.  Not  as  other  men,  8.
8.   Sent  His  apostles,  271.


ST.  JOHN.
3.   Made  in  Him  was  life,
209,  245,  500.

5.  Light  shineth  in  dark-

ness, 105.
12.   Made  the  sons  of  God,

395-
16.   Grace  for  grace,  358,

362.
18.   Bosom  of  the  Father,

170.
3.  They   have    no    wine,

187.

6.  That  which  is  born  of

the  flesh,  18.


14.


-  67.


XI.
XII.


A  well  of  water,  228,

290.  453-

28.  Left  her  waterpot ,  413.
64.   His  words   are   spirit

and  life,  412,  423.
Disciples  went    back,

413-
The  words  of  eternal
life,  413.
38.   Out  of  his  belly  shall
flow,  410.
39.  Who  believed  inHim,228
3.  Whom  Thou  lovest  is
sick,  187.

29.  Angel     hath     spoken.


69.


32


—  23.

XV.  7-

—  15-

XVI.
XVII.


24.

26.
14.

15-


If  I  be  lifted  up,  199.
Many  mansions,  416.
17.  They  shall  know  Thee,

434-
And  dwell  with  Him,

408.
If  you  abide  in    Me,

177.
I     have     called     you
friends,  333.
23.   In  that  day  you  shall
not  ask,  139.
3.  This    is    eternal    life,

380.
10.  All     my     things     are

Thine,  376,  496.
20.  Not  for  them  only  do
I  pray,  396.
May    see     my    glory,

395-

I  in  them,  497.
Mary  Magdalene,  132.
Where  thou  hast  laid

Him,  102,  215.


ACTS.

II.  2.  As  of  a  mighty  wind,

247.

VII.         32.  Durst  not  behold,  125.

XIV.  21.  Through  many  tribu-
lations, 439.

XVII.  28.  In  Him  we  live,  208,
500.

XXII.  II.  The  brightness  of  that
light,  120.


ROMANS.
I.  20.   His    invisible    things,

195-
VIII.        13.   Deeds  of  the  flesh,  194,
444.


662


INDEX  TO  PASSAGES


XI.
XII.


14


23


24


Led  by  the   Spirit  of
God,  446.

Waiting  for  the  adop-
tion, 178.
Hope     that    is     seen,
144.
26.  With     groanings    un-
utterable, 157.
33.   Incomprehensible  His
judgments,  379.
2.    Be  reformed,  65.


I.  CORINTHIANS.

II.  g.   Eye    hath    not    seen,

Sg,  390.

—  10.  The    Spirit   searcheth

all  things,  85, 224,430.

—  14.  The  sensual  man,  47S,

492.

—  15.  The  spiritual  man,  430.

III.  19.  Wisdom  of  this  world,

323-
VI.  17.  He  who  is  joined   to

our  Lord,  297.

IX.  22.  All  things  to  all  men,

482.

X.  4.  The    rock    is    Christ,

382.
XIII.         2.  Without    charity
nothing  worth,  240.

—  5.   Seeketh  not  its   own,

420.

—  6.  Rejoiceth

truth,  25,

—  7.  Believeth

136.

—  10.  That  which  is  perfect,

175,  230.

—  II.  I  spake  as  a  child,  65.

—  12.  I  shall  know  as  I  am

known,  387.
XV.  54.  Death    is     swallowed

up,  446.


II.  CORINTHIANS.

7.  Partaker  of  the  suffer-
ings, 443.


with      the

241.

all    things.


I.


—  16.


A  house  not  made
with  hands,  422,  444,
446.

Not  spoiled  but  over-
clothed,  223.

Possessing  all  things,

36.
Temple  of  the  living
God.  173.


3,  In  the  body  or  out  of

the  body,  237,  279.

4.  Secret  words ,  25 1 ,  28  x .
9.  Virtue  made   perfect,

346,  440.


GALATIANS.
II.  20.  I  live  now,  231,   299,

446.

IV.  6.  The  spirit  of  His  Son,

395-

V.  17.  The  flesh  lusteth,  194,

263.

VI.  17.  Marks   of    our   Lord,

435-


II.
III.

IV.

EPHESIANS.
15.  The  law  of  command-
ments, 302.
17.  Rooted  in  charity,  380.
22.  Put  on  the  new  man.

VI.

445-
24.  Put  on  the  new  man,

65,  III.
II.  The   armour  of   God,

193-

I.

III.


PHILIPIANS.
21.  To  die  is  gain,  343.
23.  To  be  with  Christ, 223.
20.  Conversation     in

heaven,  145.
7.  The  peace  of  God,  91,
293-


COLOSSIANS.

II.  3.  The  treasures  of  wis-

dom, 186,  382.

III.  14.  The   bond   of  perfec-

tion,   241,    332,    349,
351-


I    THESSALONIANS.

8.   Helmet   of    salvation,
142.


HEBREWS.

3.  Brightness  of  His
glory,  199,  226,  436,
500.

6.  Without  faith  im-
possible to  please
God,  140.


FROM  HOLY  SCRIPTURE.


663


ST.  JAMES.
17.   Every   best   gift,   347,

474
26.  This  man's  religion  is
vain,  515.


I.  ST.  PETER.
1  12.  On  whom  the  angels,

461
IV.  18.  Shall  scarcely  be  saved,

168.
v.  g.   Resist,  steadfast,  140.


II.  ST.  PETER.
I.  2.   Partakers  of  the  divine

nature,  397.

I.  ST.  JOHN

III.  2.  We  shall  be  like  Him,

138.

IV.  10.   He  iirst  loved  us,  354.
—  18.    Perfect    charity,    224,

310.


APOCALYPSE.

II.  7.  To     him     that    over-

cometh,  391.

—  10.   Be  thou  faithful  unto

death,  391

—  17.   The    hidden     manna,

391.438-
■ —  26.  And   keep    my  works,

391-

III.  5.  Vested  in  white   gar-

ments, 391.

—  8.   I    have   given    before

thee  an  opened  door,29.

—  12.   My  new  name,  392.

—  20.   I   stand    at    the   gate,

260.

—  21.   To  sit  on  My  throiie,

392.
X.  9.   Take  the  book,  187.

XIV  2.  The  voice  of  harpers

249,  258.

XXI.  23.   The     Lamb      is      the

lamp,  217.

XXII.  I.  A  river  of  living  water,

319-


IN  DEX,


Absence,  pain  of,  183,  200.

Adam,  fall  of,  301.

Aminadab,  404,

Angels,    the,     ministry    of,     103  ;

service  of,  205.
Anger,  imperfections  of,  19.
Aridity,  the  purgative,  31  ;    cause

of,  32,  466  ;    benefit  of,  52,   54,

74-
Ark,  the,  242,  367.
Assuerus,  462.

Attachment  to  trifles,  12,  13.
Attraction,  the  divine,  313.
Attributes,  the  divine,  449  ;  lamps

°^'.45-       .  .       ,  .  ,

Avarice,  spiritual,  12  ;  imperfec-
tions of,  12,  50.

Balsam,  the  divine,  313.

Beauty,  the  divine,  377.

Bed  of  the  soul,  304.

Beginners,  state  of,  5 ;  weak  in
virtue,  6  ;  subject  to  pride,  7  ;
imperfections  of,  9 ;  readiness
of,  to  teach  others,  11  ;  childish-
ness of,  12:  impatience  of,  20;
disobedient  to  their  directors,
21  ;  delusions  of,  in  the  matter
of  prayer,  23  ;    proper  work  of,

465-
Betrothal,  the  spiritual,  242,  203,

274 ;    time   of,   296 ;    effects   of,

330,  461.
Blasphemy,  spirit  of,  56.
Blessedness,  102.
Blessings,  three,   of  the  spiritual

night,  155.
Blindness,  spiritual,  491.
Breathing,  the  divine,  394.
Bridegroom,      the,      among      the

flowers,  273  ;  captivity  of,  354 ;

solitude  of,  372  ;  beauty  of,  376.
Burning  of  the  soul,  94,  98  ;  effects

of,  100  :   not  always  felt,  104.

Cataract,  the  spiritual,  491.
Caverns  of  sense,  458.
Centre  of  the  soul,  416.


Charity,  robe  of,  143 ;  effects  of
144,  241  ;  designated  purple,
309  ;  bond  of  perfection,  349.

Contemplation,  commencement  of,
33  ;  effects  of,  35,  66,  68,  70,  75,
105,  119,  239;  not  granted  to  all
spiritual  persons,  ib. ;  nature  of,
39  ;  dark  night  of,  60 ;  a  ray  of
darkness,  69,  120 ;  painfulness
of,  70  ;  light  of,  86,  88  ;  secret,
125;  called  a  ladder,  130;  why
called  night,  400  ;  conditions  of,
468  ;  the  highest  wisdom,  469  :
infused,  476.

Courage,  true,  rare,  342.

Creation,  meditation  on,  195  ;  the
work  of  God  only,  ■  196  ;  testi-
mony of,  197 ;  beauty  of,  199  ;
a  revelation,  207  ;  a  manifesta-
tion of  God,  257.

Cross,  the,  betrothal  of,  302.

Delila,  treachery  of,  177.
David  and  Jonathan,  351.
Death,  224  ;   why  the  soul  desires,

380,  423.
Detachment,    perfect,     267,    300,

335,  372,  404.  477-

Dionysius,  St.,  69,  252.

Directors,  necessary  gifts  of,  465  ;
evil  of  ignorant,  472 ;  the  in-
excusable, 480 ;  all,  not  qualified
for  the  whole  work,  481  ;    bad,

483-
Direction,  464  ;    evils  of  ignorant,

478  ;  importance  of,  480.
Disguise  of  the  soul,  139.
Distractions,  285.
Dove,  the,  366.

Ecstasies,    source     of,     61,  .235;

sufferings  of  the    soul   in,   236,

253  ;  cessation  of,  238.
Egypt,  fleshpots  of,  87.
Elias,  St.,  251.
Envy,  holy,  25.
Escape  of  the  soul,  113.
Eternity,  Day  of,  390.


INDEX


665


Faith,  robe  of,  141  ;  effects  of,  144  ;
sole  means  of  union  with  God,
227  ;  crystal  spring,  228.

Fervour,  of  beginners,  9  ;  when  it
is  not  to  be  sought,  466.

Fire,  the  divine,  429.

Flame,  the  living,  differs  from
transformation,  411  ;  wounds
the  soul,  417  ;  purifies,  419.

Flight  of  the  soul,  240.

Founders  of  religious  orders,  433.

Foxes,  the  spiritual,  263 ;  opera-
tions of,  264.

Francis,  St.,  saying  of,  244 ;
stigma,  433.

Friendship,  spiritual,  17 ;  par-
ticular, dangerous,  512.

Garden,  the,  of  the  beloved,   270,

29S.
Garlands,  the,  346,
Giddiness,  spirit  of,  56.
Glory,  essential,  389.
Gluttony,  spiritual,  20.
God,  hidden,    170  ;  visits  of  to  the

soul,    179 ;     how   to   be   sought

189,  191  ;  greatest  works  of,  204  ;

light  of  the  soul,  217  ;  judgments

of,  382.
Groanings  of  the  soul,  178,  183.
Grace  and  union,  461.
Guides,  three  blind,  463  ;    evil  of,

465-

Heart,  the  satisfaction  of,  369.
Hope,  robe  of,  142  ;  effects  of,  144;

when  painless,   290 ;    implies  a

want,  420.
Humility,  effects  of,  49.

Illumination,  of  the  angels,  104.
Imperfections,  of  beginners,  5.
Incarnation,  the,  199.
Inebriation,  the  divine,  315.

Jealousy,  of  confessors,  482.
Job,  trials  of,  46.
Judgments,  of  God,  382.

Knowledge  of  self  45,  48 ;  super-
natural, 323  ;  worldly,  324.

Knowledge,  and  love,  322  ;  of  the
just  in  heaven,  326  ;  the  divine,
378.

Ladder,  the  secret,   114,  129;  the

ten  steps  of,  131-139.
Lamps,  the,  two  properties  of,  449;

splendours  of,  454.


Life,  active  and  contemplative,
190  ;  natural  and  spiritual,  209.

Limbus,  223.

Look,  the  divine,  353,  365.

Love,  reverential,  107  ;  degrees  of
contemplation,  131  ;  wounds  of,
179  ;  sufferings  of,  186  ;  tests  of
love  of  God,  212  ;  love  the  re-
ward of,  213,  241 ;  anxieties  of,
216  ;  malady  of,  225  ;  transfor-
mation of,  231  ;  causes  equality,
307,  333  ;  visit  of,  312  ;  solitary,
339  ;  perfect,  388,  401,  494  ;  pro-
perty of,  380,  401.

Lukewarmness,  31.

Luxury,  spiritual,  15,  effects  of,
18  ;  correction  of,  50.

Marriage,  the  spiritual,  232,  282,
295,  320,  461.

Mary  Magdalene,  107,  338.

Meditation,  when  to  be  abandoned,
39,  466.

Melancholy,  17.

Merit,  359.

Miracles,  false,  149.

Mortification,  fruits  of,  55  ;  ne-
cessity of,  112.

Mysteries  of  God,  3S2.

Neck,  the,  of  the  bride,  299.

Neighbour,  love  of,  49.

Night,  the  dark,  effects  of,  18,  26  ;
two  kinds  of,  27.

of  sense,    29 ;    tests  of,   30  ;

troubles  of,  36  ;  benefits  of,  42
51;    entered    by    few,    42,  43;
brings  with  it  the  knowledge  of
God,  48.

of  tlie  spirit,  28,  29  ;  entered

by  few,  56  ;  beginnings  of,  59  ;
effects  of,  67,  loi,  116;  pains  of,
72;  described  byjobandjeremias
77 ;  miser)-  of  the  soul  in,  79 ;
duration  ot.  So ;  pains  of,  greater
than  those  of  the  night  of  sense,
106  ;  blessings  of,  113,  118,  145,
155  ;  difficulties  of,  192.

Nightingale,  song  of  the,  397.

Nymphs,  the,  of  Judea,  276.

Overshadowing,  the,  455.

Pains  of  the  soul  in    contempla-
tion, 83,  91.
Paradise,  flowers  of
Passions,  the,  effects  of,  328.
Paul,  St.,  vision  of,  279.
Penitents,  true  dii"ection  of,  473


666


INDEX.


Perfect,  the,  why  few,  443.

Perfection,  true,  14  ;  conditions  of,
129  ;  form  and  substance  of,
332  ;  why  not  attained,  440 ;
evangelical,  474.

Pomegranates,     3S4 ;      wine      of,

385-

Prayer,  177,  187.

Preachers,  popular,  339.

Presence  of  God  in  the  soul,  218.

Proficients,  sweetness  of,  60  ;  cer-
tain imperfections  of,  61,  65  ;
why  spiritual  sweetness  was
granted  to,  64  ;  liable  to  ecsta-
cies,  23S.

Predestination,  386.

Purgation,  distress  of  the  soul  in
its.  Si,  440.

Purgatory,  in  this  life,  75  :  how
souls  suffer  in,  95,  439.

Rachel,  109.

Recollection,    interior,    effects    of

on  the  memory,  84.
Reverence,  45.

Senses,  the,  purified  by  penance,

439

Satan,  buffetings  of,  16  ;  delusions
of,  63 ;  works  through  the
senses,  146,  147  ;  why  allowed
to  disquiet  souls,  148-151;  power
of,  193,  262  ;  afraid  of  the  per-
fect soul,  307 ;  a  blind  guide,
484.

Sin  forgiven,  360.

Sloth,  spiritual,  24.

Solitude,  369.

Soul,  the,  cause  of  the  errors  of,
115 ;  longings  of,  169 ;  wounds  of,
180  ;  presence  of  God  in,  219  ;
health  of,  226  ;  greatest  trial  of,
267  ;  nature  of,  415.

Sparrow,  the  lonely,  256.

Spirit,  liberty  of,  54,  55,  61  ;  its
own  blind  guide,  487  ;  God
dwells  in  every,  505^

Strong,  the,  trials  of,  58.

Suffering,    advantages  119;

sweet,  434.


Sweetness,  spiritual,  ig  ;  how  cor-
rected, 50  ;  effects  of,  312.

spiritual,  from  God,  53.

Supper,  the  spiritual,  259.

Teresa,  St. ,  writings  of,  23S.
Terrors  of  the  night,  288,  292.
Theology,  mystic,  68  ;    enlightens

the  understanding,  104  ;  infused

by    love,    123  ;    hides  the  soul,

126;  scholastic,  160.
Thirst,  the  living,  40,  172,  232.
Tobias,  89.

Torrents,  246;  of  delight.  319.
Touch,  the  divine,  250,  314,  436.
Transformation,    effects    of,    321,

325.  387.  402.
Trials,  necessary,  442.
Truths   of-  the     faith,    230 ;     the

beatific,  393.

Unction  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  463.

Understanding  without  under-
standing, 400,  475.

Union,  the  divine,  requisites  for,
89  ;  effects  of,  154;  the  highest
state  in  this  life,  176,  387  ;  when
perfect,  397.

Vexation,  47.

Virtues,   acquired  in  youth,  345  ;

unity  of,  352.
Visions,  two,  fatal  to  man,  222.
Voice,  interior,  247.

Waters,  the  dark,  120,  122  ;  the
divine,  157.

Way,  the  illuminative,  56.

Weak,  the,  trials  of,  58.

Webs,  the  three,  422.

Wine,  316.

Wisdom,  the  divine,  68,  102,  159  ;
secret,  123  ;  effects  of,  124  ;  in-
explicable, 124,  127 ;  a  ladder,
128.

Word  of  God,  how  received,  412.

World,  the  wisdom  of,  340.

Wounds  of  the  soul,  remedy  for,
181  ;  pain  of,  202,  203  ;  effects
of,  208,  211,  414.


DATE  DUE

»!0lJff

API  6 '98

HAR- 1

2001

m(?

1  hih

71

1    1

DEMCO    13829810

STACKS  BV5080.J7757X

John  of  the  Cross,

The  dark  night  of  the  soul


3  5282  00087  5040


'-HI


^^€^
