Select Homilies (John Chrysostom)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 1, 1887. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 St. Chrysostom:

 Homily i

 against those who say that demons govern human affairs.

 homilies ii and iii

 on the power of man to resist the devil.

 translated by

 t. p. brandram, m.a.,

 rector of rumboldswhyke, chichester.

 three homilies concerning the power of demons.

 ------------------------

 introduction by rev. w. r. w. stephens.

 The three following Homilies are closely connected in subject, and the
 opening sentence of the third clearly proves that it was delivered two
 days after the second; but it is impossible to say whether that which
 is placed first was really delivered before the other two. It must
 however have been spoken at Antioch, since Chrysostom refers at the
 beginning of it to his sermons "on the obscurity of prophecies" in
 which passages occur which clearly imply that he was not then a Bishop.
 The second of the three homilies here translated was delivered in the
 presence of a Bishop, as is clearly indicated by the commencement, and
 as the third was as already mentioned delivered two days after the
 second we may safely affirm that they were all spoken at Antioch when
 Chrysostom was a presbyter there under the Episcopate of Flavian.

 They deal with errors against which Chrysostom throughout his life most
 strenuously contended. In an age of great depravity there seem to have
 been many who tried to excuse the weak resistance which they made to
 evil, both in themselves, and in others, by maintaining that the world
 was abandoned to the dominion of devils, or to the irresistible course
 of fate. To counteract the disastrous effects of such philosophy, which
 surrendered man to the current of his passions, it was necessary to
 insist very boldly and resolutely on the essential freedom of the will,
 on moral responsibility, and the duty of vigorous exertion in resisting
 temptation. And Chrysostom did this to an extent which some thought
 carried him perilously near the errors of the Pelagian heresy. No one
 however has described in more forcible language the powerful hold of
 sin upon human nature, and the insufficiency of man to shake it off
 without the assistance of divine grace. What he does most earnestly
 combat, both in the following homilies and very many others, is the
 doctrine that evil was an original integral part of our nature: he
 maintains that it is not a substantial inherent force (dunamis
 enupostatos). If evil was a part of our nature in this sense it would
 be no more reprehensible than natural appetites and affections. We do
 not try to alter that which is by nature (phusei): sin therefore is not
 by nature, because by means of education, laws, and punishments we do
 seek to alter that. Sin comes through defect in the moral purpose
 (proairesis). Our first parents fell through indolence of moral purpose
 (rh<thumia) and this is the principal cause of sin now. They marked out
 a path which has been trodden ever since: the force of will has been
 weakened in all their posterity: so that though evil is not an inherent
 part of man's nature yet he is readily inclined to it (oxurrhepes pros
 kaki?n); and this tendency must be perpetually counteracted by vigorous
 exertion, and a bracing up of the moral purpose, with the aid of divine
 grace. Profoundly convinced therefore on the one hand of a strong and
 universal tendency to sin, but on the other of an essential freedom of
 the will, Chrysostom sounds alternately the note of warning and
 encouragement,--warning against that weakness, indolence, languor of
 moral purpose which occasions a fall,--encouragement to use to the full
 all the powers with which man is gifted, in reliance on God's
 forbearance and love, and on His willingness to help those who do not
 despair of themselves. Despair is the devil's most potent instrument
 for effecting the ruin of man; for it is that which prevents him from
 rising again after he has fallen. St. Paul repented, and, not
 despairing, became equal to angels: Judas repenting, but despairing,
 rushed into perdition.

 Homily I.

 Against those who say that demons govern human affairs, and who are
 displeased at the chastisement of God, and are offended at the
 prosperity of the wicked and the hardships of the just.

 I indeed was hoping, that from the continuance of my discourse, you
 would have had a surfeit of my words: but I see that the contrary is
 happening: that no surfeit is taking place from this continuance, but
 that your desire is increased, that an addition is made not to your
 satiety but to your pleasure, that the same thing is happening which
 the winebibbers at heathen drinking-bouts experience; for they, the
 more they pour down unmixed wine, so much the rather they kindle their
 thirst, and in your case the more teaching we inculcate, so much the
 rather do we kindle your desire, we make your longing greater, your
 love for it the stronger. On this account, although I am conscious of
 extreme poverty, I do not cease to imitate the ostentatious among
 entertainers, both setting before you my table continuously, and
 placing on it the cup of my teaching, filled full: for I see that after
 having drunk it all, you retire again thirsting. And this indeed has
 become evident during the whole time, but especially since the last
 Lord's Day: For that ye partake of the divine oracles insatiably, that
 day particularly shewed: whereon I discoursed about the unlawfulness of
 speaking ill one of another, when I furnished you with a sure subject
 for self accusation, suggesting that you should speak ill of your own
 sins, but should not busy yourselves about those of other people: when
 I brought forward the Saints as accusing themselves indeed, but sparing
 others: Paul saying I am the chief of sinners, and that God had
 compassion on him who was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and
 injurious, [547] and calling himself one born out of due time, and not
 even thinking himself worthy of the title of Apostle: [548] Peter
 saying "Depart from me because I am a sinful man:" [549] Matthew
 styling himself a publican even in the days of his Apostleship: [550]
 David crying out and saying "My iniquities have gone over my head, and
 as a heavy burden have been burdensome to me:" [551] and Isaiah
 lamenting and bewailing "I am unclean, and have unclean lips:" [552]
 The three children in the furnace of fire, confessing and saying that
 they have sinned and transgressed, and have not kept the commandments
 of God. Daniel again makes the same lamentation. When after the
 enumeration of these Saints, I called their accusers flies, and
 introduced the right reason for the comparison, saying, that just as
 they fasten themselves upon the wounds of others, so also the accusers
 bite at other people's sins, collecting disease therefrom for their
 acquaintance, and those who do the opposite, I designated bees, not
 gathering together diseases, but building honeycombs with the greatest
 devotion, and so flying to the meadow of the virtue of the Saint: Then
 accordingly--then ye shewed your insatiable longing. For when my
 discourse was extended to some length, yea to an interminable length,
 such as never was, many indeed expected that your eagerness would be
 quenched by the abundance of what was said. But the contrary happened.
 For your heart was the rather warmed, your desire was the rather
 kindled: and whence was this evident? The acclamations at least which
 took place at the end were greater, and the shouts more clear, and the
 same thing took place as at the forge. For as there at the beginning
 indeed the light of the fire is not very clear, but when the flame has
 caught the whole of the wood that is laid upon it, it is raised to a
 great height; so also accordingly this happened on the occasion of that
 day. At the beginning indeed, this assembly was not vehemently stirred
 by me. But when the discourse was extended to some length, and
 gradually took hold of all the subjects and the teaching spread more
 widely, then accordingly, then the desire of listening was kindled in
 you, and the applause broke forth, more vehemently. On this account,
 although I had been prepared to say less than was spoken, I then
 exceeded the measure, nay rather I never exceeded the measure. For I am
 wont to measure the amount of the teaching not by the multitude of the
 words spoken, but by the disposition of the audience. For he who meets
 with a disgusted audience, even if he abridge his teaching, seems to be
 vexatious, but he who meets with eager, and wide-awake, and attentive
 hearers, though he extend his discourse to some length, not even thus
 fulfils their desire.

 But since it happens that there are in so great a congregation, certain
 weak ones, unable to follow the length of the discourse, I wish to
 suggest this to them, that they should hear and receive, as much as
 they can, and having received enough should retire: There is no one who
 forbids, or compels them to remain beyond their natural strength. Let
 them not however necessitate the abridgement of the discourse before
 the time and the proper hours. Thou art replete, but thy brother still
 hungers. Thou art drunk with the multitude of the things spoken, but
 thy brother is still thirsty. Let him then not distress thy weakness,
 compelling thee to receive more than thine own power allows: nor do
 thou vex his zeal by preventing him from receiving all that he can take
 in.

 2. This also happens at secular feasts. Some indeed are more quickly
 satisfied, some more tardily, and neither do these blame those, nor do
 they condemn these. But there indeed to withdraw more quickly is
 praiseworthy, but here to withdraw more quickly is not praiseworthy,
 but excusable. There to leave off more slowly, is culpable and faulty,
 here to withdraw more tardily, brings the greatest commendation, and
 good report. Pray why is this? Because there indeed the tardiness
 arises from greediness, but here the endurance, and patience are made
 up of spiritual desire and divine longing.

 But enough of preamble. And we will proceed hereupon to that business
 which remained over to us from that day. What then was that which was
 then spoken? that all men had one speech, just as also they had one
 nature, and no one was different in speech, or in tongue. Whence then
 comes so great a distinction in speech? From the carelessness of those
 who received the gift--of both of which matters we then spoke, shewing
 both the lovingkindness of the Master through this unity of speech, and
 the senselessness of the servants through their distinction of speech.
 For he indeed foreseeing that we should waste the gift nevertheless
 gave it: and they to whom it was entrusted, waxed evil over their
 charge. This is then one way of explanation, not that God wrested the
 gift from us but that we wasted what had been given. Then next after
 that, that we received afterwards gifts greater than those lost. In
 place of temporal toil he honoured us with eternal life. In place of
 thorns and thistles he prepared the fruit of the Spirit to grow in our
 souls. Nothing was more insignificant than man, and nothing became more
 honoured than man. He was the last item of the reasonable creation. But
 the feet became the head, and by means of the first-fruits, were raised
 to the royal throne. For just as some generous and opulent man who has
 seen some one escape from shipwreck and only able to save his bare body
 from the waves, cradles him in his hands, and casts about him a bright
 garment, and conducts him to the highest honours; so also God has done
 in the case of our nature. Man cast aside all that he had, his right to
 speak freely, his communion with God, his sojourn in Paradise, his
 unclouded life, and as from a shipwreck, went forth bare. But God
 received him and straightway clothed him, and taking him by the hand
 gradually conducted him to heaven. And yet the shipwreck was quite
 unpardonable. For this tempest was due entirely not to the force of the
 winds, but to the carelessness of the sailor.

 And yet God did not look at this, but had compassion for the magnitude
 of the calamity, and him who had suffered shipwreck in harbour, he
 received as lovingly as if he had undergone this in the midst of the
 open sea. For to fall in Paradise is to undergo shipwreck in harbour.
 Why so? Because when no sadness, or care, or labours, or toil, or
 countless waves of desire assaulted our nature, it was upset and it
 fell. And as the miscreants who sail the sea, often bore through the
 ship with a small iron tool, and let in the whole sea to the ship from
 below; so accordingly then, when the Devil saw the ship of Adam, that
 is his soul, full of many good things, he came and bored it through
 with his mere voice, as with some small iron tool, and emptied him of
 all his wealth and sank the ship itself. But God made the gain greater
 than the loss, and brought our nature to the royal throne. Wherefore
 Paul cries out and says, "He raised us up with him, and made us to sit
 with him, on his right hand in the heavenly places, that in the ages to
 come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in kindness
 towards us." [553] What dost thou say? the thing has already happened
 and has an end, and dost thou say "in order that he might shew to the
 ages to come?" Has he not shewn? He has already shewn, but not to all
 men, but to me who am faithful, but the unbelieving has not yet seen
 the wonder. But then, in that day the whole nature of man will come
 forward, and will wonder at that which has been done, but especially
 will it be more manifest to us. For we believe even now; but hearing
 and sight do not put a wonder before us in the same way, but just as in
 the case of kings when we hear of the purple robe, and the diadem, and
 the golden raiment, and the royal throne, we wonder indeed, but
 experience this in greater degree when the curtains are drawn aside and
 we see him seated on the lofty judgment seat. So also in the case of
 the Only-Begotten, when we see the curtains of heaven drawn aside, and
 the King of angels descending thence, and with his body-guard of the
 heavenly hosts, then we perceive the wonder to be greater from our
 sight of it. For consider with me what it is to see our nature borne
 upon the Cherubim, and the whole angelic force surrounding it.

 3. But look, with me, too, at the wisdom of Paul, how many expressions
 he seeks for, so as to present to us the lovingkindness of God. For he
 did not speak merely the word grace, nor riches, but what did he say?
 "The exceeding riches of his grace in kindness." [554] But
 notwithstanding even so, he is below the mark; and even as the slippery
 bodies when grasped by countless hands, escape our hold, and slip
 through easily; so also are we unable to get hold of the lovingkindness
 of God in whatever expressions we may try to grasp it, but the
 exceeding magnitude of it baffles the feebleness of our utterances. And
 Paul therefore experiencing this, and seeing the force of words
 defeated by its magnitude, desists after saying one word: and what is
 this? "Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift." [555] For neither
 speech, nor any mind is able to set forth the tender care of God. On
 this account he then says that it is past finding out, and elsewhere
 "The peace of God which passeth all understanding shall keep your
 hearts." [556]

 But, as I was saying, these two ways of explanation are found in the
 meantime: one indeed that God has not wrested the gift that we have
 lost; and next, that the good things which have been given to us are
 even greater than those which we have lost. And I wish also to mention
 a third too. What then is the third? That even if he had not given the
 things after these, which were greater than those we had lost, but had
 only taken away what had been given to us, as we furnished the reason
 why, (for let this be added); even this is enough of itself to shew his
 tender care towards us. For not only to give, but also to take away
 what was given, is a mark of the greatest lovingkindness, and, if you
 will, let us lay bare the matter, in the case of Paradise. He gave
 Paradise. This of his own tender care. We were seen to be unworthy of
 the gift. This of our own senselessness. He took away the gift from
 those who became unworthy of it. This came of his own goodness. And
 what kind of goodness is it, says one, to take away the gift? Wait, and
 thou shalt fully hear. For think, what Cain would have been, dwelling
 in Paradise after his bloodguiltiness. For if, when he was expelled
 from that abode, if when condemned to toil and labour, and beholding
 the threat of death hanging over his head, if seeing the calamity of
 his father before his eyes, and holding the traces of the wrath of God
 still in his hands, and encompassed with so great horrors, he lashed
 out into such great wickedness, as to ignore nature, and to forget one
 born from the same birth pangs, and to slay him who had done him no
 wrong, to lay hold on his brother's person, and to dye his right hand
 with blood, and when God wanted him to be still, to refuse submission
 and to affront his maker, to dishonour his parents; if this man had
 continued to dwell in Paradise--look, into how great evil he would have
 rushed. For if when so many restraints were laid upon him, he leapt
 with fatal leaps; and if these walls were set at nought, whither would
 he not have precipitated himself?

 Wouldest thou learn too from the mother of this man, what a good result
 the expulsion from the life of Paradise had, compare what Eve was
 before this, and what she became afterwards. Before this indeed, she
 considered that deceiving Devil, that wicked Demon to be more worth
 believing than the commandments of God, and at the mere sight of the
 tree, she trampled under foot the law which had been laid down by Him.
 But when the expulsion from Paradise came, consider how much better and
 wiser she grew. For when she bare a son, she says "I have gotten a man
 through the Lord." [557] She straightway flew to the master, who before
 this had despised the master, and she neither ascribes the matter to
 nature, nor puts the birth down to the laws of marriage, but she
 recognizes the Lord of Nature, and acknowledges thanks to Him for the
 birth of the little child. And she who before this deceived her
 husband, afterwards even trained the little child, and gave him a name
 which of itself was able to bring the gift of God to her remembrance:
 and again when she bare another, she says "God hath raised up seed to
 me in place of Abel whom Cain slew." [558] The woman remembers her
 calamity, and does not become impatient but she gives thanks to God,
 and calls the little child after his gift, furnishing it with constant
 material for instruction. Thus even in his very deprivation God
 conferred greater benefit. The woman suffered expulsion from Paradise,
 but by means of her ejection she was led to a knowledge of God, so that
 she found a greater thing than she lost. And if it were profitable,
 says one, to suffer expulsion from Paradise, for what cause did God
 give Paradise at the beginning? This turned out profitably to man, on
 account of our carelessness, since, if at least, they had taken heed to
 themselves, and had acknowledged their master, and had known how to be
 self-restrained, and to keep within bounds, they would have remained in
 honour. But when they treated the gifts which had been given them with
 insolence, then it became profitable, that they should be ejected. For
 what cause then did God give at first? In order that he might shew
 forth his own lovingkindness, and because He himself was prepared to
 bring us even to greater honour. But we were the cause of chastisement
 and punishment on all sides, ejecting ourselves through our
 indifference to goods which were given to us. Just as therefore an
 affectionate father, at first indeed, suffers his own son to dwell in
 his home, and to enjoy all his father's goods, but when he sees that he
 has become worthless of the honour, he leads him away from his table,
 and puts him far from his own sight, and often casts him forth from his
 paternal home, in order that he, suffering expulsion, and becoming
 better by this slight and this dishonour, may again shew himself worthy
 of restoration, and may succeed to his father's inheritance: So has God
 done. He gave Paradise to man. He cast him out when he appeared
 unworthy, in order that by his dwelling outside, and through his
 dishonour, he might become better, and more self-restrained, and might
 appear worthy again of restoration. Since after those things he did
 become better, he brings him back again and says "To-day shalt thou be
 with me in Paradise." [559] Dost thou see that not the gift of Paradise
 but even the ejection from Paradise was a token of the greatest tender
 care? For had he not suffered expulsion from Paradise, he would not
 again have appeared worthy of Paradise.

 4. This argument therefore let us maintain throughout, and let us apply
 it to the case of the subject lying before us. God gave a speech common
 to all. This is part of his loving kindness to men. They did not use
 the gift rightly, but they lapsed to utter folly. He took away again
 that which had been given. For if when they had one speech, they fell
 into so great folly, as to wish to build a tower to heaven: had they
 not immediately been chastised would they not have desired to lay hold
 on the height of heaven itself? For why? If indeed that were impossible
 for them, yet notwithstanding their impious thoughts are made out from
 their plan. All which things God foresaw, and since they did not use
 their oneness of speech rightly, he rightly divided them by difference
 of speech. And see with me, his lovingkindness. "Behold," saith he
 "they all have one speech, and this they have begun to do." [560]

 For what reason did he not at once proceed to the division of tongues,
 but first of all defend himself, as if about to be judged in a
 lawcourt? And yet at least no one can say to him why hast thou thus
 done? yea he is at liberty to do all things as he wills. But still as
 one about to give account, he thus sets up a defence, teaching us to be
 gentle and loving. For if the master defends himself to his servants,
 even when they have done him this wrong; much more ought we to defend
 ourselves to one another, even if we are wronged to the highest degree.
 See at least how he defends himself. "Behold they have all one mouth
 and one speech" saith he, "and this they have begun to do," as if he
 said let no one accuse me of this when he sees the division of tongues.
 Let no one consider that this difference of speech was made over to men
 from the beginning. "Behold they all have one mouth, and one speech."
 But they did not use the gift aright. And in order that thou mayest
 understand that he does not chastise for what has taken place so much
 as he provides for improvement in the future, hear the sequel "and now
 none of all the things will fail them, which they set on foot to do."
 [561] Now what he says, is of such a kind as this. If they do not pay
 the penalty now, and be restrained from the very root of their sins,
 they will never cease from wickedness. For this is what "none of the
 things will fail them which they set on foot to do" means, as if he
 said, and they will add other deeds yet more monstrous. For such a
 thing is wickedness; if when it has taken a start it be not hindered,
 as fire catching wood, so it rises to an unspeakable height. Dost thou
 see that the deprivation of oneness of speech was a work of much
 lovingkindness? He inflicted difference of speech upon them, in order
 that they might not fall into greater wickedness. Hold fast this
 argument then with me, and let it ever be fixed and immoveable in your
 minds, that not only when he confers benefits but even when he
 chastises God is good and loving. For even his chastisements and his
 punishments are the greatest part of his beneficence, the greatest form
 of his providence. Whenever therefore thou seest that famines have
 taken place, and pestilences, and drought and immoderate rains, and
 irregularities in the atmosphere, or any other of the things which
 chasten human nature, be not distressed, nor be despondent, but worship
 Him who caused them, marvel at Him for His tender care. For He who does
 these things is such that He even chastens the body that the soul may
 become sound. Then does God these things saith one? God does these
 things, and even if the whole city, nay even if the whole universe were
 here I will not shrink from saying this. Would that my voice were
 clearer than a trumpet, and that it were possible to stand in a lofty
 place, and to cry aloud to all men, and to testify that God does these
 things. I do not say these things in arrogance but I have the prophet
 standing at my side, crying and saying, "There is no evil in the city
 which the Lord hath not done" [562] --now evil is an ambiguous term;
 and I wish that you shall learn the exact meaning of each expression,
 in order that on account of ambiguity you may not confound the nature
 of the things, and fall into blasphemy.

 5. There is then evil, which is really evil; fornication, adultery,
 covetousness, and the countless dreadful things, which are worthy of
 the utmost reproach and punishment. Again there is evil, which rather
 is not evil, but is called so, famine, pestilence, death, disease, and
 others of a like kind. For these would not be evils. On this account I
 said they are called so only. Why then? Because, were they evils, they
 would not have become the sources of good to us, chastening our pride,
 goading our sloth, and leading us on to zeal, making us more attentive.
 "For when," saith one, "he slew them, then they sought him, and they
 returned, and came early to God." [563] He calls this evil therefore
 which chastens them, which makes them purer, which renders them more
 zealous, which leads them on to love of wisdom; not that which comes
 under suspicion and is worthy of reproach; for that is not a work of
 God, but an invention of our own will, but this is for the destruction
 of the other. He calls then by the name of evil the affliction, which
 arises from our punishment; thus naming it not in regard to its own
 nature, but according to that view which men take of it. For since we
 are accustomed to call by the name of evil, not only thefts and
 adulteries, but also calamities; so he has called the matter, according
 to the estimate of mankind. This then is that which the prophet saith
 "There is no evil in the city which the Lord hath not done." This too
 by means of Isaiah God has made clear saying "I am God who maketh peace
 and createth evil," [564] again naming calamities evils. This evil also
 Christ hints at, thus saying to the disciples, "sufficient for the day
 is the evil thereof," [565] that is to say the affliction, the misery.
 It is manifest then on all sides, that he here calls punishment evil;
 and himself brings these upon us, affording us the greatest view of his
 providence. For the physician is not only to be commended when he leads
 forth the patient into gardens and meadows, nor even into baths and
 pools of water, nor yet when he sets before him a well furnished table,
 but when he orders him to remain without food, when he oppresses him
 with hunger and lays him low with thirst, confines him to his bed, both
 making his house a prison, and depriving him of the very light, and
 shadowing his room on all sides with curtains, and when he cuts, and
 when he cauterizes, and when he brings his bitter medicines, he is
 equally a physician. How is it not then preposterous to call him a
 physician who does so many evil things, but to blaspheme God, if at any
 time He doeth one of these things, if He bring on either famine or
 death, and to reject his providence over all? And yet He is the only
 true physician both of souls and bodies. On this account He often
 seizes this nature of ours wantoning in prosperity, and travailing with
 a fever of sins, and by want, and hunger, and death and other
 calamities and the rest of the medicines of which He knows, frees us
 from diseases. But the poor alone feel hunger, says one. But He does
 not chasten with hunger alone, but with countless other things. Him who
 is in poverty He has often corrected with hunger, but the rich and him
 who enjoys prosperity, with dangers, diseases, untimely deaths. For He
 is full of resources, and the medicines which He has for our salvation
 are manifold.

 Thus too the judges do. They do not honour, or crown those only who
 dwell in cities, nor do they provide gifts alone, but they also often
 correct. On this account both the sword is sharpened by them, and
 tortures are prepared; both the wheel and the stocks, and the
 executioners, and countless other forms of chastisement. That which the
 executioner is to the judges, famine is to God--as an executioner
 correcting us and leading us away from vice. This too, it is possible
 to see in the case of the husbandmen: They do not then, only protect
 the root of the vine, nor hedge it round but prune it, and lop off many
 of the branches; on this account not only have they a hoe, but a sickle
 too, suitable for cutting: yet notwithstanding we do not find fault
 with them, but then above all we admire them, when we see them cutting
 off much that is unserviceable, so as through the rejection of what is
 superfluous to afford great security to that which remains. How is it
 not then preposterous, that we should thus approve of a father indeed
 and a physician and a judge, and a husbandman, and should neither blame
 nor censure him who casts his son out of his house nor the physician
 who puts his patient to torture nor the judge who corrects, nor the
 husbandman who prunes: but that we should blame and smite with
 countless accusations God, if he would at any time raise us up, when we
 are as it were, besotted through the great drunkenness which comes of
 wickedness? How great madness would it not be, not even to allow God a
 share of the same self-justification, of which we allow our fellow
 servants a share?

 6. Fearing these things for them who reproach God, I speak now, in
 order that they may not kick against the pricks, and cover their own
 feet with blood, that they may not throw stones to heaven, and receive
 wounds on their own head. But I have somewhat else far beyond this to
 say. For omitting to ask (I say this by way of concession) if God took
 from us to our profit, I only say this; that if He took what had been
 given, not even thus, could anyone be able to reproach Him. For He was
 Lord of his own. Among men indeed, when they entrust us with money, and
 lend us silver, we give them our thanks for the time during which they
 lent it, we are not indignant at the time at which they take back their
 own. And shall we reproach God who wishes to take back his own? Indeed
 now is this not the extreme of folly? yea the great and noble Job did
 not act thus. For not only when he received, but even when he was
 deprived, he gives the greatest thanks to God saying, "The Lord gave,
 the Lord hath taken away; may the name of the Lord be blessed for
 ever." [566] But if it is right to give thanks for both these even
 separately, and deprivation is not the less serviceable than bestowal;
 what excusableness should we have, tell me, in recompensing in a
 contrary spirit, and being impatient with Him when we ought to worship,
 who is so gentle, and loving and careful, who is wiser than every
 Physician, and more full of affection than any father, juster than any
 judge, and more anxious than any husbandman, in healing these souls of
 ours? What then could be more insane and senseless than they who in the
 midst of so great good order, say that we are deprived of the
 providence of God? For just as if some one were to contend that the
 soul was murky and cold, he would produce an example of extreme
 insanity, by his opinion; so if any one doubts about the providence of
 God, much rather is he liable to charges of madness.

 Not so manifest is the Sun, as the providence of God is clear. But
 nevertheless some dare to say that Demons administer our affairs. What
 can I do? Thou hast a loving Master. He chooses rather to be blasphemed
 by thee through these words, than to commit thine affairs to the Demons
 and persuade thee by the reality how Demons administer. For then thou
 wouldest know their wickedness well by the experience of it. But rather
 indeed now it is possible to set it before you as it were by a certain
 small example. Certain men possessed of Demons coming forth out of the
 tombs met Christ, and the Demons kept beseeching him to suffer them to
 enter the herd of swine. And he suffered them, and they went away, and
 straightway precipitated them all headlong. [567] Thus do Demons
 govern; and yet to them the swine were of no particular account, but
 with thee there is ever a warfare without a truce, and an implacable
 fight, and undying hatred. And if in the case of those with whom they
 had nothing in common they did not even endure that they should be
 allowed a brief breathing space of time: if they had gotten unto their
 power us their enemies who are perpetually stinging them what would
 they not have done? and what incurable mischief would they not have
 accomplished? For for this reason God let them fall upon the herd of
 swine, in order that in the case of the bodies of irrational animals
 thou mayest learn their wickedness, and that they would have done to
 the possessed the things which they did to the swine, had not the
 demoniacs in their very madness experienced the providence of God, is
 evident to all: and now therefore when thou seest a man excited by a
 Demon, worship the Master. Learn the wickedness of the Demons. For it
 is possible to see both things in the case of these Demons, the
 lovingkindness of God, and the evil of the Demons. The evil of the
 Demons when they harass and disturb the soul of the demented: and the
 lovingkindness of God whenever he restrains and hinders so savage a
 Demon, who has taken up his abode within, and desires to hurl the man
 headlong, and does not allow him to use his own power to the full, but
 suffers him to exhibit just so much strength, as both to bring the man
 to his senses, and make his own wickedness apparent. Dost thou wish to
 form another example to see once more how a Demon arranges matters when
 God allows him to use his own power? Consider the herds, the flocks of
 Job, how in one instant of time he annihilated all, consider the
 pitiable death of the children, the blow that was dealt to his body:
 and thou shalt see the savage and inhuman and unsparing character of
 the wickedness of the Demons, and from these things thou shalt know
 clearly that if God had entrusted the whole of this world to their
 authority, they would have confused and disturbed everything, and would
 have assigned to us their treatment of the swine, and of those herds,
 since not even for a little breathing space of time could they have
 endured to spare us our salvation. If Demons were to arrange affairs,
 we should be in no better condition than possessed men, yea rather we
 should be worse than they. For God did not give them over entirely to
 the tyranny of the Demons, otherwise they would suffer far worse things
 than these which they now suffer. And I would ask this of those who say
 these things, what kind of disorder they behold in the present, that
 they set down all our affairs to the arrangement of Demons? And yet we
 behold the sun for so many years proceeding day by day in regular
 order, a manifold band of stars keeping their own order, the courses of
 the moon unimpeded, an invariable succession of night and day, all
 things, both above and below, as it were in a certain fitting harmony,
 yea rather even far more, and more accurately each keeping his own
 place, and not departing from the order which God who made them
 ordained from the beginning.

 7. And what is the use of all this, says one, when the heaven indeed,
 and sun, and moon, and the band of stars, and all the rest keep much
 good order, but our affairs are full of confusion and disorder. What
 kind of confusion, O man, and disorder? A certain one, says he, is
 rich, and overbearing, He is rapacious and covetous, he drains the
 substance of the poor day by day, and suffers no terrible affliction.
 Another lives in forbearance, self-restraint, and uprightness, and is
 adorned with all other good qualities, and is chastened with poverty
 and disease, and extremely terrible afflictions. Are these then the
 matters which offend thee? Yes, these, says he. If then thou seest both
 of the rapacious, many chastened, and of those living virtuously, yea
 some even enjoying countless goods, why dost thou not abandon thine
 opinion, and be content with the Almighty? Because it is this very
 thing which offends me more. For why when there are two evil men, is
 one chastened, and another gets off, and escapes; and when there are
 two good men, one is honoured, and the other continues under
 punishment? And this very thing is a very great work of God's
 providence. For if he were to chasten all the evil men, here; and were
 to honour here all the good men, a day of judgment were superfluous.
 Again if he were to chasten no wicked man, nor were to honour any of
 the good, then the base would become baser and worse, as being more
 careless than the excellent, and they who were minded to blaspheme
 would accuse God all the more, and say that our affairs were altogether
 deprived of his providence. For if when certain evil men are chastened,
 and certain good men punished, they likewise say that human affairs are
 subject to no providence; if even this did not happen what would they
 not say? and what words would they not send forth? On this account some
 of the wicked he chastens, and some he does not chasten and some of the
 good he honours and some he does not honour. He does not chasten all,
 in order that he may persuade thee, that there is a Resurrection. But
 he chastens some in order that he may make the more careless, through
 fear by means of the punishment of the others, more in earnest. Again
 he honours certain of the good, in order that he may lead on others by
 his honours to emulate their virtue. But he does not honour all, in
 order that thou mayest learn that there is another season for rendering
 to all their recompense. For if indeed all were to receive their
 deserts here, they would disbelieve the account of the Resurrection.
 But if no one were to receive his desert here, the majority would
 become more careless. On this account some he chastens, and others he
 does not chasten, profiting both those who are chastened, and those who
 are not chastened. For he separates their wickedness from those, and he
 makes the others by their punishment, more self-restrained. And this is
 manifest from what Christ himself said. For when they announced to him
 that a tower had been brought to the ground, and had buried certain
 men, he saith to them "What think ye? that these men were sinners only?
 I say to you nay, but if ye do not repent ye also shall suffer the same
 thing." [568]

 Dost thou see how those perished on account of their sin, and the rest
 did not escape on account of their righteousness, but in order that
 they might become better by the punishment of the others? Were not then
 the chastened unjustly dealt with says one? For they could without
 being chastened themselves become better by the punishment of others.
 But if He had known that they would become better from penitence God
 would not have chastened them. For if when he foresaw that many would
 profit nothing from his longsuffering, he nevertheless bears with them,
 with much tolerance, fulfilling his own part, and affording them an
 opportunity of coming out of their own senselessness to their sober
 senses one day; how could he deprive those who were about to become
 better from the punishment of others, of the benefit of repentance? So
 that they are in no way unjustly treated, both their evil being cut off
 by their punishment, and their chastening is to be lighter there,
 because they suffered here beforehand. Again, they who were not
 chastened are in no way unjustly treated; for it was possible for them,
 had they wished, to have used the longsuffering of God, to accomplish a
 most excellent change, and wondering at his tolerance, to have become
 ashamed at his exceeding forbearance, and one day to have gone over to
 virtue, and to have gained their own salvation by the punishment of
 others. But if they remain in wickedness, God is not to blame, who on
 this account was longsuffering, that he might recover them, but they
 are unworthy of pardon, who did not rightly use the longsuffering of
 God: and it is not only possible to use this argument as a reason why
 all the wicked are not chastened here, but another also not less than
 this. Of what kind then is this? That if God brought upon all, the
 chastenings which their sins deserved, our race would have been carried
 off, and would have failed to come down to posterity. And in order that
 thou mayest learn that this is true, hear the prophet saying "If Thou
 observedst iniquity O Lord, who shall stand?" [569] And if it seems
 good to thee to investigate this saying, leaving the accurate enquiry
 into the life of each, alone: (For it is not possible even to know all
 that has been accomplished by each man) let us bring forward those sins
 which all, without contradiction, commit: and from these it will be
 plain and manifest to us, that if we were chastened for each of our
 sins, we should long ago have perished. He who has called his brother
 fool, "is liable to the hell of fire" saith He. [570] Is there then any
 one of us who has never sinned this sin? What then? ought he to be
 straightway carried off? Therefore we should have been all carried off
 and would have disappeared, long ago, indeed very long ago. Again he
 who swears, saith he, even if he fulfil his oath, doeth the works of
 the wicked one. [571] Who is there then, who has not sworn? Yea rather
 who is there who has never sworn falsely? He who looketh on a woman,
 saith he, with unchaste eyes, [572] is wholly an adulterer, and of this
 sin any one would find many guilty. When then these acknowledged sins
 are such and so insufferable, and each of these of itself brings upon
 us inevitable chastisement, if we were to reckon up the secret sins
 committed by us, then we shall see especially that the providence of
 God does not bring upon us punishment for each sin. So that when thou
 seest anyone rapacious, covetous, and not chastened, then do thou
 unfold thine own conscience; reckon up thine own life, go over the sins
 which have been committed and thou shalt learn rightly that in thine
 own case first, it is not expedient to be chastened for each of thy
 sins: for on this account the majority make reckless utterances, since
 they do not look on their own case before that of others, but we all
 leaving our own alone, examine that of the rest. But let us no longer
 do this, but the reverse, and if thou seest any righteous man
 chastened, remember Job: for if any one be righteous, he will not be
 more righteous than that man, nor within a small distance of
 approaching him. And if he suffer countless ills, he has not yet
 suffered so much, as that man.

 8. Taking this then into thy mind, cease charging the master; learning
 that it is not by way of deserting him does God let such an one suffer
 ill, but through desire to crown him, and make him more distinguished.
 And if thou seest a sinner punished, remember the paralytic who passed
 thirty eight years on his bed. For that that man was delivered over
 then to that disease through sin, hear Christ saying "Behold thou art
 made whole; sin no more lest a worse thing happen to thee." [573] For
 either when we are chastened, we pay the penalty of our sins, or else
 we receive the occasion of crowning if, when we live in rectitude, we
 suffer ill. So that whether we live in righteousness, or in sins,
 chastening is a useful thing for us, sometimes making us more
 distinguished, sometimes rendering us more self-controlled, and
 lightening our punishment to come for us. For that it is possible that
 one chastened here, and bearing it thankfully should experience milder
 punishment there hear St. Paul saying "For this reason many are weak
 and sickly, and some sleep. For if we judged ourselves, we should not
 be judged. But when we are judged we are corrected by the Lord, that we
 should not be condemned with the world." [574] Knowing all these things
 therefore, Let us both moralize in this way on the providence of God,
 and stop the mouths of the gainsayers. And if any of the events which
 happen pass our understanding, let us not from this consider that our
 affairs are not governed by providence, but perceiving His providence
 in part, in things incomprehensible let us yield to the
 unsearchableness of His wisdom. For if it is not possible for one not
 conversant with it to understand a man's art, much rather is it
 impossible for the human understanding to comprehend the infinity of
 the providence of God. "For his judgments are unsearchable and his ways
 past finding out." [575] But nevertheless from small portions we gain a
 clear and manifest faith about the whole, we give thanks to him for all
 that happens. For there is even another consideration that cannot be
 contradicted, for those who wish to moralize about the providence of
 God. For we would ask the gainsayers, is there then a God? and if they
 should say there is not, let us not answer them. For just as it is
 worthless to answer madmen, so too those who say there is no God. For
 if a ship having few sailors, and passengers, would not be conducted
 safely for one mile even, without the hand which guides it, much more,
 such a world as this, having so many persons in it, composed of
 different elements, would not have continued so long a time, were there
 not a certain providence presiding over it, both governing, and
 continually maintaining this whole fabric, and if in shame, through the
 common opinion of all men, and the experience of affairs, they confess
 that there is a God, let us say this to them. If there is a God, as
 indeed there is, it follows that He is just, for if He is not just
 neither is He God, and if He is just He recompenses to each according
 to their desert. But we do not see all here receiving according to
 their desert. Therefore it is necessary to hope for some other requital
 awaiting us, in order that by each one receiving according to his
 desert, the justice of God may be made manifest. For this consideration
 does not only contribute to our wisdom about providence alone, but
 about the Resurrection; and let us teach others, and let us do all
 diligence to shut the mouths of them who rave against the master, and
 let us ourselves glorify him in all things. For thus shall we win more
 of his care, and enjoy much of his influence, and thus shall we be able
 to escape from real evil, and obtain future good, through the grace and
 lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, By whom and with whom be glory
 to the Father, with the Holy Spirit, now and always, for ever and ever.
 Amen.

 [547] 1 Tim. i. 13, 15.

 [548] 1 Cor. xv. 8, 9.

 [549] Luke v. 8.

 [550] Matt. x. 3.

 [551] Ps. xxxvii. 5.

 [552] Isa. vi. 5.

 [553] Eph. ii. 6, 7.

 [554] Eph. ii. 7.

 [555] 2 Cor. ix. 15.

 [556] Phil. iv. 7.

 [557] Gen. iv. 1.

 [558] Gen. iv. 25.

 [559] Luke xxiii. 43.

 [560] Gen. xi. 6.

 [561] Gen. xi. 6.

 [562] Amos iii. 6.

 [563] Ps. lxxviii. 34.

 [564] Isa. xlv. 7.

 [565] Matt. vi. 34.

 [566] Job i. 21.

 [567] Matt. viii. 28 sqq.

 [568] Luke xiii. 4.

 [569] Ps. cxxix. 3.

 [570] Matt. v. 22.

 [571] Matt. v. 37.

 [572] Matt. v. 28.

 [573] John v. 5, 14.

 [574] 1 Cor. xi. 30-32.

 [575] Rom. xi. 33.

 Homily II.

 Against those who object because the devil has not been put out of the
 world: and to prove that his wickedness does no harm to us--if we take
 heed: and concerning repentance.

 1. When Isaac, in old time, was desirous to eat a meal at the hands of
 his son, he sent his son forth from the house to the chace. But when
 this Isaac was desirous to accept a meal at my hands he did not send me
 forth from the house, but himself ran to our table. What could be more
 tenderly affectionate than he? What more humble? who thought fit to
 shew his warm love thus, and deigned to descend so far. On this account
 surely, we also having spent the tones of our voice, and the strength
 of our feet over the morning discourse, when we saw his fatherly face,
 forgot our weakness, lay aside our fatigue, were uplifted with
 pleasure; we saw his illustrious hoary head, and our soul was filled
 with light. On this account too, we set out our table with readiness,
 in order that he should eat and bless us. There is no fraud and guile,
 here, as there was then, there. One indeed was commanded to bring the
 meal--but another brought it. But I was commanded to bring it, and
 brought it too. Bless me then, O my father, with spiritual blessing,
 which we all also pray ever to receive, and which is profitable not
 only to thee, but also to me, and to all these. Entreat the common
 master of us all, to prolong thy life to the old age of Isaac. For this
 is both for me, and for these, more valuable, and more needful than the
 dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth.

 But it is time to proceed to set out our table; what then is this? The
 remains of what was lately said with a view to our love of you. For
 still--still--we renew our discourse concerning the Devil, which we
 started two days ago, which we also addressed to the initiated, this
 morning when we discoursed to them about renunciation, and covenant.
 And we do this, not because our discourse about the Devil is sweet to
 us, but because the doctrine about him is full of security for you. For
 he is an enemy and a foe, and it is a great security to know clearly,
 the tactics of your enemies. We have said lately, that he does not
 overcome by force, nor by tyranny, nor through compulsion, nor through
 violence. Since were this so, he would have destroyed all men. And in
 testimony of this we brought forward the swine, against which the
 Demons were unable to venture anything, before the permission of the
 Master. [576] The herds and flocks of Job. For not even did the Devil
 venture to destroy these, until he received power from above. We
 learned therefore this one thing first, that he does not overcome us by
 force, or by compulsion; next after that, we added that even when he
 overcomes by deceitfulness, not thus does he get the better of all men,
 Then again we brought that athlete Job, himself into the midst, against
 whom he set countless schemes going, and not even thus got the better
 of him, but withdrew defeated. One question still remains. What then is
 this matter? That if he does not overcome says one, by force, yet by
 deceitfulness. And on this account it were better that he should be
 destroyed. For if Job got the better of him, yet Adam was deceived and
 overthrown. Now if once for all he had been removed from the world,
 Adam would never have been overthrown. But now he remains, and is
 defeated indeed by one, but gets the better of many. Ten overcame him,
 but he himself overcomes and wrestles down ten thousand and if God took
 him away from the world, these ten thousand would not have perished.
 What then shall we say to this? That first of all they who overcame are
 more valuable far than they who are defeated, even if the latter be
 more, and the former less. "For better is one," saith he "that doeth
 the will of God than ten thousand transgressors." [577] And next, that
 if the antagonist were taken away he who overcomes is thereby injured.
 For if thou lettest the adversary remain, the more slothful are
 injured, not on account of the more diligent, but by their own
 slothfulness; whereas if thou takest away the antagonist, the more
 diligent are betrayed on account of the slothful, and neither exhibit
 their own power, nor win crowns.

 2. Perhaps ye have not yet understood what has been said. Therefore it
 is necessary that I should say it again more clearly. Let there be one
 antagonist. But let there be also two athletes about to wrestle against
 him, and of these two athletes let one be consumed with gluttony,
 unprepared, void of strength, nerveless; but the other diligent, of
 good habit, passing his time in the wrestling school, in many gymnastic
 exercises, and exhibiting all the practice which bears upon the
 contest. If then thou takest away the antagonist, which of these two
 hast thou injured? The slothful, pray, and unprepared, or the earnest
 one who has toiled so much? It is quite clear that it is the earnest
 one: For the one indeed is wronged by the slothful, after the
 antagonist has been taken away. But the slothful, while he remains, is
 no longer injured on account of the earnest. For he has fallen, owing
 to his own slothfulness.

 I will state another solution of this question, in order that thou
 mayest learn, that the Devil does not injure, but their own
 slothfulness everywhere overthrows those who do not take heed. Let the
 Devil be allowed to be exceeding wicked, not by nature, but by choice
 and conviction. For that the Devil is not by nature wicked, learn from
 his very names. For the Devil, the slanderer that is, is called so from
 slandering; for he slandered man to God saying "Doth Job reverence thee
 for nought? but put out thine hand, and touch what he hath, see if he
 will not blaspheme thee to thy face." [578] He slandered God again to
 man saying "Fire fell from heaven and burnt up the sheep." [579] For he
 was anxious to persuade him, that this warfare was stirred up from
 above, out of the heavens, and he set the servant at variance with the
 master, and the master with his servant; rather he did not set them at
 variance, but attempted to indeed, but was not able, in order that
 whenever thou mayest set another servant at variance with his master,
 Adam with God, and believing the Devil's slander, thou mayest learn
 that he gained strength, not owing to his own power but from that man's
 slothfulness and carelessness. He is called the Devil therefore on that
 account. But to slander, and to refrain from slander is not natural,
 but an action which takes place and which ceases to take place,
 occurring and ceasing to occur. Now such things do not reach the rank
 of the nature or of the essence of a thing. I know that this
 consideration about essence and accident is hard to be grasped by many.
 But there are they who are able to lend a finer ear, wherefore also we
 have spoken these things. Do you wish that I should come to another
 name? You shall see that that also is not a name which belongs to his
 essence or nature. He is called wicked. But his wickedness is not from
 his nature, but from his choice. For even this at one time is present,
 at another time is absent. Do not thou then say this to me that it
 always remains with him. For it was not indeed with him at the
 beginning, but afterwards came upon him; wherefore he is called
 apostate. Although many men are wicked, he alone is called wicked by
 pre-eminence. Why then is he thus called? Because though in no way
 wronged by us, having no grudge whether small or great, when he saw
 mankind had in honour, he straightway envied him his good. What
 therefore could be worse than this wickedness, except when hatred and
 war exist, without having any reasonable cause. Let the Devil then be
 let alone, and let us bring forward the creation, in order that thou
 mayest learn that the Devil is not the cause of ills to us, if we would
 only take heed: in order that thou mayest learn that the weak in
 choice, and the unprepared, and slothful, even were there no Devil,
 falls, and casts himself into many a depth of evil. The Devil is evil.
 I know it myself and it is acknowledged by all, yet give heed strictly
 to the things which are now about to be said. For they are not ordinary
 matters, but those about which many words, many times, and in many
 places arise, about which there is many a fight and battle not only on
 the part of the faithful against unbelievers but also on the part of
 the faithful against the faithful. For this is that which is full of
 pain.

 3. The Devil then is acknowledged, as I said, to be evil by all. What
 shall we say about this beautiful and wondrous creation? Pray is the
 creation too, wicked? and who is so corrupt, who so dull, and demented
 as to accuse the creation? what then shall we say about this? For it is
 not wicked, but is both beautiful and a token of the wisdom and power
 and lovingkindness of God. Hear at least how the prophet marvels at it,
 saying, "How are thy works magnified O Lord! in wisdom Thou hast made
 them all." [580] He did go through them one by one, but withdrew before
 the incomprehensible wisdom of God. And that he has made it thus
 beautiful and vast hear a certain one saying, "From the vastness and
 beauty of the creatures, the originator of them is proportionably
 seen." [581] Hear too Paul saying, "For the invisible things of Him,
 since the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being perceived
 through the things that are made." [582] For each of these by which he
 spake declared that the creation leads us to the knowledge of God,
 because it causes us to know the Master fully. What then? If we see
 this beautiful and wondrous creation itself becoming a cause of impiety
 to many, shall we blame it? In no wise, but them who were unable to use
 the medicine rightly. Whence then is this which leads us to the
 knowledge of God, a cause of impiety? "The wise" saith he "were
 darkened in their understandings, and worshipped and served the
 creature more than the creator." [583] The Devil is nowhere here, a
 Demon is nowhere here, but the creation alone is set before us, as the
 teacher of the knowledge of God. How then has it become the cause of
 impiety? Not owing to its own nature, but owing to the carelessness of
 those who do not take heed. What then? Shall we take away even the
 creation? tell me.

 And why do I speak about the creation? Let us come to our own members.
 For even these we shall find to be a cause of destruction if we do not
 take heed, not because of their own nature, but because of our sloth.
 And look; an eye was given, in order that thou mayest behold the
 creation and glorify the Master. But if thou dost not use the eye well,
 it becomes to thee the minister of adultery. A tongue has been given,
 in order that thou mayest speak well, in order that thou mayest praise
 the Creator. But if thou givest not excellent heed, it becomes a cause
 of blasphemy to thee. And hands were given thee that thou mayest
 stretch them forth unto prayer. But if thou are not wary, thou
 stretchest them out unto covetousness. Feet were given in order that
 thou mayest run unto good works, but if thou art careless thou wilt
 cause wicked works by means of them: Dost thou see that all things hurt
 the weak man? Dost thou see that even the medicines of salvation
 inflict death upon the weak, not because of their own nature but
 because of his weakness? God made the heaven in order that thou mayest
 wonder at the work, and worship the master. But others leaving the
 creator alone, have worshipped the heaven; and this from their own
 carelessness and senselessness. But why do I speak of the creation?
 assuredly what could be more conducive to salvation than the Cross? But
 this Cross has become an offence to the weak. "For the word of the
 Cross is to them that are perishing, foolishness: but to those which
 are being saved, it is the power of God." [584] And again, "we preach
 Christ crucified, unto Jews a stumbling-block and unto Gentiles
 foolishness." [585] What could be more fit for teaching than Paul, and
 the apostles? But the Apostles became a savour of death to many. He
 says at least "to one a savour from death unto death: to the other a
 savour from life unto life." [586] Dost thou see that the weak is hurt
 even by Paul, but the strong is injured not even by the Devil?

 4. Dost thou wish that we should exercise the argument in the case of
 Jesus Christ? What is equal to that salvation? what more profitable
 than that presence? But this very saving presence, so profitable,
 became an additional means of chastening to many. "For for judgment"
 saith he "came I into this world, that they which see not may see, and
 that they which see may become blind." [587] What dost thou say? The
 light became a cause of blindness? The light did not become a cause of
 blindness, but the weakness of the eyes of the soul was not able to
 entertain the light. Thou hast seen that a weak man is hurt on all
 sides, but the strong is benefited on all sides. For in every case, the
 purpose is the cause, in every case the disposition is master. Since
 the Devil, if thou wouldest understand it, is even profitable to us, if
 we use him aright, and benefits us greatly, and we gain no ordinary
 advantages; and this, we shewed in a small degree from the case of Job.
 And it is possible also to learn this from Paul: for writing about the
 fornicator he thus speaks "Deliver such an one unto Satan for the
 destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved." [588] Behold
 even the Devil has become a cause of salvation, but not because of his
 own disposition, but because of the skill of the Apostle. For as the
 physicians taking serpents and cutting off their destructive members,
 prepare medicines for antidotes; so also did Paul. He took whatever was
 profitable of the chastening that proceeds from the Devil, and left the
 rest alone; in order that thou mayest learn that the Devil is not the
 cause of salvation, but that he hasted to destroy and devour mankind.
 But that the Apostle through his own wisdom cut his throat: hear in the
 second epistle to the Corinthians, what he saith about this very
 fornicator, "confirm your love towards him," "lest by any means such an
 one should be swallowed up by over much sorrow." And, "we be taken
 advantage of by Satan." [589] We have snatched beforehand the man from
 the gullet of the wild beast, he saith. For the Apostle often used the
 Devil as an executioner. For the executioners punish those who have
 done wrong, not as they choose, but as the judges allow. For this is
 the rule for the executioner, to take vengeance, giving heed to the
 command of the judge. Dost thou see to what a dignity the Apostle
 mounted? He who was invested with a body, used the bodiless as an
 executioner; and that which their common master saith to the Devil,
 concerning Job: charging him thus, "Touch his flesh, but thou shalt not
 touch his life;" [590] giving him a limit, and measure of vengeance, in
 order that the wild beast might not be impetuous and leap upon him too
 shamelessly; this too the Apostle does. For delivering the fornicator
 over to him he says "For the destruction of the flesh," [591] that is
 "thou shalt not touch his life." Dost thou see the authority of the
 servant? Fear not therefore the Devil, even if he be bodiless: for he
 has come in contact with him. And nothing is weaker than he who has
 come into such contact even though he be not invested with a body, as
 then nothing is stronger than he who has boldness even though he bear
 about a mortal body.

 5. All these things have been now said by me, not in order that I may
 discharge the Devil from blame, but that I may free you from
 slothfulness. For he wishes extremely to attribute the cause of our
 sins to himself, in order that we being nourished by these hopes, and
 entering on all kinds of evil, may increase the chastening in our own
 case, and may meet with no pardon from having transferred the cause to
 him. Just as Eve met with none. But let us not do this. But let us know
 ourselves. Let us know our wounds. For thus shall we be able to apply
 the medicines. For he who does not know his disease, will give no care
 to his weakness. We have sinned much: I know this well. For we are all
 liable for penalties. But we are not deprived of pardon; nor shall we
 fall away from repentance for we still stand in the arena, and are in
 the struggles of repentance. Art thou old, and hast thou come to the
 last outlet of life? Do not consider even thus that thou hast fallen
 from repentance, nor despair of thine own salvation, but consider the
 robber who was freed on the cross. For what was briefer than that hour
 in which he was crowned? Yet notwithstanding even this was enough for
 him, for salvation. Art thou young? Do not be confident in thy youth,
 nor think that thou hast a very fixed term of life, "For the day of the
 Lord so cometh as a thief in the night." [592] On this account he has
 made our end invisible, in order that we might make our diligence and
 our forethought plain. Dost thou not see men taken away prematurely day
 after day? On this account a certain one admonishes "make no tarrying
 to turn to the Lord and put not off from day to day," [593] lest at any
 time, as thou delayest, thou art destroyed. Let the old man keep this
 admonition, let the young man take this advice. Yea, art thou in
 security, and art thou rich, and dost thou abound in wealth, and does
 no affliction happen to thee? Still hear what Paul says "when they say
 peace and safety, then sudden destruction cometh upon them." [594]
 Affairs are full of much change. We are not masters of our end. Let us
 be masters of virtue. Our Master Christ is loving.

 6. Do you wish that I shall speak of the ways of repentance? They are
 many, and various, and different, and all lead to heaven. The first way
 of repentance is condemnation of sins. "Declare thou first thy sins
 that thou mayest be justified." [595] Wherefore also the prophet said
 "I said, I will speak out, my transgression to the Lord, and thou
 remittedst the iniquity of my heart." [596] Condemn thyself therefore
 for thy sins. This is enough for the Master by way of self-defence. For
 he who condemns his sins, is slower to fall into them again. Awake thy
 conscience, that inward accuser, in order that thou mayest have no
 accuser at the judgment seat of the Lord. This is one way of
 repentance, the best; and there is another not less than this, not to
 bear a grudge against thine enemies to overcome anger, to forgive the
 sins of our fellow-servants. For so will those which have been done
 against the master be forgiven us. See the second expiation of sins:
 "For if ye forgive" saith he, "your debtors, your Heavenly Father will
 also forgive you." [597] Dost thou wish to learn a third way of
 repentance? Fervent and diligent prayer, and to do this from the bottom
 of the heart. Hast thou not seen that widow, how she persuaded the
 shameless judge? [598] But thou hast a gentle Master, both tender, and
 kind. She asked, against her adversaries, but thou dost not ask against
 thine adversaries, but on behalf of thine own salvation. And if thou
 wouldest learn a fourth way, I will say almsgiving. For this has a
 great power and unspeakable. For Daniel saith to Nebuchadnezzar when he
 had come to all kinds of evil, and had entered upon all impiety, "O
 King let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, redeem thy sins by
 almsgiving and thine iniquities by compassion on the poor." [599] What
 could be compared with this lovingkindness? After countless sins, after
 so many transgressions, he is promised that he will be reconciled with
 him he has come into conflict with if he will show kindness to his own
 fellow-servants. And modesty, and humility, not less than all words
 spoken, exhaust the nature of sins. And the publican is proof, being
 unable to declare his good deeds, in sight of all, bringing forward his
 humility, and laying aside the heavy burden of his sins. [600] See we
 have shewn five ways of repentance: first the condemnation of sins,
 next the forgiveness of our neighbours' sins, thirdly that which comes
 of prayer, fourth that which comes of almsgiving, fifth that which
 comes of humility. Do not thou then be lazy; but walk in all these day
 by day. For the ways are easy, nor canst thou plead poverty. And even
 if thou livest poorer than all, thou art able to leave thine anger, and
 be humble, and to pray fervently, and to condemn sins, and thy poverty
 is in no way a hindrance. And why do I speak thus, when not even in
 that way of repentance in which it is possible to spend money (I speak
 of almsgiving), not even there is poverty any hindrance to us from
 obeying the command? The widow who spent the two mites is a proof.
 [601] Having learned then the healing of our wounds, let us constantly
 apply these medicines, in order that we may return to health and enjoy
 the sacred table with assurance; and with much glory, reach Christ the
 king of glory, and attain to everlasting good by the grace, and
 compassion, and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and
 with whom be glory, power, honour, to the Father, together with the all
 holy, and good and quickening Spirit, now and always and for ever and
 ever. Amen.

 [576] Matt. viii. 31.

 [577] Ecclus. xvi. 3.

 [578] Job i. 9, 11.

 [579] Job i. 16.

 [580] Ps. civ. 24.

 [581] Wisd. xiii. 5.

 [582] Rom. i. 20.

 [583] Rom. i. 21, 25.

 [584] 1 Cor. i. 18.

 [585] 1 Cor. i. 23.

 [586] 2 Cor. ii. 16.

 [587] John ix. 39.

 [588] 1 Cor. v. 5.

 [589] 2 Cor. ii. 8, 7, 11.

 [590] Job ii. 5, 6.

 [591] 1 Cor. v. 5.

 [592] 1 Thess. v. 2.

 [593] Ecclus. v. 8.

 [594] 1 Thess. v. 3.

 [595] Isa. xliii. 26.

 [596] Ps. xxxii. 5.

 [597] Matt. vi. 14.

 [598] Luke xviii. 3.

 [599] Dan. iv. 27.

 [600] Luke xviii. 13.

 [601] Mark xii. 42.

 Homily III.

 That evil comes of sloth, and virtue from diligence, and that neither
 wicked men, nor the devil himself, are able to do the wary man any
 harm. The proof of this from many passages, and amongst others from
 those which relate to Adam and to Job.

 1. The day before yesterday we set on foot our sermon concerning the
 Devil, out of our love for you. But others, the day before yesterday
 while these matters were being set on foot here, took their places in
 the theatre, and were looking on at the Devil's show. They were taking
 part in lascivious songs; ye were having a share in spiritual music.
 They were eating of the Devil's garbage: ye were feeding on spiritual
 unguents. Who pray decoyed them? Who pray separated them from the
 sacred flock? Did the Devil pray deceive them? How did he not deceive
 you? you and they are men alike; I mean as regards your nature. You and
 they have the same soul, you have the same desires, so far as nature is
 concerned. How is it then that you and they were not in the same place?
 Because you and they have not the same purpose. On this account they
 indeed are under deception, but you beyond deception. I do not say
 these things again as discharging the Devil from accusation, but as
 desiring earnestly to free you from sins. The Devil is wicked; I grant
 this indeed, but he is wicked for himself not towards us if we are
 wary. For the nature of wickedness is of this kind. It is destructive
 to those alone who hold to it. Virtue is the contrary. It is not only
 able to profit those who hold to it, but those nearest at hand too. And
 in order that thou mayest learn that evil is evil in itself, but good
 is also good to others, I provide thee with proverbial evidence: "My
 son" saith he "if thou art become evil, thou shall bear thine evils
 alone, but if wise, for thyself and thy neighbour." [602]

 They were deceived in the theatre, but ye were not deceived. This is
 the greatest proof of things, a clear testimony, and unquestionable
 reasoning, that in every case, the purpose is master. Do thou
 accordingly use this method of proof, and if thou seest a man living in
 wickedness, and exhibiting all kinds of evil; then blaming the
 providence of God, and saying that by the necessity of fortune and fate
 and through tyranny of Demons He gave us our nature, and on all sides
 shifting the cause from himself indeed, and transferring it to the
 creator who provides for all; silence his speech not by word, but by
 deed, shewing him another fellow servant living in virtue and
 forbearance. There is no need of long speeches, no need of a complex
 plan, nor even of syllogisms. By means of deeds the proof is brought
 about. He said to him: thou art a servant, and he is a servant; thou
 art a man and he is a man. Thou livest in the same world: thou art
 nourished with the same nourishment under the same heaven: How is it
 that thou art living in wickedness, he in virtue? on this account God
 allowed the wicked to be mingled with the good; and did not give one
 law to the wicked indeed, and appointed another world as a colony for
 the good, but mixed these and those; conferring great benefit. For the
 good appear more thoroughly approved when they are in the midst of
 those who try to hinder them from living rightly, and who entice them
 to evil, and yet keep hold of virtue. "For there must" he saith "be
 also heresies among you that they which are approved may be made
 manifest among you." [603]

 Therefore also on this account he has left the wicked to be in the
 world, in order that the good may shine the brighter. Dost thou see how
 great is the gain? But the gain is not owing to the wicked, but owing
 to the courage of the good. On this account also we admire Noe, not
 because he was righteous nor yet because he was perfect alone, but
 because in that perverse and wicked generation he preserved his virtue,
 when he had no pattern of virtue, when all men invited him to
 wickedness; and he went his whole way contrary to them, like some
 traveller, pursuing his way while the great multitude is being borne
 along vehemently. On this account he did not simply say "Noe was just,
 perfect," but added "in his generation" [604] in that perverse, that
 desperate generation, when there was no acquisition of virtue. To the
 good indeed then this was the gain from the wicked. Thus at all events,
 also trees tossed about by contrary winds, become stronger. And there
 is a gain to the wicked from their mixing with the good. They feel
 confusion, they are ashamed, they blush in their presence; and even if
 they do not abstain from evil, yet nevertheless they dare what they
 dare with secrecy. And this is no small thing not to have transgression
 publicly committed. For the life of the others becomes the accuser of
 the wickedness of these. Hear at least what they say about the
 righteous man. "He is grievous to us, even when beheld," [605] and it
 is no small beginning of amendment to be tormented at his presence. For
 if the sight of the righteous man did not torment them, this word would
 not have been uttered. But to be stung, and pinched in conscience at
 his presence, would be no little hindrance to indulging in wickedness
 with pleasure, Dost thou see how great is the gain both to the good
 from the wicked, and to the wicked from the good? On this account God
 has not set them apart, but allowed them to be mingled together.

 2. Let our argument also about the Devil be the same. For on this
 account He hath left him also to be here, in order that he might render
 thee the stronger, in order that he may make the athlete more
 illustrious, in order that the contests may be greater. When therefore
 any one says, why has God left the Devil here? say these words to him,
 because he not only does no harm to the wary and the heedful, but even
 profits them, not owing to his own purpose (for that is wicked), but
 owing to their courage who have used that wickedness aright. Since he
 even fixed upon Job not on this account that he might make him more
 illustrious, but in order that he might upset him. On this account he
 is wicked both because of such an opinion and such a purpose. But
 notwithstanding he did no harm to the righteous man, but he rather
 rejoiced in the conflict as we accordingly shewed. Both the Demon
 shewed his wickedness and the righteous man his courage. But he does
 upset many says one: owing to their weakness, not owing to his own
 strength: for this too has been already proved by many examples. Direct
 thine own intention aright then, and thou shalt never receive harm from
 any, but shall get the greatest gain, not only from the good but even
 from the wicked. For on this account, as I have before said, God has
 suffered men to be with one another, and especially the wicked with the
 good, in order that they may bring them over to their own virtue. Hear
 at least what Christ saith to his disciples, "The Kingdom of heaven is
 like unto a woman who took leaven and hid it in three measures of
 meal." [606] So that the righteous have the power of leaven, in order
 that they may transfer the wicked to their own manner of conduct. But
 the righteous are few, for the leaven is small. But the smallness in no
 way injures the lump, but that little quantity converts the whole of
 the meal to itself by means of the power inherent in it. So accordingly
 the power also of the righteous has its force not in the magnitude of
 their number, but in the grace of the Spirit. There were twelve
 Apostles. Dost thou see how little is the leaven? The whole world was
 in unbelief. Dost thou see how great is the lump? But those twelve
 turned the whole world to themselves. The leaven and the lump had the
 same nature but not the same manner of conduct. On this account he left
 the wicked in the midst of the good, that since they are of the same
 nature as the righteous they may also become of the same purpose.

 Remember these things. With these stop the mouths of the indolent, the
 dissolute, the slothful, the indisposed towards the labours of virtue,
 those who accuse their common Master. "Thou hast sinned" he saith "be
 still." [607] "Do not add a second more grievous sin." [608] It is not
 so grievous to sin, as after the sin to accuse the Master. Take
 knowledge of the cause of the sin, and thou wilt find that it is none
 other than thyself who hast sinned. Everywhere there is a need of a
 good intention. I have shewn you this not from simple reasoning only,
 but from the case of fellow-servants living in the world itself. Do
 thou also use this proof. Thus too our common master will judge us.
 Learn this method of proof, and no one will be able to reason with you.
 Is any a fornicator? Shew him another who is self-restrained. Is any
 covetous and rapacious? Shew him one who gives alms. Does he live in
 jealousy and envy? Shew him one clean from passion. Is he overcome by
 anger? Bring into the midst one who is living in wisdom, for we must
 not only have recourse to ancient example, but take our models from
 present times. For even to-day by the grace of God, good deeds are done
 not less than of old. Is a man incredulous? and does he think that the
 scriptures are false? Does he not believe that Job was such as he was?
 Shew him another man, emulating the life of that righteous person. Thus
 will the Master also judge us: He places fellow servants with
 fellow-servants, nor does he give sentence according to his own
 judgment, in order that no one may begin to say again, as that servant
 said, who was entrusted with the talent, and who instead of a talent
 brought the accusation. "Thou art an austere man." [609] For he ought
 to mourn, because he did not double the talent, but rendered his sin
 the more grievous, by adding to his own idleness, his accusation
 against the Master. For what saith he? "I knew thee that thou art an
 austere man." O miserable, and wretched, ungrateful and lazy man! Thou
 oughtest to have accused thine own idleness, and to have taken away
 somewhat from thy former sin. But thou in bringing an account against
 the master hast doubled thy sin instead of doubling thy talent.

 3. On this account God places together servants and servants in order
 that the one set may judge the other, and that some being judged by the
 others may not be able for the future to accuse the master. On this
 account, he saith "The Son of Man cometh in the glory of his Father."
 [610] See the equality of the glory: he does not say in glory like to
 the glory of the Father, but in the glory of the Father, and will
 gather together all the nations. Terrible is the tribunal: terrible to
 the sinful, and the accountable. Since to those who are conscious to
 themselves of good works, it is desirable and mild. "And he will place
 the sheep on his right hand, and the kids on his left." [611] Both
 these and those are men. For what reason then are those indeed sheep
 but these kids? Not that thou mayest learn a difference in their
 nature, but the difference in their purpose. But for what reason are
 they who did not show compassion kids? Because that animal is
 unfruitful and is not able to contribute services, either by its milk,
 or by progeny, or by its hair, to those who possess it, being on all
 sides destitute of such a contribution as this, on account of the
 immaturity of its age. On this account he has called those who bear no
 fruit, by comparison, kids, but those on the right hand sheep. For from
 these the offering is great, both of their natural wool, their progeny,
 and their milk. What then does he say to them? "Ye saw me hungering and
 ye fed me, naked and ye clothed me, a stranger and ye took me in."
 Again to those he says the contrary. And yet both these and those were
 alike men, both these and those received the same promises, the same
 rewards were assigned to both on doing right. The same person came both
 to these and to those, with the same nakedness: and to these and to
 those with the same hunger, and in the same way and a stranger. All
 things were alike to those and to these.

 How then was the end not the same? Because the purpose did not permit
 it. For this alone made the difference. On this account the one set
 went to Gehenna, but the other to the Kingdom. But if the Devil were
 the cause to them of their sins, these would not be destined to be
 chastened, when another sinned and drove them on. Dost thou see here
 both those who sin, and those who do good works? Dost thou see how on
 seeing their fellow-servants they were silenced? Come and let us bring
 our discourse to another example for thy benefit. There were ten
 virgins he says. [612] Here again there are purposes which are upright,
 and purposes which are sinful, in order thou mayest see side by side,
 both the sins of the one and the good works of the others. For the
 comparison makes these things the plainer. And these and those were
 virgins; and these were five, and also those. All awaited the
 bridegroom. How then did some enter in, and others did not enter in?
 Because some indeed were churlish, and others were gentle and loving.
 Dost thou see again that the purpose determined the nature of the end,
 not the Devil? Dost thou see that the judgments were parallel, and that
 the verdict given proceeds from those who are like each other?
 Fellow-servants will judge fellow-servants. Dost thou wish that I
 should shew thee a comparison arising from contrasts? for there is one
 also from contrasts so that the condemnation may become the greater.
 "The men of Nineveh" he saith "shall rise up, and shall condemn this
 generation." [613] The judged are no longer alike, for the one are
 barbarians, the others are Jews. The one enjoyed prophetic teaching,
 the others were never partakers of a divine instruction. And this is
 not the only difference, but the fact that in that case a servant went
 to them, in this the master; and that man came and proclaimed an
 overthrow; but this man declared the glad tidings of a kingdom of
 heaven. Which of these was it the more likely, would believe? The
 barbarians, and ignorant, and they who had never partaken of divine
 teaching, or they who had from their earliest age been trained in
 prophetic books? To every one, it is plain, that the Jews would be more
 likely to believe. But the contrary took place. And these disbelieved
 the Master when he preached a kingdom of heaven, but those believed
 their fellow-servant when he threatened an overthrow: in order that
 their goodness, and these men's folly might be manifested to a greater
 degree. Is there a Demon? a Devil? chance? or Fate? has not each become
 the cause to himself both of evil, and of virtue? For if they
 themselves were not to be liable to account, he would not have said
 that they shall judge this generation. Nor would he have said that the
 Queen of the South would condemn the Jews. For then indeed not only
 will one people condemn another people, but one man will often judge a
 whole people, when they who, it is allowed, might readily have been
 deceived, are found to remain undeceived, and they who ought in every
 way to have the advantage, turn out to be worsted. On this account, we
 made mention of Adam and of Job, for there is necessity to revert to
 that subject, so as to put the finish to our discourse. He attacked
 Adam indeed by means of mere words, but Job by means of deeds. For the
 one he denuded of all his wealth, and deprived of his children. But
 from this man he took not away anything, great or little of his
 possessions. But let us rather examine the very words and the method of
 the plot. "The serpent came" saith he "and said to the woman, What is
 it that God hath said, ye shall not eat of every tree which is in the
 garden?" [614] Here it is a serpent; there a woman, in the case of Job:
 mean while great is the difference between the counsellors. The one
 [615] is a servant, the other [616] a partner of the man's life. She is
 a helpmate, but the other is under subjection. Dost thou see how
 unpardonable this is? Eve indeed, the servant in subjection deceived:
 but him [617] not even his partner, and helpmate could overthrow. But
 let us see what he saith. "What is this that God hath said, thou shalt
 not eat of every tree?" Assuredly indeed God did not say this but the
 opposite. See the villany of the Devil. He said that which was not
 spoken, in order that he might learn what was spoken. What then did the
 woman? She ought to have silenced him, she ought not to have exchanged
 a word with him. In foolishness she declared the judgment of the
 Master. Thereby she afforded the Devil a powerful handle.

 4. See what an evil it is to commit ourselves rashly to our enemies,
 and to conspirators against us. On this account Christ used to say,
 "Give not holy things to the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before
 the swine, lest they turn and rend you." [618] And this happened in the
 case of Eve. She gave the holy things to the dog, to the swine. He trod
 under foot the words: and turned and rent the woman. And see how he
 works evil. "Ye shall not die the death" saith he. [619]

 Give me your attention on this point, that the woman was able to
 understand the deceit. For he immediately announced his enmity, and his
 warfare against God, he immediately contradicted Him. Let it be so.
 Before this thou declaredst the judgment to one who wished to learn it.
 After this why didst thou follow one who said the opposite? God said
 "ye shall die the death." The Devil made answer to this and said "ye
 shall not die the death." What could be clearer than this warfare? From
 what other quarter ought one to learn the enemy and the foe, than from
 his answer returned to God? She ought then immediately to have fled
 from the bait, she ought to have started back from the snare. "Ye shall
 not die the death," saith he "for God knoweth, that on the day on which
 ye eat, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods. In hope of
 a greater promise she cast away the goods in her hand. He promised that
 he would make them Gods, and cast them down into the tyranny of death.
 Whence then O woman didst thou believe the Devil? What good didst thou
 discern? Was not the trustworthiness of the lawgiver sufficient to
 prove that the one was God, both creator and framer of the world, and
 the other the Devil and an enemy? And I do not say the Devil. Thou
 thoughtest that he was a mere serpent. Ought a serpent to claim such
 equality that thou shouldest tell him the Master's judgment? Thou seest
 that it was possible to perceive the deceit, but she would not, and yet
 God gave many proofs of his own beneficence and shewed forth his care
 of his works. For he formed man, who had not existed before; and
 breathed a soul into him, and made him according to his image, making
 him ruler of all things upon the earth, and granted him a helpmate,
 planted Paradise, and having committed to him the use of the rest of
 the trees, refused him the taste of one only: and this very prohibition
 he made for man's advantage. But the Devil manifested no good things by
 his deed, whether little, or great: but exciting the woman with mere
 words and puffing her up with vain hopes, thus he deceived her. But
 nevertheless she considered the Devil to be more worthy of credit than
 God, although God shewed forth his good will by his works. The woman
 believed in one who professed mere words, and nothing else. Dost thou
 see how, from folly alone and sloth, and not from force, the deceit
 happened? and in order that thou mayest learn it more clearly hear how
 the scripture accuses the woman: For it does not say, being deceived,
 but "seeing the tree that it was fair, she ate." So that the blame
 belongs to her uncontrolled vision, not to the deceit alone which comes
 from the Devil. For she was defeated by yielding to her own desire, not
 by the wickedness. of the Demon. On this account she did not have the
 benefit of pardon, but though she said, "the serpent deceived me," she
 paid the uttermost penalty. For it was in her power not to have fallen.
 And in order that thou mayest understand this more clearly, come, let
 us conduct our discourse to the case of Job; from the defeated to the
 vanquisher, from the conquered to the conqueror. For this man will give
 us greater zeal, so that we may raise our hands against the Devil.
 There he who deceived and conquered was a serpent; here the tempter was
 a woman, and she did not prevail: and yet at least she was far more
 persuasive than he. For to Job after the destruction of his wealth,
 after the loss of his children, after being stripped bare of all his
 goods, her wiles were added. But in the other case there was nothing of
 this kind. Adam did not suffer the destruction of his children, nor did
 he lose his wealth: he did not sit upon a dunghill, but inhabited a
 Paradise of luxury and enjoyed all manner of fruits, and fountains and
 rivers, and every other kind of security. Nowhere was there labour or
 pain, or despair and cares, or reproaches, and insults, or the
 countless ills which assailed Job: but nevertheless, when nothing of
 this kind existed, he fell and was overthrown. Is it not evident that
 it was on account of sloth? Even so therefore as the other, when all
 these things beset him, and weighed upon him, stood nobly and did not
 fall, is it not evident that his steadfastness was owing to his
 vigilance of soul?

 5. On both sides, beloved, reap the utmost gain, and avoid the
 imitation of Adam knowing how many ills are begotten of indolence: and
 imitate the piety of Job, learning how many glorious things spring from
 earnestness. Consider him, the conqueror throughout, and thou shalt
 have much consolation in all pain and peril. For as it were in the
 common theatre of the world that blessed and noble man stands forth,
 and by means of the sufferings which happened to him discourses to all
 to bear all things which befal them nobly, and never give in to the
 troubles which come upon them. For verily, there is no human suffering
 which cannot receive consolation from thence. For the sufferings which
 are scattered over the whole world, these came together, and bore down
 upon one body, even his. What pardon then shall there be for him who is
 unable to bear with thankfulness his share of the troubles which are
 brought upon him? Since he appears not bearing a part only, but the
 entire ills of all men, and in order that thou mayest not condemn the
 extravagance of my words, come, and let us take in hand severally the
 ills that came upon him, and bring forward this fulfilment of them. And
 if thou wishest, let us first bring forward that which seems to be the
 most unendurable of all, I mean poverty, and the pain which arises from
 it. For everywhere all men bewail this. What was poorer then than Job,
 who was poorer than the outcasts at the baths, and those who sleep in
 the ashes of the furnace, poorer in fact than all men? For these indeed
 have one ragged garment, but he sat naked, and had only the garment
 which nature supplies, the clothing of the flesh, and this the Devil
 destroyed on all sides, with a distressing kind of decay. Again these
 poor folk are at least under the roof of the porches at the baths, and
 are covered with a shelter. But he continued always to pass his nights
 in the open air, not having even the consolation of a bare roof. And,
 what is still greater, the fact that these are conscious of many
 terrible evils within themselves, but he was conscious of nothing
 against himself. For this is to be noticed in each of the things which
 happened to him, a thing which caused him greater pain, and produced
 more perplexity; the ignorance of the reason of what took place. These
 persons then, as I said, would have many things with which to reproach
 themselves. And this contributes no little to consolation in calamity;
 to be conscious in oneself of being punished justly. But he was
 deprived of this consolation, and while exhibiting a conversation full
 of virtue, endured the fate of those who had dared to do extreme
 wickedness. And these folk who are with us, are poor from the outset,
 and from the beginning are versed in calamity. But he endured calamity
 in which he was unversed, experiencing the immense change from wealth.
 As then the knowledge of the cause of what takes place, is the greatest
 consolation; so it is not less than this, to have been versed in
 poverty from the beginning, and so to continue in it. Of both these
 consolations that man was deprived, and not even then, did he fall
 away. Dost thou see him indeed come to extreme poverty, even in
 comparison with which it is impossible to find a fellow? For what could
 be poorer than the naked who has not even a roof over him? Yea rather
 not even was it in his power to enjoy the bare ground, but he sat upon
 the dunghill. Therefore whenever thou seest thyself come to poverty,
 consider the suffering of the just one, and straightway thou shalt rise
 up, and shake off every thought of despondency. This one calamity
 therefore seems to men to be the groundwork of all sufferings together.
 And the second after it, yea rather before it, is the affliction of the
 body. Who then was even so disabled? Who endured such disease? Who
 received or saw any one else receive so great an affliction? No one.
 Little by little his body was wasted, and a stream of worms on every
 side issued from his limbs, the running was constant, and the evil
 smell which surrounded him was strong, and the body being destroyed
 little by little, and decaying with such putrefaction, used to make
 food distasteful and hunger was to him strange and unusual. For not
 even was he able to enjoy the nourishment which was given to him. For
 saith he "I see my food to be loathsome." [620] Whenever then thou
 fallest into weakness, O man, remember that body and that saintly
 flesh. For it was saintly and pure, even when it had so many wounds.
 And if any one belong to the army, and then unjustly and without any
 reasonable pretext, be hanged upon the pillory, and has his sides
 rasped to pieces, let him not think the matter to be a reproach, nor
 let him give way to the pain when he thinks upon this saint. But this
 man, says one, has much comfort and consolation in knowing that God was
 bringing these sufferings upon him. This indeed especially troubled and
 disturbed him, to think that the just God who had in every way been
 served by him, was at war with him. And he was not able to find any
 reasonable pretext for what took place, since, when at least he
 afterwards learned the cause, see what piety he shewed, for when God
 said to him "Dost thou think that I have had dealings with thee in
 order that thou mightest appear righteous?" [621] conscious-stricken he
 says "I will lay my hand upon my mouth, once have I spoken but to a
 second word I will not proceed," [622] and again "as far as the hearing
 of the ear I have heard thee before, but now mine eye hath seen thee,
 wherefore I have held myself to be vile, and am wasted away, and I
 consider myself to be earth and ashes." [623]

 6. But if thou thinkest that this is sufficient for consolation, thou
 wilt thyself also be able to experience this comfort. And even if thou
 dost not suffer any of these misfortunes at the hands of God but owing
 to the insolence of men; and yet givest thanks and dost not blaspheme
 him who is able to prevent them indeed, but who permits them for the
 sake of testing thee: just as they who suffer at the hands of God are
 crowned, so also thou shalt obtain the same reward, because thou hast
 borne nobly the calamities which were brought upon thee from men, and
 didst give thanks to him who was able indeed to hinder them, but not
 willing.

 Behold then! thou hast seen poverty and disease, and both in the
 extremest degree brought upon this just man. Dost thou wish that I
 should shew thee the warfare at nature's hands, in such excessive
 degree waged then against this noble man? He lost ten children, the ten
 at one fell swoop, the ten in the very bloom of youth, ten who
 displayed much virtue, and that not by the common law of nature, but by
 a violent and pitiable death. Who could be able to recount so great a
 calamity? No one. Whenever therefore thou losest son and daughter
 together, have recourse to this just man, and thou shalt find
 altogether much comfort for thyself. Were these then the only
 misfortunes which happened to him? The desertion and treachery of his
 friends, and the gibes, and raillery, and the mockery and derision, and
 the tearing in pieces by all, was something intolerable. For the
 character of calamities is not of such a kind, that they who reproach
 us about our calamities are wont to vex our soul. Not only was there no
 one to soothe him but many even on many sides beset him with taunts.
 And thou seest him lamenting this bitterly, and saying "but even you
 too fell upon me." [624] And he calls them pitiless, and says "My
 neighbours have rejected me, and my servants spake against me, and I
 called the sons of my concubines, and they turned away from me." [625]
 "And others" saith he "sport upon me, and I became the common talk of
 all. [626] And my very raiment" saith he "abhorred me." [627] These
 things at least are unbearable to hear, still more to endure in their
 reality, extreme poverty, and intolerable disease new and strange, the
 loss of children so many and so good, and in such a manner, reproaches
 and gibes, and insults from men. Some indeed mocked and some reproached
 and others despised; not only enemies, but even friends; not only
 friends, but even servants, and they not only mock and reproach, but
 even abhorred him, and this not for two or three, or ten days, but for
 many months; and (a circumstance which happened in that man's case
 alone) not even had he comfort by night, but the delusions of terrors
 by night were a greater aggravation of his misfortunes by day. For that
 he endured more grievous things in his sleep, hear what he says "why
 dost thou frighten me in sleep, and terrify me in visions?" [628] What
 man of iron, what heart of steel could have endured so many
 misfortunes? For if each of these was unbearable in itself, consider
 what a tumult their simultaneous approach excited. But nevertheless he
 bore all these, and in all that happened to him he sinned not, nor was
 there guile in his lips.

 7. Let the sufferings of that man then be the medicines for our ills,
 and his grievous surging sea the harbour of our sufferings, and in each
 of the accidents which befal us, let us consider this saint, and seeing
 one person exhausting the misfortunes of the universe, we shall conduct
 ourselves bravely in those which fall to our share, and as to some
 affectionate mother, stretching forth her hands on all sides, and
 receiving and reviving her terrified children, so let us always flee to
 this book, and even if the pitiable troubles of all men assail us, let
 us take sufficient comfort for all and so depart. And if thou sayest,
 he was Job, and for this reason bore all this, but I am not like him;
 thou suppliest me with a greater accusation against thyself and fresh
 praise of him. For it is more likely that thou shouldest be able to
 bear all this than he. Why pray? Because he indeed was before the day
 of grace and of the law, when there was not much strictness of life,
 when the grace of the Spirit was not so great, when sin was hard to
 fight against, when the curse prevailed and when death was terrible.
 But now our wrestlings have become easier, all these things being
 removed after the coming of Christ; so that we have no excuse, when we
 are unable to reach the same standard as he, after so long a time, and
 such advantage, and so many gifts given to us by God. Considering
 therefore all these things, that misfortunes were greater for him, and
 that when the conflict was more grievous, then he stripped for the
 contest; let us bear all that comes upon us nobly, and with much
 thankfulness, in order that we may be able to obtain the same crown as
 he, by the grace and lovingkindness of Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom
 be glory to the Father together with the Holy Spirit, now and always
 and for ever and ever. Amen.

 [602] Prov. ix. 12.

 [603] 1 Cor. xi. 19.

 [604] Gen. vi. 9.

 [605] Wisd. ii. 15.

 [606] Matt. xiii. 33.

 [607] Gen. iv. 7.

 [608] Ecclus. xxi. 1.

 [609] Matt. xxv. 24.

 [610] Matt. xvi. 27.

 [611] Matt. xxv. 33.

 [612] Matt. xxv.

 [613] Matt. xii. 41.

 [614] Gen. iii. 1.

 [615] i.e., the Devil.

 [616] i.e., Job's wife.

 [617] i.e., Job.

 [618] Matt. vii. 6.

 [619] Gen. iii. 4.

 [620] Job vi. 7.

 [621] Job xl. 8.

 [622] Job xl. 4, 5.

 [623] Job xlii. 5, 6.

 [624] Job xix. 5.

 [625] Job xix. 14, 16.

 [626] Job xix. 9, 10.

 [627] Job ix. 31.

 [628] Job vii. 14.

 St. Chrysostom:

 Homily

 on the passage (Matt. xxvi. 19), "father if it be possible let this cup
 pass from me," etc., and against marcionists and manichæans.

 translated by

 rev. w. r. w. stephens, m.a.,

 prebendary of chichester cathedral, and rector of woolbeding, sussex.

 against marcionists and manichæans.

 ------------------------

 On the passage "Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me,
 nevertheless not as I will but as thou wilt:" and against Marcionists
 and Manichæans: also, that we ought not to rush into danger, but to
 prefer the will of God before every other will.

 1. I lately inflicted a severe stroke upon those who are grasping and
 wish to overreach others; [629] I did this not in order to wound them
 but in order to correct them; not because I hate the men, but because I
 detest their wickedness. For so the physician also lances the abscess,
 not as making an attack upon the suffering body, but as a means of
 contending with the disorder and the wound. Well to-day let us grant
 them a little respite, that they may recover from their distress, and
 not recoil from the remedy by being perpetually afflicted. Physicians
 also act thus; after the use of the knife they apply plasters and
 drugs, and let a few days pass whilst they devise things to allay the
 pain. Following their example let me today, devising means for them to
 derive benefit from my discourse, start a question concerning doctrine,
 directing my speech to the words which have been read. For I imagine
 that many feel perplexed as to the reason why these words were uttered
 by Christ: and it is probable also that any heretics who are present
 may pounce upon the words, and thereby upset many of the more
 simple-minded brethren.

 In order then to build a wall against their attack and to relieve those
 who are in perplexity from bewilderment and confusion, let us take in
 hand the words which have been cited, and dwell upon the passage, and
 dive into the depths of its meanings. For reading does not suffice
 unless knowledge also be added to it. Even as the eunuch of Candace
 read, but until one came who instructed him in the meaning of what he
 was reading he derived no great benefit from it. In order therefore
 that you may not be in the same condition attend to what is said, exert
 your understanding, let me have your mind disengaged from other
 thoughts, let your eye be quick-sighted, your intention earnest: let
 your soul be set free from worldly cares, that we may not sow our words
 upon the thorns, or upon the rock, or by the way side, but that we may
 till a deep and rich field, and so reap an abundant harvest. For if you
 thus attend to what is said you will render my labour lighter and
 facilitate the discovery of that which you are seeking.

 What then is the meaning of the passage which has been read "Father if
 it be possible let this cup pass from me?" What does the saying mean?
 For we ought to unlock the passage by first giving a clear
 interpretation of the words. What then does the saying mean? "Father if
 it be possible take away the cross." How sayest thou? is he ignorant
 whether this be possible or impossible? Who would venture to say this?
 Yet the words are those of one who is ignorant: for the addition of the
 word "if," is indicative of doubt: but as I said we must not attend to
 the words merely, but turn our attention to the sense, and learn the
 aim of the speaker, and the cause and the occasion, and by putting all
 these things together turn out the hidden meaning. The unspeakable
 Wisdom then, who knoweth the Father even as the Father knoweth the Son,
 how should he have been ignorant of this? For this knowledge concerning
 His passion was not greater than the knowledge concerning His essential
 nature, which He alone accurately knew. "For as the Father knoweth me"
 He says "even so know I the Father." [630] And why do I speak of the
 only begotten Son of God? For even the prophets appear not to have been
 ignorant of this fact, but to have known it clearly, and to have
 declared beforehand with much assurance that so it must come to pass,
 and would certainly be.

 Hear at least how variously all announce the cross. First of all the
 patriarch Jacob: for directing his discourse to Him he says "Out of a
 tender shoot didst thou spring up:" [631] by the word shoot signifying
 the Virgin and the undefiled nature of Mary. Then indicating the cross
 he said "Thou didst lie down and slumber as a lion, and as a lion's
 whelp; who shall raise him up?" [632] Here he called death a slumbering
 and a sleep, and with death he combined the resurrection when he said
 "who shall raise him up?" No one indeed save he himself--wherefore also
 Christ said "I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take
 it again," [633] and again "Destroy this temple and in three days I
 will raise it up." [634] And what is meant by the words "thou didst lie
 down and slumber as a lion?" For as the lion is terrible not only when
 he is awake but even when he is sleeping, so Christ also not only
 before the cross but also on the cross itself and in the very moment of
 death was terrible, and wrought at that time great miracles, turning
 back the light of the sun, cleaving the rocks, shaking the earth,
 rending the veil, alarming the wife of Pilate, convicting Judas of sin,
 for then he said "I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent
 blood;" [635] and the wife of Pilate declared "Have nothing to do with
 that just man, for I have suffered many things in a dream because of
 Him." [636] The darkness took possession of the earth, and night
 appeared at midday, then death was brought to nought, and his tyranny
 was destroyed: many bodies at least of the saints which slept arose.
 These things the patriarch declaring beforehand, and demonstrating
 that, even when crucified, Christ would be terrible, said "thou didst
 lie down and slumber as a lion." He did not say thou shalt slumber but
 thou didst slumber, because it would certainly come to pass. For it is
 the custom of the prophets in many places to predict things to come as
 if they were already past. For just as it is impossible that things
 which have happened should not have happened, so is it impossible that
 this should not happen, although it be future. On this account they
 predict things to come under the semblance of past time, indicating by
 this means the impossibility of their failure, the certainty of their
 coming to pass. So also spake David, signifying the cross; "They
 pierced my hands and my feet." [637] He did not say they "shall pierce"
 but "they pierced" "they counted all my bones." [638] And not only does
 he say this, but he also describes the things which were done by the
 soldiers. "They parted my garments among themselves, and upon my
 vesture did they cast lots." [639] And not only this but he also
 relates they gave Him gall to eat, and vinegar to drink. For he says
 "they gave me gall for my food, and for my thirst they gave me vinegar
 to drink." [640] And again another one says that they smote him with a
 spear, for "they shall look on Him whom they pierced." [641] Esaias
 again in another fashion predicting the cross said "He was led as a
 sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before his shearer is dumb, so
 openeth he not his mouth." "In his humiliation his judgment was taken
 away." [642]

 2. Now observe I pray how each one of these writers speaks as if
 concerning things already past, signifying by the use of this tense the
 absolute inevitable certainty of the event. So also David, describing
 this tribunal, said, "Why did the heathen rage and the people imagine
 vain things? The Kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were
 gathered together against the Lord and against his Christ." [643] And
 not only does he mention the trial, and the cross, and the incidents on
 the cross, but also him who betrayed him, declaring that he was his
 familiar companion and guest. "For," he saith, "he that eateth bread
 with me did magnify his heel against me." [644] Thus also does he
 foretell the voice which Christ was to utter on the cross saying "My
 God, My God why hast thou forsaken me?" [645] and the burial also does
 he describe: "They laid me in the lowest pit, in dark places, and in
 the shadow of death." [646] And the resurrection: "thou shalt not leave
 my soul in hell, neither shalt thou suffer thy Holy One to see
 corruption;" [647] and the ascension: "God has gone up with a merry
 noise, the Lord with the sound of the trump." [648] And the session on
 the right hand: "The Lord said to my Lord sit thou on my right hand
 until I make thy foes thy footstool." [649] But Esaias also declares
 the cause; saying, "for the transgressions of my people is He brought
 to death," [650] and because all have strayed like sheep, therefore is
 he sacrificed." [651] Then also he adds mention of the result, saying
 "by his stripes we have all been healed:" [652] and "he hath borne the
 sins of many." [653] The prophets then knew the cross, and the cause of
 the cross and that which was effected by it, and the burial and the
 resurrection, and the ascension, and the betrayal, and the trial, and
 described them all with accuracy: and is He who sent them and commanded
 them to speak these things ignorant of them Himself? What reasonable
 man would say that? Seest thou that we must not attend merely to the
 words? For this is not the only perplexing passage, but what follows is
 more perplexing. For what does He say? "Father if it be possible let
 this cup pass from me." Here he will be found to speak not only as if
 ignorant, but as if deprecating the cross: For this is what He says.
 "If it be permissible let me not be subjected to crucifixion and
 death." And yet when Peter, the leader of the apostles, said this to
 Him, "Be it far from thee Lord, this shall not happen unto Thee," He
 rebuked him so severely as to say; "get thee behind me Satan, thou art
 an offence unto me, for thou savourest not the things which be of God,
 but those which be of men:" [654] although a short time before he had
 pronounced him blessed. But to escape crucifixion seemed to Him so
 monstrous a thing, that him who had received the revelation from the
 Father, him whom He had pronounced blessed, him who had received the
 keys of Heaven, He called Satan, and an offence, and accused him of not
 savouring the things which be of God because he said to Him, "Be it far
 from thee Lord, this shall never be unto Thee"--namely crucifixion. He
 then who thus vituperated the disciple, and poured such an invective
 upon him as actually to call him Satan (after having bestowed such
 great praise on him), because he said "avoid crucifixion," how could He
 desire not to be crucified? and how after these things when drawing the
 picture of the good shepherd could He declare this to be the special
 proof of his virtue, that he should be sacrificed for the sake of the
 sheep, thus saying, "I am the good shepherd; the good shepherd layeth
 down his life for the sheep?" [655] Nor did He even stop there, but
 also added, "but he that is an hireling and not the shepherd seeth the
 wolf coming and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth." [656] If then it is the
 sign of the good shepherd to sacrifice himself, and of the hireling to
 be unwilling to undergo this, how can He who calls Himself the good
 shepherd beseech that he may not be sacrificed? And how could He say "I
 lay down my life of myself"? For if thou layest down thy life of
 thyself, how canst thou beseech another that thou mayest not lay it
 down? And how is it that Paul marvels at Him on account of this
 declaration, saying "Who being in the form of God counted it not a
 prize to be on an equality with God, but emptied Himself taking the
 form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men, and being found
 in fashion as a man he humbled himself, becoming obedient even unto
 death, yea, the death of the cross." [657] And He Himself again speaks
 in this wise, "For this cause doth my Father love me, because I lay
 down my life that I may take it again." [658] For if He does not desire
 to lay it down, but deprecates the act, and beseeches the Father, how
 is it that He is loved on this account? For love is of those who are
 like minded. And how does Paul say again "Love one another even as
 Christ also loved us and gave Himself for us?" [659] And Christ Himself
 when He was about to be crucified said "Father, the hour has come:
 glorify thy Son," [660] speaking of the cross as glory: and how then
 does He deprecate it here when He urges it there? For that the cross is
 glory listen to what the evangelist says "the Holy Ghost was not yet
 given, because Jesus was not yet glorified." [661] Now the hearing of
 this expression is "grace was not yet given because the enmity towards
 men was not yet destroyed by reason that the cross had not yet done its
 work." For the cross destroyed the enmity of God towards man, brought
 about the reconciliation, made the earth Heaven, associated men with
 angels, pulled down the citadel of death, unstrung the force of the
 devil, extinguished the power of sin, delivered the world from error,
 brought back the truth, expelled the Demons, destroyed temples,
 overturned altars, suppressed the sacrificial offering, implanted
 virtue, founded the Churches. The cross is the will of the Father, the
 glory of the Son, the rejoicing of the Spirit, the boast of Paul,
 "for," he says, "God forbid that I should boast save in the cross of
 our Lord Jesus Christ." [662] The cross is that which is brighter than
 the sun, more brilliant than the sunbeam: for when the sun is darkened
 then the cross shines brightly: and the sun is darkened not because it
 is extinguished, but because it is overpowered by the brilliancy of the
 cross. The cross has broken our bond, it has made the prison of death
 ineffectual, it is the demonstration of the love of God. "For God so
 loved the world that He gave His only-begotten Son, that every one who
 believes in Him should not perish." [663] And again Paul says "If being
 enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of His Son." [664] The
 cross is the impregnable wall, the invulnerable shield, the safeguard
 of the rich, the resource of the poor, the defence of those who are
 exposed to snares, the armour of those who are attacked, the means of
 suppressing passion, and of acquiring virtue, the wonderful and
 marvellous sign. "For this generation seeketh after a sign: and no sign
 shall be given it save the sign of Jonas;" [665] and again Paul says,
 "for the Jews ask for a sign and the Greeks seek wisdom, but we preach
 Christ crucified." [666] The cross opened Paradise, it brought in the
 robber, it conducted into the kingdom of Heaven the race of man which
 was about to perish, and was not worthy even of earth. So great are the
 benefits which have sprung and do spring from the cross, and yet doth
 He not desire to be crucified I ask? Who would venture to say this? And
 if He did not desire it who compelled Him, who forced Him to it? and
 why did He send prophets beforehand announcing that He would be
 crucified, if He was not to be, and did not wish to undergo it? And for
 what reason does He call the cross a cup, if He did not desire to be
 crucified? For that is the word of one who signifies the desire which
 he has concerning the act. For as the cup is sweet to those who are
 thirsty so also was crucifixion to Him: wherefore also He said "With
 desire have I desired to eat this Passover with you," [667] and this He
 meant not absolutely, but relatively, because after that evening the
 cross was awaiting Him.

 3. He then who calls the thing glory, and rebukes the disciple because
 he was trying to hinder Him, and proves that what constitutes the good
 shepherd is his sacrificing himself on behalf of the sheep, and
 declares that he earnestly longs for this thing, and willingly goes to
 meet it, how is it that He beseeches it may not come to pass? And if He
 did not wish it what difficulty was there in hindering those who came
 for that purpose? But in fact you behold Him hastening towards the
 deed. At least when they came upon Him He said "Whom seek ye?" and they
 replied "Jesus." Then He saith to them "Lo! I am He: and they went
 backward and fell to the ground." [668] Thus having first crippled them
 and proved that He was able to escape their hands, He then surrendered
 Himself, that thou mightest learn that not by compulsion or force, or
 the tyrannical power of those who attacked Him, did He unwillingly
 submit to this, but willingly with purpose and desire, preparing for it
 a long time before. Therefore also were prophets sent beforehand, and
 patriarchs foretold the events, and by means of words and deeds the
 cross was prefigured. For the sacrifice of Isaac also signified the
 cross to us: wherefore also Christ said "Abraham your father rejoiced
 to see my glory and he saw it and was glad." [669] The patriarch then
 was glad beholding the image of the cross, and does He Himself
 deprecate it? Thus Moses also prevailed over Amalek when he displayed
 the figure of the cross: and one may observe countless things happening
 in the Old Testament descriptive by anticipation of the cross. For what
 reason then was this the case if He who was to be crucified did not
 wish it to come to pass? And the sentence which follows this is yet
 more perplexing. For having said "Let this cup pass from me He added
 "nevertheless not as I will but as Thou wilt." [670] For herein as far
 as the actual expression is concerned we find two wills opposed to one
 another: if at least the Father desires Him to be crucified, but He
 Himself does not desire it. And yet we everywhere behold Him desiring
 and purposing the same things as the Father. For when He says "grant to
 them, as I and Thou are one that they also may be one in us," [671] it
 is equivalent to saying that the purpose of the Father and of the Son
 is one. And when He says "The words which I speak I speak not myself,
 but the Father which dwelleth in me, He doeth these works," [672] He
 indicates the same thing. And when He says "I have not come of myself"
 [673] and "I can of my own self do nothing" [674] he does not say this
 as signifying that He has been deprived of authority, either to speak
 or to act (away with the thought!), but as desiring to prove the
 concord of his purpose, both in words and deeds, and in every kind of
 transaction, to be one and the same with the Father, as I have already
 frequently demonstrated. For the expression "I speak not of myself" is
 not an abrogation of authority but a demonstration of agreement. How
 then does He say here "Nevertheless not as I will but as Thou wilt"?
 Perhaps I have excited a great conflict in your mind, but be on the
 alert: for although many words have been uttered I know well that your
 zeal is still fresh: for the discourse is now hastening on to the
 solution. Why then has this form of speech been employed? Attend
 carefully, The doctrine of the incarnation was very hard to receive.
 For the exceeding measure of His lovingkindness and the magnitude of
 His condescension were full of awe, and needed much preparation to be
 accepted. For consider what a great thing it was to hear and to learn
 that God the ineffable, the incorruptible, the unintelligible, the
 invisible, the incomprehensible, in whose hand are the ends of the
 earth, [675] who looketh upon the earth, and causeth it to tremble, who
 toucheth the mountains, and maketh them smoke, [676] the weight of
 whose condescension not even the Cherubim were able to bear but veiled
 their faces by the shelter of their wings, that this God who surpasses
 all understanding, and baffles all calculation, having passed by
 angels, archangels, and all the spiritual powers above, deigned to
 become man, and to take flesh formed of earth and clay, and enter the
 womb of a virgin, and be borne there the space of nine months, and be
 nourished with milk, and suffer all things to which man is liable.
 Inasmuch then as that which was to happen was so strange as to be
 disbelieved by many even when it had taken place, He first of all sends
 prophets beforehand, announcing this very fact. For instance the
 patriarch predicted it saying "Thou didst spring from a tender shoot my
 son: thou didst lie down and slumber as a lion;" [677] and Esaias
 saying "Behold the Virgin shall conceive and bear a son and they shall
 call His name Emmanuel;" [678] and elsewhere again "We beheld Him as a
 young child, as a root in a dry ground;" [679] and by the dry ground he
 means the virgin's womb. And again "unto us a child is born, unto us a
 son is given," [680] and again "there shall come forth a rod out of the
 root of Jesse, and a flower shall spring out of his root." [681] And
 Baruch in the book of Jeremiah says "this is our God: no other shall be
 reckoned by the side of Him: He found out every path of knowledge and
 gave it to Jacob His servant, and Israel his beloved. After these
 things also He appeared upon the earth, and held converse with men."
 [682] And David signifying His incarnate presence said "He shall come
 down like the rain into a fleece of wool, and like the drop which
 distills upon the earth" [683] because He noiselessly and gently
 entered into the Virgin's womb.

 4. But these proofs alone did not suffice, but even when He had come,
 lest what had taken place should be deemed an illusion, He warranted
 the fact not only by the sight but by duration of time and by passing
 through all the phases incident to man. For He did not enter once for
 all into a man matured and completely developed, but into a virgin's
 womb, so as to undergo the process of gestation and birth and suckling
 and growth, and by the length of the time and the variety of the stages
 of growth to give assurance of what had come to pass. And not even here
 were the proofs concluded, but even when bearing about the body of
 flesh He suffered it to experience the infirmities of human nature and
 to be hungry, and thirsty, and to sleep and feel fatigue; finally also
 when He came to the cross He suffered it to undergo the pains of the
 flesh. For this reason also streams of sweat flowed down from it and an
 angel was discovered strengthening it, and He was sad and down-cast:
 for before He uttered these words He said "my soul is troubled, and
 exceeding sorrowful ever unto death." [684] If then after all these
 things have taken place the wicked mouth of the devil speaking through
 Marcion of Pontus, and Valentinus, and Manichæus of Persia and many
 more heretics, has attempted to overthrow the doctrine of the
 Incarnation and has vented a diabolical utterance declaring that He did
 not become flesh, nor was clothed with it, but that this was mere
 fancy, and illusion, a piece of acting and pretence, although the
 sufferings, the death, the burial, the thirst, cry aloud against this
 teaching; supposing that none of these things had happened would not
 the devil have sown these wicked doctrines of impiousness much more
 widely? For this reason, just as He hungered, as He slept, as He felt
 fatigue, as He ate and drank, so also did He deprecate death, thereby
 manifesting his humanity, and that infirmity of human nature which does
 not submit without pain to be torn from this present life. For had He
 not uttered any of these things, it might have been said that if He
 were a man He ought to have experienced human feelings. And what are
 these? in the case of one about to be crucified, fear and agony, and
 pain in being torn from present life: for a sense of the charm which
 surrounds present things is implanted in human nature: on this account
 wishing to prove the reality of the fleshly clothing, and to give
 assurance of the incarnation He manifests the actual feelings of man
 with full demonstration.

 This is one consideration, but there is another no less important. And
 what is this? Christ having come to earth wished to instruct men in all
 virtue: now the instructor teaches not only by word, but also by deed:
 for this is the teacher's best method of teaching. A pilot for instance
 when he makes the apprentice sit by his side shows him how he handles
 the rudder, but he also joins speech to action, and does not depend
 upon words alone or example alone: in like manner also an architect
 when he has placed by his side the man who is intended to learn from
 him how a wall is constructed, shows him the way by means of action as
 well as by means of oral teaching; so also with the weaver, and
 embroiderer, and gold refiner, and coppersmith;--and every kind of art
 has teachers who instruct both orally and practically. Inasmuch then as
 Christ Himself came to instruct us in all virtue, He both tells us what
 ought to be done, and does it. "For," he says, "he who does and teaches
 the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven." [685] Now
 observe; He commanded men to be lowly-minded, and meek, and He taught
 this by His words: but see how He also teaches it by His deeds. For
 having said "Blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed are the meek,"
 [686] He shows how these virtues ought to be practised. How then did He
 teach them? He took a towel and girded Himself and washed the
 disciples' feet. [687] What can match this lowliness of mind? for He
 teaches this virtue no longer by His words only but also by His deeds.
 Again He teaches meekness and forbearance by His acts. How so? He was
 struck on the face by the servant of the high priest, and said "If I
 have spoken evil bear witness of the evil: but if well why smitest thou
 me?" [688] He commanded men to pray for their enemies: this also again
 He teaches by means of His acts: for when He had ascended the cross He
 said "Father forgive them for they know not what they do." [689] As
 therefore He commanded men to pray so does He Himself pray, instructing
 thee to do so by his own unflagging utterances of prayer. Again He
 commanded us to do good to those who hate us, and to deal fairly with
 those who treat us despitefully: [690] and this He did by his own acts:
 for he cast devils out of the Jews, who said that He Himself was
 possessed by a devil, He bestowed benefits on His persecutors, He fed
 those who were forming designs against Him, He conducted into His
 kingdom those who were desiring to crucify Him. Again He said to His
 disciples "Get you no gold nor silver neither brass in your purses,"
 [691] thus training them for poverty: and this also He taught by His
 example, thus saying, "Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have
 nests, but the Son of man hath not where to lay His head." [692] And He
 had neither table nor dwelling nor anything else of that kind: not
 because He was at a loss to obtain them, but because He was instructing
 men to go in that path. After the same manner then he taught them also
 to pray. They said to Him "Teach us to pray." [693] Therefore also He
 prays, in order that they may learn to pray. But it was necessary for
 them not merely to learn to pray but also how they ought to pray: for
 this reason He delivered to them a prayer in this form: "Our Father
 which art in Heaven hallowed be thy name, Thy kingdom come: Thy will be
 done, as in Heaven, so on earth. Give us this day our daily bread: and
 forgive us our debts as we also forgive our debtors: and lead us not
 into temptation:" [694] that is into danger, into snares. Since then He
 commanded them to pray "lead us not into temptation," He instructs them
 in this very precept by putting it in practice Himself, saying "Father
 if it be possible, let this cup pass away from me," thus teaching all
 the saints not to plunge into dangers, not to fling themselves into
 them but to wait for their approach, and to exhibit all possible
 courage, only not to rush forwards themselves, or to be the first to
 advance against terrors. Why so, pray? both to teach us lowliness of
 mind, and also to deliver us from the charge of vainglory. On this
 account it is said also in this passage that when He had spoken these
 words "He went away and prayed:" and after He had prayed He speaks thus
 to His disciples "Could ye not watch with me one hour? Watch and pray
 that ye enter not into temptation." [695] Seest thou He not only prays
 but also admonishes? "For the Spirit indeed is willing," He said, "but
 the flesh is weak." [696] Now this He said by way of emptying their
 soul of vanity, and delivering them from pride, teaching them
 self-restraint, training them to practice moderation. Therefore the
 prayer which He wished to teach them, He Himself also offered, speaking
 after the manner of men, not according to His Godhead (for the divine
 nature is impassable) but according to His manhood. And He prayed as
 instructing us to pray, and even to seek deliverance from distress;
 but, if this be not permitted, then to acquiesce in what seems good to
 God. Therefore He said "Nevertheless not as I will but as Thou wilt:"
 not because He had one will and the Father another; but in order that
 He might instruct men even if they were in distress and trembling, even
 if danger came upon them, and they were unwilling to be torn from
 present life, nevertheless to postpone their own will to the will of
 God: even as Paul also when he had been instructed practically
 exhibited both these principles; for he besought that temptations might
 be removed from him, thus saying "For this thing I besought the Lord
 thrice:" [697] and yet since it did not please God to remove it, he
 says "Wherefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in insults, in
 persecutions." [698] But perhaps what I have said is not quite clear:
 therefore I will make it clearer. Paul incurred many dangers and prayed
 that he might not be exposed to them. Then he heard Christ saying "my
 grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in
 weakness." [699] As soon then as he saw what the will of God was, he in
 future submitted his will to God's will. By means of this prayer then
 Christ taught both these truths, that we should not plunge into
 dangers, but rather pray that we may not fall into them; but if they
 come upon us we should bear them bravely, and postpone our own will to
 the will of God. Knowing these things then let us pray that we may
 never enter into temptation: but if we do enter it let us beseech God
 to give us patience and courage, and let us honour His will in
 preference to every will of our own. For then we shall pass through
 this present life with safety, and shall obtain the blessings to come:
 which may we all receive by the favour and lovingkindness of our Lord
 Jesus Christ, with Whom be to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost,
 glory, might, honour, now and for ever world without end. Amen.

 [629] This was such a very common topic with Chrysostom that it affords
 no clue to the date of the Homily.

 [630] John x. 15.

 [631] Gen. xlix. 9. Septuagint rendering.

 [632] Ibid.

 [633] John x. 18.

 [634] John ii. 19.

 [635] Matt. xxvii. 4.

 [636] Matt. xxvii. 19.

 [637] Ps. xxii. 17.

 [638] Ps. xxii. 18.

 [639] Ps. xxii. 19.

 [640] Ps. lxix. 22.

 [641] Zech. xii. 10.

 [642] Isa. liii. 7, 8.

 [643] Ps. ii. 1, 2.

 [644] Ps. xli. 9.

 [645] Ps. xxii. 1.

 [646] Ps. lxxxviii. 5.

 [647] Ps. xvi. 11.

 [648] Ps. xlvii. 5.

 [649] Ps. cx. 1.

 [650] Isa. liii. 8.

 [651] Isa. liii. 6, 7.

 [652] Isa. liii. 5.

 [653] Isa. liii. 12.

 [654] Matt. xvi. 22, 23.

 [655] John x. 11.

 [656] John x. 12.

 [657] Phil. ii. 6-8.

 [658] John x. 17.

 [659] Ephes. v. 2.

 [660] John xvii. 1.

 [661] John vii. 39.

 [662] Gal. vi. 14.

 [663] John iii. 16.

 [664] Rom. v. 10.

 [665] Matt. xii. 39.

 [666] 1 Cor. i. 22.

 [667] Luke xxii. 15.

 [668] John xviii. 6.

 [669] John viii. 56.

 [670] Matt. xxvi. 39.

 [671] John xvii. 11.

 [672] John xiv. 10.

 [673] John vii. 28.

 [674] John v. 30.

 [675] Ps. xcv. 4.

 [676] Ps. civ. 32.

 [677] Gen. xlix. 9.

 [678] Isa. vii. 14.

 [679] Isa. liii. 2.

 [680] Isa. ix. 6.

 [681] Isa. xi. 1.

 [682] Bar. iii. 35-37.

 [683] Ps. lxxii. 6.

 [684] Matt. xxvi. 38.

 [685] Matt. v. 19.

 [686] Matt. v. 3, 4.

 [687] John xiii. 4, 5.

 [688] John xviii. 23.

 [689] Luke xxiii. 34.

 [690] Matt. v. 44.

 [691] Matt. x. 9.

 [692] Matt. viii. 20.

 [693] Luke xi. 1.

 [694] Luke xi. 2-4.

 [695] Matt. xxvi. 39-41.

 [696] Matt. xxvi. 41.

 [697] 2 Cor. xii. 8.

 [698] 2 Cor. xii. 10.

 [699] 2 Cor. xii. 9.

 St. Chrysostom:

 Homily

 on the paralytic let down through the roof: and concerning the equality
 of the divine father and the son.

 translated by

 rev. w. r. w. stephens, m.a.,

 prebendary of chichester cathedral, and rector of woolbeding, sussex.

 homily on the paralytic let down through the roof.

 ------------------------

 1. Having lately come across the incident of the paralytic [700] who
 lay upon his bed beside the pool, we discovered a rich and large
 treasure, not by delving in the ground, but by diving into his heart:
 we found a treasure not containing silver and gold and precious stones,
 but endurance, and philosophy, and patience and much hope towards God,
 which is more valuable than any kind of jewel or source of wealth. For
 material riches are liable to the designs of robbers, and the tales of
 false accusers, and the violence of housebreakers, and the villany of
 servants, and when they have escaped all these things, they often bring
 the greatest ruin upon those who possess them by exciting the eyes of
 the envious, and consequently breeding countless storms of trouble. But
 the spiritual riches escape all these occasions of mischief and are
 superior to all abuse of this kind, laughing to scorn both robbers, and
 housebreakers, and slanderers, and false accusers and death itself. For
 they are not parted from the possessor by death, but on the contrary
 the possession becomes then more especially secured to the owners, and
 they accompany them on their journey to the other world, and are
 transplanted with them to the future life, and become marvellous
 advocates of those with whom they depart hence, and render the judge
 propitious to them.

 This wealth we found in great abundance stored in the soul of the
 paralytic. And you are witnesses who with great zeal drew up draughts
 of this treasure yet without exhausting it. For such is the nature of
 spiritual wealth; it resembles fountains of water, or rather exceeds
 their plenteousness, being most abundant when it has many to draw upon
 it. For when it enters into any man's soul it is not divided, not
 diminished, but coming in its entireness to each remains continually
 unconsumed, being incapable of ever failing: which was just what took
 place at that time. For although so many have applied to the treasure,
 and all are drawing upon it as much as they can--but why do I speak of
 you, seeing that it has made countless persons rich from that time to
 the present day, and yet abides in its original perfection? Let us not
 then grow weary in having recourse to this source of spiritual wealth:
 but as far as possible let us now also draw forth draughts from it, and
 let us gaze upon our merciful Lord, gaze upon His patient servant. He
 had been thirty and eight years struggling with an incurable infirmity
 and was perpetually plagued by it, yet he did not repine, he did not
 utter a blasphemous word, he did not accuse his Maker, but endured his
 calamity bravely and with much meekness. And whence is this manifest?
 you say: for Scripture has not told us anything clearly concerning his
 former life, but only that he had been thirty-eight years in his
 infirmity; it has not added a word to prove that he did not show
 discontent, or anger or petulance. And yet it has made this plain also,
 if any one will pay careful attention to it, not looking at it
 curiously and carelessly. For when you hear that on the approach of
 Christ who was a stranger to him, and regarded merely as a man, he
 spoke to him with such great meekness, you may be able to perceive his
 former wisdom. For when Jesus said to him "Wilt thou be made whole?" he
 did not make the natural reply "thou seest me who have been this long
 time lying sick of the palsy, and dost thou ask me if I wish to be made
 whole? hast thou come to insult my distress, to reproach me and laugh
 me to scorn and make a mock of my calamity? He did not say or conceive
 anything of this kind but meekly replied "Yea Lord." [701] Now if after
 thirty-eight; years he was thus meek and gentle, when all the vigour
 and strength of his reasoning faculties was broken down, consider what
 he is likely to have been at the outset of his trouble. For be assured
 that invalids are not so hard to please at the beginning of their
 disorder, as they are after a long lapse of time: they become most
 intractable, most intolerable to all, when the malady is prolonged. But
 as he, after so many years, was so wise, and replied with so much
 forbearance, it is quite clear that during the previous time also he
 had been bearing that calamity with much thankfulness.

 Considering these things then let us imitate the patience of our
 fellow-servant: for his paralysis is sufficient to brace up our souls:
 for no one can be so supine and indolent after having observed the
 magnitude of that calamity as not to endure bravely all evils which may
 befall him, even if they are more intolerable than all that were ever
 known. For not only his soundness but also his sickness has become a
 cause of the greatest benefit to us: for his cure has stimulated the
 souls of the hearers to speak the praise of the Lord, and his sickness
 and infirmity has encouraged you to patience, and urged you to match
 his zeal; or rather it has exhibited to you the lovingkindness of God.
 For the actual deliverance of the man to such a malady, and the
 protracted duration of his infirmity is a sign of the greatest care for
 his welfare. For as a gold refiner having cast a piece of gold into the
 furnace suffers it to be proved by the fire until such time as he sees
 it has become purer: even so God permits the souls of men to be tested
 by troubles until they become pure and transparent and have reaped much
 profit from this process of sifting: wherefore this is the greatest
 species of benefit.

 2. Let us not then be disturbed, neither dismayed, when trials befall
 us. For if the gold refiner sees how long he ought to leave the piece
 of gold in the furnace, and when he ought to draw it out, and does not
 allow it to remain in the fire until it is destroyed and burnt up: much
 more does God understand this, and when He sees that we have become
 more pure, He releases us from our trials so that we may not be
 overthrown and cast down by the multiplication of our evils. Let us
 then not be repining, or faint-hearted, when some unexpected thing
 befalls us; but let us suffer Him who knows these things accurately, to
 prove our hearts by fire as long as He pleases: for He does this for a
 useful purpose and with a view to the profit of those who are tried.

 On this account a certain wise man admonishes us saying "My Son, if
 thou come to serve the Lord prepare thy soul for temptation, set thy
 heart aright and constantly endure and make not haste in time of
 trouble;" [702] "yield to Him" he says, "in all things," for He knoweth
 exactly when it is right to pluck us out of the furnace of evil. We
 ought therefore everywhere to yield to Him and always to give thanks,
 and to bear all things contentedly, whether He bestows benefits or
 chastisement upon us, for this also is a species of benefit. For the
 physician, not only when he bathes and nourishes the patient and
 conducts him into pleasant gardens, but also when he uses cautery and
 the knife, is a physician all the same: and a father not only when he
 caresses his son, but also when he expels him from his house, and when
 he chides and scourges him, is a father all the same, no less than when
 he praises him. Knowing therefore that God is more tenderly loving than
 all physicians, do not enquire too curiously concerning His treatment
 nor demand an account of it from Him, but whether He is pleased to let
 us go free or whether He punishes, let us offer ourselves for either
 alike; for He seeks by means of each to lead us back to health, and to
 communion with Himself, and He knows our several needs, and what is
 expedient for each one, and how and in what manner we ought to be
 saved, and along that path He leads us. Let us then follow
 whithersoever He bids us, and let us not too carefully consider whether
 He commands us to go by a smooth and easy path, or by a difficult and
 rugged one: as in the case of this paralytic. It was one species of
 benefit indeed that his soul should be purged by the long duration of
 his suffering, being delivered to the fiery trial of affliction as to a
 kind of furnace; but it was another benefit no less than this that God
 was present with him in the midst of the trials, and afforded him great
 consolation. He it was who strengthened him, and upheld him, and
 stretched forth a hand to him, and suffered him not to fall. But when
 you hear that it was God Himself do not deprive the paralytic of his
 meed of praise, neither him nor any other man who is tried and yet
 steadfastly endures. For even if we be infinitely wise, even if we are
 mightier and stronger than all men, yet in the absence of His grace we
 shall not be able to withstand even the most ordinary temptation. And
 why do I speak of such insignificant and abject beings as we are? For
 even if one were a Paul, or a Peter, or a James, or a John, yet if he
 should be deprived of the divine help he would easily be put to shame,
 overthrown, and laid prostrate. And on behalf of these I will read you
 the words of Christ Himself: for He saith to Peter "Behold Satan hath
 asked to have you that he may sift you as wheat, but I have prayed for
 thee that thy faith fail not." [703] What is the meaning of "sift"? to
 turn and twist, and shake and stir and shatter, and worry, which is
 what takes place in the case of things which are winnowed: but I he
 says have restrained him, knowing that you are not able to endure the
 trial, for the expression "that thy faith fail not" is the utterance of
 one who signifies that if he had permitted it his faith would have
 failed. Now if Peter who was such a fervent lover of Christ and exposed
 his life for Him countless times and sprang into the foremost rank in
 the Apostolic band, and was pronounced blessed by his Master, and
 called Peter on this account because he kept a firm and inflexible hold
 of the faith, would have been carried away and fallen from profession
 if Christ had permitted the devil to try him as much as he desired,
 what other man will be able to stand, apart from His help? Therefore
 also Paul saith "But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be
 tempted above that ye are able, but will with the temptation also make
 the way of escape that ye may be able to bear it." [704] For not only
 does He say that He does not suffer a trial to be inflicted beyond our
 strength, but even in that which is proportioned to our strength He is
 present carrying us through it, and bracing us up, if only we ourselves
 first of all contribute the means which are at our disposal, such as
 zeal, hope in Him, thanksgiving, endurance, patience. For not only in
 the dangers which are beyond our strength, but in those which are
 proportioned to it, we need the divine assistance, if we are to make a
 brave stand; for elsewhere also it is said "even as the sufferings of
 Christ abound to us, even so our comfort also aboundeth through Christ,
 that we may be able to comfort those who are in any trouble, by the
 comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God." [705] So then he
 who comforted this man is the same who permitted the trial to be
 inflicted upon him. And now observe after the cure what tenderness He
 displays. For He did not leave him and depart, but having found him in
 the temple he saith "behold! thou art made whole; sin no more lest some
 worse thing happen unto thee." [706] For had He permitted the
 punishment because He hated him He would not have released him, He
 would not have provided for his future safety: but the expression "lest
 some worse thing happen unto thee" is the utterance of one who would
 check coming evils beforehand. He put an end to the disease, but did
 not put an end to the struggle: He expelled the infirmity but did not
 expel the dread of it, so that the benefit which had been wrought might
 remain unmoved. This is the part of a tender-hearted physician, not
 only to put an end to present pains, but to provide for future
 security, which also Christ did, bracing up his soul by the
 recollection of past events. For seeing that when the things which
 distress us have departed, the recollection of them oftentimes departs
 with them, He wishing it to abide continually, saith "sin no more lest
 some worse thing happen unto thee."

 3. Moreover it is possible to discern His forethought and consideration
 not only from this, but also from that which seems to be a rebuke. For
 He did not make a public exposure of his sins, but yet He told him that
 he suffered what he did suffer on account of his sins, but what those
 sins were He did not disclose; nor did He say "thou hast sinned" or
 "thou hast transgressed," but He indicated the fact by one simple
 utterance "sin no more;" and having said so much as just to remind him
 of it He put him more on the alert against future events, and at the
 same time He made manifest to us all his patience and courage and
 wisdom, having reduced him to the necessity of publicly lamenting his
 calamity, and having displayed his own earnestness on the man's behalf,
 "for while I am coming," he says, "another steppeth down before me:"
 [707] yet he did not publicly expose his sins. For just as we ourselves
 desire to draw a veil over our sins even so does God much more than we:
 on this account He wrought the cure in the presence of all, but He
 gives the exhortation or the advice privately. For He never makes a
 public display of our sins, except at any time He sees men insensible
 to them. For when He says "ye saw me hungry, and fed me not: and
 thirsty and gave me no drink," [708] He speaks thus at the present time
 in order that we may not hear these words in time to come. He
 threatens, He exposes us in this world, that He may not have to expose
 us in the other: even as He threatened to overthrow the city of the
 Ninevites [709] for the very reason that He might not overthrow it. For
 if He wished to publish our sins He would not announce beforehand that
 He would publish them: but as it is He does make this announcement in
 order that being sobered by the fear of exposure, if not also by the
 fear of punishment we may purge ourselves from them all. This also is
 what takes place in the case of baptism: for He conducts the man to the
 pool of water without disclosing his sins to any one; yet He publicly
 presents the boon and makes it manifest to all, while the sins of the
 man are known to no one save God Himself and him who receives the
 forgiveness of them. This also was what took place in the case of this
 paralytic, He makes the reproof without the presence of witnesses, or
 rather the utterance is not merely a reproof but also a justification;
 He justifies Himself as it were for evil-entreating him so long,
 telling him and proving to him that it was not without cause and
 purpose that He had suffered him to be so long afflicted, for He
 reminded him of his sins, and declared the cause of his infirmity. "For
 having found him," we read, "in the temple, He said unto him, sin no
 more lest some worse thing happen unto thee."

 And now since we have derived so much profit from the account of the
 former paralytic let us turn to the other who is presented to us in St.
 Matthew's Gospel. For in the case of mines where any one happens to
 find a piece of gold he makes a further excavation again in the same
 place: and I know that many of those who read without care imagine that
 one and the same paralytic is presented by the four evangelists: but it
 is not so. Therefore you must be on the alert, and pay careful
 attention to the matter. For the question is not concerned with
 ordinary matters, and this discourse when it has received its proper
 solution will be serviceable against both Greeks and Jews and many of
 the heretics. For thus all find fault with the evangelists as being at
 strife and variance: yet this is not the fact, Heaven forbid! but
 although the outward appearance is different, the grace of the Spirit
 which works upon the soul of each is one, and where the grace of the
 Spirit is, there is love, joy, and peace; and there war and
 disputation, strife and contention are not. How then shall we make it
 clear that this paralytic is not the same as the other, but a different
 man? By many tokens, both of place and time, and season, and day, and
 from the manner of the cure, and the coming of the physician and the
 loneliness of the man who was healed. And what of this? some one will
 say: for have not many of the evangelists given diverse accounts of
 other signs? Yes, but it is one thing to make statements which are
 diverse, and another, statements which are contradictory; for the
 former causes no discord or strife: but that which is now presented to
 us is a strong case of contradiction unless it be proved that the
 paralytic at the pool was a different man from him who is described by
 the other three evangelists. Now that you may understand what is the
 difference between statements which are diverse and contradictory, one
 of the evangelists has stated that Christ carried the cross, [710]
 another that Simon the Cyrenian carried it: [711] but this causes no
 contradiction or strife. "And how," you say, "is there no contradiction
 between the statements that he carried and did not carry?" Because both
 took place. When they went out of the Prætorium Christ was carrying it:
 but as they proceeded Simon took it from Him and bore it. Again in the
 case of the robbers, one says that the two blasphemed: [712] another
 that one of them checked him who was reviling the Lord. [713] Yet in
 this again there is no contradiction: because here also both things
 took place, and at the beginning both the men behaved ill: but
 afterwards when signs occurred, when the earth shook and the rocks were
 rent, and the sun was darkened, one of them was converted, and became
 more chastened, and recognized the crucified one and acknowledged his
 kingdom. For to prevent your supposing that this took place by some
 constraining force of one impelling him from within, and to remove your
 perplexity, he exhibits the man to you on the cross while he is still
 retaining his former wickedness in order that you may perceive that his
 conversion was effected from within and out of his own heart assisted
 by the grace of God and so he became a better man.

 4. And it is possible to collect many other instances of this kind from
 the Gospels, which seem to have a suspicion of contradiction, where
 there is no real contradiction, the truth being that some incidents
 have been related by this writer, others by that; or if not occurring
 at the same hour one author has related the earlier event, another the
 later; but in the present case there is nothing of this kind, but the
 multitude of the evidences which I have mentioned proves to those who
 pay any attention whatever to the matter, that the paralytic was not
 the same man in both instances. And this would be no slight proof to
 demonstrate that the evangelists were in harmony with each other and
 not at variance. For if it were the same man the discord is great
 between the two accounts: but if it be a different one all material for
 dispute has been destroyed.

 Well then let me now state the actual reasons why I affirm that this
 man is not the same as that. What are they? The one is cured in
 Jerusalem, the other in Capernaum; the one by the pool of water, the
 other in some house; there is the evidence from place: the former
 during the festival: there is the evidence from the special season: the
 former had been thirty and eight years suffering from infirmity:
 concerning the other the evangelist relates nothing of that kind: there
 is the evidence from time: the former was cured on the Sabbath: there
 is the evidence from the day: for had this man also been cured on the
 Sabbath Matthew would not have passed by the fact in silence nor would
 the Jews who were present have held their peace: for they who found
 fault for some other reason even when a man was not cured on the
 Sabbath would have been yet more violent in their accusation against
 Christ if they had got an additional handle from the argument of the
 special day. Moreover this man was brought to Christ: to the other
 Christ Himself came, and there was no man to assist him. "Lord," said
 he, "I have no man:" whereas this man had many who came to his aid, who
 also let him down through the roof. And He healed the body of the other
 man before his soul: for after he had cured the paralysis He then said
 "Behold thou art made whole, sin no more:" but not so in this case, but
 after He had healed his soul, for He said to him "Son be of good cheer
 thy sins be forgiven thee," He then cured his paralysis. That this man
 then is not the same as the other has been clearly demonstrated by
 these proofs, but it now remains for us to turn to the beginning of the
 narrative and see how Christ cured the one and the other, and why
 differently in each case: why the one on the Sabbath and the other not
 on the Sabbath, why He came Himself to the one but waited for the other
 to be brought to Him, why He healed the body of the one and the soul of
 the other first. For He does not these things without consideration and
 purpose seeing that He is wise and prudent. Let us then give our
 attention and observe Him as He performs the cure. For if in the case
 of physicians when they use the knife or cautery or operate in any
 other way upon a maimed and crippled patient, and cut off a limb, many
 persons crowd round the invalid and the physician who is doing these
 things, much more ought we to act thus in this case, in proportion as
 the physician is greater and the malady more severe, being one which
 cannot be corrected by human art, but only by divine grace. And in the
 former case we have to see the skin being cut, and matter discharging,
 and gore set in motion, and to endure much discomfort produced by the
 spectacle, and great pain and sorrow not merely from the sight of the
 wounds, but also from the suffering undergone by those who are
 subjected to this burning or cutting: for no one is so stony-hearted as
 to stand by those who are suffering these things, and hear them
 shrieking, without being himself overcome and agitated, and
 experiencing much depression of spirit; but yet we undergo all this
 owing to our desire to witness the operation. But in this case nothing
 of that kind has to be seen, no application of fire, no plunging in of
 an instrument, no flowing of blood, no pain or shrieking of the
 patient; and the reason of this is, the wisdom of the healer, which
 needs none of these external aids, but is absolutely self-sufficient.
 For it is enough that He merely utters a command and all distress
 ceases. And the wonder is not only that He effects the cure with so
 much ease, but also without pain, causing no trouble to those who are
 being healed.

 Seeing then that the marvel is greater and the cure more important, and
 the pleasure afforded to the spectators unalloyed by any kind of
 sorrow, let us now carefully contemplate Christ in the act of healing.
 "And He entered into a boat and crossed over and came into His own
 city: and behold they brought to him a man sick of the palsy lying on a
 bed: and Jesus seeing their faith said unto the sick of the palsy "Son!
 be of good cheer: thy sins are forgiven." [714] Now they were inferior
 to the centurion in respect of their faith, but superior to the
 impotent man by the pool. For the former neither invited the physician
 nor brought the sick man to the physician; but approached Him as God
 and said "Speak the word only and my servant shall be healed." [715]
 Now these men did not invite the physician to the house, and so far
 they are on an equality with the centurion: but they brought the sick
 man to the physician and so far they are inferior, because they did not
 say "speak the word only." Yet they are far better than the man lying
 by the pool. For he said "Lord I have no man when the water is troubled
 to put me into the pool:" but these men knew that Christ had no need
 either of water, or pool, or anything else of that kind: nevertheless
 Christ not only released the servant of the centurion but the other two
 men also from their maladies, and did not say: "because thou hast
 proffered a smaller degree of faith the cure which thou receivest shall
 be in proportion;" but He dismissed the man who displayed the greater
 faith with eulogy and honour, saying "I have not found so great faith,
 no, not in Israel." [716] On the man who exhibited less faith than this
 one he bestowed no praise yet He did not deprive him of a cure, no! not
 even him who displayed no faith at all. But just as physicians when
 curing the same disorder receive from some person a hundred gold
 pieces, from others half, from others less and from some nothing at
 all: even so Christ received from the centurion a large and unspeakable
 degree of faith, but from this man less and from the other not even an
 ordinary amount, and yet He healed them all. For what reason then did
 He deem the man who made no deposit of faith worthy of the benefit?
 Because his failure to exhibit faith was not owing to indolence, or to
 insensibility of soul, but to ignorance of Christ and having never
 heard any miracle in which He was concerned either small or great. On
 this account therefore the man obtained indulgence: which in fact the
 evangelist obscurely intimates when he says, "for he wist not who it
 was," [717] but he only recognized Him by sight when he lighted upon
 Him the second time.

 5. There are indeed some who say that this man was healed merely
 because they who brought him believed; but this is not the fact. For
 "when He saw their faith" refers not merely to those who brought the
 man but also to the man who was brought. Why so? "Is not one man
 healed," you say, "because another has believed?" For my part I do not
 think so unless owing to immaturity of age or excessive infirmity he is
 in some way incapable of believing. How then was it you say that in the
 case of the woman of Canaan the mother believed but the daughter was
 cured? and how was it that the servant of the centurion who believed
 rose from the bed of sickness and was preserved. Because the sick
 persons themselves were not able to believe. Hear then what the woman
 of Canaan says: "My daughter is grievously vexed with a devil [718] and
 sometimes she falleth into the water and sometimes into the fire:"
 [719] now how could she believe whose mind was darkened and possessed
 by a devil, and was never able to control herself, not in her sound
 senses? As then in the case of the woman of Canaan so also in the case
 of the centurion; his servant lay ill in the house, not knowing Christ,
 himself, nor who He was. How then was he to believe in one who was
 unknown to him, and of whom he had never yet obtained any experience?
 But in the case before us we cannot say this: for the paralytic
 believed. Whence is this manifest? From the very manner of his approach
 to Christ. For do not attend simply to the statement that they let the
 man down through the roof: but consider how great a matter it is for a
 sick man to have the fortitude to undergo this. For you are surely
 aware that invalids are so faint-hearted and difficult to please as
 often to decline the treatment administered to them on their sick bed,
 and to prefer bearing the pain which arises from their maladies to
 undergoing the annoyance caused by the remedies. But this man had the
 fortitude to go outside the house, and to be carried into the midst of
 the market place, and to exhibit himself in the presence of a crowd.
 And it is the habit of sick folk to die under their disorder rather
 than disclose their personal calamities. This sick man however did not
 act thus, but when he saw that the place of assembly was filled, the
 approaches blocked, the haven of refuge obstructed, he submitted to be
 let down through the roof. So ready in contrivance is desire, so rich
 in resource is love. "For he also that seeketh findeth, and to him that
 knocketh it shall be opened." [720] The man did not say to his friends
 "What is the meaning of this? why make this ado? why push on? Let us
 wait until the house is cleared and the assembly is dissolved: the
 crowds will withdraw, we shall then be able to approach him privately
 and confer about these matters. Why should you expose my misfortunes in
 the midst of all the spectators, and let me down from the roof-top, and
 behave in an unseemly manner?" That man said none of these things
 either to himself or to his bearers, but regarded it as an honour to
 have so many persons made witnesses of his cure. And not from this
 circumstance only was it possible to discern his faith but also from
 the actual words of Christ. For after he had been let down and
 presented Christ said to him, "Son! be of good cheer, thy sins are
 forgiven thee." And when he heard these words he was not indignant, he
 did not complain, he did not say to the physician "What mean you by
 this? I came to be healed of one thing and you heal another. This is an
 excuse and a pretence and a screen of incompetence. Do you forgive sins
 which are invisible?" He neither spoke nor thought any of these things,
 but waited, allowing the physician to adopt the method of healing which
 He desired. For this reason also Christ did not go to him, but waited
 for him to come, that He might exhibit his faith to all. For could He
 not have made the entrance easy? But He did none of these things; in
 order that He might exhibit the man's zeal and fervent faith to all.
 For as He went to the man who had been suffering thirty and eight years
 because he had no one to aid him, so did He wait for this man to come
 to him because he had many friends that He might make his faith
 manifest by the man being brought to Him, and inform us of the other
 man's loneliness by going to him, and disclose the earnestness of the
 one and the patience of the other to all and especially to those who
 were present. For some envious and misanthropical Jews were accustomed
 to grudge the benefits done to their neighbours and to find fault with
 His miracles, sometimes on account of the special season, saying that
 He healed on the sabbath day; sometimes on account of the life of those
 to whom the benefit was done, saying "if this man were a prophet He
 would have known who the woman was who touched Him:" [721] not knowing
 that it is the special mark of a physician to associate with the infirm
 and to be constantly seen by the side of the sick, not to avoid them,
 or hurry from their presence--which in fact was what He expressly said
 to those murmurers; "They that are whole have no need of a physician
 but they that are sick." [722] Therefore in order to prevent their
 making the same accusations again He proves first of all that they who
 come to Him are deserving of a cure on account of the faith which they
 exhibit. For this reason He exhibited the loneliness of one man, and
 the fervent faith and zeal of the other: for this reason He healed the
 one on the Sabbath, the other not on the Sabbath: in order that when
 you see them accusing and rebuking Christ on another day you may
 understand that they accused him on the former occasion also not
 because of their respect for the law, but because they could not
 contain their own malice. But why did He not first address Himself to
 the cure of the paralytic, but said, "Son! be of good cheer, thy sins
 are forgiven thee?" He did this very wisely. For it is a habit with
 physicians to destroy the originating cause of the malady before they
 remove the malady itself. Often for example when the eyes are
 distressed by some evil humour and corrupt discharge, the physician,
 abandoning any treatment of the disordered vision, turns his attention
 to the head, where the root and origin of the infirmity is: even so did
 Christ act: He represses first of all the source of the evil. For the
 source and root and mother of all evil is the nature of sin. This it is
 which enervates our bodies: this it is which brings on disease:
 therefore also on this occasion He said, "Son! be of good cheer, thy
 sins are forgiven thee." And on the other He said, "Behold! thou art
 made whole, sin no more lest some worse thing happen unto thee,"
 intimating to both that these maladies were the offspring of sin. And
 in the beginning and outset of the word disease as the consequence of
 sin attacked the body of Cain. For after the murder of his brother,
 after that act of wickedness, his body was subject to palsy. [723] For
 trembling is the same thing as palsy. For when the strength which
 regulates a living creature becomes weakened, being no longer able to
 support all the limbs, it deprives them of their natural power of
 direction, and then having become unstrung they tremble and turn giddy.

 6. Paul also demonstrated this: for when he was reproaching the
 Corinthians with a certain sin he said, "For this cause many are weak
 and sickly among you." Therefore also Christ first removes the cause of
 the evil, and having said "Son! be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven
 thee," He uplifts the spirit and rouses the downcast soul: for the
 speech became an efficient cause and having entered into the conscience
 it laid hold of the soul itself and cast out of it all distress. For
 nothing creates pleasure and affords confidence so much as freedom from
 self-reproach. For where remission of sins is there is sonship. Even so
 at least we are not able to call God Father until we have washed away
 our sins in the pool of the sacred water. It is when we have come up
 from thence, having put off that evil load, that we say "Our Father
 which art in Heaven." But in the case of the man who was infirm thirty
 and eight years why did He not act thus, but cured his body first of
 all? Because by that long period of time his sins had been exhausted:
 for the magnitude of a trial can lighten the load of sins; as indeed we
 read was the case with Lazarus, that he received his evil things in
 full, and thereupon was comforted: and again in another place we read,
 "Comfort ye my people, say ye to the heart of Jerusalem, that she hath
 received of the Lord's hand double for her sins." [724] And again the
 prophet says "O Lord give us peace, for thou hast requited all things
 to us," [725] indicating that penalties and punishments work
 forgiveness of sins; and this we might prove from many passages. It
 seems to me then that the reason why He said nothing to that man about
 remission of sins, but only secured him against the future, was because
 the penalty for his sins had been already worked out by the long
 duration of his sickness: or if this was not the reason, it was because
 he had not yet attained any high degree of belief concerning Christ
 that the Lord first addressed Himself to the lesser need, and one which
 was manifest and obvious, the health of the body; but in the case of
 the other man He did not act thus, but inasmuch as this man had more
 faith, and a loftier soul, He spoke to him first of all concerning the
 more dangerous disease: with the additional object of exhibiting his
 equality of rank with the Father. For just as in the former case He
 healed on the Sabbath day because He wished to lead men away from the
 Jewish mode of observing it, and to take occasion from their reproaches
 to prove Himself equal with the Father: even so in this instance also,
 knowing beforehand what they were going to say, He uttered these words
 that He might use them as a starting-point and a pretext for proving
 His equality of rank with the Father. For it is one thing when no one
 brings an accusation or charge to enter spontaneously upon a discourse
 about these things, and quite another when other persons give occasion
 for it, to set about the same work in the order and shape of a defence.
 For the nature of the former demonstration was a stumbling block to the
 hearers: but the other was less offensive, and more acceptable, and
 everywhere we see Him doing this, and manifesting His equality not so
 much by words as by deeds. This at any rate is what the Evangelist
 implied when he said that the Jews persecuted Jesus not only because He
 broke the Sabbath but also because He said that God was His Father,
 making Himself equal with God, [726] which is a far greater thing, for
 He effected this by the demonstration of His deeds. How then do the
 envious and wicked act, and those who seek to find a handle in every
 direction? "Why does this man blaspheme?" they say for "no man can
 forgive sins save God alone." [727] As they persecuted Him there
 because He broke the Sabbath, and took occasion from their reproaches
 to declare His equality with the Father in the form of a defence,
 saying "my Father worketh hitherto and I work," [728] so here also
 starting from the accusations which they make He proves from these His
 exact likeness to the Father. For what was it they said? "No man can
 forgive sins save God alone." Inasmuch then as they themselves laid
 down this definition, they themselves introduced the rule, they
 themselves declared the law, He proceeds to entangle them by means of
 their own words. "You have confessed," He says, "that forgiveness of
 sins is an attribute of God alone: my equality therefore is
 unquestionable." And it is not these men only who declare this but also
 the prophet thus saying: "who is God as thou?" and then, indicating His
 special attribute he adds "taking away iniquity and passing over
 unrighteousness." [729] If then any one else appears thus doing the
 same thing He also is God, God even as that one is God. But let us
 observe how Christ argues with them, how meekly and gently, and with
 all tenderness. "And behold some of the scribes said within themselves:
 this man blasphemeth." They did not utter the word, they did not
 proclaim it through the tongue, but reasoned in the secret recesses of
 their heart. How then did Christ act? He made public their secret
 thoughts before the demonstration which was concerned with the cure of
 the paralytic's body, wishing to prove to them the power of His
 Godhead. For that it is an attribute of God alone, a sign of His deity
 to shew the secrets of His mind, the Scripture saith "Thou alone
 knowest men's hearts." [730] Seest thou that this word "alone," is not
 used with a view of contrasting the Son with the Father. For if the
 Father alone knows the heart, how does the Son know the secrets of the
 mind? "For He Himself" it is said, "knew what was in man;" [731] and
 Paul when proving that the knowledge of secret things is a special
 attribute of God says, "and He that searchest the heart," [732] shewing
 that this expression is equivalent to the appellation "God." For just
 as when I say "He who causeth rain said," I signify none other than God
 by mentioning the deed, since it is one which belongs to Him alone: and
 when I say "He who maketh the sun to rise," without adding the word
 God, I yet signify Him by mentioning the deed: even so when Paul said
 "He who searcheth the hearts," he proved that to search the heart is an
 attribute of God alone. For if this expression had not been of equal
 force with the name "God" for pointing out Him who was signified, he
 would not have used it absolutely and by itself. For if the power were
 shared by Him in common with some created being, we should not have
 known who was signified, the community of power causing confusion in
 the mind of the hearers. Inasmuch then as this appears to be a special
 attribute of the Father, and yet is manifested of the Son whose
 equality becomes thence unquestionable, therefore we read "why think ye
 evil in your hearts? for whether is easier: to say: Thy sins are
 forgiven thee or to say arise and walk?"

 7. See moreover He makes a second proof of His power of forgiving sins.
 For to forgive sins is a very much greater act than to heal the body,
 greater in proportion as the soul is greater than the body. For as
 paralysis is a disease of the body, even so sin is a disease of the
 soul: but although this is the greater it is not palpable: whereas the
 other although it be less is manifest. Since then He is about to use
 the less for a demonstration of the greater proving that He acted thus
 on account of their weakness, and by way of condescension to their
 feeble condition He says "whether is easier? to say thy sins are
 forgiven thee or to say arise and walk?" For what reason then should He
 address Himself to the lesser act on their account? Because that which
 is manifest presents the proof in a more distinct form. Therefore He
 did not enable the man to rise until He had said to them "But that ye
 may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (then
 saith He to the sick of the palsy) arise and walk:" as if He had said:
 forgiveness of sins is indeed a greater sign: but for your sakes I add
 the less also since this seems to you to be a proof of the other. For
 as in another case when He praised the centurion for saying "speak the
 word only and my servant shall be healed: for I also say to this man go
 and he goeth and to the other come and he cometh," He confirmed his
 opinion by the eulogy which He pronounced: and again when He reproved
 the Jews for finding fault with Him on the Sabbath day saying that He
 transgressed the law, He proved that He had authority to alter laws:
 even so in this instance also when some said "He maketh Himself equal
 with God by promising that which belongs only to the Father," He having
 upbraided and accused them and proved by His deeds that He did not
 blaspheme supplied us with indisputable evidence that He could do the
 same things as the Father who begat Him. Observe at least the manner in
 which He pleases to establish the fact that what belongs to the Father
 only, belongs also to Himself: for He did not simply enable the
 paralytic to get up, but also said "but that ye may know that the Son
 of man hath power on earth to forgive sins:" thus it was his endeavour
 and earnest desire to prove above all things that He had the same
 authority as the Father.

 8. Let us then carefully hold fast all these things, both those which
 were spoken yesterday and the day before that, and let us beseech God
 that they may abide immoveably in our heart, and let us contribute zeal
 on our side, and constantly meet in this place. For in this way we
 shall preserve the truths which have been formerly spoken, and we shall
 add others to our store; and if any of them slip from our memory
 through the lapse of time we shall easily be able to recover them by
 the aid of continual teaching. And not only will the doctrines abide
 sound and uncorrupt but our course of life will have the benefit of
 much diligent care and we shall be able to pass through this present
 state of existence with pleasure and cheerfulness. For whatever kind of
 suffering is oppressing our soul when we come here will easily be got
 rid of: seeing that now also Christ is present, and he who approaches
 Him with faith will readily receive healing from Him. Suppose some one
 is struggling with perpetual poverty, and at a loss for necessary food,
 and often goes to bed hungry, if he has come in here, and heard Paul
 saying that he passed his time in hunger and thirst and nakedness, and
 that he experienced this not on one or two or three days, but
 constantly (this at least is what he indicates when he says "up to the
 present hour we both hunger and thirst and are naked"), [733] he will
 receive ample consolation, learning by means of these words that God
 has not permitted him to be in poverty because He hated him or
 abandoned him: for if this were the effect of hatred, He would not have
 permitted it in the case of Paul who was of all men especially dear to
 Him: but He permitted it out of His tender love and providential care,
 and by way of conducting him to a higher degree of spiritual wisdom.
 Has some other man a body which is beset with disease and countless
 sufferings? The condition of these paralytics may be an ample source of
 consolation and besides these the blessed and brave disciple of Paul
 who was continually suffering from disorders, and never had any respite
 from prolonged infirmity, even as Paul also said "Use a little wine for
 thy stomach's sake and thine often infirmities," [734] where he does
 not speak merely of infirmities as such. Or another having been
 subjected to false accusation has acquired a bad reputation with the
 public, and this is continually vexing and gnawing his soul: he enters
 this place and hears "Blessed are ye when men shall reproach you and
 say all manner of evil against you falsely: rejoice ye and be exceeding
 glad for great is your reward in Heaven:" [735] then he will lay aside
 all despondency and receive every kind of pleasure: for it is written
 "leap for joy, and be exceeding glad when men cast out your name as
 evil." [736] In this manner then God comforts those that are evil
 spoken of, and them that speak evil He puts in fear after another
 manner saying "every evil word which men shall speak they shall give an
 account thereof whether it be good or evil." [737]

 Another perhaps has lost a little daughter or a son, or one of his
 kinsfolk, and he also having come here listens to Paul groaning over
 this present life and longing to see that which is to come, and
 oppressed by his sojourn in this world, and he will go away with a
 sufficient remedy for his grief when he has heard him say "Now
 concerning them that are asleep I would not have you ignorant brethren
 that ye sorrow not even as others who have no hope." [738] He did not
 say concerning the dying, but "concerning them that are asleep" proving
 that death is a sleep. As then if we see any one sleeping we are not
 disturbed or distressed, expecting that he will certainly get up: even
 so when we see any one dead, let us not be disturbed or dejected for
 this also is a sleep, a longer one indeed, but still a sleep. By giving
 it the name of slumber He comforted the mourners and overthrew the
 accusation of the unbelievers. If you mourn immoderately over him who
 has departed you will be like that unbeliever who has no hope of a
 resurrection. He indeed does well to mourn, inasmuch as he cannot
 exercise any spiritual wisdom concerning things to come: but thou who
 hast received such strong proofs concerning the future life, why dost
 thou sink into the same weakness with him? Therefore it is written "now
 concerning them that are asleep we would not have you ignorant that ye
 sorrow not even as others who have no hope."

 And not only from the New Testament but from the Old also it is
 possible to receive abundant consolation. For when you hear of Job
 after the loss of his property, after the destruction of his herds,
 after the loss not of one, or two, or three, but of a whole troop of
 sons in the very flower of their age, after the great excellence of
 soul which he displayed, even if thou art the weakest of men, thou wilt
 easily be able to repent and regain thy courage. For thou, O man, hast
 constantly attended thy sick son, and hast seen him laid upon the bed,
 and hast heard him uttering his last words, and stood beside him whilst
 he was drawing his last breath and hast closed his eyes, and shut his
 mouth: but he was not present at the death struggle of his sons, he did
 not see them breathing their last gasp, but the house became the common
 grave of them all, and on the same table brains and blood were poured
 forth, and pieces of wood and tiles, and dust, and fragments of flesh,
 and all these things were mingled together in like manner. Nevertheless
 after such great calamities of this kind he was not petulant, but what
 does he say--"The Lord gave, the Lord hath taken away; as it seemed
 good unto the Lord even so has it come to pass, blessed be the name of
 the Lord for ever." [739] Let this speech be our utterance also over
 each event which befalls us; whether it be loss of property, or
 infirmity of body, or insult, or false accusation or any other form of
 evil incident to mankind, let us say these words "The Lord gave, the
 Lord hath taken away; as it seemed good to the Lord so has it come to
 pass; blessed be the name of the Lord for ever." If we practise this
 spiritual wisdom, we shall never experience any evil, even if we
 undergo countless sufferings, but the gain will be greater than the
 loss, the good will exceed the evil: by these words thou wilt cause God
 to be merciful unto thee, and wilt defend thyself against the tyranny
 of Satan. For as soon as thy tongue has uttered these words forthwith
 the Devil hastens from thee: and when he has hastened away, the cloud
 of dejection also is dispelled and the thoughts which afflict us take
 to flight, hurrying off in company with him, and in addition to all
 this thou wilt win all manner of blessings both here and in Heaven. And
 you have a convincing example in the case of Job, and of the Apostle,
 who having for God's sake despised the troubles of this world, obtained
 the everlasting blessings. Let us then be trustful and in all things
 which befall us let us rejoice and give thanks to the merciful God,
 that we may pass through this present life with serenity, and obtain
 the blessings to come, by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
 Jesus Christ to whom be glory, honour and might always, now and ever,
 world without end. Amen.

 [700] The allusion is most probably to Homily XII. against the
 Anomoeans, in which Chrysostom proves the equality of the Divine Son
 with God the Father by a reference to the cure of the paralytic by the
 pool of Bethesda. This Homily against the Anomoeans was delivered at
 Constantinople, A.D. 398.

 [701] We must suppose that Chrysostom considered such words to be
 implied in the answer actually given. They are not in the text of John
 v. 7, but it seems scarcely possible that Chrysostom should have
 forgotten the passage, or that the quotation should not have been
 subsequently corrected if he thought it misleading.

 [702] Ecclus. i. 1, 2.

 [703] Luke xxii. 31, 32.

 [704] 1 Cor. x. 13.

 [705] 2 Cor. i. 5, 4. Chrysostom transposes the clauses, and does not
 quote the exact words of the passage.

 [706] John v. 14.

 [707] John v. 7.

 [708] Matt. xxv. 12.

 [709] Jonah i. 2.

 [710] John xix. 17.

 [711] Matt. xxvii. 32; Mark xxv. 31; Luke xiii. 26.

 [712] Matt. xxvii. 44; Mark xv. 32.

 [713] Luke xxiii. 40.

 [714] Matt. ix. 1, 2.

 [715] Luke vii. 7.

 [716] Luke vii. 9.

 [717] John v. 13.

 [718] Matt. xv. 22.

 [719] These words occur in the description of the lunatic lad in Matt.
 xvii. 15. Chrysostom, speaking from memory, confuses the two
 narratives.

 [720] Luke xi. 10.

 [721] Luke vii. 39.

 [722] Matt. ix. 12.

 [723] The allusion is to Gen. iv. 12, where the words rendered in the
 English translation "a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be" are in
 the LXX. rendered st?non kai tr?mon ?se, "groaning and trembling shalt
 thou be:" but our English version is the more correct.

 [724] Isa. xl. 1, 2.

 [725] Isa. xxvi. 12.

 [726] John v. 16.

 [727] Mark ii. 7.

 [728] John v. 17.

 [729] Micah vii. 18.

 [730] 1 Kings viii. 39.

 [731] John ii. 25.

 [732] Rom. viii. 27.

 [733] 1 Cor. iv. 11.

 [734] 1 Tim. v. 23.

 [735] Matt. v. 11, 12.

 [736] Luke vi. 22, 23.

 [737] Matt. xii. 36.

 [738] 1 Thess. iv. 13.

 [739] Job i. 21, LXX. version.

 St. Chrysostom:

 Homily

 to those who had not attended the assembly: and on the apostolic
 saying, "if thine enemy hunger, feed him, etc. (rom. xii. 20), and
 concerning resentment of injuries.

 translated by

 rev. w. r. w. stephens, m.a.,

 prebendary of chichester cathedral, and rector of woolbeding, sussex.

 to those who had not attended the assembly.

 ------------------------

 To those who had not attended the assembly; on the apostolic saying,
 "If thy enemy hunger feed him," and concerning resentment of injuries.

 1. I did no good as it seems by the prolonged discourse which I lately
 addressed to you with a view to kindling your zeal for the assemblies
 here: [740] for again our Church is destitute of her children.
 Wherefore also I am again compelled to seem vexatious and burdensome,
 reproving those who are present, and finding fault with those who have
 been left behind: with them because they have not put away their sloth,
 and with you because you have not given a helping hand to the salvation
 of your brethren. I am compelled to seem burdensome and vexatious, not
 on behalf of myself, or my own possessions, but on your behalf and for
 your salvation, which is more precious to me than anything else. Let
 him who pleases take it in bad part, and call me insolent and impudent,
 yet will I not cease continually annoying him for the same purpose; for
 nothing is better for me than this kind of impudence. For it may be, it
 may be, that this at least if nothing else, will put you to shame, and
 that to avoid being perpetually importuned concerning the same things,
 ye will take part in the tender care of your brethren. For what profit
 is there to me in praise when I do not see you making advances in
 virtue? and what harm is there from the silence of the hearers when I
 behold your piety increasing? For the praise of the speaker does not
 consist in applause, but in the zeal of the hearers for godliness: not
 in noise made just at the time of hearing, but in lasting earnestness.
 As soon as applause has issued from the lips it is dispersed in air and
 perishes; but the moral improvement of the hearers brings an
 imperishable and immortal reward both to him who speaks and to them who
 obey. The praise of your cheers makes the speaker illustrious here, but
 the piety of your soul affords the teacher much confidence before the
 judgment-seat of Christ. Wherefore if any one loves the speaker, let
 him not desire the applause but the profit of the hearers. To neglect
 our brethren is no ordinary wrong, but one which brings extreme
 punishment, and an inexorable penalty. And the case of the man who
 buried the talent proves this: he was not reproached at least on
 account of his own life: for as regarded the deposit itself he did not
 turn out a bad man, since he restored it intact: nevertheless he did
 turn out a bad man as regarded his management of the deposit. For he
 did not double that which was entrusted to him; and so was punished.
 Whence it is manifest that even if we are earnest and well trained, and
 have much zeal about hearing the holy scriptures this does not suffice
 for our salvation. For the deposit must be doubled, and it becomes
 doubled when together with our own salvation we undertake to make some
 provision for the good of others. For the man in the parable said "Lo!
 there thou hast that is thine:" but this did not serve him for a
 defence: for it was said to him "thou oughtest to have put the money to
 the exchangers." [741]

 And observe I pray how easy the commands of the Master are: for men
 indeed make those who lend out capital sums at interest answerable for
 recalling them; "you have made the deposit," one says, "you must call
 it in: I have no concern with the man who has received it." But God
 does not act thus; He only commands us to make the deposit, and does
 not render us liable for the recall. For the speaker has the power of
 advising, not of persuading. Therefore he says: "I make thee answerable
 for depositing only, and not for the recall." What can be easier than
 this? And yet the servant called the master hard, who was thus gentle
 and merciful. For such is the wont of the ungrateful and indolent; they
 always try to shift the blame of their offences from themselves to
 their master. And therefore the man was thrust out with torture and
 bonds into the outer darkness. And lest we should suffer this penalty
 let us deposit our teaching with the brethren, whether they be
 persuaded by it, or not. For if they be persuaded they will profit both
 themselves and us: and if they are not, they involve themselves indeed
 in inevitable punishment, but will not be able to do us the slightest
 injury. For we have done our part, by giving them advice: but if they
 do not listen to it no harm will result to us from that. For blame
 would attach to us not for failing to persuade, but for failing to
 advise: and after prolonged and continual exhortation and counsel they
 and not we, have to reckon henceforth with God.

 I have been anxious at any rate to know clearly, whether you continue
 to exhort your brethren, and if they remain all the time in the same
 condition of indolence: otherwise I would never have given you any
 trouble: as it is, I have fears that they may remain uncorrected in
 consequence of your neglect and indifference. For it is impossible that
 a man who continually has the benefit of exhortation and instruction
 should not become better and more diligent. The proverb which I am
 about to cite is certainly a common one, nevertheless it confirms this
 very truth. For "a perpetual dropping of water" it says, "wears a
 rock," yet what is softer than water? and what is harder than a rock?
 Nevertheless perpetual action conquers nature: and if it conquers
 nature much more will it be able to prevail over the human will.
 Christianity is no child's play, my beloved: no matter of secondary
 importance. I am continually saying these things, and yet I effect
 nothing.

 2. How am I distressed, think you, when I call to mind that on the
 festival days the multitudes assembled resemble the broad expanse of
 the sea, but now not even the smallest part of that multitude is
 gathered together here? Where are they now who oppress us with their
 presence on the feast days? I look for them, and am grieved on their
 account when I mark what a multitude are perishing of those who are in
 the way of salvation, [742] how large a loss of brethren I sustain, how
 few are reached by the things which concern salvation, and how the
 greater part of the body of the Church is like a dead and motionless
 carcase. "And what concern is that to us?" you say. The greatest
 possible concern if you pay no attention to your brethren, if you do
 not exhort and advise, if you put no constraint on them, and do not
 forcibly drag them hither, and lead them away out of their deep
 indolence. For that one ought not to be useful to himself alone, but
 also to many others, Christ declared plainly, when He called us salt,
 [743] and leaven, [744] and light: [745] for these things are useful
 and profitable to others. For a lamp does not shine for itself, but for
 those who are sitting in darkness: and thou art a lamp not that thou
 mayest enjoy the light by thyself, but that thou mayest bring back
 yonder man who has gone astray. For what profit is a lamp if it does
 not give light to him who sits in darkness? and what profit is a
 Christian when he benefits no one, neither leads any one back to
 virtue? Again salt is not an astringent to itself but braces up those
 parts of the body which have decayed, and prevents them from falling to
 pieces and perishing. Even so do thou, since God has appointed thee to
 be spiritual salt, bind and brace up the decayed members, that is the
 indolent and sordid brethren, and having rescued them from their
 indolence as from some form of corruption, unite them to the rest of
 the body of the Church. And this is the reason why He called you
 leaven: for leaven also does not leaven itself, but, little though it
 is, it affects the whole lump however big it may be. So also do ye:
 although ye are few in number, yet be ye many and powerful in faith,
 and in zeal towards God. As then the leaven is not weak on account of
 its littleness, but prevails owing to its inherent heat, and the force
 of its natural quality, so ye also will be able to bring back a far
 larger number than yourselves, if you will, to the same degree of zeal
 as your own. Now if they make the summer season their excuse: for I
 hear of their saying things of this kind, "the present stifling heat is
 excessive, the scorching sun is intolerable, we cannot bear being
 trampled and crushed in the crowd, and to be steaming all over with
 perspiration and oppressed by the heat and confined space:" I am
 ashamed of them, believe me: for such excuses are womanish: indeed even
 in their case who have softer bodies, and a weaker nature, such
 pretexts do not suffice for justification. Nevertheless, even if it
 seems a disgrace to make a reply to a defence of this kind, yet is it
 necessary. For if they put forward such excuses as these and do not
 blush, much more does it behove us not to be ashamed of replying to
 these things. What then am I to say to those who advance these
 pretexts? I would remind them of the three children in the furnace and
 the flame, who when they saw the fire encircling them on all sides,
 enveloping their mouth and their eyes and even their breath, did not
 cease singing that sacred and mystical hymn to God, in company with the
 universe, but standing in the midst of the pyre sent up their song of
 praise to the common Lord of all with greater cheerfulness than they
 who abide in some flowery field: [746] and together with these three
 children I should think it proper to remind them also of the lions
 which were in Babylon, and of Daniel and the den: [747] and not of this
 one only but also of another den, and the prophet Jeremiah, and the
 mire in which he was smothered up to the neck. [748] And emerging from
 these dens, I would conduct these persons who put forward heat as an
 excuse into the prison and exhibit Paul to them there, and Silas bound
 fast in the stocks, covered with bruises and wounds lacerated all over
 their body with a mass of stripes, yet singing praises to God at
 midnight and celebrating their holy vigil. For is it not a monstrous
 thing that those holy men, both in the furnace and the fire, and the
 den, and amongst wild beasts, and mire, and in a prison and the stocks,
 and amidst stripes and gaolers, and intolerable sufferings, never
 complained of any of these things, but were continually uttering
 prayers and sacred songs with much energy and fervent zeal, whilst we
 who have not undergone any of their innumerable sufferings small or
 great, neglect our own salvation on account of a scorching sun and a
 little short lived heat and toil, and forsaking the assembly wander
 away, depraving ourselves by going to meetings which are thoroughly
 unwholesome? When the dew of the divine oracles is so abundant dost
 thou make heat thy excuse? "The water which I will give him," saith
 Christ "shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting
 life;" [749] and again; "He that believeth on me as the Scripture hath
 said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water." [750] Tell
 me; when thou hast spiritual wells and rivers, art thou afraid of
 material heat? Now in the market place where there is so much turmoil
 and crowding, and scorching wind, how is it that you do not make
 suffocation and heat an excuse for absenting yourself? For it is
 impossible for you to say that there you can enjoy a cooler
 temperature, and that all the heat is concentrated here with us:--the
 truth is exactly the reverse; here indeed owing to the pavement floor,
 and to the construction of the building in other respects (for it is
 carried up to a vast height), the air is lighter and cooler: whereas
 there the sun is strong in every direction, and there is much crowding,
 and vapour and dust, and other things which add to discomfort far more
 than these. Whence it is plain that these senseless excuses are the
 offspring of indolence and of a supine disposition, destitute of the
 fire of the Holy Spirit.

 3. Now these remarks of mine are not so much directed to them, as to
 you who do not bring them forward, do not rouse them from their
 indolence, and draw them to this table of salvation. Household slaves
 indeed when they have to discharge some service in common, summon their
 fellow slaves, but you when you are going to meet for this spiritual
 ministry suffer your fellow servants to be deprived of the advantage by
 your neglect. "But what if they do not desire it?" you say. Make them
 desire it by your continual importunity: for if they see you insisting
 upon it they certainly will desire it. Nay these things are a mere
 excuse and pretence. How many fathers at any rate are there here who
 have not their sons standing with them? Was it so difficult for thee to
 bring hither some of thy children? Whence it is clear that the absence
 of all the others who remain outside is due not only to their own
 indolence, but also to your neglect. But now at least, if never before,
 rouse yourselves up, and let each person enter the Church accompanied
 by a member of his family: let them incite and urge one another to the
 assembly here, the father his son, the son his father, the husbands
 their wives, and the wives their husbands, the master his slave,
 brother his brother, friend his friend: or rather let us not summon
 friends only but also enemies to this common treasury of good things.
 If thy enemy sees thy care for his welfare, he will undoubtedly
 relinquish his hatred.

 Say to him: "art thou not ashamed and dost thou not blush before the
 Jews who keep their sabbath with such great strictness, and from the
 evening of it abstain from all work? And if they see the sun verging
 towards setting on the day of the Preparation they break off business,
 and cut short their traffic: and if any one who has been making a
 purchase from them, before the evening, comes in the evening bringing
 the price, they do not suffer themselves to take it, or to accept the
 money." And why do I speak of the price of market wares and transaction
 of business? Even if it were possible to receive a treasure they would
 rather lose the gain than trample on their law. Are the Jews then so
 strict, and this when they keep the law out of due season, and cling to
 an observance of it which does not profit them, but rather does them
 harm: and wilt thou, who art superior to the shadow, to whom it has
 been vouchsafed to see the Sun of Righteousness, who art ranked as a
 citizen of the Heavenly commonwealth, wilt thou not display the same
 zeal as those who unseasonably cleave to what is wrong, thou who hast
 been entrusted with the truth, but although thou art summoned here for
 only a short part of the day, canst thou not endure to spend even this
 upon the hearing of the divine oracles? and what kind of indulgence,
 pray, could you obtain? and what answer will you have to make which is
 reasonable and just? It is utterly impossible that one who is so
 indifferent and indolent should ever obtain indulgence, even if he
 should allege the necessities of worldly affairs ten thousand times
 over as an excuse. Do you not know that if you come and worship God and
 take part in the work which goes on here, the business you have on hand
 is made much easier for you? Have you worldly anxieties? Come here on
 that account that by the time you spend here you may win for yourself
 the favour of God, and so depart with a sense of security; that you may
 have Him for your ally, that you may become invincible to the dæmons
 because you are assisted by the heavenly hand. If you have the benefit
 of prayers uttered by the fathers, if you take part in common prayer,
 if you listen to the divine oracles, if you win for yourself the aid of
 God, if, armed with these weapons, you then go forth, not even the
 devil himself will be able henceforth to look you in the face, much
 less wicked men who are eager to insult and malign you. But if you go
 from your house to the market place, and are found destitute of these
 weapons, you will be easily mastered by all who insult you. This is the
 reason why both in public and private affairs, many things occur
 contrary to our expectation, because we have not been diligent about
 spiritual things in the first place, and secondarily about the secular,
 but have inverted the order. For this reason also the proper sequence
 and right arrangement of things has been upset, and all our affairs are
 full of much confusion. Can you imagine what distress and grief I
 suffer when I observe, that if a public holy day and festival is at
 hand there is a concourse of all the inhabitants of the city, although
 there is no one to summon them; but when the holy day and festival are
 past, even if we should crack our voice by continuing to call you all
 day long there is no one who pays any heed? For often when turning
 these things over in my mind I have groaned heavily, and said to
 myself: What is the use of exhortation or advice, when you do
 everything merely by the force of habit, and do not become a whit more
 zealous in consequence of my teaching? For whereas in the festivals you
 need no exhortation from me, but, when they are past you profit nothing
 by my teaching, do you not show that my discourse, so far as you are
 concerned, is superfluous?

 4. Perhaps many of those who hear these things are grieved. But such is
 not the sentiment of the indolent: else they would put away their
 carelessness, like ourselves, who are daily anxious about your affairs.
 And what gain do you make by your secular transactions in proportion to
 the damage you sustain? It is impossible to depart from any other
 assembly, or gathering, in the possession of so much gain as you
 receive from the time spent here, whether it be the law court, or
 council-chamber, or even the palace itself. For we do not commit the
 administration of nations or cities nor the command of armies to those
 who enter here, but another kind of government more dignified than that
 of the empire itself; or rather we do not ourselves commit it, but the
 grace of the spirit.

 What then is the government, more dignified than that of the empire,
 which they who enter here receive? They are trained to master untoward
 passions, to rule wicked lusts, to command anger, to regulate ill-will,
 to subdue vainglory. The emperor, seated on the imperial throne, and
 wearing his diadem, is not so dignified as the man who has elevated his
 own inward right reason to the throne of government over base passions,
 and by his dominion over them has bound as it were a glorious diadem
 upon his brow. For what profit is there, pray, in purple, and raiment
 wrought with gold, and a jewelled crown, when the soul is in captivity
 to the passions? What gain is there in outward freedom when the ruling
 element within us is reduced to a state of disgraceful and pitiable
 servitude. For just as when a fever penetrates deep, and inflames all
 the inward parts, there is no benefit to be got from the outward
 surface of the body, although it is not affected in the same way: even
 so when our soul is violently carried away by the passion within, no
 outward government, not even the imperial throne, is of any profit,
 since reason is deposed from the throne of empire by the violent
 usurpation of the passions, and bows and trembles beneath their
 insurrectionary movements. Now to prevent this taking place prophets
 and apostles concur on all sides in helping us, repressing our
 passions, and expelling all the ferocity of the irrational element
 within us, and committing a mode of government to us far more dignified
 than the empire. This is why I said that they who deprive themselves of
 this care [751] receive a blow in the vital parts, sustaining greater
 damage than can be inflicted from any other quarter inasmuch as they
 who come here get greater gain than they could derive from any other
 source: even as Scripture has declared. The law said "Thou shalt not
 appear before the Lord empty;" [752] that is, enter not into the temple
 without sacrifices. Now if it is not right to go into the house of God
 without sacrifices, much more ought we to enter the assembly
 accompanied by our brethren: for this sacrifice and offering is better
 than that, when thou bringest a soul with thee into the Church. Do you
 not see doves which have been trained, how they hunt for others when
 they are let out? Let us also do this. For what kind of excuse shall we
 have, if irrational creatures are able to hunt for an animal of their
 own species, while we who have been honoured with reason and so much
 wisdom neglect this kind of pursuit? I exhorted you in my former
 discourse with these words: "Go, each of you to the houses of your
 neighbours, wait for them to come out, lay hold of them, and conduct
 them to their common mother: and imitate those who are mad upon theatre
 going, who diligently arrange to meet each other and so wait at early
 dawn to see that iniquitous spectacle." Yet I have not effected
 anything by this exhortation. Therefore I speak again and shall not
 cease speaking, until I have persuaded you. Hearing profits nothing
 unless it is accompanied by practice. It makes our punishment heavier,
 if we continually hear the same things and do none of the things which
 are spoken. That the chastisement will be heavier, hear the statement
 of Christ. "If I had not come and spoken to them they had not sin: but
 now they have no cloke for their sin." [753] And the Apostle says "for
 not the hearers of the law shall be justified." [754] These things He
 says to the hearers; but when He wishes to instruct the speaker also,
 that even he will not gain anything from his teaching unless his
 behaviour is in close correspondence with his doctrine, and his manner
 of life is in harmony with his speech, hear how the Apostle and the
 prophet address themselves to him: for the latter says "but to the
 sinner said God, why dost thou preach my laws and takest my covenant in
 thy mouth, whereas thou hast hated instruction?" [755] And the Apostle,
 addressing himself to these same again who thought great things of
 their teaching, speaks on this wise: "Thou art confident that thou
 thyself art a leader of the blind, a light of those who are in
 darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes: thou
 therefore that teachest another teachest thou not thyself?" [756]
 Inasmuch then as it could neither profit me the speaker to speak, nor
 you the hearers to hear, unless we comply with the things which are
 spoken, but rather would increase our condemnation, let us not limit
 the display of our zeal to hearing only, but let us observe what is
 said, in our deeds. For it is indeed a good thing to spend time
 continually in hearing the divine oracles: but this good thing becomes
 useless when the benefit to be derived from hearing is not linked with
 it.

 Therefore that you may not assemble here in vain I shall not cease
 beseeching you with all earnestness, as I have often besought you
 before, "conduct your brethren to us, exhort the wanderers, counsel
 them not by word only but also by deed." This is the more powerful
 teaching--that which comes through our manners and behaviour--Even if
 you do not utter a word, but yet, after you have gone out of this
 assembly, by your mien, and your look, and your voice and all the rest
 of your demeanour you exhibit to the men who have been left behind the
 gain which you have brought away with you, this is sufficient for
 exhortation and advice. For we ought to go out from this place as it
 were from some sacred shrine, as men who have descended from heaven
 itself, who have become sedate, and philosophical, who do and say
 everything in proper measure: and when a wife sees her husband
 returning from the assembly, and a father his son, and a friend his
 friend, and an enemy his enemy, let them all receive an impression of
 the benefit which you have derived from coming here: and they will
 receive it, if they perceive that you have become milder, more
 philosophical, more devout. Consider what privileges you enjoy who hast
 been initiated into the mysteries, [757] with what company thou
 offerest up that mystic hymn, with what company thou criest aloud the
 "Ter sanctus." Teach "them that are without" that thou hast joined the
 chorus of the Seraphim, that thou art ranked as a citizen of the
 commonwealth above, that thou hast been enrolled in the choir of
 Angels, that thou hast conversed with the Lord, that thou hast been in
 the company of Christ. If we regulate ourselves in this way we shall
 not need to say anything, when we go out to those who are left behind:
 but from our advantage they will perceive their own loss and will
 hasten hither, so as to enjoy the same benefits themselves. For when,
 merely by the use of their senses, they see the beauty of your soul
 shining forth, even if they are the most stupid of men, they will
 become enamoured of your goodly appearance. For if corporeal beauty
 excites those who behold it, much more will symmetry of soul be able to
 move the spectator, and stimulate him to equal zeal. Let us then adorn
 our inward man, and let us be mindful of the things which are said
 here, when we go out: for there especially is it a proper time to
 remember them; and just as an athlete displays in the lists the things
 which he has learned in the training school: even so ought we to
 display in our transactions in the world without the things which we
 have heard here.

 5. Bear in mind then the things which are said here, that when you have
 gone out and the devil lays hold of you either by means of anger or
 vainglory, or any other passion, you may call to remembrance the
 teaching which you have received here and may be able easily to shake
 off the grasp of the evil one. Do you not see the wrestling-masters in
 the practising grounds, who, after countless contests having obtained
 exemption from wrestling on account of their age, sit outside the lines
 by the side of the dust and shout to those who are wrestling inside,
 telling one to grasp a hand, or drag a leg, or seize upon the back, and
 by many other directions of that kind, saying, "if you do so and so you
 will easily throw your antagonist," they are of the greatest service to
 their pupils? Even so do thou look to thy training master, the blessed
 Paul, who after countless victories is now sitting outside the
 boundary, I mean this present life, and cries aloud to us who are
 wrestling, shouting out by means of his Epistles, when he sees us
 overcome by wrath and resentment of injuries, and choked by passion;
 "if thy enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink;" [758] --a
 beautiful precept full of spiritual wisdom, and serviceable both to the
 doer and the receiver. But the reminder of the passage causes much
 perplexity, and does not seem to correspond to the sentiment of him who
 uttered the former words. And what is the nature of this? the saying
 that "by so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head." For by
 these words he does a wrong both to the doer and the receiver: to the
 latter by setting his head on fire, and placing coals upon it; for what
 good will he get from receiving food and drink in proportion to the
 evil he will suffer from the heaping of coals on his head? Thus then
 the recipient of the benefit is wronged, having a greater vengeance
 inflicted on him, but the benefactor also is injured in another way.
 For what can he gain from doing good to his enemies when he acts in the
 hope of revenge? For he who gives meat and drink to his enemy for the
 purpose of heaping coals of fire on his head would not become merciful
 and kind, but cruel and harsh, having inflicted an enormous punishment
 by means of a small benefit. For what could be more unkind than to feed
 a person for the purpose of heaping coals of fire on his head? This
 then is the contradiction: and now it remains that the solution should
 be added, in order that by those very things which seem to do violence
 to the letter of the law you may clearly see all the wisdom of the
 lawgiver. What then is the solution?

 That great and noble-minded man was well aware of the fact that to be
 reconciled quickly with an enemy is a grievous and difficult thing;
 grievous and difficult, not on account of its own nature, but of our
 moral indolence. But he commanded us not only to be reconciled with our
 enemy, but also to feed him; which was far more grievous than the
 former. For if some are infuriated by the mere sight of those who have
 annoyed them, how would they be willing to feed them when they were
 hungry? And why do I speak of the sight infuriating them? If any one
 makes mention of the persons, and merely introduces their name in
 society, it revives the wound in our imagination, and increases the
 heat of passion. Paul then being aware of all these things and wishing
 to make what was hard and difficult of correction smooth and easy, and
 to persuade one who could not endure to see his enemy, to be ready to
 confer that benefit already mentioned upon him, added the words about
 coals of fire, in order that a man prompted by the hope of vengeance
 might hasten to do this service to one who had annoyed him. And just as
 the fisherman surrounding the hook on all sides with the bait presents
 it to the fishes in order that one of them hastening to its accustomed
 food may be captured by means of it and easily held fast: even so Paul
 also wishing to lead on the man who has been wronged to bestow a
 benefit on the man who has wronged him does not present to him the bare
 hook of spiritual wisdom, but having covered it as it were with a kind
 of bait, I mean the "coals of fire," invites the man who has been
 insulted, in the hope of inflicting punishment, to confer this benefit
 on the man who has annoyed him; but when he has come he holds him fast
 in future, and does not let him make off, the very nature of the deed
 attaching him to his enemy; and he all but says to him: "if thou art
 not willing to feed the man who has wronged thee for piety's sake: feed
 him at least from the hope of punishing him." For he knows that if the
 man once sets his hand to the work of conferring this benefit, a
 starting-point is made and a way of reconciliation is opened for him.
 For certainly no one would have the heart to regard a man continually
 as his enemy to whom he has given meat and drink, even if he originally
 does this in the hope of vengeance. For time as it goes on relaxes the
 tension of his anger. As then the fisherman, if he presented the bare
 hook would never allure the fish, but when he has covered it gets it
 unawares into the mouth of the creature who comes up to it: so also
 Paul if he had not advanced the expectation of inflicting punishment
 would never have persuaded those who were wronged to undertake to
 benefit those who had annoyed them. Wishing then to persuade those who
 recoiled in disgust, and were paralysed by the very sight of their
 enemies, to confer the greatest benefits upon them, he made mention of
 the coals of fire, not with a view of thrusting the persons in question
 into inexorable punishment, but in order that when he had persuaded
 those who were wronged to benefit their enemies in the expectation of
 punishing them, he might afterwards in time persuade them to abandon
 their anger altogether.

 6. Thus then did he encourage the man who has been wronged; but observe
 also how he unites again the man who has done the wrong to him who has
 been provoked. First of all by the very manner of the benefit: (for
 there is no one so degraded and unfeeling as to be unwilling, when he
 receives meat and drink, to become the servant and friend of him who
 does this for him): and in the second place through the dread of
 vengeance. For the passage, "by so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire
 on his head" seems indeed to be addressed to the person who gives the
 food; but it more especially touches him who has caused the annoyance,
 in order that through fear of this punishment he may be deterred from
 remaining continually in a state of enmity, and being aware that the
 reception of food and drink might do him the greatest mischief if he
 constantly retains his animosity, may suppress his anger. For thus he
 will be able to quench the coals of fire. Wherefore the proposed
 punishment and vengeance both induces the one who has been wronged to
 benefit him who has annoyed him, and it deters and checks him who has
 given the provocation, and impels him to reconciliation with the man
 who gives him meat and drink. Paul therefore linked the two persons by
 a twofold bond, the one depending on a benefit, the other on an act of
 vengeance. For the difficulty is to make a beginning and to find an
 opening for the reconciliation: but when that has once been cleared in
 whatever way it may be, all which follows will be smooth and easy. For
 even if at first the man who has been annoyed feeds his enemy in the
 hope of punishing him, yet becoming his friend by the act of giving him
 food he will be able to expel the desire of vengeance. For when he has
 become a friend he will no longer feed the man who has been reconciled
 to him, with an expectation of this kind. Again he who has given the
 provocation, when he sees the man who has been wronged electing to give
 him meat and drink, casts out all his animosity, both on account of
 this deed, and also of his fear of the punishment which is in store for
 him, even if he be excessively hard and harsh and stony hearted, being
 put to shame by the benevolence of him who gives him food, and dreading
 the punishment reserved for him, if he continues to be an enemy after
 accepting the food.

 For this reason Paul did not stop even here in his exhortation, but
 when he has emptied each side of wrath he proceeds to correct their
 disposition, saying, "be not overcome of evil." "For if," he says, "you
 continue to bear resentment and to seek revenge you seem indeed to
 conquer your enemy, but in reality you are being conquered by evil,
 that is, by wrath: so that if you wish to conquer, be reconciled, and
 do not make an attack upon your adversary;" for a brilliant victory is
 that in which by means of good, that is to say by forbearance, you
 overcome evil, expelling wrath and resentment. But the injured man,
 when inflamed with passion would not have borne these words. Therefore
 when he had satisfied his wrath he proceeded to conduct him to the best
 reason for reconciliation, and did not permit him to remain permanently
 animated by the wicked hope of vengeance. Dost thou perceive the wisdom
 of the lawgiver? And that you may learn that he introduced this law
 only on account of the weakness of those who would not otherwise be
 content to make terms amongst themselves, hear how Christ, when He
 ordained a law on this same subject did not propose the same reward, as
 the Apostle; but, having said "Love your enemies, do good to them that
 hate you," which means give them food and drink, He did not add "for in
 so doing ye shall heap coals of fire on their heads:" but what did He
 say? "that ye may become like your Father who is in Heaven." [759]
 Naturally so, for He was discoursing to Peter, James, and John and the
 rest of the apostolic band: therefore He proposed that reward. But if
 you say that even on this understanding the precept is onerous you
 improve once more the defence which I am making for Paul, but you
 deprive yourself of every plea of indulgence. For I can prove to you
 that this which seems to you onerous was accomplished under the Old
 Dispensation when the manifestation of spiritual wisdom was not so
 great as it is now. For this reason also Paul did not introduce the law
 in his own words, but used the very expressions which were employed by
 him who originally brought it in, that he might leave no room for
 excuse to those who do not observe it: for the precept "if thine enemy
 hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink" is not the utterance of
 Paul in the first instance, but of Solomon. [760] For this reason he
 quoted the words that he might persuade the hearer that for one who has
 been advanced to such a high standard of wisdom to regard an old law as
 onerous and grievous which was often fulfilled by the men of old time,
 is one of the basest things possible. Which of the ancients, you ask,
 fulfilled it? There were many, but amongst others David especially did
 so more abundantly. He did not indeed merely give food or drink to his
 enemy, but also rescued him several times from death, when he was in
 jeopardy; and when he had it in his power to slay him he spared him
 once, twice, yea many times. As for Saul he hated and abhorred him so
 much after the countless good services which he had done, after his
 brilliant triumphs, and the salvation which he had wrought in the
 matter of Goliath, that he could not bear to mention him by his own
 name, but called him after his father. For once when a festival was at
 hand, and Saul, having devised some treachery against him, and
 contrived a cruel plot, did not see him arrive--"where," said he, "is
 the son of Jesse?" [761] He called him by his father's name, both
 because on account of his hatred he could not endure the recollection
 of his proper name, and also because he thought to damage the
 distinguished position of that righteous man by a reference to his low
 birth;--a miserable and despicable thought: for certainly, even if he
 had some accusation to bring against the father this could in no wise
 injure David. For each man is answerable for his own deeds, and by
 these he can be praised and accused. But as it was, not having any evil
 deed to mention, he brought forward his low birth, expecting by this
 means to throw his glory into the shade, which in fact was the height
 of folly. For what kind of offence is it to be the child of
 insignificant and humble men, "the son of Jesse," but when David found
 him sleeping inside the cave, he did not call him the "son of Kish,"
 but by his title of honour: "for I will not lift up my hand," he said,
 "against the Lord's anointed." [762] So purely free was he from wrath
 and resentment of injuries: he calls him the Lord's anointed who had
 done him such great wrongs, who was thirsting for his blood, who after
 his countless good services had many times attempted to destroy him.
 For he did not consider how Saul deserved to be treated, but he
 considered what was becoming for himself both to do and to say, which
 is the greatest stretch of moral wisdom. How so? When thou hast got thy
 enemy in a prison, made fast by a twofold, or rather by a triple chain,
 confinement of space, dearth of assistance, and necessity of sleep,
 dost thou not demand a penalty and punishment of him? "No," he says;
 "for I am not now regarding what he deserves to suffer, but what it
 behoves me to do." He did not look to the facility for slaying, but to
 the accurate observance of the moral wisdom which was becoming to him.
 And yet which of the existing circumstances was not sufficient to
 prompt him to the act of slaughter? Was not the fact that his enemy was
 delivered bound into his hands a sufficient inducement? For you are
 aware I suppose that we hasten more eagerly to deeds for which
 facilities abound, and the hope of success increases our desire to act,
 which was just what happened then in his case.

 Well! did the captain who then counselled and urged him to the deed,
 [763] did the memory of past events induce him to slay? no one of these
 things moved him: in fact the very facility for slaughter averted him
 from it: for he bethought him that God had put Saul in his hands for
 the purpose of furnishing ample ground and opportunity for the exercise
 of moral wisdom. You then perhaps admire him, because he did not
 cherish the memory of any of his past evils: but I am much more
 astonished at him for another reason. And what is this? that the fear
 of future events did not impel him to lay violent hands on his enemy.
 For he knew clearly that if Saul escaped his hands, he would again be
 his adversary; yet he preferred exposing himself to danger by letting
 go the man who had wronged him, to providing for his own security by
 laying violent hands upon his foe. What could equal then the great and
 generous spirit of this man, who, when the law commanded eye to be
 plucked out for eye, and tooth for tooth, and retaliation on equal
 terms, [764] not only abstained from doing this, but exhibited a far
 greater measure of moral wisdom? At least if he had slain Saul at that
 time he would have retained credit for moral wisdom unimpaired, not
 merely because he had acted on the defensive, not being himself the
 originator of violence, but also because by his great moderation he was
 superior to the precept "an eye for an eye." For he would not have
 inflicted one slaughter in return for one; but, in return for many
 deaths, which Saul endeavoured to bring on him, having attempted to
 slay him not once or twice but many times, he would have brought only
 one death on Saul; and not only this, but if he had proceeded to avenge
 himself out of fear of the future, even this, combined with the things
 already mentioned, would procure him the reward of forbearance without
 any deduction. For he who is angry on account of the things which have
 been done to him, and demands satisfaction would not be able to obtain
 the praise of forbearance: but when a man dismisses the consideration
 of all past evils, although they are many and painful, but is compelled
 to take steps for self-defence from fear of the future, and by way of
 providing for his own security, no one would deprive him of the rewards
 of moderation.

 7. Nevertheless David did not act even thus, but found a novel and
 strange form of moral wisdom: and neither the remembrance of things
 past, nor the fear of things to come, nor the instigation of the
 captain, nor the solitude of the place, nor the facility for slaying,
 nor anything else incited him to kill; but he spared the man who was
 his enemy, and had given him pain just as if he was some benefactor,
 and had done him much good. What kind of indulgence then shall we have,
 if we are mindful of past transgressions, and avenge ourselves on those
 who have given us pain, whereas that innocent man who had undergone
 such great sufferings and expected more and worse evils to befall him
 in consequence of saving his enemy, is seen to spare him, so as to
 prefer incurring danger himself and to live in fear and trembling,
 rather than put to a just death the man who would cause him endless
 troubles?

 His moral wisdom then we may perceive, not only from the fact that he
 did not slay Saul, when there was so strong a compulsion, but also that
 he did not utter an irreverent word against him, although he who was
 insulted would not have heard him. Yet we often speak evil of friends
 when they are absent, he on the contrary not even of the enemy who had
 done him such great wrong. His moral wisdom then we may perceive from
 these things: but his lovingkindness and tender care from what he did
 after these things. For when he had cut off the fringe of Saul's
 garment, and had taken away the bottle of water he withdrew afar off
 and stood and shouted, and exhibited these things to him whose life he
 had preserved, doing so not with a view to display and ostentation, but
 desiring to convince him by his deeds that he suspected him without a
 cause as his enemy, and aiming therefore at winning him into
 friendship. Nevertheless when he had even thus failed to persuade him,
 and could have laid hands on him, he again chose rather to be an exile
 from his country and to sojourn in a strange land, and suffer distress
 every day, in procuring necessary food than to remain at home and vex
 his adversary. What spirit could be kinder than his? He was indeed
 justified in saying "Lord remember David and all his meekness." [765]
 Let us also imitate him, and let us neither say nor do evil to our
 enemies, but benefit them according to our power: for we shall do more
 good to ourselves than to them. "For if ye forgive your enemies," we
 are told "ye shall be forgiven." [766] Forgive base offences that thou
 mayest receive a royal pardon for thy offences; but if any one has done
 thee great wrongs, the greater the wrongs you forgive, the greater will
 be the pardon which you will receive. Therefore we have been instructed
 to say "Forgive us, as we forgive," that we may learn that the measure
 of our forgiveness takes its beginning in the first place from
 ourselves. Wherefore in proportion to the severity of the evil which
 the enemy does to us is the greatness of the benefit which he bestows.
 Let us then be earnest and eager to be reconciled with those who have
 vexed us, whether their wrath be just or unjust. For if thou art
 reconciled here, thou art delivered from judgment in the other world;
 but if in the interval while the hatred is still going on, death
 interrupting steps in and carries the enmity away with it, it follows
 of necessity that the trial of the case should be brought forward in
 the other world. As then many men when they have a dispute with one
 another, if they come to a friendly understanding together outside the
 law court save themselves loss, and alarm, and many risks, the issue of
 the case turning out in accordance with the sentiment of each party;
 but if they severally entrust the affair to the judge the only result
 to them will be loss of money, and in many cases a penalty, and the
 permanent endurance of their hatred; even so here if we come to terms
 during our present life we shall relieve ourselves from all punishment;
 but if while remaining enemies we depart to that terrible tribunal in
 the other world we shall certainly pay the utmost penalty at the
 sentence of the judge there, and shall both of us undergo inexorable
 punishment: he who is unjustly wroth because he is thus unjustly
 disposed, and he who is justly wroth, because he has, however justly,
 cherished resentment. For even if we have been unjustly ill-treated, we
 ought to grant pardon to those who have wronged us. And observe how he
 urges and incites those who have unjustly given pain to reconciliation
 with those whom they have wronged. "If thou offerest thy gift before
 the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against
 thee, go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother." [767] He did not
 say, "assemble, and offer thy sacrifice" but "be reconciled and then
 offer it." Let it lie there, he says, in order that the necessity of
 making the offering may constrain him who is justly wroth to come to
 terms even against his will. See how he again prompts us to go to the
 man who has provoked us when he says "Forgive your debtors in order
 that your Father may also forgive your trespasses." For He did not
 propose a small reward, but one which far exceeds the magnitude of the
 achievement. Considering all these things then, and counting the
 recompense which is given in this case and remembering that to wipe
 away sins does not entail much labour and zeal, let us pardon those who
 have wronged us. For that which others scarcely accomplish, I mean the
 blotting out of their own sins by means of fasting and lamentations,
 and prayers, and sackcloth, and ashes, this it is possible for us
 easily to effect without sackcloth and ashes and fasting if only we
 blot out anger from our heart, and with sincerity forgive those who
 have wronged us. May the God of peace and love, having banished from
 our soul all wrath and bitterness, and anger, deign to grant that we
 being closely knit one to another according to the proper adjustment of
 the parts, [768] may with one accord, one mouth and one soul
 continually offer up our hymns of thanksgiving due to Him: for to Him
 be glory and power for ever and ever. Amen.

 [740] The date of this Homily cannot be determined, but the allusions
 which it contains to the Imperial palace and guard, and some other
 points of internal evidence prove that it was delivered at
 Constantinople.

 [741] Matt. xxv. 27.

 [742] ton sozom?non, this signifies "members of the Church," merely,
 who, as such, are heirs of salvation, or as the English catechism
 expresses it, are in a "state of salvation," although they may forfeit
 their inheritance. Comp. Acts ii. 47.

 [743] Matt. v. 13.

 [744] Implied in Matt. xiii. 33.

 [745] Matt. v. 14.

 [746] Song of the Three Children in the Apocryphal addition to Daniel
 iii.

 [747] Dan. vi. 24.

 [748] Jerem. xxxviii. 5.

 [749] John iv. 14.

 [750] John vii. 38.

 [751] i.e., the care of their brethren. That this is the meaning
 appears from what follows.

 [752] Exod. xxiii. 15.

 [753] John xv. 22.

 [754] Rom. ii. 13.

 [755] Ps. iv. 16, 17.

 [756] Rom. ii. 19-21.

 [757] i.e., admitted to Holy Communion, which catechumens were not
 permitted to witness.

 [758] Rom. xii. 20.

 [759] Matt. v. 44.

 [760] Prov. xxv. 21, 22.

 [761] 1 Sam. xx. 23.

 [762] 1 Sam. xxvi. 11.

 [763] Abishai. 1 Sam. xxvi. 8.

 [764] Deut. xix. 21.

 [765] Psalm cxxxii. 1, the LXX. translation has not very accurately
 rendered the original. "Trouble," or "anxiety," as in our English
 version, is the meaning of the word here rendered "meekness."

 [766] Matt. vi. 14.

 [767] Matt. v. 23, 24.

 [768] Ephes. iv. 16.

 St. Chrysostom:

 Homily

 against publishing the errors of the brethren, and uttering
 imprecations upon enemies.

 translated by

 r. blackburn, m.a.,

 rector of selham, sussex, and late fellow of brasenose college, oxford.

 against publishing the errors of the brethren.

 ------------------------

 HOMILY.

 Upon the not publishing the errors of the Brethren, nor uttering
 imprecations upon enemies.

 1. I account you happy for the zeal, beloved, with which you flock into
 the Father's house. For from this zeal I have ground for feeling
 confidence about your health also with respect to the soul; for indeed
 the school of the Church is an admirable surgery--a surgery, not for
 bodies, but for souls. For it is spiritual, and sets right, not fleshly
 wounds, but errors of the mind, [769] and of these errors and wounds
 the medicine is the word. This medicine is compounded, not from the
 herbs growing on the earth, but from the words proceeding from
 heaven--this no hands of physicians, but tongues of preachers have
 dispensed. On this account it lasts right through; and neither is its
 virtue impaired by length of time, nor defeated by any strength of
 diseases. For certainly the medicines of physicians have both these
 defects; for while they are fresh they display their proper strength,
 but when much time has passed; just as those bodies which have grown
 old; they become weaker; and often too the difficult character of
 maladies is wont to baffle them; since they are but human. Whereas the
 divine medicine is not such as this; but after much time has
 intervened, it still retains all its inherent virtue. Ever since at
 least Moses was born (for from thence dates the beginning of the
 Scripture) it has healed so many human beings; and not only has it not
 lost its proper power, but neither has any disease ever yet overcome
 it. This medicine it is not possible to get by payment of silver; but
 he who has displayed sincerity of purpose and disposition goes his way
 having it all. On account of this both rich and poor alike obtain the
 benefit of this healing process. For where there is a necessity to pay
 down money the man of large means indeed shares the benefit; but the
 poor man often has to go away deprived of the gain, since his income
 does not suffice him for the making up of the medicine. But in this
 case, since it is not possible to pay down silver coin, but it is
 needful to display faith and a good purpose, he who has paid down these
 with forwardness of mind, this is he who most reaps the advantage;
 since indeed these are the price paid for the medicinal treatment. And
 the rich and the poor man share the benefit alike; or rather it is not
 alike that they share the benefit, but often the poor man goes away in
 the enjoyment of more. What ever can be the reason? It is because the
 rich man, possessed beforehand by many thoughts, having the pride and
 puffed-up temper belonging to wealthiness; living with carelessness and
 lazy ease as companions, receives the medicine of the hearing of the
 Scriptures not with much attention, nor with much earnestness; but the
 poor man, far removed from delicate living and gluttony and indolence;
 spending all his time in handicraft and honest labours; and gathering
 hence much love of wisdom for the soul; becomes thereby more attentive
 and free from slackness, and is wont to give his mind with more
 accurate care to all that is said: whence also, inasmuch as the price
 he has paid is higher, the benefit which he departs having reaped is
 greater.

 2. It is not as absolutely bringing an accusation against those who are
 wealthy that I say all this; nor as praising the poor without reference
 to circumstances: for neither is wealth an evil, but the having made a
 bad use of wealth; nor is poverty a virtue, but the having made a
 virtuous use of poverty. That rich man who was in the time of Lazarus
 was punished, [770] not because he was rich, but because he was cruel
 and inhuman. And that poor man who rested in the bosom of Abraham was
 praised, not because he was poor, but because he had borne his poverty
 with thankfulness.

 For of things--(now attend carefully to this saying; for it will avail
 to put into you sufficient religious knowledge, and to cast out all
 unsound reasoning, and to bring about your having your judgment right
 concerning the truth of things)--well, of things some are by nature
 morally good, and others the contrary; and others neither good nor
 evil, but they occupy the intermediate position. A good thing piety is
 by nature, impiety an evil thing; a good thing virtue, an evil thing
 wickedness; but wealth and poverty in themselves are neither the one
 nor the other; but from the will of those who use them they become
 either the one or the other. For if thou hast used thy wealth for
 purposes of philanthropy, the thing becomes to thee a foundation of
 good; but if for rapine and grasping and insolence, thou hast turned
 the use of it to the direct opposite; but for this wealth is not
 chargeable, but he who has used his wealth for insolence. So also we
 may say of poverty: if thou have borne it nobly by giving thanks to the
 Master, what has been done becomes to thee a cause and ground for
 receiving crowns; but if on account of this thou blaspheme thy Creator,
 and accuse Him for His providence, thou hast again used the thing to an
 evil purpose. But just as in that case it is not wealth that is
 responsible for the avarice, but the person who has made a bad use of
 wealth, so also here we are not to lay the blame of the blasphemy on
 poverty, but on him who did not choose to bear the thing in a sober
 spirit. For in every case both the praise and the blame belong to our
 own will and choice. Good is wealth, yet not absolutely, but to him
 only to whom it is not sin; and again poverty is wicked, but not
 absolutely, but only in the mouth of the impious, because he is
 discontented, because he blasphemes, because he is indignant, because
 he accuses Him who has made him.

 3. Let us not therefore accuse riches, nor revile poverty absolutely,
 but those who do not will [771] to use these virtuously; for the things
 themselves lie in the middle. But as I was saying (for it is good to
 return to the former subject), both rich and poor enjoy the benefit of
 the medicines administered here with the same boldness and freedom; and
 often the poor with more earnestness. For the special excellence of the
 medicines is not this only, that they heal souls, that their virtue is
 not destroyed by length of time, that they are not worsted by any
 disease, that the benefit is publicly offered gratuitously, that the
 healing treatment is on a footing of equality both for rich and
 poor--but they have another quality also not inferior to these good
 points. Pray of what character is this? It is that we do not publicly
 expose those who come to this surgery. For they who go off to the
 surgeries of the outside world, have many who examine their wounds, and
 unless the physician have first uncovered the sore, he does not apply
 the dressing; but here not so, but seeing as we do innumerable
 patients, we go through the medical treatment of them in a latent
 manner. For not by dragging into publicity those who have sinned do we
 thus noise abroad the sins committed by them; but after putting forth
 our teaching, as common to all, we leave it entirely to the conscience
 of the hearers; so that each may draw to himself from what is said the
 suitable medicine for his own wound. For there proceeds the word of
 doctrine from the tongue of the speaker, containing accusation of
 wickedness, praise of virtue, blame of lewdness, commendation of
 chasteness, censure of pride, praise of gentleness, just as a medicine
 of varied and manifold ingredients, compounded from every kind; and to
 take what is applicable to himself and salutary is the part of each of
 the hearers. The word then issues openly, and settling into the
 conscience of each, secretly both affords the healing treatment which
 comes from it, and before the malady has been divulged, has often
 restored health.

 4. You at all events heard yesterday how I extolled the power of
 prayer, how I reproached those who pray with listlessness; without
 having publicly exposed one of them. Those then who were conscious to
 themselves of earnestness, accepted that commendation of prayer, and
 became still more earnest by the praises, while those who were
 conscious to themselves of listlessness, accepted on the other hand the
 rebuking, and put off their carelessness. But neither these nor those
 do we know; and this ignorance is serviceable to both--how, I now tell
 you. He who has heard the commendations of prayer and is conscious to
 himself of earnestness, were he to have many witnesses of the
 commendations, would have lapsed towards pride; but, as it is, by
 having secretly accepted the praise, he is removed from all arrogance.
 On the other hand he who is conscious to himself of listlessness,
 having heard the accusation, has become better from the accusation, as
 having no one of men a witness of the rebuking; and this was of no
 ordinary profit to him. For on account of the being flurried at the
 opinion of the vulgar, [772] so long as we may think that we escape
 notice in our wickedness, we exert ourselves to become better; but when
 we have become notorious to all, and have lost the consolation derived
 from the escaping notice, we grow more shameless and remiss rather. And
 just as sores become more painful by being unbandaged and frequently
 exposed to cold air, so also the soul after having sinned, if in the
 presence of many it be rebuked for what it has done amiss, grows
 thereby more shameless. In order therefore that this might not take
 place, the word administered its medicine to you covertly. And that you
 may understand [773] that the gain which this covert treatment has is
 great, hear what the Christ says. "If thy brother have committed a
 fault against thee convince him of it," and he did not say "between him
 and the whole town," nor, "between thee and the whole people," [774]
 but "only between thee and him." Let the accusation, he says, be
 unwitnessed to, in order that the change to amendment may be made easy
 of digestion. A great good surely, the making the advice unpublished.
 Sufficient is the conscience, sufficient that incorruptible judge. It
 is not so much thou who rebukest him who has done wrong as his own
 conscience (that accuser is the sharper), nor dost thou do it with the
 more exact knowledge of the faults committed. Add not therefore wound
 to wound by exposing him who has done wrong; but administer for thyself
 the counsel unwitnessed. This therefore we are doing now--the very
 thing that Paul also did, framing the indictment against him who among
 the Corinthians had sinned without citing of witnesses. And hear how.
 "On this account," he says, "brethren, I have applied these figures of
 speech to myself and Apollos." And yet not he himself nor Apollos were
 they who had rent the people in schism and divided the Church; but all
 the same he concealed the accusation, and just as by some masks, by
 hiding the countenances of the defendants by his own and Apollos'
 names, he afforded them power to amend of that wickedness. And again,
 "Lest in some way after I have come God humble me, and I may have to
 mourn many of those who have before sinned, and have not repented over
 the uncleanness and lasciviousness which they had committed." [775] See
 how here also he indefinitely mentions those who had sinned, in order
 that he might not, by openly bringing the accusation, render the soul
 of those who had sinned more shameless. Therefore, just as we
 administer our reproofs with so much sparing of your feelings, so do ye
 also with all seriousness receive the correction; and attend with
 carefulness to what is said.

 5. We discoursed to you yesterday about the power which is in prayer. I
 pointed out [776] how the devil then lies in wait, deceiver that he is.
 For since he sees very great gain accruing to us from prayer, then most
 he assails us, in order that he may disable us from our defence; [777]
 that he may send us off home empty-handed. And just as before
 magistrates, when the officers of the court who are about the person of
 the magistrate have a hostile feeling toward those who come before him,
 they by their staves drive them away to a distance, preventing their
 coming near and resorting to lamentation and so obtaining compassion;
 so also the devil, when he has seen us coming to the judge, drives us
 away to a distance, not by any staff, but through our own slackness.
 For he knows, he knows clearly, that if they have come to him in a
 sober spirit, and have told the sins committed, and have mourned with
 their soul fervent, they will depart having received full forgiveness;
 for God loves mankind; and on this account he is beforehand with them,
 and debars them from access, [778] in order that they may obtain no one
 of the things which they need. But the soldiers of magistrates with
 violence scare away those who are coming to them; but he with no
 compulsion, but by deceiving us, and throwing us into security. On this
 account we are not deserving even of allowance, since we voluntarily
 deprive ourselves of the good things. Prayer with earnestness is a
 light of the understanding and soul--a light unquenchable and
 perpetual. On this account he throws into our minds countless
 rubbish-heaps of imaginations; and things which we never had imagined,
 these collecting together at the very moment of prayer he pours down
 upon our souls. And just as winds often rushing from an opposite
 quarter by a violent gust extinguish a lamp's flame as it is being
 lighted, so also the devil, when he has seen the flame of our prayer
 being kindled, blowing it on every side with the blasts of countless
 thoughts, does not desist before and until he has quenched the light.
 But the very thing which they who are kindling those lamps do, this let
 us also do. And what do they do? When they see a violent wind coming,
 by laying their finger upon the opening of the lamp they bar the
 entrance against the wind. For so long as he assails from without we
 shall be able to stand against him; but when we have opened to him the
 doors of the mind, and have received the enemy inside; after that we
 are no longer able to withstand even a little; but, having on all sides
 completely extinguished the memory, [779] just as a smoking lamp, he
 allows our mouth to utter empty words. But just as they put their
 finger upon the opening of the lamp, so let us lay consideration upon
 our mind: let us close off from the wicked spirit the entrance, in
 order that he may not quench our light of prayer. Remember both those
 illustrations, both that of the soldiers and the magistrate, and that
 respecting the lamp. For with this purpose we adduce to you these
 illustrations; with which we are conversant, in which we live, in order
 that, after we have departed hence and have returned home, we may from
 things of familiar occurrence receive a reminder of what has been said.

 6. Prayer is a strong piece of armour and a great security. You heard
 yesterday how the three children, fettered as they were, destroyed the
 power of the fire; how they trampled down the blaze; how they overcame
 the furnace, and conquered the operation of the element. Hear to-day
 again how the noble and great Isaac overcame the nature itself of
 bodies through prayer. They destroyed [780] the power of fire, this man
 to-day loosed the bonds of incapacitated nature. And learn how he
 effected this. "Isaac," it says, "prayed [781] concerning his wife,
 because she was barren." This has to-day been read to you; yesterday
 the sermon was about prayer; and to-day again there is a demonstration
 of the power of prayer. See how the grace of the Spirit has ordered
 that what has been read to-day harmonises with what was said yesterday.
 "Isaac," it says, "prayed concerning Rebecca his wife, because she was
 barren." This first is worth inquiring into, for what cause she was
 barren. She was of a life admirable and replete with much
 chastity--both herself and her husband. We cannot lay hold [782] of the
 life of those just ones, and say that the barrenness was the work of
 sin. And not only was she herself barren, but also his mother Sarah,
 who had borne him; not only was his mother barren and his wife, but
 also his daughter-in-law, the wife of Jacob, Rachel. What is the
 meaning of this band of barren ones? All were righteous, all living in
 virtue, all were witnessed to by God. For it was of them that He said,
 "I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob."
 Of the same persons Paul also thus speaks. "For which cause God is not
 ashamed to call himself their God." [783] Many are the commendations of
 them in the New, many the praises of them in the Old Testament. On all
 sides they were bright and illustrious, and yet they all had barren
 wives, and continued in childlessness until an advanced period. When
 therefore thou seest man and wife living with virtue; when thou seest
 them beloved of God, caring for piety, and yet suffering the malady of
 childlessness; do not suppose that the childlessness is at all a
 retribution for sins. For many are God's reasons for the dispensation,
 and to us inexplicable; and for all we must be heartily thankful, and
 think those only wretched who live in wickedness; not those who do not
 possess children. Often God does it expediently, though we know not the
 cause of events. On this account in every case it is our duty to admire
 His wisdom, and to glorify His unspeakable love of man.

 7. Well, [784] this consideration indeed is able to school us in moral
 character, but it is necessary also to state the cause for which those
 women were barren. What then was the cause? It was in order that when
 thou hast seen the Virgin bringing forth our common Master, thou
 mightest not disbelieve. Wherefore exercise thy mind in the womb of the
 barren; in order that when thou hast seen the womb, disabled and bound
 as it is, being opened to the bearing of children from the grace of
 God, thou mightest not marvel at hearing that a virgin has brought
 forth. Or rather even marvel and be astounded; but do not disbelieve
 the marvel. When the Jew says to thee, "how did the virgin bear?" say
 to him "how did she bear who was barren and enfeebled by old age?"
 There were then two hindrances, both the unseasonableness of her age
 and the unserviceableness of nature; but in the case of the Virgin
 there was one hindrance only, the not having shared in marriage. The
 barren one therefore prepares the way for the virgin. And that thou
 mayest learn that it was on this account that the barren ones had
 anticipated it, in order that the Virgin's childbirth might be
 believed, hear the words of Gabriel which were addressed to her--For
 when he had come and said to her, "thou shalt conceive in the womb and
 bear a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus;" the Virgin was
 astonished and marvelled, and said, "how will this be to me, since I
 know not a man." What then said the Angel? "The Holy Ghost shall come
 upon thee." Seek not the sequence of nature, he says, when that which
 takes place is above nature; look not round for marriage and throes of
 child-birth, when the manner of the birth is too grand for marriage.
 "And how will this be," she says, "since I know not a husband." And
 verily on this account shall this be, since thou knowest no husband.
 For didst thou know a husband, thou wouldest not have been deemed
 worthy to serve this ministry. So that, for the reason why thou
 disbelievest, for this believe. And thou wouldest not have been deemed
 worthy to serve this ministry, not because marriage is an evil; but
 because virginity is superior; and right it was that the entry of the
 Master should be more august than ours; for it was royal, and the king
 enters through one more august. It was necessary that He should both
 share as to birth, and be diverse from ours. Wherefore both these
 things are managed.

 For the being born from the womb is common in respect to us, but the
 being born without marriage is a thing greater than on a level with us.
 And the gestation and conception in the belly belongs to human nature;
 but that the pregnancy should take place without sexual intercourse is
 too august for human nature. [785] And for this purpose both these
 things took place, in order that thou mayest learn both the
 pre-eminence and the fellowship with thee of Him who was born.

 8. And pray consider the wisdom of all that was done. Neither did the
 pre-eminence injure the likeness and kinship to us, nor did the kinship
 to us dim the pre-eminence; but both were displayed by all the
 circumstances; and the one had our condition in its entirety, and the
 other what was diverse compared with us. But just as I was saying, on
 this account the barren ones went before, in order that the Virgin's
 child-birth might be believed, that she [786] might be led by the hand
 to faith in that promise and undertaking which she heard from the
 angel, saying, "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the miraculous
 power [787] of the Most High shall overshadow thee"--thus, he says,
 thou art able to bear. Look not to the earth; it is from the heavens
 that the operation will come. That which takes place is a grace of the
 Spirit; pray inquire not about nature and laws of marriage. But since
 those words were too high for her, he wills to afford also another
 demonstration. But do thou, pray, observe how the barren one leads her
 on the way to the belief in this. For since that demonstration was too
 high for the Virgin's intelligence, hear how he brought down what he
 said to lower things also, leading her by the hand by sensible facts.
 For "behold," he says, "Elizabeth thy kinswoman--she also has conceived
 a son in her old age; and this month is the sixth to her who was called
 barren." Seest thou that the barren one was for the sake of the Virgin?
 since with what object did he adduce to her the child-bearing of her
 kinswoman? with what object did he say, "in her old age?" with what
 object did he add, "who was called barren?" It was by way of inducing
 her by all these things, manifestly, to the believing the glad
 annunciation. For this cause he spoke of both the age and the disabling
 effect of nature; for this cause he awaited the time also which had
 elapsed from the conception; for he did not tell to her the glad
 tidings immediately from the beginning, [788] but awaited for a
 six-months period to have passed to the barren one, in order that the
 puerperal swelling might, for the rest, be a pledge of the pregnancy,
 and an indisputable demonstration might arise of the conception. And
 pray again look at the intelligence of Gabriel. For he neither reminded
 her [789] of Sarah, nor of Rebecca, nor of Rachel; and yet they also
 were barren, and they had grown old, and that which took place was a
 marvel; but the stories were ancient. Now things new and recent and
 occurring in our generation are wont to induce us into the belief of
 marvels more than those which are old. On this account having let those
 women alone, that she should understand from her kinswoman Elizabeth
 herself what was coming upon her, he brought it forward; so as from her
 to lead her to her own--that most awful and august childbirth. For the
 child-birth of the barren one lay between ours and that of the Master
 less indeed than that of the Virgin, but greater than ours. On this
 account it was by Elizabeth lying between, just as by some bridge, that
 he lifted up the mind of the Virgin from the travail which is according
 to nature, to that which is above nature.

 9. I did desire to say more, and to teach you other reasons for which
 Rebecca, and Rachel, were barren; but the time does not permit; urging
 on the discourse to the power of prayer. For on this account indeed I
 have mooted all these points, that ye might understand how the prayer
 of Isaac unbound the barrenness of his wife; and that prayer for so
 long a time. "Isaac," it says, "continually prayed about Rebecca his
 wife, and God listened to him." For do not suppose that he invoked God
 and had immediately been listened to; for he had spent much time in
 praying to God. And if you desire to learn how much, I will tell you
 this too with exactness. He had spent the number of twenty years in
 praying to God. Whence is this manifest? from the sequence itself. For
 the Scripture, desiring to point out the faith and the endurance and
 the love of wisdom of that righteous man, did not break off and leave
 untold even the time, but made it also clear to us, covertly indeed, so
 as to rouse up our indolence; but nevertheless did not allow it to be
 uncertain. Hear then how it covertly indicated to us the time. "Now
 Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebecca, a daughter of Bethuel
 the Syrian." You hear how many years old he was when he brought home
 his wife: "Forty years old," it says, "he was when he took Rebecca."
 But since we have learnt how many years old he was when he married his
 wife, let us learn also when he after all became a father, and how many
 years old he was then, when he begat Jacob; and we shall be able to see
 how long a time his wife had remained barren; and that during all that
 time he continued to pray to God. How many years old then was he when
 he begat Jacob? "Jacob," it says, "came forth laying hold with his
 right hand of his brother's heel: on this account he called him Jacob,
 and him Esau. Now Isaac was sixty years old when he begat them." If
 therefore when he brought Rebecca home he was forty years old, and when
 he begat the sons sixty, it is very plain that his wife had remained
 barren for twenty years between, and during all this time Isaac
 continued to pray to God.

 10. After this do we not feel shame, and hide our faces, at seeing that
 righteous man for twenty years persevering [790] and not desisting; we
 ourselves after a first or second petition often fainting and
 indignant? And yet he indeed had in large measure liberty of speech
 towards God, [791] and all the same he felt no discontent at the delay
 of the giving, but remained patient, whereas we, laden with countless
 sins, living with an evil conscience, displaying no good will towards
 the Master; if we are not heard before having spoken, are bewildered,
 impatiently recoil, desist from asking--on this account we always
 retire with empty hands. Who has for twenty years besought God for one
 thing, as this righteous man did? or rather who for twenty months only?
 Yesterday I was saying that they are many who pray with slackness, and
 yawning, and stretching themselves, and continually shifting their
 attitude, and indulging in every carelessness in their prayers--but
 to-day I have found also another damage attaching itself to their
 prayers more destructive than that one. For many, throwing themselves
 prostrate, and striking the ground with their forehead, and pouring
 forth hot tears, and groaning bitterly from the heart [792] and
 stretching out their hands, and displaying much earnestness, employ
 this warmth and forwardness against their own salvation. For it is not
 on behalf of their own sins that they beseech God; nor are they asking
 forgiveness of the offences committed by them; but they are exerting
 this earnestness against their enemies entirely, doing just the same
 thing as if one, after whetting his sword, were not to use the weapon
 against his enemies, but to thrust it through his own throat. So these
 also use their prayers not for the remission of their own sins, but
 about revenge on their enemies; which is to thrust the sword against
 themselves. This too the wicked one has devised, in order that on all
 sides we may destroy ourselves, both through slackness and through
 earnestness. For the one class by their carelessness in their prayers
 exasperate God, by displaying contempt through their slackness; and the
 others, when they display earnestness, display the earnestness on the
 other hand against their own salvation. "A certain person," he (the
 devil) says, "is slack: that is sufficient for me with a view to his
 obtaining nothing; this man is earnest and thoroughly aroused; what
 then must be done to accomplish the same result? I cannot slacken his
 earnestness, nor throw him into carelessness; I will contrive his
 destruction in the other way. How so? I will manage that he use his
 earnestness for transgressing the law:" (for the praying against one's
 personal enemies is a transgression of law). "He shall depart therefore
 not only having gained nothing by his earnestness, but also having
 endured the hurt which is greater than that caused through slackness."
 Such as these are the injuries of the devil: the one sort he destroys
 through their remissness; and the other through their earnestness
 itself, when it is shown not according to God's laws.

 11. But it is also worth hearing the very words of their prayer, and
 how the words are of a puerile mind; of how infantile a soul. I am
 ashamed in truth when about to repeat them; but it is absolutely
 necessary to repeat them, and to imitate that coarse tongue. What then
 are the words? "Avenge me of my enemies, show them that I too have God
 (on my side)." They do not then learn, man, that we have God, when we
 are indignant and angry and impatient; but when we are gentle and meek
 and subdued, and practise all love of wisdom. So also God said, "Let
 your light shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
 glorify your Father who is in the heavens." [793] Perceivest thou not
 that it is an insult to God, the making a request to God against thine
 enemies? And how is it an insult? one will say. Because He Himself
 said, "pray for your enemies;" and brought in this divine law. When
 therefore thou claimest that the legislator should relax his own laws;
 and callest upon him to legislate in opposition to himself; and
 supplicatest him who had forbidden thee to pray against thine enemies
 to hear thee praying against thine enemies; thou art not praying in
 doing this, nor calling upon him; but thou art insulting the lawgiver,
 and acting with drunken violence towards him, who is sure to give to
 thee the good things which result from prayer. And how is it possible
 to be heard when praying, tell me, when thou exasperatest him who is
 sure to hear? For by doing these things thou art pushing thine own
 salvation into a pit, and art rushing down a precipice, by striking
 thine enemy before the king's eyes. [794] For even if thou doest not
 this with the hands, with thy words thou strikest him, the thing which
 thou darest not do even in the case of thy fellow-slaves. At least dare
 to do this in a ruler's presence, and though thou hast done countless
 public services, thou wilt straightway surely be led away to execution.
 Then (I ask) in the presence of a ruler dost thou not dare to insult
 thine equal, but when doing this in God's presence, tell me, dost thou
 not shudder, nor fear when in the time of entreaty and prayer being so
 savage and turning thyself into a wild beast; and displaying greater
 want of feeling than he who demanded payment of the hundred pence?
 [795] For that thou art more insolent than he, listen to the story
 itself. A certain man owed ten thousand talents to his master; then,
 not having (wherewith) to pay, he entreated him to be long-suffering,
 in order that, his wife having been sold and his house and his
 children, he might settle his master's claim. And the master seeing him
 lamenting had compassion on him, and remitted the ten thousand talents.
 He having gone out and found another servant owing him a hundred pence,
 seizing his throat demanded them with great cruelty and inhumanity. The
 Master having heard this threw him into the prison, and laid on him
 again the debt of the ten thousand talents which he had before
 remitted; and he paid the penalty of the cruelty shown towards his
 fellow-servant.

 12. Now do thou consider in how much more unfeeling and insensible in a
 way thou hast acted even than he, praying against thine enemies. He did
 not beg his master to demand, but he himself demanded, the hundred
 pence; whereas thou even callest on the Master for this shameless and
 forbidden demand. And he seized his fellow-servant's throat not before
 his lord's eyes, but outside; while thou in the very moment of prayer,
 standing in the King's presence, doest this. And if he, for doing this
 without either having urged his master to the demand, and after going
 forth, met with no forgiveness; thou, both stirring up the Master to
 (exacting) this forbidden payment, and doing this before his eyes, what
 sort of penalty will thou have to pay? tell me. But thy mind is
 inflamed by the memory of the enmity, and swells, and thy heart rises,
 [796] and when recurring in memory to him who has caused pain, thou art
 unable to reduce the swelling of thy thought. But set against this
 inflammation the memory resulting from thine own sins committed the
 fear resulting from the punishment to come. Recall to memory for how
 many things thou art accountable to thy master, and that for all those
 things thou owest Him satisfaction; and this fear will surely overcome
 that anger; since indeed this is far more powerful than that passion.
 Recall the memory of hell and punishment and vengeance during the time
 of thy prayer; and thou wilt not be able even to receive thine enemy
 into thy mind. [797] Make thy mind contrite, humble thy soul by the
 memory of the offences committed by thee, and wrath will not be able
 even to trouble thee. But the cause of all these evils is this, that we
 scrutinise the sins of all others with great exactitude; while we let
 our own pass with great remissness. Whereas we ought to do the
 contrary--to keep our own faults unforgotten; but never even to admit a
 thought of those of others. If we do this we shall both have God
 propitious, and shall cease cherishing immortal anger against our
 neighbours, and we shall never have any one as an enemy; and even if we
 should have at any time we shall both quickly put an end to his enmity,
 and should obtain speedy pardon for our own sins. For just as he who
 treasures up the memory of wrong against his neighbour does not permit
 the punishment upon his own sins to be done away; so he who is clear of
 anger will speedily be clear of sins also. For if we, wicked as we are
 and enslaved to passion, on account of the commandment of God overlook
 all the faults committed against us, much more will He who is a lover
 of mankind, and good, and free from any passion, overlook our
 delinquencies, rendering to us the recompense of our kindly spirit
 towards our neighbour in the forgiveness of our own sins: which God
 grant that we may attain, by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
 Jesus Christ, to whom is the glory and the dominion, to the ages of the
 ages. Amen.

 [769] dianoias. In Chrysostom equivalent to the nous of St. Paul (Rom.
 xii. 2); the moral and spiritual mind. Amartemata. Lit. missings of the
 mark: errors of the moral will. Dionoia is so used. 1 John v. 20.

 [770] ekol?zeto. The imperfect denotes the continuous character of the
 punishment. So epeneito "had lasting praise." "he ?rete oexis epainete.
 Aristotle Eth.

 [771] 'Eth?lontas. In its theological sense. "Th?lema sarkos." Not a
 classical, but an ecclesiastical word (John i. 13). So our Lord, ei'
 tis th?lei, has the will.

 [772] hoi polloi, as opposed to hoi chari?ntes, those of culture and
 refinement. Arist. Eth.

 [773] A common sense of manthano. "Manth?neis; ou manth?no.
 Aristophanes; who was a favorite author with Chrysostom.

 [774] The article here has this universal force. Matt. xviii. 15.

 [775] 1 Cor. iv. 6; 2 Cor. xii. 21.

 [776] Edeixa 'Endeixis. Lat. index (digitus) the fore-finger.

 [777] The idea seems to be that of making the accused entirely forget
 the defence, such as used to be written for him by some Attic orator.

 [778] ?nteuxis, an Aristotelic term. "tes pros tous pollous enteuxeos,
 the way of addressing a large body.

 [779] Still continuing the simile of a wind.

 [780] kat?lusan, de-struo, to take to pieces, pull down, a building.

 [781] edeeto. Denotes continuance in prayer. Comp. Matt. vii. 7, 8.

 [782] epilab?sthai, as in wrestling.

 [783] Heb. xi. 16.

 [784] 'All?. This adverb is not always adversative. It is sometimes, as
 here, connective; denoting a transition in treating the subject. Comp.
 Aristophanes Acharn. 377-383.

 [785] 'Aute. The use of ?utos in the nominative in this sense; ille,
 not ipse, seems to have been introduced in the Alexandrian period of
 Greek literature. "'Autoi gar ouk eisi theoi," LXX.

 [786] 'Aute. The use of ?utos in the nominative in this sense; ille,
 not ipse, seems to have been introduced in the Alexandrian period of
 Greek literature. "'Autoi gar ouk eisi theoi," LXX.

 [787] The constant signification of dunamis in the Gospels.

 [788] Prooimion, lit. the prelude, overture. Oimas Mous edidaxe philese
 d? phulon ?oidon, Hom. Od. 481.

 [789] 'Autes, lege d? auten.

 [790] Param?nonta, waiting; as it were, like a beggar at the door.

 [791] p?rrhesian, a phrase of courtly ceremonial; sometimes coupled
 with prosagoge, the antecedent ceremony of introduction to a king's
 presence. Xenphon, Cyrop. vii. 5, 45. Both occur in Virg. Æn. i. 520.
 "Postquam introgressi, et coram data copia fandi." The literal
 translation of parrhesia: coram = par? "in the presence." Comp.
 Chrysost. Hom. II. in 2 Cor. of the catechumens standing outside the
 holy rails, and not allowed to take part in the Lord's Prayer. "oud?po
 gar parrhesian k?ktentai."

 [792] Literally "from below." Comp. Virgil Æn. i. 37; imoqoe trahens de
 pectore vocem.

 [793] Matt. v. 16.

 [794] To strike any one within "the precincts of the court" even has
 been made a capital offence.

 [795] Matt. xviii. 28.

 [796] Possibly "stomach." Comp. Thuc. ii. 49, hopote es ten kardian
 oterixai. Lat. stomachor. A medical sense, and the metaphor here is
 medical throughout. So "cardiacus." Juvenal.

 [797] Because it is filled with better thoughts. No room for him.
