Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Jean de Joinville, 'Memoirs of Louis IX, King of France, commonly called Saint Louis,' translated by Thomas Johnes, as printed in 'Chronicles of the Crusades' (London: George Bell & Sons, 1888 — reprint of H. G. Bohn's 1848 edition), extracted complete with the 'Appendix to Joinville' (lists of knights and the Makrisi extracts). Text from Internet Archive item ChroniclesOfTheCrusades1888 (OCR). Public domain work; OCR imperfections may remain.

MEMOIRS 

OF 

LOUIS  IX.  KING  OF  FRANCE, 

(commonly   called  saint  LOUIS.) 
BY 

JOHN  LORD  DE  JOINVILLE, 

■laa  ffBITBtCBAI.  OP  raAMVAOTO 


Digitized  by 


Digitized 


byGoOgl 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE  OF  JOINVILLE. 


Thb  family  of  Joinville  was,  in  the  thirteenth  century,  one  of  the  most 
distinguished  in  Champagne.  About  the  middle  of  the  preceding  century, 
Etienne,  sumamed  Devaux,  an  ancestor  of  the  author  of  these  memoirs, 
became  very  powerfiil.  He  espoused  the  countess  de  Joigny,  who 
brought  him  the  fief  so  named,  together  with  several  other  manors,  as  a 
marriage  portion  ;  and  he  was  the  first  who  built  the  castle  of  JoiuTiUe. 

The  uncle  and  father  of  Joinville  covered  themselves  with  glory  ;  the 
first,  during  the  reign  of  Philip  Augustus,  when  in  attendance  upon  the 
count  of  Flanders,  at  the  conquest  of  Constantinople  :  the  second,  during 
the  minority  of  St.  Louis,  in  defending  the  town  of  Toyes  against  the  joint 
efforts  of  almost  all  the  lords  of  France. 

John  lord  of  Joinville,  author  of  the  following  memoirs,  was  eldest  son  to 
Simon  lord  of  Joinville,  by  Beatrice  of  Burgundy,  his  second  wife.  Biogra- 
phers  differ  as  to  the  date  of  bis  birth.  Du  Cange  places  it  in  1220 ;  De  la 
Ravaliere  in  1224  ;  and  De  la  Bastie  as  late  as  1228.    The  authors  of  the 

Biographic  Universelle  "  decide  in  favour  of  the  middle  period.  He 
was  betrothed  during  the  life  of  his  parents  to  Alicia,  daughter  of  Henry 
count  de  Grand  Pre,  by  Marie  de  Garlande.  The  articles  of  marriage 
were  agreed  to  in  the  month  of  June,  1231,  in  the  presence  of  Thibaud 
count  of  Champagne,  the  principal  conditions  of  which  were,  that  the 
countess  and  her  son  Henry  should  give,  in  consideration  of  this  alliance, 
three  hundred  livres  yearly,  in  land,  and  that  in  return  Alicia  should 
renounce  all  claim  to  the  succession  of  her  father  and  mother. 

It  was  likewise  stipulated  that  Simon  lord  of  Joinville,  father  to  John, 
should  so  manage  that  Geoffry  de  Joinville,  his  son,  should  approve  olf 
and  ratify  the  sentence  of  separation  which  the  archbishop  of  Rheims  had 
pronounced  between  him  and  the  countess  of  Grand  Pr^ ;  from  which  we 
may  conjecture,  that  this  marriage  was  concluded  to  appease  the  quarrel 
which  this  divorce  had  caused  between  the  two  families. 

The  articles  were  only  signed  by  the  countess  of  Grand  Pr^,  in  the 
absence  of  her  son ;  but  the  count  of  Champagne  pledged  himself  for  his 
duly  executing  them.  This  was  not,  however,  so  soon  accomplished,  nor 
was  the  marriage  completed  until  after  the  year  1239 ;  at  which  period 
John  lord  of  Joinville  having  succeeded  his  father  in  his  estates,  and  in  the 
seneschalship  of  Champagne,  was  unmarried ;  for  in  this  year  he  promisecl 
Count  Thibaud,  king  of  Navarre,  not  to  ally  himself  with  the  count  de 
Bar,  nor  take  his  daughter  to  wife.  Beatrice,  mother  to  John,  made  the 
count  a  similar  promise  for  her  son. 

His  marriage  with  Alicia  must  have  taken  place  instantly  afterward ; 
for.  In  a  deed  of  the  year  1240,  the  lady  of  Joinville  is  styled  sister  to 
Henry  count  de  Grand  Pr^.  It  had  probably  been  deferred  until  then  on 
account  of  the  youth  of  the  lord  de  Joinville,  who  thus  speaks  of  him* 
self:  "  That  when  the  treaty  between  the  kmg.  Saint  Louis,  and  the 


344 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE  OF  JOINVILLE. 


oouDt  de  la  Marche,  was  coocluded,  he  bad  not  then  pat  on  his  helmet." 
That  is  to  saj,  he  had  not  then  borne  arms,  nor  received  the  order  of 
knighthood ;  and  that  when  he  pat  on  the  cross  to  march  to  the  Holy  Land 
with  his  king,  he  was  very  yoong. 

That  was  the  first  occasion  he  made  ase  of  to  display  his  Talonr,  and 
shew  to  all  the  world  that  he  was  no  way  degenerated  in  courage  and 
virtue  from  bis  ancestors.  The  crusade  had  been  proclaimed  throughout 
France,  and  St.  Louis,  his  queen  and  children,  with  the  brothers  to  the 
king,  and  th«  principal  barons  of  the  realm,  had  already  put  on  their 
armour,  and  covered  their  shoulders  with  the  mark  of  our  redemption,  to 
recover  the  Holy  Land  from  tiie  hands  of  the  infidels,  and  to  carry  the  war 
into  their  country. 

John  lord  of  Joinville  followed  the  examples  of  his  ancestors,  mhcr  had 
signalized  themselves  in  these  illustrious  conquests,  took  the  cross,  and 
determined  to  accompany  the  king.  But  as  this  enterprise  was  attended  with 
danger,  and  would  probably  be  of  long  duration,  he  wished,  before  he  set 
out,  to  make  a  settlement  of  his  afiairs,  and  leave  every  one  satisfied  with 
bis  conduct,  so  that  he  might  be  in  the  proper  condition  to  deserve  the 
fruits  and  pardons  which  these  crusaders  merited  through  the  concessions 
of  the  sovereign  pontiff.  Having  assembled  his  friends  and  neighbours, 
he  gave  them  to  understand,  that  if  any  one  had  the  smallest  subject 
of  complaint  against  him,  or  if  he  had  wronged  him  in  the  slightest  man- 
ner, he  was  ready  to  make  him  all  the  satisfaction  that  could  be  wished 
for.  On  the  other  hand,  as  his  mother,  Beatrice,  was  still  living,  and 
enjoyed  the  greater  part  of  his  fortune  as  her  dower,  he  found  himself 
obliged  to  mortgage  the  principal  part  of  the  remainder  of  his  lands,  to 
Bupply  the  expenses  of  his  equipment  for  so  long  a  voyage,  and  of  lo 
considerable  an  enterprise,  so  that  there  scarcely  remained  to  him  twelve 
hundred  livres  of  yearly  rent  in  land. 

He  set  out  from  his  castle  of  Joinville  after  the  Easter  of  1248,  accom- 
panied by  ten  knights,  whom  he  kept  in  his  pay  ;  among  whom  were 
three  bannerets,— namely,  Hugh  de  Landricourt,  Hugh  de  Til-ch&tel,  lord 
of  Conflans,  and  Peter  de  Pontmolain.  He  journeyed  in  company  with 
John  lord  of  Aspremont,  Gosbert  d'Aspremont  and  his  brothers,  who 
were  his  cousins,  and  the  count  de  Sarrebruche,  all  of  whom  had  in  like 
manner  put  on  the  cross.  Tbey  embarked  at  Marseilles  and  sailed  to 
Cyprus,  where  they  found  the  king  of  France,  who  had  arrived  there  a 
short  time  before.  It  was  there  the  lord  de  Joinville  first  entered 
into  the  service  and  pay  of  this  great  king,  whose  good  graces  and  affec- 
tioD  he  so  much  gained  that  this  prince  would  have  him  always  near  his 
person,  employing  him  in  the  most  important  negotiations,  and  con- 
sidering him  as  one  of  his  confidential  and  faithful  counsellors.  From 
the  day  he  entered  into  the  service  of  the  king,  in  the  island  of  Cyprus, 
he  scarcely  ever  quitted  him  until  his  death,  and  was  always  attendant  on 
him  for  the  space  of  twenty- two  years. 

This  would  be  the  place  to  relate  his  adventures,  his  combats,  and  hit 
travels  ;  how  be  landed  in  Egypt,  and  was  attacked  by  the  Saracens,  how 
he  repulsed  them  ;  how  he  was  wounded,  and  then  caught  the  epidemical 
disorder  of  the  army ;  how  he  was  made  prisoner  by  the  enemy,  saved 
and  delivered  from  their  hands ;  how  he  accompanied  the  king  to  Acre^ 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE  OF  JOINVILLE. 


346 


wtio  again  retained  him  and  his  knighU  in  his  pay :  in  short,  after  having 
been  absent  on  these  expeditions  the  space  of  seven  years,  he  returned  to 
France  with  the  king.  Bat  as  this  narration  woald  be  of  considerable 
length,  and  as  he  himself  has  written  the  history,  I  pass  it  over,  and 
ihdl  only  mention  some  others  of  his  principal  actions.  On  his  return 
to  France,  he  took  leave  of  the  king  at  Beieiaeaire,  whence,  having  visited 
the  dauphiness  of  Vienne  his  relation,  the  count  de  Ch&lons  hit  nncle, 
and  the  count  de  Bourgogne  bis  cousin-german,  he  arrived  at  his  castle  of 
Joinville.  After  residing  there  some  time,  he  went  to  Sobsons  to  meet 
the  king,  who  received  him  with  so  mucL  kindness  and  friendship  that  the 
whole  court  was  surprised  and  became  jealous  of  him.  It  was  about  this 
time  that  Thibaud  II.  king  of  Navarre  and  count  of  Champagne,  em- 
ployed  him  to  request  of  the  king  his  daughter  Isabella ;  and  this  nego- 
tiation he  managed  with  so  much  address  and  prudence  that,  in  ipite  of 
great  difficulties,  the  marriage  was  concluded,  and  celebrated  at  Melun 
with  royal  magnificence,  in  the  year  1255. 

This  service,  in  addition  to  others,  gained  him  the  affections  of  the 
kmg  of  Navarre,  who  presented  him  with  many  gifts,  among  which  was 
the  donation  to  him  and  his  heirs,  dated  January  1258,  of  all  the  rights 
and  royalties  of  the  village  of  Germay,  as  an  augmentation  of  fief,  on 
condition  of  paying  homage  liege.  In  the  following  year  he  subscribed 
the  testament  of  Ebles  de  Greneva,  son  to  Humbert  count  of  Geneva,  in 
which,  however,  he  adds  no  title  to  his  name,  which  may  cause  a  doubt 
whether  this  John  de  Joinville,  or  de  Grenville,  as  he  is  called,  be  our 
seneschaL  He  was,  afterward,  almost  constantly  at  the  court  of  the  king 
of  Navarre,  his  lord,  and  accompanied  him,  in  the  year  1267,  when  this 
prince  did  homage  to  the  bishop  of  Langres  for  the  towns  of  Bar  sur  Aube, 
Bar  sur  Seine,  and  some  others,  which  he  held  under  the  church,  in  presence 
of  William  lord  de  Grancey,  Renier  Vitardore,  and  Eustache  de  Conflans, 
marshals  of  Champagne,  and  other  lords  of  that  country. 

The  king,  St.  Louis,  having  convoked  at  Paris  all  his  barons,  on  the 
lubject  of  a  new  crusade,  summoned  thither  the  lord  de  Joinville,  at  that 
time  suffering  under  a  quartan  ague.  On  his  arrival,  the  king,  and 
Thibaud  king  of  Navarre,  pressed  him  to  put  on  the  cross,  and  under- 
take, with  them,  an  expedition  to  Africa ;  but  he  excused  himself  on  the 
plea  of  the  poverty  and  distress  of  his  subjects  and  vassals,  who  had  been 
harshly  treated  by  the  exactions  made  on  them  by  the  king  of  France's 
officers  during  his  former  expedition.  He  acted  sometime  afterward  as 
president  in  the  extraordinary  assemblies  and  assizes  held  at  Troyes,  as 
the  person  best  qualified,  in  the  year  1271.  During  the  journey  which 
was  made  to  Arragon  in  1283,  by  King  Philip  the  Hardy,  who  had  the 
wardship  of  Jane  queen  of  Navarre  and  countess  of  Champagne,  sole 
daughter  to  King  Henry,  he  was  appointed  by  him  governor  and  guardian 
of  that  country.  He  was  present  likewise  at  the  assizes  of  Champagne  in 
the  years  1291  and  1296 ;  and  in  the  year  1303  he  is  named,  with  John 

Joinville  lord  of  Ancerville,  Anseau  de  Joinville,  and  other  great 
barons  of  France  and  Champagne,  in  the  summons  of  Philip  the  Fair  to 
meet  him  at  Arras  the  5th  of  August,  and  attend  him  in  his  war  against 
Flanders. 

He  was  also  one  of  the  lords  and  barons  of  Champagne,  who  formed  a 


846 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE  OF  JOINTILLE. 


leagae,  io  the  month  of  NoTember,  1314,  agaiDst  this  same  king,  tm 
aceoant  of  a  sabsidy  which  he  had  nndertaken  to  raise  from  the  nobles  of 
his  realm.  Tliis  dispute  was  settled  the  ensuing  year  by  the  king,  Lonis 
Hatin,  who,  by  his  letters,  dated  from  the  Bois  de  Yinoennes,  the  17th 
day  of  May,  1315,  appointed  commissioners  to  inquire  into  their  priTi- 
leges.  The  king  immediately  after  issued  a  summons  for  the  nobles  of 
his  realm  to  assemble  at  Arras  in  the  month  of  August,  to  assist  him  in 
his  war  against  the  Flemings ;  but  the  lord  de  Joinrille  was  ordered,  by 
a  private  letter  from  the  king,  to  be  at  Authie  by  the  middle  of  June. 
This  was,  bowerer,  too  short  notice  for  him  to  make  his  preparations, 
and  he  wrote  to  the  king  his  excuses,  alleging  the  impossibility  of  being 
at  the  appointed  place  by  the  time  fixed,  and  promising  at  the  same  time 
to  join  the  army  as  speedily  as  he  could.  And  in  the  list  of  those  men- 
at-arms  who  were  in  the  company  of  my  lord  the  count  of  Potiers,  and 
received  at  Arras  and  elsewhere  by  his  two  marshals,  M.  Regnaut  de 
Lor  and  the  Borgne  de  Ceris,  his  name  appears,  with  one  knight  and  six 
esquires. 

The  letter  which  he  wrote  to  the  king  on  the  subject  of  this  summons 
was  as  follows  : — 

**  To  his  good  lord,  Louis,  by  the  grace  of  Grod,  King  of  France  and 
Navarre,  John  lord  of  Joinville,  seneschal  of  Champagne,  sends  health 
and  his  willing  service.  Dear  sire,  it  is  indeed  true,  as  you  inform  me, 
that  it  has  been  reported  you  had  made  up  matters  with  the  Flemings  ; 
and,  as  we  believed  it,  sire,  we  have  not  made  any  preparations  to  obey, 
your  summons,  which  you  sent  me,  sire,  acquainting  me  that  you  should 
be  at  Arras  to  redress  the  wrongs  the  Flemings  have  done  you ;  and  in 
this  I  think  you  act  well,  and  may  God  give  you  his  assistance !  And  as 
you  have  ordered  me  and  my  people  to  be  at  Authie  by  the  middle  of 
June,  sire,  I  inform  you  that  that  cannot  well  be  done ;  for  your  letters 
only  arrived  the  second  Sunday  in  June,  eight  days  before  we  ought  to 
have  been  at  the  rendezvous.  My  people  shall  be  got  ready  as  soon  as 
possible,  to  go  whithersoever  you  please.  Sire,  do  not  be  displeased  that 
at  the  beginning  of  this  letter  I  have  only  called  you  my  good  lord,  for  I 
have  never  done  otherwise  to  my  lords  your  ancestors  and  predecessors 
in  the  government,  whose  souls  may  God  pardon  I  Written  the  second 
Sunday  of  June,  the  same  day  that  your  letter  was  brought  me,  in  the 
year  1315." 

This  letter  was  folded,  and  sealed  with  a  seal  of  yellow  wax,  of  the  size 
of  «  large  golden  crown,  having  an  impression  of  a  knight  armed  with  his 
sword  and  shield,  and  the  coat  of  arms  and  housing  of  his  horse  blazoned 
with  the  arms  of  Joinville :  around  it,  instead  of  an  inscription,  was  a 
border  of  flowers  de  luce,  similar  to  that  which  is  on  the  coins  of  St.  Louis. 
The  lord  de  Joinville  must  have  been  ninety  or  ninety. two  years  old  in 
this  year  of  1315  ;  for  since  his  marriage  was  arranged  in  1231,  and  con- 
summated in  ]  240,  he  could  not  then  have  been  younger  than  twenty 
years.  A  late  author  assures  us,  that  he  lived  upwards  of  one  hundred 
years ;  and  in  a  title-deed  of  the  abbey  of  St.  Urbain,  near  Joinville,  dated 
on  the  morrow  of  Easter,  in  the  year  13  .  .  .,  by  which  he  grants  to  Robert, 
the  abbot,  and  to  the  monks  of  that  monastery,  certain  fields  and  woodt, 
be  says,  that  he  had  been  engaged  so  long  in  the  country  of  the  infidelf  ^ 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTICE  OF  JOINTILLB. 


where  he  had  remained  seyeo  yeara  with  the  king,  Saint  Lonia,  and  in 
other  p^rts  ;  for  which  God,  out  of  his  mercy »  had  preserved  his  body 
and  mind  in  greater  health  and  vigour  to  a  longer  period  of  time  than  had 
been  allotted  to  any  of  his  predecessors. 

Although  no  deed  has  been  fonnd  that  marks  precisely  the  time  of  his 
death,  it  must  have  been  about  the  year  1318 ;  for  in  that  year  his  son 
Anceau  was  in  possession  of  the  estate  of  Joinville,  and  of  the  office  of 
seneschal  of  Champagne,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter.  There  is  a  tradition 
at  Joinville,  that  this  lord  was  of  an  extraordinary  stature  and  strength  of 
body,  and  that  his  head  was  of  an  enormous  sixe,  as  large  again  as  that  of 
any  of  his  contemporaries,  and  that  it  may  now  be  seen  at  JoinYille  with 
one  of  his  thigh-bones.  This  agrees  with  what  he  writes  himself  of  his 
constitution  and  habit  of  body,  say  big  that  he  had  **  la  t&te  grosse,  et  une 
froide  fourcelle,"  meaning  a  cold  stomach;  for  which  cause,  his  phy- 
sicians had  ordered  him  to  drink  his  wine  pure,  and  to  warm  it.  With 
regard  to  the  qualities  of  his  mind,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  say,  that  the 
great  king.  Saint  Louis,  appointed  him  one  of  his  principal  counsellors 
and  ministers  of  state;  besides,  he  says  of  himself  that  he  had  a  subtle 
wit. 

These  memoirs,  which  JoinTille  finished  in  1309,  and  published  after 
the  death  of  Philip  the  Fair,  have  always  been  highly  esteemed  by  the  pub- 
lic. Although  they  include  a  space  of  but  six  years,  they  give  us  sufficient 
information  respecting  the  military  system  of  those  dayn,  and  the  princi- 
ples of  administration  adopted  by  St.  Louis.  They  present  to  us  a  faithful 
picture  of  the  cnstoms  and  manners  of  our  ancestors  :  they  charm  us  by 
the  aifecting  simplicity  of  style,  which  is  one  of  its  greatest  merits ;  and 
if  we  wish  to  become  acquainted  with  the  noble  mind  of  St.  Louis,  it  is 
in  them  displayed  with  the  most  exact  truth. 

Among  the  different  editions  of  these  memoirs  (in  French),  the 
two  most  approved  of  are  that  of  Du  Cange,  printed  in  1668,  and  the 
one  published  by  the  late  Mr.  Capperonnier  in  1761.  Whatever  may  be 
the  merit  of  the  edition  of  1761,  we  prefer  that  of  Du  Cange.  The 
public  opinion,  as  well  as  that  of  several  learned  friends,  has  deter- 
mined us  to  make  this  choice.  It  is  not  surprising  that  the  edition  of  Du 
Cange  has  preserved  its  great  reputation;  for  that  of.l761y  notwith- 
•tanding  the  glossary  which  has  been  added  to  it,  would  not  be  intelligible 
for  three-fourths  of  its  readers,  who,  unless  perfectly  well  versed  in  the 
old  French  language,  would  be  fatigued  and  disgusted  with  it. 

The  remarks  with  which  Du  Cange  has  enriched  this  edition,  clear  up 
a  number  of  important  facts  contained  in  the  memoirs  of  Joinville,  and 
throw  the  greatest  light  on  many  points  connected  with  the  customs  and 
bstitutions  of  that  period.  They  seemed  too  precious  to  be  withheld 
Ibm  our  readers*  and  are,  therefore,  subjoined  to  the  present  editimi. 


Digitized  by  Google 


A  DISSEKTATION 


OM 


JOINVILLE'8  LIFE  OP  ST.  LOUIB. 

By  Af.  le  Baron  de  la  Battie, 


Thb  life  of  St.  LoQis,  written  bj  the  lord  de  Joinville,  has  alwaji  been 
ooasidered  as  one  of  the  most  precious  moDuments  of  oar  history  ;  and  as 
a  work  that  contains  manj  of  those  qnalilications  which  we  are  accustomed 
to  wish  for  in  the  lives  of  private  persons.  The  author  was  of  verj  con- 
siderable rank  by  his  birth,  his  connections,  his  employments,  and  still 
more  from  his  personal  merit.  He  had  not  only  lived  under  the  reign  of 
the  prince  whose  life  he  has  written,  but  was  moreover  peritonaily  attached 
to  him  for  twenty-two  years,  and,  by  consequently  following  him  in  bis 
expeditions,  had  participated  in  the  most  important  events  of  his  reign. 
The  air  of  candour  and  good  faith  that  accompanies  his  recitals  prejudices 
the  reader  in  his  favour ;  the  scrupulous  attention  he  shews  not  to  men* 
tion  facts  of  which  he  was  not  a  witness,  and  only  to  touch  on  such  as 
he  relates  from  the  report  of  others,  as  his  history  requires ;  this  atten* 
tion,  I  repeat,  ought  to  convince  us,  that  the  lord  de  Joinville  had  no  other 
intention  than  to  transmit  to  posterity  nothing  but  what  he  was  perfectly 
well  informed  of. 

His  history  is  not,  like  the  greater  part  of  the  chronicles  of  those  times, 
a  simple  recital  of  what  passed  in  France  and  elsewhere  during  the  reign 
uf  -  St.  Louis ;  it  makes  us  intimately  acquainted  with  that  monarch  :  it 
gives  us  a  just  idea  of  his  heart  and  head,  and  paints  equally  well  the  great 
man,  the  great  saint,  and  the  great  king.  The  friendship  and  confidence 
with  which  St.  Louis  honoured  the  lord  de  Joinville  ;  the  intimate  fami- 
liarity, if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expression,  to  which  he  had  admitted  him, 
have  furnished  many  curious  details,  which,  although  improper  for  a 
general  history,  are  not  the  less  agreeable  or  instructive,  since  they  moru 
distinctly  display  the  characters  of  the  principal  persons  whom  the  his- 
torian successively  offers  to  our  view. 

So  many  interesting  motives  to  the  French  will  not  suffer  them  to  see 
with  indifference  the  attempt  that  has  been  made  to  tear  from  their  hand^ 
one  of  their  principal  historians,  by  endeavouring  to  make  the  history  oi 
the  lord  de  Joinville  pass  for  a  romance,  not  composed  till  the  fifteenth 
century.  For  upwards  of  two  hundred  years,  when  it  was  first  printed, 
no  one  bad  ever  thought  of  suspecting  its  authenticity,  when  an  unjust 
criticism  appeared  in  the  posthumous  works  of  a  learned  man  (Jo.  liar- 
douin),  more  celebrated,  however,  for  the  singularity  of  his  ideas,  than  for 
the  extent  of  his  erudition.  He  maintains,  that  the  Life  of  St.  Louis, 
generally  attributed  to  the  lord  de  Joinville,  is  the  work  of  an  author 
very  much  posterior  to  him,  who  has  forged  the  name  of  the  supposed 
author  of  it. 

I  pass  oyer  these  objections  in  silence ;  tbey  will  have  no  weight,  until 
it  shall  be  granted  that  the  greater  part  of  ecclesiastical  and  profane  authors 
Vive  been  supposititious  writers. 


JOINVILLE'S  HISTORY  OP  SAINT  LOUIS. 


DBDICATIOK. 


the  most  noble,  tnoii  exceUewt,  and  most  potent  prince,  Louis,  son  to 
the  King  8t,  Louis,  of  most  renowned  and  holy  memory,  by  the  grace 
God,  King  qf  France  and  Navarre,  and  Count  Palatine  qf  Cham^ 
pagne  and  Brie,  John  Lord  of  Joinville,  Seneschal  of  Champagne, 
sends  health,  wishing  that,  at  his  prayer,  Jesus  may  anoifU  him  with 
holy  love. 

Mat  it  pletse  you  to  know,  most  noble  and  potent  lord,  that  my  late 
most  excellent  lady,  yonr  mother,  whose  soul  may  Grod  pardon,  from  the 
great  affection  she  bore  me,  and  from  her  knowing  with  how  much  loyalty 
and  lore  I  had  tenred  and  attended  the  deceased  king,  St.  Louis,  her 
spouse,  in  sereral  countries,  had  most  earnestly  entreated  me,  that  in 
honour  to  God,  I  would  collect  and  write  a  small  book  or  treatise  of  the 
holy  actions  and  sayings  of  the  aboTC-mentioned  King  St.  Louis.  This  I 
very  humbly  promised  her  to  execute  to  the  best  of  my  power  ;  and  because 
you,  my  most  excellent  and  potent  lord,  are  his  eldest  son  and  heir,  and 
have  succeeded  to  the  crown  and  kingdom  of  our  late  lord  and  king,  St. 
Louis,  I  send  this  book  to  you,  not  knowing  any  one  living  to  wlram  it 
can  more  properly  belong,  in  order  that  you  and  all  others  who  may  read 
it,  or  hear  it  read,  may  profit  by  imitating  the  examples  and  deeds  which 
it  contains,  and  may  God  our  Father  and  Creator  be  worshipped  and 
honoured  by  it. 


In  the  name  of  the  most  holy  and  most  sovereign  Trinity,  the  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  I,  John  lord  of  Joinyille,  high  steward  of  Cham* 
pagne,  do  indite  and  cause  to  be  formed  into  a  book,  the  life  and  most 
pious  acts  and  sayings  of  my  late  lord,  St.  Louis,  king  of  France,  from 
what  I  personally  saw  or  heard  during  the  space  of  six  whole  years  that  I 
was  in  his  company,  as  well  in  the  holy  expedition  and  pilgrimage  beyond 
sea  as  since  our  return  thence.  This  book  will  be  divided  into  two  parts. 
The  first  will  shew  how  the  above-mentioned  king,  St  Louis,  governed 
himself  according  to  the  precepts  of  God  and  of  our  holy  mother  the 
church,  to  the  profit  and  advancement  of  this  kingdom. 

The  second  part  will  speak  of  his  gallant  chivalry  and  deeds  of  arms, 
that  the  one  may  follow  the  other,  to  enlighten  and  exalt  the  understand- 
ings of  such  as  shall  read  or  hear  it.  The  contents  of  both  parts  will 
shew  plainly  that  no  man  of  his  time,  from  the  beginning  of  his  reign  onto 
the  end  of  it,  ever  lived  a  more  godly  or  conscientious  1U)b  than  he  did. 

It  seems  however  to  me,  that  sufficient  respect  has  not  been  shewn 
him,  inasmuch  as  he  has  not  been  ranked  among  the  martyrs,  for  the 
great  vexations  he  suffered  on  his  pilgrimage  for  the  honour  of  the  cross 
during  the  six  years  that  I  attended  him ;  for,  as  our  Lord  God  died  for 
the  human  race  on  the  cross,  so  in  like  manner  died  the  good  king  St. 
Louis,  at  Tunis,  with  the  cross  on  his  breast.  Because  nothing  is  to  be 
preferred  to  the  salvation  of  the  soul,  I  shall  begin  this  first  part  which 
speaks  of  his  righteous  doctrine  and  holy  conversation,  which  is  food  for 
thesooL  ' 


JOINVILLE^S  PREFACE. 


MEMOIRS 


OF 


lOUIS  IX.  KING  OF  FRANCE, 


This  holy  man,  King  St.  Louis,  loved  and  feared  God 
daring  his  life  above  all  things,  and,  as  is  very  apparent,  was 
in  consequence  favoured  in  fdl  his  works.  As  I  have  before 
said  that  our  God  died  for  his  people,  so  in  like  manner 
did  St.  Louis  several  times  risk  his  life  and  incur  the  greatest 
dangers  for  the  people  of  his  realm,  as  shall  be  touched  on 
hereafter. 

The  good  king,  being  once  dangerously  ill  at  Fontaine- 
bleau,  said  to  my  Lord  Louis,  his  eldest  son,*  "  Fair  son,  I 
beseech  thee  to  make  thyself  beloved  by  the  people  of  thy 
kingdom ;  for,  in  truth,  I  should  like  better  that  a  Scotsman,  t 
fresh  from  Scotland,  or  from  any  other  distant  and  unknown 
country,  should  govern  the  subjects  of  my  realm  well  and 

*  He  was  born  in  the  year  1244,  and  died  when  sixteen  yean  old,  in 
1260. 

t  I  know  not  if  the  lord  de  Joinville  here  speaks  of  the  Scots  as  of  a 
people  very  distant  from  France,  and  who  inhabiteu  what  was  called  the 
Ultima  Thnle,  or  whether  he  wished  to  mark  the  character  of  this  nation, 
which  delighted  so  much  in  travelling  to  different  countries,  that  there  was 
scarcely  a  kingdom  wherein  great  numbers  of  them  were  not  to  be  found. 
This  is  noticed  by  Walfridus  Strabo  in  the  forty-sixtii  chapter  of  the 
lecond  book  of  his  Life  of  St.  Gall.  Owing  to  this  love  of  emigrating,  we 
read  that  in  almost  every  part  of  France  there  were  hospitals  founded  for 
them,  of  which  mention  is  made  in  the  capitularies  of  Charles  le  Chauve, 
tit.  6  and  23  ;  in  Synodo  Meld.  cap.  14,  and  in  the  chai:ter  of  the 
foundation  of  the  abbey  of  Walcourt,  in  the  diocese  of  Namur,  published 
by  Mirseus  in  Diplom.  Belg.  lib.  2,  cap.  22.  See  also,  on  this  subjeotf 
Innocent.  Ciron.  lib.  1 ;  Obsenrat.  Jur.  Canon,  cap.  13. 


(commonly  called  saint  LOUIS.) 


BY  JOHN  LORD  DE  JOINVILLE, 


BIOH  SBKBSCBAL  OF  CHAMPAOVa. 


FIRST  PART. 


852        jointillb's  memoirs  of  saint  louis  IX.  [ft,% 

loyally,  than  that  thou  shouldst  rule  them  wickedly  and  re- 
proachfully." 

The  holy  king  lored  truth  so  much,  that  even  to  the 
Saracens  and  infidels,  although  they  were  his  enemies,  he 
would  never  lie,  nor  hreak  his  word  In  any  thing  he  had 
promised  them,  as  shall  be  noticed  hereafter.  With  regard 
to  his  food,  he  was  extremely  temperate  ;  for  I  never  in  my 
whole  life  heard  him  express  a  wish  for  any  delicacies  in 
eating  or  drinking,  like  too  many  rich  men ;  but  he  sat  and 
took  patiently  whatever  was  set  before  him. 

In  his  conversation  he  was  remarkably  chaste  ;  for  I  never 
heard  him,  at  any  time,  utter  an  indecent  word,  nor  make 
use  of  the  devil's  name,  which,  however,  is  now  very  com- 
monly uttered  by  evenr  one,  by  which  I  firmly  believe  is  so 
far  from  being  agreeable  to  God,  that  it  is  highly  displeasing 
to  him. 

He  mixed  his  wine  with  water  by  measure,  according  to 
the  strength  of  it,  and  what  it  would  bear.  He  once  asked 
me,  when  at  Cyprus,  why  I  did  not  mix  water  with  my 
wine.  I  answered  what  the  physicians  and  surgeons  had 
told  me,  that  I  had  a  large  head  and  a  cold  stomach,  which 
would  not  bear  it.  But  the  good  king  replied,  that  they  had 
deceived  me,  and  advised  me  to  add  water ;  for  that  if  I  did 
not  learn  to  do  so  when  young,  and  was  to  attempt  it  in  the 
decline  of  life,  the  gout  and  other  disorders,  which  I  might 
have  in  my  stomach,  would  greatly  increase ;  or,  perhaps,  by 
drinking  pure  wine  in  my  old  age,  I  should  frequently  in- 
toxicate myself;  and  that  it  was  a  beastly  thing  for  an 
honourable  man  to  make  himself  drunk. 

My  good  lord  the  king  asked  me  at  another  time^  if  I 
should  wish  to  be  honoured  in  this  world,  and  afterward  to 
gain  paradise;  to  which  I  answered,  that  I  should  wish  it 
were  so.  "Then,"  replied  he,  "be  careful  never  knowingly 
to  do  or  say  any  thing  disgraceful,  that  should  it  become 
public,  you  may  not  have  to  blush,  and  be  ashamed  to  say  I 
have  done  this,  or  I  have  said  that."  In  like  manner  he 
told  me  never  to  give  the  lie,  or  contradict  rudely  whatever 
might  be  said  in  my  presence,  unless  it  should  be  sinful  or 
disgraceful  to  suffer  it,  for  oftentimes  contradiction  causes 
coarse  replies  and  harsh  words,  that  bring  on  quarrelsi 


Digitized  by 


WIEI.1M.] 


ON  POMP  IN  DREM. 


which  create  bloodshed,  and  are  the  means  of  the  deaths  of 

thousands. 

He  also  said,  that  every  one  should  dress  and  equip  him* 
self  according  to  his  rank  in  life,  and  his  fortune,  in  order 
that  the  prudent  and  elders  of  this  world  may  not  reproach 
him,  by  saying  such  a  one  has  done  too  much,  and  that  the 
youth  may  not  remark,  that  such  a  one  has  done  too  little, 
and  dishonours  his  station  in  society.  On  this  subject,  I 
remember  once  the  good  lord  king,  father  to  the  king  now  on 
the  throne,  speaking  of  the  pomp  of  dress,  and  the  em- 
broidered coats  of  arms  that  are  now  daily  common  in  the 
armies.  I  «aid  to  the  present  king,  that  when  I  was  in  the 
Holy  Land  with  his  father,  and  in  his  army,  I  never  saw  one 
single  embroidered  coat  or  ornamented  imddle '  in  the  pos- 
session of  the  king  his  &ther,  or  of  any  other  lord.  He 
answered,  that  he  had  done  wrong  in  embroidering  his  arms ; 
and  that  he  had  some  coats  that  had  cost  him  eight  hundred 
Parisian  livres.  I  replied,  that  he  would  have  acted  better  if 
he  had  given  them  in  charity,  and  had  his  dress  made  of 
good  sendal,*  lined  and  strengthened  with  his  arms,  like  as 
the  king,  his  father,  had  done. 

The  good  king,  once  calling  me  to  him,  said  he  wanted  to  talk 
with  me,  on  account  of  the  quickness  of  understanding  he  knew 
I  possessed.  In  the  presence  of  several,  he  added,  1  have 
called  these  two  monks,  and  before  them  ask  you  this  question 
respecting  God "  Seneschal,  what  is  God  ?"  "  Sire,"  re- 
plied I,  "he  is  so  supremely  good,  nothing  can  exceed  him." 
"  In  truth,"  answered  the  king,  "  that  is  well  said,  for  your 
answer  is  written  in  the  little  book  I  have  in  my  hand.  I 
will  put  another  question  to  you,  whether  you  had  rather  be 
Mnezeau  et  ladre,'t  or  have  committed,  or  be  about  to  commit, 

*  Sendal  or  cendal,  is  what  we  call  taifety.  In  the  account  of 
Stephen  de  la  Fontaine,  who  was  silversmith  to  the  king,  in  the  year 
1351,  which  is  in  the  Chamber  of  Accounts  at  Paris,  there  is  a  charge  "  For 
two  hundles  of  scarlet  cendal,  120  crowns.  For  one  bundle  of  yellow 
eendal,  52  crowns,''  &e. 

t  These  two  words  are  synonymous,  and  signify  lepers,  of  whom,  at 
that  period,  there  were  numbers,  more  especially  in  the  Holy  Land. 
Philippes  de  Beaumanoir,  chap.  62.  says, — "  When  lepers  call  to  them 
,  A  holy  man,  or  a  holy  man  calls  to  a  leper,  the  leper  may  put  himself  in  a 
state  of  defence,  because  he  is  out  of  the  protection  of  the  law/'  In  an 
oil  manuscript  la  ▼ -book  of  Normandy,  it  is  declared,  **  that  the  mezel 

2  A 


Digitized  by 


354 


JOINVILLES  MEMOIRS  OF  8AINT  LOUIS  IX.      [PT.  I* 


a  mortal  mn  ? "    But  I,  who  would  not  tell  a  lie,  replied 
that  I  would  rather  have  committed  thirty  deadly  mns  than 
be  a  leper." 

When  the  two  friars  were  gone  away,  he  called  me  to  him 
alone,  making  me  sit  at  his  feet,  and  said,  How  could  yoa 
dare  to  make  the  answer  you  did  to  my  last  question  V 
When  I  replied,  "Were  I  to  answer  it  again,  I  should  repeat 
the  same  thing,"  he  instantly  said, — "Ah,  fool  musart!* 
Musart,  you  are  deceived  ;  for  you  must  know  there  can  be 
no  leprosy  so  filthy  as  deadly  sin,  and  the  soul  that  is  guilty 
of  such  is  like  the  devil  in  hell.  It  is  very  true,"  he  added, 
"  that  when  the  leprous  mtui  is  dead,  he  is  cured  of  that 
disorder  ;  but  when  the  man  who  has  committed  a  deadly  sin 
dies,  he  is  not  assured  for  certain  that  he  had  sufficiently  re- 
pented of  it  before  his  death,  to  induce  the  goodness  of  God 
to  pardon  him  :  for  which  cause  he  must  have  great  fears  lest 
this  leprosy  of  sin  may  endure  for  a  length  of  time,  even  so 
long  as  God  may  remain  in  paradise. 

I  therefore  entreat  of  you,  first  for  the  love  of  God,  and 
next  for  the  affection  you  bear  me,  that  you  retain  in  your 
heart  what  I  have  said,  and  that  you  would  much  rather  pre- 
fer having  your  body  covered  with  the  most  filthy  leprosy 
than  suffer  your  soul  to  commit  a  single  deadly  sin,  which  is 
of  all  things  the  most  infamous." 

He  then  inquired  if  I  washe<l  the  feet  of  the  poor  on 
Holy  Thursday.  On  which  I  said,  "Oh,  for  shame,  no; 
and  never  \iill  I  wash  the  feet  of  such  fellows."  "This 
is  in  truth,"  replied  he,  "very  ill  said,  for  you  should 
never  hold  in  disdain  what  God  did  for  our  instruction ;  for 
He  who  is  lord  and  master  of  the  universe,  on  that  same 
day.  Holy  Thursday,  washed  the  feet  of  all  his  apostles, 
telling  them,  that  he  who  was  their  master  had  thus  done, 
that  they,  in  like  manner,  might  do  the  same  to  each  other. 
I  therefore  beg  of  you,  out  of  love  to  him  first,  and  then 
from  your  regard  to  me,  that  you  would  accustom  yourself  to 
do  so." 

(leper)  cannot  be  heir  to  any  one,  since  the  disorder  is  visibly  increasing, 
but  that  he  may  possess  the  inheritance  he  hack  before  he  became  a  leper." 
In  the  Assizes  of  Jerusalem,  ch.  128 — **  Whoever  pleases  may  chaUengt 
and  claim  at  the  assizes  any  male  or  female  slave  he  had  bought,  whether 
leper  or  not,  or  afflicted  with  any  other  fikhy  disorder." 
♦  Idler,  one  who  amuses  himself  by  doing  nothing. 


Digitized  by 


PRELIM.]    HIS  ADMONITION  AGAINST  WHISPERING. 


855 


He  loved  every  one  who,  with  uprightness  of  heart,  feared 
and  loved  God ;  insomuch  that  from  the  great  reputation  he 
had  beard  of  my  brother  Sir  Gilles  de  Bruyn,  who  was  not 
a  Frenchman,  for  his  fear  and  love  of  God,  as  was  the  truth, 
he  appointed  him  constable  of  France. 

In  like  manner,  from  the  favourable  report  which  he  had 
heard  of  Master  Robert  de  Sorbon  being  a  courageous  and 
discreet  man,  he  made  him  one  of  his  personal  attendants,  and 
permitted  him  to  partake  of  his  table.  One  time,  as  we 
were  sitting  near  each  other,  and  eating  and  drinking  at  the 
king's  table,  we  conversed  together  in  a  low  voice,  which 
the  good  king  observing,  reprimanded  us  by  saying,  "  You 
act  wrong  thus  to  whisper  together ;  speak  out,  that  your 
companions  may  not  suspect  you  are  talking  of  them  to  their 
disadvantage,  and  railing  at  them.  When  eating  in  company, 
if  you  have  any  things  to  say  that  are  pleasant  and  agreeable, 
say  them  aloud,  that  every  one  may  hear  them :  if  not,  be 
silent." 

When  the  good  king  was  in  a  cheerful  mood,  he  frequently 
put  questions  to  me  in  the  presence  of  Master  Kobert ;  and 
once  he  said,  ''Seneschal,  now  tell  me  the  reason  why  a 
discreet  man  is  of  more  worth  than  a  valiant  man."  Upon 
this  a  noisy  dispute  arose  between  Master  Robert  and  me ; 
and  when  we  had  long  argued  the  question,  the  good  king 
tL'js  gave  his  judgment.  "  Master  Robert,  I  should  not  only 
like  to  have  the  reputation  of  a  discreet  man,  but  to  be  so  in 
reality,  and  your  other  distinctions  you  may  keep ;  for  dis- 
cretion is  of  such  value,  that  the  very  word  fills  the  mouth. 
On  the  contrary,"  added  the  good  king,  "  it  is  most  wicked 
to  take  the  goods  of  others ;  for  the  surrendering  of  them  to 
their  rightful  owners  is  so  grievous  that  the  pronouncing  of 
it  tears  the  palate,  from  the  number  of  rrr's  that  are  in  the 
word  ;  which  rrr's  signify  the  rents  of  the  devil,  who  daily 
draws  to  him  all  those  "who  wish  to  give  away  the  chattels  of 
others  they  have  seized  upon.  The  devil  does  this  with  much 
subtlety,  for  he  seduces  the  usurers  and  despoilers,  and  urges 
them  to  give  their  usuries  and  rapines  to  the  church,  in  honour 
of  God,  which  they  ought  to  restore  to  the  proper  owners, 
who  are  well  known  to  them."  When  thus  conversing,  he  told 
me  to  say  in  his  name  to  King  Thibaut,  his  son-in-law,  that 
he  must  look  well  to  his  actions,  and  not  overcharge  his  soul, 

2  A  2 


Digitized  by 


856        joinyillb's  memoirs  of  saint  louis  ik,      [pt.  I. 


thinking  to  acquit  himself  by  the  large  sums  which  he  gaye^ 
or  should  leare  to  the  monastery  of  father-preachers  in 
Provins ;  for  the  discreet  man,  as  long  as  he  liyes,  ought  to 
act  like  to  the  faithful  executor  of  a  will.*  First,  he  ought 
to  restore  and  make  amends  for  any  wrongs  or  misdeeds  done 
to  others  by  the  deceased ;  and  from  the  residue  of  the  fortune 
of  the  dead  he  should  give  alms  to  the  poor,  in  the  name  of 
God,  as  the  Scripture  plainly  sheweth. 

The  holy  king  was,  one  Whitsun  holidays,  at  Corbeil,  ac- 
companied by  full  300  knights,  and  also  by  Master  Robert  de 
Sorbon  and  myself.  After  dinner,  the  king  went  into  the 
meadow  above  the  chapel,  to  speak  with  the  earl  of  Brittany,t 
father  to  the  present  duke,  whose  soul  may  God  receive^ 
when  Master  Robert,  taking  hold  of  my  mantle,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  king  and  the  noble  company,  aoked  my  opinion, 
whether,  if  the  king  should  seat  himself  in  this  meadow,  and  I 
were  to  place  myself  on  a  bench  above  him,  I  should,  or 
should  not,  be  blameable ;  to  which  I  answered,  "  Yes,  most 
certainly.*  "  Why,  then,"  added  he,  do  not  you  think 
yourself  blame- worthy  for  being  more  richly  dressed  than  the 
king?"  "  Master  Robert,"  replied  I,  "saving  the  king's 
honour  and  yours,  I  am  in  this  respect  blameless ;  for  the  dress 
I  wear,  such  as  you  see  it,  was  left  me  by  my  ancestors,  and  I 
have  not  had  it  made  from  my  own  authority.  It  is  you,  on 
the  contrary,  that  deserve  being  reprimanded;  for  you  are 
descended  from  bondmen,  on  both  sides,  have  quitted  the  dress 
of  your  ancestors,  and  have  clothed  yourself  in  finer  camlet 
than  what  the  king  now  wears." 

I  then  took  hold  of  his  surcoatj  and  compared  it  with  what 

*  The  lord  de  Joinville  is  laughing  at  those  who,  having  committed 
atrocious  acts  of  plunder  during  their  lives,  imagine  they  may  acquit 
themselves  before  God  by  giving  alms  to  some  monasteries  or  churches. 

t  John  I.  of  the  name,  and  who  is  noticed  in  several  parts  of  this 
history.  He  died  the  8th  of  October,  1286,  and  was  father  to  John  II., 
duke  of  Brittany,  deceased  in  the  year  1305.  It  is  apparent. from  this, 
that  the  lord  de  Joinville  wrote  his  history,  or  at  least  augmented  or  cor- 
rected it  at  different  times  ;  for  in  this  part  he  says,  that  John  II.  was 
still  alive,  and  elsewhere  he  speaks  of  Guy  de  Dampierre,  earl  of  Flanders, 
and  of  his  death,  which  happened  at  Compeigne  in  this  same  year  1305. 

X  A  sort  of  dress  or  robe  common  to  men  and  women.  In  the  accounts 
quoted  in  the  preceding  note  is  an  article, — "  For  three  pieces  and  a  half 
of  fine  velvet  in  grain,  given  to  the  aforesaid  Eustache..  to  make  a  sorcuat* 


Digitized  by 


PRELIM.] 


DISOBEDIENCE  REBUKED. 


857 


the  king  had  on,  saying,  "  Now  see,  if  I  did  not  tell  the 
truth."  The  king,  upon  this,  undertook  the  defence  of  Master 
Rohert,  and  to  save  his  honour  as  much  as  he  could,  declared 
the  very  great  humility  he  possessed,  and  how  kind  he  was  to 
every  one. 

After  this  conrersation,  the  good  king  called  to  him  my 
Lord  Philip,  father  to  the  king  now  on  the  throne,  and  King 
Thihaut,  his  son-in-law,  and  seating  himself  at  the  door  of  his 
oratory,  he  put  his  hand  on  the  ground,  and  said  to  his  sons, 
^  Seat  yourselves  here  near  me,  that  yon  may  be  out  of 
sight.**  "  Ah,  sir,"  replied  they,  "  excuse  us,  if  you  please ; 
for  it  would  not  become  us  to  sit  so  close  to  you."  The  king, 
then  addressing  me,  said,  "  Seneschal,  sit  down  here,"  which  I 
did,  and  so  near  him  that  my  robe  touched  his.  Having  made 
them  sit  down  by  my  side,  he  said,  "  You  have  behaved  very 
ill,  being  my  children,  in  not  instantly  obeying  what  I  ordered 
of  yon ;  and  take  care  that  this  never  happen  again."  They 
answered,  that  they  would  be  cautious  it  should  not. 

Then  turning  towards  me,  he  said,  that  he  had  called  us  to 
him  to  confess  to  me  that  he  had  been  in  the  wrong  in  taking 
the  part  of  Master  Robert ;  "  but,"  continued  he,  "  I  did  so 
from  seeing  him  so  much  confounded,  that  he  had  need  of  my 
assistance ;  you  must  not,  however,  think  or  believe  that  I 
did  it  from  the  conviction  of  his  being  in  the  right ;  for,  as 
the  seneschal  said,  every  one  ought  to  dress  himself  decently, 
m  order  to  be  more  beloved  by  his  wife,  and  more  esteemed 
by  his  dependants."  '  The  wise  man  says,  we  ought  to  dress 
ourselves  in  such  manner  that  the  more  observing  part  of  man- 
kind may  not  think  we  clothe  ourselves  too  grandly,  nor  the 
younger  part  say  we  dress  too  meanly. 

^  You  shall  now  hear  a  matter  of  information  which  the  good 
king  made  me  to  understand.  "When  returning  from  Asia,  we 

*  dress  mantle,  and  a  hat  lined  with  ermines  for  the  king,  against  the  feast 
w  the  Star,  &c.  For  the  said  snrcoat,  a  fur  Jining  of  346  ermines,  for  the 
Jeeves  and  wristhands,  60,  for  the  frock,  336,"  &c.  Isaacus  Pontanus, 
™  the  description  of  Denmark,  page  801,  remarks,  that  among  the  Danes 
uie  word  itrh  signifies  a  woman's  dress.  It  may  be  that  die  French 
Mvc  borrowed  this  term  from  the  Normans,  who  frequently  ravaged 
^i^ce;  but  it  IS  more  probable  that  tiiis  dress  was  so  cdled  from 
worn  over  the  coat.  This  name  was  afterwards  given  to  the 
of  the  men. 


Digitized  by  Google 


858  JODfVILLB  S  MEMOIRS  OP  SAINT  LOUIS  IX.         QpT.  !• 


were  driven  near  to  the  isle  of  Cyprus  by  a  wind  called 
Garbun,*  which  is  not  one  of  the  principal  winds  that  rnle  the 
sea;  and  our  vessel  struck  with  such  force  on  a  rock  as 
frightened  our  sailors,  who,  in  despair,  tore  their  clothes  and 
beards.  The  good  king  leaped  out  of  his  bed  barefooted^ 
with  only  a  gown  on,  and  ran  to  throw  himself  on  his  knees  be^ 
fore  the  holy  sacrament,  like  one  instantly  expecting  death. 
Shortly  after,  the  weather  became  calm.  On  the  morrow,  the 
king  called  me  and  said,  Seneschal,  know  that  God  has 
shewn  to  U8  a  part  of  his  great  power ;  for  one  of  these  trifling 
winds,  which  scarcely  deserves  a  name,  had  almost  drowned 
the  king  of  France,  his  queen,  children,  and  family ;  and  St, 
Anceaune  declares,  they  are  the  menaces  of  our  Lord,  as  if 
God  had  said,  '  Now  see  and  feel  that  if  I  had  willed  it,  you 
would  all  have  been  drowned.'"  The  good  king  added,  "  Lord 
God,  why  dost  thou  menace  us  ?  for  the  threat  thou  utterest 
is  neither  for  thy  honour  nor  profit ;  and  if  thou  hadst  drowned 
us  all,  thou  wouldst  not  have  been  richer  nor  poorer :  thy 
menaces,  therefore,  must  be  intended  for  our  advantage,  and 
not  for  thine,  if  we  be  capable  of  understanding  and  knowing 
them.  By  these  threatenings,"  said  the  holy  king,  "we 
ought  to  know,  that  if  we  have  in  us  the  smaUest  thing  dis- 
pleasing to  God,  we  should  instantly  drive  it  from  us ;  and,  in 
like  manner,  we  should  diligently  perform  every  thing  that  we 
suppose  would  give  him  pleasure  and  satisfaction.  If  we  thus 
act,  our  Lord  will  give  us  more  in  this  world  and  in  the  next 
than  we  ourselves  can  imagine.  But  should  we  act  otherwise, 
he  will  do  to  us  as  the  master  does  to  his  wicked  servant ;  for 
if  the  wicked  servant  will  not  correct  himself,  in  consequence 
of  the  menaces  he  receives,  his  master  punishes  him  in  his 
body,  and  in  his  goods  until  death,  or  farther  were  it  possible. 
In  suchwise  will  our  Lord  punish  the  perverse  sinner  who 
shall  not  be  reclaimed  by  the  threats  which  he  hears ;  and  he 
will  be  the  more  heavily  stricken  in  body  and  goods." 

This  holy  king,  and  good  man,  took  infinite  pains,  as  you 
shall  hear,  to  make  me  firmly  believe  the  Christian  laws 
which  God  has  given  us.  He  said,  we  should  so  punctnally 
believe  every  article  of  the  faith,  that  for  any  thing  that  may 
be  done  against  us  personally,  we  ought  not  to  act  or  say  any 
thing  contrary  to  them  He  added,  that  the  enemy  of  man- 
*  In  Italian  garbino;  called  by  English  sailors  a  south-wester. 


PRELIM.] 


THE  king's  religious  FAITH. 


B59 


kind,  the  devil,  is  so  subtle,  that  when  any  persons  are  neai 
dying,  he  labours  with  all  his  power  to  make  them  depart 
with  doubts  of  the  articles  of  our  faith ;  for  he  knows  well 
that  he  cannot  deprive  a  man  of  the  good  works  which  he 
may  have  done ;  and  that  he  loses  the  soul  if  the  man  die  in 
the  true  belief  of  the  Catholic  faith.  For  this  reason  every 
one  should  be  on  his  guard,  and  have  such  a  steady  belief 
that  he  may  say  to  the  enemy  when  he  comes  to  tempt  him, 

Go  thy  way,  thou  enemy  of  maukind ;  thou  shalt  never 
take  from  me  what  I  so  firmly  believe,  namely,  the  articles 
of  my  religion ;  I  had  rather  that  thou  shouldst  cut  off  all 
the  members  of  my  body ;  for  I  am  determined  to  live  and 
die  in  the  faith."  Whoever  acts  thus,  conquers  the  enemy 
with  the  staff  with  which  he  meant  to  slay  him* 

The  good  king,  however,  said  that  faith  in  God  was  of 
such  a  nature  that  we  ought  to  believe  in  it  implicitly,  and 
60  perfectly  as  not  to  depend  on  hearsay.    He  then  asked 
me  if  I  knew  the  name  of  my  father ;  I  answered,  that  his 
name  was  Simon.    ^'And  how  do  you  know  that  ?"  said  he. 
I  replied,  that  I  was  certain  of  it,  and  believed  it  firmly, 
because  my  mother  had  told  it  me  several  times.    "  Then," 
added  he,  "you  ought  perfectly  to  believe  the  articles  of  the 
ikith  wliich  the  apostles  of  our  Lord  have  testified  to  you,  as 
you  have  heard  the  Credo  chanted  every  Sunday."    He  told 
rne  that  a  bishop  of  Paris,  whose  Christian  name  was 
William,*  informed  him  that  a  very  learned  man  in  sacred 
theology  once  came  to  converse  with,  and  consult  him,  and 
that  when  he  first  opened  his  case  he  wept  most  bitterly. 
The  bishop  said  to  him,  "  Master,  do  not  thus  lament  and 
bewail,  for  there  cannot  be  any  sinner,  however  enormous, 
but  that  God  has  the  power  to  pardon."    "  Ah,"  replied  the 
learned  man,  "  know,  my  lord  bishop,  that  I  cannot  do  any 
thing  but  weep ;  for  I  am  much  afraid  that,  in  one  point,  I 
am  an  unbeliever,  in  not  being  well  assured  with  respect  to 
the  holy  sacrament  that  is  placed  on  the  altar,  according  to 
what  the  holy  church  teaches  and  commands  to  be  believed. 
This  is  what  my  mind  cannot  receive  ;  and  I  believe,"  added 
he,  ^  that  it  is  caused  by  the  temptation  of  the  enemy." 

•*  Master,"  answered  the  bishop,  "  now  tell  me,  when  the 

*  Who  has  left  behind  him  several  works,  and  under  whom  tlie  questicfi 
of  pitiralttj  of  benefices  was  agitated. 


Digitized  by 


860        JOINVn.LB'8  MEMOIRS  OF  SAINT  LOUIS  IS.  [PT.  I.  - 


enemy  thus  tempts  you^  or  leads  you  into  this  error,  is  it 
pleasing  to  you?"  "Not  5t  all,"  said  he;  "on  the  con- 
trary, it  is  very  disgusting,  and  displeases  me  more  than  I 
can  tell  you." 

"  Well,  I  ask  you  again,"  said  the  bishop,  "  if  ever  you 
accepted  of  money  or  worldly  goods,  to  deny,  with  your 
mouth,  the  holy  sacrament  on  the  altar,  or  the  other  sacra- 
ments of  the  church?"  "You  may  be  truly  assured," an- 
swered the  learned  man,  "  that  I  have  neyer  accepted  money, 
or  worldly  goods,  for  such  purposes  ;  and  that  I  would  rather 
have  my  limbs  cut  off,  one  by  one,  while  I  was  alive,  than  in 
any  way  to  deny  these  sacraments." 

The  bishop  then  remonstrated  with  him  on  the  great  merit 
which  he  gained  in  the  suffering  of  such  temptations,  and 
added,  "  You  know,  master,  that  the  king  of  France  is  now 
carrying  on  a  war  against  the  king  of  England.  You  know, 
likewise,  that  the  castle  situated  nearest  to  the  frontiers  of 
each  monarch  is  La  Rocbelle,  in  Poitou ;  now  tell  me,  if  the 
good  king  of  France  was  to  nominate  you  governor  of  the 
castle  of  La  Rochelle,  on  the  frontiers,  and  to  make  me 
governor  of  the  castle  of  Montlehery,  which  is  in  the  heart  of 
France,  to  whom  would  the  king,  at  the  end  of  the  war,  feel 
himself  most  obliged,  you  or  me,  for  having  prevented  the 
loss  of  his  castles  ?  " 

"  Certainly,  sir,"  replied  the  learned  man,  "  I  should  sup- 
pose it  would  be  me,  and  for  this  good  reason,  that  I  had  well 
guarded  La  Rochelle,  as  being  in  a  more  dangerous  situation." 
"  Master,"  answered  the  bishop,  "  I  assure  you  that  my  heart 
is  like  the  castle  of  Montlehery ;  for  I  am  perfectly  con- 
vinced of  the  truth  respecting  the  holy  sacrament  displayed 
on  the  altar,  as  well  as  the  other  sacraments,  without  having 
the  most  trifling  doubt  on  their  subject.  I  must  however 
tell  you,  that  whatever  good- will  God  the  Creator  bears  me, 
because  I  believe  his  commandments  without  doubting,  he 
will  have  double  satisfaction  in  you,  for  having  preserved  to 
him  your  heart  in  the  midst  of  perplexity  and  tribulation ; 
and"  that  for  no  earthly  good,  nor  for  any  distress  that  ad- 
versity might  bring  on  your  body,  you  would  ever  deny  or 
abandon  your  faith  in  his  religion.  It  is  for  this  reason,  I 
say,  that  your  state  is  more  pleasing  to  him  than  mine ;  and 
I  am  much  rejoiced  thereat,  and  entreat  that  you  will  keep 


Digitized  by 


rRELIM.^  THB  KIHO's  RELI0I0U8  FAITH.  B6\ 

it  in  your  remembrance,  for  he  will  sacconr  you  in  your 
distress." 

Tbe  learned  man,  on  hearing  these  words,  threw  himself 
on  his  knees  before  the  bishop,  and  felt  his  mind  much 
at  ease,  and  was  well  contented  with  the  bishop's  comfortable 
advice. 

The  holy  king  related  to  me  *  that  the  Albigeois  once  came 
to  the  count  de  Montfort,  who  was  guarding  that  country  for 
the  king,  and  desired  he  would  come  and  see  the  body  of  our 
Saviour,  which  had  become  flesh  and  blood  in  the  hands  of 
the  officiating  priest,  to  their  very  great  astonishment.  But 
the  count  replied,  "Ye  who  have  doubts  respecting  the 
faith  may  go  thither ;  but,  with  regard  to  me,  I  implicitly 
believe  every  thing  respecting  the  holy  sacrament,  according 
to  the  doctrines  of  our  holy  mother  church.  In  return  for 
this  faith,  I  hope  to  receive  a  crown  greater  than  the  angels, 
who  see  the  Divinity  face  to  face,  which  must  make  them 
firm  in  their  belief." 

At  another  time,  the  holy  king  told  me,  that  during  a  great 
disputation  at  the  monastery  of  Clugny,  between  the  monks 
and  Jews,  an  ancient  knight  happened  to  be  present,  who 
requested  the  abbot  of  the  monastery  to  allow  him  to  say  a 
few  words,  which  with  difficulty  was  granted  him.  The 
old  knight,  raising  himself  on  his  crutches,  desired  the  mmt 
learned  clerk  and  the  first  rabbi  of  the  Jews  to  come  near 
him,  which  being  done,  the  knight  put  the  following  question 
to  the  rabbi :  "  Do  you  believe  in  the  Virgin  Mary,  who 
bore  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  in  her  womb,  and  then  in 
her  arms,  and  that  she  was  a  virgin  when  delivered,  and  is 
now  the  mother  of  God  ?  "  The  Jew  replied,  that  he  did  not 
believe  o&e  word  of  all  this.  The  knight  said,  "Very 
stupidly  hast  thou  answered,  and  foolhardy  art  thou,  when 
disbelieving  all  I  have  asked,  thou  hast  entered  the  monas- 
tery  and  house  of  God,  for  which  truly  thou  shalt  now  pay 
and  lifting  up  his  crutch,  he  smote  the  Jew  such  a  blow  on 
the  ear  as  felled  him  to  the  ground.  The  other  Jews,  seeing 
their  rabbi  wounded,  fled  away,  and  thus  ended  the  disputa- 
tion between  the  monks  and  the  Jews. 
The  abbot  advanced  to  the  knight,  and  said,  "  Sir  knight, 

*  Giovanni  Villani,  1.  6,  cb.  7,  attributes  tbis  bistory  to  St.  Louii  him* 
utttf  and  not  to  tbe  count  de  Montfort. 


Digitized  by 


d62  JOINVILLE's  memoirs  op  saint  LOUIS  IX.        []PT.  !• 


you  have  done  a  foolish  thing,  in  thua  striking  the  Jew 
but  the  knight  answered,  "You  have  committed  a  much, 
greater  folly  in  permitting  such  an  assembly,  and  suffering 
such  a  disputation  of  errors ;  for  here  are  numbers  of  very 
good  Christians,  who  might  have  gone  away  unbelievers  in 
consequence  of  the  arguments  of  the  Jews." 

"  I  therefore  tell  you,"  continued  the  king,  "  that  no  one, 
however  learned  or  perfect  a  theologian  he  may  be,  onght  to 
dispute  witb  the  Jews;  but  the  layman,  whenever  he  hears 
the  Christian  faith  contemned,  should  defend  it,  not  only  by- 
words, but.  with  a  sharp-edged  sword,*  with  which  he  should 
strike  the  scandalizers  and  disbelievers,  until  it  enter  their 
bodies  as  far  as  the  hilt." 

The  king's  mode  of  living  was  such,  that  every  day  he 
heard  prayers  chanted,  and  a  mass  of  requiem,  and  then  the 
service  of  the  day,  according  to  what  saint  it  was  dedicated 
to,  was  sung.  It  was  his  custom  to  repose  himself  daily  on 
his  bed  after  dinner,  \vhen  he  repeated  privately,  with  one 
of  his  chaplains,  prayers  for  the  dead,  and  every  evening  he 
heard  complines. 

One  day  a  good  Cordelier  friar  came  to  the  king,  at  the 
castle  of  Hieres,  where  we  had  disembarked,  and  addressed 
him,  saying,  that  he  had  read  in  the  Bible,  and  other  good 
books  which  spoke  of  unbelieving  princes ;  but  that  he  never 
.'•found  a  kingdom  of  believers  or  unbelievers  was  ruined  but 
from  want  of  justice  being  duly  administered.  "Now," 

*  It  was  the  maxim  of  those  days  that  heretics  should  be  exterminated 
by  fire  and  sword.  We  frequently  read  of  heretics  being  burnt  alive, 
especially  in  the  reign  of  St.  Louis,  who  carried  on  an  incessant  war 
against  the  Albigeois.  See  what  two  learned  Greeks  of  that  age  have 
written  on  the  subject : — Nicolaus  Almannus  in  not.  ad  Procopii  Hist. 
Arcanam.  p.  55,  et  Leo  Allatius,  lib.  2,  de  Concord,  utriusque  Eocl. 
cap.  13,  n.  2.  But  Agathias,  in  lib.  1  of  his  History,  holds  ecrors  in 
religious  matters  pardonable ; — "  Forasmuch,"  says  he,  "as  those  who 
embrace  these  erroneous  and  heretical  opinions  commonly  do  so  from  the 
firm  belief  which  they  have  of  their  truth."  Theodore  Balsamon,  on  the 
Nomocanon  of  Photius,  tit.  9,  eh.  25,  says,  that  he  cannot  conceive  how 
the  couucil  held  at  Constantinople,  under  the  patriarchate  of  Michael 
Oxistus,  could  have  condemned  to  the  flames  the  Bogomiles,  who  were 
heretics  of  those  times,  since  at  that  period  there  did  not  exist  any  canon 
of  the  church  which  decreed  the  punishment  of  death  against  heretics. 
Several  learned  persons  have  therefore  endeavoured  to  prove,  by  solid 
reasoning,  that  heretics  ought  to  be  reclaimed  by  gentle  means  instejd  of 
rigorous  ones. 


PRELIM.]]  ADMINISTRATION  OF  JU8TICB. 


,  contintied  the  Cordelier,  *Met  the  king,  who  I  perceive  is 
going  to  France,  take  care  that  he  administer  strict  and 
legal  justice  to  his  people,  in  order  that  our  Lord  may  suffer 
him  to  enjoy  his  kingdom,  and  that  it  may  remain  in  peace 
and  tranquillity  all  the  days  of  his  life." 

It  is  said  that  this  discreet  Cordelier,  who  thus  lessoned  the 
king,  is  buried  at  Marseilles,  where  our  Lord,  through  him, 
does  many  £a;ir  miracles. 

This  Cordelier  would  not  remain  longer  with  the  king  than 
one  day,  in  spite  of  all  the  entreaties  that  were  made  him. 
The  good  king  was  not  forgetful  of  what  the  friar  had  told 
him,  to  govern  his  realm  loyally  according  to  the  laws  of  God, 
but  was  anxious  that  justice  should  be  done  to  all,  according 
to  the  manner  you  shall  hear. 

It  was  customary  after  the  lord  de  Neeles,*  the  good  lord 
de  Soissons,t  myself,  and  others  that  were  about  the  king's 
person,  had  heard  mass,  for  us  to  go  and  hear  the  pleadings 
at  the  gateway,  which  is  now  called  the  Court  of  Requests,  in 
the  palace  at  Paris.  When  the  good  king  was  in  the  morning 
returned  from  the  church,  he  sent  for  us,  and  inquired  how 
things  had  passed,  and  if  there  were  any  matters  that  required 
his  decision.  And  when  we  told  him  that  there  were  some^ 
he  sent  for  the  parties,  and  asked  them  why  they  would  not 
be  contented  with  the  sentence  of  his  officers,  and  then  instantly 
made  their  differences  up  to  their  satisfaction,  according  to 
the  custom  of  this  godly  king. 

Many  times  have  I  seen  this  holy  saint,  after  having  heard 
mass  in  the  summer,  go  and  amuse  himself  in  the  wood  of 
Vincenues ;  when,  seating  himself  at  the  foot  of  an  oak,  he 
would  make  us  seat  ourselves  round  about  him,  and  every  one 
who  wished  to  speak  with  him  came  thither  without  ceremony, 
and  without  hindrance  from  any  usher  or  others.  He  then 
demanded  aloud  if  there  were  any  who  had  complaints  to 
make ;  and  when  there  were  sume,  he  said,  "  My  friends,  be 

♦  Simon,  son  of  Raoul  de  Clerroont,  lord  of  Ailly,  and  of  Gertrude, 
lady  and  heiress  of  Neelle.  He  was  regent  of  the  kingdom  of  France 
during  the  second  expedition  of  Saint  Louis  to  the  Holy  Land. 

f  John,  the  second  of  the  name,  surnamed  le  Begue,  son  to  Raoul  de 
Neelle  count  of  Soissons,  hy  Jolande  de  Joinyille,  his  second  wife,  and 
consequently  cousin-german  to  our  lord  de  Joinyille,  as  he  thus  styles 
him  some  pages  hence. 


Digitized  by 


864      joinyille's  memoirs  of  saint  Lonts  tx.       []pt«  t 


sileDt,  and  your  causes  shall  be  despatched  one  after  another." 
Then,  oftentimes,  he  called  to  him  the  lord  Peter  de  Fon- 
taines, and  the  lord  Geofiroy  de  Yillette,*  and  said  to  them, 
**  Despatch  these  causes and  whenever  he  heard  any  thing 
that  could  be  amended  in  the  speeches  of  those  who  pleaded 
for  others,  he  most  graciously  corrected  them  himself.  I  have 
likewise  seen  this  good  king  ofttimes  come  to  the  garden  of 
Paris,  dressed  in  a  coat  of  camlet,  a  surcoat  of  tyretalne,t 
without  sleeves,  and  a  mantle  of  black  sendal,  and  have  car- 
pets spread  for  us  to  sit  round  him,  and  hear  and  discuss  the 
complaints  of  his  people  with  the  same  diligence  as  in  the 
wood  of  Vincennes. 

I  remember  all  the  prelates  of  France  J  once  assembled  at 
Paris,  to  speak  with  the  good  St.  Louis,  and  to  make  him  a 
request ;  which,  when  he  was  told,  he  went  to  the  palace  to  hear 
what  they  had 'to  say.  The  meeting  being  full,  it  was  the 
bishop  Guy  d'Auseure,  son  to  the  lord  William  de  Melot, 
who  addressed  the  king,  by  the  unanimous  assent  of  the  other 
prelates,  as  follows : — "Sire,  know  that  all  these  prelates,  who 

*  This  lord  was  bailiff  of  Tours  in  the  year  1261,  as  we  leara  from  « 
list  of  the  bailiffs  of  France  at  Candlemas  in  that  year,  and  which  is  in  the 
Chambre  des  Comptes  at  Paris.  In  another  of  the  year  1268,  he  is  men- 
tioned as  having  been  sent  ambassador  to  the  republic  of  Venice. 

t  Tyretaine,  tireteine, — a  woollen  stuff  used  in  the  present  times,  that 
took  its  name  from  ttie  town  of  Tyre. 

t  This  assembly  of  the  prelates  of  France  was  induced,  according  to 
the  lord  de  Joinville,  to  remonstrate  with  the  king  on  the  contempt 
in  which,  the  heretics,  that  is  to  say,  the  Albigeois,  held  the  excommuni- 
cations of  the  bishops,  and  to  request  that  they  ^ould  be  compelled  to 
undergo  absolution  and  return  by  this  means  to  an  union  with  the  church 
under  the  penalty  of  seizure  and  confiscation  of  their  goods,  imploring, 
to  effectuate  this,  the  aid  and  support  of  the  royal  authority.  The 
assembly  must  have  been  held  between  the  year  1247,  when  Guy  de 
Mello,  bishop  of  Auxerre,  the  president  of  the  meeting,  took  possession 
of  the  episcopal  throne,  and  the  year  1270,  which  was  the  year  of  his 
death.  Thus  we  cannot  refer  to  this  assembly  the  ordinance  of  St.  Looisy 
which  he  issued  on  the  same  subject  in  the  year  1228,  and  which  is  to  be 
found  in  the  register  of  the  Tresor  des  Chartes,  Nos.  10,  26,  and  27, 
from  which  I  should  be  inclined  to  believe,  that  the  bishops  only  required 
in  this  assembly  that  this  ordinance  should  be  put  into  execution.  The 
chronicle  of  the  abbots  of  Castres,  published  by  Dom  Lucd'Achery  (in  the 
7th  volume  of  his  Spicilegium),  reports  some  verses  which  shew  tliat  the 
bishops  and  other  ecclesiastics  forced  by  imprisonment  such  as  were 
excommunicated  to  resort  to  absolution ;  but  as  temporal  punishments 
eoncemed  the  secular  arm,  the  royal  judges  always  opposed  this  mode  ot 
ponishmeut,  and  maintained  that' it  belonged  to  their  sole  jurisdiction. 


Digitized  by 


MKLIM.]]  ON  EXCOMMI'NICATION  AND  ABSOLUTION.  865 


are  here  assembled  in  your  presence,  instruct  me  to  tell  you 
that  yon  are  ruining  Uhristendom,  and  that  it  is  sinking  in 
yonr  hands." 

The  king,  upon  this,  crossed  himself^  and  said,  Bishop, 
inform  me  how  this  happens,  and  by  what  cause.^  Sir^," 
answered  the  bishop,  ^^it  is  because  no  notice  is  taken  of 
excommunicated  persons ;  for  -  at  this  moment  a  man  would 
rather  die  in  a  state  of  excommunication  than  be  absolved,  and 
"will  no  way  make  satisfaction  to  the  church.  It  is  for  this 
reason,  sire,  that  they  unanimously  call  on  you,  in  the  name 
of  God,  and  in  conformity  to  your  duty,  that  you  would  be 
pleased  to  command  your  bailiffs,  provosts,  and  other  admini- 
strators of  justice,  that  wherever  in  your  realm  they  shall  find 
any  one  who  has  be6n  excommunicated  a  whole  year  and  a 
day,  they  constrain  him  to  be  absolved  by  the  seizure  of  hih 
goods." 

The  holy  man  replied,  that  he  would  most  cheerfully  order 
this  to  be  done  to  every  one  who  should  be  found  unjust 
towards  the  church,  or  towards  his  parents.  The  bishop  said, 
it  only  belonged  to  them  to  be  acquainted  with  their  own 
cause  of  complaint.  To  this,  the  good  king  said,  he  would 
not  act  otherwise,  and  that  it  would  be  blameable  before  God, 
and  against  reason,  to  force  those  who  had  been  injured  by 
churchmen  to  absolve  themselves  without  being  heard  in  their 
own  defence.  And  he  quoted,  as  an  example,  the  count  of 
Brittany,  excommunicated  as  he  was,  having  pleaded  for  seven 
years  against  the  prelates  of  Brittany,  and  at  last  brought  the 
business  before  our  holy  father  the  pope,  who  gave  judgment 
against  them  in  favour  of  the  count.  "  Now,  should  I  have 
constrained  the  count  to  seek  absolution  instantly  after  the 
expiration  of  the  first  year,  he  would  have  been  forced  to 
allow  to  these  prelates  their  demands  whether  he  would  or  not, 
and  I  should,  by  so  doing,  have  behaved  wickedly  towards 
God  and  towards  the  count  of  Brittany." 

After  the  prelates  had  heard  this,  they  were  satisfied  with  the 
favourable  answer  the  king  had  made  them ;  and  from  that  time 
I  have  never  heard  that  there  was  further  question  about  it. 

The  peace  which  St.  Louis  made  with  the  king  of  England* 

*  The  preliminaries  of  this  peace  were  settled  at  London  on  the  Mon- 
day after  St.  Valentine's  Day  in  the  year  1258,  between  Guy,  dean  of  St. 
Martin's  churdi  in  Tours,  Odo,  treasurer  of  the  church  of  Bayeux,  and 


d66        joinville's  memoirs  of  saint  Loms  IX.     [^pt.  ^ 


was  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  his  whole  conncil,  who  said  to 
him,  "  Sire,  it  seems  to  us  that  you  are  doing  wrong  to  your 
realm  by  giving  up  so  much  of  its  territory  to  the  king  ot 
England,  to  which  he  appears  to  us  not  to  have  any  rights 
since  his  father  lost  it  by  a  legal  sentence/*  The  king  replied, 
that  he  knew  well  the  king  of  England  had  no  right  to  it ; 
but  that,  for  a  good  reason,  he- thought  he  was  bound  to  give 
it  to  him,  adding,  "We  have  married  two  sisters :  our  children, 
therefore,  are  cousins-german,  and  it  is  fitting  that  there 
should  be  union  among  us.  It  has  likewise  given  me  great 
pleasure  to  make  peace  with  the  king  of  England,  for  he  is  at 
present  my  vassal,  which  was  not  the  case  before." 

The  uprightness  of  this  good  king  was  very  apparent  in  the 
case  of  the  lord  Reginald  de  Trie,*  who  brought  to  the  holy 

Sir  Richard  de  Menou,  the  king  of  France's  knight,  as  commissioners 
from  the  said  king,  on  the  one  part,  and  Humphrey  de  Bohan,  earl  of 
Hereford  and  Essex,  constable  of  England,  and  William  de  Fortibus,  earl 
of  Albemarle,  commissioners  from  the  king  of  England,  on  the  other  part. 
This  preliminary  treaty  is  now  to  be  seen  in  the  Tr^sor  de&  Chartes  da 
Roi,  with  the  seals  of  these  two  earls  attached  to  it.  It  is  similar  to  the 
one  which  Claude  Menard  has  given  in  his  Observations,  both  in  terms 
and  substance,  excepting  that  it  is  drawn  up  as  a  plan  on  which  the  definitive 
treaty  of  peace  was  afterwards  formed.  The  arms  of  William  de 
Fortibus,  earl  of  Albemarle  (whose  family  was  originally  fipom  Nor- 
mandy, where  the  lordship  of  Fors  is  situated),  represented  on  his 
seal,  have  a  cross  patt^e  of  Vair,  which  proves  an  error  made  by  Ralph 
Brook,  and  Vincent,  Rouge  Croix,  his  corrector,  in  the  Collections 
which  they  have  made  of  the  arms  of  the  English  dukes  and  earls, 
wherein  they  have  given  this  earl  "  un  ^cu  d'argent  au  chef  de  guenles." 
Thev  have  been  again  mistaken,  in  giving  to  the  two  Stephens,  earls  of 
Albemarle,  of  the  house  of  Blois  or  of  Champagne,  the  cross  patt^ 
de  Vair,  which  are  the  arms  of  de  Fortibus.  The  arms  of  Stephen,  first 
of  the  name,  being  an  escutcheon  plain,  with  a  bordure  oompon^,  as 
Andrew  du  Chesne  has  noticed  i".  respect  to  the  seal  of  this  earl,  in  his 
Genealogical  History  of  the  House  of  Bethune,  page  152. 

*  The  countess  of  Boulogne,  of  whom  our  author  is  speaking,  was 
Matilda,  only  daughter  and  heiress  of  Reginald,  count  de  Dammartin, 
bv  Ide,  countess  of  Boulogne.  She  was  twice  married ;  first  to  Philip 
of  France,  sumamed  Hurepel,  son  to  Philip  Augustus  by  Agnes  de 
Meranie.  From  this  union  was  born  Jane,  an  only  daughter,  who  was 
married  to  Gaucher  de  Chatillon,  lord  de  Saint  Agnan,  and  died  childless. 
The  countess  Matilda  married,  secondly,  Alfonso,  afterwards  king  of 
Portugal,  who  in  like  manner  died  without  posterity  in'the  year  1258. 
After  his  decease,  there  were  many  disputes  relative  to  the  successiohy 
which  are  fully  discussed  in  the  History  of  the  House  of  Chatillon,  book  3, 
ch.  8. 


Digitized  by 


PRELIM.] 


ROYAL  EQUITY. 


307 


man  letters  which  declared  he  had  given  to  the  heirs  of  the 
countess  of  Boulogne,  lately  deceased,  the  county  of  Dam- 
martin,  which  letters  were  disfigured  and  the  seals  hroken. 
All  that  remained  of  the  seals  were  one-half  of  the  legs  of  the 
king's  effigies  and  the  chantel*  on  which  the  royal  feet  were 
placed. 

The  king  shewed  these  letters  to  us  who  were  of  his  coun- 
cil, to  have  our  advice  on  the  occasion.  We  wore  unani- 
mously of  opinion  that  the  king  was  not  bounden  to  put  these 
letters  into  execution,  and  that  the  persons  mentioned  in  them 
ought  not  to  enjoy  that  county.  The  king  instantly  called  to 
him  J ohn  Sarrazin,  his  chamberlain,  and  asked  fox  the  letter 
which  he  had  commanded  him  to  draw  up.  When  he  had 
examined  it,  he  looked  at  the  seal,  and  at  the  remains  of  that 
on  the  letters  of  Sir  Reginald,  and  then  said  to  us,  '*My 
lords,  this  is  the  seal  I  made  use  of  before  I  went  to  the  Holy 
Land,  and  the  remnant  on  these  letters  so  much  resembles  the 
whole  seal  that  I  dare  not,  without  sinning  against  God  and 
reason,  retain  the  county  of  Dammartin."  He  then  called 
for  the  lord  Reginald  de  Trie,  and  said,  "  My  fair  sir,  I 
restore  to  you  the  county  which  you  demand." 


SECOND  PART. 

Here  begins  the  second  part  of  this  present  book,  in  which, 
as  I  have  before  said,  you  shall  hear  of  grand  feats  of 
chivalry. 

In  the  name  of  the  all-powerful  God,  this  good  king,  St* 
Louis,  as  I  have  frequently  heard  say,  was  bomt  on  the  feast* 

The  county  of  Dammartin  fell  to  the  family  of  Trie,  as  being  the  nearest 
heirs  on  the  side  from  whence  that  estate  came. 

*  Le  ehantel  or  ehanteau  was  that  side  of  the  seal  on  which  the  foot- 
stool of  the  king  was.  Philippes  Mouskes,  in  the  Life  of  Robert,  king  of 
France,  says,— 

"  La  lance  et  Tescu  en  cantiel 
that  is  to  say,  on  the  side  shields  and  bucklers  were  commonly  worn, 
namely,  on  the  left  side.    The  romance  of  Guerin  uses  other  terms  : — 
Au  col  ly  pendant  un  escu  de  car  tier." 
t  St.  Louis  came  into  this  world  on  the  festival  of  Saint  Mark,  the  25th 
of  April,  in  the  year  1215,  at  Poissy,  where  is  still  to  be  seen,  in  the 
ebmpel  called  by  the  name  of  St.  Louis,  in  the  cathedral  church,  a  large 


Digitized  by 


308  JOINVILLB's  memoirs  op  saint  LOUIS  IX.        f  PT.  n 


day  of  St  Mark  the  apostle  and  evangelist.  On  this  day, 
crosses  were  carried  in  processions  in  several  parts  of  France, 
and  were  called  "  the  black  crosses,"*  a  sort  of  superstition 
among  the  people,  in  commemoration  of  the  great  multitudes 
who  died  as  it  were  crucified  in  the  expeditions  of  their  holy 
pilgrimages ;  that  is  to  say,  in  Egypt  and  before  Carthage. 
This  caused  much  grief  and  moaning  in  this  world,  and  at 
present  there  is  great  joy  in  paradise  cmong  those  who  died 
for  the  faith  of  God  in  these  devout  pilgrimages. 

He  was  crowned  t  the  first  Sunday  in  Advent,  on  which 
Sunday  the  mass  begins  with  these  words,  "  Ad  te  levari 
animam  meam,"  which  is  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Good  Lord  God, 
I  have  raised  mv  heart  and  soul  toward  thee :  I  put  my 
trust  in  thee."  in  these  words  the  good  king  had  great  con- 
vase  of  freestone,  elevated  on  a  high  pedestal,  which  is  said  to  be  the  font 
wherein  St.  Louis  was  baptized. 

*  Durandus,  in  Rationali  Divinor.  Offic.  lib.  6,  cap.  102,  remarks,  that 
this  procession,  which  is  annually  made  on  the  feast  of  St.  Mark,  and 
which  the  whole  church  acknowledges,  under  the  name  of  Litania  major, 
was  instituted  by  Pope  Gregory  the  Great,  is  now  known  under  the 
name  of  the  Black  Crosses,  from  the  altars  and  crosses  being  that  day 
covered  with  black,  in  remembrance  of  the  great  mortality  which  hap- 
pened at  Rome  in  consequence  of  the  plague,  and  which  caused  this  great 
pope  to  institute  public  prayers.  With  regard  to  what  the  lord  de  Join- 
ville  says,  that  in  certain  places  this  procession  was  called  the  Black 
Crosses,  it  is  only  the  mode  of  expression  of  those  times,  when  all  sorts 
of  processions  were  called  Crosses. 

t  On  the  first  day  of  December,  1 226,  by  the  hands  of  the  bishop  of 
Soissons,  the  archbishopric  of  Rheims  being  then  vacant.  I  found  in  an 
0I4  roll  in  the  Chamber  of  Accounts  at  Paris  a  state  of  the  expenses  of 
this  coronation,  entitled,  *'  Expensse  pro  Coronatione  Regum,"  in  these 
terms  : — **  Expenses  incurred  for  the  coronation  of  king  Saint 
Louis,  in  the  month  of  November,  1226.*' 

Bread    . .  . .  . .    896  livres. 

Bread  for  the  king,  pies,  and  making  . .  38 

Wine     ..  ..  ..991 

Kitchen  expenses  . .  . .  . .  1356         4  sob. 

Wax  and  fruit      ..  ..  ..138 

The  king's  chamber  . .  . .    914  10 

The  queen's  expenses         . .  . .  320 

Wages  and  deliveries  for  the  king's 
household,  and  for  the  king  when 
beyond  sea      , .  . .  . .  400 

Sum  total  .  5053  .14 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  122B-40  *!  INSURRECTION  DURING  THE  REOBNCT.  369 

Odfmcc,  as  respecting  himself  personally,  for  the  great  charge 
he  had  just  undertaken.  He  had  the  fullest  trust  in  God 
from  his  in&ncy  to  his  death ;  for  at  the  end  of  his  latter 
days,  he  called  upon  God  and  his  saints,  and  especially  on  St. 
James  and  St.  Genevieve  as  his  intercessors.  In  return  he 
was  protected  by  God,  in  regard  to  his  soul,  from  his  earliest 
years  to  his  death,  and  also  in  respect  to  the  good  doctrine 
he  received  from  his  mother,  who  taught  him  to.believe  in 
God,  and  to  love  and  fear  him  in  his  youth ;  and  he  has, 
ever  since  that  time,  lived  a  virtuous  and  holy  life.  His 
mother  caused  him  to  be  attended  by  religious  persons,  who 
preached  to  him  the  word  of  God  on  Sundays  and  feast>days. 
Many  times  has  he  related  that  his  mother  should  frequently 
say  that  she  would  rather  he  was  in  his  grave,  than  that  he 
should  commit  a  mortal  sin.  ■ 

It  was  needful  that  God  should  help  him  in  his  youth  ; 
for  his  mother  was  from  Spain,  a  foreign  country,  and  re- 
mained in  France  without  any  of  her  own  family,  relations,  or 
friends.  The  barons  of  France  thus  seeing  him  an  infant,  and 
his  mother  a  foreigner,  without  any  support  but  from  God, 
made  the  count  of  Boulogne,  uncle  to  the  king  just  dead,  their 
leader,  and  considered  him  as  their  lord  and  master.  It  hap- 
pened therefore,  after  the  coronation  of  this  good  king,  that 
by  way  of  beginning  the  rebellion,  some  of  these  great 
Imrons  of  France  required  of  the  queen-dowager,  that  she 
would  give  them  lands  appertaining  to  the  crown  of  France; 
and  because  she  would  not  consent,  urging,  as  an  excuse, 
that  it  was  not  for  her  to  dismember  the  kingdom  of  France 
contrary  to  the  will  of  her  son,  who  was  now  crowned  king, 
these  barons  assembled  at  Corbeil.  The  holy  king  told  me 
that  when  he  and  his  mother  were  at  Montlehery,  they  dared 
not  go  to  Paris  until  the  inhabitants  came  with  a  large  force 
of  men-at-arms  to  escort  them  thither ;  and  he  added,  that  the 
whole  road  from  Montlehery  to  Paris  was  filled  on  all  sides 
with  men-at-arms,  who  besought  the  Lord  that  he  would 
grant  the  king  long  life  and  prosperity,  and  that  he  would 
defend  him  against  all  his  enemies.  And  this  God  did  in 
different  places,  and  at  different  times,  as  you  shall  hear  in  the 
course  of  this  history. 

While  the  barons  were  assembled  at  Corbeil  they  practised 
among  themselves,  and  resolved,  with  one  accord,  to  raise  up 

9  b 


Digitized  by 


870       joinyille's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.       [PT.  lU 


the  count  of  Brittany*  against  the  king.  They  promiiied 
him,  in  order  to  act  more  treacherously  to  the  good  king,  that 
they  would  obey  the  royal  summons ;  and  if  the  king  should 
send  them  to  make  war  agsunst  the  earl  of  Brittany,  thejr 
would  not  bring  with  them  more  than  two  knights  each, 
that  the  count  might  the  more  easily  conquer  the  good  kin^ 
Louis,  and  his  mother,  who  was  a  foreigner,  as  you  have 
before  heard. 

This  plot  the  barons  put  into  execution,  according  to  the 
engagement  which  they  had  entered  into  with  the  count  of 
Brittany ;  and  I  have  heard  many  say,  that  the  count  would 
have  destroyed  and  subdued  the  king  and  his  mother,  if  it  had 
not  been  for  God's  assistance,  which  never  failed  1dm.  The 
count  Thibaut  de  Champagne,  as  it  were  by  divine  permission, 
put  himself  and  his  forces  in  motion,  to  wait  on  the  good 
king  when  he  was  in  such  distress  and  danger.  In  good 
truth,  he  set  off  with  full  three  hundred  knights,  perfectly 
well  equipped,  and,  through  God's  grace,  arrived  in  good 
time ;  for,  by  this  timely  reinforcement  of  the  count  of  Cham- 
pagne, the  oount  of  Brittany  was  forced  to  surrender  himself 
to  the  king,  and  beg  his  mercy.  The  good  king  had  no  desire 
of  revenge,  and  considering  the  victory  he  had  obtained  was 
gained  through  the  power  and  will  of  Gt)d,  in  sending  to 
him  so  opportunely  the  count  of  Champagne,  received  the 
count  of  Brittany  into  favour,  and  thenceforward  the  king 
travelled  throughout  his  kingdom  in  security. 

Because  incidents  frequently  happen  that  deserve  mention, 
I  shall  at  times  leave  the  principal  matter  of  my  history  to 
relate  them;  but,  notwithstanding  this,  you  shall  hear  of 
some  things  necessary  to  be  related,  for  the  better  under- 
standing the  matters  I  treat  of.  I  will  therefore  advance 
with  truth. 

The  good  count  Henry  le  Large  had,  by  the  countess  Mary 
his  wife,  who  was  sister  to  the  king  of  France,  and  to  Richard 
king  of  England,  two  sons ;  the  elder  was  caJled  Henry,  and 
the  second  Thibaut.  Henry  had  put  on  the  cross,  and  had 
accompanied  King  Philip  and  King  Richard  to  the  Holy 
Land,  where  these  three  besieged  the  city  of  Acre,  and 
took  it. 

*  Pierre  de  Dreuz.  samamed  Mauclerc,  who  had  withdra«ni  itimsell 
from  the  king  s  P^..iti^e* 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1226-40.3  TERROR  INSPIRED  BY  RICHARD's  NAME.  371 

Immediately  after  the  capture,  King  Philip  returned  to 
France,  for  which  he  was  greatly  hlamed.  King  Richard  re-^ 
inained  in  Palestine,  and  performed  veiy  great  feats  of  arms 
against  the  unbelievers  and  Saracens.  They  were  so  much 
in  dread  of  him,  that,  as  it  is  written  in  the  history  of  this  ex- 
pedition to  the  Holy  Land,  whenever  Saracen  children  cried, 
their  mothers  said  to  them,  ^^Be  quiet,  be  quiet;  here  is 
King  Richard"'  coming  to  fetch  you and,  instantly,  through 
the  fear  which  these  Saracen  children  had  of  the  name  of  King 
Richard,  they  became  quiet.  In  like  manner,  when  the  Sa- 
racens or  Turks  were  riding  in  the  fields,  and  their  horses 
stiEuled  at  a  bush  or  shadow,  and  took  fright,  they  said  to 
their  horses,  sticking  spurs  into  their  sides,  "  What,  dost  think 
King  Richard  is  there?"  All  this  clearly  proves  that  he 
performed  grand  deeds  of  arms  against  them,  to  make  him  so 
much  dreaded 

This  King  Richard  gained  so  great  renown  by  his  valour 
that  he  gave  to  Count  Henry  of  Champagne,  who,  as  I 
have  before  said,  bad  remained  with  him,  the  queen  of 
Jerusalem  for  his  wife.  Henry  of  Champagne  had  by  her 
two  daughters,  the  elder  of  whom  was  queen  of  Cyprus,  and 
the  other  was  married  to  Sir  Ayrart  de  Brienne,  from  whom 
a  noble  progeny  descended,  as  is  apparent  in  France,  and  in 
Champagne.t 

*  Raoul  de  Coggeshall,  whose  maniiscript  is  in  the  library  of  St.  Victor 
at  Paris,  Matthew  Parisi  John  Brompton,  and  other  English  historians  of 
the  year  1172  ;  Jacques  de  Vitry,  1.  1,  ch.  99 ;  Sanudo,  1.  3,  part  11, 
ch.  1 ;  Le  Moine  de  Saint  Marian  d'Auxerre,  and  others,  speak  most 
amply  of  the  great  actions  and  deeds  of  arms  of  King  Richard  I.  in  the 
Holy  Land ;  but  they  have  all  omitted  this  circnmstance  mentioned  by 
the  lord  de  Joinyille,  who  has  taken  it,  as  he  says  himself,  from  the 
history  of  the  holy  wars  written  in  the  vidgar  tongue,  which  I  have  read 
in  manuscript,  and  which  relates  the  same  thing  in  these  terms  : — **  Frotn 
whence  it  happened,  &c.i  King  Richard  was  so  feared  in  the  country  that 
whenever  a  Saracen  mother  perceived  her  children  crying,  she  said  to 
them,  '  Do  not  make  a  noise,  for  here  is  King  Richard  and 
he  was  so  dreaded  that  the  children  gave  over  crying  instantly. 

Mattliew  of  Westminster  relates  that  in  the  year  1240,  when  Richard 
earl  of  Cornwall  arrived  in  the  Holy  Land,  the  Saracens  began  to  dread 
exceedingly  the  experience  and  power  of  Richard,  as  well  because  his  name 
had  always  been  held  up  as  that  of  the  bitter  enemy  of  the  Saracens-, 
as  because  he  abounded  in  gold  and  silver. 

f  See  the  list  of  nobles  who  went  on  the  expedition  to  the  Holy  Landt 
^h.  1,  Vignier;  Du  Chesne,  in  the  histories  of  the  families  of  ChUtilloa 
and  of  fiethune. 


2  B  2 


873  JOINTILLB*S  MEMOIRS  OF  SAINT  LOUIS  IX.       [[PT.  IL 


Of  the  wife  of  my  beforesaid  lord,  Sir  A3rrart  de  Brienne, 
I  will  not  say  more  at  present,  but  speak  of  the  queen  oi 
Cyprus,*  because  it  is  right  to  continue  my  subject  properly, 
and  thus  proceed. 

After  the  good  king  had  conquered  the  count  of  Brittany, 
through  the  aid  of  Count  Thibaut  de  Champagne,  the  barons  of 
France,  indignant  against  Count  Thibaut,  agreed  among  them- 
selves to  disinherit  him,  as  being  a  son  of  the  second  son  of 
Champagne,  and  to  send  for  the  queen  of  Cyprus.  This, 
however,  did  not  seem  to  them  to  be  for  their  advantage ;  and 
for  this  reason,  and  because  some  of  the  barons  foreseeing 
they  could  not  accomplish  their  ends,  undertook  to  be  me- 
diators of  a  peace  between  Count  Peter  of  Brittany  and 
Count  Thibaut  of  Champagne,  the  matter  was  so  warmly 
pushed  forward,  that  for  greater  solidity  of  peace.  Count 
Thibaut  promised  to  espouse  the  daughter  of  Count  Peter  of 
Brittany,  t  A  day  was  fixed  on  for  this  ceremony,  when  the 
young  lady  was  to  be  conducted  to  an  abbey  belonging  to 
the  Preaching  Friars  near  ChS,teau  Thierry,  called  Valserre, 
when  the  count  of  Champagne  was  to  marry  her.  And  thus, 
as  I  have  heard,  the  count  of  Brittany  set  out  attended  by 
the  barons  of  France,  who  were  almost  all  his  relations,  to 
conduct  the  damsel  to  the  monastery  of  Valrerry,  and  sent  to 
summon  the  count  of  Champagne,  then  at  Chateau  Thierry, 
to  come  and  marry  the  lady,  according  to  his  engagement, 
which  he  was  well  inclined  to  do.  But  suddenly  there  came 
to  him  Sir  Geoffrey  de  la  Chappelle  bringing  letters  from 
the  king,  the  contents  of  which  were  as  follows. 

"  Sir  Thibaut  de  Champagne, — I  have  learnt  that  you  have 
entered  into  engagements  to  marry  the  daughter  of  the  count 
Peter  c»f  Brittany.  I  therefore  send  to  require  of  you,  that 
for  the  sake  of  all  you  love  in  France,  you  do  not  perform 
them.  The  reason  of  my  desiring  it  is  well  known  to 
you  :  I  have  never  found  any  one  more  willing  to  do  me  evil 
than  the  count  of  Brittany." 

When  Count  Thibaut  had  read  these  letters,  although  he 
had  left  Chateau  Thierry,  he  instantly  returned  thither. 

Alicia,  eldest  daughter  of  Henry,  count  of  Champagne,  hj  the  queea 
of  Jerusalem. 

f  Joland,  who  was  afterward  married  to  Hugh  XI.,  count  de  la  Marcha 
ci  d'Angouleme. 


Digitized  by 


LD.  1226-40.]         DtSTUUBANCES  IN  BRITTANY. 


373 


The  count  Peter  of  Brittany,  and  the  French  barons,  in 
opposition  to  the  king  of  France,  were  waiting  for  the  count 
of  Champagne  at  Valserre ;  and  perceiving  that  he  had  de- 
ceived them,  in  the  first  burst  of  their  rage  against  him,  they 
sent  for  the  queen  of  Cyprus,  who  shortly  afterward  joined 
them. 

Immediately  on  her  arrival,  they,  with  one  accord,  having 
discussed  the  matter,  sent  each  of  them  to  collect  as  many  men. 
at-arms  as  they  possibly  could,  and  resolved  to  make  an  in- 
road by  way  of  France  into  the  territories  of  Count  Thibaut, 
even  into  Champagne  and  Brie. 

They  had  a  good  understanding  with  the  duke  of  Burgundy, 
who  had  for  his  wife  the  daughter  of  Robert,  count  de  Dreux  ; 
and  who  likewise  engaged,  on  his  part,  to  enter  the  county  of 
Champagne  from  Burgundy.  A  day  was  appointed  for  their 
assembling  all  together  before  the  city  of  Troyes,  in  order  to 
take  it ;  but  all  this  was  known  to  good  King  Louis,  who,  in 
like  manner,  summoned  his  men  at  arms  to  accompany  him  to 
the  aid  of  Count  Thibaut  de  Champagne. 

The  barons,  in  fact,  burnt  and  pillaged  the  whole  country 
they  marched  through,  as  did  their  ally  the  duke  of  Bur- 
gundy. When  the  count  of  Champagne  thus  saw  himself 
and  his  country  attacked  on  all  sides,  he  burnt  and  destroyed 
several  of  his  towns,  such  as  Epemay,  Vertus,  and  Sezanne, 
that  his  enemies  might  not  find  them  well  furnished  with  pro- 
visions  and  stores,  and  turn  them  against  him. 

The  citizens  of  Troyes,  finding  their  good  master  and  lord, 
the  count  of  Champagne,  had  left  their  town,  instantly  sent 
to  Simon,  lord  of  Joinville,  father  to  the  lord  de  Joinville  of 
the  present  day,  and  whose  name  is  inscribed  in  the  prologue 
of  this  book,  to  desire  that  he  would  come  to  their  assistance. 
That  good  gentleman  did  so.  His  people  were  immediately 
informed  of  the  intelligence  that  had  been  brought  him,  and 
before  day  they  were  in  the  city  of  Troyes,  where,  for  his 
part,  he  performed  such  wonders  in  aiding  the  citizens,  that 
the  barons  failed  to  take  it. 

The  barons  were  forced  to  march  beyond  the  town,  and  fix 
tlieir  quarters  in  the  meads  with  the  duke  of  Burgundy. 
When  the  king  of  France  knew  where  they  were  lodged,  he 
marched  his  army  straight  to  combat  them  ;  which  the  barons 
learning,  they  sent  to  entreat  that  he  would  withdraw  hii 


Digitized  by 


S74      jointillb's  memoirs  of  saint  louis  rx.      [Jpt.  n* 


army,  for  that  they  were  going  to  fight  the  count  of  Cham- 
pagne, and  the  duke  of  Lorraine  and  their  forces,  with  300 
knights  less  than  were  with  the  count  and  the  duke  of  Lor- 
raine. But  the  king  replied,  that  they  should  no  way  fight 
with  his  vassals  without  his  being  personally  engaged  in  their 
defence.  This  answer  threw  the  barons  into  confusion,  and 
speedily  after,  they  sent  again  to  say,  they  would  cheerfully 
persuade  the  queen  of  Cyprus  to  offer  terms  of  peace  to  Count 
Thibaut  of  Champagne.  The  king's  answer  was,  that  he 
would  not  listen  to  any  proposals  for  peace,  nor  suffer  the 
count  of  Champagne  to  do  so,  until  they  shoidd  have  quitted 
the  county  of  Champagne. 

On  hearing  this,  they  instantly  marched  away,  and  at  on© 
march  quartered  themselves  under  Juilli.  The  king  lodged  at 
Ylles,  whence  he  had  driven  them  ;  and  the  barons  perceiving 
the  king  was  so  closely  pursuing  them,  they  decamped  from 
Juilli,  and  quartered  at  Langres,  which  is  in  the  county  of 
Nevers,  and  attached  to  their  party.  Thus  did  the  good  king, 
St.  Louis,  make  up  the  differences  between  the  queen  of 
Cjrprus  and  the  count  of  Champagne,  in  spite  of  the  enterprise 
of  the  barons;  and  peace  was  concluded  between  them  in 
such  wise,  that  the  count  of  Champagne  gave  to  the  queen  of 
Cyprus,  for  her  rights  of  succession,  2,000  livres  of  landed 
annual  revenue ;  and  the  king  paid  her,  in  behalf  of  the  count 
of  Champagne,  the  sum  of  40,000  livres  for  the  reimburse- 
ment of  her  expenses.  To  repay  these  40,000  livres  the  count 
of  Champagne  sold  to  the  king  the  following  fiefs  and  lord- 
ships ;  namely,  the  fief  of  the  county  of  Blois  ;  the  fief  of  the 
county  of  Chartres ;  the  fief  of  the  county  of  Sancerre ;  the 
fief  of  the  viscounty  of  Chllteaudun.  Some  said  that  the 
king  held  them  only  as  a  security  for  the  repayment,  but  that 
is  not  the  truth,  for  I  put  the  question  to  the  good  king  in 
Palestine,  and  he  told  me  he  held  them  by  purchase. 

The  lands  which  the  count  de  Champagne  gave  to  the  queen 
of  Cyprus  were  part  of  the  present  county  of  Brienne  and 
the  county  of  Joigny,  because  the  grandmother  of  the  count 
de  Brienne  was  daughter  to  the  queen  of  Cjrprus,  and  wife  to 
the  great  count,  Walter  de  Brienne.  And  that  you  may  know 
whence  came  the  fiefs  which  the  count  of  Champagne  sold  to 
the  king,  I  shall  inform  you,  that  the  great  count  Thibaut, 
who  is  interred  at  Laigny,  had  three  sons,  the  eldest  of  whom 


Digitized  by 


^.T>.  1226-40.]]     ANBCDOTR  OF  HENRY  THE  LIBERAL.  375 


was  named  Henry,  the  second  Thibaufc,  and  the  third  Stephen. 
H«nry  was  afterwards  count  of  Champagne  and  of  Brie,  and 
sumamed  Henry  the  Liberal ;  for  generous  and  liberal  was 
he  towards  God  and  man.  Towards  God  he  was  apparently 
liberal,  by  his  founding  the  church  of  St  Stephen  at  Troyes, 
as  well  as  many  other,  to  each  of  which  he  daily  made  great 
gifts,  as  is  well  known  throughout  Champagne. 

Towards  man  he  was  equally  generous,  as  is  notorious  from 
his  conduct  to  Artbault  of  Nogent,  and  in  many  other 
instances  too  tedious  to  relate ;  but  I  roust  mention  that  of 
Artbault  of  Nogent.  This  Arthault  was  a  citizen  in  whom, 
/or  a  time.  Count  Henry  had  the  greatest  confidence ;  and 
Arthault  increased  so  much  in  riches  that  he  built  the  castle 
of  Nogent  Now  it  chanced  that  Count  Henry  was  desirous 
of  descending  from  his  castles  of  Troyes  to  hear  mass  at  St. 
Stephen's  church  on  Whitsunday :  on  the  lower  steps  of  the 
entrance  to  the  church,  he  found  a  poor  knight  on  bis  knees, 
who  with  a  loud  voice  cried  out,  "  Sir  count,  I  request  of  you, 
in  the  name  of  God,  that  you  would  give  me  wherewith  to 
portion  my  two  daughters  that'  are  by  my  side,  for  I  am 
unable  to  do  it"  Arthur  de  Nogent,  who  was  behind  the 
count,  replied  to  the  knight,  "  Sir  knight,  you  do  wrong  to 
make  such  a  request  to  my  lord ;  for  he  has  given  away  so 
luuch,  he  is  no  longer  aUe  to  be  generous." 

The  count,  on  hearing  this,  tamed  round  to  Arthault  and 
said,  "  Sir  Vilain,  you  do  not  speak  truth  when  you  say  I 
have  no  longer  wherewithal  to  give,  for  I  have  you  in  my 
disposal,  and  I  give  you  to  him.  Here,  sir  knight,  I  give 
this  man  to  you,  and  warrant  him  your  bondsman."  The 
poor  knight  was  greatly  surprised,  and  instantly  seizing  the 
citizen  by  his  hood,  said  he  would  not  let  him  go  until  he 
should  have  ransomed  himself  handsomely.  Arthault  was 
forced  to  pay  a  fine  of  500  livres. 

The  second  brother  to  Henry  the  Liberal  was  Thibaut 
count  de  Blois,and  the  third,  Stephen  count  de  Sancerre; 
but  these  two  brothers  held  their  counties  and  lordships 
under  their  elder  brother  Henry  the  Liberal,  and  after  him 
under  his  heirs^  who  possessed  the  county  of  Champagne  until 
this  Count  Thibaut  sold  them  to  the  king,  St.  liouis,  as  has 
been  mentioned. 

Lot  us  now  return  to  our  more  immediate  subject,  and  say, 


Digitized  by 


876       joinvillb's  memoirs  of  saint  louis  ix.      [^pt*  n. 


tbii  shortly  after  this  King  Louis  held  a  great  and  open  court 


present.  I  can  assure  you  that  it  was  the  grandest  sight  I 
ever  witnessed,  the  best  ornamented  and  prepared.  At  the 
king's  table  were  seated  the  count  de  Poitiers,*  whom  he  had 
knighted  on  the  last  St.  John's  day ;  the  count  John  de 
Dreux,t  whom  he  had  lately  knighted ;  the  count  de  la 
Marche,!  and  the  count  Peter  of  Brittany. 

At  another  table,  before  that  of  the  king  on  the  side  where 
count  de  Dreux  was  seated,  the  king  of  Navarre  dined.  He 
was  most  richly  dressed  in  cloth  of  gold,  in  coat,  mantle, 
girdle,  clasp,§  and  cap  of  fine  gold,  to  whom  I  was  the  carver. 
The  count  d'Artois||  served  the  king,  St.  Louis,  and  his  bro- 
ther, and  the  count  de  Soissons  cut  up  the  meat.  Sir  Ymbert 
de  Beljeu,  who  was  afterwards  constable  of  France,  Sir 
Honourat  de  Coney,  and  Sir  Archibald  de  Bourbon  were 
the  guards  of  fhe  king's  table ;  and  there  were  behind  these 
barons,  full  thirty  of  their  knights  in  cloth  of  silk,  to  serve 
under  them.  There  were  likewise  behind  these  knights  a 
great  many  ushers  of  arms,  and  of  the  apartments,  who  bore 
the  arms  of  the  count  de  Poitiers,  worked  on  feudal. 

The  king  was  dressed  as  magnificently  as  it  was  possible, 

*  Alphonso,  brother  to  St.  Louis,  who  had  been  created  a  knight  hj 
the  king  on  the  feast  of  the  Nativity  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  in  th^  year 
1241,  at  which  time  he  likewise  gave  him  the  county  of  Poitou. — See  M. 
Paris,  p.  313. 

t  Son  of  Robert  III.,  count  de  Dreux,  by  d'Aenor  de  St.  Valery,  tkit 
first  who  bore  the  name  of  John.    He  died  at  C3rpru8. 

X  Hugh  X.,  sumamed  le  Brun,  count  de  la  Mardie  and  d'Angoul^me. 

§  Clasp  or  fermail  was  a  sort  of  medal  or  ornament,  like  the  diamond 
ornaments  now  in  fashion,  which  was  fastened  not  only  to  the  shoulder 
where  the  folds  of  the  mantle  met,  in  like  manner  to  the  latos  clavus 
of  the  Romans  ;  but  also  to  the  front  of  the  cap,  as  diamonds  are  now  worn. 
In  war  it  was  £9i8tened  to  the  hood,  on  the  coat  of  arms,  or  in  some  other 
conspicuous  place.  Women  wore  them  on  their  breast.  Froissart,  in  the 
154th  chapter  of  the  2nd  volume,  says,  **  he  received,  as  the  prize, 
a  clasp  of  precious  stones,  which  the  duchess  of  Burgundy  detached  firom 
her  breast.''  It  is  for  this  reason,  that  the  Latin  and  French  MS. 
Glossary  translates  the  word  monile  clasp  or  fermail.  Elsewhere 
redimiculum  a  female  ornament,  as  a  clasp,  chaplet,  or  girdle. 
Johannes  de  Janua  calls  it  Fibularium."  But  I  suspect  he  in- 
tended to  have  called  it  fibulatorium,  which  the  Greek  and  Latia 
Glossary  defines  to  be  the  diminutive  of  fibvia* 

Q  Robert,  brotner  to  the  king. 


at  Sanmur  in  Anjou,  which 


i.I>.  1241.3  DEFEAT  OF  HENRY  III.  AT  TAILLEBOURO.  877 

bnt  it  would  be  tedious  to  enter  into  the  particulars  of  hia 
habiliments.  I  have  heard  several  persons  declare,  that  they 
never  before  saw  at  any  feast  so  many  surcoats  and  other 
dresses  of  cloth  of  gold  as  at  this. 

After  this  feast,  the  king  conducted  the  count  of  Poitiers 
to  that  city,  to  recover  the  fiefs  and  lordships.  It  happened 
immediately  after  the  king  s  arrival  there,  that  the  count  de  la 
Marche,  who  had  even  dined  at  the  king's  table  at  Saumur, 
secretly  assembled  a  large  body  of  men-at-arms  to  wage  war 
against  the  king  until  he  should  gain  his  object,  and  kept 
himself  at  Lusignan  near  to  Poitiers.  The  good  king  wished 
to  have  been  in  Paris,  but  he  was  forced  to  remain  at  Poitiers 
fifteen  days  without  daring  to  venture  beyond  its  walls.  It 
was  said  that  the  king  and  the  count  of  Poitiers  had  made  a 
disadvantageous  peace  with  the  count  de  la  Marche.  It  was 
necessary,  therefore,  for  the  king,  in  order  to  make  up  matters 
with  the  count  de  la  Marche,  to  hold  a  parley  with  him  and 
the  dowager  queen  of  England  his  wife,  mother  to  the  monarch 
on  the  throne. 

It  was  not  long  after  the  king  was  returned  from  Poitiers 
to  Paris,  that  the  king  of  England  and  the  count  de  la 
Marche  united  together  to  make  war  on  good  St.  Louis,  and 
to  collect  as  large  a  body  of  men-at-arms  as  they  could. 
They  assembled  in  Gascony,  before  the  castle  of  Taillebourg, 
which  is  situated  on  a  dangerous  river  called  the  Charente, 
near  which  there  was  only  one  narrow  stone  bridge  that 
could  be  passed  over. 

King  Louis,  on  hearing  this,  marched  an  army  against 
them  towards  Taillebourg ;  and  his  men  no  sooner  saw  the 
host  of  the  enemy,  who  had  the  castle  of  Taillebourg  on  their 
side,  than  with  great  peril  they  hastened  to  cross  the  bridge, 
and  others  passed  over  the  river  in  boats,  and  began  to 
charge  the  English:  Heavy  blows  were  given  on  each  side, 
which  the  good  king  beholding,  he  with  much  danger  joined 
them :  indeed,  the  risk  was  very  considerable,  for  the  Eng- 
lish were  more  numerous  than  the  French  who  passed  the 
river,  by  one  hundred  to  one. 

Notwithstanding  this  superiority,  when  the  English  found 
that  the  king  of  France  had  crossed  the  river,  they  took 
fright,  as  it  seemed  God  willed,  and  made  for  the  city  of 
Saintes,  which  they  entered.    It  happened  in  the  confusion. 


Digitized  by 


878 


JOINVILLE's  memoirs  op  saint  LOUIS  IX. 


\jrr.rL 


that  several  of  our  men  entered  that  city  with  them,  and 
were  made  prisoners. 

I  have  heard  from  some  among  them,  that  during  that 
night  there  was  much  discord  between  the  king  of  England 
and  the  count  de  la  Marche  in  Saintes,*  as  they  were  in- 
formed ;  and  that  the  king  of  England  should  tell  the  count 
that  he  had  sent  for  him,  under  promise  that  he  would  find 
great  aid  in  France ;  and  that,  perceiving  the  fallacy  of  his 
information,  he  should  return  to  Guscony,  whence  be  had 
come.  The  count  de  la  Marche  thus  deserted,  and  knowing 
that  he  could  not  amend  himself  for  the  evil  he  bad  done, 
surrendered  himself,  his  wife  and  children,  prisoners  to  the 
king,  who  gained,  on  consenting  to  a  peace,  many  considerable 
territories  from  the  count.  I  know  not  what  quantity,  for 
I  was  not  present  at  the  treaty,  not  having  then  put  on  the 
coat  of  mail  ;t  but  I  have  heard,  that  with  the  lands  the 
king  acquired,  the  count  de  la  Marche  gave  him  an  acquit- 
tance for  ten  thousand  livres  parisis,  which  he  was  wont  to 
receive  from  him  annually. 

Shortly  after  this,  the  good  king  was  taken  grievously  ill 
at  Paris ;  j:  and  so  bad  was  his  state,  that  I  have  heard  that 
one  of  the  ladies  who  nursed  him,  thinking  it  was  all  over, 
wanted  to  cover  his  face  with  a  cloth,  but  that  another  lady, 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  bed  (so  God  willed  it),  would  not 

*  See  William  Guiart  and  Matthew  of  Westminster,  among  otherst 
respecting  the  treaty,  and  this  new  war  of  the  count  de  la  Marche. 

t  John,  lord  of  Joinville,  was  not  a  knight  in  the  year  1243,  and  con- 
sequently had  not  attained  the  age  of  twenty-one,  which  was  the  age 
to  receive  the  order  of  knighthood,  and  put  on  the  hauberk,  which  was  a 
species  of  armour  peculiar  to  knights.  Hence  it  comes  that  those  who 
possessed  fiefs  of  hauberk  in  Normandy,  qui  per  loricas  terras  suas 
serviebat,"  to  the  terms  of  the  laws  of  William  I.,  king  of  England,  were 
obliged  to  have  horse  and  arms,  and  from  the  time  they  were  twenty -one 
years  of  age  to  be  created  knights,  in  order  that  they  might  join  the 
armies  of  their  prince  or  other  superior  lord,  on  the  first  summons,  as  is 
noticed  in  the  ancient  MS.  Coutumier  of  Normandy,  1,  P.  sect.  3,  chap.  8. 
When  the  term  hricaii  is  met  with  in  ancient  Latin  authors,  it  must  be 
understood  to  mean  such  knights  alone  as  were  entitled  to  wear  the  hau- 
berk, for  previously  they  wore  but  the  arms  of  squires. 

X  The  lord  de  JoinvUle  says  this  happened  at  Paris ;  but  Nangb  and 
the  author  of  the  Chronicle  of  Saint  Denis  say  that  it  was  at  Pontoise. 
William  Guiart  particularly  mentions  the  king  being  ill  at  the  monastery 
of  Maubuisson,  and  marks  the  year  1243  for  the  period,  while  the  othen 
place  it  in  the  following  year. 


Digitized  by 


I.D.  1248.] 


THE  KINO  ASSUMES  THE  CROSS. 


8?» 


suffer  his  face  to  be  covered,  or  baried  as  it  were,  declaring 
contiiinaJlj  that  he  was  alire. 

During  the  conversation  of  these  ladies,  our  Lord  worked 
upon  him,  and  restored  to  him  his  speech.  The  good  king 
desired  them  to  bring  him  a  cmciGx,  which  was  done ;  and 
when  the  good  lady,  his  mother,  heard  that  he  had  recovered 
his  speech,  she  was  in  the  utmost  possible  joy ;  but  when 
she  came  and  saw  that  he  had  put  on  the  cross*  she  was 
panic-struck,  and  seemed  as  if  she  would  rather  have  seen 
him  dead. 

In  the  like  manner  as  the  king  had  put  on  the  cross,  so  did 
Robert,  count  d'Artois ;  Alphonso,  count  of  Poitiers ;  Charles, 
count  d'Anjou,  who  was  afterwards  king  of  Sicily ;  all  three 
brothers  to  the  king ;  Hugh,  duke  of  Burgundy ;  William, 
earl  of  Flanders ;  his  brother  Guion  de  FLandres,  who  died 
shortly  after  at  Gompiegne  ;  the  valiant  count  Hugh  de  St. 
Pol ;  his  nephew.  Sir  Walter,  who  behaved  most  gallantly 
beyond  sea,  and  would  have  gained  great  renown  had  longer 
life  been  granted  him.  The  count  de  la  Marche,  whom  we 
have  lately  mentioned,  was  also  of  the  number ;  Sir  Hugh  le 
Brun  and  his  son ;  the  count  de  Salebruche ;  Sir  Chiubert 
d'Apremont  and  his  brothers,  in  whose  company,  being  my 
cousins,  I,  John  de  Joinville,  crossed  the  sea  in  a  small  ship 
which  we  hired.  We  were  twenty  knights :  ten  of  whom 
accompanied  me,  and  ten  came  with  my  cousins.  This  event 
took  place  after  Easter,  in  the  year  of  grace  1248. 

Before  my  departure,  I  summoned  all  my  men  and  vassals 
of  Joinville,  who  came  to  me  the  vigil  of  Easter-day,  which 
was  the  birthday  of  my  son  John,  lord  of  Ancarville,  by 
my  first  wife,  sister  to  the  count  of  Grand  Pr6.  During  that 
whole  week  I  was  occupied  in  feasts  and  banquets  with  my 
brother  de  Yaucouleur,  and  all  the  rich  ment  of  that  part  of 

*  Richer,  monk  of  Sens,  says  in  his  Chronicle,  ch.  10,  that  the  king 
pot  on  the  cross  in  consequence  of  a  vision  that  he  had  during  this  illness. 
Matthew  Paris  mentions  several  circumstances  of  this  illness. 

t  Our  author  makes  use  of  this  mode  of  expression  in  several  parts 
of  his  history,  to  point  out  the  barons  and  great  lords  of  a  country, 
HI  imitation  of  the  Spaniards,  who  divide  their  nobility  into  three  orders, 
J^ot  ombrett  eavalleroSf  and  infanfos.  These  are  called  in  Prance, 
harons,  knights,  and  squires.  The  term  baron  is  generally  under 
*tood  to  mean  aU  those  who  have  a  right  to  bear  a  banner  in  the 


880       joinyille's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.       £PT.  lU 


the  countrj,  where,  after  eating  and  drinking,  we  amused 
ourselves  with  songs,  and  led  a  joyous  life.  When  Friday 
came,  I  addressed  them  thus : — Gentlemen,  know  that  I 
am  about  to  go  to  the  Holy  Land,  and  it  is  uncertain  whether 
I  may  ever  return  :  should  there  be  any  of  you,*  therefore, 
to  whom  I  have  done  wrong,  and  who  thinks  he  has  cause 
for  complaint,  let  him  come  forward;  for  I  am  willing  to 
mako  him  amends,  as  I  am  accustomed  to  do  to  those  who 
have  complained  of  me  or  my  people." 

I  did  this  according  to  the  usual  manner  of  my  country 
and  my  lands ;  and  in  order  that  they  might  not  be  awed  by 

wars,  and  are  commoDly  called  bannerets,  but  to  whom  the  Spaniards 
give  a  more  specific  name,  ricos  hombret  de  genera.  Hier.  Blanca  in 
Comment.  Rer.  Arragon.  often  speaks  of  these  rich  men,  or  rather  of  these 
Spanish  ricombresy  who  are  usually  styled  rid  homines  in  Latin  deeds. 
Many  have  thought  that  the  ricombres  were  thus  named  in  Spain  from 
the  syllable  rtc,  which  is  found  to  terminate  the  names  of  the  greater 
part  of  the  Gothic  kings ;  but  I  believe  it  more  probably  originates  from 
another  word  which  was  common  to  the  northern  nations.  BiCf  which  is 
the  termination  of  most  of  the  names  of  their  chieftains,  signifies  rich, 
whence  the  Germans  have  formed  the  word  ruek^  the  French  riche^  and 
the  Spanish  rtco,  to  mark  a  person  of  opulency  ;  and  because  great  lords 
are  commonly  rich  and  powerful  in  land,  they  have  been  thus  styled, 
besides  that  all  who  abounded  in  landed  property  did  not  come  under  the 
title  of  ricos  ombres^  for  birth,  fiefs,  and  distinguished  lordships  alone 
gave  this  qualification. 

*  Those  who  had  put  on  the  cross,  and  were  preparing  for  these  long 
and  troublesome  expeditions  to  the  Holy  Land,  were  accustomed,  before 
their  departure,  to  settle  their  affairs,  to  make  their  wills,  and  to  fix  por- 
tions for  their  children.  And  as  their  return  was  very  uncertain,  both 
from  the  difficulties  of  the  journey,  and  the  hazards  and  perils  of  war,  the 
events  of  which  are  always  doubtful,  they  commonly  performed  all  such 
acts  as  those  who  are  on  the  point  of  death  usually  observe ;  such  as 
making  restitution  of  whatever  they  may  have  seized  or  usurped  from  the 
church  or  from  private  persons,  for  the  discharge  of  their  consciences. 
Tide-deeds  abound  with  these  restitutions  made  to  the  church  by  knights 
before  the  departure  for  the  Holy  Land.  The  lord  de  Joinville, 
although  he  did  not  feel  himself  guilty  of  any  such  usurpations, 
yet  to  satisfy  the  duty  of  his  conscience,  made  preparations,  before 
he  set  out  on  this  expedition,  to  repair  whatever  wrongs  he  might  have 
done  to  his  neighbours,  should  there  be  any  of  them  that  made  complaint 
against  him.  Many  persons  imagine  that  the  greater  part  of  the  monas- 
teries built  towards  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century,  and  in  the  follow, 
ing  ones,  were  solely  founded  from  the  restitutions  which  the  great 
lords  had  made  prior  to  their  undertaking  expeditions  to  sudi  a  great 
distance. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1248.]  DEPARTURE  OF  JOINT ILLB  POR  THE  HOLT  LAND.  381 

my  presence  while  they  consulted  together,  I  withdrew,  and 
would  only  listen  to  what  they  might  say  to  me  without  the 
restraint  of  fear.  I  likewise  adopted  this  measure,  because  I 
was  unwilling  to  carry  with  me  one  single  penny  wrong- 
fully ;  and  to  fulfil  any  demands  that  might  be  made,  I  had 
mortgaged*  to  friends  a  great  part  of  my  inheritance,  so 
that  there  did  not  remain  at  the  utmost  more  than  twelve 
hundred  livres  of  yearly  revenue  from  my  lands;  for  my 
lady-mother  was  still  living,  who  held  the  best  of  my  estate  in 
dower. 

I  set  out,  I  before  said,  with  my  nine  knights,  having  three 
banners :  and  I  have  mentioned  the  things  above,  because  if 
it  had  not  been  for  the  aid  and  assistance  of  God,  who  never 
forgot  me,  I  should  never  have  been  able  to  support  sucli  a 
burden  as  I  bore  for  six  years,  the  time  I  was  on  my  pil- 
grimage in  the  Holy  Land. 

When  I  was  on  the  point  of  departure,  John,  lord  d'Apre- 
mont,  and  the  count  de  Salebruche,  sent  to  me  to  inquire 
if  I  were  willing  to  join  parties,  and  embark  together,  for 
that  they  were  ready  to  march,  and  their  company  consisted 
of  ten  knights.    I  cheerfully  assented,  and  we  ordered  a 

*  The  derotion  of  our  first  crusaders  in  the  Holy  Land,  added  to 
their  courage  and  desire  of  acquiring  glory  and  reputation  in  the  wars, 
were  so  extraordinary,  that  they  not  only  made  no  difficulty  in  abandoning 
their  families  and  country,  but  even  alienated  or  mortgaged  the 
feirest  parts  of  their  possessions.  The  history  of  these  wars  informs 
us,  that  Godfrey  de  Bouillon ;  Ra3rmond,  count  de  St.  Gilles ;  Wil- 
lisuoQ,  duke  of  Normandy;  Boemond,  duke  de  la  Puglia;  Harpin, 
count  de  Bourges,  and  other  great  lords,  sold  or  mortgaged  tiieir 
duchies  or  counties,  to  supply  die  means  for  the  expense  of  so  great 
an  enterprise.  Such  was  the  height  of  their  fervour ;  and  in  imita- 
tion of  them,  and  following  the  example  of  his  ancestors,  the  lord 
de  Joinville  did  not  fail  to  mortgage  the  better  part  of  his  estates, 
although  they  were  then  but  small,  on  account  of  bis  mother's  enjoy- 
ing the  larger  share  for  her  dower.  The  facility  with  which  the 
crusaders  sold  or  mortgaged  their  lands,  to  afford  them  the  means 
of  undertaking  these  expeditions,  gave  rise  to  the  spirited  reply 
which  king  Philip  Augustus  made  to  John,  king  of  England,  who 
having  put  on  the  cross,  afterwards  sent  his  ambassadors  to  Philip, 
to  demand  th&t  he  would  be  pleased  to  restore  to  him  some 
portion  of  the  land,  which  he  had  gained  from  him  in  war,  for  a 
fixed  amount  of  money.*'  The  king  gave  them  this  witty  answer  :  It 
is  a  strange  and  unheard-of  thing,  for  one  marked  with  the  cross  to  wish 
to  become  a  purchaser ;  when  he  ought  rather  to  sell,  if  he  entered  upon 
his  pilgrimage  as  be-came  him.*' 


Digitized  by 


d88  JOINTILLE's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.       JjPT.  If. 


vessel  to  he  hired  for  ns  at  Marseilles,  which  carried  as«  our 
arms  and  horses. 

You  must  know,  that  before  the  king  left  the  realm,  he 
summoned  all  the  barons  to  Paris,  and  there  made  tiiera 
renew  their  fealty  and  homage,*  and  swear  loyalty  to  his 
children,  should  any  unfortunate  event  happen  to  himself 
during  this  expedition  to  the  Holy  Land.  He  summoned  me 
also ;  but  I,  who  was  not  his  subject,  would  not  take  the 
oath :  besides,  it  was  not  my  intention  to  remain  behind. 

When  I  was  nearly  ready  to  set  out,  I  sent  for  the  abbot 
of  Cheminon,  who  was  at  that  time  considered  as  the  most 
discreet  man  of  all  the  White  Monks,  to  reconcile  myself  with 
him.  He  gave  me  my  scarf  and  bound  it  on  me,  and  like- 
wise put  the  pilgrim's  staff  in  my  hand.  Instantly  after,  I 
quitted  the  castle  of  Joinville  without  ever  re-entering  it, 
until  my  return  from  beyond  sea.  I  made  pilgrimages  to 
all  the  holy  places  in  tho  neighbourhood ;  such  as  Biiecoort, 
St.  Urban,  and  others  near  to  Joinville,  on  foot  without  shoes, 
and  in  my  shirt.  But  as  I  was  journeying  horn  Blieoourt  to 
St.  Urban,  I  was  obliged  to  pass  near  to  the  castle  of  Join- 
ville ;  I  dared  never  turn  my  eyes  that  way  for  fear  of  feeling 
too  great  regret,  and  lest  my  courage  should  £a.il  on  leaving 
my  two  fine  children  and  my  fair  castle  of  Joinville,  which 
I  loved  in  my  heart.  Being  suddenly  called  upon  by  the 
count  de  Salbruche,  my  brother  in  arms,  with  our  knights  and 
attendants,  we  went  to  dine  at  La  Fontaine  Archeveque 
before  Dongeux  :  and  there  the  abbot  of  St.  Urban,  to  whom 
may  God  shew  mercy !  gave  to  me  and  my  knights  very  hand- 
some jewels.  We  then  took  our  leave  of  him,  and  went  straight 
to  Auxoune,  where  we  embarked  with  our  armour  on  the  Soane 
for  Lyons:  our  cavalry  and  war-horses  were  led  along  its  banks. 
When  we  came  to  Lyons,  we  embarked  cn  the  river  Rh6ne 
to  go  to  Aries  le  Blanc.  I  remember  well  that  on  its  banks 
we  saw  the  remains  of  a  castle  called  La  Roche-gluy,  wl  ich 
castle  the  king  had  caused  to  be  demolished  on  account  of  the 
lord  of  it,  named  Roger,  having  a  very  ill-famed  reputation 

•  The  king,  Louis  VIII.,  father  to  St.  Louis,  when  taken  ill  of  a 
grieyous  disorder  at  Montpensier,  of  which  he  died,  exacted  a  similar  oath 
from  those  barons  who  were  then  at  court,  as  the  letters  of  this  kin^; 
inform  us.  which  remain  in  the  cartulary  of  Champagne,  in  the  Chamber 
of  Accounts  at  Paris. 


^.D.  1248.] 


A  MIRACLE  AT  SEA. 


iji  stopping  and  plundering  all  merchants  and  pilgrims  that 
passed  that  way 

It  was  the  month  of  August  in  this  same  year  that  we . 
embarked  at  the  rock  of  Marseilles,*  and  the  ports  of  the 
ressel  were  opened  to  allow  the  horses  we  intended  carrying 
with  us  to  enter.  When  we  were  all  on  board,  the  port 
was  caulked  and  stopped  up  as  close  as  a  large  tun  of  wine, 
because  when  the  vessel  was  at  sea,  the  port  was  under 
water.  Shortly  after  the  captain  of  the  ship  cried  out  to  his 
people  on  its  prow,  " Is  your  work  done?  Are  we  ready?" 
They  replied,  "  Yes :  in  truth,  we  are." 

When  the  priests  and  clerks  embarked,  the  captain  made 
them  mount  to  the  castle  of  the  ship,  and  chant  psalms  in 
praise  of  God,  that  he  might  be  pleased  to  grant  us  a  pros* 
perous  voyage.  They  all,  with  a  loud  voice,  sang  the  beau- 
tiful hymn  of  "Yeni  Creator,"  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end  ;  and  while  they  were  singing,  the  mariners  set  their  sails 
in  the  name  of  God.  Instantly  after,  a  breeze  of  wind  filled 
our  sails,  and  soon  made  us  lose  sight  of  land,  so  that  we 
only  saw  sea  and  sky,  and  each  day  we  were  at  a  farther 
distance  from  the  places  from  which  we  had  set  out. 

I  must  say  here,  that  he  is  a  great  fool  who  shaU  put 
himself  in  such  dangers,  having  wronged  any  one,  or  having 
any  mortal  sins  on  his  conscience  ;  for  when  he  goes  to  sleep 
in  the  evening,  he  knows  not  if  in  the  morning  he  may  not 
find  himself  under  the  sea. 

I  will  tell  you  the  first  marvel  that  befel  us  at  sea.  It  was 
a  great  round  mountain  which  we  met  with  about  vespers,  off 
Barbary :  when  we  had  passed  it,  we  made  all  the  sail  we 
could  the  whole  night,  and  in  the  morning  we  supposed  we 
must  have  run  fifty  leagues,  or  more,  but  we  found  ourselves 
again  ofi"  this  large  mountain.  We  were,  of  course,  much 
alarmed,  and  continued  to  make  all  the  sail  we  could  that  day 
and  the  following  night,  but  it  was  all  the  same,  we  still  had 
the  mountain  near  at  hand.  We  were  more  astonished  than 
ever,  and  thought  we  ran  great  risk  of  our  lives ;  for  the 
sailors  told  us  that  the  Saracens  of  Barbary  would  come  and 
attack  us.    A  very  discreet  churchman,  called  the  dean  of 

*  He  thus  calls  the  promontory  which  encloses  the  port  of  Marseilles, 
where  the  fort  of  Notre  Dame  de  la  Garde  is  placed.  The  writers  of  the 
li^iddle  ages  often  use  the  word  rock  to  signify  a  fort  or  castle. 


Digitized  by 


884      joinville's  memoirs  of  saint  louis  ix.       fpT.  ii; 


Maum,  came  forward  and  said,  "Gentlemen,  I  never  remem-* 
ber  any  distress  in  oar  parish,  either  from  too  much  abun- 
dance, or  for  want  of  rain  or  any  other  plague,  but  that  God 
and  his  mother  delivered  us  from  it,  and  caused  every  thing 
to  happen  as  it  could  be  wished,  when  a  procession  had  beea 
made  three  times  with  devotion  on  a  Saturday."  Now  this 
day  was  a  Saturday,  and  we  instantly  began  a  procession 
round  the  masts  of  the  ship.  I  remember  well  that  I  was 
forced  to  be  supported  under  my  arms,  because  I  was  at  the 
time  very  sick.  Immediately  afterwards  we  lost  siglit  of 
this  mountain,  and  arrived  at  Cyprus  the  third  Saturday 
after  we  had  made  our  procession. 

We  found,  on  our  landing  at  Cyprus,  that  the  good  king, 
St.  Louis,  was  already  there,  and  had  laid  in  provisions  in 
great  abundance.*  You  would  have  taken  his  cellars,  at  a 
distance,  for  great  houses  formed  of  casks  of  wine,  placed 
one  on  the  other,  which  his  purveyors  had  bought  two  years 
before,  and  had  left  in  the  open  fields.  In  like  manner  was 
the  wheat,  barley,  and  other  grain  in  large  heaps,  which,  from 
their  immense  size,  appeared  like  mountains ;  and  in  truth 
many  would  have  supposed  them  such  ;  for  the  rains  which  had 
battered  their  sides  had  made  the  corn  grow,  so  that  there 
was  nothing  to  be  seen  but  green  corn.  When  the  array  of 
the  king  came  to  remove  the  grain,  in  order  to  its  being 
sent  to  Egypt,  and  to  take  off  the  crust  of  green  com,  they 
found  the  com  undemeath  as  fine  and  fresh  as  if  it  had  been 
just  threshed. 

The  good  king  was  impatient  to  set  sail,  so  that  if  it 
had  not  been  for  his  barons,  and  near  relations,  who  pre- 
vailed on  him  to  wait  the  arrival  of  forces  that  were  daily 
expected,  he  would  have  embarked  alone,  or  with  a  very 
small  company. 

While  the  king  remained  in  Cyprus,  the  great  cham  of 

*  Matthew  Paris  writes,  then  when  the  king's  army  was  in  want  of 
provision,  the  Venetians  and  the  inhabitants  of  some  other  towns,  which 
he  does  not  name,  Drought  succour.  The  emperor  Frederick  also 
sent  him  assistance,  for  which  the  king  felt  so  much  obliged,  that  he 
wrote  in  his  favour  to  the  pope  to  obtain  his  absolution.  Queen  Blanche 
likewise  thanked  him  by  her  letters,  and  sent  him  various  presents,  aa  an 
acknowledgment  to  him  from  France,  assuring  him  that  the  whole  French 
army  was  indebted  to  hliu  for  its  preservation. 


Digitized  by 


AJK  1248.]  PRESENT  TO  THE  CHAM  OP  TARTARY.  385 

Tartary*  sent  him  an  ambassador,  who  paid  Lim  many  fine 
eompliments;  among  others,  the  cham  of  Tartary  sent  him 
word  that  he  was  r^idy  and  at  his  command  to  assist  him  in 
the  conquest  of  the  Holy  Land,  and  to  deliver  Jerusalem  from 
the  hands  of  the  Saracens  and  Pagans.  The  king  received  this 
embassy  with  kindness,  and,  in  return,  sent  ambassadors  to 
the  cham  of  Tartary,  who  were  two  years  before  they  returned. 
The  king  of  France  sent  likewise  to  the  cham  a  tent  in  the 
form  of  a  chapel ;  it  was  of  fine  scarlet  cloth,  very  rich,  and 
handsomely  made,  with  the  intent  to  see  if  he  could  induce 
tbe  cham  and  his  subjects  to  embrace  our  faith  and  religion ; 
and,  as  a  further  inducement,  he  had  embroidered  on  the  in- 
side of  the  tent  the  Annunciation  of  the  Virgin  ihother  of 
God,  with  other  mysteries  of  our  faith.  Two  Black  Monks, 
who  understood  the  Saracen  language,  had  charge  of  this  tent, 
and  to  exhort  the  Tartars,  and  shew  how  they  ought  to  put 
their  belief  in  God. 

The  two  monks  shortly  returned,  thinking  to  meet  the  king 
at  Acre ;  but  he  was  already  in  Csesarea,  upon  which  they 
went  back  to  France.  To  say  how  the  other  ambassadors, 
whom  the  king  had  sent  to  the  king  of  Barbary,  were 
received,  would  be  to  tell  of  wonders,  as  I  heard  them 
related  to  the  king  from  their  own  mouths.  I  have  like- 
wise frequently  inquired  of  them  concerning  their  adven- 
tures ;  but  I  will  not  say  any  thing  of  them  at  present,  for 
fear  of  breaking  in  upon  the  principal  matter,  which  I  had 
already  begun. 

You  must  know  that  when  I  quitted  France,  to  join  this 
expedition  to  the  Holy  Land,  I  did  not  possess  more  than 
1,200  livres  of  yearly  revenue,  and  yet  I  took  charge  of  nine 
other  knights  and  three  banners.  On  my  arrival  at  Cyprus  I 
had  but  twelve  score  livres  in  gold  and  silver,  after  paying 
the  freight  of  the  ship,  so  that  many  of  my  knights  told  me 
they  would  leave  me  if  I  did  not  better  provide  myself  with 
money.  I  was  somewhat  cast  down  in  courage  on  hearing 
this,  but  had  ever  my  confidence  in  God  ;  and  when  the  good 
king  St.  Louis  heard  of  my  distress,  he  sent  for  me,  and 

*  ThU  king  was  not  the  great  cham  of  Tartary,  but  a  prince  over  hia 
•nbjects,  whose  name  was  Erca^  as  we  see  in  the  additions  to  Matt. 
hau,  p.  116. 

2g 


Digitized  by 


880 


JOIMTILLE's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.       ^PT.  II. 


retained  me  in  his'  service,  allowing  me,  like  a  kind  lord,  $00 
livres  Tonmois.  I  instanUy  returned  thanks  to  God,  for  I  had 
now  more  monej  than  I  had  need  of. 

It  is  now  necessary  that  I  speak  of  the  state  and  power  of 
the  princes  heyond  sea,  and  I  shall  first  begin  with  the  sultan 
of  Connie.*  This  sultan  is  the  most  powerful  king  of  all 
agan  land,  and  had  a  most  marvellous  work  achieved ;  for 
e  had  melted  part  of  his  gold,  and  made  it  into  large  vessels 
after  the  manner  of  the  earthen  pots  in  which  wine  is  pre- 
served in  those  countries,  each  of  which  held  about  a  tun  of 
wine.  He  afterwards  had  these  pots  broken,  and  the  pieces 
lay  in  one  of  his  castles,  which  was  open  for  every  one  to  see 
and  touch  these  broken  masses  of  gold.  It  was  said  that  be 
had  six  or  seven  of  these  large  golden  pots.  His  great  riches 
were  apparent  in  a  pavilion  which  the  king  of  Armenia  sent 
to  the  king  of  France  when  he  was  at  C3rprus,  for  it  was  esti- 
mated  at  500  livres.  The  king  of  Armenia  sent  word,  that 
it  had  been  given  to  him  by  one  of  the  serrais  of  the  snltan 
of  Connie.  Now  you  must  know  that  these  serrais  have  the 
care  and  management  of  the  pavilions  of  the  sultan,  and  their 
employment  is  to  clean  every  day  the  apartments  of  his  dif- 
ferent palaces. 

This  king  of  Armenia  was  vassal  to  the  sultan  of  Connie ; 
and  went  to  the  grand  cham  of  Tartary  to  complain  that  the 
eultan  had  made  war  upon  him,  and  kept  him  in  vassalage, 
and  at  the  same  time  tc  entreat  he  would  support  and  succour 
him.  He  consented  to  become  vassal  to  the  cham  of  Tartary, 
if  he  would  supply  him  with  a  large  body  of  men-at-arms 
against  the  sultau  of  Connie. 

The  cham  of  Tartary  was  willing  to  do  this,  and  sent  him  a 
considerable  force,  with  which  the  king  of  Armenia  marched 
against  the  sultan,  whose  army  was  nearly  equal  to  his ;  but 
the  Armenians  and  Tartars  defeated  the  troops  of  their  enemy; 
and  in  consequence  of  this  the  king  of  Armenia  was  no  longer 
vassal  nor  subject  to  the  sultan.  This  victory,  which  he  had 
gained  by  the  assistance  of  the  Tartars,  increased  his  renown 

*  This  sultan  of  Iconium,  a  town  in  Cilicia  or  Caramania,  which  the 
Turks  at  this  day  call  Coni,  had  the  name  of  Azatines,  and  was  s 
Christian.  There  is  a  letter  from  him  to  Pope  Gregory  IX.,  who 
wanted  to  persuade  him  to  embrace  the  Christian  religion,  in  the  Ecde* 
tiastical  Annals  of  Odoricus  Raynaldus,  in  the  year  1235,  n.  37»  ni 
which  he  is  called  Alatinus. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1248.3       SULTAN  OF  BABYLON  POISONED. 


387 


80  much  in  Cyprus,  that  many  of  our  people  went  to  Armenia 
to  seek  for  profit  in  these  engagements ;  but  of  them  we  had 
never  after  any  intelligence. 

Of  the  saltan  of  Babylon*  I  shall  say,  that  he  imagined  tbe 
king,  was  about  to  make  war  on  the  sultan  of  Hamault,t  his 
ancient  enemy :  he  was  therefore  waiting  for  the  king  to  join 
his  forces  against  the  sultan  of  Hamatdt ;  but  when  he  per- 
eeired  that  the  king  did  not  advance,  he  departed,  and  went 
to  lay  siege  to  the  city  of  Hamault,  in  which  the  sultan 
resided. 

The  sultan,  thus  finding  himself  besieged,  knew  not  how  to 
act ;  for  he  was  aware,  that  if  the  sultan  of  Babylon  should 
remain  long,  he  must  conquer  and  overthrow  him.  He, 
however,  practised  so  successfully  by  gifts  and  promises  with 
one  of  the  varlets  of  the  chamber  of  the  sultan  of  Babylon 
that  he  poisoned  his  master.  The  manner  of  his  doing  it  was 
as  follows : — The  varlet,  who  in  their  language  is  officially 
called  Serais,  knowing  that  the  sultan  after  playing  at  chess  X 
was  frequently  used  to  lie  down  on  mats  that  were  at  the  foot 
of  his  bed,  poisoned  one  of  these  mats ;  and  it  chanced  that 
the  sultan,  having  thrown  aside  part  of  his  dress,  lay  on  the 
mat  with  his  naked  legs,  and  turning  about  rubbed  a  sore  he 
had  on  one  of  them  against  the  poisoned  part.    The  venom 

*  According  to  the  Arabian  Chronicle  given  to  the  public  by  Abraham 
Echellensis,  his  name  was  Saleh  Nagem-addim  Aiiub,  and  he  was  son  to 
the  king  Aicamel  Mahomet,  whom  Vincent  de  Beauvais  calls  Soldanus 
KiemeL 

f  It  should  be  of  Haman.  This  sultan  was  lord  of  Aleppo,  as  we 
learn  from  the  monk  Aython,  ch.  3S  and  39,  and  from  Vincent  de 
Beauvais,  1.  32,  ch.  89  and  95,  wherein  he  relates  also  the  difference 
between  the  two  sultans. 

X  This  game  has  been  always  very  much  in  vogue  among  the  Turks  and 
Saracens,  as  we  learn  from  Elemacin,  1.  2,  ch.  7,  from  Aython,  ch.  53, 
and  ^om  Ducas,  in  his  History,  ch.  16.  The  game  has  even  taken  its 
name  from  a  Turkish  or  Arabic  word  Scach,  which  signifies  king,  because 
the  principal  piece  of  chess  is  the  king,  as  is  noticed  in  the  Pandect  of 
Leunclavius,  n.  1,  102,  179.  The  Greeks  of  the  middle  ages,  and  those 
of  the  present  day,  call  it  ZartiKiovt  as  Saumaise  in  his  observations 
on  Pliny,  and  Meursius  in  his  Glossary,  have  observed.  Anna  Comnena, 
in  the  22nd  book  of  her  Alexiade,  makes  use  of  this  word,  and  re- 
marks, that  it  was  invented  by  the  Assyrians.  See  the  Chronicle  of 
Hainault,  by  Jacques  de  Guyse,  vol.  i.  pp.  53  and  54,  and  M.  Menage 
in  his  Glossary  of  the  French  Language.  Lucanus  in  Paneg.  ad  Pisonem 
has  ielegantly  described  the  game  of  chess,  and  after  him  Hieronymos 
Vida». 

2  c  2 


Digitized  by 


888  JOINTILLe's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX*  fPT.A 

instantaneouslj  took  effect  through  this  sore,  and  his  whole 
body  became  so  much  affected  that  he  lost  the  use  of  that  side. 
When  the  venom  was  come  towards  the  head,  he  continued 
for  two  days  without  eating  or  drinking,  and  this  was  the 
cause  that  the  sultan  of  Hamault  remained  in  peace,  for  the 
sultan  of  Babylon  was  obliged  to  be  carried  back  to  his  own 
country  by  his  people. 

As  soon  as  the  month  of  March  was  come,  it  was  pro- 
claimed, by  orders  of  the  king,  that  all  vessels  should  be  ladea 
and  ready  to  sail  whenever  the  king  should  command.  All 
things  being  ready,  the  king,  the  queen,  and  their  households 
embarked  on  board  their  different  ships.  On  the  Friday  pre- 
ceding "Whitsunday,  the  king  ordered  every  one  to  follow 
him  on  the  morrow,  and  proceed  to  Egypt;  and  on  the 
morrow,  being  Saturday,  every  vessel  made  sail,  which  was 
a  pleasant  sight  to  see,  for  it  seemed  as  if  the  whole  sea,  as 
far  as  the  sight  could  reach,  was  covered  with  cloth,  from  the 
great  quantity  of  sails  that  were  spread  to  the  wind,  there 
being  1,800  vessels  great  and  small. 

The  king,  followed  by  the  other  vessels,  came  on  Whitsun- 
day to  the  point  of  L3miesson,  where  he  landed,  and  heard 
mass ;  but  of  full  2,800  knights,  who  had  embarked  to  foUow 
the  king,  there  were  now  only  700  with  him  on  shore.  A 
horrible  wind  that  blew  from  Egypt  had  made  the  remainder 
alter  their  course,  and  bad  separated  them  from  the  company 
of  the  king,  and  driven  them  on  the  coast  of  Acre  and  other 
strange  countries  at  a  great  distance,  so  that  the  king  did  not 
see  them  again  for  a  long  time.  He  and  his  companions  were 
much  grieved  at  their  loss,  for  they  believed  them  drowned, 
3r  in  great  danger  at  least. 

On  the  morrow  of  Whitsunday,  the  wind  was  favourable, 
and  the  king  and  we  who  were  with  him  made  sail,  in  God's 
name,  to  pursue  our  route.  It  happened  that  in  our  course 
we  met  the  prince  of  Morea*  and  the  duke  of  Burgundy ,t 
who  has  sojourned  in  the  Morea.    The  king  arrived  with  his 

*  William  de  Villehardonin,  prince  of  Achaia  and  of  the  Morea,  senes- 
chal  of  Romania. 

t  The  duke  of  Burgundy  had  passed  the  winter  in  the  Morea,  accord- 
mg  to  Vincent  de  Beauvais,  1.  32,  ch.  97,  and,  as  I  presume,  then 
returned  to  Constantinople,  which  he  undertook  in  consequence  of  a 
promise  he  had  made  the  emperor  Baldwin  so  long  ago  as  the  year  1238, 
ro  fuccour  him  in  case  of  need,  as  we  read  in  Albericus. 


Digitized  by 


ARRtYAL  AT  DAMIETTA. 


889 


fleet  on  the  Thursday  after  Whitsuntide  at  Damietta,  where  a 
great  company  were  waiting  for  us. 

On  the  shore  we  saw  the  whole  force  of  the  sultan,  who 
were  handsome  men  to  look  at.  The  sultan  wore  arms  of 
burnished  gold  of  so  fine  a  polish,  that  when  the  sun  shone  on 
them,  he  seemed  like  a  sun  himself.  The  tumult  and  noise 
they  made  with  their  horns  and  nacaires*  was  frightful  to 
hesu*,  and  seemed  very  strange  to  the  French. 

The  king,  perceiving  this,  called  together  his  barons  and 
Counsellors  to  consult  on  what  should  be  done.  They  advised 
him  to  wait  until  the  whole  of  his  force  should  arrive ;  for  he 
had  not  now  with  him  a  third  part,  owing,  as  I  before  said,  to 
the  contrariety  of  the  wind.  But  the  king  would  not  consent, 
saying,  that  by  such  conduct  he  should  encourage  the  enemy ; 
and  likewise  because  there  was  not  any  port  near  in  those 
seas  whither  he  might  retire,  and  wait  in  safety  the  return  of 
those  who  had  been  dis})ersed  by  the  storm.  He  added,  that 
a  strong  gust  of  wind  might  arise  and  separate  them  from 
each  other  in  these  foreign  countries,  as  had  happened  to  his 
other  knights  on  Whitsimday  last.  They  acceded,  therefore, 
to  his  proposal,  that  on  the  Friday  preceding  Trinity  Sunday 
the  king  should  disembark,  and  combat  the  Saracens,  if  it 
were  not  their  fault.  The  king  ordered  the  lord  John  de 
Belmont  to  cause  a  galley  to  be  given  to  the  lord  Airart  de 
Brienne,  with  whom  I  was,  to  land  us  and  our  men-at-arms, 
because  the  large  ships  could  not  approach  near  enough  to  the 
shore.  Thus  was  it  the  will  of  God  that  I  should  quit  my 
ship,  and  enter  a  small  galley,  which  I  thought  I  had  lost, 
and  wherein  were  eight  of  my  horses.  This  galley  had  been 
given  me  by  Madame  de  Baruth,  cousin-german  to  the  count 
de  Montbelml. 

The  lord  Airart  de  Brienne  and  I,  fully  armed,  went  to  the 

*  The  Italians  call  them  naccara  and  gnacara.  Philippo  Venuto  says, 
that  it  is  a  Stromento  musicu,  col  quale  i  fanciulli  cantano  il  san  Mar- 
tino/'  Retro  de  la  Valle,  in  his  Travels,  ep.  6,  says,  that  a  sort  of  drum 
is  called  by  this  name  which  is  used  by  the  German  cavalry,  and  which  we 
commonly  call  tymbaU.  Jean  d'Oronville,  in  his  History  of  Louis,  Duke 
of  Bourbon,  chap.  76,  attributes  in  like  manner  the  naccaires  to  the 
Saracens  of  Africa.  The  king  of  Tunis,  the  king  of  Treme^en,  and  the 
king  of  Bugia,  came  before  the  town  of  Africa  wi£  their  array,  and,  ac- 
cording to  custom,  attended  by  their  naccaires,  drums,  cymbals,  flutes, 
and  shoutings." 


390 


JOINTILLB's  memoirs  op  saint  LOUIS  tx. 


£PT.II. 


king  on  the  Friday,  tu  ask  for  the  galley  which  he  had 
ordered  for  us ;  hut  Sir  John  de  Belmont  replied,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  king,  that  we  should  not  then  have  it ;  horn 
which  may  he  known,  that  the  good  king  had  as  much  trouble 
in  keeping  his  own  people  in  peace  together,  as  in  his  ill-for- 
tunes and  losses. 

When  our  people  saw  thai  we  were  not  bringing  back  the 
galley,  they  dropped  into  the  boat  with  all  their  weight,  and 
when  the  sailors  perceived  the  boat  was  gradually  sinking, 
they  retired  into  the  ship,  abandoning  my  knights  in  the  boaL 
On  seeing  this,  I  called  out  to  the  captain,  and  asked  how 
many  there  were  overweight  for  the  boat  He  said,  too 
many  by  eighteen  so  armed.  I  then  instantly  discharged  so 
many  from  the  boat,  and  put  them  in  the  ship  with  my  horses. 
As  I  was  thus  arranging  these  men-at-arms,  a  knight,  belong- 
ing to  the  lord  Airart  de  Brienne,  named  Plouquet,  wanting 
to  descend  from  the  ship  to  the  boat  as  it  was  pushing  oSy  feU 
into  the  sea  and  was  drowned.* 

We  then  began  to  sail  after  the  boat  of  the  king's  large  ship, 
and  made  for  land  ;  but  when  those  attached  to  the  king,  who 
were  hastening  to  land  like  ourselves,  saw  that  we  made  more 
Speed  than  they,  they  cried  out  for  us  to  wait  for  the  arrival 
of  the  standard  of  St.  Denis  ;t  but  I  would  not  attend  to 

*  After  thege  words  the  Poitiers  edition  adds,  ''And  I  must  rehte  a 
marvellous  event  which  happened  in  my  little  boat.  I  had  taken  ¥dth  me 
two  valiant  knights  bachelor,  whose  names  were  Villains  de  Vergy  and 
William  de  Dammartin.  They  bore  so  great  a  hatred  to  each  other,  that 
it  could  not  be  exceeded,  insomuch  that  they  had  several  times  fought, 
and  there  was  no  way  of  appeasing  their  rage.  But  when  my  boat  was 
on  the  point  of  leaving  the  ship  for  land,  on  a  sudden  these  two  bachelors, 
without  saying  one  word,  ran  and  embraced  each  other,  weeping  through 
affection,  and  mutually  asking  pardon  for  their  offences.  I  mention  this 
to  shew  that  the  danger  of  death  extinguishes  all  hatred  and  rancour." 

t  That  is  to  say,  the  vessel  which  bore  the  standard  of  St.  Denis,  for, 
further  on,  **the  galley  arrived  with  the  standard  of  St.  Denis;"  and 
directly  afterward,  "  when  the  good  king  Saint  Louis  knew  that  the 
standard  of  St.  Denis  was  landed."  This  standard  of  St.  Denis  was  no 
Other  than  the  oriflamme.  This  name  was  given  to  it  because  it  was  slit  up 
from  the  bottom  to  resemble  flames,  or  perhaps  from  its  being  of  a  red 
colour  :  when  it  fluttered  in  th^s  wind,  it  appeared  at  a  distance  like  flames ; 
and,  beside,  the  lance  to  which  it  was  fixed  was  gilded.  The  oriflamme  was 
the  particular  banner  of  the  abbot  and  monastery  of  St.  Denis,  which  was 
borne  in  their  wars  by  their  proxies,  who,  in  quality  of  defenders  or  pro- 
tectors of  monasteries  and  churches,  undertook  to  lead  their  vassals  ia  the 


A,D.  1249.]  LANDING  AT  DAMIETTA. 


891 


them,  and  continued  advancing  towards  a  large  battalion  of 
Saracens  and  Turks,  consisting  of  6,000  men,  at  least,  on 
horseback.  The  moment  they  saw  us  on  shore  they  spurred 
their  horses  full  gallop  toward  us ;  but  we  struck  our  spears 
and  shields  into  the  sand  with  their  points  against  them, 
which  as  soon  as  they  perceived,  and  that  we  were  advancing 
inland,  they  suddenly  wheeled  about  and  fled. 

That  discreet  man  Sir  Baldwin  de  Rheims,  as  soon  as  I 
was  landed,  sent  one  of  his  squires  to  desire  I  would  wait  for 
him.  I  made  answer,  by  his  messenger,  that  I  would  cheer- 
fulij  do  so,  for  that  so  valiant  a  man  as  he  was  well  deserved 
waiting  for ;  and  he  was  thankful  for  this  attention  as  long 
as  he  lived.  He  shortly  after  joined  our  company,  with  a 
thousand  knights  at  least.  You  must  know  that  when  I 
first  landed  I  had  not  any  one  person  with  me,  neither  friend 
nor  servant,  of  all  those  I  had  brought  from  France.  Not- 
withstanding this,  God  always  assisted  me  with  his  grace,  for 
which  I  ever  praise  him. 

On  our  left  the  count  de  Japhe,*  counsin-german  to  the 
count  de  Montbelial,  and  of  the  lineage  of  the  house  of  Join- 
yille,  drew  up  his  men.  This  count  Japhe  had  disembarked 
in  a  most  grand  manner ;  for  his  galley  was  all  painted 
withinside  and  without  with  escutcheons  of  his  arms,  which 
were  a  cross  pat6e  gules  on  a  field  or.  There  were  full  three 
hundred  sailors  on  board  the  galley,  each  bearing  a  target  of 

defence  of  their  rights,  and  to  bear  their  standards  in  war :  hence  they  have 
been  called  standard- biearers  to  the  church,  Signiferi  Ecclesiarum."  The 
counts  of  Vexin  and  of  Pontoise  had  this  title  in  the  monastery  of  St. 
Denis,  of  which  they  were  the  proxies  and  guardians,  and  in  this  quality 
they  bore  the  oriflamme  in  the  wars  which  they  undertook  in  the  defence 
of  its  property.  From  this  the  banner  has  been  by  authors  more  com- 
monly  called  the  standard  of  St.  Denis,  not  because  it  was  preserved  in 
the  church  of  that  monastery,  but  because  it  was  the  banner  usually  borne 
in  the  wars  in  which  this  abbey  was  concerned.  We  may  therefore  conclude 
that  it  was  not  borne  by  our  kings  in  their  wars  until  they  were  become 
proprietors  of  the  counties  of  Pontoise  and  Mante  ;  that  is  to  say,  of  the 
Vexin,  which  happened  during  the  reign  of  Philippes  I.  or  of  Louis  le 
6ro8,  his  son. 

*  This  count  was  the  person  who  had  succeeded  Count  Walter  de 
Bneniie,  made  prisoner  by  the  sultan  of  Persia,  about  the  year  1244.  His 
name  was  John  d'Ibelin,  and  he  was  lord  of  Baruth,  by  descent  from  his 
father,  Balian  d'Ibelin.  His  mother  was  Eschive  de  Montbeliard,  by 
reason  of  which  alliance  John  d'Ibelin  was  a  cousin,  once  removed,  from 
Germain  de  Richard,  count  de  Montbeliard,  son  of  Peter. 


Digitized  by 


292       joinville's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.     ^PT.  a. 


his  arms,  and  on  each  target  was  a  smaU  flag  with  his  arms 
likewise,  of  beaten  gold.  It  was  a  sight  worthy  to  be  viewed 
when  he  went  to  sea,  on  account  of  the  noise  which  these  flags 
made,  as  well  as  the  sounds  of  the  drums,*  horns,  and  Saracen 
nacaires,  which  he  had  in  his  gallej. 

The  moment  his  vessel  grounded  on  the  sand,  and  as  near 
as  she  could  be  brought  to  the  land,  he  himself^  his  knights, 
and  men-at-arms  disembarked,  well  armed  at  all  points,  and 
posted  themselves  by  our  side.  The  count  de  Japhe  instantly 
ordered  his  pavilions  to  be  pitched,  which  when  the  Saracens 
saw  was  about  to  be  done,  they  again  returned,  spurring 
their  horses  against  us ;  but  finding  we  were  not  any  way  in- 
timidated, and  that  we  were  firmly  waiting  for  them,  they 
turned  their  backs  and  galloped  away. 

On  our  right,  the  galley  bearing  the  standard  of  St  Denis 
arrived  within  a  crossbow-shot  of  us ;  and  it  happened,  that 
as  she  was  touching  the  ground,  a  Saracen  rode  against  the 
crew  full  speed.  I  know  not  why  he  did  so,  whether  he 
could  not  stop  his  horse,  or  expected  support  from  his  coan- 
trymen,  but  the  poor  creature  was  very  soon  destroyed  and 
cut  to  pieces. 

When  the  good  king  St.  Louis  learnt  that  the  standard  of 
St.  Denis  was  landed,  he  quitted  his  vessel,  which  was 
already  close  to  the  shore,  without  waiting  until  he  could 

*  The  Saracenic  horn  is  mentioned  in  the  extract  I  have  made  from 
the  roll  in  the  Chamber  of  Accounts  of  Paris.  The  manuscript  chromcle 
^f  Bertrand  du  Gnesclin  mentions  it  likewise : — 

Trompes  et  chalemelles  et  cors  Sarazinois.^^ 
I  have  already  spoken  of  naeaires  :  it  remains  only  that  I  say  a  few 
words  respecting  drums,  the  use  of  which  we  have  also  borrowed  from  the 
Saracens.   The  lord  de  Joinville  shews  us,  that  in  his  time  they  were 
called  tabours,  which  is  confirmed  by  the  romance  of  Garin : — 
**  Les  tabours  sonnent  por  les  chevaux  lesdir." 
And  by  William  Guiart  in  the  year  1202  :— 

"  Ne  mena  trompes  ne  tabours.'' 
Jacques  Millet,  in  his  Destruction  of  Troy  : — 
**  Faites  ces  trompettes  sonnor, 
Tabours,  menestriers,  et  clarons," 
Sanuto,  1.  2,  part  4,  ch.  21,  uses  the  word  iamburtum.  The  Spanianoi 
call  them  dltambors.    Bonaventura  Pistofilo,  i.  part,  della  Oplomachla* 
supposes  these  words  to  have  been  formed  from  the  Greek  rafi^oc, 
these  instruments  having  been  invented  to  astonish  and  strike  dismay  ;  but 
it  b  certain  that  the  word,  as  well  as  the  use  of  drums,  has  originated 
with  the  Saracens  and  Arabians* 


Digitized  by 


▲.D.  1249.^  STXHRfilTDeR  OF  DAMlETtA. 


398 


disembark  from  it,  and  against  the  will  of  the  legate,  who 
was  with  him,  leaped  into  the  sea,  which  was  up  to  liis 
shoulders,  and  advanced  to  the  land,  his  shield  on  his  neck« 
his  helmet  on  his  head,  and  lance  in  hand.*  On  joining  his 
men,  he  observed  the  Saracen  anny,  and  asked  who  they 
were.  On  being  told  they  were  Turks  and  Saracens,  he 
wanted  to  make  a  course  alone  against  them,  but  his  attend- 
ants would  not  permit  it,  and  made  him  remain  quiet  until 
his  whole  army  should  be  assembled  and  armed. 

A  messenger,  called  Coullon,  was  sent  thrice  to  the  sultan 
of  the  Saracens,  to  inform  him  of  the  arrival  of  the  king  of 
France ;  but  no  answer  was  returned,  because  the  sultan  was 
ill.  The  Saracens,  hearing  of  this,  abandoned  the  city  of 
Damietta,  believing  their  sultan  was  dead.t  When  the  king 
heard  this  news,  he  sent  one  of  his  knights  to  Damietta  to 
know  the  truth  of  it,  who,  on  his  return,  related  that  the 
sultan  was  really  dead,  and  that  the  Saracens  had  fled  from 
Damietta,  for  he  had  entered  their  houses  that  were  empty. 

Upon  this,  the  king  had  the  legate  called,  with  all  the 
prelates  of  the  army,  and  ordered  the  "  Te  Deum  laudamus  " 
to  be  sung  throughout.  The  king  and  his  army,  shortly 
after,  mounted  their  horses,  and  went  to  take  up  their  quar- 
ters in  Damietta.  The  Turks  were  ill  advised  to  retreat  so 
suddenly  without  destroying  the  bridges  which  they  had 
made  of  boats,  which  would  have  distressed  us  much.  But 
in  another  way  they  did  us  great  mischief,  by  setting  fire  to 
all  parts  of  the  Soulde,:|:  where  their  merchandise  and  plun- 

*  Froissart,  vol.  i.  ch.  12,  and  the  Chronicle  of  Flanders,  pp.  55,  99» 
&c.,  mention  this  usage. 

t  The  Oriental  Chronicle  says,  that  the  sultan  of  Bftbylon  was  not 
deceased  when  St.  Louis  took  Damietta,  bnt  that  he  died  the  day  the  king 
left  it  to  encamp  before  Massoura,  which  was  the  25th  of  November. 

X  According  to  the  lord  de  Joinville,  the  Soulde  was  a  row  of  trades- 
men's shops;  but  it  is  an  error,  and  la  Soulde  must  be  changed  to 
la  Fonde,  as  it  is  printed  in  the  edition  of  Bordeaux.  In  the  treaty 
concluded  by  the  patriarch  Guermond,  and  the  barons  of  Jerusalem, 
with  Dominico  Michiel,  doge  of  "Venice,  relative  to  the  undertaking 
the  siege  of  the  city  of  Tyre  in  the  year  1123,  as  reported  by  Wil- 
liam, archbishop  of  Tyre,  in  his  History,  1.  12,  ch.  25  : — **  Ipse  rex 
Hierusalem  et  nos  omnes  dnci  Venetorum  de  funda  Tyri  ex  parte  regi^ 
festo  apostolomm  Petri  et  Pauli  trecentos  in  unoquoque  anno  Byzantios 
Saracenatos  ex  debiti  conditione  persolvere  debemus.  Now  the  words 
fiinda  Tyri  mean  nothing  else  than  the  revenue  afforded  by  oommeroe^ 


S94        joinville's  memoik»  of  saint  louis  IX.     fpT.  n 


der  had  been  deposited,  which  they  burnt,  for  fear  we  might 
make  any  adyantage  of  them.  It  would  be  the  same  thing  if 
fire  were  set  to  the  Petit  Pont  of  Paris,  which  God  preserve 
from  such  an  accident ! 

Now  let  us  ask  ourselves,  what  grace  did  not  God  the 
Creator  shew  us  in  preserving  us  from  death  and  danger  on 
our  landing,  and  when  we  joyfully  advanced  to  our  enemies 
who  were  on  horseback  ?  What  other  greater  grace  did  not 
our  good  Lord  shew  us  in  delivering  up  Damietta  without  any 
risk  of  our  lives,  and  which  we  never  could  have  gained  but 
by  starving  the  garrison  ?  These  graces,  we  may  say,  were 
wondrous  great,  and  apparent  to  every  one. 

King  John  had  indeed  taken  it  l^y  famine  in  the  times  ot 
our  ancestors :  but  I  doubt  if  the  good  Lord  God  may  not 
say  as  much  of  us  as  he  did  of  the  children  of  Israel,  when 
he  had  conducted  and  led  them  into  the  land  of  promise ; 
for  which  he  reproached  them,  saying,  "  Et  pro  nihilo  hc^ 
hmrunt  terram  desiderabilem^  et  qusB  sequuntnr."  He  said 
this,  because  they  had  forgotten  him,  who  had  showered 
down  on  them  so  much  good.  He  had  saved  them,  and 
brought  them  out  of  the  captivity  of  Pharaoh,  and  given  them 
the  land  of  promise.  Thus  may  he  say  of  us,  who  forgot 
him,  as  shall  hereafter  be  told. 

I  shall  begin  with  the  person  of  the  king  himself^  who 
Bjssembled  all  the  barons  and  prelates  that  had  accompanied 
him,  and  asked  their  advice  what  he  should  do  with  the 
riches  he  had  found  in  Damietta,  and  how  he  should  divide 
them  ?    A  patriarch  who  was  present*  spoke  first,  and  said, 

and  taken  from  the  common  purse  of  the  merchants,  fox  Junda  signifies  a 
purse,  in  Macrobius,  1.  2,  Satumal.  c.  4  ;  and  in  some  Greek  authors, 
quoted  by  Meursius  in  his  Glossary,  y.  <l>ovvda*  This  may  be  the  cause 
that,  in  some  of  the  towns  of  Germany,  the  Low  Countries,  and  in 
England,  the  public  places  for  the  meetings  of  merchants  have  retained  the 
name  of  Bourse,  or  Purse,  on  account  of  its  being  the  common  purse  of 
the  companies  of  merchants. 

*  It  was  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  of  whom  mention  is  made  here- 
after, and  who,  according  to  the  account  of  the  lord  de  Joinville,  was 
eighty  years  old  at  the  time  of  this  expedition.  His  name  was  Guy,  and 
a  native  of  La  Puglia.  Pope  Gregory  IX.  promoted  him  to  the  biflhop. 
ric  of  Nantes  in  Brittany  after  the  death  of  the  patriarch  Girold. 
Albericus  in  the  year  1236.  The  epistle  of  Pope  Gregory,  mentioning 
his  promotion  to  this  dignity-  may  be  found  in  the  ..\.naals  of  Odoricui 
Raynaldus,  anno  1240,  n^  47* 


Digitized  by 


A. D.  1249.3       DISTRIBUTION  OP  THE  SPOILS. 


— Sire,  it  seems  right  to  me,  that  you  should  reserye  the 
wheat,  barley,  rice,  and  all  other  proyisions,  in  order  that  the 
city  may  not  suffer  famine ;  and  that  you  should  order  pro- 
cUunation  to  be  made  throughout  the  army,  that  all  other 
goods  and  furniture  should  be  carried  and  deposited  in  the 
house  of  the  legate,  under  pain  of  excommunication."  This 
advice  was  acceded  to  by  the  barons  and  all  present,  and  put 
in  execution. 

The  furniture  that  was  carried  to  the  legate's  house  was 
found,  on  valuation,  not  worth  more  than  six  thousand 
livres.  When  all  had  been  brought  thither,  the  king  and 
the  barons  sent  to  seek  for  the  good  and  discreet  man,  Sir 
John  de  Yaleri.  On  his  arrival,  the  king  told  him  what 
had  been  done,  and  that  his  council  had  advised  that  the 
legate  should  give  him  the  six  thousand  livres  at  which  the 
goods  had  been  valued,  which  he  would  carry  to  his  house, 
iu  order  that  he  might  dispose  of  them  in  the  manner 
he  should  see  right,  and  where  he  should  think  them  best 
employed. 

"  Sire,"  replied  Sir  John,  "  I  most  humbly  thank  you  for 
the  honour  you  do  me ;  but,  under  your  good  pleasure,  I  will 
not  accept  your  proposal :  never,  please  God,  will  I  alter 
good  and  ancient  customs,  and  such  as  our  predecessors  have 
folk>wed  in  the  Holy  Land ;  for,  whenever  any  city,  or  other 
considerable  booty,  was  gained  from  the  enemy,  the  king 
never  received  but  one-third  of  all  the  riches  or  goods  that 
were  found  in  the  city,  and  the  pilgrims  had  two  parts.  This 
was  the  custom  followed  by  King  John,  when  formerly  he 
took  Damietta :  and  thus,  as  I  have  heard  mjr  elders  say, 
did  the  king  of  Jerusalem  act  before  King  John  s  time,  with- 
out failing  in  any  one  point.  Now,  consider  if  you  be 
willing  to  give  me  two  parts  of  the  grain  and  other  provi- 
sions which  you  have  retained,  and  most  cheerfully  will  I  di- 
vide and  distribute  them  among  the  pilgrims,  in  honour  of  God." 

The  king  did  not  agree  to  this  advice,  and  matters  re- 
mained as  before,  which  made  many  discontented  with  the 
king,  because  he  had  broken  through  good  ancient  customs. 

The  king's  officers,  when  they  were  at  their  ease,  and 
comfortably  lodged  in  the  city  of  Damietta,  instead  of  well 
treating  and  entertaining  the  merchants,  and  those  who  fol- 
lowed the  army  with  provisions,  hired  out  to  them  stalls  and 


Digitized  by 


39d 


JOINYILLE's  MBMOlItS  OF  SAINT  LOUIS  DC      [|PT,  IL 


workmen  at  as  dear  a  rate  as  they  possibly  could.  This 
conduct  was  spread  abroad  to  distant  countries ;  and  those 
who  would  have  supplied  the  army  with  provisions  delayed 
doing  so,  which  was  a  great  evil  and  loss* 

The  barons,  knights,  and  others,  who  ought  to  have 
attended  to  their  money  concerns,  and  to  have  practised 
economy,  as  a  resource  in  times  of  need,  began  to  give  sump* 
tuous  banquets  in  rivalship  to  each  other,  with  the  utmost 
abundance  of  the  most  delicious  meats.  The  commonalty 
likewise  gave  themselves  up  to  debauchery,  and  violated  both 
women  and  girls.  Great  were  the  evils  in  consequence  ;  for 
it  became  necessary  for  the  king  to  wink  at  the  greatest 
liberties  of  his  officers  and  men.  The  good  king  even  told 
me,  that  at  a  stone's  throw  round  his  own  pavilion  were 
several  brothds,*  kept  by  his  personal  attendants.  Other 
disorders  were  going  forward,  and  to  a  greater  extent  than 
any  person  had  hitherto  seen. 

But  let  us  return  to  our  principal  object*  After  we  had 
remained  some  time  in  this  city  of  Damietta,  the  sultan  laid 
.  siege  to  it  on  the  land  side,  with  a  numerous  army.  The 
king  and  his  men-at-arms  were  soon  properly  drawn  out. 
In  order  to  prevent  the  Turks  from  taking  possession  of  the 
camp  we  had  on  the  plain,  I  went  to  the  king  fully  armed, 
whom  I  found  in  the  same  state  of  preparation,  as  well  as  all 
his  knights  seated  around  him  on  benches,t  and  most  humbly 
requested  that  he  would  permit  me  and  my  people  to  make  a 
course  against  the  Saracens.  But  the  moment  Sir  John  de 
Belmont  heard  me,  he  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice,  command- 
ing me,  in  the  king's  name,  not  to  dare  to  quit  my  quarters 
until  I  should  be  so  ordered  by  the  king. 

You  must  know  that  there  were  with  the  king  eight  good 
and  valiant  knights,  who  had  several  times  won  the  prize  of 

*  The  word  bordel,  which  signifies  a  place  of  infeuny,  brothel,  takes 
its  origin  from  loose  women  and  suchlike  characters  inhabiting  small 
houses,  which  in  the  old  French  language  were  called  bordel*,  from  the 
diminutive  of  borde^  a  house,  and  is  probably  borrowed  from  bord  of  the 
English  Saxons,  with  whom  this  word  has  the  same  meaning.  See  like- 
wise Spelman's  Glossary.  From  the  word  bordt  comes  bordel,  to  mark  a 
small  house.  There  are  some  who  conceive  that  the  word  bortf  whidi 
the  Gascons  formerly  used  to  signify  bastard,  took  its  rise  from  tho 
term  bordel,  as  bom  **  incerto  patre,''  and  in  places  of  public  resort. 

t  That  is  to  say,  mounted  on  their  war-horses. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1249.]  ACCIDENT  TO  SIR  WALTER  d'ENTRACHE.  397 


arms,  as  well  on  this  side  of  the  sea  as  on  the  other,  and 
they  were  asually  called  the  good  knights.  Among  them 
were  Sir  Geoffrey  de  Sargines,*  Sir  Mahom  de  Marly,t  Sir 
Philip  de  Nantnel,  and  Sir  Ymbert  de  Beanjeu,  constable  of 
France ;  but  these  were  not  present  when  I  niade  my  request, 
being  on  the  plain  without  the  city,  as  well  as  the  master  of 
the  cross-bows,  with  a  large  body  of  men-at-arms  to  prevent 
the  Turks  from  approaching  our  main  army.  It  happened 
that  Sir  Walter  d'Entrache  having  caused  himself  to  be  well 
armed,  and  his  lance  and  shield  to  be  given  to  him,  mounted 
his  horse ;  and  one  of  the  sides  of  his  pavilion  being  raised, 
stuck  spurs  into  his  horse,  and  rode  full  gallop  against  the 
Turks.  He  thus  quitted  his  pavilion,  attended  only  bjr  one 
of  his  people,  named  Castillon ;  but  his  horse  flung  him  to 
the  ground,  and  ran  off,  covered  with  his  arms,  full  speed  to 
the  enemy;  for  the  greater  part  of  the  Saracens  were  mounted 
on  mares,  which  caused  the  horse  to  play  these  tricks  and  run 
away.  I  heard  from  those  who  said  they  had  witnessed  it, 
that  while  the  lord  d'Entrache  lay  on  the  ground,  four  Turks 
came  to  him  and,  as  they  crossed  him  backward  and  forward, 
gave  him  heavy  blows  with  their  clubs,  and  would  have 
killed  him,  if  the  constable  of  France  had  not  gone  to  his 
succour  with  a  body  of  king's  troops  which  were  under  him. 
He  was  led  back  to  his  pavilion,  but  so  much  bruised  by  the 
blows  he  had  received,  that  he  was  speechless.  He  was  soon 
attended  by  the  physicians  and  surgeons ;  and  because  they 
did  not  thmk  him  m  any  danger  of  death,  they  bled  him  in 
the  arm,  from  which  fatal  consequences  ensued. 

Towards  evening.  Sir  Aubert  de  Nancy  desired  I  would 
accompany  him  on  a  visit  to  him,  for  that  he  was  a  man  of 
great  renown  and  valour :  this  I  very  willingly  did,  and  we 
went  together.  On  our  entering  his  tent,  one  of  his  squires 
came  to  us,  and  desired  we  would  tread  softly,  lest  we  might 
awaken  him.  We  followed  this  advice,  and  found  him  lying 
on  his  mantle  of  minever, j:  which  covered  him ;  but,  on  ap- 
proaching his  face,  we  saw  he  was  dead. 

*  He  is  called  Gaufridus  de  Sarcinis,  in  an  epistle  of  Pope  Urban  IV. 
in  the  fifth  toI.  of  the  Historians  of  France,  p.  870.  This  letter  inform* 
ns  that  he  remained  in  the  Holy  Land  after  the  departure  of  St.  Louis. 

t  Mahien  de  Marly,  who  was  a  nobleman  descended  from  a  branch  of 
the  Montmorenci  family. 

t  In  those  days,  the  coverlids  of  beds  usually  consisted  of  skins  of 


L 


Digitized  by 


898 


JOINTILLE^S  MEMOIRS  OF  SAINT  LODIS  IX.      [^PT.  II 


We,  and  several  more,  were  much  grieved  at  the  loss  of 
such  a  man ;  but  when  it  was  told  the  king,  he  replied,  that 
he  did  not  wish  for  any  one's  service  who  would  not  attend 
to  him,  and  obey  his  orders  better  than  the  lord  d'Entrache 
had  done;  and  that  through  his  own  fault  he  had  caused  his 
death. 

1  must  inform  you  that  the  sultan  gave  for  every  head*  of 
a  Christian  that  was  brought  to  him  a  besant  of  gold ;  and 
these  Saracen  traitors  entered  our  camp  during  the  night,  and 
wherever  they  found  any  asleep  they  cut  off  their  heads. 
They  once  surprised  the  watcht  of  the  lord  de  Gourtenay, 
and  cut  off  his  head,  leaving  the  body  lying  on  a  table. 
They  were  likewise  well  informed  of  the  manner  of  our  en- 
campment :  for  the  engagements  between  us  brought  each 
party  near  to  the  other  in  the  evenings ;  and  the  Saracens,  in 

yalue;  whence  ancient  writers  have  included  them  among  the  ridiest 
fdrniture.  In  the  last  will  of  Jane,  queen  of  France  and  Nayarre,  in  the 
year  1304,  sheets,  coverlids,  and  counterpanes  are  named  among  the 
furniture  of  value  ;  but  our  old  writers  particularly  speak  of  those  rich 
coverlids  of  exquisite  skins  when  on  the  subject  of  the  ceremonies  used  in 
times  of  peace  on  the  creation  of  knights ;  for  after  they  had  been 
bathed,  they  were  laid  in  a  rich  state  bed  under  the  finest  coverlids,  and 
were  there  visited  by  their  friends.  The  author  of  the  "  Ordene  de 
Chevalerie,''  after  telling  us  how  Saladin  was  put  into  the  bath  by  Hues 
Tabarie,  before  he  gave  him  the  order  of  knighthood,  adds,  that  he 
led  him  to  his  new  bed,  and  having  laid  him  therein,  said  to  him,  *  Sire, 
this  bed  gives  you  ....  to  the  great  city  of  Paradise,  which  you  must 
conquer  by  your  chivalry  \*  and  when  he  had  reposed  himself,  he 
made  him  rise,  and  clothed  him  with  a  white  robe  of  fine  linen  or  sUk." 
The  same  ceremonies  are  observed  in  creating  knights  of  the  Bath, 
according  to  the  customs  of  England,  related  by  Edward  Bisse,  in  his 
notes  on  Nicholas  Upton,  page  21.  **  This  done,  the  squires  directors 
take  the  noviciate  out  of  the  bath,  and  put  him  to  bed,  until  he  be  dry ; 
md  this  bed  must  be  plain,  and  without  curtains." 

*  The  Turks  to  this  day  follow  the  same  custom,  as  our  countrymen 
witnessed  when  they  signalized  their  valour  in  the  last  wars  between  the 
emperor  of  Germany  and  the  Grand  Signor.  See  Gaufirid.  Malaterrat 
1.  2,  ch.  46. 

t  In  the  Chronicle  of  Bertrand  du  Guesclin  : — 
**  Y  avoit  une  gaite  toute  jour  k  joumee, 
Qui  sonnoit  un  bacin,  quant  la  pierre  est  levee.'' 
These  verses  inform  us,  that  he  who  acted  as  sentinel  on  the  watch- 
towers,  and  rang  the  alarm  bell  in  cases  of  danger,  was  thence  called 
Bachinator,  in  some  of  the  ordinances  of  King  Edward,  relative  to  tbe 
office  of  seneschal  of  Gasoony, 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1249.]]  ARRITAL  OF  THE  COUNT  DB  POITIERfl. 


S9$ 


coQseqnence  of  this  knowledge,  entered  the  camp  as  soou  as 
the  guard  had  made  its  round,  and  committed  many  disorders 
and  murders. 

The  king,  when  he  heard  of  this,  gaye  orders  for  those 
who  were  wont  to  go  the  rounds  on  horsehack  henceforward 
to  do  so  on  foot;  by  this  means  the  army  was  in  security;  for 
we  were  so  closely  encamped  that  we  touched  each  other,  and 
there  were  no  void  spaces. 

We  remained  a  long  time  in  and  before  Damietta ;  for  the 
king  had  none  in  his  council  who  advised  him  to  march 
further,  until  his  brother,  the  count  de  Poitiers,  whom  the 
storms  had  driven,  as  before  mentioned,  to  Acre,  was  re- 
turned :  for  he  had  with  him  the  arriere  ban  of  France.  From 
fear  that  the  Turks  might  force  the  camp  with  their  cavalry, 
the  king  ordered  it  to  be  surrounded  with  deep  ditches ;  and 
on  their  banks  there  were  numerous  parties  of  cross-bows 
and  others,  who  watched  during  the  nights. 

The  feast  of  St.  Remy  had  passed  without  the  army  re* 
ceiving  any  news  from  the  count  de  Poitiers  or  his  men. 
This  farmed  the  king  greatly,  and  the  army  were  in  much 
distress ;  for  they  began  to  fear,  from  his  not  coming,  that  he 
was  either  dead,  or  in  very  great  danger.  I  then  recollected 
the  worthy  dean  of  Mauru,  and  told  the  legate  how,  by  means 
of  the  three  processions  which  he  made  us  perform  when  at 
sea,  we  were  delivered  from  the  great  peril  we  were  in,  as  I 
have  already  related.  The  legate  believed  what  I  said, 
and  ordered  three  processions  to  be  proclaimed  throughout  the 
army,  to  be  put  into  practice  the  three  following  Saturdays. 

The  first  procession  began  at  the  house  of  the  legate,  and 
proceeded  to  the  church  of  our  Lady  in  the  town  of  Dami^ 
etta.  This  church  had  been  a  mosque  of  the  Turks  and 
Saracens ;  but  the  legate  had  consecrated  it  to  the  honour 
of  the  Mother  of  God,  the  glorious  Virgin  Mary.  Thus 
was  it  continued  for  two  Saturdays :  and  each  time  the 
legate  preached  a  sermon.  The  king  and  the  great  lords 
attended,  to  whom,  after  they  had  heard  the  sermon,  the 
legate  gave  absolution.  Before  the  third  Saturday,  the  count 
de  Poitiers  arrived  with  his  men,  and  fortunately  for  him 
he  did  not  come  earlier ;  for  during  the  space  of  the  two 
preceding  Saturdays  there  were  such  continued  storms  at  see 

f  OlFOfiD  ; 


Digitized  by 


400  JOINYILLE  S  MEMOIRS  OP  SAINT  LOUIS  EX.       QPT.  1* 


before  Damietta,  that  twelve  score  yessels,  great  and  small, 
were  wrecked  and  sunk,  and  their  crews  drowned.  Had 
the  count  de  Poitiers  arrived  at  that  time,  he  would  have  run 
great  risk  of  suffering  a  similar  fate ;  and  I  believe  it  would 
have  been  so,  if  God  had  not  assisted  him. 

There  was  much  joy  in  the  whole  army  on  the  arrival  of 
the  count  de  Poitiers,  the  king's  brother ;  and  shortly  after 
the  king  assembled  his  barons  and  council,  and  asked  them 
what  route  he  should  pursue,  whether  to  Alexandria  or  to 
Babylon  ?  The  count  Peter  of  Brittany,  with  several  other 
barons,  were  of  opinion  that  the  king  should  march  to  Alex- 
andria,  because  there  was  a  good  harbour  for  boats  and  vessels, 
to  bring  provision  to  the  army.  But  this  plan  was  not 
approved  of  by  the  count  d'Artois,  who  said  he  would  never 
march  to  Alexandria  until  he  should  have  been  at  Babylon, 
which  was  the  seat  of  empire  in  Egypt.  He  added,  among 
other  reasons,  that  whoever  wished  to  kill  a  snake,  should 
begin  with  the  head.  To  this  opinion  the  king  assented,  and 
gave  up  the  former  plan. 

At  the  beginning  of  Advent,  the  king  and  his  whole  army 
began  their  march  toward  Babylon,  according  to  the  advice 
given  by  the  count  d'Artois.  On  the  road  near  to  Damietta, 
we  met  a  branch  of  the  great  river  ;  and  the  king  was  ad- 
vised to  halt  a  day,  until  a  dam  should  be  thrown  across, 
that  the  army  might  pass.  This  was  easily  done  ;  and  the 
river  was  stopped  so  level  that  it  did  not  overflow,  and  might 
be  crossed  with  facility. 

What  did  the  sultan  do?  He  sent  craftily  to  the  king 
five  hundred  of  his  best-mounted  troops,  saying  they  were 
come  to  assist  him,  but  in  reality  to  delay  him  as  much  as 
possible.  On  St.  Nicholas's  day,  the  king  commanded  his 
army  to  mount  their  horses,  and  forbade  any  of  his  people 
to  dare  to  hurt,  in  any  way,  one  of  the  Turks  or  Saracens 
whom  the  sultan  had  sent  to  him.  Now  it  happened,  that 
when  the  Saracens  perceived  the  king's  army  was  in  motion, 
and  heard  that  the  king  had  forbidden  any  one  to  touch 
them,  they  advanced  with  great  courage  in  a  body  toward  the 
Templars,  who  had  the  van  of  the  army.  One  of  these  Turks 
gave  a  knight  in  the  first  rank  so  heavy  a  blow  with  his 
battle-axe  as  felled  him  under  the  feet  of  Sir  Reginald  de 
Bicher's  horse,  who  was  marshal  of  the  Templars. 


Digitized  by 


▲.D.  1249.^       SLAUGHTER  OF  THB  8ABA0EN9. 


401 


Tlie  marshal,  seeing  this,  cried  oat  to  his  men-at-arms,— 
Now,  companions,  attack  them,  in  the  name  of  God !  for  I 
cannot  longer  suffer  thus."  He  instantly  stuck  spurs  into  his 
horse,  and  charged  the  Saracens,  followed  by  the  whole 
army.  The  horses  of  the  Turks  were  worn  down  and  tired, 
while  ours  were  fresh  and  hearty,  which  caused  their  misfor- 
tune ;  for  I  have  since  heard  that  not  one  escaped  being  slain 
or  drowned  in  the  sea. 

It  is  proper  that  I  say  something  here  of  the  river  which 
runs  through  Egypt,  and  which  comes  from  the  terrestrial 
paradise ;  for  such  things  should  be  known  to  those  who 
are  desirous  of  understanding  the  subject  I  am  writing  on. 
This  river  differs  from  all  others,  for  the  more  brooks  fall 
into  a  large  river,  the  more  it  is  divided  into  small  stream- 
lets, and  spread  o^r  a  country ;  but  this  river  has  not  such 
aids,  and  seems  always  the  same.  When  arrived  in  Egypt,  it 
spreads  its  waters  over  the  country.  About  the  period  of 
St.  Remy  s  day,  it  expands  itself  into  seven  branches,  and 
thence  flows  over  the  plains.  When  the  waters  are  retired, 
the  labourers  appear,  and  till  the  ground  with  ploughs  without 
wheels,  and  then  sow  wheat,  barley,  rice,  and  cummin,  which 
succeed  so  well  that  it  is  not  possible  to  have  finer  crops. 

No  one  can  say  whence  this  annual  increase  of  water  comes, 
except  from  God's  mercy.  Were  it  not  to  happen,  Egypt 
would  produce  nothing,  from  the  very  great  heat  of  that  coun- 
try ;  for  it  is  near  to  the  rising  sun,  and  it  scarcely  ever  rains 
but  at  very  long  intervals. 

This  river  is  quite  muddy,  from  the  crowds  of  people  of  that 
and  other  countries  who,  towards  evening,  come  thither  to 
seek  water  to  drink.    They  put  into  their  vessels  which  hold 
it  four  almonds  or  four  beans,  which  they  shake  well,  and  on 
the  morrow  it  is  wondrous  clear  and  fit  to  drink.    When  this 
river  enters  Egypt,  there  are  expert  persons,  accustomed  to 
the  business,  who  may  be  called  the  fishermen  of  this  stream, 
and  who  in  the  evenings  cast  their  nets  into  the  water,  and  in 
the  mornings  frequently  find  many  spices  in  them,  which  they 
sell  into  these  countries  dearly,  and  by  weight ;  such  as  cinna- 
mon, ginger,  rhubarb,  cloves,  lignum-aloes,  and  other  good 
things.    It  is  the  report  of  the  country,  that  they  come  from 
the  terrestrial  paradise,  and  that  the  wind  blows  them  down 
from  these  fine  trees,  as  it  does  in  our  forests  the  old  dry 

2  D 


Digitized  by 


402        joinville's  memoirs  of  saint  louis  IX.      [ft.  11 


wood.  What  falls  into  the  river  is  brought  down  with  it,  and 
collected  by  merchants,  who  sell  it  to  us  by  weight. 

I  heard  in  the  country  of  Babylon,  that  the  sultan  had 
frequently  attempted  to  learn  whence  this  river  came,  by 
sending  experienced  persons  to  follow  the  course  of  it.  They 
carried  with  them  a  bread  called  biscuit,  for  they  would  not 
have  found  any  on  their  route,  and  on  their  return  reported, 
that  they  had  followed  the  course  of  the  river  until  they  came 
to  a  large  mountain  of  perpendicular  rocks,  which  it  was  im- 
possible to  climb,  and  over  these  rocks  fell  the  river.  It 
seemed  to  them,  that  on  the  top  of  this  mountain  were  many 
trees ;  and  they  said  they  had  seen  there  many  strange  wild 
beasts,  such  as  lions,  serpents,  elephants,  and  other  sorts, 
which  came  to  gaze  at  them  as  they  ascended  the  river.  These 
travellers,  not  daring  to  advance  further,  returned  to  the 
sultan. 

Now,  to  pursue  my  subject,  this  river,  on  entering  Egypt, 
spreads  its  branches  over  the  plain :  one  of  them  flows  to 
Damietta,  another  to  Alexandria,  another  to  Tunis,  and 
another  to  Rexi.  To  this  branch  which  rnns  by  Rexi,  the 
king  of  France  marched  with  his  whole  array,  and  encamped 
between  the  Damietta  branch  and  that  of  Rexi."^  We  found 
the  sultan  encamped  with  his  entire  force  on  the  opposite 
bank  of  the  Rexi  branch,  to  prevent  and  oppose  our  passage. 
It  was  easy  for  him  to  do  this,  for  none  of  us  could  have 
crossed  unless  we  had  stripped  ourselves  naked,  as  there  were 
no  other  means  to  pass. 

The  king  determined  to  have  a  causeway  made,  to  enable 
him  to  pass  over  to  the  Saracens ;  and  to  guard  those  em- 
ployed on  it,  he  had  built  two  beffrois,t  called  chat  cha^ 

*  All  the  historians  who  relate  this  passage  call  the  river  Thanis, 
which  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  hranches  of  the  Nile  that  flows  by  a  place 
of  the  same  name,  and  is  called  at  this  day  Tones  or  Tenez.  It  will 
therefore  be  necessary  to  correct  our  author,  and  make  it  Tanis  instead  of 
Tunis. 

t  The  beffroy  was  a  warlike  machine  in  the  form  of  a  tower,  made  of  wood, 
having  different  stories,  which  was  drawn  near  to  the  walls  of  a  town,  and 
the  stories  filled  with  a  proper  number  of  soldiers,  who  shot  from  their  bows 
and  cross-bows  over  the  walls,  against  the  defenders  of  the  place.  These 
machines  were  usually  moved  on  four  wheels,  and  to  prevent  the  Greek 
fire  from  hurting  them,  they  were  covered  with  boiled  horse  or  bullock 
i^kins.   Froissart,  in  his  first  volume,  chap.  lOB,  thus  describes  the  bet** 


Digitized  by 


A.D  1249.]]  MILITAkT  MACHINES. 


403 


teih.*  There  were  two  towers  in  front  of  these  beflrois,  and  two 
houses  in  their  rear,  to  receive  the  things  the  Saracens  threw 
upon  their  machines,  of  which  they  had  sixteen  that  did 
wonders.  The  king  ordered  eighteen  machines  to  be  con- 
structed, under  the  direction  of  a  man  named  Jousselin  de 
Courvant,  who  was  the  inventor  and  undertaker ;  and  with 
these  engines  did  each  army  play  on  the  other.  The  king's 
brother  was  on  guard  over  the  cats  in  the  daytime,  and  we 
other  knights  guarded  them  at  night. 

These  chas-chateils  were  finished  the  week  before  Christ- 
mas, and  then  the  causeway  was  set  about  in  earnest ;  but  as 
fast  as  we  advanced,  the  Saracens  destroyed  it.  They  dug,  on 
their  side  of  the  river,  wide  and  deep  holes  in  the  earth,  and 
as  the  water  recoiled  from  our  causeway  it  filled  these  holes 
with  water,  and  tore  away  the  banks ;  so  that  what  we  had 
been  employed  on  for  three  weeks  or  a  month,  they  ruined  in 
one  or  two  days;  they  also  very  much  annoyed,  by  their 
arrows,  our  people  who  were  carrying  materials  for  the  dam. 

The  Turks,  after  the  death  of  their  sultan,  who  died  of  the 
disorder  he  was  seized  with  when  before  Hamault,  chose  for 
their  chief  a  Sara<;en  named  Sacedun,  son  of  the  sheik, 
whom  the  emperor  Ferrait  had  made  a  knight. 

Shortly  after  this,  Sacedun  sent  part  of  his  army  to  cross 
near  Damietta,  and  to  a  small  town  called  Sourmesac,  which 

frois  :  "  The  English  had  constructed  two  large  towers,  of  great  beams  ot 
wood,  three  stories  high  ;  each  tower  was  placed  on  wheels,  and  covered 
over  with  prepared  leather,  to  shelter  those  within  from  fire,  and  from 
the  arrows  :  in  each  story  were  100  archers."  William  of  Malmesbury, 
in  the  fourth  book  of  his  History  of  England,  calls  this  machine  hwfroy. 
This  word  heffroy  (belfry)  has  since  been  applied  *^o  the  highest  towers 
of  frontier  towns,  wherein  a  sentinel  is  placed  to  watch  for  their  security, 
and  with  a  bell  for  him  to  strike  on  to  alarm  the  inhabitants  and  guards  at 
the  gates.  This  bell  has  afterwards  been  employed  to  mark  the  hour  for 
the  retreat  of  the  inhabitants  to  their  houses,  and  the  garrisons  to  their 
quarters,  and  other  public  uses. 

*  The  cat  was  properly  a  machine  made  in  the  form  of  a  covered 
gallery  (whence  Anna  Comnena,  in  her  Alextade,  page  383,  gives  it  the 
name  of  (rroa),  which  was  fastened  to  the  walls  to  afford  shelter  to  the 
sappers.  Ravedicus,  in  the  second  book  of  the  History  of  Frederic  I.  c. 
63,  describing  the  siege  of  Crema,  says  that  the  inhabitants,  to  defend  them- 
selves against  those  who  scaled  the  walls,  or  who  descended  on'  their  walls 
from  beffrois  and  towers  of  wood,  made  use  of  cats  to  enable  them  to 
attack  the  enemy  within  their  machines. 

2  D  a 


Digitized  by 


404 


JOINVILLE's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX. 


is  on  the  Rexi  branch,  that  from  that  quarter  thej  might  fall 
on  us.  On  Christmas  day,  whilst  I  and  all  my  people  were  at 
dinner  with  my  companion  Pien^e  d'Avalon,  the  Saracens 
entered  our  camp,  and  slew  many  of  our  poor  soldiers  who  had 
strayed  into  the  fields. 

We  instantly  mounted  our  horses  to  attack  them ;  and  well 
timed  was  it  for  my  lord  Perron,  our  host,  who  had  quitted 
the  camp  on  the  first  alarm  ;  for  before  we  could  overtake 
him,  the  Saracens  had  made  him  prisoner,  and  were  carrying 
him  off  with  his  brother,  the  lord  Du  Val.  We  pushed  our 
horses  forward,  attacked  the  Saracens,  and  rescued  these  two 
good  knights,  whom  they  had  already,  by  their  blows,  struck 
to  the>  ground,  and  brought  them  l^k  to  the  camp.  The 
Templars,  who  were  within  hearing,  formed  a  bold  and 
determined  rear-guard. 

The  Turks  continued  to  make  repeated  attacks  on  us  in 
that  quarter  with  much  courage,  until  our  army  had  closed 
up  the  canal  toward  Damietta,  from  that  branch  to  the  one  of 
Rexi. 

This  Saoedun,  chief  o(  the  Turks,  was  held  to  be  the  most 
able  and  courageous  of  all  the  infidels.  He  bore  on  his  ban- 
ners the  arms  of  the  emperor  who  had  made  him  a  knight ;  his 
banner  had  several  bends,*  on  one  of  which  he  bore  the  same 
arms  with  the  sultan  of  Aleppo,  and  on  another  bend  on  the 
side  were  the  arms  of  the  sultan  of  Babylon.  His  name  was, 
as  I  said  before,  Sacedun,  son  of  the  sheik,  which  signifies  the 
same  in  their  language  as  to  say  the  son  of  the  old  man.  His 
name  had  great  weight  with  them  ;  for  they  are  a  people,  it 
is  said,  who  pay  much  honour  to  such  old  men  as  have  in 
their  youth  been  especially  careful  to  preserve  their  characters 
from  reproach.  This  chief,  as  it  was  told  the  king  by  his 
spies,  boasted,  that  on  St.  Sebastian's  day  next  coming,  he 
would  dine  in  the  king's  tent. 

When  the  king  heard  this,  he  replied,  that  he  would  take 
good  care  to  prevent  it.  He  then  drew  his  army  in  closei 
array,  orders  for  which  were  given  to  the  men-at-arms ;  and 
to  the  count  d'Artois,  brother  to  the  king,  was  given  the  com- 

*  It  results  from  this  passage  that  armorial  bearings  were  in  use 
lunong  the  Mahometans,  and  t^t  their  sultans  or  princes  had  them 
painted  on  their  banners. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1249.]  INTREPIDITY  OP  THE  COUNT  D*ANJOV. 


405 


mand  of  the  beffrois  and  macbines.  The  king,  and  the  connt 
d'Anjou,  who  was  afterwards  king  of  Sicily,  took  on  them 
the  guard  of  the  army,  on  the  side  of  Babylon  ;  and  the  count 
de  Poitiers,  with  me,  senescbal  of  Champagne,  had  the  guard 
on  the  side  towards  Damietta. 

Not  long  after  this,  the  chief  of  the  Turks,  before  named, 
crossed  with  his  army  into  the  island  that  lies  between  the 
Rexi  and  Damietta  branches,  where  our  army  was  encamped, 
and  formed  a  line  of  battle,  extending  from  one  bank  of  the 
river  to  the  other.  The  count  d'Anjou,  who  was  on  the  spot, 
attacked  the  Turks,  and  defeated  them  so  completely  that 
they  took  to  flight,  and  numbers  were  drowned  in  each  of 
the  branches  of  the  Nile. 

A  large  body,  however,  kept  their  ground,  whom  we  dared 
not  attack,  on  account  of  their  numerous  machines,  by  which 
they  did  us  great  injury  with  the  divers  things  cast  from 
them.  During  the  attack  on  the  Turks  by  the  count  d'  Anjou, 
the  count  Guy  de  Ferrois,  who  was  in  his  company,  galloped 
trough  the  Turkish  force,  attended  by  his  knights,  until  they 
tame  to  another  battalion  of  Saracens,  where  they  performed 
wonders.  But  at  last  he  was  thrown  to  the  ground  with  a 
broken  leg,  and  was  led  back  by  two  of  his  knights,  support- 
ing him  by  the  arms. 

You  must  know  there  was  difficulty  in  withdrawing  the 
count  d'Anjou  from  this  attack,  wherein  he  was  frequently 
in  the  atmost  danger,  and  was  ever  after  greatly  honoured 
for  it. 

Another  large  body  of  Turks  made  an  attack  on  the  count 
de  Poitiers  and  me  ;  but  be  assured  they  were  very  well 
received,  and  served  in  like  manner.  It  was  well  for  them 
that  they  found  their  way  back  by  which  they  had  come ; 
but  they  left  behind  great  numbers  of  slain.  We  returned 
safely  to  our  camp  without  having  scarcely  lost  any  of  our 
men. 

One  night  the  Turks  brought  forward  an  engine,  called  by 
them  la  perriere^  a  terrible  engine  to  do  mischief,  and  placed 
it  opposite  to  the  chas-chateils,  which  Sir  Walter  de  Curel  and 
I  were  guarding  by  night.  From  this  engine  they  flung  such 
quantities  of  Greek  fire,*  that  it  was  the  most  horrible  sight 

*  This  fire  was  bo  called,  because  it  was  first  invented  among  the 


Digitized  by 


406 


JOINYILLE's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX. 


fPT.  IL 


ever  witnessed.  When  my  companion,  the  good  Sir  Walter, 
saw  this  shower  of  fire,  he  cried  out,     Gentlemen,  we  are 

Greeks  by  Callinicus  the  architect,  a  native  of  Heliopolis,  a  town  in 
Syria,  under  Constantinns  Barbatus ;  and  likewise  because  the  Greeks 
were  for  a  long  time  the  only  people  who  preserved  the  use  of  it,  which 
they  very  rarely  communicated  to  any  of  their  allies.  Anna  Comnena 
says,  that  this  fire  was  made  with  pitch  and  other  gums  from  trees,  mixed 
with  sulphur,  and  the  whole  ground  together.  Abbon,  in  the  first  book 
of  the  Wars  of  Paris,  has  given  the  composition  of  it  in  these  verses  : 
Addit  eis  oleum,  ceramque,  picemque  ministrans, 
Mixta  simul  liqueiacta  foco  ferventia  valde, 
Qwae  Danis  cervice  comas  uruntque  trahuntque." 
The  author  of  the  History  of  Jerusalem,  p.  1167,  makes  oil  a  part  of 
the  composition  :  at  least,  he  names  it,  oleum  incendarium,  quod  ignem 
Grsecum  vocant.''  It  may  perhaps  be  naphtha,  which  Procopius,  in  the 
fourth  book  of  the  War  of  the  Goths,  ch.  11,  says,  the  Greeks  call 
MrjdHag  eXaiovt  and  the  Medes  naphtha^  which  Lambecius,  in  his  obser- 
vations on  Codinus,  thinks  should  be  corrected  to  Mridiag  tXaiov,  oil  of 
Media,  and  that  for  this  reason  the  same  Greeks  have  given  to  this  arti- 
ficial fire  the  name  of  MtidiKov  wop,  which  is  met  with  in  Cinnamns, 
p.  308,  and  in  Codinus,  p.  7  of  the  royal  edition.  There  are  others, 
however,  who  imagine  naphtha  was  called  Mridtiag  tXaiov,  or  Trop, 
because  Medea,  according  to  Pliny  (1.  2,  ch.  105),  burnt  her  husbaiki 
Jason  with  this  fire.  Whatever  may  be  thought  of  this,  Procopius, 
in  the  part  quoted,  informs  us,  that  in  the  composition  of  this  arti- 
ficial fire,  there  was  a  mixture  of  naphtha  with  sulphur  and  bitumen. 
Vanoccio  Biringuccio,  in  the  tenth  book  of  his  Pyrotechny,  chap.  9, 
has  described  aU  the  materials  that  form  part  of  the  artificial  fireworks 
which  the  Greeks  made  use  of  to  bum  the  vessels  of  their  enemies.  The 
Greeks  made  use  of  this  fire  when  at  sea,  in  two  ways ;  first  by  fire-ships 
filled  with  this  fire,  that  were  floa*«d  among  the  enemies'  fleet,  and  thus 
tiet  them  on  fire.  Fire-ships  were  used  before  the  time  of  the  emperor 
Constantinus  Barbatus,  for  Theophanes  informs  us,  p.  100,  that  under 
the  empire  of  Leon  le  Grand,  Genseric,  king  of  Africa,  burnt  with 
vessels  that  were  filled  with  dry  wood  and  other  combustibles,  and  which 
he  floated  down  the  stream,  the  whole  of  the  Grecian  fleet.  Secondly,  by 
artificial  fires  on  the  prows  of  these  vessels*  placed  in  large  tubes  of 
copper,  through  which  they  blew  them  into  the  enemy's  ships.  With 
regard  to  the  use  of  the  Greek  fire  in  battles  on  land,  it  was  different, 
for  soldiers  were  then  supplied  with  copper  tubes,  and  blew  it  throagfa 
them  on  their  enemies. — See  Anna  Comnena,  in  the  13th  book  of  her 
Alexiade.  Sometimes  they  threw  sharp  bolts  of  iron,  covered  with 
tow,  well  oiled  and  pitched,  with  which  they  set  fire  to  the  engines. 
Joinville  speaks  of  this  fire,  ''and  they  opened  a  very  quick  fire  upon 
us  with  bails  made  of  the  Greek  fire."  Sometimes  thid  fire  was  put  into 
phials  and  pots,  and  it  was  also  discharged  from  perrieres  and  cross- 
bows. Albert  d'Aix,  1.  7,  ch.  5,  remarks,  that  "hujus  ignis  genua 
aqua  erat  inextinguibile but  there  were  other  materials  by  which  it 


Digitized  by 


A«D  1249.]]      GREEK  FIRE  AltO  ITS  TERRORS. 


407 


all  lost  without  remedy ;  for  should  they  set  fire  to  our  chas- 
cbateils  we  must  be  burnt ;  and  if  we  quit  our  post  we  are 
for  ever  dishonoured;  from  which  I  conclude,  that  no  one 
can  possibly  save  us  from  this  peril  but  God,  our  benignant 
Creator ;  I  therefore  advise  all  of  you,  whenever  they  throw 
any  of  this  Greek  fire,  to  cast  yourselves  on  your  hands  and 
knees,  and  cry  for  mercy  to  our  Lord,  in  whom  alone  resides 
all  power." 

As  soon,  therefore,  as  the  Turks  threw  their  fires,  we  fiung 
ourselves  on  our  hands  and  knees,  as  the  wise  man  had  ad- 
vised ;  and  this  time  they  fell  between  our  two  cats  into  a 
bole  in  front,  wliich  our  people  had  made  to  extinguish  them; 
and  they  were  instantly  put  out  by  a  man  appointed  for  that 
purpose.  This  Greek  fire,  in  appearance,  was  like  a  large 
tun,  and  its  tail  was  of  the  length  of  a  long  spear ;  the  noise 
which  it  made  was  like  to  thunder ;  and  it  seemed  a  great 
dragon  of  fire  fiying  through  the  air,  giving  so  great  a  light 
with  its  flame,  that  we  saw  in  our  camp  as  clearly  as  in  broad 
day.  Thrice  this  night  did  tliey  throw  the  fire  from  la  per- 
nere,  and  four  times  from  cross-bows. 

Each  time  that  our  good  king  St.  Louis  heard  them  make 
these  discharges  of  fire,  he  cast  himself  on  the  ground,  and 
with  extended  arms  and  eyes  turned  to  the  heavens,  cried 
with  a  loud  voice  to  our  Lord,  and  shedding  heavy  tears,  said, 
*'  Good  Lord  God  Jesus  Christ,  preserve  thou  me,  and  all  my 
people ;"  and  believe  me,  his  sincere  prayers  were  of  great 
service  to  us.  At  every  time  the  fire  fell  near  us,  he  sent 
one  of  his  knigi^  to  know  how  we  were,  and  if  the  fire  had 
hurt  us.  One  of  the  discharges  from  the  Turks  fell  beside  a 
chas-chateil,  guarded  by  the  men  of  the  Lord  Courtenay, 
struck  the  bank  of  the  river  in  front,  and  ran  on  the  ground 
tDward  them  burning  with  flame.  One  of  the  knights  of 
ihia  guard  instantly  came  to  me,  crying  out, — "  Help  us,  my 
brd,  or  we  are  burnt ;  for  there  is  a  long  train  of  Greek  fire, 
wliich  the  Saracens  have  discharged,  that  is  running  straight 
for  our  castle." 

eoold  be  eztingtilsbed,  namely,  Tinegar  and  sand.  Jacqnet  de  Vitry, 
I.  3,  ch.  84,  adds  urine  as  an  extinguisher;  and  Cinnamas,  in  the  place 
bHore  quoted,  says  that  ships  were  frequently  covered  with  cloths  dipped 
L  vinegar,  to  prevent  the  bad  effects  of  this  fire. 


Digitized  by 


408  JOINTILLE*S  MEMOIRS  OP  SAINT  LOUIS  IX.       Qj>T.  H. 


We  immediately  hastened  thither,  and  good  need  was 
there ;  for  as  the  knight  had  said,  so  it  was.  We  extin* 
guished  the  fire  with  much  labour  and  difficulty ;  for  the 
Saracens,  in  the  mean  time,  kept  up  so  brisk  a  shooting  from 
the  opposite  bank,  that  we  were  covered  with  arrows  and 
bolts. 

The  count  of  Anjou,  t)rother  to  the  king,  guarded  these 
castles  during  the  day,  and  annoyed  the  Saracen  army  with 
his  cross-bows.  It  was  ordered  by  the  king,  that  after  the 
count  of  Anjou  should  have  finished  his  daily  guard,  we,  and 
others  of  my  company,  should  continue  it  during  the  night. 
We  sufiered  much  pain  and  uneasiness ;  for  the  Turks  had 
already  broken  and  damaged  our  tandies  and  defences. 
Once  these  Turkish  traitors  advanced  their  perriere  in  the 
daytime,  when  the  count  d' Anjou  had  the  guard,  and  had 
brought  together  all  their  machines,  from  which  they  threw 
Greek  fires  on  our  dams,  over  the  river,  opposite  to  our 
tandies  and  defences,  which  completely  prevented  any  of  the 
workmen  from  shewing  themselves ;  and  our  two  chas- 
chateils  were  in  a  moment  destroyed  and  burnt.  The  count 
d* Anjou  was  almost  mad  at  seeing  this ;  -for  they  were  under 
his  guard,  and  like  one  out  of  his  senses,  wanted  to  throw 
himself  into  the  fire  to  extinguish  it,  whilst  I  and  my  knighta 
returned  thanks  to  God  ;  for  if  they  had  delayed  this  attack 
to  the  night,  we  must  have  all  been  burnt. 

The  king,  on  hearing  what  had  happened,  made  a  request 
to  each  of  his  barons,  that  they  would  give  him  as  much  of 
tho  largest  timbers*  from  their  ships  that  were  on  the  coast 
as  they  could  spare,  and  have  them  transported  to  where  the 
army  lay;  for  there  was  not  any  timber  near  fit  to  make  use 
of.  After  the  king  had  made  this  request,  they  all  aided 
him  to  the  utmost ;  and  before  the  new  chas-chateils  were 
finished,  the  timber  employed  was  estimated  to  be  worth 
upwards  of  10,000  livres.  You  may  guess  from  this  that 
many  boats  were  destroyed,  and  that  we  were  then  in  the 
utmost  distress. 

When  the  chas-chateils  were  completed,  the  king  would 
not  have  them  fixed,  or  pointed,  until  the  count  of  Anjou 
resumed  the  guard :  he  then  ordered  that  they  should  be 
*  Mcterials  of  beams  of  woocL 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1249.^  DANGEROUS  POSITION  OF  THE  ROYAL  ARMY.  409 


placed  on  the  exact  spot  where  the  others  had  heen  bnrut. 
This  he  did  to  recover  the  honour  of  his  said  brother,  under 
whose  guard  the  two  others  had  been  destroyed.  As 
the  king  had  ordered,  so  it  was  done ;  which  the  Saracens 
observing,  they  brought  thither  all  their  machines,  and, 
coupling  them  together,  shot  at  our  new  chas-chateils  vigor- 
ously. When  they  perceived  that  our  men  were  afraid  ot 
going  from  one  castle  to  the  other,  for  fear  of  the  showers  of 
stones  which  they  were  casting,  they  advanced  the  perriere 
directly  opposite  to  them,  and  again  burnt  them  with  their 
Greek  fires.  I  and  my  knights  returned  thanks  to  God  for 
this  second  escape.  Had  they  waited  until  night  to  make 
the  attack,  when  the  guard  would  have  devolved  to  us,  we 
must  all  have  been  burnt  with  them. 

The  king,  seeing  this,  was,  as.  well  as  his  army,  much 
troubled,  and  he  called  his  barons  to  council,  to  consider  what 
should  be  done ;  for  they  now  perceived  themselves  that  it 
would  be  impossible  to  throw  a  causeway  over  the  river  to 
cross  to  the  Turks  and  Saracens,  as  our  people  could  not 
make  such  advance  on  their  side,  but  they  were  more  speedily 
ruined  by  the  Turks  on  the  other. 

Sir  Humbert  de  Beaujeu,  constable  of  France,  then  ad- 
dressed the  king,  and  said,  that  a  Bedouin  had  lately  come 
to  him  to  say,  that  if  we  would  give  him  500  golden  besanis, 
he  would  shew  a  safe  ford,  which  might  easily  be  crossed  on 
horseback.  The  king  replied,  that  he  most  cheerfully  granted 
this,  provided  he  spoke  the  truth  ,*  but  the  man  would  on  no 
account  shew  the  ford  before  the  money  demanded  was  paid. 

It  was  determined  by  the  king,  that  the  duke  of  Bur- 
gundy, and  the  nobles  beyond  sea  his  allies,  should  guard  the 
army  from  the  alarms  of  the  Saracens ;  whilst  he,  with  his 
three  brothers,  the  counts  of  Poitiers,  Artois,  and  Anjou,  who 
was  afterward  king  of  Sicily,  as  I  have  said  before,  should 
with  their  attendants  on  horseback  make  trial  of  the  ford 
the  Bedouin  was  to  shew  them.  Tlie  day  appointed  for  this 
purpose  was  Shrove-Tuesday,  which,  when  arrived,  we  all 
mounted  our  horses,  and^  armed  at  all  points,  followed  the 
Bedouin  to  the  ford. 

On  our  way  thither,  some  advanced  too  near  the  banks  of 
the  river,  which  being  soft  and  slippery,  they  and  their 


Digitized  by 


410  JOINVILLE's  memoirs  op  saint  LOUIS  IX.      ^PT.  II. 


horses  fell  in  and  were  drowned.  The  king  seeing  it,  pointed 
it  out  to  the  rest,  that  they  might  he  more  careful  and  avoid 
similar  danger.  Among  those  that  were  drowned  was  that 
valiant  knight  Sir  John  d'Orleans,  who  hore  the  banner  of 
the  army.  When  we  came  to  the  ford,  we  saw,  on  the  oppo- 
site bank,  full  300  Saracen  cavalry  ready  to  defend  this 
passage.  We  entered  the  river,  and  our  horses  found  a 
tolerable  ford  with  firm  footing,  so  that  by  ascending  the 
stresim  we  found  an  easy  shore,  and,  through  God's  mercy, 
we  all  crossed  over  with  safety.  The  Saracens,  observing  us 
thus  cross,  fled  away  with  the  utmost  despatch. 

Before  we  set  out,  the  king  had  ordered  that  the  Templars 
should  form  the  van,  and  the  count  d'Artois,  his  brother, 
should  command  the  second  division  of  the  army ;  but  the 
moment  the  count  d'Artois  had  passed  the  ford  with  all  his 
people,  and  saw  the  Saracens  flying,  they  stuck  spurs  into 
their  horses  and  galloped  after  them ;  for  which  those  who 
formed  the  van  were  much  angered  at  the  count  d'Artois, 
who  could  not  make  any  answer,  on  account  of  Sir  Foucquault 
du  Melle,  who  held  the  bridle  of  his  horse ;  and  Sir  Fouc- 
quault, being  deaf,  heard  nothing  the  Templars  were  saying 
to  the  count  d'Artois,  but  kept  bawling  out  "Forward, 
forward !" 

When  the  Templars  perceived  this,  they  thought  they 
should  be  dishonoured  if  they  allowed  the  count  d'Artois 
thus  to  take  the  lead,  and  with  one  accord  they  spurred  their 
horses  to  their  fastest  speed,  pursuing  the  Saracens  through 
the  town  of  Massoura,  as  far  the  plains  before  Babylon  ;  but 
on  their  return  the  Turks  shot  at  them  plenty  of  arrows, 
and  other  artillery,  as  they  repassed  through  the  narrow 
streets  of  the  town.  The  count  d'Artois  and  the  lord  de 
Coucy,  of  the  name  of  Raoul,  were  there  slain,  and  as  many 
as  300  other*  knights.  The  Templars  lost,  as  their  chief 
informed  me,  full  fourteen  score  men-at-arms  and  horses. 
My  knights,  as  well  as  myself,  noticing  on  our  left  a  large 
body  of  Turks  who  were  arming,  instantly  charged  them ;  and 
when  we  were  advanced  into  the  midst  of  them,  I  perceived  a 
tturdy  Saracen  moanting  his  horse,  which  was  held  by  one 
of  his  esquires  by  the  bridle,  and  while  he  was  putting  his 

*  The  Oriental  Chronicle  says,  that  the  French  lost  in  this  defeat,  hcside 
the  brother  of  the  king,  fourteen  hundred  knights. 


A.D.  1249.^     SKIRMISHES  WITH  THK  SAUACENA. 


411 


hand  od  the  saddle  to  mount,  I  gave  him  such  a  thrust  with 
my  spear,  which  I  pushed  as  f<ir  as  I  was  able,  that  he  fell 
down  dead.  The  esquire,  seeing  his  lord  dead,  abandoned 
master  and  horse;  but,  watching  my  motions,  on  my  return 
struck  me  with  his  lance  such  a  blow  between  the  shoulders 
as  drove  me  on  my  horse's  neck,  and  held  me  there  so  tightly 
that  I  could  not  draw  my  sword,  which  was  girthed  round  me. 
I  was  forced  to  draw  another  sword  which  was  at  the  pommel 
of  my  saddle,  and  it  was  high  time ;  but,  when  he  saw  I  had 
my  sword  in  my  hand,  he  withdrew  his  lance,  which  I  had 
seized,  and  ran  from  me. 

It  chanced  that  I  and  my  knights  had  traversed  the  army 
of  the  Saracens,  and  saw  here  and  there  different  parties  of 
them,  to  the  amount  of  about  6,000,  who,  abandoning  their 
quarters,  had  advanced  into  the  plain.  On  perceiving  that 
we  were  separated  from  the  main  body,  they  boldly  attacked 
us,  and  slew  Sir  Hugues  de  Trichatel,  lord  d'Escoflans,  who 
bore  the  banner  of  our  company.  They  also  luaJe  prisoner 
Sir  Raoul  de  Wanon,  of  our  company,  whom  they  had  struck 
to  the  ground.  As  they  were  carrying  him  off,  my  knights  and 
myself  knew  liim,  and  instantly  hastened,  with  great  courage, 
to  assist  him,  and  deliver  him  from  their  hands.  In  returning 
from  this  engagement  the  Turks  gave  me  such  heavy  blows, 
that  my  horse,  not  being  able  to  withstand  them,  fell  on  his 
knees,  and  threw  me  to  the  ground  over  his  head.*    I  very 

*  After  these  words,  as  far  as  to  the  walls  of  this  ruined  house/'  the 
Poitiers  edition  has,  **  and  the  Saracens  would  have  killed  me,  had  it  not 
been  for  Sir  Amaud  de  Commenge,  viscount  de  Couzerans,  who  came 
most  valiantly  to  my  succour,  and  the  vigorous  gallantry  he  displayed. 
He  had  left  the  cross-bows,  which  he  was  conducting  to  the  camp  with 
the  duke  of  Burgundy,  and  had  followed  the  count  de  Poitiers,  whom  he 
would  never  abandon  in  any  serious  affair.  From  the  time  he  gave  me 
this  timely  assistance,  there  never  was  a  day  of  my  life  that  I  did  not  most 
affectionately  love  him.  After  I  was  thus  rescued  from  the  Saracens, 
the  viscount  de  Couzerans  and  myself  retired  towards  a  house  that  had 
been  destroyed  to  wait  for  the  king,  who  was  coming,  and  in  the  mean  time 
I  found  an  opportunity  of  recovering  my  horse.  But  while  we  were 
waiting  near  this  house,  a  fresh  troop  of  Saracens  appeared,  who  seeing 
the  main  body  of  our  people  in  our  rear,  pushed  by  us  to  attack  them  : 
in  their  passage,  they  flung  me  to  the  ground  with  my  shield  over  my  neck, 
and  galloped  over  me,  thinking  me  dead,  which  was  nearly  the  case. 
When  they  had  passed,  Sir  Arnaud  de  Commenge,  after  having  courage- 
oufly  fought  the  Saracens,  returned  to  me,  and  raised  me  from  the  ground, 
■ad  then  we  went  to  the  walls  of  this  ruined  house." 


Digitized  by 


412 


JOlNTTLLBfs  MEMOIRS  OP  SAINT  LOUIS  IX.      ^PT.  II. 


shortly  replaced  my  shield  on  my  breast,  and  grasped  my 
•peiir,  during  which  time  the  Lord  Errat  d'Esmeray,  whose 
soul  may  God  pardon !  advanced  towards  me,  for  he  had 
also  been  struck  down  by  the  enemy ;  and  we  retreated  to- 
gether towards  an  old  ruined  house  to  wait  for  the  king,  who 
was  coming,  and  I  found  means  to  recover  my  borse. 

As  we  were  going  to  this  house,  a  large  body  of  Turks 
came  galloping  towards  us,  but  passed  on  to  a  party  of  ours 
whom  they  saw  hard  by :  as  they  passed,  they  struck  me  to 
the  ground,  with  my  shield  over  my  neck,  and  galloped  over 
me,  thinking  I  was  dead ;  and  indeed  I  was  nearly  so. 
When  they  were  gone,  my  companion,  Sir  Errart,  came  and 
raised  me  up,  and  we  went  to  the  walls  of  the  ruined  house. 
Thither  also  had  retired  Sir  Hugues  d'Escosse,  Sir  Ferreys  de 
Loppei,  Sir  Regnault  de  Menoncourt,  and  several  others ; 
and  there  also  the  Turks  came  to  attack  us,  more  bravdy 
than  ever,  on  all  sides.  Some  of  them  entered  within  the 
walls,  and  were  a  long  time  fighting  with  us  at  spear's  length, 
during  which  my  knights  gave  me  my  horse,  which  they  held^ 
lest  he  should  run  away,  and  at  the  same  time  so  vigorously 
defended  us  against  the  Turks,  that  they  were  greatly  praised 
by  several  able  persons  who  witnessed  their  prowess. 

Sir  Hugues  d'Escosse  was  depserately  hurt  by  three  great 
wounds  in  the  face  and  elsewhere.  Sir  Raoul  and  Sir  Ferreys 
were  also  badly  wounded  in  their  shoulders,  so  that  the 
blood  spouted  out  just  like  to  a  tun  of  wine  when  tapped. 
Sir  Errart  d'Esmeray  was  so  severely  wounded  in  the  face 
by  a  sword,  the  stroke  of  which  cut  off  his  nose,  that  it  hung 
down  over  his  mouth.  In  this  severe  distress,  I  called  to 
my  mind  St.  James,  and  said,  "  Good  Lord  St.  James,  suc- 
cour me,  I  beseech  thee ;  and  come  to  my  aid  in  this  time  of 
need."  I  had  scarcely  ended  my  prayer,  when  Sir  Errart 
said  to  me,  ^  Sir,  if  I  did  not  think  you  might  suppose  it 
was  done  to  abandon  you,  and  save  myself,  I  would  go  to  my 
lord  of  Anjou,  whom  I  see  on  the  plain,  and  beg  he  would 
hasten  to  your  help."  "  Sir  Errart,"  I  replied,  "  you  will  do 
me  great  honour  and  pleasure,  if  you  will  go  and  seek  suc- 
cour to  safe  our  lives  ;  for  your  own  also  is  in  great  j>eril 
and  I  said  truly,  for  he  died  of  the  wound  he  had  received. 
Ail  were  of  my  opinion  that  he  should  seek  for  assistance ;  and 


Digitized  by 


▲.T>.  1249.3      270BLB  BEARING  OF  THE  KINO. 


I  then  quitting  hold  of  the  rein  of  his  bridle,  he  galloped  to- 
wards the  count  d'Anjoo,  to  request  he  would  support  us  in 
the  danger  we  were  in. 

There  was  a  great  lord  with  him  who  wished  to  detain  him, 
but  the  good  prince  would  not  attend  to  what  he  urged,  but, 
spurring  his  horse,  galloped  towards  us  followed  by  his  men. 
The  Saracens,  observing  them  coming,  left  us ;  but  when  on 
their  arrival  they  eaw  the  Saracens  carrying  away  their  pri- 
soner, Sir  Raould  de  Wanon,  badly  wounded,  they  hastened  to 
recover  him,  and  brought  him  back  in  a  most  pitiful  state. 

Shortly  after,  I  saw  the  king  arrive  with  all  his  attendants, 
and  with  a  terrible  noise  of  trumpets,  clarions,  and  horns. 
He  halted  on  an  eminence,  with  his  men-at-arms,  for  some- 
thing he  had  to  say ;  and  I  assure  you  I  never  saw  so  hand- 
some a  man  under  arms.  He  was  taller  than  any  of  his 
troop  by  the  shoulders  ;  and  his  helmet,  which  was  gilded, 
was  handsomely  placed  on  his  head  ;  and  he  bore  a  German 
sword*  in  his  hand. 

Soon  after  he  had  halted,  many  of  his  knights  were  observed 
intermixed  with  the  Turks :  their  companions  instantly  rushed 
into  the  battle  among  them ;  and  you  must  know,  that  in 
this  engagement  were  performed,  on  both  sides,  the  most 
gallant  deeds  that  were  ever  done  in  this  expedition  to  the 
Holy  Land ;  for  none  made  use  of  the  bow,t  cross-bow,  or 

*  William  Goiart,  in  the  Life  of  Philip  Augustas,  speaks  of  these 
Grerman  swords : — 

A  grans  esp^  d'Allemagne 
Leur  tranchent  souvent  les  poins  outre." 
In  his  description  of  the  hattle  of  Bovines,  he  says  that  the  Germans 
fought  with  short  and  sharp  swords.  The  emperor  Nicephorus  Phocas 
reproaches  the  Germans,  through  his  ambassador  Luitprandus,  for  their 
long  swords.  In  some  old  ordinances  of  the  town  of  Paris  mention  is 
made  of  the  swords  of  Lubec.  The  French,  on  the  contrary,  used  short 
swords.    William  Guiart ^ 

"  Li  Fran9ois  espees  reportent, 

Courtes  et  roides,  dont  ils  taillent." 
t  To  kill  an  enemy  by  the  bow,  cross-bow,  or  other  artillery,  has  never 
been  esteemed  by  the  French  an  action  of  valour.  They  only  valued  blows 
from  the  hand,  sword,  or  lance,  which  required  address  and  skill ;  and  it  was 
for  this  reason,  that,  in  process  of  time,  they  forbade  the  use  of  cross-bows, 
arrows,  and  poisoned  darts  :  it  was  not  sufficient  to  destroy  the  enemy  by 
any  means  whatever,  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  be  conquered  by  fair 
force,  and  with  such  arms  as  displayed  the  dexterity  of  the  person  using 


Digitized  by 


414  JOINTILLE's  memoirs  op  saint  LOUIS  IX.  .     [PT.  II. 


other  artillery.  But  the  conflict  consisted  of  blows  given  to 
each  other  by  battle-axes,  swords,  butts  of  spears,  aJl  mixed 
together.  From  all  I  saw,  my  knights  and  myself,  all 
wounded  as  we  were,  were  very  impatient  to  join  the  battle 
with  the  others. 

Shortly  after  one  of  my  esquires,  who  had  once  fled  from 
my  banner,  came  to  me,  and  brought  me  one  of  my  Flemish 
war-horses :  I  was  soon  mounted,  and  rode  by  the  side  of  the 
king,  whom  I  found  attended  by  that  discreet  man.  Sir  John 
de  Valeri.  Sir  John  seeing  the  king  desirous  to  enter  into 
the  midst  of  the  battle,  advised  him  to  make  for  the  river- 
side, on  the  right,  in  order  that  in  case  there  should  be  any 
danger,  he  might  have  support  from  the  duke  of  Burgundy 
and  bis  army,  which  had  been  left  behind  to  guard  the 
camp ;  and  likewise  that  his  men  might  be  refreshed,  and 
have  wherewith  to  quench  their  thirst ;  for  the  weather  was 
at  this  moment  exceedingly  hot. 

The  king  sent  orders  for  his  barons,  knights,  and  others 
of  his  council,  to  quit  the  Turkish  army,  and  on  their  arrival, 
demanded  their  counsel,  what  was  best  to  be  done.  Several 
answered,  that  the  good  knight.  Sir  John  de  Valeri,  now  by 
his  side,  would  give  him  the  best  advice.  Then,  according 
to  the  former  opinion  of  Sir  John  de  Yaleri,  which  many  agreed 
was  good,  the  king  turned  to  the  right  hand,  and  advanced 
toward  the  river. 

As  this  was  doing,  Sir  Humbert  de  Beaujeu,  constable  of 
France,  came  up,  and  told  the  king  that  his  brother,  the 
count  d'Artois,  was  much  pressed  in  a  house  at  Massoura, 
where,  however,  he  defended  himself  gallantly,  but  that  he 
would  need  speedy  assistance  ;  and  entreated  the  king  to  go 
to  his  aid.    The  king  replied,  "Constable,  spur  forward, 

them.  It  is  certain  that  the  above-mentioned  arms  have  been  forbidden 
at  various  times  by  the  popes,  and  particularly  at  the  council  held  at  Rome 
under  Pope  Innocent  II.  in  the  year  1139,  ch.  29.  The  emperor  Conrad 
was  one  of  the  Christian  princes  who  forbade  their  use  for  similar  reasons. 
From  whence  it  is  easy  to  judge,  that  we  must  interpret  favourably  the 
terms  of  the  Breton  poet,  when,  in  the  second  book  of  his  Philippiade,  he 
says  that  Richard  I.,  king  of  England,  invented  cross-bows ;  it  must 
be  explained  by  his  meaning  that  King  Richard  revived  the  use  of  them 
during  his  reign.  This  is  so  strictly  true,  that  in  every  action  we  read  of 
in  the  historieit  of  the  first  crusades,  they  made  use  of  bows  and  crofs- 
bows. 


A.D.  1249.] 


THE  KIKG*S  GREAT  TALOUR. 


415 


and  I  will  follow  you  close."  I  also,  the  lord  de  Joiuville, 
said  to  the  constable,  that  I  wonld  be  one  of  his  knights,  and 
follow  him  in  snch  a  case  as  this. 

All  of  us  now  galloped  straight  to  Massonra,  and  were  in  the 
midst  of  the  Turkish  army,  when  we  were  instantly  separated 
from  each  other  by  the  greater  power  of  the  Saracens  and 
Turks.  Shortly  after,  a  serjeant  at  mace  of  the  constable, 
with  whom  I  was,  came  to  him,  and  said  the  king  was 
surrounded  by  the  Turks,  and  his  person  in  imminent  danger. 
You  may  suppose  our  astonishment  and  fears,  for  there  were 
between  us  and  where  the  king  was  full  one  thousand  or 
twelve  hundred  Turks,  and  we  were  only  six  persons  in  all. 
I  said  to  the  constable,  that  since  it  was  impossible  for  us  to 
make  our  way  through  such  a  crowd  of  Turks,  it  would  be 
much  better  to  wheel  round  and  get  on  the  other  side  of  them. 
This  we  instantly  did.  There  wa«  a  deep  ditch  on  the  road 
we  took  between  the  Saracens  and  us ;  and,  had  they  noticed 
us,  they  must  have  slain  us  all :  but  they  were  solely  occu- 
pied with  the  king,  and  the  larger  bodies  :  perhaps  also  they 
might  have  taken  us  for  some  of  their  friends.  As  we  thus 
gained  the  river,  following  its  course  downward  between  it  and 
the  road,  we  observed  that  the  king  had  ascended  it,  and  that 
the  Turks  were  sending  fresh  troops  after  him.  Both  armies 
now  met  on  the  banks,  and  the  event  was  miserably  unfor- 
tunate; for  the  weaker  part  of  our  army  thought  to  cross 
over  to  the  division  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  but  that  was 
impossible  from  their  horses  being  worn  down,  and  the  ex- 
treme heat  of  the  weather.  As  we  descended  the  river,  we 
saw  it  covered  with  lances,  pikes,  shields,  men  and  horses, 
unable  to  save  themselves  from  death. 

"When  we  perceived  the  miserable  state  of  our  army,  I 
advised  the  constable  to  remain  on  this  side  of  the  river,  to 
guard  a  small  bridge  that  was  hard  by ;  "  for  if  we  leave  it," 
added  I,  the  enemy  may  come  and  attack  the  king  on  this 
side ;  and  if  our  men  be  assaulted  in  two  places,  they  must  be 
discomfited." 

There  then  we  halted  ;  and  you  may  believe  me  when  I 
say,  that  the  good  king  performed  that  day  the  most  gallant 
deeds  that  ever  I  saw  in  any  battle.  It  was  said,  that  had 
it  not  been  for  his  personal  exertions,  the  whole  army  would 
have  been  d^atroyed ;  but  I  believe  that  the  great  courage  he 


Digitized  by 


416  JOINTlLLB*S  MEMOIRS  OF  SAINT  LOUIS  IX.       £fT.  IU 


naturally  possessed  was  that  day  doubled  by  tbe  power  of 
God,  for  ne  forced  himself  wherever  he  saw  his  men  in  any 
distress,  and  gave  such  blows  with  battle-axe  and  sword,  it 
was  wonderful  to  behold. 

The  lord  de  Conrtenay  and  Sir  John  de  Salenay  one  day 
told  me,  that  at  this  engagement  six  Turks  caught  hold  of  the 
bridle  of  the  king's  horse,  and  were  leading  him  away ;  but 
this  virtaous  prince  exerted  himself  with  such  bravery  in 
fighting  the  six  Turks,  that  he  alone  freed  bimself  from  them  ; 
and  that  many,  seeing  how  valiantly  he  defended  himself,  and 
the  great  courage  he  displayed,  took  greater  courage  them- 
selves, and  abandoning  the  passage  they  were  guarding, 
hastened  to  support  the  king. 

After  some  little  time,  the  count  Peter  of  Brittany  came 
to  us  who  were  guarding  the  small  bridge  from  Massonra, 
having  had  a  most  furious  skirmish.  He  was  so  badly 
wounded  in  the  face  that  the  blood  came  out  of  his  mouth, 
as  if  it  had  been  full  of  water,  and  he  vomited  it  forth.  The 
count  was  mounted  on  a  short,  thick,  but  strong  horse,  and 
his  reins  and  the  pommel  of  his  saddle  were  cut  and  destroyed, 
so  that  he  was  forced  to  hold  himself  by  his  tw^o  hands  round 
the  horse's  neck  for  fear  the  Turks,  who  were  close  behind 
him,  should  make  him  fall  off.  He  did  not,  however, 
seem  much  afraid  of  them,  for  he  frequently  turned  roond, 
and  gave  them  many  abusive  words,  hj  way  of  mockery. 

Towards  the  end  of  this  battle.  Sir  John  de  Soissons  and 
Sir  Peter  de  Nouille,  sumamed  Cayer,  came  to  us :  they  had 
suffered  much  from  the  blows  they  had  received  by  remaining 
behind  in  the  last  battle.  The  Turks,  seeing  them,  began  to 
move  to  meet  them,  but  observing  us  who  were  guarding  the 
bridge,  with  our  fexies  towards  them,  suffered  them  to  pass, 
suspecting  that  we  should  have  gone  to  their  succour,  as  we 
certainly  should  have  done.  I  addressed  the  count  de  Sois- 
sons, who  was  my  cousin -german  :  "  Sir,  I  beg  that  you  will 
remain  here  to  guard  this  bridge.  You  will  act  right  in  so 
doing ;  for,  if  you  leave  it,  the  Turks  whom  you  see  before 
you  will  advance  to  attack  us,  and  the  king  may  thus  have 
his  enemies  in  front  and  rear  at  the  same  moment."  He 
asked,  if  he  should  stay,  would  I  remain  with  him  ?  to  which 
I  most  cheerfully  assented. 

The  oonstable,  hearing  our  conversation  and  agreement,  told 


Digitized  by 


A  ^.  1249.*)  8TRATAOBM  OF  A  TURK. 


417 


me  to  defend  this  bridge,  and  not  on  any  account  to  ^uit  it,  and 
Uiat  be  would  go  and  seek  for  succour.  I  was  sitting  quietly 
tbere  on  my  horse,  having  my  cousin  Sir  John  de  Soissons  on 
my  right  and  Sir  Peter  de  Nouille  on  my  left  hand,  when  a 
Turk,  galloping  from  where  the  king  was,  struck  Sir  Peter  de 
Nouille  so  heavy  a  blow  with  his  battle-axe  on  the  back  as 
felled  him  on  the  neck  of  his  horse,  and  then  crossed  the 
bridge  full  speed  to  his  own  people,  imagining  that  we  would 
abandon  our  post  and  follow  him,  and  thus  they  might  gain 
the  bridge.  When  they  perceived  that  we  would  on  no 
account  quit  our  post,  they  crossed  the  rivulet,  and  placed 
themselves  between  it  and  the  river ;  on  which  we  marched 
towards  them  in  such-wise  that  we  were  ready  to  charge  them, 
if  they  had  further  advanced. 

In  our  front  were  two  of  the  king's  heralds :  the  name  of 
one  was  Guillaume  de  Bron,  and  that  of  the  other  John  de 
Gaymaches ;  against  whom  the  Turks,  who,  as  I  have  said, 
had  posted  themselves  between  the  rivulet  and  river,  led  a 
rabble  of  peasants  of  the  country,  who  pelted  them  with  clods 
of  earth  and  large  stones.  At  last,  they  brought  a  villanous 
Turk,  who  thrice  flung  Greek  fires  at  them  ;  and  by  one  of 
them  was  the  tabard  of  Guillaume  de  Bron  set  on  fire;  but  he 
eoon  threw  it  ofi^,  and  good  need  had  he,  for  if  it  had  set  fire 
to  his  clothes,  he  must  have  been  burnt.  We  were  also  covered 
with  these  showers  of  stones  and  arrows  which  the  Turks  dis- 
charged at  the  two  heralds. 

I  luckily  found  near  me  a  gaubison*  of  coarse  cloth  which 
had  belonged  to  a  Saracen,  and  turning  the  slit  part  inward, 
I  made  a  sort  of  shield,  which  was  of  much  service  to  me  ; 
for  I  was  only  wounded  by  their  shots  in  five  places,  whereas 
my  horse  was  hurt  in  fifteen.  Soon  after,  as  God  willed  it, 
one  of  my  vassals  of  Join vi  lie  brought  me  a  banner  with  my 
arms,  and  a  long  knife  for  war,  which  I  was  in  want  of ;  and 
then,  when  these  Turkish  villains,  who  were  on  foot,  pressed 
on  the  heralds,  we  made  a  charge  on  them,  and  put  them  in- 
stantly to  flight. 

*  It  should  be  gambison,  which  is  the  name  of  this  sort  of  dress, 
Roger  Hoveden,  in  the  year  1181,  uses  the  word  wanbatia,  and  in 
page  614  that  of  wanbais.  The  gamboison  was  a  quilted  dress,  well 
st^ed  with  wool,  that  had  been  soaked  in,  and  beat  up  with  yinegar, 
which  Pliny,  in  the  48th  chapter  of  his  8th  book,  says  resists  iron. 

2  E 


Digitized  by 


418        joinville's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.     [^pr.  n. 

Thus  when  the  good  count  do  Soissons  and  myself  were 
returned  to  our  post  on  the  bridge,  after  chasing  away  these 
peasants,  he  rallied  me,  sajring,  Seneschal,  let  ns  allow  this 
rabble  to  bawl  and  bray ;  and,  by  the  *  Ciesse  Dieu,"*  his 
usual  oath,  '^you  and  I  will  talk  over  this  day's  adventures  in 
the  chambers  of  our  ladies." 

It  happened  that  towards  evening,  about  sunset,  the  con- 
stable. Sir  Hymbert  de  Beaujeu,  brought  us  the  king's  cross- 
bows that  were  on  foot ;  and  they  drew  up  in  one  front,  while 
we,  horsemen,  dismounted  under  shelter  of  the  cross-bows. 
The  Saracens,  observing  this,  immediately  took  to  flight,  and 
left  us  in  peace.  The  constable  told  me  that  we  had  behaved 
well  in  thus  guarding  the  bridge ;  and  bade  me  go  boldly  to 
the  king,  and  not  quit  him  until  he  should  be  dismounted  in 
his  pavilion.  I  went  to  the  king,  and  at  the  same  moment 
Sir  John  de  Valeri  joined,  and  requested  of  him,  in  the  name 
of  the  lord  de  Chastillon,  that  the  said  lord  might  command 
the  rear  guard,  which  the  king  veiy  willingly  granted.  The 
king  then  took  the  road  to  return  to  his  pavilion,  and  raised 
the  helmet  from  his  head,  on  which  I  gave  him  my  iron 
skull-cap,  which  was  much  lighter,  that  he  might  have  more 
air. 

Thus  as  we  were  riding  together,  Father  Henry,  prior  of 
the  hospital  of  Ronnay,  who  had  crossed  the  river,  came  to 
him  and  kissed  his  hand,  fully  armed,  and  asked  if  he  had 
heard  any  news  of  his  brother,  the  count  d'Artois.  "  Yes,"  re- 
plied the  king, I  have  heard  all;"  that  is  to  say,  that  he  knew 
well  he  was  now  in  paradise.  The  prior,  thinking  to  comfort 
him  for  the  death  of  his  brother,  continued,  "  Sire,  no  king  of 
France  has  ever  reaped  such  honour  as  you  have  done ;  for 
with  great  intrepidity  have  you  and  your  army  crossed  a  dan- 
gerous river  to  combat  your  enemies ;  and  have  been  so  very 
successful,  that  you  have  put  them  to  flight  and  gained  the 
field,  together  with  their  warlike  engines,  with  which  they 
had  wonderfully  annoyed  you,  and  concluded  the  affair  by 
taking  posse^^sion  this  day  of  their  camp  and  quarters." 

The  good  king  replied,  that  God  shoiild  be  adored  for  aU 
the  good  he  bad  granted  him ;  and  then  heavy  tears  began  to 
fall  down  his  cheeks,  which  many  great  persons  noticing,  were 
oppressed  with  anguish  and  compassion,  on  seeing  him  thus 


Digitized  by 


A.l>.  1249.] 


THB  UBDOUIN  ARABS. 


419 


weep,  praising  the  name  of  God,  who  had  enabled  him  to  gain 
the  victory. 

When  we  arriyed  at  onr  qoarters,  we  found  great  numbers 
of  Saracens  on  foot  holding  the  cords  of  a  tent  which  some 
of  our  servants  were  erecting,  and  pulling  against  them  with 
all  their  might.  The  master  of  the  Temple,  who  had  the 
command  of  the  vanguard,  and  myself  charged  this  rabble, 
and  made  them  run  away.  The  tent  remained,  therefore, 
with  us ;  not,  however,  that  there  was  any  great  fight,  for 
which  reason  many  boasters  were  put  to  shame.  I  could 
readily  mention  their  names,  but  I  abstain  from  doing  so  be- 
cause they  are  deceased ;  and  we  ought  not  to  speak  ill  of 
the  dead.  Of  Sir  Guyon  de  MaJvoisin  I  am  willing  to 
speak,  for  the  constable  and  I  met  him  on  the  road,  returning 
from  Massoura,  bearing  himself  gallantly,  although  hard 
pressed  by  the  Turks,  who  closely  pursued  him ;  for  after  they 
had  dispersed  the  count  of  Brittany  and  his  battalion,  as  I 
have  before  said,  they  followed  the  lord  Guyon  and  his 
company.  He  had  not  suffered  much  in  this  engagement, 
for  he  and  his  ^people  .  had  most  courageously  behaved ; 
which  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  when,  as  I  have  heard 
from  those  who  knew  him  and  his  family,  almost  all  his 
knights  were  of  his  kindred  and  lineage,  and  his  men-at- 
arms  his  liege  vassals.  This  gave  them  the  greater  confidence 
in  their  chief. 

After  we  had  discomfited  the  Turks,  and  driven  them  out 
of  their  quarters,  the  Bedouins,+  who  are  a  powerful  people, 
entered  the  camp  of  the  Saracens  and  Turks,  and  seized  and 
carried  off  whatever  they  could  find,  and  all  that  the  Saracens 
and  Turks  had  left  behind  them.  I  was  much  surprised  at 
this ;  for  the  Bedouins  are  subjects  and  tributary  to  the 
Saracens ;  but  I  never  heard  that  they  were  treated  the  worse 
by  the  Saracens  for  what  they  had  thus  pillaged.  They  said 
it  was  their  usual  custom  to  fall  on  the  weakest,  which  is 

*  He  is  <^lled  Frere  Onillanme  de  Sonnac  in  the  additions  to  Matt. 
Paris,  p.  110. 

f  The  lord  de  Jomville  has  here  confounded,  as  elsewhere,  the  Bedouins 
with  the  Assassins.  Jacques  de  Vitry  says  positively  they  were  Arabians, 
that  their  residence  was  near  Aleppo  and  Crach,  in  Arabia,  and  that  the 
Assassins  inhabited  a  canton  of  the  province  of  Phoenicia,  enclosed  b^ 
mountains  nwir  Tortosa.  However  this  may  be,  every  writer  agrees  that 
the  Bedouins  were  a  wandering  and  vagabond  people. 


2  B  2 


4^0  JOTNVILLETs  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.       [^PT.  II» 


the  natare  of  dogs ;  for  when  there  is  one  dog  pursued  by 
another,  and  a  shouting  made  after  him,  all  die  other  dogs 
DeJI  on  him. 

As  my  subject  requires  it,  I  shall  say  something  concern- 
ing these  Bedouins,  and  what  sort  of  people  they  be.  The 
Bedouins  reside  in  deserts  and  mountains,  and  have  no  great 
faith  in  Mahomet,  like  the  Turks,  but  believe  in  the  religion 
of  Aly,*  who,  they  say,  was  uncle  to  Mahomet  They  are 
persuaded  that  when  any  one  of  them  dies  for  the  service 
of  his  lord,  or  when  attempting  any  good  design,  his  soul 
enters  a  superior  body,  and  is  much  more  comfortable 
than  it  was  before ;  this  makes  them  ready  to  die  at  the 
command  of  their  superiors  or  elders.  These  Bedouins  do 
not  reside  in  town  or  city,  but  always  lie  in  the  fields  ani 
deserted  places,  where,  whenever  the  weather  is  bad,  tbey^ 
their  wives  and  children,  make  themselves  an  habitation^ 
by  sticking  into  the  ground  poles  connected  by  hoops,  like  to 
what  women  use  in  drying  their  washed  clothes ;  and  over 
these  hoops  they  throw  skins  of  their  large  sheep,  which 
they  call  skins  of  Somas,  tanned  with  alum.  The  Bedonins 
have  large  pelisses  of  coarse  hair,  which  cover  their  whole 
bodies,  and  when  evening  comes,  or  when  it  is  cold  or  wet, 
they  wrap  themselves  up  in  them,  and  retire  to  rest. 
Those  who  follow  war  have  their  horses  feeding  near  them 
during  the  night,  and  have  only  to  take  off  their  bridles, 
and  let  them  eat.  In  the  morning  they  spread  their  pelisses 
to  the  sun,  and,  when  dry,  rub  them,  so  that  they  do  not 
appear  as  if  they  had  been  wetted.  They  never  are  armed 
for  combat,  for  they  say,  and  believe,  that  no  one  can  die  but 
at  his  appointed  hour :  they  have  likewise  a  mode  of  cursing, 
alluding  to  their  faith,  when  they  swear  at  their  children, 
saying,  ''Be  thou  accursed,  like  him  who  arms  himself 
for  fear  of  death."  In  battle  they  use  only  a  sword,  made 
after  the  Turkish  manner,  and  are  clothed  in  linen  robes  like 
to  surplices.    They  are  an  ugly  race,  and  hideous  to  look 

*  Aly  was  not  uncle  to  Mahomet,  but  his  cousin,  and  son-in-law, 
hiiving  married  his  daughter  Fatima.  The  writers  of  the  Mahometan 
histories  relate  at  length  the  difference  of  the  religion  established  hy 
Mahomet,  and  that  introduced  by  Aly,  the  latter  of  which  was  embraced 
Dy  the  caliphs  of  Egypt,  who  for  that  reason  are  called  Fatimitet  in  the 
Eastern  Chronicle,  Arom  the  name  of  Fatima^  wife  of  Aly. — See  Ockley'i 
History  of  the  Saracens. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1249.] 


BtmPRtSED  BY  THB  BARAOBNS. 


42t 


at ;  for  their  hair  and  beards  are  long  and  black.  They  live 
on  the  superabundance  of  the  milk  from  their  herds ;  and 
their  numbers  are  not  to  be  counted ;  for  they  dwell  in  the 
kingdoms  of  Jerusalem,  Egypt,  and  throughout  all  the 
lands  of  the  Saracens  and  infidels,  to  whom  they  are 
tribntary. 

Now  I  am  on  the  subject  of  the  Bedouins,  I  must  say  that 
I  have  seen,  since  my  return  from  the  Holy  Land,  some 
calling  themselres  Christians,  who  hold  similar  faith  with  the 
Bedouins ;  for  they  maintain  that  no  man  can  die  before  his 
determined  time,  happen  what  may,  which  is  a  &lsehood. 
I  consider  such  ^  belief  the  same  as  if  they  should  say  that 
God  had  not  the  power  to  assist  or  hurt  us,  nor  to  lengthen 
or  abridge  our  liyes,  which  is  heresy.  On  the  contrary,  I 
declare  that  we  ought  to  put  our  whole  faith  in  him  who  is 
all-powerful,  and  may,  according  to  his  good  pleasure,  send 
US  death  sooner  or  later.  This  is  the  opposite  to  the  &ith  of 
the  Bedouins,  who  firmly  believe  the  day  of  death  to  each 
person  is  determined  infallibly,  without  any  possibility  of 
prolonging  or  shortening  the  time. 

To  return  to  the  original  matter,  and  continue  my  history. 
In  the  evening  of  this  severe  engagement  that  I  spoke  of, 
and  when  we  had  taken  up  our  quarters  in  those  from  whence 
we  had  driven  the  Saracens,  my  people  brought  me,  from  the 
main  army,  a  tent,  which  the  master  of  the  Templars,  who 
had  the  command  of  the  van,  had  given  me.  I  had  it  pitched 
on  the  right  of  those  machines  we  had  won  from  the  enempr, 
as  each  of  us  was  eager  for  repose :  indeed  we  had  need  of  it, 
from  the  wounds  and  fatigues  we  had  suffered  in  the  late 
battle. 

Before  daybreak,  however,  we  were  alarmed  by  the  cries 
of  To  arms,  to  arms ! "  and  I  made  my  chamberlain  rise, 
who  lay  by  m^  side,  to  go  and  see  what  was  the  matter.  He 
was  not  long  in  returning,  much  frightened,  and  crying  out, 
^  My  lord,  up  instantly ;  for  the  Saracens  have  entered  the 
camp,  both  horse  and  foot,  and  have  already  defeated  the 
guard  which  the  king  had  appointed  for  our  security,  and  to 
defend  the  engines  we  had  won  from  them." 

These  engines  were  in  front  of  the  king's  pavilions,  and  of 
118  who  were  near  to  him.  I  immediately  rose,  threw  a 
cuirass  on  my  back,  and  put  my  iron  skull-cap  on  my  head  i 


Digitized  by 


422       JOINTILLE's  MBMOIRS  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.         QPT.  II, 

ana  huving  roused  oar  people,  wounded  as  we  were,  we  drovu 
the  Saracens  from  the  engines  which  they  were  so  anxious  to 
recover. 

The  king,  seeing  that  scarcely  any  of  us  had  armour  on, 
sent  Sir  Walter  de  Cliastillon,  who  posted  himself  between 
US  and  the  Turks,  for  the  better  guard  of  the  engines.  After 
bir  AValtor  had  severul  times  repulsed  the  enemy,  who  made 
frequent  attempts  during  the  night  to  carry  off  these  engines, 
the  Saracens,  finding  they  could  not  succeed,  retreated  to  a 
large  body  of  their  horse,  that  were  drawn  up  opposite  to  our 
lines,  to  prevent  us  from  surprising  their  camp,  which  was  in 
their  rear. 

Six  of  the  principal  Turks  dismounted,  armed  from  bead  to 
foot,  and  made  themselves  a  rampart  of  large  stones,  as  a 
shelter  from  our  cross-bows,  and  from  tbence  shot  volleys  of 
arrows,  which,  often  wounded  many  of  our  men.  When  I 
and  my  men-at-arms  who  bad  the  guard  of  that  quarter  saw 
their  stone  rampart,  we  took  counsel  together,  and  resolved 
that,  during  the  ensuing  night,  we  would  destroy  this  rampart, 
and  bring  away  the  stones. 

Now  I  had  a  priest  called  John  de  Waysy,*  who,  having 
overheard  our  counsel  and  resolution,  did  not  wait  so  long,  but 
set  out  alone  towards  the  Saracens,  with  his  cuirass  on,  his 
cap  of  iron,  and  his  sword  under  his  arm.  When  he  was  near 
the  enemy,  who  neither  thought  of  nor  suspected  any  one 
coming  against  them  thus  alone,  he  rushed  furiously  on, 
sword  in  hand,  and  gave  such  blows  to  these  six  captains,  that 

*  Anna  Comnena,  in  the  292nd  page  of  the  tenth  book  of  her  Aleziade, 
reproaches  the  Latins  for  their  clergy  patting  on  armour,  and  with  sword 
and  lance  hastening  to  the  field  of  battle  when  they  have  bnt  jnst 
received  the  order  of  priesthood,  which  is  directly  forbidden  by  ihe 
Greeks.  Petrus  Diaconns,  in  the  fourth  book  of  the  Chronicle  of 
Monte  Cassino,  makes  the  same  charge.  Doubtless  it  is  not  without 
reason  that  the  Greeks  have  so  often  made  this  reproach  to  the 
Latins ;  seeing  that  although  it  has  been  forbidden  by  all  the  cou^. 
cils  for  priests  to  handle  arms,  or  interfere  in  battles  as  combatants, 
yet  notwithstanding  they  are  there  to  be  found  fighting  like  seculars. 
Thus  we  read  that  Ebles,  abbot  of  St.  Germain  des  Pr^,  and  Gosselin, 
bishop  of  Paris,  fought  valiantly  against  the  Normans,  who  had  besieged 
Mie  capital  of  France.  The  clergy  not  only  fought  against  the  infidels, 
but  against  the  Christians  ;  witness  the  bishop  of  Beauvais,  who,  at  the 
battle  of  Bovines,  struck  the  earl  of  Salisbury  to  the  ground  with  his 
battle-axe. 


Digitized  by 


▲  D.  1249.] 


INTREPIDITY  OP  A  PRIEST. 


423 


they  oonld  not  defend  themselves^  and  took  to  flight,  to  the 
great  astonishment  of  the  other  Turks  and  Saracens. 

When  the  Turks  saw  their  leaders  fly,  they  stuck  spurs 
into  their  horses,  and  charged  the  priest,  who  was  returning 
to  our  army,  whence  had  sallied  fifty  of  our  men  to  oppose 
them,  as  they  were  pursuing  him  on  horseback :  the  Turks 
would  not  meet  them,  but  wheeled  off  two  or  three  times.  It 
happened,  however,  that  during  these  wheelings,  one  of  our 
men  threw  his  dagger*  at  a  Turk,  and  hit  him  between  the 
ribs:  he  carried  off  the  dagger,  but  it  caused  his  death. 
The  other  Turks,  seeing  this,  were  more  shy  than  before,  and 
never  dared  to  approach  while  our  men  were  carrying  away 
the  stones  of  the  rampart  My  priest  was  well  known  ever 
after  by  the  whole  army,  who  said  when  they  saw  him, 

That  is  the  priest  who,  single-handed,  defeated  the  Sara- 
cens." 

These  things  happened  during  the  first  day  of  Lent ;  and 
this  same  day  the  Saracens  elected  another  chief,  in  the  plai^ 
of  their  late  chief,  Secedun,  of  whom  mention  has  been  rnade, 
and  who  died  in  the  battle  of  Shrove* Tuesday ;  at  the  same 
time,  probably,  that  the  good  count  d'Artois,  brother  to  the 
king  St.  Louis,  was  slain.  This  new  chief  found  among  the 
other  dead  the  body  of  the  count  d'Artois,  who  had  shewn 
great  intrepidity  in  this  battle,  magnificently  dressed,  be- 
coming a  prince;  and  this  chief  took  the  count's  coat  of 
armour,  and,  to  give  courage  to  the  Turks  and  Saracens,  had 
it  hoisted  before  them,  telling  them  it  was  the  coat-armour  of 
the  king  their  enemy,  who  had  been  slain  in  battle ;  adding, 
*'  My  lords,  this  should  make  you  exert  yourselves  the  more, 
for  body  without  head  is  nothing,  nor  is  an  army  without 
prince  or  chief  to  be  feared.  I  advise,  and  you  ought  to  have 
confidence  in  me,  that  we  increase  the  force  of  our  attacks  on 
them ;  and  on  Friday  next  we  must  conquer  and  gain  the 
battle,  since  tliey  have  now  lost  their  commander."  All  who 
heard  him  cheeifully  agreed  to  follow  his  advice. 

You  must  know  that  the  king  had  many  spies  in  the  Saracen 
army,  who,  having  overheard  their  plans,  knew  their  inten- 

*  The  word  dagw  is  still  in  use  for  a  small  knife  or  dagger.  The 
Spaniards  call  it  dagag,  the  English  dagger.  The  statules  of  William, 
king  of  Scotland,  cap.  23  Habeat  eqnum,  habergeon,  capitium  e  ferro 
et  cultellum,  qui  dicitar  dagger." 


424       joikyille's  memoirs  of  sAmr  louis  ix.     [^tr.  ii. 

tions,  and  how  thty  meant  to  act  Some  of  them  informed 
the  king  of  the  intended  attack  of  the  enemy,  and  that  they 
belieyed  him  dead  and  the  anny  without  a  leader. 

Upon  this,  the  king  summoned  all  his  captains,  and  com- 
mandsd  them  to  liave  their  men-at-arms  completely  armed, 
and  ready  drawn  up  before  their  tents  at  midnight,  and  then 
to  advance  as  far  as  the  lines  which  had  been  made  to  pre- 
vent the  Saracens  entering  the  camp  on  horseback,  although 
thejr  were  so  constructed  tliat  they  might  pass  them  on  foot. 
This  was  punctually  executed  according  to  the  king's  orders. 

You  may  suppose  that  the  plan  the  Saracen  chief  had  pro- 
po8e<l  and  adopted  he  lost  no  time  in  putting  into  execution. 

On  the  Friday  morning,  by  sunrise,  4,000  knights,  well 
armed  'i'^i  mounted,  were  drawn  up  in  battalions,  alongside 
our  anny,  which  lay  on  the  banks  of  the  river  toward  Baby* 
Ion,  and  extending  as  far  as  a  town  called  Ressil.  When 
the  Pagan  chief  had  thus  drawn  up  his  4,000  knights  in 
front  of  our  army,  he  then  brought  another  large  body  of 
Saracens  on  foot,  and  in  such  numbers  that  they  surrounded 
all  the  other  side  of  it.  After  doing  this,  he  drew  up  at  a 
short  distance  other  bodies  in  conjunction  with  the  power  of  the 
sultan  of  Babylon,  to  succour  and  aid  each  of  the  two  former, 
as  occasion  might  occur. 

The  chief  of  the  Saracens,  having  now  completed  the  ar- 
rangement of  his  army,  advanced  on  horseback  alone,  to  view 
and  make  his  observations  on  the  manner  in  which  the  king's 
army  was  formed  ;  and  where  he  saw  ours  was  the  strongest 
or  weakest,  he  strengthened  or  diminished  his  own.  After 
this  he  ordered  3,000  Bedouins,  whose  nature  and  character 
I  have  described,  to  march  in  front  of  the  troops  under  the 
command  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  which  were  posted  be- 
tween the  two  branches  of  the  Nile,  thinking  that  part  of  the 
king's  army  might  be  under  the  duke,  and  his  own  so  much 
the  weaker,  and  that  these  Bedouins  would  effectually  pre- 
vent the  duke  from  affording  any  support  to  the  king. 

AH  these  operations  of  the  infidel  chief  took  him  up  untO 
abodt  mid-day.  This  done,  he  ordered  the  nacaires  and 
drums  to  be  loudly  sounded^  according  to  the  mode  of  the 
Turks,  which  is  certainly  very  surprising  to  those  who  have 
not  been  accustomed  to  hear  them  ;  and  then  both  horse  and 
foot  began  to  be  in  motion  on  all  sides.    I  will  speak  first  of 


A.D.  1249.] 


THE  TEMPLARS  WORSTED. 


42$ 


tlie  battalion  under  the  connt  d'Anjoo,  which  received  the 
first  attack,  being  posted  the  nearest  to  Babylon.  The 
enemy  advanced  in  a  chequered  manner,  like  to  a  game  of 
chess :  for  their  infantry  ran  towards  our  men,  and  burnt 
them  with  Greek  fires,  which  they  cast  from  instruments 
made  for  that  purpose.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Turkish 
cavalry  charged  them  with  such  rapidity  and  success,  that 
the  battalion  of  the  count  d'Anjou  was  defeated.  He  himself 
was  on  foot  among  his  knights,  very  uncomfortably  situated. 

When  news  was  brought  to  the  king  of  the  danger  his 
brother  was  in,  nothing  could  check  his  ardour ;  nor  would 
be  wait  for  any  one,  but,  sticking  spurs  to  his  horse,  galloped 
iiito  the  midst  of  the  battle,  lance  in  hand,  to  where  his 
brother  was,  and  gave  most  deadly  blows  to  the  Turks, 
hastening  always  to  where  he  saw  the  greatest  crowd.  He 
suffered  many  hard  blows ;  and  the  Saracens  covered  all  his 
horse's  tail  and  rump  with  Greek  fires.  Yon  may  be  assured 
that  at  such  a  time  he  had  God  in  his  heart  and  mind ;  and 
in  good  truth  our  Lord  in  this  distress  befriended  him,  and  so 
far  assisted  him,  that  the  king  rescued  his  brother,  the  count 
d'Anjou,  and  drove  the  Turks  before  him  without  the  lines. 

Next  to  the  battalion  of  the  count  d'Anjou  was  that  com* 
manded  by  Sir  Guy  de  Guivelins,  and  his  brother  Baldwin, 
which  joined  the  battalion  of  that  bold  and  gallant  man  Sir 
Walter  de  Chastillon.  He  had  with  him  numbers  of  chi- 
Talrous  knights ;  and  these  two  battalions  behaved  so  vigor- 
ously against  the  Turks,  that  they  were  neither  any  way 
broken  nor  conquered. 

The  next  battalion,  however,  fared  but  badlv,  under  the 
command  of  Friar  William  de  Sonnac,  master  of  the  Temple, 
who  had  with  him  the  remnant  of  the  men-at-arms  that  had 
survived  the  battle  of  Shrove-Tuesday,  which  had  been  so 
severely  murderous.  The  master  of  the  Temple,  having  but 
few  men,  made  of  the  engines  that  had  been  taken  from  the 
enemy,  a  sort  of  rampart  in  his  front;  this,  nevertheless, 
availed  him  nothing,  for  the  Templars  having  added  to  them 
many  planks  of  fir-wood,  the  Saracens  burnt  them  with  their 
Greek  fires  ;  and  seeing  there  were  but  few  to  oppose  them, 
they  waited  not  until  they  were  destroyed,  but  vigorously 
attacking  the  Templars,  defeated  them  in  a  very  short  time. 
It  is  certain,  that  in  the  rear  of  the  Templars  there  was  about 


126         JOINVILLb's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.         QPT.  II. 


an  acre  of  gronnd  so  covered  with  bolts,  darts,  arrows,  and 
other  weapons,  that  you  could  not  see  the  earth  beneath  them, 
such  showers  of  these  bad  been  discharged  against  the  Tem- 
plars by  the  Saracens.  The  commander  o^  this  battalion  had 
lost  an  eye  in  the  preceding  battle  of  Shrove-Tuesday ;  and 
in  this  he  lost  the  other,  and  was  slain :  God  have  mercy  on 
his  soul ! 

Sir  Guy  de  Malvoisin,  a  bold  and  valiant  captain  of  another 
battalion,  was  severely  wounded  in  the  body ;  and  the  Sara- 
cens perceiving  his  gallant  conduct  and  address,  shot  Greek 
fire  at  him  incessantly,  so  that  at  one  time  when  he  was  hit 
by  it,  his  people  had  much  difficulty  to  extinguish  it.  But 
notwithstanding  this,  he  stood  bold  and  firm,  unconquered  by 
the  Pagans. 

From  the  battalion  of  Sir  Guy  de  Malvoisin,  the  lines 
which  enclosed  our  army  descended  to  where  I  was,  within  a 
stone's  cast  of  the  river,  and  passed  by  the  division  of  the 
lord  William  earl  of  Flanders,  which  extended  to  that  branch 
of  the  river  which  entered  the  sea.  Our  battalion  was  posted 
opposite,  and  on  that  bank  of  the  river  where  Sir  Guy  de 
Malvoisin  was.  The  Saracens,  observing  the  appearance  of 
the  division  of  the  earl  of  Flanders  fronting  them,  dared  not 
make  any  attack  on  us,  for  which  I  thanked  God,  as  neither 
my  knights  nor  myself  could  put  on  any  armour,  on  account 
of  the  wounds  we  had  received  in  the  engagement  of  the  Tues- 
day, which  rendered  it  impossible  to  wear  any  defensive 
clothing. 

The  Lord  William  of  Flanders  and  his  battalion  did  won- 
ders ;  they  gallantly  and  fiercely  attacked  the  Turks  on 
horseback  and  on  foot,  and  performed  great  deeds  of  arms. 
Seeing  theiz  prowess,  I  ordered  my  cross-bows  to  shoot 
strongly  at  the  Turks,  who  were  on  horseback  at  this  engage- 
ni.ent;  and  the  moment  they  felt  themselves  or  horses  wounded 
by  the  arrows,  they  instantly  took  flight,  and  abandoned  their 
infantry.  The  earl  of  Flanders  and  his  division,  observing 
the  Turks  fly,  passed  the  lines,  and  charged  the  Pagans,  who 
were  on  foot,  killing  great  numbers,  and  bringing  .oif  many 
targets.  Among  others.  Sir  Graultier  de  la  Horgne,  who  bore 
the  banner  of  the  count  d'Aspremont,  displayed  much 
(K>urage. 

Adjoining  this  battalion  was  that  of  my  lord  the  c-ount  de 


▲.D.  1249.^  NARROW  .ESCAPS  Of  THR  COUNT  DB  POITIERS.  427 

Poitiers,  brother  to  the  king ;  it  was  composed  solely  of  in£Ein« 
try,  and  the  only  person  on  horseback  was  the  count,  which  was 
unfortunate  for  him ;  for  the  Turks  defeated  this  battalion, 
and  made  the  count  prisoner.  They  would  surely  have  carried 
him  away,  had  not  the  butchers,  and  till  the  other  traffick- 
ers, men  and  women,  who  supplied  the  army  with  provision, 
hearing  that  the  Turks  were  carrying  off  the  count  de  Poitiers, 
set  up  a  great  shout,  and  rushed  on  the  Saracens  with  such 
fury  that  they  rescued  the  count  de  Poitiers,  and  drove  the 
Turks  beyond  the  lines. 

The  next  battalion  to  that  of  the  count  de  Poitiers  was  the 
weakest  of  the  whole  army,  and  commanded  by  Sir  Josseraiit 
de  Bran9on,  whom  my  lord  de  Poitiers  had  brought  with 
him  to  Egypt.  This  division  was  also  formed  of  dismounted 
knights,  Sir  Josserant  and  his  son  Sir  Henry  being  the  only 
persons  on  horseback.  The  Turks  broke  this  battalion  on  all 
sides,  on  which  Sir  Josserant  and  his  son  fell  on  the  rear  of 
the  Turks,  and  cut  them  down  with  their  swords.  They 
pressed  the  enemy  so  much  that  they  frequently  turned  on 
them  again,  leaving  the  main  body  of  his  men.  In  the  end 
this  would  have  been  fatal ;  for  the  Turks  must  have  slain 
the  whole,  if  Sir  Henry  de  Cone,  a  wise  and  valiant  knight  of 
the  division  under  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  well  knowing  the 
weakness  of  the  lord  de  Bran9on's  battalion,  had  not,  every 
time  he  saw  the  Turks  make  their  charge  on  it,  ordered  the 
king's  cross-bows  to  shoot  at  them.  He  exerted  himself  so 
effectually  that  the  lord  de  Bran9on  escaped  from  this  danger, 
but  lost  twelve  of  the  twenty  knights  whom  it  was  said  he 
had,  without  counting  other  men-at-arms.  He  himself,  how- 
ever, was  the  victim  of  the  wounds  he  received  in  the  service 
of  God,  who,  we  are  bound  to  believe,  has  well  rewarded  him 
for  it. 

This  lord  was  my  uncle,  and  I  heard  him  on  his  death-bed 
say,  that  he  had  in  his  time  been  in  thirty-six  battles  or  war- 
like skirmishes,  and  had  borne  off  the  prize  of  arms  in  most. 
Of  some  of  them  I  have  a  remembrance ;  for  once  being  in 
the  army  of  the  count  de  Mascon,  who  was  his  cousin,  he 
came  to  me  and  a  brother  of  mine  on  a  Good  Friday,  and  said 
to  us,  Come  my  nephews  with  all  your  men,  and  join  us  in 
charging  these  Germans,  who  are  destroying  the  monastery  of 
Mascon." 


Digitized  by 


428 


JOINYILLE's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.       [_PT.  It. 


We  were  instantly  on  horseback,  and  hastened  to  attack 
the  Germans,  whom,  with  hard  blows  of  sword  and  lance,  we 
drove  from  the  monastery,  where  many  were  killed  and 
wounded.  When  this  was  done,  the  good  man  fell  on  his 
knees  before  the  altar,  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  oar 
Lord,  praying  that  he  would  be  pleased  to  have  mercy  on  his 
soul,  that  he  might  die  for  his  service,  to  the  end  that  he 
might  be  entitled  to  the  reward  of  paradise.  I  have  related 
this,  that  you  may  know,  as  I  firmly  believe,  that  God  has 
granted  to  him  the  request  he  then  made. 

After  this  battle  was  ended,  the  king  summoned  all  his 
barons,  knights,  and  other  great  lords,  to  whom,  when  as- 
sembled, he  thus  kindly  addressed  himself :  My  lords  and 
friends,  you  have  all  now  witnessed  the  great  grace  which 
God  our  Creator  has  of  late  shewn  us,  and  continues  to  do  so 
daily,  for  which  we  are  bounden  to  return  him  our  thanks- 
giving. Last  Tuesday,  which  was  Shrovetide,  we,  aided  by 
him,  dislodged  our  enemies  from  their  quarters,  of  which  we 
have  gained  the  possession.  This  Friday,  which  is  now  passed, 
we  have  defended  ourselves  against  them,  very  many  of  us 
being  without  arms,  while  they  were  completely  armed  on 
horseback,  and  on  their  own  ground."  Many  more  fair 
speeches  did  he  make ;  and  the  good  king  dwelt  much  upon 
what  had  passed,  to  comfort  and  give  them  courage  and  faith 
in  God. 

In  pursuing  the  subject-matter  of  my  book  it  is  necessary 
now  and  then  to  make  digressions,  and  to  inform  you  of  the 
manner  in  which  the  sultan  supported  his  men-at-arms,  and 
how  his  armies  were  supplied.  It  is  true  that  the  greater 
part  of  his  chivalry  was  comjposed  of  foreigners,  whom  the 
merchants  trading  by  sea  had  bought  when  young,  and  whom 
the  Egyptians  purchased  by  order  of  their  sultan.  They  came 
mostly  from  the  east ;  for  when  an  eastern  king*  had  de- 
feated in  battle  another  neighbouring  monarch,  the  victor,  and 

*  It  is  Btill  the  custom  of  the  Turks  to  compose  their  prindpal  military 
force,  the  Janisaries,  from  tributary  children,  sent  for  tlds  purpose  every 
fifth  year  by  commissaries  established  in  the  provinces.  These  c^hildren 
are  carried  off  from  Christians,  and  are  instructed  in  the  Turkish  religion, 
and  trained  up  to  military  exercises.  Soldiers,  thus  educated,  and  Un- 
acquainted with  their  parents  and  birth,  only  acknowledge  the  Grand 
Signor  for  their  father  and  protector,  which  is  one  of  the  best  poUticil 
anaxims  of  the  infidels,  although  contrary  to  the  law  of  nature. 


Digitized  by 


▲.D.  1249."]  AOtOUNT  OF  THE  SULTAN's  HODY-OUARD.  42i 


bis  people,  seized  the  subjects  of  the  vanquished,  whom  they 
sold  to  merchants,  who  bought  them,  as  I  have  said,  to  seU 
again  in  Egypt.  The  children  bom  from  these  captires  the 
sidtan  supported  and  educated,  and  when  their  beards  ap- 
peared, thej  were  taught  to  draw  the  bow,  by  way  of  amuse* 
ment ;  and  when  he  was  in  a  jocund  mood  they  displayed 
their  skill  before  him. 

As  they  increased  in  strength,  their  small  bows  were  ex- 
changed for  others  of  greater  weight,  and  proportioned  to 
their  powers.  These  youths  bore  the  arms  of  the  sultan,  and 
were  called  his  Bahairiz.*  When  their  beards  were  grown, 
the  sultan  made  them  knights;  and  their  emblazonments 
were  like  his,  of  pure  gold,  save  that  to  distinguish  them, 
they  added  bars  of  yermilion,  with  roses,  birds,  griffins,  or 
any  other  difference  as  they  please.  They  were  called  the 
band  of  La  ffauleca^  which  signifies  the  archers  of  the  king's 
ffuard ;  and  were  always  about  the  person  of  the  sultan  to 
defend  him.  When  the  sultan  went  to  war  they  were  quar- 
tered near  him  as  his  body-guard. 

He  had,  beside  these,  other  guards  still  nearer  to  his 
person,  such  as  porters  and  minstrels,  who  played  upon  their 
instruments  from  the  break  of  day  until  the  sultan  rose ;  and 
in  the  evenings  sounded  the  retreat.  Their  instruments  made 
so  loud  a  noise,  that  those  who  were  near  them  could  not 
hear  each  other  speak ;  and  their  notes  were  distinctly  heard 
throughout  the  army.  During  the  daytime,  they  dared  on 
no  account  play  on  them,  without  express  orders  from  the 
commander  of  the  Hauleca. 

*  Bahairiz.-^This  word  comes  from  Bahr»  which  the  Arabians  nse  to 
express  the  sea,  or  any  great  collection  of  water.  The  name  of  Bahairiz 
was  first  given  to  a  thousand  youths,  whom  Melik-Ussali  had  bought  of 
the  Tartars  who  ravaged  the  Turquestan,  and  whom  he  had  educated  in 
all  military  exercises  in  a  castle,  built  by  his  orders,  opposite  to  Cairo,  on 
an  island  of  th^  Nile  called  Revdhah.  This  fort  was  called  Bahriieh,  or 
the  Maritime  Fortress,  on  account  of  the  Nile  surrounding  it.  It  was  in 
this  castle  that  Melik-Ussali,  who  had  not  forgotten  the  cowardly  conduct 
of  his  troops  at  the  siege  of  Napoulous,  fixed  his  residence.  He  gave  his 
whole  confidence  to  these  Bahairiz,  loaded  them  with  favours,  and  named 
from  among  them  the  governors  of  provinces,  the  commanders  of  his 
armies,  ana  the  first  officers  of  the  state.  The  remainder  were  reserved 
for  the  guard  of  his  new  palace,  and  to  attend  on  him  wherever  he  went, 
during  peace  or  war.  It  is  this  body  of  troops  the  lord  de  JouiviUe 
means  under  the  name  of  La  Uauleca. 


Digitized  by 


430 


JOINVILLB's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX. 


"When  the  sultan  wanted  any  thing,  or  wished  to  give 
orders  to  his  men-at-arms,  he  mentioned  it  to  the  above  com- 
mander, who  ordered  the  minstrels  to  sound  their  Saracen 
horns,  drums,  and  nacaires ;  and  to  this  sound  the  whole  of 
the  chiefs  drew  np  before  their  sultan's  tent,  to  whom  the 
commander  of  the  Hauleca  told  the  good  pleasure  of  the 
sultan,  which  they  instantly  obeyed  to  the  utmost  of  their 
power.  Whenever  the  sultan  went  personally  to  war,  he  no- 
minated from  such  of  the  knights  of  the  Hauleca  as  shewed 
the  most  courage  and  abilities  an  admiral,*  or  captain  over  the 
men-at-arms,  and  according  as  they  rose  in  merit,  the  more 
the  sultan  gave  them ;  by  which  means  every  one  of  them  tried 
who  should  surpass  the  other  to  the  utmost. 

The  manner  of  the  sultan's  acting  towards  them  was,  thai 
whenever  any  one  of  the  knights  of  ^he  Hauleca  had,  by  his 
prowess  and  chivalry,  gained  a  sufficiency,  so  that  he  was 
no  longer  in  want,  and  could  live  independent,  the  sultan,  for 

^  That  is  to  say,  as  the  lord  de  Joinville  explains  this  word,  captain  or 
gOTemor  of  a  province  or  place,  chief  of  an  army  or  smaller  body  of 
troops.  The  word  is  derived  from  the  Arabic  emir  or  amir,  whidi 
signifies  lord.  The  same  thing  is  observed  by  the  lord  de  Villerval  in 
his  manuscript  travels,  in  the  chapter  on  the  condition  and  nature  of  the 
sultans,  of  their  admirals  and. •slaves,  Sec,  Item.  The  saltan  of 
Babylon  has  always,  as  they  tell  me,  as  well  in  Cairo  as  in  the 
environs,  about  ten  thousand  slaves  in  his  pay,  who  fight  for  him 
when  war  makes  it  necessary,  some  with  two  horses,  and  others  with 
more  or  less,  according  to  their  circumstances.  It  must  be  known, 
that  these  slaves  are  from  foreign  nations,  such  as  Tartary,  Torkey.  Bul- 
garia, Hungary,  Sclavonia,  Wallachia,  Russia,  Greece,  and  other  coun- 
tries, as  well  from  those  of  the  Christians,  as  elsewhere.  They  are  not 
called  the  sultan's  slaves  unless  they  be  bought  with  his  money,  or  sent 
to  him  as  presents  from  distant  countries.  In  these  slaves  he  trusts 
wholly  for  the  guard  of  his  person,  and  he  gives  them  women,  houses, 
horses,  and  robes,  and  places  them,  when  young,  under  masters,  to  teach 
them  the  art  of  war.  According  to  their  different  abilities,  he  appoints 
one  captain  of  ten  lancemen,  another  of  twenty,  another  of  fifty,  another 
of  one  hundred  ;  and,  thus  rising,  they  are  made,  one  governor  of  Jeru- 
salem, another  king,  or  ruler,  of  Damascus,  another  chief  governor  of 
Cairo,  and  thus  with  other  officers  of  that  country.*' 

The  word  admiral  is  printed  by  different  writers  various  ways.  This 
officer  is  called  by  the  Greeks,  afiKpat^  afiripaioit  and  by  the  Latins  of 
the  middle  ages,  admirabilea,  admiraldi^  &c.  This  much  is  however 
certain,  that  we  have  borrowed  the  word  from  the  infidel  nations,  and 
commonly  style  the  chiefs  of  naval  armaments  admirals,  because  those 
from  whom  we  have  adopted  it  thus  applied  the  word. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1249.] 


TRAITS  OF  EASTERN  CRUELTY. 


431 


fear  he  should  dethrone  or  kill  him,  had  him  arrested  and 
thrown  into  prison,  where  he  was  secretly  pnt  to  death,  and 
then  he  took  possession  of  all  the  fortune  his  wife  and  chil- 
dren might  have  had  left  to  them.  An  example  of  this 
happened  while  I  was  in  that  country;  for  the  sultan  had 
imprisoned  those  who,  by  their  valour  and  address,  had  made 
prisoners  of  the  counts  of  Montfort  and  Bar;  and  from 
envy  and  jealousy,  and  from  his  dread  of  them,  had  them 
put  to  death.  He  acted  in  like  manner  to  the  Boudendars, 
\i  ho  are  his  subjects  ;  for  when  they  had  defeated  the  king  of 
Armenia,  and  came  to  inform  him  of  the  events  they  found 
him  hunting  wild  beasts.  Having  dismounted  to  make  their 
obeisance,  and  thinking,  aa  they  had  behaved  so  well,  they 
should  be  recompensed,  he  eyed  them  maliciously,  and  said  he 
should  not  return  their  salute,  for  they  had  made  him  lose  his 
chase ;  and  ordered  their  heads  to  be  struck  off. 

To  return  to  our  subject.  The  sultan,  lately  deceased,  had 
!effc  a  son,  who  was  twenty-five  years  old,  well  informed, 
prudent,  and  already  full  of  malice.  The  last  sultan,  fearing 
he  might  dethrone  him,  kept  him  at  a  distance  from  his  per- 
son, and  had  given  him  a  kingdom  in  the  East :  but  the 
moment  his  father  was  dead,  the  admirals  of  Babylon  sent 
for  him,  and  made  him  their  sultan.  On  taking  possession  of 
his  dignity,  he  deprived  the  constable,  marshals,  and  senes* 
chals  of'  his  father  of  their  golden  wands,  and  the  offices 
which  they  held,  and  gave  them  to  those  whom  he  had  brought 
with  him  from  the  East. 

This  caused  great  discontent  in  those  who  had  been  re- 
moved, as  also  in  those  of  the  council  of  his  late  father,  who 
suspected  strongly  that  he  would  aot  by  them,  after  seizing 
their  wealth,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  sultan  had  done  by 
those  who  had  taken  the  counts  of  Montfort  and  of  Bar,  as 
already  related.  They  therefore  unanimously  agreed  to 
pnt  him  to  death,  and  found  means  of  obtaining  from  those 
called  La  Hauleca,  who  were  the  sultan's  guard,  a  promise  to 
murder  him. 

After  the  two  battles  I  have  mentioned,  which  were  mar- 
vellously sharp  and  severe,  the  one  on  Shrove-Tuesday, 
and  the  other  the  first  Friday  in  Lent,  another  great  mis- 
fortune befel  our  army.  At  the  end  of  eight  or  ten  days,  tho 
bodies  of  those  who  had  been  slain  in  these  two  engagementSi 


»iv^?rc^  ^^^^  8^1^^^  ^^^^^ 


1 1»  ^'-^ 


at  lb* 


Digitized  by 


▲.U   1249.^  8CARCITT  OF  PROTISION. 


433 


imagine  the  reason  of  this,  until  one  of  the  galleys  of  the  earl 
of  Flanders,  having  forced  a  passage,  informed  us  how  the 
sultan  had  launched  his  vessels,  bj  drawing  them  overland, 
below  us,  so  that  the  Turks  watched  all  galleys  going  toward 
JCHLmietta,  and  had  already  captured  fourscore  of  ours,  and 
killed  their  crews. 

6y  this  means  all  providon  iras  exceedingly  dear  in  the 
army ;  and  when  Easter  arrived,  a  beef  was  sold  for  eighty 
livres,  a  sheep  for  thirty  livres,  a  hog  for  thirty  livres,  a  muid 
of  wine  for  ten  livres,  an  egg  for  sixpence,  and  every  thing 
else  in  proportion. 

"When  the  king  and  his  barons  saw  this,  and  that  there  was 
not  any  remedy  for  it,  they  advised  the  king  to  march  the 
army  from  near  Babylon,  and  join  that  of  the  duke  of  Bur- 
gundy, which  was  on  the  other  bank  of  the  river  that  flowed 
to  Damietta.  For  the  security  of  his  retreat,  the  king  had 
erected  a  barbican  in  front  of  the  small  bridge  1  have  so 
often  mentioned ;  and  it  waa  constructed  in  suchwise  that  it 
mi^ht  be  entered  on  each  side  on  horseback.  As  soon  as 
this  barbican  was  finished,  the  whole  host  armed;  for  the 
Turks  made  a  vigorous  attack,  observing  our  intentions  to 
join  the  duke  of  Burgundy's  army  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
river. 

During  the  lime  we  were  entering  the  barbican,  the  enemy 
fell  on  the  rear  of  our  army,  and  took  prisoner  Sir  Errart  de 
Valeri ;  but  he  was  soon  rescued  by  his  brother.  Sir  John  de 
VaJeri.  The  king,  however,  and  his  division  never  moved 
until  the  haggSLge  and  arms  had  crossed  the  river  ;  and  then 
we  all  passed  after  the  king,  except  Sir  Gaultier  de 
^bastUloD  who  commanded  the  rear-guard  in  the  barbican. 

When  the  whole  army  had  passed,  the  rear-guard  was 
^   h  distressed  by  the  Turkish  cavalry;  for  from  their  horses 
(v^^      1 1  shoot  point  blank,  as  the  barbican  was  low.  The 
t^ey  com         *brew  largo  stones  and  clods  of  earth  in  their 
^urkBontoot         ^^^^^  ^^.^^  ^^j^  ^  ^^^^^^  themselves. 

\aces,  ^        •nfallibly  have  been  destroyed,  if  the  count 
Jbey  would         ^        j^j^^^       afterwards  king  of  Sicily, 
Xnjau,  ^fjj^^gone  to  their  rescue,  and  brought  them  off  in 

.       Shrovetide  I  saw  a  thing  which  I  must 
•  il  of  that  day  died  a  very  valiant  and 

2  F 


Digitized  by  Google 


432       joinville's  memoirs  op  saint  louis  ix.      Qpt.  n. 

and  thrown  into  the  Nile,  rose  to  the  top  of  the  water. 
It  was  said,  this  always  happens  when  the  gall  is  hnrst  and 
rotten.  These  bodies  floated  down  the  river  nntil  they  came 
to  the  small  bridge  that  communicated  with  each  part  of  our 
army ;  and  the  arch  was  so  low  it  almost  touched  the  water, 
and  prevented  the  bodies  passing  underneath.  The  river 
was  covered  with  them  from  bank  to  bank,  so  that  the  water 
could  not  be  seen  a  good  stone's  throw  from  the  bridge  up* 
ward. 

The  king  hired  one  hundred  labourers,  who  were  full  eight 
days  in  separating  the  bodies  of  the  Christians  from  the 
Saracens,  which  were  easily  distinguishable :  the  Saracen 
bodies  they  thrust  under  the  bridge  by  main  force,  and 
floated  them  down  to  the  sea ;  but  the  Christians  were  buried 
in  deep  graves,  one  over  the  other.  God  knows  how  great 
was  the  stench,  and  what  misery  it  was  to  see  the  bodies 
of  such  noble  and  worthy  persons  lying  so  exposed.  I  wit- 
nessed the  chamberlain  of  the  late  count  d'Artois  seeking  the 
body  of  his  master,  and  many  more  hunting  after  the  bodies 
of  their  friends  ;  but  I  never  heard  that  any  who  were  thus 
seeking  their  friends  amidst  such  an  infectious  smell  ever 
recovered  their  healths.  You  must  know,  that  we  ate  no 
fish  the  whole  Lent  but  eelpouts,  which  is  a  gluttonous  fish, 
and  feeds  on  dead  bodies.  From  this  cause,  and  from  the 
bad  air  of  the  country,  where  it  scarcely  ever  rains  a  drop, 
the  whole  army  was  infected  by  a  shocking  disorder,  which 
dried  up  the  flesh  on  our  legs  to  the  bone,  and  our  skins  be- 
came tanned  as  black  as  the  ground,  or  like  an  old  boot  that 
has  long  lain  behind  a  coffer.  In  addition  to  this  miserable 
disorder,  those  affected  by  it  had  another  sore  complaint  in 
the  mouth,  from  eating  such  fish,  that  rotted  the  gums,  and 
caused  a  most  stinking  breath.  Very  few  escaped  death  that 
were  thus  attacked  ;  and  the  surest  symptom  of  its  bein>^ 
fatal  was  a  bleeding  at  the  nose,  for  when  that  took  place 
none  ever  recovered. 

The  better  to  cure  us,  the  Turks,  who  knew  our  situation, 
fifteen  days  afterward  attempted  to  starve  us,  by  means  I 
shall  now  tell  you.  These  villanous  Turks  had  drawn  their 
galleys  overland,  and  launched  them  again  below  our  army, 
so  that  those  who  had  gone  to  Damietta  for  provision  never 
returned,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  us  all.    We  could  not 


A.D  1249.^  SOARCITT  OF  PROTISION. 


433 


imagine  the  reason  of  this,  until  one  of  the  galleys  of  the  earl 
of  Flanders,  having  forced  a  passage,  informed  ns  how  the 
sultan  had  launched  his  vessels,  by  drawing  them  overland, 
bdow  us,  so  that  the  Turks  watched  all  galleys  going  toward 
Damietta,  and  had  already  captured  fourscore  of  ours,  and 
killed  their  crews. 

By  this  means  all  provision  iras  exceedingly  dear  in  the 
army  ;  and  when  Easter  arrived,  a  beef  was  sold  for  eighty 
livres,  a  sheep  for  thirty  livres,  a  hog  for  thirty  livres,  a  muid 
of  wine  for  ten  livres,  an  egg  for  sixpence,  and  every  thing 
else  in  proportion. 

When  the  king  and  his  barons  saw  this,  and  that  there  was 
not  any  remedy  for  it,  they  advised  the  king  to  march  the 
army  from  near  Babylon,  and  join  that  of  the  duke  of  Bur- 
gundy, which  was  on  the  other  bank  of  the  river  that  flowed 
to  Damietta.  For  the  security  of  his  retreat,  the  king  had 
erected  a  barbican  in  front  of  the  small  bridge  I  have  so 
often  mentioned ;  and  it  waa  constructed  in  suchwise  that  it 
might  be  entered  on  each  side  on  horseback.  As  soon  as 
this  barbican  was  finished,  the  whole  host  armed ;  for  the 
Turks  made  a  vigorous  attack,  observing  our  intentions  to 
join  the  duke  of  Burgundy's  army  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
river. 

During  the  lime  we  were  entering  the  barbican,  the  enemy 
fell  on  the  rear  of  our  army,  and  took  prisoner  Sir  Errart  de 
Valeri ;  but  he  was  soon  rescued  by  his  brother,  Sir  John  de 
VaJeri.  The  king,  however,  and  his  division  never  moved 
until  the  baggage  and  arms  had  crossed  the  river  ;  and  then 
we  all  passed  after  the  king,  except  Sir  Gaultier  de 
Chastillon,  who  commanded  the  rear-guard  in  the  barbican. 

When  the  whole  army  had  passed,  the  rear-guard  was 
much  distressed  by  the  Turkish  cavalry;  for  from  their  horses 
they  could  shoot  point  blank,  as  the  barbican  was  low.  The 
Turks  on  foot  threw  largo  stones  and  clods  of  earth  in  their 
faces,  without  the  guard  being  able  to  defend  themselves. 
They  would  infallibly  have  been  destroyed,  if  the  count 
d'Anjou,  brother  to  the  king,  and  afterwards  king  of  Sicil}?^ 
had  not  boldly  gone  to  their  rescue,  and  brought  them  off  in 
eafety. 

The  day  T-receding  Shrovetide  I  saw  a  thing  which  I  must 
relate.    On  the  vigil  of  that  day  died  a  very  valiant  and 

2  F 


Digitized  by 


434         JOINYILLB's  memoirs  of  saint  LOJJIB  IX.     [[PT.  IL 


prudent  knight,  Sir  Hugh  de  Landricourt,  one  under  mj 
banner ;  and  during  his  burial,  six  of  my  knights  talked  so 
loud  thej  disturbed  the  priest  as  he  was  sajring  mass :  on 
this  I  arose,  and  bade  them  be  silent ;  for  it  was.  unbecoming 
gentlemen  thus  to  talk  whilst  the  mass  was  celebrating.  But 
thej  burst  into  laughter,  and  told  me  they  were  talking  of 
marrying  the  widow  of  Sir  Hugh,  now  in  his  bier.  I  re- 
buked them  sharply,  and  said  such  conversation  was  indecent 
and  improper,  for  that  they  had  too  soon  forgotten  their 
companion. 

Now  it  happened  on  the  morrow,  when  the  fir^t  grand 
battle  took  place,  although  we  may  laugh  at  their  foUies,  God 
took  such  vengeance  on  them,  that  of  all  the  six  not  one 
escaped  death,  and  remained  unburied.  The  wives  of  the 
whole  six  re-married.  This  makes  it  credible,  that  God 
leaves  no  such  conduct  unpunished.  With  regard  to  myself 
I  fared  little  better,  for  I  was  grievously  wounded  in  the 
battle  of  Shrove-Tuesday.  I  had,  besides,  the  disorder  in 
my  legs  and  mouth  before  spoken  of,  and  such  a  rheum  in 
my  head  it  ran  through  my  mouth  and  nostrils.  In  addition, 
I  had  a  double  fever,  called  a  quartan,  from  which  God 
defend  ns  !  and  with  these  illnesses  was  I  confined  to  my  bed 
the  half  of  Lent. 

My  poor  priest  was  likewise  as  ill  as  myself ;  and  one  day 
when  he  was  singing  mass  before  me  as  I  lay  in  my  bed,  at 
the  moment  of  the  elevation  of  the  host,  I  ^saw  him  so  ex- 
ceedingly weak  that  he  was  near  fainting ;  but.  when  I  j>er- 
ceived  he  was  on  the  point  of  falling  to  the  ground,  I  fiung 
myself  out  of  bed,  sick  as  T  was,  and  taking  my  coat,  em- 
braced him,  and  bade  him  be  at  his  ease,  and  take  courage 
from  him  whom  he  held  in  his  hands.  He  recovered  some 
little  ;  but  I  never  quitted  him  until  he  had  finished  the  mass, 
which  he  completed,  and  this  was  the  last,  for  he  never  after 
celebrated  another,  but  died.    God  receive  his  soul ! 

To  return  to  our  history.  It  is  true  there  were  some 
parleys  between  the  councils  of  the  king  and  of  the  sultan, 
respecting  a  peace  ;  and  a  day  was  appointed  for  the  further 
discussion  of  it.  The  basis  of  the  treaty  was  agreed  on,— 
namely,  that  the  king  should  restore  to  the  sultan  Damietta^ 
and  the  sultan  should  surrender  to  the  king  the  realm  of 
,  Jerusalem.    He  was  also  to  take  proper  care  of  the  siok  is 


Digitized  by 


l.D.  1249.^         NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  JERUSALEM. 


435 


Damietta,  and  to  give  up  the  salted  provision  that  was  thero, 
for  neither  Turk  nor  Saracen  eat  of  it»  and  likewise  the 
engines  of  war ;  but  the  king  was  to  send  for  all  these  things 
from  Damietta. 

The  end  of  this  was,  that  the  snltan  demanded  what 
security  the  king  would  give  him  for  the  surrender  of  Dami- 
etta ;  and  it  was  proposed  that  he  should  detain  as  prisoner 
one  of  the  king's  brothers,  either  the  count  de  Poitiers,  or  the 
count  d'Anjou,  until  it  were  effected.  But  the  Turks  refused 
to  accept  of  any  other  hostage  than  the  person  of  the  king. 

To  this  the  gallant  knight,  Sir  Geoffiy  de  Sergines,  replied, 
that  the  Turks  should  never  have  the  king's  person  ;  and  that 
he  would  rather  they  should  all  be  slain  than  it  should  be 
said  they  had  given  their  king  in  pawn ;  and  thus  matters 
remained. 

The  disorder  I  spoke  of  very  soon  increased  so  much  in 
the  army  that  tbe  barbers  were  forced  to  cut  away  very  large 
pieces  of  flesh  from  the  gums,  to  enable  their  patients  to  eat. 
It  was  pitiful  to  hear  the  cries  and  groans  of  those  on  whom 
this  operation  was  performing ;  they  seemed  like  to  the  cries 
of  women  in  labour,  and  I  cannot  express  the  great  concern 
all  felt  who  heard  them. 

The  good  king,  St.  Louis,  witnessing  the  miserable  condi- 
tion of  great  part  of  his  army,  raised  his  hands  and  eyes  to 
heaven,  blessing  our  Lord  for  all  he  had  given  him,  and  see- 
ing that  he  could  not  longer  remain  where  he  was,  without 
perishing  himself  as  well  as  his  army,  gave  orders  to  march 
on  the  Tuesday  evening  after  the  octave  of  Easter,  and  return 
to  Damietta.  He  issued  his  commands  to  the  masters  of  the 
galleys  to  have  them  ready  to  receive  on  board  the  sick,  and 
convey  them  to  Damietta.  He  likewise  gave  his  orders  to 
Josselin  de  Corvant,  and  to  other  engineers,  to  cut  the  cords 
which  held  the  bridges  between  us  and  the  Saracens ;  but  they 
neglected  them,  which  was  the  cause  of  much  evil  befall- 
ing us. 

Perceiving  that  every  one  was  preparing  to  go  to  Damietta, 
I  withdrew  to  my  vessel,  with  two  of  my  knights,  all  that  I 
had  remaining  of  those  that  had  accompanied  me,  and  the 
rest  of  my  household.  Towards  evening,  when  it  began  to 
grow  dark,  I  ordered  my  captain  to  raise  the  anchor,  that  wo 
might  float  down  the  stream ;  but  he  replied,  that  he  dared 


2  F  2 


436       joinville's  memoirs  of  saint  louis  tx.      [pt.  il 


not  obey  me,  for  that  between  us  and  Damietta  were  the  large 
galleys  of  the  sultan,  which  would  infallibly  capture  us. 

The  king's  seamen  had  made  great  fires  on  board  their 
galleys,  to  cherish  the  unfortunate  sick ;  and  many  others  in 
the  same  state  were  waiting  on  the  banks  of  the  river  for 
vessels  to  take  them  on  board.  As  I  was  advising  my  sailors 
to  make  some  little  way,  I  saw,  by  the  light  of  the  fires,  the 
Saracens  enter  our  camp,  and  murder  these  sick  that  were 
waiting  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile ;  and  as  my  men  were 
raising  the  anchor,  and  we  began  to  move  downward,  the 
sailors  who  were  to  take  the  sick  on  board  advanced  with 
their  boats ;  but  seeing  the  Saracens  in .  the  act  of  killing 
them,  they  retreated  to  their  large  galleys,  cut  their  cables, 
and  fell  down  on  my  small  bark. 

I  expected  every  moment  they  would  have  sunk  me ;  but 
we  escaped  this  imminent  danger,  and  made  some  way  down 
the  river.  The  king  had  the  same  illness  as  the  rest  of  his 
army,  with  a  dysentery,*  which,  had  he  pleased,  he  might 
have  prevented,  by  living  on  board  his  larger  vessels ;  but  he 
said,  he  had  rather  die  than  leave  his  people.  The^  king, 
observing  us  make  off,  began  to  shout  and  cry  to  us  to  remain, 
and  likewise  ordered  some  heavy  bolts  to  be  shot  at  us,  to 
stop  our  course  until  we  should  have  his  orders  to  sail. 

I  will  now  break  the  course  of  my  narration,  and  say  in 
what  manner  the  king  was  made  prisoner,  as  he  told  me 
himself.  I  heard  him  say,  that  he  had  quitted  his  own  bat- 
talion and  men-at-arms,  and,  with  Sir  Geoffry  de  Serginesi, 
had  joined  the  battalion  of  Sir  Gaul  tier  de  Chastillon,  who 
commanded  the  rear  division.  The  king  was  mounted  on  a 
small  courser,  with  only  a  housing  of  silk  ;  and  of  all  his  men- 
at-arms,  there  was  only  with  him  the  good  knight  Sir  Geoffry 
de  Sergines,  who  attended  him  as  far  aa  the  town  of  Casel, 
where  the  king  was  made  prisoner.  But  before  the  Turks 
could  take  him,  I  heard  say,  that  Sir  Geoffry  de  Sergines 
defended  him  in  like  manner  as  a  faithful  servant  does  the 
cup  of  his  master  from  flies ;  for  every  time  the  Saracens  ap- 
proached him.  Sir  Geoffry  guarded  him  with  vigorous  strokes 
of  the  blade  and  point  of  his  sword,  and  it  seemed  as  if  his 
courage  and  strength  were  doubled. 

*  In  the  lapidary  manuscript,  in  the  chapter  of  Amethysts,  it  is  said* 
**  that  it  destroys  dead  flesh  from  wounds,  and  stops  the  dysentery." 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1250.] 


THE  KING  TAKEN  PRISONER. 


487 


By  dint  of  gallantry  he  drove  them  away  from  the  king, 
and  thus  conducted  him  to  Casel,  where,  having  dismount^ 
at  a  house,  he  laid  the  king  in  the  lap  of  a  woman  who  had 
come  from  Paris,  thinking  that  every  moment  most  be  his 
last,  for  he  had  no  hopes  that  he  could  ever  jiass  that  day 
without  dying. 

Shortly  after  arrived  Sir  Philip  de  Montfort,  who  told  the 
king  that  he  had  just  seen  the  admiral  of  the  sultan,  with 
whom  he  had  formerly  treated  for  a  truce,  and  that  if  it  were 
his  good  pleasure,  he  would  return  to  him  again,  and  renew  it. 
The  king  entreated  him  so  to  do,  and  declared  he  would  abide 
by  whatever  terms  they  should  agree  oa. 

Sir  Philip  de  Montfort  returned  to  the  Saracens,  who  had 
taken  their  turbans*  from  their  heads,  and  gave  a  ring,  which 
he  took  off  his  finger,  to  the  admiral,  as  a  pledge  of  keeping 
the  truce,  and  that  they  would  accept  the  terms  as  offered, 
and  of  which  I  have  spoken. 

Just  at  this  moment  a  villanous  traitor  of  an  apostate  ser- 
geant, named  Marcel,  set  up  a  loud  shout  to  our  people,  and 
said,  "  Sir  knights,  surrender  yourselves ;  the  king  orders  you 
by  me  so  to  do,  and  not  to  cause  yourselves  to  be  slain."  At 
these  words,  all  were  thunderstruck ;  and  thinking  the  king 
had  indeed  sent  snch  orders,  they  each  gave  up  their  arms  and 
Staves  to  the  Saracens. 

The  admiral,  seeing  the  Saracens  leading  the  king's  knights 
as  their  prisoners,  said  to  Sir  Philip  de  Montfort,  that  he 
would  not  agree  to  any  truce,  for  that  the  army  bad  been 
made  prisoners.  Sir  Philip  was  greatly  astonished  at  what 
he  saw,  for  he  was  aware  that,  although  he  was  sent  as  am- 
bassador to  settle  a  truce,  he  should  likewise  be  made  pri- 
soner, and  knew  not  to  whom  to  have  recourse.  In  Pagan 
countries,  they  have  a  very  bad  custom,  that  when  any  am- 
bassadors are  despatched  from  one  king  or  sultan  to  another, 
to  demand  or  conclude  a  peace,  and  one  of  these  princes  dies, 

*  Turbans  are  commonly  made  of  napkins  or  other  linen  wrapped 
ffonnd  the  head.  The  lord  de  Joinville,  in  another  part,  says,  And 
know  that  they  received  heavy  blows  on  these  towels  :  they,  however, 
wore  them  when  going  to  battle,  and  they  are  tightly  wrapped  round  one 
over  the  other.''  The  Latin  authors  of  the  middle  ages  have  differently 
written  this  word  touaille;  the  Chronicle  of  Fontenelle  uses  toacuhtf 
Odoricus  de  Frioul  toaliat  the  Roman  Ceremonial  in  MS.  tobaleOt 
Johannes  de  Janua  togUla* 


Digitized  by 


438 


JOINVILLE'b  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX. 


[PT.  IL 


and  the  treaty  is  not  concluded  before  that  event  takes  place, 
the  ambassador  is  made  prisoner,  wherever  he  may  be,  and 
whether  sent  by  saltan  or  king. 

Yon  must  know,  that  we  who  had  embarked  on  board  oar 
vessels,  thinking  to  escape  to  Damietta,  were  not  more  for- 
tunate than  those  who  had  remained  on  land ;  for  we  were 
also  taken,  as  you  shall  hear.  It  is  true,  that  during  the  time 
we  were  on  the  river,  a  dreadful  tempest  of  wind  arose,  blow- 
ing towards  Damietta,  and  with  such  force  that,  unable  to 
ascend  the  streano,  we  were  driven  towards  the  Saracens. 
The  king,  indeed,  had  left  a  body  of  knights,  with  orders  to 
guard  the  invalids  on  the  banks  of  the  river ;  but  it  would 
not  have  been  of  any  use  to  have  made  for  that  part,  as  they 
had  all  fled.  Towards  the  break  of  day,  we  arrived  at  the 
pass  where  the  sultan's  galleys  lay,  to  prevent  any  provisions 
being  sent  from  Damietta  to  the  army,  who,  when  they  per- 
ceived us,  set  up  a  great  noise,  and  shot  at  us  and  such  of  our 
horsemen  as  were  on  the  banks,  with  large  bolts  armed  with 
Greek  fire,  so  that  it  seemed  as  if  the  stars  were  falling  from 
the  heavens. 

When  our  mariners  had  gained  the  current,  and  we  at- 
tempted to  push  forward,  we  saw  the  horsemen  whom  the 
king  had  left  to  guard  the  sick  flying  towards  Damietta. 
The  wind  became  more  violent  than  ever,  and  drove  ns 
against  the  bank  of  the  river.  On  the  opposite  shore  were 
immense  numbers  of  our  vessels  that  the  Saracens  had  taken, 
which  we  feared  to  approach ;  for  we  plainly  saw  them  mur- 
dering their  crews,  and  throwing  the  dead  bodies  into  the 
water,  and  carrying  away  the  trunks  and  arms  they  had  thus 
gained. 

Because  we  would  not  go  near  the  Saracens,  who  menaced 
us,  they  shot  plenty  of  bolts ;  upon  which,  I  put  on  my  ar- 
mour, to  prevent  such  as  were  well  aimed  from  hurting  me. 
At  the  stern  of  my  vessel  were  some  of  my  people,  who  cried 
out  to  me,  "  My  lord,  my  lord ;  our  steersman,  because  the 
Saracens  threaten  us,  is  determined  to  run  us  on  shore,  where 
we  shall  be  all  murdered."  I  instantly  rose  up,  for  I  wivs 
then  very  ill,  and,  advancing  with  my  drawn  sword,  declared 
r  would  kill  the  flrst  person  who  should  attempt  to  run  us  on 
the  Saracen  shore.  The  sailors  replied,  that  it  was  impossible 
to  proceed,  and  that  I  must  determine  which  I  would  prefer, 


Digitized  by 


A^D,  1250.]  JOINTILLB  TAKEN  PRISONER. 


439 


to  be  landed  on  the  shore,  or  to  be  stranded  on  the  mud  of 
the  banks  in  the  river.  1  preferred,  veijr  fortunately,  as  you 
shall  hear,  being  run  on  a  mud  bank  m  the  river  to  being 
carried  on  shore,  where  I  saw  our  men  murdered,  and  they 
followed  my  orders. 

It  was  not  long  ere  we  saw  four  of  the  sultan's  large  galleys 
making  toward  us,  having  full  a  thousand  men  on  board.  I 
called  upon  my  knights  to  advise  me  how  to  act,  whether  to 
surrender  to  the  galleys  of  the  sultan  or  to  those  who  were  on 
the  shore.  We  were  unanimous,  that  it  would  be  more  advi- 
sable to  surrender  to  tiis  galleys  that  were  coming,  for  then  we 
might  have  a  chance  of  being  kept  together ;  whereas,  if  we 
gave  ours^ves  up  to  those  on  the  shore,  we  should  certainly 
be  separated,  and  perhaps  sold  to  the  Bedouins,  of  whom  I 
have  before  spoken.  To  Uiis  opinion,  however,  one  of  my 
<derks  would  not  agree,  but  said  it  would  be  much  better  for 
us  to  be  slain,  as  then  we  should  go  to  paradise;  but  we 
would  not  listen  to  him,  for  the  fear  of  death  had  greater  in- 
fluence over  us. 

Seeing  that  we  must  surrender,  I  took  a  small  case  that 
contained  my  jewels  and  relics,  and  cast  it  into  the  river. 
One  of  my  sailors  told  me,  th&t  if  I  would  not  let  him  tell  the 
Saracens  1  was  cousin  to  the  king,  we  should  all  be  put  to 
death.  In  reply,  I  bade  him  say  what  he  pleased.  The  first 
of  these  galleys  now  came  athwart  us,  and  cast  anchor  close  to 
our  bow.  Then,  as  I  firmly  believe,  God  sent  to  my  aid  a 
Saracen,  who  was  a  subject  of  the  emperor.  Having  on  a 
pair  of  trousers  of  coarse  cloth,  and  swimming  straight  to  my 
vessel,  he  embraced  my  knees,  and  said,  ^^My  lord,  if  yon 
do  not  believe  what  I  shall  say,  you  are  a  lost  man.  To  save 
yourself,  you  must  leap  into  the  river,  which  will  be  unob- 
served by  the  crew,  who  are  solely  occupied  with  the  capture 
of  your  bark."  He  had  a  cord  thrown  to  me  from  their  galley 
on  the  escot  of  my  vessel,  and  I  lea})ed  into  the  water  fol- 
lowed by  the  Saracen,  who  indeed  saved  me,  and  conducted 
me  to  the  galley ;  for  I  was  so  weak  I  staggered,  and  should 
have  otherwise  sunk  to  the  bottom  of  the  river. 

I  was  drawn  into  the  galley,  wherein  were  fourteen  score 
men,  besides  those  who  had  boarded  my  vessel,  and  this  poor 
Saracen  held  me  fast  in  his  arms.  Shortly  after,  I  was 
landed,  and  they  rushed  upon  me  to  cut  my  throat :  indeed,  I 


Digitized  by 


440      joinyille's  memoirs  of  saint  louh  ix.    [[pt.  n. 


'  expected  nothing  elsa.  for  he  that  should  do  it  would  imagine 
he  had  acquired  honour. 

This  Saracen  who  had  saved  me  from  drowning  would  not 
quit  hold  of  me,  but  cried  out  to  them,  The  king's  cousin ! 
the  king's  cousin !" 

I  felt  the  knife  at  my  throat,  and  had  already  cast  myself 
on  my  knees  on  the  ground  ;  but  God  delivered  me  from  this 
peril  by  the  aid  of  the  poor  Saracen,  who  led  me  to  the  castle 
where  the  Saracen  chiefs  were  assembled. 

When  I  was  in  their  presence,  they  took  off  my  coat  of 
mail ;  and  from  pity,  seeing  me  so  very  ill,  they  flung  over 
me  one  of  my  own  scarlet  coverlids,  lined  with  minever, 
which  my  lady-mother  had  given  me.  Another  brought  me 
a  white  leathern  girdle,  with  which  I  girthed  my  coverlii 
around  me.  One  of  the  Saracen  knights  gave  me  a  small  cap, 
which  I  put  on  my  head;  but  I  soon  began  to  tremble,  so  that 
my  teeth  chattered,  as  well  from  the  fright  I  had  had  as  from 
my  disorder. 

On  my  complaining  of  thirst,  they  brought  me  some  water 
in  a  pot ;  but  I  had  no  sooner  put  it  to  my  mouth,  and  began 
drinking,  than  it  ran  back  through  my  nostrils.  God  knows 
what  a  pitiful  state  I  was  in  ;  for  I  looked  for  death  rather 
than  life,  having  an  imposthume  in  my  throat  "When  my 
attendants  saw  the  water  run  thus  through  my  nostrils,  they . 
began  to  weep  and  to  be  very  sorrowful. 

The  Saracen  who  had  saved  me  asked  my  people  why  they 
wept ;  they  gave  him  to  understand,  that  I  was  nearly  dead, 
from  an  imposthume  in  the  throat  which  was  choking  me. 
The  good  Saracen,  having  always  great  compajssion  for  me, 
went  to  tell  this  to  one  of  the  Saracen  knights,  who  bade  him 
to  be  comforted,  for  that  he  would  give  me  something  to  drink 
that  should  cure  me  in  two  days.  This  he  did ;  and  I  was 
soon  well,  through  God  s  grace,  and  the  beverage  which  the 
Saracen  knight  gave  me. 

Soon  after  my  recovery,  the  admiral  of  the  sultan's  galleys 
sent  for  me,  and  demanded  if  I  were  cousin  to  the  king,  as  it 
was  said.  I  told  him  I  was  not,  and  related  why  it  had  been 
reported,  and  that  one  of  my  mariners  had  advised  it  through 
fear  of  the  Saracens  in  the  galleys,  for  that  otherwise  they 
would  put  us  to  death.  The  admiral  replied,  that  I  had  been 
very  ^ell  advised,  or  we  should  have  been  all  murdered 


Digitized  by  L30ogle 


A.D.  1250.^      CRUEL  TREATMENT  OF  PRISONERS.  441 


without  fail,  and  thrown  into  the  river.  The  admiral  again 
asked  me,  if  I  had  any  acquaintance  with  the  emperor 
Ferry*  of  Germany,  then  living,  and  if  I  were  of  his  lineage; 
I  answered  truly,  that  I  had  heard  my  mother  say  I  was  his 
second  cousin.  The  admiral  replied,  that  he  would  love  me 
the  better  for  it. 

Thus,  as  we  were  eating  and  drinking,  he  sent  for  an  inha- 
bitant of  Paris  to  come  to  me,  who,  on  his  entrance,  seeing 
what  we  were  doing,  exclaimed,  "  Ah,  sir,  what  are  you 
about  V*  "  What  am  I  about !"  replied  I.  "When  he  in- 
formed me,  on  the  part  of  God,  that  I  was  eating  meat  on  a 
Friday.  On  which,  I  suddenly  threw  my  trencher  behind 
me ;  and  the  admiral,  noticing  it,  asked  of  my  friendly  Sara- 
cen, who  was  always  with  me,  why  1  had  left  off  eating.  He 
told  him,  because  it  was  a  Friday,  which  I  had  forgotten. 
The  admiral  said,  that  God  could  never  be  displeased,  because 
I  had  done  it  unknowingly.  You  must  know,  that  the 
legate  who  had  accompanied  the  king  frequently  reproached 
me  for  fasting  when  thus  ill,  and  when  there  was  not  any 
statesman  but  myself  left  with  the  king,  and  that  I  should 
hurt  myself  by  fcisting.  But  notwithstanding  this,  and  that  I 
was  a  prisoner,  I  never  £a<iled  to  fast  every  Friday  on  bread 
and  water. 


A  CONTINUATION  0?  THE  SECOND  PART  OF  THE  MEMOIRS 
OF  JOHN  LORD  DE  JOINVILLE, 

Sfc.  Sfc,  8fc. 

On  the  Sunday  after  we  had  been  made  prisoners,  the  ad- 
miral ordered  all  that  had  been  taken  on  the  Nile  to  be 
brought  from  the  castle,  on  the  banks  of  the  river.  In  my 
presence,  my  chaplain  was  dragged  from  the  hold  of  the 
galley ;  but,  on  coming  to  the  open  air,  he  fainted,  and  the 
Saracens  killed  him  instantly  before  my  eyes,  and  flung  him 
into  the  stream.  His  clerk,  from  the  disorder  he  had  caught 
when  with  the  army,  being  unable  to  stand,  they  cast  a  mortar 
on  his  head,  killed  him,  and  flung  him  after  his  master. 

*  The  emperor  Frederic  II. 


Digitized  by 


442       joinyille's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  fx,    [PT.  n. 


In  the  like  manner  did  they  deal  with  the  other  prisoners ; 
for  as  they  were  drawn  out  of  the  hold  of  the  galleys  wherein 
they  had  been  confined,  there  were  Saracens  purposely  posted, 
who,  on  seeing  any  one  weak  or  ill,  killed  him  and  threw  him 
into  the  water.  Such  was  the  treatment  of  the  unfortunate 
sick.  Seeing  this  tyranny,  I  told  them,  through  the  inter- 
pretation of  my  Saraeen,  that  they  were  doing  very  wrong, 
and  contrary  to  the  commands  of  Saladin  the  pagan,  who  had 
declared  it  unlawful  to  put  to  death  any  one  to  whom  they 
had  given  salt  and  bread.  They  made  answer,  that  they  were 
destroying  men  of  no  use,  for  thaA  they  were  too  ill  with  their 
disorders  to  do  any  service. 

After  this  they  brought  before  me  my  mariners,  and 
said  they  had  all  denied  their  faith.  I  replied  I  did  not 
believe  it,  but  that  their  fears  of  death  might  have  caused 
them  to  say  so,  and  that  the  moment  they  found  themselves 
in  another  country  they  would  return  to  their  own  religion. 

The  admiral  added  to  this,  that  he  believed  firmly  what  I 
said,  for  that  Saladin  had  declared,  that  a  Christian  was 
never  known  to  make  a  good  pagan,  nor  a  good  Saracen  a 
Christian.  The  admiral,  soon  after,  made  me  mount  a 
palfrey,  and  we  rode  side  by  side  over  a  bridge  to  the  place 
where  St.  Louis  and  his  men  were  prisoners. 

At  the  entrance  of  a  large  pavilion  we  found  a  secretary 
writing  down  the  names  of  the  prisoners  by  orders  of  the 
sultan.  I  was  there  forced  to  declare  my  name,  which  I  no 
way  wished  to  conceal,  and  it  was  written  down  with  the 
others.  As  we  entered  this  pavilion  the  Saracen,  who  had 
preserved  my  life,  and  had  always  followed  me,  said,  "  Sir, 
you  must  excuse  me,  but  I  cannot  follow  you  further.  I 
advise  and  entreat  that  you  will  never  quit  the  hand  of  this 
young  boy  whom  you  have  with  you,  otherwise  the  Saracens 
will  murder  him."  The  boys  name  was  Bartholomew  de 
Montfaucon,  son  to  the  lord  Montfaucon  de  Bar. 

When  my  name  was  written  down,  the  admiral  led  me  and 
the  little  boy  to  the  tent  where  were  the  barons  of  Francei, 
and  more  than  ten  thousand  other  persons  with  them.  On 
my  entrance,  every  one  seemed  to  testify  great  pleasure  at 
seeing  me  again ;  and  for  some  time  nothing  could  be  heard 
for  their  noisy  joy,  as  they  concluded  I  had  been  murdered. 

Thus  as  we  were  together,  hoping,  through  the  grace  of 
God,  we  should  not  long  remain  in  this  state,  a  rich  Saracen 


A.l>.  1250.] 


COITNCIL  HELD  BY  THE  8ABACEN8. 


443 


led  us  into  another  tent,  where  we  had  miserable  cheer. 
Nambers  of  knights  and  other  men  were  confined  in  a  large 
court,  surrounded  with  walls  of  mud.  The  guards  of  this 
prison  led  them  out  one  at  a  time,  and  asked  each  if  he  would 
become  a  renegade:  those  that  answered  in  the  affirmative 
were  put  aside,  but  those  who  refused,  instantly  had  their 
heads  cut  off. 

Shortly  after,  the  council  of  the  sultan  sent  for  us,  and  de- 
manded to  whom  it  was  most  agreeable  they  should  deliver  the 
sultan's  message.  We  unanimously  answered,  by  means  of  an 
interpreter,  who  spoke  both  French  and  Saracen,  to  the  count 
Peter  of  Brittany.  This  was  the  message :  My  lords,  the 
sultan  asks  by  us  if  yon  wish  to  be  free,  and  what  you  are 
willing  to  give  for  your  liberty  ?  " 

To  this  the  earl  of  Brittany  replied,  that  we  all  heartily 
wished  to  be  delivered  from  the  hands  of  the  sultan,  who  had 
made  us  suffer  most  unreasonably.  But  when  the  council  of 
the  sultan  asked  if  we  would  not  be  willing  to  give  for  our 
ransom  some  of  the  castles  of  the  barons  of  the  Holy  Land, 
the  earl  of  Brittany  answered,  that  we  could  not  possibly 
comply ;  for  these  castles  and  strong  places  belonged  to  the 
emperor  of  Germany,*  now  on  the  throne,  and  who  would 
never  consent  to  the  sultan  holding  any  fiefs  under  him. 

The  council  then  asked  if  we  would  not  surrender  some  of 
the  castles  belonging  to  the  Knights  Templars,  or  to  the  hos- 
pital of  Rhodes,  for  our  deliverance.  The  earl  replied,  that 
that  was  equally  impossible ;  for  it  would  be  contrary  to  the 
accustomed  oath  which  the  governors  or  lords  of  such  castles 
take  on  their  investiture,  when  they  solemnly  swear  to  God 
that  they  will  never  surrender  these  castles  for  the  deliverance 
of  any  man  whatever. 

The  Saracens  then  spoke  together,  saying,  that  it  did  not 
appear  we  had  any  desire  to  regain  our  liberty ;  and  that  they 
would  send  us  those  who  well  knew  how  to  use  their  swords, 
to  treat  us  as  the  others  had  been  dealt  with,  and  on  that  they 
left  us. 

Not  long  after  the  sultan's  council  had  departed,  a  tall  old 
Saracen,  of  goodly  appearance,  came  to  us,  accompanied  by  a 
great  multitude  of  young  Saracens,  each  of  whom  had  a  large 
sword  by  his  side,  which  alarmed  us  much.    The  old  Saracen 

*  Frederic  II.,  who  had  been  crowned  king  of  Jerusalem,  and  held  ill 
the  places  in  the  kingdom. 


444 


JOINVILLE's  memoirs  op  SAtNT  LOtTIS  IX.       [pT.  It 


asked  us,  by  means  of  an  interpreter,  who  spoke  and  under- 
stood our  language  well,  if  it  were  true  that  we  believed  in 
one  only  God,  who  had  been  born  for  our  salvation,  was  cru- 
cified to  death,  and  after  three  days  rose  again  to  save  us. 
We  answered,  that  what  we  had  heard  was  perfectly  true. 
On  this  he  replied,  that  since  it  was  so,  we  ought  not  to  be 
east  down  for  any  persecutions  we  might  suffer  for  his  sake ; 
and  that  we  had  not  as  yet  endured  death  for  him,  as  he  had 
done  for  us  ;  and  since  he  had  the  power  to  raise  himself  from 
the  dead,  it  would  not  be  long  before  he  would  deliver  us. 

The  old  Saracen  then  went  away  with  all  the  young  men, 
without  doing  any  thing  more,  which  rejoiced  me  exceedingly; 
for  I  really  thought  the  intent  of  his  visit  was  to  cut  our 
heads  off.  It  was  not  long  after  this  before  we  heard  news 
of  our  deliverance. 

The  sultan's  council  soon  returned  to  us  again,  and  said  the 
king  had  exerted  himself  so  effectually,  that  he  had  succeeded 
in  obtaining  our  liberty.  They  ordered  us  to  send  four  of 
our  company  to  hear  and  know  the  terms  on  which  we  were 
to  have  our  freedom.  To  this  end  we  deputed  the  lords  John 
de  Valeri,  Philip  de  Montfort,  Baldwin  de  Ebelin,  seneschal 
of  Cyprus,  and  his  brother,  the  constable  of  Cyprus,  who  was 
one  of  the  handsomest  and  best-informed  knights  I  ever  knew, 
and  who  loved  greatly  the  people  of  that  country. 

These  four  knights  were  not  long  in  bringing  us  the  terms 
of  our  liberty.  In  order  to  try  the  king,  the  sultan's  council 
had  made  the  same  demands  from  him  as  from  us;  but  it 
pleased  God  that  the  good  king,  St.  Louis,  made  similar 
answers  to  what  we  had  done  through  the  mouth  of  Count 
Peter  of  Brittany.  The  council,  seeing  the  king  would  not 
comply  with  their  demands,  threatened  to  put  him  in  the 
bernicles,*  which  is  the  greatest  torture  they  can  inflict  on 
any  one.  The  bernicles  are  formed  of  two  thick  blocks  of 
wood,  fastened  together  at  the  top ;  and  when  they  use  this 
mode  of  torture,  they  lay  the  person  on  his  side,  between  these 

*  This  engine  of  torture  appears  to  have  been  made  of  pieces  of  wood 
pierced  with  holes,  into  which  the  legs  of  criminals  were  put :  they  were 
placed  at  such  distances  from  each  other,  and  forced  to  so  great  an  exten- 
sion of  the  legs  as  caused  very  great  pain,  for  the  criminals  could  not 
draw  them  back  again.  The  holes  in  these  pieces  of  wood  were  at  various 
distances,  and  the  legs  of  the  criminal  were  inserted  into  those  that  ex- 
tended them  to  a  greater  or  lesser  distance,  according  to  the  heinousnett 
of  the  crime  or  the  pains  to  be  inflicted. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1250.3 


TERMS  OF  THE  KINO's  RANSOM. 


445 


two  blocks,  passing  his  legs  through  broad  pins ;  they  then  fix 
the  upper  block  on  the  sufferer,  and  make  a  man  sit  on  him,  by 
which  means  all  the  small  bones  of  his  legs  are  broken  or  dislo- 
cated. To  increase  the  torture,  at  the  end  of  three  days  thejr 
replace  his  legs,  which  are  now  greatly  swollen,  in  the  bemi- 
cles,  and  break  them  again,  which  is  the  most  cruel  thing  ever 
heard ;  and  they  tie  his  head  down  with  bullock's  sinews,  for 
fear  he  should  move  himself  while  in  them. 

The  good  king  held  all  their  menaces  cheap,  and  said,  that 
since  he  was  their  prisoner  they  might  do  to  him  whatever 
they  pleased.  The  Saracens  finding  they  could  not  conq[uer 
the  king  by  threats,  came  to  him,  and  asked  how  much  money 
he  would  give  the  sultan  for  his  ransom,  in  addition  to  Dami- 
etta,  which  was  to  be  surrendered.  The  king  replied,  that  if  the 
sultan  would  be  contented  with  a  reasonable  ransom,  he  would 
write  to  the  queen  to  pay  it  for  himself  and  his  army.  The  Sara* 
cens  asked  why  he  wanted  to  write  to  the  queen.  He  answered, 
that  it  was  but  reasonable  he  should  do  so,  for  that  she  was 
his  wife  and  companion.  The  council  then  went  to  the  sultan 
to  know  what  sum  he  required  from  the  king ;  and  on  their 
return  told  the  king,  that  if  the  queen  would  pay  a  million  of 
golden  besants,  equal  at  that  time  to  500,000  livres,  she 
would,  by  so  doing,  obtain  the  king's  liberty.  The  king  then 
asked  them,  on  their  oath,  should  the  queen  pay  these  500,000 
livres,  would  the  sultan  consent  to  his  deliverance.  On  this 
they  again  returned  to  the  sultan  to  know  if  he  would  bind 
himself  by  such  a  promise,  and  brought  back  his  answer,  that 
he  was  very  willing  so  to  do. 

The  council  then  took  their  oaths  to  the  punctual  fulfilment 
of  this  agreement,  which,  when  done,  the  king  engaged  to  pay 
cheerfully,  for  the  ransom  of  his  army,  500,000  livres ;  and 
that  for  his  own  ransom  he  would  surrender  the  town  of 
Damietta  to  the  sultan  ;  for  he  was  of  a  rank  whose  bodily 
ransom  could  not  be  estimated  by  the  value  of  money. 

When  the  sultan  heard  the  good  disposition  of  the  king,  he 
said,  "  By  my  faith,  the  Frenchman  is  generous  and  liberal, 
when  he  does  not  condescend  to  bargain  about  so  large  a  sum 
of  money,  but  has  instantly  complied  with  the  first  demand. 
Go,  and  tell  him  from  me,"  added  the  sultan,  that  I  make 
him  a  present  of  100,000  livres,  so  that  he  will  have  only  to 
pay  400,000." 

The  sultan  then  commanded  that  all  of  the  principal  no'jleE* 


446 


joinyille's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.     [ft.  n. 


and  great  officers  of  the  king,  should  be  embarked  in  fonr  of 
the  largest  galleys,  and  condncted  to  Damietta.  In  the 
^illey  on  board  of  which  I  was  shipped,  were  the  good  count 
Peter  of  Brittany,  William  count  of  Flanders,  John,  the  good 
count  de  Soissous,  Sir  Uymbert  de  Beaujeu,  constabfe  of 
France,  and  those  two  excellent  knights  and  brothers,  Sir 
Baldwin  and  Sir  Guy  d'Ebelin. 

The  captain  of  the  galley  made  us  land  before  a  large  house 
which  the  sultan  had  erected  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  where 
there  was  a  handsome  tower  made  of  poles  of  fir-wood,  and 
covered  with  painted  cloth.  At  the  entrance  a  great  pavilion 
had  been  pitched,  where  the  admirals  of  the  sultan  left  their 
swords  and  staves  whenever  they  wanted  to  speak  with  him. 
Passing  this  pavilion,  there  was  another  very  handsome  gate- 
way, that  led  to  the  great  hall  of  the  sultan,  and  adjoining 
was  a  tower  like  unto  the  first,  by  which  they  mounted  to  the 
chamber  of  the  sultan.  In  the  midst  of  this  lodgment  was  a 
handsome  lawn,  on  which  was  another  tow  erlarger  than  the 
others,  whence  the  sultan  made  his  observations  on  the  sur- 
rounding country,  and  on  each  army.  There  was  in  this  lawn 
an  alley  that  led  to  the  river,  at  the  end  of  which  the  sultan 
had  made  a  summer-house  on  the  strand  to  bathe  himself. 
This  summer-house  was  formed  of  trelliswork,  covered  with 
Indian  linen,  to  prevent  any  one  seeing  what  passed  withinside. 
All  the  towers  were  likewise  covered  with  cloth. 

We  arrived  before  this  lodging  on  the  Thursday  preceding 
the  feast  of  the  Ascension  of  our  Lord.  Near  to  it  the  king 
had  landed,  to  hold  a  parley  with  the  sultan  in  a  pavilion,  and 
it  was  then  agreed  that  the  ensuing  Saturday  the  king  should 
go  to  Damietta. 

Just  as  we  were  on  our  departure  for  Damietta,  to  surren- 
der to  the  sultan,  the  admiral  of  the  present  sultan's  father 
shewed  great  dissatisfaction  with  the  reigning  •  monarch. 
Although  he  had  been  the  principal  author  of  his  having  been 
sent  for  on  his  father's  death  at  Damietta,  to  succeed  to  the 
throne,  he  had  much  disappointed  the  admiral  by  dismissing 
him  from  his  office  of  constable,  and  others  from  their  mar- 
shalships  and  seneschalships,  to  provide  for  those  who  had 
accompanied  him  to  Egypt. 

They  therefore  held  a  council,  when  he  said, — "  My  lords, 
you  see  how  much  the  sultan  has  dishonoured  us,  by  depriy« 
mg  us  of  those  governments  and  honours  with  which  his  father 


A.D.  1250.] 


MURDER  OF  TUB  SULTAN. 


447 


had  entrusted  us.  Such  couduct,  you  may  he  assured,  will 
induce  him,  wheu  once  master  of  the  castle  and  fortresses  of 
Damietta,  to  have  us  arrested  and  put  to  death  in  his  prisons, 
through  fear  that  in  process  of  time  we  may  take  our  revenge 
on  him ;  as  his  grand&ther  did  to  the  admiral  and  the  others 
who  had  made  the  counts  de  Bar  and  de  Montfort  prisoners 
It  will  be  therefore  more  to  our  advantage  that  we  destroy 
him  before  he  escape  out  of  our  hands." 

This  was  unanimously  assented  to ;  and  they  instantly  went 
to  practise  with  the  band  of  the  Hauleca,  who,  as  I  have  said 
before,  are  those  who  have  the  guard  of  the  sultan's  person. 
They  made  to  them  remonstrances  on  the  subject  similar  to 
those  which  they  had  made  among  themselves,  and  required 
of  them  to  slay  the  sultan,  which  they  promised  to  do. 

One  day  the  sultan  invited  the  knights  of  the  Hauleca  to 
dine  with  him.  After  the  dinner,  when  he  had  taken  leave 
of  his  admirals,  and  was  about  to  retire  to  his  chamber,  one 
of  these  knights,  who  bore  the  sultan's  sword,  struck  him  a 
blow  on  the  hand,  which  cut  up  his  arm  between  the  four 
fingers.  The  sultan,  turning  to  his  admirals,  who  had  been 
the  instigators  of  it,  said,  "  My  lords,  I  make  my  complaint 
to  you  against  the  knights  of  the  Hauleca,  who  have  endea- 
voured to  kill  me,  as  you  may  see  by  my  hand."  They  all 
replied,  that  it  was  much  better  he  should  be  slain  than  that 
he  murder  them,  as  he  would  assuredly  do  if  once  in  posses- 
sion of  the  fortresses  of  Damietta. 

The  conspirators  acted  with  great  caution,  for  they  ordered 
the  sultan's  trumpets  and  nacaires  to  sound  for  tne  assem- 
bling of  the  army  to  know  the  sultan's  will.  The  admirals 
and  their  accomplices  told  them,  Damietta  was  taken,  that  the 
sultan  was  marching  thither,  and  ordered  them  to  arm  and 
follow  him.  Instantly  all  armed,  and  set  off,  full  gallop, 
towards  Damietta.  We  were  much  frightened,  on  noticing 
what  was  going  forward,  for  we  really  befieved  Damietta  had 
been  stormed. 

The  sultan,  though  wounded,  being  aware  of  the  malice  of 
his  enemies,  who  had  conspired  against  his  person,  fled  to  the 
high  tower  near  his  chamber  which  I  mentioned ;  for  those 
of  the  Hauleca  had  already  destroyed  his  other  pavilions,  and 
were  surrounding  that  in  which  he  had  hidden  himself. 
Within  this  tower  were  three  of  his  ecclesiastics,  who  had  dined 


448 


with  him,  who  bade  him  descend.  He  replied,  he  would  will- 
ingly descend,  if  they  would  answer  for  his  safety ;  but  they 
replied  that  they  would  make  him  come  down  by  force,  for  that 
he  was  not  yet  arrived  at  Damietta.  They  then  discharged  somo 
Greek  fire  into  the  tower,  which  being  made  only  of  fir  and 
linen  cloth,  as  I  have  before  said,  the  whole  was  in  a  blaze ;  and 
I  promise  you,  I  never  beheld  so  fine  nor  so  sudden  a  bonfire. 

When  the  sultan  saw  the  fire  gaining  ground  on  a)l  sides, 
he  descended  into  the  lawn,  of  which  I  have  spoken,  and  ran 
for  the  river ;  but  in  his  flight  one  of  the  Hauleca  struck  him 
a  severe  blow  on  the  ribs  with  a  sword,  and  then  he  flung 
himself,  with  the  sword  in  him,  into  the  Nile.  Nine  other 
knights  pursued  and  killed  him  while  in  the  water,  near  the 
side  of  the  galley.*  • 

One  of  the  foresaid  knights,  whose  name  was  Faracataici 
seeing  the  sultan  dead,  cut  him  in  twain,  and  tore  the  heart 
from  his  body.  On  coming  to  the  king  with  his  hands  all 
bloody,  he  said,  "  What  wilt  thou  give  me  who  have  slain 
thine  enemy,  who,  had  he  lived,  would  have  put  thee  to 
death  V*  But  the  good  king  St.  Louis  made  no  answer  what- 
ever to  this  demand. 

The  deed  being  done,  about  thirty  of  them  entered  our 
gaUey  with  their  swords  drawn,  and  their  battle-axes  on  their 
necks.  I  asked  Sir  Baldwin  d'Ebelin,  who  understood  Sara- 
cenic, what  they  were  saying.  And  he  replied,  that  they  said 
they  were  come  to  cut  off  our  heads ;  and  shortly  after  I  saw 
a  large  body  of  our  men  on  board  confessing  themselves  to  a 
monk  of  La  Trinite,  who  had  accompanied  the  count  of 
Flanders.  With  regard  to  myself,  I  no  longer  thought  ot 
any  sin  or  evil  I  had  done,  but  that  I  was  about  to  receive  my 
death  :  in  consequence,  I  fell  on  my  knees  at  the  feet  of  one  of 

*  A  Chronicle,  published  by  M.  Catel,  of  the  year  1249,  says,  that  the 
sultan  was  killed  by  his  own  people,  in  a  dispute  about  the  ransom  of 
St.  Louis.  The  lord  de  Joinville  writes,  that  he  was  slain  by  those  of 
the  Haulequa.  Matt.  Paris  says,  that  he  was  poisoned  by  his  chamber- 
lains. Aython,  in  ch.  52,  says  it  was  done  by  the  Comains ;  and  the 
Oriental  Chronicle,  by  the  Mamelukes.  This  difference  is  easily  recon- 
ciled, for  the  lord  de  Joinville  has  before  said,  that  the  knights  of  the 
Haulequa  formed  paii;  of  the  military  force  of  the  sultans  of  Egypt,  com- 
posed of  children  sent  as  tribute ;  and  Aython  adds,  that  these  tributary 
children  were  from  Comania.  These  foreign  soldiers  were,  in  the  Ara« 
bian  language,  called  Mamelukes,  as  we  learn  from  William  of  Tyiei 
L  2,  ch.  23. 


Digitized  by 


A»I>.  2250.3  CONVENTIOX  FOR  DELIVERY  OF  PRISONERS.  440 


them,  and,  making  the  sign  of  the  cross,  said,  Thns  died  St 
Agnes."  Sir  Guy  d'Ebelin,  constable  of  Cyprus,  knelt  be- 
side me,  and  confessed  himself  to  me ;  and  1  gave  him  such 
absolution  as  God  was  pleased  to  grant  me  the  power  of 
bestowing ;  but  of  all  the  things  he  had  said  to  me,  when  I 
arose  up  I  could  not  remember  one  of  them. 

We  were  confined  in  the  hold  of  the  galley,  and  laid  heads 
luid  heels  together.  We  thought  it  had  been  so  ordered  be- 
cause they  were  afraid  of  attacking  us  wben  we  were  in  a 
body,  and  that  they  would  destroy  us  one  at  a  time.  This 
danger  lasted  the  whole  night  I  had  my  feet  right  on  the 
face  of  the  count  Peter  of  Brittany,  whose  feet,  in  return, 
were  beside  my  face.  On  the  morrow  we  were  taken  out  of 
the  hold,  and  the  admirals  sent  to  inform  us  that  we  might 
renew  the  treaties  we  had  made  with  the  sultan.  Those  who 
were  able  went  thither ;  but  the  earl  of  Brittany,  the  con- 
stable of  Cyprus,  and  myself,  who  were  grievously  ill,  re- 
mained on  board. 

The  earl  of  Flanders,  the  count  de  Soissons,  and  the  others 
who  had  gone  to  parley  with  the  admirals,  related  to  us  the 
convention  for  our  delivery  ;  and  the  admirals  promised,  that 
as  soon  as  Damietta  should  be  surrendered  to  them,  they 
would  give  liberty  to  the  king  and  the  other  great  personages 
now  prisoners. 

They  told  them,  that  had  the  sultan  lived,  he  would  have 
had  the  king  beheaded,  with  the  others ;  and  that,  contrary 
to  the  treaties  entered  into,  and  the  promises  made  to  the 
king,  he  had  already  transported  to  Babylon  several  of  their 
most  considerable  men ;  that  they  had  slain  the  sultan, 
because  they  knew  well  that  the  moment  he  should  have  been 
master  of  Damietta  he  would  have  had  them  instantly  mur- 
dered, or  would  have  put  them  to  death  when  in  confinement. 

By  this  new  agreement,  the  king  was  to  swear  to  leave  at 
their  disposal  200,000  livres  before  he  quitted  the  river,  and 
the  other  200,000  he  should  pay  in  Acre.  They  declared 
they  would  detain,  for  their  security,  all  the  sick  in  Damietta, 
the  cross-bows,  armours,  machines,  and  salted  meats,  until 
the  king  should  send  for  them,  and  should  have  paid  the 
balance  of  his  ransom. 

The  oath,  which  was  on  this  occasion  to  be  taken  by  the 
king  and  the  admirals,  was  drawn  up ;  and  on  the  part  of  the 


9.  o 


4.^0  JOINTILLE*S  MEMOIRS  OP  SAINT  LOFTS  IX.       QpT.  T& 

admirals  it  ran  thus ;  that  in  case  they  failed  in  their  conren- 
tions  with  the  king,  they  would  own  themselves  dishonoured 
like  those  who  for  their  sins  went  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecc& 
hareheaded,  or  like  to  those  who  diyorced  their  wives,  anc 
took  them  again.  By  their  law,  no  one  can  divorce  his  wife 
and  cohabit  with  her  again,  before  he  has  witnessed  some 
other  person  lying  in  bed  with  her.  The  third  oath  was,  that 
they  would  own  themselves  blasted  and  dishonoured,  like  » 
Saracen  who  should  eat  pork. 

The  king  accepted  the  above  oaths,  because  Master  Nicolle^ 
of  Acre,  who  knew  their  manners  well,  assured  him  they 
could  not  swear  more  strongly.  After  the  admirals  had  taken 
the  oath  above  mentioned,  they  had  one  such  as  they  wished 
him  to  take  written  down,  and  gave  it  to  the  king.  This 
oath  had  been  drawn  up  according  to  the  advice  of  some 
renegado  Chnstians,  whom  they  had  with  them.  It  ran 
thus,  that  in  case  the  king  did  not  fulfil  the  conventions  he 
had  entered  into  with  them,  he  might  be  deprived  for  ever  of 
the  presence  of  God,  of  his  worthy  mother,  of  the  twelve 
apostles,  and  of  all  the  saints  of  both  sexes  in  Paradise. 
This  oath  the  king  took.  The  other  was,  that  if  the  king 
broke  his  word  he  should  bo  reputed  perjured,  as  a  Christian 
who  had  denied  God,  his  baptism,  and  his  faith  ^  and  in 
despite  of  God  would  spit  on  his  cross,  and  ti-aniple  it  under 
foot.  But  when  the  king  heard  this  oath  read,  he  declared 
he  would  never  take  it. 

The  admirals,  hearing  the  king  had  refused  to  take  the 
oath  which  they  had  required  of  him,  sent  in  haste  for  Master 
Nicolle,  of  Acre,  to  tell  him  they  were  greatly  dissatisfied 
with  him,  and  discontented  with  the  king ;  for  that  they  had 
sworn  every  oath  he  had  desired,  and  now,  in  his  turn,  he 
had  refused  to  comply  with  the  oaths  offered  to  him  on  their 
part.  Master  Nicolle  told  the  king  that  he  was  certain,  that 
unless  he  took  the  oaths  as  prescribed,  the  Saracens  would 
behead  him  and  all  his  people. 

The  king  replied,  that  they  might  act  according  to  their 
pleasure,  but  that  for  his  part  he  would  rather  die  a  good 
Christian  than  live  under  the  anger  of  God,  his  blessed 
mother,  and  his  saints.  At  that  time,  the  patriarch  of  Jeru- 
salem was  with  the  king ;  he  was  eighty  years  old,  or  there* 
about,  and  had  once  before  gained  the  good- will  of  the  Sara- 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1250*3  CRVELTT  TOWARDS  THE  PATRIARCH.  451 


eens  for  the  king,  and  was  then  come  to  him  to  assist  in  his 
delivery  from  them.  It  was  the  custom  among  the  Pagans 
and  Christians,  that  in  case  any  two  princes  were  at  war  with 
each  other,  and  one  of  them  should  die  during  the  time  am- 
bassadors were  sent  to  either,  the  ambassadors  were,  in  such 
case,  to  remain  prisoners,  whether  in  pagan  land  or  in  Chris- 
tendom ;  and  because  the  sultan,  lately  murdered,  had  granted 
a  safe-conduct  to  this  patriarch,  he  was  become  a  prisoner  to 
the  Saracens  as  well  as  ourselves. 

The  admirals  perceiving  the  king  was  not  to  be  frightened 
by  their  menaces,  one  of  them  said  to  the  others,  that  it  was 
the  patriarch  who  had  thus  advised  him ;  and  if  they  would 
allow  him  to  act,  he  would  for<3e  the  king  to  take  the  oath, 
for  he  would  cut  off  the  head  of  the  patriarch,  and  make  it 
fly  into  the  king's  lap.  The  rest  would  not  agree  to  this ; 
but  they  seized  the  good  patriarch,  and  tied  him  to  a  post  in 
the  presence  of  the  king,  and  bound  his  hands  behind  his 
back  so  tightly,  that  they  soon  swelled  as  big  as  his  head ; 
and  the  blood  spouted  out  from  several  parts  of  his  hands. 
From  the  sufferings  he  endured,  he  cried  out,  "  Ah  !  sire, 
sire,  swear  boldly ;  for  I  take  the  whole  sin  of  it  on  my  own 
soul,  since  it  is  by  this  means  alone  you  may  have  the  power 
to  fulfil  your  promises."  I  know  not  whether  the  oath  was 
taken  at  last ;  but  however  that  may  be,  the  admirals  at 
length  held  themselves  satisfied  with  the  oaths  of  the  king 
and  his  lords  then  present. 

When  the  knights  of  the  Hauleca  had  slain  the  sultan, 
the  admirals  ordered  their  trumpets  and  nacaires  to  sound 
merrily  before  the  king's  tent ;  and  it  was  told  the  king,  that 
the  admirals  had  hoi  den  a  council  and  were  very  desirous  to 
elect  him  sultan  of  Babylon.  The  king  one  day  asked  me,  if 
I  were  of  .  opinion,  that  if  the  kingdom  of  Babylon  had  been 
offered  him,  he  ought  to  have  taken  it  ?  I  answered,  that  i'f 
he  had,  he  would  have  done  a  foolish  thing,  seeing  they  had 
murdered  their  lord.  Notwithstanding  this,  the  king  told  me 
he  should  have  scarcely  refused  it. 

This  project  only  failed  from  the  admirals  saying  among 
themselves,  that  the  king  was  the  proudest  Christian  they 
ever  knew ;  and  that,  if  they  elected  him  sultan,  he  would 
force  them  to  turn  Christians,  or  have  them  pnt  to  death. 
This  they  said  from  observing,  that  whenever  he  quitted  his 

2o2 


Digitized  by 


452        joinyille's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.      [PT.  IL 


lodgings,  he  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  on  the  ground,  ani^ 
crossed  his  body  all  oTer.  The  Saracens  added,  that  if  theii 
Mahomet  had  allowed  them  to  suffer  the  manifold  erils  that 
God  had  caused  the  king  to  undergo,  thej  would  never  hare 
had  any  confidence  in  him,  nor  paid  him  their  adorations. 

Not  long  after  the  conventions  had  been  completed  between 
the  king  and  the  admirals,  it  was  detennined  that  on  the 
morrow  of  the  feast  of  the  Ascension  of  our  Lord,  Damietta 
should  be  surrendered  to  the  Turks,  and  the  king  and  all  the 
other  prisoners  set  at  liberty.  Our  four  galleys  were  anchored 
before  the  bridge  of  Damietta,  where  a  pavilion  had  been 
pitched  for  the  king's  landing. 

About  sunrise  of  the  appointed  day.  Sir  Geoffry  de  Sergines 
went  to  the  town  of  Damietta*  to  deliver  it  to  the  admirals^ 
and  instantly  the  flags  of  the  sultan  were  displayed  from  the 
walls.  The  Saracen  knights  entered  the  town,  and  drank  of 
the  wines  they  found  there,  insomuch  that  the  greater  part 
were  drunk.  One  of  them  came  on  board  our  galley  with 
his  naked  sword  reeking  with  blood,  telling  us  that  he  had 
killed  six  of  our  countrymen,  which  was  a  brutal  thing  for 
any  knight  or  other  to  boast  of. 

Before  the  surrender  of  Damietta,  the  queen  had  embarked 
with  all  our  people  on  board  the  ships,  except  the  poor  sick, 
whom  the  Saracens  were  bound  by  their  oath  to  take  care  of, 
and  give  up  on  the  payment  of  200,000  livres,  as  has  been 
mentioned.-  They  were  also  to  restore  the  war  machines, 
salted  meats,  which  they  never  eat,  and  our  armour ;  but  these 
infidel  dogs,  on  the  contrary,  killed  all  the  sick,  and  cut  to 
pieces  the  machines  and  other  things  which  they  had  pro- 
mised to  take  care  of  and  restore  at  the  proper  time  and 
place.  They  made  a  great  heap  of  the  whole,  and  set  it  on 
fire ;  and  it  was  so  immense,  the  fire  blazed  from  the  Friday 
to  the  Sunday  following. 

After  they  had  thus  killed,  destroyed,  and  set  fire  to  all 
they  could  lay  hands  on,  we  that  ought  to  have  had  our 

*  It  was  then  under  the  guard  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and  Olivier 
de  Termesi  in  which  the  legate  and  a  number  of  prelates  had  saved  them- 
selves ;  as  did  likewise  the  queen  of  France,  according  to  Matt.  Paris. 
Aython,  ch.  24,  says,  that  when  it  had  been  surrendered  to  the  Saracens, 
they  completely  destroyed  it,  and  made  it  a  desert,  building  another  town 
ferther  distant  froin  the  river  and  sea.  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of 
New  Damietta. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1250  3  PROPOfiAIS  TO  PUT  THE  KING  TO  DEATH. 


458 


liberties  at  sunrise  remained  until  sunset  without  eating  or 
drinking,  and  the  king  suffered  equally  with  us.  The  ad  - 
mirals  were  disputing  together,  and  seemed  inclined  to  put 
us  to  death.  One  of  them,  addressing  the  others,  said,  My 
lords,  if  you  will  belieye  me  and  these  beside  me,  we  will  kill 
the  king  and  all  the  great  persons  with  him,  and  then  for 
forty  years  to  come  we  need  not  fear  them ;  for  their  children 
are  young,  and  we  have  possession  of  Damietta,  which  will 
likewise  be  our  security." 

Another  Saracen,  named  Scebrecy,  a  native  of  Moren- 
taigne,*  opposed  this,  and  remonstrated  with  the  others,  that 
if  they  should  slay  the  king,  just  after  they  had  killed  their 
sultan,  it  would  be  said  that  the  Egyptians  were  the  most 
disloyal  and  iniquitous  race  of  men  in  the  world.  The 
admiral,  who  was  desirous  of  our  deaths,  replied  by  palliating 
arguments.  He  said,  that  indeed  they  had  been  to  blame  in 
slaying  their  sultan,  because  it  was  contrary  to  the  law  of 
Hahomet,  who  had  commanded  them  to  guard  their  sovereign 
as  the  apple  of  their  eye,  and  he  shewed  them  this  command- 
ment written  down  in  a  book  which  he  held  in  his  hand. 
*  But,"  added  he,  "  listen,  my  lords,  to  another  command- 
ment," and^  turning  over  the  leaves  of  his  book,  read  to  them 
the  commandment  of  Mahomet,  that  for  the  security  of  the 
faith,  the  law  permitted  the  death  of  an  enemy.  Then,  turn- 
ing his  speech  to  his  formei*  purpose,  he  continued,  "  Now 
consider  the  sin  we  have  committed  in  killing  the  sultan, 
against  the  positive  command  of  our  prophet,  and  the  great 
evil  we  shall  again  do  if  we  suffer  the  king  to  depart,  and  if 
we  do  not  put  him  to  death,  in  spite  of  the  assurances  of 
safety  he  may  have  had  from  us,  for  he  is  the  greatest  enemy 
to  our  law  and  religion." 

One  of  the  admirals  that  were  against  us,  thinking  we 
should  be  slain,  came  to  the  bank  of  the  river,  and  shouted 
out  in  Saracen  to  those  who  were  on  board  our  galleys,  and 
taking  off  his  turban  made  signs,  and  told  them,  they  were  to 
carry  us  back  to  Babylon.  The  anchors  were  instantly  raised, 
and  we  were  carried  a  good  league  np  the  river.  This  caused 
great  grief  to  all  of  us,  and  many  tears  fell  from  our  eyes, 
fur  we  now  expected  nothing  but  death. 

However,  as  God  wille<l  it,  who  never  is  forgetful  of  his 
*  Mauritania. 


Digitized  by 


454 


JOIN  villi's  MEltfOIRS  OP  SAINT  LOITIS  IX.       [PT.  If 


tervants,  it  was  agreed  among  the  admirals,  aboat  sunset,  that 
we  should  have  our  liberty,  and  we  were  in  consequence 
brought  back  to  Damietta.  Our  galleys  were  moored  close 
to  the  shore,  and  we  requested  permission  to  land  ;  but  Ihey 
would  not  allow  it  until  we  had  refreshed  ourselves,  for  the 
Saracens  said  it  would  be  a  shame  for  the  admirals  to  dis- 
charge us  fiEksting  from  their  prison. 

Shortly  after  they  sent  us  provision  from  the  army ;  that 
is  to  say,  loaves  of  cheese  that  had  been  baked  in  the  sun  to 
prevent  the  worms  from  collecting  in  them,  with  hard  eggs, 
which  had  been  boiled  four  or  five  days,  and  the  shells  of 
which,  in  honour  to  us,  they  had  painted  with  various  colours. 
When  we  had  eaten  some  little,  they  put  us  on  shore,  and  we 
went  towards  the  king,  whom  the  Se^acens  were  conducting 
from  the  pavilion  where  they  had  detained  him,  toward  the 
water-side.  There  were  full  20,000  Saracens  on  foot  sur- 
rounding the  king,  girded  with  swords. 

It  chanced  that  a  Genoese  galley  was  on  the  river  opposite 
to  the  king,  on  board  of  which  there  appeared  but  one  man, 
who,  the  moment  he  saw  the  king,  whistled,  and  instantly 
fourscore  cross-bows,  well  equipped,  with  their  bows  bent  and 
arrows  placed,  leaped  on  the  deck  from  below.  The  Saracens 
no  sooner  saw  them,  than,  panic  struck,  they  ran  away  like 
sheep,  and  not  more  than  two  or  three  stayed  with  the  king. 

The  Genoese  cast  a  plank  on  shore,  and  took  on  board  die 
king,  his  brother  the  count  d'Anjou,  who  was  afterward 
king  of  Sicily,  Sir  Geoffry  de  Sergines,  Sir  Philip  de 
Nemours,  the  marshal  of  France,  the  master  of  the 
Trinity,  and  myself.  The  count  de  Poitiers  remained  pri- 
soner with  the  Saracens  until  the  king  should  send  the 
200,000  livres  which  he  was  bound  to  pay  before  he  quitted 
the  river. 

The  Saturday  after  the  Ascension,  which  was  the  morrow 
of  our  deliverance,  the  earl  of  Flanders,  the  count  de  Sois- 
sons,  and  many  other  great  lords,  came  to  take  leave  of  the 
king.  He  entreated  them  to  delay  going  until  his  brother, 
the  count  de  Poitiers,  should  have  his  liberty ;  but  they 
replied  it  was  not  possible,  for  their  galleys  were  on  the  point 
of  sailing. 

They  embarked  on  board  their  galleys  on  their  return  to 
France,  and  with  them  was  the  earl  of  Brittany,  who  was 


Digitized  by 


^.D.  1250.]]   RANSOM  OF  THE  COUNT  DS  POITIERS. 

grieyoaslj  sick.  He  did  not  live  three  weeks,  but  died  at 
sea. 

The  king,  uneasy  at  the  situation  of  his  brother,  was  very 
anxious  to  pay  the  200,000  livres ;  and  the  whole  of  Satur- 
day and  Sunday  were  employed  in  it.  They  paid  the  money 
according  to  weight,*  and  each  weighing  was  to  the  amount 
of  10,000  liyres.  Towards  eyening  of  the  Sunday,  the  king's 
servant,  occupied  in  this  payment,  sent  him  word  they  still 
wanted  30,000  livres.  There  were  then  with  the  king  only 
the  count  d'Anjou,  the  marshal  of  France,  the  roaster  of  the 
Trinity  and  myself,  all  the  rest  being  engaged  in  pa3ring  the 
ransom.  I  said  to  the  king  it  would  be  much  better  to  a«k 
the  commands  and  marshal  of  the  Knights  Templars  to  lend 
him  the  30,000  livres  to  make  up  the  sum,  than  to  risk  his 
brother  longer  with  such  people. 

Father  Stephen  d'Outricourt,  master  of  the  Temple,  hear- 
ing the  advice  I  gave  the  king,  said  to  me,  ^  Lord  de  Join- 
ville,  the  counsel  you  give  the  king  is  wrong  and  unrea^n- 
able  ;  for  you  know  we  receive  every  farthing  on  our  oath  ; 
and  that  we  cannot  make  any  payments  but  to  those  who 
give  us  their  oaths  in  return.** 

The  marshal  of  the  Temple,  thinking  to  satisfy  the  king, 
said,  Sire,  dont  attend  to  the  dispute  and  contention  of 
the  lord  de  Joinville  and  our  commander.  For  it  is  as  he  has 
said ;  we  cannot  dispose  of  any  of  the  money  entrusted  to  us, 
but  for  tlie  means  intended,  without  acting  contrary  to  our 
oaths,  and  being  perjured.  Know,  that  the  seneschal  has 
ill-advised  you  to  take  by  force,  should  we  refuse  you  a 
loan;  but  in  this  you  will  act  according  to  your  will.  Should 
you,  however,  do  so,  we  will  make  ourselves  amends  from 
the  wealth  you  have  in  Acre."  When  I  heard  this  menace 
from  them  to  the  I^ing,  I  said  to  him,  that  if  he  pleased  I 

*  What  Louis  Lassere,  purveyor  to  the  college  of  Navarre,  has  intro- 
duced in  the  life  of  St.  Louis,  is  only  a  vulgar  error;  namely,  that 
when  the  ransom  of  the  king  was  fixed  at  800,000  golden  besants,  there 
were  instantly  coined  a  similar  number  at  Paris  from  gold  which  he  had 
exacted  from  the  people,  and  sent  off  by  Charles,  count  of  Anjou, 
whom  his  brother,  the  king  St.  Louis,  had  ordered  to  return  to  France 
expressly  for  this  purpose.  It  is  also  another  vulgar  error,  that  Stj. 
liOuis  paid  for  his  ransom  his  weight  in  gold,  and  that  he  put 
himself  into  the  scales  fur  this  purpose,  the  word  besana  having  caused 
the  mistake. 


Digitized  by 


456        jointillb's  memoirs  ov  SAnrr  touis  ix.     |^ft.  if. 


would  go  and  seek  the  sum,  which  he  commanded  me  to 
do. 

I  instantly  went  on  board  one  of  the  galleys  of  the 
Templars,  and,  seeing  a  coffer,  of  which  they  refused  to 
give  me  the  keys,  I  was  about  to  break  it  open  with  a  wedge 
in  the  king's  name ;  but  the  marshal,  observing  I  was  in 
earnest,  ordered  the  keys  to  be  given  me.  I  opened  the 
coffer,  took  out  the  sum  wanting,  and  carried  it  to  the  king, 
who  was  much  rejoiced  at  my  return.  Thus  was  the  whole 
payment  of  the  two  hundred  thousand  livres  completed  for 
the  ransom  of  the  count  de  Poitiers.  Before  it  was  all  paid, 
there  were  some  who  advised  the  king  to  withhold  it  untU  the 
Saracens  had  delivered  up  his  brother ;  but  he  replied,  that 
since  he  had  promised  it,  he  would  pay  the  whole  before  he 
quitted  the  river. 

As  he  said  this.  Sir  Philip  de  Montfort  told  the  king,  that 
the  Saracens  had  miscounted  one  scale  weight,  which  was 
worth  ten  thousand  livres.  The  king  was  greatly  enraged 
at  this,  and  commanded  Sir  Philip,  on  the  faith  he  owed  him 
as  his  liege  man,  to  pay  the  Saracens  these  ten  thousand 
livres,  should  they  in  fact  not  have  been  paid.  He  added, 
that  he  would  never  depart  until  the  uttermost  penny  of  the 
two  hundred  thousand  livres  were  paid. 

Several  persons,  perceiving  the  king  was  not  as  yet  out  of 
danger  from  the  Saracens,  often  entreated  him  to  retire  to  a 
galley  that  was  waiting  for  him  at  sea,  to  be  out  of  their 
hands,  and  at  length  prevailed  on  him  so  to  do,  for  he  said 
that  he  believed  he  had  now  fulfilled  his  oath. 

We  now  began  to  make  some  way  at  sea,  and  had  ad« 
vanced  a  full  league  without  saying  a  word  to  each  other  on 
the  concern  we  felt  to  have  left  the  count  de  Poitiers  in  prison- 
In  a  very  short  tiriie.  Sir  Philip  de  Montfort,  who  bad  re-, 
mained  to  make  good  the  payment  of  the  ten  thousand  livres^ 
approached  us^  calling  out  to  the  king,  Sire,  sire,  wait  for 
your  brother  the  count  de  Poitiers,  who  is  following  you  in 
this  other  galley."    The  king  then  said  to  those  near  him. 

Light  up,  light  up  V  and  there  was  great  joy  among  us  all 
on  the  arrival  of  the  king's  brother.  A  poor  fisherman 
having  hastened  to  the  countess  of  Poitiers,  and  told  her  he 
had  seen  the  count  at  liberty  from  the  Sanusens,  she  ordered 


Digitized  by 


A.]>.  1250.^  TALOITR  OP  SIR  OAITLTIER  DE  CHASTILtOX.  46t 

twenty  livres  parisis  to  be  given  him,  and  each  then  went  to 
his  galley. 

Before  I  quit  the  subject  of  Egypt,  I  wish  not  to  forget 
any  occurrences  that  happened  while  we  were  there.  I  shall 
first  speak  of  Sir  Gaultier  de  Chastillon,  and  say,  that  I  heard 
from  a  knight,  that  he  had  seen  him  post  himself  with  his 
drawn  sword  in  a  street  at  Casel,  where  the  king  was  made 
prisoner,  and,  whenever  any  Turks  passed  that  street^  he 
attacked  and  drove  them  before  him  with  hard  blows ;  as 
they  fled,  they  discharged  arrows  at  him,  with  which  he 
was  covered ;  and,  when  Sir  Walter  had  put  them  to  flight, 
he  picked  the  arrows  out  of  his  body,  and  re-armed  himself. 
He  was  a  long  time  thus  engaged ;  and  the  knight  saw  him 
rise  in  his  stirrups,  and  call  out,  Ha !  Chastillon,  chevalier, 
where  are  my  good  companions  V  but  not  one  was  with  him. 

One  day  adPterward,  as  I  was  conversing  with  the  admiral  of 
the  galleys,  I  inquired  of  all  his  men-at-arms  if  there  were 
any  one  who  could  give  me  an  account  of  what  was  become  of 
him,  but  I  could  hear  nothing.  At  length,  I  met  with  a 
knight  called  Sir  John  Frumons,  who  told  me,  that  as  they 
were  carrying  him  prisoner,  he  saw  a  Turk  on  the  horse  of 
Sir  Graultier  de  Chastillon,  whose  tail  and  rump  were 
covered  with  blood ;  and  when  he  asked  him  what  was  become 
of  the  knight  to  whom  that  horse  belonged,  he  replied,  thai 
he  had  cut  his  throat  while  on  horseback,  and  that  he  was 
thus  covered  with  his  blood. 

There  was  a  most  valiant  man  in  our  army  whose  name  wa» 
Sir  James  du  Chastel,  bishop  of  Soissons,  who  when  he  saw 
we  were  going  towards  Damietta,  and  that  every  one  was 
impatient  to  return  to  France,  preferred  living  with  God  to 
returning  to  where  he  was  bom.  In  consequence,  he  made  a 
charge  on  the  Turks,  as  if  he  alone  meant  to  combat  their 
army  ;  but  they  soon  sent  him  to  God,  and  placed  him  in  the 
company  of  martyrs,  for  they  killed  him  in  a  very  short 
time. 

Another  thing  I  witnessed.  As  the  king  was  waiting  on 
the  river  the  completion  of  the  payment  of  the  ransom  for  his 
brother,  the  count  de  Poitiers,  a  handsome  and  well-dressed 
Saracen  came  up,  and  presented  him  with  some  lard  in  pots, 
and  a  variety  of  sweet-smelling  flowers,  telling  the  king  it 


Digitized  by 


458 


JOINVILLE's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.       I^PT.  tl» 


the  children  of  the  nazac  of  the  sultan  of  Egypt, 
^ho  had  heen  murdered,  that  seut  him  this  gift. 

The  king,  hearing  the  Saracen  address  him  in  French, 
asked  him  where  he  had  learnt  it.  He  replied,  that  he  was  a 
Christian  rcnegado  :  on  which  the  king  bade  him  withdraw, 
for  he  would  not  say  any  more  to  him.  I  took  him  aside, 
and  inquired  who  he  was,  and  why  he  had  become  a  rene- 
gade. The  Saracen  told  me,  "  that  he  wajs  bom  in  Provence, 
and  had  followed  King  John  to  Egypt,  where  he  was 
married,  and  had  a  very  considerable  property."  I  said  to 
him,  "  And  do  you  not  know,  that  if  you  were  to  die  in  such 
a  state^  you  would  descend  straight  to  hell,  and  be  damned  for 
ever  ?"  He  replied,  "  that  he  knew  it  well,  and  that  there 
was  not  a  better  religion  than  that  of  the  Christians;  but  I 
fear,  wei-e  I  to  return  with  you,  I  should  suffer  great  poverty, 
and  be  continually  reproacl  led  all  my  days  by  being  called 
^  Renegade,  rene^ido  !'  I  had  rather,  therefore,  live  at  my 
ease,  like  a  rich  man,  than  become  such  an  object  of 
contempt." 

I  remonstrated  with  him,  that  it  was  much  better  to  suffer 
the  scorn  of  the  world,  since  at  the  day  of  judgment  every  evil 
deed  would  be  made  manifest  to  all,  and  then  damnation  would 
follow.  But  all  this  was  to  no  purpose,  and  when  he  quitted 
me  I  never  saw  him  more. 

You  have  had  related  the  great  persecutions  and  miseries 
the  good  king  St.  Louis  and  we  all  suffered  in  Egypt.  You 
must  know  also,  that  the  good  queen  was  not  without  her 
share,  and  very  bitter  to  her  heart,  as  you  shall  soon  hear. 
Three  days  before  she  was  brought  to  bed,  she  was  informed 
that  the  good  king,  her  husband,  had  been  made  prisoner, 
which  so  troubled  her  mind,  that  she  seemed  continually  to 
see  her  chamber  filled  with  Saracens  ready  to  slay  her ;  and 
she  incessantly  kept  crying  out,  "Help,  help;"  when  there 
was  not  a  ioul  near  her.  For  fear  the  fruit  of  her  womb 
should  perish,  she  made  a  knight  watch  at  the  foot  of  her  bed 
all  night  without  sleeping.  This  knight  was  very  old,  not 
less  than  eighty  years,  or  perhaps  more ;  and  every  time  she 
screamed  he  held  her  hands,  and  said,  "  Madam,  do  not  be 
thus  alarmed ;  I  am  with  you  :  quit  these  fears." 

Before  the  good  lady  was  brought  to  bed,  she  ordered 
every  person  to  leave  her  chamber  except  this  ancient  knight. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1250-3    THE  QUfiEN  DELTVERtB  OV  A  80N.  4.^J 

when  she  cast  herself  out  of  bed  on  her  knees  befoie  him,  and 
requested  that  he  would  grant  her  a  boon.  The  knight,  with 
an  oath,  promised  compliance.  The  qneen  then  said,  Sir 
knight,  I  request,  on  the  oath  you  have  sworn,  that  should 
the  Saracens  storm  this  town  and  take  it,  you  will  cut  off  my 
head  before  they  seize  my  person."  The  knight  replied,  that 
he  would  cheerfully  so  do,  and  that  he  had  before  thought  of 
it,  in  case  such  an  event  should  happen. 

The  queen  was,  shortly  after,  delivered  of  a  son  in  the 
town  of  Damietta,  whose  name  was  John,  and  his  surname 
Tristan,*  because  he  had  been  bom  in  misery  and  poverty. 
The  day  she  was  brought  to  bed  it  was  told  her,  that  the 
Pisans,  the  Genoese,  and  all  the  poorer  commonalty  that 
were  in  the  town,  were  about  to  fly  and  leave  the  king. 

The  queen  sent  for  them,  and  addressed  them,— "Gentle- 
men, I  beg  of  you,  for  the  love  of  God,  that  you  will  not 
think  of  quitting  this  town ;  for  you  well  know  if  you  do, 
that  my  lord  the  king,  and  his  whole  army,  will  be  ruined. 
At  least,  if  such  be  your  fixed  determination,  have  pity  on  this 
wretched  person  who  now  lies  in  pain,  and  wait  until  she  be 
recovered,  before  you  put  it  into  execution. 

They  answered,  they  could  not  remain  longer  in  a  town 
where  they  were  dying  of  hunger.  She  said,  they  should 
never  die  of  hunger;  for  that  she  would  buy  up  all  the 
provision  that  was  in  the  place,  and  retain  it  henceforward 
in  the  name  of  the  king.  This  she  was  obliged  to  do ;  and 
all  the  provision  that  could  be  found  was  bought  up,  which, 
on  her  recovery  a  little  time  after,  cost  her  upwards  of 
three  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  livres  to  feed  these  people. 
Notwithstanding  this,  the  good  lady  was  forced  to  rise  before 
she  was  perfectly  recovered,  and  set  out  for  the  city  of  Acre, 
for  Damietta  was  to  be  surrendered  to  the  Turks  and 
Saracens. 

It  should  be  known,  that  although  the  king  had  suffered 
such  a  variety  of  woes,  his  attendants^  when  he  embarked, 
had  not  made  any  preparations  for  him  on  board,  such  as 
robes,  bed,  bedding,  and  other  necessary  things.  He  was 
thus  forced,  for  six  days,  to  sleep  on  mattresses,  until  we 
arrived  at  Acre.  The  king  had  not  any  other  habiliments 
but  two  robes  which  the  sultan  had  caused  to  be  made  fox 
*  Tristan  died  in  1270,  at  Tunis,  aged  twenty  yean. 


Digitized  by 


460  JOINTILLB's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.       QPT.  IT. 

him  ;  they  were  of  a  black  silken  staff,  lined  with  squirrel 
skins,  with  a  number  of  golden  buttons. 

While  we  were  on  our  voyage  to  Acre,  on  account  of  ill- 
ness, I  was  always  seated  near  the  king  ;  and  it  was  then  he 
related  to  me  how  he  had  been  taken,  and  how,  through  the  aid 
of  God,  he  had  accomplished  his  own  ransom  and  ours.  I 
was  likewise  obliged  to  tell  him  how  I  had  been  captured  on 
the  rirer,  and  how  a  Saracen  had  saved  my  life.  The  king 
said,  I  ought  to  feel  myself  under  the  greatest  obligations  to 
our  Lord,  who  had  delivered  me  from  such  imminent  dangers. 
At  times,  the  good  and  holy  king  bewailed  bitterly  the  death 
of  his  brother  the  count  d'Artois. 

He  one  day  inquired  what  his  brother  the  count  d'Anjou 
was  doing,  and  complained,  that  notwithstanding  they  were 
in  the  same  galley,  he  never  once  thought  of  being  in  his 
company  a  single  day.  When  the  king  was  told  that  he  was 
playing  at  tables*  with  Sir  Walter  de  Nemours,  he  arose 
hastily,  though  from  his  severe  illness  he  could  scarcely  stand, 
and  went  staggering  to  where  they  were  at  play,  when,  seizing 
the  dice  and  tables,  he  flung  them  into  the  sea,  and  was  in  a 
violent  passion  with  his  brother  for  so  soon  thinking  of  thus 
amusing  himself  by  gaming,  forgetful  of  the  death  of  his 
brother  the  count  d'Artois,  and  of  the  great  perils  from  which 
the  Lord  had  delivered  them.  But  Sr  Walter  de  Nemours 
suffered  most,  for  the  king  flung  all  the  money  that  lay  on  the 
tables  after  them  into  the  sea. 

[[After  these  words,  the  Poitiers  edition  contains  a  whole 
chapter,  which  is  wanting  in  the  edition  of  Menard,  in  the 
following  terms : — 

When  we  arrived  before  Acre,  the  citizens  came  out  to 
meet  the  king  as  fcur  as  the  shore  with  grand  processions,  and 
received  him  joyfully. 

I  attempted  to  mount  the  palfrey  that  had  been  brought 
for  me  from  the  town ;  but  I  was  no  sooner  mounted  than  I 
fainted,  and  should  have  fallen  to  the  ground  had  it  not  been 
for  him  who  brought  the  horse,  who  held  me  tight,  and  with 

*  Among  the  orders  laid  down  for  the  more  regular  discipline  that  was 
to  be  observed  in  these  expeditions  to  the  Holy  Land,  all  playing  with 
dice  was  strictly  forbidden :  **  Statatum  est  etiam,  ut  nullos  enormiter 
jnret,  et  quod  'nullus  ad  aleas,  ▼«!  ad  dedos  Indat."  In  William  io 
Neabourg,  1.  3.  ch.  23. 


Digitized  by 


A. D.  1250.] 


ARBITAL  AT  ACRB. 


much  difficulty  I  was  led  to  the  king^a  house.  I  remained 
some  time  at  a  window  without  an^  one  taking  the  least 
notice  of  me,  and  of  all  those  whom  I  had  brought  to  Egypt 
I  had  or^y  with  me,  a  young  boy,  called  Bartholomew,  the 
bastard-son  of  the  lord  Am€  de  Montbelliar,*  lord  of  Mont- 
faucon,  of  whom  I  hare  before  spoken. 

As  I  was  there  waiting,  a  youth  came  to  me  dressed  in 
scarlet  striped  with  yellow,  and,  having  saluted  me,  asked  if 
I  did  not  know  him.  On  my  saying  I  did  not,  he  told  me  he 
was  a  native  of  Chasteau-Descler,  that  belonged  to  my  uncle. 
He  asked  if  I  would  take  him  into  my  service,  for  he  was  with- 
out a  master.  This  I  readily  agreed  to,  and  retained  him  as  my 
varlet.  He  soon  after  brought  me  clean  coifes,  and  combed  my 
hair  exceedingly  well.  At  this  time,  the  king  sent  for  me  to 
come  to  dinner;  I  went,  attended  by  my  new  varlet,  who 
carved  before  me,  and  found  means  to  get  a  sufficiency  for 
himself  and  the  young  boy. 

After  the  dinner  this  varlet,  whose  name  was  Guillemin, 
obtained  for  me  a  lod^ng  near  the  baths,  that  I  might  wash 
and  clean  myself  from  the  filth  I  had  gained  in  prison. 
Towards  evening,  he  put  me  into  %  bath  ;  but  I  had  no  sooner 
entered  It  than  I  again  tinted  and  fell  backwards  in  the 
water,  so  that  with  much  trouble  they  drew  me  out  alive,  and 
carried  me  to  my  chamber.  You  must  know,  that  I  had 
only  a  poor  jacket  for  my  dress,  nor  any  money  in  my 
pocket  to  buy  better  clothing,  or  to  support  me  in  my  illness. 
This  affected  me  very  much,  and  I  suffered  more  from  the  ex- 
treme indigence  I  was  in,  than  from  the  pains  of  my  disorder. 

As  1  was  in  this  distress,  most  fortunately  a  knight  came 
to  visit  me,  whose  name  was  Sir  Peter  de  Bourbrainne,  and 
seeing  my  miserable  state,  he  comforted  me  to  the  best  of  his 
power,  and  caused  cloth  to  be  given  me  to  new-dress  myseli^ 
by  a  merchant  o  Acre,  to  whom  he  gave  his  own  security  for 
the  due  payment. 

"  At  the  end  of  three  days,  when  I  was  somewhat  better 
and  stronger,  I  went  to  the  king,  who  blamed  me  much  for 
having  been  so  long  absent,  and  charged  me,  as  I  valued  his 
love,  not  to  fail  partaking  of  his  meals  morning  and  evening, 
until  he  should  determine  to  remain  there,  or  return  to 
France.  While  with  the  king,  I  complained  to  him  of 
the  lord  Peter  de  Courcenay,  who  owed  me  400  livres 


402  ^  JOINVILLHfs  MEMOIRS  OP  SAINT  LOUTS  IX.      [[PT.  It 


of  mj  pay,  and  refused  to  give  it  me  ;  and  the  king  ordered 
the  400  iivres  to  be  instantly  paid  me,  to  my  great  joy,  for  I 
did  not  possess  a  single  farthing. 

"  When  I  had  received  my  money,  Sir  Peter  de  Bour- 
brainne  advised  me  to  keep  only  forty  livres  for  my  expenses, 
and  to  give  the  remainder  to  the  governor  of  the  palace  of 
the  Templars  to  keep  for  me,  which  I  willingly  did.  Having 
spent  the  forty  livres,  I  sent  for  as  much  more;  but  this 
governor  bade  them  tell  me,  that  he  had  not  any  money  of 
mine,  and,  what  was  worse,  that  he  did  not  know  me. 

"  On  the  receipt  of  this  answer,  I  went  to  the  master  of 
the  Templars,  whose  name  was  Father  Regnaut  de  Vichiers, 
to  whom  I  carried  intelligence  of  the  king,  and  then  told  him 
the  treatment  I  had  met  with,  and  complained  to  him  of  the 
governor  of  the  palace,  for  not  restoring  to  me  the  money  I 
had  entrusted  to  his  care.  But  I  had  no  sooner  ended,  than 
he  flew  into  a  violent  passion,  and  said,  '  Lord  de  Joinville, 
I  love  you  very  much,  but  I  shall  cease  doing  so,  if  you  hold 
such  language,  for  it  seems  to  be  insinuated,  by  what  you 
complain  of,  that  our  brotherhood  are  all  thieves.'  I  replied,  that 
so  far  from  being  silent,  I  would  make  the  matter  public,  for 
that  I  was  in  such  want  of  my  money  I  had  not  a  penny  to 
support  me,  and,  without  a  word  more,  left  him. 

I  can  assure  you  I  was  during  four  days  in  the  utmost 
uneasiness  about  my  money,  and  knew  not  to  what  saint  to 
make  my  vows,  to  recover  it.  These  four  days  I  did  nothing 
but  run  about,  seeking  means  to  regain  it.  On  the  fifth  the 
master  of  the  Templars  accosted  me  with  a  smile,  and  told 
me  he  had  found  my  money,  and  instantly  gave  me  the 
amount,  to  my  great  joy,  as  I  was  in  very  great  need  of  it ; 
and  I  took  good  care,  in  future,  not  to  trouble  these  monks 
with  the  keeping  of  my  cash."] 

At  this  place  I  must  relate  some  great  persecutions  and 
evils  that  befel  me  when  at  Acre,  but  from  which  those  two, 
in  whom  I  had  my  whole  confidence,  our  Lord  God  and  thi 
blessed  Virgin  Mary,  relieved  me.  This  I  say  as  an  encou- 
ragement to  such  as  may  read  my  book,  to  have  a  perfect 
confidence  in  God,  and  patience  in  their  adversities  and  tri* 
bulations,  when  he  will  aid  them,  as  he  has  done  me,  many 
and  many  times. 

On  the  kings  arrival  before  Acre,  the  inhabitants  of  that 


Digitized  by 


A.I».  1250.^     IMPORTANT  MEWS  FROM  FKANCB.  4^*{ 

eity  came  out  in  grand  procession  to  meet  him  on  the  sea-ahoie, 
and  received  him  with  mnch  joy.  Soon  after,  the  king  sent 
for  me,  and  expressly  commanded  me,  as  I  valued  his  love, 
to  como  and  eat  with  him  morning  and  evening,  until  he 
should  determine  whether  to  return  to  FrancA  or  to  remain 
there. 

I  was  lodged  with  the  rector  of  Acre,  for  there  the  bishop 
had  fixed  my  residence,  and  was  most  grievously  ill.  Of  all 
my  servants^  there  was  but  one  that  was  not  confined  to  his 
bed  with  sickness  like  myself ;  nor  had  I  any  to  comfort  me, 
by  once  offering  me  something  to  drink.  The  more  to  enliven 
me,  I  saw  daily  pass  my  window  twenty  corpses  for  burial ; 
and  when  I  heard  the  chant,  "  Libera  me  Doniine,"  I  shed 
floods  of  tears,  and  cried  out  to  God  that  he  would  mercifully 
save  me  and  my  household  from  the  pestilenc-e  that  then 
raged.    And  this  he  did. 

Not  long  after  the  king's  arrival  at  Acre  ho  summoned  his 
brothers,  and  all  the  other  nobles,  on  a  certain  Sunday,  and, 
when  assembled,  he  addressed  them:  "  My  lords,  I  have 
called  you  together,  to  give  you  some  news  from  France.  In 
truth,  my  lady-mother,  the  queen,  has  sent  for  me,  and  it  is 
necessary  that  I  return  with  the  utmost  haste,  for  my  king- 
dom is  in  great  danger,  inasmuch  as  there  exists  neither  peace 
nor  truce  with  the  king  of  England.  The  people  here  wish 
to  detain  me,  assuring  me  that  if  I  depart  their  country  will 
be  destroyed,  and  insist  on  following  me.  I  beg  you  will 
maturely  consider  what  I  have  said,  and  give  me  your  opinions 
within  eight  days." 

On  the  Sunday  following,  we  all  presented  ourselves  before 
the  king  to  give  him  our  opinions,  as  he  had  charged  us, 
whether  he  should  depart  or  stay.  Sir  Guion  de  Malvoisin 
was  our  spokesman,  and  said,  Sire,  my  lords  your  brothers, 
and  the  other  nobles  now  present,  have  fully  considered  youp 
situation,  and  they  are  of  opinion,  that  you  cannot  remain 
longer  in  this  country  with  honour  to  yourself  or  profit  to 
your  kingdom.  For,  in  the  first  place,  of  all  the  knights 
whom  you  led  to  Cyprus,  amounting  to  2,800,  not  one 
hundred  remain.  Secondly,  you  have  not  any  habitation  in 
this  country,  nor  have  your  army  any  money ;  for  these 
reasons,  which  we  have  maturely  weighed,  we  unanimously 
advise  that  you  return  to  France  to  reinforce  yourself  with 


Digitized  by 


JOIMVILLE's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX. 


[[PT.  II 


meu-at-arms,  and  supply  yourself  with  money,  so  that  you 
may  hastily  repair  again  hither,  and  take  vengeance  on  the 
enemies  of  God  and  of  his  holy  religion/' 

The  king  was  not  pleased  with  this  advice  of  Sir  Guy,  but 
demanded  from  each  person  his  private  opinion  on  the  busi- 
ness, beginning  with  the  counts  d*Anjou,  de  Poitiers,  and  the 
other  nobles  near  him.  All  of  them  replied,  they  agreed  in 
the  advice  of  Sir  Guy  de  Malvoisin.  The  count  de  Japhe 
was  hard  pressed  to  give  his  opinion,  for  he  had  castles  and 
possessions  in  those  countries ;  but  when  the  king  insisted  on 
having  it,  he  said,  that  if  the  king  could  keep  the  field,  it 
^ould  redound  moce  to  his  honour  to  remain,  than  thus  dis^ 
comfited  to  return.  I,  who  was  the  fourteenth  in  rank, 
answered  in  my  turn  that  I  was  of  the  same  opinion  with 
the  count  de  Japhe  ;  moreover,  giving  these  additional  reasons, 
that  it  was  reported  the  king  had  not  as  yet  expended  any  of 
the  money  from  the  royal  treasury,  but  had  employed  that 
which  was  in  the  hands  of  the  clerks  of  finance ;  and  that 
the  king  should  send  to  the  Morea,  and  the  adjoining  coun- 
tries, to  seek  powerful  reinforcements  of  men-at-arms,  who, 
when  they  should  learn  the  high  pay  the  king  was  willing  to 
give,  would  hasten  to  join  him  from  all  parts,  and  by  this 
means  the  king  might  deliver  the  multitude  of  poor  prisoners  | 
who  had  been  captured  in  the  service  of  God,  which  would 
never  be  the  case  unless  it  were  done  as  now  proposed. 

You  must  know,  that  at  this  moment  none  reproved  me 
for  my  opinion,  but  many  began  to  weep,  for  there  was 
scarcely  one  among  us  who  had  not  some  of  his  relations  in 
the  prisons  of  the  Saracens. 

Sir  William  de  Belmont*  spoke  next,  and  said  that  my 
advice  was  very  good,  and  that  he  agreed  in  it.  When  iJl 
had  delivered  their  opinions,  the  king  was  much  confounded 
at  their  diversity,  and  took  eight  days  more  to  declare  which 
he  should  follow.  When  we  had  left  the  presence  of  the 
king,  the  great  nobles  made  a  violent  attack  on  me,  and, 
through  jealousy  and  envy,  said,  "  Ha !  certainly  the  king 
must  be  mad,  if  he  do  not  follow  your  opinion,  lord  de  Join- 

*  I  believe  this  to  be  the  same  whose  name  appears  ie  the  cartulary  a 
the  bishopric  of  Paris,  wherein  he  is  mentioned  as  doing  homage  to  tfaa 
tee,  in  the  year  1263,  for  his  lordship  of  Pierre  Fitz. 

\ 


Digitized  by 


A.P  1250,  &C.J  JOINVILLE  ADVISES  THB  KING  TO  STAY.  405 


yille,  in  preferonoe  to  that  of  the  whole  French  council.  *  But 
to  this  I  made  not  any  reply. 

The  tables  were  soon  after  laid  for  dinner,  and  the  king, 
who  had  usually  made  me  sit  down  near  him  when  his  bro- 
thers were  absent,  and  during  the  repasts  had  conversed  with 
me,  did  not  now  open  his  lips,  nor  even  turn  his  face  toward 
me.  I  then  thought  he  was  displeased  with  me  for  having 
said  that  he  had  not  employed  his  own  money,  when  he  had 
expended  such  very  large  sums.  After  he  had  said  grace, 
and  returned  thanks  to  God  for  his  dinner,  I  retired  to  a 
window  near  the  head  of  the  kings  beiL  and*  passing 
my  hand  through  the  grating,  remained  there  nmsing.  I 
said  to  myself,  that  if  the  king  should  now  return  to  Fmnce, 
I  would  go  to  the  prince  of  Antioch,*  who  was  a  relation  of 
mine. 

While  I  was  thus  meditating,  the  king  leant  on  niy 
shoulders,  and  held  my  bead  between  his  hands.  I  thought 
it  was  Sir  Philip  de  Nemours,  who  had  been  fretting  me  all 
the  day  for  the  advice  which  I  had  given  the  king,  and  said 
to  him,  "  Sir  Philip,  do  leave  me  quiet  in  my  misfortune." 
As  I  turned  round,  the  king  covered  my  face  with  his  hands, 
and  I  then  knew  it  was  the  king  from  an  emerald  on  his 
Onger.  I  wished  to  make  some  repamtion,  as  one  that  had 
improperly  spoken ;  but  the  king  made  me  be  silent,  and  con- 
tinued, "  Now,  lord  de  Joinville,  tell  me  how  you,  who  are  so 
young  a  man,  could  have  the  courage  to  advise  me  to  remain 
in  these  countries  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  all  my  greatest 
nobles?"  I  replied,  that  if  I  had  advised  him  well, he  should  fol- 
low it ;  if  the  contrary,  he  ought  not  to  think  more  on  what  I 
had  said.    "  And  will  you  remain  with  me,  if  I  should  stay  V 

Yes,  certainly,"  answered  I,  ''were  it  at  my  own  or  at 
another's  expense."  The  king  said,  that  he  was  pleased  with 
the  advice  I  had  given,  but  ordered  me  to  tell  this  to  no  one. 

1  was  so  rejoiced  that  whole  week  with  what  he  had  told 
me,  that  I  was  insensible  to  my  illness,  and  defended  myself 
boldly  against  the  other  lords  when  they  attacked  me. 

You  must  know,  in  these  countries  the  peasant  is  callea 

*  Boemond  V.,  prtnce  of  Antioch,  and  count  of  Tripoly,  who  died  in 
tbe  y«ar  12C1. 

2  H 


Digitized  by 


4(TG        JOINVILLE'S  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.      [PT.  If* 


Poulain,*  and  I  was  told  by  my  cousin  Sir  Peter  d'Arallon, 
that  I  was  called  Poulain,  because  I  had  advised  the  king  to 
remain  with  the  Ponlaius.  This  information  be  gave  me,  that 
I  might  defend  myself  against  those  who  should  call  me  so, 
and  tell  them  that  I  would  rather  be  a  Poulain  than  such 
recreant  knights  as  them8elyes.t 

On  the  Sunday  we  all  again  assembled  in  the  presence  of 
the  king,  who  began  by  mgiiing  himself  with  the  cross,  saying 
that  it  was  front  the  instructions  of  his  mother  he  did  so,  who 

*  Poulain, — a  child  bom  of  an  European  mother  by  a  Syrian  father.— 
Glo88»  to  Louvre  edit.  The  author  of  the  Life  of  Louis  le  Gros  ex* 
plains  the  force  of  this  word  in  his  24th  chapter,  as  follows :  **  Pol- 
lani  dicuntur,  qui  de  patre  Syriano  et  matre  Francigena  generantur.'' 
It  is  probable  that  Frenchmen  gave  this  name  to  such  as  bad  sprung 
from  these  irregular  connections,  because  they  resembled  young  wild  colts, 
that  could  not  be  caught.  During  the  time  the  French  possessed  the  em- 
pire  of  Constantinople,  they  called  Grasmoules  {TafffiovXai)  those  born 
from  a  French  man  and  Greek  woman ;  or  more  probably  Gastemoules, 
by  way  of  derision ;  as  if  such  children  by  these  irregular  marriages,  on 
account  of  the  difference  of  nations,  and  even  religions,  had  in  scone  sort 
sullied  and  debased  the  womb  of  their  mothers,  which  is  the  mould 
wherein  children  are  formed.  Thus  in  Antioch,  the  issue  of  Armenian 
or  Greek  inhabitants  of  that  town  by  Turkish  women  were  called 
Turcati, 

t  That  is  to  say,  one  who  owned  himself  conquered,  for  that  is  the 
meaning  of  the  word  recreu,  which  is  taken  from  the  usage  of  duelling. 
When  one  of  the  combatants  was  overpowered  by  his  adversary,  and  con- 
fessed himself  unable  to  continue  the  fight  longer,  he  owned  that  he  was 
recreant  or  recme ;  that  is,  that  he  was  exhausted,  and  could  do  no  more, 
and  confessed  himself  vanquished.  *  *  *  In  those  parts  of  the  MS. 
Assizes  of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem  which  ppe&k.  of  wager  of  battle,''  the 
appellant  or  defendant  is  introduced  as  saying  these  words  before  the  judge 
of  the  field  :  I  am  ready  to  prove  it  by  my  body  against  his  body,  and  to 
fight  until  death,  or  till  I  own  myself  recreant  any  hour  of  the  day,  and  here 
is  my  glove,"  &c.  *  *  *  The  same  Assizes  say,  chap.  94,  on  the 
subject  of  trial  for  the  cause  of  murder :  *•  The  judges  of  the  field  must 
attend,  and  be  as  near  the  combatants  as  possible,  that  if  one  of  them 
should  utter  the  word  recreant,  he  may  be  heard,  and  in  that  case,  the 
moment  it  shall  be  heard,  they  will  order  his  adversary  to  cease,  and  say 
that  he  has  done  enough.  They  will  then  take  the  body  of  the  vanquished, 
and  give  it  up  to  the  pleasure  of  the  lord,  who  will  order  it  to  be  dragged 
thence  to  the  gallows,  and  hanged  by  the  neck.  The  same  will  be  done 
to  him  that  shall  be  slain  in  the  duel,  although  he  may  not  have  said  the 
word  recreant.**  *  *  *  So  that  the  lord  de  Joinville,  on  this  occasion, 
returned  abuse  for  abuse,  and,  as  they  called  him  Poulain,"  he  retorted 
on  these  knights  **  recreant  knights,"  that  is  to  say,  cowardtf  and 
tase.  ■  »   *  • 


A.D.  1250,  BBTERMINES  TO  STAY  AT  ACRE. 


467 


had  thus  ordered  him,  and  likewise  to  invoke  the  name  of 
God  and  the  aid  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  whenever  he  was  about 
to  make  a  speech.  He  then  continued  :  My  lords,  I  feel 
equally  thankful  to  those  who  have  advised  our  return  to 
France  as  to  those  who  have  recommended  our  stay  here. 
But,  since  I  last  saw  you,  I  have  fully  considered  this  matter, 
and  believe,  that  should  we  remain  here,  my  kingdom  will  not 
the  sooner  be  in  great  danger  from  it ;  for  my  lady-mother  the 
queen  has  a  sufficiency  of  men-at-arms  to  defend  it.  I  have 
thought  much  on  what  the  knights  of  this  country  say,  that  if 
I  depart,  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem  will  be  lost,  since  no  one 
will  remain  here  after  me.  Now,  my  lords,  having  told  my 
resolution,  let  such  speak  out  boldly  who  wish  to  remain  with 
me ;  and  I  promise  to  give  them  emoluments,  that  the  fault 
shall  not  be  mine  but  their  own,  if  they  do  not  remain. 
Those  that  may  not  choose  to  stay,  Grod  be  with  them." 

When  the  king  had  done  speaking,  several  were  as  if 
thunderstruck,  and  began  to  weep  bitterly.  After  the  king 
had  declared  his  resolution,  he  gave  permission  to  his  brothers 
to  return  to  France  ;  but  I  know  not  if  he  did  this  at  their 
requests,  or  whether  it  was  the  wiH  of  the  king.  This  passed 
about  St.  John  Baptist's  day. 

Shortly  after  the  departure  of  his  brothers  for  France,  the 
king  was  impatient  to  learn  what  success  those  who  had  stayed 
with  him  had  met  with  in  recruiting  his  men-at-arms.  On 
the  feast-day  of  St.  James,  whose  pilgrim  I  was,  for  the  mani- 
fold kindness  he  had  shewn  me,  the  king,  after  mass,  retired 
to  his  chamber,  and  called  to  him  the  chiefs  of  his  council, 
namely.  Sir  Peter  the  chamberlain,*  who  was  the  most  loyal 
and  upright  man  I  ever  saw  of  the  king's  household,  that 
good  knight  Sir  Geoffry  de  Sergines,  the  discreet  Sir  Giles  le 
Brun,  and  others,  among  whom  was  that  prudent  man,  to 
whom  the  king,  after  the  death  of  Sir  Hymbert  de  Beaujeu, 
had  given  the  constable's  sword.  He  asked  them  what  num- 
bers and  sort  of  men  they  had  collected  for  the  reinforcement 
of  his  army,  and  with  warmth  continued, — "  You  know  that 
it  is  about  a  month  since  I  have  declared  my  intention  to  stay 

*  Peter  ae  Nemours,  or  de  Ville-Beon,  chamberlain  of  France,  under 
tiir  reign  of  St.  Louis,  whom  he  accompanied  in  his  expedition  to  Tunis, 
and  died  there.  He  was  buried  at  the  king*s  feet,  in  the  abbey  of  St, 
Denis. 

2  H  2 


Digitized  by 


408  JOINYILLE's  MEMOIUS  of  saint  LOUIS  tX.        [t*T«  lU 

here,  and  I  have  not  as  yet  had  intellii^ence  that  you  havQ 
raised  any  reinforcements  of  knights  or  others/' 

To  this  Sir  Peter  the  chamberlain  replied,  in  the  name 
of  the  council,—^'  Sire,  we  have  not  hitherto  done  any  thing, 
nor  do  we  think  we  shall  ever  accomplish  it ;  for  every  one 
demands  such  a  price,  and  so  great  pay,  that  we  are  afraid  of 
promising  to  give  them  what  they  ask."  The  king  would 
know  to  whom  they  had  spoken,  and  those  who  had  de- 
manded such  great  pay.  They  unanimously  replied,  that  it 
was  I,  and  that  I  would  not  be  satisfied  with  a  trifle.  All 
this  I  overheard,  as  I  was  in  the  king's  apartment ;  and  the 
council  had  told  the  king  these  things  of  me,  because  I  had 
advised  him,  contrary  to  their  opinion,  to  remain,  and  had 
thus  prevented  their  return  to  France. 

The  king  sent  for  me ;  on  my  entrance,  I  cast  myself  on 
my  knees  before  him ;  when,  making  me  rise  and  seat 
myself,  he  said, — "  Seneschal,  you  know  full  well  the  con- 
fidence I  have  in  you,  and  how  much  you  are  beloved  by 
me.  My  council,  notwithstanding  this,  assure  me,  that  you 
are  so  hard  to  deal  with,  that  they  cannot  satisfy  you  in 
regard  to  the  pay  they  are  willing  to  give  you.    How  is 

this  r 

"Sire,*  replied  I,  "I  know  not  what  they  may  have 
reported  to  you;  but  in  regard  to  myself  if  I  demand  a 
good  salary,  I  cannot  avoid  it ;  for  you  know,  that  when  I 
was  made  prisoner  on  the  Nile,  I  lost  every  thing  I  had, 
except  what  was  on  my  body,  and  I  cannot  maintaiB  my 
people  on  a  little." 

The  king  then  asked,  how  much  I  would  have  for  the 
support  of  my  company  until  next  Easter,  which  was 
nearly  half  a  year.  I  answered,  two  thousand  livres.  "Now 
tell  me,"  continued  the  king,  "have  you  no  knights  here 
with  you?"  "Yes,  sire,  I  made  Sir  Peter  de  PontmoLiin 
remain,  who  is  the  third  under  my  banner ;  and  he  costs  me 
four  hundred  livres."  The  king,  then  reckoning  on  hifl 
fingers,  said,  "  Your  knights  and  men-at-arms  then  coat 
you  twelve  hundred  livres."  I  then  said,  "Consider,  sire, 
if  I  must  not  require  full  eight  hundred  livres  to  equip 
myself  with  horses  and  armour,  and  to  provide  a  table  for 
my  knights  until  Easter."    The  king  then  told  his  oooniul 


Digitized  by 


4.D.  1 250,  EMBASSIES  FROM  OBRMAKT,  ETC.  469 

that  he  could  not  think  demands  extrayagant;  and  said 
to  me,  that  he  retained  me  m  his  seryice. 

Not  long  after  this,  the  emperor  of  Germany  sent  an 
embassy  to  the  king,  with  credential  letters,  to  say  that  he 
had  written  to  the  sultan  of  Babylon,  of  whose  death  he 
was  ignorant,  to  giye  credit  to  those  he  sent  to  him,  and, 
cost  what  it  would,  to  deliyer  the  king  of  France  and  his 
army  from  their  captivity.  But  I  well  remember,  that 
several  said  they  believed  the  emperor  wished  to  find  them 
still  prisoners ;  mr  they  suspected,  that  his  motive  in  sending 
this  embassy  was  to  cause  us  to  be  more  straitly  confined, 
and  more  heavily  oppressed.  When  the  ambassadors  found 
us  at  liberty,  they  returned  to  the  emperor. 

After  this  embassy  was  departed,  there  arrived  at  Acre 
another  from  the  sultan  of  Damascus  to  the  king.  The 
sultan  complained,  in  kis  letter,  of  the  admirals  of  Eg3rpt, 
for  having  put  to  death  their  sultan,  who  was  his  cousin. 
He  offered,  if  the  king  would  assist  him  against  them,  to 
deliver  up  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem,  which  they  held. 
The  king  replied  to  these  ambassadors,  that  if  they  would 
retire  to  their  lodgings,  which  had  been  prepared  for  them, 
they  should  shortly  have  an  answer  on  the  subject  on  which 
the  sultan  of  Damascus  had  written  to  him.  To  this  they 
consented ;  and  the  king  resolved,  in  council,  to  send  his 
answer  by  the  ambassadors:  but  that  they  should  be  accom- 
panied by  a  monk,  called  Father  Yves  le  Breton,  who  was  of 
the  order  of  Preaching  Friars. 

Father  Yves  was  sent  for,  and  despatched  to  the  am- 
bassadors of  the  sultan,  to  say,  the  king  had  ordered  him 
to  accompany  them  to  Damascus,  to  inform  the  sultan  what 
were  the  king's  intentions  respecting  the  Saracens.  This 
Father  Yves  did;  but  I  must  relate  an  incident  which 
I  heard  from  him.  On  going  from  the  king's  residence 
to  the  lodgings  of  the  ambassadors,  he  met  a  very  old 
woman  in  the  street,  having  in  her  right  hand  a  por* 
ringer  full  of  fire,  and  in  her  left  a  phial  of  water.  Father 
Yves  asked,  "Woman,  what  art  thou  going  to  do  with 
this  fire  and  water  which  thou  art  carrying  V*  She  replied 
that  with  the  fire  she  wished  to  bum  paradise,  and  with 
the  water  to  drown  hell,  so  that  there  should  be  never 


Digitized  by 


t/0  JOIKVILLE'b  MEli^OIRS  OF  SAINT  LOUIS  IX.       [PT.  fl, 

more  a  paradise  or  bell.  The  friar  asked  why  she  uttered 
such  words.  "Because,"  she  said,  "I  wish  not  that  any 
one  should  do  good  for  the  reward  of  paradise,  nor  avoid 
evil  from  fear  of  hell;  but  every  good  ought  to  be  done 
from  the  perfect  and  sincere  love  we  owe  to  our  Creator, 
God,  who  is  the  supreme  good,  and  who  loved  us  so  much 
that  he  suffered  death  for  our  redemption;  which  death  he 
submitted  to  for  the  sin  of  our  first  father,  Adam,  and  for  our 
salvation." 

During  the  king's  residence  at  Acre,  there  came  like- 
wise to  him  ambassadors  from  the  prince  of  the  Be- 
douins, called  the  Old  Man  of  the  Mountain.  After  the 
king  had  attended  mass  in  the  morning,  he  would  hear 
what  these  ambassadors  had  to  say.  On  their  entrance^ 
the  king  caused  them  to  be  seated,  to  deliver  their  message ; 
when  one  of  the  chiefs  began  by  asking  the  king  if  he  were 
acquainted  with  their  lord,  the  prince  of  the  mountain.  The 
king  said  he  was  not ;  he  had  never  seen  him,  although  he 
had  heard  much  spoken  of  him.  The  chief  continued:  "Sire, 
since  you  have  heard  my  lord  spoken  of,  I  wonder  much  that 
you  have  not  sent  him  such  of  your  people  as  should  have 
made  him  your  friend,  in  like  manner  as  the  emperor  of 
Germany,  the  king  of  Hungary,  the  sultan  of  Babylon,  and 
many  other  princes  have  yearly  done ;  for  they  know  well 
that  they  would  not  be  allowed  to  exist  or  reign,  but  during 
his  good  pleasure.  For  this  cause  he  has  despatched  ua 
hither  to  advertise  you,  that  he  wills  you  should  act  in  thp 
like  manner,  or  at  least  that  you  acquit  him  of  the  tribute 
he  pays  annually  to  the  grand  master  of  the  Temple,  or  of 
the  Hospital,  and  if  you  do  this,  he  will  consider  it  as 
paid  to  himself.  My  lord  says  truly,  that  should  he  destroy 
the  master  of  the  Temple,  or  of  the  Hospital,  there  would 
joon  be  others  as  good,  and  for  this  reason  he  is  unwilling 
f>  risk  his  people's  lives  where  little  is  to  be  gained." 

The  king  replied,  that  he  would  consider  what  they  had 
said,  and  if  they  would  return  in  the  evening  they  should 
have  his  answer.  When  they  came  again  before  the  king, 
it  was  about  vespers,  and  they  found  the  master  of  th« 
Temple  on  one  side  of  him,  and  the  master  of  the  Hospital 
on  t^e  other.    The  king,  on  their  entrance,  ordered  Uiem 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1250,  See/]  THE  OLD  MAN  v>P  THB  HOUNTAm.  471 


to  repeat  what  they  had  before  said  to  him,  as  well  as  the 
demand  which  they  had  made  in  the  morning.  They  replied, 
that  they  should  not  think  it  right  to  repeat  what  they  had 
6aid,  except  in  tlie  presence  of  such  as  had  heard  them  in 
the  morning.  The  masters  of  the  Temple,  and  of  the 
Hospital,  on  this  ordered  them  to  repeat  it  The  chief  then 
repeated  what  he  had  said  before  to  the  king,  as  has  been 
mentioned. 

The  masters,  on  hearing  it,  bade  them  come  and  confer 
with  them  in  the  rooming,  and  they  should  then  know  the 
kings  pleasure.  On  the  morrow,  when  they  were  before  the 
masters  of  the  Temple  and  Hospital,  they  told  them,  that 
their  lord  had  very  foolishly  and  impudently  sent  such  a 
message  to  the  king  of  France,  and  had  used  such  harsh 
expressions,  that  were  it  not  unbecoming  the  honour  of  the 
king,  on  the  account  of  their  being  invested  with  the  cha* 
Eacter  of  ambassadors,  he  would  have  had  them  thrown  into 
the  filthy  sea  of  Acre,  and  drowned,  in  despite  of  their 
master.  "  And  we  command  you,*  continued  the  masters, 
**  to  return  to  your  lord,  and  to  come  back  within  fifteen  days 
with  such  letters  from  your  prince,  that  tiie  king  sliall  be  con- 
lented  with  him  and  with  you." 

Before  the  fifteen  days  were  expired,  the  same  ambassador 
returned  from  the  prince  of  the  mountain,  and  addressing  the 
king,  said,  "Sire,  we  are  come  back  from  our  lord,  who 
informe  yoo,  that  as  the  shirt  is  the  part  of  dress  nearest  to 
the  body,  he  sends  you  this,  his  shirt,  as  a  gift,  or  a  83nnbol 
that  you  are  the  king  for  whom  he  has  the  greatest  affection, 
and  which  he  is  most  desirous  to  cultivate ;  and,  for  a  further 
assurance  of  it,  here  is  his  ring  that  he  sends  you,  which  is 
of  pure  gold,  and  hath  his  name  engraven  on  it ;  and  with 
this  ring  our  lord  espouses  you,  and  understands  that  hence- 
Cbrward  you  be  as  one  of  the  fingers  of  his  hand." 

Among  other  presents  sent  to  the  king  were  an  elephant  of 
crystal,  figures  of  men  of  different  crystals,  the  whole  set  in 
fine  pieces  of  amber  with  borders  of  pure  gold.  You  must 
know,  that  when  the  ambassadors  opened  the  case  that  con* 
tained  all  these  fine  things,  the  whole  apartment  was  instantly 
embalmed  with  the  sweet  odour  of  their  perfumes. 

The  kin     desirous  not  to  be  behindhand  in  making  a 


Digitized  by 


472 


JOINTILLB's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  nt. 


J[VT.  II. 


return  for  these  presents  from  the  old  prince  of  the  moan- 
tain,*  sent  to  him,  hy  his  ambassadors,  and  by  Father  Yves 
Le  Breton,  who  understood  the  Saracenic,  great  quantities  of 
scarlet  robes,  cups  of  gold,  and  other  vessels  of  silver.  When 
Father  Yves  was  in  the  presence  of  the  prince  of  the  Be- 
douins, he  conversed  with  him  on  the  articles  of  his  faith ; 
but,  as  he  afterward  reported  to  the  king,  he  found  he  did  noi 
believe  in  Mahomet,  but  followed  the  religion  of  Aly,  who 
was,  he  said,  the  uncle  of  Mahomet.  He  told  him,  that  it 
was  Aly  to  whom  Mahomet  was  indebted  for  all  the  honours 

*  All  the  writers  on  the  holy  wars  agree,  that  the  Old  Man  of  the 
Mountain,  who  is  called    Vetulus/'  or  **  Senex  de  Montanis/'  ruled  over 
the  Assassins,  who  inhabited,  as  I  have  elsewhere  remarked,  the  moun- 
tains of  Phoenicia,  whence  he  was  called  prince  of  the  mountains.  The 
lord  de  Joiuville  confounds  the  Bedouins,  in  this  place,  with  the  Assassras. 
Arnold  de  Lubeck,  1.  7,  ch.  10,  speaks  thus  of  them :  "  In  terminis 
Damasd,  Antiochise,  et  Alapise,  est  quoddam  genus  Saracenorum  in  mon- 
tanis,  quod  eorum  lingua  vulgari  Heissesim  vocatur."    He  then  describes 
the  palace,  and  the  behaviour  of  this  prince,  which  is  conformable  to 
what  the  lord  de  Joinville  and  the  greater  part  of  those  who  have  written 
-    on  the  holy  wars  relate.    Among  others,  William  of  Tyre,  1.  14,  c.  19  ; 
1.  20,  ch.  21;  Matthew  Paris,  in  the  year  1150;  William  de  Neu- 
bourg,  1.  4,  c.  24 ;  1.  5,  ch.  16.    From  these  authors,  the  author  of 
the  MS.  **  Traits  de  la  Terre  d'Outremer  "  has  drawn  all  he  has 
written  of  the  Assassins  and  their  prince  in  these  terras : — **  In  the 
lands  near  Damascus  and  Antioch,  live  a  «ort  of  Saracens,  called 
by  some  *  Haussassis,'  by  others  *  the  people  of  the  Old  Man  of  the 
Mountain.'    These  people  live  a  lawless  life,  and  eat  pork,  contrary 
to  the  religion  of  the  Saracens,  and  lie  with  every  woman  they  meet, 
whether  mothers  or  sisters.    They  inhabit  great  towers,  which  they  have 
built  among  the  mountains.    The  country  is  full  of  wild  beasts,  on  which 
they  live.    Their  prince  is  very  cruel,  and  very  different  from  other 
Saracens  and  Christians,  for  he  is  accustomed  to  put  many  to  deadi 
without  reason.    He  has  several  fine  and  strong  palaces,  surrounded  by 
high  walls,  and  he  has  them  very  well  guarded,  so  that  no  one  can  enter 
them  but  at  one  gate.    In  these  palaces  he  confines  the  children  of  his 
subjects,  and  none  of  these  youths  appear  before  him,  unless  so  ordered 
by  their  masters,  who  teach  them  various  languages  and  other  things : 
they  must  obey  the  commands  of  their  prince,  believing  that  through 
him  alone  they  can  obtain  paradise,  and  not  otherwise.    When  once 
confined,  they  are  never  to  come  into  his  presence  without  his  permission, 
and  when  he  asks  them  if  they  be  willing  to  obey  his  orders  in  hopes  olf 
gaining  paradise,  they  make  him  such  answers  as  their  masters  have  taught 
them.    The  prince  then  gives  them  a  large  and  sharp  knife,  and  sends 
them  whither  he  lists  to  assassinate  those  he  hates ;  and  know  that  tbey 
will,  if  possible,  execute  this  commission,  whatever  may  happen  to  then 
in  life  or  death  " 


iL.II.  1250,  &e.]  RELIGIOUS  BELIEF  OF  THE  BEDOUIHff.  4^.1 

he  enjoyed ;  and  that,  when  Mahomet  had  made  his  great 
conquests  over  mankind,  he  quarreUed  with  and  separated 
from  Aly,  who  perceiving  the  pride  of  Mahomet,  and  that  he 
wished  to  trample  upon  him,  began  to  draw  as  many  as  he 
could  to  his  doctrines,  and  retired  to  a  part  of  the  deserts  and 
mountains  of  Egjrpt,  where  he  gave  them  a  different  creed 
fronl  that  of  Mahomet.  Those  who  support  the  religion  of 
Aly  call  those  who  follow  Mahomet  unbelievers,  as  the  Ma- 
hometans in  like  manner  style  the  Bedouins  infidels.  Each 
party,  in  this  respect,  says  the  truth,  for  in  fact  they  are  both 
unbelievers. 

One  of  the  points  of  doctrine  of  Aly  consists  in  the  belief^ 
that  when  any  one  is  killed  by  the  command  or  in  the  service 
of  his  superior,  the  soul  of  the  person  so  killed*  goes  into 
another  body  of  higher  rank,  and  enjoys  more  comforts  than 
before.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Bedouins  of  the  moun- 
tain are  ambitious  to  be  killed  in  the  service  of  their  prince, 
in  the  expectation  of  enjoying  the  above  recompense. 

Another  point  is,  that  no  man  can  die  before  his  pre- 
determined day.  This  the  Bedouins  so  firmly  believe,  that 
they  never  go  in  armour  to  battle ;  for,  if  they  did,  they 
would  think  they  were  acting  contrary  to  the  dogmas  of  their 
isihh.  When  they  swear  at  their  children,  they  usuaUy  say, 
"  Mayest  thou  be  cursed  like  him  who  arms  himself  for  fear 
of  death,"  which,  they  think,  every  one  should  be  ashamed 
of.  This  is  an  absurd  error ;  for  it  supposes  that  God,  who 
is  all-powerful,  cannot  abridge  or  lengthen  life  at  his  pleasure. 
It  is  also  false,  for  in  Him  alone  resides  omnipotency. 

While  Father  Yves  Le  Breton  was  on  his  embassy  to  the 
Old  Man  of  the  Mountain,  he  one  day  found  at  the  head  of 
the  prince's  bed  a  small  book,t  in  which  were  written  many 
of  the  excellent  words  that  our  Saviour  had  said  to  Peter 
during  his  residence  on  earth,  and  prior  to  his  passion.  Father 
Yves,  having  read  them,  said,  "  Ah  !  niy  lord !  the  frequent 
reading  of  this  book  will  do  you  much  good ;  for,  small  as  it 
may  be,  it  contains  many  excellent  things." 

*  They  had  borrowed  from  the  Arabians  the  doctrine  of  the  Metem- 
piychosis. 

t  This  prince  had,  in  this  respect,  followed  the  example  of  his  prede* 
ressors,  who  had  made  themselves  acquainted  with  the  mysteries  of  OUS 
religion,  by  reading  the  Evangelists  and  Epistles  of  St.  PaiU. 


474  JOINTILLBS  MEMOIRS  OF  SAINT  LOUIS  IX.       [_PT.  it* 

The  Old  Man  of  the  Mouutain  replied,  tnat  he  frequently 
read  it,  as  he  had  great  hXth  in  St.  Peter.  He  continned, 
"  In  the  beginning  of  the  world,  the  soul  of  Abel,  after  his 
brother  Cain  had  murdered  him,  entered  the  body  of  Noah  ; 
and  the  soul  of  Noah,  on  his  decease,  went  into  the  body 
of  Abraham ;  and  after  Abraham  it  entered  the  body  of  St. 
Peter,  who  is  now  under  the  earth." 

Father  Yves,  hearing  him  thus  talk,  argued  with  him  on 
the  absurdity  of  his  belief,  and  shewed  him  many  fair  promises 
and  commandments  of  God,  but  he  would  never  have  any 
faith  in  them.  Father  Yves  reported  to  the  king,  that  when 
the  prince  of  the  Bedouins  took  the  field,  he  was  preceded  by 
a  man  carrying  his  battle-axe,  the  handle  of  which  was 
covered  with  silver ;  and  this  handle  served  as  a  case  for  a 
number  of  sheep  knives.  The  bearer  cried  out  with  a  lond 
voice  in  his  language,  "  Turn  back  !  fly  from  before  him  who 
carries  the  deaths  of  kings  in  bis  hands." 

I  have  delayed  informing  you  of  the  answer  which  the  king 
made  to  the  ambassadors  from  Damascus.  It  was  to  this 
effect ;  that  the  king  would  send  to  the  admirals  of  Egypt  to 
know  if  they  were  willing  to  re-establish  the  truce  they  had 
promised,  but  which  they  had  already  broken,  as  has  been 
said,  and,  shoidd  they  refuse,  the  king  would  very  willingly 
join  his  forces,  and  assist  him  in  revenging  the  murder  of  his 
cousin  the  sultan  of  Babylon. 

After  this,  the  king,  during  the  time  he  was  at  Acre,  sent 
Sir  John  de  Vallance  to  the  admirals  in  Egypt,  to  require 
them  to  make  such  satisfaction  to  the  king  for  the  outrages 
they  had  committed,  contrary  to  treaty,  that  he  should  be 
contented  with  them.  This  the  admirals  promised  to  do,  but 
on  condition  that  he  would  unite  himself  with  them  against 
the  sultan  of  Damascus  before  mentioned.  To  gain  the  king's 
heart,  after  that  wise  man  Sir  John  de  Vallance  had  strongly 
remonstrated  with  and  severely  blamed  them  for  the  wrongs 
they  had  done  contrary  to  their  law,  and  for  breaking  the 
truce  they  had  solemnly  sworn  to  keep,  they  sent  to  the  king 
all  the  knights  whom  they  had  detained  in  their  prisons. 
They  likewise  sent  him  the  bones  of  the  count  "Wialter  do 
Brienne,  that  they  might  be  buried  in  consecrated  ground. 

Sir  John  de  Vallance  brought  back  with  him  200  knights, 
without  including  great  numbers  of  common  people  who  had 


Digitized  by 


A-D.  1250,  &C.]  JOIKVILLB  EQUIPS  FORTY  KNIGHTS.  475 


been  confined  in  the  Saracen  prisons.  On  his  arrival  at  Acre, 
Madame  de  Secte,  cousin-gemian  to  the  count  de  Brienne, 
received  his  bones,  and  had  them  interred  well  and  honourably 
in  the  church  of  the  Knights  Hospitallers  at  Acre.  Tho 
funeral  service  was  grand,  and  attended  by  every  knight,  who 
made  his  offering  of  a  waxen  taper  and  a  silver  penny.  The 
king  offered  a  taper,  and  a  golden  bezant  of  the  coinage  of 
Madame  de  Secte,*  which  caused  every  one  to  wonder,  for  he 
was  never  before  knowu  to  make  an  offering  of  any  coin  but 
his  own.  He  did  this,  however,  out  of  compliment  to 
Madame  de  Secte. 

Among  the  knights  whom  Sir  John  de  Yallance  had 
brought  with  him  from  Egypt,  I  was  acquainted  with  forty 
at  least,  attached  to  the  count  of  Champagne,  who  were  in  a 
most  ragged  and  dirty  condition.  These  forty  I  had  new 
dressed  at  my  own  expense,  and,  clothed  in  coats  and  sur- 
coats  of  green,  I  conducted  them  to  the  presence  of  the  king, 
and  entreated  that  he  would  detain  them  in  his  service. 

The  king,  having  heard  my  request,  made  not  a  word  of 
reply  ;  but  one  of  his  council  then  present  reproved  me,  say- 
ing, that  I  did  very  ill  to  make  such  requests  to  the  king, 
who  had  already  exceeded  the  state  of  his  income  by  7,000 
livres.  L  replied,  that  misfortunes  make  people  speak ;  for 
that  among  us  of  Champagne  we  had  lost  in  the  service  of 
the  king  at  least  five-and- thirty  knights  bannerets  of  the 
count  of  Champagne,  adding,  that  the  king  would  not  act 
properly  if  he  did  not  retain  them,  seeing  the  want  he  was  in 
of  knights.  As  I  said  this,  I  began  to  weep,  when  the  king 
appeased  me,  by  granting  what  I  had  asked  ;  he  retained  all 
the  knights,  and  added  them  to  my  battalion. 

When  the  king  had  given  audience  to  the  ambassadors 
from  the  admirals  of  Egyj)t  who  had  accompanied  Sir  John 
de  Vallance,.  and  learnt  that  they  were  impatient  to  return, 
he  told  them,  that  he  would  not  enter  into  any  negotiation 
with  them  for  a  truce  until  they  should  have  restored  all  the 
beads  of  the  Christians  which  were  hanging  on  the  walls  of 
Qua8sere,t  from  the  time  the  counts  of  Montfort  and  of  Bar 

♦  Of  the  number  of  the  great  barons  of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem, 
who  among  other  rights,  bad  that  of  coining  money,  was  the  lord  dO 
Sfljette. 

+  The  Poitiers  edition  has  Quahei'e,  and  the  lord  de  Joinville  gives  ua 


Digitized  by 


476        JOINTILLe's  HEM0IR8  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.        f  pT.  n.  ~ 

were  made  prisoners.  They  were  likewise  to  send  liim  all 
children  whom  they  had  taken  when  young,  and  had  forced 
to  deny  the  Christian  religion  and  believe  in  their  f&hh ;  and, 
beside  these  two  articles,  they  were  to  send  an  acquittance 
for  the  200,000  livres  which  were  still  owing  to  them. 

The  king  ordered  Sir  John  de  Vallance  to  return  with  the 
ambassadors,  on  account  of  his  consummate  wisdom  and 
valour,  to  announce  this  answer  to  the  admirals 

About  this  time  the  king  left  Acre,  and  went  to  Caesarea 
with  all  his  people,  and  had  the  walls  and  fortifications  of 
that  place  repaired,  which  the  Saracens  had  broken  down 
and  destroyed.  Csasarea  is  full  twelve  leagues  from  Acre, 
on  the  road  to  Jerusalem.  I  know  not  how  it  happened, 
except  by  the  will  of  God.  who  can  do  as  he  lists,  but 
during  the  year  that  the  king  stayed  at  CaBsarea  to  repair 
it,  no  attack  was  made  upon  him,  nor  harm  done  to  him, 
nor  to  the  few  men-at-arms  that  were  left  at  Acre. 

I  have  before  said  that  ambassadors  had  come  to  the 
king  from  the  great  cham  of  Tartary  during  our  resi- 
dence at  Cyprus.  They  assured  the  king  they  were  come 
to  assist  him  in  the  conquest  of  Jerusalem  from  the  Sara- 
cens. The  king  sent  them  back,  and  with  them  two  notable 
Friars  Preachers,  who  carried  as  a  present  to  the  cham  of 
Tartary  a  tent  in  the  fonn  of  a  chapel,  the  lining  of  which 
was  of  scarlet  cloth,  embroidered  over  with  the  history  of 
our  religion ;  the  Annunciation  of  the  angel  Gabriel,  the 
Nativity,  the  Baptism  of  our  Lord,  the  Passion,  the  Ascen- 
sion, and  the  Descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  king  sent 
also  chalices,  books,  ornaments,  and  every  thing  necessary 
for  saying  mass;  and,  as  I  have  since  heard  these  ambas- 
sadors tell  the  king,  they  embarked  for  the  port  of  Antioch, 
and  in  going  from  thence  to  the  place  where  the  cham  of 
Tartary  resided,  they  were  occupied  for  a  whole  year,  tra- 
velling ten  leagues  a  day.  They  found  the  country  through 
which  they  passed  subject  to  the  Tartars,  and  saw  in 
different  towns  on  their  road  large  mounds  of  bones. 

The  ambassadors  inquired  how  they  could  have  conquered 

to  understand,  further  on,  that  he  means  the  town  of  Cairo.  The  Eastern 
Chronicle  also  informs  us,  that  the  heads  of  those  slain  at  the  battle  of 
Massoura  were  brought  to  Cairo,  and  affixed  to  the  points  of  lances,  o« 
the  gate  of  Zualia,  which  is  a  suburb  of  Cairo. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1250,  ACCOUNT  OF  PRESTER  JOHN. 


477 


80  large  a  tract  of  country,  and  destroyed  such  numbers 
of  people,  whose  bones  they  had  seen  piled  up.  The  Tar- 
tars described  to  them  their  manners,  beginning  from  their 
first  origin,  saying  they  were  sprung  from  a  great  berrie,* 
in  a  plain  where  nothing  grew.  This  berrie  was  placed 
under  a  rock,  so  very  high  that  no  one  could  pass  it,  and 
pointed  toward  the  east.  The  Tartars  told  </lem,  that  between 
this,  and  other  rocks  towards  the  extremity  of  the  earth, 
were  enclosed  the  people  of  Gog  and  Magog,t  who  were 
to  attend  Antichrist  when  he  should  come,  at  the  end  of  the 
world,  to  make  a  general  destruction. 

From  this  same  berrie  came  the  Tartars  that  are  subject 
to  Prester  John{  on  the  one  side,  and  to  the  emperor  of 

*  A  flat  country.  Sanato,  1. 2,  part  4 ,  c.  28,  in  quo  habitant  Arabes, 
qui  Bedwini  vocantur,  in  beria  continue  habitantes,  sen  in  locis  campes^ 
tribus,  sub  tentoriis  mansiones  Buas  omni  tempore  facientes.''  Spelmaa 
has  tbought  that  the  word  *'  beria,"  or  "  de  berry,"  which  is  found  at 
the  termination  of  the  names  of  some  towns  in  England,  signified  **  a 
burgh  ;"  but  it  is  more  probable  they  were  thus  called  from  tiieir  being 
built  on  extensive  plains.  Matthew  Pari&  speaks  in  the  year  1174  of  the 
berry  of  St.  Edmund,  beria  S.  Edmundi,"  which  is  nothing  more 
than  the  plain  belonging  to  the  monastery  of  St.  Edmund. 

t  In  the  list  of  the  Aijubite  Caliphs,  in  the  Chronicon  Orienialet  it  is 
•aid,  that  these  people  of  Gog  and  Magog  inhabited  the  country  adjoin- 
ing China  :  **  Anno  613  fuit  irruptia  Tartarorum,  qui  colebant  planitiem 
Sinarum  contermimam,  quse  dicitur  Hagin-Magin.*'  Marco  Polo,  1.  1, 
ch.  64 :  **  Sunt  etiam  ibi  regiones  Gog  et  Magog,  quas  illi  nominant 
Lug  et  Mungug." 

X  It  was  an  ancient  error,  now  no  longer  believed,  that  the  empire  of 
Prester  John  was  the  kingdom  of  the  Abyssinians  in  Africa.  The 
kingdom  of  Prester  John  was  in  Asia,  and  meant  the  empire  of  India. 
William  of  Tripoly  relates,  that  at  the  time  of  the  capture  of  Antioch 
by  the  French  in  the  year  1098,  Coiren  Cham  was  lord  or  king  of  the 
eastern  parts  of  Asia.  After  his  death,  a  certain  Nestorian  priest  seized 
the  kingdom,  and  was  called  Priest  John.  Albericus,  in  the  year  1145, 
has  fully  spoken  of  him,  and  said  that  it  was  believed  he  was  of  the  race 
of  the  Magi  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures.  He  may,  however,  have  ad- 
vanced this  opinion,  from  what  he  had  read,  that  he  governed  the  country 
called  in  the  Scriptures  Gog  and  Magog.  In  the  year  1165,  he  says,  that 
this  prince  sent  ambassadors  to  the  emperors  of  Germany,  Manuel  and 
Frederick.  He  speaks  of  him  again  in  the  year  1170.  His  brother, 
Wth  Cham,  succeeded  him,  but  was  defeated  by  Genghis,  cham  or  king 
of  the  Tartars,  prior  to  the  year  1200,  as  Paolo  Yeneto  tells  us  in  1.  1, 
chapteis  51  and  52.  This  king  of  India  was  called  David,  and  the  son  of 
Trester  John.  The  Tartars  h-iving  subdued  the  kingdom  of  India,  and 
,  3dUed  the  king,  established  another,  who  was  of  the  race  of  Prester  John, 


Digitized  by 


478 


joinyjlle's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUlS  IX. 


Persia  on  the  other,  which  empire  was  joined  to  them  also 
by  a  narrow  tract  of  land. 

There  were  many  infidel  nations  intermixed  with  them, 
to  whom  they  were  forced  to  pay  a  yearly  tribute,  f(ir 
themselves  and  for  the  pasturage-  of  their  herds,  which  were 
their  sole  nourishment. 

The  Tartars  added,  that  this  Prester  John,  the  emperor 
of  Persia,  and  the  other  kings  to  whom  they  were  tribu- 
tary, held  them  in  great  abhorrence  and  hatred;  for  when 
they  carried  them  their  tribute,  tbey  would  not  receive  it 
in  their  presence,  but  turned  their  backs  on  them.  This 
conduct  was  the  cause  that  one  of  their  wise  men  went 
from  berrie  to  berrie,  stating  to  the  inhabitants  the  wretched 
condition  they  were  in,  and  remonstrating  on  the  base  slavery 
they  were  suffering  from  various  princes,  and  recommended 
that  they  should  take  counsel  together  on  the  best  means 
of  extricating  themselves  from  the  debasing  condition  ia 
which  they  were  now  kept.  This  wise  man  worked  so 
effectually  on  their  minds,  that  there  was  a  general  assem- 
bly appointed  at  the  berrie  nearest  to  the  lands  of  Prester 
John.  After  many  remonstrances,  this  wise  man  prevailed 
on  them  to  act  as  he  should  advise :  they  only  requested 
him  to  be  prudent  in  adopting  the  best  means  to  accom- 
plish his  purposes. 

He  told  them,  they  would  never  be  successful  until  they 
should  have  a  king  to  be  master  and  lord  over  them,  and 

and  made  him  tributary  to  them.  Vincent  de  Beauvais  says,  that  thii 
king  was  a  Christian,  and  adds,  that  Ghengis  Cham  married  his  daughter/ 
which  last  p.irt  is  confirmed  by  Thomas  de  Cantinpre  and  Sanuto.  Our 
ancient  heralds  even  go  so  far  as  to  give  for  arms,  to  Prester  John,  a 
shield  or,  with  a  cnicilix  azur,  having  on  each  side  two  thongs  of  the  same* 
There  are  some  writers  who  do  not  agree  that  this  prince,  who  was  the 
origin  of,  and  gave  his  name  to  these  kings  of  India,  was  a  priest ;  and 
they  suppose  the  error  to,  have  arisen  from  his  being  called  in  the  Persian 
language  prestegiani^  which  means  in  Latin  apostoHcus^  or  a  Christian 
orthodox  king,  and  that  in  this  quality  he  had  a  cross  borne  before  him, 
like  the  archbishops  and  primates,  to  shew  his  people  that  he  was  the 
protector  an  I  defender  of  the  Christian  religion.  This  is  the  opinion  of 
Joseph  Scaliger,  in  lib.  7,  de  Emendat.  Tempor.  and  of  some  others. 
But  it  is  not  very  certain  what  were  the  provinces  of  Asia  which  these 
princes  possessed,  whose  dominions  were  so  extensive,  that  it  was  said 
the  first  Prester  John  subjugated  and  rendered  tributary  seventy  .two 
kings. 


Digitized  by 


AJ>.  1250,  &C.]  TARTAR  MODE  OF  ELECTING  A  KIKO. 


479 


whom  they  must  obey  in  whatsoever  he  commanded.  The 
manner  in  wbich  he  proposed  they  should  elect  a  king  was 
as  follows :  of  the  fifty-two  tribes  of  which  the  Tartars 
were  composed,  each  tribe  should  bring  him  an  arrow* 
marked  with  the  name  and  seal  of  the  tribe.  This  was 
agreed  to  by  all  the  people ;  and  when  done,  the  whole 
fifty-two  arrows  were  placed  before  a  child  of  five  years 
old,  and  from  the  tribe  whose  arrow  the  child  should  pick,  the 
king  was  to'  be  chosen. 

The  child  having  taken  an  arrow,  all  the  tribes  were 
ordered  to  retire ;  and  fifty-two  men,  the  most  learned  and 
valiant,  were  selected  from  the  tribe  to  whom  the  arrow 
belonged,  among  whom  was  their  adviser;  and  each  of  them 
holding  an  arrow  apart  signed  with  his  name,  they  made 
a  child  of  five  years  old  take  one  of  these  arrows,  the 
owner  of  which  was  to  be  their  king  or  ruler.  By  accident 
the  choice  of  the  child  fell  on  the  arrow  of  him  who  had 
proposed  the  measure,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  whole  na- 
tion. Having  caused  silence  to  be  proclaimed,  he  said, — 
"  Gentlemen,  if  you  wish  that  I  should  be  your  lord, 
you  will  swear  by  Him  who  made  the  heavens  and  earth, 
that  you  will  obey  my  commands."  And  they  ail  took  the 
oath. 

After  this,  he  gave  them  many  useful  instructions,  very 
excellent  for  keeping  a  nation  in  peace  at  home.  One  of 
his  regulations  was,  that  no  one  should  seize  the  goods  of 
another  without  his  will,  nor  to  his  loss ;  and  that  no  one 
should  strike  another,  under  pain  of  his  hand  being  cut  ofi*. 
Another,  that  no  one  should  force  the  wife  or  daughter  of 
any  one,  under  penalty  of  death.  Many  other  good  laws 
did  he  promulgate  for  the  preservation  of  peace  among 
them. 

Having  given  them  these  instructions,  he  remonstrated  with 
them  on  their  ancient  enemy  Prester  John,  and  how  great 
his  hatred  was  against  them  ;  and,  in  conclusion,  said,— 

*  The  lord  de  Jomville  has  made  a  mistake  by  attributing  to  the  Tar« 
tan  the  election  of  their  king  by  the  number  of  arrows.  This  circum- 
itance  is  told  of  the  Turks  and  Turcomans  by  William  of  Tyre,  who  lived 
before  the  name  of  Tartars  was  heard  of,  in  the  first  book  and  serentl 
chapter,  and  by  Albericus  in  the  year  1059,  when  they  possessed  them' 
selves  of  the  Iwds  of  the  king  of  Persia. 


Digitized  by 


480      jotnville's  memoirs  of  saint  louis  i^.       [pt.  n. 

**  Now,  as  I  am  determined  to  attack  him,  I  order  you  all 
to  be  ready  to-morrow  to  follow  me.  Should  it  so  happen 
that  we  be  defeated,  which  God  forbid,  each  of  you  must 
do  the  best  he  can  to  save  himself.  Should  the  victory  be 
ours,  I  strictly  command  that  it  be  followed  up  with  cou-- 
rage,  should  the  combat  last  three  days  and  three  nights, 
without  any  one  daring  to  think  of  pillage,  but  all  most 
be  solely  occupied  with  destroying  and  putting  to  death 
the  enemy ;  for  when  the  victory  shall  be  completely  gained, 
I  will  so  honourably  divide  the  plunder  among  you,  that  evei^ 
one  shall  be  satisfied."  He  was  heard  with  pleasure,  and  bis 
orders  unanimously  obeyed. 

On  the  morrow,  according  to  what  had  been  proposed,  so 
did  they  act.  They  made  a  very  severe  inroad  on  their 
enemies,  and  according  to  the  will  of  God,  who  is  all- 


that  had  defensive  arms  in  his  hand.  But  those  that  wore 
a  religious  dress,  an<l  the  priests,  were  spared.  The  rest  of 
the  nation,  under  Prester  John,  who  were  not.  engaged  in 
battle,  submitted,  and  placed  themselves  under  their  dominion. 

A  wonderful  thing  happened  after  this  conquest.  A 
great  chief  of  one  of  the  tribes  before  spoken  of  was  miss- 
ing from  the  Tartars  three  days,  without  any  thing  being 
known  of  him.  On  his  return,  he  told  his  people  that  ho 
thought  he  had  been  absent  but  one  night,  and  that  he 
had  not  suffered  hunger  or  thirst.  He  related,  that  he  had 
ascended  a  marvellous  high  hill,  where  he  liad  seen  the 
handsomest  race  of  men,  uid  the  finest  dressed,  that  he 
had  ever  beheld  in  his  life.  In  the  centre  of  this  hill  a 
king  \\as  seated  on.  a  throne  of  gold,  who  was  superior  in 
beauty  and  dress  to  all  the  others :  on  his  right  and  left 
were  six  kings  richly  adorned  with  jewels,  and  with  crowns 
on  their  heads.  Near  to  him,  on  his  right,  was  a  queen 
on  her  knees,  who  begged  and  entreated  him  to  consider 
his  people.  On  his  left  a  most  beautiful  youth  knelt, 
having  two  wings  as  brilliant  as  the  sun ;  and  around  the 
king  were  great  numbers  of  handsome  winged  attendants. 

The  king  called  him  to  him,  and  said,  "Thou  art  come 
from  the  host  of  the  Tartars."  "  Sire,"  replied  I,  I  am." 
"Thou  wilt  return  thither  and  tell  the  cham  of  Tartary 
that  thou  hast  seen  me,  who  am  the  Lord  of  heaven  and 


powerful,  they  defeated 


every  one 


Digitized  by 


A.P.  1250,  8ce,2        CHAM  of  tartary  baptized.  481 

earth;  and  that  I  order  him  to  render  me  thanks  and 
praise  for  the  victory  I  have  granted  him  oyer  Preeter 
John  and  his  nation ;  and  thon  wilt  tell  him  from  me, 
that  I  give  him  power  to  sahdoe  the  whole  earth."  **  Sire,** 
answered  the  chief,  "  bow  will  the  cham  of  Tartary  belieye 
me?"  "Thou  wilt  tell  him  he  shall  believe  in  thee  from 
the  following  circumstance ;  that  thou  shalt  go  and  combat 
the  emperor  of  Persia  with  three  hundred  of  thy  men, 
and  that,  through  me,  thou  shalt  vanquish  the  emperor  of 
Persia,  although  he  will  advance  to  combat  thee  with  three 
hundred  thousand  men-at-arms  and  upwards.  But  before 
thou  thinkest  of  fighting  with  the  emperor  of  Persia,  thou 
wilt  demand,  of  the  cham  of  Tartary,  that  he  give  up  to 
thee  all  priests,  the  monks^  and  the  commonalty  who  have 
remained  of  those  taken  in  the  battle  with  Prester  John ; 
and  thou  wilt  believe  all  they  shall  say  and  show  to  thee, 
for  they  are  my  people  and  my  servants."  "  Sire,"  replied 
the  Tartar  chief,  "I  shall  never  find  my  way,  unless  you 
cause  me  to  be  conducted."  The  king,  on  this,  turned 
round,  and  said,  ^'Come  hither,  George;  go  and  conduct 
this  man  to  his  quarters,  and  let  him  be  restored  safe ;" 
and  instantly  this  chief  was  transported  among  the  Tartars. 

On  his  return,  all  the  host  of  the  Tartairs  came  to  see  him, 
and  made  him  good  cheer.  He  very  soon  demanded  the 
priests  and  monks  from  the  cham  of  Tartary,  according  to 
the  instructions  he  had  received  from  the  king  on  the  mount, 
who  were  granted  to  him.  This  prince  of  the  Tartars  received 
Very  kindly  the  doctrines  they  taught,  and  all  his  people 
were  baptized.  When  this  ceremony  was  over,  he  selected 
800,  made  them  confess  themselves  and  get  ready,  and  thence 
marehed  to  attack  the  emperor  of  Persia,  whom  he  defeated, 
and  drove  out  of  his  kingdom  and  possessions.  He  fled  as 
far  as  Jerusalem ;  and  it  was  he  who  vanquished  our  people, 
and  made  the  coimt  Grautier  de  Brienne  prisoner,  as  you 
shall  hear  related.  The  subjects  of  this  Christian  prince 
increased  so  much,  according  to  the  information  I  had  from 
those  whom  the  king  had  sent  as  ambassadors  to  Tartary, 
that  they  counted  in  his  army  800  chapels  on  wheels. 

But  let  us  now  return  to  my  principal  subject.  During 
the  time  the  king  was  fortifying  CsBsarea,  as  I  have  before 
noticed,  there  came  to  him  a  knight  called  Sir  Elenai's  de 

St 


Digitized  by 


482 


JOINTILLE's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX. 


Cpt.  II, 


Sevingaan,  who  said  he  had  set  out  from  Uie  kingdom  of 
Norone,  where  he  had  emharked,  and  coasting  Spain,  had 
passed  the  Straits  of  Morocco ;  and  that  he  had  run  great 
hazards  and  suffered  much  evil  hefore  he  could  come  to  us. 
The  king  retained  this  knight,  with  ten  others  of  his  com- 
panions. I  heard  him  say,  that  the  nights  in  the  land  of 
Norone,  during  the  summer,  were  so  short,  that  you  could 
see  in  the  latest  part  of  them.  When  this  knight  became 
acquainted  with  the  country,  he  and  his  people  began  to  hunt 
the  lions,  many  of  which  they  took,  but  not  witiiout  much 
bodily  danger. 

Their  manner  of  hunting  was  on  horseback ;  and  when 
they  found  a  lion,  they  shot  at  him  at  a  proper  distance  from 
their  bow  or  cross-bow.  On  the  lion  being  wounded,  he  ran 
at  the  first  he  saw,  who  instantly  spurred  his  horse  to  a  full 
gallop,  dropping  as  he  fled  some  piece  of  old  cloth  or  coverlid, 
which  the  lion  seized  and  tore  to  pieces,  imagining  it  was  the 
man  he  was  in  pursuit  of.  As  the  lion  was  employed  in  tearing 
the  cloth,  others  advanced  and  shot  at  him,  which  made  him 
again  pursue  them :  they  kept  dropping  old  cloths,  and  shoot* 
ing  at  him  alternately,  until  they  killed  him.  Thus  did  they 
destroy  many  lions. 

Another  most  noble  knight  came  to  the  king  when  he  was 
at  CsBsarea,  who  said  he  was  of  the  house  of  Coucy.  The  king 
said,  he  was  his  cousin  by  his  descent  from  one  of  the  edsters  of 
King  Philip,  who  had  been  married  to  the  emperor  of  Con- 
stantinople. The  king  retained  this  knight,  and  nine  others, 
for  one  year ;  on  the  expiration  of  which,  he  returned  to  Con-» 
stantinople,  whence  he  had  come.  While  he  was  with  us,  I 
heard  him  tell  the  king,  that  the  emperor  of  Constantinople 
had  once  formed  an  alliance  with  the  king  of  the  Commalns^ 
to  have  their  assistance  to  conquer  the  emperor  of  Greece^ 
whose  name  was  Yataiche ;  and  he  added,  that  the  king  of 
the  Commains,  to  have  greater  faith  in  the  professions  of  the 
emperor  of  Constantinople,  caused  him  and  their  people  on 
both  sides  to  be  blooded,  and  made  each  drink  alternately  of 
the  other's  blood,  in  sign  of  brotherhood,  saying  they  were 
now  brothers  of  the  same  blood.  It  was  thus  we  were  forced 
to  do  with  this  knight  and  his  companions ;  and  our  blood, 
being  mixed  with  wine,  was  drunk  by  each  party,  as  consti- 
tuting us  all  brothers  of  the  same  blood. 


Digitized  by 


JLD.  1250,  JOtNVtLLE  TIBIT8  THE  KING  AT  CiBSAREA  483 

They  perfonned  another  ceremony,  by  driving  a  dog  be- 
tween them  and  us,  as  we  were  divided  into  two  bodies,  and 
then  cutting  him  to  pieces  with  their  swords,  saying,  Let 
those  be  thus  mangled  who  shall  (aH  in  their  engagements 
to  each  other." 

Another  wonderful  story  this  knight  of  Coucy  told  the 
king.  He  said,  that  in  the  country  of  the  Commains,  when 
a  great  and  powerful  prince  died,  on  his  decease  an  immense 
grave  was  made,  and  the  dead  person,  most  richly  adorned, 
was  seated  in  a  magnificent  chair  within  the  grave,  and  the 
finest  horse  he  had  possessed,  together  with  one  of  his  officers, 
were  let  down  alive  in  the  grave.  The  officer,  before  he 
descended,  took  leave  of  the  king  and  the  other  great  person- 
ages present,  when  the  king  gave  to  him  a  large  quantity  of 
gold  and  silver  coin,  which  he  placed  in  a  scarf  round  his 
neck,  the  king  making  him  promise  that  on  his  arrival  in  the 
other  world  he  would  restore  to  him  his  money,  which  he 
faithfully  engaged  to  do.  After  this,  the  king  gave  him  a 
letter  addressed  to  the  first  of  their  monarchs,  in  which  he 
told  him,  that  the  bearer  of  it  had  well  and  faithfully  served 
him,  and  on  that  account  entreated  he  would  properly  reward 
him.  When  this  was  done,  the  grave  was  filled  up  over  the 
corpse,  the  living  officer,  and  the  horse,  and  covered  with 
planks  well  nailed  together.  Before  night  there  was  a  con- 
siderable mound  of  stones  piled  over  the  grave,  in  memory  of 
those  whom  they  had  interred. 

When  it  was  near  Easter  I  left  Acre,  and  went  to  visit  the 
king  at  CsBsarea,  where  he  was  employed  in  fortifying  and 
enclosing  it.  On  my  arrival,  I  found  him  in  conversation 
with  the  legate,  who  had  never  left  him  during  this  expedition 
to  the  Holy  Laud.  On  seeing  me,  he  quitted  the  legate,  and 
coming  to  me,  said,  "Lord  de  Joinville,  is  it  really  true  that 
I  have  only  retained  you  until  this  ensuing  Easter  ?  Should 
it  be  so,  I  beg  you  will  tell  me  how  much  I  shall  give  you 
from  this  Easter  to  that  of  this  time  twelve  months." 

I  replied,  that  I  was  not  come  to  him  to  make  such  a  bar- 
gain, and  that  I  would  not  take  more  of  his  money ;  but  I 
would  ofier  other  terms,  which  were,  that  he  should  promise 
never  to  fiy  into  a  passion  for  any  thing  I  should  say  to  him, 
which  was  often  the  case,  and  I  engag^  that  I  would  keep 
my  temper  whenever  he  refused  wh&i  I  should  ask. 


48 i        JOINTILLE's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  DC.         f  PT.  II. 

When  be  heard  my  tenus,  he  burst  into  laughter,  and  said 
that  he  retained  me  accordingly ;  then,  taking  me  by  the 
hand,  he  led  me  before  the  legate  to  his  council,  and  repeatod 
the  convention  that  had  been  agreed  to  between  us.  Every 
one  was  joyous  on  hearing  it,  and  consequently  I  remained. 

I  will  now  speak  of  the  acts  of  justice,  and  the  sentences  of 
the  king,  which  I  witnessed  during  his  stay  at  CsBsarea. 
The  first  was  on  a  knight  who  had  been  caught  in  a  house  of 
ill  fame :  he  gave  him  the  alternative,*  that  the  prostitute 
with  whom  he  had  been  found  should  lead  him  in  his  shirt 
through  the  army,  with  a  cord  tied  to  his  private  parts,  one 
end  of  which  cord  the  prostitute  was  to  hold ;  or,  should  he 
not  like  this,  he  should  forfeit  his  horse,  armour,  and  accoutre* 
ments,  and  be  driven  from  and  banished  the  king's  army.  The 
knight  preferred  the  loss  of  his  horse  and  arms,  and  banish- 
ment from  the  army.  When  I  saw  the  horse  was  forfeited, 
I  requested  to  have  him  for  one  of  my  knights  who  was  a 
poor  gentleman  ;  but  the  king  said  my  request  was  unreason- 
able, for  that  the  horse  was  well  worth  from  fourscore  to  a 
hundred  livres,  which  was  no  small  sum.  I  answered,  "  Sire, 
you  have  broken  our  convention  in  thus  replying  to  my 
request."  The  king  laughed,  and  said,  "  Lord  de  Joinville, 
you  majr  say  what  you  please,  but  you  shall  not  put  me 
m  a  passion  the  sooner."  However,  I  did  not  get  the  horse 
for  my  poor  gentleman. 

The  second  act  of  justice  I  witnessed  was  on  some  of  my 
knights  who,  one  day,  had  gone  to  hunt  the  animal  called  an 
antelope,  which  is  something  like  a  roe-buck.  The  Knights 
Hospitallers  had  sallied  out  to  meet  my  knights,  fought  with 
them,  and  did  them  much  mischief,  for  which  outrage  I  went 
to  lay  my  complaints  before  their  commander,  taking  with 
me  those  of  my  knights  who  had  been  wounded.  The  com- 
mander, having  heard  my  accusation,  promised  to  do  me 
justice,  according  to  the  rules  and  customs  of  the  Holy  Land, 
which  were,  to  make  the  brethren  who  had  been  guilty  of  this 

*  Matthew  of  Westminster  relates,  in  the  year  1253,  another  instanoe 
of  the  severity  of  St.  Louis  in  the  punishment  of  knights  found  guilty  of 
crimes.  He  tells  us,  that  the  king  having  ordered  a  knight  to  be  hanged, 
the  father  was  so  outrageous  at  it,  that  he  retired  to  the  Saraoent ,  aniU 
changing  his  religion,  embraced  that  of  Mahomet. 


A*D.  1250,  INSTANCES  OF  THE  KINGS  lUSTIOB. 


485 


outrage,  eat  upon  tbeir  cloaks,  in  the  presence  of  those  who  had 
been  ill-used,  who  should  afterwards  cany  away  their  cloaks* 

The  commander  did  indeed  make  the  guilty  eat  on  their 
doaks  before  me  and  some  of  mj  knights,  but  when  we 
demanded  of  the  conmiander  that  thej  should  rise  up,  he 
wanted  to  refuse ;  however,  he  was  forced  to  it  at  last ;  for  we 
seated  ourselves  to  eat  with  the  brethren,  which  thej  would 
not  suffer,  and  thej  were  obliged  to  rise  with  us  to  eat  with 
the  other  brethren  at  table,  leaying  us  their  cloaks. 

Another  act  of  justice  was  on  a  king's  Serjeant  called 
Goullu,  who  laid  his  hands  on  one  of  my  knights,  and  rudely 
pushed  him.  I  went  to  complain  of  <his  to  the  king,  who 
told  me  I  might  as  well  be  quiet,  since  the  Serjeant  had  only 
pushed  the  knight.  But  I  replied,  that  I  would  not  be  quiet, 
and  would  quit  his  service  unless  justice  were  done  me ;  for 
that  it  was  highly  indecent  for  any  Serjeant  to  lay  his  hands 
on  a  knight.  The  king,  hearing  this,  did  me  the  usual  jus- 
tice, which  was,  that,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  country, 
the  Serjeant  should  come  to  my  lodgings,  barefooted,  and  in 
his  shirt,  with  a  sword  hanging  on  his  wrist,  when,  having 
knelt  before  the  knight  whom  he  bad  injured,  he  was  to  offer 
the  sword  by  the  hilt,  and  say  to  him,—"  Sir  knight,  I  crave 
your  mercy  for  having  laid  hands  on  you,  and  have  brought  this 
sword,  which  I  now  offer  to  you  for  you  to  cut  off  my  hand, 
if  it  shall  so  please  you."  I  then  entreated  the  knight  to 
pardon  him,  which  he  did.  Several  other  judgments  I  wit- 
nessed, that  were  executed  according  to  the  rites  and  cus- 
toms of  the  Holy  Land. 

You  have  before  heard  how  the  king  had  sent  to  inform 
tiie  admirals  of  Egypt,  that  unless  they  made  him  satisfaction 
for  the  outrages  they  had  committed,  be  would  not  abide  by 
any  truce  that  had  been  made  with  them.  Ambassadors,  in 
consequence,  had  arrived  from  the  admirals,  with  letters,  to 
assure  the  king  that  they  would  do  all  he  had  desired. 

A  day  was  appointed  for  the  king  and  these  ambassadors 
to  meet  at  Jaffa,  when  they  were  to  promise  the  king,  on  theii 
oaths,  that  they  would  surrender  Jerusalem  up  to  him.  In 
return,  the  king  and  his  nobles  were  to  swear,  on  their  part, 
to  aid  and  assist  the  admirals  against  the  sultan  of  Damascus. 
It  happened,  that  on  the  sultan  of  Damascus  hearing  that  we 


Digitized  by 


486         J0INTILLE8  MEMOIRS  OF  SAINT  LOUllB  GC        £pT  ttm 


were  become  the  allies  of  his  enemies  in  Egjpt,  and  that  a 
day  was  appointed  for  the  ratification  of  the  treaties  at  Jaffa, 
he  sent  upwards  of  20,000  Turks  to  guard  the  passes ;  but 
this  did  not  prevent  the  king  from  putting  himself  in  motion 
to  march  to  Jaffa. 

When  the  count  of  Jaffa  learnt  that  the  king  was  comings 
he  put  his  castle  into  such  a  good  state,  that  it  resembled  a 
well-defended  town :  at  each  bulwark  of  his  castle  were 
posted  500  men,  each  with  a  target  and  penoncel  with  hia 
arms.  It  was  a  beautiful  sight  to  see ;  for  his  arms  were  of 
fine  gold,  with  a  cross-pat6e  gules,  richly  worked. 

We  encamped  on  the  plain,  near  to  this  castle  of  Ja&, 
which  was  situated  on  an  island  near  the  sea-shore ;  and  the 
king  began  to  fortify  and  enclose  a  village  adjacent  to  the 
castle,  wherever  the  shore  would  permit  it  The  king,  by 
way  of  encouraging  his  workmen,  said  to  them,  *'  I  have  more 
than  once  carried  the  hod  myself  to  gain  a  pardon."  The 
admirals  of  Egypt  were  afraid  to  advance,  on  account  of  the 
passes  being  so  well  guarded  by  the  sultan  of  Damascus : 
however,  they  sent  to  the  king  all  the  heads  of  the  Christians 
that  had  been  exposed  on  the  walls  of  Cairo,  in  compliance 
with  the  demand  which  he  had  made  for  them.  Those  heads 
he  caused  to  be  buried  in  consecrated  ground.  They  likewise 
sent  him  all  the  children  they  had  detained,  and  whom  they 
had  forced  to  abjure  their  foith  to  God,  together  with  an  ele- 
phant, which  last  the  king  had  transported  to  France. 

As  the  king  and  his  whole  army  were  lying  before  Jafifi^ 
fortifying  themselves  against  those  in  the  castle,  news  was 
brought  the  king  that  the  army  of  the  sultan  of  Damascus 
had  taken  the  field,  and  was  in  ambush  waiiiUg  to  attack 
him ;  and  that  one  of  their  admirals  had  advanced  to  reap 
and  despoil  the  com  of  a  Karet,  within  three  leagues  of  the 
army.  The  king  instantly  sent  thither  to  reconnoitre,  and 
followed  in  person ;  but  the  admiral  no  sooner  saw  us  appear 
than  he  took  to  flight,  pursued  by  some  of  our  men  full 
gallop.  A  young  gentleman  of  our  army  came  up  with  them, 
and  gallantly  unhorsed  two  Turks  with  the  point  of  his  lance, 
without  breaking  it.  The  admiral  perceiving  that  this  gehUe  - 
man  was  alone,  turned  about,  but  he  received  such  a  stroke 
from  him  with  his  spear  as  wounded  him  desperately  in  the 
body,  when  the  young  man  returned  to  the  army. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1253.]|    ARRITAL  OF  TUB  KINO  AT  JAFFA. 


487 


The  admirals  of  Egypt,  learning  that  the  king  and  hia 
army  were  at  Jaffa,  sent  other  ambassadors  to  him,  to  appoint 
a  day  when  they  would  meet  him  without  fail.  The  king 
haying  fixed  on  a  day,  they  promised  faithfully  to  be  punctual 
in  concluding  all  the  different  businesses  that  were  in  agita- 
tiou.  While  we  were  waiting  for  this  day  of  meeting  with 
the  admirals  from  Egypt,  the  count  d'Eu  came  to  the  king 
bringing  with  him  the  good  knight  Amokl  de  Guyn^  and 
his  two  brothers,  whom,  with  eight  other  knights,  the  king 
retained  in  his  senrice,  and  created  the  count  d'Eu  a  knight, 
who  was  at  that  time  but  a  rery  youth. 

At  the  same  time,  the  prince  of  Antioch  and  his  mother 
waited  on  the  king,  to  whom  he  paid  much  respect,  and 
received  them  with  e^ery  honout.  The  king  made  the  prince 
of  Antioch  a  knight,  though  but  sixteen  years  old ;  but  I 
never  saw,  at  that  age,  so  discreet  a  youth.  When  he  was 
knitted,  he  requested  the  king  to  allow  him  and  his  mother 
a  private  audience,  which  being  granted,  he  spoke  as  follows : 

Sire,  it  is  very  true  that  my  mother  here  present  keeps  me 
in  ward,  and  has  the  power  of  so  doing  for  four  years  to 
come,*  by  which  she  has  the  enjoyment  of  all  things,  and  I 
have  nothing.  I  think,  however,  that  she  ought  not  to  suffer 
my  lands  to  be  wasted ;  and  this  I  say  because  my  city  of 
Antioch  is  falling  to  ruin  in  her  hands.  I  therefore  suppli- 
cate you,  sire,  to  remonstrate  with  her  on  this  matter,  and  to 
prevail  on  her  to  allow  me  money  and  men  that  I  may  suc- 
cour my  people  who  are  in  that  city,  as  she  is  bounden  in 
justice  to  do." 

When  the  king  had  heard  the  prince's  demand,  here  mon- 
strated  so  effectually  with  his  mother  that  she  complied  with 
his  wishes,  and  the  prince  returned  to  Antioch,  where  he  did 
wonders.  From  that  time,  in  honour  to  the  king,  he  quar- 
tered his  arms,  which  are  gules  with  the  arms  of  France. 

*  Whence  it  may  be  inferred,  that  in  the  principality  of  Antiodi,  at 
least  in  regard  to  prmces,  the  same  costom  was  followed  that  was  uni- 
versal through  France,  which  fixed  the  age  of  majority,  and  the  period 
judged  proper  for  the  uncontrolled  management  of  estates,  and  the  hold- 
ing of  fiefs,  at  twenty-one  years.  Elsewhere,  accordin|[  to  the  Assizes  of 
Jerusalem,  the  age  of  majority  for  males  was  fifteen  yeam,  and  for  females 
twelve  years  complete.  Neither  could  hold  fiefis  until  they  had  attained 
these  years,  and  during  their  minority  their  guardian  or  tutor  managed 
their  estates. 


488      joinyille's  memoirs  op  saint  LOUIS  IX.      I^PT.  n. 

As  it  is  very  praiseworthy  and  pleasant  to  relate,  in  order 
that  they  may  be  known,  the  deeds  and  virtnes  of  any  excel- 
lent prince,  we  will  here  speak  of  the  good  count  of  Ja&y 
Sir  Gantier  de  Brienne.  He  performed  in  his  lifetime  most 
gallant  deeds  of  chivalry,  and  kept  possession  of  his  county  of 
Jaffa  for  many  year0,  although  continually  attacked  by  the 
Egyptians,  and  without  enjoying  any  reyenues  but  what  he 
gained  in  his  excursions  against  the  Saracens  and  other  eno^ 
mies  of  the  Christian  faith. 

He  once  defeated  a  large  body  of  infidels,  who  were  trans- 
porting many  bales  of  different  sorts  of  silken  cloths,  which 
haying  taken  and  brought  home,  he  divided  the  whole  among 
his  knights,  without  keeping  any  part  for  himself.  His  way 
of  life  was,  after  parting  with  his  knights  in  the  evening,  to 
enter  his  chapel,  where  he  was  long  employed  in  prayer  and 
thanksgiving  to  his  God.  He  afterwards  went  to  bed  to  his  wife, 
who  was  a  wondrous  good  lady,  and  sister  to  the  king  of  Cyprus. 

You  haye  before  heard  of  the  Tartar  prince  haying,  through 
the  aid  of  God,  defeated  the  emperor  of  Persia  and  his  army 
of  300,000  men,  with  only  300,  and  afterwards  driying  him 
out  of  his  kingdom.  We  now  know  the  road  that  this  em- 
peror of  Persia,  whose  name  was  Barbaquan,  took.  He  fled 
to  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem,  and  on  his  arrival  did  great 
damage  to  it ;  for  he  took  the  castle  of  Tabarie,  that  belonged 
to  Sir  Eudes  de  Montbeliar,  and  put  to  death  as  many  of 
our  people  as  he  could  find  in  the  hospitia  without  Acre^ 
and  without  Jaffa.  After  domg  as  much  mischief  as  he  could, 
he  marched  toward  Babylon,  to  receive  succours  from  the 
sultan  of  Babylon,  who  was  to  join  his  forces  and  attack  us. 
Upon  this,  the  barons  of  the  country  assembled  with  the 
patriarchs,  and  determined  to  offer  combat  to  the  emperor 
before  he  should  form  his  junction  with  the  sultan  of  Babylon. 
They  sent  to  the  sultan  of  La  Chamelle  for  his  assistance, 
who  was  one  of  the  best  and  most  loyal  knights  in  all  pagan 
land.  He  came  to  them,  and  was  most  hononrably  received 
at  Acre,  which  they  left  together,  and  sat  down  before  Jaffa. 

When  this  army  arriyed  at  Jaffa,  the  chiefs  entreated  the 
count  Gautier  to  join  them,  and  march  against  the  emperor 
of  Persia.  He  replied,  that  he  would  cheerfully  do  so  if 
the  patriarch  would  absolve  him  from  an  excommunication 
which  he  had  lately  denounced  against  him,  because  he  would 


Digitized  by 


1253.]  THE  PRENCn  DEFEATED  BY  THE  PERSIANS.  4B9 


not  surrender  a  tower  of  his  oastle  of  Jaffa  called  the  Tower  of 
the  Patriarch,  and  which  the  patriarch  claimed  as  helonging  to 
him.  The  patriarch  would  not  absolve  him:  nevertheless,  the 
count  did  not  fail  to  accompany  us.  The  army  was  divided  into 
three  battalions :  the  first  was  given  to  Count  Gautier,  the 
second  to  the  sultan  of  La  Chamelle,  and  the  third  to  the 
patriarch  and  barons  of  the  country.  In  the  battalion  of  Sir 
Chiutier  were  the  Knights  Hospitallers. 

When  these  three  battalions  had  been  properly  arrayed, 
they  moved  forward,  and  advanced  within  sight  of  the  enemy; 
who,  on  noticing  their  approach,  formed  their  army  likewise 
into  three  divisions.  Count  Gautier  de  Brienne,  observing 
this  manoeuvre,  cried  out,  My  lords,  what  are  we  about  ? 
We  allow  our  enemies  time  to  draw  up  their  men  in  arrays 
and  increase  their  courage  by  seeing  us  thus  remain  inactive. 
I  beg  of  you,  in  the  name  of  God,  instantly  to  charge  them." 
But  not  one  would  pay  him  the  least  attention,  or  advance. 
He  then  went  up  to  the  patriarch,  and  again  demanded  abso* 
lution,  but  it  was  refused  him. 

With  the  count  was  a  most  learned  man,  the  bishop  of 
Ranid,  who  had  done  many  gallant  deeds  of  chivalry  in 
company  with  the  count.  The  bishop  said  to  him,  Do  not 
let  your  conscience  be  uneasy  at  this  excommunication  of  the 
patriarch,  for  he  is  very  much  in  the  wrong ;  and,  from  the 
powers  I  possess,  I  absolve  you  from  it,  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  Amen."  He  then  added, 
^  Come  now,  let  us  charge  the  enemy."  Sticking  spurs  into 
their  horses,  they  fell  on  the  battalion  of  the  emperor  of 
Persia  that  formed  the  rear,  but  it  was  too  numerous  for  those 
who  had  followed  the  count.  Very  many  were  slain  on  each 
side  :  notwithstanding  this,  the  count  was  made  prisoner,  for 
his  battalion  most  shamefully  fied,  and  several,  from  despair, 
threw  themselves  into  the  sea.  One  cause  of  this  despair  was 
owing  to  a  battalion  of  the  emperor  of  Persia  falling  on  that 
of  the  sultan  of  La  Chamelle,  who  fought  and  defendetl  him- 
self with  such  great  valour,  although  he  was  much  weaker  in 
numbers  than  the  enemy,  that  out  of  2,000  men  there  did 
not  remain  more  than  fourscore,  so  that  he  was  forced  to  make 
his  retreat  to  the  castle  of  La  Chamelle. 

The  emperor  of  Persia,  concluding  that  his  victory  was 
complete,  resolved  to  besiege  the  sultan  in  his  castle  of  La 


Digitized  by 


490       ^oinville's  memotrs  op  saint  LOUIS  IX.       fpT.  II* 

Chamelle.  But  the  sultan,  observiug  bis  approach,  like  a 
wary  soldier,  assembled  his  garrison,  and  said,  "  Gentlemen, 
if  we  allow  ourselves  to  be  besieged  we  are  undone :  it  will 
be  better  therefore  that  we  attack  them."  In  consequence, 
he  ordered  out  a  party,  badly  armed,  to  march  in  the  hollow 
of  a  valley,  and  to  fall  on  the  rear  of  the  enemy.  This  was 
executed,  and  a  great  slaughter  made  of  women  and  children. 
The  emperor  hearing  a  sudden  noise  in  his  rear,  as  he  was 
advancing  near  the  castle,  turned  about,  with  the  intent  to 
put  a  stop  to  it,  but  this  was  no  sooner  done,  than  the  saltan 
made  a  sally  with  his  whole  garrison,  and  fought  them  so 
desperately,  that  the  emperor's  army,  which  at  first  con- 
sisted of  25,000  men,  being  attacked  in  front  and  rear,  was 
defeated,  and  not  one  man  or  woman  escaped  being  put  to 
death. 

You  must  know,  that  the  emperor  of  Persia,  before  he 
marched  to  lay  siege  to  the  castle  of  La  Chamelle,  had  car<* 
ried  the  good  count  of  Jafi^  Sir  Gautier  de  Brienne,  before 
the  city  of  JaiSa,  and  had  him  hung  by  the  arms  to  a  gallows 
that  was  in  front  of  the  castle,  declaring  publicly  that  he 
^ould  never  take  down  their  count  until  they  should  have 
surrendered  to  him  the  castle.  As  the  poor  count  was  thus 
suspended,  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  his  people  never  to 
surrender  the  castle  for  any  thing  they  might  see  done  to 
him ;  for  should  they  so  do.  the  emperor  would  put  them  all 
to  the  sword. 

The  emperor,  perceiving  he  could  not  gain  any  thing  more, 
sent  Count  Gautier  to  the  sultan  of  Babylon  as  a  present^ 
with  the  commander  of  the  Knights  Hospitallers,  and  many 
other  noble  personages  whom  he  had  made  prisoners.  He 
ordered  300  of  his  knights  to  escort  Count  Gautier  and  the 
other  prisoners  as  far  as  Babylon,  which  turned  out  for- 
tunately  for  them ;  since  by  this  they  avoided  being  included 
in  the  butchery  of  the  emperor  of  Persia  and  his  army  before 
the  castle  of  La  Chamelle,  as  has  been  before  told. 

When  the  merchants  of  Babylon  heard  that  their  sultwi 
detained  Count  Guutier  in  his  prisons,  they  assembled,  and 
made  a  clamorous  petition  to  the  sultan,  that  he  would 
execute  the  count  of  Jaffa,  for  that  he  had  destroyed  several 
of  their  companions,  and  had  frequently  done  them  much 
mischief.     In  compliance  with  their  request,  the  sultan 


Digitized  by 


A.n.  1253.]  SUDDEN  ATTACK  OP  THE  SARACENS. 


49  i 


ordered  the  body  of  Count  Gautier  to  be  delivered  to  thein, 
in  order  that  they  might  take  their  own  revenge  on  him. 
These  traitorous  dogs  entered  the  prison  of  the  count  and 
cut  him  into  pieces,  making  him  thus  suffer  martyrdom,  for 
which  we  may  imagine  be  is  now  glorious  in  paradise. 

But  to  return  to  tbe  sultan  of  Damascus.  He  withdrew 
the  men  he  had  at  Gadres,  and,  entering  Egypt,  made  an 
attack  on  the  admirals.  By  the  fortune  of  war,  one  of 
liis  battalions  defeated  one  of  the  admirals,  and  in  another 
instance  tbe  chance  was  just  the  reverse.  On  this  account,  tlio 
Bultan  of  Damascus  returned  to  Gudres,  very  badly  wounded  in 
the  bead  and  other  places.  While  be  stayed  there,  tbe  admiral 
sent  him  ambassadors,  who  made  a  peace  between  them,  so 
that  we  seemed  a  subject  of  mockery  to  both  sides ;  for,  from 
that  time  forward,  we  enjoyed  neither  peace  nor  truce  from 
the  sultan,  nor  from  tbe  admirals.  You  must  know,  that  we 
could  never  muster  in  our  army  more  than  about  1,400  men- 
at-arms  fit  for  service. 

As  soon  as  the  sultan  of  Damascus  bad  concluded  a  peace 
with  the  admirals  of  Egypt,  he  collected  all  bis  men  from 
Gadres,  and  marched  bis  whole  army,  amounting  to  20,000 
Saracens  and  10,000  Bedouins,  within  sight  of  us.  They 
passed  within  two  leagues,  but  never  made  any  attack.  The 
king,  the  master  of  bis  artillery,  and  tbe  whole  army  were 
on  the  watch  for  three  days,  lest  they  should  attempt  to 
fall  on  us  when  we  were  unprepared. 

On  St.  John's  day,  next  after  Easter,  while  the  king  was 
at  sermon,  one  of  the  men  attached  to  the  master  of  the 
artillery  entered  the  king's  chapel  armed  and  told  him  that 
tbe  Saracens  had  surrounded  the  master  of  the  cross-bows 
in  tbe  plain.  I  instantly  requested  of  tbe  king  permission 
to  go  thither,  to  which  he  consented,  and  gave  me  500  men- 
at-arms,  whom  he  named.  As  soon  as  we  were  without  the 
camp,  and  were  perceived  by  the  Saracens  who  were  pressing 
round  tbe  master  of  tbe  cross-bows,  they  retreated  to  an 
admiral  that  was  posted  on  a  small  hillock  with  at  least 
1,000  men.  The  battle  now  began  between  the  Saracens  and 
the  company  of  the  master  of  the  cross-bows;  and  as  the 
admiral  saw  his  men  fail,  he  sent  thither  fresh  reinforcements, 
in  like  manner  did  the  master  of  the  cross-bows  to  his  men* 
While  they  were  thus  fighting,  the  legate  and  tbe  baron.s  of 


Digitized  by 


4D2      joinyillb's  memoirs  of  saikt  louib  ix.       fi^.  tu 


the  country  told  the  king,  it  was  great  madness  to  allow  me 
to  take  the  field ;  and  he  thereon  sent  to  order  me  back,  to- 
gether with  the  master  of  the  cross-bows. 

The  Turks  now  retired,  and  we  returned  to  the  army ;  but 
many  were  much  surprised  that  the  Turks  let  us  return 
quietly  witliout  an  attack,  and  accounted  for  it  by  saying, 
that  their  horses  were  almost  starved  by  haying  remained  a 
whole  year  at  (^l^adres. 

Some  other  Turks,  who  had  left  Jaffa,  came  to  Acre,  and 
sent  to  inform  the  lord  d'Asur,  who  was  constable  of  Jeru- 
salem, that  if  he  did  not  send  them  50,000  besants,  they 
would  destroy  the  gardens  round  the  town.  The  lord  d'Asur 
made  answer,  that  he  would  give  them  nothing.  Upon  this, 
they  drew  up  their  battalions,  and  advanced  sdong  the  sands 
so  near  to  the  town  of  Acre  as  to  be  within  cross-bow  shot. 
The  lord  d'Asur  then  quitted  the  town  and  marched  to  the 
mount,  where  was  the  church-yard  of  St.  Nicholas,  to  defend 
the  gardens ;  and  when  the  Turks  approached,  a  body  of 
foot  sallied  out  of  Acre,  and  kept  up  a  brisk  discharge  of 
arrows  against  them  ;  but  for  fear  of  the  dangers  they  might 
incur,  the  lord  d'Asur  sent  them  orders  by  a  young  knight 
from  Genoa  to  retire  within  the  walls. 

As  the  Genoese  knight  was  retiring  with  his  body  of 
infia.ntry,  a  Saracen,  suddenly  moved  by  his  courage,  came 
boldly  up  to  him,  and  said* in  his  Saracenic  tongue,  that  if 
he  pleased,  he  would  tilt  with  him.  The  knight  answered 
with  pride  that  he  would  receive  him ;  but,  when  he  was  on 
the  point  of  beginning  his  course,  he  perceived  on  his  left 
hand  eight  or  nine  Saracens,  who  had  halted  there  to  see  the 
event  of  the  tournament.  The  knight,  therefore,  instead  of 
directing  his  course  toward  the  Saracen  who  had  offered  to 
tilt  with  him,  made  for  this  troop,  and  striking  one  of  them 
with  his  lance,  pierced  his  body  through,  and  killed  him  dead 
on  the  spot.  He  retreated  to  our  men,  pursued  by  the  other 
Saracens,  one  of  whom  gave  him  a  heavy  blow  on  his  helmet 
with  a  battle-axe.  In  return,  the  knight  struck  the  Saracen 
so  severely  on  the  head  that  he  made  his  turban  fly  off. 
You  must  know,  that  these  turbans  save  them  from  many 
hard  blows;  and  for  this  reason,  they  always  wear  them 
when  they  go  to  battle.  Another  Saracen  thought  to  have 
given  the  knight  a  mortal  blow  with  his  Turkish  blade,  bat 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1253.3         VALOUR  OP  A  GENOESE  KNIOHT. 


499 


he  twisted  his  body  in  sachwise  that  it  missed  him ;  and 
the  knight,  by  a  back-hand  blow  on  the  Saracen's  arm,  made 
his  sword  fail  to  the  ground,  and  he  then  made  a  good  retreat 
with  the  infantry.  These  three  £unoDS  actions  did  the 
Genoese  knight  perform  in  the  presence  of  the  lord  d'Asnr, 
and  before  idl  the  principal  persons  of  the  town,  who  were 
assembled  on  the  battlements. 

The  Saracens  withdrew  from  before  Acre ;  and  as  they  had 
heard  the  king  was  strengthening  and  enclosing  Sajecte,  and 
bad  bnt  few  men-at-arms  with  him,  they  marched  thither. 
As  soon  as  the  king  learnt  their  intentions,  not  having  a 
sufficient  force  to  oppose  them,  he  retired  with  the  master  of 
his  artillery,  and  as  many  as  the  place  would  hold,  into  the 
-castle  of  Sajecte,  which  was  very  strong,  and  well  enclosed : 
few,  however,  could  be  lodged  within  it  from  the  smallness 
of  its  extent.  The  Saracens  arrived  soon  after,  and  entered 
Sajecte  without  any  opposition,  for  the  walls  were  not  then 
fimshed,  and  slaughtered  full  2,000  of  the  poorer  sort  of  our 
army :  having  done  this,  and  pillaged  the  town,  they  marched 
off  toward  Damascus. 

The  king  was  much  grieved  on  hearing  that  the  Saracens 
had  destroyed  all  his  works  at  Sajecte,  but  he  could  not  help 
it ;  on  the  contrary,  the  barons  of  the  country  were  rejoiced 
at  it ;  and  the  reason  was,  that  the  king  intended,  after  he 
had  finished  at  Siekjecte,  to  enclose  a  mound,  on  which  for- 
merly had  stood  a  castle  in  the  time  of  the  Maccabees,  and 
which  was  on  the  road  from  Jaffa  to  Jerusalem.  The  barons 
opposed  its  being  enclosed,  because  it  was  five  leagues  from 
the  sea,  and  they  said,  and  said  truly,  that  it  could  never 
be  victualled  without  certain  risk  of  the  provision  being 
seized  on  the  road  thither  by  the  Saracens,  as  they  were 
more  numerous.  The  barons  remonstrated  with  the  king, 
that  it  would  be  preferable  in  point  of  honour,  and  in  aU 
other  respects,  to  repair  Sajecte,  than  to  undertake  a  large 
and  new  building  so  far  from  the  sea.  To  this  the  king 
assented. 

During  the  king's  stay  at  Jaffa,  he  was  told  that  the 
sultan  of  Damascus  would  allow  him  to  visit  Jerusalem  in 
perfect  security.  The  king  would  most  willingly  have  gone 
thither,  but  his  great  council  dissuaded  him  from  it,  as  it 
would  leave  the  city  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.    The  lords 


Digitized  by 


494      jointillb's  memoirs  op  saint  LOUIS  IX.      f  PT.  n. 


of  the  countnr  likewse  were  unwilling  to  consent  to  this, 
and  cited  to  him  the  example  of  King  Philip,  who,  when 
he  departed  from  Acre  on  his  return  to  France,  left  the 
command  of  his  whole  army  to  Hugh,  duke  of  Burgundy, 
grandfather  to  the  duke  lately  deceased.* 

In  those  times,  and  when  Duke  Hugh  of  Burgundy  and 
King  Richard  of  England  were  residing  in  Acre,  they 
received  intelligence  that  they  might  ta^e  Jerusalem  on 
the  morrow,  if  they  pleased ;  for  that  a  large  army  of  knights 
from  Egypt  was  gone  to  the  assistance  of  the  sultan  of 
Damascus,  in  his  war  at  Nessa  against  the  sultan  of  that 
place.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  and  the  king  were  soon 
prepared  to  march  thither;  and  when  they  had  divided 
their  army,  the  king  of  England  led  the  first  hattalion,  fol- 
lowed by  the  duke  of  Burgundy,  and  by  such  of  the  king  of 
France's  army  as  had  remained  after  his  departure.  But 
when  they  were  near  to  Jerusalem,  and  on  the  point  oi 
taking  it,  intelligence  came  from  the  duke  of  Burgundy's 
division,  that  he  had  turned  back  merely  out  of  envy,  and 
to  prevent  its  being  said,  that  the  English  had  taken  Jeru- 
salem. As  this  intelligence  was  discussing,  one  of  the  king 
of  England's  officers  cried  out,  "Sire,  sire,  only  come  hither, 
and  I  will  shew  you  Jerusalem."  But  the  king,  throwing 
down  his  arms,  said  vrith  tears,  and  with  hands  uplifted  to 
heaven,  "  Ah !  Lord  God,  I  pray  thee  that  I  may  never 
see  thy  holy  city  of  Jerusalem,  since  things  thus  happen, 
and  since  I  cannot  deliver  it  from  the  hands  of  thine 
enemies." 

This  example  was  laid  before  the  king  St.  Louis,  because 
he  was  the  greatest  monarch  in  Christendom ;  and  if  he 
should  perform  a  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,  without  delivering 
it  from  the  enemies  of  God,  every  other  king,  who  might 
wish  to  make  a  similar  pilgrimage,  would  tibink  he  had 

*  Henry  III.,  duke  of  Burgundy,  father  to  Duke  Eudes  III.,  and 
grandfather  to  Duke  Hugh  IV.,  died  in  the  year  1272.  Sanuto,  1.  3, 
part  10,  ch.  6,  seems  to  speak  of  the  retreat  of  the  duke  of  Burgundy 
with  less  bitterness  than  the  lord  de  Joinville ;  for  he  says,  that  as  the 
Christiana  were  advancing  towards  Jerusalem,  the  duke  represented  to  the 
French^  that  the  whole  flower  of  French  cMvalry  was  in  his  battalion ; 
whereas  King  Richard  had  but  few  in  number,  to  whom,  nevertheless,  die 
honour  of  the  victory  would  be  given,  which  would  be  to  the  disadvantage 
and  shame  of  France. 


A.D.  1253.^       GREAT  EXPENSE  OF  BN0L08IKO  JAWPA.  495 


amply  perfonned  it  withont  seeking  to  do  more  than  the 
king  of  France  had  done. 

This  Richard,  king  of  England,  perfonned  snoh  deeds  of 
prowess  when  he  was  in  the  Holy  Land,  that  the  Saracens, 
on  seeing  their  horses  frightened  at  a  shadow  or  hush,  cried 
t)ut  to  them,  "What,  dost  think  King  Richard  is  there?" 
This  they  were  accustomed  to  say,  from  the  many  and 
many  times  he  had  conquered  and  yanquished  them.  In 
like  manner,  when  the  children  of  the  Turks  or  Saracens 
cried,  their  mothers  said  to  them,  '^Hush,  hush!  or  I  will 
bring  King  Richard  of  England  to  you;"  and  from  the 
fright  these  words  caused  they  were  instantly  quiet. 

I  must  say  something  more  of  this  Hugh,  duke  of  Bur 
gundy.  He  was  personally  brave  and  chivalrous,  but  never 
reputed  very  wise  toward  God  or  man,  as  appears  from 
what  has  just  been  told  of  him ;  and,  in  allusion  to  him, 
the  great  king  Philip  said,  when  he  was  told  that  the 
count  John  de  ChMons  had  a  son  whom  he  had  christened 
Hugh,  "May  God,  out  of  his  goodness,  make  him  a  preuhomme 
as  well  as  a  preudhomme"*  There  is  much  difference  be- 
tween these  two  characters,  for  many  a  knight  among  the 
Christians  and  Saracens  is  bold  enough,  but  of  little  dis- 
cretion, who  neither  fears  nor  loves  God ;  and  it  was  said 
that  God  had  been  very  gracious  to  that  knight,  who,  by 
his  actions,  shewed  he  united  both  these  qualities.  But  the 
person  of  whom  I  am  speaking  might  well  be  called  a 
preudhomme,  for  he  was  sufficiently  bold  and  personally 
jenterprising,  but  not  mentally  so,  for  he  feared  not  to  sin, 
nor  to  behave  ill  toward  his  God. 

Of  the  immense  sums  it  cost  the  king  to  enclose  Jaffa, 
it  does  not  become  me  to  speak,  for  they  were  countless. 
He  enclosed  the  town  from  one  side  of  the  sea  to  the 
other;  and  there  were  twenty-four  towers,  including  small 
and  great.    The  ditches  were  well  scoured,  and  kept  clean 

*  Saint  Louis  made  this  distinction  between  preuhomme  and  preud- 
homme. The  first  was  valiant  and  personally  bold  ;  the  second,  prudetit, 
discreet,  having  a  good  conscience,  and  the  fear  of  God.  The  words 
preu  and  preuhomme  are  derived  from  the  hatin  probuSy  which,  in  the 
writers  of  the  middle  ages,  signified  a  **  valiant  man  i**  and  from  this  the 
French  have  formed  their  word  prewe.  From  this  word  we  have  formed 
**prott88ee,"  the  English  **  prowess,"  the  Spaniards  **  prozza/'the  Italians 

piodezza." 


496        jointillb's  memoirs  op  saint  LOUIS  IX.  f  PT.  II. 


both  within  and  without.  There  were  three  gates,  one  of 
which  the  legate  was  ordered  to  baild,  as  well  as  the  wall 
that  connected  it  with  the  next  gate.  To  form  some  esti- 
mate of  what  the  king's  expenses  might  have  been,  I  was 
once  asked  hy  the  legate  how  much  I  thou^t  the  gate 
and  wall  he  had  erected  cost  him.  When  I  replied  that 
I  estimated  the  gate  at  five  hundred  livres,  and  the  wall 
three  hundred,  he  told  me  I  was  very  £Eir  from  the  amount, 
and  added,  that  as  God  might  help  him,  the  gate  and 
wall  had  cost  him  full  thirty  thousand  livres.  We  may 
guess  from  this  sum  how  great  was  the  expense  for  the 
remainder. 

When  the  king  had  finished  the  fortifications  of  Jafi^ 
he  was  desirous  of  doing  the  same  to  Sajecte,  and  repairing 
its  walls,  to  put  it  in  a  similar  state  to  what  it  had  been 
in  before  the  Saracens  destroyed  it.  In  consequence,  he 
gave  orders  for  the  march  of  the  army  thither  on  the  fes- 
tival of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul.  While  the  king  and  his 
army  were  before  the  castle  of  Asur,  he  summoned  his 
council  in  the  evening,  and  told  them  he  was  very  anxious 
to  take  from  the  Saracens  the  city  of  Naples,  which  is 
called  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  Samaria. 

The  Knights  Templars,  barons  and  admirals  of  the  country, 
advised  him  to  it,  as  what  he  was  in  duty  bound  to  do ; 
but  added,  that  he  ought  not  personally  to  expose  himself 
there,  for  fear  of  any  unfortunate  accident,  saying  that  if  he 
were  made  prisoner  or  killed,  the  whole  country  would  be 
lost. 

The  king  replied,  that  he  would  not  allow  his  army  to 
inarch  thither  without  his  accompanying  it,  and  from  this 
disagreement  the  enterprise  was  no  more  thought  of.  We 
continued  our  march  along  the  sands  to  Acre,  where  the  king 
and  his  whole  army  were  lodged  that  night 

On  the  morrow,  a  great  troop  of  Armenians,  who  were  on 
their  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,  came  to  me,  and  entreated, 
through  a  Latin  interpreter,  that  as  I  was  about  the  king's 
person,  I  would  shew  them  the  good  king  Louis.  I  went 
to  the  king,  and  told  him  that  a  large  body  of  people, 
from  Upper  Armenia,  going  to  Jerusalem,  were  very  desir- 
ous to  see  him.  He  burst  into  laughter,  and  bade  me 
bring  them  to  him.    I  instantly  obeyed,  and  they  followed 


Digitized  by 


▲.D.  1253.^       QUARREL  BBTWSEM  TWO  BSaUIRES.  497 


me  eagerly.  When  they  bad  seen  him,  they  recommended 
faim  to  God,  as  he  did  the  same  to  them  in  return. 

The  next  day  the  king  and  his  army  marched  to  a  place 
called  Passe-poulain,*  about  a  league  distant  from  Acre,  where 
are  many  beautiful  springs  of  water,  with  which  the  sugar- 
canes  i^e  irrigated. 

When  I  was  lodged,  one  of  my  knights  said  to  me,  "  Sir, 
you  are  now  much  better  quartered  than  you  were  before 
Saint  Sur."  Upon  which  another  of  my  knights,  who  had 
fixed  on  my  lodgings  the  preceding  day,  replied,  '^You  are 
too  foolhardy  in  thus  blaming  me  to  my  lord and  having 
said  this,  he  sprang  on  the  other  knight,  and  seized  him 
by  the  hair.  Astonished  at  the  presumption  of  the  knight, 
who  had  thus  in  my  presence  seized  his  companion,  I  ran 
to  them,  and  gave  the  aggressor  a  hard  blow  between  the 
shoulders,  which  made  him  quit  his  hold  of  the  knight's  hair. 
I  then  ordered  him  to  quit  my  lodgings  instantly,  for  that 
never  more,  as  God  might  help  me,  should  he  be  of  my 
household. 

The  knight  went  away  making  great  moan  to  Sir  Gilles 
le  Brun,  then  constable  of  France,  who  shortly  after  came 
to  me  to  entreat  I  would  take  my  knight  again,  for  that 
he  was  sorely  repentant  of  his  folly.  1  told  him  I  could  not 
do  any  thing  until  the  legate  had  absolved  me  from  my 
oath.  The  constable  then  went  to  the  legate,  told  him  the 
case,  and  requested  him  to  give  me  absolution  from  the  oath 
I  had  sworn ;  but  the  legate  said,  he  had  not  the  power  to 
absolve  me,  seeing  that  I  was  justified  in  making  such  an 
oath,  and  that  the  knight  had  richly  deserved  it  by  his 
conduct.  This  story  I  wished  to  introduce  into  my  book, 
as  an  example  to  all  not  to  make  any  oaths  without  very  suffi- 
cient grounds  for  so  doing  ;  for  the  wise  man  says,  that  those 
who  swear  on  every  occasion  will  probably  as  often  forswear. 

On  the  day  following,  the  king  marched  his  army  before 
the  city  of  Sur,  which  is  called  Thiry  in  the  Bible.  When 
there,  the  king  was  pressed  to  march  and  take  a  city  hard  by 
caUed  Belinas ;  his  council  advised  him  to  it,  but  not  to  go 
thither  in  person,  to  which,  with  some  difficulty,  he  wae 
persuaded.  It  was  detenuined  that  the  count  d'Anjou 
should  march  thither,  with  Sir  Philip  de  Montfort,  the  lord 
*  See  note  at  paa^  466. 

2k 


Digitized  by 


198  JOINTILLE*S  MEMOIRS  OF  SAINT  LOUIS  IX.      [PT.  II. 

of  Sur,  Sir  Gilles  le  ^run,  constable  of  France,  Sir  Peter 
the  chamberlain,  the  masters  of  the  Temple  and  of  the 
Hospital,  and  their  men-at-arms.  Daring  the  nigbt  we 
armed  ourselves,  and  a  little  before  day  saw  the  plain  in 
which  was  situated  the  city  of  Belinas,*  called  in  Scripture 
Csesarea  Philippi.  There  is  within  the  city  a  beautiful 
fountain  named  Le  Jour,  and  on  the  plain  before  the  place, 
another  fine  spring,  called  Dain.  From  these  two  springs 
issue  rivulets,  which  unite  at  some  distance  and  form  the 
river  Jordan,  in  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  baptized. 

By  the  advice  of  the  count  d'Anjou,  and  the  masters  of  the 
Templars  and  Hospitallers,  it  wa«  ordered,  that  the  battalion 
of  the  king,  in  which  I  then  was,  with  my  knights,  as  were 
also  the  forty  knights  from  Champagne,  whom  the  king  had 
put  under  my  command,  Sir  GeofFry  de  Sergines,  and  the 
other  brave  men  that  were  with  us,  should  march  between  the 
castle  and  town ;  that  the  barons  and  landholders  of  the 
country  should  enter  the  town  on  the  left,  the  Hospitallers  on 
the  right,  and  the  master  of  the  Templars,  with  his  division, 
was  to  enter  the  place  from  the  road  by  whidi  we  had  come. 
Each  body  was  now  in  motion  ;  and  as  we  approached  the 
back  parts  of  the  city  we  found  many  of  our  countrymen 
dead,  whom  the  Saracens  had  killed  and  thrown  o>er  the 
walls.    You  must  know  the  line  we  were  to  take  was  very 
dangerous ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  there  were  three  walls  to 
pass,  and  a  bank  so  steep  and  broken,  that  no  one  could  keep 
his  saddle.  On  the  top  of  this  bank,  which  we  were  to  ascend, 
was  a  large  body  of  Turks  on  horseback.    Perceiving  that 
our  people  were  at  one  place  breaking  down  the  walls,  I 
wished  to  advance  towards  them  skirmishing.    As  I  was 
doing  this,  one  of  our  men  attempted  to  leap  the  wall,  but  he 
fell  under  his  horse,  which  was  also  thrown  down.    When  I 
saw  this  I  dismounted,  and,  taking  my  horse  by  the  bridle^ 
ascende<l  boldly  towards  the  Turks ;  but,  as  God  willed  it, 
they  fled  and  left  us  the  place.     On  the  top  there  was  a 
road  cut  in  the  rock  which  led  to  the  city ;  and  the  Saracens 
within  the  place  no  sooner  saw  us  masters  of  the  rock  than 
they  took  to  flight,  and  gave  up  the  city  without  oppositioa 
to  our  army. 

*  Called  by  the  ancients    Paneas,''  and    Ciesarea  PhiHppi."  Ncndia 
oaptured  it  irom  Humphry  de  Toroa  in  the  year  1177. 


Digitizfed  by 


A.D.  1253.]]  TAKE  CiESAREA  PHILIPPL 


499 


While  I  was  on  the  top  of  this  mount,  the  master  of  the 
Templars,  hearing  that  I  was  in  great  danger,  hastened  to 
me.  I  had  with  me  the  Germans,  who,  when  they  saw  the 
Turks  fly  for  the  castle,  which  was  at  some  distance  from  the 
town,  began  to  pursue  them,  in  spite  of  me,  and  although  I 
cried  out  to  them  they  were  doing  wrong,  for  we  had  accom- 
plished what  we  had  been  ordered  to  perform. 

The  castle  was  seated  above  the  town,  but  without  the 
suburbs,  and  nearly  half  a  league  up  Mount  Libanus.  There  are 
very  high  rocks  to  pass  before  you  arrive  at  the  castle ;  and 
when  the  Germans  found  they  were  very  rashly  pursuing  the 
Turks,  who  had  gained  the  castle,  well  knowing  all  the  turn- 
ings of  the  rocks,  they  returned  to  rejoin  us ;  but  the  Saracens, 
observing  them  retreating,  dismounted,  and,  falling  on  them 
as  they  descended  the  rocks,  gave  them  many  severe  blows 
with  their  battle-axes,  insomuch  that  they  drove  them  back 
in  disorder  to  where  I  was.  My  men  seeing  the  mischief  the 
Saracens  did  to  the  Germans,  whom  they  closely  pursued, 
began  to  be  frightened,  and  to  take  alarm ;  but  I  told  them 
that  if  they  quitted  their  position  I  would  break  them,  and 
prevent  them  ever  after  from  receiving  the  king's  pay.  They 
replied,  "  Lord  de  Joinville,  we  are  much  worse  off  than  you 
are ;  for  you  are  on  horseback,  and  can  escape  when  and 
where  you  please ;  but  we  who  are  on  foot  are  in  the  greatest 
danger  of  being  killed,  should  the  Saracens  come  hither." 
Upon  this  I  dismounted  among  them,  to  give  them  more 
courage,  and  sent  my  war-horse  to  the  battalion  of  the 
Templars,  which  was  a  long  cross-bow-shot  distant. 

As  the  Saracens  were  thus  driving  the  Germans  before 
them,  one  of  my  knights  received  a  bolt  from  a  cross-bow 
in  the  throat  that  laid  him  dead  at  my  feet,  upon  which 
another  of  my  knights,  called  Sir  Hugh  d'Escoss^,  uncle  to 
the  dead  knight,  desired  I  would  assist  him  to  carry  his 
nephew  down  from  the  mount,  that  he  might  be  buried; 
but  I  refused,  for  the  knight  had  joined  the  Germans  in 
pursuing  the  Saracens,  contrary  to  my  will  and  orders.  If, 
therefore,  he  suffered  for  it,  I  was  no  way  to  blame.  So 
soon  as  Sir  John  de  Valenciennes  heard  the  danger  we 
were  in,  and  that  my  division  was  in  disorder,  he  hastened 
to  Sir  Olivier  de  Termes,  and  the  other  captains  from 
Languedoc,  and  addressed  them,  •*  My  lords,  I  beg  of  you^ 

2  K  2 


Digitized  by 


500  JOINTILLE's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.  ^PT.n 

and  indeed  command,  in  the  king's  name,  that  you  join  me 
to  assist  the  seneschal  of  Champagne." 

A  knight,  whose  name  was  Sir  William  de  Beanmont^ 
came  to  him,  and  said  that  I  was  killed ;  but,  notwith- 
standing this,  the  good  Sir  Olivier  de  Tennes  did  not  the 
more  spare  himself,  for  he  was  determined  to  know  the 
truth,  whether  I  was  alive  or  dead,  that  he  might  give  the 
king  certain  information  of  it,  and  gallantly  ascended  the 
mount,  when  I  went  to  him.  Sir  Olivier,  when  on  the 
mount,  saw  the  great  danger  we  were  in,  and  that  we 
could  not  descend  the  way  we  had  got  up;  he  therefore 
gave  us  good  advice,  and  made  us  descend  a  slope  of  the 
hill,  as  if  we  were  going  to  Damascus,  saying  that  the 
Saracens  would  suppose,  by  this  manoeuvre,  that  we  meant 
to  fall  on  their  rear.  When  we  had  got  into  the  plain. 
Sir  Olivier  ordered  a  large  heap  of  com,  that  was  stacked 
on  the  ground,  to  be  set  on  fire,  and  by  this  means,  and 
our  own  exertions,  through  the  good  counsel  of  Sir  Olivier 
de  Termes,  we  escaped,  and  arrived  on  the  morrow  in  safety 
at  Sajecte,  where  the  king  was.  We  found  the  good  and 
holy  man  had  ordered  the  bodies  of  those  Christians  that 
were  slain  to  be  buried,  and  that  he  himself  had  assisted 
in  canying  their  corpses  to  the  grave.  Some  of  the  bodies 
were  in  such  a  state  of  corruption,  that  divers  of  the  car- 
riers were  obliged  to  stop  their  nostrils,  but  the  good  king 
never  did  this.  When  we  came  to  him,  he  had  caused  our 
lodgings  and  quarters  to  be  read^  prepared  for  us. 

*  While  we  were  before  Sajette,  some  merchants  came 
to  the  king,  and  brought  him  intelligence  that  the  king  of 
Tartary  had  taken  the  city  of  Baldac,  with  the  apostle 
of  the  Saracens,  who  was  lord  of  the  town,  and  was  called 
the  Caliph  of  Baldac. 

"  The  manner  of  its  capture  was  as  follows :— The  king 
of  Tartary  had  laid  his  plans  with  much  secrecy  and  cau- 
tion, and  after  he  had  besieged  the  place,  sent  to  inform 
the  caliph,  that  in  order  to  preserve  peace  and  be  on  good 
terms  with  him,  he  was  desirous  that  a  marriage  should 

The  chapter)  which  is  here  given,  is  omitted  by  Menard,  bnt  is 
contained  in  the  Poitiers  edition.  As  it  bears  every  appearance  of 
having  been  written  by  Joinville,  it  has  been  thought  proper  to  insert  il 
in  it!  place* 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1 256.^  CAPTURE        BALDAC  BY  THE  TARTARS.  501 


take  place  between  their  two  children.  The  caliph,  having 
consnlted  his  council,  replied,  that  he  was  satisfied  with  tho 
proposal.  In  retnm,  the  king  of  Tartarj  requested  that 
he  would  send  to  him  forty  of  his  principal  counsellors  to 
treat  of  and  agree  to  this  marriage.  This  the  caliph  com- 
plied with;  but  the  king  of  Tartarj  detained  them,  and 
sent  word  they  were  not  enough,  and  that  forty  more  of 
the  richest  of  the  caliph's  subjects  must  also  be  sent  for  the 
greater  security  of  the  articles  of  the  marriage.  The  caliph, 
belieying  what  he  said  was  the  truth,  sent  him  forty  more, 
as  he  had  desired,  and  eren  a  third  time  the  same  number 
of  his  principal  subjects. 

^^When  the  Tartar  king  had  thus  got  six  score  of  the 
best  captains,  and  the  principal  and  most  wealthy  of  the 
caliph's  subjects,  he  thought  the  remainder  must  consist  of 
such  common  people  as  could  not  resist  him,  and  would  be 
unable  to  defend  themselves. 

^^Upon  this,  he  ordered  the  six  score  personages  to  b« 
beheaded,  and  attacked  the  town  so  briskly  that  he  took  it, 
with  the  caliph  its  lord. 

"Having  gained  the  town,  he  wished  to  cover  his  dis- 
loyalty and  treason  by  throwing  tbe  blame  on  the  caliph, 
whom  he  confined  in  an  iron  cage.  He  made  him  fast 
until  the  last  extremity,  when  the  king  came  to  him,  and 
asked  if  he  were  hungry.  ^  Yes,  indeed,  am  I,'  replied  the 
caliph,  and  not  without  cause.'  The  king  then  ordered  a 
large  golden  platter  filled  with  jewels  and  precious  stones 
to  be  offered  to  him,  and  asked  him,  '  Caliph,  dost  thou 
know  these  rich  jewels  and  treasure  which  thou  sees! 
before  thee  ? '  *  Yes,'  said  the  caliph,  for  they  had  been 
his  own.  The  king  again  asked,  if  he  much  loved  these 
{ewels ;  and  on  the  caliph  answering  in  the  affirmative,  he 
replied,  ^  Well,  since  then  thou  lovest  these  treasures  so  much, 
take  of  them  as  much  as  thou  wilt,  and  eat  them,  to 
appease  thy  hunger.'  The  caliph  said  they  were  not  food 
to  eat.  *  Now,'  answered  the  king  of  Tartary, '  thou  mayest 
at  present  see  thy  great  fault;  for  if  thou  hadst  given  of 
thy  treasures,  which  thou  lovest  so  dearly,  to  subsidize 
soldiers  in  thy  defence,  thou  mightest  have  held  out  against 
me ;  but  that  which  thou  prizedst  the  most  has  fja^iled  theo 
in  thy  need.'"] 


Digitized  by 


502  JOINTILLE's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.  |_PT.II« 


Daring  this  time,  being  one  day  in  the  presence  of  the 
king,  I  asked  his  leave  to  make  a  pilgrimage  to  our  Lady 
of  Tortosa,  which  was  then  very  much  in  request.  Great 
numbers  of  pilgrims  went  thither  daily,  for  it  was  said  to 
have  been  the  first  altar  erected  in  honour  of  the  mother 
of  God.  Our  Lady  performed  there  many  wonderful  mira- 
cles; and  one  in  particular  on  a  poor  man  that  was  a 
demoniac,  having  lost  his  senses,  for  he  was  possessed  by  a 
wicked  spirit.  It  happened,  that  one  day*  he  was  brought 
to  this  altar  of  our  Lady  at  Tortosa ;  swid  as  his  friends  who 
had  brought  him  were  praying  to  our  Lady  to  cure  him, 
and  restore  his  senses,  the  devil  whom  the  poor  creature 
had  in  his  body  replied,  "  Our  Lady  is  not  here  but  in 
Egypt,  whither  she  is  gone  to  aid  the  king  of  France  and 
the  Christians,  who  land  this  day  on  the  Holy  Land,  to  make 
war  on  the  Pagans,  who  are  on  horseback  to  receive  them." 

What  the  devil  had  uttered  was  put  down  in  writing  ; 
and  when  it  was  brought  to  the  legate,  who  was  with  the 
king  of  France,  he  said  to  me  that  it  was  on  that  very 
day  we  had  arrived  in  Egypt ;  and  I  am  sure  the  good  Lady 
Mary  was  of  the  utmost  service  to  us. 

The  king  very  readily  gave  me  leave  to  make  this  pilgrim 
age,  and  at  the  same  time  charged  me  to  buy  for  him  a  hun 
dred-weight  of  diflerent  coloured  camlets,  which   he  was 
desirous  to  give  to  the  Cordeliers  on.  his  return  to  France. 
From  this,  I  guessed  that  it  would  not  be  long  before  he  set 
out  on  his  return  thither. 

When  I  arrived  at  Triple,*  the  end  of  my  pilgrimage,  I 
made  my  offerings  to  God,  and  to  our  Lady  of  Tortosa,  and 
afterward  bought  the  camlets  according  to  the  king's  orders. 
My  knights,  seeing  me  thus  occupied,  asked  what  I  intended 
doing  with  so  many  camlets.  I  induced  them  to  believe 
that  I  made  these  purchases  to  gain  a  profit  from  reselling 
them. 

The  prince  of  tliat  country,  hearing  of  our  arrival,  and 
knowing  that  I  was  come  from  the  king's  array,  gave  us  a 
most  honourable  reception,  and  offered  us  magnificent  pre- 
sents. We  returned  him  our  most  humble  thanks,  but  would 
accept  of  nothing  but  a  few  relics,  which  I  brought  to  the 
king  with  his  camlets. 

*  Qy.  TripoU. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  125S.2  ™b  king's  grief  at  his  mother's  peath.  503 


You  must  know*  that  the  queen  had  heard  that  I  had  been 
on  a  pilgrimage,  aud  had  brou^t  back  some  relics.  I  sent 
ker  by  one  of  my  knights  four  pieces  of  the  camlets  which  1 
had  purchased  ;  and  when  the  knight  entered  her  apartment, 
she  cast  herself  on  her  knees  before  the  camlets,  that  were 
wrapped  up  in  a  towel,  and  the  knight,  seeing  the  queen  do 
this,  flung  himself  on  his  knees  also.  The  queen,  observing 
him,  said,  ^  Rise,  sir  knight,  it  does  not  become  you  to  kneeU 
who  are  the  hearer  of  such  holy  relics."  My  knight  replied, 
that  it  was  not  relics,  but  camlets,  that  he  had  brought  as  a 
present  from  me.  When  the  queen  and  her  ladies  heard  this, 
tliey  burst  into  kughter,  and  the  queen  said,  Sir  knight, 
the  deuce  take  your  lord  for  having  made  me  kneel  to  a 
parcel  of  camlets."* 

Soon  after  the  king's  arrival  at  Sajecte,  he  received  the 
Dews  of  the  death  of  the  queen  his  mother,  which  caused 
him  such  grief  that  he  was  two  days  in  his  chamber  without 
suffering  any  one  to  see  him.  On  the  third,  he  sent  one  of 
his  valets  to  seek  me;  and,  on  my  presenting  myself,  he 
extended  his  arms,  and  said,  ^'  Ah,  seneschal,  I  have  lost  my 
mother!" 

Sir,"  replied  I,  "  I  am  not  surprised  at  it,  for  you  know 
tliere  m«st  come  a  time  for  her  death ;  but  I  am  indeed 
frreatly  so,  that  you  who  are  considered  as  so  great  a  prince 
should  so  outrageously  grieve ;  for  you  know,"  continued  I, 

that  the  wise  man  sayft,  whatever  grief  tlie  valiant  man 
suffers  in  his  mind,  he  ought  not  to  shew  it  on  his  countenance, 
nor  let  it  be  publicly  known,  for  he  that  does  so  gives  plea- 
sure to  his  enemies  and  sorrow  to  his  friends." 

I  thus  appeased  him  a  little ;  and  he  gave  orders  that 
most  magnificent  religious  services  should  be  performed  in  the 
country  in  which  he  then  was,  for  the  salvation  of  the  soul 
of  the  late  queen.  He  sent  likewise  to  France  a  load  of 
jewels  and  precious  stones  to  the  national  churches,  with 

*  After  these  words,  what  follows  is  in  the  edition  of  Poitiers:  "  I 
forgot  to  say,  that  whilst  the  king  was  at  Sajette,  a  great  person  in  Egypt 
tent  him  a  most  curious  stone,  the  like  was  never  seen.  It  split  into 
f  caies.  and  when  one  scale  was  taken  off,  there  was  seen  the  perfect  re- 
semhlance  of  a  sea-fish  was  deeply  impressed  between  two  stones,  to 
which  neither  colour  nor  form  was  deficient,  in  similar  matter  to  the 
stone.  The  king  gave  me  a  part  of  it,  and,  when  it  was  divided,  there 
was  the  exact  form  and  colour  of  a  tench,  such  as  it  is  in  nature." 


504       joinville's  memoirs  of  saint  louis  tx.  Qpt.ii* 

letters  from  him  to  entreat  they  would  pray  to  God  for  him, 
and  for  the  soul  of  the  late  queen  his  mother. 

[The  Poitiers  edition  adds :  "After  I  had  quitted  the  apart- 
ment of  the  king,  the  lady  Mary  de  Bonnes-Yertns  came 
to  entreat  that  I  would  wait  on  the  queen  to  comfort  her, 
for  that  she  was  in  marvellous  great  grief.  When  I  was  in 
her  chamber,  and  saw  her  weeping  so  very  bitteriy,  I  coidd 
not  refrain  from  saying  to  her,  that  the  proverb  was  very 
true  which  said,  *  We  ought  never  to  believe  in  the  tears  of 
women,'  for  that  the  lamentation  she  was  making  was  for 
the  woman  she  hated  the  most  in  this  world.  She  replied, 
that  it  was  not  for  her^she  wept,  but  for  the  extreme  melan- 
choly of  the  king,  as  well  as  for  her  daughter,  afterwards 
queen  of  Navarre,  who  would  now  be  under  the  guardian- 
ship of  men.  The  reason  why  the  queen  disliked  the  queen 
dowager,  was  the  continued  rudeness  of  her  behaviotur  to 
her ;  for  she  would  not  suffer  her  son  to  keep  company  with 
his  queen,  and  prevented  it  as  much  as  lay  in  her  power. 
When  the  king  made  any  excursions  through  his  kingdom, 
in  company  with  the  two  queens,  Queen  Blanche  had  him 
separated  from  his  queen,  and  they  were  never  lodged  in 
the  same  house.  It  happened  one  day,  during  a  stay  which 
the  court  made  at  Pontoise,  that  the  king  was  lodged  in 
the  story  above  the  apartments  of  his  queen,  and  he  had 
given  orders  to  his  ushers  of  the  chamber,  whenever  he 
should  go  to  lie  with  his  queen,  and  his  mother  was  coming 
to  his,  or  to  the  queen's  chamber,  to  beat  the  dogs  until 
they  cried  out :  when  the  king  heard  them,  he  hid  himself 
from  his  mother.  Now  one  day  Queen  Blanche  went  to 
the  queen's  chamber,  where  her  son  had  gone  before  to  com- 
foil  her,  for  she  was  in  great  danger  of  death,  from  a  bad 
delivery,  and  he  hid  himself  behind  the  quemi  to  avoid 
l>eing  seen ;  but  his  mother  perceived  him,  and,  taking  him 
by  the  hand,  said,  ^  Come  along :  you  will  do  no  good 
here,'  and  put  him  out  of  the  chamber.  Queen  Margaret 
observing  this,  and  that  she  was  to  be  separated  from  her 
husband,  cried  aloud,  ^  Alas !  will  you  not  allow  me  to  see 
my  lord,  neither  when  I  am  alive  nor  dying?'  In  uttering 
these  words  she  fainted,  and  her  attendants  thought  she 
was  dead :  the  king  likewise  believed  it,  and  instantly  re- 
turned to  her,  and  recovered  her  from  her  fainting-fit,""] 


Digitized  by 


1254.^        THE  KING  RETURNS  TO  FRj^KCE. 


505 


Not  long  after  this  the  king  attended  to  his  affairs,  but 
was  undetermined  whether  to  remain  longer  where  he  was, 
or  to  return  to  France.  "While  he  was  thus  hesitating,  and 
during  his  stay  at  Sajecte,  which  he  had  almost  enclosed, 
he  called  the  legate,  who  had  accompanied  it,  and  bade  him 
make  many  processions,  requesting  God  to  enlighten  him, 
and  let  him  know  his  will,  whether  he  should  return  to 
France  or  remain  in  Palestine.  Some  little  time  after  these 
processions  were  over,  the  principal  persons  of  the  eonntry 
and  myself  were  going  to  amuse  ourselves  in  a  meadow, 
when  the  king  called  me  to  him.  The  legate  was  with  him, 
who  said  to  me,  in  the  presence  of  the  king, — Seneschal, 
the  king  is  very  much  satisfied  with  the  good  and  agreeable 
services  you  have  done  him,  and  earnestly  wishes  for  your 
honour  and  advancement.  He  orders  me  to  tell  you,  as  he 
knows  it  will  give  you  much  pleasure  at  heart,  that  his 
intention  is  to  return  to  France  on  this  side  Easter  that  is 
coming." 

I  replied,  "  May  our  Lord  induce  him  to  act  alway  ac- 
cording to  his  will."  When  I  had  said  this,  the  legate  left  the 
king,  and  desired  I  would  accompany  him  to  his  lodgings, 
to  which  I  willingly  assented.  He  made  me  enter  his  closet, 
when,  bursting  into  tears,  he  clasped  my  hands  and  said, — 
"  Seneschal,  I  am  greatly  rejoiced,  and  thank  God  for  that 
you  have  thus  escaped  from  the  imminent  dangers  you  have 
been  in  during  your  stay  in  this  country ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  I  am  much  concerned  and  grieved  at  my  heart,  that 
I  shall  be  forced  to  quit  such  good  and  religious  com- 
panions, to  return  among  such  a  set  of  wretches  as  the  court 
of  Rome  consists  of.  But  I  will  tell  you  that  my  inten- 
tion is  to  remain  one  year,  after  your  departure,  at  Acre,  to 
expend  all  money  in  enclosing  the  suburbs  of  that  place, 
which  I  shall  continue  to  do  as  long  as  my  means  shall  last, 
to  avoid  having  any  reproaches  made  against  me." 

On  my  return  to  the  king  the  next  day,  he  commanded 
me  to  arm  myself  and  my  knights  on  the  morrow.  When 
I  was  armed,  I  asked  him  what  was  his  pleasure  for  us  to 
do.  He  then  said,  to  escort  the  queen  and  his  children  to 
Sur,  which  was  full  seven  leagues  d'jstant.  I  would  not  say 
any  thing  against  this,  in  spite  of  the  great  dangers  we  should 
run^  for  at  that  time  we  had  neither  peace  nor  truce  witl-  the 


Digitized  by 


506       joinvillb's  memoirs  of  saint  louts  IX,    fPT.  IV 

Egyptians,  nor  with  those  of  Damascus.  We  set  out,  and 
through  the  mercy  of  God,  arrived  in  the  evening  at  Sur 
without  any  accident  or  hinderance. 

Soon  after  the  patriarchs  and  harons  of  the  country  who 
had  for  a  length  of  time  attended  on  the  king,  seeing  that 
he  had  enclosed  Sajecte  with  high  walls  and  large  towers, 
and  that  the  ditches  were  well  cleansed  within  and  without, 
waited  on  him  to  render  him  their  most  humhle  thanks  and 
praise  for  the  great  good  and  the  honour  he  had  conferred 
on  Palestine ;  for  he  had  rebuilt,  from  the  ground,  Sajecte, 
OsBsarea,  Jaffa,  and  had  greatly  strengthened  the  city  of  Acre 
with  high  walls  and  towers. 

They  addressed  him  as  follows :  Sire,  we  perceive  very 
clearly  that  your  stay  with  us  cannot  be  much  prolonged, 
with  any  kind  of  profit  to  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem.  We 
would  therefore  advise  you  to  go  to  Acre,  where  you  may 
make  your  preparations  for  departure  during  this  ensuing 
Lent,  so  that  you  may  secure  a  safe  passage  to  France." 

The  king  followed  their  counsel  and  went  to  Sur,  whither 
we  had  escorted  the  queen  and  his  family,  and  at  the  be- 
ginning of  Lent  we  all  arrived  at  Acre. 

During  the  whole  of  Lent,  the  king  was  making  his  fleet 
ready  for  his  return  to  France,  which  consisted  of  fourteen 
ships  and  galleys.  On  the  vigil  of  St.  Mark,  after  Easter, 
the  king  and  queen  embarked  on  board  their  ship,  and  put 
to  sea,  having  a  favourable  wind  for  their  departure.  The 
king  told  me  he  was  bom  on  St.  Mark's  day ;  and  I  replied, 
that  he  might  well  say  he  had  been  bom  again  on  St.  Mark's 
^ay,  in  thus  escaping  from  such  a  pestilent  land,  where  he 
had  remained  so  long. 

On  the  Saturday  following,  we  arrived  at  the  island  of 
Cyprus;  and  there  was  a  mountain  hard  by  the  island, 
csdled  the  Mountain  of  the  Cross,  which  marked  at  a  great 
distance  the  situation  of  the  island.  On  this  Saturday, 
about  vespers,  there  came  on  such  a  thick  fog  from  the 
land  that  our  sailors  thought  themselves  at  a  greater  distance 
from  the  shore  than  they  were,  for  they  lost  sight  of  this 
mountain ;  and  it  happened,  that  as  they  were  eager  to 
reach  the  shore,  they  struck  on  the  extremity  of  a  sand- 
bank which  was  clear  of  the  island :  fortunately  it  was  so, 
for  had  we  not  struck  on  this  bank,  we  should  have  run 


Digitized  by 


A.P  1 254.3  THE  PARTY  IN  DANGER  OP  SniPWRECIT.  50* 


against  some  dangerous  half-covered  rocks,  and  sbonld 
have  been  in  the  utmost  peril  of  being  all  drowned.  We 
-were  even  now  in  much  danger.  All  thought  themselves 
lost,  and  that  the  vessel  must  be  wrecked;  but  a  sailor, 
casting  the  .lead,  found  we  were  no  longer  aground,  on 
which  every  one  rejoiced  and  returned  thanks  to  God. 

Many  on  board  were  kneeling  before  the  holy  sacrament 
that  was  on  the  ship's  altar,  adoring  and  begging  pardon 
of  God,  for  each  expected  nothing  but  death.  When  day 
appeared,  we  saw  the  rocks  on  which  we  should  have 
struck,  had  it  not  been  for  the  good  fortune  of  the  sand- 
bank. In  the  morning  the  king  sent  for  the  principal  of 
the  ships*  captains,  who  brought  with  them  four  divers, 
fellows  who  dive  naked  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea  like  fish. 
The  captains  ordered  the  divers  to  plunge  into  the  sea  at 
this  place,  who  did  so,  and  passed  under  the  king's  ship.  On 
their  reappearance  on  the  opposite  side  to  where  they  had 
gone  down,  we  heard  each  ask  the  other  what  he  had  found. 
They  all  reported,  that  on  the  part  where  our  vessel  had 
struck  on  the  sand  three  fathoms  of  its  keel  had  been  beaten 
off,  which  account  surprised  very  much  the  king,  and  all  who 
heard  it.  The  king  asked  the  mariners  for  their  advice  on 
the  occasion,  who  replied, — "  Sire,  if  you  will  believe  us,  you 
inust  remove  from  this  ship  to  another.  We  know  well,  that 
since  the  keel  has  suffered  such  damage,  all  the  ribs  of  the 
vessel  will  have  been  started,  and  we  very  much  fear  that 
she  will  be  unable  to  bear  the  sea,  should  tlicre  be  any  wind, 
without  danger  of  sinking.  When  you  sailed  from  France, 
we  saw  an  accident  just  similar  happen  to  a  vessel  which  had 
struck  on  a  bank  ;  and  when  she  was  afterward  in  a  gale  of 
wind  she  could  not  withstand  it,  but  opened  her  sides  and  was 
lost ;  all  on  board  perished  but  a  young  woman,  with  an  in- 
fant child  in  her  arms,  who  had  accidentally,  remained  on  one 
of  the  ship's  timbers,  and  was  saved." 

The  king  having  listened  to  what  the  mariners  said,  and 
the  example  they  brought,  I  testified  to  the  truth  of  it ;  for 
I  had  seen  the  woman  and  child,  who  had  arrived  at  the 
city  of  Baphe,  in  the  house  of  the  count  de  Joingny,  who 
had  all  care  taken  of  them  for  the  honour  of  God. 

The  king  summoned  his  council  to  deliberate  on  what  was 
to  l>e  done,  and  they  unanimously  agreed  to  what  the  marinera 


Digitized  by 


508        joinville's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.    []PT.  IT. 

bad  proposed  ;  but  the  king  called  the  captains  again  to  him, 
and  asked  them,  on  the  faith  and  loyalty  which  they  owed 
him,  whether,  if  the  ship  were  their  own,  and  full  of  mer- 
chandise, they  would  quit  it.  They  all  said  they  would  not ; 
for  that  they  woidd  prefer  risking  their  lives  to  the  loss  of 
such  a  vessel,  which  would  cost  them  from  forty  to  fifty  thou- 
sand livres.  Why  then,"  said  the  king,  "  do  you  advise  me 
to  quit  her  ?  "  They  replied, — "  Sire,  you  and  we  are  two 
different  sorts  of  things ;  for  there  is  no  sum,  however  great, 
that  can  be  had  in  compensation  for  the  loss  of  yourself,  the 
queen,  and  your  three  children;  and  we  will  never  advise  that 
you  should  put  yourself  in  such  risk." 

"  Now,"  said  the  king,  "  I  will  tell  you  what  I  think  of 
the  matter.  Suppose  I  quit  this  ship,  there  are  five  or  six 
hundred  persons  on  board,  who  will  remain  in  the  island  of 
Cyprus  for  fear  of  the  danger  that  may  happen  to  them  should 
they  stay  on  board ;  and  there  is  not,"  added  the  king,  one 
among  them  who  is  more  attached  to  his  own  person,  than  I 
am  myself,  and  if  we  land  they  will  lose  all  hopes  of  returning 
to  their  own  country.  I  therefore  declare,  I  will  rather  put 
myself,  the  queen,  and  my  children,  in  this  danger,  under 
the  good  providence  of  Grod,  than  make  such  numbers  of 
people  suffer  as  are  now  with  me." 

The  great  mischief  that  would  have  happened,  if  the  king 
had  landed,  was  very  apparent,  from  what  befel  that  puissant 
knight  Sir  Olivier  de  Termes,  who  was  on  board  the  king's 
ship.  Sir  Olivier  was  one  of  the  bravest  knights,  and  most 
enterprising  men  of  all  I  was  acquainted  with  in  the  Holy  Land ; 
he  was,  however,  afraid  of  remaining  on  board,  and  therefore 
went  on  shore ;  but,  rich  and  mighty  as  he  was,  he  met  with 
so  many  difficulties,  that  it  was  upwards  of  a  year  and  a  half 
before  he  could  again  rejoin  the  king.  Now,  if  so  rich  a  man 
found  so  many  difficulties,  what  would  the  number  of  inferior 
personages  have  done,  who  could  not  have  money  to  defray 
their  expenses  and  support  themselves  ? 

After  God  had  saved  us  from  this  peril,  near  the  island  of 
Cyprus,  another  befel  us ;  for  there  arose  so  violent  a  storm, 
that  in  spite  of  all  our  efforts  we  were  driven  back  again  to  the 
same  island,  after  we  had  long  left  it.  The  sailors  cast  four 
anchors  in  vain,  for  the  vessel  could  not  be  stopped  until  they 
had  thrown  out  the  fifth,  which  held.    All  the  partitions  of 


Digitized  by 


A.T>.  1254.3      OTERTAKEN  BY  A  TIOLENT  STORM.  509 


the  king's  cabin  were  obliged  to  be  destroyed ;  and  so  high 
was  the  wind,  that  no  one  dared  stay  therein  for  fear  of  being 
blown  overboard. 

The  qneen  came  into  the  king's  chamber,  thinking  to  meet 
him  there,  but  found  only  Sir  Gilles  le  Bmn,  constable  of 
France,  and  myself  who  were  lying  down.  On  seeing  her,  I 
asked  what  she  wished.  She  said,  she  wanted  the  king,  to 
beg  he  would  make  some  vows  to  God  and  his  saints,  that  we 
might  be  delivered  from  this  storm,  for  that  the  sailors  had 
assured  her  we  were  in  the  greatest  danger  of  being  drowned. 
I  replied  to  her, — Madam,  vow  to  make  a  pilgrimage  to 
my  lord  Saint  Nicholas,  at  Varengeville,  and  I  promise  you 
that  God  wiU  restore  us  in  safety  to  France."  "  Ah ! 
seneschal,"  answered  she,  I  am  afraid  the  king  will  not 
permit  me  to  make  this  pilgrimage  for  the  accomplishment 
of  my  vow."  "At  least,  then,  madam,  promise  him,  that 
if  God  shall  restore  you  in  safety  to  France,  you  will  give 
him  a  silver  ship  of  the  value  of  five  marcs,  for  the  king, 
yourself,  and  your  children ;  and  if  you  shall  do  this,  I 
assure  you  that,  at  the  entreaties  of  St.  Nicholas,  God  will 
grant  you  a  successful  voyage ;  and  I  vow  for  myself,  that,  on 
my  return  to  JoinviUe,  I  will  make  a  pilgrimage  to  his  shrine 
barefooted." 

Upon  this,  she  made  a  vow  of  a  silver  ship  to  St. 
Nicholas,  and  demanded  that  I  would  be  hei  pledge  for 
her  due  performance  of  it,  to  which  I  assented.  She  shortly 
after  came  to  us,  to  say  that  God,  at  the  intercession  of 
St.  Nicholas,  had  delivered  us  from  this  peril. 

On  the  queen's  return  to  France,  she  caused  the  ship  to 
be  made  that  she  had  vowed,  and  had  introduced  in  it  the 
king,  herself,  her  three  children,  with  the  sailors,  mast  and 
steerage,  all  of  silver,  and  the  ix)pes  of  silver  thread.  This 
ship  she  sent  me  with  orders  to  convey  it  to  the  shrine  of 
my  lord  Saint  Nicholas,  which  I  did.  I  saw  it  there  a 
long  time  afterward,  when  we  conducted  the  king's  sister  to 
the  emperor  of  Germany. 

We  will  return  to  our  principal  subject,  and  continue  the 
luscovnt  of  our  voyage  home.  When  the  king  perceived  we 
had  escaped  from  these  two  perils,  he  rose  from  a  bench  of  the 
Tessel,  and  said  to  me, — "  Now  see,  seneschal,  if  God  has  not 
dearly  manifested  his  great  power,  when  by  a  blast  of  ono 


Digitized  by 


510       jointille's  memoirs  op  saint  LOUIS  IX.    [^PT.  n; 

of  these  four  winds,  the  king,  the  queen,  our  children^  and  so 
many  other  persons,  might  have  been  drowned  ?  For  our  de- 
liverance from  this  danger,  we  ought  to  pay  him  our  sincerest 
thanks.- 

The  good  king  talked  incessantly  of  the  imminent  danger 
we  had  been  in,  and  of  the  power  which  God  had  displayed^ 
Hewsaid  to  me,  "  Seneschal,  when  such  tribulations  be&l  man- 
kind, or  other  misfortunes  of  sickness,  the  saints  say  they  are 
threatenings  from  our  Lord.  I  therefore  maintain,  that  the 
perils  we  have  been  in  are  the  same  kind  of  threatening  from 
our  Lord,  who  might  say,  *  Now  consider  how  very  easily  I 
might  have  suffered  you  all  to  be  drowned,  had  I  so  willed 
it.'  "  For  this  reason,"  continued  the  holy  king,  "  we  should 
examine  ourselves  well  that  there  be  nothing  in  our  conduct 
displeasing  to  God  our  Creator ;  and  whenever  we  nmy  find 
there  is  any  thing  wrong,  we  ought  instantly  to  make  ourselves 
clear  of  it.  When  we  thus  act,  God  willl  love  us  and  pre- 
serve us  from  all  perils;  but,  should  we  follow  a  contrary  be- 
haviour after  having  noticed  these  menaces,  he  will  afflict  us 
with  some  grievous  malady,  perhaps  death,  and  permit  us  to 
descend  to  hell,  without  hope  of  redemption." 

The  good  and  holy  king  continued, — "  Seneschal,  that 
good  man  Job  said  to  God,  '  Lord  God,  wherefore  dost  thou 
afflict  us  ?  for  if  thou  destroy  us,  thou  wilt  not  be  the  poorer ; 
and  if  thou  wert  to  call  us  all  to  thee,  thou  wouldst  not  be 
more  powerful  nor  more  rich.'  Whence  we  may  see," 
added  he,  "  that  the  menaces  of  God  are  uttered  against  us 
from  his  great  love  to  us,  and  for  our  welfare,  not  for  his  own ; 
that  we  may  the  more  clearly  discover  our  faults  and  de- 
merits, and  purify  our  consciences  from  all  that  may  be  dis- 
pleasing to  him.  Let  us  therefore  act  in  this  manner,  and  we 
shall  be  the  wiser  and  better  for  it." 

After  having  taken  water  on  board  at  the  island  of  Cyprus, 
and  some  other  necessary  articles,  we  again  set  sail  when  the 
tempest  had  ceased,  and  saw  another  island  called  Lampe- 
dosa.*    We  landed  on  it,  and  catched  a  great  many  rabbits. 

*  This  is  the  island  of  Lampedosa,  called  by  Ptolemy  LapaduMt  by 
the  Italians  Lampadowa^  and  by  Ariosto  in  his  fourth  canto  JJpadutHf 
who  represents  it  as  being  uninhabited,  as  well  as  the  lord  de  JoinviUe. 
It  is  100  miles  distant  from  Malta.  Geographers  remark,  there  is  at 
present  a  church  called  Sancta  Maria  de  Lampedusa,  divided  into  two 
parts,  as  described  by  our  author. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1254.']  TOUCH  AT  LAMPEDOSA  AND  PANTALEONE.  511 

We  fouDd  there  a  hermitage  among  the  rocks,  with  a  hand- 
some garden  planted  with  olives,  figs,  vines,  and  other  fruit- 
trees,  with  a  fine  spring  of  water,  that  ran  through  it  The 
king  and  his  company  went  to  the  upper  part  of  the  garden, 
where  was  an  oratory,  the  roof  of  which  was  painted  white, 
with  a  red  cross  in  the  centre.  In  another  chamber,  more 
retired,  we  found  two  dead  bodies  with  their  hands  on  their 
breasts,  and  only  the  ribs  which  held  them  together.  These 
bodies  were  laid  towards  the  east,  as  is  the  usual  custom  at 
interments. 

When  we  had  seen  and  examined  every  thing,  the  king 
and  his  company  returned  on  shipboard ;  but  one  of  our 
sailors  was  missing,  and  the  captain,  after  considering  a  while, 
said  he  guessed  who  it  was,  and  that  it  was  one  who  was  desirous 
of  living  there  henceforward  as  a  hermit.  The  king,  hearing 
this,  ordered  three  sacks  of  biscuit  to  be  left  oa  the  shore  of 
this  island,  in  order  that  the  sailor  might  find  them,  and  they 
might  serve  for  his  sustenance. 

[The  Poitiers  edition  to  this  adds:  "Afterward,  in  the 
course  of  our  voyage,  we  passed  another  island,  called  Panta- 
leone,  which  was  peopled  with  Saracens,  a  part  of  whom 
were  subject  to  the  king  of  Sicily,  and  part  to  the  king  of 
Tunis.  When  we  first  saw  this  island  at  a  distance,  the 
queen  entreated  the  king  to  have  the  goodness  to  order  three 
galleys  to  bring  fruit  for  her  children,  which  he  did,  com- 
manding them  to  make  haste,  that  they  might  meet  him  when 
he  should  pass  the  island. 

"  It  fell  out,  that  when  the  king  was  opposite  to  the  port 
of  this  island,  he  could  not  see  his  galleys.  The  sailors,  to  his 
questions  about  them,  answered, '  that  >  ery  probably  the  Sara- 
cens had  captured  them  and  their  crews ;  but,  sire,  we  would 
not  advise  you  to  wait  for  them,  for  you  are  near  the  king- 
doms of  Sicily  and  Tunis,  neither  of  whose  kings  bears  you 
any  great  love;  and  if  you  will  allow  us  to  make  sail,* we 
will,  before  night,  place  you  out  of  danger  from  them,  for  we 
shall,  in  a  short  time,  have  passed  the  straits.'  *  In  truth,' 
replied  the  king,  *  I  shall  not  follow  your  advice,  but  order  you 
to  turn  the  helm,  that  we  may  seek  our  people.'  And,  happen 
wlj^i  would,  we  were  obliged  so  to  do,  and  thus  lost  fiill  eight 
dayp  m  waiting  for  them,  on  account  of  their  gluttony,  which 
they  ircre  impatient  to  satisfy. 


Digitized  by 


512 


JOINYILLB'S  MKMOIRS  OF  SAINT  LOUIS  IX.     [[PT.  II. 


This  island,  which  is  here  called  '  Pantaleone,'  is  that 
named  by  geographers  *  Pantalarea,'  situated  between  Sicily 
and  Africa,  pretty  near  to  Sousa,  a  town  in  the  kingdom 
of  Tunis.  It  belongs  to  the  king  of  Spain,  and  is  subject  to 
the  viceroy  of  Sicily.  The  inhabitants,  although  Catholic 
Christians,  wear  the  dress  and  speak  the  language  of  the 
Moors."] 

Shortly  after,  an  accident  happened  on  board  the  ship  of 
the  lord  d'Argones,  one  of  the  most  powerful  lords  of  Prorence. 
He  was  annoyed  one  morning  in  bed  by  the  rays  of  the  sun 
darting  on  his  eyes  through  a  hole  in  the  vessel,  and  calling 
one  of  his  esquires,  ordered  him  to  stop  the  hole.  The  esquire, 
finding  he  could  not  stop  it  withinside,  attempted  to  do  it 
without,  but  his  foot  slipping,  he  fell  into  the  sea.  The  ship 
kept  on  her  way,  and  there  was  not  the  smallest  boat  along- 
side to  succour  him.  We,  who  were  in  the  king's  ship,  saw 
him,  but  as  we  were  half  a  league  off,  we  thought  it  was 
some  piece  of  furniture  that  had  fallen  into  the  sea,  for  the 
esquire  did  not  attempt  to  save  himself,  nor  to  move.  When 
we  cnme  nearer,  one  of  the  king's  boats  took  him  up,  and 
brought  him  on  board  our  vessel,  when  he  related  his  acci- 
dent. We  asked  him  why  he  did  not  attempt  to  save  himself 
by  swimming,  nor  call  out  to  the  other  ships  for  help.  He 
said  he  had  no  occasion  so  to  do,  for,  as  he  fell  into  the  sea, 
he  exclaimed,  "  Our  Lady  of  Valbert ! "  and  that  she  had 
supported  him  by  his  shoulders  until  the  king's  galley  came  to 
him.  In  honour  of  the  blessed  Virgin  Mary,  and  to  per- 
petuate this  miracle,  I  had  it  painted  in  my  chapel  of  Join- 
ville,  and  also  on  the  windows  of  the  church  of  Blecourt. 

At  the  end  of  ten  weeks  that  we  had  been  at  sea,  we 
arrived  in  the  port  of  Hieres,  in  front  of  the  castle  that 
belonged  to  the  count  de  Provence,  afterward  king  of  Sicily. 

The  queen,  and  the  whole  of  the  council,  advised  the  king 
to  disembark  there,  as  it  was  on  his  brother  s  land ;  but  he 
declared  he  would  not  land  before  he  came  to  Aigues 
Mortes,  which  was  his  own  territory.  On  this  difference, 
the  king  detained  us  there  Wednesday  and  Thursday,  without 
any  one  being  able  to  prevail  on  him  to  land.  On  the  Frioa  v, 
as  he  was  seated  on  one  of  the  benches  of  the  ship,  he  cailea 
me  to  him,  and  demanded  my  opinion,  whether  he  ou&rnt 
to  land  or  not.     I  replied,  ^*  Sire,  it  seems  to  me  ih&t  yo» 


Digitized  by 


▲.D.  1254.^  DISEMBARK  AT  HIERES. 


513 


ought  to  land ;  for  Madame  de  Botlrbon,  being  once  in  this 
very  port,  and  unwilling  to  land,  put  again  to  sea,  to  disem- 
bark at  Aigues  Mortes,  but  she  was  tossed  about  for  upwards 
of  seven  weeks  before  she  could  make  that  harbour."  Upon 
this,  the  king  consented  to  follow  my  advice,  and  landed  at 
Hieres,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  queen  and  all  on  board. 

The  king,  the  queen,  and  their  children  took  up  their  resi- 
dence in  the  castle  of  Hieres  until  horses  should  be  provided 
for  the  further  continuance  of  their  journey.  The  abbot  of 
Cluny,  who  was  afterward  bishop  of  Olive,  sent  the  king  two 
palfreys ;  one  for  himself  and  the  other  for  the  queen.  It 
was  said  at  the  time,  that  they  were  each  well  worth  500 
livres.  When  the  king  had  accepted  of  these  two  fine  horses, 
the  abbot  requested  an  audience  of  him  on  the  morrow,  on  the 
subject  of  his  affairs.  This  was  granted,  and  the  next  day 
the  abbot  conversed  a  long  time  with  the  king,  who  listened 
to  him  veiy  attentively. 

When  the  abbot  was  gone,  I  asked  the  king  if  he  would 
answer  a  question  I  wished  to  put  to  him.  On  his  replying 
in  the  affirmative,  I  said,  Sire,  is  it  not  true  that  you  have 
thus  long  listened  to  the  abbot  for  the  sake  of  the  horses 
be  gave  you  ? "  The  king  said,  "  It  was  certainly  so."  I 
then  continued,  that  I  had  asked  the  question,  that  he  might 
forbid,  on  bis  return  to  France,  those  of  his  council,  on  their 
oaths,  to  receive  the  smallest  gifts  from  any  one  who  had 
business  to  transact  in  his  presence  ;  for  be  assured,"  added 
I,  "  that  if  they  take  presents,  they  will  listen  and  attend  to 
the  givers,  even  longer  than  you  have  done  to  the  abbot 
of  Cluny."  The  king,  calling  his  council,  told  them  the 
request  I  had  made,  and  the  reason  for  my  making  it.  His 
council,  however,  said  that  I  had  given  very  excellent 
advice. 

While  we  were  at  Hieres  we  heard  of  a  very  good  man, 
a  Cordelier  friar,  who  went  about  the  country  preaching ;  his 
name  was  Father  Hugh.  The  king  being  desirous  of  hear- 
ing and  seeing  him,  the  day  he  came  to  Hieres,  we  went  out 
to  meet  him,  and  saw  a  great  company  of  men  and  women 
following  him  on  foot.  On  his  arrival  in  the  town,  the  king 
directed  him  to  preach,  and  his  first  sermon  was  against  the 
clergy,  whom  he  blamed  for  bt'ing  in  such  numbers  with 
the  king,  saying:  they  were  not  in  a  situation  to  save  their 


2l 


514  JOINVILLe's  memoirs  op  saint  LOUIS  IX.        £PT.  II. 

souls,  or  that  the  Scriptures  lied.  This  was  true ;  for  the 
Scriptures  do  say  that  a  monk  cannot  live  out  of  his 
cloister,  without  falling  into  deadly  sins,  any  more  than  fish 
can  live  out  of  water  without  dying.  The  reason  is  plain ; 
for  the  religious,  who  follow  the  king's  court,  eat  and  drink 
many  meats  and  wines  which  they  would  not  do  were  they 
resident  in  their  cloisters,  and  this  luxurious  living  induces 
them  more  to  sin  than  if  they  led  the  austere  life  of  a 
convent. 

He  afterwards  addressed  the  king,  and  pointed  out  to  him, 
that  if  he  wished  to  live  beloved  and  in  peace  with  his  people, 
he  must  be  just  and  upright.  He  said,  he  had  carefully 
perused  the  Bible  and  other  holy  books,  and  had  always 
found,  that  among  princes,  whether  Christians  or  infidels, 
no  kingdoms  had  ever  been  excited  to  war  against  their 
lords,  but  through  want  of  proper  justice  being  done  to  the 
subject.  "  The  king,  therefore,"  added  the  Cordelier,  "  must 
carefully  have  justice  administered  equally  to  every  one  of  his 
subjects,  that  he  may  live  among  them  in  peace  and  tran- 
quillity to  his  last  day,  and  that  God  may  not  deprive  him 
of  his  kingdom  with  dishonour  and  shame. 

The  king  had  him  several  times  entreated  to  live  with  him 
during  his  stay  in  Provence ;  but  he  replied  that  he  would 
not  on  any  account  remain  in  the  company  of  the  king. 
This  Cordelier  only  stayed  with  us  one  day,  and  on  the  mor- 
row departed.  I  have  since  heard  that  his  body  is  buried  at 
Marseilles,  where  it  performs  many  fine  miracles. 

After  this,  the  king  set  out  from  Hieres,  and  came  to  the 
city  of  Alx  in  Provence,  in  honour  of  the  blessed  Magdalen, 
who  is  interred  a  short  day's  journey  off.  We  visited  the 
place  of  Le  Baume,  which  is  a  deep  cave  in  a  rock,  wherein, 
it  is  said,  the  holy  Magdalen  resided  for  a  long  time,  at  a 
hermitage.  We  passed  the  Rh6ne  at  Beaucaire ;  and  when 
the  king  was  in  his  own  realm  I  took  my  leave  of  him,  and 
went  to  my  niece  the  dauphiness  of  Viennois,  thence  to  my 
uncle's  the  count  de  ChMons,  and  to  the  count  of  Burgundy 
his  son,  whence  I  went  to  Joinville. 

Having  made  a  short  stay  there,  I  set  out  to  meet  the 
king,  whom  I  found  at  Soissons.  On  my  arrival,  he  received 
me  with  such  joy  as  suryirised  every  one.  I  met  there  Count 
JokQ  of  Brittany,  and  his  wife,  the  daughter  of  King  Thi- 


Digitized  by 


▲.D.  1254.^  MARRIAGE  OF  THE  KING's  DAUGBTBIL  51^ 


bault.  On  account  of  the  dispute  that  was  between  the 
king  of  Navarre  and  the  heiress  of  Champagne,  for  some 
claims  the  king  of  Navarre  pretended  to  have  on  the  country 
of  Champagne,  the  king  ordered  them  all  to  Paris,  that  each 
side  might  be  heard,  and  justice  properly  done  between  them. 

At  this  parliament  King  Thibault  of  Navarre  demanded 
in  marriage  Isabella,  the  king's  daughter;  and  they  had 
brought  me  with  them  that  I  might  in  suitable  terms  make 
this  proposal  of  marriage,  for  they  had  observed  the  high 
feivour  I  was  in  with  the  king  when  at  Soissons.  I  went 
purposely  to  speak  on  this  subject  to  the  king,  who  replied, 
"  Seneschal,  go  first  and  make  peace  with  the  count  of  Brit- 
tany, and  when  that  is  done,  we  will  settle  the  marriage/' 
I  answered,  "  Sire,  you  should  not  neglect  this  matter  on  any 
account."  But  he  said,  he  would  not  marry  his  daughter  with- 
out the  consent  of  his  barons,  nor  until  peace  were  concluded 
with  the  count  of  Brittany. 

I  immediately  returned  to  Queen  Margaret  of  Navarre, 
the  king  her  son,  and  their  council,  to  tell  them  the  king's 
answer :  which  having  heard,  they  set  about  concluding  a 
peace  with  all  diligence  with  the  count  of  Brittany;  and 
when  that  was  done,  the  king  gave  his  daughter  Isabella  iu 
marriage  to  the  kiug  of  Navarre.  The  wedding  was  cele- 
brated with  pomp  and  magnificence  at  Melun,  whence  King 
Thibault  conducted  her  to  Provins,  where  they  were  most 
splendidly  received  by  the  barons. 

I  will  now  speak  of  the  state  and  mode  of  living  of  the 
king,  after  his  return  from  Palestine.  In  regard  to  his  dress, 
he  would  never  more  wear  minever  or  squirrel  furs,  nor 
scarlet  robes,  nor  gilt  spurs,  nor  use  stirrups.  Hia  dress  was 
of  camlet  or  Persian,  and  the  fur  trimmings  of  his  robes  were 
the  skins  of  gamutes  or  the  legs  of  hares.  He  was  ve^ 
sober  at  his  meals,  and  never  ordered  any  thing  particular  or 
delicate  to  be  cooked  for  him,  but  took  patiently  whatever 
was  set  before  him.  He  mixed  his  wine  with  water  accord- 
ing to  its  strength,  and  drank  but  one  glass.  He  had  com- 
njouly  at  his  meals  many  poor 'persons  behind  his  chair,  whom 
he  fed,  and  then  ordered  money  to  be  given  to  them.  After 
dinner,  he  had  his  chaplains  who  said  grace  for  him ;  and, 
when  any  noble  person  was  at  table  with  him,  he  was  an 
excellent  companion,  and  very  friendly.    He  was  considered 


516  aOlNTILLS's  MEMOIRS  OF  SATNT  LOUIS  IX.      [^PT.  H. 


as  by  fiur  the  wisest  of  any  in  his  council ;  and  as  a  proof  of 
bis  wisdom,  whenever  any  thing  occurred  that  demanded 
immediate  attention,  he  never  waited  for  his  council,  but  gave 
a  speedy  and  decided  answer. 

Soon  after,  the  good  king  St.  Ijouis  negotiated  so  success- 
fully that  he  prevailed  on  the  king  and  queen  of  England  to 
come  to  France  with  their  children  to  conclude  a  peace.  His 
council,  however,  were  much  against  this  peace,  and  said  to 
him,  "  Sire,  we  marvel  greatly  how  you  can  consent  to  the 
king  of  England  keeping  so  large  a  tract  of  your  territories, 
which  your  predecessors  have  conquered  from  him  for  ill 
conduct,  and  which  it  seems  you  have  not  duly  considered, 
nor  will  he  be  any  way  grateful  for  it.*' 

To  this  the  king  answered,  that  he  was  well  aware  the  king 
of  England  and  his  predecessor  had  mostly  forfeited  the  lands 
he  held,  and  that  he  never  meant  to  restore  any  thing  but 
what  be  was  in  justice  bounden  to  do.  But  he  should  make 
this  restoration  in  order  to  confirm  and  strengthen  that  union 
which  ought  to  exist  between  them  and  their  children,  who 
were  cousins-german.  The  king  added,  "  And  by  thus 
acting,  I  think  I  shall  do  a  very  good  work ;  for,  in  the  first 
place,  I  shall  establish  a  peace,  and  shall  then  make  him  my 
vassal,  which  he  is  not  yet,  as  he  has  never  done  me  homage." 

The  king,  St.  Louis,  was  the  man  in  the  world  who 
laboured  most  to  maintain  peace  and  concord  among  his  sub- 
jects, more  especially  between  the  princes  and  barons  of  his 
realm,  in  particular  between  my  uncle,  the  count  de  Chylous, 
and  his  son,  the  count  of  Burgundy,  who  carried  on  a  violent 
war  after  our  return  from  Palestine.  To  make  a  peace  between 
the  father  and  son,  he  sent  several  of  his  council,  at  his  own 
costs  and  charges,  into  Burgundy,  and  took  such  pains,  that 
at  length  he  concluded  a  peace  between  them.  Through  his 
interference,  in  like  manner,  was  peace  made  between  the 
second  king  Thibault  of  Navarre,  and  the  counts  of  Ch&lons 
and  Burgundy,  who  carried  on  a  very  disastrous  war ;  but  he 
sent  part  of  his  council  thither,  who  appeased  their  differences, 
and  concluded  a  peace. 

After  this  peace  another  serious  war  broke  out  between 
Count  Thibault  de  Bar  and  the  count  of  Luxembourg,  who 
had  married  his  sister.  They  fought  a  duel  with  each  other 
below  Pigny,  when  the  count  de  Bar  made  prisoner  the  eoont 


Digitized  by 


A.t>.  1254.]  PUNISHMENT  OF  8WEAREIUI. 


517 


de  Luxembourg,  and  won  tbe  castle  of  Lignev,  that  belonged 
to  the  latter  in  right  of  his  wife.  To  put  an  end  to  thia 
war,  the  king,  at  his  own  expense,  sent  thither  his  chamber* 
lain,  the  lord  Perron,  in  whom,  of  all  his  courtiers,  he  put  the 
greatest  confidence,  who,  in  conjunction  with  the  king, 
laboured  so  effectually  that  peace  was  restored. 

His  council  sometimes  reproved  him  for  the  great  pains  he 
took  to  make  up  the  quarrels  of  foreigners,  for  that  he  acted 
wrong  in  preventing  them  from  making  war  on.  each  other, 
as  peace  would  in  consequence  be  more  securely  maintained. 
The  king,  in  answer,  told  them,  they  did  not  advise  what  was 
right ;  for,"  added  he,  if  the  princes  and  great  barons, 
whose  territories  join  mine,  perceive  that  I  suffer  them  to 
make  war  on  each  other  with  indifference,  they  may  say 
among  themselves,  that  the  king  of  France  allows  them  thus 
to  act,  through  malice  and  ingratitude,  and  on  that  account 
they  may  unite  and  make  an  attack  on  my  kingdom,  which 
may  suffer  from  it ;  and  I  shall,  besides,  incur  the  anger  of 
God,  who  expressly  says,  *  Blessed  are  peacemakers,  for  theirs 
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven/  " 

The  Burgundians  and  Lorrainers  perceiving  so  much 
goodness  in  the  king,  and  the  great  pains  he  took  to  keep  them 
at  peace,  had  such  an  affection  for  him  that  they  were  willing 
to  obey  his  commands,  and  with  much  pleasure  pleaded  their 
private  disputes  in  his  presence.  I  saw  them  frequently  come 
on  this  business  to  Paris,  to  Rheims,  to  Melun  and  elsewhere, 
as  the  king  might  happen  to  be. 

The  good  king  loved  God  and  the  blessed  Virgin  with  such 
sincerity,  that  he  severely  punished  every  one  that  was  guilty 
of  viUanous  swearing,  or  of  having  used  any  indecent  or 
beastly  expression.  I  saw  him  once  at  CsBsarea  order  a  silver- 
smith to  be  pilloried*  in  his  shirt  and  breeches,  to  the  disgrace 
of  the  criminal ;  and  I  heard  that,  after  his  return  from 
Palestine,  while  I  was  at  Joinville,  he  caused  a  citizen  of 
Paris  to  be  burnt,  and  marked  with  a  hot  iron  on  the  nose  and 
under-lip,  for  having  blasphemed.  I  heard  also,  from  the 
king's  own  mouth,  that  he  would  willingly  be  seared  with  a 

*  This  ladder  of  panishment  was  used  in  ancient  times,  and,  according 
to  the  Glossary  of  Du  Cange,  is  similar  to  oar  pillory.  The  criminal 
was  forced  to  mount  it,  and  be  exposed  to  public  Tiew,  to  make  him 
piflbr  the  shame  his  crime  deserved. 


Digitized  by 


518 


JOINTIX^LE's  memoirs  op  saint  LOUIS  IX.       []PT.  th 


red-hot  iron,  and  he  was  little  able  to  bear  such  an  operation, 
if  he  could  banish  from  his  kingdom  all  blasphemies  and 
swearings. 

I  have  been  constantly  with  him  for  twenty-two  years,  but 
never  in  my  life,  for  all  the  passions  I  have  seen  him  in,  did  I 
hear  him  swear  or  blaspheme  God,  his  holy  mother,  or  any  of 
the  saints.  When  he  wished  to  affirm  any  thing,  he  said, 
"  Truly  it  is  so  or,  "  In  truth,  it  is  not  so."  It  was  very 
clear  that  on  no  earthly  consideration  would  he  deny  his  God; 
for  when  the  sultan  and  admirals  of  Egypt  wanted  to  make 
that  the  condition,  should  he  break  the  treaty,  he  would  never 
consent ;  and  when  he  was  told  this  was  the  last  proposal  of 
the  Turks,  he  replied,  that  he  would  rather  die  than  commit 
such  a  crime. 

I  never  heard  him  name  or  mention  the  word  devil,*  if  it 
was  not  in  some  book  that  made  it  necessary ;  and  it  is  very 
disgraceful  to  the  princes  and  kingdom  of  France  to  suffer  it, 
and  hear  the  name  ;  for  you  will  see  that  in  any  dispute  one 
will  not  say  three  words  to  another  in  abuse,  but  he  will  add, 
"  Go  to  the  devil,"  or  other  bad  words.  Now  it  is  very  shock- 
ing  thus  to  send  man  or  woman  to  the  devil,  when  they  are  by 
baptism  become  the  creatures  of  God.  In  my  castle  of  Join- 
viUe,  whoever  makes  use  of  this  word  is  instantly  buffeted, 
and  the  frequency  of  bad  language  is  abolished  there. 

The  holy  king  once  asked  me  if  I  washed  the  feet  of  the 
poor  on  Thursday  before  Easter.  I  said  I  did  not,  for  that  I 
did  not  think  it  very  becoming  such  a  person  as  I  was.  The 
good  king  instantly  replied,  *  Ah,  Lord  de  Joinville,  you  ought 
not  to  disdain  nor  think  unbecoming  that  which  God  has  done 
for  our  example,  when  he  washed  the  feet  of  his  apostles,  he 
who  was  their  Lord  an<l  Master.  I  believe  you  would  very 
unwillingly  perform  what  the  king  of  England,  now  with  us, 

*  Our  first  Christians,  and  the  devout  who  served  God,  held  the  devil 
in  such  abhorrence,  as  the  enemy  of  mankind,  that  they  were  scrupulous 
even  of  naming  him.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  find  the  fathers  of  the 
church  have  affected  to  call  him  the  wicked  one,  by  simply  naming  him 
Malus.  Several  imagine  that  this  is  understood  in  the  words  of  the 
Lord's  prayer,  "  Deliver  us  from  evil."  St.  Chrysostom  thinks  so,  with 
Euthymius,  Theophylactes,  Origen,  and  others,  on  this  prayer.  Our 
ancient  poets  call  him  almost  always  Maufez^  because  he  does  evil,  and 
is  the  Author  of  it ;  or  because  he  is  deformed  and  ill  made,  whence  wf 
have  the  word  mauvait  at  present  in  use. 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1254.3        HIS  BENEVOLENT  CHARACTER. 


519 


does.  On  this  Holy  Thursday,  he  washes  the  feet  of  lepers, 
and  then  kisses  them." 

Before  this  good  king  went  to  bed  he  was  often  accustomed 
to  have  his  children  brought  to  him,  and  then  related  to  them 
the  brilliant  actions  and  sayings  of  kings  and  other  ancient 
princes,  telling  them  to  retain  them  well  in  their  memory,  to 
serve  as  examples.  In  like  manner,  he  told  them  the  deeds  of 
wicked  men,  who,  by  their  luxury,  rapine,  avarice,  and  pride, 
had  lost  their  honours  and  kingdoms,  and  that  their  deaths 
bad  been  unfortunate.  "  Such  things,"  added  the  king,  "  you 
will  cautiously  avoid  doing  like  them,  that  you  may  not  fall 
under  the  displeasure  of  God."  He  likewise  taught  them 
their  prayers  to  the  blessed  Virgin,  and  heard  them  daily 
repeat  the  prayers  for  the  day,  according  to  the  seasons,  in 
order  to  accustom  them  to  do  the  same  when  they  should  be 
more  advanced  in  years,  and  govern  their  country. 

He  was  a  most  liberal  almsgiver;  for,  whenever  he  tra- 
velled through  his  kingdom,  he  always  visited  the  churches, 
the  infirmaries,  and  hospitals.  He  sought  out  distressed 
gentlemen,  poor  widows,  and  unmarried  girls  without  fortune  ; 
and  every  place  where  he  found  distress  or  want,  he  gave 
large  sums  of  money.  To  poor  beggars  he  ordered  meat  and 
drink,  and  I  have  often  seen  him  cut  the  bread  and  pour  out 
drink  to  them  himself. 

During  his  reign,  he  built  and  endowed  several  churches, 
monasteries,  and  abbeys ;  such  as  Reaumont,  the  abbey  of  St. 
Anthony  at  Paris,  the  abbey  Du  Lis,  the  abbey  De  Malbois- 
son,  and  many  more  for  the  Cordeliers  and  Friars-preachers. 
He  also  erected  the  Maison  Dieu  at  Pontoise,  that  of  Vernon, 
the  house  of  the  Quinze-vingts  at  Paris,  and  the  abbey  of 
Cordeliers  at  St.  Cloud,  which  the  princess  Isabella,  his  sister, 
founded  at  his  request.  When  any  benefices  became  vacant 
and  were  in  his  gift,  before  he  provided  for  them,  he  made 
strict  inquiry  of  proper  persons  respecting  the  situation  and 
condition  of  those  who  asked  for  them,  and  whether  they  were 
men  of  letters  and  well  informed.  He  would  never  allow 
those  to  whom  he  gave  benefices  to  hold  more  than  was  be- 
coming their  state,  and  he  never  gave  them  without  having 
duly  consulted  those  well  qualified  to  give  hira  good  advice. 

You  will  see  below  how  he  punished  his  bailifi*s,  judges, 
•nd  other  officers  when  in  &ult,  and  the  handsome  new  esta- 


Digitized  by 


520         JOINYILLE's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.         I^PT.  II. 

blishinents  he  formed  for  the  boDefit  of  his  kingdom  of  France. 
His  ordinance  runs  thus : 

"  We  Louis,  by  the  grace  of  God,  king  of  France,  order 
that  all  bailiffs,  provosts,  mayors,  judges,  receiyers,  and 
others  in  whatever  office  they  may  be,  do  each  henceforth 
make  oath  that,  during  the  time  he  shall  hold  such  office,  he 
will  do  strict  justice  to  every  one,  without  exception  of 
person,  as  well  to  the  poor  as  to  the  rich,  to  the  stranger  as 
well  as  to  the  resident,  and  will  follow  such  laws  and  cus- 
toms as  have  been  found  good  and  approved  of.  Should  my 
one  act  contrary  to  his  oath,  we  will  and  expressly  command 
that  he  be  punished  in  body  and  estate,  according  to  the  exi- 
gency of  the  case.  We  reserve  to  ourselves,  and  to  our  own 
discretion,  the  punishments  that  may  be  due  to  our  bailiffs, 
judges,  and  other  officers,  and  also  to  those  employed  under 
them. 

Our  treasurers,  receivers,  provosts,  auditors  of  accounts, 
and  other  officers  concerned  in  our  finances,  will  swear  that 
they  will  well  and  loyally  guard  our  rents  and  domains,  with 
all  our  rights,  liberties,  and  privileges,  without  suffering  them 
in  any  way  to  be  infringed  upon  or  abridged. 

"  They  will  not  themselves  accept  of  any  gift  or  present, 
nor  permit  their  clerks  or  other  persons  under  them  to  do  the 
same,  nor  consent  to  any  presents  being  made  to  their  wives 
or  children,  in  order  to  gain  their  &vour.  Should  any  gift 
have  been  made,  they  will  instantly  and  without  delay  restore 
it,  or  have  it  sent  back.  In  like  manner,  they  will  not  make 
any  presents  to  any  persons  their  superiors,  to  gain  their 
favour  and  support.  They  will  also  swear,  that  whenever 
they  shall  discover  any  officers,  sergeants,  or  others,  who  are 
robbers,  and  abuse  their  offices,  for  which  they  ought  to  be 
dismissed  from  them,  and  our  service,  they  will  not  conceal 
or  disguise  their  guilt  for  any  gift,  favour,  promise,  or  other- 
wise; but  that  they  will  punish  and  correct  them,  as  the 
case  may  require,  with  good  faith  and  equity,  and  without  any 
malice. 

We  will,  that  the  aforesaid  oaths  be  taken  before  ns,  and 
that  afterward  they  be  proclaimed  publicly  before  clerks, 
knights,  lords,  and  the  commonalty,  in  order  that  they  may 
be  better  observed,  and  that  those  who  have  taken  these 
oaths  may  be  afraid  of  committing  the  sin  of  perjury,  not 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1254.]  JUDICIAL  ORDINANCES. 


521 


only  for  the  punishment  that  may  ensue  at  our  hands,  but 
for  fear  of  public  disgrace  and  the  judgment  of  €h>d  here- 
after. 

'^We  likewise  forbid  and  prohibit  all  our  said  bailiffs, 
provosts,  mayors,  judges,  and  others  our  oflBcere,  either  to 
swear  by  or  blaspheme  the  name  of  God,  his  holy  mother,  or 
the  blessed  saints  in  paradise,  or  to  game  with  dice,  or  to  fre- 
quent taverns,  or  houses  of  ill-fame,  under  penaltpr  of  depri- 
vation of  office  and  undergoing  such  other  punishment  as 
their  crimes  may  deserve.  We  order,  likewise,  that  common 
prostitutes  and  women  too  free  of  their  favour^  be  put  out  of 
private  houses,  and  separated  from  others  of  a  different  beha- 
viour ;  and  that  no  person  let  to  hire  any  house  or  habitation 
for  them  to  carry  on  their  libidinous  trade  and  vicious  habitis 
of  luxury. 

"  We  also  forbid  and  prohibit  any  of  our  bailiffs,  provosts, 
mayora  or  others  our  officers,  to  have  the  boldness  to 
acquire  or  purchase,  by  themselves  or  others,  any  lands  or 
possessions  in  the  districts  over  which  they  have  been  ap- 
pointed to  administer  justice,  without  our  being  previously 
made  acquainted  therewith,  and  our  leave  and  license  first 
had  and  obtained.  Should  they  act  otherwise,  we  will  and 
declare  that  such  lands  and  possessions,  so  acquired,  be  con- 
fiscated to  our  benefit. 

"  In  like  manner,  we  forbid  any  of  our  aforesaid  superior 
officers,  so  long  as  they  shall  be  in  our  eervice,  to  marry  their 
sons,  daughters,  or  other  relations  they  may  have,  to  any 
persons  within  their  bailiwicks  or  district,  without  our  spe- 
cial permission  first  obtained.  We  also  include  within  the 
above  prohibitions  of  acquisitions  of  property  and  marriage, 
all  other  inferior  judges,  or  other  subalterns  of  office. 

"  We  likewise  forbid  any  bailiff,  provost,  or  other,  to  have 
too  great  a  number  of  sergeants  or  beadles,  so  that  the  people 
may  be  aggrieved  thereat. 

'*We  also  forbid  any  of  our  subjects  to  be  personally 
arrested  or  imprisoned  for  any  debts  of  theirs,  but  what  may 
be  owed  to  the  crown,  and  that  any  fine  be  levied  on  any  of 
our  subjects  for  debt. 

"  We  likewise  ordain  that  those  who  may  hold  our  pro- 
vostships,  viscountships,  or  other  offices,  do  not  sell  nor  trans- 
fer them  to  any  other  person  without  our  consent.  And 


Digitized  by 


522      jointille's  memoirs  op  saint  louis  ix.      Qpt.  n 

wben  several  are  in  one  office,  we  order  that  one  of  them  do 
its  duties  for  all. 

"  We  forbid,  likewise,  any  disseizure  of  possession  without 
assigning  a  proper  reason  for  it,  or  having  our  special  com- 
mands to  that  purpose.  We  order  that  there  be  no  additional 
taxes  raised,  nor  any  other  imposts  or  customs  whatever. 

"We  will  that  our  baili&,  provosts,  mayors,  viscounts, 
and  other  our  officers,  who  shall  at  any  time  be  deprived  of 
their  offices,  and  dismissed  our  service,  do  remain  after  such 
dismission  forty  days  within  the  districts  where  their  ap- 
pointments lay,  either  personally,  or  by  sufficient  proxy,  to 
answer  to  those  who  shall  be  their  successors,  to  such  ques- 
tions as  they  shall  ask  touching  their  evil  deeds  and  the 
complaints  made  against  them." 

By  these  regulations,  the  king  greatly  improved  the  state 
of  his  kingdom,  insomuch  that  every  one  lived  in  peace  and 
security.  You  must  know  that  in  former  times  the  office  of 
the  provostship  of  Paris  was  sold  to  the  highest  bidder; 
whence  it  happened  that  many  robberies  and  other  crimes 
were  committed,  and  justice  was  corrupted  at  its  source,  by 
favour  of  friends,  gifts,  or  promises.  The  common  people 
were  afraid  of  dwelling  in  the  open  country  of  France, 
which,  by  this  means,  was  almost  a  desert.  Oftentimes  there 
were  not  ten  prisoners  when  the  provost  held  his  assizes, 
notwithstanding  the  multitude  of  crimes  that  were  daily 
committed.  For  this  he  would  not  that  the  provostship 
should  be  sold,  as  it  was  an  office  he  would  give  to  some 
wise  and  upright  man  with  a  sufficient  sidary  for  his  ex- 
penses, and  to  support  his  dignity.  He  also  abolished  all 
the  heavy  taxes,  that  had  before  weighed  on  the  common 
people. 

He  made  inquiry  throughout  the  realm  for  a  learned  and 
honest  man,  who  understood  the  laws,  and  would  rigorously 
punish  malefactors,  without  regarding  the  rich  more  than  the 
poor.  In  consequence  of  this,  Stephen  Boileau  was  brought 
to  him,  to  whom  he  gave  the  provostship  of  Paris,  and  who 
ever  after  did  wonders  in  the  said  office,  so  that  henceforth 
no  robber,  murderer,  or  other  malefactor  could  remain  in 
Paris  without  his  having  instant  knowledge  thereof,  and  he 
was  sure  to  be  hanged  or  punished  very  severely  according  •10 
the  greatness  of  his  guilt.     No  friends,  relations,  or  monej 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1267*3  ™^  BAR0K8  SUMMONED. 


52a 


could  prevent  him  from  acting  on  every  occasion  with  the 
strictest  justice.  In  a  short  time,  population  increased  so 
much  throughout  the  realm,  from  the  justness  and  upright- 
ness that  reigned,  that  the  estates,  rents,  and  revenues  of  the 
kingdom  were  in  one  year  nearly  doubled,  and  the  country 
was  very  much  improved. 

From  his  earliest  youth  he  was  very  compassionate  to  the 
poor  and  those  under  misfortune ;  which  so  much  increased 
as  he  grew  up,  that,  during  his  reign  he  was  accustomed  to 
feed  daily  six  score  poor  people  at  his  table  in  whatever  part 
of  the  kingdom  he  might  be.  In  Lent  the  numbers  of  the 
poor  were  greater ;  and  ofttimes  I  have  seen  him  serve  them 
himself,  and  from  his  own  table.  On  the  vigils  of  annual 
festivals,  before  he  had  eaten  or  drunk,  he  served  the  poor, 
who,  when  fed,  carried  away  a  certain  sum  of  money  each. 
In  short,  the  king  St.  Louis  gave  away  such  immense  sums 
in  alms  that  they  cannot  be  told  nor  counted.  Some  of  his 
household  murmured  at  these  great  gifts  and  alms,  saying  he 
was  too  extravagant  in  these  expenses ;  but  the  good  king  re- 
plied, that  he  had  rather  spend  such  large  sums  in  alms  than 
in  follies  and  vanity.  However,  for  all  this  expense  in  alms, 
he  did  not  keep  the  less  grand  household,  which  was  costly 
and  liberal,  and  such  as  became  so  great  a  prince.  He  was 
naturally  generous ;  and,  during  the  parliaments  and  councils 
that  were  held  for  the  establishment  of  his  new  regulations, 
he  entertained  daily  at  his  court  all  the  lords  and  knights 
that  attended  them,  with  greater  magnificence  than  any  of 
his  predecessors  had  done.  He  was  attached  to  all  who 
served  God,  and  in  consequence  founded  many  monasteries 
and  religious  houses  in  various  parts  of  his  reahn,  and  even 
surrounded  Paris  with  different  orders  of  religion,  whose 
houses  he  founded  and  endowed  with  his  own  money. 

After  he  had  arranged  his  new  establishments,  he  summoned 
all  the  barons  of  his  realm  to  meet  him  during  the  Lent  at 
Paris.  He  sent  for  me  at  Joinville,  and  I  thought  to  excuse 
myself  from  going  on  account  of  a  quartan  ague  that  I  had ; 
but  he  sent  me  word,  that  he  had  enough  of  people  who  knew 
how  to  cure  a  quartan  ague,  and  that  from  the  love  I  bore 
him  I  must  come  to  Paris.  I  obeyed,  but  when  I  was  there 
i  could  never  find  out  why  he  had  thus  summoned  all  the 
great  barons  of  his  kingdom.    It  happened,  on  the  festival  of 


Digitized  by 


524        jointillb's  memoirs  of  saint  louis  ix«    [|pt.  n. 


our  Lady  in  March,  that  I  fell  asleep  during  matin  seryioe. 
In  my  sleep,  I  thought  I  saw  the  king  on  his  knees  before  an 
altar,  and  that  he  was  surrounded  by  many  prelates  who 
clothed  him  with  a  red  chasuble,  that  was  of  serge  of  Rheims. 
When  I  awakened,  I  told  one  of  my  chaplains,  who  was  a 
learned  man,  my  dream,  who  informed  me  that  the  king  was 
the  next  day  to  put  on  the  cross.  I  asked  him  how  he  knew 
this :  he  replied,  by  what  I  had  told  him  of  my  vision ;  and 
that  the  red  chasuble  I  had  seen  him  clothed  with  signified 
the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  was  dyed  with  tho 
precious  blood  he  had  shed  for  us ;  and,  as  the  chasuble  was 
of  serge  of  Rheims,  the  croisade  would  be  of  a  short  duration ; 
and  the  truth  of  what  he  said  I  should  be  witness  to  on  the 
morrow. 

Now,  on  the  next  day,  the  king  and  his  three  sons  did  put 
on  the  cross ;  and  the  croisade  was  a  trifling  business,  as  the 
chaplain  had  foretold  to  me  the  preceding  day.  This  made 
me  consider  it  as  a  prophecy.  When  this  was  done,  the  king 
of  France  and  the  king  of  Navarre  pressed  me  strongly  to  put 
on  the  cross,  and  undertake  a  pilgrimage  with  them ;  but  I 
replied  that  when  I  was  before  beyond  sea,  on  the  service  of 
G^d,  the  officers  of  the  king  of  France  had  so  grievously  op- 
pressed my  people  that  they  were  in  a  state  of  poverty,  inso- 
much that  we  should  have  great  difficulty  to  recover  our- 
selves ;  and  that  I  saw  clearly,  were  I  to  undertake  another 
croisade,  it  would  be  the  total  ruin  of  my  people.  I  have 
heard  many  say  since,  that  those  who  had  advised  him  to  this 
croisade  had  been  guilty  of  a  great  crime,  and  had  sinned 
deadly.  As  long  as  he  remained  in  his  kingdom  of  France, 
every  thing  went  on  well,  and  all  liv»««l  peaceably  and  in  secu- 
rity, but  the  moment  he  left  it  things  began  to  decline.  They 
were  criminal  in  another  respect,  for  the  good  king  was  so 
weakened  in  his  body  that  he  could  not  support  the  weight  of 
his  armour,  nor  remain  long  on  horseback.  I  remember  that 
I  was  once  forced  to  carry  him  in  my  arms  from  the  house  of 
the  count  d'Auxerre  as  far  as  the  convent  of  the  Cordeliers, 
when  we  landed  on  our  return  from  Palestine. 

Of  his  expedition  to  Tunis  I  will  say  nothing,  for  I  was 
not  of  it,  and  am  resolved  not  to  insert  any  thing  in  this  book 
bat  what  I  am  perfectly  certain  is  true.  But  I  will  say,  that 
during  the  time  the  good  king  Saint  Louis  was  at  Tani^  and 


Digitized  by 


4»D.  1270.]  DEATH  OP  TUB  KINO. 


525 


before  the  castle  of  Carthage,  he  was  seized  with  a  drsen- 
tery ;  the  lord  Philip,  his  eldest  sod,  was  attacked  with  the 
same  disorder,  and  a  quartan  ague.  The  good  king  took  to 
his  bed,  and,  well  knowing  he  was  about  to  quit  this  life  for 
another,  called  to  his  children,  and,  addressing  himself  to  his 
eldest  son,  gave  them  instructions,  which  he  commanded  them 
to  consider  as  his  last  will,  and  the  objects  which  they  were 
to  attend  to  when  he  should  be  deceased.  I  have  heard  that 
tbe  good  king  had  written  out  these  instructions  with  his  own 
hand,  and  that  tbej  were  as  follow : 

Fair  son,  the  first  advice  that  I  shall  give  thee  is,  that 
with  all  thy  heart,  and  above  all  other  things,  thou  love  God, 
for  without  this  no  man  can  be  saved.  Be  most  careful  not 
to  do  any  thing  that  may  displease  Him ;  that  is  to  say,  avoid 
sin.  Thou  oughtest  to  desire  to  suffer  any  torments  rather 
than  sin  mortally.  Should  God  send  thee  adversity,  receive 
it  patiently,  give  him  thanks  for  it,  and  believe  that  thou  hast 
well  deserved  it,  and  that  it  will  turn  out  to  thine  honour. 
Should  he  grant  thee  prosperity,  be  humbly  grateful  for  it ; 
but  take  care  thou  do  not  become  worse,  through  pride  or 
presumption,  for  it  behoves  us  not  to  make  war  against  God 
for  his  gifts.  Confess  thyself  often,  and  choose  such  a  dis- 
creet and  wise  confessor  as  may  have  abilities  to  point  out 
to  thee  the  things  necessary  for  thy  salvation,  and  what 
things  thou  oughtest  to  shun ;  and  mayest  thou  be  such  a 
character,  that  thy  confessor,  relations,  and  acquaintance  may 
boldly  reprove  thee  for  any  wrong  thou  mayest  have  done, 
and  instruct  thee  how  thou  shouldest  act.  Attend  the  service 
of  God,  and  of  our  mother  church,  with  heartfelt  devotion, 
more  particularly  the  mass,  from  the  consecration  of  the 
holy  body  of  our  Lord,  without  iaughing  or  gossiping 
with  any  one.  Have  always  a  compassionate  heart  for  the 
poor,  and  assist  and  comfort  them  as  much  as  thou  canst. 

Keep  up  and  maintain  good  manners  in  thy  kingdom  : 
abase  and  punish  the  bad.  Preserve  thyself  from  too  great 
luxury;  and  never  lay  any  heavy  imposts  on  thy  people, 
unless  through  necessity  forced  to  it,  or  for  the  defence  of  thy 
country.  If  thy  heart  feel  any  discontent,  tell  it  instantly 
to  thy  confessor,  or  to  any  sober-minded  person,  that  is  not 
full  of  wicked  words :  thou  mayest  thus  more  easily  bear  it, 
from  the  consolation  he  may  give  thee.    Be  careful  to  choose 


Digitized  by 


5t6  JOINVILLe's  memoirs  op  saint  LOUIS  IX.       \jPT.  u. 

8uch  companions  as  are  honest  and  loyal,  and  not  full  of 
vices,  whether  they  be  churchmen,  monks,  seculars,  or  others. 

"  Avoid  the  society  of  the  wicked ;  and  force  thyself  to 
listen  to  the  word  of  God,  and  to  retain  it  in  thy  heart.  Beg 
continually  in  thy  prayers  for  pardon,  and  the  remission  of 
thy  sins.  Love  thine  honour.  Take  care  not  to  suffer  any 
one  to  dare  utter  words  in  thy  presence  that  may  excite  to 
sin,  nor  any  calumny  of  another,  whether  he  be  present  or 
absent ;  nor  any  thing  disrespectful  of  God,  his  holy  mother, 
or  of  the  saints. 

"  Offer  thanks  frequently  to  God  for  the  prosperity  and 
other  good  things  he  gives  thee.  Be  upright,  and  do  justice 
strictly  to  all,  to  the  poor  and  to  the  rich.  Be  liberal  and 
good  to  thy  servants,  but  firm  in  thy  orders,  that  they  may 
fear  and  love  thee  as  their  master.  If  any  controversy  or 
dispute  arise,  inquire  into  it  until  thou  comest  to  the  truth, 
whether  it  be  in  thy  favour  or  a^inst  thee.  If  thou  possess 
any  thing  that  does  not  belong  to  thee,  or  that  may  have 
come  to  thee  from  thy  predecessors,  and  thou  be  informed 
for  a  truth  that  it  is  not  thine,  cause  it  instantly  to  be  re- 
stored to  its  proper  owner.  Be  particularly  attentive  that 
thy  subjects  live  in  peace  and  security,  as  well  in  the  towns 
as  in  the  country.  Maintain  such  liberties  and  franchises  as 
thy  ancestors  have  done,  and  preserve  them  inviolate ;  for  by 
the  riches  and  power  of  thy  principal  towns  thy  enemies  will 
be  afraid  of  affronting  or  attacking  thee,  more  especially  thy 
equals,  thy  barons,  and  such  like. 

Love  and  honour  all  churchmen,  and  be  careful  not  to 
deprive  them  of  any  gifts,  revenues,  or  alms  which  thy 
ancestors  or  predecessors  may  have  granted  to  them.  It  is 
reported  of  my  grandfather  Philip,  that  when  one  of  his 
counsellors  told  him  that  the  churchmen  were  making  him 
lose  his  revenues,  royalties,  and  even  his  rights  of  justice, 
and  that  he  was  surprised  how  he  suffered  it,  the  king  re- 
plied, that  he  believed  it  was  so,  but  that  God  had  shewn 
liim  so  much  favour,  and  granted  him  such  prosperity,  that  he 
had  rather  lose  all  he  had,  than  have  any  dispute  or  con  ten 
tion  with  the  servants  of  his  holy  church. 

"  Be  to  thy  father  and  mother  dutiful  and  respectful,  and 
avoid  angering  them  by  thy  disobedience  to  their  just  com^ 
msnds.    Give  such  benefices  as  may  become  vacant  to  dis« 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1270.]       THE  king's  ADVICE  TO  HIS  SON. 


52? 


creet  persons  of  a  pure  conversation,  and  give  them  with  the 
advice  of  well-advised,  prudent  persons.  Avoid  going  to 
war  with  any  Christian  power,  without  mature  deliberation, 
and  if  it  can  in  anywise  be  prevented.  If  thou  goest  to 
war,  respect  churchmen  and  all  who  have  done  Ihee  no  wrong. 
Should  contentions  arise  between  thy  vassals,  put  an  end  to 
them  as  speedily  as  possible. 

"  Attend  frequently  to  the  conduct  of  thy  bailiffs,  provosts, 
and  others  thy  officers :  inquire  into  their  behaviour,  in  order 
that  if  there  may  be  any  amendment  to  be  made  in  their 
manner  of  distributing  justice,  thou  mayest  make  it.  Should 
any  disgraceful  sin,  such  as  blasphemy  or  heresy,  be  prevalent 
in  thy  kingdom,  have  it  instantly  destroyed  and  driven 
thence.  Be  careful  that  thou  keep  a  liberal  establishmenrt, 
but.  with  economy. 

"  I  beseech  thee,  my  child,  that  thou  hold  me,  and  my 
poor  soul,  in  thy  remembrance  when  I  am  no  more,  and  that 
tbou  succour  me  by  masses,  prayers,  intercessions,  alms,  and 
benefactions,  throughout  thy  kingdom,  and  that  thou  allot 
for  me  a  part  of  all  the  good  acts  thou  shalt  perform. 

"  I  give  thee  every  blessing  that  father  ever  bestowed  on 
son,  beseeching  the  whole  Trinity  of  paradise,  the  Father,  the 
Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  preserve  and  guard  thee  from 
all  evils,  more  particularly  that  thou  die  not  under  any  deadly 
sin,  and  that  we  may,  after  this  mortal  life,  appear  together 
before  God,  to  render  him  praise  and  thanksgiving,  without 
ceasing,  in  his  kingdom  of  paradise.  Amen." 

When  the  good  king  St.  Louis  had  finished  giving  the 
above  instructions  to  the  lord  Philip,  his  son,  his  disorder  so 
greatly  increased,  that  he  asked  for  the  sacraments  of  the 
holy  church,  which  were  duly  administered  to  him,  whilst  he 
enjoyed  full  life  and  perfect  memory.  This  was  very  appa- 
rent when  they  came  to  the  unction  ;  for  when  they  chanted 
the  seven  penitential  psalms,  he  himself  repeated  the  responses 
with  the  assistants,  who  replied  to  the  priest  that  was  anoint- 
ing him.  I  have  since  heard  from  my  lord  the  count  d'Alen- 
9on,  his  son,  that  while  the  good  king  was  in  the  agonies  of 
death,  he  made  efforts  to  call  on  all  the  saints  in  paradise  to 
come  and  aid  him  in  his  distress.  He  in  particular  called  on 
my  lord  St.  James,  in  repeating  his  prayer,  which  begins 
•*  Esto  Domine."    He  prayed  to  my  lord  St.  Denis  of  Fnmoek 


Digitized  by 


5iH        jointille's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX.    [jn.  n. 

in  words  that  were  nearly  as  follow : — "  Lord  God,  give  as 
grace  to  have  the  power  of  despising  and  forgetting  the 
things  of  this  world,  so  that  we  may  not  fear  any  eril." 
He  called,  likewise,  on  St.  Qenevieye.  He  then  ordered  his 
body  to  be  placed  on  a  bed  of  ashes,  and,  crossing  his  hands 
on  his  breast,  with  eyes  uplifted  to  heaven,  rendered  his  soul 
back  to  his  Creator,  at  the  very  same  hour  that  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  expired  on  the  cross  for  the  salvation  of  hia 
people. 

The  death  of  this  holy  prince  was  a  melancholy  event  and 
worthy  of  lamentation ;  for  he  had  lived  like  a  saint,  had 
well  taken  care  of  his  kingdom,  and  done  many  religious  acts 
towards  Qod.  As  an  author  has  his  book  finely  illuminated, 
that  greater  honour  and  respect  may  be  paid  to  it,  so  our  late 
holy  king  had  illuminated  his  country  by  hia  great  alms,  and 
by  the  churches  and  monasteries  that  he  had  erected  and 
founded  in  his  lifetime,  in  which,  at  this  moment,  God  is 
praised  and  adored  day  and  night.  The  good  king  departed 
from  this  life  to  another  on  the  morrow  after  the  feast  of 
St.  Bartholomew,  and  his  corpse  was  brought  to  St.  Denis 
in  France,  and  was  buried  in  the  spot  he  had  some  time 
before  fixed  for  his  sepnltore;  in  which  place,  God  has, 
through  his  intercessions,  done  many  and  great  miracles. 

Soon  after,  by  orders  from  the  holy  pontiff  at  Rome,  a 
prelate  of  France,  who  was  archbishop  of  Rouen,  in  com- 
pany with  another  bishop,  came  to  St.  Denis,  where  they 
remained  a  long  time,  making  inquiries  into  the  life  of  the 
good  king  St.  Louis.  They  summoned  me  before  them,  and  I 
stiiyed  there  two  days  in  relating  all  I  knew  of  his  life  and 
manners.  When  they  had  made  every  necessary  inquiry 
respecting  this  good  king,  they  carried  with  them  their  report 
to  Rome  ;  where,  having  thoroughly  canvassed  it,  they  placed 
him  among  the  saints  in  paradise.  This  was  undoubtedly 
joyful  news  to  France,  and  ought  to  be  so  to  the  whole  king- 
dom, and  a  great  honour  to  his  descendants,  particularly  such 
as  may  follow  his  example,  but  dishonourable  to  those  who 
shall  not ;  and  they  will  be  pointed  at  by  the  fingers  of  the 
public,  who  will  say,  the  holy  man,  had  he  been  alive,  would 
never  have  <lone  such  disgraceful  acts. 

When  intelligence  of  his  canonization  was  brought  {torn, 
Rome,  the  king  appointed  a  day  for  the  raising  of  his  holy 


Digitized  by 


A.D.  1271. J      CAI^ONIZATION  OP  ST.  LOUIS. 


529 


body,*  which  was  done  by  the  then  archbishop  of  Rheims, 
and  it  was  borne  by  Sir  Henry  de  Villiers,  archbishop  of 
Lyon,  and  by  several  archbishops  and  bishops,  whose  names 
I  do  not  remember.  After  its  transktion,  Friar  John  de 
Semours  preached  a  public  sermon.  Among  the  many  traits 
of  the  life  of  this  holy  king  which  he  dwelt  upon,  was  one 
which  I  had  told  him  :  I  mean,  his  great  fidelity  to  his  word  ; 
for,  as  I  have  before  said,  whenever  he  had  simply  given  his 
word  to  the  Saracens  on  any  subject,  there  was  nothing  that 
could  prevent  him  from  most  strictly  keeping  it,  whatever 
might  be  the  consequences;  nor,  for  100,000  livres  would  ho 
have  broken  his  word.    Friar  John,  in  his  sermon,  detailed  the 

*  The  bodf  of  St.  Louis  wms  taken  from  its  tomb  in  the  church  of 
St.  Denis,  and  transferred  to  the  holy  chapel  in  Paris  in  the  year  1298, 
pope  Boniface  having  granted  indulgences  to  all  who  should  assist  at  this 
elevation  by  his  bull,  given  at  Rome  the  first  day  of  June,  in  the  fourth 
year  of  his  pontificate.    This  translation  was  performed  on  the  morrow 
of  the  feast  of  Saint  Bartholomew,  not  in  the  year  1299,  as  Walsingham 
writes,  but  in  the  preceding  year.    A  manuscript  chronicle,  which  ends 
at  the  year  1322,  has  these  words : — In  this  year  King  Philip  had  the 
fair  body  of  Saint  Louis,  formerly  king  of  France,  brought  from  the 
church  of  St.  Denis  with  great  solemnity,  and  attended  by  multitudes  of 
people,  on  the  morrow  of  Saint  Bartholomew,  which  was  just  eighteen 
years  after  he  had  departed  this  life."    Stephen,  archbishop  of  Sens, 
performed  the  service  on  the  day  of  this  translation,  in  the  church  of  St, 
Denis,  in  the  presence  of  the  prelates.    The  expenses  of  this  ceremony 
were  very  great,  as  may  be  collected  from  a  journal  of  the  king's  treasury, 
beginning  the  first  day  of  January,  1297,  to  the  last  day  of  December, 
1301,  which  is  in  the  Chamber  of  Accounts  at  Paris.    It  informs  us 
that  there  were  public  festivals  attended  with  great  pomp  ;  that  Raoul  de 
Beaumont,  director  of  the  kitchen,  spent  100  livres  parisis ;  Robert  de 
Meudon,  pantler,  1,500 livres  for  tablecloths;  Alain  Breton,  horse-ser- 
geant  to  the  Chitelet,  10  livres  for  setting  to  music  the  history  of  Saint 
Louis ;  Master  Guillaume,  the  silversmith,  300  livres  for  the  workman- 
ship of  the  shrine  or  bier ;  Guillaume  de  Flavacourt,  knight,  60  livres 
for  the  expenses  of  divers  works  that  were  made  for  this  festival ;  the 
king's  fruiterers,  2,000  livres  toumois  for  lights ;  Raoul  de  Beaumont, 
king's  cook,  1,500  livres  parisis  for  plate;  Geoffry  Coquatrix  different 
sums,  as  for  wine  delivered,  and  other  things.    In  short  there  were  given 
to  the  proprietors  of  houses  and  stalls,  which  were  pulled  down  at  Saint 
Denis  for  this  feast,  255  1.  13  s.  6  deniers  parisis.    The  king  commanded 
several  persons  to  write  the  life  of  this  holy  king ;  namely.  Monsieur 
Geoffroy,  chaplain  to  the  lord  James  de  St.  Paul,  whose  history  is  in  print, 
and  Master  Peter  de  la  Croix  of  Amiens.    Geoffroy  received  30  livres  and 
Peter  de  la  Croix  10  livres.    There  is  likewise  mention  made,  under  the 
date  of  the  16th  March,  1299,  of  Arthur  of  Florence,  notary. public,  to 
whom  was  given  the  sum  of  200  livres  tournoiA. 


2  Af 


BUO  JUINVILLe's  memoirs  of  saint  LOUIS  IX,.      £PT.  IL 


whole  life  of  this  good  king,  as  I  have  indited  it.  On  the 
aermon  being  ended,  the  king  and  his  brothers  carried  the 
corpse  of  their  father*  to  the  charch  of  St.  Denis,  assisted  by 

*  His  head  was  afterwards  separated  and  carried  to  the  holy  chapel 
in  Paris.  Guillaume  Guiart,  as  well  as  Louis  Lassere,  says,  that  this 
translation  took  place  in  the  year  1306.  The  MS.  chronicle,  before 
quoted,  which  ends  with  the  year  1322,  says  it  took  place  the  preceding 
year.  **  In  this  year,  the  head  and  one  of  the  ribs  of  St.  Louis  were 
brought  to  Paris,  without  the  chin  and  gums,  by  King  Philip,  attended 
by  numbers  of  prelates  and  barons,  with  the  permission  of  the  sovereign 
pontiff.  The  rib  was  placed  in  the  church  of  Notre  Dame,  in  Paris, 
and  the  head  in  the  king's  chapel,  on  the  Tuesday  preceding  Japhe." 
Among  the  chattels  which  had  personally  belonged  to  St.  Louis,  and 
which  our  kings  most  carefully  preserved  as  relics,  were  his  missal  and  his 
cup  of  gold,  out  of  which,  from  respect  to  him,  no  one  afterward  drank. 
In  the  account  of  the  disbursements  of  the  queen's  household  from 
the  25th  December,  1329,  to  the  8th  of  April,  1330,  is  the  following : — 
**  Expenses  of  the  chapels.  To  the  almoner,  for  having  bound  and 
cased  the  missal  that  had  belonged  to  our  lord  St.  Louis,  20  livres."  In 
the  inventory  of  the  furniture  of  King  Louis  Hutin,  which  is  in  a  roll  in 
the  Chamber  of  Accounts :  **  This  is  the  inventory  of  the  butlery.  Sic. 
Item,  the  golden  cup  of  St.  Louis,  out  of  which  no  one  drinks." 
It  is  to  be  remarked,  that  from  the  time  this  great  monarch  was 
enrolled  among  the  saints,  our  kings,  his  successors,  have  chosen  him  for 
the  protector  of  their  sacred  persons  and  their  kingdom.  This  is.  the 
title  wh'ch  Charles  VIII.  gives  him,  in  letters  of  mortmain  issued  at 
Pont  de  C^  in  the  month  of  April,  1487,  the  original  of  which  was  com- 
municated to  me  by  M.  d'Herouval.  "  By  and  at  the  request  and 
prayer  of  his  uncle  and  cousin,  the  duke  of  Bourbonnois  and  Auvergne, 
constable  of  France,  explaining,  that  in  the  year  1450,  being  then  lieu- 
tenant- general  of  the  county  and  duchy  of  Normandy  for  King  Charles  VII., 
he  had  an  engagement  with  thQ  English,  the  ancient  enemies  of  the  crown 
of  France,  in  a  field  near  to  the  village  of  Formigny,  in  the  diocese  of 
Bayeux,  in  which  engagement  Qod  gave  him  the  victory,  so  that  the 
English  were  defeated,  which  occasioned  the  reduction  of  the  whole 
duchy  and  county  of  Normandy  to  the  obedience  of  the  said  king.  For 
this  victory  the  duke,  willing  to  render  his  thanks  to  God,  vowed  to  erect 
and  dedicate,  in  the  aforesaid  field  where  the  victory  was  won,  a  chapel  to 
the  honour  of  my  lord  SL  LouiSy  our  ancient  progenitor  and  protector  qf 
the  crown  of  Prance  "  (it  is  the  king  who  speaks),  "  and  to  establish  two 
chaplains  as  vicars,  to  celebrate  a  mass  daily,  and  perform  such  other 
services  as  may  be  thought  advisable  for  the  salvation  of  the  souls  of 
those  nobles  and  others  who  perished  in  that  combat.  For  the  purpose  of 
this  foundation,  he  had  bought  of  Robert  de  Mann^ville,  esquire,  lord  de 
ia  Vigne,  the  lands  and  lordship  of  Colombiers,  in  the  county  and 
viscounty  of  Bayeux,  held  from  his  majesty  at  20  livres  yearly,  as  a  fief 
noble,  the  whole  valued  at  the  sum  of  one  hundred  livres  annual  rent, 
together  with  a  piece  of  land,  containing  about  three  roods,  to  build  and 
erect  the  said  chapel,  which  fiefs  and  land  the  king,  by  these  iett^Vy 
grants  in  mortmain,"  &c. 


A.D.  1271.] 


JOINYILLE'S  VISION. 


631 


others  of  their  relations,  t  >  do  honour  to  the  corpse  of  him 
who  had  done  them  great  honour,  if  they  did  not  deprive 
themselves  of  it  hy  their  own  faults,  as  I  have  before  said. 

I  must  mention  something  more  in  honour  to  the  good  king 
St.  Louis.  I  was  on  a  certain  day  in  my  chapel  of  Joinville, 
when  I  thought  I  saw  him  resplendent  with  glory  before 
me.  I  was  very  proud  to  see  him  thus  in  my  castle,  and  said 
to  him,  "  Sire,  when  you  shall  depart  hence  I  will  conduct 
you  to  another  of  my  castles  that  I  have  at  Chevillon,  where 
you  shall  also  be  lodged.  Methought  he  answered  me  with 
a  smile,  "  Lord  de  Joinville,  from  my  affection  to  you,  I 
will  not,  since  I  am  here,  depart  hence  so  soon."  AVhen 
I  awoke,  I  bethought  myself,  that  it  was  the  pleasure  of 
God,  and  his  own,  that  I  should  lodge  him  in  my  chapel, 
and  instantly  afterward  I  had  an  altar  erected  to  the  honour 
of  God  and  of  him.  I  also  founded  a  perpetual  mass  for 
every  day  in  honour  of  God  and  St.  Louis.  These  things 
have  I  told  to  the  king  Louis,  in  order  that  by  my  endea- 
vours to  pleajse  God  and  my  late  lord,  I  might  obtain  some 
part  of  the  relics  of  the  real  holy  body  of  St.  Louis  to 
decorate  my  chapel  of  Joinville  with,  to  induce  those  who 
shall  see  his  altar  to  pay  greater  devotion  to  the  saint. 

I  now  make  known  to  my  readers,  that  all  they  shall 
find  in  this  little  book,  which  I  have  declared  to  have  seen 
and  known,  is  true,  and  what  they  ought  most  firmly  to 
believe.  As  for  such  things  as  I  have  mentioned  as  hearsay, 
they  will  understand  them  just  as  they  shall  please.  And 
I  beseech  God,  through  the  prayers  of  my  lord  St.  Louis, 
thai  it  may  please  him  to  give  us  such  things  aa  he  knows 
to  be  necessary,  as  well  for  the  body  as  the  soul.  Ameo. 


BND  OF  THE  MBMOIRS. 


iii2 


Digitized  by 


JOINVILLE'S  MEMOIRS-APPENDIX. 


A  LIST  OF  THE  KNIGHTS  WHO  ACCOMPANIED  SAINT 
LOUIS  IN  HIS  EXPEDITION  TO  PALESTINE. 

Underneath  are  the  names  of  the  knights  who  are  to  accompany  tk« 
king,  Saint  Louis ,  to  the  Holy  Land,  and  the  terms  of  agreemeni 
entered  into  bettoeen  them  and  the  king. 

Monsieur  db  Valert  to  be  of  the  expedition,  with  thirty  knights.  The 
king  agrees  to  pay  him  eight  thousand  livres  toumois.  He  is  to  be 
recompensed  by  the  king  for  any  loss  of  horses  during  the  passage,  but  is 
not  to  have  his  meals  at  court ;  and  he  is  to  remain,  he  and  his  people, 
one  whole  year,  which  year  is  to  commence  from  the  day  they  disembark 
from  the  voyage.  Should  it  happen,  either  by  consent  or  stress  of  bad 
weather,  that  the  king  and  his  army  pass  the  winter  on  an  island,  and 
that  he  remain  behind  at  sea,  the  year  shall  commence  from  the  time  of 
his  arrival  at  winter-quarters.  In  regard  to  the  payment  of  his  knights, 
he  is  to  pay  them  one-half  of  their  salaries  at  the  commencement  or  the 
year,  and  the  other  moiety  when  the  first  half-year  shall  be  expired.  He 
is  to  transport  two  horses  for  each  banneret,  and  one  horse  for  such  as  are 
not  of  that  rank  :  with  the  horses  are  the  boys  who  take  care  of  them. 
The  banneret  to  be  attended  by  five  persons,  and  poor  knights  with  two. 
The  Constable  wiJ  attend  with  fourteen  knights,  on  the  same  terms  as 
M.  de  Valery.  He  will  receive  from  the  king  but  three  thousand  livres 
toumois.  Monsieur  Florent  de  Varennes,  the  admiral,  will  go  on  the 
same  conditions  as  above,  himself  and  twelve  knights,  and  will  receive 
from  the  king  three  thousand  two  hundred  iifty-iive  livres  toumois. 
Monsieur  Raoul  d'Estr^,  the  marshal,  will  go  on  similar  terms,  himself 
and  six  knights,  to  receive  sixteen  hundred  livres  toumois.  Monsieur 
Lancelot  de  St.  Maart,  the  marshal,  to  go  on  the  same  conditions,  himself 
and  five  knights,  to  receive  fourteen  hundred  livres  toumois.  Monsieur 
Pierre  de  Moleines  to  go  with  five  knights  on  the  above  conditions,  except- 
ing  that  he  and  his  brother  in  arms  have  their  meals  at  court,  to  receive 
thirteen  hundred  livres  toumois,  and  four  hundred  livres  as  a  private  gift 
to  them  both.  Monsieur  CoUard  de  Moleines  to  go  on  the  same  terms 
and  manner  as  his  brother.  Monsieur  Gilles  de  la  Touraelle  to  go  him- 
self  and  four  knights  on  these  same  conditions,  to  receive  twelve  hundred 
livres  toumois  and  to  eat  at  court.  Monsieur  Mahi  de  Roie  to  go 
himself  and  eight  knights  on  the  above  conditions,  to  eat  at  court,  and 
to  receive  two  thousand  livres,  and  two  hundred  Uvres  as  a  private  gift. 
Monsieur  Girard  de  Morbois  to  go  himself  and  ten  knights:  three 
thousand  livres  toumois.  Monsieur  Raoul  de  Neelle,  himself  and 
fifteen  knights  :  four  thousand  livres  toumois.  He  will  eat  at  his  own 
bouse.       Monsieur  Amauri  de  MeuleQC,  himself  and  fifteen  knights : 


KNIGHTS  WHO  ACCOMPANIED  SAINT  LOUIS.  533 


on  terms  the  same  as  the  preceding.  Monsieur  Ansont  d'Oflfemont, 
himself  and  ten  knights :  two  thousand  six  hundred  livres  toamois,  and 
their  meals  at  the  pidaoe.  Monsieur  Raoal  le  Flamant,  himself  and  six 
knights  :  one  thousand  five  hundred  livres  toumois,  and  their  meals  at  the 
palace.  Monsieur  Baudouin  de  Longueval,  himself  and  four  knights  : 
eleven  hundred  livres  toumois.  Monsieur  Loys  de  Beaujeu,  himself 
and  ten  knights  :  two  thousand  six  hundred  livres,  and  their  meals  at  the 

Ealace.  Monsieur  Jean  Ville,  himself  and  four  knights  :  twelve  hundred 
vres,  and  their  meals  at  court.  Monsieur  Mahi  de  le  Toumelle,  him- 
self and  four  knights :  twelve  hundred  livres :  meals  as  above.  The 
archbishop  of  Rheims,  four  thousand  livres.  The  bishop  of  Langres 
the  same.  These  two  to  be  attended  by  thirty  knights,  and  to  be  em- 
barked on  board  the  same  ship.  Monsieur  Guillaume  de  Courtenay, 
himself  and  ten  knights :  two  thousand  two  hundred  livres,  and  their 
meals  at  court.  Monsieur  Guillaume  de  Patay,  himself  and  brother  : 
four  hundred  livres,  and  their  meals  at  the  palace.  Monsieur  Pierre 
de  Sarz,  himself  alone :  eight  score  livres,  and  his  meals  at  court. 
Monsieur  Robert  de  Bois-Gencelin,  alone,  on  the  same  terms  as  the  pre- 
ceding. Monsieur  Estienne  Grancke,  alone,  on  the  same  terms. 
Monsieur  Maci  de  Loue,  alone,  on  similar  conditions.  Monsieur 
Gilles  de  Mailly,  himself  and  ten  knights :  three  thousand  livres,  transport 
of  horses  going  and  returning,  with  his  meals  at  the  palace.  Monsieur 
Itier  de  Maignac,  himself  and  five  knights  :  twelve  hundred  livres,  trans- 
port of  horses,  and  his  meals  as  the  preceding.  Fouriers  de  Vernuel, 
himself  and  four  knights :  twelve  hundred  livres :  his  meals  at  court. 
Monsieur  Guillaume  de  Fresnes,  himself  and  ten  knights  :  two  thousand 
six  hundred  livres,  and  their  meals  at  court.  The  count  de  Guignes, 
himself  and  ten  knights,  on  similar  conditions.  The  count  de  St.  Paul, 
himself  and  thirty  Imights,  passage  and  return  of  horses :  twelve  thousand 
livres,  including  food  and  all  other  things,  with  twelve  hundred  livres  as 
a  private  gift.  Monsieur  Lambert  de  Limous,  himself  and  thirty 
knights  in  the  pay  of  the  king ;  that  is  to  say,  ten  sols  toumois  to  each 
daily  for  their  subsistence,  the  sum  of  eighteen  hundred  and  twenty-five 
livres.  Monsieur  Girard  de  Campendu,  himself  and  fifteen  knights  at 
the  king's  pay,  subsisting  themselves  like  to  Monsieur  Lambert :  two 
thousand  seven  hundred  thirty-seven  livres,  ten  sols.  Monsieur  Raimon 
Aban,  himself  and  five  others  in  the  pay  of  the  king,  nine  hundred 
twelve  livres,  ten  sols.  Monsieur  Jean  de  Belnes,  himself  and  ten 
others :  three  thousand  livres,  passage  and  return  of  his  horses,  and  meals 
at  court.  The  marshal  of  Champagne  will  go  himself  with  ten  others, 
but  will  not  receive  any  thing  from  the  king.  Monsieur  Guillard 
d'Arce,  himself  and  five  others,  in  the  king's  pay,  nine  hundred  twelve 
livres,  ten  sols.  Monsieur  Guillaume  de  Flandres,  himself  and  twenty 
others  :  six  thousand  livres,  passage  and  retum  of  their  horses,  and  their 
meals  at  the  palace.  Monsieur  Aubert  de  Longueval,  himself  and  five 
more :  eleven  hundred  livres,  passage  and  retum  of  horses,  and  mealb  at 
court. 


534 


JOINTILLE'S  HEAIOIRS — APPENDIX. 


Kniyhtt  qf  the  houtehold  who  attended  the  king,  Saint  Louie,  in 
expedition  to  Tuniji, 


Monsieur  de  Watery. 

Ly  Boutillert. 

Ly  Connestables. 

Monsieur  Guillaume  de  Flandret 

Ly  sire  de  Neeiles. 

Ly  sire  de  MontmoraneL 

Ly  sire  de  Harcour. 

Messire  Jean  ses  fils. 

Mewire  Baudouin  de  Longuefal. 

Messire  Lanrelot  ly  Mareschaux. 

Messire  Guiliaume  de  Courtenay. 

Messire  Florant  de  Vorennes. 

Messire  Amaury  de  Mellenc. 

Me>slte  Jean  de  Ville  ly  estous. 

Mes&ire  Guillaume  de  Prunay. 

Messire  Raoul  d'Estr^ 

Messire  Simon  de  Coutes. 

Ly  Maistres  des  Arbalestriers. 

MeMire  Guillaume  de  Clignei. 

Messire  Renault  de  Mormant. 

Messire  Qui  li  Bas. 

Messire  Guinemer  de  Guimeri, 

Messire  Jean  de  Chaumes. 

Messire  Landry  de  Bonnay. 

Messire  Gilles  de  Brienon. 

Messire  Pierre  de  Bailly. 

Messire  Robert  Sansavoir. 

Messire  Mac^  de  Lyons. 

Messire  Nebert  de  Medionne. 

Messire  N  icolas  Routier. 

Messire  Pierre  d'Autoil. 

Messire  Gautier  Descos. 

Messire  Colars  de  Molaines. 

Messire  Pierre  de  Molaines. 

Messire  Mahy  de  Roye. 

Messire  Jehan  de  Varennei. 

Messire  Simon  de  Falloel. 

Messire  Oilles  de  la  Toumelle. 

Messire  Gaufr.  de  Rinel,  ou  de  Clermont. 

Messire  Maurice  de  Craon. 

Le  comte  de  Saint  Paul. 

Le  comte  de  Pontia. 

Meisire  Jean  de  Neelle. 

Messire  Raoul  de  Neelle. 

Messire  Guillaume  de  Minieres. 

Ly  mareschaux  de  Champaigne. 

Le  comte  de  Soissons. 

Messire  Bonnables. 

Messire  Guillaume  de  Fiennes. 

Le  comte  de  Dreui. 

Messire  Jean  Males. 

Messire  Guillaume  de  Paroy. 

Messire  Robert  de  Girolles. 

Messire  Lambert  de  Limous. 

Messire  Gautier  ly  Cliambellant. 

Messire  Phelipes  de  Nemous. 

Messire  Guillaume  de  Centegnonville. 

Messire  Jean  Palnnevaire. 

M'  dsire  Phelipes  d'AutoiL 

Aiiessire  Hue  Gaignars. 

Messire  Renault  Couperiaus. 

Messire  Henry  ly  Baacles. 

Messire  Matheu  de  Ron. 

Me»sire  Jean  de  Rochefort 

Messire  Raoul  Flaroens. 

Messire  Hubert  Chesnan. 


Messire  Robert  de  Bots- JosseUn 

Messire  Jean  Rivellon. 

Messire  Simon  de  Menon. 

Messire  Hue  de  Vlllers. 

Messire  Jean  de  Bebreie. 

Messire  Pierre  de  Bebrde. 

Messire  Renault  de  S.  M^art. 

Messire  Pierre  de  Villenoive. 

Messire  Geuffroy  de  Boismenard»^ 

Messire  Robert  de  Bolsgautisr. 

Messire  Jean  Davion. 

Messire  Hector  Dorillac 

Messire  Renault  de  Precignf. 

Messire  Guillaume  de  Aunoy. 

Messire  Ansout  d'Offemont. 

Messire  Jean  de  Ciery. 

Messire  Amori  de  S.  Cler. 

Messire  Johens  d'Amiens. 

Ly  mareschaux  de  Mirepoix. 

Messire  Guillaume  de  Coardon. 

Messire  Henry  de  Gaudonviliier. 

Messire  Gocerem  de  Lorris,  Cosiiis. 

Messire  Nesbert  de  Medion. 

Messire  Jean  de  Chambly. 

Ly  seneschaux  de  Champaiffne. 

Messire  Engerens  de  BailloiL 

Messire  Jean  de  Soins. 

Messire  Pierre  de  Loon. 

Messire  Otes  de  Toucy. 

Messire  Guillaume  de  Chasteaunou 

Messire  Jean  Males. 

Messire  Guillaume  de  Sandreville. 

Mesure  Girards  de  Campendu. 

Messire  Pierre  t^ambaus,  parent,  rafw»> 

tole  Climent. 
Messire  Piastre  de  Henequerque. 
Messire  Jean  de  Cbastenoi. 
Messire  Pierre  de  Blemus. 
Messire  Estienne  Granche. 
Messire  Jean  de  Soilly. 
Messire  Jean  de  Tornebu. 
Messire  Enfans  Chevalier  au 

Ubie. 

Messire  Pregent  ly  Bretons. 
Messire  Pierre  de  Saux. 
Messire  Jean  de  Beaumont 
Messire  Gaultier  ly  povre  Hoamck 
Messire  Aufroy  de  Montfort. 
Messire  Gilles  de  Boissavesnes. 
Messire  Baudoin  de  Wandieres. 
Messire  Kaoul  de  Wandieres. 
Messire  Gilles  de  Maiily. 
Messire  Jean  Britauz. 
Monsieur  Galerens  de  Yury. 
Monsieur  Haoul  de  Jupilles. 
Monsieur  Guitier  ses  flls. 
Monsieur  Roger  de  Morteigne. 
Messire  Anguerrans  de  Jomi. 
Messsire  Pierre  de  Bautm. 
Messire  Simon  de  Baugenci. 
Messire  Estienne  Jaunoy. 
Messire  Vores. 
Ly  Fouriers  de  VemoiL 
Ly  Bruns  ses  fils. 
Messire  Guillaume  de  PrecignL 


Digitized  by  Google 


EXTRACTS  FROM  AN  ARABIAN  MANUSCRIPT 


VNTITLBD 


EssuLOUK  LI  Marisbt  il  Duvel  il  Mulouk  ;  that  is  to  tay^  '*  Tht 
Road  to  Knowledge  qf  the  Reigfu  of  Kingt.**  It  is  the  History  qf 
the  Sultans  Curdes-Eioubites,  qf  the  race  qf  Saladin,  and  qf  the 
two  Dynasties  that  have  reigned  in  Egypt ;  the  one  qf  Turkish  slaves, 
known  under  the  name  qf  Mamelukes-Baharitbs,  the  other  of 
Circassians,  This  Work  was  composed  by  Makrisi,  who  was  bom 
in  the  769th  year  qf  the  Hegira,  or  one  hundred  and  twenty  years 
after  the  expedition  St.  Iiouis. 

The  sultan  Melikul-Kamil  died  at  Damascus  the  21st  of 
the  moon  Regeb,  in  the  6d5th  year  of  the  Hegira  (March 
10,  A.D.  1238).  Melikul-Adil-Scifeddin,  one  of  his  two  sons, 
was  proclaimed  on  the  morrow,  in  the  same  town,  sultan  of 
Syria,  and  of  Egypt.  He  was  the  seventh  king  of  the 
posterity  of  the  Eioubites,  who  descended  from  Saladin. 

On  the  17th  day  of  the  moon  Ramadan,  there  arrived  an 
ambassador  from  the  caliph  of  Bagdad,  who  was  the  bearer 
of  a  standard  and  rich  robe  for  the  sultan,  weak  remnants 
of  the  vast  authority  the  caliphs  who  succeeded  Mahommed* 
formerly  enjoyed,  and  of  which  the  sultans  had  not  thought 
it  worth  their  while  to  deprive  them. 

Melikul-Adil,  when  scarcely  on  the  throne,  instead  of  at- 
tending to  the  government  of  his  kingdoms,  gave  himself  up 
to  all  sorts  of  debauchery.  The  grandees  of  the  state,  who 
might  have  reproached  him  for  the  dissipated  life  he  led, 
were  banished  under  various  pretexts,  and  replaced  by 
more  complaisant  ministers.  He  believed  he  could  have 
nothing  to  fear,  if  the  troops  were  attached  to  him;  and, 
in  order  to  gain  them,  he  made  them  great  presents,  which, 
added  to  those  his  pleasures  required,  exhausted  the  trea- 
sures his  father  had  amassed  with  so  much  difficulty. 

*  The  caliphs,  successors  to  Mahommed,  were  formerly  masters  of  Syria, 
Egypt,  and  in  general  of  all  the  conquests  made  by  the  Mahommedans. 
Corrupted  by  luxury  and  indolence,  they  suffered  Egypt  and  Syria  to  be 
taken  from  them  by  the  Fatimites,  at  the  time  of  the  expedition  of  St. 
Louis,  and  they  retained  Irak- Arabia.  They,  however,  still  preserved  a 
shadow  of  power  over  the  provinces  captured  from  them.  The  sultans  of 
Egypt  submitted  to  a  sort  of  inauguration  on  their  part,  which  consisted 
in  the  investiture  of  a  dress  which  the  caliphs  sent  them.  This  custom  is 
not  yet  abolished :  the  grand  seignior  sends  a  similar  dress  to  the  his. 
podars  of  Moldavia  and  Walachia,  when  he  nominates  them  to  thett 
principalities. 


JOINVILLE's  memoirs — APPENDIX.    [^A.D.  1240 


A  conduct  so  unworthy  a  sovereign  made  him  con 
temptihle,  and  his  subjects  offered  up  vows  that  his  brother 
Nedjm-Eddin  would  deprive  him  of  his  crown.  This  prince 
had  no  other  wish,  but  he  was  afraid  of  intrusting  a  project 
of  this  nature  in  the  hands  of  a  fickle  populace.  At  last 
all  the  orders  of  the  state,  oppressed  by  the  tyrannies  of 
Melikul-Adil,  called  Nedjm-Eddin  to  the  throne.  He  made 
his  entry  into  Cairo  the  ninth  day  of  the  moon  Chuwal,  in 
the  year  637  (May  3,  a.d.  1240),  and  was  proclaimed 
sultan  of  Syria  and  Eg3rpt  Melikul-Adil  was  imprisoned, 
after  having  reigned  two  years  and  eighteen  days. 

Nedjm-Eddin,  on  mounting  the  throne,  found  only  one 
solitary  piece  of  gold,  and  one  thousand  drachms  of  silver, 
in  the  public  treasury.  He  assembled  the  grandees  of  the 
state,  and  those  in  particular  who  had  had  any  share  in 
the  administration  of  the  finances,  under  the  reign  of  his 
brother,  and  asked  what  had  been  their  reasons  for  deposing 
Melikul-Adil.  "  Because  he  was  a  madman,"  they  replied. 
Then,  addressing  himself  to  the  chiefs  of  the  law,  he  asked 
if  a  madman  could  dispose  of  the  public  money.  And  on 
their  answering  that  it  was  contrary  to  law,  he  ordered  all 
who  had  received  any  sums  of  money  from  his  brother  to 
bring  them  back  to  the  treasury,  or  they  should  pay  for 
their  disobedience  with  their  heads.  By  this  means,  he 
recovered  seven  hundred  and  fifty-eight  thousand  pieces  of 
gold,  and  two  millions  three  hundred  thousand  drachms  of 
silver. 

In  the  year  638  (1240),  Salih-Imad-Eddin,  who  had  sur- 
prised  Damascus,  under  the  reign  of  Melikul-Adil,  fearful  that 
the  new  sultan  would  deprive  him  of  this  unjust  conquest, 
made  an  ofiensive  and  defensive  alliance  with  the  Franks 
of  Syria.  He  gave  them,  the  better  to  secure  their  support, 
the  towns  of  Safet*  and  Chakif,t  with  their  territories,  half 
of  the  town  of  Sidon,  and  a  part  of  the  country  of  the 

*  Safet,  a  moderate-sized  town  in  Palestine.  It  has  a  fortxess  wMch 
commands  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  and  is  situated  in  fifty-seven  degrees 
th'Tty-five  minutes  longitude,  thirty-two  degrees  thirty  minutes  latitude. 

f  Chakif.  Abulfeda  mentions  two  fortresses  under  the  name  of  Chakif. 
Chakif-Amoun,  and  Chakif-Tiroun  :  the  first,  partly  cut  in  a  rock,  is  on 
one  of  the  roads  leading  from  Sidon  to  Damascus.  It  is  the  second,  called 
Tiroun,  which  is  noticed  in  the  text.  It  lies  towards  the  sea,  in  regard  to 
Safet.  Chakif-Arnoun  is,  in  like  manner,  distant  from  the  sea,  on  thetof 
uf  LebanoQ. 


Digitized  by 


HBG.  638.^  ARABIAN  ACCOtTNT  OF  THE  CRUSADE. 


537 


Tiberiad.*  He  added  also  tho  mountain  of  Aamileli,t  and 
several  other  places  on  the  sea-shore,  permitting  them  to 
come  to  Damascus  to  purchase  arms.  This  alliance  dis- 
pleajsed  good  Mussulmen,  who  were  indignant  to  see  Franks 
purchase  arms  in  a  Mahommedan  town,  which  these  infidels 
might  one  day  turn  against  the  sellers. 

Salih-Imad-Eddin  resolved  to  make  war  on  Egypt,  and, 
assembling  his  troops,  joined  the  army  of  the  Franks.  The 
sultan  of  Egypt  was  informed  of  this  movement,  and  sent,  in 
consequence,  a  body  of  men  as  for  as  Acre.  Tho  two 
armies  met ;  but  the  Egjrptians  corrupted  the  Mussulman 
soldiers  of  Damascus,  who,  according  to  their  secret  conven- 
tions, fled  on  the  first  attack,  and  left  the  Franks  singly  to 
bear  the  shock.  They,  however,  made  but  a  feeble  resistance; 
great  numbers  were  slain,  and  the  rest,  loaded  with  chains, 
were  led  to  Cairo. 

In  the  640th  year  of  the  Hegira,  the  Franks  surprised 
the  town  of  NapoulousJ  on  a  Friday,  the  4th  day  of  the 
moon  Djemazilewel,  and  made  slaves  of  the  inhabitants,  after 
they  had  plundered  them  of  all  they  had,  and  committed  all 
sorts  of  cruelties. 

The  whole  year  of  641  (a.d.  1243)  was  employed  in 
negotiations  between  Salih-Imad-Eddin  and  Nedjm-Eddin. 
The  latter  consented  to  allow  the  former  to  be  master  of  Da- 
mascus, but  on  condition  that  the  town  should  be  a  fief  to 
Eg3rpt,  and  that  the  coin  skould  be  struck  in  his  name. 
However,  as  they  could  not  agree,  Imad-Eddin  made  another 
treaty  with  the  Franks,  by  which  he  gave  up  to  them 
Jerusalem,  the  whole  country  of  the  Tiberiad,  and  Ascalon.  § 

*  A  part  of  Palestine  has  been  thus  called  from  the  town  of  Tiberias, 
built  on  the  side  of  a  mountain  near  to  the  lake  of  the  same  name.  The 
lake  is  twelve  miles  long  by  six  wide,  and  is  surrounded  by  mountains. 
This  town  was  famous  in  former  times,  but  Saladin,  on  reconquering  it 
from  the  Frac^j  had  it  destroyed.  It  owes  its  name  to  the  emperor 
Tiberius.  There  were  in  its  confines  many  hot  springs  celebrated  for  the 
cure  of  different  disorders.  It  was  but  six  miles  from  Tiberias  to  the  well 
into  which  Joseph  was  cast  by  his  hrethren.-^Abulfeda. 

t  Aamileb,  a  celebrated  mountain  of  Syria.  It  spreads  eastwardly  and 
southerly  from  the  sea-shore  as  far  as  Tvre.  It  had  a  fortress  on  its 
summit. 

X  Napoulous,  a  town  in  Palestine,  anciently  called  Samaria.  Jero- 
boam caused  a  temple  to  be  built  on  a  mountain  near  the  town  to  prevent 
the  ten  tribes  from  going  to  Jerusalem. 

§  Ascalon,  a  town  ia  Palestine,  on  the  Mediterranean  shore,  sii 


Digitized  by 


59%  joinville's  memoirs — appendix.    [^a.d.  1243. 

The  Franks  took  possession  of  these  towns,  and  instantly 
fortiiSed  all  the  castles  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tiberias  and 
Ascalon.  They  expelled  Mussulmen  from  the  mosque 
Aksa,"*^  made  a  church  of  it,  and  hung  bells  in  the  minaret. 

Nedjm-Eddin,  on  his  side,  connected  himself  with  the 
Kharesmiens,t  a  people  whose  lives  were  passed  in  war  and 
plunder.  They  hastened  from  the  farthest  part  of  the  East, 
crossed  the  Euphrates,  to  the  amount  of  ten  thousand  com- 
batants, under  the  command  of  three  generals.  One  division 
fell  back  upon  Balbeck,  and  another  marched  to  the  very  gates 
of  Damascus,  pillaging  and  destroying  all  that  came  in  their 
way.  Salih-Imad-Eddin  shut  himself  up  in  Damascus,  with- 
out attempting  to  stop  the  torrent  that  inundated  his  domi- 
nions. When  they  had  despoiled  all  the  country  near  to 
Damascus,  they  advanced  to  Jerusalem,  took  it  by  storm,  and 
put  all  the  Christians  to  the  sword.  The  women  and  girls, 
having  suffered  every  insult  from  a  brutal  disorderly  soldiery, 
were  loaded  with  chains.  They  destroyed  the  church  of  the 
Holy  Sepulchre  ;  and  when  they  found  nothing  among  the 
living,  to  glut  their  rage,  they  opened  the  tombs  of  the  Chris- 
tians, took  out  the  bodies,  and  burnt  them. 

After  this  expedition,  they  marched  to  Graza,  and  deputed 
some  of  their  principal  officers  to  Nedjm-Eddin.  This  prince 
caressed  them  much,  had  them  clothed  in  superb  dresses,  and 
presented  them  with  rich  stuffs  and  horses  of  great  value. 
He  desired  that  they  would  halt  their  troops  at  Gaza,  where 
he  proposed  making  a  junction  of  the  two  armies,  promising 
to  march  them  to  Damascus.  The  troops  of  the  sultan  were 
soon  ready  to  take  the  field,  under  the  command  of  the  emir 
Rukneddin-Bibars,  one  of  his  favourite  slaves,  and  in  whose 

leagues  from  Graza.  It  is  built  on  a  rock,  bat  wants  a  harbour  and  fresh 
water. 

*  The  name  oi  the  mosque  which  the  Mahommedans  built  after  the 
capture  of  Jerusalem,  on  the  ancient  foundations  of  the  temple  of  Solo- 
mon, and  on  the  stone  whence  Jacob  was  said  to  be  have  conversed  with 
God,  and  which  the  Mussulmen  affirm  to  be  that  which  this  patriarch 
named  the  gate  of  heaven,  in  consequence  of  his  vision.  The  Christians, 
when  they  conquered  Jerusalem  from  the  Mahommedans,  erected  a  golden 
cross  on  the  top  of  this  temple,  but  Saladin,  on  regaining  the  town,  made 
them  take  it  down. — D*Herbelot,  Bibl.  Orient. 

t  Kharesmiens,  a  people  of  Khouaresm,  which  country  is  situated  on 
this  side  the  Gion,  or  Oxus,  on  the  side  of  Khorassan,  and  a  part  beyoni 
h,  bounding  the  Mawaralnahar,  or  the  Transoxane. 


Digitized  by 


HBO.  641.^  ARABIAN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  0RU8ADB. 


brareiy  he  wholly  confided.  Bibars  joined  the  Elhareflmiens 
at  Gaza.* 

Imad'Eddin,  on  his  part,  raised  troops  in  Damascus  :  they 
inarched  under  the  orders  of  Melik-Mansour,  prince  of 
Hemesse.t  The  Franks  were  likewise  ready  to  take  the 
field ;  and  the  two  bodies  met  at  Acre,  when  they  formea 
but  one  army.  Nasir-Daoud,  prince  of  Karak,:^  and  Zahir, 
son  of  Songour,  also  brought  some  soldiers  to  the  prince 
of  Damajscus.  This  was  the  first  time  the  standards  of  the 
Christians,  on  which  was  a  cross,  were  seen  intermixed  with 
those  of  Mussulmen.  The  Christians  formed  the  right  wing, 
the  troops  of  Nasir-Daoud  the  left,  and  the  emir  Mansour 
formed  the  centre  with  the  Syrians. 

The  two  armies  met  near  to  Gaza.  The  Kharesmiens  made 
the  first  onset,  which  was  but  fkintly  opposed  by  the  Syrians, 
who  instantly  fled.  Zahir,  who  commanded  the  left  wing, 
being  made  prisoner,  there  only  remained  the  Franks,  who 
for  some  time  defended  themselves,  but  were  soon  surrounded 
by  the  Kharesmiens :  the  greater  part  perished  on  this  occa- 
sion, except  a  few  that  had  the  good  fortune  to  escape.  Eight 
hundred  prisoners  were  made ;  and  there  lay  on  the  field  of 
battle  upwards  of  thirty  thousand  dead,  as  well  Christians  as 
Syrian  Mussulmen.  Mansour  returned  to  Damascus  with  a 
few  soldiers.    The  Kharesmiens  made  an  immense  booty. 

The  news  of  this  complete  victory  arrived  at  Cairo  on  the 
15th  of  the  moon  GImazilewel,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira 
642  (Oct.  9,  A.D.  1244).  Nedjm-Eddin  was  so  delighted 
with  it  that  he  ordered  public  rejoicings  to  be  made,  and  they 
were  announced  to  the  people  by  sound  of  drums  and  trum-^ 
pets.  The  town  and  the  castle  of  the  sultan  §  were  illumi- 
nated for  several  nights.    The  heads  of  the  enemies  that  had 

*  Gaza,  a  town  in  Palestine  near  the  sea.  Its  territory  is  very  fertile, 
particularly  in  palm-trees. 

f  Hemesse  or  Hems,  an  ancient  town,  and  one  of  the  principal  in  Syria. 
It  is  situated  on  a  plain,  a  mile  distant  from  the  river  Orontes.  It  is  the 
most  fertile  country  of  the  whole  province. 

%  Kerek  or  Karak,  a  celebrated  town  on  the  confines  of  Syria,  where 
it  joins  Arabia  Petrsea.  This  town  formeriy  possessed  an  impregnable 
fortress,  and  was  one  of  the  keys  to  Syria. 

§  It  was  the  castle  of  Cairo  built  by  the  sultan  Saladin,  with  stones 
taken  from  many  small  pyramids  destroyed  near  ancient  Memphis,  oppo- 
site to  old  Cairo.  The  bashaws,  governors  of  Egypt,  make  this  castle 
their  residence.    It  is  situated  at  the  foot  of  the  Mountain  of  St.  Josephs 


Digitized  by 


540 


joinyille's  memoirs— appendix.    [a.d.  1244. 


been  slain  in  battle  were  sent  to  Cairo,  and  ex{)osed  on  the 
gates  of  the  town.  The  captive  Franks  arrived  at  the  same 
time,  mounted  on  camels:  as  a  mark  of  distinction,  horses  had 
been  given  to  the  iliost  considerable  among  them.  Zahir- 
ben-Songour,  one  of  the  Syrian  generals  that  had  been  taken, 
marched  next,  with  the  other  officers  of  the  Syrian  army. 
They  were  paraded  with  much  pomp  through  the  town  of 
Cairo,  and  then  confined  in  prisons. 

The  emirs  Bibars  and  Abouali  had  orders  from  the  sultan 
to  lay  siege  to  Ascalon ;  but  the  place  was  too  strong,  and 
too  well  defended,  to  be  taken.  Bibars  remained  before 
Ascalon,  and  Abouali  advanced  to  Napoulous. 

The  other  generals  of  Nedjm-Eddin  took  possession  of 
Cbza,  Jerusalem,  Khalil,  Beit-Djebril,  and  Gaur.*  Nasir- 
Daoud  lost  nearly  all  his  territories  ;  for  there  only  remained 
to  him  the  fortress  of  Kerck,  Belka,  Essalib,t  and  Adje- 
loun. 

Nedjm-Eddin  had  promised  the  Kharesmiens  to  lead  them 
to  Damascus ;  for  he  counted  as  nothing  the  last  victory,  if  he 
did  not  regain  that  town ;  and  he  resolved  to  make  so  im- 
portant a  conquest  in  person.  The  Kharesmiens  followed  him 
with  joy,  and  Damascus  was  besieged.  Battering-rams,  and 
other  machines  for  casting  stones  were  erected ;  but  the  be- 
sieged made  a  vigorous  resistance,  and  the  siege  lasted  up- 
wards of  six  months  without  any  breach  being  made.  Pro- 
visions, however,  began  to  fciil  in  the  town ;  and  Mansour, 
prince  of  Hemesse,  had  a  conference  with  Berket,  one  of  the 
Kharesmien  chiefs,  for  the  surrender  of  the  place.  It  was  at 
length  agreed  that  the  town  should  be  surrendered  to  the 
sultan,  and  that  Imad-Eddin,  Mansour,  and  the  other  Syrian 
chiefs,  should  have  liberty  to  retire  with  all  their  riches.  The 
town  of  Balbeck,  and  all  its  territory,  were  given  to  Imad- 
Eddin  :  Hemesse  and  Palmyra  were  allotted  to  Mansour. 
The  Kharesmiens,  who  had  flattered  themselves  with  the  hope 
of  pillaging  Damascus,  in  despair  at  being  frustrated,  quar- 
relled with  the  sultan,  and,  the  ensuing  year,  formed  an  alli- 
ance with  Mansour  and  the  other  Syrian  leaders.  They 

*  Gaar,  a  deep  valley  that  traverses  the  country  of  Jourdan  from  th« 
Lake  of  Tiberias  to  the  Dead  Sea. 

t  Essalib,  or,  according  to  some  authors,  Essoleti  is  a  castle  near  to, 
but  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan.    So  is  Adjeloun. 


Digitized  by 


BVa.  642.]  ARABIAN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  CRUSADE. 


541 


marched  conjointly  to  the  siege  of  Damascus,  and  reduced 
the  town  to  the  utmost  distress  from  want  of  provision.  The 
inhabitants,  after  they  had  consumed  the  vilest  food,  did  not 
scruple  to  feed  on  the  bodies  of  such  as  died,  to  preserve 
their  lives.  Nedjm-Eddin  had  returned  to  Egypt ;  but  he 
hastened  to  S3rria  again,  with  a  numerous  army,  attacked 
the  Kharesmiens,  and  totally  defeated  them  in  two  battles. 

In  the  year  644,  the  emir  Fakreddin  won  from  the  Franks 
the  castle  of  Tiberias  and  the  town  of  Ascalon,  both  of  which 
he  razed  to  the  ground.  This  year  was  fatal  to  the  Franks, 
from  their  intestine  divisions. 

In  the  year  645,  the  sultan  returned  to  Egypt,  and  passed 
through  Ranil^.*  He  was  there  attacked  with  an  abscess, 
which  turned  to  a  fistula ;  but  in  spite  of  this  accident,  he 
continued  his  journey,  and  arrived  at  Cairo.  New  troubles, 
which  had  arisen  in  Syria,  called  him  again  into  tliat  province ; 
but  having  learned  at  Damascus,  f  that  the  French  were 
preparing  to  invade  Egypt,  he  preferred  defending  his  own 
kingdom  in  person.  In  spite  of  the  violence  of  his  sufienngs 
from  pain,  he  mounted  his  litter,  and  arrived  at  Achmoum- 
Tanab,:^  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  647. 

As  he  had  no  doubt  but  that  Damietta  would  be  the  first 
place  attacked,  he  endeavoured  to  put  it  in  a  state  of  defence, 
and  formed  there  magazines  of  eveiy  sort  of  provision,  arms, 
and  ammunition.  The  emir  Fakreddin  was  ordered  to  march 
toward  that  town,  to  prevent  a  descent  on  the  coast.  Fak- 
reddin encamped  at  Giz6  de  Damietta,  with  the  Nile  between 
his  camp  and  the  town. 

The  disorder  of  the  sultan,  however,  grew  worse ;  and  he 
caused  proclamation  to  be  made,  that  all  to  whom  he  owed 
any  thing  should  present  themselves  at  his  treasury,  when 
they  would  be  paid.§ 

*  Raml^.  Reml  signifies  sand.  Ramla  is  a  town  some  leagues  from 
Jaffa  or  Joppa,  on  the  road  to  Jerusalem. 

t  Makrisi,  in  his  description  of  Egypt,  says,  that  in  the  year  of  the 
Hegira  647  (a.d.  1249),  the  emperor  sent  an  ambassador  to  the  sultan 
Nedjm-Eddin,  who  was  then  ill  at  Damascus  :  that  this  ambassador  was 
disguised  as  a  merchant,  and  informed  the  sultan  of  the  preparations  of 
the  king  of  France  against  Egypt. 

X  Achmoum,  or  Achmoum-Tanah,  a  town  on  the  Nile,  and  the  capital 
of  one  of  the  provinces  of  Egypt  called  Dahkali^,  fifty-four  deg.  longitude, 
thirty-one  deg.  fifty-four  min.  latitude. — Abulfeda. 

§  It  is  one  point  of  the  Mahommedan  law  to  pay  all  debts  before 


642 


joinville's  memoirs — APPENDIX,    [[a.d.  1249. 


On  Friday,  the  2 let  of  the  moon  Sefer,  and  in  the  year  of 
the  Hegira  647  (a.d.  1249,  Friday,  4th  June),  the  French 
fleet  arrived  off  the  coast,  at  two  o'clock  of  the  day,  filled 
with  an  innumerable  body  of  troops  under  the  command  of 
Louis,  son  to  Louis,  king  of  France.  The  Franks,  who  were 
masters  of  Syria,  had  joined  the  French.  The  whole  fleet 
anchored  on  the  strand  opposite  to  the  cafnp  of  Fakreddin. 

The  king  of  France,  before  he  commenced  any  hostilities, 
sent  by  a  herald  a  letter  to  the  sultan  Nedjm-Eddin,  conceived 
a  the  following  words  : — 

"  You  are  not  ignorant  that  I  am  the  prince  of  those  who 
follow  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  you  are  of  those  who 
obey  the  laws  of  Mahommed.  Your  power  inspires  me  with 
no  fear.  How  should  it  ?  I  v^ho  make  the  Mussulmen  in  Spain 
tremble !  I  lead  them  as  a  shepherd  does  a  flock  of  sheep.  I 
have  made  the  bravest  among  them  perish,  and  loaded  their 
women  and  children  with  chains.  They  endeavour  by  pre- 
sents to  appease  me,  and  turn  my  arms  to  another  quarter. 
The  soldiers  who  march  under  my  standards  cover  the  plains, 
and  my  cavalry  is  not  less  redoubtable.  You  have  but  one 
method  to  avoid  the  tempest  that  threatens  you.  Receive 
priests,  who  will  teach  you  the  Christian  religion ;  embrace 
it,  and  adore  the  Cross ;  otherwise  I  will  pursue  you  every- 
where, and  God  shall  decide  whether  you  or  I  be  master  of 
Egypt." 

Nedjm-Eddin,  on  reading  this  letter,  could  not  restrain  hia 
tears.  He  caused  the  following  answer  to  be  written  by  the 
cadi  Behaedin,  his  secretary : — 

"In  the  name  of  the  Omnipotent  and  All-merciful  God, 
salvation  to  our  prophet  Mahommed  and  his  friends  !  I  have 
received  your  letter ;  it  is  filled  with  menaces,  and  you  make 
a  boast  of  the  great  number  of  your  soldiers.  Are  you 
ignorant  that  we  know  the  use  of  arms,  and  that  we  inherit 
the  valour  of  our  ancestors  ?  No  one  has  ever  attacked  us 
without  feeling  our  superiority.  Recollect  the  cod  quests  we 
have  made  from  the  Christians ;  we  have  driven  them  from 
the  lands  they  possessed ;  their  strongest  towns  have  fallen 
under  our  blows.  Recal  to  your  mind  that  passage  of  the 
Alcoran,  which  says,  'Those  who  make  war  unjustly  shall 

death,  and  those  who  pretend  to  strictness  of  doctrine  never  fail  to 
observe  it. 


Digitized  by 


HEO.  647.1  ARABIAN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  CRUSADE. 


549 


perish and  also  another  passage,  ^  How  often  have  the  most 
numerous  armies  been  destroyed  by  a  handful  of  soldiers  1* 
God  protects  the  just;  and  we  have  no  doubt  of  his  protec- 
tion, nor  that  he  will  confound  your  arrogant  designs." 

The  French  disembarked  on  the  Saturday,  on  the  same 
shore  where  Fakreddin  had  made  his  encampment,  and  pitched 
a  red  tent  for  their  king. 

The  Mussulmen  made  some  movements  to  prevent  their 
landing;  and  the  emirs  Nedjm-Eddin  and  Sarimeddin  were 
slain  in  these  skirmishes. 

'  At  the  beginning  of  the  night  the  emir  Fakreddin  decamped 
with  his  whole  army,  and  crossed  the  bridge  which  leads  to  the 
eastern  shore  of  the  Nile,  whereon  Damietta  is  situated.  He 
took  the  road  to  Achmoum-Tanah,  and  by  this  march  the 
French  were  left  masters  of  the  western  bank  of  that  river* 

It  is  impossible  to  paint  the  despair  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Damietta  when  they  saw  the  emir  Fakreddin  march  away 
from  their  town,  and  abandon  them  to  the  fury  of  the  Chris* 
tians.  They  were  afraid  to  wait  for  the  enemy,  and  quitted 
their  town  precipitately  during  the  night.  This  conduct  of  the 
Mussulman  general  was  so  much  the  less  excusable  as  the  gar- 
rison was  composed  of  the  bravest  of  the  tribe  of  Beni- 
K6nane,  and  as  Damietta  was  in  a  better  state  of  resistance 
than  when  it  was  besieged  by  the  Franks  during  the  reign  of 
the  sultan  Elmelikul-Kamil ;  for,  although  plague  and  famine 
afflicted  the  town,  the  Franks  could  not  conquer  it  until  after 
sixteen  months'  siege. 

On  the  Monday  morning  (6th  June,  1249),  the  French 
came  before  the  town ;  but,  astonished  to  see  no  one,  they 
were  afraid  of  a  surprise.  They  were  soon  informed  of  the 
flight  of  its  inhabitants,  and,  without  striking  a  blow,  took 
possession  of  this  important  place,  and  all  the  ammunition 
and  provision  they  found  there. 

When  the  news  of  the  capture  of  Damietta  reached  Cairo, 
the  consternation  was  general.  They  considered  how  greatly 
this  success  would  augment  the  courage  and  hopes  of  the 
French ;  for  they  had  seen  an  army  of  Mussulmen  timorously 
fly  before  them,  and  were  in  possession  of  an  innumerable 
quantity  of  arms  of  all  sorts,  with  plenty  of  ammunition  and 
provision.  The  disorder  of  the  sultan,  which  daily  grew 
worse,  and  hindered  him  from  acting  in  this  critical  state  of 


Digitized  by 


544 


JOINVILLB's  memoirs — APPENDIX,    [a.d.  1240 


ailairs,  overwhelmed  the  Egyptians  with  despair.  No  one  now 
longer  doubted  but  that  the  kingdom  would  be  conquered  by 
the  Christians. 

The  sultan,  indignant  at  the  cowardice  of  the  garrison, 
ordered  fifty  of  the  principal  officers  to  be  strangled.  In  vain 
did  they  aUege  in  their  defence  the  retreat  of  the  emir  Fak- 
reddin  :  the  sultan  told  them  they  deserved  death,  for  having 
quitted  Damietta  without  his  orders.  One  of  these  officers, 
condemned  to  death  with  his  son,  requested  to  be  executed 
first ;  but  the  sultan  refused  him  this  favour,  and  the  father 
had  the  misery  to  see  his  son  expire  before  his  eyes. 

After  this  execution,  the  sultan,  turning  to  the  emir  Fak- 
reddin,  asked  with  an  enraged  tone,  "  What  resistance  have 
you  made  ?  what  battles  have  you  fought  ?  You  could  not 
withstand  the  Franks  one  hour.  You  should  have  shewn 
hiore  coarage  and  firmness."  The  officers  of  the  army,  fearing 
for  Fakreddin  the  rage  of  the  sultan,  made  the  emir  under- 
stand by  their  gestures  that  they  were  ready  to  massacre 
their  sovereign.  Fakreddin  refused  his  assent,  and  told  them 
afterward  that  the  sultan  could  not  live  more  than  a  few 
days ;  and  that,  if  the  prince  wished  to  trouble  them,  they 
were  able  at  any  time  to  get  rid  of  him. 

Nedjm-Eddin,  notwithstanding  his  melancholy  state,  gave 
orders  for  his  departure  for  Mansoura.  He  entered  his  boat 
of  war,*  and  arrived  there  on  Wednesday  the  25th  of  the 
moon  Sefer  (June  9,  a.d.  1249).  He  put  the  town  in  a 
posture  of  defence  by  employing  his  whole  army  on  this  ser- 
vice. The  boats  ordered  by  the  prince  before  his  departure 
arrived  laden  with  soldiers,  and  all  sorts  of  ammunition. 
Every  one  able  to  bear  arms  ranged  himself  under  his  stand- 
ards,  and  he  was  joined  by  the  Arabs  in  great  numbers. 

While  the  sultan  was  making  his  preparations,  the  French 
were  adding  new  fortifications  to  Damietta,,  and  placed  there 
a  considerable  garrison. 

On  Monday,  the  last  day  of  the  moon  Rebiulewel  (July 
12,  A.D.  1249),  thirty-six  Christian  prisoners  were  conducted 

*  Boat  of  war, — ^The  Arabic  word  signifies  properly  "  fire-work  boat." 
Such  were  probably  made  use  of  to  carry  the  Greek  fire,  and  the  machines 
to  throw  it.  Makrisi,  in  the  history  of  the  first  siege  of  Damietta,  speaks 
much  of  these  fire-ships,  saying  that  the  Mussulmen  made  use  of  them  to 
set  fire  to  the  vessels  of  the  Christians. 


HBO.  647.]    ARABIAN  ACCOUNT  OF  THB  CRUSADE.  5i5 


to  Csdro ;  they  had  helonged  to  the  guard  of  the  camp  against 
the  inroads  of  the  Arabs,  among  whom  were  two  knights. 
The  5th  of  the  same  moon,  thirty-seven  were  sent  thither ; 
on  the  7th,  twenty-two;  and  on  the  16th,  forty-five  other 
prisoners ;  and  among  these  last  were  three  knights. 

Different  Christian  princes,  who  held  lands  on  the  coast  of 
Syria,  had  accompanied  the  French,  by  which  their  places 
were  weakened.  The  inhabitants  of  Damascus  seized  this 
opportunity  to  besiege  Sidon,  which,  after  some  resistance, 
was  forced  to  surrender.  The  news  of  this,  when  carried 
io  Cairo,  caused  an  excess  of  joy,  and  seemed  to  compensate 
for  the  loss  of  Damietta.  Prisoners  were  made  almost  daily 
from  the  French,  fifty  of  whom  were  sent  to  Cairo  the  18th 
of  the  moon  Dieniazilewel  (Aug.  29,  a.d.  1249), 

The  sultan  continued  daily  to  grow  worse  in  health ;  and 
the  physicians  despaired  of  his  recovery,  for  he  was  attacked 
at  the  same  time  by  a  fistula  and  an  ulcer  on  his  lungs.  At 
length  he  expired,  on  the  night  of  the  15th  of  the  moon 
Chaban  (Nov.  22),  after  having  appointed  as  his  successor  his 
son  Touran-Cliah.  Nedjm-Eddin  was  forty-four  years  old 
when  he  died,  and  had  reigned  ten  years.  It  was  he  who  instil 
tuted  that  militia  of  slaves,  or  of  Mamelukes- Baharites,*  thus 

*  Melikul-Salih-Nedjin-Eddin,  son  to  Melikul-Kamil,  the  last  but  one 
of  the  princes  of  the  dynasty  of  the  Eioubites,  opened,  if  I  may  so  express 
myself,  the  road  to  the  throne  to  these  slaves.  When  this  prince  was  be- 
sieging Naponlous,  his  troops  timorously  abandoned  him,  but  the  Baharite 
slaves  alone  supported  the  enemy's  charge,  and  gave  time  to  Nedjm-Eddin 
to  escape.  From  that  moment  this  prince  gave  them  his  whole  confidence. 
Called  some  time  after  by  the  Egyptians  to  be  sultan,  in  the  place  of  his 
brother,  Melikul-Adil-Seif-Eddin,  he  loaded  these  slaves  with  his  boun- 
ties, and  elevated  them  to  the  highest  dignities.  He  quitted  the  castle,  the 
usual  residence  of  the  sultans,  to  inhabit  one  which  he  had  built  in  the 
small  island  of  Roudah,  opposite  to  old  Cairo.  The  Baharite  slaves  had 
the  guard  of  it,  and  thence  took  the  name  Baharite  or  Maritime,  the  Arabs 
calling  all  great  rivers  by  the  name  of  sea,  as  well  as  the  sea  itself.  These 
slaves,  or  Mamelukes-Baharites,  amounted  to  eight  hundred  at  the  time 
of  St.  Louis's  invasion,  and  it  was  they  who,  at  the  battle  of  Man- 
soura,  repulsed  this  prince,  who  had  advanced  as  fiir  as  the  palace  of  the 
sultan.  They  contributed  greatly  to  the  last  victory  of  the  Egyptians  over 
St.  Louis  ;  and,  as  the  historian  remarks,  after  these  two  battles  their  name 
and  power  greatly  increased.  A  short  time  after  they  assassinated 
Touran-Qhah,  the  last  prince  of  the  dynasty  of  the  Eioubites,  and  seized 
the  throne.  Azeddin-Aibegh,  the  Turcoman,  was  the  first  who  mounted 
it,  and  took  the  name  of  Melikul-Muez.  Chegeret-Eddur,  his  wife, 
hsfing  caused  him  to  be  mnrdere4»  his  son,  who  was  twelve  years  oldi 


2  N 


546 


JOINVILLE's  memoirs  APPENDIX,     f  A.D.  1  249* 


called  from  being  quartered  in  the  castle  which  this  prince 
had  built  in  the  island  of  Roudah,  opposite  to  old  Cairo- 
This  militia,  in  course  of  time,  seized  on  the  throne  of  Eg3rpt 

As  soon  as  the  sultan  had  expired,  the  sultana  Chegeret  • 
Eddur,  his  spouse,  sent  for  the  general  Fakreddin  and  the 
eunuch  Diemaleddin,  to  inform  them  of  the  death  of  the  sul- 
tan, and  to  request  their  assistance  in  supporting  the  weight 
of  government  at  such  a  critical  period.  All  three  resolved 
to  keep  the  sultan's  death  a  secret,  and  to  act  in  his  name  as 
if  he  were  alive.  His  death  was  not  to  be  made  public  until 
after  the  arrival  of  Touran-Chah,  to  whom  were  sent  messen- 
gers after  messengers. 

Notwithstanding  these  precautions,  the  French  were  in- 
formed of  his  death.  Their  army  instantly  quitted  the  plains 
of  Damietta,  and  encamped  at  Fariskour.  Boats  laden  with 
provision  and  stores  came  up  the  Nile,  and  kept  the  army 
abundantly  supplied. 

The  emir  Fakreddin  sent  a  letter  to  Cairo,  to  inform  the 
inhabitants  of  the  approach  of  the  French,  and  to  exhort 
them  to  sacrifice  their  fives  and  fortunes  in  the  defence  of  the 
country.  This  letter  was  read  in  the  pulpit  of  the  great 
mosque,  and  the  people  answered  only  with  sighs  and  groans. 
Every  thing  was  in  trouble  and  confusion ;  and  the  death  of 
the  sultan,  which  was  suspected,  added  to  the  consternation. 
The  most  cowardly  thought  of  quitting  a  town  which  they 
believed  unable  to  withstand  the  French ;  but  the  more 
courageous,  on  the  contrary,  marched  to  Mansoura,  to  join 
the  Mussulman  army. 

On  Tuesday,  the  1st  day  of  the  moon  Ramadan  (Dec.  7y 
A.D.  1249),  there  were  some  trifling  skirmishes  between 

occupied  his  place,  but  reigned  only  two  years.  Khotouz  succeeded  him* 
Bibars-Elbondukdari,  the  same  who,  at  the  head  of  the  Mamelukes, 
charged  the  French  cavalry  with  such  fury  as  forced  them  to  abandon 
Mansoura,  ascended  this  throne  the  658th  year  of  the  Hegira,  and  of 
our  sera  1289,  and  took  the  name  of  Melikul- Daher.  After  a  glorious 
reign  of  seventeen  years,  he  died  at  Damascus.  This  dynasty  reigned  in 
Egypt  and  Syria  during  one  hundred  and  thirty-six  years,  and  had  twenty- 
seven  sultans.  The  Mamelukes-Baharites  were  originaUy  Turks,  and  had 
been  sold  to  the  sultan  Nedjm-Eddin  by  merchants  from  Syria.  The 
slaves,  or  Mamelukes-Circassians,  dethroned  them  in  their  turn,  in  the 
784th  year  of  the  Hegira,  and  of  our  sera  1382,  and  formed  anew  dynasty, 
which  governed  Egypt  until  the  conquest  of  that  kingdom  by  Sultan 
Selim,  emperor  of  the  Turks,  in  the  923rd  year  of  the  Hegira,  a.d.  1517* 


Digitized  by 


HEG.  647.]  ARABIAN  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  CRUSADB. 


547 


different  corps  of  troops  of  each  army.  This,  however,  did 
not  prevent  the  French  army  from  encamping  at  Oharmesah : 
the  Monday  following,  being  the  7th  of  the  same  moon,  the 
army  advanced  to  Bermoun. 

On  Sunday,  the  13th  day  of  the  same  moon,  the  Chris- 
tian army  appeared  before  the  town  of  Mansonra ;  the  branch 
of  the  Achmoum  was  between  it  and  the  Egyptian  camp. 
Nasir  Daoud,  prince  of  Karak,  was  on  the  western  bank  of 
the  Nile  with  some  troops.  The  French  traced  out  their  camp, 
surrounding  it  with  a  deep  ditch  surmounted  by  a  palisado, 
and  erected  machines  to  cast  stones  at  the  Egyptian  army. 
Their  fleet  arrived  at  the  same  time ;  so  that  there  were  en- 
gagements on  water  and  on  land. 

On  Wednesday,  the  15th  day  of  the  same  moon,  six 
deserters  passed  over  to  the  camp  of  the  Mussulmen,  and 
informed  them  that  the  French  army  was  in  want  of  pro- 
vision. 

The  day  of  Bairam,*  a  great  lord,  and  relation  to  the  king 
of  France,  was  made  prisoner.  Not  a  day  passed  without 
skirmishes  on  both  sides,  and  with  alternate  success.  The 
Mussulmen  were  particularly  anxious  to  make  prisoners,  to 
gain  information  as  to  the  state  of  the  enemy's  army,  and  used 
all  sorts  of  stratagems  for  this  purpose.  A  soldier  from  Cairo 
bethought  himself  of  putting  his  head  withinside  of  a  water- 
melon, the  interior  of  which  he  had  scooped  out,  and  of  thus 
swimming  toward  the  French  camp ;  a  Christian  soldier,  not 
suspecting  a  trick,  leaped  into  the  Nile  to  seize  the  melon ; 
but  the  Egyptian  was  a  stout  swimmer,  and  catching  hold  of 
him,  dragged  him  to  his  general.t 

On  Wednesday,  the  7th  day  of  the  moon  Chewal  (Jan. 
12,  1250),  the  Mussulmen  captured  a  large  boat,  in  which 
were  a  hundred  soldiers,  commanded  by  an  officer  of  dis- 
tinction. On  Thursday,  the  15th  of  the  same  moon,  the 
French  marched  out  of  their  camp,  and  their  cavalry  began 
to  move.  The  troops  were  ordered  to  file  off,  when  a  slight 
skirmish  took  place,  and  the  French  left  on  the  field  forty 
cavaliers  with  their  horses. 

*  The  grand  Bairam,  the  Ist  day  of  the  moon  Chewal,  was  on  Thursday, 
6th  January,  1250. 

t  The  Egyptians  are,  at  this  day,  perfect  swimmers,  and  they  exhibit 
eitiaordinary  specimens  of  their  art  in  this  line. 

8n  2 


Digitized  by 


JOINYILLE'b  memoirs — ^APPENDIX.     ^A-D.  1250, 


On  the  Friday,  seventy  prisoners  were  conducted  to 
Cairo,  among  whom  were  three  lords  of  rank.  On  the  22nd 
of  the  same  moon,  a  large  boat  belonging  to  the  French  took 
fire,  which  was  considered  as  a  fortunate  omen  for  the 
Mussulmen. 

Some  traitors  having  shewn  the  ford  over  the  canal  of 
Achmoum  to  the  French,  fourteen  hundred  cavaliers  crossed 
it,  and  fell  unexpectedly  on  the  camp  of  the  Mussulmen,  on  a 
Tuesday,  the  15th  day  of  the  moon  Zilkalde  (Feb.  8),  having 
at  their  head  the  brother  of  the  king  of  France.  The  emir 
Fakrcddin  was  at  the  time  in  the  bath  :  he  instantly  quitted 
it  with  precipitation,  iand  mounted  a  horse  without  saddle  or 
bridle,  followed  only  by  some  slaves.  The  enemy  attacked 
him  on  all  sides,  but  his  slaves,  like  cowards,  abandoned  him 
when  in  the  midst  of  the  French:  it  was  in  vain  he  attempted 
to  defend  himself ;  he  fell  pierced  with  wounds.  The  French, 
after  the  death  of  Fakreddin,  retreated  to  Dj6dil6;  but  their 
whole  cavalry  advanced  to  Mansoura,  and,  having  forced  one 
of  the  gates,  entered  the  town :  the  Mussulmen  fled  to  the 
right  and  left.  The  king  of  France  had  already  penetrated 
as  far  as  the  sultan's  palace,  and  victory  seemed  ready  to 
declare  for  him,  when  the  Baharite  slaves,  led  by  Bibars,  ad- 
vanced, and  snatched  it  from  his  hands  :  their  charge  was  so 
furious  that  the  French  were  obliged  to  retreat.  The  French 
infantry,  during  this  time,  had  advanced  to  cross  the  bridge; 
had  they  been  able  to  join  their  cavalry,  the  defeat  of  the 
Egyptian  army,  and  the  loss  of  the  town  of  Mansoura,  would 
have  been  inevitable. 

Night  separated  the  combatants,  when  the  French  retreated 
in  disorder  to  Djldil^,  after  leaving  fifteen  hundred  of  their 
men  on  the  field.  They  surrounded  their  camp  with  a  ditch 
and  wall,  but  their  army  was  divided*  into  two  corps:  the 
least  considerable  body  was  encamped  on  the  branch  of  the 
Achmoum,  and  the  larger  on  the  great  branch  of  the  Nile  that 
runs  to  Damietta. 

A  pigeon  had  been  let  loose  to  fly  to  Cairof  the  instant 
the  French  had  surprised  the  camp  of  Fakreddin,  having  a 
note  under  its  wing,  to  inform  the  inhabitants  of  this  mis- 

*  Joinville  speaks  of  a  camp  separate  from  that  of  the  lung,  eon* 
Wianded  by  the  count  of  Burgundy, 
t  This  custom  is  very  a^clent  in  the  Ka$t« 


Digitized  by 


HEG.  648.]]  ARABIAN  ACCOtTlfT  OP  THB  CRI78At>B. 


549 


fortune.  This  melancholy  event  had  created  a  general  cou'- 
sternation  in  the  town,  which  the  runaways  had  augmented, 
aud  the  gates  of  Cairo  were  kept  open  all  the  night  to 
receive  them.  A  second  pigeon  bearing  the  news  of  the  vic- 
tory over  the  French,  had  restored  tranquillity  to  the  capital. 
Joy  succeeded  sorrow ;  and  each  congratulated  the  other 
on  this  happy  turn  of  affairs,  and  public  rejoicings  were 
made. 

When  Touran-Chah  heard  of  the  death  of  his  father, 
Nedjm-Eddin,  he  set  out  from  Huns-Keifa.*  It  was  the 
15th  of  the  moon  Ramadan  when  he  departed,  attended  by 
only  fifty  horsemen,  and  he  arrived  at  Damascus  toward  the 
end  of  that  moon.  After  receiving  the  homage  of  all  the 
governors  of  the  towns  in  Syria,  he  set  out  on  a  Wednesday, 
the  27th  day  of  the  moon  Chewal,  and  took  the  road  to 
Egypt.  The  news  of  his  arrival  raised  the  courage  of  the 
Mussulmen.  The  death  of  Nedjm-Eddin  had  not  yet  been 
publicly  announced :  the  service  of  the  sultan  was  performed 
as  usual :  his  ofiicers  prepared  his  table  as  if  he  had 
been  alive,  and  every  order  was  given  in  his  name.  The 
sultana  governed  the  kingdom,  and  found,  in  her  own  mind, 
resources  for  alL  The  moment  she  heard  of  Touran-Chah's 
arrival,  she  waited  on  him,  and  laid  aside  the  sovereign  com- 
mand, to  invest  him  with  it.  This  prince  was  anxious  to 
appear  at  the  head  of  his  troops,  and  set  out  for  Mansoura, 
where  he  arrived  on  the  5th  of  the  moon  Zilkad^  (Feb.  8). 

Boats  sent  from  Damietta  brought  all  sorts  of  provision  to 
the  French  camp,  and  kept  it  abundantly  supplied.  The 
Nile  was  now  at  its  greatest  heightt  Touran-Chah  caused 
many  boats  to  be  built,  which,  ^hen  taken  to  pieces,  he  placed 
on  the  backs  of  camels,  and  had  them  thus  carried  to  the 
canal  of  M6hal€,  when  they  were  put  together  again,  launched 
on  the  canal,  and  filled  with  troops  for  an  ambuscade. 

As  soon  as  the  French  fleet  of  boats  appeared  at  the  mouth 
of  the  canal  of  M6hal^  the  Mussulmen  quitted  their  hiding- 
place,  and  attacked   them.    While  the  two   fleets  were 

*  A  town  of  Diarbekir,  od  the  banks  of  the  Tigris. 

t  How  could  Makrisi  say  the  Nile  was  at  its  greatest  height  when  It 
was  only  the  8th  of  February  ?  and  this  river  is  never  in  that  state  but  in 
the  month  of  September.  The  date  is  exact,  and  agrees  with  JoinviUe, 
who  notices  this  same  event  happening  on  the  Shrove-Tuesday. 


Digitized  by 


S50 


JOINVILLR'S  MBM0IR6 — APPENDIX.     ^A.D.  1250. 


engaged,  other  boats  left  Mansoura  filled  with  soldiers,  and 
fell  on  the  rear  of  the  French.  It  was  in  vain  they  sought  to 
escape  hj  flight :  a  thousand  Christians  were  killed  or  made 
prisoners. 

In  this  defeat,  fifty-two  of  their  boats  laden  with  provision 
were  taken,  and  their  communication  with  Damietta  by  tbe 
navigation  of  the  Nile  was  cut  ofl^  so  that  within  a  short  time 
the  whole  army  sufiered  the  most  terrible  famine.  The  Mus- 
Bulmen  surrounded  them  on  all  sides,  and  they  could  neither 
advance  nor  retreat. 

On  the  1st  of  the  moon  Zilhig6  (March  7),  the  French  sur- 
prised seven  boats ;  but  the  troops  on  board  had  the  good  for- 
tune to  escape.  In  spite  of  the  superiority  of  the  Egyptians  on 
the  Nile,  they  attempted  to  bring  up  another  convoy  from  Da- 
mietta, but  they  lost  it :  thirty-two  of  their  boats  were  taken 
and  carried  to  Mansoura,  on  the  9th  of  the  same  moon. 
This  new  loss  filled  the  measure  of  their  woes,  and  caused 
them  to  propose  a  truce  and  send  ambassadors  to  treat  of  it 
with  the  sultan.  The  emir  Zeineddin  and  the  cadi  Bedreddin 
were  ordered  to  meet  and  confer  with  them,  when  the 
French  oifered  to  surrender  Damietta,  on  condition  that 
Jerusalem,  and  some  other  places  in  Syria,  should  be  given  in 
exchange  for  it.  This  proposal  was  rejected,  and  the  confer- 
ences broken  up. 

On  Friday,  the  27th  of  the  moon  Zilhij^  (April  1),  the 
French  set  fire  to  all  their  machines  of  war  and  timber  for 
building,  and  rendered  almost  all  their  boats  unfit  for  use. 
During  the  night  of  Tuesday,*  the  3rd  day  of  the  moon 
Mahasem  (April  5),  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  648,  the 
whole  of  the  French  army  decamped,  and  took  the  road 
to  Damietta.  Some  boats  which  they  had  reserved  fell  down 
the  Nile  at  the  same  time.  The  Mussulmen  having,  at  break 
of  day  of  the  Wednesday,  perceived  the  retreat  of  the  French, 
pursued  and  attacked  them. 

The  heat  of  the  combat  was  at  Fariskour.  The  French 
were  defeated  and  put  to  flight :  ten  thousand  of  their  men 
fell  on  the  field  of  battle,  some  say  thirty  thousand.  Up- 
wards of  one  hundred  thousand  horsemen,  infantry,  trades- 
people, and  others,  were  made  slaves.    The  booty  was  im- 

*  Joinyille  dates  this  erent  on  the  Tuesday  evening  after  the  octftTe  of 
Easter. 


BEG.  648.^   ARABIAN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  CRUSADE. 


551 


mense  in  horses,  mules,  tents,  and  other  riches.  There  were 
but  one  hundred  slain  on  the  side  of  the  Mussulmen.  The 
Baharite  slaves,  under  the  command  of  Bibars  Elbondukdari, 
performed  in  this  battle  signal  acts  of  valour.  The  king  0/ 
France  had  retired,  with  a  few  of  his  lords,  to  a  small  hillock, 
and  surrendered  himself,  under  promise  of  his  life  being 
spared,  to  the  eunuch  Djemaddelin  Mahsun-Elsalihi :  he  was 
bound  with  a  chain,  and  in  this  state  conducted  to  Mansoura, 
where  he  was  confined  in  the  house  of  Ibrahim-ben  Lokman, 
secretary  to  the  sultan,  and  under  the  guard  of  the  eunuch 
Sahil.  The  king's  brother  was  made  prisoner  at  the  same 
time,  and  carried  to  the  same  house.  The  sultan  provided 
for  their  subsistence. 

The  number  of  slaves  was  so  great,  it  was  embarrassing, 
and  the  sultan  gave  orders  to  Seifeddin-Jousef-ben-tardi  to 
put  them  to  death.  Every  night  this  cruel  minister  of  the 
vengeance  of  his  master  had  from  three  to  four  hundred  of 
the  prisoners  brought  from  their  places  of  confinement,  and, 
after  he  had  caused  them  to  be  beheaded,  their  bodies  were 
thrown  into  the  Nile ;  in  this  manner  perished  one  hundred 
thousand  of  the  French. 

The  sultan  departed  from  Mansoura,  and  went  to  Fariskour^ 
where  he  had  pitched  a  most  magnificent  tent.  He  had  also 
built  a  tower  of  wood  over  the  Nile ;  and,  being  freed  from 
a  disagreeable  war,  he  there  gave  himself  up  to  all  sorts  of 
debauchery. 

The  victory  he  had  just  gained  was  so  brilliant  that  he  was 
eager  to  make  all  who  were  subjected  to  him  acquainted  with 
it.  He  wrote  with  his  own  hand  a  letter  in  the  following 
terms,  to  the  emir  Djemal-Edden-ben-Jagmonr,  governor  of 
Damascus : 

"  Thanks  be  given  to  the  All-powerful,  who  has  changed 
our  grief  to  joy :  it  is  to  him  alone  we  owe  the  victory. 
The  favours  he  has  condescended  to  shower  upon  us  are  in- 
numerable, but  this  last  is  most  precious.  You  will  announce 
to  the  people  of  Damascus,  or  rather  to  all  Mussulmen,  that 
God  has  enabled  us  to  gain  a  complete  victory  over  the  Chris- 
tians, at  the  moment  they  had  conspired  our  ruin. 

On  Monday,  the  first  day  of  this  year,  we  opened  our 
treasury,  and  distributed  riches  and  anus  to  our  faithful  sol- 
diers.   We  had  called  to  our  succour  the  Arabian  tribes,  and 


Digitized  by 


552 


JOINVILLE's  memoirs  ^APPENDIX.    Qa.d.  1250. 


8  numberless  multitude  of  soldiers  ranged  themselves  under 
our  standards.  On  the  nights  between  Tuesday  and  Wednes- 
day, our  enemies  abandoned  their  camp  with  all  their  baggage, 
and  marched  towards  Damietta  :  in  spite  of  the  obscurtyof  the 
night,  we  pursued  them,  and  thirty  thousand  of  them  were  left 
dead  on  the  field,  not  including  those  who  precipitated  them 
selves  into  the  Nile.  We  hnve  beside  slain  our  very  nume- 
rous prisoners,  and  thrown  their  bodies  into  the  same  rirer. 
Their  king  had  retreated  to  Minieh :  he  has  implored  our 
clemency,  and  we  have  granted  him  his  life,  and  paid  him 
all  the  honours  due  to  his  rank.  We  have  regained  Da- 
mietta." 

The  sultan,  with  this  letter,  sent  the  king's  cap,  which  had 
fallen  in  the  combat :  it  was  of  scarlet,  lined  with  a  fine  fur. 
The  governor  of  Damascus  put  the  king's  cap  on  his  own 
head  when  he  read  to  the  public  the  sultan's  letter.  A  poet 
made  these  verses  on  the  occasion  : 

"The  cap  of  the  French  was  whiter  than  paper:  out 
sabres  have  dyed  it  with  the  blood  of  the  enemy,  and  have 
changed  its  colour." 

The  gloomy  and  retired  life  the  sultan  led  had  irritated  the 
minds  of  his  people.  He  had  no  confidence  but  in  a  certain 
number  of  favourites,  whom  he  had  brought  with  him  from 
Huns-Kei£a.,  and  whom  he  had  invested  with  the  principal 
ofiices  of  the  state,  in  the  room  of  the  ancient  ministers  of  his 
father.  Above  all,  he  shewed  a  decided  hatred  to  the  Mame- 
lukes, although  they  had  contributed  so  greatly  to  the  last 
victory.  His  debaucheries  exhausted  his  revenue;  and,  to 
supply  the  deficiencies,  he  forced  the  sultana  Chegeret-Eddur 
to  render  him  an  account  of  the  riches  of  his  father.  The 
sultana,  in  alarm,  implored  the  protection  of  the  Mamelukes^ 
representing  to  them  the  services  she  had  done  the  state  in 
very  difficult  times,  and  the  ingratitude  of  Touran-Chah,  who 
was  indebted  to  her  for  the  crown  he  wore.  These  slaves, 
already  irritated  against  Touran-Chah,  did  not  hesitate  to 
take  the  part  of  the  sultana,  and  resolved  to  assassinate  the 
prince.  To  execute  this  design,  they  fixed  on  the  moment 
when  he  was  at  table ;  Bibars-Elbondukdari  gave  him  the 
first  blow  with  his  sabre,  and,  though  he  parried  it  with  bis 
hand,  he  lost  his  fingers.  He  then  fled  to  the  tower  which  he 
had  built  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  and  which  was  but  a 


HEG.  648.]]  ARABIAN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  CRUSADM.  553 

short  distance  from  his  tent.  The  conspirators  followed  nim, 
and,  finding  he  had  closed  the  door,  set  fire  to  it.  The  whole 
army  saw  what  was  passing ;  but,  as  he  was  a  prince  univer* 
sally  detested,  no  one  came  forward  in  his  defence. 

It  was  in  vain  he  cried  from  the  top  of  the  tower,  that  he 
would  abdicate  his  throne,  and  return  to  Huns-Keifa;  the 
assassins  were  inflexible.  The  flames  at  length  gaining  on 
the  tower,  he  attempted  to  leap  into  the  Nile ;  but  his  dress 
caught  as  he  was  falling,  and  he  remained  some  time  ana-* 
pended  in  the  air.  In  this  state,  he  received  many  wounds 
from  sabres,  and  then  fell  into  the  river,  where  he  was 
drowned.  Thus  iron,  fire,  and  water  contributed  to  put  an 
end  to  his  life.  His  body  continued  three  days  on  the  bank 
of  the  Nile,  without  any  one  daring  to  give  it  sepulture.  At 
length,  the  ambassador  from  the  caliph  of  Bagdad  obtained 
permission,  and  had  it  buried. 

This  cruel  prince,  when  he  ascended  the  throne,  had  his 
brother,  Adil-Chah,  strangled.  Four  Mameluke  slaves  had 
been  ordered  to  execute  this ;  but  the  fratricide  did  not  long 
remain  unpunished,  and  these  same  four  slaves  were  the  most 
bitter  in  putting  him  to  death.  With  this  prince  was  ex- 
tinguished the  dynasty  of  the  Eioubites,  who  had  governed 
Egjrpt  eighty  years,  under  eight  difierent  kings. 

After  the  massacre  of  Touran-Chah,  the  sultana  Chegeret- 
Eddur  was  declared  sovereign  of  Egypt ;  she  was  the  first 
slave  who  had  reigned  over  this  country.  This  princess  was 
a  Turk,  but  others  said  an  Armenian.  The  sultan  Nedjm- 
Eddin  had  bought  her,  and  loved  her  so  desperately  that  he 
carried  her  with  him  to  his  wars,  and  never  quitted  her.  She 
had  a  son  by  the  sultan,  called  Kbalil,  but  who  died  when 
very  young.  The  emir  Azeddin-Aibegh,  of  the  Turcoman 
nation,  was  appointed  general  of  the  army ;  and  the  name  of 
the  sultana  was  imprinted  on  the  coin. 

The  emir  Abou-Ali  was  nominated  to  treat  with  the  king 
of  France  for  his  ransom,  and  for  the  surrender  of  Damietta. 
After  many  conferences  and  disputes,  it  was  agreed  that  the 
French  should  evacuate  Damietta,  and  that  the  king,  and  all 
prisoners  in  Egypt,  should  be  set  at  liberty,  on  condition  of 
paying  down  one  half  of  such  ransom  as  should  be  fixed  on. 
The  king  of  France  sent  orders  to  the  governor  of  Damietta 
to  surrender  that  town ;  but  he  refused  to  obey,  and  new 


Digitized  by 


554 


JOINVILLB's  memoirs  APPENDIX.    ^A.D.  I  250 


orders  were  necessary.  At  last  it  was  ^ven  up  to  the  Mus- 
sulmen,  after  having  remained  eleven  months  in  the  hands  of 
the  enemy.  The  king  paid  four  hundred  thousand  pieces  of 
^old,  as  well  for  his  own  ransom  as  for  that  of  the  queen, 
his  brother,  and  the  other  lords  that  had  accompanied  him. 

All  the  Franks  that  had  been  made  prisoners  during  the 
reigns  of  the  sultans  Hadil-Kamil,  Salih-Nedjm-Eddin,  and 
Touran-Chah,  obtained  their  liberty:  they  amounted  to 
twelve  thousand  one  hundred  men  and  ten  women.  The 
king,  with  all  the  French,  crossed  to  the  westward  branch  of 
the  Nile,  and  embarked  on  a  Saturday  for  Acre.* 

The  poet,  £ssahib-Giemal-Edden-Ben-Matroub  made,  on 
the  departure  of  this  prince,  the  following  verses  : 

"  Bear  to  the  king  of  France,  when  you  shall  see  him, 
these  words,  traced  by  a  partisan  of  truth  :  The  death  of  the 
servants  of  the  Messiah  has  been  the  reward  given  to  you  by 
God. 

"  You  have  landed  in  Egypt,  thinking  to  take  possession 
of  it.  You  have  imagined  that  it  was  only  peopled  with 
cowards !  you  who  are  a  drum  filled  with  wind. 

"  You  thought  that  the  moment  to  destroy  the  Mussulmen 
was  arrived ;  and  this  false  idea  has  smoothed,  in  your  eyes, 
every  difficulty. 

"  By  your  excellent  conduct,  you  have  abandoned  your 
soldiers  on  the  plains  of  Eg3rpt,  and  the  tomb  has  gaped 
under  their  feet. 

"  What  now  remains  of  the  seventy  thousand  who  accom- 
panied you  ?    Dead,  wounded,  and  prisoners ! 

"  May  God  inspire  you  often  with  similar  designs !  They 
will  cause  the  ruin  of  all  Christians,  and  Egypt  will  have  no 
longer  to  dread  any  thing  from  their  rage. 

"  Without  doubt,  your  priests  announced  victories  to  you : 
their  predictions  were  false. 

"  Refer  yourselves  to  a  more  enlightened  oracle. 

"  Should  the  desire  of  revenge  urge  you  to  return  to  Egypt, 
be  assured  the  house  of  Lokman  still  remains,  that  the  chain 
is  ready  prepared,  and  the  eunuch  awake."t 

Great  rejoicings  were  made  at  Cairo  and  throughout  Egypt, 

*  7th  May,  1250.    Joinville  says  the  Saturday  after  Ascension  day. 
t  The  poet,  in  this  stanza,  allndes  to  the  prison  of  St.  Louis  and  tht 
•onuch  who  guarded  him. 


Digitized  by 


TIEQ,  648.]]  ARABIAN  ACCOUNT  OP  THE  CRU8ADE. 


555 


for  the  restoration  of  Damietta.  The  army  broke  ap  its  en- 
campment, and  returned  to  the  capital,  when  the  snltana 
loaded  the  officers  with  presents,  and  her  liberalities  extended 
to  the  meanest  soldier. 

The  king  of  France,*  having  fortunately  eseaped  from  the 
hands  of  the  Egyptians,  resolved  to  make  war  against  the 
kingdom  of  Tunis.  He  chose  a  time  when  a  horrible  famine 
ravaged  Africa,  and  sent  an  ambassador  to  the  pope,  whom 
the  Christians  consider  as  the  vicar  of  the  Messiah.  This 
jontiff  gave  him  permission  to  take  for  the  support  of  this 
war  the  wealth  of  churches.  He  also  sent  ambsieadors  to  all 
the  kings  in  Christendom,  to  demand  assistance,  and  to  engage 
them  to  unite  with  him  in  this  expedition.  The  kings  of 
England,  of  Scotland,  and  of  Arragon,  the  count  of  Toulouse, 
and  many  other  Christian  princes,  accepted  of  his  invitation. 

Abouabdoullah-Muhammed-Elmoustausir-Billab,  son  to  the 
emir  Abizikeria,  then  reigned  at  Tunis.  The  report  of  this 
intended  expedition  came  to  his  ears,  and  he  sent  an  ambas- 
sador to  the  king  of  France  to  sue  for  peace,  offering  eighty 
thousand  pieces  of  gold  to  obtain  it.  The  king  took  the 
money,  but  did  not  the  less  carry  his  arms  into  Africa.  He 
landed  on  the  shore  of  the  plains  of  Carthage,  and  laid  siege 
to  Tunis  the  last  day  of  the  moon  Zilkad^,  in  the  668th  year 
of  theHegira  (July  21,  a.d.  1270). 

*  The  Egyptiaiv  repented  having  suffered  the  king  of  France  to  escape 
from  their  hands,  for  it  was  comoaonly  reported  that  he  was  meditating 
another  war  against  Egypt.    Makdsi,  in  the  description  of  this  kingdom, 
says,  that  this  report  was  renewed  under  the  reign  of  Bibars-Albonduk- 
dari.    This  sultan  assembled  his  council,  when  it  was  resolved,  that,  in 
order  to  gain  access  to  succour  Damietta,  which  had  lately  been  rebuilt, 
not  far  from  the  site  of  the  ancient  town,  that  had  been  ruined,  a  bridge 
should  be  constructed  from  Kiioub  to  the  town.    Kiloub  nas  ariUage  two 
days'  march  distant  from  Damietta,  and  when  the  Nile  is  at  its  h.'ight,  the 
road  to  that  village  is  impassable.    The  emir  Achoub,  one  of  the  Mame- 
luke chiefs,  had  the  superintendence  of  it.    Thirty  thousand  men  were 
employed  in  building  this  bridge,  and  six  hundred  oxen  transported  ma- 
terials and  earth.    This  bridge  was  finished  in  a  month.    It  was  two  days* 
march  in  length,  and  six  horsemen  co'ild  pass  it  in  front.    This  bridge, 
however,  could  not  be  very  high,  since  it  was  not  built  over  the  NUe, 
where  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  construct  one  ;  and  this  proves  it 
was  erected  on  the  land,  and  of  use  only  in  the  time  of  innndaticns.  It 
was  rather  a  causeway  than  a  bridge,  and  sufficiently  high  to  be  above  the 
country  flooded  by  the  Nile.    Similar  ones  are  built  at  this  day,  to  pre- 
fvnt  the  land  from  being  overflowed. 


556 


JOINTILLE's  memoirs — APPENDIX.    [a.D.  1  270. 


His  army  was  composed  of  thirty  thousand  infantry  and 
six  thousand  cavalry.    The  siege  lasted  six  months. 

On  the  15th  of  the  month  Muharsem.,  the  first  month  of 
the  year  669,  there  was  a  bloody  battle,  in  which  numbers 
were  slain  on  each  side.  The  Tunisians  were  on  the  point  of 
being  destroyed,  when  the  death  of  the  king  of  France 
changed  the  face  of  affairs.  The  French,  after  this  event, 
only  thought  of  making  peace  and  returning  to  their  own 
country. 

One  Ismael-Erreian,  an  inhabitant  of  Tunis,  made  the  fol- 
lowing verses  during  the  siege  : — 

"  Frenchman,  art  thou  ignorant  that  Tunis  is  the  sister  of 
Cairo  ?  Think  on  the  fate  that  awaits  thee !  Thou  wilt  find 
before  this  town  thy  tomb,  instead  of  the  house  of  Lokman ; 
and  the  two  terrible  angels,  Munkir  and  Nakir,  will  take  the 
place  of  the  eunuch  Sahil."* 

This  king  of  France  had  a  good  understanding,  but  was  of 
an  artful  character.t 

Munkir  and  Nakir  are  two  angels  who,  according  to  the  Mussulman 
creed y  interrogate  the  dead  the  moment  they  are  in  the  grave.  They 
begin  their  interrogatories  with  these  words,  **  Who  is  thy  Lord  and 
Who  is  thy  prophet  V* 

t  It  is  disgraceful  to  Makrisi,  otherwise  a  tolerably  faithful  historiant 
to  suffer  himself  to  be  blinded  by  the  common  aversion  of  Mussulmea  to 
Chrifltiaiis. 
