A DESCRIPTION OF THE NATURE OF FOUR-FOOTED BEASTS
=================================================
PUBLIC DOMAIN (EEBO-TCP Phase 1, CC0). Transcribed from the original edition.
Joannes Jonston (John Johnston), 1678 English translation. Complete as published.

========================================================================
A DESCRIPTION Of the Nature OF FOUR-FOOTED BEASTS, With their Figures

[...] WRITTEN IN LATIN By DR. JOHN JOHNSTON. Translated into English by J. P.

AMSTERDAM, Printed for the Widow of JOHN JACOBSEN SCHIPPER, and STEPHEN SWART. M.DC.LXXVIII.

THE PREFACE To the BOOK Of the FOUR-FOOTED BEASTS.

Courteous Reader,

WE have thought good to anticipate somthing touching FOUR-FOOTED BEASTS in general: which I trust I shall have sufficiently performed, when I shall have praemised to you some account of the Name, the Parts, Place, Food, Growth, Generation, Life, Animal actions, Use and Differences thereof. Now under the denomination of These,Name. are to be by us considered Those Animals which, being of a middle nature between the airy and the waterish, are for the most part covered with hair, somtimes with shells, and do go upon four feet. I should call them, after the Greek idiom, Tetrapoda four-footed, Tetrakola having four members or parts, Tetraskele four legg'd, and Tetrabamona such as walk on four.Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 39. In all the rest there is a manifold and incomprehensible varietie, which, if you should well consider, would strike you with astonishment.

Please first to view with me the outward Parts. Parts external. They which bring forth living creatures have hairs; which produce eggs, a shell. The hairs of Horses are seen in their large manes, so the locks of Lyons on their shoulders: and in Coneys within their cheeks and feet. The Hare is of all living creatures the most hairy. The hairs grow thicker in all with age. In the Horse onely they contract a grayness. Swine and porcupines are covered with bristles, Sheep with wool, Goats have their beards hanging down from their chin. The Hide of the Sea-horse is so thick, that out of it are formed turned-spears: that also of the Elephant and Rhinoceros is almost impenetrable. Nowhere is Natures wantonness,Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 37. or lavishness, more evident than in the Horns. These It spreads abroad into branches, as in the Harts. To Others it gives single Ones, as in the Harts call'd Spitters which have young horns without tines. The horns of Others hath it fashioned as the palms of hands spread abroad, and hath shot out fingers from them, whence they call them Platycerota's Broad-horned beasts. To the Roes, or wild Goats, hath it given horns with branches, but little: neither hath it made them hanging down. Such as are circularly convolved or wound about, as a worlebat, are given to the Rams: unlucky ones to Bulls. To the wild Goats of the Rocks, such as are crookedly writhen backwards, to the Fallow-Deer on the contrary, forwards. Such as stand bolt upright, and twined with the compassing about of wrinckles and sharpened lightly toward the top, to the Strepsiceros a Beast half wild and half tame, which in Africa they call an Addax. Those are moveable, as are ears, which be found among the herds in Phrygia: Those of the Troglodyts (so called from their inhabiting in caverns) grow directly toward the earth, by reason whereof they must turn their necks awry when they feed. To Others onely one horn is given, and that in the middle of the head, or on the nose. To Some also are given horns of strength to run on in a forcible assault; to Others, for striking withall. Some are hooked, Others contrariwise

crooking upwards. In Some they are cast in various manners, lying along, turned about, entangled together: all of them tending toward a sharp point. To all them and them onely who procreate a living creature are given Ears, and they are movable. In Some they are less, in Others greater. In the Harts onely they are cloven, and as it were divided: in Ratts they are full of hairs. In Horses and all kind of labouring cattell they show the tokens of the mind: in the weary they are flagging: panting or trembling in the fearfull: standing upright in the raging: hanging loose in the sick. The Dog, the Lion, and those which live upon hunting for the prey have the Mouth so cut open as to gape wide; 't is of a middle size in the Swine. The snout or trunk is onely in the Elephant. The Jaws in labouring cattell are long, in Apes round. The Neck in the Lion onely, and the Wolf and the subtil Beast Hyaena is stiffened with each of them one bone.Plin H. N. l. 11. c. 42. Touching the Paps or Teats this is observed by Pliny: The Beasts which have whole hoofs, and bring not forth above two young at once, these all have two paps, and not otherwhere than between the thighs: the cloven-footed and horned in the same place. The Cows have four, the Sheep and Goats two. Those which are fruitfull with a numerous brood at once, and have toes or claws in their feet, have many more along their whole belly, in a double rank, as the Swine: the nobler sort have twelve, the vulgar fewer by two: in like manner the Bitches of Dogs. Others have four in the middle part of the belly, as the Panthers: Others two, as the Lionesses. The Elephant onely hath two under the shoulders; not in his breast, but on the side hid under the arm-holes. None have any between their thighs which have claws on their feet. They who live upon the prey have Claws, Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 43. five in the foremost feet, four in the rest. Lions, Wolvs, Dogs, and a few other beasts have also in their after-feet five nails, one whereof hangs close by the joining on of the leg:Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 45. & 46. the rest which are less have five claws. All those that have toes or claws, have also Nails. But the Apes have them bowed or roof-like rising up: the ravenous crooked: in the rest they stand right out, as in dogs, except that which commonly hangs upon the leg. They have solid or whole Hoofs which bear no horns: but the horned are cloven-footed. They say that the Swine in some places of Illyria (Sclavonia) have whole hoofs. They are renewed onely in that kind of beasts which bear burdens.Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 51. Lastly, they have all Tails, except Apes, and those that bring forth eggs, according to the need of their bodies. They are bare in those that are rugged, or have bristles, as in boars: little in those that are full of hairs, or wolly, as in bears: in those that are very long they are full of hard hair, as in horses. Being cut off they renew again in lizards. In kine the tail is longest of all, and at the lowest part long-hair'd. The same are longer in asses than in horses, but in those that bear burdens, full of rough hairs: Lions have them in the lowest part as they are in Oxen and in Rats: with the Panthers not so: with Foxes and Wolvs they are full of rough, or flock-like hair, as in Sheep, but longer.

No less is the diversity of the Inward Parts. Internal Parts. The Teeth in the brawn and wild boar stick right out: in the Dog and the Lion, like as if they were indented or sawed: in the Horse and Ox they stand close together; the foremost are sharp, those more inward are plain: The horned beasts want the one row: they stick not out in any, where they are as sawed: none that have horns do either stick out or are sawed: but in all these they are hollow, in others solidly fixt: they are in apes as in men. In those that chew the cud, in the lion and the dog they are various or interchanged. In Swine they never fall out. The Tongue in Crocodiles cleaveth wholly fast: in Lions and Catts it is very rough and sharp, like a file. In the Elephant especially broad. The Ribs in Swine are ten, in horned beasts thirteen. The Heart in all of them is in the middle of the breast. In that of horses, oxen and harts are bones found. It is proportionably the greatest in mice, hares, rabbets, deer, hyaena's, and in all beasts that through timidity become mischievous. The Lung is in the Tortoise without bloud: In the Chamaeleon 't is according to proportion the greatest, and nothing else within. The Belly in those that are whole-hoofd is rough and hard: in some of the

Land-beasts it hath a sharpness as of teeth, in others toothed, yet like a lattise. Touching the bellies of those that chew the cud we have spoken in the second book. The Spleen in round in the double-hoof'd & horn'd beasts: drawn out long-ways in those that have many claws: very long in those that are whole-hoof'd: the lest in the cattel that are in the region of Asia which is called Scepsis. All they which generate a living creature have Reins: of those which bring forth eggs, onely the Tortoise. None of those that bring forth eggs, except the Tortoise, have a Bladder: also none, save those that have a bloudy lung: and none of them that want feet. Concerning the Fat and Tallow it is observed,Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 37.  the Horned Beasts which are toothed but on one side, and which have pastern-bones in their feet, abound with tallow; the double-hoof'd and those that have their feet slit into toes, and are not horned, with fat. The tallow is congealed together, and when it is cold it's brittle; and is always in the end of the flesh. On the contrary the fat is between the flesh and the skin moistened with juice. Some grow not fat: all that are fat are more barren. The Marrow in young beasts is reddish and in those of old age it grows white: this is onely in hollow bones, neither is it in the thighs or shanks of labouring cattell or dogs: it abounds in those that are fat; it is like tallow in the horned beasts: in Bears there is none, in the Lion among the bones of his thighs and arms very little. And so much of the parts.

Nature hath designed the earth as the Place for most of them:Place. and the water to a few of them, as to the Crocodile, the Sea-horse, the Castor, the Sea-tortoise. Some of these and the other have certain dens or lurking places: some dwell among the trees. You may find some in a cold, others in a hot climate: some things in the same soil are denied to some of them.Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 58. In Cilicia (others read Lycia) the Bucks and Does pass not over the mountains that border on the Syrians: the wild Asses go not over the mountain that divides Cappadocia from Cilicia. On the coast by Hellespont the Harts do not go to and fro to other territories: and about Argenusa they do not go beyond that lofty mountain. In the Island Pordoselene (or Poroselene) the weasels run not over the way: the Moles of Baeotia brought over into Lebadia avoid the very soil, which yet in Orchomenus, which is close by, do root up whole fields. The Hares brought over into Ithaca die, and that upon the uttermost shores: in Ebusus there are no Rabbets. Among the Cyrenians they have had frogs that were dumb: but the kind of those Croakers brought out of the Continent continues still. In Olympus a mountain of Macedonia are no Wolvs, nor in the Island Creta (now Candia.) 'Tis more wonderful, that there are no Harts in that Island, except in the region of Cydon. In Africa are neither wild Boars, nor Harts, nor Goats.

'T is likewise in vain to look for an uniformity in their Food. Food. Oxen, or kine, Harts, Horses, Swine feed on herbs and fruits: the lower sort whereof is the food of Sheep; the higher, as branches and twigs, of Goats. Wolvs, Lions and Dogs delight in flesh: Beavers and Catts in fish: The Chamaeleon in flies. Some chaw their victuals, some not. You may perhaps rightly reckon the Apes and Monkeys among those that eat all things. It is believed, that the Bear lives in his dens in the winter, out of that humour, or moisture, which he sucks out of his fore-feet, which then swell.

Touching their Generation take this,Generation. That Some bring forth without copulation, as the Mice in Egypt after the running back of the Nile. Those that admit of copulation do it most in autumn, summer or the spring: the Bulls and Bears do it with raging violence, the Dogs not. The greatest number bring forth their young alive; the Tortoises,Resend. Antiq. Lusit. l. 1. Crocodiles, Lizards, &c eggs. I learn from Resendus that Mares in Portugal conceive a mole (lump of unshapen flesh) from wind; and from Others, that Cows being big do carry their young onely on the right side of the womb, even when they carry twins. Their time of Going with young wonderfully varies. The Wolf goes a moneth or at the utmost XL. days; the Dog (Bitch) nine weeks; the Sow four moneths; the Goat five; the Sheep about six; the Cow

ten; the Horse eleven. The same (variety) must you understand of the number of their young: the Mule, as is believed, never brings forth: the Wolf but once in it's life: the Hare brings forth abundantly.

Of their Augmentation it may suffice to say,Growth. that the Whole-hoof'd and Two-hoof'd are greater than they that have claws (or fingers) except the Rhinoceros, the Camel, the Sea-horse, &c. and they differ in greatness from the those of the same kind according to their places. In the Region of Camadu the Rams are not less than the Asses: About Taprobane the Tortoises are so great that they weigh CIII. pounds: the Lizards in Ethiopia are eight Cubits long.

Some of them have a long,Life. Others a short Life. Hares and Cats attain onely to the seventh year: the Ram and the Goat seldom to the tenth: the Sow arrives at the twentieth: the Dog somtimes at the same: the Cow scarce exceeds sixteen: Horses (the male-kind) somtimes reach the thirtieth year: yea the seventy fifth year, as we read in Pliny. Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 42. & 43. 'Tis evident from the monuments of the Athenians, that a Mule hath lived eighty years: and that the Harts have lived a hundred years you may find in History.

Unto the Animal Actions appertain the external and internal senses, Animal Actions.  their appetites, and their faculties of removing from place to place. The Bucks (and Does) and Lynx excell in sight: the Hyenae and Cats see by night: the Moles little or nothing: the Hares are quick of hearing: Camels, Harts and Lybian Mares are delighted with the musick of the pipe: every one knows that Dogs are excellent at smelling: Swine have so little (Smell) that they are not moved with the stench of filthy mud: the Ape exceeds us in tasting, as the vulgar vers runs. If we take notice of their Inward (senses,) Some are exceedingly stupid, as the Buff, who, if his head be coverd, thinks his whole body to be hid; Others are most acute: there is nothing that the Apes do not imitate: Foxes, ere they go over the ice, first by laying their ears to it, find out it's thickness: Dogs remember journeys though very long: neither have any, except Man, a greater memory. Harts, when they hear the barking of dogs, run along with the wind, that therewith the sent of their footsteps might go farther off. For the rest you may look in the chapters of Horses,Cicero de Nat. Deor. l. 2. Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 27. Goats, Wolvs, and Others. But it is mostly to be wondred at that so many four-footed beasts do know the things whereby they may be cured of their diseases. The Panther seeks Mans dung. The Tortoise recovers it's strength against serpents by feeding on Savory or Marjoram, or, as Some will have it, Pennyroyal: the Weasel by (eating of) Rue,Plin. H. N. l. 28. c. ult. in its hunting of mice, when it is environed with them in battel: the Cow in Cyprus cures itself against it's torments in the belly by the excrements of men. In their Appetite, their Love and Lust especially shows it self: so great is that of Apes toward their young, that they kill a great part of them by embracing them. Sows swelling with lust are carried on with that fury that they would tear a man:Livius l. 41. the Bulls also are so greatly furious, as that the brazen Cow at Syracuse, was enter'd upon, and bespattered with seed by a wild Bul which had wandered from the heard. On the contrary the Camel shuns copulation in open view.Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 42.  Pliny tells us, that a Horse, his eyes being uncovered, and he thereby seeing that he had copulated with his dam, fell down a steep place, and so died. Touching their Motion we know that Some are swift, Others slow. Xenophon believed, that no living creature doth aequall the Hare in running. But Horace, Xenoph. l. de Venatione. when he would express a most speedy carefulness, said swifter than Harts: the Elck makes so long a journey in one day, as a horse doth in three. I will say nothing of the Arabian Asses: for the common Asses are most slow, as is also the Tiger, as Bontius informs us.

I had almost forgot to speak of their Voice: Voice. of which ne'retheless there is a wonderfull variety in this sort of living creatures. For the Horse neighs, or hinneys: the Bul low's, bellow's, or rowts: the Ass howls: the Ram clatters: the Sheep bleats: the Swine grunts: the wild Boar grunts and cries out aloud with grinning: the Hart

and wild Ass clucks or cackles: the Goat chatters: the Lion roars: the Tygers voice is hoars: the Panther cries: the Libbard waws as a cat: the Wolf howls: the Elephant bray's: the Dog barks: the Fox yelps: the Kitling mew's: the Hare cries like a child: the Mouse chirps or squeaks: the Weasel maketh a noise with it's teeth: the Rat also, with the sawing of it's teeth: the Frog croaks.

But let us come to their Use. Use. For no man will deny that they are made of God for our benefit. Hence they are to us Aliment or nourishment, Medicin, Cloathing, and for other Uses. Nourishment: For those that are covered with hair supply us with milk, out of which is made butter and chees: the labouring cattel give us flesh, as do also those which live in desarts, Harts, Fallow-deer, Boars, the Elck and others. Neither are we onely provided for with necessaries; Nature hath not forgot to store us also with delicacies: Martial calls the flesh of the Hare the chief daintie: the flesh also of a tame Swine may so be seasoned or drest fiftie severall ways, that they may seem to be so many sorts of wild Boars flesh. Medicaments: For they have taught us some: 'tis not one alone wherewith they supply us: we have it from the Weasel and Tortoise that savory and rue are available against venoms. The Sea-hors hath taught us the art of bloud-letting by opening veins: the Harts have led us to the knowledge of this, that dittany is good to draw darts (out of the flesh.) You may consult History touching remedies against diseases. Cloathing: We have great advantage from the cattel by the use of their skins: we are beholden to them for the preservation of our bodies. The richest of the Caspian people made their garments of Camels hairs: those (garments) also are made of wool which Gaesar called subcoacta compressed, Helmodus Presbiter feltra & filtra felts, the same with those called by the Greeks Pileta and Pilota: Out of these or of the quilted coverings made of course wool or flocks, or out of hides the soldiers made coats or coverings, wherewith they might avoid the darts. The Dead ones supply us with skins. The first coats that God made, were out of these. Hercules was cloathed with the skin of a Lion. The ancient German Garments that covered their shoulders and breasts were made of Sheep-skins: their start-up-shoes and baggs were of raw hides: the shoes of their more noble persons were of tawed and dressed leather: lastly the Frieslanders, by the command of Drusius, brought the hides of Oxen into military use. Touching other Uses I shall onely say this: That Dogs serve for our preservation: Cats defend the meat from the Mice: the Horse, the Ass, the Mule, the Camel are used for carrying burdens.Aristot. H. A. l. 5. c. 2. Out of the Nervs or sinews are made fiddle-strings. With the yard of the Camels are bows best spanned or stretched out.Dionys. Halicarn. l. 2. The cords, wherewith the arms of the dart-shooting bows are kept together, are twined or wreathed ont of the sinews. Paper is smoothed or polished with Boars teeth. The vulgar or common servants among the Romans were driven to their places of meeting by certain persons sounding with the horns of oxen. Ambrose said that wine flowed down mens throats through a horn. The Barbarous Northern people did certainly drink out of the horns of the wild Bulls. The altar of Apollo of Delos made of horns is accounted among the seven wonders of the world. Bulls gall is of mighty vertue, even in copper, and in colouring skins of a golden colour. What shall I say of their Dung? of the differences whereof Pliny thus speaks:Plin. H. N. l. 17. c. 9.  Some Authours, for the manuring of ground, especially commend Mans dung, calling it human dainties. Others praefer that which men drink, viz. Urin, when hair hath been steeped in it, [...] Tanners work-houses. In the next place they prais the filth of Swine: Columella onely [...] ondemns it. Varro add's to his precepts, that corn-ground should be nourished with that [...] ors-dung, which is lightest, but the meadows with that which is heavier, as also that which [...] made by those who feed on bearley, as bringing forth many herbs. Some also praefer [...] e dung of working-Cattle before that of the Buff or wild Ox; and that of the Sheep before [...] at of the Goats. But the Asses dung is esteemed above all, because they feed most leisurly.

Touching their Differences Differences. we might infinitely treat. But how we have digested the whole host of Four-footed Beasts into their severall orders or ranks, the (following) History will teach us. First you will meet with the Whole-hoofed; next Cloven-hoofed, both such as chew the cud, whether horned or not, and those that chew not the cud: lastly those that have fingers & toes, or claws, both those who bring forth their young alive, whether on the land or water, and those who bring forth eggs, which are either cover'd with a shell, or not. But I will not further proceed herein.

Now, Courteous Reader, take my labour in good part; and at the next Marts or Fairs expect the History of Serpents & Insects; after which shall follow, if it please GOD, the History of such Creatures as fly on high, & of those Under the earth, and also of Man.

THE NATURALL HISTORY OF THE FOURFOOTED BEASTS.

THE FIRST BOOKE. Of wholehoof'd fourfooted Beasts.

CHAPTER I. Of the Horse.

ON the living creatures that are brutish, [...] drov. de [...] lidiped. or without reason, and having blood, hath nature bestow'd feet, on some two, on some four. The fourfooted, (in Latine called Quadrupedes, in Greek Tetrapoda,

[...] . by Aristotle called Peza) are comprised under three main kindes. One whereof is wholehoofd or solidfooted,

[...] . or onehoofd (Aschides, Mononyschon.) Another sort are cloven-footed,

[...] n. [...] idipe [...] . [...] za So [...] edem. having two clefts on either side, afore and behinde. In Latine bisulca; in Greeke Dichela, having as it were claws for hoofs. A Third kind are as it were toed, [...] . having many partings (in Greeke Polyschides, [...] . Polydaktylon, in Latine multifidum.) [...]  They have all feet to goe on, but those that have toes doe the offices of hands with their forefeet, [...] A. l. 2.as the wholehoof'd doe with their hinderfeet. [...] stotle. Among the wholehoof'd are the Horse, the Asse, the wild Asse, the Mule, the Vnicorne, and the Elephant; whereof wee shall treat in order in this first booke.

Wee begin with the Horse, which hath the preeminence among the labouring beasts, called jumenta from juvando, or helpfulnesse. Demosthenes reckons him among City-ammunition. The Romans out of the publique purse layde out 10000 peeces for this beast, [...] nys. and took them away from those, [...] lyc. who could not goe to warre. [...] . A horse with faire trappings was held an ornament to any Consul, [...] iq. or Emperour. [...] man. In many countries care hath been taken that no Horse should be exported. The Circassians suffered not the common-people to keep horses. M. Anthony forbad riding on horseback in cities. [...] arch. Atheas a Scythian King curried his horse with his own hands. Hectors wife Andromache herself gave oates, and hay to her husbands horses, knowing hee took delight in them. Theophilactus, Patriarch of Constantinople under Lacapenus the Emperor, kept above 2000 Horses, and was so intent, and earnest in feeding them, that he gave them pistacknuts, pine-apples, palm-fruit, raisins, dried-figs; and all of them choyse [...] t, moystened with perfumed wine, and mixt with saffran, cinnamon, and other costly druge; in this excesse going beyond the Emperor himself, who layd in the manger for his Horse,Capitolinus. called the winged, raisins, and kernels in stead of barly. The Moxy, a people of Tartary, on a set and solemne day yearly after some ceremonies, flaid a horse, eat the flesh at table, stuf'd the hide with chaff, then reare an altar, set it up thereon,Ioseph. worship'd it as a favourable deity.Barbar. In Petrarchs time there lived one in Italy who doated so on his sick horse,Itiner. that he spread under him a silk bed, with a golden pillow. And when hee himself was layd fast by the gowt that hee could not stirr, and must be ruled by the Physitians Laws, yet would hee needs bee carried by his servants, or be layd on another horse, and taking his Physitians with him twice, or thrice a day visite his sick horse, and sit down by him sighing, and troubled, stroking him, and murmuring comfort to him. The mighty King of Narsinga had a horse thought to be of such a value for the incredible plenty of jewels,Ludo. wherewith it was laden,Rom. that hee was worth one of our cities.Navig, l. 4. c. 11. In such esteeme is the Horse among most nations, as Aldrovand shews more at large.

But to come to his Name. The Name. Hee hath gotten divers names both with the Greekes, [...] . and Latines. [...] . By the Greekes Hippus and Polos (which yet is properly a Fole. [...] .) By the Karians Alla;

[...] . by some Kalpis (which seemes to fit the ambler; [...] . by the Ligurians Damnos and Ikkos;

[...] . by the Etimologers Kaballos,

[...] . from the manger, and his ever-eating; Ergatees is a wrought one, or an ordinary one the same with Caballus, so the Latines use it. [...] .  Innos is that that hath an Horse for the sire, and an asse for the dam; Hinnos,

[...] . whose dam is a mare, and the sire a mu [...] e. [...] . Aristotle takes it for a nag. Keles, and Azyx is a Horse when back'd; some say a generous one, some a saddle Horse,Varin. or a bare Horse; some, but mistaking, a curvetter. Chrysampus is rather an epithite or addition then a name, [...] , taken from the goldstring that ties his foretop. The Latines call him Equus from payring,Isidor. or matching them in wagons.Orig. By Scaliger Eniochus and Canterius from gelding;l. 12. c. 43.

(Varro) or from branding; or taken for a cheap,Isid. common Horse. Veredus is one that carries no packs, nor draws, or a post-horse.

Mannus is a little Nag,Porph. so called from his gentle bringing to hand. Seneca calls the tollutares when loose. Others call them Burdones, Burichi, and Strabo Gygeny. Musimones perhaps from the place whence they are had, so much for their names.

Wee need not describe so known a beast, for his, and their names.The parts. The Hoofs (Ungulae, Oplai,) whole, [...] . firme, not cloven. Chelidon is the hollow being like a swallows nest. Batrachos, or frog is the tender part of the hoofe, which is hurt, if the nayls be ill driven. The Dutch call it Kern. Full, fleshy hoofs are called Chamelai in Greeke.Xenephon. The joyning tween the hoof, and foot the Greeks call Stephanee. Aristotle saith, no beast, but the Indian Asse hath ankle bones: (but Horses have Pasterns,) and that behind that answers the knee afore, a turning joynt, (called Suffrago, and garrectum) joyning the foot to the leg. They have Fetlocks; little bones called Basis

Vegetius.  Tufts of hayre adorne them.

The haunches, the hips, large and strong; the Horse thereof is thought to desire his Rider,Nolanus. or the saddle near his shoulders; the Asses and Mule contrary.( [...] .) The seat, (Edra) is that part of the back whereon men sit. The shoulder is called armus. Xenophon. Both Horses and Mares have teats; these two tween the thighs, those have but risings like teats. Aristotle. The taile is quite contrary to the Oxes; a short dock, and long haire, serving them for a flee-flap.Plin. They are stiffer in Horses then Mares,Plutar. these weaken them with staling.Sertorius. Horses have manes, and crests, and fore-tops. The lower eylids have no hayr; therefore the painter, (whether the Ephesian Apelles, or Nicon, Micon, or Polygnostus, is doubtfull) is blamed for painting hayr there. It is a mistake in Pliny, and Arist. that (except man) they only grow gray, or hoory, by reason of the thinnesse of their brainpan, for dogs also wax grizly. Under the saddle on the scares of gall'd places ever grow white hayrs, whether because that part is weak, and perisht, or for any other cause.Arist. Yet they come forth of one colour, if you sprinkle on them ground barly fried, which hath a dispersing, and cleansing power.Plin. Of the Colours in the differences: They have a continued rew of teeth on both sides;Arist. and besides those in colts, 40. Afore the rest are small ones, as big as a bean that hinder their chewing,Arist. and make them leaner. The stone Horses are said to have more then Mares. They change. The foreteeth are shed first, called cutters and suckers; they are 12, 6 in the upper,Plin. 6 in the lower chap.Arist. These shew the Horses age.H. A. l. 6. c. 22. Xeno. For a Horse 30 moneths old looses first his middle teeth, 2. above, and 2 below. Entring on their fourth year, they shed as many more, then come Columellares, or eyeteeth. In the fifth year they shed the second dogteeth; in the sixth year they grow again; and then they have their full number in the eighth year.Varro. Three year after,Absyrtus. they break a tooth, which becomes roundish, and then 3 square, when a rheum falls into their mouths. After 7 they grow crooked, & stick out sometimes; and wax hollow;Columel. and after there is no guessing at their age. Yet at 10 their temples grow hollow, and their eybrows gray, and their teeth stick out, At 12 a blacknesse is seen in the midst of their teeth, saith Vegetius, but Varro, and Arist. write then they wax brighter with age.Hesy [...] . Pliny saith they grow reddish.Varin. Some have their names from the variety of teeth among the Greeks;Pet. they with the marke out of the mouth, Agnomoi, Crescenti Cardan. &c. [...] . Some write besides of Grinders,

[...] . and double teeth. [...] . They hold them fast, though old, and fed with hard meat, because they eat nothing hot. The Farrides call the cheekbone Psalion,

[...] .  Gnathos, jaw, or chap. The chaps are very large, and moved by great muscles, because they eat stooping. In the heart is sometimes a bone found.Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 42. & 11. 37. Some say hee hath a gall, some deny it.Arist. H. A. l. 2. c. 15. Indeed hee hath no gall-bag in the liver. Yet Ruinus in dissecting a Horse found on the right side of the liver a hollow receit for gall. In most it is set in sprigs into the substance of the bowels, whereby the liver easily disburthens it self of gall; it layes it also into the duodenum gut, or the first gut 12 foot long. Nature, it seems confines the gall to no one bag in him, as in man, and in other beasts, because hee is ever eating, and needs gall ever ready to provoke him to dung.Arist. It is observed in their shape that the Foles are a little lower then their dams, and being growen up cannot reach their head. It is said a witchcraft of lust, called Hippomanes is naturall to them, and sticks in their foreheads, it is black, as big as a fig, which the Mare presently after foaling bites off afore shee lets the fole suck, such another grows on the Mares privities.Plin. l. 8. c. 42 & 24. 13. This venome but daubd on the brazen Olympick Mare set all the Horses a madding:Arist. H. A. 16. 15.  as Pliny, Pausanias, and Aelian. (H. A. l. 3. c. 17. and 14. 18.) write. Horses are found in all places almost. They delight in marishes, and places wel watered, though plains, or hills. And such places are fittest for them,Colum. R. R. l. 6. c. 27 not dry grounds; nor pestered with trees; and where tender shrubs grow rather then tall trees. Horses for state, and service in warre stand in the stable at rack, and manger, where they are tied with head-stalls.Plin. Their feed is fruit, it is a wise beast in choyse. Barly is lesse windy for them then oats, or wheat. Wee use oats. In England and elsewhere hors-loaves of beans, and pease. Grasse is the common, and proper fodder, and hay. Melilote in Italy is called the Horse three-leave-grasse. Strabo speaks of a Median Physick grasse that battens them. Not the first cutting, especially if it grow in stinking pudde water,Arist. that is unwholesome. They cut it 4, or 6 times a year.Colum. Some commend Cytisus in winter,Plin. l. 1. c. 24. being dry, moystned. Ten pound serves an Horse; lesse, other cattell. In many places they give them bundles of vetches. By Damascus, pulse; for a need other things. Caesars Horses

besieged by Scipio ate duck meat,Hist. rinced in fresh water.Bel. The Pompejan Horses at Dyrrachium in a siege ate leaves striped from trees,Afri. and reed-roots. In Senega, that dry soyl, fitches, and mixt. In Thrace by Strymon, thistle-leaves. In Parthia the herb Hippax.Scalig. Ex. 206. 5. In Tartary boughs,Aelian. H. A. [...] . 41. c. 15. and bark of trees, and roots strook out of the earth with their hoofs. In Aden they eat fish, there being plenty there. And dried fish in Golconda in Persia; and among the Gedrosians, the Celtae, Macedonians, Lydians, and Paeons inhabiting the Prasian Lake. The Arabs feed them twice a day with camels milk. In spring with tender herbs. [...] . They love to drink water whether troubled,Ven. or clear,Herod. running,Arist. or standing,Veget. muddy, or other. Some, to make them metled,Colum. give them wine; especiall if leane,Varin. of old beer of oats, or corne, say some.

The males live longest. [...] ge. We read of one 70 years old. [...] lin. 4. 42. At 33 they gender. After 20 men use them for stallions. One called Opuns, held out 40 years. Some judge their age by the pinching of their shoulder-skin, if after pinching it, unfold it self leysumly, it is an old, if presently, a young horse. Some judge by the joynts in the tayl, after the mark is out of the mouth. Mares leave growing at 5, [...] lin. males grow a year longer, [...] rist. after they spread, and so till 20. But Mares come sooner to their just pitch. [...] endring. It is the most lustfull of all beasts; [...] rist. H. A. [...] 6. c. 12. whence a venerous man is compared to a Horse, and called Hippobinos. The Mares are most salacious; among whom Cupid is by Poëts faind to be bred, and whores all called Mares; having been but a few dayes together they smell out one another. The Horses by biting drive away strange Mares, and hold to their owne, feeding with them. [...] rist. Some say, [...] enanim. [...] 5. a Mare great with fole, will take Horse, some deny it. Gryllus in Plutarchs questions, whether buggerers are not worse then beasts, since beasts sollicite none. Yet at Athens, a Horse is said to have ravisht a girle, the daughter of the last of the Codry, called Hippomanes.

[...] rist. [...] . A. [...] 5. c. 14. [...] 6. 24. Those that begin to gender at two years old, [...] in. [...] o. c. 63. bring weak colts; but they begin commonly at 3, or 30 moneths old, and hold on to 20. They are fit when they cease breeding teeth; but best, if they feed well, when they are a year and half old complete, or somewhat yonger. Pliny saith that Mares, after the third, or one year after they have had a fold, may take Horse againe, and bee forced to it; The tame 60 dayes sooner then those that run abroad.Martyr. [...] lum. [...] R. [...] . 1. 28. In Hispaniola at 10 moneths old they conceive, and oft fole two at once. Columella thinks the Mare should bee 2 years old, and the Horse 3. Shee after 10 bring sluggish foles; he lasts to 20. Anatolius would have the Horse begin at 5, and give over at 14. You shall know their lust, by gathering themselves up together, oft whisking the tayl, and oft staling. The Horse will bee covering the Mare one, two, somtimes 3 dayes, or more; It is fit to give him a years intermission.

The beginning of the conception from the Spring Equinoctial to the Solstice in April, in hote places, is colder in May. So that the Mare, using to fole in the twelfth moneth, that will fall out about the green and temperate season of the year. The Eleans carry their Mares out of their own coasts to take Horse, because they find by 600 experiments, that by this means the brood wonderfull prospers. The males covet coupling in the morning-season, the females after mid-day. Some give them provocatives. Absyrtus bids men to weaken a Deers tayl burnt in wine, and therewith to anoynt them. Some give them parsnip; some put nettles into their mouths, &c. The Mares of Lybia, The Author adds much of this stuffe, that I will not translate. and Mysia, are provoked with piping, and come thereby to bee with fole, as we read in Aelian in his history of beasts, in booke 12, chapter 44. Pollu calls the Pipe Hippophorbus, made of a bay-tree peeld. Yet all conceive not, neither doe all that conceive, bring forth; which is, say they, betokened by this, that the brood about the reins, hath somewhat like reins that being cut, it seems to have 4 reins. If you demand how many Mares serve one Horse, Columella saith, no lesse then 15, nor above 20. Arist. allows him 30. Palladius advises to allot to able Horses, either few or many; and to a young and handsome one 12, or 15.Aristo. You shall know when they are with fole,Abscyrtus. by the holding up of their months,Plin. or by their refusing the Horse, or by their hayr turning on a sudden redder, or fuller then it was. They say that it shall be an Horse-colt, if the Mare take Horse the third day afore the full Moon; if the third after, a female-colt, They guesse the former, if the Horse mount on the right side, the latter, if on the left. In Pharsalia they counted that a right Mare, whose fole resembled the Sire. That they conceived by the wind in Portugal, Var. R. R. l. 2. Pl. l. 8. c. 42. Soli. Poly. c. 36.  Colum.August. de civit. Dei l. 21. c. 5. Varro, Plin. Solinus, Albertus, Avicen, thought, and S. Austin affirmes it of Cappadocia; but Iustin reckons it for a fable. Aristotle denies it to be possible. Husbandmen tell what is to bee done about those with fole. They cast their fole, if they smell the smoke of a candle, or if an asse cover them. They goe with fole, according to the opinion of most, a yeare; according to Absirtus, eleven moneths and ten dayes. The hardnesse of the belly is the cause, if we follow Aristotle. They bring forth with most of all the 4 footed beasts, and standing upright. Eumelus saith, that if they be long in foaling. bind her nostrils close, and gently, and you help her. For the most part they bring but one at once, sometimes twins. They are very cleanly in foaling, not voiding much blood, according to their bignesse. Assoone as she hath foale'd, shee eats her after-birth, and the bunch that is on the foals forehead.

There have been Hermophrodites, to wit, of both Sexus foales.Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 47.  Nero shew'd such Mares brought out of Trier Land, yoaking them in his Chariots, a strange sight; the Lord of the world riding on monsters.Hee was himself a monster. Of such a mixt brood that belonged to the Vicount Princival

Cardanus writes thus;De rer. var. l. 7. c. 33. he had but one stone in the right place with swelling teats,His voyce. such as Mares have: And besides a matrice, whereout he put forth his member, that was not greater then 4 fingers. When the Greeks would expresse a horses neighing, [...] . they call it Chremetizein and Epichremitizein,

[...] . the Latine, Fremere, hinnire. The voyce it self is called Mimigmos, &c. Of the change whereof Arist.

[...] . writes, they differ much in their neighing. The shefolds send forth as soone as foled, a very small voyce; The males somewhat fuller, and greater, which dayly increases. A Horse of two years old, when he begins to engender, neighs strongly; and the Mare clearer, and shriller then afore, and it continues so, for the most part, till 20; after that age their neigh is feebler.Of their motion, and pace. There are that never neigh in company;Card. l. 13. c. 3.  Miraldus calls them dumb:De var. rer. when they goe, or pace, they make a noyse with their feet, striking the ground with their hoofs: whence the Latines call them Sonipedes, Homer Hypsechees, or great noyse-makers; because they cannot so well bend their hams, they are most weary going up hill, and falling, they run headlong; going down hill, they can well endure their burden, because they have foure thighs. Their nimblenesse, both the Epithites give them, that we meet with in Authors, and examples testifie. Homer calls them Okypodes, Elaphropodes,

[...] . &c. fleetfooted, and deerfooted. Oppianus writes, that those of Iberia were so swift, that Eagles onely might be compared with them, or Hauks of the Circus, where they ran for mastery. Perseus his Pegasus is said to be winged. Some write that the Sarma [...] ae, could dispatch with their long journeys of 150 miles, without drawing bit, or baiting. In Arabia, if we credit Vertomannus, they hold a more fleet pace day and night without resting. In the Alanican war, Probus the Prince, (men report) tooke one that in one day would travell an 100 miles, and would hold out so for ten dayes together. But,Horat. l. 2. od. 16. it is questioned, whether Mare, or Horse are swifter. Homer gives the plam to the Pheretian Mares. Menelaus his Aetha was exceeding fleet. Horace chooses to say, that Horses are fitter to draw then Mares. Pliny saith, that Mares stale as they run. The Mare of Crauxida, in the eight Olympiade, outran all the Race-horses. Wee read that Hecra [...] ites the Thessalian his Mare, and shee was great with fole (Pliny calls her Echecratides)N. H. l. 15. c. 21. had the better of all the running-horses in the Olympique Games. But Oppinan writes, that males are better for hunting; that Mares cannot so well ridde way in woods, in long courses. What Cicero means by the Horse called Admissus, p. 40. see in Aldrovandus; He grows restive, lesning, or loosing his pace, if he stand long idle in the stable. Therefore when King Antigonus with his Cavallery was besieged, and so straitned, that he had no place to exercise his Horse, he caused them to be thrust up by the head, that their forefeet could not touch ground, and forced them to strike with their hind feet, which made them sweat, as if they had travelled. It is well knowne, that Wasps breed in the marrow of a rotten Horse.

If you look upon their Nature, Their nature. they are very sociable, they sup their drink, and plunge their nose deep in the water, which is a signe of their boldnes: their minds are ever on rack and manger, and can better endure thirst then hunger: Mares stale often; and their monthly clensings: they dung more dry, then wet stuff, because they are kept at hard meat: If you ride them hard, and tire them, they fome: the cause whereof Galen hath exactly declared;Aphor. 5. 2. 45. They dream on what they are wonted: They sleep commonly standing; especially geldings; who are more drowsy then others. When they are angry, like dogs, they shew their teeth, and bite: They love to be strok't: they eagerly love their folds. Hence it was that Dartius after his defeat escaped on a Mare out of the battle at Issus, shee hastning home to her fole. And the Tartarians, Paul. Vener. l. 9. c. 47. when they goe into any land to seek for prey,Paul. or plunder,Venet. l. 9. c. 47. where the Sunne shines for a good part of the year, they leave their folds on the borders; so that the Mares marking their night-journey at their return, goe strait to their foles. The Mares are seldome, but sometimes mad; as when they see their shape by reflection in the water, they are taken with a vain selflove, and forget their meat, and pine to death; they are brought to their wits againe, if you cut off their maine, and bring them to water: then the memory, of the former ugly shape that they saw, will be abolished.Aelia. H. A. l. 16. c. 24.  Aelianus writes that the Lycospadian Horses did their best, that they might seem comely to their Wagoners. Unto their inward sences, Their inward senses. their witt, teachablenesse, memory, love, and faithfulnesse towards their masters, chastity, and courage doe belong. It is ascribed to their witt, that they know the enemies of their partye, so that they bite their enemies in Battle: that, having lost their Riders that they loved, they pine themselves to death: that they showe by their eares what they heare, and that they know well a skilfull Horsman. Alexander his Busephalus, would vouchsafe to suffer none at any time to back him beside his Lord, and that with his Kingly caparisons: and having received deepe wounds in a Battle, he fell not before he had set his Lord safe downe out of danger. Solinus and Suetonius tell us,Sueton. i [...] Caesare. that Cajus Iulius Caesar, his Horse would receive no man on his back besides Caesar. A certaine Pannonian Physition, his Horse being let loose afore the dores, would wait even a whole day, untill his master returned from the sick; and when he came againe, met him rejoycing; it is well knowne by the example of the Sybarites, that they may be taught to daunce, who were come to that hight of madnesse, that in their drinking-feasts, they would teach there Horses to daunce to the Pijpe.Scalig. exerc. 209. 5. 1.  Scaliger writes of a Horse that he sawe, that was little and mishapen, which a certain Juggeler carried about to showe, by whose desire also he would sometimes

doe all his trickes, that he would walke, goe a round trott, run, daunce, either on fourefeete or on two. Wee have seen them drinke wine, sitting on their buttocks; that they have bourne up their first foure feet, to carry a goblet: that they have bourne up a basen with their legges, as if they had beene to be washed by a Barber; as we see the painted Asse with the Coule: they will lye all alonge on the ground, stretched out at length: that they will beckon unto you, closing their eye-lids: and lift up their head at their master his nod: and turne on their back, lying with their face upward. It is knowne that they knowe their stable, and returne willingly home. Therefore Galba, when there was a dispute about the possession of a Horse, whose he was, commanded that he should be led vailed to watering, and when he had drunke, he would go home to the right stable. [...] idas in [...] . As Deuxippus his Horse was so taught, that he would gallop with him without a bridle, and when he went saftly afore, he would stand still. Strabo tels us, that the Horses of the Nigrites, followed their masters like dogs. We read in Herodotus, that they were taught by the Yarce, to lye down on their belly. In Parthia a Horse boud down to Narva. Another at Paris, made obeisance with bent knees, to the Queene of Louïs the Twelfth. In the yeare 1636. we saw at Venice, that a Horse would leep through wooden hoopes, like a doge, and jumping with a lively swiftnesse turne himself round; that they have a good Memory, the sound of the Trumpet especially showes us, which as soone as the Horse heares, he prickes up his eares, snortles, he neighs, he champs upon the bit: he beats the earth with his hoofes, no ground will scarce hold him. A certaine jester also in Tzetzen, riding upon a Chariot-Horse, lost his dinner, because the Horse lighting by chance upon the marke-piller, thinking it to be the circe, he went round about the piller till night, running with great violence. To say nothing of that Tholossanus writeth of the Horse of a certaine Bishop, that his brother had so wonted, that as often as he heard these words, O God, attend to be my helper, he would leap often, and high from the ground, curvetting, and bounding.

As concerning their love, gratitude, and faithfulnesse toward their master, examples witnesse for them. Antiochus his Horse, his Lord being slain in battell, cast himself, and rider Centeretrius a Gaul man headlong down. A Horse of a Scythian King, with kicks, and bites killed the conquerer, comming to plunder. Dionysius his Horse, being left by him, sticking in the mudde, (as we read in Pliny out of Philistus,) as soon as hee got out, traced his masters steps, though a stock of Bees clave to his back. Homer saith, that Patroclus his Horse wept. Virgil writes the same of Pallantus, Suetonius of Caesar, Cardan of his own Gennet. [...] . 8.  Pliny also hath delivered, that many Horses have such an affection to their masters, that they will mourn for them, and sometimes bewaile them with tears. King Nicomedes being slain, his Horse starv'd himself to death. The same is related of the Horse of Socles an Athenian, after hee had sold him away.

Of their Chastity you may read in Aelian, Varro, and others. Pliny breefly thus: A Horse his eyes being uncovered, and knowing then that hee had covered his dame, sought a steep place, and there killed himself. And in the Reatine Province, a Mare for the like reason perisht, and tore the Carter in peeces, who had so deceived her, for they have understanding of their kindred; therefore a Mare will choose rather to keep her sister of the former year company, then the dame. About the folds jealousy, that is sprung from an incestuous commixture, see Aldrovandus.

Of the Courage of the Horse, the same Author speaks at large. Let it suffice, that Pliny hath advised, that you shear of the Horse main, that they may condescend to cover an asse, for they pride themselves in their crest. There have been those also, that would win a course without a wagoner. In the circe, put into Chariots, they undoubtedly manifest that they understand both hartning, and prayse.Hi. N. l. 8. c. 42. In Claudius Caesars races, a Charioter being shaken at setting out, from his seat, the Horses clad in white, won the race, dashing out of their way whatever hindred them, and performing all against their corrivals, as if they had had a guide, shaming men, and their skill, that they should be outdone by horses; and comming, having run their course, to the goal, they stood stone still. It was a great matter of divination of old, that Horses in the Plebejan-games, having cast off their guide, ran into the Capitol, and thence compassed the seat there, (as Pliny adds.) And the greatest omen of all, that Ratumena, being Conqueror of Veja, ran with lawrell, and crownes thither; from which gate came to beare the name.Pausanias in Corinthiacis. In Pausanias we read that Phidotus of Corinth his Mare, her name was Aura, her rider falling off, at first starting, held her course as exactly, as if he had been managed by a Horseman, and reaching the goal, she turne herself; but hearing the Trumpet sound, shee was mad to be running, and preventing the Judges, she stood still, as knowing that she had won. If you mark their Sympathy, Their Sympathy, and Antipathy. and Antipathy; The Horse holds much friendship with Hens, and the Buzzard; but is at enmity with the Camel, Elephant, Wolf, Beare, Sow, Sheep, Asse, Serpents, a Fish called Trachurus, the Sea-Calf, Apples, and Figs, a kinde of Barly called Pelwort, of a black colour, and dead carkasses. When Cyrus encountred Craesus his Horse with Camels, Herod. Hist. l. 1. c. 15. the Horse fled. Xerxes placed his Arabians, mounted in Camels in his rere, least his Horse should bee frighted. In the Tarentine war, the Horses being terrified by the greatnesse, the misshapen Bulk, and strange Hew, and hideous noyce of the Elephants, thinking those unknown beasts to be huger then indeed they were, fled all,

which cause a great slaughter. Caesar wading over a River in Brittain, mounted on an Elephant, amazed the British Horses. Aporta reports, that they cannot abide so much as drums made of the skins, either of Elephant, or Camel, or Wolf.Plin. H. N. l. 20. c. 20.  Pliny testifies, that it went by tradition, that a Horse will burst that under his rider treads in a Wolfs steps. We read in Aelian, that if a Wolf tread on a Horse heel, as he is drawing a Cart, he stands still, and stif, as if with the Carter he were frozen. Pierius Valerianus reports, that you cannot get a Horse to passe by, where a Wolfs bowels are buried. Pliny saith, that if you ty great teeth to horses, they will never tire. We shall speake of Lycospadi, and Lycophori, or Horses that men ride with bits, when we shall deal with the differences of Horses. Wee ow it to Portaes relation, that Bears in the wildernesse, are affrighted by a drum, made of a horsehide. Geldings will by no meanes come neare a Lion, others not gelt will run on him.Colum. R. R. l. 6. c. 30. If Sheep stand in a stable wherein Mules, Horses, or Asses have stood, they easily get the scab. Braying Asses in Darius his expedition against the Scythians, troubled their Horses. Of Serpents, and Horses, Silius Ital. hath written. The tayl of a Trachurus hung at a Mares belly, makes her cast her foal,H. A. l. 13. c. 27. Plut. Symp. l. 6. q. 8. if we beleeve Aelian. They cannot abide the sight of a sea-calf. They swound, if they carry Appels, or Figs; but come to themselves again, if you lay bread afore them: They will not touch a kind of barley, that grows in Thrace, near a Province of the Scythians and Medes. They run mad, if you smeare their nostrils with the herb laser, or benjamin. Gesner was informed by an old man, that Gentiana, or Pelwort, causes Mares to cast fole. If they tread on henbane, they cast their shoos. If Horses drink of the River Sybaris, they are troubled with neezing: if of Cossiniris in Thrace, that fall into the land of the Abdeerites, they run mad. The same is said of a well, or pit, not far from Potniae a city of Boeotia. SIlius Ital. writes, that Catoes Horse, though spurr'd on, would not approach a black Moore in black harnesse. We have it from Homer, that they loath carcases.

Wee have great use of the Horses in meat,Their use. phisick, war, hunting, journeying, triumphs, and other occasions: we will onely see in what account they are to be had in meats, and medicine. That not onely besieg'd persons have eaten horse-flesh, as in Verona under Maximilian the First, in Novara, under Lewis Aurelian; at Rupel, under Lewis 13 of France, to name no more, but we read that heathens make it their food the name of the Nomedes, the Scythians, the Scarmathae, and the late Tartarians is well knowne; these take pleasure in wounding and cutting of Horses, and feeding upon half rawe flesh: they eat Horses dyeing the day before of themselves, or of a desease, the impostumed place being cut up; and their Kings, when they would distribute provisions amongst them, were wont to give one horse amongst 40 men. And also amongst the Persians in their Feasts on their bearth-day, they had set before them whole roasted horses: and among the Gearmans, they ate both wild and tame horses, untill it was forbidden by Gregory the III. Bruerenus relates,Bruyer. l. 13. c. 42. Plin. H. N. l. 18. c. 10. that he hath heard that the Inhabitants of the Alpes, eate colts. Blood also hath beene a delicate: Pliny indeed reports that the Sauromatae doe live of hirse, especially puls, and also rawe meal mingled with blood out of the thigh vaines. Mecovius and Paulus Venetus have written, that if travellers be surprized with hunger and thirst, they satisfie themselves with opening of vaines and drinking of blood. Wee read in Horace, l. 2. carm. that the Cancany, who according to some are Besalte, and according to Acron and Porphiry are Spanish nations, delighted in the same food. Concerning milk there is no doubt. For the Scithyans give their children Mares-milke, assoone as they are borne. Thence have they their names of horse and milke-suckers. The same lay the milke in the Sun, that the thicker part may settle downe, and by and by they seath it. They say that it becomes like white wine.Cro. Hist. Polon. l. 29. The Moschy once, the servants of the Tarters, were wont to present them Mares-milke upon their journey, as they came with their Captaine to demand tribute.l. 4. de morb. l. 28. c. 9. Writers are not agreed what Hippacks is. Hypocrates, Dioscorides, and Pliny, write that it is chees, which he ads smels of vennome, and answers in proportion to ox-milke, others beleeve it to be Mares-milke crudled. Theopompus writes that it was Scithian food of Mares-milke; however it is, we read in Theophrastus that they could live 11 or 12 days together upon that and licourise: Hypocrates testifies,H. P. l. 9. c. 13. that for the most part they use Mares-milk chees. Neither is that any wonder, since some relate, that Zoroaster lived once six moneths with milke alone; which Atheneus declares also of another. As for what belongs to Medicines, Horses milk,Their use in Phisique. whay, blood, greace, curd, teeth, heart-bone, liver, stones, gall, hayre, hoofes, sweat, foame, spittle, stale and dunge hath place therein; their Milke is very purgative,M. M. l. 2. c. 75. as Dioscorides delivers. Whay serves to cleanse the Ulsers of the reins, to wit that, that by seathing is sever'd from the milk, if we beleeve Aethius. Rhasis writes that a woman, if shee unwittingly drink Mares-milk, if shee presently accompany with her husband, shall conceive. I find also in Pliny, that the same milk is good to wash the matrix. Their blood is of a purifying quality,Her. Barb. but whether that of mares, that have taken horse, or of stallions, or of either sex, experience may best decide. Pliny writes, that the same is good for the Kings evill: and fariers use it for divers diseases. The Phragmaticum drawn from the matrix,Plin. Veger. l. 1. c. 17. warme with oyl and wine, and smeard on over the whole beast against the hayr, cures it.

The Gall is of a malignant nature, and is reckoned among poysons, so that the Priest for that cause must not touch a Horse. His grease

smoked brings forth a dead birth, and the afterbirth follows.extus. His marrow is mixt with ointment for the cramp. Curd from the Mares milke is accounted a remedy against bloody fluxes, and collicks, say Dioscor. Gale. Avicenna, and Haly. Meal made of their teeth sprinkled on the privities cures many, cures their greefs. The teeth that a Horse first sheds tied to infantes, eases them in breeding teeth, and with more successe, if they have not toucht the ground. Sextus writes that with a touch they heal the toothake; for, hee adds, that if an infant kisse a horse mouth, the pain of the teeth is not felt, nor will a horse bite an infant. The tongue in wine is a present remedy for the Milt, [...] olcil. [...] on. saith Pliny. The Heartbone neerly resembles dogsteeth: It scarifies, or opens a sore; or if you take a tooth out of a dead horses jaw it helps a sore shoulder, Plini saith, infallibly. The Liver laid up in a cedar chest, tempered with wine of chies, [...] alen. [...] porist. [...] . c. 38. and water prevents the consumption of the Liver. De  Milt drunke in fresh water cast forth a dead child, saith Pliny. Their stones dride, and drunke provoke lust. Bunches in their knees, and the hard skin of their hoofs or grown ground to pouder, and given in vineger are good against the falling sicknesse, as Dioscor, Galen. and Pliny write. The hayr tied at a doore keepes flies, and the worms called cniphes out, as Rhasis, and Albertus have delivered. Three Horse bristles tied in so many knots within sores in the privities, helpe them. The ashes of the same taken out of the head, or belly stops a flux of blood. Warts are taken away, if you bind a horse hayr about them, because by tying that that feeds them is stopt, and so they dry away. The ashes of their Hoofs smeare with oyl, and water on wax kernels, and apostumate, mattery swelling in any part scatters, and removes them: and also bunches, if mingled with hot urine. The same being taken in with wine, and water helps against the stone in de bladder. Hierocles write, scrapings pourd into a horses nostrils provokes him to stale. Their sweat, drunk with urine in a bath drives out belly wormes, and serpents; if you will trust the promises of some, mixt with wine, and drunke by one great with child makes her miscarry. If a knife, or sword warme out a wound be dipt therein, it is so infected, saith Albertus, that the wounded place will never leave bleeding till the party dy. Their fome newly taken from them infuse in oyl of roses helps eares, though never so sore. Gesner commends their spittle as a remedy for the pestilentiall burning in the jaws, that sometimes in summer troubles especially shouldiers; Let the patient, saith hee, gargle horses spittle in his mouth, that is provenderd with oats, or barly: then bruse together living crabs, presse out the moysture, and wash it again with the same; if you cannot get living ones, sprinkle the pouder of crabs dried in an oven: after you have washt it with horses spittle. Give to them that are so far gone in a consumption of the lungs, that they are given over, an horses some, or spitle in warme water three dayes together,Plin. Ma [...] cellus. Sextus. the sick person shall without delay be healed, but the horse shall dy. As for their stale, and dung, let it suffice to have said, that mingled with smiths forge water it helps the falling sicknesse; the same sod in white wine is used against the collicke, and the bite of a Scorpion; and in water, good against a flux. Being fresh and put to the nose stanches blood, especially if stird with chalk, and sharp vineger mingled with Eggshell beaten to powder, it prevents the overbleeding of a wound. Their breath, as some feign, is a preservative against the plague.

The differences, or kinds of Horses are manifold; the cheefe are borrow from places, parts, and certain accidents. From place, those of Acarnan are said to be greatest; whence it grew a proverb, when men spake of any huge thing. The Aethiopian Horses, (the wild I beleeve) are reported to be wingd, and horned, and can endure no heat.

Those from Agrigentum were use to be sent of old to the Graecian games,In Sicilia. and went away still conquerors. The Alanican were fleetest, and strongest. Probus had one, as men say, of such swiftnesse, that between sun, and sun hee went an hundred mile, and would hold out so ten dayes together,H. Angl. l. 1. Strabo. Geog. l. 16. as wee have said. The English are most pacers, few trotters, saith Polydore Virgil. The Apaniensers in Sytia kept above 30000 Mares, and 300 they sent out for breed. Those of Apulia are cried up for the best warhorses, saith Varro, and Volateran. Those of Arabia, specially the Mares, in a day and a night, or thereabout, can rid an 100 mile ground, if we beleeve Vartomannus. Arcadia is famous for breed of mules tween-horses, and shee-asses, whence it hath the name Hippobatos.

[...] . The Armenian are of the Parthian race, but have greater heads, saith Absyrtus. The Gennets of Austria are small, [...] , having a soft turning in the opening of their thighs, have been in great request; but are unfit for warre.Martial. Epigram. The Barbaries out of Tunis, and Numidia are swiftest. Those of Bengala are so hard hooft, that they need not be shod, though they travell among rocks, and mountains. In Bisnagar they are sould for 400, or 500 peeces of gold, and sometimes 800, because they are fetcht elsewhere. The Britones have short thighs and eares. Those of Burgundy most patient. The Calabrian best travellers. Those of Cappadocia best of all; They used to pay yearly to the Persian a thousand five hundred. Those of Caraja are brought by merchants into India, the natives use to cut two or three joynts from their tayl, that they may not swinge their rider. Those of Biscay are whitish; brought into the farther end of Spaine, they change colour. Those of Cilicia payd for tribute 360 white Horses to Darius. Those of Corsica are gallant spirited, but low; some little bigger then sheep, saith Procopius; some add that they cannot be rode unlesse you close their eyes. The Cretan are so lofty spirited, a man dare scarse come near them. Those of Cyrene pinchbellued, but

have sound feet, shortbreath'd if ridden, and of great bulk. The Dacian most fleet, with manes hanging to the ground, long-tayles, and little heads. The Danish handsome, and famous for strength. The Oelandi of the Ile of the Gothique sea, the least tits in the world, but very teachable. The Elean prayz'd for swiftnesse; the natives cause their Mares to be lead out of their coasts to take horse, finding by experience, that it wonderfully betters the breed. The Epirots are biters, and froward, by the Elis they deserved the palme; they now call them Aban. Vegetius applauds the Frigisci, as outdone by none for swiftnesse, and holding out untired. The German horses are most trotters. The Transilvanian not so docible as others, but yeelding to none in maintaining a long course.

Those of Greece, whereof Absyrtus writes, have good feete, a great body, a handsome head, high afore, neat bodyed, but unhandsome buttocks, no way answering the rest, swift and couragious. The Hetrusei are copt-headed and thick crested.Absyrtus. The Spanish are great, and handsome bodyed, straight, neat of head, their whole frame plainely distinct; but thin buttockt, able, and stout travellers of a body, nor slender, nor leane, but fit for going, and neede no spur. Besides they are from the time of their foaling to their full age, well manner'd, and obedient, after untoward, and biters. Rodericus Santius saith,Hist. that so great is there fidelity,Hisp. p. 1. c. 2. that when they feele themselves wounded in battle, they set downe their Rider safe from all danger: they commonly call them Gennets. Those of Holland, especially southward, are of baway bodies. In Friesland, their Horses generous, thick-brested, and fit for warre-service.Vegetius. The Hunnisci are of a great and bow-bending head, their eyes sticking out, narrow of nostrill, broad cheeckt, strong, and stiffe-neckt, their manes hang below their knees, great ribs, saddle-backt, thick taild, strong leg'd, small footed, full and broad hoofs, hollowe bouweld, and the whole body full of nooks, no fat in their buttocks, no muscles in their necks, rather long, then high statured, hanging bellyed, great boned, leane, but handsome, and whose deformity it self is beautifull, their spirit moderate, and knowing, patient of wounds: they are otherwise called Hunnici: perhaps they are those of Hungaria, that, Camerarius saith, never shed their teeth. Those of Iberia are swift,Oppianus. ceneg. l. 1. but not for a long course, handsome bodyed, but tender hoof [...] d. Perhaps they are not those of Spaine, but out of Iberia, betweene Armenia and Colchis; though Oppianus makes them the same. Of the Indian Horses,H. A. [...] l. 12. c. 9. Aelian saith, that they are hardly stopt when they run, unlesse by most skilfull horsemen. These know how to run the Ring. The Iusubres are harder neckt then others, and of sparkling eyes. The Istrian, tall their backbone continued, and hollow, or saddle-backt. The Lidian, very long, of thick ribs and sides, and broad brested. They can well endure heat, and thirst at midday. The Massesily are small, and fleet, governed onely with a switch, which is also said of the Moorish. The Menapian, or Gelders, are the onely warre-horses of Jermeny, and therefore much valued. Some will have them called Cicambry. The Moscy go unshod.Herberstinius. The Murciby, will scarce take a bit into their mouth. The Neapolitan, are stout, handsome, and strong. The Negritae are almost of no use, because of the too much heat: as also because they are codsweld, that they cannot stale. In stead of hay they use shred fitches dryed in the Sun: for oates they use hirse: for a horse trapped, and with his other furniture they will give nine slaves, at the most 14. The Nisei, which Oppeanus priseth highly, are most dutifull easie paced and reined, smal-headed, their maines long and thick, the haire hanging downe on each side, somewhat yellow. Stephanus and Am. Marcel. testifie, that they have beene out of Media, they are also called Nesei; they were wont to send yearly 20000 of them to the King of Persia,Strabo. about the time when the feast of Mithra was held.

Norwey breeds Horses of a middle pitch, but those of an admirable stoutnesse, and fleednesse, even in craggy wayes. The Numidian, tast not barley, nor wheat, being content with grasse,Absyr. and hay alone. The Parthian are of fast, huge body; their hayr tied up in crisped curls.Oppian. The Persian Horses are not much unlike others in stature, and shape, onely are discerned from others by a certain gracefull walke. They take their steps thick,Vegetius. and short, but their pace delights, and recreates the Rider, which they have naturall, never being taught it; they are reckoned among the pacers, or amblers, and rackers, like neither, yet like both: for a spurt they have a gracefull gate, in a long journey of a strong endurance, of a proud temper, and, unlesse kept down by labour, dayly stubborn against their rider; swelling, ingenious: and, which is strange, in such a hote climate, wary observers of comelinesse in carriage, their crest arched, and bowing downe to their very breast.Arist. A. H. l. 7. c. 5. Among the Pharsalick, Arist. avers, there was a kind of Mare, called Justa, that brought foals all like stallions; whence it may bee, they have the name, justae, or perfect.Cromerus. The Polonian are coveted by strangers, partly for their swiftnesse, and endurance of hardship, partly for their easie going. Among the Psylli, l. 16. c. 37. H. H. In veterinaria. Aelian Faines that their Horses are no greater then Rams. What the Saphareni are, that Vegetius mentions with the Armenian, having applauded the Persian, I can in no Author find. I guesse they are from Saphara, a towne of Arabia the Happy, neare the Midland-Sea, which Pliny mentions, and Ptolomy calls Saphara. Those of Sardis are most cried up, their tayls are long, and bushy, their crest short, their hoofs like Asses: of a strong,Absyrtus. sinewy limbs, ears prickt up, if Stradanus have well described them. The Sarmatici, a kind not unhandsome, and in their kind neat, good racers, plain, and great bodied,

strong of head, and of a comely neck. They geld them, least being enraged by the sight of Mares, they be borne away, and take head, or being high fed, they should run a madding, and by often neighing, betray their owners. Pliny saith, that that people, when they are to take a long journey, prepare their Horses by keeping them short, and hungry, and let them not drinke much, and so shall travell 150 miles without lighting. The Scenitae are outgone by none in swiftnesse. [...] agri. [...] aus [...] agnus l. 1 [...] 65. In Swethland, and Gothland, they are great, and very serviceable in Battell, when armed, and are forbidden, by royal command, to be exported. The Tartar are most white. Venetus writes, that the great Cham keeps XM; [...] icho. [...] 1. c. 6. so fleet they are, that they can ride 20 German miles of ground in one day: low crested, and with their feet they search for their food, and water under the snow; and are fleeter then others, as the Moschi say. Those of Thessalie have this brand on them, [...] syrtus. that they are Oxheaded. The Thrasian Horses are ugly, mishapen, rough-bodied, great-shouldered, saddle-back'd, crooked-shanked, and goe an uncertain jogging pace. Yet Virgil praises the Delphique (uncertain, doubtfull) oracle. The Toringi, Vegetius commends, setting them next the Hunnisci. Volateran makes those of Sardinia, and Corsica, Isles of the Tyrrhene Sea, to be very low, but generous, and restles. And thus much of their kinds, in respect of places.

Very many differences also meet us taken from their severall shaped parts, some are stild Elaphopodes, or hartfooted, from their deersfeet, who have bones in their hough joynt, that make them of a hobbling pace, that they tire their rider with their shufling, so hard they set. Some in the same parts have short, [...] noba [...]  and low bonds, and their hoofs come to the inmost part of their heels, so that they trail, and drag their legs after them, and halt; these are dog-footed. Some are waglers. Absyrtus calls them Eteroskeleis;

[...] . not having a right stroak. Some tosse their heads up, (or hold them like a Pig on a spit,) others are unlike jaw'd, one jaw hard, the other soft; from their accidents, or qualities, [...] . [...] mer. [...] . they are distinguisht (to let passe the rest) from their colour. In which respect, they are some fleabitten, some streaked, some pide, some all of a colour, white, black, red, chestnut, &c.

The spotted, [...] pian. especially with great coleblack spots, and ringlets, whether on the thighs, or back, at length, or distinct on the neck, are counted the noblest, and are thought the choyser, because nature seemes, in so marking them, to keep a kind of order, whether in respect of numbers endures, or placed in those spots, or straitnesse: next to these are the red, and dark spotted. To these may be refer'd the chequered,

[...] mer. or dappled, the speckled, like Panthers; the pide; the fleabitten; those like magpies, [...] beati. [...] nstra [...] i. full of black and white spots. Those whose right, or left feet are both white, are esteemed bad. Those that have each other foot white, worst of all. The reason is, because the legs lay clapt together in the dames belly, whence they became so spotted. Those that are of one onely colour, Palladius advises to choose for stallions.The wall-eyed are skewish. The white Claudian counts fleetest, and are most magnified by Plato. Those also that are gray-eyed; for, since they all, either black, or goot-eyed, or grey-eyed, the colour of the ey answers that of the body. The blackish are cried up, especially, if they have a star in the forehead, and a white streak, and some white on one foot. The coleblacke,Varro. Cassius Medicus. [...] . as it were schorcht in the fire, (Homer calls them Aithoonas) Oppian commends them for hunting the wild boar. There are some brightbloody, and palme colour'd, and bay, and chestnut. Becanus saids the azure, or blewish are fleet. Hesychius, and Varinus mention flame-colour'd. Some, (calls Heterophthalmi) have one ey greater, or lower then the other. Lacuna miscalls them, one-eyed. The Parthians liked the fearfull ones best, perhaps, because good to run away upon. Some are called Aetogeneis,

[...] . or eaglebreed, from a native scarlet spot on the shoulder, as Absyrtus thinks; the Sarmatae hold them for good: but reject those that have an eagle marke about their hips, or tayl. [...]  Lastly, those that are called Alphorugchoi, are said to hold out good, and not to decay so soon as others.

CHAPTER II. Of the Asse.

NExt the Horse, I shall treat of the Asse, a beast contemptible indeed, but no lesse usefull.Value. Certainly the report goes, that it is above beleefe, almost how gainfull they proove to their owners: and it is said for certain, that a Shee-asse there was, that brought in more then any the most fruitfull farme:H. N. l. 8. c. 43. for it was knowne, as we read in Pliny, that in Celtiberia, Shee-asses each yeelded 400000 pieces of mony, so fruitfull they were. No wonder therefore that Q. Axius the Senatour, gave 400 pieces for an Asse; and that Heliogabalus distributed Asses for rich magnificent presents, and donatives to the people of Rome.Name. The name the Asse hath obtained among the Romans (Asinus) is not derived from A, and Sinos, as if he were a senselesse beast, as Bartholomaeus plays upon the word; but from sitting, as one should say, a Waine,A sedendo Isidor [...] s. [...] . or Waggon; or rather from the Hebrew word Ason, that signifies an Asse. The Greeks call him Onos, because helpfull to us in our works; unlesse it were better to say, from the Palish, wan colour, whence also it is thought that the same name (Asellus) is put on the codfish. The Cyrenenses call him Brikos, from his untowardnesse; [...] .  Aristophanes, Boupalas, as a man should say, blockish as an ox. Nicander, Broomaees, the brayer; [...] . and from his hideous absurd voyce, Megamocos; Eustathius and Suidas, Kanthoon, from his packsadle; Hezyc. and

the Dores, Killos; others, Koothulos, Lepargos, from his whitish bowells; [...] . Descrip. [...] , Hesych.  Cyrill, Memmemnoon, Monios; which yet the Phocenses give onely to those that are sent in hast: Also Keeloon he is called; and Okribas, that is, wild; Ogkistees, from braying. If you looke on his Description, his eares are long and broad, proportionable to his body; he is thick lipped, great headed, there are black streaks on his neck, and feet. In the enterance of his skin, he bears the shape of a crosse, in which place also his burdens fall more uneasie to him, then near his reines, because he is there weakerboned. His hair very rough, and unfit to make cloaths; his bowells white; he is fairer hang'd then any other of the fourfooted beasts; [...] .  Nicander calls it Korooneen, he fors teeth both male, and female loose at 30 months old; the second, in the sixth month, and if they bring no yong, afore they shed their last teeth, they are undoubtedly barren. Their skin is so tough,Pliny. and thick, that they scarce feel a club. The heart, very great, as in all timerous beasts, or those out of fear doe mischief. The blood extream thick, fat, and black.

As for places, Place. the Nomades have them not, by reason of the coldnesse of the region; therefore northward you find but few. Very many are found in Italy, France, Germany, Greece, as we shall see in their differences;Feed. their food is of the meanest. For even, where there are no pastures,Colum. R. R. l. 7. c. 1. they will be fed with anything, and a little serves their turne; for they will eat leaves, and thorns, and willow spruggs, or bavins, if you lay them afore them. They thrive on chaff, that you may find every where in abundance. Therefore Tetzes, declaring a cities utter ruïne, said wittily, that he fears it should prove Asses-provender. He delights in reed, that to other beasts is poyson; and in figs, the which when one had greedily eaten, and a boy desired that wine (or grapes,) should be also given to him. Philemon (the Poët) seeing the Asse eat them, died with laughing.Or Chrysippus. But so great cost was layd out on Christian the Bishop of Mentz his Asses,Kranzius. Sax. l. 6. as might have well maintained a mighty Princes family. They say also that drinking of water, battens them, and that the more they drink, the more they thrive by their provender.Engendering. They are very lustfull, which appears by the brazen Asse, that those of Ambracia dedicated at Delphos, after their conquest over the Molossi, in a night-fight. But that excesse of theirs in venery, it is well knowne, makes them sluggish and barren. Hence it is, that to the Aegyptians they were so hatefull, as Aelian relates.H. A. l. 10. c. 28. H. N. l. 16. c. 20. Of their engendring thus Pliny; their soonest bringing forth is after 30 month old, but a full exact birth after three years, as it is with Mares, in the same months, and after the same fashion. The shee-asses brings forth in the twelfth month, for the most part but one at once, for so is her nature, yet twins sometimes, but very rarely. Seven dayes after she will couple, and then conceives; but after again shee will take the hee-asse. She is not wont to doe so, unlesse she bring forth, afore she loose the tooth, whereby her age is knowne; but if she bring forth afore, she shall be fruitfull as long as she lives. She uses to breed all her life long, that is, till she be 30 years old; when their time comes, they must be helped by a kind of midwiferie, for their great toyling weakens them in those parts. They never let the hee stand idle, for rest makes him but worse. They bring the hee and shee together afore the solstice, that is the longest, or shortest day in the year, that every other year they may bring forth about the same time, which they do the twelfth month after conception. Thus far Pliny. They are use to be sore teated with breeding, therefore at six months end they suffer their hee-colts to suck no more, but suckle their shee-colts almost a whole year. The breeders have milk in the tenth month; Pliny saith, they are never without from the first. If the dames run in rank pasture, it is deadly for the colts to suck for the two first dayes after foaling; they call the disease Colostratio, coming from the first crudled milke.Gen. 36. 24.  Anah was the first that brought horses, and Asses together, (whence Mules proceed.) It is worthy our nothing,The following passage [...] list not [...] English. Their enmity. as Pliny saids, that, especially at the production of Mules, the hair of the ears, and brows are like the dames, and of as many colours, though all the rest of the body be of one colour. They are all at enmity with the bird, call'd Aegithus, (that uses to peck-asses galled backs, because these spoyl their nests) as also the Spinus, (the Nightingal, or Thistlefinch.) And among plants, they hate hemlock most. They use to rub themselves against thistles, and so wrong the Aegithus his nest; which shee so dreads, that, hearing but an Asse bray, she casts out all her eggs, and the Chickens fall all out. The Spinus hates the Asse, because he devours so the thistle-flowers, that she lives upon. If in Hetruria they eat but hemlocke, they are taken with a deep sleep, and seaz'd with a senselesnesse, that they seeme stark dead. Scaliger testifies, that many with eating thereof fall a yawning, and then are giddy, and turne round, and fall. What men report of the Crow,Exerc. 152. Wolf, Rat, and Horse, stands with plain reason.

The Asse loves the Scorpion,What they lo [...]  and Vines; whereof Merula saith, if one strook by the Scorpion, sit on an Asse upright toward the tayl, the Asse shall feel the anguish in his stead; and that is a signe thereof, that Asse dies farting. Or if hee, whom a Scorpion hath stung, whisper the Asse in the eare, saying, a Scorpion hath stung mee, the pain shall leave him, and passe into the Asse. But it is observed, that, if an Asse crop a vine-branch off, from that time the vine shall take better, and prove more fruitfull: and that those that have studiously endeavoured this, have gain'd yearly an ample vintage. Men use to fetch the water of the river Styx, onely in an Asses hoof; and that Empedocles could allay east-winds with botles made of asses-hides: I know not whether these

are to be reckoned among the examples of Sympathy. Their life they prolong to the thirtieth year, [...] . unlesse they be worn out with overhard labour. The shee-asse is more lively then the hee.

Their voyce is braying, or onking, as Scaliger will have it, [...] oyce. and wee read of that they call Bromomai, and Mycaomai by the Greeks. They only among the hairy beasts are free from not only lice, [...] seases. but also loosnes, and chapping of the skin. They are troubled with rheums, and insatiable hunger, and that most, if they carry figs dried, and apples. They call it Malida, which arises in the head, and causeth much red and yellow stuff to run out of the nostrills; which should it fall down on his lungs, would kill him, [...] . A. l. 14. [...] 10. as it is said. Aelian reports that the Maurusian Asses, assoone as they come into the highway, ridd ground with such incredible swiftnes, that they rather do fly, then run; but then they are soon tired, their feet, and spirits fayling them, and when goaded on to mend their pace, stand stone still, and weep bitterly. See in Aldrovandus, how their halting may be cured. That, as Pliny writes, they take heed of water, [...] heir na [...] re. and feare to dip their feet in it; that (wonderfull to be related) though very thirsty, if the water be changed, you must force them to drink, and unload him also; that grinning, gaping, and unhandsome shewing their teeth, they seeme to laugh. That they will pisse, when they see others stale afore them, or upon dung; that they are not much troubled with monthly terms; that, when they drinke, that thrust not their nose farre in, certainly because of the shadow of their eares. Lastly, that they, of all beasts, except the mouse, are most quick of hearing; all this belongs to their nature. All men know, that they are condemned to the priveledge of singular stupid dulnes, whence blockish men have obtained deservedly the name of Asses; [...] o [...] tish [...] esse. whereof Aldrovandus at large. Yet some examples shew, that they may be taught, [...] descr. [...] fricae. for Cardan, out of Leo Africanus, writes, that Asses can daunce to the pipe, and with a word whispered in their eare, will of their owne accord ly down on their back, and hold their eyes close shut, and as if they had drunk poyson, swell, nor can be brought for a time by threats, entreaties, nor blows to rise up, but will start up on a sudden, and jolly, allur'd by stroaking, and flattering, and by promis that they shall carry a beautifull woman; but when they shall heare that they are to carry old crones, or decrepid women, they shall hang their eares, and fain themselves lame; and being asked whether they love fair mayds, they shall beckon a yea with their head; nay, they shall pick out the fairest in the company. Gesner, having been an eye-witnes, [...] ist. [...] uadrup. [...] Asino. reports the like of a shee-Asse of Iohn à Grua the juggler. Shee, saith hee, would first daunce three severall kinds of daunces, as the musick changed; and that with her forefeet held up, with great alacrity, and anone, as if all her jollity were turn'd into the deepest sorrow, cast herself all along on the ground, and there ly stone still, as struck with an apoplexy, and could not be brought to stir, with spurning, or kicking: after being bid to greet all the beholders, shee would, like a man, turne her eyes and head toward them all, and salute them, doing obeysance with her forefeet: and, which was the greatest wonder of all, shee, to the amazement of the bystanders, would cast her body through a hoop, at her masters beck; as cleverly as a dog should leap through. Lastly, like a dogge, shee would take up an handkerchief, or glove dropt on the ground, and restore it to the owner. They are so fond on their colts, that they will run through fire to come at them; and are so loving to their kind, that they swound, if they see them dy. It is also observed, that the sheeashe takes speciall heed, that shee bring not forth afore any mans eyes, or in the light. When shee is overloaden, shee shews it by hanging down her eares.

That Asses flesh hath serve for food, is witnest by Galen.Their use in food lib. 3. de aliment. facult. The story also of Charles V. relates the Spanjards did sometime eat it. Wee know also, that M.D.XVI. at the siege of Verona, it was counted a dainty, when they used lentils, and beanes but seldome. The Persians also on their birth-feast-day would rost an Asse whole, and reckoned it among Princely delicates. Mecaenas, saith Pliny, was the first who appointed Asse-colts in feasts, at that time prefer'd afore wilde Asses;H. N. l. 8. c. 43. after his time the tast grew out of request. That they are ill tasted, and hard of disgestion, and spoil the stomach, they that have fed on them can witnes.Vse in Physick. The Physitians have brought into use Asses milk, blood, flesh, liver, spleen, yard, stones, hoofs, scurf, stales and dung. L. 6. de tuen. sa. Galen saith, their milk is thinnest, if compared with that of the cattell that we use to milke: but thick, if compared with that of camels and Mares. Unlesse we so distinguish he must be said to contradict himself; since Pliny also writes, that camels-milk is thinnest, next that of Mares, the shee-asses so thick that men use it in stead of curds. It is best, if she be well, well fed, young, and shortly after her foaling. Physitians advise, some of them, that they that are in a consumption,Plin. H. N. l. 23. c. 5. 28. c. 12. should suck it themselves, that it abate not of the native warmth. Galen prescribe it to yong man, who was wasted away, mixt with hony, as soon as he came out of a bath. The same drunke alone refresheth an exulcerated stomack; and is commended against a cough, leannes,H. N. l. 11. c. 41. and spitting of blood. Drinking it helps a sore breast, as Pliny delivers; and taken in with hony it helps monthly terms. It is not good for a weak, or giddy, swimming head. It helps against parget, ceruse, brimstone, and quicksilver. Gargling it is most comfortable for exulcerated jaws. There are examples of some helped of the gout by drinking Asses-milk. And some eased of that gowtish pain, by drinking the whey thereof.Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 41. It is thought to help somewhat to the making womens skin white. It is certain that Domitius Nero his Poppaea carried still along with her

500 bigbellied Asses, and bathed her whole body in the milk, on a conceit that it saftned and suppled her skin.

The blood, some say, stanches a flux of blood out of the brain.Plin. H. N. lib. 28. c. 16. Pliny sayes, that it is said to cure a quartan ague, if the patient drink three drops of the blood taken out of a vein in the Asses-eare,In Praxichim. in a pinte and a half of water. Hartmannus commends the same taken after the ears, as extreme good against madnesse. Linnen never used afore is thereby softened, and bleached; whereof a part is softned in a draught of spring-water, and the water taken in against frenzy. Aelian witnesses the same of Asses flesh; and that one Bathylis of Candia was recovered of lunacy thereby, it being prescribed him. Pliny saith,Lib. 28. H. N. c. 16. it cures the Tisick, especially in Achaja: wee read the same in Avicen, who addes that it is given in against the falling sicknesse.

The liver also eaten helps against the same disease, but is prescribed to be eaten fasting. Others advise it to be drop'd into the mouth mixt with a little of the universall medicine. The milt is so effectuall against the spleen, that the profit is felt in three dayes usage. The same beaten to powder, and out of water put on the breasts brings the milk into them, if we credit Sextus. The fume is good for old matrices, as Pliny holds. Their Reins in powder given in pure wine, help the bladder, and to hold the water. The Asses genital is conceived, sayes Pliny, burnt to ashes to make hayr come thick, and prevent gray hayrs, if smeare on the new shaven with oyl, and pounched to powder with lead. His right stone drunke in wine, or bound to the arme provokes lust. Either of them helps against witchraft. Wrapping infants in the skin keeps them from frighting.Plin. l. 10. c. 19. A ring made of his hoof, if there be no black in it carried about one inclinable to sounding fits, keeps him from falling. The Asses of the same are also good for that end, drunk many dayes together, and kneaded with oyl dispersse swellings, or bunches. Tarentus used it for a bait to take many fishes. That they call lichen (whether male, or scurf, or tetter) burnt, and powderd, and laid on with old oyle, breeds hayr so, that if you annoint but a womans jaw with it, shee shall have a beard; daubd on with vineger raises from a lethargy, or dead sleep. Their stale smeard on with clay takes away corns,Plin. l. 26. c. 16. and 28. 15. and cures hard flesh, saith Marcellus. Savanarola hath written that it is good against an ill savour of the nostrils. Dioscorides, that in drinke it helps the ache, and gravell in the reins. Wherefore those of old have still used it.L. 28. c. 16. Of their dung, thus Pliny; The dung of the Asse-colt, voided first after his foaling, is called Polea. The Syrians minister it in vineger, and meth against the spleen: The same helps the collick, and bloody flux, boyld in wine it greatly relievs the pain of the skin: In three dayes it cures the kings-evill given but as big as a bean in wine. A mares foles dung hath the like efficacy. The same is used to stanch blood. Tarentinus much commends it moystned in Coriander juice, and kneaded with barly-flower, for the taking of trachuris and perch.

I need not speake of their usefulnesse in carriage, in the mill, in warre, and at the plow, &c. This may be added, that pipes are made of Asses bones, and are shriller then others; and that the Arabs make parchment of the asse-hide, and cloath of the hayr.

Some differences, Differences. and kinds they may be divided into; There are those of Mysia, that are crooked gutted; and Vary so called, such as the Great Turke gave Ferdinand K. of Naples, of a strange hayr,Pontanus. a body streakt, many colourd, and markt with even streaks, Small, such as Illyria, Thrace, and Epire breed. Great ones, such as Antron a City of Thessaly yeelds. Swift, found by Euphrates, that out-run a Horse.Xenophon. Scaliger writes that in Aegypt such is the holding out, and fleetnesse of their ambling Asses,Exercit. 117. that they can without baiting ride their 40 miles a day without taking a hayrs harme.

CHAPTER III. Of the wilde Asse.

THe Greeks call him Onagros,

[...] . as much as to say, the Asse of the field, or wilde Asse. Nicephorus Callistus, speaking of India,H. Eccl. l. 9. seemes to describe him, when he saith, this Region breeds wild Asses both very great, and of a skin of strange musuall colours, black, and white being mixt with a great variety: And certain girdles, or rings reaching down from the top of the back-bone to the sides, and belly, and there parted, and by certain turnings entertwined, making an admirable folding, and variety. Oppianus ascribes a silver colour to him,Cyn [...] g l. 3. which Gesner takes it for an ash-colour, and conceives that Eeroenta signifies the same. But that he is not all white is clear by what Oppian adds about a black streak running along his back, fairly distinguisht here, and there by snow-white crownlets. Their skins Suidas calls Ozai.

They live in wildernesses, especially in rocky and craggy places, in Africk, Lycaonia, Narsinga. Some deny that they passe in Lycia, that hill that severs Cappadocia from it. The Cappadocians hunt them most.Lucian. In Psara, an isle of the Aegean sea, lives there a kind, that translates elsewhere dy. Some deny that there are any in Scythia. But Strabo sais that the inhabitants about the marshes of Moeotis, appoint hunting matches of them.

As for their nature, and fashions; Isidore, Their nature, and fashions. and Bartholomew of England write, that they were about the first Equinoctial once every hour night and day; and thereby men know that the nights, and dayes are of a length: which rather agrees to the Cynocephalus, bodied like an Ape, and headed like a Dog; Scaliger saith, that if they have seen a man stand in the same steps, they presently fall a braying, holding their forefeet still, and flinging out

with their hindfeet. He will suffer the hunter to come so near him, that he can touch him with his hand, and then he betakes him to his heels.Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 44. & Soli [...] us. They are very jealous, and each governs his females: They are fearfull of their rivals. Whence it is, that they watch their shee-asses, when great with fole; that, if they can, they may by biting geld the male-colts, which the dammes fearing, doe their best to hide them in corners, and love to foale by stealth. We gather out of H. Scriptures, that they are impatient of thirst. Some, to have a breed of Mules, choose wilde-asses tamed. This beast is easily tamed, and made so gentle, that he shall not seek to returne to his former lovely wildnesse.

Their flesh is bitter,Vse. saith Aelian: Galen saith, that that of the well conditioned, and young, comes near to Harts-flesh, and beef. Scaliger saith, that it is ranke, while warme; cold, it neither smels, nor tastes well. And Pliny writes, that Maecenas made feasts of Asses-colts,Exerc. Zob. 5. 4. and that then they were far preferd afore the wilde Asses; but after his time, their taste was not regarded.

Physitians smear their galls on Ulcers with good successe; and mingle them in plaisters against S. Anthonies fire, if we beleeve Avicen. Their fat with oyle of Costus, is commended for the windinesse of the loins, and reins. The flesh of their back with oyles, help aking-joynts. Their pisse, saith Avicen, breaks the stone in the bladder. Their marrow cures the Gout, and takes away the pain, annointing the place. The dung mixt with the yolke of an egge, daubed on the forehead, stanches blood. The same with an Ox-gall, if you annoint the hair, makes it curl.

There are said to be two kindes of them.Kindes. Sc [...] liger. In the mountaine that parts the Narsingae their Kingdome from the Malabars, many savage Asses have their haunt. The same breeds wild Asses faced like a Horse, ash-coloured, so nimble of foot, that there is no taking of them. Those also of Africa are so swift, that they fall short of no wild beast, except that they call the Lant.

CHAPTER IV. Of the Mule, and the Indian Zebra.

THe nameName. of the Mule is common to four living creatures; For the shee-mule is ingendered, not only between a Mare and an Asse, but between a shee-Asse [...] , and an Horse, as also a wild-Asse, and a Mare, as Columella hath delivered. The Iumar, R. R. l. 6. c. 36. between an Asse, and a Bull. Onely males come from a Horse and an Asse; Ancients called them hinnulos, Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 44. Nonius. or little Mules: on the other side, they called those Mules, that came of an Asse and a Mare. Yet Varro thinks that they are to be called, Mules, that come of a Mare, and a Mule. It may be those are the pumily, or tits, that Martial mentions. For Hinnus (they are Varro his words) engendered of an Horse,R. R. l. 2. c. 8. and shee-Asse is fleshie in bulk then a Mule, and for the most part, ruddier, dard as a Horse, mained, and tailed like an Asse. But the name of Mule, Isidore conceives to be drawn from the Greeks, namely from that Bakers use to drive abont their flowgoing mills withall, or a mullet: But it is better to drive it from Molos,

[...] , labour, or of the Hebrew Maal, which signifies prevaricating, deceiving. or going out of the right way; Since this is a toyling creature, and bred out of the road, or ordinary course of nature:Gr. [...] . He hath obtained many names among the Greeks; Emionos, or half, mungril-breed, because sprung from an Asse, and a Mare; Astrabe, from his strength of body; Agonomoxthos, from barrennesse; Eterogonon zoon, as bred of diverse seeds; Thres, olkas, &c. are names given to the shee, as Oreus to the hee. Aeidaros, because he can lobour more then any other beasts on mountanous places. Many more Greeks names he hath gotten, whereof consult with the Lexicons,

When the Mule hath a Mare to the Dam,Descriptïon. and an Asse to the Sire, he resembles partly the one, and partly the other: yet more the Sire then the Dam, and is also voyced like him. They are long dard like the Asse; and hath them in stead of forelocks to guard the eyes.Xenoph. There is a crosse on the shoulder; small, slender footed they are, lank of body; for the rest, like a Horse, save that the neck is none strait. They have all 36. teeth, besides others more then usual by nature:Ruellus. s. Hierocle We learn from Aristotle, that they shed them. In the heart of some is found a bone. Gall they have none, as all whole hoofed.

If you would know their place; Place. they say, that hote, and dark places spoyl them, and make them after a manner beside themselves; they love to have their standing in the open aire, covered, or onely their head, it is enough; the rest takes no harm by the aire. There are none of them in Arabia the Happy, England, Scotland, Poland, nor in the neighbouring regions. They cannot breed in Eleus because of a certain imprecation,Herodotus. or curse.Fran. The East-Indies also want them.Lopoz. In Scythia they cannot abide so much as the beginning of winter.Diodor. A certain Isle there breeds some,Siculus. but those of a loud,Strabo. and shrill voyce.Geog. l. 11. & 12 Themisita is full of them. The Cappadocians pay yearly 2000 of them to the Persians. That they abound in Persia, Mesopotamia, and Babilon appears by Alexanders taking order to lead away 3000, at the taking of Susae, both such as would carry and draw. Their food Feed. is both fruit, and grasse; but they baten most by their drink; nothing is better to keep them in good plight, then clave-grasse: the more barly they eat, the more they neigh. From their first breeding of teeth they wax, and live many years. It is reported, that, when the Temple was built at Athens, there was one 80 years old.

The male, as they say, engenders at seven

years old;Engendring. Arist. de Gen. c. ult. the female is barren, because, though shee conceive, shee can bring nought to perfection; but the Hee-mule, being of a hotter temper, then the female, sometimes generates, though he confer litle to the brood; and what comes of him is but a maimed tit, as among the Swine the Metachaerum, or afterbirth, you shall find the same of a Mule in Juvenal. Yet good Authors, not to be concealed, as M. Varro, and afore him Dionysius, and Mago, have delivered that in regions of Africa, the broods of shee-mules are not so prodigiously strange, but are as common with them, as Mares with us. We shall unfold the reasons of their barrennesse, in the books of Nature.Smell. Some relate that they excell in the sense of smelling, by the benefit whereof, leave them any where, they shall by their sent alone find out their way. Hence is it, that they are easily tainted with an infectious aire, and stroken with the pestilence, which also happens to dogs. Of the diseases whereto they are liable, see Aldrovandus.

There is such a Sympathy, Sympathy. Antipathy. or agreement in nature, between them and swimming fowles, whether Geese, or Ducks, that they are said to be heald with the very sight of them. On the contrary the Flowers, and leaves of the Lawrell rose, that are wholsome to man, are to them poyson. In Mules also there is, I know not what, deadly to Mice. For fasten but a Mules left hoof at door, and the Mice shall quit the house; they are ever tame. The shees are found livelier then the hees, and wax not so soon old. Those are cleansed by the flowing of stale; these seem sooner old by the sent of urine. They love tumbling to refresh them, when weary. They borrow from the fire hardinesse to labour, and boldnesse, and from the dame,R. R. l. 2. c. [...] . swiftnesse. I have knowne, saith Varro, that when a Wolf hath come to a company of Mules, they have hemmed him in among them, and kicked him dead. Yet any un-usuall sight terrifies them, and brings them into hazards. They kick most fiercely. There hath been one seen, that would brook no master, but one. They are extream stubborn. I saw, as I went between Naples and Rome, one, that could by no means be forced to lead the way, and being left by her fellows, lay downe, making us all laugh, and the Priest, who rode on her, fret. An example of their craft,Plin. l. utr. anim. you have in Thales his Mule,H. N. l. 8. c. 44. and of their memory, in Pliny. Arist. The monuments of Athens declare,H. A. l. 6. c. 24. that one Mule lived 80 years; they taking delight in him, because; when they were building a Temple in the Tower, he being excused from labour for his great age, would endevour to help, and in courage by his company, the beasts that fell under their burden; concerning which mule they decreed, that no corne-merchants should offer to drive him from their corne-sives: Some have wrote, that they will not kicke, when they have drunk wine.Vse. How true that is, we shall shew elsewhere. They are of great efficacy against poyson, few one poysoned in a Mules belly newly killed, hee shall escape with life, if hee remain therein, as long as there is any warmth in the beast; Hee shall be much better, if hee use many. Maranta is Authour, that there have been Princes, who to save a life, have used 30, 40, and 50 Mules. Some have allayed their lust by sprinkling on their body the dust wherein a shee-Mule hath tumbled.Plin. Their heart,H. N. l. 8. c. 45. stones, reins, flesh, and filth of their ears, are said to cause barrennesse. The bristles of the taile, bound together, are good to help conception, saith Pliny. Hippocrates prescribes, against the womb-flux, to drink their dung burnt, powder'd, and sifted in wine.

Aristotle mentions two kindes, namely the barren, Kinds. (whereof afore) and the breeder, whereof he writes, that there are in Syria, called Mules, of a divers kind from that engendered between a Mare and an Asse, but faced alike as wild-Asses, have obtained the name of tame from their likenesse. And indeed, as wild-Asses, so Mules excell in swiftnesse. Such Mules engender in their kind, as it is well knowen in them, that in the time of Pharnaces father of Pharnabazes came into Phrigia, that are there yet; three of nine are kept there to this day. They commonly engender in Cappadocia, but it is a peculiar kind.

The Zebra answers every way the mule,Theophrastus, Aldrovand. l list. quad. l. 1. c. 8. but that it is a fruitfull breeder.Purchas Plig. l. 7. c. 13. 5. 7. Of a hayr full of seames and streakes, wonderfull to be seen. For even from the back-top to the belly shee hath lines, as painted, of three colours, black, white, and yellow, the lists being disposed in an even proportion, each almost three fingers broad. They run wild, but in herds, and are famous for swiftnesse; and, if tamed, might serve in stead of an Horse. Some take them for mules. Whereof Pigafeta thus:Arist. The Zebra is bred in this tract (Congo) as also in other parts of Barbary,P [...] ga [...] . de [...] c. r [...] g. Congo. and Africa, which though in shape, and stature like the mule, yet is not it, (since it breeds) and differs from the mule, and all other beasts in colour. For in three colours, black, white, and fresh red streaks of three fingers bredth compasse the body from the back to the belly in fashion of semy, or half circles; the tail being of a red, and shining hew-footed, and hoof'd as the mule, otherwise of a light, and nimble foot, as the Horse, nay much fleeter then he, so that it occasions the proverb in Portugal, swifter then the Zebra. Shee breeds every year, whence there is great plenty of them; but uselesse to the natives, who know not how to use them; else they might serve them as well as Horses, both in peace, and warre, nature having furnist those places with them, where there are no Horses, to supply that want. Those of Congo therefore, nether having Horse, nor knowing how to yooke oxen, nor to tame, or briddle the Zebra, nor know how to use other beasts; are faine to use men in all their works. And as they lay all their baggage on mens shoulders, so themselves are carried about by men in litters, or on chairs covered

from the Sun, having alwayes servants, or other hirelings at hand to that purpose. And if they are to dispatch long journies in a short time, they carry many such man-bearers about with them to take their turnes, as the rest are weary; by which shifting, they ridde more way, then Horses themselves. So far Pigafeta.

CHAPTER V. Of the Elephant.

THe Elephant hath also place among the whole-hoof'd,Aldr. whose hoof,H. q. l. 4. c. 9. though it may seem to be shaped, as if he had toes, yet because they are not cleft: I know not well how to shut them out from among the whole-footed. He hath gotten his name, Name. not from his vast bulke, he seeming to be a kind of mountain, as Isidore would have it;Vincen. Beilun. Martin. in Lexi. but rather from the Hebrew Alaph, to learn, he surpassing all other beasts in teachablenesse: or from Eleph, an Ox, by reason of his greatnesse, Bu, being a word importing increase: [...] . Or, as it were Elebas, from Elas, a marish, and Baino, to descend, because with his weight he makes there deep gulls; or from Elephrairo,

[...] . to hurt; or from Elisso, to bend in, because he hath an involved in bending his trunk; [...] . or finally, from Alphos, white, since ivory, triumphs in that colour. Some call him Pirissas,

[...] . others simply the monstrous beast, [...] . (Theria.) The Romanes,Helye. Bari [...] . who saw Elephants first in their warre with King Pyrrhus,P [...] n. call them Lucanian oxen; whether from Lucanian, where they first saw them, or (a Luce) from light, because they glistered a far of by reason of the Princely golden shields, wherewith the towers on their backs were adorned. The Indians call him Bartus, from his voyce, saith Isidore; others will have it a Sabine name, whence Servius thinks Ebur, Ivory hath the name.

We shall shew in the differences,Descript. their different greatnesse. Gillius measured one at Constantinople, that from the ey to the farther end of the back was eleven foot; from the ey to the end of his trunke, eight foot. Some of them are twelve foot high; some thirteen; some reach fifteen, and nine inches. Aloysius Cadamustus writes, that hee saw one, that had more flesh then five of our Bulls. They are all black, except the Aethiopian: yet the writers of the Indian voyages report, that the King of Narsinga hath a white one.

They have a checquerd skin, or rather one graven with blistered pits, and is of such a hardnesse, that you would take it to be of bone.Cassiod. Therefore the Moores make their bucklers of it;Plin. and the Peguans use it in stead of armes: yet it is harder on the back,H. H. l. 8. c. 9. then the belly. Their back-skin is extreme hard and stubborn,Solinus. their bellies are soft.H. N. l. 11. c. 39. Whether he be hairy, or no, Pliny himself knew not; He hath no bristles to cover him, nor can he use so much as his taile to drive away the flies from annoying him; Pliny speakes of the Elephants in some places; but in others, their bodies have impenetrable bristles. Cardan saith, their skin is naked, and gives reason why it must be so. But Cadamustus testifies that he himself hath pluckt blackish haires two palms long out of them. Gillius affirms the same length thereof. Vartoman, finally, reports, that they have a taile like the oxes, about 27 inches long, with a few hairs at the end; and in the description of Guinea we read that the women use such for fly flaps to drive them from their images. Nay Pliny, as forgetting himself, writes, that the Indians delight strangely in Emeralds, counting them only precious stones, and had rather want gold then them, and that they make holes in them, and tie them in Elephants bristles.

They have an ugly mishapen head; and about the temples a kind of tunnell,Plin. H. H. l. 35. c. 5. whereout the male sends forth a fat stuff at couplingtime; the female also hath the like then open, if we beleeve Strabo. Their ears are little for a beast of that bulk,Geog. l. 15. Oppian. Cyneg. l. 2. v. 519. two hand-palms breadth every way, and under them is a place, where you may strike him dead with one stroak of a chissell driven by a hammer. Livy thinks that Haserubal first found it out. Those among the Sambri,Solin. c. 43. Plin. l. 6. c. 30. an Ethiopian folk, have no ears. Their eyes, though great, yet seem but small for so vast a body; and those but heavy. The mouth in the breast, and with that they suck, and not with the trunck;Cadamust. their is also very small,Aelian. and very far in,Arist. not as in other beasts,H. A. l. 2. c. 6. that you can hardly perceive it. They have foure teeth within to chew withall, besides the tushes that hang out,Arist. the males are crooked,H. A. l. 2. c. 5. and turning again, the females teeth strait, and hanging downward. They have teeth so soon as they are brought forth, but those great ones, are not so plainly seen; with those they grind their food as small as meal. They are placed in their upper-jaw, and some are of an astonishing greatnesse. Bartomannus saw a couple in Sumatra, hanging up, that weighed 336 pound. And Gadamustus saw one slain, whose teeth exceeded 36 fingers bredth in greatnes; and sticking 24 fingers bredth out. Of whose vastnesse thus Pliny. The greatest teeth are to be seen in temples. But in the utmost coasts of Africk,H. N. l. 8. c. 10. where it borders on Ethiopia, they use them in stead of posts in their houses, and for fences,Polyb. Guloss. and stakes, and prope in their stalls for cattell. Gillius reports, that they wax sometimes to ten foot length. Venetus the Merchant, that one was said to be sold for 36. pieces of gold, being 94 inches long, and 36 inches thick; and that it was so heavy, that he could not lift it from the ground. Besides Sabellicus writes, that there was at Firmus two Elephants-teeth of that excessive hugenesse, that Aurelian, who conquered it, caused them to be carried for a miracle to Rome, and of such an unbeleeveable length. Some call these Horns. How properly Aldr and Cardan shew, and shall elsewhere declare; onely I desire to

add here,Arist. that the lower jaw is onely stirred in eating,H. A. l. 1. c. 11. the upper lying still. In that place, where other beasts noses stand. The Elephant hath a part hanging, narrow, and long, that reaches to the very ground, board at the end, flexible, yeelding nimble, like a serpent, that can every way turn it self, a Trunk the English call it; the Latines, Proboscis, (or a snout.) Tuba (a Trumpet) Manus (a hand) as Pliny and Cicero call it;Cic. l. 2. de nat. Deo. Cas. l. 10. variorum.  Manus nasuta (a nosed hand) as Cassiodore, Promuscis, as Vitruvius. The Greeks call it Proboskitha, Mokteera, Pronomaian, &c. There is the same use of it, as of a hand. For therewith they take, and put food dry, and moist to their mouth. Therewith they breath, drinke,And take up burdens; discharge a pistoll, as I have seen. l. 8. a. 1. ad 12. smell. Lucretius therefore calls them, Anguimanos, snakehanded. Aristotle H. A. l. 2. c. 1. testifies, that they have bending joynts in the lower part of their hinde legs; but, as concerning the bending of their leggs, some report otherwise, as that they have no joynts, but their legs is one entire bone, which they cannot bend, and that falling, they cannot rise again: But others, as Pliny for one, deliver, that they have behind short joynts, and within bending hams, like a man; and indeed experience hath taught us so much. Their feet are round, like a horsehoofe, but broader, the bottomes being some 18 inches round. Vertoman likens them to a table-trencher, form'd of an hard, black, wide skin. Their toes are misshapen, five in number, but not parted, and scarsely distinguisht, the hoofs are not like claws.Plin. l. 11. c. 46. They have two paps under their shoulders,Arist. not on the breast,H. A. but on the side it is hidden in the shoulder-pits. Their Genital is like a horses, but small, no way answerable to their bulk. Pliny saith, that they gender averse, the face turne from each other. Their testicles are not seen outwardly, but lurke within about the reins, whence they engender the sooner. Ctezias trifles in saying their seed is as dry, and hard as amber. Pliny saids, they have foure bellies. H. N. l. 11. c. 37. Aristotle,H. A. l. 2. c. 17. that their gut is windding, and turning, that they seeme to have foure bellies, and therein meat is found. Galen makes it very wide, and most like a horses, their entralls resemble a swines. Their liver is foure times as great as an oxes; the rest of the inwards are answerable, except the milt; this is lesse then proportion would require. Pliny makes their lungs foure times greater as an oxes. Aristotle denies that he hath any gall in his liver: yet, if you cut that part, where it uses to bide, some gally moysture more, or lesse, will spurt out. Galen also avers, that there is choller in his bladder. The same tooke a bone out of the heart of one that he cut up; and he observes, that it hath two ventricles in it,H. A. l. 4. c. 31. and not three, as Aristotle saith. Whereof Aelian thus; The Elephant is said to have a double heart, and sense, that by the one he is anger'd, by the other appeased, as the Moors report. See the description of a couple in Aldrovandus. They are found in Africk,Place. Asia, and the neighbouring Islands. And in Africk in a Forrest behind the Syrtes, or quicksands, in the deserts-bordering on Sala, a Town of Mauritania; in Lybia, Getulia, and the Forrests near mount Atlas, &c. The Symbari, between the Arabian Mountains, and the Nile, live on the hunting of them.Plin. H. N. l. 6. c. 3o. There were huntings of them appointed by Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, King of Aegypt, in the Aethiopia of the Ophiophagi, or Serpent-eaters. As for Asia, King of Parthia,Plin. H. N. l. 6. c. 20. 21. kept D. C C. King of Audata a 1000. The King of the Palibroti 9000. The King of Chrysaeum, Parasanga, Asanga had 300 armed. In Taprobana are vaster, and more warlike accounted then in India, as Onesicritus a Governour under Alexander the Great,Iohan. Metellus. relates. In Zeilan are at this day very great ones, and very ingenious. The Siamensian King is said to keep 12000; whereof 4000 stand ever armed against any sudden surprizes, and chances. Under the great Mogul, his command are 50000.Var [...] omann [...] de Baros. Paul. Ven [...] t [...] s. In Mosambique Isle, and in Benomotapa. are found whole herds of them. To the Isle Zanzibar, also resort many Merchants to buy Yvory. They delight much in moyst and marishy places, they love rivers, especially in hote countries, for they can endure no cold.

As concerning their foed, Meat, and drinke. they feed on fennygraffe,Plin. on leaves of trees,H. N. l. 8. c. 12. on stumps, the fruits of the mose-tree, and on the roots of the Indian fig-tree. They devour sometimes earth and stones. But eating it brings them diseases, unlesse they first chew it. The tame ones are fed with barley, and they will sometimes devour nine Macedonian bushels thereof at once. There was one shewed at Antwerp, that gobbled up foure bushels of apples on one day. They write, that they are much taken with musckmelons. [...] . Water, but muddy, and troubled, is their drink; Wine also made of rice, and other grain, and so among us. That at Antwerp souped up at once more then 16. pound; and did that so often, that it seems to come near the proportion, whereof Aristotle writes.H. A. l. 8. c. 8. Yet they can well bear thirst, and can goe without drinking eight dayes together.Engen. [...] . About their coupling, Plin. the time and manners,Arist. writers report diversly.H. A. l. 5. c. 2. & 5. 14. Pliny out of Aristotle saith, the male begins at five years old, the female at ten. Aristotle assignes to both the 20 years, and anotherwhile, the twelfth to the female, when soonest, and the fifteenth, when latest; you shall find in Solinus, that they couple averse from each other. Horace of Canida agrees with him, that the female sits,I will not translate all [...] nor is it fit. wh [...] t they are ashamed to doe, I will bl [...] h to write. If they then spy any spi [...] s, they will kill them, if they can. then the male covers her. See Albertus the Great, and Aristotle, about the circumstances, the desire to couple in the water especially, &c. They never couple but in secret. The male three years after seeks out the same female, and never more after. In two years they couple five dayes, and no more, saith Solinus out of Pliny, nor returne they to their herd, till they have wash'd themselves in fountain-water. In coupling-time they rage most, and [...] row down the Indians stables. It is also doubted, how long the shee carries her burden.

Some say a year and six moneths; some say three years, some say ten. Arist. H. A. l. 6. c. 27. writes, two years; Strabo, 16 months at least; at longest 18. Diod. Sic. and Aelian, say the same. Some say resolutely, eight years. They bring forth sitting on their hind legs with pain. The Birth comes into the light with the head formost,H. A. l. 4. cap. 31. saith Aelian. They bring but one at once, as we read in Arist. and Diod. Sic. Every foure years one birth, say Cadamustus, and Scaliger.Exer. 204.

The birth is as great as a grown hog,Aelian. or a calfe of three months.Plin. As soon as it is brought forth, it can see and goe; and sucks with the mouth, and not with the trunk. They suck till they be eight years old.

They hold enmity with the Rhinoceros, Enmity. the Lyon, Tiger, Ram, Hog, Serpent, Dragon, they hate some colours and fire. Of the Rhinoceros thus Pliny: In Pompey his sports was a Rhinoceros seen. A born enemy to the Elephant; he whets his horn on the stones, [...] . 11. A. [...] . 16. c. 44. and prepares for fight, wherein he aimes most at the belly, which he knowes to be softest.

They are of equal height, only the legs are somewhat shorter of one then the other. Among the westerly Ethiopians, the Lyons will fasten on the young Elephants, and wound them; but if the dame come, they fly. The Tiger flies at the Elephants head, and with ease chokes him. If he be in a raging fit, the very sight of a Ram makes him gentle. The grunting of a Swine terrifies him. [...] . Of their combating with Dragons, and their perpetual discord, Pliny writes, that the Dragon clings about him, as on a knot; he finding himself overmastered with his weight falling, disentangles himself. The cunning of beasts in self-defence, is singular, as in those Dragons, who not being able to clime so high as the Elephant, spying their prey, cast themselves thereon from a high tree; He is not able to avoid the Serpents circling him, seeks a tree, or a rock to rub against. The Dragon aware of this, clings with his feet about the Elephants taile; he unites the knot: The Dragon flies then, and hides his head in one of the Elephants nostrils, stops his breath, and tears the softest parts: Dragons meeting them, being surprised, stand upright, and make at their eyes most, so that many of them being blind, and famished, [...] . are found dead. Among colours, he avoids the light-red, and the white most: We shall shew the cause else-where. That fire frights them, Livy tells us by an example of Hannibal, who at the siege of Capua, by fire drove them away: It so terrified them that they fly, and can by no means be brought back again.

Of their Age, Age. men write diversly: Some say they live two hundred years, some three hundered; some say, one hundered and twenty years.

One Sicritus saith, that they live to three hundered, seldome to five hundered, and that they are very strong about the two hundered year of their age. Philostratus relates, that one of those that fought against K. Alexander, live above three hundered and fifty years after him.Strabo. I say nothing of Juba his Elephant; and that of Ptolom. Philad. and that of Seleucus Nicanor: At sixty years begins their youth. By the greatnesse of their teeth you may know how long they shall live.

They can endure no cold,Plin. that is their greatest bane:Arist. They are troubled with wind,Cadamust. and flux of the belly, and feel no other diseases. Yet Aelian speaks of sore eyes.

They that are taken and wounded, their wounds are washed with warme water first; then, if very deep gashed, anoynted with butter; after that, men lay on fresh and bleeding swines-flesh, and so the inflammation is asswaged. Some years, I find they are madde, and then they spare none they meet. A foretoken thereof is an oyly substance, flowing out of their ears. The cure is, to chide, and rage at them: Their keepers shew, by reason that they are of a base, and degenerate disposition; and that lust casts them into their mad-sits. Men write, that they are troubled with rheums, and that the humour will petrifie, or harden into a kind of stone, whereof there have been a statue shewen. They walk slowly, by reason of their heavy bulk: Yet they say, none is so swift, whom they with their walk cannot overtake. They bend their hams inward like a man:Pliny. And because his bending joynts of the legs are not so high, as those of other beasts, but stand lower toward the earth; it is troublesome to the Rider, he being so used to sitting, which yet is to be meant of those that are grown up; Since the young have an easie pace, and as delightfull to the Rider, as that of the ambling Mule.

There are many things that witnesse their singular nature and ingenuety; Var [...] om. G [...] lisu [...] . Their Nature and Wit. Po [...] yb. H. lib. 5. Livy l. 21. that it is no wonder, that Pliny calls him the wittiest of all that go on four feet. We said afore, that they fear water, whereof Hannibal had much adoe to bring his to it: and Pliny saith, that at Puteoli, they ran away from the ships for fear. Yet L. Caelius Meteilus joyning tunnes together, ferried them over the Sicilian sea, for want of ships. The female is much stronger then the male, as shews plainly a masculine ability. Aristotle yet affirmes them to be more timerous.Ver [...] om.  Opian saith, they can with their tuches turne beeches, wild-olives, and palmtrees upside down. One of them laid flat a body of a tree of such a vastnesse, that four and twentie men could scarce stir it; and three of them drew a shoar a very great Pinnace. They fight eagerly one with another. The conquered flyes the very voyce of the conquerour, holding to him earth, and verwain. It come to a proverb, the conquered brings grasse to the conquerer, from hence, yet with Vossius, I can hardly yeeld beleefe to it. They will revenge an injury. One of them kept a nut-shell, that a souldier flung at his face, and many daies after cast it at him again walking in

the same street. They are strangly kind to their keepers, or masters, and also mindfull of any wrong offered them, as Seneca excellently expresses it:Seneca. the wildnesse of Elephants, condescending to the basest offices deservs them their meat. Strabo saith indeed that some of them have carried their chariotters falne in battail,Geor. l. 15. clearly off, and others have saved others. And Cassiodore writes, that when they thinke that their Masters provision falles short, they will by a certain motion, by meat of diverse, who if they slight them, and regard not answering their desire, they will open a bladder wherein much filth is gathered together, and cast so much out on the refusers houses, that you would thinke there ran a river therein, with that stink revenging the deniall. At Cochin some of them tooke a souldier, and ducked him severall times in the water, because he refused to give their Master the way. Porus an Indian King being almost dispatched with wounds, his Elephant with his trunk plucked out the darts by degrees,Plutar. de Sol [...] r. Animn. and gently, and himself being also much wounded, would not fall, till he felt the King slide down from his back, having lost much blood; and then he bowed himself a little, that the King might not tumble down, but reach gently the ground. They by nature fear man, for if he but see the print of humane footing,P [...] in. H. N. l. 8. c. 12. though he spy not yet the man, he trembles for feare of ginnes, or snares, makes a stand, smels, snufs, and looks about him, puffes, but tramples not on him, but plucks him out, and delivers him over to the next, and he to the next, like a message, and so to the very last of the herd, that goes too and fro, & order themselves, as preparing for a battell. That sent of a mans steps, though bare footed they hold long.Philos. de via [...] Appo [...] lon. Cicero is of opinion that they are great lovers of mankind, and there is a kind of a conversation between them. Philos intimates the same, saying, that if be once wonted to man, he suffers any thing from him, imitates all his carriages, delights to take food from a mans hand, like dogs, and embraces him with his trunk, suffers a man to thrust his head into his mouth; & hold it there as long as he please. See Athenaeus and Aelian their relations of a certain Elephants love toward an infant.Plin. One is said to be in love with an Egyptian Herbwoman; it seemes his choyse was not common, for shee was also very acceptable to Aristophanes the famous Grammarian. Many arguments there are of their teachablenesse, which is singular. They will cast weapons into the aire, and catch them again, the wind not carrying them away; they among themselves can set-forth a swore fight; and daunce the armour-daunce sportively: And, which is the greatest wonder, goe on thwart ropes, but better backward, as stooping forward. You find the like, as in Pliny, so in Seneca and Suetonius,Seneca Ep. 86. Sueton. to say nothing of Xiphilinus. At Rome one was taught to tread the maze, without admonition, by night, and was found one night practising by himself by moonshine without bidding. That that Eman the Portugal King presented Pope Leo the tenth with, would with all reverence salute him, looking out of a window, thrice with bended knees, and a lowly posture, and courtesie, as Osorius relates. A [...] ger. Busbequius also telles, that he saw a young one daunce, and foot it to musique, and tosse a ball with his trunk, as with hands. Those of Zeilan understand languages; one there learnt to write in Greeke these words: I my self have written this, and dedicate these Celticke spoyls.Plin. H. N. l. 8. Aeli. H. A. l. 8. c. 32. and 10. They will feast together like men, and not one of them observed to be greedy after the greater peeces: In drinking, reaching the cup to each other, drinking with their trunks very moderately; then standing round, lightly, and merrily dashing each other. Arrianus boasts that he saw them, as an Ape, imitate, and fain the masters office, and as it were sing and daunce, some leading the way. Among the rest this shews their wit, that, being to passe deep ditches, and hard to be waded through, the greatest standing in the midst, will like a bridge, convey the rest over; others will carry pieces of planks into the ditch, to save him.Plutarch. Aelian. Besides they know their usuall allowance of food; and can perceive it, if you mingle meal with it, though never so cunningly: And, which is miraculous, one of them would go draw water to try, if the kettle had holes in it, or no. They will worship the Sun, and the new Moon; set a wandring man in his right way again; watch adulterers,Aelian. and murderers, and reveale them: But that they understand, speake and write the native tongue of a land, I count it fabulous.

Of their use in warre,Vse. shews, triumphs, and otherwise, shall be spoken elsewhere. Some use of them hath been in food, whence is the name of Elephant-eaters, dwelling about Draba in the Azachaean mountains, and over against Meroe, Authors call them Adjabars, or Magabars. Pliny also saith that the Troglodites hunt,H. N. l. 8. c. 8. Phrasis. and live most upon them. Their flesh is heavy, cold, and odious. Aelian saith, there is nothing eatable in them, besides the trunke, the lip, and the marrow of their teeth. The Aethiopians desire their hind-parts. But their reins are said to be delicates for Kings. As for medicine; their fat is fabulously said to make him who is nointed therewith, hurt-free, though naked, under the wildest and savagest beasts. The touch of the trunke helps the head-ake,Aelian. especiall with neezing. His right side bound to red Lemnianearth makes lustfull. The liver is good against the falling sicknesse. Smearing with his dung drives away lice.

The Ivory, Ivory. that is that part especially about the mouth, or teeth, is of a singular nature and use.Pliny. It may endure moysture, drowth not, and it is subject to rot. It may be softned, and is by a kind of drink called Zythus, or Beer. When softned, it may be turned and take any shape. Thereof have been made Tables, Beds, Knif-hefts, Swords, Sheaths, Quivers, Scepters, Chariots, Gates, and what not: Whereof search Aldrovandus. It

is pollished like wood,Hist. Quad. l. 1. c. 20. Plin. especially with rough skin of a Skate, or Sole. The brightnesse of it is dimmed by womens termes. It is of a binding force, though it have no taste. Those who have tried it, delivers, that it furthers conception, and helps a moyst stomach. The clouds in a face are taken away by the shavings thereof, smeared on with hony. The powder of it cures fellons, mixt with Hartshorns, it is good against wormes. If burned to ashes, it is called Spodium: But men are cozened with other beasts horns for this. Harts, horne is more used then ivory.

Their differences and kindes, Differences. are especially considered from their places by Ancients, and later Writers. Since some of them are fen, some mountain,Philast. Aelian. Pliny. some field, some wood, or wild Elephants, some Lybian, and Indian. Solinus mentions Prasian, and Taxilan ones.

Those that haunt marishy-fens, their teeth are pale, thin, rough, and have in many places holes, in some knobs like hail-stones, nor cannot be well wrought on by Art. Those are maddish, and light.

The mountainers are perverse, and crafty, and never trust man, unlesse necessitie drives them to it. Their teeth are lesser, white enough, and not very rough.

Those that live in fields, are accounted gentle, tame, and love to imitate. Their teeth are largest, whitest, and easiest to be cut, and may be brought to what you please.

Those of the woods, in the Kingdome of Senega they are to be found, especially by the River Gambra; there they are by herds, as boors among us.

The Lybian, or Moorish, are lesse then the Indian,

[...] . and can endure neither the voice, nor sent of these; nay they dare not so much as look on them.

The Indian ones are greatest of all, yet not all of a bignesse. [...] .  Solinus therefore divides them into two kinds, the nobler are known by their vastnesse, the lesser are called bastards.

The Parsy are the greatest, such as Madagascar produces.Scalig. Exer. 204. Those men call Taxilae, that are in greatnesse next to the former. These you find in Sumatra, very towardly, and excelling those on the Continent in good conditions, and ingenuity.Aelian. H. H. l. 16. c. 15. Therefore they have been transported in great ships to the fast land, (from that Island Sumatra) and sold to the Calingian King.

Our Authour promise a discourse of the use of the Elephants in War, and otherwise;The Translator. whereof are many noble relations extant. As afore he omitted the diseases of the Horse; that are so many, that it is grown to an English proverb, He hath as many diseases as a Horse. He is troubled with Stagger, Bots, Glanders, Vives, Farcive, &c. But I must hold me to translating.

CHAPTER VI. Of the Vnicorn, and of the Horned-Asses

THe name of Monoceros, Aldrov. H. Quad. l. 1. c. 16. that among the Latines sounds so much, as a onehorned beast, agrees to many creatures; but in a strict sense, is retained to one alone. namely that, who from having but one horn, bears the name of Unicorn. In the Brachmans dialect, called Kartazonon, whether there is, or hath been such a beast in nature: I shall elsewhere examine, after Baccius, and Bartholinus, the great son of so great a father. For present we shall treat hereof briefly, as resting on the fidelity of Relators.

As for the description of the Unicorne,Strabo. he is said to resemble in his whole body the Horse: He is tailed like a Boor, grins and snarls like a Lyon, headed like an Hart, footed like an Elephant,Plin. furnisht with one onely horn, and that a black one, two cubits long, standing in the midst of his fore-head.Solinus.  Isidore makes him all one with the Rhinoceros, and saith that his horn is so sharp and strong, that what ever he strikes at, he shatters, or peirces it through. There was one seen in the service of the great Cham of Tartary,M. Paul. Venet. l. 3. c. 15. in the Kingdome of Lambris. They are lesse then Elephants, holding their head downwards, like a Swine, of a prickling tongue, wherewith they get what they meet with; black eyed, and very like the Rhinoceros. Lewis of Barthema of Bononia, writes thus of the Unicorns seen by him: There are Dens on the one side of the Temple at Mecca, wherein are kept two Unicorns,Vartom l. 1. c. 18. that are showen, as the manner is, for a rarity.

Concerning the shape: The greater resembled a Horse-colt of thirty months old; his horn, that he bears on his fore-head, is about three ells in length; the other was a year old, his horn grown to four hand breadth.

The colour of the beast, somewhat darker then that of a Sumpter, or Pack-horse, headed like a Hart, short-necked, and thin-haired thereabout, short-mained, and that hanging only on one side: Small, and slender-legged, like a Hinde: The feet a little cloven afore, Goat-hoofed, the feet hairy on the right side. He seems feirce, and of a nature affecting lovelinesse. I adde not what Garzias hath out of Hortus: They are said to be found in the Arabian Deserts,Bartholi. de Unicor. c. 24. Car. H. Arom. l. 1. c. 14. Paul. Venet. Aene. Sylv. Cadam. and to have been seen there by Merchants; as also between the Cape of Good-Hope, and that they call the Currentes. Some are in the Kingdom Basma, and Lambris; some in the utmost parts of Asia, in the Province Macinus, between the mountains of India, and Cathay, where the Serici inhabite. Some in the new world. The Horn is shewen in many places; the most famous are, S. Denys in France, Venetia, Spain, Utrecht, Helvetia, Denmark, Hampton-Court in England,

Windsor, and the Gedansian of Empiricus. That at S. Denys is of greatest note, being rugged, not polished, blackish, and nearest those Ancients describe. Writers differ about the Unicorns horns lenth, Renodaeus makes him as long as a mans hight, he takes it on trust,Baccius, l. 2. c. ult. as we do.Renod. l. 3.  Baccius, Pharin. c. 21. and Marinus bring it to six cubits: Golnitzius his measure is six foot and an half: Bellonius makes it up full seven foot. Nor do they agree about the weight. Cardan saith, one hath been seen to weigh seventeen pound, and three quarters. Golnitzius rises it to five and twenty. I with Bellonius should judge the horn to weigh eighteen pound, having poysed it in my hand. Baccius thinks the Venetian are right. Marinus, that they are longer then old ones, nor so writhed as Aelians, and so thin, that they cannot be drunk out of. Coloured like a smooth Harts-horn, and pale, not black. They are reported at the siege of Bysantium, to be conveyed to the Venetian Common-wealth, with twelve breast-plates of Imperial Cavaliers. The Spanish one hath nothing singular, a piece whereof Phil. IV. presented to Cardinal Francis Barbarine, an eminent man, and most courteous to strang Gentery.

That at Utrecht is as long as that at Paris, and reasonable great; much wreathed at top, and then growing straiter toward the bottome. The outside is of a sand-colour, the inside is whither. It is held in great account, and is shown for a right one, so that Colonia Agrippina, hath bid a great summe of gold for it. That of the Helvetians, was found in the year M.D.XX.Bartholin. de Unicor. c. 27. at the mouth of the River Arula, near Brugia; white it is within, yellowish without, without writhings, two cubits long, but as sweet as musk, especially if it be near the fire. The Danish, one is kept in Fredericks-Burgs Castle, above seven Roman-foot long, if we except that part within the hollow, which Bartholine conceives to be above a foot, it is seven fingers about, writhed all along, and sharppointed at top; the colour mixt of white, and ash-colour, and in some of the spaces channeld, and chamfered with black, and duskish streaks. That of the Venetian Merchants, was brought out of Germany, promising by the bright, and divers colour'd shape, that it is a right one; and the rather, because there fall pieces from it, if you shave it, not like teeth, and shavings, that can be crumbled; but there come thence shavings that are clammy, and yeelding, as any other cut hornes. I can say litle of the Gedanensian one. Empiricus returning from Constantinople, not long ago, magnified it highly. More about this beast Aelian tells us,H. A. l. 16. c. 20. saying, that among all beasts he hath the must absur'd vile voyce; that if other beasts come to him, he is gentle, but ever fighting with those of his owne kind; the males do not onely quarrell, but they also with the females, so that they kill one other. His whole body is very strong, but his horn invincible. He seeks deserts, and goes ever alone wandring. At coupling-time the male is tamer, and feeds quietly with the female; when that time is over, and the female begins to swell, the male returns to his former fiercenesse, and betakes him to his wandring lovelinesse. Men say that there were some of their young ones brought to the Prasian-King, and that on feast, and triumph-dayes, they were put together to fight, to shew their strength: for no man ever remembers that one growen up, hath been taken. So far Aelian. Some add,Albert. H. A. l. 22. that this beast loves young Virgins so, that if one spreads but her lap, as he comes, he will lay his head there, and fall in a slumber, and is so taken. For their use, all know how they are commended for the soverain vertue of their horne against venome, for where poyson is, it sweats, and drops stand on it; and so, as some think, the right horn is knowne. Aloysius Mundella, commends it against the bite of a mad dog, and other mischievous beasts, as also of worms. The ancient Indian Kings, who first arrived at the knowledge of this horne, made cups of it for themselves, that drinking out of them, they might fence themselves against poyson, drunkennesse, cramp, falling sicknesse, and other malignant diseases. [...]  A Iew of Venice, made a circle on a table with that horn, and cast then a Scorpion, and a Spider within it, who had not the power to passe that circle: after that they being pluckt by it a hand high, whether by the shadow of it, or the vertue flowing from it, they were both kill'd, within the space of an hour. No wonder then that it is so valued,Baccius. that German Merchants ask'd for one of them 90000 crowns; and the Pope, setting up a kind of an Apothecaries shop in the Vatican, gave 12000 pieces of gold to the Epidaurian Merchants, for a piece of an Unicorns horne; of the which Austin Ricchus the Popes then chief Physitian, used to put now a scruple, now 10 grains in wine, or cordiall water, and administred it with great successe. And thus shall serve now to have spoken of the Unicorn, we shall say more elsewhere.l. 4. H. A. l. 1 [...] . c. [...] . Concerning horn'd Asses, I find them cried up in three places, namely in India, Scythia, and Africa. Herodotus mentions the African. Aelian saith that they hold the water of the River Styx, and were sent in yron vessels by Alexander to Delphos, to be there dedicated to Pythia.l. 4. c. [...] 2. Of the Indian ones, the same Aelian thus: I have been informed, that there are wild Asses, no lesse then Horses bred among the Indians, white bodied, onely purple-headed, and blew-eyed, and that they bear a horn in the forehead, a cubite and half long; the upper-part whereof is light red, the lower white, and the middle coalblack; and that, not all, but the principall Indians have hang'd them as bracelets on their arms, and set them off with gold, and have use to drink out of the same. They report, that, who so uses to drink out of this horn, shall be free from incurable diseases, nor shall be ever troubled with convulsion fits, nor ever toucht with the falling-sicknesse, nor tainted with any poyson;

nay, that if he hath drunk any venome, he shall cast it up again,Cresias. and recover his health. And when other Asses, all the world over, whether tame, or wild, and all other wholehooft beasts have, as it is said, nor ankles, nor gall in their liver: These Indian Asses onely have ankles, and these black, and that within, if you break them, neither want they a gall; and that in swiftnesse, they exceed not onely by much other Asses, but also by far both Elephants and Horses. And when they come first on the way, their pace is but slow at beginning, but then they mend it by degrees, and at length none can overtake them. After the females have brought forth, the sires very carefully looke to the colts, and their haunt is in the most desert parts of India: when the Indians hunt them, they hold the colts feeding behind them, and fight for them: they dare meet the horsemen face to face, and make at them with their hornes. So strong they are, there is no resisting of them, they make all yeeld, or what will not. They break, or so shatter, that it become uselesse, and is quite spoyl'd. If they meet with horses they rend, and tear their sides in pieces, that their very guts fall out, so that horsemen are affraid to come near them, knowing that the approach is the utter lamentable destruction, both man and horse, they lay finely about them with their heels. What ever they bite, they make an utter riddance of it. If they be once grown up, they are not to be taken; they are kill'd with darts and arrows. Their flesh is so bitter, it is not to be eaten. Philostratus writes almost the same.Vit. Apollon. l. 9. The figure that we have here added, is of a wild beastbodied, and eared like an Asse, armed with two hornes, one shooting out of his nostrills, the other about his eys; but because it is not wholehoof'd, nor one-horn'd, it cannot be the Indian Asse.

THE NATURALL HISTORY OF THE FOURFOOTED BEASTS.

THE SECOND BOOKE. Of the Clovenfooted, Fourfooted Beasts.

THE FIRST TITLE. Of the Clovenfooted that live on the Earth.

CHAPTER I. Of the Horned Beasts in generall that chew the Cud.

THus farre have we prosecuted the History of the whole-hoof d;Aldrov. de Bisul. l. 1. c. 1. the Clovenfooted follow: In Greek Dichele,

[...] . and Dischide; which in H. Scripture are said to divide the hoof, because they have diverse clefts, though properly they cannot be said to have toes. I find two kinds of them; to wit, those that live on the earth, and those that live in the water. Of the former, some chew the cud, and some not. Of the former kind, some are horned, and some not. We shall consider them in generall, and in particular. We call those Ruminaters, or chewers of the cud, that, having swallowed their meat, bring it up again into the mouth, and chew it again.

In Latine,Ap [...] lejus. q [...] ntil.  Ruminare,Plin. Rumigare, Remandere, Revolvere; in Greek, Mereykazein, Merikan, from Meruein, to roul again. Some of the Latines have fetched the word, Ruminating, from Rumen, the place in the belly whether the food descends, and whence it is again sent upward into the mouth. But Servius, from Ruma, the upper part of the neck; whether such beasts recall their eaten meat. But Mercurialis derives it from Erumnae, Arnob. l. 7. con. gent. that are these of the throatpipe. How necessary this chewing the cud is for these beasts, we may gather from this, because they are fed with grosser food, as also from this, because they want upper-teeth, and the lower are not sharp. Whence it is, that nature recompences the want of teeth with the multitude, as it were, of bellies; for they have no lesse then four; namely the belly, the call, the tripe, and the paunch. The throat beginning from the mouth reaches down to the lungs, and midriffe:Arist. thence,H. A. l. 2. c. ult. to the greater belly, that on the inside is sharp, and rugged, and hath a cell near the knitting of the gullet, called the net, or call; for it is outwardly like a belly, and within netted, like womens head cals, and is much greater then the belly; next is the tripe, rugged, checkered, crusty, and as great as the call; next is the paunch, greater and longer then the tripe, and checkered, and crusted with many light, and great crusts, vast, and misshapen, and then follow the bowels. In the first hollow place of the paunch the meat is to be seen undisgested, even in bits, and pieces scarce torned; in the second, more change, and yet more in the third; and in the last at length perfectly concocted, where it is turned into a white creame. Nether yet do those only chew the cud,Arist. H. A. l. 9. c. ult. that want their upper-teeth; for among the fishes the Scarus doth the same, having blunt teeth; and among the beasts, the common, and pontick Mouse, the Hare, the Cony, as we have it in Leviticus. If you ask the manner, and fashion of chewing the cud, Aristotle answers, that the meat being chewed again is sent out of one belly into another, till at last it slides into the bowels. Galen saith, that it is first brought up out of the stomack into the mouth; thence it passes into the kall, thence into the tripes, thence into the guts. After sucking, they begin to chew the cud, in seven months, understand it of the tame. The herders, in lesse time, because they feed abroad; yet in winter, more then at other times of the year; and they seem to delight more in this chewing the cud, then in eating. That they then require rest appeares by this,Plin. H. N. l. 10. c. 73. that they do that work lying in their stalles.Arist. H. A. l. 3. c. 21. Aristotle saith, that their milk alone cruddles, and that they have curdled milke in their tripes, and that they abound in milke. The causes hereof we shall elsewhere unfold.

Horns are given to these chewers (the

Camel excepted) for defence, and offence. The nourishment that should go to the making of upper-teeth, which they want, turns into Horses, and those are very manifold, and different; neither hath nature in any thing more wantonized then in these weapons of beasts; Shee hath spread them into branches, as those of Deer;Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 37. to others shee hath given plain ones, as to the Harts, called spitters, or pipers, from the shape; others hath shee shaped like hands, and those as fingered, called broadhorned. Shee hath given to wild-goats, or Roes branched ones, but small, as such which are never cast: to Rams crumpled horns, like clubs, troublesome to Bulls. In this kind shee gratifies females also in many, onely male: To Roe-bucks-horns hooked backward, to Bucks, contrary. To the Strepsiceros, (a beast half wild, half tame, that Africa calls the Bold) horns standing bolt upright, writhed, and sharp at top. To the Phrygian herds, moveable horns like ears. To those of the Trogloditae, horns pointing downwards, so that they are fain to feed with their necks on one side. Others have but one horn, and that in the middle of their head, or in their nose. Again, some of them are strong to push withall, some to strike, some crooked, some to toffe many wayes; upright ones, turned, beamy; all sharppointed. Thus far Pliny; who hath left out their severall colours, which are very different. Some simply, white, blackish, ash-coloured, yellowish; others party-coloured, as shall be shewen in the severall kinds.

These horned beasts also have some peculiar parts, as hucklebones, and sewet, and some parts common with others, but otherwise placed, as the belly, milt, udders. The milt is most round: The bowels large; the udders between the legs in couples. The belly hath hollows while they go with yong. In the hucklebone they are furnisht with many things, and the same in their hinder-feet. But more of these in the severall kinds.

CHAPTER II. Of the Horned Beasts, in particular that chew the cud.

ARTICLE I. Of the tame Beeve, or Neat, or Ox.

ANd thus much of the fourfooted,Aldrov. H. Quad. l. 2. c. 1. clovenhoof'd, cud-chewing, horned beasts in generall.

If you consider the kinds, there are among them, the Ox, both tame, and wild; the sheep; the Shee, and Hee-Goat, the Hart, the Busse, Elk, Rhinoceros, (or Nosehorned) we begin, and that with just reason, with the Beeve, being a beast, that challenges to it self almost all thing, whereof we stand in need, for food, or otherwise,Vegetius in Prolo. lib. 2. Veterin. certain it is that we owe all pulse, and grain to the Neat, and plow. Nay the use of vineyards would be lost, if they kept not our carts a going. What need I speake of severall trades, that must be all at a stand, and heavy mooveables, ly still, and uselesse for want of carriage; other creatures, and birds themselves fed in pennes, and coops, live on their labour: for whence should the masters be provided of barly for their horses, meat for their dogs, and swine without the toile of the Ox: And, to make short, wat ever eats, ows the food to the meat. Some make use of mules, some of camels, some few of Elephants, but to what purpose are there without those.Tacit. de mori. Cerman. No wonder then, that of old the Germans used to send to those that were to marrie, for a dowry Oxen yoked, to signifie by these beginnings of the marriage-state, that the wife came to be a yokefellow in all labours and dangers.Aelian. H. A. l. 12. c. 34. The Athenians would sacrifice not one for a long time, while they had use of a plow, or a wagon. Pythagoras advised, that no such labouring cattle should be killed. The Phrygians punisht the killing of a labouring Ox, with death. The Emperour Valens made a Law, that in all the East, they should eat no Veal: And Constantine forbad taking plowing Oxen in pledge for debt: Nay, such were given as rewards for vertue and deserts: Decius Mus, Tribuny of the souldery, having saved the Roman Army, beset by the Sabines, by compassing a mountain, was rewarded with a Crown of Gold, and an hundred Oxen; and Lelius with thirty, after the City was taken. To say nothing of an hundred and thirty Oxen,D [...] brav. in Histor. Bohem. sent yearly under the name of tribute by the Bohemians, to Charles the Great. That the stealing of Beeves hath occasioned a War;Pausan. in Messen. and that the Low-Dutch of the Cheese and Butter they make and send abroad, make yearly two hundred Sesterties, that amount to ten hundred thousand Carolines, besides what they easily spend for their own use, as Adrian Iunius relates.

The Beeve obtains diverse names according to their different ages,Names. and sexes; the chief are the Ox, Bull, Cowe, Heifer, or Stier, and Calfe.

The Ox hath his name, Bos, properly imposed from his gelding,Ox. yet it includes also the Bull, and Cow. As also among the Greeks, Bus is a general, comprehensive name, and imports sometimes the Calf also.

The Bull is the beeve afore castration, the captain and husband of the Cowes;Bul. Yet Oppian in this name, as the more worthy comprehends, all neat. He is called (as the Etimologists say) Tauros, or Tanyuros, from his long taile, or Garos, i. e. proud; or from the Syriaque,Scaliger.  Tor, and Taur.

The Cow is the Bulls female, and in Greek distinguisht from the male,Cow. only by the article O. Florentinus renders it Butheleian, or Damalin, which Phocian ascribes to every young beast, some to the Heifer.

Authors speak not distinctly enough of the Heifer, and Calf, nor is Varro constant to himself:Heifer. And the Poëts call Heifers, Oxen, and Cowes, and Calves, whose horns sprout

not yet out: When Isidore yet calls Juvencus, the Stier that begins to be able, juvare, to help man in tillage: We shall take it for a Beeve, that is no longer a Calfe. Iunix, seems to be the same with juvenca, Varro. the Heifers, or the Neat not yet of age.

The Calfe is the name of the first age of the Beeve, called Vitulus, either from the youngnesse, or the wantonnesse, or the life of it. It bears many names among the Greeks, at least fourteen, as Petalos, Mochos, Roos, &c. though some of them agree to the Bulls, or rather the Ox; Petaloi, Athaene. from their slender, or plain,Rhodigin. broad horns. Mochos, is common to either sex; or so called from Moo, the cry; or Othmadai, smelling after the dam, or crying, or longing after her. The Graecians at this day call it Mouskori. Portis is one, very young. Poris, Hesyth. Stephan. Suidas. Hee, and Shee, from Poreia, comming forward. Enis, is one of a year old. Preey, is rather a Bull, saith Varinus. Killix, an Ox, or Lamb with a crosse-horn. Kooronios, an Ox with a round horn. Roos, is a Scythian Bull, as Zetzen relates. Knoodala, are Oxen. Pellis, is an Ox with a black horn.

In describing the Ox, I shall only note the most remarkable things, it being a beast so well known. Of the differences of their horns hereafter.

It is an hairy beast, that sheds it yearly, which comes thinner,Descrip. or thicker then the first hair; it is thicker on the back and neck, called Mollopsi; because thereof hated men to make glew Kolla, or Kollaboi, pegs for Lute-strings are thence fitted. That double neck-hair is called Mukos. The lips are thick, and sticking out; the upper-jaw thick and blunt, so that he cannot pluck short grasse. On the fore-head is the shape of a V.Caelius. The gelded have a broader then Bulls.Democr. The bones are hardest between the horns; very stubborn,Aelian. and not easily broken.Cardan. The tongue, when pluckt out, will pant a whole day. The skins that hang down the throat, are called palezar, the dew-lap. See the Greek names in Varrinus. The teeth are continued, and twice changed. [...] . H. N. l. 11. c. 37. Those of two years old, change teeth, saith Pliny. They want the upper-row, they chew therefore with the four fore-teeth as hath been said. Their peezel is very stiffe. They have two udders between their legges,Arist. H. N. l. 8. c. 45.  Pliny saith four, calling, it seems the teats, which are four udders. Their arse gapes, saith Horace. Their taile is long, the hair short. The flesh dry and duskish. The sinews hard and stubborn, though not so long as the Bulls. The blood full of strings, therefore hastily congeals and hardens. The ham-joynt not so fast as that of other beasts, therefore he drags his feet more, especially when he is lean and old. It is said they have a stone in the head, which they spit out, when they look to be slaughtered. Austin reports they have one also in the liver, and reins. Pliny saith, there is a bone in his heart. The milt is very long, and blacker then the Swines, especially when he grows old. The reins resemble mans, each as it were made up of many. The ancles greater then the Camels. In the Heifers second ventricle is found a rough sand-stone,Arist. round as a ball,Pliny. very light. Aldrovand had two of them in his study, one reddish, the other black; for that was taken out of a red, this out of a black Ox, since it is sprung from haires that they lick in, in chewing the cud, as it sometimes happens, they with licking themselves swallow something, that gathers into an ovall chapt, being mixt with flegme, wee need not discourse much of the place, where they are found. For their meat, they devour all that the earth yeelds; especially grasse, çitisus, pease, knot-grasse, sedge, willow, oke-leaves, olive-bows, reed, black-elder, vines, barly, hirse, wheat, acornes, date-kernels, wild olive, missle-toe, these the most delight in. All know, grasse to be their feed in Summer, and hay in Winter. [...]  In the province of Narbon in Fount-Orges, grows an herb so gratefull to Oxen, that they will plunge themselves over head, and eares to seek it. They will do the like in the River Loïr, [...]  about Veluin, and in the Sebusian Fish-ponds: And in the ditches, pools, and black waters thereabout, grows a grasse, with long, reddish leaves, flooting on the water, [...]  after which they are so greedy, that they will wade belly-deep, and duck in the whole head to feed thereon, which fattens them strangely; and the Cows that fed there, yeeld much more milk, then neerhand. Citisus breeds much, and sweet milk; but while it flourishes, it is not so good, but dries up milk. Pease are commended, but not sowed in March, because it makes them wild-headed. Pliny says, that not onely that, that is sowen in March, is hurtfull to oxen; but also that that is sowen in May is hurtfull to Oxen, but also that that is sowen in Autumne, makes them sleepy, steep it, and it is corrected. Therefore Democritus prescribes such to be given them monthly in their drinke, to strengthen them; five bushells serves a yoak of oxen. Clave grasse, or three leaved fattens a carrion lean ox, and cures a sick one.Th [...] ophr [...] st. Therefore wild Trifoly is diligently sowen in many parts of Spain, especially in Valentia: Yet it must be given sparingly, else it dries milke, and turns all the meat into blood, fat and flesh. Lotus gives best nourishment, and sweetest, and being sowen once in fallow ground, flourishes many yeares after. Elm -leaves,Columel. R. R. l. 5 c. 6.  especially those of Attinia,Greog. [...] . Lucr [...] t. l. 2. the Romans held much of. If you give it them dayly, and then another sort of leaves, they will be weary of them. Virgil mentions willows; nor hath Lucretius forgot them. Fig-leaves, if they may be had, are very good for them; yet oke-leaves, and wild olive that is not thorny, are thought better. Black elder leaves bring a flush of milk: Barly chaffe, and that of other grain. Hirse is sowen in Italy for them, saith Porta, fitches are given them, in stead of pease, ground in a hand-mill, and weakned a little in water, in Spaine Baetica. A bushell of pulse serves to put an Ox into good case; weakned three dayes in river,P [...] in.

or sea-water, it grows sweet; and then dried again is laid up for this use. Acornes are advised to be gathered after seed time, and cast into water, and a half bushell, to be given in spring to each Ox: It is meet about the fall of the leafe to give each yoke of oxen 24 bushells. The greater make them unhealthfull; and when ever you give it, if they have it not 30 dayes together, they get the spring scab.

The Babylonians give their Oxen datekernels soakt in water,Strabo. and to their sheep.Theoph. They are fattened by misletoe. They feed also on fish among the Paeonae, who dwell by the Prashian marishes. Neither do they abstain from Hemlock, whether green, or dry: Nor doth eating of frogs do them any harme. Briefly, they delight to drinke clear water, nor doth muddy hurt them.Vegetius. About their manner of feeding see Aldrovand, and writers of husbandry. For their age, the Cow lives 15 years at most, the male 20; they are at their best at five. Their age is knowen by changing their teeth;Pliny. the foreteeth they cast within a year, and eight, or ten months;Arist. H. A. l. 6. c. 21. then after six months by degrees they loose the next, till within three yeare they have changed them all; when they are best disposed, and so hold out to fifthteen. At best, their teeth stand fair, long, and even; but growing old, they diminish, wax black, and rot. The Helvetians judge of their Cows age by certain circles almost at top of their horns; they are three at five years old, after more. Some thinke they get a circle with every calving. About their gendring, lust, coupling, and calving, I meet with these observations. The Bull feeds with the Cow only in engendring time; they couple with the elder twice a day, with the yonger oftner, and that with one, and the same, and quietly. A geld one hath egendred, saith Aristotle. One Bull may serve 15 Cows. Varro allows many more.Varro. R. R. l. 2 c. 5. Hee abstaines from the cows that are with calf at first, and as it were voluntarily divorces himself, as it is to be seen in Epire especially, where for most part hee is not to be seen for three months, but feeds by himself. The Cows salacity is famous. See Aristotle about the excesse and signes of their lust; as also Aelian. H. A. l. 10. c. 27. About what heats then see Columella, R. R. l. 6. (thither I refer the reader, for I list not to translate such stuffe.) The Cows are knowen to be with calf, when their termes cease,Arist. within 2, 3, 4 half a months space. They goe 10 months, and in the tenth they calve: they bring forth nothing alive sooner, saith Pliny: Some say they calve when the tenth month is compleat. How the calve lies in the belly is exprest by an image, and the skin wherein it is enwrapped, is also shewen hereafter. Though the Cow bring but one at once,Diogenia [...] s. seldome twins, yet in Ptolomy the yonger his time, a certain Cow calved six at once; and in Hispaniola this cattle is strangely fruitfull; for the most part they bring two at once; in the eleventh month they go to Bull, and though they carry a couple, yet they say, they ly both on the right side. They guesse by the Cows frisking after coupling, whether shee shall have a Bull, or Cow-calf; if on the right side a Bull-calf; if on the left, a Cow-calf. They love bees, but hate hornets, gad-flees, flees of all sorts, tikes, bears, swine, crows, and some kind of plants, and some sorts of colours.

Pliny writes, that it is best to smear behinds with cow-dung,Pliny. this kills the Vermin that breeds of their bodies, and Spiders, Butterflies, and raises the Bees themselves.Cael. They are repaired by ox-paunch,Rhodig. fresh,Antiqu. l. 23. c. 30. and covered with their dung. Virgil saids the like of a young Heifers carcase, as also of Horses. Neat being stung by an hornet, as in great anguish, fall a running, Flies vext them so, that in Leucadia it was a custome to sacrifice an ox to the flies, which being swelled with their blood, are thought to vanish away; bitten by the like, they pine away, and are disabled for labour. Bears hanging with all four on bulls hornes, and necks, tire them out with their weight. Swines-dung is harmfull to them. Crows pick at their egs. Some say, that if a bulls tong be smeard with tallow (whether swines, or other I know not) they will sooner dy, then eat, unlesse washt with salt, and vineger. For plants, if a bulls nostrils be smeard with oyl of roses, hee becomes giddy; Lady-glove put into their nostrils, makes them maddish. Black hellebore kills them. The juice of the Chamaeleon kills yong Heyfers with the squincy. The wild fig makes them tender-flesht.Plin. Ash-leaves are deadly to Neat, that other cattell may safely chew; it is true of the gew-tree. There is a place, they say, a Thracian Province, near the Scythians, and Medes, almost 20 furlongs long, that brings forth barly, that men eat, but horses, and oxen will not tast of, nor other beasts. Tragus, amongst the hurtfull fruits, describes an herb, leaved like pulse at first, sharp, and long eared, the ears cleaving like burrs, commonly found in fields sowen with pulse, and barely, very hurtfull to oxen, and shund by them.At Waltham-Abby in England grows a grasse so l [...] snious, that beasts in 24. hours will eat, if not watched, til they burst. Of the grasse that is good for them, the Alpine violet, and great burre, called by the Germans Blakken, read Gesner, oxen eating bedewd, swell till they burst somtimes, unlesse they be driven up and down, till they be warm, and void it. Seneca, writing of Anger, saith, that oxen are much enraged by red, or any colour like it. But it is strange, that oxen that have been made to draw any man to execution, will not plow after, or if they be forced to it, the ground will not thrive. The Geroponici advise to take heed in seed-time, that the seed fall not on ox-horns; such they hold will never come to good, they call it Kerasbolon, horn-fallen. Pliny saith, that, if when a stable is on fire, and oxen, or sheeps-dung be cast out, they are more easily drawen out, nor will returne thither, which is no wonder. About their motion, and voyce, a few words shall suffice. Their pace is slow, not to say sluggish; whence we say, this is to hunt the Hare with the Ox; their voyce is different according to the age and sex. The Calves

sounds deeper then the growen; the cows, then the Oxes,Plin. their voyce changes when they are geld.Arist. Their proper voice is lowing, in Lat. boare, bovare, boïre; in Gr. Mukima, &c. They yeeld us many things for food, namely flesh, braines, tongue, heart, liver, milt, reines, cale, inwards, feet, and marrow, besides milk, to make cheese and butter. Their flesh is prime; and though the Egyptians abstain from Cow-beefe, and feed on Bull-beefe: Yet the Romans have forbidden the latter to be sold, because under Tarquin the proud, by eating thereof, women great with child, got the pestilence. In Homer, beefe was set afore Nobles. Lysander going into Jonia was presented with beefe among other varieties. In the kingdom of Senega, they eat nothing else. Prometheus, saith Pliny, was the first who slew an Ox. Of old in their choysest Feasts, they set whole oxen roasted on the table.Arist. The Turks also in the lesser Asia,B [...] llon. or Natolia,obs. l. 1. c. 60. when a childe, whose parents were of any fashion, was to be circumcised, would roast on a great pole a whole ox, with a whole belweather in his belly, that had a hen with an egge in her, in his belly, and this is eaten by the kindred. Beefe yeelds the best nourishment,Celsus. and agreeable to the stomack, and not so subject to purifie.Hippocra. de rat. vic. lib. 2. It is strong,Galen. and fast food, but not soon concocted. It is not waterish indeed, flegmatique, or slimy, but yet it is hard of disgestion; very nourishing, but breeds thick blood. But if a melancholy person feed too freely on it, it shall hasten his fit. In some it swells the Spleen, and breeds a consumption. Beef is not so good while fed in the Spring with the first, thin grasse; best, when fed with thick grasse, and near seeding. The Dutch, Scotch, English, and other northerly people pickeld, and smoak it, and so eat it. They pickle it most in midst of October, and November; when they hang it up, some smoke it first [...] with juniper, which they strait quench again. Some think it gives it a good colour to fume it with bundles of dry netles, and that it makes it redder; but you must feed but sparingly hereon, for it nourishes little, and lies long in the maw, being very hard to disgest, and then yeelds but ill juyce. The middle-aged is thought best, that hath not been over-laboured, yet old one will hastily fatten. Bruierinus saw some, that the Avern sent, that were so fat and heavy, that the buyers must carry them in carts. It hath been forbid, on great forfaits, to kill, in cities of note, diseased oxen; and the guilty taken, have been hevily punisht; since tainted flesh lies heavy, and breeds corrupt humours, and spirits. Veal is temperate food, juicy, favoury, light of disgestion, breeds good blood, esteemed so by all, and preferred afore Kid by many. Crescentiensis would have it killed fifteen dayes after. Others would not have it weaned till thirty dayes old: In many parts of France, they are brought to the Buthchers of a month old, sometimes lesse, sometimes a month and an half old.Bruierin. At Rome they let them suck oft a whole year; and keeps them from grasse, and other fodder: they are after that a delicate food, and used by Francis the first of France.Donat. One magnifies their flesh, if weaned at three or four months old, and killed at a year old compleat. As for Heifers, they are better food, then growen, but fall short of Veal. At Lions they like yearlings, and those of six months, and of two and three years old. Bruier commends those that never took Bull. Their parts we shall now consider.

A Calves-head boyled, and eaten warme, is known good food; the brain taken out, boyled a while in water, and then skin'd, and sod in wine, and seasoned with spice, is good: The jaw is counted a dainty; but an Oxes is disputed of. The Neats-tongue is prized in Germany, both in the high and low-Countries. Of old it was not sacrificed, the Priests under a pretence of Religion, preserving it for themselves. Some stuffe it with spice, and rost it. The udder uses to be par-boyled, and with fat or butter fryed, and sprinkled with spice, and so served in. The paunch was in old times cried up:Plin. the tripe among the Romans especially was a dainty.H. N. l. S. c. 45. Their Ancestors had such a special care of this beast, that there are Presidents of some condemned by the people of Rome, for killing an Ox, and denying they had eaten the tripe, and were banished as if they had murdered a husbandman.

The sweet-breeds were a service at great mens tables, and of old magnified: Nor are Neats-feet cast away. Diogenes the Cynick is said to have died with eating one raw.

As for their use in medicine; Beefe allayes a swelling; and laid on hote, disperses impostumes, and boyles, if Pliny be to be believed. Cowes-flesh laid on the privities, strangly heals the ulcers and coupissing. Beefe-pottage stops the flux, saith Simeon Sethis; Pottage of Cow-beefe heals sore and chapped mouths; Calves-broth is reakoned among the helps of the Collick, and Bloody-flux; Veal new killed, sod in vineger, and laid moyst under the arm-pits, takes away the rank, rammish smell; If women about the time of conception, eat it well rosted with heart-wort, they shall bear males. See Aldrovand. about Neats-feet broth among the Portugeses:Arist. And also, the oyl of Neats-feet is good against all aches and lamenesse. Holy saith, that Ox-liver burnt, and drunk, is good against loosnesse, and bloody-issues. A distilled-water made of a Bull-calfs-liver cut small, with a like quantity of Sage-leaves, helps the hard swellings that lie crosse the bottom of the belly. The extract of the Ox-spleen, suppresses the monthly termes.

Pliny writes of superstitious,Pliny. and magical uses, or rather abuses. The paunch, or tripebroth taken in thought to expel venome; especially poyson from Henbane, and Hemlok.Gesner. The intrals of a Calfe, fresh and warm, chopt small, yeelds a juice, that with a like quantity of Sage and Parsly, are good to rub cold, wasted,Sextus. and palsied parts. The pissle weakned

in vineger, and smeared on, makes a smooth face.Sextus. A red Bulls dried to powder, the quantity of a peece weight, some say quench, some say kindle lust. Their marrow, especially the Calves, is a softner: the Cowes marrow kneaded in flower, and eaten as bread, cures strangly the bloody-fluxes, especially eaten with new cheese:Marcell. the Bulls is dryer,Empir. and the powder taken in wine, helps strangury, and gut-wringing; dissolved, and with a fourth part of red myrrhe, and of oyle of Bay, or Laurel, as much loosens the shrunk sinnews, if you annoint the feet and hands morning and evening. Pliny saith, the Ox-marrow out the right forethigh, poudered with sowte, is good for the hair, and the eye-lids, and corners, if they aile any thing. Of the sewet, and the preparation of the Bulls-tallow, thus Pliny: The way of fat, the same is used about the sewet, and tallow of the beasts that chew the cud; the veins are taken out, it is washed in Sea-water, or brackish; beaten into balls, sprinkled with Sea-waters, then sod oft, till the rank smell be gone; then by continual salting it, is whitened; that is most prized, that is taken from the reins: If you resume the old, you must first melt it, then oft wash it in cold water, then try it again, and pour very sweet wine, or perfumed on it; thus by often seathing, the malignity is boyled out. Dioscorides shewes how it should be sweetned. It is much hotter and dryer then Swins-grease, and cooler then the Lyons; good for fiery, and hard swellings, with rosin, and fullers chalk it is soften; Aesculapius adds wax; and perhaps it comes near to Galens fourfold medicine. It takes spots and freckles out of the face, with feed of Cunila, and ashes of harts-horne, if it be burnt in the beginning of the dogdayes, with gum and hony it helps wax kernels, and the like; mixt with bears grase, and wax, a like quantity, it strangely suppresseth impostumes, and with nightshadened rue it helps freckles, warts, bunches and the like. Calves fat take out of the flank, boild with three pints of water, and taken in as broth, helps the collick. Bruised, and with salt it is good for lowsinesse, and sore-heads, mixt with a little nitre, and like ser-cloth it is said to heal the swellings, and other griefs of the cods. It helps against poyson that uses to kill with exulcerating calves-sewet with goose-grease closes the chaps in the mouth. Ox-sewet rubed on, takes away the stifnesse and pain of the neck. [...]  It helps the griefs of the fundament, with flower of frankincense it heals cornes, and leprosies, morfew, tetters, fellons, scurft, taken with salt, raisins, origanum, leven or bread. For fellons this sewet with salt, and goats-grease is smeared on, or burnt in the Sun with roses. [...] rcell. The Ox-gall cures sore-heads presently, if mingled with juice of Asses-dung, and a little powder of Sea-onion and Bulls-gal; or with nitre, wine and oyl, well mixt with fullers-earth and nitre, it piels of the leprosie and scurfe. [...] scor. It is applied to cankers and fiftulaes with juice of leeks and breast-milke, [...] . rubed on with a woollen-cloath on the navel, it voids worms; smeared on with hony, it helps the squincy, closes the chapt fundament, opens stopt emrods; makes loos-bodied, laid on the bottom of the belly with butter, Deer-marrow, and oyl of Bay rubed on the knees, it helps them; it helps the griefs of the privie parts, annointed on with oyl, as also of the cods; dissolved in hot water, it takes away the dead-flesh of the fingers; and womens terms it helps, laid on with moist woolen.

Ox-gal mixt with , drawes splinters of yron,Pliny. and thorns; and kneaded up to the thicknesse of hony daubt on, with allom. And Mirrhe is a speedy cure for worms in the privie parts, it disperses kernels, and impostumes in any part; as also ox-blood, and flesh layd hot on; with oyl of palma Christi, and roses, it helps the hearing; and layd on with cotton, takes away tinkling noyses in the eare. There are who think that the Kings-evill is helped by a linnen band, dipt in a warm ox-gal, and tied under the hips, shifted, and layd fresh on three dayes. Hippocrates advices, that, if a woman hath not conceived, her months shewing themselves, on the third, or fourth day, all umbray'd moystened with ointment, is to be layd on with a woollen cloath, and so three dayes renewed; and the third day, an ox-gall is to be shaven, and the shavings mixt with oyl, and put in a linnen cloath, and three dayes together layd on,Prosper. and then she shall conceive.Alpinus de Medic. Finally,Aegyp. l. 3. c. 3. it is strange that is written, that some Egyptian women, to become fat, take in a bath 9 dayes a chirat of Cows-gall, dissolved in Cow-pisse. About the calves-gall, understand that with vineger warmed, it takes away Nits, it lesses the chops of the eyes, bruized with hony, and especially Mirrhe and Safran; and is very good to put into the eare with a Snakes-slough, sprinkled with lees mixt with oyl, it drives away gnats. The stone in an Ox-gall, the Philosophers call it Alcheron, it is like a ring, bruised to pouder, and snuffed up, helps the sight, and prevents eye-rheums: and is good for the falling-sicknesse, if you take thereof the quantity of a pea with the juyce of into the nostrills. The hide, and glue also hath it's use in Phisick:Plin. Burnt, it heals kibes, especially out of an old shoe: with hony it eats off cankers in sores; the ashes of an old soal burnt, helps against a bruise from a pinching shoe. Glew sod out of Ox-hides, especially Bulls, and that out of their ears, and pizles of very soverain; nor is any thing better against burnings. But it is often counterfaited, nothing more taken out of other leather to cozen you. That of Rhodes is truest, and therefore used by Painters, and Phisitians. The best at this day, called German, is of a light-red-colour, very hard, britled as glasse, and blackish, and twice as deere as the other.Dioscor. It is called Xylocolla, or wood-glue, because it is used in gluing wood together; others call it Taurocolla, or Bulls-glue: we owe the invention of it to Daedalus; it joyns things firmer then any other thing can.Plin. Melted

in vineger it heals the scab, adding lime-wit, if it be not gone too far, weakened in vineger, and with brimstone, boild on a soft fire, to the thicknesse of hony, and stird boyling, with a fig-tree sprig, applied twice a day, it cures itch, melted, and dissolved the third day, it heals, and closest wounds, made by iron. Mixt with vineger, and hony, it removes Nits. It helps teeth, boyld in water, and rubed on, and presently taken of again, and then the teeth washt with wine, wherein hath been sod sweet Pomegranet-roots, drunk with three cups with hot water, it helps spitting of blood; as also the hot collique, and belly-ake, if layd on. The horne, the top of it,Plin. burnt, two spoonfulls weight, with hony, swallowed in pills, helps the Ptisick, or short-breath, or wheezing; as much burnt to pouder, with three cups of hot water, and a litle vineger, helps the Spleen, taken three dayes in, if fasting. The hoof is also medicineable; boyled, and eaten with mustard, it resists poyson: burnt, and drunk in pottage, wine, or other liquour, it restores milk to womens dried breasts; the smoke thereof kills, or chases away Mice. The Ancledust drunk with hony, brings away worms; with mulled vineger, it lessens the Spleen; with wine, it fastens the teeth. It is frivolous, but not to be left out, saith Pliny, if it be but to please women, that the ankle, of a white heifer, sod 40 dayes and nights, till dissolved, rub'd on with a linnen cloath, makes a clear smooth skin.Phrasis. The Hips burnt, and drunk, stopt fluxes of blood. The thin skin moyst from the calving, heals a sore face. The Stone, found in the head, drunk out of the same water that the ox drinks, helps effectually the head-ake.

The milke, being thick, and fat passes not so easily through us; yet Pliny saith it loosens the belly, and is drunk in the spring to purge, because it comes from many herbs whereon the Cows feed hartily.D [...] o [...] co [...] . It works out poyson, especially, that that corrodes, and inflames; particularly it helps against Doryenium, Colchicum, Hemlock, and the sea-hare. Warmed, and gargled it soon allayes the pain, and swelling of the almonds under the eares. Taken warme from the Cow it helps an exulcerated stomack. A cupfull, with so much deer-sewet, tried, and moyst pitch, and Scythian red-oker, helps strangely a consumption.Hippocc. A black Cows milk with pouder of Sesamum is good to drink for a women that after child-birth vomits blood, after fourty dayes.Marcel. Dioscor. Plin. The same boyled mitigates, and removes fluxus, and desire to stool, if newly milk, and two parts boyled away, for the strangury a little hony must be added; and if the pain be great, lay on the navell dust of Harts-horn, or Ox gall mixt with cummin-seed, with flesh, up-goared. Nor are these the prescriptions only of Aëtius, Galen, and Pliny, but our late Physitians prescribe the like, and therein they quench a gad of steel nine times, and apply it hot to the patient, or glister wise. Hippocrates prescribed it of old, and others mixt with liquour. For he when the guts were wounded, and the breath came forth beneath apparently by the wound, and the breasts emptied, advised it to be given with a like quantity of milke, wine and water. And Gesner also testifies, that some cried it up, if the liquour mixt with wine, and milke were drunk certain dayes in Maries-bath. Butter, although Pliny say it was a food prized only by Barbarians and poor common people, yet Galen, and Diosco. and others proclaim great vertue to be in it. Vitalis de Furno Cardinal, and a famous Physitian saith that butter is naturally warm, and moyst; heat is predominant in it, it is viscous, and oylie. Oft eaten it moystens the stomack, and make loos-bodied, softens the breast; cures ulcers in breast, and bowells; especially, when fresh and new, agreeing to mans complexion, helps apostumate breasts and lungs; it being the proper quality to ripen, disperse, and cleanse all superfluous humours, especially if eaten with hony and sugar. Butter resists poyson, supples the members, softens, and helps, smeared on eye-smart, disperses, and ripens impostumes, eases sore breasts, and lungs, and gripings of the bowels, supples, and loosens shriveled up sinews. It is a speciall remedy against inward poyson, if hartily drunk melted in hot milk, after you have drunk venome, for by its fatnesse it stops the passages, that the venome reach not suddenly the heart. But, new butter is thus praise-worthy, not so the old, &c. Thus far the Cardinall Cheese is good against flaxes, strangury, and colique. Hippocrates uses the same against his third sort of consumption. Donatus writes that he gave a pellet of Sicilian cheese dipt in hony to a boy troubled with wormes.G [...] . Of the whey, hote, or cold we shall elsewhere discusse; certain it is, that it thins and cleanse away the thick humours, and brings down the belly; to this last purpose the ancients have used it often, especially in those, which they would purge gently, as the melancholy, and those that had the falling sicknesse, the leprous, the scald, and those that brake out with blisters over the whole body; above all it is good for shortwinded taken with neezing pouder. Ox-pisse allayd with amber burnt,D [...] . and quenched therein removes impotence. Hippoc.P [...] . purged therewith female wombs, that conception might follow. Bulls-pisse takes away leprosie, and scurf; heals sore running-heads; allays grief, of the ears dropped in with myrrhe. Finally, if the hearing be very thick,Plin. the Hee-goats, or Bulls, or mans old urine hot, and vapouring out of a long necked bottle helps: they mixt with it a third part vineger, and some Calves-pisse that never tasted grasse. Ox-blood, men write, that taken with vineger, and moderately it helps against blood-vomiting. it cures dogs newly faln mad: it concocts ulcers, if a playster be made of it with sewet by the fire.Dio [...]  Bulls-blood with meal smeard on softens hardnes, and dried it scatters impostumes in any part: it kills serpents; takes away face-spots; and that it is deadly to drink, by reason that it soon congulates, and hardens.

Midas King of Phrygia, and Psammenitus of Egypt, Themistocles and others, who died by drinking it,H. N. l. 20. c. 13. & l. 29. c. 13. are sad examples. Pliny excepts Aegyra, a city doubtles of Achaia, which Homer calls Hyperesia, where the Priestesse being to divine, drinks bulls blood afore shee descend her prophesying cave. Signes that you have drunk it are stopping of breath, even to choaking, closing the jaws, and eares, almonds, rednes of tongue, infecting the teeth, &c. They help against ik, with mariorane, cole, wildfigs, calamint, ladyglove, salpeeter, pepper, copperas, black southistle, thorn and time. A few words of the Dung: The bulls dissolves swellings, and callow hardnes; the ox-dung is layd on, made up with vineger cataplasme-wise, for hand-greefs, and hard-swellings. Layd on coles with melantine, snuffed up, it heals megrim, freck, prest out, and weakened in urine, it is commended for gut-ake, men use of it bruised, and sifted for a purge for the barren. The calves dung differs little from the oxes in vertue, Marcellus saith, that it is a present help daubed on sore joints. Some parts are for many other uses, to say nothing of husbandry, treading out corne, carriage, warre, sights; of the hornes are made, besides cups, lavers, cupping glasses, lanterns, cornets, buglehorns, trumpets and bows: Of the hide are made shields, bucklers, helmets, tents, ships, ladders, belts, girdles, mony, pouches, bottles, bellowes, whips, shoos, and other things; nay the Pyraeaean siege in Greece, and that of Ripella in France witnes that they have been for food. Out of the fagg-ends of hides comes glew. Out of the sinews are made both tough and yeelding whips. The teeth smoothen paper. Cleanthes the Philosopher, wanting mony to buy paper, wrote what hee heard from Zeno, with ox-bone on tiles, or slate. The powder of the same helps rheums and gout. The blood, being thicker then other, and soon coming together and stifning, is very fit to make morter. And calves blood with minced veal kept ten dayes in an earthen pot, makes fit baits for fish.Ap [...] s. The sewet, especially of the heifer, and that about three year old, makes the best candles. If you mash your seed with ox-gall, afore you sow it, it is good against field mice: nor will Ants come neare a tree, if you rub the root with cow-gall. The same and lees counterfait Lyciam, and make a golden colour. Of old they made brushes of ox-bristles, and painters their pencills. The Troglodites spent with age, used to strangle themselves with an ox-tail.Dio [...] lor. The Chinois feed their fish to fatten them with cow-dung. Some smear their walls with it against flies. [...] . Their hoofs drive vermines from vines.

Oxen admit of many differences from their bignesses,Differences. variety of hornes, monstrous shape of parts, place, and otherwise. In the Isle Aden (of old Madoce, and Ocellis) their Cows are as great as a Camell, snow-white, with hornes, and ears,Francis A [...] varez, de Aethio. c. 119. some pricking up, some hanging. Aristot. saith, that the Aegyptian are greater then those of Greece. Those of Ethiopia in Prete Gan his domin [...] ons, beare such great hornes, that thereof are made vessells that hold many galons. The African Cows are so little, that they scarce reach the greatnesse of our calves, but can beare any labour, and hardship.Plin. And such are the Alpine, (or rather Altine;) Altinum being an old city and a flourishing one on the Venetian coast, near Aquileia. The English Oxen pride themselves in their hornes, and admirable savoury flesh, called Beefe. Those in the north of America want a dewlap, and are bunsh-backed. In Dariena they are said to be whole-hoof'd, not unlike Mules, great ear'd, trunked like Elephants, ash-colour'd, and of a delicate flesh. Out of Spain are transported into Hispaniola, Cows so fruitfull, that one common Cow in 26 years shall calve 800 calves, while their race is still breeding also. The Aonian Oxen are many coloured, whole-hoof'd, have one horne, coming out of their mouth.Aelian. Vartomannus saw the Sultan in Arabia, presented with Cows-horne like Deer, and black; and some had but one horne, and that on the forehead. Among the Arachatae are wilde Oxen, black, ginning, flat-horned. The Armenian have a double-horne,Arist. H. A. l. 2. c. 1. writhed, bending, and entortled like an zuy, and so hard, that it can turn a swords-edge. In the Province of Bengala,P. Venet. their Oxen are as thick as Elephants. In Holland the Cows, especially the pied ones, yeeld a great soop of milk. In some parts, in summer-dayes, each Cow yeelds to the pale 44 quarts a day. In the Lazerhuys at Amsterdam,Ponta [...] s Amstel. l. 2. c. 23. they hold 22 Cows, out of which they gain in milk and cheese, beside what themselves daily spend, about 500 crowns a year. It is not wonder then that in butter and cheese, they export to forreigne parts each year, for 200 Sesterties, that is, 1000000 Carolusses.Had [...] n. Gun. They make it out of Butter-milk, that we in England give to the poore, and to our swine. In Scotland there are very white wild Oxen, of thick and long Manes, savage, and fierce, so hating mankind, that they will for many dayes abstain from that, that man hath handled, or breathed on, and being taken by wiles, they dy of themselves; they have a sinewy, gristly kind of flesh. In the Camanduan quarters there are vast Oxen,Scalig. Exerc. 206. short, and blunt-horned; of aspotles whitenesse, bunched-back'd, and strong as Camels, that will take up burdens, Camel-like, with bended knees at their keepers command.Plin. I know not whither he mean those of Caria in Asia, ugly, with a bunch on the shoulders, reaching from their necks, with loose horns and laborious: The other, black, or white, are condemned to toyl. Those of Cyprus feed on mans dung. In the City Diu, are small Oxen, with great and strait hornes; but, besides their fitnesse to carry, and toyl, they will be taught to obey a bridle, and to pace like horses.Arist. The Cows of Epirus, each fill a payl with milk; the milker stands upright, or stoups a little, for sitting he cannot come by the udders. The Oxen of the same place that are called Pirrhique, from Pyrrhus,

who held (men say) so much of them,Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 45. are highly cried up; they come to that perfection at foure years old. They were very great, and there are of the race yet left. But now they desire yearlings for breed; but those of two years are better.

In Eubaea the oxen are almost all white; whence Poëts call Eubaea Arggroboaeon, silver-oxed. In Galata a hill of Africk,Aelian. H. N. l. 12. c. 36. Herod. l. 4. the oxen, when oldest, are not so great as those of eight moneths in Italy, saith Leonius. In, or neare the region of the Garamantes, they feed praeposterously; for if they direct their mouths strait to their pasture, their horns bending downward hinder them. The Helvetian oxen, specially those by Zofinga, a town of Bern, are prayzed for tender flesh.Plin. Aelian. H. A. l. 3. c. 34. In India there are oxen with one and with three horns, and whole-hoof'd, they are as tall as Camells, their horns foure foot broad. One of them was brought to Ptolomy, that held three pitchers full of water. They run there with horses, being equally fleet, perhaps Pliny means these, speaking of Indian wood-bulls, greater then wild ones, swifter then all others, yellow, blew-eyed, their hair turning thwart, their chaps gaping to their eares, their horns wagging, their hide as hard as a flint, and wound-free; they hunt all wild beasts; they are taken only in pits, and kill themselves with their fiercenes. I know not whether they are those, the Sangiaci and Bassae use by Damascus, with thin tayls and hair, valued each at four or five Ducats. Wee read also that in India is an Ox, called in their native tongue Ignaragna, near the Fort of the Holy Ghost (so called,) and elsewhere, where it is lesse cold, of a monstrous bulk, feeding on grasse, that is red, far bigger then our oxen, skin'd like the Elephant, having two armes near the breast, the teats hidden, wherewith shee suckles her young; headed and mouthed as ours, sweet of flesh, that the Indians much long after; yeelding fat like butter, wherewith they season their food; the bones as firme as ivory. The Umbrian Oxen, chiefly by the river Clitumnus, are famous; they are the greatest in Italy,Plin. and most white. The Sabine are also cried up; there was one of old bred by a househoulder, of a strange size and shape, whose hornes were many ages kept for a miraculous monument in the porch of Dianaes Temple. The Leutrican Oxen, their hornes and eares are alike,Arist. and of apeece. In a Province of Catay are white and black ones, tayl'd as a horse, but bushier and long, bearing fine hairs, like feathers, of great value, which the Cavaliers hang on their lance top, counting it an ensigne of high gentility; the hornes, as they lift up their head, reach to their tayle; the hornes are so great, that the inhabitants use them in stead of buckets.Aeli. H. A. l. 2. c. 51. The Mysian have no horns. Among the Negros, the cows are all black, or white, or mixt, none red. They winter them by the marsh Maeotis among the Nomades, and summer them in the plain fields. Of the Oxen, some have no horns, some they saw off. The Poeonian bulls are shagged bodied, especially on breast, and chin; and carry so great horns, that scarce three or foure quarts of wine can fill them; whereof the Poeonian Kings and Nobles make cups, tipp'd with ivory and silver, saith Theopompus. Hungary abounds so with them, that Sigismundus, Baron of Heberstein, affirmed, that he saw one onely way toward Vienna, driven above 80000 in one year.Pa [...] l. Venet. l. 1. c. 22.  Comandu, a Persian region (so called of a city there) hath many vast ones, all white, short and blunt-horned, bunch'd-backed like Camels; whence they become so strong, and fit for carriage. Such are also in Quivira. The Bulls there are wild, yellow, low, crookbacked, great mained, and hanging; their flesh good wholesome, and not unpleasant: the Natives eat the tayl, drink the blood, weare the hides. The Phaenician Cows are so tall, that the tallest shepheards milk standing; lower men must have a footstool. In Phrygia and Erythraea,Aelian. H. A. l. 16. c. 33. the Oxen wag the hornes as the ears, saith Aristot. and Aelian. In Norwey, Island, Gothland, Feronia, Oxen are wilde, untameable, and long-bearded. The hunters skulk among the trees, and when they are stroken, they either revenged, or kill themselves.

There is also a Sea-cow, a great, strong, furious, dangerous monster, spawning the like, not above two at once, oftner but one, which it tenders, and caries carefully about, whereever she swims, or goes aland; shee carries her fry 10 moneths, she is known by cutting of her tayl, to have lived 130 years. On some Northeren-Coasts, they have teeths like Elephants. In Caricta, a Scotch Province above Galloway, are Oxen of tender and sweet flesh; but the fat never thickens, but slows like oyl. About Torona, lastly, are some that a few dayes afore calving, have no milk, but at other times are flush, they go ten months with calve. Of the Tartarian Oxen,V [...] r. o. tall as Elephants, black and white-hayred, and hanging thick on their shoulders, like Lions, three foot long, soft as silk, I have spoken already. As also of the Tartarian, (that Scaliger calls Syrian) that have no dew-laps.Plin. Thus far of their differences in a promiscuous way. Hetherto belongs the beast called in Corgo Empalanga, shaped like an ox, and of the like bulke; onely he carries his head, and neck aloft, like a Stag; the horns strait, and long, knotty at top, bending a litle inwards, wilde, but not harmfull, nor fierce; and might be brought to the plow, if the inhabitants had the wit to use them.Monsters. As for monsters, there was seene at Millian, and Satura, a calf with two heads; at a village of Thuringia, one with six feet, two heads, and but one passage; and one hath been seen with seven feet, and a bunch of flesh on the side, also one nose, and eare like a man, with two heads and faces, and double-bodied; onely two hind-feet, and faced like a Lamb. Anno 1551 was seen at Basil of the Rauraci, an Ox with five feet; such as we saw once in London in England; and another with a horn in the neck, and short legs

like a dwarfe. You shall here also have the print of a monstrous calfe with two bodies, upright, and with five eares.

ARTICLE II. Of wild-Oxen.

POINT I. Of the Wild-Ox, or Bugle.

WId-Oxen, in Greek Agrioi, that differ from the wild Agrayloi, in this, that these though tame, and bred of such, yet running loose among the hills a pleasure are left to feed in woods and fields, but those are not wild so much from the nature of the place, as their own naturall disposition; such are Bugle, Bison.

The Urus, or Bugle, Macrobius makes a French, and Aldrovand a German name: For Ur signified among the old Dutch wild, or great, vast and strong. Servius yet will have it to be Greek, fetching it from Oroi, the mountains. The Poles, at least about Mafovia, Samogitia, call him Tur; which Gesner thinks to be the Tarand among the Ancients. The Liturnians calls him Zumbro. Sc [...] g. Whether it be Iphicrates his thezes, we shall inquire elsewhere. S. Hieronymus calls him Bubalus, or Buffe, as also Martialis; and the unskilful common Romans, saith Pliny. Authours differ somewhat about the description, unlesse happily there be several kindes of them. Caesar and Pliny mentions no shagge hair on them; Eras. Stella ascribes to them shaggie temples and beards;Caesar. Albert. M. A. l. 22. as also Albertus Magnus, who confounds him with the Bonasus. For the rest, he is little lesse then the Elephant, shaped and coloured like the Bull Some are fifthteen cubits high, three men may stand between his horns; rough of hide, and dew-lapped. Horned thick, black, short, red-eyed towards the outer corner; great-headed, broad-faced, almost black, especially his temples, chin, neck. The face, sides, thighs, tail, einclining to red. He is found in the Hyrcinian wildernesse, in Podolia, Samogitia, Masovia, and Hungaria. They are not tameable by man, not the least of them: they are exceeding strong, and swift; he can tosse with his hornes Horse and Rider, and turn up reasonable great trees by the roots. Great men count his flesh seasoned a dainty. The northern Barbarians drink in the horns, some head their darts with them. Among us, saith Pliny, they make clear lanterns of them,P [...] iny. that cast light very far; and the shavings are used to many delightful purposes, now painted, now smeared, pictures called Cerostrata, or horn-peeces are made of them: It may be that wild-Bull, that did so much mischief in Macedonie, that King Philip killed at the foot of Orbel, whose hide, and horns of fourteen hand-breadth, dedicated in the porch of Hercules his Temple,De Bicul. l. 1. c. 2. was a Bugle, or Urus. See Aldrovand. of the manner of taking him.

POINT II. Of the Bison, or Buffle.

THe name Bison comes from the German word Vicent.Aldrov. The Oppian coppies have it Bistoon, from Bistonia (happily) a Thracian wood, but it is a mistake.Plin. Solin.  Dion calls them Bissones. Like wild Oxen they are, bristled, and have rough long manes, which they shake on their thick neck and shoulders, that it is terrible to behold; so busht also they are about the cheeks and chin.Oppian. Their horns crooked, but bending upwards,Gyllius. Gesner. and sharp as swords; not broad, and crosse as other Oxen; but starting upright, and hooked only about the tip. Their shaggy hair smells of musk, short-headed, great and fierce-eyed, and sparkling, broad fore-headed; the horns so wide from one another, that three men may sit between; A bunch on the back; the hinder-part of the body lower then the fore-body. Gesner saw a horn of them at a Gold-smiths to be tiped with silver, of a glistering black, eighteen inches long, hooked like a bird of preys talends. The tongue so rough, that were it licks, it fetches blood. The Greeks used not these,Plin. nor Bugles in Physick, not having tried their vertue; though Indianwoods are full of such; yet parts of them are of more efficacy in medecine, (it is thought) then any part of ordinary Oxen. Of this kind are the Bulls of Florida, an Isle of the new world,Ambros. Paré. the natives call them Butrones. They have horns of a foot long, bunched backed like Camels, long and yellow haired, tailed like Lions; they never become tame; the wild cloath themselves in winter with their hides; they conceive the horn soveraigne against poyson, and wears them for defence against it.

Hither may by referred the Scotch Bison, or wild-Ox, who is said to be milk-white, mained and crested like the Lion, otherwise like the tame Ox; but so wild, and untamed, and opposite to mankind, that he shuns grasse, or shrubs, that a mans hand hath but touched; but taken by wiles, hee pines to death, and finding himself aimed at to be caught, makes at his hunter with all his might.

POINT III. Of the Bonasus.

ARistotle calls him Bonassos, and Bolintos; Aldrov. de Besul. l. 1. c. 4. the Poeones Honapos, the derivation of the name is uncertain. Divers mistake him for the Urus, or Bugle; and some later Writers calls it the Indian Cow. He is bred in the mount Mestapius, that parts Poeonia from Media. The Poeonians call it Monapus.Arist. Of a Bulls bulk, thicker then an

Ox,Arist. H. A. l. 4. c. 71. Scalig. Not high. His hide stretched out, holds enough food for seven Guests. Like an Ox, only mained like a Horse; but softer haired, and lower; yellow haired. His eye-haires long, tween ash-coloured and red, rougher then that of the Paroa Mares, but wholly under: None of them are very black, or carnation; voyced like the Ox. The horns crooked and thwart, and unfit for fight; a palm breadth, and not full longer; each as thick as may be grasped: Of a handsome shining blacknesse. His ancles rather spreading, then bending down-ward. He wants the upper-teeth, as the Ox, and other horned cattel. The thighs are shaggy; he is cloven-footed; his taile is not great for his bulke, but greater then the Oxes. He casts dust about, and digs up the earth like the Bull. Her hide is stroke-proofe. Her flesh sweet, and therefore men hunt her. She flies when stroken,Pliny. till she tyre her self. She defends herself with her heels and dung, which she casts from her four paces; (not three akers, as Pliny faines.) The use whereof is good; it burns so strong, that the cole can scorch a dogs-hair; that it is, if you stir, and fright her; otherwise the dung burns not. Such is her look and nature, when her calving-time drawes near; she seeks the mountains, and dungs about the place where she calves, as if she would so fence herself; she dungs in a large measure. All this Pliny doubtlesse, Solian and Aelian have taken out of Aristotle. Arist. It is uncertain whether the horns, joynts, and shoulder-blades, and ribs, as Cainius on Gesner describes them, are this beasts or no. The horns are two foot long, and three hands and a half finger round, near the head, a foot and half a palme. Between the horns on the fore-head, 3. Roman palmes and a half. The turning joynt 3. Roman foot long, and two hands-bredth and a half about. A rib six foot long. To say nothing of the omoplata, or shoulder-blade: We have added here a figure of the head and bones.

POINT IV. Of the Wild-Ox of the Ancients, or Bubalus.

THe name Bubalus is at this day an uncertain thing,Aldrovan. quadr. l. 2. cap. 5. as also it seemed to be in Pliny his time; nor had it any peculiar sense among the Greeks. Many call divers wild-Oxen, especial there where they were brought from abroad, Bubali. Some make them Goats. We shall distinguish them; calling the Bubalus, that Aristotle calls a timerous beast, having blood without fibrae, or string-veins; the same with the African Ox. Scaliger speaks of the Bubalis, whose blood and horns are described by Aristotle. Pliny makes him like a Calfe, or Hart. What is it then? the Gazella? No surely, wherefore what I could learn out of the African stories, I will freely impart.

The African Oxen are scarce so great as our Calves; but very strong, and can endure hardship. I find him called Dant, and Lant, and Elant; Hath an Oxes face, but is much lesse and nimbler; yea, swifter then all other wild-beasts. The hide impenitrable, iron cannot pierce, only a bullet can; White-haired, taken in Summer, because their hoofs are loosned by the burning of the sand. Bellonius describs another African Ox to be old, lesse then the Hart, neater and greater then the wild-Goat; of a square and well-shaped body, goodly to behold, yellow-haired, and so shining and smooth, that she seems sleeked over. The belly hath red-wrinckles, and seems to incline more to yellow then the back, that is dusk-coloured. It is short, but strong thighed; thick and short-necked, and hath a little dew-lap headed like an Ox, the horns black and very crooked as the Gazella, bending like a Moon in the increase, wherewith he cannot well defend himself, so crooked they are. Ox-eared, full, and high-shouldered; the taile, like the Panther, or Camel, Horses, hanging to the hams; black-haired, twice as thick as the Horses; lows like the Ox, but not so lowd. He is not the same, whose picture Horatius Fontana sent to Aldrovandus; for it was of much higher and slender neck, and the horns bending back, and crooking as in a wild-Goat. It had great ears, the proportion of the head near the beginning of the neck; faced rather like the Kid then the Ox; wherefore reckoned by some among the African Goats. The whole body yellowish, except that the musle and horns were blackish: It was very long-haired.

POINT V. Of the Buffell, and Strepsicerot.

THat the Buffell, or common wild Ox, is not that Bubalus in Aristotle,Aldrovan quadr. l. 2. cap. 6. shall be manifest by comparing the History of either; but it seems that he gave him no precise name among the wilde Oxen, while he saith, that among the Arachoti (an Indian City,) are wilde Oxen, that differ from the tame, as much as wilde Swine from others, black, and stout-bodied, with a muzle, somewhat crooked, the horns uprighter. And perhaps this of ours shall be that wild black one, of the strange operation, of whose blood on women, if their loyns be nointed with it, Osthanes speaks in Pliny. To describe our Buffell, he is like, but greater and higher then the Ox, thick of body, hard-skind, and the parts lean, and spare; his hair black, thin grown, and small, litle, or none on the tayl. The forehead rough, and curl'd with intricate hair. The head hanging earthward for the most part, and but small for such a body.Albertus. The horns long, crumpled, and black; sometime hanging near the neck inward, toward the inner-part of the breast; sometime upright. The neck thick, and long, lower toward the rump. The tayl short, small, and hath almost no hair. The thighs thick,

strong, and short for such a body. They are often found in Asia, Greece, Aegypt, the Isle Borndo, and cities of Italy. We have seen many about Fundi, they love to bide among waters. Their low is frightfull. The female hath milk, and in coupling-time,Niph [...] s. and at first calving. At first they seeme gentle; but provoked, (and that they are by red) there is no taming them; chase them, they fly strait on, and never turne. Enraged, he takes water, and dowses into the head, to cool his boyling blood. The female endures not a calf of another kind; knowing it by the smell, but smear it with cow-dung, the smell deceives her, and she suckles, and brings it up for her owne. They will labour hard; they are lead, and ruled by an iron, or brasse ring-strook through the nostrils, with a halter, or bridle fastened to it. Men say, that, if he be overladen, you can not beat him up; he will not stand up, till you disburthen him. Their flesh is sold at Rome; and the Jews like it; but it is so slimy, that it cleaves, if you clap it on the wall. The cheeses, that abound in the Pistorian Province, called Marzolinis, of an ovall shape; (that is, shape like an egg, are preferred afore those of other cows, are better tasted.) They make rings of the hoofs, and hornes, which worn on fingers, or toes, are excellent against cramps; some tide on foure sorts of threads, of gold, silver, brasse, and iron; thinking them more effectuall so. Cloaths, especially doublets are made of the hide; and horse-trappings in Narzinga. The Siamenses make bows of the hornes.

The Ox called Strepsiceros, or sharp-horned, is faced rather like a wild Goat, then an Ox; yet tayled like the ox, though very short. Coloured he is all over like the Deere.

ARTICLE III. Of the Sheepe.

FRom the History of the Ox we passe to the description of the Sheep, of old sacred to the Aegyptians; and with the Athenians of such esteemed, that an action was ordered to be commenced against him,Pl [...] ar. who flead a live Ram. And it was enacted by an old law, that none should out of a flock of a 100 head, kill one uncliped, or that had not yeaned. Which Athenaeus writes also, adding that in his time in the sacrifices of Pallace, neither might an ew-lamb be slain, nor cheese tasted.Agel. l. 11. c. 1. And among the Romans of old, no mulcts were imposed on delinquents, but paying sheep, or oxen, where also by the laws of their King, a man-slayer was to pay a ram. The tribute among the Persians and Medes,Ambr. was sheep. Those payed L. M. These as many more. And the Staby (to speak of places at hand) sent yearly to Nola, to the President under the name of tribute, and respect a great white lamb with gilded horns. To say nothing of the custome of giving for a reward lambsflesh to the unridlers of r [...] ddles, and to Poëts. Whence they that sung for, or of such rewards were called Arnothooi, alluding to sheep.

Among the names of this beast among the Latins are Ovis, the Sheep, Aries, the Ram; Agnus, the Lamb; Adasia, or an old Ew; minae, smooth-bellied; Aspicae, Lanata, woolly, or fleeced; Bidens, two teethed; Pecus, cattell Onis, is the name of the female, or ew. Though Festus saith it was used in the Masculine of old, about mulcts. Whence Oviaria denotes a flock. The Ram is the male. The Lamb is not yet a year old. Adasia is an old ew, newly yeaning. Matrices were those that suckled lambs for the Palladium, called Tokades, or paschals, nourisht everywhere. Minae had no wool on the belly. Apicae, the small ones, and thin-wooled. Lanata, from the fleece. Bidentes, that had two teeth longer then the rest, and such onely were to be sacrificed. Also Ambidentes, and Duidentes. Festus takes them for those that had upper, and lower teeth. The name pecus is given to grazing cattell, and usefull to man. Often to sheep onely.Plin. The Greeks have as many names for the sheep and ram. As the Laconians Amnoa,

[...] . Amnos, Bara, Probata, or Bota, Goita, the sheep; Didoees, two-teethed; Dikuma, ews that yean twins; Eggalon, milse; Eniron, soft woolled; Iereion, for sacrificed; Metassai, ews with lambs under their teats; [...]

Meselikes, middle-aged, between lambs and sheep; Kar, Karnos, Karos, Oïs, Ox, Poon, Renes, simple names for any sheep. The Ram is called Aricha, Krios, Arneios, Dedmaoon, Ethris, is the bel-weather geld; Ktilos, the leader of the flock; Mischias, Okribas, is the wild sheep. The boors pig is nefreus in Latine. [...]

Ars, Amnos, Ersai, Kathetos, Killix, Pratinion, Tranon, Phagilon, &c. are Greeke names of lambs. Not to stay long on the description;Descript. this beast being so well knowne. Yet we shall set downe the most memorable things we meet with in authors. Nature hath given the sheep a most weak head. The braine is leane. The horns of the ews are commonly smaller; many have none. Some lambs are yeaned with hornes, the rams crooked, and sometime more then two. Cardan writes that he hath seene some choyce ones with foure, we shew the figure of three, and six-horned. The gelded change the place of the hornes, bearing them on a quite contary fashion; their eyes look a side downwards, far one from the other,Aristot. de gen. anim. l. 5. c. 1. Aristo. H. A. l. 2. c. 3. darkish, or blackish, and broad. The lips thin, contrary to ox-lips. The teeth continued; the ew having fewer then the ram. After a year and half they change, (saith Crescentius,) namely the two fore-teeth, and six moneth after, the two next, then the rest; in three or foure years at most, they shed them all. The teeth of the younger are uneven, when they are bigger, equall; when they wax old, ungummed, lessened, and rotted. Their bellies are as of all that shew the cud. Those of the lamb we hereafter lay open. Know that A denotes the stomach, B the gummes, C the salter, D the Tripe. The testicles fall to the ancles. The udders of the ew are two; as

many the teats. Those of Chalicis a part of Euboia, have no gall; those in Nexus, a great and monstrous gall.Aristo. de part. l. 4. cap. 2. Aelian saith that here they have a double gall;Plin. H. N. l. 11. cap. 37. in Pontus none;Aelian. H. A. l. 17. c. 26. and that in very cold countries, in deep snows, and hard winters, they have no gall, nor being folded, eat; but in Spring, as they come to pasture, they get great galls; and so it is with the Scythian sheep. In Scopsis their spleen is very litle, and round. Their reins are even, and the sewet lies thicker about them; if they be quite compast with fat, it kills them; which comes from rank pasture, as in the Leontine Land in Sicily: wherefore the Shepheards there drive them late to pasture, that they may not eat too much.Bellunen. In Syria, the fat lies thick between the skin, and flesh in geld-rams, as in hogs. In their ford, and hind-legs sticks a bump, near the bottome, shaped like a round worm, within woolly and hairy, like rose-cups, that hold the seed, inclosed in a softy and thin down;Lemnius de nat. mir. c. l. 3. c. 5. It is oft taken out, when the sheeps-feet are sod, and resembles the rottennesse in worm-eten, rottenwood, or chest-nuts. Shepheards are of opinion, that for this cleaving to the joynts, no creature alive would be swifter then the sheep. The tayl is thick of wooll. Hesiod. denies, that the North-wind pearces their skin, by reason of the hair, or rather the wooll. There is scarce a place where they are not found, more or fewer, and of great difference according to the place, as we shall hereafter shew in the differences. Their food is grasse, whence called Poephaga, grasse-eter; yet they eat leaves also. That grasse is sweetest to them, that grows where the plow hath gone, next that in dry medows.Colum. R. R. lib. 7. c. 2, 3. To prevent fulsomnesse, men lay salt in summer in wodden gutters, which they lick when they come from pasture, that as it were seasons it to them. In winter they nibble, or browse on elm, ax, leaves, and the second cut-hay, called Cordum. They eat also the Cytisus, tame fisses, and, if need be, pulsechaffe. Some give them a litle kern of resins, and bran. Those that are pastured in salt marishes, yeeld more milk, and more savoury cheese, and are more fruitfull, and more tender, and sweeter fleshed; such are those fat ones by Ostia, and the neighbouring Portuensian Land, by the tenth mile-stone from the city (Rome) which land the Tiber runs through,Gome. l. 1. de Sale. where are many brackish marishes round about, which Gomesius saith he tasted of.Arist. The Sheep that drink river-water, couple soonest, and being used to salt from yeaning-time, yeeld much more milk. And on some Sea-coast, where are dry and salt medows, Sheep lives twinty years, and bring young.Albert. In Scotland they feed in the wilde on Cytisus. In India they feed most (especially among the Praessii) on grasse well wetted with rain. In Pontus they fatten on the bitterest worm-wood. They that feed on Laserpitium usually, are first cleansed by it, then fatten on a sudden, and their flesh is wondrous sweet. When they will breed, is known by this, they after feed will neese, and then fall a sleep.Pliny The Jews give theirs palm-nuts, which the Babilonian-Smiths use for their coles. They delight also in Coluthea, Aphax, wool-herb, vine-buds, Adianthus, and with the Brabanti, in juy, and rosemary; and lastly Eryngius.Strabo. Geog. Thcocrit. Among the Ichtyophagi, or fisheaters, and about the Calami, an Indian village, and in the Province of Aden, they feed on fish; wheron also they wax fat in Lydia, and Macedon. For their drinke, they batten on troubled water, and where much is. Also on rain-water after wind; in summer after Northern cool showers; in winter after Southern warm showers. Change of water is thought to hurt them,Vanto. especially about coupling-time.

Ews of a year old may yean lambs; but the lambs are better, if the sire, and dame be older. Columella thinks the second yeare as a good breeding-time, and so till five, and at seven to cease breeding. Florentinus is for breeding when two years old.Arist. Aristot. and Palladius affirms, that they may held on breeding till eight, nay to eleven, if well tended. It is worthy noting that lambs slight yong, and seeke old ews; and themselves are better, and more usefull, when old.P [...] in. They all couple from the setting of Arcturus, that is, from the third of the Ides of May, till the setting of the Eagle, that is,Arist. to the 13 of August; and those that are conceived later, are huge and weakly. Columella yet saith, that the young couple in Spring, the ews that have had lambs, about Iuly. They go five months with lamb, and yean commonly but one at once, yet sometimes two, three, nay foure. In some places the goodnesse of the pasture, and their naturall strength enables them to breed twins. In some places they yean so, twice, or thrice. After the third or fourth coupling, they conceive; and sometimes one Ram serves a whole flock. Sometimes they yean monsters. Albertus calls that Cinirus,Ges [...] . that comes of an ew, and a hee-goat. In Helvetia, some lambs are yeaned like goats afore, and sheep or rams behinde; but such live not long. The Musmon is ingendred between the shee-goat and Ram. From the coupling of sheep with wilde rams, comes a brood of the sires colour,Albert. Co [...] . which holds also in the succeeding breed; the wooll, in the first young, rough; in the following ones, softer. The brood is of the colour of the veins of the dames-tongue, when pregnant-Males are ingendred by the ability of the dame, and fire, and the vertue of the waters they drinke. Aristotle teaches that they must take in southwinds, if females, and northerne-blasts, if males be engendred.Pliny. The same happens, if you tie the rams left, or right testicle; water also doth much in it, since the cattell that drinke of the River Charadrus bring all males. Rubbing on salt,Arist. Pausan [...] . and nitre helps herein; and overfatnesse hinders conception. Men take a presage of a happy year from their coupling; for the Shepheards say, that, if the older begin betimes, it will be a good year; if the younger be forward to couple, they shall have a bad year. The

ancients call the conception after the ordinary season, Cordum. There is a secret liking between Sheep and Shee-goats, therefore they willingly come on together. From Rams-horns bruised, and digged out, some say Asparagus sprouts;Alber. M. Dioscorides denies it. If the same be buried at the root of a fig-tree, the fruit shall the sooner ripen. What is related of the Fliter-mous, Pliny reckons among magical experiments. They are thought to hold enmity with the Wolfe, Beare, Tiger, Elephant, especially the Wolf, Raven, Eagle, Serpents, Bees. These plants are hurtfull to them, wolf-bane, pease, acorns. What is said of the wolfes entralls, and some other things, we shall elsewhere examine. If they eat Sanguinaria, their whole belly is distorted, and they void a most filthy, unsavoury foame at mouth. If they eat Calamogrostis, it makes them thirty, lean and rascalls, and draws blood up into their stomack. Duva (a French herb, and name) but tasted by them, breeds in their liver litle black living things, called also Duvae. Pease sowen in March is unwholesome for them. Acorns make them cast their lambs, if they eat too freely of them. In Attica they will not touch the root of Thapsia; if strange ones to happen to eat of it, it either cast them into a loosnesse, or kills them. They cast their lambs, if frighted with thunders, if not looked to. In Thrace, the Turks conceive, [...] . l. 3. c. 51 there are two stars, appearing in July and Agust, just over their heads, or verticall to them, on whose lustre, if sheep chance, lifting up their heads, but once to see, they dy upon it. Therefore then they are held in house. They may live 10 years, but for most part they dy sooner; yet the place contributs much to the lengthning out of their life. Some in dry pasture,Arist. and by the sea-coast lives 20 years. Some Aethiopian sheep last 12 or 13 years. Bleating is their voice, in Greek Blechathai. Homer yet calls lambs Mekoomenas, or meakers. Claudian saith, they grunt. In coupling they have a peculiar voyce,Arist H. A. l. 4. c. 4. saith Aristot.

As for their nature, dispositions, and usages; they are so silly, that thence a fool is called, Probatoodes, sheepish; and it is become a Proverd, There is no profit of sheep, if the shepherd be away; gentle they are, and they only of all beasts rage not in yeaning, nor presently after, saith Aristotle; but every slight occasion scares them, yet-Horace calls Lambs bold. Beside the shepherd and his dog, they have a Ram, or bell-Weather for their leader, whom the shepherd yet first teacheth; and you may see them march out of their folds, or stall, as in martiall array; especially if the shepherd conduct them, whose very hisse they understand: That the Rams are given to fight as soon as their horns peep out, all know. They will but at, not only their own, but sometimes at mankind. Their rage is taken off, if you bind with prickles abord a foot-broad crosse their fore-head on their horns, or bore these through in the crooking near the ears; of, if you geld them.Macrob. Aelian. Experience proves it untrue that some write, that in the six winter-months they ly on their left-side, and at spring-time on their right; as the Sun about that time takes the right, after the left-Hemisphere.

This Cattell loves coole-springs, bites up grasse by the roots, spoiles trees, hath milk eight months; in the fore-winter feeds greedily, as if it foresaw the hard weather and want; is impatient of cold, though best cled of all beasts; yet those fear it lesse that have large tailes. Mizaldus saith, they will follow him who shall stop his ears with wool. The wild ones growing old, are nourisht by their own breed; They know their own Lambs by smelling on them behind.Albert. They use harder layer then goats. The Ews make a thicker water then the Males: Both they and Goats shew their months at coupling-time, and after for a time, then they cease till yeaning-time; then have a shew of them again, whence shepherds knows that the time drawes near; after they purge exceedingly,Arist. first redish, then very red stuffe.

Lambs-flesh, the Ancients cared not for, say some, as Turnebus. Yet Plautus speaks of eating it at Rome; and Horace reckons it among delicates, as Plautus mentions Lambs inwards, At Athens, none of old might eat of an unshorn-lamb. The flesh is hot in a low degree, but over-moyst,Athaene. and the younger the moyster; therefore though good for the strong, ill for a weak-stomack, being slimy and cleaving; though Crescentiensis commends yearlings. Columella preferres Autumne afore Spring-flesh. A Lambs-head is counted a delicate dish in a feast. The Syringatus, Terpianus, Pasticus, are but names of several dressing the Lamb.

Rams-flesh is not moyst, and well boyled, breeds good blood,Donat. especially if well gelded.Anton. Weather-flesh is wholsome for people of all ages,Ferrus. places, and at all times; if young, two years old, not too far, and bred in a dry aire, fed with good grasse. Those are best that are bred in the high Trivican mountains, saith Ferrus. Those in moyst places in Campania are little set by. Bellonius holds those most savoury that are roasted whole,Obser. l. 1. c. 60. as the shepheard in Trace, above the river Nessus use to do. The Lambs-stones are counted dainties.Athen. l. 4.  Arnoldus saith, their marrow is poyson, against which Phesants-flesh is an antidotes: Yet Homer saith, that Assianact used to feed on it.Homer. Ilia. 10. Sheeps-flesh, or Mutton for the taste, and over-moysture hath been forbidden to be killed after the fifthteenth of Iuly, or S. Iames-time, as fitter food for Spring-time, then Summer. The feet trouble the stomach, unlesse the worme afore spoken of be taken out. The shoulder of Mutten roasted, and cold again, is much eaten. The Lungs minched. The Tigurine Helvetians, of the Liver make puddings, rouling them up in the call, spitting them on sticks, and roast them upon the grid-iron, they mince sweet-herbs in. Some bray it whole, with bread crumed, and strain it, and besprinckle

it with spices to give a good taste, and handsome colour, then make it hot, and lay thereon thrushes par-boyled in flesh-pottage, and fryed a while in butter. The Milke, the newer the better, and the same is to be thought of the cheese. Over-salt is disallowed. As for Medicine, a Lamb layed warm with gourds on a part bitten by a venemous creature,Aetius. fetches out the poyson;Brunus. and the pottage is very good in quartan agues.Pliny. The braine furthers madnesse, as Gesner hath it out of a Manuscript. Their feet yield a decoction, good against the pains in the bladder. The Rams-stones poudered, and drunk in water, are good for the fallingsickness. Their lungs take away bunches in the flesh, roasted prevents drunkennesse; shreded, helps bruises, and makes black scars white: And is used for purges. The Liver helps blood-shot-eyes;Hippo. and is good for a woman swelled in childbearing, taking in drink, and with meat. The Milt tosted,Plin. & powder taken in wine, resists the collick; which yet Pliny somewhere counts it superstition, it being among the Magical precepts, that the patient must say, that he maks a remedy for the spleen, and then he must hide, and steal it up in his chamber, and repeat a Verse three times nine times.Mizaldus. The Sheeps-bladder Galen advises them to take in drink, burnt to powder,Pliny. who let water go from them in sleep. Their Gall, and honey, cleanses the ears; and smeared on the head with earth dryes up scurffe; with the sewet, it eases the Gout. The Milk is cried up for wholesome against all kind of venome, except the Buprestis and Hemlock.

Afore your quartan-fit,Plin. take three cups of it with a dram of Swallows-dung: If to a sixt part you adde four peny weight purified Cnicus, and you drink the decoction, it loosens: The same boyled on hot stones, is good against fluxes, and of an exulcerated belly. The Butter that comes from Sheeps-Milke,Dioscor. smeared on with hony,Plin. together with ashes of a dogs head, or the womb, boyled in oyl, takes away dead-flesh growing about the fingers. Old Cheese taken with our meat refreshes disentericks, or eaten, and scraped, and taken in wine, helps the collick. Rams-horns burnt to powder, with oyle some give to make the hair curle. The ashes of the Trotters with hony, heals the bite of a Mouse and a Spider.Plin. The Curd in a dram of wine, helps against pricks and all strokes and bites of the Peterman, and other Sea-fishes. And is good for Infants drunke out of water, when troubled with pend, or curdled breast-milke, or given out of Vineger. Put under, or into the nostrils, it strenches blood, when other things help not.

The Sewet is taken either simply, or for that that is taken from the ribs, or call. One saith that melt it, and dip a cloth in it, and lay it on a burnt part, it helps: It is laid on the kibe-heels with allum;Plin. If mingled with ashes of womens hair it cures fellons. It heals all kind of griefs about the privities, mixt with ashes of the pumice, and salt, that fat taken from the call, especially that from the reins.

The Lambs marrow melted by the fire drunke with oyle of nuts,Albert. and white sugar, dissolves the stone in the bladder. The urine of a red or black sheepe, mixt with hony, is good for the dropsy.Galen. Their dung a Physitian in Mysia used, weakened in vineger, to take away Cornes and hard knobs; and mingled with rose-salve to close,Dioscor. and skin over an ulcer from burning.Galen. Out of vineger smeard on it works the same effects. The pouder out of oyl, applied as a cataplasme, cures a fresh wound. The ashes of the same, with salpeter,Pliny. or the ashes of lambs hucklebones are good against the canker,Marcell. and ulcers, that will not close. Sheeps dung also heat, and kneaded, allays the swelling of wounds. And is good for the colique. A mountain-sheeps dung in September shut up, the Moon decreasing the day afore, gather up early, and harden in the Sun, and pounce it to pouder, and keep it in a glasse, or tin vessell, for use. A spoonfull of it given three dayes out of water, cures the colique; if a fever goe with it,Pliny. use wine. The wool only layd on, or with brimstone helps many unknowen griefs; and is of that vertue, that men put it on medicines. The wool of a butting ram, taken from between his hornes, and burnt, is good for the head-ake. The ashes (in Dioscor. opinion) draws over a crust, hinders dead flesh, closes ulcers. Men burn it, when clean and pickt in a new earthen pot, to use as afore. Some shear it, some pluck it off, and clip of the top, dry, and pick it, and put it together into a new earthen pot, and drench it in hony. Others with lincks set it on fire, it being sprinkled with oyle, and rub the ashes with their hands, putting in water, and then let it stand, and oft shift the water, till it lightly touch, but not bite the toung, then they lay up, and keep the ashes. It hath a cleansing vertue to the cheeks. Wool taken after sheep-shearing, between the spring Aequinoctiall, and the Solstice, when they begun to sweat, that from the neck is most commended. Such wool helps green wounds,Dioscor. cleansed, and broken bones, with oly, vineger, or wine; since they soon suck up moysture, and by reason of the ranknes of the cattell (called Oesypus) soften,Pliny. changed, or applied seven dayes,Marcell. it heals the bite of a mad dogge, and out of cold water heals the splents fingers; out of hot oyle it helps running sores. Herodotus relates, that the Carthaginians sheephards with such wool sindge the veins of the crown of the head of their children, when foure years old, and some the temple-vein, to prevent rheums and catarrs. And if the children in finging chance, with crampes, the sprinkling of goats-pisse helps them. If a plowsheard hurt, an ox his legs, or hoof, stoned pitch, and grease with brimstone, wound up in shorn wool with a red hote iron thrust in, cures it.Collume [...]  The same wool with oyl of roses, stanches blood in the nose; and another way is good to stop the eares of hearing:Plin. Blood is also stanched by binding the joynt-ends. Oesypus, or the foul that cleaves to wool, helps disgestion. It eases,Galen. closes, supples ulcers. It helps the inflammation

of the matrice,Discor. Aetius. taken with butter, and Melilote. It cures wounds also taken with barly ashes, and rust, equally divided; it helps also the canker and ulcers. It eats out the swelling about ulcers; and evens knobby flesh. It cures Sint Antonies fire taken with Pompholyx. It provokes sleep, used with a little Mirrhe washt in two cups of wine. It lessens face-spots, with Corsick hony, that is counted stronger. About gathering and preparing it, see Aldrovandus. The skin of the feet, and musles of the ox and sheep, long boyled on a soft fire, to a gelly, taken out, and dried in the open ayre when it whistles, is commended agains ruptures. So much for the medicinall use.

Sheep are also usefull otherwise outwardly; both their fleece and pelts, or skins yeeld us stuf for cloathing. The Arabian Bedevini weare no other, as Vitriacus relates. Zeno Citicus, and Crates of Thebes, sewd Sheeps-skins within their cloaks. Wolstan also Bishop of Worcester in England, was ever clad in Sheeps-skins, because not Leopards, but the Lamb of God is celebrated in the Temples. They were also used in Tragedies, whence the wearers were called Diphtheriai. Only beware of the skins of sheepe that dy of the plague; for such breed not only lowsinesse, but also Sint Anthonies fire. That out of Aelian is strange, a garment of the wool of a Sheep bitten by the wolfe, brings an itchon the wearer. New married women among the Roamns weare girdles of wool. The Pescia, or Capucia, were made of lambs-skins. The Molostans was (saith Festus) sheeps-skin, wherewith helmets were covered. The same skin hath been used in stead of paper. The Belly Diophanes makes good for killing vermine. [...]  Purses have been made of rams stones: And bellows, saith Festus. The smallguts make lute, and bow-strings. In May make Sheeps and Goats-cheese. Their pisse yeelds matter for salpeter. Their dung fattens the ground. If you close a candle of pure rams-sewet in a linnen cloath,Mizaldus. and put it into your chests, it keeps your cloath from moths. Their differences wee shall take from their hair, or wool, or place, and handle them promis-cuously. The Scythian Sheep are soft,Arist. the Sauromatan hard wooled. Those of Tarentum soft-wooled. The Colonian rougher, because kept ever aborad. [...] . Wee shall represent their shaggy shape to you. They are called Montaneers from their rough,Gailex. Oppian. and unkemed wool. There are also Wild-Sheep, not much greater then ours, but swifter, and with horns bending back, armed with butting, and strong fore-heads. They oft in the woods strike to the earth fell Bores; sometimes they combate fiercely with each other. In the Gordian forrest memorable in Iul. [...] Capi [...] ol. Cap. [...] calig. Ex. 2. 17. N. 8. time, [...] oh. Leo. Assi. l. 7. were many painted beasts kept, and an hundered wild sheep. In the Lybian deserts called Adimain, was a beast shaped like a Ram, as big as an Asse, with long dangling-ears, and short wool, she would suffer herself to be backed, though she was not kept for that use, but only for the Milk. Contrary to ours, the Ewes are horned, the rams not. There they are commonly seen, in Numidia also sometimes,Plin. but counted prodigious. The Egyptian-fleeces resembles rather haire then wool. Garments of them being thredbare and died again, last an age. They are greater then those of Greece. About Damiate the weathers have tayls round and so great, they can scarce carry them. Leo Affricanus saith, hee hath seene of those tayls that weighed some 50. and an 100 pound. In Aethiopia they have no wool, but weare all rugged camels hair. Their Sheep are very little,Dioscor. and the natives cover their privities with the tayls.Sicul. In Nubia the rams are yeaned with horns;Bibliot. l. 4. the Ewes also are horned,Aelin. and which seems a miracle,Strabo. they drinke but once in every foure dayes.Plin. At Tunis they are so loaden with their thick tayls, that they can hardly stir themselves, but those that tend them are faine to bind their tayls on litle carts, when they would remoove them. In England they never drinke any thing but dew,Bellon. observat. l. 2. c. 60. Hero. l. 2. Aeli. H. A. l. 10. c. 4. and they of purpose keep them from water, finding by experience, that it hurts them. In Arabia some drag tayls after them three cubits long, some of a cubite broad. Such are found in Arabia the stony and the Happy; the tayls weighing some 26, some 44 pound. Where also are Rams whose hair hangs to the ground. That, that is called the Indian, but is indeed the Arabian Ram, hath no hornes, but long fleece, and a tayle reaching to the ground.Nier. H. E. l. 9. c. 52. There is a kind of smooth-rams, called Moromorus, who stands stone still, and stays till any come near him; sometimes hee is shy, and flies for feare with his burden.Marckgr. H. Bras. l. 4. c. 10. The Ram of Angola (called Guineensis) is of the bignes of ours, thick of head, the after part sticking out more then ours; eares dangling; the tayl reaches but to the anckles; with a great tripe; the yard in the midst of the belly; the hornes small downward, bending toward the eyes, and as it were crumpled; at the bottome of his neck a long hairy maine, the rest of his body is short-haired like a goat, but hee carries no wool, black-headed and eared, and the upper-half of his tayl, the rest white, as also the hinder-part of the head; the fore-legs white to the knees, the lower halfe black; the hind-legs all black; about the dock and back white, the sides have black spots; footed like the goat, black-hoofed. Yet these Sheep are as ours, some coloured on one fashion, some on another; and one kind is thick-legged like a man and fat, having no hanging mane, nor wool, but is haired like a goat. Greater then ours, their belly strutting out like an ox. In Asia some are red-wooled. The region Camanda feeds some as big as Asses, and those fair and fat, with tayls of 80 pound wight. The Canusinian fleeces are reddish, or yellowish. Those of Chios, for want of pasturage, are very small;Aelian. Hermola. but their Cheeses is much cried up. The Clazomenian, are some white, some cole-black,Strabo. some Raven-black. The Coraxine wool is of all the purest.

Therefore the Rams for breed are not

bought under a talent. Those of Creet on mount Ida, called by the shepherds Striphoceri, have straight-horns like a Unicorn, round and hollow, and wreathed like a shell-fish, no bigger then our Rams.

In the Isle Erythraea (it may be Gades) their milk is so fat,Strabo. it yields no whey, and they choke within thirty dayes, if you blood them not.He. Boe. Aelian. In a part of Scotland,Oppian. de Venat. l. 2. the sheep are yellow,Olaus M. Boet. de Scot. their teeth gold colour, the flesh and wool like saffran. In Gortynis, they are red, and have four horns. In Gothland are Rams with four and eight horns, which makes them so fierce, that to prevent mischief, which they else do to each other, and to other creatures, they are fain to saw them off. They bear a soft and long wool. Hirta, one of the Hebrides, hath sheep taller then the greatest hee-goats, with horns as thick as those of Oxen, and somewhat longer, and tailes touching the ground. In Spain in Marineus his time, there was such a glut of sheep, that he knew many shepheards owners of thirty thousand, where their Lambs ar better then elsewhere.Iul. Alex. Arist. Mirab. In Illyria they report, the Ewes yean twice a year, and for the most part couples; nay, many three at once, and four, and sometimes five. And give two quarts and a half of milk at one time.

The Indian reacht in bignesse the greatest Asses,Aelian. and yean commonly four at once, ever three at least. Their tailes reach their feet which they cut off, both that the Rams may come at them, and that oyl may be fetched out of their fat: The Rams tailes also are cut off, and the fat taken out, and are so neatly sewed on again, that the seam is not to be seen. Of which Rams we shall give a figure; one without horns and taile, but having something growing in stead, with a kind of dew-lap under the chin; all white, except the head, and hoof-ends which are black. Another notably fenced with bending and wreathed horns, they and the head of horn-colour; the muzzle, feet, testicles, and bottom of the taile of a shining white, the rest all red.Pliny. Gesner. The fleece of the sheep of Istria, or rather Liburnia, is liker hair then wool. There is a kind said to be in Italy, that carries four or six horns, but weakly ones, and their wool is uselesse. In Laodicea in Asia are small ones, with noble choyse fleeces.Pliny. Athenae. Theophr. Lusitania hath been so fertile, that a Lamb hath been commonly sold for four pence, and a Sow weighing a hundred pound, for twelve-pence, a sheep for six-pence. In Lybia the Rams shoot their horns early forth. In Macedonia, they who would have their wool white, drive them to Aliacmon; they who would have it black, or dark, to Axius. The Madagascar sheep have the heaviest tailes. In Magnesia, and Mesopotamia, they yean twice a year. Those of Milesia hold the third place in goodnesse.

In Moscovy in the deserts about the rivers Bonistenes, Tanais, and Rha, is a wild-sheep, they call it Seigios, about the row, but shorter-footed, with lofty strait-hornes, markt with ringlets, (whereof the natives make knife-hefts that are transparent) very swift, and leaps high. The Nabathaeans (saith Strabo) have all white sheep. In Naxus, they have a double gall. In Panchaea, are much softer wooled then elsewhere. In Peru, they are as big as Asses, long-ledged, grosse-bodied, long-headed, Camel-necked, and shaped; their flesh is excellent, especially their lambs. They plow with the Wethers, which also carry their wood; they never bleat, their colour is white, black, and ash; they can carry fifty pound weight, and let them rest a while, and lay on their burden again, they shall bear it some miles; they can make them sit, and eat, and turn their head about, and grin; if over-loaded, they stink and squat down, and till unloaded, can by no blows be forced to rise up. Their wool exceeds ours in finenesse, length, and abundance. They are fed with corn, but are fed with little; and can three or four dayes together go without eating or drinking. Mathiolus exactly describes them, telling us that they resemble partly a Camel, and partly a Deer. They may be well called Elaphokameloi. He is six foot long from the neck to the tail, but four foot high from the back to the foot-sole, the neck two foot long; like a Camel in head, neck, and mouth; especially in the parting of the upper-lip, and the genital; but somewhat longer headed: he hath Deers-ears, and is Ox-eyed, having no foreteeth in the upper-jaw, but grinders on both sides, as most cloven-footed beasts have, and it also chews the cud; the back riged, which they the cutter hath forgot; the shoulders near the neck deprest, or flat; the sides swollen, broad bellied, high buttocked; the tail but a span long, in all which in resembles a Deer, as also in the thighs, especially in the hind-legs; cloven-hoofed, the cleft afore drawn far out; it hath clawes round the foot, pointing and ending in a thick skin; the sole as the Camels covered with skin, pisses backwards as the Camel; the testicles pinching inward; broad-breasted, and bunched at the knitting, tween the breast and belly; whence a kind of excrement seems to vent it self; the neck, breast, and fore-feet white, the rest of the body reddish, or darkred, the muzzle black, and the forefeet from the knee shining bright. It is tame and gentle, but can endure no cold, as others that are brought us out of hot-countries. Offends no man, but revenges it self strangly on those that vex it, or wrong it: about the buttocks, not defending it self by biting, or kicking; but by spewing, or squirting on the vexer with a force, to the utmost length of the neck stretched out. So lustfull it is, that where there are no females of the kind, he will couple with Goats: His coupling-time is Spring, and Fall; yet those shee-goats conceive not by him, being even forced, as appears by their crying; and it is a kind that hath no agreement with this beast. They call it an Indian-sheep, who brought it to us (saith Mathiolus) but you may judge how

vast the difference is between it and our sheep. Those Chilensian-sheep, whose picture the Hollanders brought over, differs much from these. They are somewhat in make, or bulk of body, but that their hind-feet are cloven in twain, and their fore-feet in four, and the wool very long and shaggy, which they highly commend: but they are a like natured, and are questionlesse of one and the same kind; only the climate makes the difference, unlesse they differ in that bespattring revenge, whereof I speak even now, and is thought where it lights, to breed the scab. Martial. (Epig. l. 14. ep. 157.) writes, that the sheep of Pollentia near the Alps, are all gray-fleeced. The Rhetian sheep of six or seven years old, get new horns to their old. They yean two or three at once, small ones, and not till after six or seven, the first being strongest, and of thicker bulk. The Sauromatan sheep are hard haired. The Syrian have tailes of a cubit long, and most what wooly in that part. [...] . About Tarnasar, a City in India, are seen sheep, horned like bucks, much larger then ours; and monstrous Lambs, whose shapes we hereafter represent; one headed like a Sow, another with two heads, and five feet; a third footed like a Horse, and headed like an Ape; a fourth, three headed; a fifth, double backed, with eight feet.

ARTICLE IV. Of the tame Goat and Kid.

IN this history wee shall first deal with the name, [...]

Copra, or Goat; then with Hircus, or Hee-Goat; after with Hadus, or Kid. Varro, Cicero, and Nonnius fetch Capra, à Carpendo, from cropping, Festus from crepans, because the Goat makes a noyse with the things; Martinius from kapto,

[...] . from devouring, because it is a beast that eats much. It changes names from age and sex. The Greeks call it aix, from aissein,

[...]  to rush on with a force. But the newborne are called Aiges, and Erriphoi, and Chimaroi; the yearlings, or middle aged and growen Tragoi, yet this seemes to be the name of the males only. It hath many Synonimaes, the late Greeks call him Gida. The Turrhenians Kapra, the Cretians Karrano, Hesychius Meklas, and Astignas. The Kelades are shee-goats, and horned for most part; the Kelades are marked in the fore-head, as with a bunch, or hard-skin; the Mnaades are milked. The Ynnas is wild; the Chimara borne in winter, though the Grammarians take it for the name of the whole kind, of what sex or age soever. Called Hircus, (or as the Sabine Pircus) either from the roughnes (Hirsutus;) or from the Hebrew [...] , to burne, since it is a lustfull beast. Called Tragos, from Tragein, to eat; it being a ravenous beast; or from Trachu, because it is rough skind; or from Trechein, running. The geld-one is Kaper; the Egyptians call him Mendes. Haedus is that that comes of the Kapra and Hircus, the hee and shee-goat, or the kid, borrowed from [...] , filthy.Varin. That of three or foure months age is Eriphos; after called Chimaros, till it have yong, and is milked. They of Rhodes call it Karannos, and Kekrykephalos, and, in a certain law, Diakala maserkes, from feeding on fruits-talks.Arist. Description. They are all clovenfooted and horned. They change colour, and are sometimes variously generated. The hair differs according to the sex, thicker in the males, softer and finer in the shees. Festus calls hairy men goatish. Pliny denies that they are all horned, but you may guesse their age by the horn,Varinus. which is long and sharp. In Delos one of the horns is two cubites, and weighs six and twenty pound. Their eyes, which they ever thrust into their corners, look diversly at times; in the dark they shine, and dart forth light. They are flat-nosed. The shee hath no upper-teeth besides the double-ones afore,Pliny. l. 28. c. 11. and the rest are fewer then those of the hee-goat. They have all a shaggy-bard; the Latines call it, aruncus, spirillus; the Greeks Ereggos, Arist.  Krygkes. The little that hang out of their jaws, Festus calls Noneolas; Varro Mammilias, teats; Pliny Lacinias, rags, others Warts. The females have two dugs, slender feet. Some have thought, as the Egyptians sayes and others, that they breath by the ears. Philes saith, the signe is,Alc [...] maeo. Archel. that if you stop their noses, you offend them not: Especially the wild ones, who are said to have a passage betwixt the horns to the lungs, which if you stop with wax, you choke them. Barthol. Oppian.  Eustathius credits it the rather, because he saith he hath found some such thing in man, though Aristotle is against it. They say, the liver, if you take it out, stirs long after. They have more bellies then one.Arist. H. A. l. 1. c. 11. The milt is round. The sharp artery is like that in man. As for their place, they abound in the North. In Candy is great store, because there are no Wolves. In Ithaca Homer calls Aigiboton, goatish. The best Goats-cheese is in the Helvetian, Rhetia, Switserland, especially in the hilly-ground about the Fabarian baths: They are found also in Achaia, Africa, Nubia, Sardinia, Cephalonia, Miletum, Damascus, India, the Newworld, in Spaine, Corsica, and else-where, as we shall see anone in their differences. The ground fittest for them, the Greeks call Aigiboton, &c. Their food is manifold: they delight most in shrubs, the wild Cytisus, Okenleaves. If they eat too many Acorns, it causes abortion.Coisumel. They love the Olive, and so were said to be hated by Minerva, and they will crop young Vines, wherefore they were sacrificed to Bacchus, Figs and Wheat, Ash and Tamarisk, Goats-beard,Aelian. and Dogs-rose. Beans make them full of milk, and cinque foyle, if you give it five dayes together, afore you let them drink. And to this end some ty dittany under their belly. In some places they are greedy after Hemlock, &c.Lucret. Plin. H. N. lib. 12. cap. 17. Ladanum also (a sleepy plant) such as Arabia boasts of; it may be this chance, because of the offensivenesse of the smell. Goats hurtful otherwise to all green things, covets most sweet shrubs, as if they

knew their worth; they will crop the stalks of sprigs, that are full of sweet juice, and wipe from their stinking beard that that thence drops thereon: This they roul in dust, and bake in the Sun; and therefore are goats-hair found in Ladanum. Later Writers tells us, that the Arabian woods are made waste by the feeding of Goats, and that juice cleaves to all the beards. Thus is it also at Cyprus (they say) and that there sticks to Goats-beards and knees, the flower of the Ivy being croped off, afore the dew be off; after, the Sun dispelling the mist, and the day clearing up, a dust cleaves to the dewy goats-beards, and thence ladanum is kammed out.Ruelli [...] s. Their commonnest food is Spire-grasse, and Capriola, because better tasted then others, that they delight in salt, torturers well know; for Dracula the Hungarian Governour, oft cut out the soles of captive Turks feet, and rubbed salt in, and used Goats to lick it out again to increase the torment. For their drink, puddle, standing water, or long keept is disallowed. After noon, when stirred, they drink most. It is strange,Albert. that at Zant, about the season when the Etesiae wind use to blow,Antigo. the Goats stand gaping toward the North, and that serves them without drinking.

The Goat is very lustfull; for they at seven months old, and while they suck, begin to couple, and with greater heat then sheep. The yearlings couple three or four times;Pliny. if presently after a great rain falls, it causes abortion. They go five months; and bring,Varro. for most part, but one at once; sometimes two, three, four. In good aire, and well fed, they bear twice a year.Arist. It continues eight years. Aristotle saith, all their life long, and that they bring twins, if the Sire and Dam be of a lusty kind. In the third year it failes. Fatnesse makes them barren. The meetest coupling time is the Winter, or Solstice. They conceive in November, and bring forth in March when the shrubs begin to swell.Pliny. Some use one Hee for ten females, some to fifteen, some to twenty. Rubbing their genitals with much salt and nitre, and annointing them with peper and nettle-berries, makes them lusty. About their venery and coupling, read Aristotle his History of fourfooted-beasts. They are lovers of sheep, the Tiger, the Sargus, with the Poley and Fringo. Offer a kid to a Tiger to eat, he will fast two dayes after, the third day he will desire some other food; if he have it not, he digs a hole; yet he spares the kid, as if it were his own kinde, saith Plutarch. The fish Sargus delights in their very shadow, and loves to touch it while they stand on the shore, but is by nature disabled from leaping ashore. The Pulegium,Pliny. or Poley, being tasted by the Goat, makes them bleat, whence some Greeks call it Blechon. Theoph. If a Shee-goat crop an Fringo stalk, and carry it in her mouth, the whole heard shall straight leave their pasture, and as astonished at a new sight, shall not give over gazing till the Goat-herd take away the stalk. They hold enimity with the Wolfe,Pliny. Pard, Elephant, the Goat-sucking-bird; they hate mans spittle, hony,Aelian. and the Evonymus, the Vine, &c. For the Wolfe devours them, the Pard seazes them, the Elephant terrifies them, the Caprimulgus sucks them so, that the udder mortifies, and the Shee-goat turns blind upon it. Aelian saith, they avoid mans spittle,Albert. Hony taken in, weakens them; the leaf, or fruit of the Evonymus were but tasted by them, kills them, unlesse they purge it out again by Anochus. If they drink water,Aldrova [...]

wherein Rose-tree-leaves are steeped, they dy Savine is also poyson to them. A young sprouting Olive-tree will not bear, if a Goar but lick it. The lung rosted, prevents drunkennesse. If they eat Conyza, they dy with thirst. The herb Aegolethrum in Lycia, is their bane, whence it hath the name Goat-bane. Their voice is a kind of muttering, or murmuring; whence Homer calls them Mekades. In Latine,Hos [...] . they and sheep are said, balare, to bleat. The Hees are said Phrimassein, to grumble. Varinus saith, they cry Ena, ena. [...]

They are ever stirring, and swift, and nimble. Varro saith (R. R. l. 2. c. 3.) that wild-Goats will frisk away from a stone above sixty foot. They can better away with cold, then sultry heat; especially the breeders, that conceive in deep winter. They love woody, furzy, shrubby places much better then plain pastureground, or medow, and thrive best on clifty, shadowy-land.Col [...] . They hang so strangly on clifts, and rocks, that they who view them from beneath, would verily believe they were falling; whence the rocks are called Aigilipes, and the flock Aipopolion, from their loftinesse, and clambring. They skip, and frisk wantonly about near brinks of rivers, browzing on the banks. Authours are not agreed about the quality of their flesh. Hippocrates holds it raw, windy in the stomack, begetting crudities and belching; but more harmlesse in Summer, their feed being better. At the falling of the leaf, it is most unwholesome. In Winter it breeds somewhat better blood.Gale [...] . Some affirm, that though it be rank, it nourishes and strengthens much. Clitomachus of Carthage,Athae [...] Dipno. l. 9. a follower of the new Academie, saith, that a wrestler of Thebes outwent all of that age in strength, because kid, or goat-flesh was his diet, and that the toughest, and hardest of digestion; with eating whereof, his sweet was rank and rammish. Homer, in A [...] hillus his entertaining of Agamemnon his Ambassadours, shews it to be souldiers diet. The milk is as moderate as most kindes,Galen [...] bon. [...] mal. [...] cibus. [...] . except womens breast-milk. Yet is very different according to their age, feed, season of the year, and length of time after they bring forth their young, without hony it is dangerous food, curdling in the stomack. And it troubles the belly a little,Galen. unlesse eaten with scammony, and other things. In some parts of the East, those that are weaned at three months, are wont to be fed with it.

The cheese follows the nature of the milke. But hee-goats flesh is worst of all to dresse, breeding

ill blood, and is most corrupt, and offensive at coupling time. And yet it hath been a dish at a feast in Antiphanes, as bad and rank as it is. The testicles and liver also are much condemned. About kid, writers are not agreed: It was a delicate with the Patriarches under the old Testament. [...]  And Ascraeus the Poët calls it good juicy nourishment. And Platina after Galen, cries it up for the best houshold fare, easily disgested, as having litle dros in it, nourishing and breeding well tempered blood. But Brujerinus cries it downe, because shee-goats are feverish, and therefore the kid cannot but be unwholsome.Ial. Alex. Sal [...] ber. l. 11. c. 7. Yet Jul. Alex. confessing it indeed to be hot, yet the tendernes of the kids age is an allay to the hot, and dry quality of the dam, and especially if the kid suck yet, not so much for the age, as the nourishment, which takes of from the heat, and makes tender, and juicy. Heathen also of old made it a messe in their feasts, seasoning it with Laser, and other herbs. The blood made into a dish, was called Sanguiculus or blooding; which the Laconians call Melas Xoomos,

[...]  or black-meat; and Pollux A [...] matian blood-meat. Apycius will tell you how to dresse the liver and lungs. The use of this creature in medicine is great, Pliny speaks of a thousand medicines to be fetched from them. Democritus magnifies that is borne alone. The Magitians prescribed goats flesh rosted against a mans carcasse burning, against the falling sicknes. Hee-goats flesh sod in water, breaks impostumes, and divers ulcers. The Porredge drives away Spanish flies. Drusus the Tribune of the people is said to have drunke goats blood, when hee with wannes and envy accused Q. Cepio of poysoning him. The same washes out spots. [...]  And fried, it stops the pain in the bowells, and the flux of the belly, as Galen and Dioscorides relates. Hee-gaots blood soon ripens, make it hot, mingled with somewhat waxy, it eases the gout, helps ill-eyes, that of one fed with diereticall herbs, dried to pouder, and taken with parsly in wine, is very good against the stone. See in Aldrovand how and when it must be gathered. Some call this medicine Gods hand. Authors of great note (as Scaliger and Ioubert, &c.) say that goats [...] blood can soften and dissolve the Adamants glasse heated therein, and in juyce, may be made as soft and yeelding as wax, or clay, and wrought into any shape; but dip it in water, it shall return to its former firmnes. This is a secret of Geberus, [...] 8. [...] . 18. Albertus, and an ingenious Bituricensian glasmaker, which when hee was near death, hee freely revealed to Ant [...] Mizoaldus, as himself relates. The same mixt with vineger, is good against vomiting, [...] den. and hauking, and spitting. The whey is good for them that have been bitten, in right gut, or the colon, because it soon congeals. It is very loosning taken with melanthins and brimstone, [...] icen. and takes away morphew and spots, and itch: [...] ny. With goos grease, deers marrow, rosin and chalk, it closes chapped lips. If an oxes neck swell, [...] mel. R. l. 6. [...] 4. it is a golden soveraign help, with soft pitch, and ox-marrow, and goat-sewet, and old oyl, of each an equall portion, and unsod.Pliny. Marcel. With chalk it scatters swellings; with wax it stops spreading of ulcers, with pitch and brimstone it is through healing; and with hony and juyce of bramble it stops the running of the reines.

The fat of it self alone helps the sting of the green Spanish fly.Dioscor. Magitians commend it against the falling sicknes, with bulls gall, boild in equall portions,Pliny. and put up in litle gallbags, it must not touch the ground, (forsooth) and is to be drunk out of water at doore. The same with Ptisana, or barly unhusked boyled, is good for the colique.Marcel. Goats-fat boyled with barly, rhoe and cheese, they give for the bloody flux, and taken in with juyce of barly unhusked.Dioscor. M. M. l. 2. cap. 94. Pliny. Sext. Empiricus Cadamust. And helps much against diseases in the bowells, supt in in cold water. It is also good against the dropsy. Those of the Canary Islands annoint their flesh with goat-sewet, and juyce of certain herbs, to thicken their skins the better to endure cold; because they goe naked. It is used also against the gout, with shee-goats dung, and saffran, and mustard, with Ivy stalks bruised, or the flower of wild-cucumber. The same is an ingredient into Pomatum, good for chapped lips. The marrow next to deers and calves-marrow, is commended. The liver rosted, and layd with oyl of mirrhe on the navell, helps the cholique, and is better then the same boild with sowr wine, and drunk. The same is good for Nyctalopia, and against the falling sicknes, and for convulsions. It is also commended against the biting of a mad dog, and layd on, it takes away the feare of water, they say, which the bitten, dread. Hippocrates prescribes sheeps,De natu. muliebri. or goats liver buried in embers, to a woman in child-birth, sweld, to be eaten for four dayes, and old wine to be drunk therewith. The gall yeelds many medicines.Pliny. It helps against venome from a wild Weezel; with allom ashes it remooves the itch; with fullers earth and vineger it helps scurf, so that the hairs by degrees dry. With cheese and brimstone it takes away morfew, with sponge-ashes thickened as hony. It scatters swelling, if often touched therewith at first rising. Layd on the eybrows, it takes away hair. To say nothing of the squincy, and eare-diseases.Dydimus. Lastly, smear your beds or walls with goats or bulls [...] gall, steeped in keen-vineger, you shall not be troubled with wall, or bedsted-lice. The spleen fresh taken out of the beast, and laid on mans spleen, in a few dayes strangly removes the spleenative pains, if you after hang it up in the smok, and there dry it. The head, with hair and all boiled, and pounded, strengthens the bowels. The brain dropt through a gold-ring into Infants, afore they have ever sucked, the Magitians prescribe against falling-sicknesse, and all other Infants-griefs.Aescula. Sextus. With honey, it heals carbuncles. And water poured out of a goats palate; and what ever it eats, if mixt with houy and salt destroys lice [...] f you rub the head & body with it in whay, and is a remedy against belly ake. The ashes of the skin smeared on with oyl, rids strangly

the kibe-heel. Shaving thereof, pounded with pumice, and mingled with vineger, helps the Mazels. Bind a womans paps with a thong of goats-lether, and it will stop excessive rheums out of her nostrils. The hair burnt, heals all fluxes; and burnt with pitch, and vineger, and put into the nostrils, stanches bleeding. When burning, it chases Serpents away. The horn burnt, mixt with meal, laid on, mends scurffe, and scald-heads. Pieces of it scorched in the flame, with vineger, are of good use against S. Anthonies fire. Laid under a weak mans head, it causes sleep. Shave, or burn it, and mingle it with goats-gall, and myrrhe, and rub the arm-pits, it takes away the rank-smell. It helps against the Epilepsy, and the sent of it rowseth out of a Lethargy, or dead-sleep. And burnt, if you rub the teeth therewith, it makes them clean and white. The hoof burnt,Pallaelius. it drives away Serpents; and the ashes smeared on with vineger, helps baldnesse, and shedding of hair.

Goats-milke also is many wayes medicinable. Democratis to my knowledge (saith Pliny) caused Con [...] idia, Pliny. H. N. l. 24. cap. 7.  M. Servilius the Consuls daughter, who could not bear strong physick, to use goats-milke, which sustained her long in her weaknesse. The goats were fed with Mastixtrees. There is a healing vertue in it. A draught of it with uva taminia grape, cures a Serpents bite. That which is first milked, lessens the fits of a quartan ague, whether eaten or drunk.Sexus Empiri. Some Magi give swallows-dung, a dram out of goats, or sheeps-milk, or sweet wine, three measures afore the fit. Annoint the gums therewith, and the teeth are bred with more ease. Drunk with salt and hony, it loosens the belly; it is given against the falling sicknesse, palsy, Melancholy, leprosie, &c. Hot in barly-meal like pulse, it is given against the pain in the bowels. It cures the spleen, after two dayes fasting; the third day the goats being fed with Ivy, if it be drunk three dayes without any other food.

The cheese being fresh, heals bites; being dry, with vineger and hony, it clenses wounds; soft, and kneaded with hony, and laid on, and covered with woolen or linnen, it speedily helps bruises, &c. newly curdled, laid on, it helps sore eyes. If a woman hath eaten what goes against stomack, so that her belly ake, and she be feverish, Hippocrates prescribes a fift part of white Peplium, and half a chaenix, and as much nettle-feed, and half an pound of goats-cheese shaved, mixt with old wine, and supped up. And if in the womb any thing be putrified, or blood, or corruption come forth, he prescribes goats-cheese tosted, or scraped, alone, or with as much barly-meal, and taken in with win fasting. As for the curd, a dram out of wine is good against the bite of the Pieterman, and other Sea-fishes: It is drunk also for fluxes and taken against curdled-milk. A third part drunk out with vineger, is good against rank excesse of blood; the bignesse of a bean, steeped in myrtle-wine, taken fasting, eases the collick.Hippocra. It is good against the lask. The pisse drunk with Sea-Aquin vineger, helps against the biting of Serpents, and breakis impostumes where ever they are; poured into the ears, it helps the pulling of the sinews.Herod. l. 4. The Carthaginian shepherds burn the crown veins of their children of four years old with unwasht wool, and some the temple-veins to prevent rheums: If they faint under the pain, they sprinkle goats-pisse on them, and fetch them again.Dioscor. The same drunken two cups a day with spicknard, is good against the water under the skin, drawing it away by urine. Sextus thinks it helps women in their months. Their dung is of frequent use, Spurathoris, the Greeks call it, it is of a digestive and eagre property, softning the hardest swellings, not only of the spleen, but also of others parts. Being burnt, it is thinner, but not stronger. Given in vineger, it cures the vipers bite, in wine with frankincense, female-issues. Ty it on a cloath, it stills children, especially girles.Piny. They daub it on parts out of joynt. Sod in vineger, it disperses throat, and other swellings; And warmed and smeared on, it cures spreading ulcers. Prepared with hony, and laid on, it heals cancers, and belly carbunckles, and disperses them. Bruised to powder, and mixt with vineger, and applied to the fore-head, it takes away the migram: It cures burns, and leaves no scar: kneaded with vineger to the thickness of hony, it loosens contracted joynts, and removes tremblings with barly-meal and vineger, especial in tough and rustical bodies, it helps the sciatica.Hippo [...] . Pills thereof are a remedy for the months and second-birth. Adde hereto, that in Plague-time, if you keep a Goat at home, his breath and smell is good against infection. Besides all this, of the Goats-hair are made sives, of the skin garments, shoos, coverlids, bottles, boots, bellows, sails, paper, and whips. Pirrhus, of the horns made him a crest. The Locrians (the Ozoli) wear sheeps and goat-skins, and live among flocks of goats. The Sardi,Varro R. R. l. [...] c. 3. and Getuli had no other cloaths. In Cypris they make Chamlets of goats-hair; and to that purpose, near the rivers Betolis, and Issa in Armenia the lesse they keep, and shear a multitude of goats yearly. The Turks also at Ancyra, the head-City of Capadocia, make their choysest watered stuffes thereof, and also their tapestry.Observ. l. 3. c. 12. The paper or parchment, I speak of, were first found out at the Troian Pergamus, and thence obtain the name.

We read little of their differences. The Egyptian bring five at a birth, because they drink the fat fruitfull water of the river Nile. In Phrigia there are four horned goats, as Scaliger relates, Sc [...]

with long hair, and snow-white; in the Weveries they shear not, but pluck the hair out. The Egyptians say, that when the Dog-starre arises, the goats turn ever Eastward,Plutar. and their looking that way, is a sure signe of the revolutions of that Star. In the Nothern-coasts they are great bodied, thick thighed, full, and short shouldered, bending

eared, small headed, thick, long and bright necked, high and broad horned. They are almost all white. In Winter they live on Pinebark, Mosse, and Poplar-boughs. The skins are carried by great shipfuls into Germany, and yield great gaine. The Caspian Goats are whitest,Aelian. not horned, and as big as Horses: So soft is their hair, that it may compare with Milesian-wool; so that the Caspian Priests, and the richest make it their wear. In Cephalenia the Goats drink not dayly,Anist. Mitab. Aelian. H. A. l. 3. c. 32. Plin. but gape. and take in the wind. Theophrastus therefore saith, they drink not in six months. In Cilicia, and about the Syrtes they are as shorn. At Damascus they have long eares, manifold teats, and are very fruitful. The owners carry fourty or fifty up and down to sell their milke; and they will milk them where you please, in your dining-room, though it be three stories high, afore your eyes in tin vessels. At Narbon, they have broad and long ears.Gesner. Alex. In Illyria they are not cloven-footed; they bring sometimes three, four or five at a birth, and give a gallon and a half of milk. The same is said of the Indian, near the City Tarnassuri; and of the Affrican at the Promontory of the green-head. Xaverius the Jesuit testifies, that he hath seen at Amborna an Hee-goat suckling little kids, in that corrupted History of Christ and Peter, which the Authour wrote in the Persian language. He had but one udder, and gave a great sop of milk dayly. The Mambron Shee-goat in the Region of Damiata, they may ride with saddle and briddle, and other Horse-furniture; the ears dangle to the ground, the horns hang downward, and turn up again under the mouth. Pharos, an Island in the Aegean-Sea, breeds Goats coloured like the Deer, and greater by much; with an horn twelve handfull long, straight, having but on knag reaching right forth. In Sardinia, their skins are hot in winter, and cold in summer; like the Musmones. And some are swifter then any beast. Among the Monsters we give hereafter the figure of one with three horns.

ARTICLE V. Of the wild-Goats in generall.

WEe are now to treat of wild-Goats both generally, [...] drovan. Hist. and specially with many names, whereof we meet among the Greeks; as Aix agrios,

[...]  [...] olin. [...] ristot. [...] heoph. [...] cero. [...] irgil. Wild-Goat. These have the wit with Dictany, to draw arrows out of their bodies, those namely that live in Candy, and on the hill Ida. Aristotle denies there are any in Africa, Virgil affirms it; who takes the wild for those that are liker tame; which Varro saith are a breed of the tamer, Wee call them Roes, Aigagros;

[...] . Oppian takes for a peculiar kind, called Camozza about Trent. The Aigokeroas, or Capricorn, is a wild wood-goat, of a severall kind; in Suidas D [...] rkas; Hermolaus conceives to be a divers kind, but it seems to be but another name Scaliger takes Dorcas for a kid; [...] . Aldrown. Oppian. [...] . Aelian.  Dorcus for a Roe. However it seems to have the name from sharp-sightednes; for it hath a moysture within the bowelles that helps the sight. The name is used in the Canticles. The Dorcalides are short-tayled. Proches-Gaza, turns a Doe, having the name from Proixesthai, the swiftnes. P [...] oox, from fearfullnes, the Epithite that Homer gives the Hare. It is as swift as a whirlewind; yellow haired, white tayled, the eyes white and blew, the eares stuck with long hair; it swims very swiftly, and with the feet can stem a streame; it delights in lakes where it seeks repast among the bulrushes. The Nebros some make a fawn; some a kind of goat:Marcel. Dioscor. of Solinus a Doe, Kolos is a Scythian wild-goat, of bignes between a Deer and a Ram, of a bright body, very swift, drinking with the nostrils, and holds the water there many dayes, and can make long shift in dry pasture: With the Latines Caprea,Strabo. Geogr. l. 7. is a Rodi Rupicapra, a wild-goat, living among rocky places, as the name gives it. They love to clime high, and to live on the loftiest mountains, where your eye can hardly reach them: yet if they be pursued by beast, or man, it can cast it self headlong from the steepest crags, and yet help themselves so with their horns, that they catch no harme. They fall out often about the females in coupling time: By consent of all they excell the tame in goodnes of tast, savourines, and nourishment, in delicacy of temper, easines of digestion, and in paucity of excrements; yet is their flesh somewhat drier; therefore the Arabes invented the boyling them in oyl, to make them juicier. Yet some thinke that what is sod in oyl becomes dry, and looses the glutinousnes, as Psathuron, Galen. and Kauron. As for their use in physique, wild Goats-flesh is good food for those who have the bloody flux: The liver, either unrosted, or beaten to powder helps the cholique. The steame thereof boyled in salt water, helps thicksighted eys: Burnt, and sprinkled on it, stanches blood, especially if you snuf up the powder.Pliny. The blood with sea-palme takes away the hair: It helps to an easing by stool. The gall is soveraign against venemous bites. The same helps against bloodshotten and dim eyes, and against ruggednes of the cheeks and eye-lids, with conserve of roses, or bruised with juice of leeks, and droped warm into the nostrils, it takes away the tinckling of the head; with Athenian hony, it eases the pain of the jaws, and cures the exulceration of the pizzle. The dung dried, stamped, and sifted, and taken in a cup of hypocras,Galen. takes away the yellow-Jaundice.

ARTICLE VI. Of the wild-Goats in particular.

POINT I. Of the Roe-Deer, Fallovv-Deer, Bucks, and Doe.

THe kindes of wild-Goats are the Rupicapra, &c. The Rupicapra, or Dorcos; in Greek,Dioscor. [...] . Oppian. Aldrovan. Hist.  Aigastros, or Aigagros, that is Wild-goat. It is of the same greatnesse with the shaggy-goat, only a little taller, and in shape liker the tall wild-beasts. Bellonius takes it for a Buck. The colour is between dark and red; it inclines more to the red in Summer then in Winter, to the dusky. But Scaliger saith,Scalig. Bellon. ob. l. 1. c. 54. it is in Summer yellowish, in Winter ash-colour. Gesner saw one black and white. Some are all white, but few. It is red-eyed. The ears are longer then the Rams, and carnation coloured, and on either side a streak above the eyes from the root of the horns, straight to the end of the mouth, and ending in the upper-lip. The fore-head marked with a kind of star. The upper part of the tail hairy, black and round, and as long as that of a Buck. The horns blackish, nine or ten fingers long, rough with knotty ringlets; none in the hooked part, which is smooth, and sharp like a hook. Almost paralel, rising in equal spaces; firm, only at beginning, only a thumbs length, hollow; and rounder then those of the tame. Some say they can,Scal. as we see Goats, scratch their backs with them. It is note-worthy what mischief they do themselves by that scratching; they are thought to delight so in the tickling, that they fasten the horn-tip so in their skin, that they cannot pluck it back again; so that they through anguish will cast themselves from the highest clifts, and taken, they dy of pain, or famish to death. They haunt rocky mountains; yet not the tops as the Ibex, nor leap they high, or far; they come down sometime to the lower Alps. They meet oft about some sandy rocks, and thence they lick sand, as Goats do salt, whereby they rub off their sluggish flegme, and sharpen their stomack. When they are hardly chased, they climb so high, that no dogs can come at them: Then when they see the hunters creep on all four to pursue them, they frisk from stone to stone, and make to the mountain tops, where no man can follow them, there they hold, and hang by the horns till they are shot with guns, or driven headlong from their hold, or famish to death. Presently after S. Iames time they betake themselves to the colder clifts, to inuse themselves by degrees to cold. Being taken, they are sometimes made tame. Of the skins are made gloves for horsemen. When they stray to find out new pastures, the next rock they look wishly on, putting forth a foot, they try often whether it be fast, or loose, and slippery. It is pleasant, saith Scaliger, to see how in my uncle Boniface his hall, they that are kept tame will leap at the hangings, wherein the like wild are woven. As for their use, their flesh is somewhat dry, and a breeder of melancholy, and is of a wild sent. Hunters drink the blood afresh, springing out for a present help for the swimming of the head.Pliny. A cup of the sewet mixt with the milk, it is said to cure a deep consumption. We represent here a double figure, of the Rupicapra, or wild and mountain-Goats. The Buck is twofold; one that the ancients write of, whereof here; the other, the common one that the Moderns write of, called Platykeroos, or broad-horned; men (it may be) by Gaza, who translates Proka, (in Aristotle) Dama, or Buck. Pliny reckons it among the wild outlandish goats. It may be it is that that Dioscor. calls Nebros. It is like a Goat, and coloured like the Doe.Nic [...] n.  Ovid calls it a Doe with a yellow back. They are famous for their fearfulnesse; therefore they are seldome tamed. They catch hold of Crags with their horns,Pliny. as if they were hooks; nor do they any other wayes clim the inaccessible ridges of mountains.

POINT II. Of the Ibex.

DIoscorides in his Chapter of Curdles [...] akes no mention of this Goat,Ald [...] . Hist. B [...] . c. 13. [...] . and scarce any other of the Ancients, except Homer, who calls it Ixalon Aiga. But the learned witnesse, as with one mouth, that it is the same that the Germans call Ston-Buck. Pliny comprizes the whole story inPliny. short, saying, that among the wild-goats are the Ibices on the Alps, of a wonderful swiftnesse, though their heads by burdened with huge horns, where with they defend, and poyze themselves; and can safely tumble, and frisk as they lift from clift to clift, most nimbly. It is a gallant creature, and great-bodied, almost shaped like an Hart, but not so great; slender thighed, and small-headed, the skin dark-coloured; growing old, they wax gresly, and have a black list along the back; clear, and fair-eyed; cloven, and sharp-hoofed: The female is lesse then the male, and not so dusky of colour. He is bigger then the shaggy goat; not unlike the Rupicapra. The hee hath along black beard, that happens to no other beast, so Bellonius writes, haired like the Hart; unlesseBellono [...] l. 1. c. 13. happily to the Hippelaphus: His vast massy horns bent toward his back, sharp, and knotty, and the more, the older he growes; for they wax yearly, till that they grow to about twenty knots in the old ones: Both horns, when grown to their utmost, are well neat sixteen or eighteen pound weight. Bellonius had seen some horns four cubits long; they have as many crosse-beams, as they are years old. Fleet they are; nor is their any rock so

high, lofty, or steep, that they will not reach with some leaps, if it be but rough, and just but so far out, that they can fasten their hoofs on. They are wont to leap from clift to clift six paces distant from each other. Falling, he breaks the force of the fall with his horns. See Aldrovand about the manner of hunting them. There are two kinds of them in Candy. Bellonius writes, having seen of their horns brought out of Cyprus: If they are surprized, and have space enough, they venture on the hunters, and cast them head-long from the rock; But finding there is no escaping, they easily yeild themselves.

Of the same kind is that African wild beast, which Aelian H. A. l. 14. c. 16. describes thus: Wild-Goats abide on the tops of the Lybian mountains; they are well near as great as oxen, their shoulders, and thighs extreme shaggy, small legged; their foreheads round, thin and hollow-eyed, not bolting much out; the horns from the first sprouting, very unlike each other, scambling, and crooked, and not uniformed and strait, as other goats horns; but bend-back to their very shoulders. No Goats so fit, and able to leap, & so far as they from clift to clift; and though they sometimes leap short, and fall headlong downe between the crags, they get no harme, so made he is against such brunts, so firme bodied, that hee hurts no horns nor head. The Goat-heards have many arts to take them, as high as they are, with darts, or nets, or gins, being very cunning in that hunting. On the plain ground any slowfooted hunts-man can overtake them. Their skins and horns are of some use; for the skins are very good to make gloves for shepheards, and carpenters in cold winters. The horns are as fit to draw water out of rivers, or wells to drink in, as cups themselves; for they hold so much, as cannot be taken in at one draught; if well fitted by a good workman, it may hold three measures. It hath it's use also in physick. The curds as usefull as those of the hare. [...]  The blood with wine, and rosemary is commended against the stone. The only helpe for the Sciatica and the gout: gather the dung when the moone is 17 dayes old, or when the moone is oldest, if it be needfull, it may be of like efficacy, so the medicine be made on the 17 day, a handfull must be taken, stamped in a morter, with 25 pepper cornes, make it into pills, the number odd, adding three, quarters of a pint of the best, and of the most generous old wine, a pinte and halfe; first making all into one masse, lay them up in a glasse; but to make it more effectuall, doe it on the 17 day of the moon, and begin on a thirsday to apply it, giving it for seven dayes together, so that the patient stand eastward on a footstool, and drinke it; which are meer fopperies, though Marcellus prescribe so.

POINT III. Of the Buff, the Bubalides, and the Pygargus, or Roe-Buck.

ALdrovand sayes c. 14. p. 303. that hee thought once that the Bubalus, or Buf, and the Bubalides, differed in former times in the shape; but hee confesseth hee was mistaken. For the nature, hee is much taken with old home, and bring him into good pasture, hee will returne; when frighted hee thinks himself safe, if hee can hide his head, like the Ostrich. Hee shuns all fierce and quarrelsome beasts. The blood is somewhat thicker then that of the Hare and Hart; thickning well neare as much as the sheep. The Pygargus (as Pliny also saith) is a beast alwayes given to be lonely, and keeps in the woods.

POINT IV. Of the Caprea, or Roe, in Pliny, the Goat half Wild and half tame, and the common Buck, or Doe.

PLinies Caprea, or Roe, is no other then our Capreolus, or Kid; which the Germans call Reh, not unlike the Hart in colour, but far smaller, scarce so great as the Goat. The male his horns commonly have six branches. There was one had 17 horns, whose picture the Duke of Bavaria sent to Aldrovand. The horns are branched indeed,Pliny. Virg. but small, and they cast them. Sharp-sighted they are; small voyced: they shed not their teeth; spotted; some spots are white. In time they change colour, and the spots become not so sightly. Many are taken in the Helvetian Alps; yet they love lower places then other Wild-goats. The Shee, if her Male be taken, seeks another, bringing him to her old place; and if the Shee be taken, the Hee seeks another. Their horns they either know not how to use, or dare not. They love to feed,Bellifar. Iul. Alex. where Partridges haunt. They run only when the wind blows, to refresh themselves in their toyl. They are as well tasted as the Boor, and their flesh sooner digested. Of this sort are those in Brasile; two kinds are of them, Cagua-cuete, and Cagua-capara: Almost like our hee-goats. The head about seven fingers long, great and blackeyed, large and wide nostrild; the mouth black, the skin shining; the eares four fingers long, two and an half broad; their veins easily seen; the neck round and smoother haired then the rest of the body; five fingers and a half long. The body but two feet from the neck to the rump. The tayl short, as of other Goats. The forethighs a foot, the hinder a foot and half long; the hoof cloven and black; and on those two other lesser ones. Smooth-haired, red on the thighs and feet, dark on the neck and head, white under the throat, and the bottome of the

neck; the tayl white below; the eares whit within, dusky without, and almost hairles; the mouth a litle longer below then above. Hee chews the cud, and is easily tamed: After one or two months old hee becomes delicately whitespotted, which in time weare out. The Brasile Cuguacu apara is a horned Hee-goat, coloured as the former, but somewhat lesse; the horns have three shoots on them, the lowest is longest, and parted at top; the main horn is a thumb thick, and eight or nine Rhineland fingers long. The Strepsicerote, or Roe-buck, is described by Aldrovand out of Pliny,Aldrovan. Plin. Bellon. and reckoned among the wild-goats, that are outlandish. The picture of the Cretian one is taken out of Bellonius.

The common Buck resembles in shape the Hart, is greater then the Roe, but differs in colour. The Buck is smaller-headed then the Hart; hee casts his head every year, the horns stick foreward out, and not as others use: The ridge of the back is blinking yellow, and hath a black list all along. The taile reaches to the hams, as a calves. The sides sometimes are checkered with white spots, that with age wear away. Sometimes the Does are all white, that you should take them for goats, but that the hair is short. Their horns are in many places shewen of a vast greatnesse and beamy, as at the ascent and steps of the Ambosian fort. The flesh very like the Kids; the blood of a deep black. Sometimes he is fat as a Wether. The dung prepared with oyl of mirrhe, is said to make hair come thick.

POINT V. Of the Goat of Muskus, or Musk-Cat.

THe Arabians only have written of him among the old Writers.A [...] ro H. Bis. c. 19. The later Greeks, as Aetius, and Paulus Aegineta, have borrowed what they have from them. Call him Wild, or Goat, or Indian, or out-landish, or eastern Gazella, or Goat of Moschus, it skills not much. Some call him Moschus from Musk, S. Hierome reckons his skin for the most delicate of perfumes, and calls him an outlandish Mouse. Gesner saith,Gesner. the Musk lies in a bag in him. Writers differ in describing him, and some that have seen him, they say: But all agree, that he is a kind of Goat. Men report that he feeds all on sweet herbs, especially Nard; and that the sweet musk is a blood gathered about the navil. They are so swift, that they are seldome taken alive. He bites at his pursuers with a fury. Take his longer teeth out, and you may tame him. In the Province Thebet they hunt them with dogs: Some say, they are found in Persia, Africa, Egypt. The perfume we call musk; perhaps because of old they use the mosse of the Cedars and white Poplar, &c. in composition of perfumes and thickning oyntments. I have seen the like growing on beasts. The bags in this Gazella are full of musk; He is of a middle nature, between a Hee-goat and a Calfe, and yellowish,Moschus. [...] . which the Greeks call Moschus; whence musk may have the name, or from the likenesse the bag bears with the small cups on Ovian-tops where the seed is, which the Gr. call Moschai; or as Etimologists will have it, because it lies En Mesu, the middle, or the navell: Not to say it comes from the Verb Moo, because all desire it; or from Ozoo, smelling, senting, of the Original writers differ. And as much about the choosing of it.Aldrovan.  Platearius likes not the black, but that that is coloured like Spikenard Brasavolus holds that the blackish hath the best sent, that brought out of Cataia. Some prefer Tumbascin musk, because of the abundance of pasture there, which is ripe in the bag, and better then that that is hanged up in the aire: The unripe, though in the beast, smells not well. The Antebian musk is better then the Abensin, then the Jurgian; next the Indian by the Sea-coasts.

That of Elluchasis among the Tacuini is thin, and the bag thin: The Gergerian quite contrary, and not so aromatical. That of Charua is a middle sort; The Salmindian, not so good. For the proof of Musk, see Aldrovand. It is many wayes adulterated, especially the black, and reddish; by mixture of a little goats-blood a little rosted, and stamped, three of four parts for one musk: But rosted bread makes it moulder; the goats-blood broken is bright, and clear within.Alex. Bened. G [...] sner. The Saracens vent it oft, bag and all, but sophisticated. Some falsifie it with a kids-liver dried, and birds muting. Some increase it with Angelica-root. It will loose the sent, if you adde any sweet thing to it. It is best kept in a thick glasse-bottle, waxed over. It recovers the lost sent, if you hang it in an open pot in a house of office.

For the use of Musk, Authours differ about the temper of it. Averroes holds it hot, and dry in the end of the second degree; Sethus in the third. All confesse it to be a thin substance. It drawes out blood, put to the nose; and opens the vessels of the body. It is besides used to strengthen, and against trembling, fainting, wind; to purge the head in sweet-balls, and wash-balls; in censing, in pomanders, and sweet-oyntments. Yet it is ill for the mother to some women; as the Venetian, and Northern women.

POINT VI. Of the Bezoar, or the Pazahartica-Goat.

MEn write diversly in the describing of the Bezoartican-Goat.Aldro [...] .  Bell [...] nensis seems to deny there is any such beast, while he relates out of Thiphasis the Arabian, that that they call the Bezoar-stone, is taken out of the veins. The Arabs fetch it from the Harts. Monardes from the testimony of eye-witnesses, reports it to be as great as the Hart, and resembling him. Bontius saith, that

he is shaped like our goats of Europa, except that they have more upright and longer horns,Bontius Med. and that some of them are partly coloured, as Tigers, and goodly to look on; two whereof are to be seen in the fort in Batavia. The greater, or lesser the stone is, that they carry the nimbler, or heavier they go; which the wily Armenians, and Persians well know. They feed on an herb like Saffran; the eating whereof breeds that stone. Whence it comes to passe, that because an Isle between Cormandel, [...]  and Ceylon, called by the Portugals, Isle de Vaccas, (or of Cows,) is sometimes overflowen, that the goats must be transported thence to save them, they being deprived of that herb, breed not that stone; and when the waters are down, and they are brought back thether, they yield the Bezoar-stone again, which is as troublesome to them, as to us the stone is in the bladders or reins. Whence we may gather,Monardes. how vain their relations are that tell us that it is bred in their bowels, or reins, or the gall. Some call it Pasani, some Balsaar, some Pazaher, that is, an antidote against poyson. It is bred especially in Persia in Stabanon, three dayes journey beyond Lara, where the Persian Kings are watchful to challenge for themselves all the stones that exceed a certain weight. They are of several shapes, and kindes; some much costlier then others,Aldrouan and of greater vertue, and efficacy. There are counterfaits made. Monardes, from the relation of Guido de Lavaretus, writes, the right ones are made up of kind of lates, or barks folded within one another, very bright and shining, as if they were pollished; having within a dust, or a chaffe. Bontius thinks that Genuine, that rubed on a piece of chalk, shews a light-red; cast into a bason full of water, and left there three hours together, looses nothing of the weight. When the counterfait becomes hevier, or lighter taken out of water; and rubed with chalk, splits. Much is written by many of the vertues thereof; that laid on any bare part of the body, it defends it against poyson:G [...] ia. That the powder cures bites, sprinkled on the bitten place; That cast on wild beasts, it benums them, and kills vipers with any liquor: That all receits taken against poyson, and malignant Fevers are vain, unlesse Bezoar be also used.Monard.  Monardes gives examples of diverse hereby rescued out of the very jawes of death. It helps melancholy, quartons, fainting fits, epilepsies, giddinesse, stone, worms, and what not: But it is observed to be more helpful to women then men. Some in India dream that it makes them young again. Monardes hath a whole tract about it: But Bontius writes, that he findes by a thousand experiments, that the vertue thereof is not so great. He saith, that the stones called pazahar bred in the stomack of the Simior are round, and above a finger long, and are counted the best.

Hether may be referred the Vicuna, [...] E. l. 9. [...] p. 59. and Taruga. The Vicuna is a swift beast of Peru. It is hornlesse, else like a wild goat. Nether is that any hinderance, that he wants horns; since there are dogs that are said to have horns, when most have none. He delights in mountanious and rocky places: She loves cold and deserts: She seems to be refreshed with snow, and frosts: She loves company, and the Herd. She runs from all men she meets, putting her young ones afore, being carefull of them. She is taken by a swift chase; to which end three thousand Barbarians compasse a mountain, and by degrees make all the wild here together, sometimes more then three hundred; they send the females after the young ones; They are taken also, when they come to a convenient space, and toyles of cord, and lead laid for them. They shear them to make coverlids; their wool is fine as silke, of a lasting colour; being natural, it needs no dye. In hot whether it refreshes, helping the inflammation of the reins: wherefore they stuffe therewith tikes for beds. It is said to ease the Gout. The flesh hath no good relish; yet it is an Indian dainty. And a piece of it new killed, and laid on the eye, removes suddenly the smart. They breed the Bezoar in the bowels, next to the eastern Vicuna is the Taruca, of that kind, but swifter, and greater, and deeper colour; of soft and dangling ears, not delighting in company, she wanders among rocks alone. In these is the Bezoar-stone found both of greater vertue, and bulk.

POINT VII. Of the Scythian Suhak, and the Goat with dangling eares.

OF the Scythian Suhak,Aldrovan. H. Bis. c. 23. Arist. H. A. l. 8. c. 28. see Aldrovan. pag. 313. We owe to Aristotle the mention of the Goat with hanging-ears, a palm, and more broad, and reaching near the ground; Probably it is that in the print here following, which they call the Indian Goat, and the Syrian Mambrina. By the wool, hair, face, and horns, it seems to resemble a sheep rather then a Goat. The colour is white.

POINT VIII. Of the Oryx.

THree sorts of creatures are by the Greeks termed Oryges.Strabo. One a water one, two land ones. Of the first Strabo writes treating of Turdetamia,Geo. l. 3. which some suppose to be the Sea-orke.Aldro. H. B. c. 24. Pliny. [...] . Of the two latter kinds Pliny, and Oppian mention. The name Oryx comes from To Orytte [...] n, or digging, because, at new Moon it turns eastward, and digs up the earth with the fore-feet. For the shape, it is one-horned, and cloven-footed. It is of the kind of wild Goats. But of a contrary hayr, turning toward the head; as it grows

on the Aethiopian Bull.Plin. H. N. l. 11. cap. 46. Arist. H. A. l. 2. c. 1. Pliny. He is engendred in the driest parts of Africa, ever without drinke, and strongly usefull against thirst; for the Getulian theeves hold out by a draught of wholesome liquor found in their bladders. Albertus saith that he is as big as a Hart, bearded, used to the deserts, and easily taken in a net. Herodotus makes him as great as an Ox; Nor have we any certainty of his shape. The horns are black, and to be seen in most libraries, like a swords blade at top, diverse, according to their age, both in length, bredth, and number of knobs. Wee give you here the images of two of them. But Aldrovand himself durst define, whether they are Indian Asses horns, or no. But, since the Aethiops, called Sili, used them for weapons against the Struthiophagi, or Estridge-eaters, and they are very hand, and beamy, long, sharp-pointed, and hollow, they seeme to belong to the Oryx. The Egyptians fain many things of him, that they know, when the Dog-star arises, and then cry out; that they gaze on the star, and adored it like a God;Albert. whether by a peculiar sympathy, or that they know cold weather is past, which they cannot well endure. He seems to despise the Sun,Aldrovan. and Moon; they dung against the rising Sun, and never drink. Columella, and Martial mention the Orus; but I beleeve it is not the same with this. The later calls him Cavage; the former reckons him among the beasts kept in warrens, or parks for food. Hee is said by Oppian,Aldrovan. to be wild, a great foe to wild beasts, and milke white. So different are the relations about the Orus, which must be a double kind; one fearfull, the other fierce. Some in India are said to have four horns. Ambr.Aelian. Paréus (T. 1. l. 5. c. 5.) mentions a wild beast in some Island of the Red-sea, called by the Arabs Kademotha; by the inhabitants called Parasoupi; as great as a mule, and headed alike; haired like a Beare, but not so dark-coloured, but yellowish; footed like the Hart; having two lofty horns, but not beamed, akin to the Unicorns horn. The natives being bitten by any venomous beast, are cured forthwith by drinking the water, wherein the horn hath lien soaking certain dayes.

ARTICLE VII. Of the Hart, or Deer.

THe Latine name Cervus is taken from the Greek Kerata,

[...] Aldro. H. Biscul. c. 27. horns. The Greeks give him very many names, as Elaphos, because of his nimblenesse, or his delight to be about lakes, or waters; or because he drives away the serpent with the smell of his horn, who rubs it on purpose against a stone, to raise the sent; and Beirix, Bredos, &c. The Hinds first fawning, they call Ptookas, that is, Procas,Varinus. Descript. the Calf, or Fawn, Nebros, &c. The Deer, or Hart is cloven-footed, tong-hoofed, soft-haired, and hollow within, if you beleeve Junius, which makes him swim well.Pliny. He is light coloured, sandy reddish, yet there are white ones, as Sertorius his Hind, which, as he perswaded the Spaniards, was propheticall. No beast carries greater horns: The Hind hath none ordinarily; though some have been seen horned by Maximilian the Emperor, and by Scaliger. The Fawn of a year old hath beginnings of horns budding, short and rough; The second year he is called a pricket, and hath plain horns, called spellers, or pipers; The third year he is a sorell, his horns branching once; and sox increase to the sixt year. (Wee say there are in a stages head the Burre, or round roll next the head; then the Beam, or main horn; then the Browanteliers; next above the Bezanteliers, next the royall, above the surroyall top. In a Bucks head are Burre, Beam, Braunch, Advancers, Palm, Spellers. The fourth year the Buck is a Sore; the fifth year, a Buck of the first head; the sixt, he is a Buck, or great Buck.) But the branching is very different. William Duke of Bavaria hath two, each horn hath one and twenty branches. Albertus speaks of eleven such in Germany.

Aemilian saw in the Duke of Ferrara his store-house a Hart, little lesse then a Horse, and so branched as the German heads. At Antwerp is one with 15 branches. Other hornes are hollow,Gesner. except at top the Harts solied throughout,Aristo [...] . others cleave to the bone; the Harts sprout onely out of the skin. No beast casts the horns so as hee.Pliny The horn is as firme, and hard as a stone; growing old, it is lighter, especially in the open air, and sometimes moyst and dry again. Gesner hath observed in a grown Hart, at top of the horn, two, three, or five branches, and the beame six fingers broad, beside the antlers and spellers below; and he hath marked between the brain-pan, and the horns, litle bones, or double-bony knobs, about two fingers long, smooth; and the shorter, the older the Hart is. (Wee English divide the Deer into red, and fallow Deer; among the red, wee call the male a Stag; the shee, an Hind; the young, Calves; among the f [...] llow Deer, wee call the hee a Buck; the shee, a Doe; the young, Fawns.) And they all differ in hornes, and in some they are grown together. Gesner saith he hath seen a Stags-speller of 9 inches; and of one of three years old, with the speller of 18 inches. Those wee have mentioned are smooth, white, not rugged. They cast their horns yearly at a certain time in the Spring. One hath been taken,Arist. in whose horn green Ivy grew. It is said, that if you gueled them, their horns fade away.Pliny. Their face is fleshy; the nose flat;Oppia [...] . the neck long; the nostrils fourefold, and with as many passages; their musles slender, and weake;Cyn [...] g. the ears as cut, and parted, as no other beasts have.Arist. They that are about Argenusa on the hill Elapsus, they have foure teeth on each side,Albert. both below, grinders, and besides two other above; greater in the male, then the female, they bend all downward, and seeme bent:Arist. They have all live-worms in the head, bred under the tongue, in a hollow of a turning joynt that joyns the neck to the head; others as great bred in the flesh, at least [...] 0,

some have seen more,Plin. and severed; though some have none. Some say Wasps are bred within theirs eye-bone, and fly out thence. The blood is like water, having no strings, but is curdled,Arist. as many have observed with Baldus Angelus. The eyes are great; the heart as great as uses to be in all timerous creatures. Divers write diversly of a stone in the corner of the eye,Plin. called Belzahart, or Bezaar. Scaliger denies it, [...]  that there is any stone there, till the Deere be an 100 years old; and then it begins to grow, and waxes harder then a horn, swelling out of the bones, and over the face; where it bunches out, it is round, and shining, yellow, and streaked with black so light, that it scarce abides the touch; you may see it withdrawn it self. Scribonius calls it, the eye-filth. Almost in all Deers hearts are found bones, the greater in the older, sometimes shaped like a crosse, interfering. I have seen them, saith Iordanus, as big as a pigeons egg, and framed of plates, and, which is pleasant to see, break them, and you find a bone in the midst, like the other heart-bones, about which those shells clings, the heat of the heart ingenders them.G [...] sne [...] . They are found from the midst of August, to the middle of September. Brasavolus calls it a sinew, or sinewy gristle. Andernacus shews you how to find it, laying open the left side, and tracing the roots, and membrance of the artery, whereabout it lurks. The Deers tayl is but little, like the Sea-calves; the thighs very slender. They have more bellies then one. The genital sinewy like the Camells. [...]  The gut is so small, and britle, that you may break it, and never crack the skin. Men say they have no gall, but the bowells are so bitter, [...]  that a dogge will not touch it, unlesse the Deere be very fat. Those of Achaia are thought to carry theirs in their tayl, but liken the fourepart of the spleen, then the gall. The Doe is lesse then the Buck, a handsome beast, onely hornlesse, sharp-sighted, of wondrous swiftnesse, shee hath foure teats as the Cow. [...]  Galen speaking of the tunicles of a birth, and of veins, and arteries, which issuing out the womb, are fastened to it, affirms, that in all animals given to leaping, as Deere, and goats, the ends of the vessells are joyned with the matrixes, not onely by thin skins, but by tough flesh, like a kind of fat; a token of admirable divine providence. [...]  The back of either sex is fat.

Arist. [...]  and Pliny write, that there are none found in Africa, but Virgil and modern authors say the contrary. Some write that in Apulia, they shew themselves like armies; and that Ferdinand King of Napels was deceived by them, [...] 2. de Bel. [...] ap. [...] 1. c. 61. Cpitoli. [...]  [...] ispal. and James Caldor, the wisest Prin [...] e of that age. In Bargu, a Province of Cataja, they are numerous, and so tame, that they ride on them. In Batavia they have abounded all along, that tract of sand-hills, and valleys, laying between the Haghs-wood and Egmond. In Brittain, checkered have been white, and black ones. In the region of the Chicoriary in the new world, they are kept tame like goats. Solinus writes, that there are none in Candy, except among the Cydoniatae. Yet Varinus mention Does in Achaea on that Isle. Bellonius said there are many there, there being no harmfull creatures in Creet. They swim out of Syria to Cyprus, because there is plenty of pasture, that they fancy. In Elaphus an Asian-hill by Arginussus,Aelian. they are cloveneared; and by the Hellespont. They are there tame by nature, saith Aurelius the Emperour. In Scotland the Deare are great,Arist. and so numerous, that at a solemne hunting 500, 800, sometimes a 1000 have been killed; some are 10 thumbs thick of fat. They abound also in a hill on the Ilands, the Hebrides, which bears the name Cervus from the Deer. Xapita in America hath herds of them, as wee of Oxen; they breed at home,Martyr. Decad. Ocean. 7. c. 2. are fed near their houses, by day let out into the woods, at night they return to their fawns, are shut up in huts, and suffer themselves to be milked. In France about Fountaineblea [...] they swarmed. In Florida there are tame, in Xapitum, and wilde, some as big as an ox, some lesse. In many parts of Germany, they are kept tame in dry ditches about their walls. In Helvetia they lessen dayly, inhabitants increasing, and woods decaying. In Hercynia they are blackish. Among the Dikilappi,Gesner. there are many herds of them. In Norw [...] y they are called Rhen, they are somewhat greater then ours. The Laplander use them in stead of beasts of carriage, they yoake them in a wagon, like a fishers-boat, whereon they bind a man fast by the legs;Sigism. Herberstein. he holds the reins in his left hand; in his right he holds a staf to keep the wagon from overturning: Thus they can ride twenty miles a day; and they let the Deere loose, which returne to their owner, and usuall stables of themselves. They are so lustfull, that they go the whole day a rutting,Engengendring. Badaeus. a whole month together, and are raging, and wast away with it, almost another month. They will fight for their Does, and Hindes; and the worsted Deere will attend, and serve the conqueror, if we beleeve Albertus. The females being with fawn, they separate themselves from others,Arist. and keep by their males, they dig holes in lonely places, they smell rank like goats, their faces sported with black; so they live, till a sound shewr of rain fall, and then they return to their pasture. They gender in August and September. The same Bucks follow divers Does, and returne again to the first. The tame are usually barren,Plin. unlesse they be from the very first brought up tame. They go with fawn eight months. They bring forth most part but one at once. The fawns grow apace. The Doe in fawning is cleared of a flegmatique humour, otherwise she never purges. About suckling, and her posture, therein Pollux, and Gesner write contradictions. Authours write much of their longlivednesse. A Raven may live nine of our lives;Age Hesiod. Deer, that is, Stags, foure times as long. By that reckoning they should live 3600

years. Pliny speaks of some, taken some hundreds of years after Alexander the Great his time, who had caused golden collars to be put about their neck, which were found covered with skin, and sunk in great fatnesse.

In the reigne of Charls of France, who lived in the time of the Schisme, between Clement and Urban VI. there was a Stag taken at Sylvanectus, on whose collar was inscribed in Latine letters; Hoc me Caesar donavit; Caesar bestowed this on mee. Theophrastus who lived 80 years, yet complained of nature, that made Deere longer lived then man. Not to stand long on the sacred Doe,Dominae Sacra. mentioned by Pausanias, that was a fawn in Agapenons time; or Diomedes his Stag, taken in Agathocles time, some ages after. It is said that a Hind of Augustus C. was taken many lustres of years after his reigne, with this inscription on the collar; Touch mee not, I am Caesars. Some guesse at their age by the number of the branches of their horns. Though Aristotle likes it not.

Authors give severall names to their voyce;Their voyce. as Glocitare, yonking; Virgill calls it braying. Wee give different name to the voyce of Bucks, Does, Fawns, Stags, Hinds, and their Calves.Sympathy, and Antipathy. They are friends to the Quail, but hold lasting enmity with the Eagle, Vulcur, Serpent, Dog, Tigre, wild beasts, Foxes, the Gew, and whitet-horn, and red feathers. The Quail sits oft on their back, and pick their hairs. The Eagle gathers a lump of dust, and sitting on their horns, shake it in their eyes, and strike them on the face with their wings.Plin. They fight with Serpents, search after them in their holes, and draw them out by the snuffing of their nostrils. The very smell of Harts-horn burnt, will drive away Serpents. In Lybia, they make at Serpents,Oppian. where ever they ly. If a Deer tread on Cactum, the Hartychoke, and it pierce, their bones never be sound after. Aspalathus kills them with the touch.Their ingenuity, and disposition. They delight in covert, in wild woods, forrests, chases, where the soyl is fat. They love vineyards and lawns, and pastures in woods, where the Sun comes. The Buck leaving his pasture, hids him to the woodside, but the Does run into the thickets; they seek after fresh pasture, but ever return home again. One uses like a Captain to lead the Herd, they feed all day, at high-noon they seek shade; they are fearfull even to a proverb. Cantharion Arcas, was by the oracle nicknamed a Deere. They are good at leaping, whence a place near Frankfort hath the name; where two stones are erected,Gesner. in memory of one that being hunted leaped 60 foot, and upon a loaden cart to save himself. When hardly chased, they will rest themselves, till the dogges draw near them. When they despair of escaping, they leave the woods, fly into the fields, and sometimes into towns, and houses for shelter; for most part they go with the wind. Their sagacity and wit, in deluding the dogges, is strange. If they are hunted by Eager-dogges,Budae [...] s. they gather into parties; then if pursued, they fly among the Deere, kept tame about house; sometimes they mingle with the Herd, to shrowed themselves, sometimes they will drive the hunted Deere from them; they will amuse the dogges by their uncertain steps, going back the same wayes, or where other Deere use to tread, to confound the dogges sent; they will run round, and leap to put the dogges to alosse. There hath been one seen to run among a Herd of oxen, and leap on an oxes back, and to ride him along way, and trailing the hinder-feet on the ground, to put the dogs to a cold sent. They have been seen to leap into trees in shady places. They eat Cinara against venomous grasse; and crabs against the bite of Spiders.

They are very carefull that the Sun-beams shed not on their fresh wounds,Aeli. to purifie them afore they be closed. With eating Dittany, they can draw arrowes out of their bodies, which goats also do.Dios [...] . Plin. They swim over seas by herds, one resting the head on the others buttock, and take turns when the first is weary. This is most observed in the passage from Cilicia to Cyprus; though they see not land, they smell it. They put the weakest last, and venter not out till the wind favours them. They fatten in summer,Aelian. and then lurk in corners, that their weight may not make them an easy prey to the dogs.Arist. They hide themselves also by day, when they have cast their horns, and keep in shady places, to avoid annoyance from flies; and feed in the night, till their horns sprout again, then they come into the Sun to confirm, and harden them. And when they can rub them against trees without pain, they dare venture abroad again. Some say they bury their horns, some say but one; the horn is seldome found, which is medicinable.Plin. Arist. In Epire they bury their right, else-where their left horn; In Parks neither, though they cast their horns yearly. When they have eat a Serpent, that the poyson hurt them not, they go to a river, and plunge themselves in all but the head; yet drink not, till by tears they have sweet out the venome, which the cold water expels at the eyes. Eating serpents,Vinc [...] . clears their eye-sight: when taken, they become not only tame, but will come when called. Nay, you may briddle, and sadle them. It is certain that in Ptolomeis Triumphant-shew, there were seven brace of Stags seen coupled in chariots.Athen [...]  Heliogabalus exhibited them by quaternions so yoked together. They were to Mithridates, as it were a lifeguard. Sertorius the Generall of the Spanjards,Ae l. H. [...] l. 7. c. 46. the Roman, carried a white one alwayes about with him, making the world beleeve it was Diana. Ptolomy used one to understand Greeke. In fawning they forsake not beaten wayes,Aelian. H. A. l. 11. c. 25 no more then coverts. They purge themselves with the herb Seselis, that they may fawn with more ease; after fawning, they eat their after-birth, that enwrapped their fawn, then tast of a certain herb, and then return to their fawns.Soli [...]  These they bring not up all one way; the tenderest they carefully hide among

thick shrubs,Aelin. H. A. l. 12. c. 46. or grasse; and chastise them with taps of their feet, to make them ly still, and not disclose themselves. When grown up a litle, they exercise them to run and leap gapps. A Shepheards Pipe, and singing, will intice them from their pasture. As for their senses, if they prick up their ears, they are quick of hearing; if they hang them downe, they are easily surprised. That they are sharpsighted, their great ey is a token. Authors are of divers opinions about their usefulnesse in food. Some say their flesh is tender,Their use. and light of disgestion; and better tempered, if cut afore their horns come.Isidore. Galen. Galen holds it to be hard of concoction and melancholy, like Asses-flesh. Simon Sethi saids, it breeds black coller; and that you must beware of it in summer, because they eat serpents then. If often eaten, it brings the palsie; in winter it is safer food.Iul. Alex. Some say, fawns-flesh is best. Of old they praised the flesh, till they were three years old. The older, the dryer, and harder. In rutting time their flesh is rank,Arist. H. A. l. 6. c. 29. and rammish of smell, like goats-flesh. Avicen thinks it breeds quartan-agues. But Pliny saith that he knew Gentle-women, that used to tast it every morning, and were, for a long time free of agues; especially if they dy of one wound. Others, by constant eating of venison, promise themselves vivacity, and spritefulnesse. The liver is thought to be naught. The horn newly shot forth, hath been counted a delicate, boyled, and then fried in gobbets.

In Medicine, [...]  many parts thereof are usefull. The hair burnt under the belly, prevent miscarrying of women. [...]  The skin shaved with a pumice with vineger, cures S. Anthonies fire. The same fastened on the doore with the right feet, scare away all venemous creatures. The same helps against urine going from a man against his will in bed. The marrow easens pain, drives away serpents, helps against scalding; taken in water eases the pain in the bowelles; allays the bloudy-flux taken glisterwise; softens the womb; helps in Lint monthly termes. The sewet eases the gout, takes away face-freckles; burnt and mixt with a tosted oyster, [...]  cures kibes and chilblaius, layd fresh on, cures the exulcerations of the womb. [...]  The brains Rhasis commends against the pain in the hips and sides, and against bruises. The lungs Pliny prayses against corns, chappings, and hard flesh. Marcellus sayes it helps feet pinched by, strait shoes, layed often fresh on it. Dried in the smoak, and poudered, taken in wine, it helps the Ptisique. The ashes burnt in an earthen pot, helps against sighing, and pursines. The pizle dried to powder, taken in wine, is given against the vipers bite; smeard on with wine, it makes a bull lusty, dried it provokes urine, and helps the wind collique, if you drinke the water wherein it is washed. Pliny speaks of the Magicall use, or rather abuse of it. The bones are good against fluxes. [...] a [...] en. Sextus saith the knee-blade is good against priapisme, if carried about one. The heart burned with the skin and horn, smeared on with oyl, cures wounds. The heartbone is counted a preservative: The stone in the heart, or the other prevents abortion. The crudled blood of a fawn killed in the Does belly, is a speciall remedy against a Serpents bite; and drunk, is good against the bite of a mad dog; as also if you have eaten hemlock, and toadstools. The urine helps the spleen, and the wind in the stomack and bowells. The teares in wine,Heurn. method. l. 2. p. 245. bring vehement sweats. It is round and bright-yellow, and hath black streaks, if you but touch it, it withdraws, as if it stirred it self. The Harts-borne is of speciall use. It helps burning feavers, provokes sweat; is soveraign against poyson, and many diseases. The inhabitants of Florida bore holes in their childrens lips, and fill them therewith, perswading themselves that that makes them poyson proof. Aldernacus makes an eye-salve of it with frankincense, burnt lead, opium, &c. in rain-water. Infused in vineger, or poudered some, smear it on against freckles, and ring-worms; burnt, the smell helps the falling sicknes; with lentile, and deer-sewet it takes spots out of the face. Poudered with spunges, wherein there are stones, in a like quantity of wine and water, dayly drunke, it helps the kings-evill. Snuft into the nostrills with Sandaracha, it takes away swelling there; with mastick and salt-amoniack, it whitens the teeth. With vineger it eases toothake. Burnt with wine it fastens the teeth. With tragacanthus it cures the Haemoptoicum; half-burnt it helps the bloody flux: with a litle livesulphur, and a newlayed eg, it stops vomiting. Burnt with oxymel,Sextus. Marcellus, Aldrov. Galen. it dries the spleen: It helps the collique. Drunk with yvory, it is good against worms. Some make cakes of it with chalk, holy seed, a rosted eg, and hony. It is used also against womens greefs, stopping of the mother.Differences. For the differences of Deere. In new Spain is a kind called Macar. Some are red; some white all over. These the Indians call Kings of Harts & Yztak Makanne. Others they call Aculhuame. The lesser, Quauhtlamacame, that of timerous become generous, and wounded are so fierce that they assault their hunters, and oft kill them. Others like them are called Thalhuicamacame, of the same bulk, and nature, but not so couragious. The least are Tamamacame; perhaps a kind of goats. In Duarhe, Xapida, and other parts of America they herds of Deere, as we of oxen; breeding, and fed in, and near the house. They let them loose by day to seek their pasture in the woods; at even they returne to their fawns shut up in stalls; they milk them, and have no other milk, nor cheese made of any other milk. In some western parts there chased, and wounded in hunting they seeke an herb, called by the Barbarians Atochielt, whereby they refresh themselves, and recover their swiftnesse. It is more usefull to them then Ditany. In Virginia the Deer are longer tayled then ours, and their horn-tops bend back. In America is a race of them called Seovassen, much lesse then ours, and with lesse heads, their hair hanging down

like Goats among us. In new Mexico, they have hairy long tailes, as Mules, and they are as great, or greater then Mules, and very strong. A Spanish Captain had a brace to draw his coach.Aldrovan. H. Bisulc. c. 28. See Aldrovand about the Cervopalmatus. We have said already out of Julius Capitolinus, that the memorable wood of Cordianus is painted in the Beaked-house of Cn. Pompey; that among other pictures, there are two hundred Palm-herts; the which Gesner at first thought to be all one with the bread-horned Goats; but after, when John Caius a British Phisitian sent out of Britain these horns to him, he changed his mind, yeelding it to be a Palm-deere. The horns being longer and thicker, then a Deers usually are. In Persia, about Schamachia, Karabach, and Morage, there are beasts like Does, yellowish, with horns bending backwards, without knobs, which the Turks call Tzeiran;Olearius. the Persians Aku.

ARTICLE VIII. Of the Tragelaphus, and the Tarandus, or Busse.

THe Tragelaphus seemes to have taken his name from his resembling the Hee-goat, and the Hart.Aldro. Bis. c. 29. Some call him Hippelaphus, because he is somewhat like a Horse, he having a mane, and being greater, and grosser then a Stage. The Germans call him Brandthirsch, Gesner. Arist. either because he is blacker then the Deer, or because he haunts the places, where charcole is made, and feeds on the grasse growing thereabout. He is of greater bulk, and strength then a Deer. Hee hath thick, black hair on his throat, and long on the shoulders.Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 32. He differs from the Deer therein only, and in his beard. The ridge of his back is ash-colour, the belly duskish, the hair about his peezle cole-black. They are found, not only about the river Phasis, as Pliny mistakes, but also among the Arachosians; and are taken also in the Torantine, and Konigsteinian wildes of Misnia near Bohemia. The blackish Deer in England differ little from them.

De Tarandus, or Busse, is called by the Barbarians Pyrandrus, [...] . and Pyradus, by the Northern folk Rehenschier; by Hezychius Chandaros. He is as big as an Ox; headed like a Stage, nor unlike; shaggy like a Beare, but white-hayred. His hide so tough, that they make breast-plates thereof. Thick breasted; cloven, and hollow hoofed, and loose; for in going he displaies them.Aldrovan. H. Bis. c. 30. So fleet, and light of foot, that he scarce leaves any print of his footsteps in the snow; outrunning the beasts that ly in wait for him in the vallies. His horns are lofty, that are crosse beamed from the very forehead; a knotty branch is in the midst, that branches out again into broader. The horns are white, and streaked as with small veins. They differ from the Elks-horns in height; from the Harts, in breeth; from both, in colour, and numerousnesse of branches. When he runs, he rests them on his back, for while he stands still the lower branches even cover his forehead; with these lower he is said to breake the ice to come by drink. His food is wood-fruit, and mosse on trees. He makes himself lurking holes in the Northerne mountains, and in hard frosts comes to Mosiberg, and other hills in Norwey. Men take them for household uses. They bring him to high-way journies; and the Husbandmen to work of husbandry. No wild flesh is more delicate: They live together in herds, and are seen in the vast Northern wildernesses by thousands together. The females branch not. They are found in Norwey, Swethland, Lapland, and Poland. There were once a brace brought bridled, sadled, and trapped to Augusta of the Vindelici.Solin. [...] . c. 33. They change colour through feare, taking the colour of what they come near, be it stone, or wood, white, or green, to shrowd themselves, like the Polypus in sea, and the Chamaeleon on land; but these latter are smoother, and fitter for that purpose, those are rough, and it is strange they should change colour. But what for a Busse this is, whether the Turo, or Rangifer is uncertain. I have given you his print here, as near the truth as I could.

ARTICLE IX. Of the Rangifer.

IN the description of the Rangifer,Aldro. [...] Bis. c. [...]  or Reen, Writers agree not. Albertus saith, it resembles a Deer, but is greater, and of remarkable colour, and very swift of foot. He is attired with three rows of horns, on each are two horns, so that his head seems made up of little rocks. Of these two are greater then the rest, standing where the Deers horns use, which grow to five cubits length, and there are seen on him five and twenty branches. Those two in the middle of his head are short, and weakly. Others he hath on his forehead, liker bons, then horns, which he uses most in fight. Olaus M. saith, he is three-horned, and that he is a kind of Stag, but much taller, fleeter, and longer. He is called Rangifer, both because of his lofty horns, that resemble the branches of the Oke; as also because the harnesse that they fasten their winter Carts with, to their horns or breasts, are in the countrey tongue, where they are called Ranga, and Loga. He hath a mane, and round hoofs. He hath a trident on the top of his horns, and is found in the Forrests of Poland.Ioh., A [...] cola. C [...] sar de [...] Gal. l. 6.  Iulius Caesar makes him a kind of Ox, shaped somewhat like a Hart; from the midst of his forehead, between the ears sprouts out one lofty horn, straighter then those known to us; the top spread, and branching. Some make him like the Elke, some like the Asse, in stature, bulck, and slendernesse of legs; headed like a Calf;

necked, and mained like a Horse; the horns shadowing, smooth, slender, long, stretching to the back, otherwise like the common Deer. Scaliger ascribes to him all that Olous M. doth to the Elke. They are found in Lapland, Swethland, Norwey, and near the North-Pole. Their meat is mountain-mosse, white, especially in winter when the ground is covered with snow; which though never so thick, nature hath taught them to dig through to come by their food. In Summer they browse on trees, leaves, flowers, and herbs; rather desiring to stand upright, then to bend in feeding, because their horns stricking out afore hinders them; so that they must feed with their head wryed on one side. If you bring them into other lands, they live not long, as men find in Holsatia, and Prussia. Hether some were sent by King Gustavus in the year 1533. and turned loose into the woods, but none of their breed have been found there. Because they are both wild and tame; their milk, skin, sinews, bones, flesh, and hair are made serviceable to man. The milk and whey is for food. The skin serves for cloaths, bedding, and saddles; being strong and lasting, they make therefore sacks, and bellowes of it. With the sinews they sew garments. Of the bones and horns they make bowes. The flesh they dry in the wind and the smoke, to last many years. The hoof helps the cramp. With the hair they stuffe saddles and cushions.

ARTICLE X. Of the Elk.

SOme make the Elk a wild beast,Aldro. H. Bisul. c. 32. Pausan. in Eliacis, & Baeoticis. Caesar. l. 6. de bel. Gal. a kinde between the Hart and the Camel; bred among the Celtae, hardly found out; if they smell a man, which they do afar off, they hide themselves in deep caves, and dens. They are in the Hercynian wildernesse, somewhat like the goat, but so me what bigger, and of another hew; not horned, their thighs without joynts, never lying down to rest; nor if they chance to fall, can they rise again of themselves. Pliny makes him like a beast of use in husbandry,Plin. H. N. [...] . 8. c. 15. only differing in height of ears and neck: Not unlike the Machlin in the Isle Scandinavia, the like never seen in these parts, but without bending knees, sleeping standing, leaning against a tree, and so taken by cutting the tree then down, otherwise very swift. The upper-lip very great, which in feeding turns back, which else would be wrapt about what lies afore him. He is found on the Alps, saith Dodoneus, hath under his chin a gobbet of flesh, [...] ol. Pol. [...] & 33. [...] trabo Geog. l. 4. so big as a hand, hairy, grosse as a foles tail. Scaliger speaks of two kinds of Elks, but calls this Bison. Olaus, a kind of wild Asse. Erasmus Stella, a kind between the Horse and the Deer, casting his horns yearly. Lemning takes him for a kind of Goat. [...] emn. in [...] . nat. The Dutch call him Elend, or Misery, both because he is daily sick, and remains so till he put his right after-hoof to his left ear, as also because the slightest wound kills him. Cardan calls him a great beast like a Hart, bred in the North, having long forelegs, and a fleshy trunk, but little, and horns unlike all other beasts, thick and broad from the bottom. The shoulders sink downward; as big, and tall he is as a reasonable sized fat Horse; he goes hanging his head down. His head and neck to the shoulders is thick of hair, and that long, and hath a beard like a Goat. His colour white-ash, but at times of the year his hair changes colour. His head very long, and slender for such a body. The lips great, hanging, and thick, chiefly the upper-lip. The mouth long. The teeth not great, nor long: Ears long, and broad. The male hath various horns, and full of branches, but nothing near the Stags; the female hath no horns. The horns are two fingers thick. One horn is almost triangularim shape, and extend like a great birds wing, of twelve pound weight. Like Stags, they cast their horns at set times of the year. One I had a while by me, that fell from the Elk, like a ripe aple from the tree of it self, known well by the root; other two small ones I have, of two or three months growth, cut off a while afore the Elks death; which have a soft down on them, and blood. He is big-bellied like a Cow: his tail strangly small: cloven-hoofed he is as an ox.

The skinne is thick,Dodoneus. Gesner. in Alce. and tough, and can defend against cuts and stabs, as if it were an iron breast-plate; the Tanners prepare it with fish-fat so, that it can keep out any shower of raine. It is like a Deers skin, but differs from it thus; it sends forth a breath, that may be felt by a hand opposite, because it is full of pores, and the hairs are hollow, though Gesner deny it, who hath a foot by him; but he might be deceived, because pores are shut in dead Bodies. The horns weigh about twelf pound, and are two foot long,Gesner. not branched, as the stages, yet divided with some flat blades, more like a shoulder, then a horn: They are brought out of Lithuania. But the horn of a great Elk sent to Aldrovand, weighed but seven pound twelf ounces; the part near the head, a man could scarce graspe, adorned with five blades, two on each side, beside a little one shooting out. The legge weighed three pound and an half. The nature of the Elk is, being hunted to betake him to the water, and to take a mouthfull, and to spout it hot at the dogges. He is seene seldome alone; in snow they goe many together in company. One hastens afore, as occasion serves; the rest tread in his very steps, and hold the same pace: They can hold out a day and a night, without eating or drinking. If you take the yong one, you may make the dame so tame, that shee will be brought to drink beere with you. He hath such a strength in his hoof, that with one blow hee can kill a wolf, and bruise a tree, as if it were a toad-stool. The natives, where they are, eat the flesh, both fresh and salted; but the

juice seems to be but grosse, and melancholy. In Phisick, the horne is binding, and good against the epilepsy, if cut off between the feast of the birth, and that of the assumption of the Virgin Mary: Some say, on Aegidius his day.Olaus M. The sinews are used in Swethland against the cramp, made into a girdle, and tied about the part in paine. The hoof helps against the falling-sicknesse, and the stopping of the womb, or hystericae. The outer right hind-hoof of the male, afore he hath coupled, choped of from the live-foot with a hatchet, after mid-August, is a present help for the cramp, and fainting fits; if you make a ring of it for your left hand, or if you grasp it in your right hand; or put a bit into the left eare, and sometimes pick the eare therewith. The shavings of it with zedoary, helps womens griefs.

ARTICLE XI. Of the Rhinoceros.

THe Rhinoceros borrows his name from the horn in his snout.Diacon. l. 16. Pausanius in Baeoti. Some call him an Aegyptian Ox, some an Aethiopian Bull, but they mistake; for there are none in Aegypt, except by chance. In Aethiopia indeed is a bull like him in the horn, which the unskilfull miscall a Rhinoceros. Authours are most uncertain in their description of him.

Pliny in short thus; Pliny.  That hee hath one horn in his Nose, he is as tall as the Elephant, his thighs much shorter, box-coloured. Others add, that he hath a swines-head,Aeli. H. A. l. 17. c. 44. Tertul. l. 3. an oxes-tayl, the Elephants hew; his horn is two foot long, that he is in the Province of Mangus; that he is cold of temper; the horn on the tip of his snowt is sharp, strong as iron, his skin so tough, that no dart can pierce it; that he hath another shorter horn on his right shoulder. Some say, two in his nose, others say, one in his forehead. Some make the horn strait, like a Trumpet, with a black crosse streaked.Martial. Some say it is crooked; some flat;Strabo. some, turning up. Some write that he hath two girdles on his back curling, and winding like those of Dragons; one turning toward his mane;Diod. Solin. the other toward his loyns. But Bontius, who hath seen the Rhinoceros a hundred times, both kept in Den, and loose in woods,Bontius. writes that his skin is ash-coloured like the Elephants, very rugged, full of deep folds on the sides, and back, thick of hide, that a Japons sword cannot enter; the folds are like shields, or shells. He is hog-snouted, but not so blunt-nosed, their horn at the end is different according to their age: in some ash-coloured, sometimes black, sometimes white, he is not so long-legged, nor sightly as the Elephant.

He is found in the deserts of Africa,Place. in Abasia, in many parts of Asia, in Bengala, and Jacatra; Not knowen to the Greeks in Aristoteles time; nor to the Romans afore the year DCLXVI after the building of Rome. Some say Augustus shewed on in a Triumph. Some,Dio. Hist. l. 51. Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 20. Soli. Pol. c. 30. that Pompey was the first, who presented him in his Palays. He hath a rough tongue, and feeds on grasse, and briars. He holds enmity with the Elephant. He hurts not mankind, unlesse provoked. When he is to fight,Nature. he sharpens his horn on the stones: In combate, he aimes at the belly, which he knows to be soft; out of which he lets all his enemies blood. If he cannot come at the belly, the Elephant with his trunk and teeth dispatcheth him. Provoked, he makes no more of a Man and an Horse, then of a flea; he can with his sharp tongue lick a man to death; fetching of skin and flesh to the bare bones. Shoot him, and he with a hideous cry layes all flat, that comes in his way, even the thickest trees. Read stories of his fiercenes in Bontius. Hee delights strangely in mud. Being to fight, shee secures her yong one first: Hee grunts like a hog. The Moors feed on his flesh, which is so sinewy, that they had need of iron teeth to chaw it. The skin steeped in wine is given in against malignant feavers.Zacurus. The horne some prescribe against poyson. The dainty ones among the Romans used it in bathing for a cruize; They kept oyl in it for them that bathed: I cannot say there are different kinds of these beasts. Yet they say, there was one taken in Africa as great as a wild Asse, the horn two cubits long, the feet like the Deers, eared like the Horse, tayled like the Ox.

CHAPTER III. Of the fourefooted Beasts chevving the cud, that have no horns.

ARTICLE I. Of the Camell.

THus far of the Horned-beasts chewing the cud.Aldro. H. Bis. c. 34. Those that have no horns, are the Camell, and the Camell-panther.

The Camell is so called either from the Hebrew Gamal, Name. [...] . or the Greek Kamnoo, to labour, since hee is a Beast of carriage; or from Chamai, lowly; because hee kneels to take up his burden; [...] , or from Kammeros, crooked, from his manner of bending.Artem. Hee is cloven-footed, but behind on one fashion, afore on another; the clefts like the Gooses are filled.Descript. Arist. H. A. l. 5 c. 1. 2. The Bunch on their back differences them from all other beasts: Hee hath another below like it, that seems to support his body, it is about the bending of the knee. The female hath four teats like the Cow: Tayled like the Asse. The Genital behind, and so sinewy, that with it men bend the strongest bows:Herod. in Thaliu [...]  On either thigh a knee; nor more folds, but they seeme so many, because they come under the belly. The ankle like the Oxes. The buttock answers the bulk of the body: The gall is not distinct, but confounded with certain veins.Arist. Hee hath no fore-teeth

above. Hee alone of the hornles beasts hath a double stomack, to disgest his thorny hard food.Plin. Therefore the skin that covers his mouth and stomack, is througout rough: Some write of their marrow and sewet. They are found in Africa and Asia,Place. in Bactria especially and Arabia, and in Ionia by the city Clazomenia, where they leave whole fields for them to feed in. MithridatesAnax. being overcome by the river Rhijndacus, they were first (saith Salust) seen at Rome; but there wee of them seen in the Achaian and Asian warre. Ptolomy at LagusPlutar. shewed a Bactrian one all over coleblack among his sights. They delight in thorny and woody food; they brows also on bulrush tops, nor refuse they barly alone, or with hay, or thin low grasse; sometimes content with thistles:Varro. Now a dayes they that travell through the deserts of Arabia, give each five barly cakes a day, as bigh each as an Quince: They can goe four dayes together without drinke; but when they come to water, they drinke so much, as not only quenches thirst,Solin. Pol. c. 62. but serves for the day following. They love muddy, and avoid cleare water: they stamp on purpose in their water to thicken it. The later ones they say can refrain from drinking 12, nay 15 dayes together, if need be; and some eye-witnesses affirme that in Biled Elgerid, if they feed on fresh grasse, they never drinke. About their Engendring, the postrue and manner read Pliny, and Aristotle. In coupling-time they retire into lonely places;Gendring. Plin. when none can safely come near them, but their keeper. Some say the female goes ten months, and in the eleventh brings forth; and a year intermitted couples again.Arist. They bring forth in the spring, and some say, they presently after couple. Writers differ about it. They have three enemies,Suidas. Arist. the Horse, the Lion, and the Gadfly. Cyrus with his Camels worsted Craesus his Horse;Aeli. for Horses cannot endure their smell And the Arabs smeare their Camels with fish fat, to keep away the flies from vexing them.

They are troubled with the gout, whereof they dy,Diseases. and shedding all their hair, is another of their diseases.Arist. They run mad sometimes through lust, and remember a wrong, and kill whoever they meet, even their guides. This frensie lasts fourty dayes.Hieron. [...] vit. Hilarion. Some say, Hierom writes of one in Bactria, that had killed divers men; there were above thirty men to master him with strong ropes, and a great out-cry. His eyes were blood-red, he fomed at mouth, his tongue swelled, and he roared hideously. Some live fifty years,Age. some last hundred, unlesse change of hair bring them into diseases, they live longest in Bactria.Arist. Their disposition, nature, appears in their revengefulnes, teachablenesse, love of musick, modesty, and naturall affection. He layes up an injury long,Plin. being stroken, and watches occasion to be revenged. He may be taught by a drum to lead a dance;Aeli. they use a yong one to tread on a hote floor, which makes him lift up his feet by turns;Nature. Basil. a drum being still beaten at door. They use him to it a year in this school; and after, when ever he hears a drum, he falls a capring; when he begins to tire, musick will invite him on, when blows cannot force him.Arist. He will not couple with his dame. If being blinded he be betrayed to it, in revenge he will kill the causer of it. He is compassionate. He eats all night; but forbeares, if any in the stable be sick. This the Indians observed. When they would have them speedy they take their yong ones along some miles with the dame; Shee will double her pace to returne to her yong ones. He is very usefull. In medicine, the flesh provokes urine.Vse. The fat of the bunch smoked helps the Hemrods. The brain dried, with vineger, the falling sicknesse. The blood furthers conception, and is good against the stoppings of the mother, if used after the moneths. The milk eases the belly, being thin and waterish, it helps the cramp, and wakens appetite. The urine, (which fullers also use) whitens and cleanses the teeth. The tayl dried loosens.Plin. The dung with oyl makes the hair curl. The same, white, pounded with hony, allays swellings, and clenses wounds. It is said,Apul. that the bristles of the tayl wreath, and tied to the left arme cures the quartane; if you will beleeve it, we know that the Arabs eat the milk.Galen. Galen saith, the Alexandrians eat the flesh. Heliogabalus, Apicius like, fed on it sometimes at supper; and the heels being tenderest. The Jews of old made it their food. Some reckon that,Lamprid. and the milk among dainties. This, in those that are near foaling, is of a lesse cheesy, and buttery substance. Historians relate their use in war. Hence some armes have their names, as we shall shew, if God give leave, in our Philology.Solin. In Arabia, Aegypt, &c. they travell not without them. They are good for carriage, but stinted to so much weight; usually six hundred pound; for a need, a thousand. While they are loaden, and unloaden, they ly down on their belly; and feeling they have their just load, they rise up, and will carry no more. The African Camels will travell with ease fifthy dayes together without intermission. Some are fat,Differences. some leane, there are reddish, and white. The swiftest are called Dromedaries; these are lower then the other. They will travell above an hundred mile in one day. They are fleeter then Nisaean horses.Isidore. The females are swiftest.Arist. The Arabian are double-bunched on the back, called thence Dityloi. The Bactrian are held strongest, and have one bunch under the belly to ly on. The Caspian are as big as the greatest horse. The African are of three kinds; the first is called Hugium, who are indeed huge great,Solin. cap. 62. Aelian. and strong, able to carry a 1000 pound weight. The second sort are lesse, double-bunched on the back, called Bec [...] eti, fit for carriage, and to ride on; the Asians know no other. The last they call Raguahil, they are lanke, and slender; fit onely for the sadle, he will carry a man an hundred miles a day. On these the King of Tambutus uses to send his messengers to Segelmessis, or Darha, 900 miles of, in the space of eight dayes,

without any baiting, or resting by the way.

ARTICLE II. Of the Camel-pard.

HEe borrows his name from the Camel,Aldrov. c. 35. whom in bulk he resembles, and from the Pard, or Panther, whom he resembles in his spotted skin. The name, and the beast came first from Alexandria to Rome. He bears other names, as, wilde Sheep; from his gentlenesse, and living in deserts, and Nabis, Pliny. Albert. Nabuna; by the Ethiopians, Anabula, & Saffarat, and Orasius, but falsly. Since that is a beautifull, this a misshapen beast; of late, Giraffa, corruptly Saffarat. Nor Aristotle, nor Aelian mention him; Strabo, and other ancients,Vincent. differently describe him. One writes, that he is so long-necked, that he can reach his food from the highest trees, and that his skin is checkered like a hinds, and streaked; he is lower behind,Strabo. Geog. then afore: sitting, he seems as high as an Ox, he is taller then the Camell, and gentle as tame cattell. Pliny makes him horse-necked, ox-thighed, camel-headed, with glistering white spots. He is slender, and swannecked. Bellonius saith,Phot. he saw three in Cair, each had two small horns, sticking six fingers long out the forehead,Plin. and a bunch out the midst of the forehead, like another horn, about two fingers long,Dio. Hist. the neck seven foot long; and when he stretcheth it out, it is sixteen foot from the ground, he is eighteen foot from the tayl to the top of his head; that his legs are of an equall length;Heliodor. on his thighs afore stand much higher then those behind; his back, from his tayl to the top of his head, rises like a ladder, and as a ship-keel, the whole body marked with great spots, like a deers, fouresquared, nine inches broad, the ends white, and a finger broad. The whole body, like a net, the spots are not round like the Leopards, the foot cloven, like the oxes. The upper-lip hangs far over the lower. The tayl is thin and small, hairy at top. He hath a mane like a horse, reaching from the back to the top of his head. He seems to halt, as he goes, now on the right side, anone on the left; but on legs, and sides wagling; and when he would either eat, or drink any thing from the ground, hee straddles wide afore, and bends his legs; otherwise he cannot eat. His tongue is two foot long, of a darke violet-colour, round as an eel, wherewith he licks in boughs, leaves, grasse, nimbly, and even undiscernally.

Purchas, out of Fernando the Jesuite, writes, that he is so vast and tall, that a man on horseback can passe under his belly; he is found in Africa among the Troglodites, and in Ethiopia. Caesar the Dictator,Place. Strabo. made them first a part of his Shew at Rome. After him Gordianus shewed 10. Aurelia also led some of them in Triumph. The Ethiops presented one to Leo the Emperor. A Sultan of Babilon, another to Frederick;Suidas. and another Sultan, another to Laurence de Medices. His keeper can easily lead him with a head-stall,Heliod. as he list. The Jews might not eat of them, whence perhaps they come to abound so in Judaea.

CHAPTER IV. Of the foure-footed Beasts that chevv not the Cud.

ARTICLE I. Of the Swine.

THe Latines give the Swine five names,Name

Sus, Porcus, Scropha, Verres, Majalis; in English, the Sow, the Hog, the Barrow-hog, the Boar. Sus the Sow; in Greeke Us, common also to the Boar. Of old, [...]

called Thysus, from Thyein, to sacrifice; since a Swine in the rites of Ceres was offered,Varro. and in entring covenant; and in Hetruria, at marriages by the new-wedded couple. The like did the ancient Latines, and Greeks in Italy; for the women, the nurses chiefly called, the female nature Choiron, which signifies a swine, [...] . and one that deserves a good marriage. Porcus, Isidor. a porke, from Spurcus, wallowing in the mire. The Sabines, Poridus; the name they give brawn. Scropha is a Sow that hath of [...] had pigs. Verres is the Boar, or Boar-pig: Majalis is as the gelding among horses, or the capon among pullen. Hybridae were of old swine half wild, or ingendred tween, a tame, and a wild.Description. Wee shall in brief describe the Swine, it being so well knowen, in the Bones is not much marrow. The hairs are stiff, and bristly, thicker then the Oxes, and Elephants; amongst us for the most part yellow. In France, and Italy, black; most are party-coloured, if you observe them well. The fat lies betweene the skinne, and the muscles, called Lard; the grease is old, or salted, or simple. The brain is fattish, and decreases in the waining of the Moone, more then any other beasts. The eyes are hollow, and sunk, not to be taken out without hazard of life; no not one onely. The eye-brows move downwards toward the nose, and are drawn backward toward the temples. The tip of the nose is thick, the forehead narrow, the lips broad, the mouth stretched out, and broad, to root withall, called the snout.Plin. l. 11. c. 37. The Sow hath fewer teeth, and never sheds them; the neck-skin is toughest. The Sows hearts are inarticulate. In the ears is a moysture like gall,Arist. H. A. l. 2. c. 1. & l. 3. de parti. c. 4. of the thicknesse of that of the spleen. The stomack is large, and winding. In the liver are white stones. The flesh below the navell is without bone. The Sow hath many paps,Arist. on a double row, having many Pigs to suckle; the best, twelf, the common ones, two lesse. Of their genitals, see Aristotle. Their tayl is crooked, they have no ancle, and are a middle-kinde between the whole, and cloven-footed.

They have ten ribs. The Sow hath circular gristles,Plin. whereof read Severinus. In the small guts of one he hath seen two wormes, one a palme, another a finger long, both hollow, and full of white juice,Democr. p. 299. as chile, or first milk, both shaped like an earth-worme. Learn hence how worms breed in, and cleave to our bowels. The thin skin of the Sow, is of the same colour with the hair. He anatomized a Sowes belly, and found in the utmost ends certain thin skins, wherein it seems, were preserved the superfluities of dregs, and pisse. The navel-vein is parted near the womb; the navel-vessels first bend toward the left pinion, then encompassing the neck croswise, they lead back toward the right leg. In the Birth almost all the bowels are conspicuous, the Liver, Stomack, Bowels, Milt, Reins, Mid-rif, Heart, Lungs. The heart whitish, the Lungs liver-coloured, the Liver dark-red, the Reins great according to the proportion of the vein appearing by the right forefeet, but more by the hinderfeet; the throat veins that ascend to the head, are of the shape of a lambda (λ). In a perfect shaped pig, the breast laid open by two crosse-sections, you see two sinews, that passing through the throat, and cleaving to the heart-skin, descend directly through the sides of the heart to the mid-rif, by whose sinewy-ringlet they are fastned through two or three branches, or sprigs; whence passeth another to the upper-mouth of the stomack. Here perceive you plainly the severing of the axillary vein, and the thymiaean. The lappets of the heart are hollow, divided from the forepart of the heart, conjoyned behind. The passage of the urine from the bottom of the bladder after two fingers bredth is set into the arteries. At the end of the yard is a round kernel, and two in the neck of the bladder, &c. In the Stomack is a slimy juice like bird-lime, or the white of an egg; in the bowels another like thin hony. A vain unparallel'd runs along the back-bone, branching toward the severall ribs. Swine are found every where among us. In Strabo his time, Gual was so full of them,Place. Strabo. Geog. [...] . 5. that they furnished Rome; the best came pickled thither from Lions. So good were at Syracuse, that Sicilian-cheese, and Syracusan-porke grew into a proverb. Solinus saith there are none in Arabian; Aelian, that there are none in India; and if brought thither, they dy. In the Southland there are none of the four-footed beasts, that are in our world, except Buffles, Cows, Goats, and Hogs.

Swine eat all things, plants, fruits, roots, acorns,Hessel. Gerar. descrip. Austr. chestnuts, dates, grane, bran, what not? Beech-acorns make Sows lively, and pork light of digestion; the Holmed-acorns make them well trussed,Plin. and weighty, and plump; the Oken ones, well spread, large and heavy. Fast flesh, but hard comes from Mast. Holmberries are best, given a few at once. Acorns from the Esculus, the Oke, the Cork make light, spungy pork. The Haliphlaei give them acorns only, when they want other food. Pliny among chestnuts commends those with a stony shell. In Egypt, Cyprus, Syria, and Seleucia in Assiria, they are fatned with dates. The Ash-fruit also fattens them. Dry Cytisus is commended by Aristomachus the Athenian. Scalions they eat in Bavaria. Wild rape also, have leaves like a violet, sharp, a white root, not without milk. Henbane makes them run made. Green pasture hurts them.Columel. R. R. l. 7. c. 9. 10. They eat flesh also, mens carcases; nay, they spare not their own pigs; nor hens and geese in winter. They root up worms, they feed on snails, and wood-tartoyses. Sixty dayes will fatten them, especially, if you hold them fasting three dayes in the beginning. To fatten them with figs, till they burst again, was Apicious his invention. The English are a year fatning them, which makes their pork firme and dainty, where a Sow becomes so fat, that she cannot stand nor goe, but must be carried on a cart. In Lusitania the farther end of Spain was a Swine killed, two ribs whereof were sent to Lucius Volumnius the Senator,Attil. Hisp. that weighed three and twenty pound; and there were two foot, and two fingers from the skin to the bone. Varro saw in Arcadia a Sow so fat that she could not rise. and that a Rat had eaten into her flesh, and made a nest therein, and laid her young ones there. Gesner relates the like of Basil. Thirst in Summer troubles them.Plin. l. 11. c. 37. Grape-kernels in wash makes them drunk. They gender from eight months old to their seventh or eigth year.Engendring. Plin. l. 8. c. 51. Arist. H. A. l. 2. c. 1. They litter twice a year, and sometimes twenty at a litter; they go four months with pig. They are prone to cast their farrow; the pigs are piged with teeth, saith Nigidius. One Boar serves ten Sowes. They couple when the Moon wains, and that often, and aforenoon commonly; when the Boar of rages, and will tear a man with his tusks, especially one in white cloaths. They litter fewest at first time, more at next, and though old they bate not; they pig eight and ten, sometimes eighteen at a time;Plutarch. some say, as many as they have teats. A white Sow is thought most fruitful. The Winter-pigs are small, and thrive not.

The Helvetians prefer March-pigs. In hot Regions, winter ones are best. The Sow having littered, gives to the first pig the former teats, being fullest of milk. Every pig knows it's teat, and keeps to that alone. Take away the pigs she grows barren, leave her one only, she brings it well up. If you give acorns to a Sow big with pig,Plin. you hazard the casting her farrow.Antipathy Aeli. l. 9. c. 28. Plin. l. 10. c. 74. Arist. H. A. l. 8. c. 29. Swine hold antipathy with the Elephant, who also cannot endure their grunting. A Wolf also fears it, and dars not venture on an herd of them. Salamanders they devour without danger. Ointment of Amaracus is bane to them. The Weesel and they are foes. Hemlock kills them. In Scythia, Scorpions dispatch them with one stroke. The Horse abhors his filthy smell, ugly grunting, and filthy breath. They cast not their teeth; but after eating new corn, their teeth are ever weak, nature so punisheth their otherwise untameable greedinesse. If they loose not their eyes, nor eat themselves

dead,Age. Plin. they live fifteen, some twenty years. The disease that most troubles them, is a swelling like hailstons, that lurks unseen while they live, but cut one up it shews it self; nor is there scarce any without three at the least, whereto those are more liable, the flesh of whose thighs, neck and shoulders are moyst, we call them meazles. They cleave to the lower part of the tongue; a Hog is knowen to be meazled by the bristles plucked from the back, if the roots be bloody. If they come out of a hot into a cold place, and are suffered to ly down, if you stir them not, there is a kind of convulsion in all their members. They are also troubled with hog-lice; and in Summer, unlesse you often stir them, they are taken with a lethargy. They are troubled also with cough, sqincy, swellings and loosnesse; unlesse they drink their fill, they become shortbreathed. They are most brutish,Plin. l. 8. c. 51. filthy, lustful, and greedy by nature; and seem to have a soul only as salt to keep them from stinking. As bathing is mans delight, so wallowing in the myre is theirs. Gryllus in Plutarch praises their modesty and continence, and prefers them afore men and women. Though they are ravenous, yet they will not eat a dead hog. Their greedinesse is insatiable. They know mans voyce. They have been known to swim home again,Rhodigin. having been stollen, and the ship cast away. Their voice is grunting: And to say the truth with Pliny, no creature yields more matter for gluttony to work on then it; near fifty several savoury dishes may be made of Swins-flesh.Lipsi. in Macrob.  Livy celebrats a feast of a Chalciden-Hoast set off with exquisite variety consisting hereof. Homer tells of what value it was in the Heroique-age of the world; the servants fed on lean, the Masters on fat pork. The solemnity of the Saturnals was celebrated almost with no other, however no daintier food; and their riot came to that height, that they set whole ones (and those stuffed,) on the table, whence came the names Garden, and Trojan-pork: One part rosted, another boyled, and killed after a peculiar fashion.Athen. The Pigs are counted daintiest: Yet the Jews will not touch Swins-flesh, it being forbidden by their Law; the Arabians forbear it; the Mahumetans also, who feigne that Mice breed in Swins-snouts;Solin. c. 46. Pausan. and the Moors, Tartars, and the Pessinunty of old. But that of the Delphaci is too moyst, and breeds raw humours. Some kind is good of digestion, by reason of the similitude it hath with mans body,Galen. and nourisheth more then other food. How strengthning it is, the example of Wrestlers shews that used to feed thereon;Hippocr. It is not so grosse as Beef. Hippocrates condemns pork. The Sow of a middle age is sweetest; yonger, if it ly long in the stomack,Athen. corrupts. Choyce ones come from Cicilia. Apicius drest Pigs on sundry fashions, whence the names of farcil, liquaminous, rost, Vitellian, Flaccian, Laureate, Frontaninian, Oenogerate, Celsilian, and the rest. The liver is preferred afore all the rest, if the Hog be fed with figs dryed.Aetius. The Ancients prized the neck, the gammon, the flitch, &c. Of the flesh, and the rest are made sausages, puddings, &c. Of all which elsewhere, God willing.

Of their Medicinal use Gesner treats most accuratly;Physick Galen. a decoction of their flesh helps against the poyson of the fly Buprestis. The warm blood is good against warts smeared on, keeping them from growing. The grease of a male sucking pig gelt, that especially about the rim of the belly, is by Apothecaries used in their oyntments, and by Physitians to soften, and disperse humours. The bones broken,Plin. l. 28. c. 9. tied about bacon in boyling, makes it firme on a sudden. Bruised with broom, it helps the pain in the knees. With chalk smeared on, it is good against wax-kernels. Drunk in wine with salt on, it helps cattel that have eaten Hemlock. The Liver taken with wine, helps against the biting of any venemous thing; rosted, it stops a loosnesse. The Bladder provokes urine, if it have not touched the ground, laid on the privities. Any thing about a Boar burned, helps those who cannot hold their water. The Stones kept long, and stamped in Sows-milk, is good for the falling-sicknesse.

The greatest bone of the gammon of a barrow-hog, burnt dries, and fastens the gums. The ankle burnt till of black it become white, easest the paine of the colon; the milk smeard on the temples, makes drowsy. Hog-dung made into a paste with vineger, is good for the bursten. See more in Gesner. As for their different sorts, some are tame, some wilde. Later writers mention Guinee swine,Kinds. and the Sluviatil, and the Tapierete;Mar [...] gra [...] Hist Brasil. l. [...] c. 7. the Guinee-hog brought to Brasil, is shaped as ours, but of a yellowish colour; the head not so high as ours, the ears long, and sharp at top with long tips, the tayl reaching to the ankles without hair; the rest of the body hairy, and sleek, and glistring, without bristles, even on the back, the hair longer toward the tayl, and on the neck. He is very gentle. The River-hog the Brasilians call Capybaria, is so big as ours of a year or two old, two foot long from the head to the dock, the belly a foot and half thick, he hath no tayl, his forefeet have foure hoofs, the hinder but three, the midlemost afore is longest, the fourth is least; so behinde, the middlemost is longest, he hath a hard skin, even to his hoofe, his head is ten fingers long, and almost as many thick, very disproportionable, the mouth is also long, and thick, the eyes great and black, the ears small and round, the under-chap shorter then the upper, either hath two forefeet crooked that hang out, from their sockets a finger and half, and sticking in almost two fingers; but the tuskes stick not out of the mouth, but are set as in hares. The other tuskes are strange, in each jaw stands eight bones, on each side foure, and each bone holds three teeth undivided, so that in each jaw stand 24 teeth, in all 48, all plain at the ends; they eat grasse, and divers sorts of fruit, they eat the flesh, though it have no good taste, the head is best. The Brasilians call one kinde Tapierete; the Lusitanians,

Anta; he is fourefooted, as big as an heifer six months old, shaped like a hog, and so headed, onely thicker, and longer, and more copped; his snout hangs over beyond the mouth, which by a strong sinew he can draw in, and thrust out, the snout hath long clefts, the lower part of the mouth is shorter then the upper, both jaws are pointed, or sharp afore; he hath in all fourty teeth, grinders, and others. His eyes are small, as an hogs, his ears great and round, sticking forward, the thigs are thicker then a hogs, and as long; in his forefeet are foure hoofs, in the hinder three, the middlemost greater then the rest, all black, and hollow, and may be plucked off: He hath no tayl, but in stead a bald stump: Genitaled as a Baboon; goes with the back ridged as the Capybara; the skinne solid, as the Elke, the hair short, in the younger coloured as a lightsome shadow, spotted with white; in the oulder darkish without spots. He sleeps by day in shady thickets, night and morning he comes forth to feed. He can swim excellently. He feeds on grasse, sugarcanes, cole, &c. Men eat his flesh, but it is not well tasted.

ARTICLE II. Of the wilde Boare.

THe Latines call him Aper, Aldrovan. Hist. Bis. c. 3 [...] . Na [...] e. [...] . Pi [...] tar. &c. the Greeks Kapros, &c. They are for the most part black, or blackish. Some brasse-coloured saith Pliny. Pausanias writes, that he hath seen white ones; their eyes fierce, and staring. The tuskes great, turning up, sharp, and white. And, which is strange, while the beast lives, they have the keen force of iron, but pluck them out of him dead, they are thought to loose their keennesse. Some tuskes are said to be so long, that they turne back into a ring.Descript. In India some have double bending tusks, a cubite long. Gyllius relates, that,Oppian. when he is mastered by the dogs, and spearmen, and falls, his tusks through his inflaming breath burnt as fire; and if any pluck a bristle out of his neck, and hold it to his tusk, while hee breaths, it shall shrivell up, and scorch; and if he touch but a dog with his tusk in hunting, it shall set a marke on him, as if he were branded. His mouth is like a shield, wherewith he withstands spear, and sword. He hath no gall. His blood hath no strings in it.

Pliny saith there are none in Creet.P [...] ace. Some say, but mistake, that there are none in Africa, nor in India.Theoph. H. P. l. 4. cap. 13. Aelian. [...] . 17. c. 10. Plin. l. 11. c. 51. But they are by herds in Islands in the Nile in Egypt. Some say they are mute in Macedon. The Spaniards in West-Indies have found some lesse then ours, with short tayls, that they thought they had been cut off; not footed as ours, not cleft behind, but wholehoofd;Pet. Mart. Decad. Ocean. the flesh much more savoury and wholesome then ours. Neare the Sea-shore there grow many palms, and marishy reeds, where many of them wander. Lycotus, in Calphurnius his husbandry, saith that among the Roman shews he saw snow-white hairs, and horned wild Boars. These wild feed as the tame swine on acorns, apples, barly, herbs, roots, and the rest. With their snouts they root also worms up.Aelian. l. 17. c. 31. They long excessively after dry-figs. But they are of a more cleanly nature then the tame. They are found sometimes among ferne leaves, which themselves have gathered together, and spread to ly on. They avoid a kind of sharp-eared corn, that the Germans use to feed on.Engendring. When they would engender, their neck bristles start up, and stand as the crest of an helmet; they fome at mouth, gnash with their tusks, and their breath is extreme hot: After, they abate of their fury; being rejected they force,Aristotle. or wound the female. They couple in the beginning of winter; bring forth at spring, seeking lonely, craggy, narrow, darksome places to litter in. They keepe company thirty dayes. The wild swine carry their pigs as long as the tame, and litter as many. They pig once a year; The Boar is a year old ere he genders. They grunt, and snuft as tame; but the Sow more, the Boar is seldome heard. They haunt out-places, and those deep and steep. They are quicker of hearing then man is; they herd together, but commonly with their own brood. Their tears are sweet; they foame when chafed with hunting, and it is cleaving.Plin. Their urine is so troublesome to them, that unlesse they can water, they cannot fly, but are taken, as if they were tied; some say it burnes them. They are hardly ever tamed, and you must begin from the first, while they are pigs. Hemlock, and the root of Syanchus kills them. If they chance they eat hemlock, they strait shrink up behind, and pine, and hasten to water,Plin. l. 8. cap. 27. Var. and eat crabs. They cure their diseases with Ivy: they grow till they be four year old; they are taken with, and by musick. In a Borrough in Tusculum they came together to their meat at the blowing of a trumpet. They know how to confound the hunters by their footsteps in marishes. The females, though many in a herd, fly with their pigs, if they see a hunter; but if one of their pigs be hunted, they fly not, not though one be alone, but shee will rush on the huntsman, they whet their teeth ere they fight: though they in combate among themselves, yet if they spy Wolves, they combine against the common foe, and hasten to help as soon as they heare the cry. Fulvius Hirpinus was the first of the Gowndorder that had a parke for wild Boares, and other wild; and not long after L. Lucullus, and Q. Hortensius imitated him.Use. Plin. l. 8. cap. 51. How savoury meat they are is well knowen. Servilius Rullus, father to that Rullus, who in Cicero his Consulship proclaimed the field, or Agrarian law, was the first Roman who set a whole Boar on his table at a feast. Some such were a thousand pound weight, that the Romans had to their suppers; thence called Milliary, from their weight. Consult Apicius about the manner of seasoning them. The flesh is much better then

common porke, soon disgested, and very nourishing, begetting a thick, and glevy juice. Heliogabalus for ten dayes together shewed on his table the paps of sowes that had newly farrowed,Lamprid. in Heliog. three hundred a day. On the day of Lentulus his instalment, when he was made Flamen, he had at his supper such pappes, and teats, with loyns, and heads of brawn. Wild Boares have also their place in Phisick. The brain with the blood is commended as souverain against serpents, and carbuncles in the privities. Bacon boiled, and bound about broken parts,Gesner. suddenly, and strangely settles them; heals men annoint with the fat of roses. The pouder of the cheek-bones heals spreading sores. The teeth shavings disperses the pleurisy. The lungs mixt with hony some put under their feet, when hurt by a strait shoos. The liver rayses from a lethargy, and helps matteryears if drop'd in. Drunke in wine, fresh, and unsalted it stays a loosnesse. The small stones found therein poudered help the stone. The galle warme dissolves swellings; the ashes of the hoof burnt sprinckled in drink provokes urine. The claws burnt, and bruised helps those that pisse abed. The dung dried, drunke in water, or wine, stanches blood; eases an old pain of the side, taken in vineger helps ruptures, and convulsions, and parts out of joynt with a serecloath and oyl of roses. Fresh and hot it is good against running of the nose. Kneaded with wine, a plaster of it draws out what sticks in the body. Poudered, and searsed, and kneaded with grasse-hony, it helps the joynts. Men pour the pisse into mattery eares. The bladder boyled, and eaten helps those that cannot hold their water.Differences. Nieremb. See more in Gesner. The Indians have a wild Boare of a strange nature on their mountains, they call Koya Metl, and by six other names, like ours, but lesse, and not so handsome, with the navell on the back, and about the reins, strange to behold, pinch it, and a watry humour gushes out; yet it is properly no navel, but a kind of soft grisly fat, and under is nothing but as in other beasts, as is well known by the dissecting of him. Some thinke that he breaths that way. He is noysome;Anton. Herrera. he gnashes with his tusks horridly, and is leaner and slenderer then ours. He is fierce. The huntsmen climbe trees; a herd of these Zaini bite at, and teare the body of the tree, not being able to come at the men, who from above wound them with borespears. They go in herds, and choose a leader, and as men report, the least, and vilest of the herd, old, and feeble, nor part they company till he be slain,Pet. Simon. they will dy ere they forsake him. Some ascribe the like to the Bachirae. They abhor the Tiger. The captain of the Zaini calls of his kind more then three hundred together, and conducts them, as a Generall his forces; with these he sets on the Tiger, who, though the fiercest of all American wild beasts, is yet overmastered by multitude, but not with a great destruction of the Zaini; many of whom have been found lying dead with the Tigre, and but a few left to ring their knell.Franc. Hernand. Hee bites shrewdly, when first taken; but when tamed, men take pleasure in him. His flesh is like porke, or brawn, but tougher, and not so sweet; his bristles are sharp, and party-cloured, black and white. He feeds on acorns, roots, and other mountain-fruit, and also on worms, and such vermine as are bred in moyst-fenny places. Their toes are some longer then other, their tayls are short, and their feet unlike those of ours, one of their hinder-feet having no claw. The flesh of the Indian wild Bores is moyster, and wholesomer then ours; but unlesse the navell of the Zainies be pared off, they putrifie in one day. Wee give you the picture of him, with the Jajacu Kaaigora, of the Marckgrave. Ampliss. de Laet, had one very tame, but died with eating moyst feed, as it seemed. Valckenburg calls that navell an udder, but hee mistakes; since it is well known that the young suck not at that part.

TITLE II. Of the vvater-cloven-hoofed Beasts.

CHAP. I. Of the Hippotame, or River-Horse.

FOllowing Aristotle,Aldrovan. Digit. l. 1. c. 12. hether I refer the River-Horse; though others, and perhaps more properly, to another head. Hee is called an Horse, not from his shape, but his greatnesse. Hee is stiled the Horse of Nile,Bellon. and the Sea-ox, and the Sea-hog, that afore resembles an ox, in the rest of the body, a swine; called a Sea-Elephant, from his vastnesse, and the whitenesse, and hardnesse of his teeth; and the Elephant of Egypt, the Rosmarus,Alvaresius. Descript. Aelian. H. A. l. 11. cap. 44. Aristotle. Leo de Asr. l. 7. the Rohart, the Gomarus, in Pretebans country. Writers differ in describing him. Some say that hee is five cubites high, and hath ox-hoofs, three teeth sticking out each side of his mouth, greater out then any other beasts, eared, tayled, and neighing like the horse, in the rest like the Elephant; he hath a mane, a snout turning up, in his inwards not unlike an horse, or asse, without hair; taken by boats. Bellonius saw a small one at Byzantium, cow-headed, beardard, short, and roundish, wider jaw'd then a lion, wilde nostrills, broad lips turning up, sharp teeth as a horse, the eyes and tong very great, his neck short, tayled like a hog, swag-bellied like a sow; his feet so short, that they are scant foure fingers high from the ground. But Fabius Columna describes him most accurately from the carcasse of one, preserved in salt, brought by a Chirurgion called Nicholas Zerenghus from Damiata into Italy; hee saith, that he was liker an ox then a horse, and about that size, leg'd like a bear, thirteen foot long from head to tayl, foure foot and an half broad, three foot & an half high, squat-bellied, his legs three foot

and an half long, and three foot round; his foot a foot broad, the hoofs each three inches, groutheaded, two foot and an half broad, three foot long, seven foot about in compasse, his mouth a foot wide, snout-fleshy and turning up, litle-eyed, each an inch wide, and two long, the ears about three; the bulke thick, the foot broad, parted into foure toes, the ankle hard of flesh, tayled like a tortoys: skin thick, tough, black. The nostrils like an S, snouted as a lion, or cat, with some stragling hairs, nor are any more in the whole body, in the under-chap, thwart half a foot long, &c. like a boar-tusks, not sticking out, but plainly seene, the mouth opening, &c. On each side seven cheek-teeth, thick, broad, and very short. In the upper-chap, which he moves like a crocodile, wherewith hee chews, stand six fore-teeth, aptly answering those beneath, &c. The teeth are hard as a flint, and will strike fire, so that by night rubbing his teeth,Plinv. Herod. H. N. l. 2. L [...] o Asri. l. 9. he seems to vomit fire.Plin. l. 32. c. 11. His proper place is said to be Saiticae in Egypt. There are of them also in the River Niger, and in the Sea that washes Petzora. Barbosa hath seen many in Gofala.

He observed many there comming forth of the Sea into the pasture-grounds, and returning again:Aelian. They feed also on ripe corn, and yellow-ears. When he is grown up, he begins to try his strength with his Sire, if he can master him, hee then proves his masteries with the Dam, and leaves his Sire; if he offer to resist, he kills him.Gendring. Nature. Aelian. They bring forth young on the dry land, and there brings them up: They are so fruitful, that they teeme every year. He comes out of Nilus into the fields, and having filled his belly with corn, he returns backwards, that the husbandmen may not surprize him, or by his averse footing to amuse the hunts-men; since he is as harmful as the Crocodile. He being overburdened with his own grosse bulk, he rubs himself against the canes, till he hath opened a vein, and having bled enough, he stops the vein with mud: whether he neigh, or no, is disputed.

The Ethiops eat him.Use. Clusius. About the promontory Cabo Lopez in Guinee a Schipper of the Hage and his mates saw it; and in the town Ulibet they saw many of their heads, wherein were teeth of a wonderfull bignesse. One Firmius Seleucius eat an Hippotame.Capitol. They are also medicinable; the Egyptians use the teeth against emrods, shut or open, tying them on, or wearing a ring made thereof. The Blackmoors use it also as a preservative against a certain disease. Pliny extolls those teeth for a speciall remedy for toot-ache; and the fat against a raging Fever. The ashes of the skin with water smeared, dissolves waxen-kernels. The skin of the forehead slakes lust: the stones dryed, is good against the bite of a Serpent: the parts as otherwise also useful.Diosco [...] .  Pausanius saith, that the face of his mother Dindymena was formed of the Hippotames teeth. Pliny saith, that the Painters use the blood dissolv'd in gumwater instead of red-lead. They that are besmeared with the fat, may safely go among Crocodiles. Some say,Iuli. Capitol. that they who are covered with the skin, are thunder free. Pliny saith, that the hide, especially about the back is so thick, that therewith strong spears may be shaped, and shaved by the turner.

THE NATURALL HISTORY OF THE FOURFOOTED BEASTS.

THE THIRD BOOKE. Of the Clovenfooted, Fourfooted Beasts.

THE FIRST TITLE. Of the wild Beasts with paws that bring their young alive into the VVorld.

CHAPTER I. Of the Lyon.

THus far of the hoofed Beasts, [...] . the four-footed follow that have paws, and toes: [...] . These are either such as bear a livingbrood, or such as lay egges. The former are either wild, and never wholly tameable; or those that may be tamed, at least in some measure. Among the former are reckoned the Lyon, the Leopard, the Ounce, the Tiger, the Bear, and the Wolfe.

We begin with the Lyon,Name. [...] . whose name in Latine is Leo, in Gr. Leoon seems to be derived from Laoo, to see by reason of the rigour of his sight. The young are called Whelps.

Of the Numidian Bear,Descript. or Lyon, see Pliny and Lipsius. His head is of a middle size, his forehead square, lofty of brow, and toward the nose like a cloud;Aristot. H. A. l. 6. c. 31. the eyes not hollow, nor goggle; his nose not great, his gape, as a sheeps, wide; lips thin; his upper, and lower jaw alike, stif and great necked, and reasonable thick, strong of breast; the part of the back against the heart broad, slender flankled, thighs stout, and sinewy; the hair yellow, not much curling. The forefeet are parted by five toes, the hinder by four. The Lyonesse is differenced from the Lyon, by the smoothnesse of her neck and shoulders, the male having there a thick hair, mane, as also by two teats in the midst of their belly, whence we are not to argue the number of Whelps. She hath little milk, so that the Whelp must have other food, but little serves the turn. As for the inward parts, the Lyon hath exceeding strong temple-muscles,Galen. part. l. 9. cap. 19. that enable him to bite so hard; his tongue is sharp, and rough; his bowels are like a dogs; his milt is black;Aristot. A. l. 5. c. 80. his neck consists of one bone, but made up of many turning joynts; his bones have little, or no marrow in them, which even melts away. The inward passages are so narrow, that one would think there were none.

Lyons grow up in Europe between the Rivers Achelous and Nessus,Scali. Aeli. l. 2. cap. 12. Fallopius. Michael. Ephesius. but seldome breed in Europe, but in Mooreland, Parthia, Massylia, India, Marmarica, Caspia, Lybia, Getulia, Syria, (where are black ones, if we credit Pliny) and in Tartaria, saith Paul Venetus. In Caragol the Countrey-men for fear of them are fain to arm themselves, when they till their land. In the Wildernesse of Angad by Telessin, they prey on herds of cattell,Place. Aristot. H. A. l. 8. c. 2 [...] . Leo Af. and on men. And by Feez, many that make Char-cole in the Woods, are devoured by them. They are in the Kingdome of Senega, on a high mountain near Aden; and in the Holy Land, and elsewhere. Martyr saith, that in Coba they are harmelesse; Aelian saith that Agla, and the adjacent parts, breed Lyons so timerous, that they are grown into a Proverb.

They are of a most hot and dry complectionTemper. that proceeds from the extreme heat of the heart. Hotter in the foreparts then the hinder.Gesnei. Nor are all alike fierce, as the mountain Lion is not so fierce as others.Food. They feed on beef most, but hunger makes them prey on Camels, mans and birds flesh. Therefore many in Africa were seen by Polybius & Aemilian to be crucified,Aelian. H. A. l. 2. c. 1 [...] Aristor. that the rest might by that sight be frighted from killing of men; many things they devoure whole without tearing, which within two, or three dayes they perfectly disgest.

It is not certain that they will feed on carcasses.Aelian. l. [...] c. 3. Strabo. Ge. l. 1 [...] . It is thought that they refrain either because of the stinke, or in pride. Some say, that having eaten their fill, they hide the reliques, and breath thereon, that other wild

lighting thereon may not eat them. They venter on young Elephants, but if the Dam come, they fly. A whelp will forsake the teat, and prey on weaker cattell, and feed also on palms. He is sparing in drinking; he can refrain three dayes,Drinke. especially in summer; in winter he drinks more. They couple averse, as all other beasts that pisse backward,Arist. Aeli. and commonly in spring-time, when they fight cruelly, eight, or twelve following one Lionesse. The first of the year being past,Gendring. in hot weather, the males forbearing, the Lionesses couple with Pards, whence come Leopards; and with Panthers, whence comes a brood without mane,Ael. l. 2. c. 2. Plin. & with Hyaenaes, whence the Crocuta, and sometime with the dog. They alone among all fourfooted crooked clawed beasts bring forth their yong seing, [...]  whence called Sun-beasts. They whelp within six months an imperfect brood; not that the yong tear their passage, but for want of nourishment,Ael. 2. 2. some say they are whelped no bigger then a weesell; seldome above one at once,Arist. Wocton. Ph [...] ost. sometimes six. There have been eight found in a Lionesse taken and killed.

At Florence an old one beyond all expectation whelped six. In Syria the Lionesses bear five times, first five, then four, then three, then two, then one. He loves a Dolphin, both of them,Arist. when old, and diseased devoure an Ape to help them. He hates a womans secrets, on the sight whereof he runs away. He cannot abide a bristled Sow, nor a Wolfe, nor a wild Asse,AE [...] . nor a Bull, nor an Ape. If he but tast of the herb Leontophonus, he dies, so strong it is. Some count it a beast. [...] . The Greeks of old were so confident that the Lion feared the crowing of a Cock, that they thought verily, that by sacrificing Cocks, they called Cecrop's soule forth, which they beleeved was transmigrated into a Lion. Some conceive that the red, glistring sparkling Cocks-comb frights him. Camerarius knew the contrary, who relates that in the Duke of Bavariaes Court a Lion by strange leaps got into a neighbours yard, and devoured both Cocks, and Hens. In Africa the Gnats drive them away. He will not touch a man rubd over with garlick; or is taken with a heavinesse if he unawares tread on the leans of Scilla,AE. H. A. [...] . 1. c. 36. or Seaonion, or of the Ilex. The creaking of wheels frights him. A bright table-cloath drives him away. He abhors fire, and dares not come neare it. They are thought to be longlived.Life. Some have been taken without teeth, and some with perished knags. The Lionesse big with young will fight with the males that would couple with her: they are said to look downwards, that the hunting spears may not amate them.S [...] ceped. They sleep in the open aire, and with the eyes open, because their eyes are so great that the lids kan hardly cover them; and while they sleep they wag their tayl, that they may seeme awake. Their voyce is roaring; the Latines expresse it by divers words.Voyce. As for their nature, one African Lionesse set on two hundred Horsemen, having received her deaths wound, and would not leave her whelps. They cannot endure to be scorned;Nature. the wantonnesse of the Apes playing vexes them. He goes alone to hunt his prey. He looks you in the face,Leo Afr. l. 9. and fears not. His generousnesse appears in danger, when he despises weapons; slights dogs and hunters makes a stand in the open field, when pursued; if he enter a thicket, he rusheth through with a disdaign that he should take covert. He pursues his prey leaping,Aeli. H. A. l. 2. c. 17. but walks away when hunted. He observes who wounds him, & singles him out in a troop, and sets on him; He will make him sure, who aims at him, and misses; as one did to a yong man in Iubaes army. One hurt with an arrow by a passerby, revenged it a year after,Aelian. tearing the same man, lighting on him againe amidst a troop of men.

Another endeavoured to pearce a Lion with a lance,Albertus. and missing the Lion, griped with his paw his helmet, which saved his head; while they walk they withdraw their claws, that they may not be blunted. They go not strait on, but sideling, shifting their steps to amuse the chasers. No doubt but they may be tamed. Onomarchus, King of Catana had them for his familiars. One used to sit like a dogge by the side of John II. of Portugall. In Adonis Temple in Elimeae, they fawned on all that entred. Berenice her Lion licked her face. One converts with a Ram,Mart. Epig. l. 9. c. 73. Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 16. as if they had forgot their natures. Marcus Anthony at Rome coupled them to draw a chariot, hee was the first that did so, and it seemed ominous, that in civill warre, when the Phatsalicks field was fought, that generous spirits should be subdued to the yoake; and it was a monstrous show above those monstrous calamities, that hee should then ride so in state with his Mimed Citheris. Hanuo that famous Carthaginian, was the first who durst familiarly handle a Lion, which rendered him more suspected both of craft, and cruelty. There are examples also extant of their gentlenesse exprest to diverse, who have met them by chance. Mentor of Syracuse, lighting on one in Syria, was astonished, and would have fled, but the Lion met him at every turne, fawned on him, and licked his footsteps; at length hee spied a swelling, and wound, and a thorn, whereof hee eased him. Which is kept in memory in a picture at Syracuse. Also Elpis a Samian arriving in Africa by the shore-side, a Lion came with open mouth, hee clomb a tree, calls on father Bacchus, having no hope but in prayer; the Lion left him not, but seemed to crave his pitty and ayd, having a bone sticking in his teeth, that put him him to excessive pain, and drew lamentable cries from him; the man tooke heart, come downe, pluckt the bone out, and they said, that in gratitude the Lion hunted, and brought prey to that man, so long as the ship rode there. The story of Androdus also is well knowen, the Roman slave, and the Lion.Gel. noct. Attic. l. 5. Seneca also was eye-witnesse of a Lion, that in the Amphitheater owned a man,

destined to dy there,Plin. l. 8. c. 16. and protected him from the assault of other wilde beasts. The Lion alone among all savage beasts, is gentle to suppliants; sparing those that ly prostrate at his mercy. Hee will assault men first, and spare women; and unlesse hee be very hungry, hee will not meddle with infants. In Lybia they beleeve, that they understand requests. A Getulian captivessed is said to have escaped the fury of many Lions, by pleading thus for her self; alack, I am a silly woman, banished, weak, and a petitioner to the noblest, and most generous of beasts, that rulest the rest; thou canst have no honour in such a worthles prey. It used to be an hard task to take Lions; the common way was in pits. A Getulian shepheard mastered a Lion, by casting his coat on his head; which was also shewen in a Theatre, where a Lion being so muffled, was ridiculously and incredibly bound, without making any resistance. It seemes all lies in the eye. There have been of old Cannibals, that would eat Lions-flesh, all but the milt.Vse. In Physick they are of admirable use.Solinus Polyh. Br [...] erin. de recib. l. 12. c. 17. Porta Phitog. l. 3. c. 41. The Dogge-tooth helps children in breeding their second teeth without pain, being tied about the neck. The heart bruised to powder, is good against the falling-sicknesse, and quartain fevers. The fat washt, put into the ears, cures their maladies, and smeared on parts frozen, happily helps them; they use the same for hard swellings in the skin, and kibes. It is said that those that are nointed over therewith, may walke safely among other wilde beasts; and (if you will beleeve it) come in favour with Princes.Plin. The flesh is commended by Sextus, for driving away feare, and phantasies. The blood helps the cancer.D [...] oscor. The pouder of the bones with Agrimony-water, helps a fever. Sitting in the skin, eases the Emrods. Shoes thereof, ease the Gout. The dung with oyl of roses, is good face-phisick. Wee need not to say much of their use in recreations, plays, triumphs, and punishments. Heliogabalus delighted in them, when they disarmed of their claws, and taught them to sit at table. Augustus made them so tame, that they harmlesly played with hares. Bellonius writes that hee hath been an eyewitnesse thereof.Observ. l. 1. c. uit. Plin. At Constantinople, when Q. Scaevola was Aedile, hee in his shews presented diverse Lion-fights. L. Scylla, who was afterwards Dictator, in his Praetorship made a shew of an hundred male Lions. After him Pompey in the Circk shewed DC, whereof 315 had thick manes. Caesar the Dictator, 400.Differences. Plin. l. 8. c. 16. There are many differences about them among writers. The Lions chiefe honour is in his hairy shoulders, and neck, which right bred Lions in time grow too, but mungrells want. And the manes also differ, some are longer, and more curled then others. Some are much fiercer then others. In Africa, and among the Abyssines there are yellow as gold, white, and black ones. In Lybia party-coloured ones, with red mouths, and black and blew spots like flowers. In West-Indies they incline to ash-colour. Those of America are not so vigorous. In Puma in Peru are none so great as those in Africk; they are more timerous, and harmlesse, if you let them alone, degenerate, dusky rather then yellow. The Indians meet by troups, and hunt them, and kill them with stones and clubs. The Barbarians climb trees, and thence gall them with their spears, and arrows, they make merry with the flesh, and feast on it; reserving the fat for medicines, and with the bones they sport, and daunced. A Spanjard having taken a tree, kept of an huge lionesse, having pearced her through with foure arrows, in her belly were found two Tiger mungrell-whelps, as appeared by the spots. Hollanders have eaten of Sea-lions.

There are other wild beasts that come somewhat near a Lion,Nierem. H. E. l. 9. c. 24. as the Mitili, not hairy as our Lion, but a kin to him, whelped duskish, after grows yellow, sometimes red, and whitish, bigger then the common Lion, (which may be from the nature of the region) and not so fierce. There is the Quamitzli, hee is tamer, and nimbler then the lion; Some Spanjards tooke him for the Panther. Then the Macamitzli, taking name from the Hart, and Lion; and the Cuitlamitzi, so called from the lion and wolf, thicker, but gentler, and lesse then the lion; Hee lives by Hunting-deere, and crotales; and when full, hee yet kills any harmfull creature; when he hath filled his belly, hee sleeps two, or three dayes, till he is hungry again. Then the Tlalmitzli, lesse then a cat, but faced like a lion, his looke and fiercenesse seeme strange in so small a body. There is the Cacamitzli, like the lion and cat, living among the bulrushes, hee is but foure spans long, small, yellow-haired, but long, small-eared, headed like a Swan, long and rough-tayled; so fierce, that hee sometimes dare set on a Stag. In Mexico, Mixtli, signifies both cat, and lion, whence that beast hath his name. He lives also among the Pannicenses. Some of these kinds it may be are reducible to the Baboons, or Bavians.

CHAPTER II. Of the Libard, or Leopard.

CAlled Pardus from Ardoo, to be sprinkle; or Arbaloe, to defile. Leopard, Pordalis, [...] . the male; the shee, Pardalis, some say,Name. Panther; (yet to be distinguisht from that beast that resembles a spotted wolf) called Panther, from his being endued with all kinds of savagenes, never to be tamed; or, because hee seems to be adorned with the colours of all kinds of wilde beasts, called Thronon, from his spottednes; small-faced he is, wide mouthed, his eyes litle whitish, and wandring; forehead long, ears round, neck long, and slender, his breast hath small ribs,Description. long-back'd, buttocks, and thighs fleshy, belly-squat, colour divers, his whole body unproportionable. Having foure

paps in the midst of the belly,Worton. five toes on the fore, and foure on the hinder-feet. His eyes glister more in the darke then any beasts; but dull in the Sun. His skin is enameld with black in white, and gold in darke colour. In Hircania are many painted with small round yellow, blew, white spots like eyes, and some like increasing moones. As for the inward parts, hee hath a tongue like a gutter-tile, exceeding sharp teeth, and claws, an heart great in comparison,Gyllius. Oppi. n. Soli [...] . Plin. with beasts of his bulk, litle fat, it being spent by his excessive heat, his bones are somewhat thick. There are none of them in Europe; in Africk many; there being but few waters, many wilde beasts meet at the same watring-places to drinke,Place. where they couple promiscuously; whence the proverb, that Africa sends dayly novelties into the world. They live also in Asia,Arist. Pamphylia, aboundes with them, and the Province of Comerus, and the Kingdome of Bengala, and Mount Caucasus, the sent of whose odoriferous herbs invites them thither. Salomons song intimates that there are many in Mount Hermon,Lopes. which the Amorrhaeans call Sanir. Their food is most dogs-flesh, and lambs, and Apes, whom they take by faining themselves dead; then the Apes drawen by the sent,Philost. come of themselves, and are surprised.Feed. They assault men also. They couple oft with the lion, sometimes with the dog, and with the wolf; they whelp more then one at a birth,L [...] Af. as appears by their many paps. Isidore fables (Orig. l. 12. c. 2.) that the whelps prevent the season,Aelian. and through impatience tare their passage out of the dames belly. They hate mankinde so deadly, that it is said, they will teare the very picture of a man. [...] . Some say, the sight of a mans skull makes them runne away. Some conceive that it is the face that hee most abhorreth; for the King of France his beast-keeper, being sent to hunt them, could take none without turning his backe towards them.Ge [...] ner. Plin. The like enmity he holds with the cock, and serpents, so that hee will not touch one that is anointed with cockbroth. Nor will serpents hurt one in a leopards skin. Some say, hee will not come near a wall, rub'd over with garlick. There is such an enmity between him, and the Hyaena, that, if their two skins hang together,Nature. the Leopards hair falls off. Those in the hilly-part of Armenia, are much taken with the tears of Storax, destilling from the tree, [...] Apo [...] l. the sent whereof the wind brings them. His voyce is roaring. He walkes as the lion, withdrawing his claws, and runs aside to amuse hunters;Voyce. Wo [...] ton. [...] . 5. c. 82. onely for prey hee stretches out his claws. In sent hee excells all beasts, but the civet, and mush-cat. He hath wiles, when hee waxes old, to inveagle beasts to come to him, and then preys upon them. By his sent hee invites them;Plin. and no wonder, for wee see dogs diverted from their chase by sents. As for their nature, if they aile any thing (as they are sometimes distempered, and mad,Manners. or have eaten the herb Pardalianche) they betake themselves to wilde Goats-blood, or many ordured; they ever lead their whelps, and defend them to the death. They after whelping keep their Den,Arist. and the male provides food. They seldome are wholly tamed. After the death of a King of France (Francis) the Kings Leopards got loose,Gesner. a male, and female, and tare very many about Orleans; and there were womens carcasses found, whose breasts only they had devoured. But it is memorable that is reported,Plin. of a Leopard lying by the way, and seeing the father of one Philinus a Philosopher, came to him; he affrighted steped back; shee fawned on him, seeming to make great moane, shee pulled him gently by his coat, inviting him to follow her,Demetr. Physic. he did so; shee led him to a pit, into which her whelps were fallen, he helped them out; shee jocund attends him with her whelps, till he came to the borders of the wildernese; and after her fashion exprest her gratitude towards him; which in man is rarely found. Read also in Aelian of the kid that a Leopard would not touch dead,Aelian. H. A. l. 2. c. 24. because alive it had been his play-fellow. Savages use to feed on them, as they between Caucasus,Use. Plin. and the river Cophena. In India also, where they seeth them twice, the better to disgest them.Philost. They are also of use in Physick, as the brain with the juice of rocket. The right testicle helps womens terms, saith Cardan. The blood helps swoln veins; the fat sleeks the skin. The Moors use the skin for cloathing; the Ethiops for armour.Galen. They were of old presented in the Cirk at Rome. Scaurus shewed fifty of them. After, Pompey shewed four hundred and ten; Augustus four hundred and twenty. Some make three kinds of them, the Panther, the Pard, and the Leopard; some four, Panthers Pard,Porta. Phytog. Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. genial. the Leopard without mane, sprung from a Pard, and a lionesse; and the spotted one, the issue of a Pantheresse, and a lion. Some call the males Variae, and Pards, as those in Africk and Syria. Some difference them only by colour, and brightnesse. There was an order of Senate, that transporting them out of Africk into Italy;Plin. but Cneius Auffidius the Tribune for all that allowed it to gratifie the people in the Cirk-shews. Perhaps we may aptly refer hether the beast,Hierem. H. E. l. 9. c. 1. that the Spaniards call Dazypodes; and the Indians Theotochtli; he is about the bignesse of a Tumbler, round, low, thick, small-eared, Lion, or Cat faced, with lively eyes, and red circles, thick thighed, crooked claws, duskish hair about the neck, white about the belly, the rest of the body ash-coloured, everywhere black spotted, the muzzle, and tayl short, the tongue rough, rather grumbling then roaring, and of incredible swiftnesse. He lives on the Tetrocamian hills; hunts Deere, and other beasts of that bulke, and sometimes men. The tongue is so venomous, that a lick on the ey of his prey, blinds, and kills it. He covers the carcasses of the slain with herbs, hay, and greensward; then climbs the next trees and houles; when the beast within hearing, by instinct of nature, come at the call, hastning as to a feast, and fill themselves

together with the provided prey: Then the Tocotochtli comes down for his share, and not afore knowing that should he eat first, all the guest beasts should be poysoned. So civill, charitable, and providently kind is he to the rest. None, but can profit others, if he will. We stand not so much in need of power, and riches, as of a good heart to do good. Most rich are unprofitable it were well, if they were not mischievous; but all that are benevolent can in some degree be beneficient. Love is ever liberall.

CHAPTER III. Of the Lynx, or Lyzard.

THis wild Beast hath his name Lynx, from Lykes, light; he being the most quick-sighted of all creatures;Name. [...] . Scaliger. Called also a Deer-wolfe, not from his shape, but his greedinesse, and preying on deere. It is not the Thois, as we shall see hereafter. I question whether it be the Chaus or no, that the French call the Raphius.Plin. Pompey shewed one in his plays, faced like a Wolfe, and spotted like the Pard. He is smallheaded, his eyes glister, his face cheerfull,Descript. Scaliger. Gesner. hath teats on the breast. The spots are more distinct, and round on the Hee. The skin from the nose-tip to the tayl is three foot, four inches long; the tayl seven inches long; the neck-skin, half a foot, the back-skin fifteen inches about, the thighs afore fourteen, and the hinder twelve inches. The Hair soft, and downy, the back hair tips bright, the belly middle white, but varied with black spots, most, near the belly on the sides; the ears little, and triangular, and round black and shaggy, a few white hairs intermixt; the beard like the Cats, with white bristles, the feet very shaggy; the forefeet having five, the hinder four toes; the tayl blackish at the end, of the same thicknesse everywhere; the temples hath weak muscles;Ambro. in Digit. l. 3. cap. 3. the skull three futures, or seams, armed with twenty teeth, whereof twelve are foreteeth, but the first, and sixt both of the upper, and lower jaw, are lesser then the middlemost, as we observe in Weazles, four dog-teeth longer then the rest, ten grinders, four in the upper-jaw on each side; the first next the dog-teeth of a trigon figure, the last parted and broad,; six in the under-jaw, the second shaped like a lily; the third broader and greater, cloven in the midst, sharp-pointed. The lower jaw is little, because hanging,Galen. and not so employed in chewing. The foot armed with sharp, clear claws covered with a thin skin, like those of the Eagle, and Vulter; the under part hard-skinned.

They are found in the Eastern parts, thence brought into Europa;Place. Ovid. Also in the mountains of America. Those in Lithuania are black, and marked on the back with handsome spots. They are also in Poland, Muscovy, Swethland by Helsing; they call them Rattluchs. Also in Wittemberg, where one set on a countreyman, who knocked him down with his bill.Gesner. H. Quad. Olaus M. Food. They feed on flesh, especially of wild Cats, whose flesh is sweeter. They love also beasts brains, and lurk on trees, and catch at beasts as they passe by, fastning their clawes on their necks, and hold them till they tear them, and eat their brains. Some say they wound not, but only suck the blood out. In Scandinia are few beasts that they prey not on.Gesner. Engendring. They engender as dogs and bitches, and as Hares admit of superfaotation.Scal. They bring at birth two, three or four.Arist. No beast is so sharp-sighted; whence it is fabled that they can see through a solid body.Isid. Orig. Plin. Odonus. Sight. They are so swift of foot, they run headlong. Pliny saith their pisse congeals into gems like carbuncles, sparkling like fire, called Lyncurium, like a kind of amber. They themselves know it, and as out of envy, bury their urine, which hardens it the sooner. Some say it,Aelian. Isidor. Dio [...] co [...] . and some deny it: Some grant it to be an Amber, and that it will draw and take up fethers; but count the other relations frivolous. They are so forgetfull,Brasavolus. Manners. that if they spy another prey, they forget what is afore them; but that is rather their overgreedines. In summer they cast their hair, but are shaggy in winter;Lucan. l. 6. which Odonus affirmes of all shaggy beasts. Lucan saith that their bowells are as venemous as the fome of a mad Dog.Use. They are of some reasonable use in Physick. Evonymus mingles Saxifradge with the blood against the stone. Wekerus makes an oyntment of the fat for the same grief. Crollius makes salt of the stone, and crabs eyes. The claw of the greater toe of the right foot, shut in silver, and worn, helps convulsions.Pliny. In the Isle Carpathus, the claws, and hide, and drinke the ashes against running of the reins; and sprinkle them on the body to cure itch; and their pisse is good against Bear-pissing, and sore throats. A skin was sold at Bononia for 120. pound, some are greater,Differences. Oppian. and some lesser. In Italy they shew two kinds of skins; a larger, and inclining to white, thought to belong to the Deer-Wolfe; and a lesser, yellowish, which some think to be the Cat-pards.

CHAPTER IV. Of the Tyger.

THe name of this beast is imposed by the Medes from his swiftnesse,Name. they calling an Arrow Tigris.Descri [...] . Some say he is of the bignesse of a Dog; Nearchus, of a Horse. There hath been a skin seen five foot long. He hath fiery glistering eyes, a short neck, as other beasts that feed not on grasse; his clawes crooked, teeth keen, feet cloven. There is great store of them in the East,Place. and South, in India within Ganges, and Hyphasis; on mount Caucasus, by the Besi [...] gi near the Peninulei; in Java, where the fear of them makes lesse Gum Benjuin; also in Bengala, and the hill of Peru, and ever in Taprobana. They prey on,Food. and devour all kind

of living creatures; they are oft too hard for Elephants; they draw Mules away by the legs, as also Sheep, Oxen, Dogs, &c. which they tare; not sparing men, but they love kids-flesh best. So greedy they are, that if they see but blood, [...]  they devour the whole body. Because no males are ever taken, some fancy they are all female, and engender by the wind, because of their fleetnesse. They couple averse, and whelp many at a birth. They lust also after Bitches, which men ty in woods which they haunt; these they either tare, or couple with.

The first and second brood from this commixture, the Indians think too fierce;Gendrin [...] . Ae [...] an. the third they bring up. Linschot relates, that in West-Indies they do the Spaniards no hurt, but infest the Natives; [...] . that in Bamba they will not touch white men, but assault the blacks; yea, if they find a black and white man sleep together, [...]

they spare the one, and fasten on the other. They are enraged at the sight of an Elephant; [...]  the sent of Ox-dung drives them away; the noyse of a Drum mads them, so that they wound themselves. Their voyce is called rancatus, a kind of roaring; they change it, and guash the teeth when enraged. They are of an admirable fleetnesse; the young ones are taken, and fresh Horses are layd to carry them away, because the Dam finding her Den empty, her Welps gone, hastens headlong by the sent after them, (for the Hee regards not the brood.) He that seazed the young upon the approach of the Dam, casts away one of them, (for they bring many at one whelping) that she snatches up in her mouth, and hids back with it to her Den; then hastens in chase after the rest, and they being shiped, she raves, and complains on the shore. This is the opinion of the Ancients, but the Modern report the contrary; that the Tiger is heavy-paced, that a man (much more other wild) can out-runne them; [...]  that the Boor, wild Bull, Deer, senting them, run away, and escape their clutches; wherefore the Tigers lurk in sedgy places, among reeds, and with a side-leap surprise beasts, as a Cat Mice and Dor-mice: So also they seaze on men; and if with over-greedy hast they misse their prey, and leap wrong, they retire softly, roaring; and finding themselves detected, they go away. This I have out of Bontius, who being dead, it is sad to think how many exotick rarities about Plants, and Beasts died with him. The Tigresse is very fond of her Whelps; wherefore upon sight of a man, she forthwith removes them; and if they be taken away,Manners. she cruelly rages at whatever comes in her way, and dies mad. Now, though they are for the most part untameable, yet they have been tamed, and obeyed a whip,Ovid. Seneca. Plin. Ius. Capit. & their keepers have dared to kisse them. Augustus, Q. Tubero, and Fabius Maximus being Consuls, first shewed a tame Tiger in a Cage at Rome at the Dedication of Marcellus his Theater. Claudius also shewed four: Under Gordian ten were seen at Rome: At Aurelians triumph four. Heliogabalus yoakd them together in a Chariot. Yet they never lay their fiercenesse so aside, but that they start out, and shew their savagenesse, when we least think of it. When they have been led to be seen, men have surrounded them with bells,Abdias Babilo. l. 6. Hist. to warn the beholders from being surprized by them. Sometimes chains cannot hold them. Men must stupify them with juice of Mandragora, and Opium to prevent doing harm, when led along the streets. The Indians ate their hind-parts, and consecrated their fore-parts to Phoebus, holding them up toward the rising-Sun, but ate them not.Petr. Victor. Var. Lec. 4. c. 3. The Congitani ate all, but the parts under the arm-pits, or mustachio, because whosoever did eat them ran mad; wherefore it was ordered by Edict that none should be allowed to sell the skins without those parts.Vse. Philos. Apol. l. 2. Pet. Mart.  Ledesina the Spaniard thinks the flesh so good as Beef; the Cerebrarians wear the teeth into Garlands, and think the wearing makes them couragious.

Some count the Manticora a Tiger, that hath three rowes of teeth, and hairs in his tail as sharp as darts. Among the Prasy are said to be Tigers twice as big as Lyons;Linscho [...] , Kinds. Pausan. they differ in fiercenesse, and shape, and bulk. The lesser sort the Indians call Tilaco-ocelotl, or little Tigers, marked with black, and dusky spots, and not pale, and bright as others commonly are.Strabo. Geogr. l. 15. The Perunians call them Ururuncu, as Bears Aboronocus: they are fiercer then Lyons, and are greedy after Indians,Nierem. Hist. l. 9. c. 15. seeking them in their houses, and cottages; and if they keep not their doors shut, then slink in, and snatch an Indian away in their mouth, as a Cat would a Mouse. Nor can men take sanctuary in trees, for they climb them, and fetch men down, and rend them to pieces. In the expedition of Fedreman, a Tiger assaulted a troop of Souldiers, and in the midst of them tare a Spaniard, and three Indians, and escaped away unhurt: Yet swadle them about the reins with a stick, you cool their courage, and master them; there is no other way. The Indians dread no beast more, and even worship it.

The Devil very oft confers with them in the shape of a Tiger: their claws are thought venemous, and the wound they make incurable. The Barbarians reverence, nay dread this beast lesse, since the Gospel came amongst them. They are taken in nets, and in some places in traps. In Bengala are the fiercest found, and implacably revengeful. One hath followed along the shore-side thirty mile a Ship, wherein any have been embarqued who wronged her. Cruel to all they meet, man or beast: Nature yeilds some prevention to this mischief. A little beast ever accompanies the Tiger, and by constant barking discovers where he is; and both men and beasts take the warning, and hide themselves, or run away. They are most greedy after mans-flesh, especially the black-Moors, and know their ships, chasing them twenty leagues together, watching if any come ashore, to devour him. By night they leap into ships, and surprize, and destroy the Mariners. To

give a memorable example of what hapened to one of our men, while we were trading in Bengala. A certain Moor, a servant dreamed that a Tiger snatched him away; the night after he hid himself in the prow of the ship; being asked the cause, he told his dream, which the some night was verified; for all being asleep, a Tiger leaps aboard, touches not any else, though thirty lay asleep in the ship, but seazes the wretched Moor.

The lot of another was Luckier, as divine providence ordered it; hee being ashore, not far from the ship, a Tiger assaults him behinde, and a Crocodile out of a river afore; the Tiger, to prevent his foe, and bear away his prey, for overhast, runs quite beyond the man, and running against the ships-side, falls into the Crocodiles jaws, and so the man escaped. It cannot be said how those of Bengala, dread the Tigers rage; whence they call him by sundry names, fearing, that, if they should call him by his owne name, they might be torne in pieces. In Brasil there are multitudes of them, and those hungry, ravenous, dreadfull, and swift, and very strong. But once full fed, they are said to be so sluggish, that common curres can drive them away. Gluttony destroy not mankind alone. In new Spain they lurke in trees by rivers-sides, watching the Crocodiles, and leap down, and surprize, and kill them.Pet. Mart. Time was, when Darien was as much pestered by Tigers, as Nemaea with Lions, and Calidonia with wilde Boares. In six month there passed not one night free; wherein a heyfer, horse, dog, or hog, was not devoured in the town-wayes; their herds, and flocks were wasted, not a man could with safety step forth a doores; especially when the Tigresses had whelps, when hunger forced them to sease man, and beast. At length necessity put the natives on this invention, to revenge, and save the blood of them, and theirs; they observed strictly the Tigers track from their dens, and digged a ditch, cast up light earth, covered it with hurdles, fastened sharp stakes at the bottome; there came a hee-Tiger, hee fell in, stuck fast on the stakes; the Indians threw down great stones on him, and dispatched him in the pit, they cast many darts at him, which with his right paw hee shattered into a thousand pieces, and chips. If when half dead, and bloodlesse, hee bred such a terrour in the beholders, how dreadfull, think wee, was hee when loose? One John Ledesina, a Spanjard, who was present at the busines, reports, that hee ate his share of that Tiger, and that it tasted as well as beef. Ask them, who never saw a Tiger, how they know one, they tell you, by the spots, fiercenesse, nimblenesse. When many have seen Leopards, Panthers, Ounces so marked also; the male-Tiger dead, they traced his footsteps to his den, where female also dwelt; shee absent, they tooke away two sucking whelps; changing their mind, and that they might send them to Spain, when bigger, they fitted ironchains carefully to their necks, and left them there to the dames nursery. A few dayes after returning to the den, they found them not, supposing that the dame in a rage had torne them in pieces, and taken them away, that no man might have them; for they affirme, that they could not possibly be tame, alive out of the chains. The skin of the male was stuffed with dry herbs, and sent to Admirantus, and the Governers of Hispaniola. See more of this subject in Nieremberg, and Marckg. H. B. l. 6. c. 10.

CHAP. V. Of the Beare.

THe Latines call this beast Ursus,

[...] . from urgeo, to force, or dirve, or urge, as they doe their prey, till it fall afore them; or from Orsus, because they lick their cubs into shape, &c. The Greeks Ark [...] os,

[...] . from Arkoo, to drive, or Arkeomai, because hee passest the winter without eating. His body is grosse, and unwieldy, and (some say) ever waxing; some have been found five cubits long,Description. and as broad, beyond any ox-hide; and such a one was presented to Maximilian the Emperour, at the Baths of Baden. The skin is thick, and shaggy, the teeth hidden: the mouth long, eyes quick, the feet like hands, his chief strength lies in his arms, and loyns; sometimes they stand on their hindfeet,Solin. Polyb. their tayl is short, having foure paps, a large stomack, and gut; when taken in their dens in winter, sleeping, and being unbowdled,Arist. H. A. l. 8. c. 1 [...] . their stomack is empty,Scaag. l. 8. c. 21. P [...] in. [...] . [...] . l. 8. c. 36. and clinged together. Galen observes sinews in them, so turning, as in any other beasts are hardly seen. Their heads seemes weake, especially afore, (which in a Lion is strongest) therefore falling down in any precipice, they tumble down with their arms, covering their head.Theo [...]  de [...] . While they keep in their coverts, small drops of blood are onely about their heart, the rest of their body is bloodles. Grease, and fat they have, but no marrow, saith Pliny.Place. They are found almost all the world over; most are in Poland, Germany,Plin. 8. cap. 58. Lithuania, Norwey, and other Northern parts,Herod. Solin. c. 29. especially in Nova-Zembla. In England are now none; nor in Candy.

It is a mistake that there are none in Africa, for the Moores weare the skins.Strabo. Geog. l. ult. They delight more in hilly then plain land; whence it is that the Alpes so swarm with them, and those stout ones. In the mountains of Peru are many black ones; and Pernes an Attick hill is famous for Bear-hunting.Pausan. The Beare eats all kind of things; among plants, they fancy a red, and sweet berry growing on a bramble;Feed. and the herb Cuculus, a kind of Trifoyl, and a root that provokes sleep.Albert. Gesner. Arist. H. A. l. 8. c. 1 [...] . A Cow-herd on the Helvetian Alps having spied afar of a Bear eating that root, after the Beare was gone tasting it, was so sleepy thereupon, that he drop'd down where he stood. When they come out of their holes

they feed first on the herb Arum. About Trent grows a thorny shrub with a white flower, and red berries, called Bears-bread. They climb trees, [...] l. 10. [...] . 73. Ar [...] st. [...] . A. l. 8. c. 5. and eat the fruit, and pulse, and hony, crabs, ants, and flesh fresh, or rotten, especially hony-combs. Jovius tells a merry story of a Boore in Muscovy who slipping into a hollow tree up to the neck in hony, and living there two dayes with no other sustenance, a Bear came gently down into the same tree to eat hony, on whose rugged hide the poor man catching hold was drawn out. In Island, and the frozen seas they live on fish. They drink water,Martyr. [...] . 36. [...] . but neither sipping, as the sharp-toothed, nor gulping in, as the beasts, that have a continued rew of teeth, but champing it. They are very venerous, since, because wild beasts, (excepting the Lizard and Hare) when big use not to couple, these are thought to hasten to bring forth their cubs the sooner by some force on themselves,A [...] st. that they may engender a new. [...] . It is reported that the males lust after young virgins,Oppi [...] n. and that one tooke a mayd away of the Allobroge, and lay with her, and fed her with wild apples, which Philip Cosserus, Bishop of Constance, related to Gesner. Saxo tells that a race of Danish Kings is derived from a Bear;Saxo. Gr [...] m. H. Dan. [...]  and some say the same of Gothish Kings. They couple in February, or in the beginning of winter, [...]  not as other fourfooted beasts, but as mankind. Being with young, they hide themselves, and the males seemed to hold them in great regard. They goe 30 dayes, and bring one, two, sometimes five cubs together: They breed and bring forth in hast, which makes their cubs so ugly, and mis-shapen; litle lumps of white flesh, without eyes, or hair, only clawed after a fashion, which they are said to lick into shape, and to lay to their breasts to cherish with their warmth, to bring life, and breath into them. [...] . c. [...] 9. But of late experience shews the contrary; and that is but a fancy, that Ursus comes from Orsus, begun, or unfinished. Above Trent one was taken in a vally, and ripped up, and all her cubs were found full shaped within her. In a library of the Senatehouse in Bononia a young cub cut out of the Dams belly, [...] bro. [...] . exact at all parts, is kept in a glascase. Camerarius his guesse is not unlikely, that the bed wherein the cub is wrapped is so thick, that the dame is many daies licking it off, which occasioned the vulgar errour. They hate mortally the Sea-ox,Antipathy. Oppian. Horse, Boor, the Dead, and a Table-cloath. They abhor the Sea-calfe most of all. The Horse can smell them, that never saw a Bear, and fortwith prepares to combate, and kicks him on the head with his hinder feet, mastring him more by sleight then strength. They are thought to hate the dead,Ae [...] ian. because they will not touch a man layed at length with his face downward. Seneca saith, a Table-cloath incenseth them. Hemlock kills them, and the Bear called Marcillium, or Consiligo,Gesner. There is also a black fish in Armenia, the meal whereof sprinckled on figs if they eat, it is their bane. Experience shews that they delight in musick. Their voyce is roaring or rather grumbling.Voyce Nature. Having tasted Mandragora apples, they lick ants. When they are qualmish, they go to Myrmesia,Solin. c. 39. Psutar. or Myre-hools, and sitting they loll out the tongue dropping with that sweet juice, lightly holding it so long, till they set it swarme with Pis-mires. Being wounded, they heal themselves with dry herbs. The Shee-bears after their helping in to whelp, comming into the light, are so dazeled,Pli [...] . that you would thinke they were stark blind. Because they are often hevy sighted, they hunt so after hony, and that having stung their mouth with bees, they may be rid of that blood that oppresseth them.Aelian. They tumble into their dens, that their footsteps may not be tracked, where they ly quiet, and at ease fourty dayes, and for fourteen dayes stir not, sustaining themselves only by licking their right foot, so that through fasting, their guts are klinged together and even shriveled up. The males ly hid fourty dayes, the females four months.Pli [...] . They furnish their dens with heaps of bows, and shrubs, or soft leaves, making them weather proof, and then lay themselves along, and sleep the first seven dayes so soundly, that wounds cannot wake them, which strangely fattens them, after they live by sucking their forefeet; strange to say. Theophrastus thinks, that for that time Bears flesh boyled and kept might increase, there is no shew in them that they have eaten, but onely a little moysture found in the paunch, and a few drops of blood about the heart, and none in the rest of the body. In the Spring they come forward, and the males grows so fat, that they hardly stirre; the Shee-beare is leaner, because they breed.Solin. They hold their lodgings in their dens severally, divided by trenches. Comming abroad, they eat greedily the herb Arum, to loosen their guts, that are so shriveled up; and when they breed teeth, they champ on slips thereof. If they assault Bulls, they make at the horns to tire them out, and at the mustle, because they know it to be tender. Their very breath is so contagious, that no wilde beast will touch what they have blowen on. In Mysia, they say, are a kind of white bears, that being hunted, send forth such a breath, that the steame that rots the flesh of the doggs. Although their flesh be cold,Vse. rank, hard of disgestion, and ill for the spleen, and liver; yet those about the Alps,Galen. in aliment. l. 3. c. 2. and the Helvetians count it a delicate. And Bruerius saith, that hee at supper at of it,Br [...] er. de cibi [...] . l. 13. c. 41. well seasoned, at Symphorianus Campejus his table; but it was of a young one, killed in witner, which indeed they use to eat.Barthol. For though they are fatter in July, yet for their rammish sent, they are banisht the table usually; onely the forefeet are held the best food, and affected by some great men.Aeli. Some say, that salted, and hung in the chimny to be smoaked, they are a delicate,Mich. Herus. Gesner. and that they wonder not, that in winter they suck their owne feet. Savanorola saith, the brain is poyson. Divers parts of the Beare, are of great use in Phisick.

The eye dried, and hung about childrens neck, is said to free them from feare in the night, and bound on the left shoulder, allays a quartan ague. The blood dissolves waxen kernells, and impostumes, and helps against hairs bred in the eyes, and kills fleas. The fat takes out spots, and with Lilly-roots, is good against a burne; some sudar it on against S. Anthonies fire; mixt with red oker, it heals ulcers on the skins, and thighs; with Allom, it closes chaps in the feet, it helps against baldnes; they use it also in the weapon-salve. Men spread the skin under those that are bitten by a mad dog. The powder of the lungs, keeps feet, pinched by shoes from inflammation. The gall helps against the aches in the joynts, and is commended against the falling-sicknes;Arnol. Villano. and with hony is good for a cough, but is wrongly used to helpe conception. The hairs with Venushair, and roots of reeds burned, make hair come.

To omit Pliny his fable about the easening of child-bearing, by laying the stone whereon a Bear is killed, in the chamber. The Samodides, and Laplanders, wear Bears-skins; some use them for coverleds; of old they covered their bucklers with them, to appeare more dreadfull. Some daubed the fat on their ironworke of plows,Palladius. and harrows, to fence them from hail, and frost. Some smear it on their Vine-barkes, to defend them against vermine, worms, and frost. Some shewed them in their sights, and used them in their punishments, Domitius Aenobarbus October 14. The Pisods, and M. Messala, being Counsulls, presented in the Cirke an hundred Numidian Bears, and as many Ethiopian hunts-men. There are some greater, some smaller, black, and white ones.Plin. They troubled the Hollanders in their passage, through the frozen Sea to Catay. Some are of a stupendious bignes;Differenc [...] s. skins have been seen thirteen foot long. On a promontory, in the utmost confines of Arabia, are Bears gold-yellow;Purchas. Nav [...] g. T. 3. l. 4. c. 5. Strabo. Geogr. l. 16. Maiol. Col. 7. Some are dusky-coloured. The Helvetians call the small Rock-bears, the great Capitals. In the new world are some slugs, that live on ants, dogs can master them, and a staf drive them away, having no tayls, called Myrmeciphagi.

The greatest are found in the Province of Vera-Pax, or True-peace, having of black hair, or wooll upon them; their tayls a palm long, flat-nosed they are like the blacks, their muzzles round, hairlesse, and wrinkled.Nieremb. H. E. l. 9. c. 28. Paul. Ven. In Virginia they eat them. They are there timerous, avoid men take trees, and are with darts driven thence. The Province Beach, is said to have harmelesse Bears. Suidrigellius Prince of Lituania, had a Beare, which comming a mornings out of the wood, neare the Court, would with his forefeet paw on the doores; and having meat given him, returned to the wood. Among the Turks, a sect of Hermites, used to lead a Hart, or a Beare with a bell about the neck, through the cities and villages.

CHAPTER VI. Of the VVolf.

ARTICLE I. Of the VVolf in generall.

THe Wolf the Latines call Lupus, Aldrov. l. 1. c. 6. Name. [...] . or Leopus, or Lion-footed. The Greeks Lukos, from his ravenousnesse, or Apo Tees Lukees, from the morning, either from his colour, or because at day-break he comes forth to his prey. Or because their eyes are bright in the dark: they are like Mastives, and of divers colours.

Their eyes glister,Description. Aelian. and dart forth beams, and russet: their teeth like an sow, sharp, and uneven, and round: He hath a wide gape; His neck so strait, that he cannot turn it about, but must turn his whole body to look behind him, as if he had no joynts; though Philes, and other Anatomists say he hath turning-joynts. In his temples he hath great sinewy-muscles;Clamor. His brain are said to wax and wain with the Moon; his heart dried, hath a good sent, his liver is like a Horse-hoof;Galen. his genital bony; his forefeet have five toes, his hinder four; his bones thick. In his reins, when old, breed worms, or serpents,Plin. which Clamorgon saith he hath observed in three or four carcasses. In his bladder is a stone called Syrites. In Sardinia, Creet,Albertus. Gal. de usu par. and Olympus in Macedon are said to be none. England now breeds none, under Edgar they were wholly rooted our, both in Wales and elsewhere. They abound in the North-countreys, especially in Muscovy,Plin. where how they ly in wait for cattel, and men. Olcarius in his Eastern Itinerary,Place. p. 119. declares. Cadamustus, c. 29. tells, how they swarm in the Kingdome of Senega:Boethi [...] . Feed. In Augusia a Provence of Scotland, and in the vally of Glamore they are, and live by preying on wild beasts. They devour flesh; but love mutton best, and takes them out of the folds; they ly in wait also for Horses, Oxen, Geese. Having once tasted a Manscarcasse; Mans flesh savours best with them. If they smell Women with child,Olaus de gen [...] . they watch for them; Nor spare they their own kinde, if they be hungry. They go out by troops, and if any one of them chance to faint and fall, the rest tare him. They feed their sucklings with flesh they have newly swallowed, vomiting it up again; but growen up, they feed them with Lambs and Geese. They desire also the Scythian herb Bosametz. In Congo they swallow Palmoyl.Porta Physiog. They eat also potters-earth. Whence it may be the stone, is the stone called Lithargilus, full of turnings and folds, weighing eleven ounces, found in the stomack, spoken of by Schenkius. Linsch. Navig. Schenk. Hist. Monst.  Albertus thinks he doth it not for hunger, but by naturall instinct, to make himself heavier, the better to oppresse his prey. Being full he can fast long, then is

his belly widened, and his tongue swells, his mouth is stopped, and he becomes tame; when his tongue is lessened, he turns Wolf again. Whether they bury, and dig up their food, and equally divide it, and by houling call others to the orts, as Albertus relates, I leave to hunts-men to determine.

They couple as Dogs doe,Gendring. Arist. and quarrelling, twelve dayes in a year; beginning, as some reckon from Christmasse; and at that time are fiercer against others, though not among themselves.Gesner. They carry their burdens two months, and bring as many as dogges puppy, and those blind; the Helvetians speak of nine whelpes at once; and one of the Rhaetian Alps in May found seven or nine in a covert that came of on litter, and the same man reported, that it is commonly said that at first draught they bring but one Whelp, and that blind; at the second, two, and so onward, every time more, till they come to ten, and then bear no more. [...] . That in twelve dayes they litter after gendring, as Latona under that shape in Delos, is a fable. Antipater affirmes, that they cast their belly when the Acorn-bearing-trees cast their flowers, which they tasting, their womb opens; when there are none, their whelps dy within them, and they cannot bring forth; and that Wolves do no harme where is not plenty of Acorns. They drink very little. [Poët Pliny, Antipathy. So [...] n. Polyb. [...] . l. 2 [...] . c. 14. and others report many things more strange then true, more fitted for a Poëm, then a History.] As that he is first struk mute, whom the Wolfe sees first, &c. That the Wolves eye plucked out, affrights four-footed tame beasts; that she that haps to water on Wolves warm pisse, shall not conceive with child. That the tail hanged by a manger, keeps beasts from eating; Of the charming of Horses that treads in a Wolfes foot-steps.Aelian. l. 1. cap. 6. That mutton that he hath feed on tastes sweet, but the wool breeds lice, and itch. A skin put on a Wolfes skin, sheds the hair. The dung hid in stalls, holds cattel in quiet. All harmony is marred, if you mingle in musick strings of Sheeps and of Wolves guts: Fopperies! If he touch Sea-onion, he is straight shrivelled together. He fears stones, because worms breed in that part that is struck with a stone. Sparks struck out of a flint frights him so, that he dare not approach,Opian. be he never so hungry. A Drum made of his hide, drives other beasts away. A Pipe,Gesner. or any musick, or a Drum frights them away, when flinging of stones cannot. They are said to love Parrats; they run mad sometimes;Diseases. they get the Gout, and are troubled with the Squincy; Wolf-bane, or Lycoctonum kills them. When wounded, they stench the blood by wallowing in the myre. They live long; and when old, they are troubled with the tooth-ach, and cast all their teeth.

Having weake-inwards they eat herbs,Nature. especially Dracontium to sharpen their teeth. The lowest are thought bouldest. Falne into a pit, and seeing themselves inclosed,Gesner. Q. p. 721. they are stupied, and harmelesse. They observe who strikes them, and watch to be revenged.Plin. l. 8. c. 22. They love their young, the females stay by them, and the males cater for them. Flying they take their young with them. They are soonest taken in cloudy weather, then they hide themselves most. Walking among leaves they lick their feet, that they may not be heard. Being to passe a river, that the stream carry them not away, they hold one the other by the tayl with their teeth;Suidas. Aelian. H. A. l. 8. c. 14. Gesner. p. 723. and so hanging on another; they will drag an Ox out of a marsh. While they eat they are angry with lookers on, meeting with a man, and a beast together, they ever spare the man, saith Albertus: One related to Gesner, that he saw a Wolfe in a wood bite off a piece of wood of thirty, or fourty pound weight, and practised to go to and fro upon it, as it lay, and then hide it, when he was perfect; and a wilde Sow comming thether with her Hogs of severall ages, because oats were sowed there, he brake in, and tooke a Hog away about the weight of that block, and leaping took the wood back, and devoured the Hog. Sometimes they grow familiar with dogs, and so enter the folds without resistance, and worry all the sheep to death, afore they fall to eat any one.Aelian. l. 5. c. 19. They dare not make at the face of a Bull, because they feare his hornes, but they first seeme to threaten him afore, and then suddenly take advantage of him behind. Like Horses, and Dogs, they wax gray through age. When hungry, they can sent their prey by night half a mile against the wind:Ambro. de Digit. l. 1. c. 47. One will houle, and call many more, and set together on a troop of Horses, which happens oft in Bononia. At midnight they will go by troupes to a village, and stay at the entrance; one shall enter, and awake the dogs, and so entice them forth, and devoure them.Albert. de Animal. l. 2. They will hold willow boughs forth to goats to enveagle them within their reach.

Their voyce is houling.Voyce. Use. Fashionable people admit not the flesh to their table, it being a dry, grosse, rank food; yet in Savoy some eat it. They are very usefull in Physick. Boyled alive with oyl, and wax, it is commended against the gout. The Hide binds,Rhasis. and helps the colick. The flesh eases child-bearing eaten by the teeming woman, or any that are by. The fat is mixt with salves against the gout; the blood with oyl of nuts helpes the deafish; the Head layed under your pillow provokes sleep; the right Ey salted, and tied on, helps agues; the tooth takes away the swelling of the gums, making way for the teeth to come with ease; he who drinks through a Wolfs throat, escapes the danger of a Squinsy. Agricola confesses he learnt that experiment of Adolphus Occo.Gesner. The heart, a dram of it mixt with an ounce of the gum of an oke, and another of that of the Pear-tree, and two drams of Harts-horne helps the falling sicknesse.Galen. Marcellus. The Liver is good against a furred mouth; the same in warm wine helps the cough, and Tisick; the gall bound with Elaterium on the navell makes laxative. The dung gathered up among shrubs and briars,

hath helped the colick, drunk, or hanged on; nay the bones found in the excrements, if they have not touched the ground, tied to the arme. The bones dried to powder remove the pain between the ribs; the head hanged up in a Dove-coot drives away weesels, and cats. I omit the use, or abuse rather about venery, and witchcraft, and the heathens sacrifices with them,Plutar. when they invoked Divells. The newly married among the Romans smeared their posts with Wolfs-fat; the tayl hanged over mangers, keeps away the Wolf. The Differences follow.

ARTICLE II. Of the wolf in speciall, and of the Gulo.

AMong Wolves,Ambros. H. Digest. l. 1. c. 7. Olaus de gent. some are wild, as on the Doff [...] inian mountains, that part Norwey from Sweden, & in Sardinia. They are more shaggy then others, yellow, and their tayl standing up. In Media they used them in their sports, armed men fighting with them. Some are called from their elegant colour, Golden-ones, lesse then ordinary Wolves, but as greedy. They go in troops, hurting neither men, nor herds. They seeme to barke like dogs. They are seen in Turky and Cilicia.Bellon. They visite the Turks cottages by night, and eat what is eatable, that comes in their way; if they meet with nothing else, they carry away caps, cloathes, shooes, and what ever is of leather. Men make garments of their skins. There are also Scythian wolves in the utmost borders of Scandinavia,Ambros. behind Norwey, and Gothland. It is a beast as big as a wolf, and very angry; the Germans call them Grimmeklaw, because the edges of the nayl make them teachy. There is also the Sea-wolfe, a mungrell, as big as a Bear, so hardskind, as a sword can scarce pearce it.Bellon. He hath a wondrous great head; his eyes are shadowed with very many hairs, nosed, and toothed like a dog, sharp-shagged on his skin;Lop. Hist. black-spotted, his tayl long, thick, and shaggy. Small stones are found in his stomack, very fat he is, found on the British coasts.Bitterus. In the Isle of Angra a thousand of them have been seen in a troop. They are also seen in an Isle behind the Port of S. Crux, and in the Sea-tract of Peru. The Birds called Buitri kill them sometimes; they have wings fifteen foot broad. If they spy a wolfe, one takes him by the legs, another with the beake blinds him. The old ones roar like Lions, the young have a kids voyce; the liver is eatable. Those of Angra eating their flesh fresh, and salted, live long. The skins are worn.

The Gulo, or Gorbelly hath the name from greedinesse.Glutton. Scaliger calls him a fourfooted vultur;Boophagon. Miech. in desc. Sarmat. Crollius an Ox-eater; the Germans Vielfrase. Found they are in Lituania, Moscovy, and other Northern Regions. They feed on carcasses, and so cram themselves, that they strut like a drum. They squeeze out their excrements between two trees by force, and then returne to their carcasse, and cram themselves again. Akin to this is the wilde beast, that the Arabs call Dabuh,Leo Af. l. 9. Olaus 13. c. 6. the Africans Sesef, shaped like a wolf, and as big, he digs up carcases also; Gesner takes him for that ancients, called Hyaena; his blood hunts-men use for drinke. Seasoned with the finest hony they drinke it at wedding-feasts. They annoint ulcers with the fat. They make strings of the guts. The hoofs newly pluckt off from it, while living, shewed to dogs, and cats, drive them away; and hanged on remove the tinckling of the eares. The skins make handsome cloaths, and the most honoured guests are entertained with such carpets. Therefore they suffer them not to be transported to other lands. It is said, that they that sleep under coverlids made of the Guloes skin dream of gourmandizing.

TITLE II. Of the half wilde Toed-beasts.

CHAPTER I. Of the Fox.

ARTICLE I. Of the Fox in generall.

WEe call the Semiferae,Ambros. or half wilde, those beasts that though wilde, yet being of small bulk, are easily mastered, and tamed by man.Name. Isidor. I begin with the Fox, called in Latine Vulpes, or volpes, either from volupes, because he is so full of doubles in his goings; or from volipes, he being so swift of foot, or from v [...]  lipes, because he is strong-footed. The Greeks give him many names, as Aloopeez, from Aloo, and Oph, deluding the eyes, and sundry others taken from its craft, and tayl. He is so well knowne, that I need not stand long on describing him.Description. The genital is bony as the Wolves, and Wezels. The tayl bushy, ears short, he loves to eat Hens, Geese, and other foule, and hayrs, wild Mice, Cats, litle Dogs, that he can gripe,Feed. and locusts. At Marsellis a Fox hunting in a fisher-boat for Buopes, among great Lobsters, was taken in a Lobsters claw; they refrain not ripe grapes, nor pears, saith the proverb.Place. Solinus saith, there are none in Creet, or Candy. But in Russia, and the Helvetian Alps they abound. Whence Merchants buy the skins, and sell them in all parts. They couple in divers postures.Gend [...] ing. Pliny. Arist. They mix with other creatures, as with dogs, whence come the Alopecides, or dog-foxes; they bear blinde whelps, foure at most at once, and then retire, so that few are taken great with young. They lick, and carefully foster their brood.Sympathy, and Antipathy. They love serpents, and live in the same cave with them. They hate rue, which if you bind under Henswings,

the Fox will not touch them. They hate the kite and eagle, because sometimes they snatch up their young, and Hauks, because they pluck of their hair. Avicen saw a fight in a cage, between crows, and a Fox, he wounded their heads; but they bound up his lips, so that he could not queach. They have many combates with badgers, and with the sent of their dung, drive them away. Hares haunt those Isles most, where are fewest Foxes. They barke like dogs, [...]  when vexed, or in pain, when they desire any thing f [...] ame, they use a fawning murmur. They are very crafty. In Thrace, being to passe over frozen rivers, or lakes, by laying their eare to the ice, [...] . they guesse whether it be thick enough to beare, or no. In his hole he makes many outlets to scape traps, and gins. Because the Wolf by the touch of the Scillais vexed, [...] . l. 2. [...] . they lay it in their holes; when troubled with fleas, they take a lock of hay, or hair in their mouth, and dip it in the water, and drown them. When Hedge-hogs roul themselves up, they pisse in their mouths, and choke them. He will play with a Hare, [...] . and then snap him. He will roule himself in red clay, to seeme bloudy, and then ly down, and stretch himself out, as if he were dead, and loll out his toung, and so he catches birds. So in Pontus, they delude Buzzards, lying with the face another way, and sprauling, with the tayl stretch forth, as a birds neck. Taken in a snare, to get loose, he will bite off his leg, or fain himself dead, holding in his breath. He worries Hens at roost so with his tayl, that he casts them down, and eats them; and hath tricks to catch fish, and wasps with his tayl. On a tall tree he will shew himself sportive, and stand on his guard as in a castle; he fears not fire, unlesse very neare him; he will rather be thrust through, then come down to become a pray to the dog, and if he must come, [...] . hee falls like lightning on the best nosed dogs, and dies not unrevenged. Neate tables admit not Fox-flesh, yet the Sarmatians, Vandalls, and Rustique, [...]

French, eat it boyled, or roasted, as the Booetians of old. Those Islanders of S. Crux eat of it, raw, or a litle hardned in the smoake. Some decry it for a savage food; but Galen saith, it is like Hares-flesh. The brains given to children, preserve them from the falling-sicknes. The Tongue-worm in an bracelet, is good against thick sightednesse, and dried, and hung about the neck, against white in the eyes; the Lungs is commended against Ptisick, wheesings, [...] . short-breath, and liver-grown: the gall with hony, helps dim-cloudy-sight; and some put it in suppositories, to have male-children; the reins with fat, helpe knee-gout; and some rub the throat with them, to take down the swelling of the jaws. The genital, testicles, and the other secrets, some use to help conception, and months, and head-ach; the blood help the stone, the fat melted, and dropped into the eares, removes old griefs thence, and helps the sinews, and the stone, and is good against shedding of hair, and the frost in hands, and feet, if you annoint them afore they be swoln: the dung with mustard, cures fore-heads; the skin is good for the hair, and shoos made thereof, eases the Gout, and Sciatica. The tayl also hath its medicinall use: Fox-oyl is very effectuall for all diseases in the joints.Galen. Fox-skins make costly furres, especially if black. Foxes are of diverse colours, sizes, and natures.Differences. They are lesse in Egypt then in Greece. In Peru very litle, and of a noysome sent, and the stink of the pisse is not to be washed out. In the Northerne-woods are black, white,Scalig. exer. 217. glistering Foxes, and some with crosses; and those called Isatides, and some black, with some white hair sticking in order: Of reddish, are two kinds, one with black, and white throats, as if besprinkled with ashes. The other white-throated, which is rarer. There is plenty of white ones in Swethland, and Norwey, especially about Nova-Zembla, seen most, when the Sun dis-appears. Hollanders say, they taste like rabbets. Some are crossed from the mouth by the head, back and tayl with a straight black streake, and another thwart by the shoulder to the forefeet; which two streaks make the crosse.Aelian l. 7. c. 3 [...] . By the Caspian-Sea they are as familiar as little dogs, and as harmles.

ARTICLE II. Of the Indian Foxes.

THese are of sundry kinds, distinguished by name. The Coiotl hath a wolfshead, great,Nieremberg. H. Exotic. l. 9. c. 10. pale, but lively eyes, short, sharp-ears, black, long, thick-muzl'd; sinewy, hoocked-thighs, thick-claws, bushy-tail, dusky, long, and bright-hair, and bites shrewdly. For bulk, between a wolf and a Fox; frequent in new Spain, in places lesse cold; He lives by preying on weaker beasts, and on Sugar-canes, and Mazium. He sometimes sets on Deer, and Men; He is cunning in avoiding hunts-men; of the wolfs nature, revengefull, and mindfull of the losse of his prey, long after hunts him that took it; and with others falls on him, kills him, watches his house, kills all the tame cattel about it. But is so grateful to his benefactors, that he leaves part of his prey to them. His pizzle rubbed on the teeth, is said to give present ease to the touth-ach. The Cuit-lax-caiotl, is of the like nature and shape, but of another hair; thick, and shag-necked; the hair so long on the breast and face, that it is hideous to behold. The Azcacoiotle sits on Ants holes, and by night houles in several voices. The Ilpemaxtla is of a hair white, black, and gold-yellow, small-headed, and joynted, slender-bodied, and short, but long-muzzled, and thin; He is found everywhere mostwhat in hot places. The Oztoa is a kind of shape and bulk like a Fox, about thirty inches long, white and black-haired, and a little yellow, haunting ditches, and feeding

in fenny-places; They nurse up their young in hidden holes, and bite shrewdly, and fain themselves dead, if they have no other way to avoid the hunter; He breaks most stinking wind, yet they eat him. The Izquiepatl is coloured like tosted Maiz, he is eighteen inches long, low, small-muzzled, small-eared, hairy, and black-bodied, especially near the tail, short-thighed, black and crooked-claw; he lives in rockydens, and there their young are nursed up. They feed on Horse-flies, and worms, and they kill fatted-fowles, and eat their heads only; Reduced to extream hazard, he darts his pisse and dung eight paces off, and spoyles the cloathes of the hunts-men with indelible spots, and a stink never to be gotten out. They that have the Spanish-scab, find good by eating the flesh, and dung. There are two other small Foxes, the Izquiepatl, and the Conepatl, one with two bright gards, the other with one drawn along the tail. The Brachirae are like Foxes, but rounder, and of sweeter flesh; The Annae are somewhat lesse then our Cats, and of a pestilent smell, haunting towns by night; their sent betrayes them an hundred paces of, nor doors or windows can keep them out.

ARTICLE III. Of the Beasts akin to Foxes.

POINT I. Of the Cary-gueja, and Tajibi.

IN Brasil are five sorts of Beasts akin to Foxes;Marckg. H. Brasil. l. 6. c. 2. the Cary-gueja first, or the Jupatuma, or Sarigoy, or Tlaquatzin, about the bignesse of a Cat, having a Foxes head, a pointed mouth, shorter below then above, a long tongue, that he withdrawes threatning to bite; teeth as a Cat, or a Fox, small ones afore, then four long Dog-teeth, then six other, and then the grinders, which are sixteen, twelve middle-teeth, four Dog-teeth, and lesser, eight in the lower, ten in the upper-jaw, and two greater middle ones, like the Hare. He is wide-nostrild; hath fair, round, black-eyes; wide, long, Fox-ears, starting up, proportionable to his bulke; thin-skinned, smooth, transparent, a little dusky; bearded like a Cat; the hairs longer above, some on the eyes and cheeks; the head a little more then three fingers long; each ear two fingers long, and a finger and half broad; the neck but a fingers length; the rest of the body seven fingers to the dock; the tail crooked, a foot long, whereby he hangs on trees like an Ape; broad-breasted; the two fore-thighs shorter then the hinder; the fore-feet five toed, as a hand, nailes white, as a birds claws with tufts; the hinder-legges longest, as a Baboons; the hair in some parts longer, in some shorter, those of the head, and part of the neck, and tail yellow; along the head runs a large black-streak; the back, sides and tail most what black, but other coloured hairs mixt; the tail part hairy, part skinny, half black, half white, some hair dusky. Round bodied, insensibly slenderer in some parts. Male and Female alike; under the belly is a double skin, cloven like a purse, big enough to hold an Orange, hairy within, where are eight nipples, the purse closed, scarce discernable; herein are the welps conceived; six at a time are brought alive forth, and perfectly shaped, but hairlesse, there they move too and fro, each two fingers long, and stay there till they can feed themselves, and sometimes go forth, and come in again. The testicles ly under the dock; It is easie to be flead, as the Cony, or Hare, if you begin at the belly. It stinks as a Fox, or Martin. He bites hard. Feeds gladly on Hens; climbs trees to goe a birding, Mark grave fed on in his chamber a month with Sugar-canes; at last he tangled himself in his string, and died.

He is found in Dariene in Brasil, and in Florida, and new Spain. The Brasilians call him Cerigona; His tail is Medicinable steep in water, and take a dram of it, cleanses the Ureteres, helps the Stone, and Colick, breeds milk, easens Child-bearing. Champed in the mouth, and laid on, it drawes out a thorn. The Tajibi, Marckg. in Portugees, Rachorro do Mato, is round and long; white glistering-haired, the tips black; headed like a Fox, sharp-mouthed, Cat-bearded; the eyes clear, black, bolting out, goggle; the ears round, soft, thin, white, tender as soft paper; the tail five fingers long, hair white, tiped with black; the end of the tail is a thin hide, bright, scaly, like a Snakes slough. The flesh is stinking, yet eaten. The hair sticks in a thin skin, and may be plucked out without defacing the hide.

POINT II. Of the Tamandua-guacu, the Tamanduai, and the Coati.

THe former is as big as a Butchers Dog,De I [...] Ind. O [...] p. 151 [...] 618. (Abbe [...] illanus saith, as a Horse,) round headed, long snouted, sharp mouth'd, toothlesse, round tonged, seven and twenty fingers long, two feet, and half of it like an Owl, lying double in the mouth; eyes little and black; ears roundish; the tail like a fly-flap of Horse-bristles, almost a foot broad, wherewith he can cover himself all over; the thighs round; on the fore-feet four crooked-claws, the two greatest in the midst, two foot and a half long; the hollow of the foot round; the hair of the head and neck short, and dry, turning forward; he is white afore; he is slow of foot, and eats Pismires.

The Tamanduai is of the bignesse of an American little Fox, round, copped-headed, bowing somewhat downward; the mouth black, very narrow, toothlesse; eyes small, and black; ears pricking up, about two fingers long; the hair hard, bright-yellow; the tongue long,

round; like an awl, lying as a pipe between the cheeks; on the forefeet are four turning claws; fierce he is, but cannot bite; touch him with a staff, and he stands as a Bear on his hindlegs; he sleeps all day, hiding his head with his neck and forefeet; romes about by night. Drinking, part gushes out of his nostrils; Markgrave saith, that after he had killed and flead one, a great part stirred after, though he had been kept fasting 8 dayes afore. In the left rein, (saith he) I found above a three corner'd passage, fastened to the side by a double thin skin; in the bowels, many long round wormes; the lappings that folded in the hair, fair ones; the gall-bag great; the hide thick; the flesh smells like a Fox; none eat it.

The Coati is a Brasile-Fox,Marckg. H. l. 6. c. 6. as big as a Cat, with short thighs, and hands like a Baboon; coped-headed, Fox-eared; the mouth shorter below then above; long and sharp muzzled; nostrils wide, and cloven; eyes black; the tail longer then the body, which he sets up, and crooked; with ringlets on it, raried with shadow and oker. Eating, he holds his meat in his forefeet. He can climb the tops of trees. The Laet saith, he kept one tame, that would take meat out of his mouth; but when he began once to gnaw his tail, he could not be kept from it, till he had eaten it all up, and so died.

CHAP. II. Of the Ape.

THe Ape,Name. [...] . de [...] propr. in Latine Simiae, or Simius, from the flat nose, or from imitating, or his resembling of us. Festus calls them Clunas: [...] . The Greeks Pithekos, from being easily perswaded to imitate man; Emimoo,

[...] . from the gestures, Arimos, in the old tongue of the Hetruscis, Bates, from climing-trees, Kalliar, by the Laconians. Hairy it is above, and below, back and belly;D [...] cript. [...] H. A. [...] c. 8. the hair is thick; nosed, eared, toothed like a man, two paps on the breast, armes like a man but hairy, which he can use, and turne as wee, fingered, toed, nayl like man, but those ruder, he steps like us, but treads more backward, arms short, and thighs answerable, he hath something hard like a navell, slenderer in the lower parts, they want a tayl, as being two legged creatures, the heart is Pyramide-wise, [...] Hip. & [...] l. 16. [...] 6. some found with two tops, veins, arteries like ours, the vein that goes into the right-lappet of the heart, and then into the right breast, is in them above the heart; those that are joyned to the reins, are widest, and passe to the stones: the substance of the eare is unmoveable. In many parts he is like a man, and in many unlike, as in the breast, [...] es [...] l. de [...] bri. and arme-muscles, and those that move the elbow, and thigh, those within the hands, and feet, in the mid-rif, lungs, as also in the bones; for in the loins are six turning-joynts, the shoulder-joynt is far from the breast, the thighs tend not streight toward the back-bone, thence it is, that going on the hind-feet, hee waggles, his feet are hollow, the toes much cloven.Aquapen. l. 2. c. 8. Bred they are in the eastern, and other warm parts, as in Lybia, Mauritania, in that part of Mount Caucasus, that looks toward the Red-Sea, in the Kingdome of Basman, in the tract between Egypt, Ethiopia, and Lybia. In the Indian-hills were so many, that they scared Alexanders army often. In Basman they kill them, pluck off the hair, all but from the chin, dry them, and embalm them, and sell them to merchants for mermen. They like hilly better then low-land; therefore they frequent the hils of Enisa.Leo Af. l. 3. They love herbs, and barley, they go by troops to the ripe eares. They eat lice also,Feed. from men, and worms, and spiders, apples, nuts; but if the paring, or shell be bitter, they cast all away; they love flesh also, after eating, whereof they shed their hair. They drink wine too. They gender in Spring, when day and night is of a length, and beare a coupled about the summers solstice.Natal. Comes. Aelian. The hee is reported to huge one for love, and to leave another with the shee, and never to looke after it. Being led through towns, they run a madding after women. They hold friendship with daws, and conies; but dis-agree with cocks, tortoyses, snails, &c. A noble man in England kept one, that keeps his Rabbits from Weesels. When a Parricide was sewd in a sack,Ambr. l. 2. c. 5. Porta Physilog. l. 7. c. 8. they used to put in with him a Cock, an Ape, and Viper, that the Ape might fall on the Cock, and the Viper avoiding the Cock, might seaze the man. At Rome one of them, spying an Ape on a boys head, was so scared, that he pist, and shit.Galen. l. 5. c. 2. He dares not touch a Snayl. They are troubled with the hernia, or bursting, having a heavy kall, and with the falling-sicknesse, and inflammation of the liver, spleen, bladder, &c. Ill disgestion, &c. Galen anatomised a leane one, and found in the skin about the heart a praeternaturall swelling with moysture in it, such as Hydatides writs, did use to send forth. I say nothing of their biting, it is said to be venemous. Avicen, to prevent rancling, prescribes a playster of ashes with hony, and bitter almonds. They hide their meat in their cheeks, whence by degrees they fetch it to chew.Their nature. They are extreame lustfull, and will gender with Lions. They remember a wrong long;Albert. some say they soon forget, when tamed they shew their young to every one. They severally affected at diverse seasons of the yeare, jolly, and gamesome at new Moon, very lumpish and dogged afore. So soon as they find approaching death, or any infections diseased,Aelian H. A. l. 7. c. 27. you may heare from them an unusuall snuffling in the noce. Whence Crollius thinks Physitians learn the pulses of arteries;Plin. l. 8. c. 34. they go awray, or sideling. Some can guide a cart, and play at chesse. One seeing a nurse wash, and winded a child, when shee was absent, undrest it, washt it in scalding water, and killed it.

They are taken by imitating what they see hunters do.Ambrosin. They never are so tame, but that they quickly go wild again. They love to play with children, and dogs, but, if you look not to

them, they shall choak them, or breake their necks. They will make themselves drunk. The Zabeces,Use. Herodot. Porta Phys. l. 1. c. 17. Arist. and Zygantes of Africa eat them. Rhasis judgeth it but cold, and harsh flesh. The heart roasted, and boyled with hony-comb is said to sharpen memory. They differ in shape, colour, neck, hair, and bulk. Some have tayls, some none, some are gray-headed. Some among the Orsei in India are white: Polus saith, some go upright. To these may be refered the Orang-outang brought out of Angola, presented to Frederick Henry, Plin. Prince of Orange.Tulp. obser. l. 3. c. 56. Tulp calls it a Wild-man, long as a child of three years old, thick as one of six, square bodied, nor fat, nor slender, but very active and nimble; having such well trust limbs, and great muscles, that he durst attempt any thing, and do what not all smooth afore, and shaggy black behind, faced as a man, flat, and crooked-nosed, eared like a man, two fair swelling paps were on the breast, like a womans, (for it was a female) the navell deep, and limmed so like a man, that an egge is scarsely liker an egge, resembling man in elbows, fingers, thumbs, thighs, calves, heels. Shee walked oft upright, and with ease could hoyst up, and beare a burden. Being to drinke, shee with one hand took the can by the eare, and put the other under; and wiped her lips handsomly after. Going to ly down, she would lay her head orderly on the pillow, and cover herself close with the coverlids. The Sambacensian King reported, that they are so valiant, that they adventure on armed men. So given to women, that they oft ravish them. In Guinee some of them will bray any thing in a morter,P [...] arricus. Nierem. H. E. and carry pitchers of water on their heads, and empty them at their doors, to prevent spilling. These are called Baris. Strong they are, and brawny thick set. In India there is also cried up to the skies; Zeilan keeps his reliques, namely a tooth, which Constantine the Portugal Viceroy took amongst the prey from a Barbarian Prince; so honoured and adored was that Ape by the cheefe Kings there, that yearly Embassadors were sent loaden with rich presents, only to be permitted to take his print in piece of clay perfumed, and inclosed in gold, to solace themselves, forsooth, with his shadow only. After the King of Pegu being conscious to himself of an oath he had passed to the Portugees, sent Embassadors to the Viceroy with ships loaden with wares, and 300000 pieces ef gold to redeeme the tooth. Many Portugals were of opinion to send it, but to demand a greater summe, even a million, but the Viceroy (though he knew the King would have given it, and himself wanting mony, yet) prefered piety to gain, and that it might appeare to all, he caused the tooth to be brought amidst an assembly openly, and to be taken out of the rich case, beset with jewels, and gold, and with his own hand cast it into a brazen morter, and commanded it to be pounced to pouder, which was cast into a fire, and so vanished into smoake.

CHAPTER III. Of the Baboon, or Bavian.

HE takes the name of Cercopithecus from his tayl,Names [...]  for Kerkos signifies tayl, and Pithekos Monky, or Ape. The Greeks call him also Kepos, which some fetch from Kebos,

[...]  Nimble. Albert calls him Mamonet; the Italians Spinga; the Celtae Abranas.

[...]  We shall describe him anone under the kindes of Aurelius delineates his Genitalls. They are found in Aethiopia with black heads,Ambro [...] . lib. 2. c. 6. Place. Strabo. Geog. Plin. and Asses hair, and in the woods of Iava, and the kingdome of Congo; and in India on the Emoden hills, and on that lofty mountain near Aden a city of Arabia, and all about the Indian Continent. In Malabar they are very cheape, because they hurt the Indians Nut, that is the gain of the natures. They eat any thing, and gnaw their own tayl when they are lustfull. They abhor Crocodiles so, that they are almost strooke dead with the sight. In East-Indies, under the Portugals, they eat them, and use them in Physick. What sport they make is well knowen. Their bones brayed, and drunk by provoking sweat, ease the French pox. They dote on their young,Nature. Nierem. H. I. l. 9. c. 44. and hugge them hard; they feed on fruit, and birds egs. Many of them eats and drink their own excrements. Sometimes, if they see a man alone, they come down, and play with him. They are full of crafty tricks. It is strange to see how they cast stumps of trees at passengers; they passe rivers holding by each others tayls, and get over by bows, and a chain by wondrous arts. Above all, if one of them be wounded by an arrow, or dart, no men can help one another better then they, knowing how to stanch the blood with leaves, and mosse, and save, if possible, the life. They bring but one at a birth, and embrace their young, and carry them to the craggy tops of hills, where the huntsmen raise a heape, and compasse it with maiz, and lay there the stone Cacakoatl, the nature whereof is, when heated through with fire to crack, and fly asunder, the Baboone run to it, and to eat of that stone, but terrified with the crack, forget their young, and run away, leaving them a prey to hunters. They carry also their young on their back, till they can safely dispose of them. The young hang with the hands about the dames neck, and with the legs cling about her back. Some are nimble as a bird in climbling trees, and scipping from tree to tree. One hath been seen to leap a river. The captains of them perceiving a troup of men passe by, (for men dare not passe by them alone, nor a few) they call their fellows of divers shapes together, out-face the men, and with hideous moyse skip from tree to tree, and follow the men, mocking them with a thousand Apes tricks, moppings, mowings, waggings of the tayl, and make as if they would assault them; but coming down, and see the arrows, and guns, (which they have had

occasion afore to be acquainted with,) aimed at them, they fly swifter then the wind to the tree-tops, where they complain, chatter, and threaten. It is said, they are so dexterous, that they can decline, and avoid arrows-shot, and catch them flying, as if they were reached to them; but the bullets put the younger beside their skill. When they see any of their fellows fall, and taken up by the shooters, they thunder above, filling the skies with hideous noyses; as if you heard the roarings, and yellings of a thousand Lions, and Tigers. But one thing is worth hearing; each Ape, when they take a tree, carry up stones in one hand, and some in their mouths, and pelt the passengers, when they have done shooting. One levelling at a great, long-tayld Monkey with a gun, hee made as if hee would stand it; but when the man winking with one eye, was taking aime, he threw a stone in his face, and brake it, and dashed out some of his teeth. But since he perished by a new stratagen, and was shot, just as the stone fell, and was eaten for a dainty with mirth. Some would have eaten then toads, or worse, so hungry they were. Such tricks perswaded the old world, that these were a humane race, which occasioned in fables, mention of the Baboons birth-day. I thought once that they were happily a kind of Pigmees. It is strange how they can handle merchandise. They play with the savages for mony,Ioh. Ard. no [...] s. and winning, invite to the Tavern, and pay the shot. Among the souldiers of Havana, a Baboon marked that one won apace, and sate close to him, to have his share, according to the manners; if he denied, he would fight for it; if he received it, hee ran strait to the Taverne, and tooke a pot,Ios. A [...] osta. holding it to the vinter, to poure wine; the pot being brimfull, he drank it up, payed his winnings; if it came to more, he expected more wine to the value, which he did twice, or thrice.

Another being sent to the Taverne, and not using to pay till hee had his bottle full, would gather stones to defend it against the boyes; and though he loved wine well, he carried it safe and entire to his Master. He could not abide painted women,P. Martyr. but tore their hair and cloathes. One great Baboon, with an extreme long tail hanging by it, on an Oke, turning and swing himself three or four times, caught hold, skipped from bough to bough, and from tree to tree, as if he had flowen. An Archer shot one, who being wounded, in a fury set on him who hurt him; he drawing his sword, cut off the Baboons arme, and took him, but strongly resisting; but being brought to the Navy, he grew tamer, being chained: and the huntsmen bringing a Boar home, he and the Baboon were ever fighting; this with his tail tangled the Boar, flew at his throat, and throatled him. Another seeing some hunt after him to shoot him, got into a window, snatched up an Infant,Aelian. l. 7. c. 20. ran to the house top, and held the child for a buckler between him and the Archer, to make him hold from shooting. Baboons differ in bignesse, colour, tail, and otherwise, some in Prassiana an Indian Region, are as big as the greatest Dogs, having tails five cubits long.Scaliger. Some are black, some ash-coloured, some gray, some party-coloured, some spotted, some yellowish, some dusky, &c. Some longer tailed then others. Some bearded; some go upright; some Lyon-like; some mostaccioed; some of a mixt kind. The bearded, the Brasilians call them Guariba,Marckgrave. H. N. Brasil. l. 6. c. 5. are manifold, having a round goats-beard, they are as big as our Foxes, high-browed, with black sparkling-eyes, ears short and roundish; tail long, bare at the end, which they are ever swinging about; the hair black, long, sleek, and shining. There are swarms of them in the Woods there, and make a hideous noyse. They meet daily again, and again afore and after mid-day.Marckgrav. One of the lesser sits higher then the rest in the midst, and begins a singing note, giving a signe with the hand openly, the rest follow his note, holding on till the first makes a signe, then the rest are husht in a twinkling, and the first concludes aloud. They carry their young on their back, frisking from bough to bough. It is a biting and untamed beast. Some of them are great, and black, having a long, black, shaggy beard. If they find a Moor woman alone, they force her. Clusius describes a kind, long tayled, with a tuft at the end, like a Lion. The Guinee Exquina in Congo hath dark hair, as it were burnt, sprinkled with white tops. The beard very white, the hair two fingers long, as it were kemed. Anger him, he gapes wide and chatters. Another sort is as great, or each cheek stone of hair white, and yellow, bearded like a Goat, reaching to either eare; black leged: Toyish, and clamorous as the other. Ambrosine represents three prints of them; one he conceives to be the Callitriche (or fair-haired) living only in Aethiopia. A second a kin to that. The third faced like an old man (a Marmoset) with a long black tayl.Gesner. He walks upright, very nearly resembling a man. He loves boys, and women everywhere, and if he get loose, endeavors to ly with them. Industrious they are, and wittier then some men. Of the Lion-kind are first the Cagui, as the Brasilians, or the Pongi, as the Congians call him; one is greater, like the Baboon,Marckg. called Cay, round, and Lion-faced, black and bald-eared, Lion-mouthed, black-eyed, the tayl a foot, and four fingers long, and reddish. There is a lesser, a like faced, but with a lesse head, like a small apple, a little nose, sharp teeth, roundish eares, the tayl ten fingers long, with white, and dusdish ringlets, fed with bread, and mandos meat. The whole body six figners long. Another sort is called the Sagovin;Nierem. Lion-like afore, but so tender, that he brooks not the tossing of a ship at sea, and so proud withall, that never so little troubled, he in [...] ullennesse starves himself. That that Rod. Lincius brought over was lesse then a squirell,Nieremberg. and so dainty that it must be kept in furre. The snout, and fore part of the head was Lion-like,

dark-coloured, mixt with red; the ears shaggy, and bright, and reddish; the throat, and breast shaggy, dush, and white; the other hair of the body black, and white, and sparkling, and party-coloured from back to belly; the tayl long, and so coloured; the belly black-haired, the thighs white, and red; on each foot five toes, not very long; the nayls white, scarce a handsomer to be seen. The Moschatus the Brasilians call Caitaja, long-haired, white, and yellow;Marckg. H. Bras. p. 227. roundish headed, low fore-headed, nose little and flat; tayl-bending, shrill voyced, and pettish. I saw one at Generall Warden-burgs at Amsterdam. There is another of the kind darker-haired, like the Zobellines. Of a doubtfull kind are the Macaquo in Congo; of a wolfs colour; the nose high and parted, the head like a bears, buttocks bald, the tayl bowed; a foot and somewhat more long from head to tayl; a foot and nine fingers thick. Hee cries Hah, hah: the Brasil Cay in Toupinambuti is common, little and black,Lerius. H. Americ. c. 10. living most in the woods, and sitting on certain trees, where on a thick mast grows, like our greatest beans, whereon they feed. There is also another Guinee Baboon, grisly, dusk-shadowed with yellow, almost like a hares back, small-headed, and long-tailed.

CHAPTER IV. Of the Cynocephalus, (or Dogs-head) the Papio, and the wild Vpalim.

THe first hath the name from a Dogs-head. It is called also the Tartarian;Name. Gesner. [...] . Append. Quadru. Aelian. Arist. Description. Place. Solinus. Strabo. Herod. Aelian. Feed. because it comes thence. Also Kunopros [...] pon, or Dogs-face: And Cho [...] ropithekos, or Hog-ape. Almost of the shape of a long tayled Monkey, but thicker set, stronger, fiercer, and faced like a dog, or a Satyre, as Strabo makes him. Open arsed he is. Found in Aethiopia, and in Arabia from Dira to the Southern corner; and especially in the utmost promontory; also above Dachinabades, and in the South of Lybia. He feeds as other Apes, eating stone-fruit, he cast away the shells, and parings. They eat also flesh boyled, and roasted, especially the delicatest. They can drink wine also.Voyce. They have many voyces, and those rude; sometimes shreeking, then houling. Orus saith they barke;Aelian. l. 6. c. 43. they are soon moved to fury, effeminate, lustfull, petulant, fiercer then Apes. By naturall instinct,Nature. when dayes and nights are of a length, on set hours, night and day, they pisse, and make a noyse. The Hee in times twixt moon and moon, not eats, nor looks any way,Plin. but moping looks downward. They are said to congratulate the moon rising, wherefore the Egyptians in their religious rites made much of them, to learn from them the heavenly conjunctions. Of a singular wit they are, comming nearest man,Strabo. Geog. l. 15. Bellon. obser. l. 2. c. 52. except the Elephant. In Egypt they write letters, and receive mony of the spectators for their masters. Akin to these is that Alvarez in his Ethiopian journy writes of, and another in Clusius. That's as big as a Bel-wether, and shaggy as a Lion, going by herds near Calote. This shaged, and ash-coloured, not so long tailed as a Baboon, long snowted and blunt at the end, bal'd buttocked, blood-coloured, as if flead. The Papio (in Dutch Paphon) is great rugged,Ambr. H. Digit. ugly headed, short thighed, almost Fox-tailed, but short, and commonly lifted up, footed like a man, no way answering his height,Gesn [...] r. doting on women. He feeds on apples, pears, and other fruit. The Shee brings two at a birth, a male, and a female. The wild Upalim is as big as an Ethiopian Baboon, the skin red as scarlet,Ambrosin. l. 9. c. 9. spotted in some places, the head round as a ball, the feet round, and broad, the claws harmlesse. The Moors beat the flesh with planks to make it tender, and eat it. What it feeds on is unknown.

CHAPTER V. Of the Ignavus, or Slug.

THey are of two kinds; one the Portugees call Perillo Ligero, Marckg. H. Brasil. p. 2 [...] 1. Clusius. the little swift dog by contraries; and Friguiza. Of the bignes of one of our midling Foxes, short-necked, two fingers long at most, small, and somwhat round-headed; narrow mouthed, toothed as a Lamb, blunt, smooth, high, black-nosed. The eyes small, black, drowsy, having no eares; the tayl blunt, like a sugar-loof, on each foot are three nayls, white and yellow, crooked, bending, and hollowed. The hair about two fingers long, ash-coloured, badger-like, but softer, and whiter. The most sluggish, and slow-paced of beasts. He creeps up trees, and eats leaves, never drinks. Seldome send forth any voyce; holds fast what he catchest, fears the smallest rain. The heart taken out of the female, stirs half an houre after. The paunch red-streaked like beans, into which the navelvessells in many sprigs are fastened. They bear young-haired,Marc [...] . toothed and clawed. The heart of the shee hath two plain ears, hollow. In the stomack the upper-mouth is two fingers crosse from the gullet, and where the opening uses to be, is a gut a span long, but hath no passage. In the stomack is plainly seen green matter of leaves. Two paps are on the breast. Tough of hide. So lively, that, if all the guts be taken out, it stirs, and draws the feet together. De Laet, who saith, hee saw one alive, saith, the neck is longer, as we have made it. He clings so fast, that he looses hold, and life together. Hermaneus saith,Hier. l. 9. c. 15. he in a whole day cannot move fifty paces forward. By night he is heard, and the latter syllables still lower then the former. He stays sometimes in a tree twenty dayes without food, and is thick-sighted. Another of the kind,Lerius. called Hag, hath an Apes face, a rough-shaged skin, hairy-thighs, claws, on each foot three, and those sharp, and long, is easily tamed, when taken.

CHAPTER VI. Of the Badger.

THe Greeks have no proper name for it;Ambros. H. D. l. 2. c. 11. [...] . Albert. Descript. Isidor. Barthol. the Latines call it Taxus, perhaps from Dasus, hairy, and shaggy; and Meles, or Melis, Melo, and Melotus; from the roundnes of the members. It is greater then a cat, or fox, whose nature it comes nearest, the skin being rough-hairy; it hath more white, then black hairs, the head black in the midst, white on the sides, broodbacked, sharp-toothed, it is a mistake, that the left legs are shorter. They are found over all the hills of Italy,Place. and Helvetia, and elswhere. They live on hornets, and worms, apples, and grapes,Feed. being fattest in Autumne. They love Rabbits-flesh, and Geese, chickens, and other foules.Breeding. They breed their young as foxes, and bring forth in three months, sometime two, sometime three in autumne. They hate foxes, for these watch when they are gone abroad, and so bedung their holes, that they must seeke another for the stinke. They are so thickskind, that you can scarce hurt them, but their nose is so tender, then there you may kill them. Their skin is so pufd, that dogs cannot fasten on it.Nature. He turnes on his back, and with teeth, and feet, resists the beasts that vex him. Knowing himself to be short-legged,Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 28. he goes not far from his hole. When cold weather presses him, he skulks, and fattens by-sleep. Bring him in winter by the fire, he casts himself among the coals. The Moone waxing, he fattens, in the wain he grows leaner; men say, but it is uncertain.Carol. S [...] ephan. His bite is mortall, because hee feeds on hornets, and venomous things. Olaus shews their ingenuity in digging,Olaus M. l. 18. c. 18. and voyding their house of the earth, and strewing themselves a bed therein with chaff, and leaves, bringing so much on their heads, and with their feet at once, as a man can carry under his arme. They ever have two doores to their house. When the South-wind blows, they open the North-doore; and when the North-winde, the South-doore. They lay up winters-provisions; and the male keep the female from eating too much, least they should want afore Spring. When they grow blind for age, they keep house, feeding one another at home. When they are spied, and hunted on hills, they lay their forelegs over their head, and ly round like a globe, and as Bears tumbled down. In Italy, Germany, and elsewhere, their flesh is counted a dainty,Use. Bruyer. l. 13. c. 3. if taken in Autumne. They seeth it with pears in Switzerland. Savanarola likens it to wilde porke; Platina to Porcupines-flesh. In Phisick, they put the fat into glifters to helpe back-each; it helps chapped nipples, and gouts, and shrunk-members. The blood dried,Weeker. antid. Spec. 2. heals leprosie. It is given with salt, and beasts-horn against the plague. Lonicerus deftills it onely in the dog-dayes, and prescribes two drams.

Ges [...] er saith, that the same blood in a composition with Armeniack-earth, Saffran, and Tormentil, is a receit in the most raging Pest.Albert. The ashes stench blood. To say nothing of the brain, tooth, or left foot, which tied under the arme, is said to help memory. Of old they wore Badgers skins. Dog-collars are made thereof.

Some are tame,Differences. Ola [...] s. Bruierin. you may play with them; some are wild, and rough-bristled; some are Dog, and some Hog, Badgers or Grays, both taken in the Matisconensian Territory. The Dog-Badgers have a Dogs grin, and dig their holes in gravelly places; they have not many borroughs; feeding on carcases, and Dogs-meat. They are whitish, and biger then Dogs; with their snout they dig a small hole near their house door, where they hide their dung. They eat roots, and fruits, and what swine love to feed on.Gesner. The Heygrat, (or hony-devourer) in America, of a Chesnut-colour, as big as a Cat, is a kind of Badger. They ever hunt after Beehives, or the trees where wild hony is,Nierem. l. 9. c. 43. of the like kind is the Quanpecotli about eighteen inches long, long snouted, slender, writheld upwards, long tailed, and haired, shining about the belly; the rest dusk, or black, and glistering; the back blackest; black-footed, and crooked-nailed; easily tamed; ravenous; spares nothing eatable; gamesome a thousand wayes; harmful to strangers; found in New-Spain among the hills, where he delights to be. Akin to this is the Tacuintecuani, or Cynodaticus in bulk, snout, qualities, and feet. It is white, but hath large black spots; having the name from biting. Lives not far from the South-sea: Like to these is the Tlalcoyotl, hairy, two spans long, Badger-clawed, short-legged, and black, short-tailed; having a small head, a slender, and very long snout, teeth sticking out; his body of a yellowish white, but on the back, and upper-parts of the neck black, and bright streaked, and feeds as the Quanpecotli.

CHAPTER VII. Of the Castor, or Bever.

CAlled by the Greeks Kastoor, from Casteros, the belly,Name. Ambros. l. 2. c. 13. [...] . because he is almost belly; not from castrating himself, when pursued for his stones, as some ridiculously derive it, for they are so small, and cleave so close to the ridge of his back, that he cannot come at them, nor while he lives, can they be plucked from him. He is called Fiber, not from frequenting the brinks of Rivers, that of old were called Fibri, but from Fibros, soft, because his hair is so. [...] . Salmasius in Solin. Some have mistaken him for the Otter. Nor is it the Latax in Arist. nor shall I decide it, whether it is the Orchia, or no: Some have counted him an Amphibium, or half a fish, because he lives both on land, and in the water. He is of a bright ash-colour, but blackish-backed;Description. finer haired then the Badger, & the blacker the skin, the coftlier.

His teeth are very sharp, wherewith he can cut wood; the foreteeth are red: The forefeet like Dogs-feet; the hinder skinned like Goosfeet, each five-toed. Tailed like a fish. In the greater,Plin. l. 8. c. 30. Bellon. H. Aqua. a foot and half broad, and six fingers, two thick; sometimes weighing four pound; thin at the edges, a thin skin, and smooth, and pale, streaked with admirable artifice. In the privy parts he hath two swellings as big as a Goose mouth, on each side one; these are lappets covered with a thin skin, in the midst a passage, whence sweats out a fat, clammy-moysture, wherewith, after wiping his mouth, he annoints all the parts he can come by; as some Birds that have in the same place a small bag with a moysture in it, fetch it thence with their bill, and annoint their feathers, to keep them moyst, while they remain in the open aire. In tongue, heart, stomack, guts, and liver divided into five laps, or strings, he resembles a Hog most. His gall lurks under the lesser laps of the liver. His spleen is but small for a beast of his bignesse. His reins as great as a yearling-calves, and fat. The bladder like a Sowes. The testicles small, and cleaving to his back-bone. The femal hath but one passage for all natural uses;Matthio [...] . the necks of the womb, and bladder meeting there. Gesner in dissecting a Bever, found in a bag a yellow matter, solid, waxy, sharp, not earthy, of a pound weight; and the genital to consist of one bone, and in each knob another small bag with a honied-kind of substance in it, smelling like mouldy rotten cheese. The like is in the femals, but weighing hardly an ounce. Wherein Bellonius found stones as big as an egge, but without doubt it was counterfait. Bevers are found in Burgundy, about the River Matrona;Place. Scal. ex. 215. Bruyer. Rei. Cibariae l. 18. c. 4. and by the Sein in Cabillon, and in Lorain. Austria, about the Danow, where they are called Biferi; in Helvetia, about Arula, Rusa, and the River Lomagus; in Poland also, Russia, Prussia, and Italia; especially where the Po disburthens himself into the Sea; Finally, the best are about the Rivers of Pontus, and in Spain. They haunt rather the Northern-waters,Olaus M. then the Rhine, or Danube, or other Rivers troubled with Navigation. But where ever he lives, he lives partly in the water, and partly on the land. Therefore they make their holes by River-sides.

They feed on tree-leaves,Food. as the Poplar, &c. but they covet most the broad-leaved Willows, because bitter. Not on fish, as Albert mistakes; for Pelicerius, Bishop of Montpellier, laid often afore them fish alive, and dead, but they would not so much as smell to them.

In the beginning of Summer,Engendring. under the constellation of the Dolphin with Sagittarius declining, they couple. They bring forth at the fall of the leaf. The voice of the Beaver is like the crying of a child. They never leave their hold in biting, till they hear the bones crack; when you keep them tame,Iul. Pompon. Nature. they are so modest, that they never foul the house with their ordure, and they cry, and whine, if they cannot get abroad. They love their young so, that they will break through doors, and grates, and cast themselves down headlong for their sakes, as the forenamed Bishop relates. They feed themselves with their forefeet, as with hands. They wet their hinder-parts often, because the barks of trees bind their bodies, or for that but little gaul flows to their guttes. That opinion of his biting off his testicles,Aelian. l. 13. c. 4 [...] . when hunted, is false, rising from his craft in hiding them. He is observed to be very cunning. As appears by the wise building, and preparing of their house, in carrying of the materialls on the old ones lying on their backs, and packing the wood handsomely between their thighs, and dragging them by the tail to the appointed place, which makes the old ones backs so sleek. Those that the Scythians call Drudges, gather apples, cut barke, others lay them on the backs of two yoaked, having framed a hurdle of sticks to that end. The same by the black ones, which are called Masters, direct by their gate, and posture the rest; being to cut wood, they ever hold the same track from the river to the tree; never leaving a tree, till they have gnawed it almost asunder; and when it is near falling, they take care that it may not fall on that side where they stand. In a word, they build their houses higher, or lower, as the river runs, and shift lodging the day afore it overflows.

The flesh is not unsavoury, if in dressing the venome be removed.Use. The foreparts are hot, the hinder so cold, that, like Tortoyses, they eat them onely on fasting-dayes.Matthiol. The Loranois count the tayl a delicate, it co [...] ming near the tast of a Lamprey. Some sprinkle it with Ginger, and roast it. Gesner saith it tasts like eel. In Phis [...] ck the Bevers-gall, pisse, tayl and skin is usefull. Bever compast with many naturall skins, with a waxy moysture within it, of a tart tast, and a strong sent,Diosco [...] . is said to be the choysest; which is to be plucked from the beast in his ripe vigorous age, and to be dried with the Hony liquor in it; it will hold the vertue seven years, it helps the fallingsicknes, and lethargie, if boyled with rue in keen vineger, and the swimming in the head, if the crown be annointed with it, and vineseed, and oyl of roses; and it helps losse of memory after chronicall tedious diseases, and against short-breath with Ammoniack, and honied vineger; also against hickok after much eating. Easens collick, in juice of vine, and boyled in vineger, applied as a cataplasme on the breast, and secrets, is good against running of the reins. A perfume of it, furthers conception. Eases womens griefs, rising from cold causes. Purges a woman in child-bed. Opium corrects it best.Rondeletius. Finally it is an ingredient into many medicines, as waters, extracts, oyls, ointments, waxes. The curd helps the falling-sicknesse. The pisse poyson; the tayl wounds in the guts. The ashes of the skin burnt with soft pitch, and leek juice stanches blood. It is a good wearing for the palsied. The teeth are worn for Amulets. The fat is a good bait to catch fish. The softest hair makes

hats, and breeches. The Geloni make of the skins furred coats. We finde no differences of the kinds; onely the Scythians distinguish them into black, and reddish, or yellowish, and party-coloured, calling those masters, these servants.

CHAPTER VIII. Of the Otter.

CAlled Lutra from Luein, Name [...] . Ambrosin. Hist. Dig [...] . l. 12. c. 13. [...] . either loosning-trees at the roots, standing by the river-sides; or from often washing it self. In Greeke Enudris, from living in the water. Suidas mistakes the Ictis for it. Sylvaticus miscalls it Hydria. Gaza calls it Lytria:S [...] idas l. 37. [...] . Descript. Aetius, a river-dog. He is slenderer, and longer then the Bever; toothed, and headed like a waterspaniell; square-mouthed, eared like the Beaver; the tayl long, round, and pointed at the end; the legs like a foxes, but somewhat thicker, the hinder-feet flat, and skinny, he is not so thick-skin'd as a Castor, hair thick, and short, almost chest-nut colour. They are found everywhere in Europe. They swarme in America,P [...] ce. especially in Canada, most about streams, and lakes, reckoned among those that live both in water, and on land. They abound in the Napleshy territories.Brasa [...] . They feed on fish, whereof they carry so much into their holes, that they infect the air. They eat also the soft tops of herbs,Food. Bellon. Aq [...] at. l. 2. and fruits, and bark of trees. In winter he forrages for his provision. In diving they draw air by degrees into their nostrills, to prevent drowning. In their hole they frame a table-worke of bows, and rods to hold them dry,Nature. as they ly. They can out of a river smell a fish-pond some miles off. They draw breath easiest with the stream.Scal. Exer. 215. When hungry, they swim against, when full, with streame. Entring a fish-pond, they sease the best fish with a strange ni [...] ublenes, and fright them all. They are easily tamed, and are taught by signes to dive,Use. and catch fish. In Swethland, at a Cooks-beck they fetch fish out of the pond into the Kitchen. In Germany, and France, Pesants eat the flesh, but it is grosse, and flegmatique, Carthusians are allowed to eat it. [...] . de [...] b. l. 13. c. 31. Gesner. Holler. Aelian. In Phisick the fat helps the joints. The blood mixt with water and vineger, takes down the swelling of the nerves. The testicles are approved against the fallingsicknes, but fall short of the Bevers. The liver baked, is good against the Dysentery; a cushion of the skin, easeth the Emrods; the skins help the palsie, giddinesse, and head-each. Shoes thereof ease the pain in the feet. We in cold climates make gloves, and halfe sleeves of the whole skinne, tayl, and all. The American beasts,Ambrosin. l. 2. c. 13. the Saricoujeme, and the Carygueibeju, seeme to be a kin to them. The former is as big as a cat, soft-haired, whitish, skinne-footed. In Amphilbia they are.Marckg. Brasil. l. 6. c. 9. The latter, called also the Jiya, is as big as a reasonable dog, roundishhead as a cats, but more coped; eares round, and standing lower; footed like the Baboone, each hath five toes, the inner most shorter then the rest, soft-haired, not long; black all over, except the head, which is dusky. Hee hath a yellow spot on the throat. He lives on lobsters, fish, and mandow meal, moystened in water. Of the S [...] elswhere.

CHAPTER IX. Of the Ichneumon.

HE hath his name from Ichneuein, from searching; [...] Ambros [...] . Dig. l. 2. c. 14. Name. Albert. [...] . Manardus. Bellon. obser. l. 22. c. 22. Descript. he being able to distinguish between foyson and poyson. Called also a swine, from his hair being so like. Miscalled Ibis; and Anschycamus. Called also Thyamon, and Alcasis. In Greek Ullos, little hog, because with his snowt he is ever rooting. At this day stiled the Mouse of Pharoh, or Otter of Egypt. Of the bignesse of a Cat, but longer, hair hard, as a Wolfs, bright, and yellowish by spaces, and russet; blacksnowted, and like a hog; short, and round-eared, legs black; on the hinder-feet five toes, the last inner one very short, the tail long, and thick; the teeth, tongue, testicles, like a Cats; having, beside the passage of the excrement another wide one without, which in hote weather he uses to open; whence writers have thought them all double sexed.Place. Arist. H. Some thinke that Egypt only produces them; but they are found on the other side of Atlas, near the heads of the Nile. It is an Amphibium. They feed on Mice, Snakes, Snails, Lizards, the Chamaeleon, Frogs, and the like:Vitruv. Food. They love fowles, especially hens, and the Crocodiles liver; and therefore, as it is thought, they creepe into their bellies,Oppian. Cyneget. l. 3. while they sleep, whence there is great enmity betwixt the two creatures; so that if one finds the others egges, he breaks them, which is well for the Egyptians, since it prevents the increase of the Crocodiles.Oppian. Cyn. l. 3. Antipathy. Aelian. l. 9. c. 1. Nature, and manners. He is also at enmity with the Asp, and all kinds of serpents. He hates the wind most, so that it begins to rise, hee hastens to his hole. They are tamed easily in Egypt; they destroy rats, like cats, or weesells; they love to be plaid with; they shun cold, hide their heads between their legs, rouling themselves up like a Hedge-hog in a ball round; set up their bristles when they spy any beast; dare encounter one great dog, and choke a cat at three bites; venter on horses and camells, and any sort of beasts. They whelp as many at a time as bitches doe. The relations about their changing of sex are fabulous. Their wit is seene herein, that they stand on their hind-legs to prey,Arist. H. H. l. 6. c. 35. & 9. 6. and creep slily till it be within reach, and then furiously fasten. Hee never venters on his foe, till hee call his fellows. Being to fight with the Asp, hee wallows in mire, and then drives it on in the sun, till it serve him for an armour of proofe. If there be no mud near, he wets himself, and roules, and tumbles in the dust; knowing his nostrills tender, in fight hee saves them with his tayl. In Physick his pisse some drinke

with a black cows milk against the collick.Use. The ashes of the skin burnt in vineger, cures a sting of a Serpent, smeared on. A fume of the hair is good against wormes.Aegineta. l. 4. c. 58.

CHAPTER X. Of VVeesels.

ARTICLE I. Of the common VVeese [...] , or Ferret.

ALmost all Dictionary-writers fetch the name Mustela, Ambrosin. H. Digit. l. 2. c. 15. Name. (Weesel) from Mus, and Telum, a Mouse, and a Weapon, because of his length: some from Teele,

[...] . longe; at length, or from far; or from Mus, and Stelloo, mouse-stealing, because they draw them out of their holes. Of old Galeoe, from the milky whitenes. [...] . Some Kedroo, from his fox-craft. Of late Numphitza. It is reddish on the sides, and back;Description. sometimes yellowish, ever white about the thraot: Slender-bodied, short-tayled.Albert. The teeth lesse then the mouses; the heart small, yet in comparison with that of other beasts,Place. great enough. They are found everywhere; but the white most in Northern Regions. The great ones are in Mauritania, the greatest, in the Tartesian territory without Hercules his pillars, by Cales. In Java woods they are. In the Isle Pordeselene they passe not their bounds.Suidas. Bring them into Baeotia, they dy, or fly. They dwell in holes, clefts of rocks, haymows, and stables. He eats all things; mostwhat mice,Food. Plin. H. N. l. 29. c. 4. Aelian. and moles; he abstain not from serpents: he lies in wait for bats; he sucks Pigeon-egges, and the blood of birds killed, picks out dead mens, eyes, catches hares; he hath been seen with one in his mouth. That they bring forth at the mouth, is a tale forged out of the fained turning Galanthis AlkmenasGendring. Mayd, by Iuno into a Weesel. That they have a womb, is certain. The Raven, and crow hate them for sucking their egs: their voyce frights hens;Antipathy. Arist. H. they fight with Cats. They fight with serpents, armed only with a sprig of run, or with so wthistles; if they want these, they are worsted. Their dung, if they live in fields, and woods, smells like musk. With their age they change colour.Nature. They recover their whelps sight with an herb; are easily tamed, if you rub their teeth with garlick. They dare set on greater beasts. They build their holes with two doors, one North, the other South. They transport their young thence for a dayes space. Their bite is mortall, and makes mad; if it but touch a Cows udder, it is inflamed. Oyl wherein the Weesel hath rotted is a remedy, or rubbing the place with the skin dry. Aristides of Locris died of the bite of a Weesel.Use. The Mexicans eat them. Galen saith that corned with salt, and dried the flesh tasts like Hare. The brain dried helps not a little against swounding fits.Galen. de Ther. c. 9. The stomack stuf'd with Coriander-seed cures serpent bites. The lungs are good for the lungs. The liver helps giddinesse,Dioscor. M. M. l. 2. c. 24. Glycas l. 1. and swounding, because it increases, and decreases with the moon. Pliny commends the gall against all venome, Matthiolus used it with Fennell-water against dimnesse of sight, and skin spots. The yard dried is soverain against the strangury. The stones, and womb, like the Eagle-stone, prevents a womans miscarrying. Lonicerus cries up the blood with juice of Plantan against the gout, Galen, against catarhs. Mathiolus magnifies the dung taken in hony, with pulse-meal, and feny-greek against swellings, and wens. The Weesel whole is of use. Dioscorides commends it unbowelled, and long pickled against sting.Gal. l. 3. c. 2. Galen used the dust dried against the falling-sicknesse. Matthiolus the ashes of it burnt made with water into a dow, against head-ache, dimnesse of sight, and blood-shot, smeared on. Marcellus burned it to ashes in an old pot, and mixt them with hony on a thirsday, in the wane of the moon against swellings of the jaws. See Ambrosine about the divers uses of it.Por [...] . Phy [...] oga. l. 6. c. 4. Galen. A Weesels foot hung with rose, and mustard-feed on the branches of a barren tree make it beare. Farriers with a piece of the skin have cured Horses of the parlous disease, called Tach. Some sprinkle seeds with the ashes on their ground to drive away field-mice; others seeth them in much water to that purpose. Some make the Weesel, and Ictis herein to differ,Differences. Plin. Galen. that the one is kept tame, the other goes wild. Others call the white one Hermellani; that that is white only on the breast Visela. The Rosola, or Guisela, his dung smells sweet. One is called a Salamander, Figuli. dial. de. Mustela. for his many colours. The Austrian Girella, is of the bignesse of a Weezel. The Italian Curriers shew a skinne black, and glistring brought out of the cold Coasts, called the Rosoleus, or Romulus. Some count the Chiurca a Ferret. The Vormela mentioned by Agricola, is another; and Cardan adds the Lardironi, and the Genet [...] a.

Scaliger writes that the Chiurca hath a ferrets face, and bulk, a foxes head, lives under ground, is very fruitfull, bringing at a birth twelve at once. The tayl small, and almost bald; It self is black-haired, carrying her young under her belly in a bag. The African Ferret is as big as a great Mouse, resembling a Ferret,Hier. H. E. l. [...] . c. 32. Clusius. and a Squirrell, lifting up the tayl, but not over the head as the Squirrell; but high, and spreading it abroad, and sitting eating on the breech, holding his food with the fore-feet squirrell-like, and tossing it. In either jaw were two longer fore-teeth, the ears roundish, the haire party-coloured from head to tayl, sandy, dusk, and white with streaks. The tayl very handsome, he could display it like a Pea-cock; five toes on each foot; foure forwards, the middlemost longest; the fifth like a spur behinde. He refused no food, but liked bread best; he was tame, and went loose. On shipboard they come into the marriners laps, and stockins, so tame they are. Nieremberg calls it a Lybia Weezel.

ARTICLE II. Of the wilde Ferret, or Fitcher.

SOme call it Putorius; some Furo, Ambrosin. H. Digit. l. 2. c. 16. Name. either from his theeving by night, or his darke colour, from his digging, and myning in burrows; some Viverra or Ferret from verrunco, ferriting, and driving beasts out of burrows. [...] . Also Iktis, from a bird of that colour; and Pholita, or Pholenta, Coloured betweene white, and box,Grapald. white-bellied, reddish-eyed; greater then a tame Weesel. Aristotle makes it of the bulk of a Malta-whelp;Descript. but in hair, shape, colour (white below) very unlike the common-Ferret. In Italy, France, and Germany,Place. Gesner. S [...] rabo. Food. they are not, but onely in Africa, and in England. He lives on hony, fish, pigeons, and Conies, which he likes best of all. The females dy with heat, if they couple not, when lust is on them. They mix as cats, and bring seven or eight in a lutter, they carry them fourty dayes;Gendring. the young after for thirty dayes are blinde; and the fourtieth day after sight comes, they go a hunting. Provoke them, and their dung sents well; when time in boxes, they sleep away most of their time. In Narbon, France, they hunt Rabbets with them; and elswhere they fetch with them dirds out the high nests, that men cannot come by. There is a peculiar kind in Zeilan,Differences. foe to the crowned Serpent, he bites on the roote of snake-wood, when he goes to combate with him. The Hamester is of this kinde, bigger then a tame Forret;Agrico. de ani. s [...] bter. the back is Hare-coloured, the belly black, the sides shining, feet short. He is a great gatherer of grain into his burrow. Thuringia is full of them, called Putorius from his stinking breath; and Icktis, because he loves fish.Ambr. H. Digit. l. 2. c. 17. Scaliger calls him a stinking cat. Bodied like a Mattern, but bigger; narrower necked, broader bellied, blacker on the tayl and thighs; the sides yellower. It hath a double ranke of hair, some shorter, and yellow; other longer, and black, the left legs are not shorter, as some think. They inhabite garners, stables, woods, and bank-sides. They feed on Mice, Hens, and other fowles (whose heads they strait pull off) fish, frogs. In Spring their skin smell strongly, in Winter not. There also the Noërza, as big as a Pole-cat, of an Otters-colour, is a stinking beast, lurking in wood-corners.

CHAPTER XI. Of the Mattern, or Pole-Cat; and of the Zibelline-Ferret, or Musk-Cat.

THe Martes, Ambrosin. H. Digit. l. 2. c. 18. or Mattern, hath the name from his fiercenes; called also Martia, Marta, Marrus, and Foina, Gainus, Scismus. His teeth pure white, even set, and keen. The dog-teeth in either jaw hang out, six smaller of diverse length are between, in stead of cutters, and are very small in the lower jaw. The grinders are eight, and like saws, some single. The utmost above stand more inward then the rest by much. Under the skin are sinewy small veins,Zootom. Democr. p. 317. stretched out, answering all the ribs in number, and order; the ribs are fourteen. No membrane fleshly. The muscles of the paunch are between the two tunicles of the rim, which makes it seeme thicker, and grosser, as the horny-film of an Ox-ey; fleshy in length by that line, that answers the navell, but not abroad, and onely below. The kell fastened to the stomack, entralls, and milt; the milt very small, hanging on the left side of the stomack, and a part of the kell fastened to it. The stomack bigger then ordinary for such a small body, consisting of a doubled coat, the outmost whiter, the inmost smoother, both thin. The guts fastened behind to the back-bone by a thin skin. No blind gut, all uniforme. The bladder very long, thin, but inclining more to the stomack. The liver of seven films, the weakest three-parted, like a chicken-foot, the middle three-cornerd, annexed to the hollow vein, a litle way by a thin skin. The right Rein is higher. The left Emulgens longer then the right; both sprouting from the great artery, not from the hollow-vein. Yet I doubt of it. By the hollow-vain are here and there reddish, and yellow kernells; the uppermost on the right side joyns to the liver by small veins. The hollow vein sends many sprigs through the loyn-space of muscles to the back bone; and the great artery lies under the hollow. The seed-vessels descend from the midst of the reins, but are parted in two on either side below, one branch joyned to the stone, reaching without the paunch. The yard arising from strings of os sacrum, is gri [...] tly, and hard as a bone, writhed at top like an wimble-skind, close, sharp as a needle. The right uritory sit higher into the bladder, then the left; a fine sinew comes strait down, tied to the right side, sit into the beginning of the hollow vein. Also a small sinew on the left-side, descends to the stomacks-mouth. The hollow-vein is set into the right ventricle of the heart, neare the right lappet, which is black, and full of blood, and greater then the left; this is white, and bloodles, hollow, spreading on the right side into the lungs. The great artery is set into the hearts left ventricle, bending downward. The hollow vain on the right, passing a little above the lungs-branches it self, into six springs, rising to the lower jaw. On the right side the lungs, consist of foure lesser veins, on the left of two greater. They are most in the North, and in the German-Alps, Southward, and toward Italy. They inhabite the roofs of greater houses, and beech, and firre-woods. A Boor told Gesner, that in a very high firre-tree, he tooke a Mattern, and foure welps. France hath no such. Out of Poland are some brought of a slight dusk-colour.

Beside other Weezels-food, they are said to eat shrubs,Renod. l. 3. Pharmacop. their dung smels like Musk; they are easily tamed. Gesner had one that loved his dog, that went about with him; let loose, shee would come to the chaine again, and play with him like a cat, lying on the back. But there is no trusting them; therefore some advise, to take out their dog-teeth. The skin is of use; that under the throat, makes caps good and wholsome for the head.Differences. In Canada the women shew their babes in them. There are two kinds; one tamer of a dark yellow, except a white part of the throat, which curriers and skinners call Faina. Bodies like a cat, a litle longer, and shorter legged. It rooms about the country, kills Hens, and sucks their egs. The other is wilde, of a brighter, and softer hair, and a clay-coloured throat. Some inhabite Beech,Ambrosin. H. Dig. l. 2. c. 19. Arist. Niphus. Alciate. Agricola. and Oake, and Holm-woods, some pitch, and firre-woods. About the Bregantine Lake, they shine by night.

The Zibelline Weezel, or Satherius, or Sebalus, or the Sarmatick, and Scythian-Mouse, is somewhat lesse then the Mattern, of a dark yellow all over, except the throat, which is ash-coloured. Found in the North, in the utmost woods of Moscovia, in Lithuania, white-Russia, and neare the Cronion-Sea, and in Laucerusa, a wood of Scandinavia. The Tartars, and Laplanders send the best skins. The Guinee story tells of store, in a Province of Congo; they lurke in shady Forrests, and catch birds. They are very nimble, and restles. It is said, that, if you lay the skin under other cloathes in a chest-bottome, in three dayes it shall be found uppermost; Handle them, yet they remain even. The long-haired, and inclining to black, are the best skins. You spoyl them, if you lay them in the Sun. To keep them from the moth, shake them oft, and lay them up wrapped in wormwood; they are very costly. Agricola saw fourty sold for a thousand crowns. Ambrosine, a halfe sleeve trim'd therewith, worth foure hundred pound of Bonony-money. They of Obdoria, offer this Mus-cats-skins to their Idol, called Zlata Baba.M. Paul. Venet. The great Cham of Tartary, his Tents are said to be lined with them.

CHAPTER XII. Of the Genetta, and the Zibethus, or Civet-Cat.

SOme conceive that Genetta, being a Spanish name,Ambrosin. H. Digit. l. 12. c. 21. borrows the name from some place there. Others call it a Spanish, or Genet-Cat. Some a lesser Panther. The Oppians suppose it to be a lesser Wolf. The whole body is handsomely, marked with black spots.

The whole skin is of a soft and thick hair, and downy, breathing forth a not unacceptable sent. It is found in Spain in waterish places, where it seeks the food. A winter halfe-sleeve furred therewith is sold for 25, nay 30 pound Bononian mony.lb. c. 22. Scalig. Ex. 211. Ludov. Rom. Gyllius. Bellonius. The Zibet, unknown perhaps to the ancients, is by the Greeks called Zapetion; by others a Zibet-Cat; or a Civet-cat, a kind of Panther, which the ancients thought the only well-sented beast; this is thought the same with the Hyena of old. It is armed with sharp teeth and hair. An arme long from head to dock; the legs to the feet, a third part of an armes length. Hee is about the bignes of a fox, coloured like a wolf, but black-spotted. Hee carries a bag about his privities, wherein lies the Civet, that is so fragrant.Rondel [...] . Pharmac. l. 3. c. 16. Hee hath a wide mouth like the Badger, the tongue not quite so rough as a cats. They are found in Pegu,Leo Af. Cardan. Congo, China, Cambaja, and in the Ethiopian woods. Brought also out of Egypt, where they breed plentifully, and out of Spain into Italy. Hee loves raw flesh, and field-mice. Cardinal Galeotto feeds them at Rome with chicken-flesh. In China hee eats sweet-meats, and rice, and egs, and the sweet wood called Camaron; if that be the beast Pigafetta, mentions in his journall. Scaliger hath seen them so tame at Rome and Mantua, that men carry them harmlesly on their shoulders. A Florentine Consul at Alexandria had one so gentle,Bellon. Obser. l. 2. c. 20. that hee played with men, taking them by the nose, ear, lips, teeth, and did them no harm. Ever fed from the first it was with womans breast-milk. The sweet excrement lurking as afore,Fallopius. is first white, after of a clayish colour, at length waxes black. It smells strong at first to wonder men; being layd in the open ayr, and hardened, it obtains that most gratefull fragrancy. Some will have it to be his seed. It is gathered in a silver spoon, or one of brasse, or horn, every day a dram. If you vex him with a small rod, hee yeelds more at a time. Some are said to pisse civet at a set time of the year. Civet is best kept in horn. There are some nobles of Ulyssipone that gaine thence yearly fifteen hundred pounds. It is of use in Phisick, and otherwise. A grain put on hot bread, applied to the navell eases the collique.Maiol. Coll. 7. It is one good ingredient against giddinesse, and apoplexy, smeared on the nostrills, temples, and crown of the head. It opens the mother. Some adulterate it with ox-gall, storax, and hony. It is used in preparing Cypres-pouder, sope-balls,Ambro [...]  strongwaters, oyls, spirits, and perfumes.

CHAPTER XIII. Of the Hare.

HE is called Lepus, and Levipes,Isidor. Origin. l. 12. Name [...] . lightfoot from his fleetnesse, or his soft going by reason of his shaggy feet. Derived from the old Aeolick Lepori; or from his uncertain footing Leioos, that it is hard to trace him. In Greeke Liporis, Lagoos; by the Athenians, by the Ionians Lagos. And Dasypous, from his shaged feet; and from his swiftnesse doubtlesse, Dromalos, Ptox, Tachines. In Candy Kekenas; by Aristotle Trochos. His

head is short,Varro de I. D. l. 3. c. 12. Scalig. Albert. and round; neck narrow, round, soft, long, prick-eared, legs strait & light, breast not fleshy, back-bone round, breast sinking; thighs light; those afore near one another, behind stradling; the whole body pliable; heart very great. About Briletum, Therne, the Chersonesus, the Propontis they seeme double livered.Zootom. Democ. [...] 9. The gristle under the fore corner of the ey is broad; there lies somewhat near the brain like a worme; the body round like a vault,Arist. l. 3. [...] 9. not found in other beasts. The ear-tip thin, and transparant as a cats. Among the toothed, and single-bellied beasts this alone hath cur'd. They are everywhere, both in hote, and colder climates. White ones are brought out of Africa. In the Indian Isle Mazzua they abound so, the natives everywhere kill them.Place. Paerzan. Lapez. Ovid. art. am. l. 2. Arist. Their plenty on mount Athos is grown to a proverb. They frequent uninhabited places most, where huntsmen least trouble them. In Ithaca are none, nor live they, if brought thether. Of their food Bargeus hath composed nine queint Verses. The summe is: They nibble on rank grasse, and corn-stalks, and strings of herbs in the earth, and soft barks of trees, and moyst books, apples, acorns, fitches, milt,Food. elms-leaves; especially wild mint, water-cresses, and betony, and pennyroyall. They gender averse, as all other beasts that pisse backward.Gendring. Xenophon. Po [...] lux. Athenaeus l. 9. They couple all the year, especially in spring. They admit of superfaetation. Aelian speaks of pregnant leverets found in a Hare cut up. In the time of Antiochus Gonata two Hares in Astypalaea in a short time bred above six thousand. And all Geron an Isle of the Scarian sea was within a while pestered from one Hare big with young. They breed in forrests in the most solitary places, two, three, sometimes four at once; you may know the female by the long head,Sex. thick body, longer ears, and grisly hair inclining to black on the back, and by her many doubles when hunted. The male hath red shoulders, and long hairs in the midst, the head shorter, and blunter; the beard, and brow hairs longer, the ears shorter, and broader. Afore the hounds he will run strait on ten miles together. They hate Eagles, crows, Weesels, Foxes, and Dogs. They live seven years.Archel. Albert. Their age may be gues'd by the clefts of their dung by the mouth of their forme. Their voyce is squeaking or mourning.Philomel. autor. They are well-sighted, and sleep with their eyes open, and are quick of hearing. The noyse of shaken leaves makes them run,Nature. and use their ears to guide them in their course, when they go to sleep, that their forme may not be found, they run too and fro with doubles, and then take a leap into their hole, where they lies with their forelegs together, and their ears layd squat on their shoulders. They love to sit abroad in the Sun in fair weather. They love the place best where they were bred. Are easily tamed; but dy, if too fat, yet, on the least scope given, they run away to their old liberty, and fall to their first wildnesse. They seldome grow fat in the woods, because perhaps they live in fear. Against winter they provide their house in Sunny places,Wit. in summer Northward. They run far for food, on purpose to keep themselves long winded by dayly breathing, and to use their feet. To amuse the hunters they run through windy wayes, shunning shrubs, least their hair should stick thereon, and so yeeld sent to the dogs. They know how to proportion their course, as the dogs are slower, or fleeter, and they lurk, when hunted, among clods, because they are of their colour. Jews may not eat them; but among the Gentiles, after Attalicus the Cydonian had made Hare a dish at his feasts, it became a dainty ever after, and was thought to make the face fair. For certain Alexander Severus ate it dayly;Lamprid. Mar. Epig. 30. Brui. l. 13. and Martiall writes something, that sounds that way. As for the temper of Hares flesh, those of two, or three months old, leverets, of six at most are most juicy, and of easiest digestion; if older, as above a year old, it breeds grosse blood, yet there are jolly huntsmen that eat it every day.

But that Cato Censorinus prescribes it, and pot-herbs to the sick, it must be meant of young Leverets. But those that live on hills, or heaths, feeding on Pennyroyall, &c. are much better then those that frequent waterish places. They taste best as cold weather comes in. See Ambrosin about the dressing of them.Galen. l. 11. de Simpl. med. facul. In Phisick no part almost of the Hare that is not usefull, even the very excrements. The Head burnt with Bears-grease, or vineger, helps shedding the hair; the Brain helps children in breeding teeth, if oft rubbed on the gum; drunk in wine, it helps those that cannot hold their water; the Heart is tied on those that are troubled with Quartains; the powder of it dried with a third part of Manna, Frankincense in white wine, men drink seven dayes against the Falling-sicknesse;Sextus. the Lungs helps sore eyes; the Liver with sowr wine, the Collick; the Gall in sugar, pearls, and dimnesse of the eyes; the curd of one that hath eaten nothing but milk, dried in the Sun, or smoke, is sovereign against bloodyfluxes; It draws out a thorn,Dioscor. mixt with flower of Frankincense, and Oke-gum. Some use it against the sting of Serpents; and to help conception: But it is said to kill what is conceived, if drunk in; the Reins boyled,Idem. are ministred for the Stone; stale, and tied to the feet,Matthiol. eases the Gout; From the Mother, some make medicines for the griefs of the bladder;Olam. Quercetan. Albert. Diosc. the Flesh fried in oyl, is ministred glister-wise against Dysenteries, and Ulcers in the bowels, to the same purpose is the blood roasted good; some mingle it with Barly-meal; The Milk makes women fruitful; the Fat with Bean-flower, helps to draw out stings; the Tooth hang'd on, eases tooth-ach; the Ancle-bone tied on with a string of Hares hair,Marcellus. Tragus. mitigates the Collick; and distilled with Pennyroyal, and drunk, it allayes sharp child-bearing-labour, and is prescribed with Oke-lime, Pearl, Coral, and Paeony-seed against the Falling-sicknesse, and provokes Urine; the Skin in sere-cloth, is good

against burstings; the Feet cut off while he lives, easens the Gout; the Pisse with Spiknard is a wholsome drink against Dropsie;Matthiol [...] s. the dung born by a woman, hinders conception, but put under, helps the months, and dries, burn the whole Hare, the ashes taken in warm wine, helps the Stone; whereof also is compounded an electuary,Montag. l. 2. whereto Jews-stone, and spunges found among small stones are added.

Hares differ in colour,Differences. bignesse, fatnesse. Some are blew, others in a black-soyls, duskish, others on red-soyls, glistering. In America are found some with the black Hare coloured, the sides white and black, the rest white. There are white ones on the Alps,Plin. l. 18. c. 55. and on the hill tops by the vally of Anania  Gesner saw one milk-white, with black hair on the ear-tips, and found the flesh tenderer in taste then other; the Elymaean are as big a Fox. In Macedon, and Transalpin-Gual are great ones; in Italy, and Spain, lesse. In lower Hungary they are observed to be fatter then in Italy. One kind is said to sent so of Musk,Manard. that they make the hounds mad that hunt them.Ambrosin. de Digit. l. 2. c. 23. Some are called mountain, some field, some marish, some Italian, French, Spanish, Indian Hares. The Italian are low-footed afore, black-backed, and white-bellied. The Mountaneers differ from others in their black-hew,Varro. bulk, wildnesse, and thick hair; the French are most what bright. The Spanish comprehend Rabbits, there is one in New-Spain called by the Natives Citli, shaped as ours, and feeds so,Nieremb. H. exot. l. 9. c. 8. but with ears very long, and broad for such a body: The Indians weave the hair into clothes and sheets, which they wear for cloaks. The Brasilians have their Cotias of the bignesse, shape, and taste of the Hare; yellowish, little eared, and almost no tail. There is a greater kind called Pacae, round mouthed, Cat-faced, dusk, with white spots; tender of flesh, and skin also, therefore fought after as a dainty. There is also a kind that the Indians cudgell to death; then flea it,Amat. Lusitan. and work the blew-beaten-flesh into a Paste, which they wrap in the skin, and call Musk.

CHAPTER XIV. Of the Cony.

HAth the name from myning,Name. and burrowing under ground, and dwelling there; called by Aelian a little Hare, or Leveret; by the Greeks Sunax,

[...] . Dasupous; which yet Pliny seems to distinguish from both Cony, and Hare. Strabo calls them digging Hares, and Leberidas,

[...] . perhaps from the Serpents-slough; whence a young one newly kindled,Strabo. Geogra. l. 3. and hairlesse, is termed liberis, laberis, and laurix, or glib. Also Adapis, perhaps from Adapanos,

[...] . that cannot be spent; so fruitfull,Hemol. in Dioscor. and numerous they are. By Erotianus, Limopoios,

[...] . dearth-bringer. All the Belly-muscles cleave fast between the two skins of the Peritonaeum. The strait gut small; the heart little, the liver great, and the reins,Zoor [...] m. Democ. p. 327. the milt long like a Swallows, or Cocks; the Parepar, or Byliver, shaped like a shoe-makers broad handled knif, lying in the midst between the broad liver strings; the stomack not unlike a Hogs, very like a Mouses, or Dormouses; the Cystis small fastened to the liver; the blind-gut more then a palm great, celled, and hath an appendix of three fingers; the turning-joynts of the loyns long, between which ly fair muscles. Pliny denies there are any bred in the Isle Ebusus;Place. but they swarm in France, Italy, Mauritania, Muscovy, Poland, England, &c. About Mosaiscus, a Muscovy-town, they are numberlesse;Scaliger. but they abound most in Spain. In the Baleares, Majorca, and Minorca, they devour their harvest. In Zeland by the Sea-side there are many, enough to furnish all Brabant in Winter.

They feed on grasse, three-leaved grasse, cabbage, lettuce, cicory, turneps, and apple-parings, and especially bay-berries.Food. Mans-blood fattens them apace; they cannot away with moysture; they couple every six,Gendring. or rather twelf moneths, and kindle monethly in hot-countries. One that kept Conies, relates that some have brought three young at once; and after a fortnight as many more. But in Germany, and Italy, they seldome breed in winter,Niphus. they bring five or nine at most; that of their double-sex is a fiction; they suck oneantwenty dayes; if any handle them, the dames are angry, and either forsake, or hurt, or kill their yong: And the males doe the same, if the females are busie about their young, and neglect them. By leaping Rabbits,Nature, and Wat. scape taking; they forsake places, where they are in danger; and one going, all the rest follow. It is known that they chew the cud; through envy they will bite one anothers ears, and legs off, yet are easily tamed. Cardan knew one of it self follow the dogs; they dig them burrows with many outlets. In Spain they in sandy soyl undermined, and subeverted a fair town,M. Varro. so that the natives must seeke other dwellings; they come not abroad, but mornings, or evenings; and go not far from burrows, and stop up the entrance, to prevent discovery by the passengers; their flesh, especially of the young ones, is tenderer then Hare.Use. A Spanjard was the first who made it a dish on his table; they care not in Spain for tame Conies, they tast too much of their food, but wild are a dainty. They parboyl them, and stuf them with sweet herbs; and lard them with pork. In Phisick, the fat refreshes the sinews, and helps watering: Burned,Marcel. Ambrosin. Differences. it cures the inward ague; they differ in colour, bignesse, inwards, and places: there are white, black, yellow, ash-coloured, pied, bright, stated with black, and glittering spots.Nieremb. H. E. l. 9. c. 8. Valerian saw at Verona with a Jugler one fouretimes as bigge as ours, and strangly fat. Pliny thinks that the Betick-Conies have double inwards. Some called Vtiae in India, are no bigger then Rats. I leave to the reader to judge, whether they are Conies that Scaliger describes, of Hare-colour, short-eares, thick-body,

and well set, long-tails like the Squirrels. Some call them Pharohs-Mice, some Indian-Hares; there those they call Indian-Pigs, of the bignes of our Conies, but shorter-legged, on the fore six toes, on the hinder-feet five; they have Mice-teeth, no tayl, a sharp Muzzle; Ears little, and round, rather bristled then hairy; they gruntle like Pigs, they eat all herbs, fruit, bread, oats, living many month without water. One male is enough for seven, or nine females; admitting of superfetation like Conies. In winter they kindle, in 60 dayes all seeing. The males fight afore the female. We have added the picture of another Indian-Cony. Some make nine sorts of Indian-Conies.Nierem. H. E. l. 9. c. 7. 1. The Pacfli, as dainty as those in Spain, if it live where good grasse grows. 2. The Eliztactotli, or white-breast. 3. The Cuitlatepotli, or short tayl. 4. The Tocant [...] ctli of Peru, shaped like the Mexican Mole, called Tuca. 5. The Quau [...] toctli. 6. Metochtli. 7. Cacotochtli. 8. Another Cuitlatepotli. All differing in shape, and name, not so savoury, and delicate of tast as ours. All this I had out of D. Franc. Hornandus his manuscripts. Out of another, that there are some somewhat lesse then the Castellani tayl like a fish, well-tasted; living on hills, and grassie places, and not in burrows. There are foure sorts of them.ld. lb. c. 9. 1. Quemi, greater, and harder. 2. Utiae. 3. Mohlas. 4. Cuties, litle, daintier, and wholesomer. There are Viscachae, long-tailed like Cats. They love snow, and batten on it. The Hair of old hath been valued, and of use.

CHAPTER XV. Of the Squirrell.

THe first who called this small beast Sciurus was Oppianus,Ambrosin. Dig. Name. who lived in the time of Antonine C. so called from the shadow of his tail; [...] . and Kampsiouros, from Kamptein, because hee bends, and turnes up his tail ever on his back; and Eleion, a Dor-mouse; and Nitela, from climing; and Pirolus; and Spiriolus; and Scurulus from running. A kind of Mouse he is. His lower-teeth are longest;Belluacen. Descript. and the blinde-gut, answering the stomack. They are found almost everywhere; especially Northward, where their colour is fairest. They feed on apples, chesse-nuts,Place. Food. Gendring. and other nuts, beech, and pineapples, and acorns; and in Summer they hoard up against Winter. In Spring they gender, and build nests of sticks, and leaves, on the highest boughs of trees. They bring three, or foure young at once; that are said to leave their nest after they are three or foure dayes old. They can use their fore-feet like hands, are easily tamed,Nature. Wit. and chatter: going, they drag their tail after; sitting they turn it upon their back, in leaping it is in stead of wings; in schorching weather it yeelds them shadow, passing waters it serves for a sail, they make a bark of a tree their ship; in their holes they have many outlets, which they stop, or open as the wind stands, or foreseeing a storme.

Some dresse them to eat, the Velleians hold them for a delicate. The fat mollifies.Use. Galen commends it highly against ear-ache.Bruyer. l. 13. de recib. c. 29. Iuglers abuse the teeth to fortune telling; they differ in colour, and according to their place.Differences. In Germany they are in the first year black,Cromerus. when bigger, red.Arist. In Poland gray, and flame-coloured. In Russia all ash-coloured.Pliny. In Podolia spotted.Amb. Some are called Pontick mice; the Getulian, and Indian are pied. The Pontick lives about Pontus, and used there for weare, called also the Laffican-mouse, and the Venetian, and by the Pole, Popieliza. He is ash-coloured in bright, the tail not so bushy as others, but natured as the common squirrell. He is buried all winter in a deep sleep, some on the back are more ash, some more fier red. The Getulian is party-coloured red, and black, streaked handsome with white, and dusk from the shoulders to the tail through back, and sides, lesse then the common one, with hanging ears, almost as big as his head, round, fetched through the surface of the skin, long headed like a frog. Of the Indian are five, or six kinds.

1. The Quauhtechallotl, the Tliltik, or Tlilocotequillin, so called from the black colour,Hier. H. E. l. 9. c. 34. and the pine-tree, where he dwells. He eats the pine-apples, in the hollow there he layes up his winters provision, there they keep their brood, and gnaw all round. They are subtile, chirp like sparrows, the tail is woolly, and can cover the whole body. They are easily tamed, and brought to eat any thing. Eating, he stands on his hind-feet, and holds his meat with the forefeet, lifting up his tail, but running he stretches it out at length. Anger him he raises his hair. They make winter-furres of the skins, which are warme, and handsome.

2. The Quauhtechallotl, Quapachtli, or Corticolotequilin, so called from the clay-colour of the belly, twice as big as others; and except the belly is white, black, and dusk; the tail long and bushy, that can cover him all over. They live with their young in burrows, eat Indian wheat, which they take out of the fields, and lay up for winter, they are subtile, and never tamed.

3. The Tlechallotl, with a tail half bald, and shorter, not about nine inches, is never tamed, bites cruelly, gnaw all things, is bright, and dusk, eats as squirrells, and most maiz, hath great eyes, digs himself a burrow, strews it with wool, cotten, or any soft thing, lives there, and chirps like a sparrow.

4. The Thalmototli, of a span long, great-headed, and eyed for such a small body; the tail long, bushy, with white, dark, and black streaks, and can cover himself therewith, the body is pied, sometimes inclining to yellow.

5. The Quiniichpatlan, or flying mouse, black, shaped like a small bird, long near the arms, and thighs; he goes from tree to tree, as if he flew; lesse he is then the rest mouse-headed, great eared, feed as the other. The ashes

of the tail burnt, are said to easen childbearing.

6. The Yztactechalotl, like the rest, only the head, neck, and buttocks at top, yellow, and the tail hath blew spaces, and whitish, and yellow streaks; the rest of the body is whitish, whence it hath the name.

CHAPTER XVI. Of the Dormouse.

CAlled Glis from gliscere to wax, or grow fat,Amb. Dig. Vi. l. 2. c. 29. resting, and batning all winter in its hole. In Greek Eleios, of old Gelaios, Name. (whence happily Glis,) so called from living abroad, [...] . in woods, or in winter in hollow trees sleeping;Isidor. some call him Lagoneiron,

[...] . the sleepy Hare. Some Muozon, from the sharp Muzzle, for such it is, and long; the Ears very sharp, the tayl not so bushy;Described. the belly strutting out more then the Squirrells; sides and back ash-coloured, some yellowish on the belly are taken. They are not onely in woods, but also about country-houses. It is a mistake, that there are none in Yreland, nor where Yrish wood is;Place. I know the contrary. They swarm neare Goricia, and in the Alps of Carniola, Styria, and Carinthia. They eat beech, acorns, nuts, apples, &c. Some say, they open apples,Food. onely for the kernels. In Winter they ly snorting, and fattening in hollow-trees, in so deep a sleep,Nature. that fire can scarce wake them, nor cutting;Wit. Arist. till you cast them into scalding water, they stir not. In summer they couple, and bring forth at fall of the leafe. They are prously tender of their old fires, and dames. Like Mice, they quit a ruinous house, three months afore it fall by a prophetique instinct; that winters-fatning by rest, lasts not above six years. All that inhabite one wood, meet sometime, and maintain a flight against those of another hill, or river. All authours hold that there is poyson in them about their tail, and that their pisse sprinkled on any part, makes it incurably, putrifie to the bone. Some write,Epiphan. that the Viper blinds, and fosters up their young, and thence the venome comes. Q. Scaurus was the first who set their flesh afore his guests,Use. at his sumptious Feasts: the Romans held them for delicates, whence their Gliraria, or Dormouse pens. They are thought best, and fattest from October to January; and the younger the better meat. In Phisick they have also place. Eating the flesh frees from dog-hunger; the fat provokes sleep, if you annoint the soles of the feet therewith: the dung drunke, breaks the stone; the same with vineger, and rosemary, cures shedding the hair;Plin. the ashes cleare the eye-sight. There are severall kinds of them.Differences. There is among the Allobroges, the Savoyards, and the Tarantesians such a beast,Bruyer. that sleeps a great part of the year,Nierem. H. E. l. 9. c. 75. and is of a delicate taste. In East-India are some as big as Pigs, that overturne houses, and digge through walls. There are some reddish-haired, senting like Musk. In Chiapa is a litle beast, the bignes of a Cony, shaped like a Dor-mouse; that, when she seeks her food, carries her young on her back.

CHAP. XVII. Of Mice.

ARTICLE I. Of House-Mice.

MIce we divide into House,Ambr. l. 2. c. 32. Field, Nut, Spider, Alpine, and Water-mice. The first called in Latine Catus, Name. and Sorex and Mus,

[...] . from the Greek, Mus; Ratus is the name of the greater, so called from ravening; [...] . now of late called Riskos in Greek. Sorex is from the noise in nibbling, like sawing, or from the rotten matter, that breeds them: in the Aeolick Vrax,

[...] . from the muzzle like the Swines-snout; by the Thracians Arklos;

[...] . by some Sminthos, and Lamas. No need of describing the outward parts; as for the inner, the heart is very great; it is said to have no gall.Varin. Onely in horned-beasts,Described. having teeth on one side; and in Hares,Arist. Bats, and Mice,Plin. that have teeth on either side; is there a womb,Sever. having a hollow,Zoo [...] om. p. 323. whereon the embrio hangs in the midst. The lappet of their heart is far greater on the right then the left side, and that black, as gore blood. At the stomacks-mouth above is a certain round passage, turning back into it selfe, having the shape of a Bird turning, and hiding the neck and head in the breast. The hollow vein, rising from the liver, wide in the beginning, then slenderer, but even all along. The blind-gut is like a Swines-stomack, though lesse. The stones as big as a Chickens, and the skins hang lower as the testicles; and the right is fuller of veins then the left. The right rein is nearer to the hollow vein then the left. The privy part is gristly, with a threefold parting, and sharp at end, the rest consists of two sinews. The bladder-neck hath fair kennels afore: the mid-rif is transparant in the middle, long, and round. In a dissected Mouse, in the right horn of the womb were found foure young, in the left, two; each had it's cake of flesh round, disposed afore the navell, and covered. Some write,Place. there are no Mice in the Isle Parus; that about the Castle Slane in Scotland,Hect. if you bring a great Mouse, he dies.Boer. That there are none in Peru, but those that were brought out of Spain with the Merchants-Wares; they eat corne,Food. bread, flesh, and pulse, oft onjons, and garlick; they nibble on many cheeses, they sup wine, and lick oyl. If hunger-starved, they fall on each other. The females can fill themselves with licking of salt; which made Pliny think that by licking they gendred:Gendring. But it is certain, that they couple, and bring many at

once,Plin. l. 10. c. 65. hundred-and-twenty at a time. And some in Persia have been found with young in the dames belly. They breed also out of filth in houses,Anist. H. A. l. 8. c. 37. and ships.

As in India, Worms a finger thick, breed of a rotten stuf in reed,Pausanias. which after turn into Butter-flies, and Mice. In Jonia, through the overflowing of Maeander, Mice multiply so, that men are fain to shift their dwellings. Those that breed of filth, gender not; or if they doe, their young doe not.Cardan. Their noise is squeaking. They hold antipathy with elaterium, Sea-Onion, coloquintida,

[...] . the Weesel, Hauke, Cats, &c. but sympathy with sweet majoram, to the root whereof they betake themselves, when they ail any thing; and they agree with Swine; for offer a mous-liver in a fig to a Sow, she shall follow you without grunting; as Pierius Valerian at Padua hath experimented. They are quick of hearing,Nature. and hate light by night, because it dazles them. In goldsmiths shops they eat fileings of mettles, and doubtles disgest them. In the Isle Gyarus,Plin. l. 8. c. 57. they drove out the inhabitants, and nibled on iron, and steel, in the iron-mongers shops. Golden metalls, their bellies can cut through. Their pisse sprinkled thereon, eats through. If they slip to the water, they hold by each others tayls, so that if one scape all scape.Amoldus. Albert saw in the low-countries a Mouse, hold the candle to his master at his nod, and bidding. They differ in bignes, colour, hair smell, and place. In Arabia are Mice much greater then Rats.Differences. Vitriacus speaks of some in the East, as big as Foxes.Anist. Americus found exceeding great ones in a certain Island, most are of the colour of the Asse, some black, some dusk, some ash. Gesner saw one very white in Germany, taken in April, with reddish bolt-goggle-eyes, and a beard rough, and full of rough hairs. Scaliger saw another very bright, with flaming eyes. Albert writes of white, and very lustfull; and white stones found in their excrements. Some are softer haired then others,Ae [...] ian. and some as bristled, and sharp as Hedge-hogs in the region of Cyrene; and a kind of Mice are called Echines. Hedge-hogs. The dung of some is sweet. In Italy is a kinde called Moschardine,Plin. from their sent.Heriod. Bellonius saw one that lived on Hoscyam-seed onely,Ruell. H. P [...] ant. [...] . 4. white-bellied, ash-coloured, backed, long-bodied, and tayled, and sword-mouthed, called Skalopes,

[...] . by the Scholiast on Aristophanes. [...] . In Cappadocia is a kind called Muexis.

ARTICLE II. Of water-Mice, and other wilde Mice.

VVIlde Mice live abroad,Ambrosin. called Nitedulae,Digit. they with their feet dig themselves holes. The field-Mice are called Arourai [...] us,

[...] . the wood-Mice Agrious.

[...]  They abound no where so as in Egypt. Neare Thebes, after the overflow of Nilus, in warm weather,Name. they come numberles out of the clefts of the ground.Aelian. l. 6. c. 21. Between Gazara, and Belba they swarm so, that,Place. were they not devoured by the Perenopters (Birds) they would eat up all kinds of seeds; they devoure Hops, Parsnips, and the roots of all sorts of Pulse;Food. they affect Artichokes most. In the year 1271. they destroyed all kind of Grain, so that a great dearth ensued. In the North they lurk under the snow, and feed on worms.Cardan. de rer. They are in some places bred after sudden rains, and floods.Variet. The forepart of a Mouse hath the full shape, the hinder not. Sometimes they propagate of seed.Arist. It hath happened, that, when the movers have intended to reape a field next day, the Mice have in one day prevented them, and devoured all in one night, at Calenum we have seene it done, saith Niphus. In Cantabria, men are hired to hunt them. The Aeolians, and Trajans were so vexed with them, that they sacrificed them to Smynthian Apollo. They entrap them, and knock them on the head with a Spade; when they are hurt, they betake them to succoury, that is their nature. Not to speak now of the Rats,Kinds. with tails tufted at the end, and have a peculiar cry; nor of the leem that falls from the clouds in hasty rain,Olaus. and lives till it taste new grasse; nor of the Napel-Mouse.

There is the Filbert mouse, of which kind there is a greater,Ambr. and a lesser. Gesner kept a great one some dayes alive,Dig. l. 2. c. 32. it was like a Rat and Mouse-coloured on the back, the sides yellow, and especially the head, the ears great, and smooth, the belly white, feet reddish, the tail hairy, eyes broad, black, goggle, the beard white, and black, smelling like the house-mouse. The lesse is reddish, some, but few, have a sweet sent,Albert. called by the Italians Muschardines, by some Lucioli from their bright glistring eyes; it is very like a Spider-mouse. He nestles among the bows of the Filbert-tree, or the Flax, and also under ground, and eats Nuts. Some of them sleep from harvest to spring,Avicen. some say without waking; but those that have kept them say they wake sometimes. There also a Spider-mouse that is so nimble and light, it can walke on thred, and not bent it, or on a sword edge,Sipontine. without taking harme. Others say it is venomous,Gesner. and hath the name from a fish, called Aranaeus, or a Spider, it is much lesse then a Weesel, inclining to ash-colour, teeth small, [...] . the tail short, and slender, the muzzle long and sharp.Aetius. The eyes so small for such a body,Albert. that Pliny thought it pureblind, and others call it the blind mouse.Maethiolus. It is dusk, and yellow, the belly white, Swine-snowted, thick of hair, [...] . the tail twice as little, as of other mice. In either jaw are two foreteeth sticking o [...] t. Between the cheek teeth is no hollow place,Ambrosin. but they are all as one bone; in one part are three knags so small, that you cannot see them. there are four other cheek teeth unequall, and knaged, in all twenty teeth. They are not beyond the Appenine hill,Plin. but everywhere in Italy,Matthiol. especially about Trent, also in Germany. They

winter in stables, in summer they haunt gardens, and Cow-dunghills, feeding on roots, especiall eatable thistles, to the Husbandmans great damage, also on carrion. Those by Trent are not venomous.Matthiol. They hate the track of wheels.Barbarus. Their squeake is shriller then of other mice, but by reason of its dimme sight, it is sluggish. Their bite is venemous, for a Cat will catch, but not eat them. Their bite is worse that are great with young to any other creature that is so. The Alpine Mouse lives in the Alps, is called also Marmota, and beare mouse, it being shaped like both.Ambro. dig. vi. l. 2. c. 34. Albert refers the Empetra to these, a beast now unknown headed like a Hare, as big as a Cony, the ears so small, scarce seen above the hair, like a badger long, and party-coloured haired, short-tayled, sharp nayled, and dig deep. In winter it grows monstrous fat.Aurel. The foreteeth like the Hares,Sever. and if cut off, will grow again in one night.Zootom. Their stones ly high. The blind gut is large,Democ. p. 325. like a stomack, rough within and netlike, there in a large womb. The liver hath seven lappets distinct, the greatest towards the left side. The gall-bag is the fold to the duodenum, the spleen long like a large Swallows. The water-vessels, or Uriteres not comming strait down from the reines, but cleaving to the back, and small. Most of them about Trent, and in the snowy cold parts of Germany. They feed on fruit, especially milke, that they suck as pigs, therefore haunt they sheep-coats. Being tamed they eat pulse, bread, fish, &c. About Christmasse dig, you find them asleep in the ground, nothing wakes them, but the heat of the sun, or fire. A little thing frights them, vex them, they squeak like a pipe, or against change of weather. They stink so, that in summer they are not to be endured; nor want they wit. Toward winter they convey hay, and chaff into their holes. They lay one flat, and load him with hay, and drag him by the tale into their hole, which hath two entrances; through the one they all passe too, and fro, out of the other they carry their dung. When winter begins they stop up the doore, and in the depth of winter they stop up the other so fast, that a spade cannot pearce it. About the end of September they meet seven, or more in one hole, commonly the number is odd, and there on straw they ly snorting till spring. One still stands centinell, while the rest go abroad; if he spy any thing, he squeaks aloud, and warns the rest, whereupon they all come running, and he enters last. In fair weather they play together, and murmur, and bark like little dogs.Stumpfius. When tame they will looke your head, like an Ape. About approach of winter they come, and eat with those who live on the Alps. They rost and boyl them in black pottage, and sprinkle them with salt, and hang them in the smoake, and give them to women in child-bed. The fat softens shriveled sinews, and smeared on the navell provokes sleep. The stomack eases the collick.

Aristotle in his book of wonders, mentions the water-Mouse. He hath three passages, one for his filth,Ambr. [...] c. 35. one for his water, one for bearing young.B [...] llon. aquat. l. 1. Near the bignes of the Mole, of a dusk-colour, all but the belly, which is bright ash-colour;Cl [...] sius in Auct. it is thick, and soft-haired, the head small for such a body;Exot. the upper-part of the musle hangs over; in each jaw two teeth, in the lower, lesser, and blunt. Their eyes are hardly seene; the sides of the mouth are of a long ash-coloured shagge; the tayl thin of hair, and a bony sinew in the midst; the hinder-legs are longest, and flat, and skind as a Ducks. They are common in Strymon, and Nile; they go abroad in faire nights. There are of them in smaller rivers, and in Lusae an Arcadian-Spring. They feed on water-plants, fruit, and fish. The Magi that followed Zoroastres,Holler. thought these Mice divells,Arist. or Tortoyses. In some parts of France they eate them.P [...] utar. There is also the Coyopillis, Sympo 4. q. ult. it uses the tayl for hands; the young,Nier [...] m. when frighted, embraces the dame. It resembles the Tlacuatzis in tayl,Exo. l. 9. c. 3. eares, and mussles. The tayl is thicker, and stronger then the Mouses, the belly palish white, the ears so thin, you may see through them; the feet and thighs white. They are found in the Tepoplan-hills. The Crocodile also uses the tail as hands, therewith catching beasts, and men as a prey.

CHAPTER XVIII. Of the Mole.

THe name Talpa, Ambros [...] de digit. vivip. l. 2. c. 36. the Latines have put on it, either from Thaptoo, to digge, or Tophlos, blind; or Thalpae, nourishing it self under ground;Name. or from the Chaldee Talaf,

[...] Describ [...]  to cleave the earth. The Greeks call it Spalax, from Span, scraping. Some Siphncus, from hollowing the earth; and Blacta. It is not unlike a Mouse; the body broad, and flat, feet like a Bears; short-thighed, toad-headed;Scal. having on the forefeet five toes, on the hinder foure, the fifth crooks so inward, it is hardly seene. The palme of the forefeet is flat like a hand, the neck very short, or almost none, hair short and thick, and glistring black; the teeth, as the Dogges, and Wesels, are all on the sides, none afore, and sticking up; the lungs, tied with many severall strings to the heart; the fore-thighs consist of two bones, set into the shoulder-bone, whence he is stronger to digge: his hinder-thighs have a bone, that a litle below the knee-parts in two: All the bowells are as in other beasts; Onely 1. they have no colon,Severin. no blind-gut. 2. The stones hid,Zoot. on the bladder-side,Democ. p. 317. and black. 3. The reins joyned to the next hollow vein. 4. The gall great for such a body with faire Cholidochs. 5. The porter of the stomack, is as tied by a thwart line. 6. The water-conveying-vessells, propt with uriteres. 7. The Larinx, as in a Land tortoyse, for it is a mute beast. 8. The hammer, and anvill within the inner-eare are strangely small; the bone in the

midst like a pumice-stone full of pores. 9. Three passages are in the nether jaw. 10. The eyes stand in the right place all black,Pliny. covered with a skin, small as a fleawort-seed; I could perceive no optick sinews, nor know I whether they can see, or no, not onely, because their eyes have a film over them, but they want many things, conducing to sight. They seeme rather natures sportive essays, to shew what shee can doe, then eyes. In a Mole found 1617, were observed a fleshy filme, strangely set into the skinne; the brain great, distinct, and faire; the ears lying inward, hide the bones extreame small, the bowels small as strings. In Thessaly they with heaving, have overturned a whole Town.Place. In Lebaica are none;Plin. l. 8. c. 2 [...] . if you bring any thither, they heave not, perhaps because it is a hard soile. They feed most on worms, and therefore haunt dunghills; and worms failing, they eat earth. They have been seen also to make at roots of hearbs,Food. and fruits, and toads. They are commonly bred in ground, rotted by rain, long lying. Albert saith, they cannot live an houre above ground, but he is mistaken. They have but dim sight, but are very quick of hearing. They are of use in Phisick; a Tooth pluckt out of a live one,Use. is thought to ease the tooth-ach. Pills of them with hony, wear away swellings. The head cut, and stamped with earth of his heaving, made up into balls, and kept in a tinne box, is given against all neck-griefs, the blood brings hair, and helps felons: the fat keeps hair from growing, as also batfat.M [...] rinel. The ashes cures fistulaes. Some lay a Moles-heart,Mizald [...] s. and Saladine, under a sick mans pillow, to know if hee shall dy, or no, conceiving that he shall recover, if he sing, or cry out; if he weep, he shall not last long.

The water wherein a Mole hath been, and left hair,Ag [...] icola. restores hair. Of the skins are caps made.

CHAPTER XIX. Of the Land-Hedg-hog, or Vrchin.

CAlled Echinus, because we cannot hold him for his prickles.Ambrosin. l. [...] . c. 37. In Greek Akanthochoiros, a prickled-hog. [...] . Lycophron calls him Naplium from his surpassing cunning. Some Herinaceus, and not improperly from his roughnesse, or cleaving. It is as big as a rabbit,Plin. full of prickles, except the mouth, and feet below, where grows a thin down.Described. It is observed in him, that the muscles are knit together over all his body.Severin. The bowells all of a thicknesse,Democ. and very long, like the Mouses.Zoot. p. 319. The dung, and testicles all of a bignesse, the rise of the yard long, the seed like yellow snivell; the liver sevenpointed. In the yard are whitish bits of flesh, craggy like a rock, and resembling somewhat the lungstrings. The testicles ly hid, and are fastned to the loyns. The bones are some round, some flat, some sharp, some blunt. They are found everywhere, except in Candy.Plin. l. 9. c. 12. Aristotle writes that they can last a year without food. They live most on apples,Food. and grapes, which they shake off, and stick on their prickles, and carry to their hole. They have been also observed to drinke milke,Aelian. l. 16. c. 69. and wine in houses; they hold enmity with the Beare, Wolfe, Fox, the viper, and the herb water-grasse. When he hears the barking of dogs, or smells the approach of wild beasts, or hunters, he forthwith rouls himself up like a ball, and lies, as if he were starke dead. He shifts his layer, as the North, and South wind change, and from wall to wall, if you keep him in house, accordingly as the wind sits. When you take him he pisses,Arist. H. A. l. 9. c. 6. and that wet slackens, and opens his prickles. They meet, and ingender, as mankind doth. Some eat them, but they breed the strangury, unlesse they be carefully dressed,Use. that is killed at one blow, as some are of opinion, and washed in whole vessells of urine. In August they are fattest, when they get plenty of food. Some spice, and bake them in crust. Gesner warmed them in vineger,Durantes. and wine, and larded them, and stuck them with cloves, and rosted them. They are very usefull in Phisick, the liver helps the reins, the gall dries up warts, the spleen rosted, and pulverized is good for the spleen; the flesh prevents miscarrying, and if killed at a blow, the strangullion, if you hang it about you conveniently; dried it helps rumples in the skin. The Polonians use the fat to that end, it is also good for the stone; the blood is not unusefull for the stone, the reins, and the scorching of the urine; the ashes with Bears-grease sleeks the hair; many use the same with oyly fat to prevent miscarrying; it is used also in the pain of the reins, and against the water between the skin; the dung newly voided with the herb Sandarucha, vineger, and tarre hinders shedding of hair: with the hide and prickles men used of old to fetch spots out of cloaths. They are distinguished into the swine,Kinds. and the dog urchine from their shape. A vile stinke vapours from them. In Brasil is such a beast resembling the hedge-hog with very long bristles, pale haired, black at the tops,Majolus. and very sharp, and prickly. Nature hath layed up a wonder in them, one prickle pluckt from them alive, but layed on anything, especially flesh, pearcheth it, and in one night it hath been known to pearce through a very thick hide, as if hands hath pricked it in.

CHAPTER XX. Of the Porcupine.

SOme reckon this among the Hedgehogs,Ambr. as Pliny,Digit. l. 2. c. 38. [...] . &c. The Greeks call it Ystrix, from Ys, and Thrix no doubt; some think it to be the African mouse in Plautus. Isidore writes it without an aspiration, and derives it from the noise he makes,Described. and rustling in shaking his bristles. Claudian describes him to be long snowted, like a Hog,

his bristles like horns stif, his eyes fiery red; under his rough back are seen the prints of a small whelp. But Agricola makes him to be Hare-mouthed, with four teeth, two above, two beneath, eared like a man, footed afore like a Badger, behind like a Beare; his bristles, or prickles on his back, and sides partly white, partly black, sometimes two palmes long, which he can make to start up as a Pea-cock his traine. They are common in Ethiopia, and are in all Africa, and India to be found; in Italy, and France now,Place. and then, but seldome, also in Galicia,Solinus. as the pilgrims of Compostella testify, who weare their prickly quills in their caps. They lurke in groves among the bushes. They live on apples,Food. turneps, peares, parsnips and crumbled bread,Agric. [...] de an [...] . subter. they drinke water, but if mixt with wine,Nature. most greedily. They can dart their quills at their enemy, and aime them like arrows; whence, it may be, the Archers art came. By night, they feed most, in winter they lurk in their holes. They carry their young as many dayes as the Beare.

Gluttony hath not spared it neither, some have eaten it,Use. and they cry it up for a dainty, you may see how to dresse it in Ambrosine out of Scapius. In Phisick it seemes to conduce to the same maladies as the Hedge-hog doth. Pliny made tooth-picks of the prickles to fasten the teeth. And women use them for bodkins to part their hair. There is small difference between them.Differences. Some distinguish them into sea, and land Porcupines; but too confidently, no good Authour mentions the sea one. Such a kind of beast Cardan saw at Papia fifteen hundred and fifty, as big as a Fox, mouthed like a Hare; the teeth sticking like the squirrells, the eyes black, and serpent-like; the hair like a Goats beard, hanging in the neck, the forefeet like the Badgers, the hinder like the Bears, eared like a man, beset with almost an hundred pricklequils, some crooked at top, else fast, but rustling as he went, Goos-tailed, the feathers spiny, the voyce grumbling like a dogs, he hated all dogs, probably it was some mungrill sprung from the Porcupine, and some other beast.

CHAPTER XXI. Of the Tatus, or the Brasil Hedge-hog.

THere is a kind of an armed beast, called a Tate;Nierem. by the Spaniards Armadillo; by the Portugese Sneubertado;Hist. exot. l. 9. c. 6. by the Italians Barbato; by the Brasilians Tatau, by some Tatusia, and Tatus; in new Spain Chirquincus, and Cassamin elsewhere, by other Indians Ajatochtli,Gesne [...] . or a Gourdcony, for he as they lives in burrows.Maphaeus. He can dig in one night fifty paces; if he be not tied, no place can hold him, he mines through all in houses, and towns, and gets away. There are sundry kinds of these armed beasts, but the Ajatochtlus seemes to me the strangest, rarely written, or found. He is armed with hard plates, as I my self have seene; As big as a Malta dog, the feet small as a swines, the snout long, and slender. He is all over armed as with male, or armour like a Cavalier, plated, the plates joyned close, distinct, which he can move, and every way fence himself with. His belly is bright, and soft-shined as ours, having here, and there long slender hairs. He hunts after Ants, lies on his back, with his tail on his mouth, so that the pis-mires comming on fall strait as a prey into his power,Anton. which he eats. It is said also that he fills with his own water the hollow on his belly between the plates,Herrera. and so the ants, the moysture lying in their way, come directly into his mouth: when he flies, in all hast he claps his head, and tail on his belly, and fences himself with his shell, rolling up himself round. If he be chased hard, he flies at the hunters breast, and oft strikes almost the breath out of his body. He haunts marishes. Feeds on worms, fish, berries, and apples. The flesh is very fat, and sweet, but flegmatick, and breeds crudities. The ancients used the tail to fence those they called their Zebratanae, which were of frequent use among them. Their shall is many wayes usefull both in warre, and peace. They say that a dram of the pouder thereof taken in, helps to sweat out the French pox. He is found in hot boggy places.

There are among the Lucatanenses two sorts of them; some are as harmlesse, and acceptable nourishment, others unwholesome, and poysonous, provoking to vomite, and filling the belly so with wind, that they bring swounding fits, and at length kill. The Antidote is oyl of olives, unlesse the venome have too farre prevailed, then there is no remedy. If happily any recover, their hair falls off, the colour fades, and they pine away by degrees. Those that beare eight shells or plates, are harmlesse; those with six venomous. The harmles also want a hip-bone, and have red spots about the belly: this beast is beloved of the Vipers, that have a voyce, that they can live together in the same hole, and never injure each other.

The former kinde is armed round to admiration, other gates then those in Spain,Consalv. or elsewhere in Europa.Ferdinan. He is fourefooted, covered all over,Oviedus. tail and all with a hide like the slough of a Serpent, called the American-Crocodile, betwixt white, and ash-colour, but inclining more to white, like a Barbed war-horse, as big as an ordinary Dog, harmles, burrowing himself in the earth, like the Conies; they are taken in nets, and with Cros-bows, killed commonly in seed-time, when the stubble is burnt, or the ground tilled, or husbanded, to bring grasse. Consalvus writes, that he had often eat of them; and that it is better tasted then kid, and found wholesome. He thinks that men might hence learne to Arme-horses, completely capable. Others are otherwise opinioned about them. Some say, he was never seen to

eat, but lives ever under, and on earth.Monardes. Others say, some few have been brought into France, and been seen to eat seeds, and fruits. I refute neither; they may speake of diverse kindes. Platean, and Clusius acknowleged three sorts of them. One short-tayled, one foot, and foure inches long, and fourteen inches about; covered with a dusky hard crust, so grown happily by age, and oft handling, after a manner checquered; from the neck to the midst roundish, the shells party-coloured, the middle of the body set with three rows of diverse coloures, fouresquare plates; the hinder-parts as the first; the head so plated to the nose; the eares wide, and pointed; the tayl short, not greater then a mans two fingers ends, round, and armed; the belly soft, and shaggy, as the picture presented it; as also the hinder-part of the thighs, and the throat, and nostrills; three toes on the hinder-feet, and spur'd, two on the forefeet, and a spur; the yard long, and stretched out. His chief strength lies in the tail-bone, a pill whereof made of the dust, as bigge as a birds-head, and put into the eare, asswages eare-paine, and takes away tingling, and thicknes of hearing, as it is said; but it is knowen to give certain ease. I adde the craft of the Chirquinchus, they that have seene it and report, that when it raines, he lies on his back, gathers water on his soft belly, that lies between the plates, and remaines so, while the shewre lasts, though it rain the whole day, till some Deere thirsty, comes unawares to drink, then he closes his plates, and snaps the Deers slips, and nose; and let not go the hold, till he stifle him. And, as the Hedge-hogge also, he craftily rouls up himself round, like a ball, and nothing but fire can loosen him. The Indians abuse the shells to their witchcrafts, especially to discover, and punish theeves; first touching the ground therewith, that the suspected person had toucht, or any thing else; they fill his mouth with the drinke Chicha: then beat they drums; the shells the while skip, and daunce. Hereby is the theeves face marked with a whelk, that runs along his cheeks through either jaw; if the charm hold.

ARTICLE III. Of tame foure-footed Beasts.

CHAPTER I. Of the Dog.

SO much for the half wilde Beasts;Ambros. the tame follow,Digit. vivi. l. 3. c. 1. namely the Dog, and the Cat. Varro fetches the Dogs name Canis, from Canorus, The Name. shrils in his barke. The Greekes of old called him Kuoon, from Kuoo doubtles, [...] . to love, or lust. Of late Ekilos, from his masterfulnes, [...] .  Ulaktoor, from barking, and Akanthis, from fawning with his tayl; not to insist on the description of so knowen a beast. In dissection it is noted,Suidas that the belly within forked the neck in shortnes,Describ. and narrownes, answering the middle-finger,Sever. the corners are an handbreath,Democ. a palme long, of like thicknes, not wreathed like a Swines;Zootom. p. 306. the forkends reach to the reins, tied by veins, that come as far as the womb, the testicles resting thereon by a thin skin. At the first opening of the neck, the body shews it self in bulk, shape, and colour, like a Snails-head thrust forth out of the shell; you cannot thrust a bodkin in, till you cut it up a litle. Dissect a bitch, you find the puppies wrapt up in three beds called chorion, allantoides, and amnion; the former can scarce be parted, they are so thin. In the right corner ly usually five whelps, in the left foure; each hath its bed, the chorion in the midst, girdles ly thwart two fingers broad, streaked with black from the end, and red in the middle; each as blood-spotted. The kell like a bag, covering the upper-guts; the top sprouting out of the stomack-bottome, compassing the whole; the hinder-part is set into the Spleen, and the sweetbreads; which latter shew themselves presently at the rise of the duodenum, being fastned thereto, and to the porturine, which sends a trebble-branch to the neighbouring-parts, Meseraick, Spleen-guts, the Paunch-branch runs beyond part of the stomack; the Spleen-branch runs up strait to the mouth of the stomack. The Spleen is tied to the mid-rif by a film two fingers broad, and to the stomack by the kall; the Spleen is like a foot with a wide shoo on. Colon-gut it hath none; the blind-gut receives the end of the strait one, which unfolded is as long as your middle-finger. At the end of the streight-gut within, is one faire lappet, and another lesse in the beginning of the blind-gut. The streight-gut is much rumpled. There is a fold of arteries from the aorta wound, to the hollow of the liver, approaching the pancreas; pluck one, you draw the other, and the upper-bowells. Above the upper-mouth of the stomack are two kernels, both Spungy-moist, the right harder, and greater then the left. Dogs-blood is black, as burnt. At the tip of the Tongue, is set in a round muscle, descending in a middle-line. The right lappet of the heart, is twice as big as the left. On the parts of the pan, that the temple-muscles cover, appears no thin skin, to enwrap them, besides what is proper to the muscles; but on the other parts of the brain-pan there is. At the tongue-root is a small kernell on either side, drawne out sideling. The ringlets of the sharp artery lie thwart, but not awry as in the Swine. The brain is greater then a Swines. Turn the brain up, and certain mamillary-passages shew themselves, and the beginning of the back-bone, if you cut deep, there you shall spy two small passages, one comming from the paps in a strait line, reaching to the end of the inner-brain; the other a litle on this side, lying upward thwart of that. On the fore-feet are five toes, on the hinder foure. The Bitches-belly hath

two rows of paps on either side. Albert saith, that the nostrils of a Dog of a good breed, are at the ends, round, firme, and blunt. The temple muscles, are noted to be very strong, as in the Wolf,Galen. and the Lion, which inables his jaws to break bones. There were no Dogs in Brasil, till Vilagagnon's voyage. If any come by hap into the Arabian Island Sigaron, they wander,Place. and die. They eat any thing, even fish, and carrion. Onely they refrain dogs-flesh, and what is thunder-strooke.Lerius. Textor. Food. They eat grasse also, and it is their Physick. From Ash-apples they abstain, because the turning-joints of their hips are thereby pained. Drinking wine, or strong water, makes them run wild, till the vapour be spent. They are ever given to gendring,Gendring. Arist. H. A. l. 5. c. 14. seldomest in Autumne. They hold on so till twelf years old; sometimes give over at nine. If they begin at foure, the breed is better; if at a year old, not. They are foureteen dayes hote; and the Bitch six months after puppying,Id. Ib. l. 18. c. 28. go to Dog again. They couple also promiscuously with other beasts; as with Wolves by Cyrene, whence spring, Crocutae, with Lions, whence Leontomiges come; with Beavers whence Castorides; with Foxes, whence Fox-dogs. They carry their puppies sixty dayes, some three-and-sixty. They bring a litter of twelf, sometimes sixteen. A Hare-hound in Bononia, puppied seventeen at once. Albertus saw Mastives, that brought in the first litter nineteen, at another eighteen, at a third thirteen.Arist. l. 5. c. 14. Pliny. Those that women dandle, puppy one at once. First they breed males, next females; then males again, if they couple in due time. The first resembles the sire; the rest are, as it happens. They are all puppied-blind, and the more they suck, the longer they remain so, yet none longer then one-and-twenty dayes; nor do any see till seven dayes old some say, if but one be puppied, at nine dayes old he sees; if two, the tenth day, and so on, but it is not certain. They have milke commonly five dayes ere they litter, some sooner. Their milke is thicker then other beasts, except the Sows, and Hares. They seldome live above fourteene yeares, some have lasted two-and-twenty. The Dogs of Laconia ten,Age Pliny. the bitches twelf, other kinds fifteen. The whelps have white teeth, and a shrill bark; the elder, their teeth blunter saffran-coloured, the bark greater. Which voyce we call barking,Voyce. in Latine latrare, and banbare. In Greeke Whelps, are said, [...] .  Banzein, older Ylaktein, to yelpe, &c. when they drink they lap; when they quarrell, or fawne, they grumble. We say, a salt-bitch hot, [...] . go to dog, in hunting they open, (Prokunein) provoked, they snarl, (Ararizein.) They dread the Hyaena so, that the very shadow strikes them dumb. In Nilus they give but a lap, and away, for feare of the Crocodile. A Wolf they hate.Antipathy. Plin. Porta saith, a Wolfs-skinne hanged on one, bitten with a mad dogge, removes fear of water. They dread the Buzzard for her slow, and low flying. Blondus his dog would not come neare Hens-flesh. Some refuse the bones of wilde-fowles. Of old they would not enter Hercules his temple, either by reason of his club; or they sented something buried under the threshold that they hated. Some complain lamentably if you strike a Harp; some houl, if they hear a Trumpet. The report of a Gun, makes them run. Well they agree with mankind, wee shall see anone. They are soon vexed, and will fight long about a bone. They are watchfull house-keepers; they are soon waked.Natur [...] . They drive them in Sparta from their temples, for their lust after women. They are skilfull in senting, and by smelling behind, distinguish of the disposition of bodies. They are ever hunting with their nose near the ground, and so soon infected. Quick of hearing they are. At foure moneths old they shed teeth, and hayr. If crop-sick, they devour grasse. They soon cast puppy, if the dog be killed, they coupled with. They are very cunning,Wit. and have a good memory, and are very teacheable. That in Plutarch cast so many stones into the oyl-cruyze, till the oyl swelled high enough, that he could lick it. They forget not a way once gone. Man onely exceeds them in remembring. One in Venice knew his master after three years. Ulisses his dog after twenty years absence. On Vespasians Theater was shewn a dog, that was taught all kinds of daunces, and fained himself sick, and dead; suffered himself to be draged about by the tayl, then started up as out of a deepe sleep. Francis Marquesse of Mantua, becomming dumb in a sicknesse, taught a Dog by signes, to call any courtier to him. Another in the presence of Justinian the Emperor, and the people having rings from the spectators, which his master jumbled together, returned each his own ring. Being asked which of the company was poore, or rich, a whore, or a widow, he shewed each, taking their cloaths in his mouth. They are very faithfull to their masters.Plin. l. 5. c. 4 [...] . We have heard of one that fought with theeves for his master, and would not leave his dead body, but drive birds, and beasts of prey from the carcasse. Of another in Epire, that discovered one that killed his master, and never left rending and barking, till he confest the deed. Two hundred dogs rescued the Garamant King from banishment, withstanding all resistance. Those of Colophon, and the Castabale [...] es, made use of squadrons of Dogs in warre; they set them in the front; neither would they give ground; they were the most faithfull forces they had, and asked no pay. When the Cimbrians were slain, their Dogs defended their houses, lying on Carts.

Jason the Lycian his dog would not eat when his master was slain, but starved himself to death. Another called Hircanus, leaped into King Lysimachus his funerall flame, the like is said of King Hierons dog. Pyrrhus King Gelons dog also is famous,D [...] ris. Philistis. and that of Nicomedes the Bithinian King, his Queen Consinga being torn wantonizing with her husband. With you a dog defended Volcatius a

Gentleman, a Civilian, from a rouge who assailed him returning out of the suburbs homeward. And Caelius also a Senator of Placentia, who was sickly, and opprest with armed men, nor was he slain, till his dog was first killed. But above all that surpasses any instance in our age, that the Roman Chronicle testifies, that when Appius Jenius, and Publius Silius were consuls, T. Sabinus, who was condemned for Nero Germanicus sons sake, to be cast down the Gemonies, had a dog that hould piteously for his master there, many Romans standing about, and being offered meat, he put it to his dead Lords mouth, and the carcasse being cast into Tiber, the dog swam to it, and endevoured to keep it from sinking, all the people ran to beholds the dum beasts faithfulnesse. Another discovered and killed the murderer of his master. That of Corsica, that would not suffer the nearest friends to take away his masters body frozen to death, till they killed him. I mention not yet those that would be burnt, or buried with their masters, as that of Polus the Tragedian, that of Pyrrhus, and Theodorus his dog.Athen. H. A. l. 7. c. 33. Eupolis the Poëts dog would never eat after his masters death, nor Jasons the Lycian. Darius the last Persian Monarch had no companion at his death but his dog. Xantippus his dog swam after him, and was drowned. Few, or civilized people will eat dogs flesh, unlesse need compell them.Use. Yet those of Senega eat them, and those of Guinee. Some nations gueld and eat them.Cadamust [...] s. Galen. Alim. l. 3. 2. But in medicine they are of speciall use. The brain-pan pouder takes down the swelling of the cods; a playster of the brain sets bones; the greatest tooth if you scarifie the jaw-bone, eases tooth-ache; some hang a black dogs longest tooth on those that have a quartan ague; the dogtooth of a mad dog hung in raw leather allays frenzy; the congeal stuffe dissolved in wine eases collick, & in vineger is taken in against dropsy; Sextus layes it on their belly, and by vomit draws out the hydroptique humour; the liver of a mad-dog roasted is souverain against madnesse; the gall with hony cures inward ulcers. Marcellus applies the milt when fresh to the spleen; the blood helps parts hurt by a mad dog, the fat eases the gout; a Puppies fat removes skars, and face freckles;Aescu. c [...] lap. Plin. Sextus. the milke is good for sore eyes, and to rub infants gums with all; and drunk, brings away a dead child. The pisse fetches off hair, and warts, and mixt with salpeter cleanses leprosy. The pouder of their dung is excellent against squincies, ey-sentery, and old sores, if the dog be kept up, and fed three dayes with bones. Marcellus prepares it dried in the Sun and sifted, with red wax, by bits, and a little oyl for the sciatica. Pliny thinks, that the bones found in their dung tied on helps the Siriasis in children. The skin helps rheums, if drawn on the fingers, and thongs of it tied thrice about the neck helps the squincy. The hair laid on the bite of a mad dog draws out the venome, and stanches blood.Mizaldus. Centur. 6. Some cure a quartane, or remove it by making a cake of meal kneaded with the water the sick person makes in one fit, at once, and giving it to a hungry dog. See the rest in Gesner. Some take two puppies newly puppied,Wecker. Antidot. and four pound of oyl of violets, and a pound of earthwormes prepared, and make an ointment for wounds made by gunshot. Andrew Furnerius cries up the destilled water out of whelps to prevent growing of hair. Dogs differ in many respects. Horned ones are said to be found in the Hellespont.Differences. Ovid. Clusius. In Hispaniola are some that bark not. In Guinee some strive to bark, and cannot. Some (in regard of their qualities) are Wind-hounds, some coursers, running-dogs, some tumblers, some house, some gate-dogs, some hunting, some setting dogs, some blood-hounds, some shoks. If we regard place, there English, Scotch, Epire, Cyrenaick, Arcadian, Indian, &c. dogs. We shall in order treat of the severall sorts, and first of mad dogs, which become such by eating rotten, and worm-eaten meats, and flesh, chiefly in the dog-daies.Ambr. l. 3. c. 2. Quad. Digit. Then they hate to eat, and drink dread water, rome up and down, bark hoarsly, fome extremely at mouth, and ears, look fearcely, their tail hangs down, they bite men without barking.Aetius. Many used manifold remedies, as white hellebore with barly boyled to make them spew;Mysaldus. Blondus. Hen-dung mixt with their meat, blooding them after the third day in the swelling veins on the thighs, casting them in a pond where many hors-leeches are to suck their bad blood away, annointing them over with oyl of poplar, washing them in a decoction of fumitory, sorell,Plin. Colum. and Elicampane root. To prevent it some prescribe giving them while puppies breast-milk of one hath lien in of a son; some cut off whelps tails, when fourty dayes old. Some pinch it off with their fingers the utmost joynt of the tail.Ambr. ib. l. 3. c. 3. There are Malta dogs, bred in that Isle over against Pachynus a promontory of Sicily; some of them short, some long haired, with shagnecks. Blondus prayses the black, and white ones, now the red, and white are cried up. As big as a wild weasle. They keep and feed them in baskets to keep them little. They are dainty of food. If they whelp more then once, they dy on a sudden. That they may be whelped shaggy, they strew the place where they ly with woolly fleeches, that the bitches may have them ever in ey. At Lions in France they are sould for ten pieces. In Bononia for four hundred pound. They are womens delights.

Hunting-dogs,Ambr. ib. c. 4. or Hounds are almost everywhere. Those are best that are bred in Hircania, between a Bitch, and a Tiger, and those of Epire, and the region of the Molossi, and Chaonia. The Persian are stoutest, and fleetest; The biggest are in Thebeth.Megastenes. Those in the Province Gingue, are so bold, they dare venture to fasten on a Lion. The writers of Husbandry, shew how to breed such. Alphonso King of Naples prized them, and the great Cham of Tartary keeps five thousand of them. They are diversly distinguished. In relation to the sundry wild that they hunt, or chase; there are

Hare-hounds, and little Badger-dogs; some good at a fowl, that hunt them softly into the nets; there are Water-spaniells; others are to bait great beasts, (as Bull and Bear-dogs.) In respect to places, there are those called Arcadian, Ausonian, Carian, Thracian, Iberian, Hungarian, Argive, Lacedemonian, Tegeatians, Sauromatan, Candian, Celtan, Magnetian, Amorgan, Hounds. If you regard their colours, there are ash-coloured, hony-colour'd, yellow, white, black. The white are somewhat afraid of the water, and will not willingly take water. Those with black spots are thick, and tender-footed. The ash-coloured, or russet, are strong set, and bold, but slow-footed. The black are stout, but not so fleet as the white, being lowthighed. Men choose a Hound by his eager looke, great head, hanging upper-lip, red-eyes, wide nostrills, sharp teeth, thick neck, broad breast, lion liked.

That is the best Hare-hound, Id. Ib. [...] . 3. c. 5. that is long, and plain-headed, sharp-eared, behind strait, and little; the upper-lips not hanging over the lower, long and thick necked, copped breast, strait guts, high, and lean thighs, tayl not thick, nor too long, not alwayes yelping. Some of them go out a hunting of themselves, and bring Hares home; they call them Tumblers. There are as many sorts of wind, or sented, as of hounds. In Scotland are three kinds; some bold, and very fleet. Some will catch fish. Some red, and black-spotted, or black, and red-spotted, are lime-hounds, that will hunt out theeves and stolen goods, and take rivers to chase them. The English, and Scotch, usually breed such blood-hounds up, and count him a theef, who is sky of letting them, have accesse where ever they would hunt, though into their bed-chamber. Such a lime-hound must be low,Blondus. flat-nosed, neat-mouthed, the hind-thighs of one length, not big-bellied, plain-backed to the tayl, dangling eares, quick eyes. The Brittish, Spanish, Gnosian, and Tescan excell. There is the Village, and Shepheards Dog. The white Dog is approoved, being better distinguished from the Wolf. Among the Turks no one master owns them, nor come they into house;Bellon. obset. l. 3. c. 40. they lay in yards on mats. Of old the Romans kept five hundred of them, to keep their stables. We read little about the Warre-dogs, and the useles Curres. England breeds some that theeves, murderers, and traitors breed up for their cursed purpose, and some that thirst after royall blood this very yeare. Such the Spanjards in battell against the Indians, which they feed with mans flesh, to train them to hunt men. Vazquez Nunnez used them in stead of hangmen. The Indian Dogs in America,Nierem. H. E. l. 9. c. 36. are a new breed, yet almost like ours in nature, qualities & shape. The Xeloitzevintly is great, most what above three cubits, without hair, sleek-skinned, with yellow, and blew spots. Another sort they call from the country Itzcevinteporzotli, michva canem; like those of Malta, white, black, and yellow, a litle misshapen, yet sportive, pleasing, fawning, with an ugly bunch, sticking out from the head and shoulders, having almost no neck. A third kind is the Tetichi, not unlike ours, but with a surly looke. The Indians eat him, as the Thracians of old.Sextus. Empyr. Diocles the Physitian, of the Asclepiad Schole, prescribed Puppies-flesh to some Patients. But the Cozumellol are a dainty with the Indians, they fatten them as the Spanjards Conies, and geld them, to fatten the sooner: and keepe many bitches to breed, as shepheards with us, for want of children they foster these, and are found of them. The Alco is a little Dog, they are much taken with, they pinch themselves to feed them; travell with them on their shoulders, or in their lap; never are without them. They have also dogs like Foxes, that never barke; bred in the Isle Cozumella. If you strike them,Ovie [...] s. they will not complain, nor cry. These are called in Hispaniola, Calamitan frogs, spawned like Vermine by nature; no need of an after [...] birth dogs thin skin, nor Hares-dung, nor hair. Pliny superstitiously seekes after them, to strike dogs-dumb. In Hispaniola are little dogs, that grumble onely, a [...] d bark not, they taste well. In Quivira, they lay packs on their greatest Dogs.

CHAPTER II. Of the Cat.

THe Cats Latine name is Felis, Ambro. l. 3. c. 10. comes from Phaelos, Salmas. in Solinus. Name. cozener-deceitfull impostor; or Ailis, flatterer; in the Aeolick dialect, Phailis, called catus, Cat from cautus, wary. In Greeke Ailouros, from flattering with the tayl. A knowen beast found almost everywhere. At first probably wilde. The greatest,Place. all say, are bred in Iberia, among the Tartessians; they feed on flesh, fish, Mice,Food. birds, snakes, and kill toads. In Cyprus they hunt Vipers, and Chameleons. They ly in wait also for leverts, and spare not their owne kind. In Bononia they are known to play with kitlings,Ambr. and then rend, and eat them. They live six years, sometimes ten; the gelded longer.

In Europa they go a caterwalling most what in January,Plin. l. 1 [...] . c. 63. and February.Gendring. Arist. In India all the year long. The females in gendring ever wawl, whether for pain, or that the Hee scratches them. He stands, she lies. The shees are most lustfull. They kitten after two months or six and fifty dayes. The march breed is prefered; those in August not, for the fleas. They kitten five, or six at once. The Shee is fondest of the kitlins; the Hee oft kills them to make the Shee covet others, and affect him. They hate mice,Sympathy. toads,Antipathy. serpents, Fox-geese, eagles, rew, their own gall, sweet smells, and wet. With rew you may drive them from your Dove-cotes, sents of ointments sometimes make them run mad. Duck them a while, and you drown them. On the contrary, they willing rub themselves with setwol, and delight in mint. The

Shee casts her kitlins,Valerian. Mizal. Cent. 4. if her male mate be killed. We meet with singular passages about their qualities. Cats eyes wax, and wain with the moon; nay the sun, and stars, breed changes in in their ey-balles.Nature. In the morning they are stretched out, at noon are they round, at sunset, duller. Cardan imputes it to want of muscles, that they cannot govern their eyes as they list. They glister by night. Carry them in a bag far from home, they come back again. They stay in the old house, though you remove. They love to be stroaked; subtile they are:Plin. l. 10. c. 73. How slily they steal upon birds. How softly they tread, and catch mice; how they watch them. They bury their own dung, knowing that the sent discovers them, some, especially in Spain, Holland, Brabant, eat them, as tasting like Hare. Their breath is pestilent, and breeds consumptions,Bruier. and no mervail, for the brains are ranke poyson, and made an Uratislavian Girl mad, as Weinrichius (I thinke) relates.Porta Phys. l. 5. c. 25. In Phisick they have place. The ashes of the head burnt in a pot, and blown into the eyes, clears them; the flesh sucks weapons out of the body,Galen. and eases emrods,Sampl. 11. and back-ache; the liver burnt to powder easens the stone, the gall fetches away a dead child, the fat is smeared on gouty parts; the pisse stiled helps the thick of hearing, the dregs of the paunch with rosin, and oyl of roses in a suppository, stops womans flux of blood. Some mince the flesh, and stuf a fat Goose with it, and salt, and rost it by a soft fire, [...] ony [...] us. and distill it, and annoint gouty joints with successe. The fat keeps iron from rusting, nothing better.

There are tame,Differences. and wild, and outlandish cats. Among the tame, the Spanish are greediest, nimblest, and have softest skins. Among the exotiques, or outlandish the Syrian are cheefe, and divers, round mouthed, strong big-breasted, large footed, and content with a little meat. The wild are bigger then the tame, their hair thicker, and longer, dark-coloured, the tail thicker. They feed on birds, and other living things.Scal. Ex. 217. [...] . 9. Perfume of rew drives them from trees. In Malabar they live on trees, nothing so fleet as they. They are best at leaping, and even fly without wings. They stretch forth a thin skin from afore to behind, when they would fly, and then draw it together, and hover in the air; when they rest, they draw it up to their belly. There is also a kind of cat in India, black-haired, here, and there bright hairs, the muzzle long,Nierem. H. E. l. 9. c. 30. ears small, thighs short, the tail streakt, and striped with black and white. The powder helps feavers. Then there are monstrous cats, one sort hath misshapen, another six feet. In Singui is a beast like a Cat,M. P. Venetus [...] . 1. c. 62. haired like a Deer, with many toes, two teeth in either chap, of the greatnesse of two fingers, having a fleshy bladder near the navell, full of blood, senting like musk. We have put the print of it down, like a Cat, very coped-headed.

In dissecting a Cat are found these observables.Anatomy M. Aurel. Sever. The milt resembles the lower part of an oare. The neck of the gall-bag hath very swoln veins;Zootom. Demo. p. 4. c. 309. at the bottome come down streight veins running outward, two sinews are on the sides of the sharp artery, on either side one, descending to the upper-mouth of the stomack, sending also branches to the said sides of the sharp artery. The said sinews are knit by one common nerve descending awry; then are set into the left side of the stomack, tied by many strings, where the sharp artery first parts appeare great kernels, and some small ones white, red, ash-coloured, mixed. In the sharp artery are half circles, parted as in man, but behind wrapped in a double coat; the one outward, and fleshy, the other inner, and sinewy sprouting from the circle-brims. In the heart are lappets-party-coloured, the right more spotted with black, and white, then the left; besides the right is thicker, and rounder, the left slenderer, and longer, like the dogs, both hollow, and stringy. In the right creek of the heart is fold, like net-worke, longer, and plainer to be seen then that in the dog; but not with such laps. The great artery is almost in the midst of the heart, inclining to the left side. The inner-coat of the stomack is rough all along, like the plaits in an oxes paunch, turning up into a round. Those tunicles are very fast, tied to the upper orifice of the stomack; the pleats ly crosse. The Liver is coloured like that of the dog-fish. In the eare-bone a shell, a maze, a little window, a ring, a round muscle, three small bones, and a stirrop, but not bored through. In the brain are three creeks,Casserius. two round with net-folds. In the eye the uvea or thin skin, cleaves not afore to the cornea, or horne-tunicles, whence the lesse dilatation to this greater kinde; in that part is the uvea, coloured like a pale leaf. The optick nerve is almost in the midst, inclining downward, the outter thick skin somewhat covering the eye, as in the Cock. In the Heecat we observe, that there is something peculiar about the spermatique vessels, testicles, &c. A white streake, the third part of a finger broad, descending by the right side of the paunche, lies under the muscles of the Peritonaeum; the membrane is very thin; the Peritonaeum under the ensie forme, or sword, is fat. The Kall is very fast, tied to one right liverstring, and to the spleen, and stomack, and the gut duodenum, like a purse, or bag. The bladder fastened above to the Peritonaeum, and below to the streight gut. The stones are covered with foure skins; the outmost called scrotum; the next dartos, the third, erythroides, or the red; the fourth is the inmost. There is somewhat also considerable in the vessells preparing, and conveying the seed, &c. Wee saw the uriteres descending from flat, or hollow of the reins to the bladder-neck: also the milk-veins, tending toward the bunchy-part of the reins, both sprouting from the body of the hollow-gut, but the left is higher then the right, and all most twice as long. The straight-gut is tied to the beginning of the tayl by a middle-string; it hath veines, and sharp kernels.

Wee saw the mid-rif, and meseraicks, and sweetbreads, being a kernelly substance. Wee saw the blind-gut a thumb-breeth long; the other guts are uniform, but winding, and brittle. The reins large, bigger then a great nut, wherein are a few creeks, through which the pisse is strained. We saw the vein porta with it's meseraick, and Spleen-branch; hereout sprouts the coeliacus; a branch compassing the stomack, and conveys the melancholy humour thither to provoke appetite. We saw the vein ascendent, pearcing the mid-rif, and reaching the heart, and set into the right side thereof. Wee saw the peerles vein-branched from the hollow vein by the heart, and turning backagain, and descending by the backbone on the right side, which sends forth sprigs to the ribs to nourish them. The liver is distinguished by six strings, out of the midst of two of them on the right side goes the gall forth; the bottome shews like a bolt-eye. The gall-bag hath two branches, the one passes from the liver to the duodenum, carrying the dregs away. The other running back to the bladder, to be kept there. In the duodenum, foure fingers below the pores called cholidochi, is found a worme, little, but of the bignes of the ureteries: from the sides of the ascendent hollow veine, descends a sinnew to the fleshy ringlet of the diaphragm; and another on the left side proped with the thin skins of the sharp artery, conveying feeling to the diaphragm. We saw the turnagainsi news, which propagated from the sixth conjugation of sinews, are set in at the head of the sharp artery; the one on the left turning upward about the great artery; the other about the branches of the arterie, tending toward the throte; the heart with a double lappet on the right, and left side, the right is greatest, and blackish; the left of the colour of the heart. The heart hath a right venticle to beget vitall spirits, and a left one whether the veinblood is conveyed, and it hath foure large vessells; the first is the hollow ascending vein, which is set into the left eare; the third, the arteriall vein, containing blood, having a double coat, whence it hath the name; this is set into the lungs, to nourish them. The fourth is a vein-artery, set into the left ventricle of the heart, to convey to the brain blood, prepared there, to beget animal spirits. In the right venticle are lappets, or partitions, which keep in the blood, and so in the left. The lungs have six fins. Wee saw the inner-muscles about the larynx, or the head of the sharp artery, which being inflamed, breed a squincy. There are kernells in the yard like a Cats-tongue. Wee marked the passage, leading to the bladder. The Cats brain-pan hath red streaks like veins; the inner-eare is rarely fashioned, whereof they have such use to listen, and looked, and prey by night. Herein we marked the communion between the great artery, and the great vein, where the first parting is into the bowels.

I beleeve it is common to all living creatures what I observe in the tame Cats-back bone, for with the own membranes, it being covered at the end, that which answer the hard menynx, the inner sends forth nerves from it self, but since there are companies of them, like strings, we note that they having passed a little way, meet as in one knot, as we in top of grain. And, since those severall strings are covered with the same skins, if you strain one, you spoyl the other, till they come to the knot. In one rib of the house cat was noted a round knob, like a tree-knot, the midst whereof being broken asunder was porose, and full of pits with drops of blood. My fellow dissecters doubted whether it was the breach of a bone in anatomizing, or some error in the first shaping, and superfluous stuffe. In a man on the flat part of the forehead bone, that lies between the two eybrows ly equally on the right root of the nose: Bruize but that bone, or peirce it, you find two long pits, passing sidelings above under the skull, and below blind ones with partitions. These are doubtlesse the chambers of smelling, where the breath is, as also in the ear, which is but of late discovered. That which strengthens my opinion is, that in a hound these cells are broader and more conspicuous then in man; dogs excelling in sent. This is not found in a Monky, perhaps because he needs not excell in that sense.

THE NATURALL HISTORY OF THE FOURFOOTED BEASTS.

THE FOVRTH BOOKE. Of the Fourfooted Creatures that have toes, and spring of an Egge.

THE FIRST TITLE. Of the skined ones.

CHAPTER I. Of the Frog.

ARTICLE I. Of the VVater-Frogs.

THus far of the Fourfooted beasts that bring forth living broods;Ambr. Digit. Ovipar. l. 1. c. 1. those that lay egges follow. These are either skined, or shelled: Those that are covered with skin are the Frog, Lizard, Salmander, Chamaeleon, Crocodile, &c.

The Frog is either the water, or Land-frog. Called Rana, Name. Isid. either from the summer-croaking ra, ra, or the Hebrew [...] , that is, to cry out. In Greek Batrachos,

[...] . Varin. Described. from his shrill voyce, and Boox, &c. By the Cypriots Brouchetos; the Ionians Bathrakos; the Phocians Brianchone; by those of Pontus Babakos; by the late Greeks Bordakos, and Gurinos, and Brinoi, and Parphusides, from their puffed-cheeks with croaking. It is an Amphilium, living both in water, and on land; afore not fleshy but behind; the hinderlegs nature hath made thick, and longer the fore-legs. They have five toes long, skined between, to help their swimming. The Shee is biggest;Arist. they have no neck, the belly white, the tong, as infants tied afore, but loose by the throat,Plin. the milt small, the liver imparted into three laps,Bellon. whereunder on each side part of the lungs is seen, frothy, not very bloudy; the guts knotly, the testicles, and other parts like those of other beasts.

In England are no green ones,Place. but they abound in Germany, Italy, especially in Bononia. They swarm so in the waterish places of Egypt, that they would destroy all, if the storks did not devour them. They are said to be dumb in the Island Seriphus, and Cyrene, perhaps because the water is cold. They are in streams, but delight in puddles where bulrushes, reeds, and sea-gras grows. They are ever found in the waters that never freeze, but not in brimstony, or mare-waters, they being too clammy. They eat any creature that swim,Food. Arist. H. A. l. 9. c. 40. Gendring. Arist. Ib. l. 5. c. 3. Plin. l. 9. c. 51. Arist. Ib. l. 7. c. 14. Antipathy. are greedy after Bees, & dead Moles. Probably they eat herbs also. The male covers the female, which layes egges after, and oft black flesh, with fair eyes, and tail, and after they get the Frogs shape, the tail being parted into two hinder-legs. Strange it is that after six months living they are indiscernably resolved into slime, and again reingendred in the spring puddles. But some in warmer waters last all winter, and in spring the old ones swim about. The egges are shed about the banks of pones, and marishes, hanging together as in a string, like black bits of flesh; Chymists call it spermas, or spawn. They hate Storks, Swans, the Buzzard, the Salmander, Putter, Pike, Eel, and fire. Storks devour them. The Swan by eating them cures himself of a certain malady. They combate oft with Salamandres.Glyca. It is well known how the Pike, and Eel swallow them. Kindle a fire by night on the banks where they are, they croke not, nor stir, you may easily take them in your hand.Mizald. Their voyce is brekekex, koax, koax, croaking; Aristotle calls the noyse the hees make in coupling time ololygon, Cent. 9. Memora [...] . Voyce. hurt them, they squeak like a mouse. About Cyrene they are mute. (But bring crokers thither they abide so.) In Seriphus also, and a certain lake of Thessaly they croke not;Plin. their flesh is loose, whitish, moyst, and subject to rot,Arist. H. A. l. 8. c. 28. so that they that oft eat them grow wan, and feverish: their lips are so close in August, that you can hardly open them; they ly with the

belly above, and the sides under water. If you stop their breath you choak them.Aelian. l. 3. c. 37. Nature. Ael. l. 9. 13. Plin. They love warmth, and therefore croke in summer, against winter they skulk. Busbequius heard them by Strigonium in December, the waters there being warm, and sulphurous. They are clamorous against rain, either because they feel it colder, or are much taken with sweet water. They can dive long having but small lungs. They are thought to dy in winter, and revive at spring. They lurk also in the ground, and come with their young abroad then. They couple by night, and on land, not for shame but fear. In Egypt, when they see the water-serpent, they carry a piece of reed thwart to prevent being swallowed up.Plin. l. 8. c. 29. In France they drove away a whole city. To know their sex, prick the back with a needle, from the Hee shall spurt out red blood; out of the Shee yellow water. Galen hath omitted their use in food. The common opinion is that they are light of disgestion,Use. yeeld good juice, but cold, and moyst. The Romans never used them, but now from May to October they are eaten roast, or boyled all but the head; the hips are best liked. Mundella counts them most harmlesse of cold things, and when they gender not. Others forbid the eating as venemous. See how to dresse them in Ambrosine.Amar. Lusit. In Physick both in whole and parts they help against sundry maladies. They remove the blewnesse after blows.Galen. l. 9. Tied on the jaws they ease tooth-ache, and sod in vineger they fasten loose teeth. The juice removes squincy, and helps the almonds of the ears, and abates swellings. The soft pulpis given against tisick,Porta. with Capons-flesh, Pine-apples, and Sugar; Boiled in oyl easens pain in the sinews. Against every poysonous bite it is cried up; the ashes stanch blood, Galeatius of S. Sophia saies it was tied to a Hens-neck,Dioscor. Aetius. l. 13. c. 55. Habdarrham de propriet. an. c. 41. Plin. l. 32. c. 10. Villanovanus. which being after cut off, there gushed no blood out. Some blow it into the nostrils for the Haemorrhagia, and with oil of Lilies kept in an leaden box, for the Interemta, and with conserve of Roses to helpe the writhing of the countenance. Ambrosin shews how to prepare the oyl. It is also cried up against joynt pain from a hote cause. The eyes men hang in fine linnen about the neck of the ill-sighted; the heart bound on the heart allays burning feavers, and hath helped fistulaes; the lungs taken out through the back, wrapped in an cabbage leaf, and burnt in a pot is given in the falling sicknesse, others take the liver. It helped the Elector Palatine. The dust of the liver some take, as a quartan fit comes, lay it afore pis-mires, and that part that they desire is an antidote against all venome;Plin. l. 32. c. 5. the gall helps the bloody flux, and kills worms in old sores; the fat drop'd into the ears removes pains; the Spawn is good against the Erysipelas and other inflammations, emrods, scab, itch, morfew; the water helps the rednesse of face. A staffe on which a Frog shaken from a serpent hath been eases women in travell.Q [...] ercetan [...] s. Pliny relates fables about the tongue; as that Democritus saith that if you take the tongue clear out, that it touch not any other part, and throw the Frog into the water, and lay the tongue on the panting of the heart of a sleeping women, she shall in her sleep answer you all you ask.

Some spring from egges, some out of mud,Differences. Diod. Sicul. as in Egypt. There are green, and pale, and ash-coloured Frogs. In Stochornium a hill in Bern are two lakes, wherein are Frogs with great heads, and long tails.

ARTICLE II. Of Land-Frogs.

POINT I. Of the Toad.

CAlled Bufo from blowing perhaps;Ambr. l. 1. c. 2. Name. [...] . and Rubeta from being among bushes, Phronon, and Phrunen, the poyson running to the head, and causing giddinesse, or from the shrub Phruganon. By Lucian, Phusalos from swelling, if but touched. It is thick skined, [...] . Arist. Plin. Described. hardly to be pearced by the sharpest stake, pale, spotted, as if pimpled, the belly swoln and pufd, thick-headed, broad-backed, without hair. One sort lives on land, and in marishy puddles. The phansy shady,Place. Plin. rotten holes. There are none in Ireland; bring any thither (they say) they dy, sprinkle but irish dust upon them.

They feed on earthy moysture, herbs, worms,Food. bees. It is said they eat so much earth a day, as they can grasp with the forefoot. They lurk oft under sage; there are sad stories of divers dying with tasting sage leaves, [...] . whether they eat it, or no is not known.

They are bred out of egges, and rotten stuff;Mizaldus. and out of buried ashes; and in Dariene, from the drops falling from slaves right hands, as they water the floor,Pareus l. 20. c. 24. Generation. Pet. Mart. Port. Nat. Mag. l. 2. Sympathy. and from a duck buried; and from menstrue, we read of womans voiding toads.

They hold enmity with salt, for being sprinkled therewith, they pine away to the bones, if we beleeve Albert. Strong sents, as of rew, &c. drives them away, as also of a blooming vine. They fight with Cats, and dy for it; Moles, and they devoure each other. A Spider strikes him dead at a blow.Sympathy. They love Sage, Weezels will slide into their mouths. Plantan is their antidote against Spiders.Plin. By day, and in winter they skulk, and ly in the paths by night, and rome about;Nature. they hate the Sun-beams. Hevygated they are; sometimes they leap.Agrico. Strike them, they swell, and spurt poyson out behinde, and then certain stinking drops. They infect Sage, and make it as deadly as wolfbane; they cry, or croak gru, gru. When they crawl about in the evening, it presages rain.

Their poyson is not much, nor strong;Poyson. Albert. especially of those in colder regions, but in hotter, stronger. The very salt wherein a

toad dies, melted in water, so infects it, that wet a rag, or shirt with it, it brings an incurable scurf. If you would take it off, either prick the skin, or whip it, or prick the outside, and cast it into water. One poysoned swells, looks wan, sighs, is shortbreathed, and taken with seed-flux; sometimes with the bloodyflux, inflammation of throat, and giddinesse. There was one, who with the cane, that pearched a toad, so venome his hands, that he vomited up the meat he had handled, and never ceast spewing, till hee took his meat from others hands; they who scape death, most commonly shed all their teeth.

For cure,

[...] . 3. men use River-crabs, stamped and drunk; and toads-ashes, and right Harts-horn, breast-milke, fasting spittle, reed-rootes, the herb poterion, or phrynion, taken in wine, Malta earth, Emerald, triacle, and without oyl of Scorpion. Some cry up the toads-stone; adds Mithridate, and the quintessence of Treacle.

As harmfull as the toad is, [...] . and venemous, it helps against venome, and otherwayes usefull. [...] . Some seeth it in a plain pot with Bears-grease for the joynt-gout. Boyled in oyle, men annoint with it, swellings with successe. Cut it up, and clap it to the reins, it provokes urine; which also cures the dropsy. Boyled, and made into a playster, helps the Squincy; the string also whereon it is hanged.

The inner-fat, (and stuffe one Laureola-root, and Hens-dung, [...] . salt, and oyl of Dialthaea) dropping from it, when roasted, is good ointment for a fistula; also the powder thereof roasted to a cole. Dried in the shadow, and wrapt in a linnen, and held in the hand, it stanches blood; the ashes prevents the emrods overbleeding.

Nicolaus makes a playster thereof. Others hang it dried about the neck, for an amulate against the pest. Crollius sprinkles the dust of it on all venemous bites. Some against a Cancer, take a thick toad, weigh it, and take Crabs alive of the same weight, and dry them to dust over a soft fire in a plain pot, leaving a litle hole for vent. Helmond was taught by Butler of Yreland, out of a toads-carcasse, and earth, and those small creatures, that he uses to vomit out in three dayes, hanging by the fire into a waxen-platter,Helmon. [...] p. 76. makes pellets with the gumme tragacanthus, and that dish, and hangs them at the left pap, to repell contagion, and draw out the venome; the older, and more used, the more powerfull; the toad taken in July, after-noon. He tooke some also at the waining of the Moon in July, whose eyes swarmed with white worms, with black heads; so at least, as if both eyes had been turned into worms; they clinged thick together in either eye, their heads sticking out; and as any endeavoured to come forth, the toad with his paw hindered it. Hee vomited flies with shining wings, handsome, and greenish; and by and by, after died of vomiting. The feet of a living toad, when the Moon is in the last quarter, being cut off cures neck swellings, if they be hanged on of the toad-stone hereafter.

In the new world,Use in meats. in the Isle Peragua a Spanjard for hunger, ate boiled-toads, saith Pet. Martyr in his Decades 3. l. 10. And Lerius, that the Brasilians eat them roasted, and never unbowell them; they give a burnt-toad to their Falcons, to prevent the moth-eating of their feathers. There are that shut a toad in an earthen-pot, and hide it amidst their standing corn, to prevent blasting in tempests; to omit the foppery about the right side-bone; they are differenced from place, shape,Difference. and bulk. For place, some are found in and about sacred places, and things. In Sneberg, and Mansfield, bring them out, they swell, and dy.

At Tholouse was one with white spots,Place. found in a red sand-stone. A Mason of Antwerp found one in marble. Agricola saith, they are in those they make mill-stones, and afore they shape them, they had need looke well, if they lurk not therein. About the shape, and bulke, writers mention many things;Shape. as of a bunchbacked toad; see his figure hereafter, &c.

POINT II. Of the green small Frog, and the temporary Frog.

THe green Frog is very small.Ambrosin. Ovied. Ind. p. 608. Gesner. Ambr. l. 1. c. 3. Plin. Isid. Names. [...] . Some call them calamites, from their being among reeds, and canes; some agredula, or field-frog, some wood-frogs; they delighting much to be there; or as to difference them from the green Frog that men eat. The Greeks call it Kanthis, from croaking against rain; and Druobataes, from their skipping amongst trees; and Diopetaes, as dropping from the sky; and Brexantes, from croking.

It is all green throughout, except the feet. It is usefull against many griefs.Described. Ambr. p. 622. Use. Plin. Sylv. Guiner. Timoth. Marcellus. Spit into the mouth, it helps a cough: Held in the hand, it allays a burning-feaver. Some Cran-hens with puls of barley-meal, and the flesh hereof boyled, and give the hen to those in hectique feavers; some cut it in the midst, and apply it to the reins in dropsies, to fetch out the water. The liver tied in a Cranes-skin, makes lusty. The fat is good for tooth-ach. The blood dropped in, where hairs on the cheeks have been plucked out, keeps them from growing againe. Some prick the Frogs with a copper pin, and annoint those places with the blood. The temporary Frog hath the name from its short life.

CHAPTER II. Of Lizards.

ARTICLE I. Of the common Lizard.

CAlled Lacertus, Ambr. l. 2. c. 4. p. 623. Id. Ib. c. 5. Name. [...] . Difference. In Arist. H. A. & 204. because it hath armes, and hands, that it bends, and turnes like a man. In Greeke Saura, Smulla, &c. Leaving Pliny, who writes of rusty, iron-coloured ones, and Scaligers division into lesser, and greater; wee shall distinguish them in common, green, and brasse-coloured, and Brasil, or Indian ones. The first have five very small toes, with nails in the foote, and hinder-feet; the thumb short, the fore-finger longest, the tongue hairy, and cleft; dry lungs, small and round milt, testicles, cleaving to Spondyls;Plin. the secrets of the Shee, like a fowls; and the egs so lying, and fenced. There are store in Italy, great in Capreae;Arist. and so common in India, that they creep into the beds there sometimes. Those of Arabia are a cubite long; in Nysa an Indian Hill, foure and twenty foot long, and yellow, or blew. They inhabite commonly graves,Albert. Place. Lin. chot. Plin. dens, thorny places, and ruined heaps. At Genua in the Prince of Doria his Fort, wee saw very many in the open ayr. They eat flesh, herbs, bees, antz; they gender about the end of March; they close as one body like serpents, they lay egs,Arist. and hide them in the earth, and the young come abroad; (though they sit not on the eggs) at set times.Food. That they bring forth at the month,Gendring. and devour their broot all, but the one slug is a fableArist.. They hate the stork, that feeds her young with them, and spiders with their webs, intangle young Lizards in holes, and crevises of walls, and strike them dead, also toads, Scorpions, and Serpents, with which they fight; whence called Ophiomechi. They love flesh of shellfish, and dittany,Sympathy. which is their refuge after combating with Serpents; and man they lvoe, and protect him from serpents. They will lick the spittle out of your mouth greedily:Scal. In time they loose their fight,Erasm. Disposition. Aelian. Arist. and recover it againe, either by course of nature, or by the sun, in whose beams they ly lurking till they be recovered. They lurk the six winter-months under ground, and there lay up store. The female is greatest. They go in couples, and defend each other; and are mad at any that take their fellow. They forget the eggs they lay; cut an egge in two, it is not lost, by reason of the glewy humour; they naturally cleave again,Plin. Aelian. l. 9. c. 58. Theocr. as may be seen by the scarre. Their tayle are said to grow again, though oft cut off. It is not true that a dried one turns Viper. At Paris have been seen some as big as a great fish. Some have three tayls, and some two heads. Torn in twain, it cures a Scorpions bite, and eaten it is good against the Salamanders poyson. The oyl of them drowned,Schenck Use in Physick. Plin. and boyled in oyl with Sheep-dung, is a good anointment for swellings of the neck, and face morfew, and pimples. The powder with crematartar, and candy-oyl, helps dim sight; the green are best. The brain helps Syffusions.Diosc. M. M. l. 2. c. 58. The head bruised to a poultise, and laid on alone, or with long aristolochia, root of reed, bulb of Narcissus, draws out arrows, and thorns, stick they never so fast. The heart burnt, and mixt with dreges of wine, benums, that you shall not feel the chirurgions probe. The blood keeps rickets from growing, if you annoint infants-thighs carefully therewith; and is good, if they be bursten: the dung is put into the medicine for horses strangury. Kill one in a mans-pisse, it abates your lust.

ARTICLE II. Of the green, and the Brazen-coloured Lizard.

THe green Lizard, [...] Ambr. l. 1. c. 6. or Chloorosaura, is called also the Greater; and the Serpent-fighter, (they worstling serpents.) They haunt hote places, as Italy, where coming of many abroad at once presages a sickly time. In summer they bide in trees, and croak like frogs; and have two tails. The figure below shall save a labour to describe them. It is usefull in Phisick; ty it on thirty dayes for neck-swellings, and then change it. Childrens burstings are cured by a bite, then shoot him through with an arrow,Plin. and bloat him. Boyled alive with wine, and given fasting, it helps wheesings, and sod with oyl, face pimples. With tarre, and an old sows grease it takes away tendernesse of Horse-hoofs: It makes the hair black; [...] sran [...] . Hier [...] . And it renews hair. See in Ambrosine the ointment for the falling sicknesse. The ashes help exulcerated neck-swellings. The bones help them in a swound, after you powder him alive in a stone pot, and the flesh fall off.

There is a Lizard with brasse-coloured streaks down the back, called Ziglis, Chalcid. Ambr. l. 1. c. 7. Samiamithon, and Seps, a serpent, because the flesh it bites, rots, and Tarantula, but amisse. It resembles the small Lizard, and is coloured like the serpent Caecilia. It is bred, and lives among the stones in Syria, Lybia, and Cyprus. It beares young, as the viper doth, but carry egs in the belly, as other animals that lay egges. Fabius Columna killed one in a French camp, and cutting it up found fifteen young within her; some hath a thin transparent skin,Gal. Med. Simp. some none, cut it in two it cures a bite. Galen praescribes it among pickled meats.

ARTICLE III. Of Indian Lizards.

POINT I. Of the Senembi, or Igvana.

THere are many kinds of Indian Lizards; the most famous are,Marckg. H. Brasil. [...] 6. c. 11. the Senembi, or Igvana (the Portugees miscall it Cameliaon, and the Dutch worse, Legvan) long from the mouth to the tail end three foot, eight fingers, compasse ten fingers. The whole skin of a delicate green, with black, and white spots, chequered, like chamelet; it is scaly, the greatest scales are on the back, thighs, and tail, and here all equall. From the neck to the tail end a new of plain ones, like saw-teeth, and green; the head about two fingers long, and scaly; the scales greater then elsewhere; the neck a finger and half long, five thick, their eyes large, clear, and blackish, nostrills wide, the teeth many small, black, short; tongue thick, the head on each side black spotted, a gullet hanging as fish gills, or a crop down to the breast, most part blackish, that he can gather up, and let hang out, when vexed, or frighted. From the mouth to the crop it hath bristles, and on the back, it hath four thighs, and four feet, on each five toes, all scaly, the fore-thighs are shortest, and slenderest, four fingers long, and the middle toes shorter then those on the hinder-feet; the nayls black, and crooked, like bird-claws, &c. The hinder-thighs like a mans calf, the foremost not; the dock five fingers thick, and so the tail thinner and thinner, and ending like an aul. One being kill and flead, yet waged after, and the heart taken out leaped; it had in either side above ten egs, some as big as a cherry, some lesse; the fat plainly seen, as a Hens; in the stomack was much fruit, especially sweet Limons, which was the usuall food. They eat also meal and Mandioca-water. They can fast two, or three months together. The flesh is well tasted, boyled, and long fried with butter, it tasts as well as chicken, or cony. It hath heart, lungs, liver, gall-bladder, reins, bladder, genitals, as other beasts; a large liver, a double stomack, one afore, receiving the food, whence a gut as big as the little finger, and about ten fingers long, whereto is knit the other ventricle, that disgests food, hence passe the other to the strait gut. In the fore-stomack of one was found great store of Mandoa meal, and Angolas milt raw; the hindermost, the greater, was stuf [...] d with half disguested meat, whereto cleaved many mites, as in cheese; the last gut held the dung. Being flead, and the taile cut off, it stird yet, five or six strokes on the head could not kill it, till a cut was given in the neck; the tayl-flesh is stringy, and sinewy. Anno 1641. was a stone taken out of a Senembies stomack, as big as a reasonable hen-egge, and so shaped, but not so round, but squatter, without smooth, bright; within made up of coasts, like an onjon, to be pilled off; within it was bright gray, hard as a Bezoar-stone; they fit in trees, and are taken in lines, that the Brasilians know how to fit a club, which the beast spying, wonders at, but stirres not, suffring it self to be ensnared and taken, else he is very swift; the younger are all over green, the elder party-coloured,Fr. Ximenes. or ash-hewd. In their heads are sometimes found small stones, that lessen, and void the stones in the reins forthwith, either by the juice drawn out, of a dram weight; or tied to the body. It were good to try, whether those found in the stomack, have that vertue, or no.

POINT II. Of the Tejuguacu, Taraguira, and Americima.

THe Tejuguacu, Marckg. H. Bras. l. 6. c. 11. and Temapara Tupinambis, is a choyse Lyzard, shaped like the Senembi, with this difference, that this is all black, but sprinkled with goodly white spots, and toward the tayl seems to have white prickles. Next the tayl is thicker at the dock. 3. It wants those sharp bristles along the back. 4. The outertoe on the hind-feet, stands a little a loof from the rest, and is shorter. 5. It hath a long cloven tongue, red, smooth, which snake like, it can suddenly thrust out a finger long, and withdraw it. It yeelds no voyce, is patient, loves raw-egs, can fast long. The Markgrave kept one in his chamber, tied, and sometime loosed, gave it water out of a glasse; unlesse, when thirsty, it used to sit all day, moping in a corner. It loved to ly on hot ashes. One trod of a piece of the tayl, yet it grew two fingers after: In two month it ate not, and so pined to death; onely it sometimes licked in a litle water; the flesh was eaten.

The Taraguira of Brasil is a Lizard, in, and near their houses, common in their gardens, and everywhere; about a foot long, and some lesse: the body round, all full of three cornered ash-coloured scales: hath no crop under the chin, the back plain; they nod nirably with the head, when they spy any things, and run swiftly, and wagging. They wake a man, if they see any Serpent, or venemous creature, making toward him. As they couple, the Hee bites the Shee gently on the neck, and pulls her to his side.

The Brasil Americima, is a small Lizard, three fingers long, and no thicker any where then a Swans-quill; footed, and ledged as the Senembi; blacke-eyed, almost square-bodied, the back cloathed with ash-coloured scales, the sides with dusky ones: the head, legs, and tayl with blew ones, all bright and smooth, the toes like hogs-bristles. The Portugees say it is

venemous, and longs to suck the blood of women great with child; they report that if it but touch a woman, nay her cloaths, she never after conceives more.

POINT III. Of other Indian Lizards.

THe Carapopeba is with the Brasilians a venomous Lyzard,Marckg. H. Bras. l. 6. c. 12. three, four, five fingers long, shaped, as the other, with five toes on the fore, and four on the hinder-feet. It is all liver-coloured, with white spots, and on the tail white streaks mixt with yellow, eyes glistring, and like glasse. The Ameiva with the Brasilians, and the Tupinambi is everyway like the Taraguira; only this is forked tailed, ending in two strait horns. The Taraguico Aycuraba in Brasil is like the Taraguira, only the scales on the tail are small, and triangular at top, but the tip plaine, with four dusk spots, the back chamleted. The Brasil Tejunhana is as thick as your litle finger; coped-headed, black-eyed, with golden ringlets, fourfooted, three fingers long, the tail six fingers and an half long, round, and at the end sharp as a birds; the head scaly, sides, thighs above skined soft as silke, the tail hath fouresquare small scales, the head greater and duskish; the back and sides above shadowed with three streaks, and checkered, below green, above one green streak from the head to the thighs; there is another green streak at the parting of the dusk, and green; between the two streaks is a rank of green pricks in dusk, and under the lower green streak a rew of black spots in green; the thighs above wax-coloured with small dusky spots, below white the tail above wax-coloured, and also below, but mixt with white; the head beneath the throat and belly, bright, and blood-spotted; it hath a cloven tongue.

CHAPTER III. Of the Salamander.

IT is uncertain whence it borrows the name,Ambrosin. de Digit. ovip. l. 1. c. 5. Name. [...] . whether as Valincendra, from the ability to withstand fire, or as a sole lover of fire, or as Saulamandran, from quiet lurking, or as Selamandra, as living between the void spaces of sheep-coates, and caves; or (which is but too ridiculous) from Sela Mana Dera, from dimming brightnesse; or from the Arabique Saanbras, or Samabras, which is likely, but not sure. Pliny calls it a starry beast; Aetius a venemous Lizard.Stellatum. There are two sorts, the Land, and the water-Salmander. The Land one resembles the green Lizard, only the head,The landone described. and belly of this are thicker. It hath a short tail, it is black, spotted with clay-spots, but smooth, and transparant. Gesner found one on the Alps, all duskish, and dark, short-tailed, and striking it, a milky juice flowed out. Some in the Germane forrests have black backs, [...]  and red bellies. Some have long, and crooked tails, and claws. [...]  [...] Nic [...] . Some call it Liporrinon, because it is shining, and glistring, as if greased over. They haunt cold moyst, gloomy places.

In Dutchland are many found,Place. knotted together. They are oft seen about Trent, and in the Ananiensian vale.Food. Some thinke they breath only at the mouth, and so live, others write that they covet hony-combs,Gendring. bees, and milk, and annoy hives, and cows.Plin. l. 10. c. 68. Bellon. obs. l. 3. Pliny mistakes in saying they breed not, and have no distinction of sex; for some have seen their brood; they lay egges, wherein the young come to maturity. Whether it live in, or can put out fire, we shall hereafter inquire.Nature. They come abroad in rainy weather, and afore storms. It is never seen in winter,Cardan. rer. var. l. 7. c. 33. or summer; it is slow-gated. In Cumana, they crow. If you cut them in two, the forepart goes forward, the hinder moves backward. By nature it hates Frogs, and tortoyses, and fights eagerly with them. It is found venomous, whole families have been poysoned to death, by drinking the water, wherein one had falne. Nay, the fruit is thought deadly, whereon their spittle is sprinkled. They bite also to death,Plin. Aeans. Nican. as many testifie. Gesner was told, that, where the tooth once fastens, and bends, it is mortall to it, but he kept two at home, that were never prone to bite, if not provoked, nor heard hee of any in Germany, bitten by them. But in France the bite is deadly. And the Rhetians have a proverb, that, who so is bitten by them, needs as many Physitians, as the Salamander hath spots. Physitians use the spittle among their psilothra.Use. Kiranides hangs the hart, wrapped in a black skin, on the arme, against a quartan. Not to speake of the fables of girdles, of the skin, to quench fire.

The Water-Salamander, called the water Lizard,The water-one. Ambr. l. 1. c. [...] . Be [...] o [...] . and Cordulus, and the water-Scincus, or Crocodile, hath a broad tayl, and is of foure kinds. 1. That with a tayl like a Rhomlus, the tongue short, and broad; the teeth so small, you cannot see them, on the forefeet are foure, on the hinder five toes; the heart is spongy, and lies on the right side: whose left ear-lappet takes up the greatest part of the pericardium: the milt reddish, reins spongy, liver black, it hath egges in the belly big as peas,Agric [...] . lying orderly, whereout live young breake; the back hath ugly bumps on it, it is ash-colour, or dun. That Gesner dissected, was seven fingers long, black, with white spots on the belly, the rest spotted with black, and rugged. There is another sort with bright half circles on the back, and there is of those, the greater, and the lesser Salamander. The last is that of Matheolus, common among the Utinenses, the head rounder, and shorter. The Land-ones, tayled like the eel, black-backed with murry-spots; they love dark ditches, and fat soils, and ponds with white mud, there they cleave under stones, and seldome swim above. Gesner cast one into a tub of water, and it put forth the mouth. They are slow on ground, and

hold their mouths close shut, you must force them open.Agricola. Cast them into salt, they wagge the tayl, and dy. Beat them long, they live. The skinne so hard, a sword cannot pierce it. Out of the wounds comes milky matter. Provoke them, they swell, and start upright, and pour out poysonous sweat, and look wistly on the provoker. If a Sow eat one, shee dies.

CHAPTER IV. Of the Stellio.

THis goes for a Lizard, called Stellio from his starry marks; [...] 29. and in Greeke Askalalotaes, or Koolobataes, from the soft, and silent gate, and creeping through walls; and Galeotes, because Weesellike, it is ever climbing softly; there are divers kinds of them. That of the Greeks called Colotes, and Ascalabotes, it is full of spots, and hath a harsh voyce, and feeds on every thing. That of Italy, resembling Chamaeleon, living on dew, and Spiders, and is said to be venomous, as the other harmles. Hether referre the little white beasts like small Lizards, of a bright, and brittle-body, about Rome, called Tarantulaes;

[...]  but the small Lizard is silver-coloured, called Liakoni. In Gazara was seen a black Stellio, as big as a Weesel, great-headed, and big-bellied. We give below a Print of the Mat [...] oli, and Facetan Lizard. There are none in Germany, France, nor England, but in Thrace, Sicily, and Syria, and those more deadly then they of Italy. [...]  They keep in chinks of doors, and windows, and chimnyes. That that is foe to the Scorpion, is not in Italy bred. There are venomous ones. In winter they ly hid, and eat not. Like snakes they grow young again, [...]  they help the falling-sicknesse, they ly in wait for Spiders, and Bees, and hunt them, and Scorpions: they seldome bite, having bent teeth, which they leave in a wound; their bite benums, but seldome kills. The flesh plucks splinters out mans body, it cures its own bite, and putrified in oyl, cures the Scorpions bite. [...]  In Quartans, some layd it in a box under the patients head, to prevent the fit. [...]  The ashes held in the left hand, provoke, in the right, subdue Iust. The parts make sleepy, and benum; the liver-pounct eases tooth-ach, sprinkled on. The dung takes away warts, the older the better against epilepsy: drowned in wine, the wine drunke, breeds spots, or freckles on the face: the gall dissolved in water, gathers Weesels.

CHAPTER V. Of the Scincus, or Land-Crocodile.

THe Scincus, so called perhaps from Tinsa in the Arabique, [...]  is also called the land, or lesser Crocodile, either for being like, or for dreading Saffran. It [...] s of the bignes of a green Lizard, [...] ame. or the Salamander, fourefooted, a thumb thick,Dioscor. Bellon. Described. and not above a quarter long, the tayl round, and scaly; the scales small on the body, many, and clayish coloured; the head long, little thicker then the neck, the belly as it were winged, the tayl round, as of the Lizard, but shorter, and crooked at the end; a streak from head to tayl, Gesner saw one with five toes and nails, a thumb and half broad, two palms long; and another six palms long, at Constantinople. The are bred onely in Arabia about Mecha,Place. and are brought thence to Alexandria, and Venice. They live on sweet flowers, therefore no wonder their dung sents so, on dry ground they lay egges,Food. and bury them. The flesh is a great antidote. Rhasis uses to hang the young on those,Vse. that are frighted in their sleep. Pulverid, it makes lustfull; the same flesh helps the falling sicknes in India, and makes fat: The heart in black Sheep-wool, of a Lamb first yeaned, being worn,Plin. is thought to chase away quartan-agues. The gall with hony, is cried up against bloodshot-eyes: the reins increase seed; the blood with borax, smeard on the face, removes freckles; the fat helps reinpain: the ashes of the skin, some sprinkle on parts to be cut off, to make them lesse sensible. Aegineta of the tayl, make his oyntment Entaticon: out of the bowells is a perfume made against stopping of the matrix: the dung is antiepileptick, and clears the eyes, the best is the white, and mouldring, that soon melts in water:Plin. whores use it, to keep their faces sleek, and unwrinkled, as you bruise it, it smells like old leven. Of old it was sophisticated with dung of stares, fed with rice. The Indian,Differences Plin. and Arabian, are the biggest. In India is bred a beast like it, as great as a Malta Dog, with a rough scaly skin, called by the Indians Phatagen, happily it is the Candiverbera, or smitetayl. In Cyprus is a Lizard, everyway resembling the Scincus. In the Lake of Vicenza is a divers sort, a kind of Salamander. The Scincus Rhasis, hath a tayl not round, but flat, or squat about the sides.

CHAPTER VI. Of the Foure-footed Cordylus, and other Lyzards.

IT is like the fish Cordylus, called by some Latermen, the land-Crocodile; and the Candiverbera, Ambrosin. l. 2. c. 12. because it is ever whisking, and clapping with the tayl, which is like a knotted club, and beats all that come near him. Some say, he hath gils; but there hangs one in a publique library,Bellon. with onely two holes by the corners of the mouth. It is like a Crocodile, but lesse, and moves the under-jaw; headed, and mouthed like a Tortoyse, the neck short, and swelling below: each foot hath five toes, the body scaly, skin hard, like a snakes slough, tayl round, with scaly ringlets inexpressible; the scales are hard as bones, and fouresquare, hollowed a litle, to make the tayl

round, joyned like tiles, the corners sharp as thorns, they are transparant, and of a pale yellow, as horn; the belly struts out more then a Crocodiles; the back broad, and flat. This may proove Aelians Indian Phattages by the description, whose rough skin they use to cut with.

CHAPTER VII. Of the Chamaeleon.

TE name imports a little Lion; the notation from a Camel,Ambr. l. 1. c. 14. [...] Ovip. l. 1. Name. Described. Plin. l 8. c. 33. and a Lion is ridiculous; of late the wild call it Gamaleon, Zamaleon, Hamaleon, and Maleon. It resembles a Lizard, only the thighs stand uprighter, and higher; the sides are joyned to the belly, as a fish, and the back-bone such snouted like a hog; the tail long, and pointed, with rounds, viperlike, it is crooked clawed, it is rough-bodied as the Crocodile, the eyes hollow, and sunk, great, and coloured as the body; the flesh is but little about the head, jaws and dock, elsewhere, none; it hath blood only in the heart, and about the eyes; the bowells are without spleen. The lungs take up almost the whole body:Arist. H. A. l. 2. c. 11. Theoph. de mutant. color. Thus Arist. and Pliny. Others write, that from the midst of the head backward there sticks out a three cornered part bony, and the rest afore is hollow as a pipe, the brims on both sides sticking out bony and sharp as a saw-teeth: It moves not the ey-balls, it is ever gaping, hath a long tongue, like that of an earth-worm; at the tip is a spungy glewly knot, wherewith it preys. In stead of teeth and gums it hath one continued bone, knaged; the upper-lip is shortest, the throat, and artery like the Lizards; the heart as big as a house-mouses; the liver hath two lappets, the left greatest, the gall-bag as big as a barly corn, cleaving to the left liver-lappet, bowelled as a Lizard;Arist. Bellon. Gesner. the forefeet very different from the hinder; the forefeet having three toes inward, two outward, the hinder three outward and two inward: It is from the snowt to the dock seven, or eight fingers long, five fingers high; it hath about sixteen ribs bending between the bottome of the belly, and the ridge of the back, and it is spotted like a Leopard; the teeth stand comlily, he hath but one gut with bendings,Gassendus. the excrement moyst, unlesse near the fundament; the liver parted, & on the bunchy side pouring the blood into the hart that hath ears, and not veins; the lungs being puffed passes into a thin skin reaching round almost through the whole body; there is no rim at the belly bottome, onely a thin skin severing the right from the left parts: He hath no milt, no bladder, no reins to be seene, but small bits of flesh, that, it may be, are genitals; the tongue is near a foot long. They are in Asia, Africk, India, and Madagascar.Place. Bellon. obs. l. 2. c. 34. Food. Plin. l. 8. c. 33. They sit on the garden hedges at grand Cair by the banks of Nile; as also on bramble-bushes. Of old they were thought to live on air, but they prey on flies, locusts, but they fancy most the worms in meal tubs. They keep above for fear of serpents and vipers. They use their tongue as a trunk, darting it forth with that nimblenesse that you can hardly perceive it, by the means of a small forke bone planted on either side the ends of the jaws, the tongue is hollow, like a gut, which he can infold, and unfold at pleasure; at the end is a slimy bit of flesh to prey withall. Peirescius kept eight of them to observe their breeding, [...]

there were in one female within a thin skin above a hundred egges, some as big as an olive kernell, all yolk, no white seen in them, yet resembling milk. They hold enmity with the hauk, which will dy, it is thought, if he but tast a Chamaeleon, [...]  and a crew also, unlesse bay-leave fence him. The Elephant is fabled by Solinus to swallow them they being of the colour of the leaves, and they cost him his life, unlesse he help himself by wild olive. Fear of vipers, and serpents makes him live on shrubs, and trees. His spittle let down on a serpents head, [...]  like a limed thread, kills him. Wild figs make him wild, who is otherwise harmlesse. He turns his whole dy about, sits high, ever gaping, when dead hee is pale. In winter he hides himself, as Lizards use. By nature he admirably changes colour but in eyes, and tail, and whole body according to the colour of what lies next, except red, and white; yet Ambrosine affirms from a Gentlemans testimony that he changes to white. But Peirescius his eight changed not colour. Whether they be green, or ash they put on a black, if you turn them to the sun, or fire. It is strange, that their eyes being combined move not but one looking any way, the other is fixed, or bends the other way, which deflection comes from the four pullies in them, there being no distinction of Iris, but only a ball, wherein the horny part ends, which is glistring, and various, as the rest of the body. Those of Cochin eat them. They bind many together, and sell them, being bought, they are cast into the fire,Use in [...]  and roasted. Flea one, the flesh is very clear, which they seeth in a liquour like our butter. Sod away with oyl in a new earthen pot, it drives away an Epilepsy. It makes a rare oyntment for the gout; see the composition in Trallianus. The tongue hanged on helps memory, and women in child-birth: the gall stops fluxes. The hart wrapt in black-wool first shorn helps a quartan ague; to omit fables about raising storms, making mute, &c.Plin. l 2 c. 8. with the heart, tongue, &c. you must know it is Pliny, who, though learned, and usefull, studied too much to delight men.Difference. Bellon. In Egypt they are pale. In Arabia much smaller, and of another colour, as bright, yellowish, and red-spotted. Wee have given here the shapes of the pale, and black Chamaeleons.

CHAPTER VIII. Of the Crocodile.

HE is a kind of Lizard,Name. [...] . Kircher. [...] . 172. so called from dreading the shores. The Aegyptians terme him Chempsa, the Turks thence Kimsak. Kircher, Picharouki. Statius the Pharian wild-beast, others Tenchea. In Arsinoë, Suchus, in India, Cayman. It resembles a Lizard, it is of a Saffran colour, but white-bellied,Described. [...] . and there soft-skined, elsewhere musket proofe. Some have been seen six and twenty cubites long. By Panama there are some of above a hundred foot. The head is broad, the snowt as a swines, the gape reaches to the ears; the eyes sharp, and piercing, and like a hogs; [...]  he hath a rew of great, bright strong teeth, like a comb, about sixty in all; more in the upper jaw, and sticking out, seen when the mouth is shut. The tongue cleaves, and is uselesse. [...]  The under jaw he stirs not, the testicles cling to the inner-loyns. The back-bone is made up of sixty turning joynts, tied by as many sinews; the claws are very sharp bending somewhat toward the sides; the tail is of the length of the rest of the body, wherein is a finne of seven fingers to the end. [...]  M. Scaurus was first who in his Edil-ship shewed five in his plays in an Euripus made for the time. They are found in Africa, Asia, and America; [...]  especially in Nilus, and neighbouring pools; in Niger, in Ganges about Bengala, in the river Bambotus near Atlas, and not far from Chalcedon, but small ones, They love warm waters. In Peru are none till you come to Pacra, then they are frequent. Some live in miry plashes on fish, but are most greedy after mans flesh. They prey also on beasts on land. There was one taken that had swallowed three young ones. [...] . l. 2. About Arsinoë they were held holy, and nourished of old by the Priests with bread, flesh, and wine. Some gave them dainties, rost-meat, and mingled drinks. The Shee lays sixty egges, [...]  as big as Goose-egges, and by a kind of divination, where the Nile, when it swells, comes not. Shee lays and hatches sixty in sixty daies. [...] ndring. [...] . Gyllius hath marked that the young have crept out of the sand, where the egges have been hidden, the egges grow not greater. They hate the Ichneumon for spoyling their egges, [...] . and endeavouring to creep into their mouths, while they sleep, and gnaw their bowell; and the wild Ox, [...]  that can over-master them. The Tiger, because they teare them, when they take them lying on their backs, and hauks, and therefore the Coptitae, that worship the Crocodile, kill up the hauks. They that carry the gall of water-serpent are said to be safe from the Crocodile. They let the Porpisci alone for the prickles on his neck.

Dolphins get into Nilus under their bellies, [...] . and tear them up, Babillus, Gouvernour of Egypt, was eye-witnes of it. Scorpions wound the young, as they break out of the egge. They feare a mans voyce, and fly if a man pursue them;Sen. Nat. quaest. l. 4. Phil. the Tentyritae they hate, who dwell on an Isle in the Nile, a people of small stature, but couragious against Crocodiles, that are terrible in pursuit of those that fly them,Plin. l. 8. c. 25. and fly those that pursued them, but that people alone dare encounter them, and swim, and ride them, and thrust a club in their mouths, and as it were bridle them, and captivate them, and terrifie them with their very voyce, and force them to disgorge bodies, newly devoured, to bury them, so that Crocodiles shun onely that Island, and fly, if they but smell those men, fly them as Serpents the Psylli. When in Scaurus his time they were brought to Rome, Tentyrites kept, and managed them in shews, in fish-ponds. Among plants they avoid the prickled beane. Diverse use to carry Potamogeton with them as an amulet,Crescentiensis. Sympathy. Plin. or preservative against the Crocodile.

They agree well with the hogs, so that they are saved by the Niles, and with the Trochilus, (called king of birds in Italy,) that, while they ly gaping after eating, picks their teeth, and jaws clean; which the Crocodile likes so well, that they invite the bird, and gape on purpose. With eating of much fish, worms breed in their chaps,Leo Af [...]  l. 9. which the Trochilus eats out; which having done, the Crocodile would devoure the bird too, but that it hath a sharp prickle on the head, and makes him open his mouth, and so she scapes. By night they keepe in the water, by day on land; the same way they come forth of the water,Nature. Mart. Leg. bab. l. 3. Arist. they returne, keeping a track. Their legs are short, and they cannot easily turne aside, they leave a sweet sent, where they goe; especially the female, so that no Arabian sweets excell it,Aelian. as the Inhabitants by the River Nilus say foure months, some say fourty, some sixty dayes, they hide themselves, and eat not. Artemidore the Grammarian, was so affrighted with the sight of one, that he lost his wits, and learning, and verily beleeved, that the beast had bit off his left legge. When they feed on a mans carcasse, they with their teares, some say, break the brain-pan for the brain. They doe more harme to those that go up the stream, because the fishers catch the fish, they would prey on, and so ravine fiercely on man, and beast; and so after Niles overflow, when it returns within its chanell, for want of fish, in the shallows at the rivers mouth, where they lurk in the slime, watching for what ever comes to drink. They follow boats against streame, when the boatmen thrust with poles, and with their tayl strike man, and pole overbord. It is a tayl that they hurt no man,Plin. l. 11. c. 4. Scal. Exer. 196. Aelian. l. 8. c. 8. & 9. 3. while Apis, his birth is solemnized. Achmed Ben-Tolon; finding a leaden one at the foundations of Temples, commanded it to be melted. The Priests guesed, that one of the Ptolomees was near death, when their old, and cheef Crocodile being called, came not, and refused the meat, offered him. Being tamed, they know mans voyce, and will let men handle them, and

rub their teeth with a napkin, and gaped to that end. No wonder then that in the Ombitan Marshes, that they are brought up by art, and tamed, and fed with the heads of their sacrifices. In the town Anteum, and old woman was taken in bed with a Crocodile. Many learned say, they live as long as man, some sixty years,Gyllius Diod. Bibl. l. 9. c. I. Use. some eat them. The Apollonopolitae were bound by their law to eat them, either, because the daughter of King Psammenitus was devoured by one, or out of hate of the tyran Typhon, who was fained to be turned into a Crocodile.Herodot. Lopez. Leo Afr. c. 9. In Phisick. In India they roast them, and in Florida they dry them, and in winter feed on them. The egges also in the new world are eaten, and in Egypt. Sodden, they cure Spider-biting; the dogs-teeth stuffed with Frankincense, asswaged Fevers. The blood clears eye-sight, and helps stung-parts. The fat annointed on, is good against shaking in agues, and old sores, and cancer. The skinne burnt, mixt with dregs of oyl, stupefies à lirib, to be cut off, or feared. In India they cast delinquents, bound to Crocodiles.Baldus Itin. c. 35. In Pegu they keep them in their City-ditches, that no man may swim over in the night. The Inhabitants, because they worship them, drink the ditch-water; and beleeved that all killed by Crocodiles, fly strait to heaven. Firmus a Tyrant of Egypt, being annointed over with their fat, swam safely among them. Some are greater,Differences. Plin. Albert. Aelian. some lesser, as Scinci. Some called Tenchea. In Ganges, there are harmles ones, and harmfull, with a horne on the snout. In the Province of Xanagarra, they leave a sent like musk where they goe.

THE SECOND TITLE. Of the Beasts that have Toes that come of an egge, and are shelled.

CHAPTER I. Of the Tortoyse in generall.

HEe is called Testudo, from testa, his shell.Ambr. l. 2. c. 1. Name. [...] . Isidor. Described. Paucunius. In Greeke Chelis, &c. from Cheoo, to be capacious. It is no sightly beast, covered with an ovall shell, like a target, whereunder it hides head, feet, and tayl; the head litle, the tayl as a snakes, the looke rough. Severall writers give the shell severall names, as hided, covering, shell, &c. In Greeke Cheloonion, and Ostrakon:

[...] . In stead of teeth it hath one continued bone, the lungs are very large,Plin. and bloodles: Liver tainted, testicles cleaving to the loyns: milt very litle; they have reins, and bladder, and but one passage for excrement, Arist. l. 3. c. 8. which is therefore ever wet. It is footed like the Lizard, having five toes and nayls. Cardan saw one with a nayl in the tayl like a cocks-spur; and the tayl of such as of Lizards, cut off, grows again, and harder.Place. They are found on land, in Sea, lakes,Arrian. Mar. R [...] b. Herbe [...] . Itin. p. 349. Gendri [...] g. Arist. Plin. Aelian. or muddy places; they abound in the Red-Sea, and are sold in the Markets. They are in the Isle Dioscoris, now Socotora, and Mauritius, once Cerne: they meet to gender, as others that lay egges: they delight not in coupling: they lay egges like Henne-egges, but lesse, and longer, with shell, white, and yolk: the shell is so hard, that a Cart may drive over it, without bruising it;Nature, and qu [...]  lities. it never changes it, as other shelly creatures use. In winter-moneths they hide themselves in the earth, and eat not, comming forth, they creep slowly, whether from feeblenesse, or their nature. They are at variance with Partriges and Eagles, that snap them oft up, to crack them on Rocks;Aeli. as one let one fall of the bald-pate of the tragick Poët Aeschylus, mistaking it for a stone, and killed him;Arist. H. A. l 4. c. 6. who abhorred to lengthen life, according to Hyppocrates directions. Their voyce is a little louder then a snakes hisse; they fight with Serpents, fenceing themselves with origanum,Plin. &c. Some parboyl them, and then fry them in steaks. Some reckon them among fishes, [...] . and allow them on fasting-dayes, others not; they have bones, and breath. Not to speak of their eyes. Some Americans count them dainties:Bru [...] . c [...] l. 22. c  [...] . the flesh is usefull against dropsie, and short-breath, or wheesings. Boiled, they remove the loathsomnes of glutting of hony. The ashes of the shell are used against fistulaes, and shedding of hair;Plin. and with oyl, and wine, against sore legs; and in a fume, against Emrods. Burne them, they close chapped-nipples,G [...] l [...] n. E [...] p or. with the white of an egge; and they help bursten people: the blood of the head cut off, when it lies on the back, and dried in the Sun, quenches S. Anthonies fire, and removes warts, and morfew; and is good for a sore-head, and with ants-egges, Henbane, Hyoscyamus, & Hemlock, is made an excellent oyntment: the shell makes a good potlid that keeps the pot from boyling over: the blood in wine, makes abstemious: the flesh fattens Horses, and Hogs. Vegetius makes an ointment of the live Tortoys, burnt on chips, and raw Allum, and Deers-marrow, and wine, to make cattells hair grow. The shell-shavings drunk in wine, allay lust. Of the greater, some have framed tables, vessells, and beds.

Pliny,Plin. l. 16. c. 43. and Seneca, complain of the luxury in this kind under Nero; and of counterfaiting the colour of the shell, to make coverings for cup-bords. The Amazons made shields of the shells, and cradles for their children.

Pliny divides them into land, and Sea, and Ponds-tortoyses, and such as live in sweet water,Difference. Plin. Ambr. ex Boh [...] . l. 2. c. 1. called Emyclae. In the Isle Zambol, are seene small beasts like them, round-bodied, crosse-streakt; at the end of each streak is an eare, and an eye; they have but one belly, many feet, and can goe every way. The blood is soveraigne to close any wound. Gesner calls it the many-footed-Tortoys. In the Isle Mauritius, under the line,Herbert. Itin. they are so large, and strong, that they carry men too, and fro; the Portugees speak of fifteen such.

CHAPTER II. Of Tortoyses in speciall.

ARTICLE I. Of the Land-Tortoyse.

THe Land-Tortoys is called by some the hill,Ambros. O [...] ip. D [...] git. l  [...] . c. 2. Name. [...] Described. wood, field, wild-one; in Greek Chersaian, &c. It is as the Salmander markt with yellow, and black spots on the back, shelled like the sea-one. The under-shell of the female is plain, but of the male hollow, and heavier; under the under-shells are two moving muscles afore, on each side one, either seems double, [...] . Z [...] ot. Da [...] ocr. the greater outward, the lesse inward; both rising sideling as out of the arm-pits, springing from a thin skin clinging to the shell, and ending in a sharp tendon; under these long, round muscles six other appeares long that haply bend the arms. Two come to the thighs sprouting from the foresaid membrane, these are lesse then the former, but more fleshy, and are set into the thighs. The back-bone is compact, and fastened strongly to the shell, in the middle of the length. Below the head in the midst a fingers breath from the sides descend two muscles, plucking the head inward, and two other a little below, all long. The liver is parted but alike big on the right, and left side, without bunched, within hollow, on the right side craggy containing in a strange workmanship the nether mouth of the stomack, and a part of the duodenum; the left side holding the greater hollow of the stomack, like a hollow eyebrow. The gall-bag lies deep in the right string of the liver. The stomack nearly resembles a mans, or swines; but after it comes to the bowells it hath three large hollows, wherein are perfected the three digestions. In the two first is a herby substance, the latter better wrought, and from hence cleaves the milt round, and black; in the third a certain moystish, and very white substance, like a chewed chesnut, but washy. It is thought this serves for a bladder, that, as Hens use, darts out sometimes a white moysture. It is large, and shaped like a chesnut, thin, and of a large conveyance. It clings fast to the peritonaeum. The straight gut at the end hath such side passages, as all Cocks have, but parted, and reaching into the sides, even to the reins. Here on each side ly their egges. The mid-rif is interwoaven with great veins. The heart is roundish, and whitish, hollow on one corner, placed just above the liver. The sharp artery (which is worthy marking) a little after the beginning is cloven, and the branches are twisted. The lungs above cling to the back-bone, thin, not fleshy, but rather skinny, set into the sharp artery, like a blackish net-worke. The disposition of the Hyois-bone, and shield-gristle is remarkable. In the skull of the Sea-tortoyse is a partition. These come about in the deserts of Africa, and in some part of Lybia.Place. Also in the Arcadian woods;Plin. they of old made harps of them. They are most in the Isle Dioscoris in the red-sea. Living in the deserts they have been thought to feed on dew.Pausan. in Arcad. Food. Bruier. Others say they crop young sprouts of pot-herbs, and Pompions, &c. Worms also they eat, and shell-fish. In house they kept with bran, and meal. To passe by fables, of their being gendred of Geranus a woman turned into a Crane, and Nicodamas. They lay hard shelled, and party-coloured egges, which they hide in the ground, and at times sit on, and the following year they foster them. It is a mistake that they conceive only when the wind blows.Gendring. Athen. Dipros. l. 5. Nicander. Aelian. l. 5. c. 32. It is certainer, that the female being very slow to coupling is of the male quickned by an herb. The Greeks eat them not. Certain Hungarians seeing Clusius tast of one,Use in Food. Bellon. beleeved he should dy of it. In India they are commonly eaten. In August, and September, when corn is ripe, they are fattest, and most cried up. Some say, from February to May the Shees are best, being then full of egges, and from June to Autumne, the Hees.Ambrosi [...] . Some praise them with garlick sauce. At this day at Bononia they behead the female land-Crocodile, and throw away the blood, and seeth it till the shell fall from the flesh, and wash the inward, and boyl all together with saffran, sweet spices, pines, and raisins in Malmsy, and so serve it in.

The flesh makes good perfumes against witchraft,In Phisick. Plin. and poyson. In Africa they cut off the head, and feet, and make an antidote of them. In pottage eaten they disperse swellings, and help the falling sicknesse, and spleen; the blood clears the ey-sight, and removes blood-shot, rednesse in the eyes, and helps against all venome of serpents, spiders, toads, the blood wrought with meal into pilles, and take in wine; the gall with Athenian hony is good for the yellow in the eyes, and the stroak of a scorpion; the ashes of the shell kneaded with wine, and oyl, closes chaps, and ulcers. The scales shaven off at top in drinke allay, as the the powder of the shell inflames lust. The urine I thinke is not seen but in dissection, but is thought good against aspick-bites, better, if mixt with hog-lice; the egges hardened make an ointment for swellings, and ulcers comming from cold, or burnes. Some swallow them in stomack-aches.

Among the Bononians there is syroop of Tortoyses for short-breath, and consumptions. Some also made a decoction for rheums, and cough, described by Amatus the Portugees. Wecker compounds an electuary against sharp uds of seed. Galen stampt the liver to drink for the suffocations of the mother.

In India are great ones. They pluck off their shells with spades,Differences. Aelian. they have fat, and sweet flesh. In Brasil is one called Jubeti, by the Portugees Cagado de terra; it hath a black shell with many six cornered marks thereon, snowted as others.Mar [...] kg. Brasil. The head, and legs dusk, but shadowed, and spotted. The liver hath a more savoury tast, thenof any other beast.

ARTICLE II. Of the VVater-Tortoyse.

POINT I. Of the fresh-water, and Pond-Tortoyse.

PLiny calls it water-mouse,Ambro. Name. [...] . and Emyda. The clay-coloured is called Myda. In Greek Potamia Cheloonia, or river-Tortoyses. They live in fresh water, in lakes,Place. Gesner. Leo Afr. l. 5. and rivers, as near Adelfing in a small lake in the Tigurine territory. And near Constance in a hote that runs long, and wide among the rocks, there are plenty of them; the women of that city call them divells, and ascribe all their sicknesses to them. They wander also in Ganges,Aeli. and Nile; they breath. In breeding time they dig a hole on dry land, where they lay and hide their egges, and after thirty dayes they uncover them,Arist. and bring their brood presently to the water. Of the fat bruized with Aizoon, or the everliving herb, and Lily-seed some annoint those that have quartans all over,Plin. but the head, afore the fit; then they wrap them warme, and give them hote water to drinke. They catch it on the fifteenth day of the moon, when it is fattest, and annoint the patient the day after. The blood droped in, eases head-akes, and swellings. Some behead them lying on their backs with a brazen knife receiving the blood in a new earthen pot, annointing with the blood cure all kinds of S. Anthonies fires, and running sore heads, and warts. The dung is said to disperse waxen kernels. some beleeve that ships sayl slower, if a Tortoyses right foot be aboard. The Indian river-Tortoyse is just as big as a Boat, and holds sixty bushells of pulse. The clay, or Pond-Tortoyse Pelamida, and Amida, is alike broad on back and breast, the shell makes a handsome cup. It abides in muddy places,Plin. l. 32. c. 4. but at spring seekes running-water. They want bladder, and reines. They are seene about Ferraria, and in France, Poland, Hungary. Some think to drive over a shoar of hayl by laying one with the right hand about their garden,Mizald. Cent. 5. or field on the back, so that it may see the cloud big with hayl. Some lay three on a fire of chips, and take the bodies from the shells,Plin. and parboyl them in a gallon of water, and a litle salt to a third part, and make a drink for palsy, and gout, for those that have feeling. The gall is good for flegm, and corrupt blood. Drunk in cold water, it stays a loosnes.

POINT II. Of the Sea-Tortoyse.

PLiny calls it the Sea-mouse; Ambr, l. c. 4. Name. [...] . the Greek Cheludros; the German and Flemish Fishers, the Souldier, because it beares a shield, and helmet; and Barchora, and of old Zytyron, that, or such another with rugged, hard armed-head, and a buckler hanging at the neck. It resembles the Land-Tortoyse; if youAlbert. Described. except the feet, and bignes. In stead of teeth it hath a bone so hard, it breaks asunder the thickest staffe with one stroke. The snout brims seeme like teeth. The eyes sparkle from farre; the balls being exceeding bright, and glittering. The feet like wings,Aeli. wherewith they swim as with oars; turn him on his back, and cut him up crosse, taking away the shell, you see a peritonaean membrane covering all the fore-parts from the throat to the secrets,Severin. Zoo [...] . Den [...] . Par 4 p. 321. tied to the shell by fleshy strings, especially by the breast. Kall it hath none, nor blind gut, but slender bowells from above downwards, contrary to other fourfooted beasts. Nay from the gullet top, which is two thumbs thick, it reaches to the beginning of the straight gut, and lessens all along; it hath also double tunicles, the outer sinewy, the inner fleshy, and this is hairy, and limber, and moyst, like a fat Cows right gut. In the beginning of the Oesophagus are many thwart prickles, bigger then in an Ox-tongue, which is strange, they serve happily to chew the grosse food they use to gobble in. The neck of the bladder answers the straight gut within, and have both but one outlet; the milt round as an egge, tied to the upper-gut: Reins plain, and long, as if made up of many small ones; heart moyst full of intricate vessels in the entrance; the lappes large, blackish, dangling by a thin skin; lungs large comming down much lower then the heart; the neck bent with many muscles, and two very long plucking the head in to the shell.Place. They live in salt water, and about Moluris, and live on small fish, shell-fish, and being brought a land they eat grasse.

They at breeding-time lay about an hundred egs on land,Gend [...] Arist. and hide them in a pit, and by night sit on them; & with their foot make a mark on the covered-place, to find it again. They plain the earth with their breast. In fourty dayes they are hatched.Plin. Plutr. In America are hide oft above three hundred egges in one hole, and are hatched by the Sun, with the dams sitting, so that an army seemes to be poured out at once. They sleep sometimes on land, but cannot live long there,P. [...] . l. 6. c. 3. like Sea-calves; they come by night on land, and feed greedily, and being full, and weary, they float on the water on their backs sleeping, and snorting. If they ly long, dried by the Sun-beams,Arist. and cannot get into the sleep, they dy. They thrust forth their heads, to take ayr, like Sea-calves; and are so bold, they dare set on three men at once. Cut off their heads, they dy not presently, but shall bite,Oppian. Hali. E [...] . l. 1. Aeli. l. 4. c. 28. Use in Food. Bell. o [...] . l. 2. c. 63. if you put your hand to them.

The Armenians, by the Patriark of Alexandria, are forbidden to eat them, on pain of excommunication. Between Spring, and fall, they are good meat. Some make pies of them. In Brasile they catch some that may suffice 80 men. They lard, and roast them, they tast

like veal. Their flesh and Frogs-flesh, help against Salamanders:S [...] ppi [...] s. [...] . l. 5. c. [...] . [...] In Phi [...] ck. [...] . l. 32. c. 4. the blood against shedding of hair, itch, and foreheads; but dried, and washt with breast-milk, men drop it into the ears for paine there. Some eat it with corne-meal, for the falling-sicknes: some mixt the blood with vineger, wine, and barly-meal, and eat a pellet as big as a bean, morning, and evening, and after some dayes, at evening. It is taken in a castor-glister, for the cramp, wash the teeth long with the blood, you shall have no tooth-ake; and in barly-meal soked, and fried, it removes shortnes of breath: the gall makes eyes clear, lessens scars, swellings of the amonds of the ears, squincies, and all sorenes in the mouth: sorenes creeping on by degrees, and the burning of the cods. Smeard on the nostrils, it is good for the falling-sicknes; and for mattery-ears, with snakes-sloughs, and vineger: Some adde ox-gall, and juice of tortoyse-flesh, long boyld in wine. The gall with hony, is good for the eyes, and for the pin, and web, with the blood of the river-tortoyse, and breast-milk: womens hair is poysond by the gall. Some drink Salamanders, and the sop: the brain with Sa [...] an, [...]  and Egyptian-salt, makes a suppository for the stoppings of the mother. The eye-balls worn in gold, are good for d [...] maes of sight: they give the blood with wild-cymine, for viper-bites. The liver pouder, in breast-milke kneaded with rain-bow ointment, and wine, purges a ch [...] lde-bed-woman. Some give the egges in an Epilepsie.

Of old, [...]  they trimed their posts with the sh [...] lls. Those of Taprobana Isle, cover their houses with them. The Tortoys-eaters use them for ships, and water-vessells, and tents: they wash new-borne B [...] bes in them. By Gambra River, they make shields of them: the Turks make Sword handles of the transparent shells. [...]  They are of a different bignes, and shape. In Taprobana one weighed an hundred and three pound. In the Red-Sea are shells as broad as a doore. In India some hold ten bushels. The Sea-tortoyses are longer, the shore, rounder. Among the Trogodites are horned ones, the horns, as on a Harp, broad and loose. that help their swimming: that kind is called Costium, vast, but rarely found. The sharp Rocks of the Chelonophagi fright them away: they frequent the Trogodites, that even worship them. Her-Barbarus bids us to call them Cheleta, or Cavaleers, that use their hornes, as spurs. One sort is covered as with a tanned hide, [...]  and is like a Lobster, the head, and feet gone: the back consists of six tablets joyned; and the tayl like that part of the harp, wherein the pegs stick: there a [...] e two sorts, the Brasilians call one Iuru [...] ua, with legs like wings; the fore-legs about a foot and half long, the tayl sharp, and conick, eyes great, and black; mouth toothles, and like a birds bill. I have had of them, whose shells were three foot long, and above two broad: the shells set into the ribs, on each side eight, the former shorter; middelmost longer, the hindmost also smaller. They eat the egges as flesh, they lay their eggs on the shore; digging a pit in the sand, and burying them. I have oft trackt them in their walke. Some I have had foure foot long, and three broad, of such a bulk, foure strong men could scarce stirre one. The shells as carved in diverse geometricall figures; some black, and glistring with yellow streaks, goodly to see too: others, otherwise shaped. The other sort the Portugees called Iuruta Cadago d' agoa, it is lesse then other Tortoyses; the shell the upper-shell, is ten fingers long, and broad: the hollownesse considered; the lower shell nine fingers long, foure and an half broad, and flat. The upper hath an crooked longsquare shape. It can hide it self under the shell, and thrust out the head three fingers; the head is three fingers thick, and longish: the nose rising, and pointed, mouth wide, eyes blackish, balls cole-black: on the feet are foure very long black nails: the tayl short, and copped; the skinne rugged, and scaly: the upper-shell dusky, the undermost yellowish: they lay roundish eggs, half as big as Hen-egges, white-shelled, they taste well fried. Marckgrave ate often of them.

AN ADDITION. Of certaine Outlandish Foure-footed Creatures of a doubtfull kind.

CHAPTER I. Of the Tlacaxolotl, the Cabim, and the Sea-secker.

HAving through Gods grace finished the History of the Foure-footed Beasts, as many sorts as are, as yet knowen, I thought good to adde this appendix about forreigne doubtfull Creatures, which I am yet thinking to what head, or kind to referre. As first: The Tlacaxolotl, it is roundish-faced, bigger then a Bull, great-headed, long muzzle, broad eares, cruell teeth; faced almost like a man, whence it hath the name: the neck thick, the nails like the Bulls, but larger: the buttocks great, and broad, tayl thick and long; skin thick, hair yellowish, and brisly. It is seldome found, living among stones, and in desolate places. The Atzaceani, Tepotzonzotla, and Haquelagani, are not far from the Honduras. It feeds on Kacaotli, Quapachtli, and green-Hoali, in the wide fields, and sowen grounds; and where they are not, on leaves and shrubs. The flesh is eateable. It fears not the face of man; Arrows cannot pearce the hide; therefore they catch them in pitfalls, and holes covered with leaves, as the Indians doe Elephants.

The Cabim, or Sionium, or Thabal is bred in Java. It hath one strange vertue, if any carry with them the tip of the mouth thereof, wound him in a thousand places, he shall not bleed one drop.Nierem Ex. l. 9. c. 3. There have been many trialls of it, and it is famous, and well knowen; for

when Naodabeguea Malacensis, an enemy of the Portugees, in a manfull fight against them, was at length overpowered, and wounded in many places, and fell, no blood started out of the widest wounds; after in rifling him, as they plucked from his arme a gold arm-let (strange to say) the blood with his life gushed all out suddenly, as out of a broken vessell, which they being astonished to see, they understood by other captives that in that arm-let was closed a Cabims mouth, that is so potent in stanching of blood.

As for the Maripetum,Nierem. Hist. Ex. l. 9. c. 49. Aloysius Almeida writes, and others affirme, (both with what truth) that among the Japons in the Gotian kingdome is a wood wherein is bred a beast as big as a dog, short-leged, good to eat, gold-coloured, soft-haired. Growing old, it leaves the land, and takes the sea, and by degrees turns fish in a certain space, loosing his beasts shape, and that some have been taken not wholly transformed, the full time being not exspired, one part beast, the other scaled, and fined.

CHAPTER II. Of the Danta, [...] and Cappa.

THe Danta,Nierem. Exot. l. 9. c. 65. or Capa, or Tapiroussu, or Doueanar, resembles the Mule, having such ears, a Calves lips; the upper-lips hangs a handfull over the lower, which he lifts up, when angred, in the rest like other beast, but a Calf most; he hath no harme. The hoof helps heart-pain, the skin makes an impenetrable target. It hath two stomacks, one receives the food, the other is found, none knows how, stuft with wood, and twigs. The use of this stomack is not knowen. Nature uses not to make any thing needlesse. The hunter must wound him afore he takes water, for there he bites dogs to death. Men have been taught breathing a vein from him, for he, his blood is rank, and he even swells, lets himself blood on the inside of the thighs with a splinter of a reed, as the Sea-horse doth. He is reddish-haired, and that hanging down, and resembles a Cow in bulk, and shape. But that he is not horned,Lerius. and hath a short neck, and long daugling ears, by his dry, and slender legs, whole hoof, a man may take him to be of the breed of the Cow, or Asse, yet differs much from both, having a very short tail, (though in America many beasts are bred, without tails) and hath much keener teeth, yet none need feare him, he trusting more in flight, then fight. The wilds shoot them, or catch them in pits, or grins, and have handsome devices to hunt them. They value him highly for his skin, which they cut round, and lay a sunning to make targets as big as a reasonable tun, which they use in warre, as being hardly to be pearced. I brought two of those shiels carefully into France; but returning, the famine was so sore, that all provisions being spent, we must eat apes, and parrets, and we were fain to fry those two targets, and other skins in the ship, to eat. The flesh tasts like beef, especially the feet well boyled.Franc. These Dantes are in many parts of the continent. The Cappa is bigger then the Asse,He [...] andus. Nier. Exot. l. 9. c. 71. black, shaggy, fierce, fatall to dogs, snapping them, as a Wolf a Lamb. The hoof is whole, like a French shoe, and sharp in the spur-place. He is affrayed of a man.

CHAPTER III. Of the Howler, the Su, and Peva.

THe Howler is cunning,Nier. Exot. l. 4. c. 72. faining an infants cry in the beginning of the night at towns ends, and kills those that in pity run out to help upon hearing the mone. But now the towns-men are well warned, and goe forth armed with fire-brands. It is like a Hare-hound in shape, and bulk.

The Su, i. e. water, because living by rivers most what,Id. l. [...] . c. 47. is found among the Patagons. Some call it Succarath. It hath a fierce Lions looke, yet is bearded from the eare like a man, short-haired, the belly strutting out, lank flanked, the tail large and long, as a squirrells. The giantlike men there, the climate being not very hote, wear the skins, for which, when hunted they lay their young on their back, and cover them with their tail, and so run away, but are taken, whelps, and all in pits covered with boughs. Being fast in, for rage, or generousnesse they kill their whelps, and cry hideously to fright the hunters; they shoot him dead with arrows, and flea him. Some fain that they in fondnesse carry their young to medows, and there they dresse each other with garlands of faire sweet flowers.

The Peva is as big as a small Cat.Id. Exo [...] . l. 9. c. 46. Spying the Tiger, she traces him, ever barking to warn all creatures of the danger. Hence we see often, that they dy in the fields for hunger.

CHAPTER IV. Of the stinking beast, the Graffa, and Caoch.

AMong the Chiribdes is a lean beast that voids serpents a cubit long.Id. l. 9. c. [...] . Pet. Ma [...] . The Dominicans brought up one in their cell, and say that those serpents creep to the next wood, where they live a while. They caused it to be killed, because it stank worse then any carrion cast out on a dung-hill. It resembles a Fox in the muzzle, a Wolf in hair. I wonder not much at this beasts dung, when consider what worms children, and old folks commonly void.

The Graffa is found most on the Isle Zanzibar. It is small-headed,Ib. c. 32 and long-necked. The forefeet are greatest. It is party-coloured, white and red, and marked with red-rose spots. It is a gentle beast.

The Caoch is thirty inches long,Ib. c. 9 [...] . black-haired, the belly yellow, and shining. By night it fains a humane cry. Like the Sow, it eates unripe mayze.

And so much of the fourfooted Beasts. If any thing shall be farther discovered to me about them, I shall God willing add it.

AN APPENDIX PETER CASTELLUS OF ROME His discovery of the Sweet Hyaena, the Dam of the Zibeth, commonly called the Civet-cat.

CHAPTER I.

IT is well knowen how needfull serious, mature, and long deliberation is in the accurate search after difficult matters; and that the more judicious, and rationall any one is the easier is it for him to unlock secrets, to bring to light hidden things, and to climbe otherwise in accessible heights. Whence it is, that when inquiry is made: Whether the Hyaena of old be knowen to us, or no; and on the other side, Whether the fruitfull Zibeth were known to the ancients, or no;

[...]  it seems hard to many to resolve. We had need search diligently, relying more in judgement, and reason then sense to perfect our wished discovery. Wherefore we take our rise from the manifold names of this beast, [...]  namely, Civetta, or S [...] vetta, whence Zibeth, and Civet-cat, and Weesel, and Zapetion, and Cadopleptus, we stile it the Odoriferous Hyaena.

Zibeth is an Arabique name, [...]  read in divers significations. Zebet is a sweet-sented A [...] galia administred in Physick to staunch blood, and against shedding-hair. It is called Saderva in Persian language; it is a black thing, wherewith they dy cloath in Haaman, or a black juice, an ingredient into sweet medicines. Rasis calls it S [...] dra,

[...]  and Scedegura; others, Severa. The Arabians, Galia, and Algalia, whence the compositions Gallia Moschata, Gallia Alephangina, and Sebellina, &c. so that a sweet pit is, [...]

called by some the Arabian Beasts sweat. Serapions Galia, is the juice of an herb, Zebeth, when the beast first obtained the name Z [...] bet, and corruptly Civette. [...]

Zelet Allahar is sea-fome, and not unfitly applied figuratively to this, Z [...] beth being taken when the beast is angry, and fomes.

He may be like a wild Cat in head, otherwise very unlike. Others call it a Cat; we rather the Sweet-Hyaena.

CHAPTER II. Whether the Civetta be the ancient Pard, or Panther, or no.

ARistotle demands, [...]  why other beasts yeeld not a sweet sent as well as the Pardal, or Panther, that thereby entices other beasts to him; no other, or rarely, but hee, senting sweet, unles by chance, having eat some sweet thing,Theophr. l. 6. de caus. Pla [...] t. c. 5. Plin. l. 8. c. 16. Arist. H. A. l. 9. c. 11. unlesse it is, that man is weaker of sent then other creatures, and knows not sents. Pliny saids, all beasts are strangely allured by this sent, but frighted by the mishapen head, which hee therefore hides. Aristotle saith, the Panther knows, that he smells so sweet; when he wants meat, he skulks in fruitfull or leavy shady thickets; then fawns, and goats,Aeli. H. A. l. 5. c. 40. Plin. &c. invited by his fragrant sent draw neare, and become a prey to him. The Panther, and Tiger have a peculiar kind of spots; the Panther hath small spots like egges set in white: But they are mistaken, who take him for the Civetta. Some deny the Panthers senting sweetly,Gesner. onely beasts follow him, but men smell no such sweetnes in him. But, to say truth, diverse beasts void sweet dung, that Aristotle, and his Scholler Theophrastus knew not off; as the Cordylus resembling the Crocodile, but lesse,Plin. l. 28. and living onely on land on sweet flowers; he is sought after for his sweet guts, called Crocodilea, or for his dung. Also wilde-yellow Mice, (that our boys play withall, called Sorcimoscaroli) voids dung like Musk. And so of some Serpents: And of the greater Weezel, that kills great Hens, (called Marter Martorella, and Fovina) and of some Baboons.Renod. M [...] t. Med. l. 3. c. 15. S [...] al. Ex. 211. p. 2. The excrement of the Gezella is a Musk. And some insects handled smell sweet, as the flower Dipcas, or Greeke-Musk. So that many beasts, beside the Panther, send forth fragrant smell, and the Zibeth among the rest. To let passe that needles quarrell, between Cardan and Scaliger, above the smell of beasts, and natures essayes in their generation.

Some thinke the Zivet to be Plinies Chaum, Dalecamp. Plin. l. 8. c. 19. in French Raphium, like a Wolf, spotted like the Panther, that Pompey shewed at Rome; but there is no mention of the sent. Nor is the Civetta, headed like the Wolf, and they differ also in the spots. Perhaps Thoe is put for Chao; the Hart-wolf, and seems to be our Civet. But of the Thoe, Philes hath composed Greek verses, the summe whereof is: How shamefast is the Thoe, if hee but see a man; How true a friend is he to man,Herodotus l. 4. aiding him, if any beast assault him. The Thoe comes of an Hyaena, and a Wolf.

CHAPTER III. Whether the Hyaena was knovven of old.

BEllonius saith,Obser. l. 2. c. 20. yea; though the ancients observed not the sweet excrement of the Civetta; see thence the shape is the same with the old Hyaena,Arist. of the colour of the Wolf, but shaggier, and longmained, with black spots, two under the eyes, the feet black-haired; thighs spotted, the tail very long, black above, with white spots beneath; on the neck, and ridge of the back black-haired, which, when he is angry, start up as Swines bristles: whence the fish Glanis is called an Hyaena. Besides all old writers call the Hyaena a wilde Savage beast, that the Panthers strangely dread, and dare not stand its, but fly, nor dare come near a piece of the skin; nay, hang up the skins over against each other,Plin. l. 28. c. 6. the Panthers hair falls off. Diverse write of this enmity, and that the Civet-cat is untameable. The best reason is, that the Hyaena of old is saidAeli. l. 6. c. 22. Cardan. 10. de subt. fer. Arist. de g [...] n. ani. l. 3. c. 6. Et K. A. l. 6. c. 132. (as by Ovid, and Pliny) yearely to change sex, and to gender with a male; which though it be false, and disavowed. By Aristotles yet there is a vessell in the Hyaenam, that makes the heedles think it Epicene, or double-sexed. He is genitaled as wolves, and dogs; and that other passage is but for the excrements. And there is female Hyaena, and under the tail of both is a streake, but it is seen more in the males, which are oftner taken then the females.

On the other side,Exer. 117. p. 7. Gesner. Busbeq. Clusius. Arist. Solin. Aelian. Scaliger derides those that think the Hyaena, and Zivet to be the same, and many others confute that opinion; many things being said of the Hyaena, that fit not our Civet-cat. As first, a hard skinne, and a main, and neck, that are not the Civetta. Besides that there is no gum in the mouth, and but one tooth, or one bone all along, shutting like a box, but the Zivet hath many teeth.

And some write, that the Hyaena fains a mans voyce, and learns Shepheards names, to entrap them; and imitates mans vomiting, to entice and catch dogs. But none of these are, as yet observed in the tamest Civet-cat. But Bellonius might easily confute all this: saying that those things are falsely ascribed to the Hyaena, as the stifnes of neck to the Lion by Aristotle; and that Solinus speaks not of the Hyaena, but of the Crocuta, gendred between the Hyaena, and Lionesse. That those passages are rather to be admired, then beleeved, as denied and confuted by some writers, and in silence passed by others.Scal. Ex. 211. p. 2. Adde, that the Hyaena is so far from being untameable, that Nicolus Ancisa, Marques of Mantuaes bastard son, carried one on his shoulders. And a Florentine Consul at Alexandria,Bellon. had a Civet-cat, that tooke man by the nose, eares, and lips, without harm, playing with them. But these are but toies, for this is by nature wilde, but may be tamed, especially the female.

And for that above the mane,Arist. H. A. l. 8. c. 5. Bellonius might probably answere, that the Hyaena is as big as a Wolf, yet but two handfulls high, and the mane is longer then the other hair, and may hang to the ground; as wee see in Swine, the bristles on the back are longer then other hair; and so in our Civetta you may say, why then did not Aristotle rather liken the Hyaenaes mane to the Swines bristled crest, then the Horses mane: I answere, that perhaps he took his description from some Indian Authour, that had seen a Horse, but not a Swine; for it is not certain, that such Swine as ours are in India; so that Aristotle changed not his expression about the mane. Besides Scaliger gathers out of Aristotle,In l. 15. [...] . Ovid. Faber. that the place of the genitalls of the Hyaena, and Civet is diverse. And Faber findes a contradiction in Scaliger, Ex. 217. Cardan. p. 7. But truth is, either Aristotle was deceived by a false relation, or some fault is in the text; or he is not to be understood literally, and strictly; but thus it may be taken, that the Hyaena hath a streak behind, but no passage, but the Civet hath two passages, and hollows; one wherein the Civet is gathered. But Busbequius saith, hee saw two Hyaenaes at Constantinople, a litle lower, but as long as a wolf, skind like the wolf, but rougher haired, thicker, and spotted with black; the head huge, close to the back-bone, without turning-joynts, that without turning the whole body about, they could not looke behinde them: and that in Galatia are very many, found easily out by their gathering of carcasse-bones, mens, and others, to their den. And Jo. Leo saith,Nova [...] . he hath hands like a man, and delights much in humane carcasses, that he digs out of their graves; that they are but silly, and are enticed out of their holes by singing, or a drum, which they love to listen too, and so are killed. Yet it is doubtfull, whether this be the right Hyaena, having no mane, nor genitals, nor qualities ascribed of old to them, as if it were a mischievous, and subtile beast; that in Africa destroyes many wilde Asses;Plin. l. 8. c. 3 [...] . certain males domineering over flocks of females, jealous of corrivals, guarding their females great with young; guelding their male-brood with their teeth, seeking out the females haunt, big with young, and being extremely lustfull. Herein like our Civetta, whose Civet makes not themselves onely prove to lust, but mankind also, if annointed with it. Referre hither Philes his Greek verses of the propertie of beasts, and of the Hyaena, no way agreeing to the Zibet-cat; (Chap. 43. of the Land, and Sea-Hyaena) the summe is, that the Hyaena changes Sexes, finding a man asleep, puts the right hand to his nostrils, to make his sleep sounder, lays the earth that was under his head on his throat, and with embraces throttles him sleeping. And the finnes of a Sea-Hyaenaes right-side with a touch, provoke sleep, stupifie, and bring terrible dreams. The Hyaena deceives, and devours dogs, amazing them with

the shadow by Moon-shine. Aelian relates the like, l. 6. c. 14. and l. 15. de An. c. 14. other fabulous things; as about the Hyaenaes hornes, which P. Cillius hath past over in his translation; and Gesner confuted as ridiculous. However many things noted in the Hyaena, are found in the Civetta.

CHAPTER IV. Vnder what kinde of Beasts the Civetta is to be reckoned.

SInce it is cleare by what hath been said, that it is neither the ancient Panther, nor Plinies Chaus, nor the true Hyaena, wee may now fitly inquire, to what kind it is to be referred. [...]  It seemes to many to be a wilde Cat; and indeed in face it resembles one, having such long hairs on the beard, and three long ones on the cheek as the cat hath, otherwise they are nothing alike, not in skinne; for the Cats is smooth, the Civets rough, the hair very long, and thick, nor nayle, for the Cats claws are crooked, the Civets blunts, nor genitalls, nor shape; [...]  this being liker a dog, or wolf, then a car, being long, not round-mouthed. It is wilde, sharp-toothed, but unlike a cat, greater oft then a Fox, unlike in head, neck, feet, and other parts; long-snouted as a Badger, long-bodied, the jaws below white, and the beard, the feet black, the belly-sides bright, the back dark-ash with black spots, and toothed more like a dog, then a cat. I indeed referre it to the Hyaenaes, and these to the generall kinde, comprehending Wolves, Dogs, Foxes, and other beasts that prey on flesh. Now there are diverse kinds of Hyaenaes.

The Thoes is genered between the Hyaena, [...]

and the Wolf. But I say there is a sweet Hyaena, and one that hath no sent. The sweet one is either the Arabian, and Eastern, or the Western, [...]  and American one. The other sort is, that the ancients write off, which perhaps is also twofold, since that Busbequius writes of wants many markes, described of old, and seems to be an Arabian Wolf.

But the sweet Hyaenaes, Arabian, and American breed, Zibeth, or Civet; but differ somewhat in shape.

The American hath a slender-copped head, [...]

liker a dogs then a cats, reddish. Ringlets are about the eyes, that are not fierce, nor great, but whitish. The head ash-coloured, with scarce any hairs on the beard, the neck longer then the Tigers, or Catpards, beautifull with black, and white wreaths, like bracelets painted; from the head to the back on the neck are such coloured streaks; and another on the back from the neck to the tail, blackish, and hairy. Handsomly set off toward the tail by the streak with blackish, round, ovall spots in order on a bright ash-colour. The uppermost nearer the backe are greater, the middlemost lesse, the lowest by little, and little lessening to nothing. The tale streakt, and so party-coloured, and long, under the tail are visibly three passages, whereof one is the Civet-bag; the middlemost seems greatest. But the African sweet Hyaena, our Civetta is liker a wolf then a cat; long-headed, sharp-muzzled, toothed as a dog; two handfulls high, as I who dissected it, found it; and as long from the shoulders to the tail, and the tail as long as the whole body, the neck above half a palm long. The beast seeme to stoop. The length of the head was double to the breeth. On the beard, and cheeks grew hard hairs, white and long as on Cats; the muzzle bald, nostrills blackish, black spots under the eyes, the eyes glistring, and reddish.

But Columna saw at Fabers,B [...] llon. saw one with chesnuts-brown eyes, mixt with yellow, and dull, heavy, and down cast. But out of the eyes of our dead one, were pulled gems as big as a drie peas, round, and angeled, like christall, which I yet keepe; which confirme mee in naming it an Hyaena, since others speak of such in the Hyaenaes eyes,P [...] in. H. A. l. 37. c. 10. Albert. de lap. Alex. 1. Probl. 6. that put under a mans tongue make him prophesie; (if you will beleeve it) I say not these are true gems, for they hold their firmues, and cristalline transparancy, but two, or three dayes, and then grow dimme, and are cut into bits three, or foure like snails-shells. Some have indeed put the question, why Cats, Hyaenaes and Bats, see clearly by night. Besides the Civets-eares are little, round, and haired as a Badgers. The body is whitish, and ash as a wolves, sprinkled with black spots, the feet but little, and short, and black-haired; foure toes on a foot, and a small thumb inward, as on a cat. The nails, as the dogs, black, short, thick, and blunt, not as claws. Next under the tayl is the excrement-passage; then the testicles, then the Civet-bag, &c. In the figure wee have printed all accurately, according to their naturall proportion. The Civet-bag lies between the genitall, and stones, which are large, these I cut out, and found them sentles, the seed-vessells were very thick; below was a small bladder. The whole genitall is hide within the body, as in cats, while the beast is quiet, onely a kernell seen; but in the carcasse it hangs quite out. The hair of the whole body is long, rough, bristled, as a Boars, and on the neck, and by the backbone black, very long, and stiffer, which starts upright, as on the Swine, when the beast is angry. The tail is very long, and pretty hairy, reaching to the ground, and marked with various spots.

Hence we conclude these to be Hyaenaes. Perhaps the Bever may be referred to this kinde, it having about the same place a bladder, which opened, a kinde of a hony-moisture drops out.

CHAPTER V. Where the Hyaenaes are bred.

HErodotus,L. 4. Pliny, and Solinus write that many of them are bred in Africa. But our sweet Hyaena is called the Syrian Cat; they are brought out of Syria.Scal. Some are sent from Spain. The Portugees bring them out of the Indies. A Lituanian Apothecary sent a Zibet-bag, and an Elcks-hoof to Rome to Henry Convinus, writing that they were the fruits of his country; so that I guesse they are bred also in those cold Regions.

The American Zibeth is bred in many parts there,I. Faber. as also in East-India in Bengala, Ceilan, Sumatra, Java the greater, and lesse, in Maliput, and elsewhere.

And in new Spain, in Quatemala, Campege, Nikaragua, Vera Crux, Florida, and the great Isle S. Dominick, or Hispaniola, Cuba, Matalino, Guadalupa, and elsewhere.

In Peru is plenty, in Paraguay, Tucamam Chiraguanas, S. Crux de la Sierra, Yungas, Andes, Chiachiapojas, Quizos, Timana, Novo Regno, and in all the Provinces bordering on the great river Maraguon, which are almost numberlesse hereabout reaching two thousand leagues. Many more of them are in Brasil, where the Civet trade is driven. They abound also in Guinee, in the Provinces of Loango, Congo, Manicongo, about the rivers of Angola, even to Cafres, and to the Cape of good Hope, especially on the high, and vast mountains there,Fragorae. Cuspides. called the Craggy-spears, and on part of the hills of Gafres, called the Torea, or of the Moon, where so much Algalia is.

CHAPTER VI. Of the Zibeth-vessell, or Civet-bag.

ZIbeth is gathered only out of one small part of the beast, we shall see whence. It is a foul mistake, that the Gazella voids Civet,Riolan. Patholog. c. 11. Renod. as dung; nor comes it out the genitalls, but it lies thereabout. To let passe Columna his discourse of the testicles (Epist. 1. ad Fabrum.) It is clear, that the Civet in the males lies between the Genitall,Alex. Bened. and the stones. The testicles are conspicuous in the males, and tane out, but ly hid within the females. In these between the anus, and the secrets are swellings, are bagges framed by nature, wherein by little and little the Zibeth is gathered, and thence voided. And being but two, the unexperienced may mistake them for testicles, and some that have seen the beast often, much more those who never saw it afore; so hath Columna mistaken. The Zibeth part at first sight seemes a feminine passe, having a long streak, and thick lips, which feels as bigge as a small egge, gristly it is, and somewhat hard, which, if you open with your fingers a little, there shew themselves two very long holes like nostrills, hollow underneath, where are the seats of the Zibeth. These vessells if you squeese out with your fingers they open themselves wide, and shew the hollownesse, which may well hold an almond kernell; in these bags is no pore, and no passage appears, but it being cut, I found a hardish body as big as an egge, feeling griftly, divided into two bags, as big as two Spanish olives, and those not at all grisly, but fleshy, stuffed with small, white, hard kernels, much harder then the stones; distinct they were those bags, but joyned with thin skins, or films, and the inner was common to both bags, which I keep still by me dried, which sent yet strongly of Civet, when the stone dried smell not all. And (which is strange) the beast being spent by a dropsy, and all the bowells putrified, and it stinking unsufferably as it was cut all over, only the Zibeth vessell sented wonderfully, and yet holds its fragrancy.

CHAPTER VII. Of the Beaver.

SInce the History of the Castor, Fiber, or Beaver conduceth much to the knowledge of the kind, and quality of the sweet Hyaena; we say that the Beaver, both Hee, & Shee have in their privities certain receptacles, whereout, through the small bones, an hony moysture flows, which the Beaver useth to lick. The males have besides their testicles shut within under the skin so, as you cannot touch them,Dios [...] . l. de Amph [...] c. 8. as swine have. Rondeletius saith such bumps are also in Hares, whence the vulgar bruit of their double sex, and he writes the like of the Moschus, and the Beaver, that this hath two such swellings in the groyn, each in his thin skin as big as a Goose-egge, between which are the privities. These swellings sweat out a fat moysture, which he licks, and sucks out, and after annoints therewith all his bodies as far as he can reach. These are not testicles, for they are there besides, and these have no passage to convey, are send forth water. That liquour at first is like oyl, after it is of the colour of hony, and as thick. The like is in the Hare (saith he) and the Moschus, whence a sweet substance flows. Nor are they to be heard, who take these swellings, for inflamed pushes, or hote matter from the navell. That the swelling is like a kernell, or testicle they know, who sophisticate musk, making it up round in such a shape, and calling it the Moschus-stone. But we know that the testicles ly so, that you cannot take them thence, and the beast live. So that many beasts, as the Hyaena, Zibeth,Plin. l [...] c. 3. Castor, and Hare, and others carry sweet moysture in bags about the groyn, as among fishes, the Cuttle, the Calamary, and the purple fish.

We grant the Moschus to be a strange Indian

beast in Pegu, frequent with the Tumbasci, not unlike a shee-goat, great-bodied, called the Dorcas Moschus, the Indian Gazella; the wild Goat-Moschus, out of whose underjaw stick tushes, as in swiny, but when the tell, that when he hath lust, his navell swells, and apostumates; and he then refrains food, and walloweth on the ground, and delights in the tickling in rubbing the swelling against stones, and tree-stumps, and breaks it, and thence comes true musk, and that the same loft on stones, and trees is by the sun, and air perfected, and all ill in it disperst, and that this is the best musk. That the beast killed, the hunters, cut a piece off, with the skin, squeeze out the blood, gather it, dry it, keep it in bottles made of the skin of the same beast, or dry the blood, and put off to chapmen that stuffe for pure musk, &c. However it be these are by these mens relations of a like nature, and the musk comes not from an apostume in the Moschus, but out of a peculiar part determined by nature.

CHAPTER VIII. VVhat the Zibeth is.

ALl not agreed about the matter of this sweet called Zibeth, [...]  and Zibet, and Zapetion, and Algalia, and Civet, and by severall writers severally. Cardan is justly taxed by Scaliger for calling it seed, that diffected the beast, [...] &c. know better, nor assent I to those think it sweat, because (say they) it is most gathered from the beast, when tired, vexed, and sweating, and also under the hippes, armes, [...] Greg. neck and tail, for then all that sweat should be sweet; unlesse you call it sweat, because it sweats out of a glistly, spongy part through invisible pores into the bags, but then it is not simply sweat, but the sweat of the Zibeth part, [...]  nor do those that call it excrement descend to a description of the particular nature of it; for there is excrement profitable, as seed-milk; and uselesse, as snot, sweat, filth, &c. Corruption this is not, there being no sore. I take it to be an excrement proper to that kernelly substance of the foresayed bags, that breeds by its innate, proper power such a thing, as the stomack makes chyle, the liver blood, breasts milke, testicles feed, ears, ear-wax, the cuttle fish inke, the viper poyson in the teeth, and the like, as the Beaver, and Moschus, &c. breed on hony, sweet excrement. But I dare not determine, whether it be usefull, or useles to the sweet part, or the breeder. But we may guesse, that it is unprofitable to the beast, it seeming burdensome to it, whereof it would case it self, and the female, when tame, seems to delight, that the Civet with an eare-pick should be taken out of her. On the other side the sweetnesse of the sent, shews it is no preternaturall rottennes, but an exact concoction, and natures master-piece; and it puts forth it self naturally and copiously after that part hath concocted it, as milk, &c. Usefull no question it is, nature gave not those bags such a vertue to breed such a sweet in vain. But to what purpose? Seed begets milk-nourshes; whereto serves this? whether to provoke the beast to generation; as wee find Musk awakes lust, and the Castors-hony; or whether to allure other beasts to him; as was said of the Panther. Wee shall praise his wit, who shall suggest other, or better reasons.

CHAPTER IX. Of the collecting, and electing of Civet.

WHen the vessels are full of Civet,How togather it. the beast it self is unquiet, and seeks to disburthen it self. The eagernes of it seemes to swell, vex, and prick, and provoke evacuation; and the tame ones take delight to have the bags emptied with an eare-picker. The Blacks, or Moors,Faber out of Father Greg. search after old, and dry stumps of trees, and mark the large and oyly spots, and take thence a round substance cleaving there as big or small as a chesnuts, they let it boyl out in water, and take that swimmes, being fat, and oyly, and pour it into clean pots, and keep it for their use, and this is the purest Civet. For on thoes trees the beast rubs, and leaves it, when the bags are full, and urge him. And keep them tame in a cellar, when the Civet abounds in the bags, it troubles them, and they cannot stand still, but run up, and down, and rub against the walles, to ease themselves of it, and so it is lost. The servants of D. Barnardine of Corduba fetch the Civet out thus:F. Columna. One drew the chain, wherein the Zibet was tied, another held the hind-legs, a third chased the bagges, and with a large ear-pick fetched the Civet clean out, scraping on all sides, then wiped the short-hair of both bags with cotton wool; and after six times fifty emptying the bags they gather Civet enough to full a chesnut-shell. In summer it is moyster, and every two dayes in warme weather they gathered half an ounce, but in winter they got it scarce once a week, nor so much, the female yeelded lesse, but without striving.

The Civet seems fat, and [...] nctunous, and swims at top in water, and serves it self from all other things; it is as hony, or butter, it is thinner in summer, at first gathering, but after thickens. I fetched out of a dead one above two drams of Civet, whitish, and fast as hony. Scaliger &c. likens it to black sope, but he saw only the outside, and that old. Some say, the fresh is ugly, and stinking, and after comes to smell sweet, contrary to amber,Amatus. Quadramius. and musk, which are the newer the better. Donatus (out of Eremi. l. 1. Antidotary, c. 10.) saith the stayler is best, and of a Lion, and palish colour, fat, thin, thickning in time, being laid on a paper, and chased

melts,Id. de. Theriaca. c. 11. and dissolves, which distinguishes it from the adulterate, false Civet. It is said the Civet of the male is whitish, that of the female Lion-coloured at first after a weak, but white also at first gathering. An ounce of the females is worth four of the males. They mix six ounces of this with one of that, and so it is perfect; the males alone is little worth.

It is many wayes sophisticated,How sophisticated. as mixed with butter, or the soft pulp of larger raisins, or Zibbibus, and with rank fat, or butter, or cheese, put a little in a silver spoon on embers with those foresaid things, it renders them sweet like it.Right. The sweetest Civet is right, and best. It is said that the right, if put into seething water, flotes at top, and all heterogeneous stuffe sinkes from it; but we have found in some the rank butter, so that it seems the separation is not so perfect. The best Civet gains a colour, as a dusky web, but at the bottome waxes white; the sophisticate is of the same colour at bottome, and top. It is to be kept only in glasse.

CHAPTER X. Of the use, and power of Civet.

IT hath a double use, the Druggists regard only the sent, Physitians the vertue. Druggists say a little Civet overcomes many sents in compositions, so that you shall smell only that simple pounder of Civet, is made of Sugar-candy,Alexius Rosellus. and Civet beaten together to pouder, which is kept in a glasse-viol close shut. Some take eg-shells washt, and dried, and bruize them to a fine powder,Powder. and in each ounce put three caracts of Civet; a caract weight four grains; or they take two ounce weight of prepared eg-shells, infusing them in Rose-water, musked ten, or twelve dayes, they dry, crumble, sears them, put an ounce of refined sugar to them, then put embers into a brasse mortor, till it be so hote, as you can endure to handle it, then wipe it, and put in the eg-dust, smooth it with the pestle, put to it four caracts of Civet, mingling it by degrees with the pestle end annointed, the spaced of an houre, then keep it in glasse close shut, and sprinkle the pouder on whitened sheets, shirts, and other garments.

Some take the best ordinary sope,Sope. slice it small, dry it in the sun, or shade ten dayes, bruize, searse it, then add Civet-pouder, and ball it with Rose-water.

Of Civet also are made oyls, ointments, and perfumes.

The skin of the belly is souverain in all cold greefs.The vertues. F. Gregory in Faber. Scribon. Larg. c. 171. A bit of it worne on the stomack strengthens it. The Guinee, and Brasil Blacks eat the flesh, though it be unsavoury, and hard of digestion to make them lusty. The Hyaenaes skin is also good against the bite of a dog. In Candy a ship-wracked Barbarian being driven on shoar, that being elderly, and maintained on the publick purse, related that a piece of the Hyaenaes skin tied in a cloath, and bound about the left arme helped against bites, cramp, &c.Mar [...] el. Empir. c. 36. Aetius [...] erm. 2 c. 162. Noni [...] s c. 259. Avicea. l. 2. c. 326. It is said, shoos made of a Seacalfs, or rather of an Hyaenaes skin, drives away the foot-gout. It is good against the bite of a mad dog, if bound on. It is past beleef that the Phocas, and Hyaenaes skin make thunder proof, and that they carry them about in ships to that end. Surely Avicen knew Civet liavour under the name of Galia, and Algalia, which was not Gallia Moschata, for he speaks of simple medicines, not compounds. And Algalia is not Serapions Sederva, which is a cold juice of an herb, and astringent, as Acacia. Besides the vertue is the same of Civet, with Avicens Algalia, as to soften hard impostumes, and dissolved in Ben-oyl, or Keiri, and droped in, eases a sore ear; the sent helps epilepsy, enlivens, and asswages the cold soda; in toxicates the brain in wine; the sent cheers the heart, and in suppositories is good for the mother, and against phlegma, and provoke terms, cleanses the mother, helps conception. So that Civet, Algalia, and Galia are all one, for all is but an Arabique article.

Some count Civet hot, and moyst, others dry,The Temper. [...] & [...]  some, a kin to Musk; but Avicen holds Musk hote, and dry in the second degree. But if it be a sweat, the Hyaena being very hote beasts, and that abounding in hot weather; and when the beast is heated by anger, or motion, it must needs be chollerick, hot, and dry, and of a disgestive nature.

But there is no certainty, [...]  because none know the tast of it. In all sweat is some salt, and when the beast sweats, the Civet hath some eagernes in it. It is certainely hot, dry, and harsh. Besides, sweat disgests, and allays swelligns, as Algalia. But Castor Durantes his medicine for the matrix, seeme to be made of the genitals.Rucil. Matth. Renod. Lay but Civet on the hollow of the navell, it turns the mother. It is used also against the stoppings of the womb, and barrennes. Read Red, à Castro l. 2. de mor. mul. c. 1. The shape of it in the beast, speaks for what parts it is good. How it helps generation, Roder. à Fonseca consult. 10. shews. And many write how usefull it is against all womb-griefs. Briefly, it easest the Collick.

Wee read nothing in our late writers of oyl of the gall and fat of the Civet-cat, [...] Medicochin. but among the ancients of the Hyaena, as in Galen de comp. med. loc. c. 7. &c. Aelian. H. A. l. 6. c. 46. writes, that the gall kills the Ibis. Galen, that the Hyaenaes fat breeds hair, it being thin, and pearcing to the roots of the hair. The same doth the whole Hyaena,Aetius [...] er. 2. c. 164. boyled in oyl, as the Fox. There are many vertues in Fox-oyl, all which are found in Hyaenas-oyl. The live Hyaena boyld in oyl, makes a discussory oyl, excellent for the joynt-gout.

CHAPTER XI. Of the bones of the Civet-cat.

IT remains now to treat of the Sceleton of this beast prepared by mee, which conduceth much to the discovery of it's nature; to know the place, seat, and posture of the bones, and to see wherein it agrees with, or differs from the Dogs, Wolse, Fox, Cat, and other beasts.

When in all other beasts the number of the turning-joynts of the back-bone is not the same, in our sweet Hyaena were reckoned 49. but in the Sow, and Hedge-hogge but foure, in the Horse, and Camels fifteen, six in the neck, as in Dogs; in the breast twelf, after the usuall way; seven others on the back, as in the Dog. But the Hedge-hogge hath eight; the Cony ten. Finally the tayl consists of foure and twenty small bones. In a Dog I told but fifteen. In the jaws were six sharp cutters on each side, but very small, as in the Cat-pard, and in Dogs.

Next stand the dog-teeth, in bignesse, and shape as the dogs: Then grinders on either side six; the first whereof next the grinders, but small, as the last, saving one, is the greatest of all. The shape of the whole seemed to resemble a dog, and such kind of beasts nearest. And so much briefly of the Anatomy. Let the reader excuse us, that wee give no account of the inwards, since such was the stink of the putrified bowells, that the offence so nau-seated, and turned the stomacks of my schollers then present, in Dr. Dominick Panarolus, who cut it up, and also in the by standers, that it scarce suffered us to make that speedy dissection.

FINIS.

 Tab. [...]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. III.

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. III

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. V

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. VI

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. VIII

[illustration]

 Tab. X

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XI

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XIIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XV

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XVI

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XVII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XVIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XIX

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XX

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXI

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXIV

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXV

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXVI

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXVII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXVIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXIX

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXX

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXXI

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab.  XXXII [illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXXIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab.  XXXIV [illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXXV

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab.  XXXVI [illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXXVII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XXXIX

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XI

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XLI

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XLII

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XLIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XLIV

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XLV

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XLVI

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab.  XLVII [illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XLVIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. XLIX

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LI

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LIV

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LVI

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LVII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LVIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LX

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXIV

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXV

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXVI

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab.  LXVII [illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXVIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXIX

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXX

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXXII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXXIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXXVI

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXXVII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXXVIII

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXXIX

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

 Tab. LXXX

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[illustration]

[...]
