JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES
PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,
HIS  COUNSELLOKS,
THE TWELVE  APOSTLES
_A_TSTD  OTHERS.
■
REPORTED  BY
<1EL\  F.  GIBBS,  JOHN  IRVINE  AND  OTHERS.
.MSPItTri  LLT DEDICATED  TO  TBI  LATTER-  DAT  RAIJTTS  IJC  ALL  THR  WORLD,
VOL.  XX1IL
LIVERPOOL:
PRINTED  A*D  PUBLISHED  BY  JOHN  HENRY  SMITH,  ISLINGTON.
LONDON  :
1ATTIB-DAT  *AlNT»*  JjOK  DEPOT,  19,  SUTHERLAND  BTRRBT,  PIMLICO,  LOM>ON,  W.
1
ENTERED  AT  STATIONERS*  HALL.
L»  R  !•  F  A  C  E
The  Twenty-third  Volant®  of  the  JoUENAL  of  DiSCOUKses,  now
complete,  will,  we  feel  assured,  be  considered  as  acceptable  reading
matter  hy  the  Latter- day  Saints  who  may  be  favored  with  its  perusal
That  they  may  be  stimulated  to  greater  faithful ness  by  the  valuable
instructions  and  exhortations  therein  contained  is  the  desire  of
THE  PUBLISHER.
IKDEX.
Preface,  Date.  Page,
The  preaching  and  practice  of  the  Gospel^ Visi-
tmtiotis  of  A  ngels.  etc,  H .  W,  Neiebitt M  ay  -  I
The  Indians  —  The  influence  of  trie  Elders
May
15,
18S1
Feb.
1
18S2
Nov.

9,

The  setting  of  Souihern  Utah, ..Building  of  the

Temple,  etc  John  Taylor. Nov. 9, 1BS1  U

Travels  of  the  First  Presidency  and  r he  Twelve
...Temporal  and  spiritual  condition  of  the
Saints... Their  Educational  projr*ss.„ Tem-
ple building,  its  object... Organization  of  the
lVii  H-}'!.. i,t,  im  ruitips  The  gathering  and
general  duties  of  the  Saints  of  tied,  their

ultimate  destiny,  John  Taylor, Dec, 11, N  20

Thi  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times  Kesto-
ratios  of  the  tt<  a  pel.  Duties  of  the  Priest-
hood. .  .The  Future  of  Zion . . ,  I  ncoiuisteucy
of  the  Saint  a"  Peraec  u  tort  ...In  ride  n  ti  of

Church  History,  etc.  John  Taylor, March  5f 1882  23

The  Southern  States'  M isaum,,.  Faith  f id  n  f  «  of
Young  tilde  re...  Opposition  to  the  Truth...
i •  rad ml  spre  id  of  the  Uospel  1  'hanges  in
religious  and  political  sentiment... Hard
Time*  in  1  he  South... Vice  and  degradation

„,The  Colorado  Settle  men  U  John  Morgan. Dec 18, 1  SSI  3d

The  linepel'a  Restoration... Its  Priesthood  and
Principles. .  The  saints  Misrepresented...
The  *l  Morm-gtr*  War"  ...  Comparative
Statistic*  .  The  impending  j  id^meiits  of
God. ..Duties  of  the  Saints..  A  warning  to
their  oppressors..* The  wickedness  of  the
world... Exhortation  to  Righteousness—

John  Taylor. April 9, 1SB2  47

The  Laws  of  ()od  and  the  laws  of  the  land. .  .The
Saints  no  obedient  and  law-abiihnv  prupk
...Their  persecutions  productive  of  prosper*
ity-, Their  pa*t  and  prospective  experience

and  eventual  triumph.  Joseph  F.  Smith. Ami 9, 1AS2  69

Man's  Free  Agenty...The  llnspe!  Restored..
Opposition  to  (rod's  Work  ...  Increase  of
wickedness,, .The  world  warned  of  retribu-
tion... The  Saints  exhorted  to  n^hieousn&tt,

Wilford  Woodruff. March 26, M  7ft

The  Last  Dispensation  ...The  Saints'  Religion
Practiaal  Hostility  to  God's  Work ...  Divis-
ions in  Sectarian  Churches  I'mtv  of  the
Saints  Karly  History  of  Utah. .."Mormon"
Thrift  and  Knter prhe  ...  The  One-Man
Power  ..Clod's  People  a  Free  People... I q-

creaae  of  corruption.  .The  Saints  hopeful Erastus  Snow. April 7, n  83

Peace  and  prosperity  of  the  >"aints  ...(imwing
importance  of  the  Church  from  its  organiza-
tion...The  Work  of  t iCKl  and  not  of  Man..,
Gods  Blesiing  upon  the  Righteous... His


■


INDEX.  *

Date.  Page,

Curt*  upon  the  ruru?hteous...Thc  Liberty
of  the  Gospel  ...The  Sainra  preserved  tnun
•war  and  VlontiHhed  ..  Their  l:uion  auduni-

■Tfrsal  guod  will.  Geo.  Q.Cannon. Nor, 20, 1891  IS

TV  Lord**  Work  .  .Warfare  not  require  J  of  the
Saints.,. An  Overruling  Providence  ...  Cor-
ruption and  perjury  in  high  places... Viola-
tion of  the  Constitution...  False  accusations
against  the  Saints... Words  of  comfort  and

exhortation.  F.  D,  Riehardi April 8, 1882  106

Modern  fulfillment  i>f  prnpheey^.Kise  of  Joseph
the  Prophet..,  Organisation  of  the  Church  of
Christ... Persecutions  of  the  Saints,., Their
Uuudyiotf  Faiih  in  God... The  world  proving
Joseph  Smith  a  Prophet...  tsar  an  busily  at
work.. The  Gospel  of  liberty  and  humanity.

Ow.  <L  tannon. April 3t 1881  114

Liberty  of  Con  science...  Man  accountable  to  Ood
...The  Fall  of  Ad n m  and  live  |«i e-nidrfiin-d . .
Redemption  and  Resurrect  ion...  The  Go  hoc  I
in  anctenL  und  in  modem  times..  Kulliil  merit
of  Ptopiecy.,«A  falsehood  refuted.,.  Patri-
archal Marriage — its  purity  and  its  eternal

purpose,  Wiiford  Woodruff. May 14, 1882  124

How  the  Gospel  is  preached  by  the  Elders. .:
vVaiae  of  the  training  they  rre*jve...  His-
torical compilation  of  experiences  of  the
Elder*  would  Vie  in r creating  ...  Prospeeis  of
the  rising  ^encrat ion...  Faith  of  the  undents
restored  .Fulfill men t  of  the  destiny  of  the
Hi  ivv'w  r a m n n t  be  hi nde red . , .  The  Sai n ts

Purified  by  TriaL  Urn  Q.  Cannon, Nor. 14, 1880  J3,t

Human  Rights.,. Origin,  Duty  and  Destiny  ef
Man,..  Cor  reel  Knowlcd^  *1n--  lo  Divine
iJewhtmn... Truth  ever  al-s"Uirt>  atid  un-
welcome to  the  world... Ood 'a  Authority
unrecgnized  ..The  world's  present  stare  and

future  prospects.  George  G.  Bywater. June 4, 1882  142

Ancient  and  Morlern  Israel  Compared. . .flod'n
Wurk  Progressive..  His  Overruling  Provi-
dence. Lorenzo  Suoir, April 7,  150

How  to  find  out  God  ...  How  Man  may  know
hints*  If...  Necessity  of  Divine  Revelation
...Hr>w  and  hy  what  m es ns  received.., Teat i-  t
many  of  i he  Larter-day  Saints. ..The  Nature
arid  origin  of  Man... His  Mortal  Eiporienee
audits  Purpose. --The  fate  of  the  wicked..
Iwot  of  the  righteous.  .  .  Eternal  Life  and  how

it  may  he  attained,  C.  W*  Penrose. June 4, lf  HS6

Preaching  of  the  Gospel  in  the  Latter-days.,
Sitpn  promised  to  follow  believers  as  an-
ciently The  Gospel  in  force  upnn  id]  the
world,. .Sincerity  nu  excuse  for  wilful  disohe-
(lu-fKre.  A  poiime  personal  t'*si  iiuor  y
att  *jiti  rible  through  obedience..  I  Jnautr-orrzed
ad  ministration  unrecognized  of  God.. .New
revelation  essential  and  desirable... True  and

fal*e  chanty,  Orson  Pratt, Sept, 6, 1880  162


ll  INDEX.

Mart  &  Mortal  and  an  J  motor* al  Brine  ...  Tem-
poral and  Spiritual  Death  ...  Redemption
Through  the  Atonement  ami  (Jospel  or
Christ ...  Son*  of  Perdition  ...  Man  s  Pre-
exist en  t,  Disembodied  And  Resurrected
State*  ...  Jesus  Christ  the  tirea*  Example
The  Righteous  to  be  Conformed  lo  Hii
Image.  His  Similarity  to  the  Father  ...  Hi*
Mission  Not  Completed  at  His  Jieath..  Hia
Resurrection and the Redemption  of

Humanity.  Jos.  F.  Smith. June  18, 1882  169

The  Death  of  the  FavthfuL..No  Cause  for  Mourn-
ing ...  The  Perpetuity  of  the  Priesthood..,
Probationary  Ingress  and  Egress  ...  All
Knowledge  *  Comes  frmi  <Iod  ..Temple
Building  and  its  Put  poses...  Exhort  at  ions  to

the  Saints,  John  Taylor. July 24, 1SS2  175-

God's  Peculiar  People  called  a  kingdom  ot  Priests
„,  Their  Ministry  thus  fores hailo wed... The
Meh-hi^edck  and  Aaronic  Priesthoods  .,.
Their  Restorstion  in  the  Latter ♦  dsys  ...
Their  P  rear  I  ling  of  the  Gospel  .«.  Ephraim
and  Manasseh  ..The  lineage  of  the  Prophet
Joit'ph  Smith..  Pr ed esri nation  and  Election
♦..Tlie  Dispersion  and  i  fathering  of  Israel
...The  Priesthood  Endless,  Administering  in
Time  and  Eremity  ...  The  Blindness  of  ths
iientilea  to  the  Triitics  of  God.,. The  lU-aults
[if  persecution. ..The  Future  of  the  Faithful.

Erastus  Snow. May 6. 1882  W

The  Establishment  of  Character  ...  Traits  rhat
are  admirable  ...  How  to  Have  Influence
with  Heaven  .  Why  Men  .Should  Do  Right  ..
Cultivation  of  Spiritual  <iift»  Things  of
(.jod  muni  he  tough  t  after.  . Fasting,  Prayer.

Devotion  and  sacrifice.  Lorenzo  Snow May 6,  189

Mission  of  the  Holy  '.'host  .Commission*  of  the
Ancient  and  Modem  Apostles  ...  Unbelief
and  fanaticism  ...  Sincerity  no  evidence  of
Truth  . .  Marriage  Commanded  of  ii™l  and
forbidden  by  Man  Moral  Courage  and
anti  "  Mormon"  Leqislniiun  .  iinthteous
and  IWichtenus  Dnminmn  ...  Purity  of  the
Elders  of  Israel... Worship  of  wealth  .and  its
poverty  .,4  Latter-day  Saints  neTer  destined
to  be  slaves...  Persecution  ami  its  consequen-
ces. Moses  Thatch  •  r. April  S,  „

Temple  at  Ijogan  . .  Liquor  trettli r  i  ] i urch  * )r-
gam/ation  Duties  of  its  » 'flicers  ...  Treat-
ment of  transgressors. . .  t  n  teres)  ing  Anecdote
and  its  .Mural  ..Various  otriccs  and  calling*
of  Priesthood,  etc.. ..Growth  and  progress  of
God's  work...  Opposi  lion  by  the  world  ...  Re-
peur  ration  of  the  Lsmatiites  and  general

salvation  of  Man.  John  Taylor. Aug. 6.  2 15

Marriage  Question .  .  .  Lawful  concubinags  and
its  unlawful  counterfeit ...  Various  views
concerning  union  ot  sexes...  Plural  Marriage
among  Latter-day  Saiiits  ...  Example  and
efuuAoierof  Abraham..  Christian  I  rimes  in
New  E  upland.  .Oppression  with  its  real  and


INDEX*  Til

Date.  Paf*.

pretended  object  .♦.  Prisons  and  penalties

powerless  to  stop  the  Lord's  work. lirastus  Snow. Feb. 26,  1B82  224

Work  of  God  and  Building  Up  of  Zion  Preach  -
ing,  Temple  Building  and  other  duties..
Corruption  and  hypocrisy  of  Christendom . . .
Rights  of  Latter-day  Saints  as  American
Citizens  ...  l>.fference  be i ween  Bignroy  and
Pol  v  cam?. . .  Unjust  legislation  and  A  merican

Jusiice,  John  Taylor. Aug, 6, 1882  235

The  (rat  her  in  jr  and  its  Object  ...  Sacrifices
required  of  Saints.. . .  Iliak  of  rejecting  testi-
mony of  truth  ...  Profession  and  practice,
Pretensions  ami  principle  Impending
Trials  and  Troubles,  Time  and  Eternity,
Body  and  Spirit... Spirit  of  Truthful  Intui-

tion'-Safeat  fJuide,  Joseph  E.  Taylor, Sept 3, 1S82  $42

Goip**!  of  Christ  or  Ancient  Christianity  ..,  Its
gro  w  i  h  a  rid  progress  ..A  'h  ristfs  Sermon  On
the  Mouot...  Early  Apostasy  and  the  Gospel's
Restoration .  -The  Object  of  11  Anti-1*  Mor~
mon"  Legislation  ...  Saints  willing  to  abide

<tlie  issue,  Oeo,  G.  By  water. Aug. S7,  1^0

Mighty  MiSMon  of  the  Saints  ...  C.!od*s  Deabncs
...  Authorship  of  Creation  and  Iiisrht  to
Bute.. .Contrasted  Statesmanship  ...  Mother
of  Harlots  and  her  Daughters  ...Political
Situs! ion,,, Rights  of  Man,.. Supporters  and
Subverted  of  Law  and  Order.,. lielig ions
hit« ■]« .Tunci:  and  Political  Injustice  ...
Latter -<lav  Saints  Future  Saviors  of  America
...  Kdflj mids  Ac'  and  its  Unjust  npi-rii-
lion  ...  Reverend  Falsifiers aud  their  Dupes,

John  Taylor, Oct. 8, „  257

Ferserution  Fulfilling  Prophecy ...  Vermont,
the  Birthplace  of  prominent  "Mormons"
and  their  oppressors.. .Faith  and  integrity  of
Saints  to  be  tested  ...  Peace  among  God's
People  a  peculisr  characteristic  ..  In  Time
of  Trouble  trust  m  (.iod,  ,l  Watch  the
Captain  "...Acts  of  Utah  Commissioners. „
t'i oil's  Overruling  Power  and  Wisdom... A
fJrent  Work  Requires  Great  Sacrifice... Non-
performance of  Huty  no  cause  for  self-
gratulation. .  Man's  pen  allies  more  endurable
than  (iod's  ...  Belter  to  disobey  Man  than

Gud.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon. Oct. St 1682  Xfl

Love  for  and  forgiveness  of  enemies  ...  Such
things  possible  without  association  and
assimilation  Saints  exhorted  against
bartering  away  their  Inheritances. . .  Idolatry

of  riches... Man  cannot  build  up  Zion,  but  (
God  can  and  will,  Joseph  F.  Smith. Oct. 7f 18S2  282

Ke  relations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ..Sacrifice  brings
fori  h  salvation..  .Episode  of  Queen  Esther  ; ,
Where  knowledge  is  Riven  obedience  is
required  *.*  Penalty  of  disobedience, *.Te»ti-
mrmy  of  Latter-day  Saints.  J  nde%truetibilii?

of  u  Mortnonisin,"  Lorenzo  Snow. Oct. 5, ,»  ■«*

"Twin  Relics'"  Slavery  and  Polygamy... Poly-
ga  *  y  and  Bijjfainy....  "Christian"  Statesman-
ship ...  .fo*r| 1  Smith  s  proposition  for  aboli-
tion of  slavery  ...  Ureat  Rebellion..  Bible


TU1  INUtX.

Date.  Page,

aTid  Polygamy,.  Origin  nf  M^n  agamy...
Mission  of  E  phi  aim  .„  Ten  Tribes  and
Scattered  Israel  ,  Present  Persecution  and

Future  Prospect*  of  Saint*.  Erastus  Snow; Oct 7, „  2SH

*g  Mormon  ism"  as  true  now  as  ever*  .Many  called
but  few  chosen  oil  s  People  t^  be  tned
and  tested... Rapid  growth  of  His  Kingdom
...  Blindness  of  the  World  ...Animosity  of
Satan  ...  Ur  deals  ordained  iV- m  I  he  Ue^rj  li-
ning ...  Howard  of  the  faithful.  Daniel  H,  Wells. Oct 6, 18S2  303

Tithes  and  Offering's ...  Consecrations  and  stew-
ardships... Law  of  the  Lord  to  Latter-day
Saints  ..Meaning  of  **  Surplus  Properly'*
...  Vear  of  Jubilee  or  Release...  Importance

of  paying  Tithing.  F.  D.  Richards. Not. 6, tl  311

Man's  Natural  Spirit  and  the  Spirit  of  fiod  ...
What  is  expeited  of  Saints ...  Christ  the

exam  |>le  to  all  His  followers.  John  Taylor. Not. 23, „  320

Hardship  the  Heriraye  of  the  Saints..,  Necessity
o f  trial. . .  For« i  v e u ess  *  f  Enetn  i es . . . Inspi  r« I
Dreams,  M  Get  the  Spirit  of  Godn... Great
Work  expected  of  Sam  is  ...  Labors  anion  jr

Lsinanites.  Wilfnrd  Woodruff, Dec In, M  326

Men  powerless  except  ns  Cod  Perm  Ms..,  Ordeals

necessary  to  purity... Zion  will  riumph.  John  Tayloi.  Oct.  29,  „  333
Ixird  Interested  in  Kitlva:ion  of  whole  Hirrt.au

Family... His  Plans.  Purposes  and  Dealings

...Necessity  of  Charity,  Love,  Union,  etc*,

in  the  Church  of  Climt ...  Ln nan  Tempi*

and  s  prophetic  glimpse  at  it  a  future. Lorenio  Knew. .  Not. 4, „  338
Revealed  Religion  And  Man-made  Methods  of
Worship  ...  Only  one  true  and  acceptable
way  to  Worship  God... Ancient  and  Modern
Revelations  corroborate  each  cither..  Gods
Spirit  the  Lighc  and  Life  of  the  whole  world
...  Coming  Forth  of  Light  in  Latter  Days...
Joseph  Smith  and  his  Doctrines,..  Personal
Experience ...  Operations  of  the  Spirit,..
Way  to  Obtain Knowledge  from  <ind  ...
Necessity  of  Priesthood  and  Church  Cov-

*rnment.  Qbsm  W.  Penrose. Jan. R 1883  343

Power  and  authority  of  Priesthood  continuous
.  Pseud o- prophets  and  their  Revelation*,.
Ordination  Pre -requisite  to  action  in  any
Office... Joseph  Smith  the  Head  of  this  Dis-
pensation Twelve  Ordained  by  Ihiu  u>
bear  off  the  Kingdom  ...  Joseph  a  Legal
Successor  and  Brigh am V  .Priesthood,  as  it
now  exists,  the  Rightful  Authority  of  God

eo  earth  , «,,.  .  q.  ..  imi.:, i  >d .. 23, 1 357

Why  Saints  meet  together  ...  What  their  profes*
sion  implies... No  Right  to  Sit  iu  Judgment
on  i he  World  ...  All  ( 'hildren  of  *  Common
Father... Many  Cood  Men  Inspired  bv  tin-
Spirit  of  Cod  ^  ho  did  not  possess  the  gift
of  the  fluly  Chest  ...  How  Joseph  Smith
outlined  knowledge What  the  Savior
rcijun  tn]...!  ipi  raiiuus  or  the  Holy  G host.,.
Duly  of  Missionaries  ion al  Feelings

Buried  in  I  "ml»i  -:teiiig  the  CospeL„Rrmtion-
abip  totiod  ...  iX-sUny  of  the  Fai  hful  ^
Character  of  would-be  Reformers  .Rights
to  he  contended  for  ...  Corrupt  practices

condemned,  John  T*  dor. Feb. 11, 1883  368


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE BY ELDER H. W,  XAISBITT.

DELIVERED  LV  THE  TaBCHXAC  LK, RaLT  LaKK  ClTV,  SUNDAY  AfTBRN'OO^f

Mat  15t»,

(Reported  by  John  Irtin*.)

TIIE  PRKAfRINfi  AHU  PRACTICE  OF  THK  ftOSPEI* — VISIT  A  TH  J  NS  UK


(OONTIJiUKD  FttMY.  J'Arili  37<ip luUftNAL  OF  DlWOUILs^s,  VtJL.  XJ£IL)


tli ere  liave  beta  larger  opportunities
for  the  •oqa^ition  of  the  knowledge
which  pertain*  to  the  designs  of  th«
Creator.  1  think  that  all  thoughtful
lui-n  and  thoughtful  women  have  felt
within  Lheiwelvw  that  there  were  a
.r>-.it  many  problems  in  regard  to
human  existence  upon  which  they
vMiill  like  to  have  light  and  tnbetli-
jjence,  they  would  like  to  understand
:nnl  to  have  a  surety  as  to  whether  a
mm  was  anything  more  than  a  mere
:immal  in  creation,  whether  it  was
hi*  destiny  only  li  to  eat  and  to  drink,
for  to-morrow  we  die,"  or  whether
his  existence  was  of  a  continuous
character  ;  whether  after  having  laid
down  this  tabernacle  of  tfeshhe  would
In 4  privileged  to  enjoy  again  the  asso-
ciations which  have  boon  agreeable
to  him  on  narth,  whether  the  t'lmily
circle  would  be  hurst  asunder,  or
whether  continuing  to  exist  he  would
be  divested  in  a  great  measure  of
the  temptations  which  seem  to  in-
fluence him  on  the  right  hand  and
on  the  left,  and  which  soi**ar  to
No,  1.


lead  so  many  thousands  ot  the
human  family  down  to  degradation
and  death.  It  appears  to  me  that
tlii  tl  are  ijuesmttfl  in  connection
with  all  these  tiling!  that  thousands
would  tike  to  solve,  and  ijui'»r.ious
which  really  never  can  be  solved  by
the  ordinary  wisdom  and  kuowh*dire
which  [iritain  to  the  educational
facilities  of  mankind.  Now,  in
reading  these  prophecies  concerning
the  future  angelic  visitation*  that
are  to  take  place  to  the  history  -I
mankind,  I  have  no  doubt  that  those
who  have  pondered  over  these
prophecies  hav«  thought  that  in
these  visitations  they  would  find
the  key  wlueh  should  unlock  the
past,  the  present  and  the  future,  and
be  of  great  value  in  th**  salvation  of
the  human  family —salvation  from
ignorance,  from  sin,  and  from
death.  These  are  the  things  which
men  everywhere  need  They  need  »
to  be  saved  from  themselves :  they
Med  to  be  saved  from  each  oilier;
they  need  to  be  saved  in  regard  to

Vol  XXIII.


2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCO  TUSKS


the  future,  according  to  the  Scrip-
tures, and  the  generally  received
notions  of  the  Christian  world

Now,  this  angel  that  was  to  come
in  the  latter  times  was  declared  to
be  one  who  was  to  bring  the  ever
lasting  Gospel  in  order  that  it  might
be  preached  among  all  nations.
Now,  the  everlasting  Gospel,  what-
ever that  may  mean,  is  something
that  is  divine  in  its  character.  It
is  not  conjured  up  by  muiuing  and
designing  men.  God  was  its  au-
thor ;  in  fact  the  Scriptures  say  that
Bis  Son  Jesus  was  the  11  author  and
finisher"  of  the  Christian  faith  on
earth.  Whenever,  therefore,  the
revelation  of  that  Gospel  comes  it
must  give  man  an  account  of  his
origin,  of  the  necessity  of  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  present,  and
something  of  his  future.  There  is
one  thing  which  strikes  the  reader
as  being  very  peculiar  in  regard  to
this  angel  coining  to  the  human
family.  It  is  implied  upon  the  sur-
face, and  in  its  depths  also,  that
there  would  be  no  necessity  of  send-
ing the  Gospel  if  the  children  of
man  had  the  Gospel  already,  this
would  be  superfluous.  Then  when
this  an  gel  comes  is  he  to  come  to
Christendom,  or  is  he  to  come  to
heathendom  ]  Is  he  to  come  to  men
that  have  not  heard  of  Jesus,  know
nothing  of  God,  know  nothing  of  the
way  of  salvation,  or  is  be  to  come  to
the  Christian  world.  If  he  is  to
come  to  heathendom  it  of  course
would  l>e  to  bring  salvation,  the  re-
demption of  the  soul  and  body  of
man  ;  hut  if  he  is  to  come  to  Christ-
endom it  would  almost  seem  to  im-
ply that  amid  them  even  the  Gos-
pel of  redemption  was  un preached
or  misunderstood,  for  in  all  the
creations  of  our  God  there  does  not
appear  to  be  anything  of  an  unneces-
sary character,  there  are  no  steps
taken  in  His  government  that  are  ;


inapplicable  to  the  existing  condi-
tion of  things  ;  hut  the  fact  that  an
angel  was  to  come  in  44  the  dispensa-
tion of  the  fulness  of  times"  natu-
rally implies  that  the  Gospel  would
not  be  at  that  time  preached  on  the
face  of  the  earth.  Now  this  is  rather
an  awkward  conclusion  to  arrive  at
when  all  Christendom  is  said  to  be
doing  st)  much  in  regard  to  the
building  of  churches,  the  teaching
of  religion,  the  payment  of  minis-
ters, tlie  semling  of  the  so-called
Gospel  to  the  heathen,  and  the  fur-
nishing of  Bibles  to  all  the  nations  of
the  earth. And  on  reflecting  upon
the  visits  of  this  angel  a  man  would
naturally  enquire,  if  this  angel  is
going  to  bring  the  Gospel,  in  what
does  the  Gospel  consist,  and  as  a
necessary consequence  he  would
also  begin  to  enquire  as  to  what  the
records"  say  which  have  come  down
to  us  from  ancient  times. He  would
look  into  the  New  Testament  ;  he
would  read  the  sayings  of  those
whose  names  have  become  historic  ;
lie  would  read  the  sayings  of  the
Great  Teacher,  who  was  sent  from
heaven, even Jesus Christ  the
righteous  ;  and  he  would  read  the
acts  and  doings  in  that  book  of  His
successors  the  Apostles,  and  of  the
primitive church, and from  this
record  he  would  endeavor  to  find
out  what  the  Gospel  was  as  preached
in  ancient  times,  and  after  he  had
done  this  he  would  begin  to  contrast
the Christian organisations  with
which  he  was  surrounded,  the  theo-
ries which  Christians  hold,  the  doc-
trines which  they  teach  and  put  them
side  by  side  in  parallel  columns  with
the  teachings  of  the  ancient  Church.
He  would  institute  comparisons  and
so  would  show  a  desire  to  understand
the  necessity  for  this  angel  coming
expressly  from  heaven  to  "  preach"
the  everlasting  Gospel  unto  them
that  dwell  upon  the  earth,  and  to


HE  PREACHING  AND  PRACTICE  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


3


every  nation  and  kindred  and  tongue
and  people."  And  in  taking  the
Kew  Testament  for  his  guide,  in
pondering  the  acts  and  teachings  of
Jesus  and  his  Apostles,  he  would
begin  to  understand  that  there  was
method  and  order  in  connection  with
that  Gospel ;  that  it  consisted  of  a
series  of  principles,  of  ideas,  and
thoughts  and  practices,  which  were
intended  to  work  out  some  desired
end*  Hence  it  was  said  that  the
Gospel  in  ancient  times  "  was
the  power  of  God  unto  salva- 1
tion."  It  was  an  important
thing,  it  was  something  of  value ;
it  was  something  calculated  to  affect
a  man's  interests  in  time  and  in
eternity,  it  was  "the  power  of
God  unto  ealvation  ;"  and  I  do  not
think  that  in  any  other  recognized
record  are  we  so  likely  to  find  a  por-
trayal of  that  Gospel  in  its  purity
and  original  simplicity  as  in  the
record  called  the  New  Testament.
When  we  come  to  search  that,  we
realize  that  Jesus  professed  to  be
the  Son  of  God.  He  encouraged
his  followers  to  exercise  faith  in  his
Father,  and  in  regard  to  his  works
he  told  them  that  he  11  did  nothing
of  himself,  but  that  which  he  had
seen  the  Father  do  that  did  he,"  and
that  which  he  did  before  his  Apos-
tles, and  which  he  commanded
them  to  do,  was  according  to  the
commandments  which  he  had  re-
ceived of  the  Father.  I  think  the
Christian  world  will  be  willing  to
acknowledge  that  this  faith  in  God
was  a  principle  which  was  calculated
to  enhance  the  welfare  of  the  hu-
man family.  It  was  calculated  to
infuse  high  and  lofty  thoughts  into
the  man  or  woman  who  accepted  it;
faith  in  the  existence  of  God,  faith
that  they  were  his  children  ;  faith  ,
that  he  was  alive  to  the ir  interests  ;
faith  that  he  was  able  to  teach
them  the  purpose  of  their  existence,


and  the  design  that  he  had  in  their
creation,  faith  that  he  was  able  to
hear  and  answer  their  prayers.
And  the  man  who  enjoyed  this
faith  in  God  after  he  had  been
taught  it  was  a  man  who  was  likely
not  only  to  feel  higher  conceptions
i  in  regard  to  humanity,  so  far  as
he  himself  was  concerned,  but
there  would  be  bound  to  spring
up  in  his  heart  feelings,  growing  out
of  this,  in  regard  to  his  brother- man,
and  to  his  sister,  woman  ;  he  would
be  bound  to  look  upon  them  with
more  regard  for  their  interests,  well-
being  and  salvation  upon  the  earth,
than  he  would  have  done  without
this  conception.  He  would  be  in-
terested in  the  moral,  mental  and
spiritual  condition  of  his  neighbor ;
he  would  be  interested  in  imparting
to  his  neighbor  the  truth,  and  thus
the  spirit  of  faith  in  God  would
begin  to  spread  and  exercise  a  salu-
■  tary  influence  Wherever  it  was  felt
among  those  who  received  it.

And  Jesus  was  not  satisfied  only
I  with  teaching  this  faith  in  God,  but
he  realized  that  there  would  grow
out  of  it  these  or  similarly  certain
principles  of  action  with  regard  to
the  conduct  of  those  who  received
it,  A  man  would  begin  to  realize
that  inasmuch  as  he  was  a  child  of
God,  that  he  h<^d  in  many  respects
been  unworthy  of  that  position,  that
he  had  been  guilty  of  many  acts  both
of  commission  and  omission  that
were  derogatory  to  such  origin,  and
he  would  naturally  begin  to  repent,
to  be  sorry  for  having  committed
himself  in  this  way  and  not  to  be
sorry  only,  but  to  Jay  everything  of
this  character  aside  in  order  that  he
might  stand  approved  of  God  His
Heavenly  Father.  Hence  there
would  grow  out  of  faith  the  spirit  of
repentance  for  past  sins,  and  then  it
was  found  that  there  was  an  ordi-
nance in  the  Gospel  by  which  through


JOURNAL  O*  msCOURSES


divine  appointment,  a  man  was  en-
abled to  receive  the  "remission  of
his  sins/'  consequent  on  the  sacrifice
that  was  to  he  offered  on  Calvary,
That  ordinance  of  the  Church,  as
established  by  Jesus,  was  the  ordi-
nance of  water  baptism  for  the  re-
mission of  si tis.  This  was  one  of
the  principles  of  the  Gospel,  one  of
the  principles  of  salvation,  one  nf  the
steps  in  the  educational  proce&s  of
those  who  submitted  themselves  to
the  authority  of  the  Great  Teacher,
Jesus  Christ.  Now  there  is  a  vast
diversity  of  opinion  in  the  Christian
world  in  regard  to  baptism,  but  this
diversity  we  need  not  stop  to  con-
sider. We  can  take  the  New  Testa-
ment,  and  see  what  is  laid  down
there  upon  the  subject.  Some  think
baptism  unimportant.  Christ,  how-
ever, evidently  thought  it  important.
In  speaking  to  Nicodemus,  he
said,  "Except  a  man  be  born  of
water  and  of  the  spirit,  he  cannot
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God/1  And
when  he  commissioned  his  Apostles
to  preach  the  Gospel,  they  \jeut
forth  among  the  people,  "  baptizing
them  in  water,  confessing  their
lins."  Indeed,  there  are  illustra-
tions in  abundance  of  this  fact,  that
will  be  familiar  to  all  the  students
of  the  New  Testament,  The  great
Apostle  Peter,  who  appeared  to
have  been  the  master  spirit  of  the
Church  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,
when  men  began  to  inquire  what
they  should  do  to  be  saved,  answered
the  inquirers  in  this  way,  im  Ke-
peut  and  be  baptized  every  one  of
you,  in  the  name  of  *resus  Christ,
for  the  remission  of  sins,  ami  ye
shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost.1'  This  was  the  ancient  order;
this  was  the  order  established  by
Jesus,  and  the  presumption  is
beyond  dispute  that  if  it  was  ne-
cessary for  any  one  single  member
of  that  primitive  church,  or  fur  any


of  the  Apostles,  or  for  Jesus  himself!'
to  be  baptized  in  water,  it  was  ne-
cessary for  the  whole*  Hence  the
irresistible  conclusion  is,  that  every
member  of  the  primitive  church
was  baptized,  44  buried  with  him
by  baptism  unto  death,  that  like
as  Christ  was  raised  up  I  rum  the
dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,,
even  so  we  also  should  walk  in
newness  of  life."  Tins  was  one
of  the  doctrines  of  the  ancient
church,  and  the  next  doctrine  that
followed  it  in  the  programme  and
system  of  the  Gospel  was  the  giving
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Now  the  scrip-
tures tell  us  that  "  the  manifesta-
tion of  the  spirit  is  given  to  every
man  to  profit  withal11  In  every
land  and  clime,  in  all  conditions  of
the  human  family,  of  every  C\>lor,
among  the  most  highly  civilized  as
among  the  most  degraded,  there  is
given  to  every  man  this  measure  of
the  spirit  of  God  to  profit  withal,
and  it  is  in  accordance  with  his  obe-
dience to  the  measure  received  of
that  spirit  that  he  will  be  rewarded
in  the  future.  But  in  the  Christian
church  there  appears  to  have  been
an  order  that  went  in  advance  of
this  universal  gift  of  the  spirit.  It
was  called  "the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost  by  the  laying  on  of  bands."
Hence  those  who  are  familial*  with
the  New  Testament  will  realize  that
when  men  were  baptized  they  were
afterwards  confirmed  by  "  the  laying
on  of  hands,"  and  upon  that  con-
fir  ma  tioti  they  received  the  Holy
Ghost.  This  Holy  Ghost  in  theni
was  the  power  of  God.  It  opened  up
their  minds,  it  informed  tlu-ir  reason,
enlarged  their  capacity,  and  enabled
them  to  comprehend,  as  the  scrip-
tures say,  the  past,  present  and
future.  It  was  a  grand  gift,  and  one
essential  to  salvation.  To  one  man
it  gave  the  spirit  of  wisdom  ;  to
another  the  word  of  knowledge  ;  to


w


THE  PREACHING  AND  PRACTICE  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC


:an  other  faith  ;  to  another  the  gift  of
liealing ;  to  another  the  working
♦of  miracles  ;  to  another  prophecy  ;
4o  another  discerning  of  spirits  ;  to
another  divers  kinds  of  tongues,  etc*
It  was  to  them  the  fountain  of  divine
intelligence  and  power.  And  these
manifestations  followed  the  believer
everywhere.  It  harmonized  all  the
^conflicting  thou  id  its  and  ideas  that
they  might  have  had  in  regard  to
God, in  regard  to  theinstitutions  with
which  thev  were  surrounded,  in  re-
.gard  to  the  duties  devolving  upon
them,  in  regard  to  their  destiny  in
the  future.  It  made  them  one  in
Christ  Jesus.  They  were  baptized
by  one  baptism,  and  they  enjoyed  one
spirit.  They  were  rich  in  the  unity  of
the  faith.  And  when  men  were  thus
baptized  and  received  tins  spirit  it
was  not  expected  that  they  should
stand  strictly  upon  their  own  indi-
viduality. They  were  not  left  to
wander  abroad  to  the  riirht  and  to  the
left,  but  there  appeared  to  have  been
in  the  primitive  times  a  good  deal  of
what  we  see  in  our  own  day.  An
organization  grew  up.  They  formed
what  was  called  a  church.  It  is
-called  in  the  New  Testament,  in
some  places  "  the  Church  of  God,"  in
other  places  it  is  called  "the  Church
of  Christ."  It  was  a  church  com-
posed of  those  who  had  thus  been
baptized,  and  thus  received  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  They  were  united
together  for  self-defense.  They  were
united  in  order  that  they  might  be
taught  by  the  authorities  of  that
church.  They  were  not  taught  by
strangers  or  by  men  who  had  never
passed  through  the  same  gateway
.and  received  the  same  spirit  as
themselves,  but  according  la  t he
New  Testament  they  were  taught
by  Apostles,  Prophets,  Pastors,
Teachers  and  Evangelists,  men  who
were  engaged  in  the  ministry  of  the
Lord  J e^ us  Christ. These  officers


were  "set  in  the  church,"  according
to  the  New  Testament,  for  the  edify-
ing of  the  body,  for  the  training  of
the  members,  until  they  all  came  to
the  unity  of  the  faith  and  to  the
full  stature  of  men  and  women  in
Christ.  Now,  that  was  a  glorious
age.  I  have  heard  good  men  and
women,  ever  since  I  heard  anything,
wisli  that  they  had  lived  in  those
jrimitive  times.  They  have  said
low  glad  they  would  have  been  to
have  the  privilege  of  even  touching
the  hem  of  the  Saviors  garment,
witnessing  his  miracles,  hearing  his
teachings,  and  to  have  been  obedient
to  the  principles  which  he  taught
Men  and  women  have  said  that
they  would  have  been  glad  to  have
lived  in  the  Apostolic  age  ;  that
thev  would  have  belonged  to  the
primitive  church  ;  that  they  would
have  been  in  their  glory  to  share
in  its  trials  and  persecutions,  to
have  enjoyed  its  spirit,  to  have
received  of  its  blessings,  and  to  have
acquired  the  knowledge  and  intel-
ligence which  accompanied  the
Priesthood  that  had  control  of  that
special  church.  I  believe  there  are
thousands  everywhere  to-day— men
who  are  Elders,  Deacons,  Superin-
tendents of  Sunday  Schools,  toch-
ers in  Sunday  Schools — who,  on
reading  the  history  of  the  past  feel
that  they  would  have  been  gla  I  to
have  lived  in  the  primitive  times
and  seen  the  leaders  and  apostles  of
that  church.  Well,  now,  these  feel-
ings are  natural.  We  realize  the
glory  and  blessing  which  belong  to
that  ancient  order.  But  it  appears
that  this  order  in  a  great  measure
ha*  become  obsolete  ;  it  has  pasted
away,  it  is  not  to  be  found  anywhere
in  the  form  in  which  it  existed  an-
ciently. There  may  be  a  church  that
has  faith  in  God  ;  there  may  be
many  churches  that  include  repent-
ance, that  practice  baptism  ;  some


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


may  have  faith  in  baptism  for  the
remission  of  sins ;  there  may  be  here
ami  there  men  who  believe  in  the
reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost  by  the
laying  on  of  hands  ;  but  in  its  beau-
tiful primitive  order  it  is  nowhere
to  be  found  among  the  children  of
men.

Now,  in  regard  to  the  angel  that
should  u  fly  in  the  midst  of  heaven,
having  the  everlasting  Gospel  to
preach  unto  them  that  dwell  on
the  earth,"  it  is  only  reasonable  to
suppose  that  when  the  Gospel  is
restored,  it  will  be  restored  with
all  its  ancient  power,  blessings,
ordinances,  Priesthood,  and  every-
thing that  gave  it  grandeur  and
glory  in  the  primitive  time*.  But
now  the  query  is,  Ha*  this  angel
come?  If  he  has  not,  are  the  chil-
dren of  men  looking  for  him]  Is
there  any  anticipation  in  the  midst
of  i  he  Christian  world  of  his  ap-
pearance J  I  think  not.  But  here
aiming  a  small  section  of  men  and
women  in  the  Kocky  Mountains,
gathered  from  all  the  nations  of  the
earth,  there  is  au  understanding
that  this  angel  has  come,  and  should
not  the  world  be  pleased  at  the
assumption  ;  for  if  they  are  de-
lighted in  reading  the  account  of
this  angel's  probable  visitation,  why
not  take  comfort  and  delight  in  the
thought  that  angelic  visitation  may
again  become  general  or  partial,  as
the  case  of  necessity  may  require,
Here,  then,  we  have  a  little  nucleus
of  men  and  women  who  say  this
angel  bus  come  in  the  19th  century,
in  the  "  dispensation  of  the  fulue>s
of  times  that  he  has  brought  with
him  and  given  to  those  who  are
preaching  it,  the  '*  everlasting  Gos-
pel" as  it  existed  in  the  ancient
tin.es  ;  that  in  their  practice  they
are  in  the  habit  of  exercising  faith
in  Cod  ;  that  they  have  repented  of
their  sins  ;  that  they  have  been  bap-


tized in  water  for  the  promised  re-
mission ;  that  they  have  laid  aside
their  follies  ;  that  they  want  to  free
themselves  from  error  and  from  all
unrighteousness ;  that  they  have
again  identified  themselves,  as  did
the  ancient  Christians,  with  the
Church,  iK)ssessiug  within  itself  the
ancient  organization,  the  ancient
Priesthood,  the  ancient  authority  to
teach,  to  lead,  and  to  govern  and
control,  until  all  the  obedient  come
again  to  the  unity  of  the  faith.  Now
if  the  Christian  world  take  joy  and
satisfaction  in  reading  ancient  his-
tory or  prospective  history  ;  if  then*
are  thousands  of  longiug  hearts  in
every  denomination  who  say  they
would  have  rejoiced  to  have  lived  in
the  ancient  times,  to  have  listened  to
the  teachings  oi  the  authorities  of
the  primitive  church,  ami  to  have
shared  in  its  blessings,  etc.  ;  what
should  be  the  thought  when  they
hear  again  from  men  passing  to  and
fro  in  the  nations  of  the  earth  de-
claring that  the  ancient  order  has
been  restored  ;  what  should  be  the
thought  of  men  of  intelligence,  men
of  reflecting  minds,  men  that  know
the  merits  and  demerits  of  the
Christian  world  should  not  these
hearts  leap  for  joy  when  they  hear
that  the  Gospel  has  been  thus  re-
stored in  all  its  ancient  glory  ]

The  Latter  day  Saints  testify — it
is  a  standing  testimony  to  the  na-
tions— that  this  angel  spoken  of  by
John,  the  lievelatur,  has  come  to
the  human  family,  that  he  has
brought  with  him  the  ancient  Gos-
pel, ami  that  all  those  who  are  wil-
iing  to  accept  their  testimony,  to
exercise  faith  in  God,  to  lay  aside
their  dead  works,  their  foolish  no-
tions and  their  fake  traditions,  to
divest  themselves  of  the  errors  of
the  ages,  ami  to  be  baptized  and
receive  the  power  of  the  Holy
Gliost,  that  they  shall  be  a>  full  of


THE  PREACHING  AND  PRACTICE  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


7


assurance  as  were  the  Saints  in  an-
cient times.  For  this,  tlie  Gospel  of
the  kingdom  neither  was  nor  is  a
cunningly  devised  fable,  nor  was  it
something  got  up  by  the  craftiness
of  men,  but  the  obedient  realized
and  know  that  it  is  "  the  power  of
God  unto  salvation  j1'  it  has  come  to
them  not  in  won!  only  but  in  power
and  in  the  Holy  Ghost  and  in  much
assurance  ;  and  there  are  thousands
throughout  the  length  and  breadth
of  the  Territory,  thousands  through-
out the  United  States,  the  islands  of
the  sea,  and  throughout  the  nations
of  the  earth,  that  rejoice  in  this  Gos-
pel. They  are  ready  to  testify  that
they  know  that  God  lives,  that  Jesus
was  the  Savior  of  mankind,  that
the  Gospel  in  all  its  pristine  purity
and  beauty  has  been  restored,  and
that  in  cur  own  day  all  the  blessings
and  privileges  necessary  for  a
complete  salvation are  offered  to


mankind.  This  may  seem  a  reflec-
tion upon  the  intelligence  of  ages
that  are  past  and  gone.  Hut  it  is
not  so.  I  presume  that  there  are
thousands  and  millions  who  have
passed  away,  that  did  the  best  they
could,  they  lived  up  to  the  light
they  had,  they  sought  to  please  God
in  their  daily  walk  and  conversation  \
but  the  Elders  of  Israel  take  the
liberty  of  pointing  out  "  a  more  ac-
ceptable way,"  and  they  are  tree  to
testify  and  speak  of  their  own
knowledge  that  God  has  restored
the  Gospel  ami  prepared  the  way  for
the  salvation  of  all  who  are  willing
to  give  obedience  to  that  which  has
been  revealed.

May  God  enable  us  to  appreciate
the  day  of  our  salvation  and  live
according  to  his  design,  that  we
may  'be  saved  in  his  kingdom,  is
my  prayer,  in  the  mine  of  Jesus,
AmtMi.


REMARKS  BY  ELDER Eli  AST  US  SNOW,


Delivered  at  Logan,  Sunday  Afternoon,  February  5th,  1882.

(Reported  hj  Geo.  F.  Gibls.)

THE INDIAN:* — 4Ki INFLUENCE  OF  THE ELDEHS  AMONG  THEM  IN  THE

INT  bit  EST  OF  PEACE,  ETC*


I  am  asked  to  occupy  the  few
minutes  yet  remaining  :  If  the  Spirit
gives  me  liberty  I  will  pursue  the
train  of  thought  that  has  parsed
through  my  mind  while  Brother
Richaids  has  been  speaking  upon


the  spirit  that  has  gone  abroad  upon
the  remnants  of  the  house  of  Israel
who  occupy  this  land,  the  American
Indians  whom  we  understand  to
be  the  descendants  of  the  Nephites,
the  Lamanites,  the  Lennudttes  and


8


JOURNAL  OF  niSCOURSKK


the  Ishmaelites  who  formerly  as-
sessed this  laud,  whose  fathers  we
have  an  account  of  in  the  Book  of
Mormon.  Those  who  are  most
familiar  with  their  history,  and
with  the  history  of  our  settlements
in  these  mountains  for  the  last
thirty  years — the  manner  in  which
we  have  sent  out  our  colonies  to
locate  upon  the  land  of  tin*  La^an-
ites  :  the  manner  in  which  we  have
treated  with  them  to  obtain  their
consent  and  approval  to  occupy  and
improve  the  laud  winch  they  claim  ;
the  manner  in  which  we  have  moved
among  them  to  maintain  ourselves
and  to  build  the  towns  and  cities
which  are  now  inhabited  by  our
people  throughout  this  mountain
region  :  the  manner  in  which  we
have  sent  out  missionaries  in  advance
of  our  colonies  to  open  up  the  way,
carrying  with  them  til*'  spirit  of  the
holy  Gospel,  the  spirit  of  peace,
the  spirit  of  love  and  brotherhood,
to  endeavor  to  impress  them  with
the  belief  that  we  were  not  men
of  blood,  but  that  we  were  a  people
who  cherished  and  cultivated  the
Ipirit  of  peace ;  the  course  we
have  taken  when  difficulties  would
arise  between  them  and  our  settle-
ments, which  occasionally  would
occur  through  the  indiscretion  of
thoughtless  and  -elfish  men,  to
settle  the  same  in  a  friendly,  peace-
ful way,  thereby  avoiding  bloodshed
and  war ;  and  the  spirit  in  which  wr
have  chastised  them  when  it  became
necessary  to  do  so,  not  in  malice  nor
revenge,  but  as  a  father  would  chas-
tise his  wayward  child,  and  then  as
soon  as  possible  pour  into  thpir
wounds  the  oil  and  the  wine  to  heal
them  up  again -  those,  1  say,  w  ho
are  best  acquainted  with  our  labors
in  this  direction  will  best  appreciate
the  results.

^  I  have  had  much  experience  du-
ring the  last  twenty  year*  in  this


direction  ;  and  have,  by  means  of
the  spirit  of  the  Gospel,  averted
much  war  and  bloodshed,

erever  our  colonies  have  been
sent  in  advance,  their  influence  has
been  felt  for  good  -not  alone  to
them,  not  only  has  it  tended  to
establish  confidence  and  a  bond  of
friendship  between  the  natives  and
our  colonies,  but  it  has  also  tended
to  restrain  the  uprising  in  their
hearts  to  war  against  the  white  race,
ami  has  thus  promoted  peace  to  our
General  Government,  the  misrepre-
sentations and  the  lying  of  our  ene-
mies to  the  contrary  notwith-
standing.

We  know  there  are  to  day,  as
there  always  have  been,  men  who
are  suspicions  and  full  of  green-eyed
jealousy,  ever  ready  to  misrepresent
the  purest  motives  of  the  best  peo-
ple on  the  earth  ;  and  acts  of  loy-
alty and  ho i it-. sty  and  commendation
are  construed  to  be  those  of  conspi-
racy and  wickedness.  And  we  know
too  that  among  this  class  of  vilifiers
and  defamei  s  are  many  of  the  clergy,
some  of  whom  have  come  among  us
as  followers  of  the  meek  and  lowly
Jesus,  to  bring  to  us  glad  tidings  :
but  being  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing
|  they  do  the  work  of  their  master,
and,  therefore,  they  scatter  broad-
cast lies  and  defamation,  Aud  many
newspaper  scribbleis,  who  are  ever
ready  to  pander  to  popular  senti-
ment, whether  it  be  right  or  wrong,
who  know  not  the  facts  in  the  case,
take  up  and  republish  to  the  world
the  untruths  and  misrepresen  tat  ions
of  the  wicked  men  who  are  seeking
notoriety  at  the  expense  of  truth
and  justice.

The  hi  .story  of  Utah  Territory
gives  the  lie  to  all  these  misrepresen-
tations. There  is  no  part  of  the
American  con  tin  eat  that  has  been
peopled  and  redeemed  from  its  deso-
lated condition  with  so  little  blood-


THE  INDIANS— THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  ELDERS-  ETC.


9


shed  as  Utah.  There  is  no  other
State  or  Territory  where  the  general
government  lias  expended  so  little  :
money  or  so  little  force,  or  where  so  i
few  lives  have  been  lost  in  settling
a  country  and  maintaining  peace
with  the  Indians  as  Utah.  To-day
the  American  nation  is  indebted  for
the  spirit  of  "  Monnonism"  that  has
been  diffused  through  this  moun-
tainous country  iu  the  maintenance
of  peace,  and  the  saving  to  the  na-
tion of  millions  of  treasure  as  well
as  thousands  of  lives.

And  the  wisdom  of  the  Lord,
through  His  servant  Brigham
Young,  in  sending  colonies  into  Ari-
zona, and  on  the  several  branches  of
the  Colorado,  also  into  the  San  Juan
country,  as  well  as  on  our  eastward
borders,  may  be  witnessed  ton  lay  in
the  influence  that  is  exerted  by  our
people  to  check  the  spirit  of  war  and
bloodshed  among  the  Xavajoes  and
the  Utes  and  the  Apaches.  The
wars  that  have  troubled  the  country
during  the  last  four  or  five  years  in
Colorado,  New  Mexico  and  Arizona,
have  been,  to  my  certain  knowledge,
greatly  mitigated  by  the  presence  of
cur  colonies  on  their  borders,  and  by
the  labors  of  our  missionaries  among
the  Indians.  During  those  years  I
have  spent  considerable  time  in  vis-
iting those  colonies,  and  have,  there-
fore, been  brought  in  contact  with
many  of  the  nations  of  the  different
tribes  when  they  have  been  visiting
colonies  and  missionary  stations.
And  so  has  Elder  Woodruff  and
some  others  of  the  Quorum  of  the
Twelve.  And  I  ma  a  witness  to
this  fact,  lhat  in  every  instance
where  the  influence  of  our  mission-
aries and  our  colonies  has  been  ex-
erted upon  these  fallen  people,  their
chiefs  have  been  imbued  with  the
spirit  of  peace,  and  they  in  turn
have  exerted  their  influence  on  the
side  **t'  peace  to  allay  the  uprising  of


their  more  bloodthirsty  brothers.
And  when  they  have  been  almost
on  the  point  of  joining  distant  war-
like bands  engaged  in  hostilities
against  the  Government,  and  have
come  to  us  to  know  our  views  and  to
seek  our  counsel,  our  advice  has
always  been  in  the  interest  of  peace,
in  the  spirit  of  kindness ;  we  hhve
always  taught  them  to  restrain  their
hostile  feeliugs,  and  have  portrayed
to  them  the  benefits  of  peace,  for-
bearance and  longsufferiug,  and
advised  them  to  endure  what  they
considered  wrong  rather  than  to
attempt  to  redress  their  wrongs  in
their  feeble,  helpless  condition,  by
taking  up  arms  against  the  strong
and  powerful  government  of  the
United  States ;  and  besides,  that
it  was  displeasing  to  God  our
heaveifly  Father,  that  they  should
shed  the  blood  of  man.  Such  is  the
character  of  the  teachings  and  coun-
sels of  our  leading  men  of  the
various  settlements  to  the  Indians,
and  of  our  missionaries  who  are
sent  anion i?  them.

And  1  have  had  the  testimony,
during  the  last  two  years,  of  many
of  our  presiding  Elders  and  Indian
missionaries — and  they  are  men,  I
know,  whose  word  may  be  relied
upon,  and  who  are  themselves,  I
know,  the  true  friends  of  the  In-
dians, and  are  laboring  for  their
welfare — they  assured  me  that  had
it  not  been  tor  this  influence,  the
young  men  of  the  Navajoes  would
have  been  fighting  with  the  Utes  in
Colorado  during  the  last  war,  and
that  many  more  of  the  Apaches
would  have  been  on  the  war-path
with  the  Late  Victorio  in  New
Mexico,

And  here  let  me  say,  the  last  out-
break of  the  Apaches  last  fall,  was
forced  upon  them  by  the  foolish  and
ruthless  procedure  of  some  of  the
officers  at  Camp  Apache,  greatly  to


10


JUUKNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  disgust  of  every  thinking  man
acquainted  with  the  affairs  of  that
country,  h  was  no  more  nor  less
than  an  attempt  to  make  a  great
national  affair  out  of  a  little,  harm-
less, religious  enthusiasm  that  sprang
among  that  tribe.  Once  in  a
while  the  Indians  become  very  much
excited  over  some  local  prophet ;
and  it  was  merely  an  event  of  this
nature  that  le*l  to  the  late  Apache
War  :  the  interference  of  the  troop*
to  quell  their  religious  enthusiasm,
And  I  want  to  say  that  a  general
war  all  through  these  eastern  mourn
tains  and  Arizona  was  imminent
last  September  ami  October,  and
have  no  doubt  would  have  broken
out,  had  it  not  been  for  tin*  presence
and  influence  of  our  colonies  ex-
tended along  their  immediate  bor-
ders, winch  are  presided  over  by
careful,  wise  men,  and  their  inter-
course and  labors  among  the  Indians;
and  for  the  conservative  influence  of
those  chiefs  and  leading  Apaches
that  Brother  Woodruff4  visited  and
preached  the  Gospel  to  two  years
ago,  and  whom  I  and  somfe  half
dozen  of  our  brethren  visited  and
labored  with  three  years  ago  last
summer,  which  had  the  tendency  to
restrain  the  uprising  of  their  more
hot-headed  brethren  and  of  quelling
it.  They  did  more  than  all  the
troops  from  California,  New  Mexico
and  Eastern  Arizona  in  bringing
about  peace*

The  influence  of  those  friendly
Indians,  who  had  listened  to  the
counsels  of  our  missionaries  and  our
leading  men  in  that  country ,  and  to
Brother  Woodruff*,  who  went  through
the  mountains  to  hunt  up  the  bands
that  had  hidden,  and  who  were
procuring  ammunition  and  other-
wise preparing  for  war — I  say,  their
influence  was  felt  for  good,  as  was


fully  attested  by  their  success  in
bringing  the  hostiles  in  by  hundreds
in  the  vicinity  of  Cooley's  ranch
t  and  elsewhere,  ami  in  allaying  the
warlike  spirit  among  the  Indians
generally  around  Camp  Apache;
and  tli us  in  a  quiet  way  bringing
about  peace  and  preventing  a  gene-
ral wan

I  know  these  things  are  true.  I
was  posted  every  day,  being  at  the
time  on  the  Little  Colorado,  and  in
company  with  President  Jesse
Smith,  who  was  in  communication
with  our  brethren  on  the  borders  of
those  hostile  Indians,  who  bad  mes-
sengers giiing  and  coming  every  day
to  and  from  them  bearing  counsels
of  peace ;  and  I  know  that  the
prayers  of  our  people  ascended  to
the  Father  in  the  interest  of  peace,
that  the  counsels  of  peace  might
prevail  among  them;  and  I  know
too  that  our  prayers,  together  with
the  good  influences  that  had  been
exerted,  did  prevail  on  behalf  of  the
Saints  of  that  region  of  country.
And  I  know  and  can  testify  that  the
influence  of  our  interpreters  and  dis-
creet Indian  men  and  missionaries,,
whom  we  have  located  on  the  San
Juan  i liver,  between  the  Navajoes
aud  the  Ute  reservations,  who  have
been  there  during  the  last  th  tee  years,
as  also  those  on  the  south  of  the
Navajoe  reservation,  and  between
the  Navajoes,  and  the  Apaches  on  the
various  branches  of  the  Little  Colo-
rado, I  know  that  their  influence  and
the  effect  of  their  teachings  and
counsels  upon  the  Lainanites  is  in  the
interest  of  peace  between  the  white
race  and  the  Indians  of  that  country.

I  teel  it  a  pleasure  to  be  able  to
speak  knowingly  of  these  things,  and
hope  that  this  spirit  of  peace  may
extend  throughout  the  land.  Amen..


J  Hi:  SETTLING  OF  SOUTHERN  UTAH,  ETC,


11


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  in  the  St.  George  Tabernacle,  Wednesday  Evening,

Nov.  9th,  1881,


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibhs.)


THE  SETTLING  OF  SOUTHERN'  UTAH — BUILDING  OK  THE  TEMPLE,  ETC.


I  feel  pleased  to  have  the  oppor-
tunity of  again  meeting  with  you.
There  are  many  things  that  if  1  had
time,  I  should  like  to  talk  about,
However,  there  were  one  or  two
statements,  that  I  made  yesterday,
which  I  will  further  explain.  In
speaking  of  the  portion  of  the  peo-
ple and  of  their  settlement*  in  this
southern  country,  I  then  stated
that  President  Young  did  not  make
any  mistake  in  laying  out  a  city
here,  nor  in  building  a  Temple  here;
that  it  was  quite  as  important  a
move  as  any  that  could  have  been
made  in  the  interests  of  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  God  upon  the
earth.  If  I  were  to  enter  into  the
details  of  that  move  I  should  speak
of  it  perhaps  in  a  two-told  capacity;
but  1  will  spe;ik  for  a  short  time,  at
least,  upon  some  of  the  leading
features  associated  with  the  position
that  we  occupy  here  in  these  valleys
of  the  mountains.

We  are  quite  a  long  distance  from
the  outside  world.  It  is  true  there
are  railroads  and  more  are  being
made  ;  and  it  is  right  there  should
be.  That  is  iheir  part  of  the  busi-
ness. In  this  way,  and  in  many
instances,  they  are  assisting  us  to
build  up  the  kingdom  of  God,  but
they  don't  know  it.  If  they  did
they  would  not  like  to  do  it.

The  position  that  we  occupy  in


these  valleys  of  the  mountains,  is  a
very  peculiar  one.  When  we  came
up  here  the  fin*t  place  that  was  de-
signaled  was  Salt  Lake  City,  Pre-
sident Young  said  that  he  had  a
manifestation  that  that  was  the
place.  There  was  a  valley,  a  very
good  valley,  a  comparatively  rich
valley,  a  valley  that  was  well  watered,
a  valley  that  could  be  irrigated  with-
out much  labor,  where  the  streams
were  quite  easy  of  access  and  where
a  small  community  could  easily  raise
their  sustenance  ;  and  this  we  did*
Now,  had  we  lauded  in  a  place  like
this  at  first,  it  would  have  been  more
difficult,  people  would  have  become
more  discouraged,  and  some  of  them
felt  very  much  discouraged  as  it
was— some  going  to  California  be-
cause everything  looked  so  forbid-
ding. Vet  others  thought  it  would
be  a  pleasant  place  to  reside  in,  a
place  where  a  living  could  be  as
easily  obtained  as  in  mo*t  other
places,  except  we  go  to  some  of  the
rich  lands  of  Missouri,  Illinois,  Iowa,
etc.  But  there  were  other  circum-
stances associated  with  these  things
that  would  have  made  it  difficult
for  us  to  sustain  ourselves  even  in
those  places.  For  instance  we  lived
m  a  rich  land  back  in  Missouri
K very  thing  there  seemed  to  grow
at  a  very  rapid  rate,  everything  in-
creased very  fast,  I  have  heard  some


12


JOURNAL  OK  IHSCOUHNEK.


people  Ml  such  big  stories  about  the
productiveness  of  that  country  that
I  ham  ■dtof  times  been  afraid  to  tidl
what  I  myself  knew  of  it,  for  fear
that  people  would  not  believe  ine.
For  instance,  I  have  seen  fields  of
corn  that  a  regiment  of  soldiers
could  ride  into  and  they  would
be  out  of  sight ;  and  I  have  seen
beans  grow  where  corn  has  been
planted  where  the  corn  stalks  have
served  as  bean  poles  ;  and  1  have
Been  pumpkins  and  squash  grow
am oi i g  them,  three  crops  growing
lihe  same  year  and  at  the  same  time.
That  country,  nevertheless,  has
many  drawbacks.  In  that  country
we  were  very  unhealthy*  We  were
subject  to  what  is  called  fever  and
ague  every  year ;  in  fact,  in  the
spring  we  used  to  think  we  did  well
if  we  didn't  happen  to  die  off  in  the
fall.  Why  could  we  not  stop  there  %
Because  the  land  was  too  good,  and
we  were  easy  of  access  to  men  de-
sirous to  possess  our  property,  and
they  told  us  to  move  on,  and  we
had  to  go.  We  hat!  to  leave  .Mis-
souri, iiiid  I  suppose  (iod  intended
to  try  the  Saints,  to  let  them  pass
through  certain  kinds  of  experience
and  place  them  in  a  position  that
they  would  have  to  lean  on  Him.
Some  of  the  people  rebelled  against
these  things  in  their  feelings.
Among  the  rest,  I  remember  being
much  shocked  at  the  remarks  of
Sidney  Rigdon  after  he  had  been
imprisoned  with  the  Prophet  Joseph
in  Richmond  jail  as  well  as  many
others.  I  visited  them  in  jail,  and
Sidney  Rigdon  made  a  remark  soon
after  he  got  out,  to  the  effect  that
if  God  did  not  care  anything  more
about  us  than  He  seemed  to  do,
that  if  He  allowed  us  to  be  hauled
around  as  Ave  had  been,  he  did  not
care  about  serving  such  a  God.  That
is,  he  found  the  trials  were  heavier
for  him  than  he  was  capable  of  bear-


ing,  nni withstanding  that  he  had
se>  n  the  Lord  and  had  had  visions
pertaining  to  the  celestial,  tenes-
tial  and  telestiai  kingdoms,  in  which
he  had  seen  the  position  of  men  in
the  future,  and  the  purposes  of  God
regarding  the  nations  of  the  earth,
ami  hail  home  testimony  of  it  in
connection  with  Joseph  Smith,  as
we  find  recorded  in  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants-  Yet  when
tiials  came  his  knees  faltered,  and
the  knees  of  many  others  have  fab
tered  in  the  same  way.  Now,  we
talk  about  lands,  good  rich  land.
Why  did  we  nut  stay  in  Missouri?
Because  people  would  not  let  ns.  It
was  just  so  in  Illinois,  Why  did
we  leave  there  ?  Because,  as  I  have
heard  Brother  George  A,  Smith  .say,
we  left  because  we  could  not  help
ourselves ;  at  least,  that  was  the
purport  uf  his  saving.  I  think  the
Lord  was  very  merciful  to  us  in
Salt  Lake  Valh-y.  I  believe  we
lan iled  just  in  the  right  place.  The
people  commenced  to  establish
themselves  ;  they  began  to  lind  that
they  could  raise  crops  there*  and  that
the  land  was  very  productive.  We
stayed  there  for  a  while  and  began
to  make  little  settlements  and  little
excursions  out  into  the  surrounding
country.  The  people  had  all  kinds
of  difficulties.  I  remember  once,  in
Bountiful,  there  were  three  or  four
families  went  up  to  settle  there,  and
they  felt  that  there  was  not  enough
water,  and  that  they  could  hardly
get  along.  They  got  to  quarreling
about  water  rights,  as  we  do  some-
times, I  do  not  know  of  much
quarreling  down  here ;  I  do  not
think  you  have  as  much  water  lo
quarrel  over  as  they  had.  After-
wards President  Young  was  moved
upon  to  begin  to  make  settlements
in  other  places.  We  had  now  ob-
tained a  foothold.  We  ha  1  a  place
where  we  could  raise  all  the  grain


necessary  for  our  sustenance,  where
we  coiil  1  raise  sheep,  cattle,  etc,
We  pushed  out  to  Ogdeu  on  the
one  hand  and  to  Provo  on  the  other,
and  then  occupied  some  of  the  best
places  in  Salt  Lake  Valley,  in  Utah
Valley,  and  on  the  Weber*  We  began
to  increase  ;  more  immigrants  came
in,  and  others  began  to  come  from
above.  Things  went  on.  A  Temple
was  started  there,  but  it  seemed  to
progress  very  slowly  ;  as  well  it
mi  if  lit  when  we  consider  the  sub-
staiitial  nature  of  the  building.
When  we  started,  we  had  nothing
but  wagons  to  haul  the  rock  on,  and
they  were  very  big  rock,  if  joll
remember.  Those  rocks  had  to  be
hauled  about  17  miles  in  those
wagons,  and  owing  to  the  liability
of  the  wagons  to  break  down,  this
work  gave  us  a  great  deal  of  trou-
ble. To-day,  and  right  along  for  a
number  of  years  past,  since  the  rail-
road has  been  built,  it  is  not  uncom-
mon to  bring  in  some  three  or  four
car  loads  at  a  time,  delivering  the
rock  in  the  Temple  yard.  Then  it
was  thought  best  to  commence
down  here.  Why  %  Let  me  tell  you
some  other  things  and  show  you
about  the  settlements  north  and
south,  and  especially  south.  If  you
remember,  Brother  Geo.  A,  Smith,
as  much  as  2  ">  years  ago — I  don't
remember  exactly  how  long — came
down  and  made  a  settlement  at
Parowan,  and  another  at  Cedar—
and  here  is  Brother  Henry  Lunt  pre-
sent ,  who  was  one  of  that  number.
He  came  to  Cedar  at  that  time,  and
they  tried  to  start  iron  works  at  that
place.  Ami  thgn  Brother  Joseph
Home  and  some  others  were  sent
down  to  see  if  cotton  could  not
be  raised  in  this  district  of  coun-
try in  the  hope  that  something
could  be  done  whereby  we  might
produce  the  raw  material  for
the manufacture  of our  clothes,


and  they  stajed  a  little  while
somewhere  not  far  from  here,  some
five  miles  south  on  the  Santa  Clara,
I  am  told.  There  was  a  rich  little
settlement  up  there.  Some  time
after,  a  great  deal  of  it  was  washed
away.  I  remember  the  struggles
Brother  George  A.  used  to  have.
He  labored  under  difficulties,  being
so  very  heavy,  and  not  as  active
as  most  men  ;  but  he  was  a  man  of
great  energy.  He  would  come  down
here  and  bring  a  few  men,  and
would  settle  them  down  and  go
back  again.  By  and  by  he  would
bring  some  more  down,  all  that  he
could  pick  up  that  would  volunteer.
By  the  time  he  came  down  again,
he  would  find  half  of  the  others  had
gone.  They  did  not  want  to  stop.
They  thought  the  land  was  set  up  on
edge  and  had  never  been  finished,
and  they  had  all  kinds  of  notions*
Then  he  would  return  to  the  cityr
and  drum  up  a  few  more  recruits,
and  take  them  down  ;  and  by  the
time  he  got  here  he  would  find  that
a  good  many  of  those  he  left  had  also
gone.  Finally,  they  became  weeded
out  and  left,  until  he  got  a  lot  of  folks
w  ho,  if  they  had  considered  it  a  duty
to  go  on  to  a  barren  rock  and  stay
there  until  they  should  he  instructed
to  leave,  would  have  done  it.  It
needed  just  such  an  element  to  come
to  this  country,  What  Brother
Snow  said  here,  referring  to  the  sad
fact  of  there  being  such  a  number  of
widows  in  this  place  whose  husbands
had  gone  to  their  graves  through
having  worked  themselves  to  death,
was  perfectly  true  ;  but,  then,  we
don't  want  to  cry  about  it.  We
may  as  well  laugh  as  cry  about  the
past  You  have  done  a  great  deal
of  hard  work  In  coming  down
from  Pine  Valley  we  found  immense
dug  ways  in  the  most  forbidding
places,  and  it  has  required  all  the
perseverance, energy,  intelligence


14  JOURNAL  OF

and  faith  of  even  those  men  who
were  capable  of  living  on  a  dry  rock
— it  required  the  combined  energy
of  the  whole  to  accomplish  these
things,  and  a  good  deal  of  faith  too.

Still  President  Young  urged  for-
ward the  people  ;  Brother  Geo.  A.
Smith  and  Brother  Erastus  Snow
urged  them  forward,  and  others
urged  them  forward,  and  there  was
a  general  feeling  to  build  up  this
southern  country,  Finally  it  was
found  that  our  Temple  in  Salt  Lake
City  would  take  such  a  long  time  to
build,  it  was  thought  best  to  erect
one  down  here.  Why  ]  Because  there
was  a  people  living  here  who  were
more  worthy  than  any  others.  Who
were  more  worthy  of  the  blessings
of  a  Temple  than  those  who  had  dis-
played the  self- abnegation  exhibited
by  the  pioneers  of  the  south  1  (Sod
inspired  President  Young  to  build  a
Temple  here  because  of  the  fidelity
and  self-abnegation  of  the  people ;
and,  furthermore  that  there  might
be  an  asylum  here  for  those  living
further  south  to  be  administered^  to
in  the  holy  ordinances  of  God.  I
speak  this  for  your  credit — not  that
all  of  you  are  of  that  class,  but  let
those  that  are  worthy  take  the
credit,  and  those  that  are  not,  need
not  take  it.  This  Temple  was  built
and  we  went  into  it,  and  a  great
many  thousands  of  people  have  been
administered  to,  and  tor,  within  its
walls.  People  have  administered
for  themselves  and  for  their  progeni-
tors* Over  150,000  people,  Brother
McAllister  says,  have  been  admin-
istered for  in  this  Temple,  Don't
you  think  it  is  worth  while  building
a  Temple  where  such  a  work  can
be  done  1  If  life  is  worth  anything,
if  solvation  is  worth  anything,  if  the
life  of  our  friends  and  brethren  with
whom  we  shall  be  associated  in  the
kingdom  of  God,  is  worth  anything,
then  I  think  a  good  work  was  done


DISCOURSES.

in  the  building  of  this  Temple.  In
other  words,  it  was  a  wise  move.
Why  ?  Because  it  helped  to  sustain
this  part  of  the  country.  Means
were  brought  from  uther  places
down  here  to  supply  the  people
with  means  and  labor,  thus  it  has
been  a  blessing  both  to  the  living
and  the  dead.  You  men  who
comprehend  things  aright,  you
would  not  take  in  exchange  anything
that  could  he  conferred  upon  you
for  the  blessings  you  have  received

in  that  Temple,

There  were  then  blessings  of  a  tem-
poral nature,  as  well  as  of  a  spiritual
nature,  connected  with  the  labor
performed  in  the  building  of  that
house.  There  was  another  thing.
In  establishing  the  kingdom  of  God
it  was  necessary  that  there  should
be  a  strong  place  somewhere  here
between  the  land  south  and  the  laud
north.  It  was  necessary  that  there
should  be  a  foothold  here  all  through
these  valleys  of  the  mountains  be-
tween Salt  Lake  City  and  north  of
Salt  Lake  City  clear  away,  as  you
have  heard  President  Young  say,  on
the  backbone  of  the  American  conti-
nent. And  why  ?  We  make  re-
marks sometimes,  but  I  always  like
to  get  at  the  bottom  of  them.  Why
is  it  better  for  us  to  be  here  than  to
be  somewhere  else  ?  If  we  had  been
in  Missouri  we  should  have  been
mobbed  and  robbed  long  ago.  If  we
had  been  anywhere  in  Central
America  or  South  America  where  we
could  have  been  reached,  our  Chris-
tian friends  would  have  come  there
and  stolen  what  we  had  from  us.
But,  furthermore,  President  Young,
who  was  governed  by  the  inspiration
of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  leading  the
people  forth  in  the  way  he  did,  ex-
pected that  these  railroads  that  are
now  coming  would  come  iftlong*
Years  ago  I  expected  the  same  thing,
because  I  saw  them  at  work  here,


and  clear  away  into  Mexico.  I  ha<l
it  manifested  to  me,  and  Brother
George  Q.  Cannon  here  has  heard
me  speak  about  the  matter.  Did'nt
you  Brother  Cannon  t  (Brother
Cannon  :  Yes,  sir.)  At  that  time  I
was  very  sick.  I  told  President
Young  of  some  things  that  I  then
believed  would  take  place,  among
the  rest  was  this  railroad  bui Ming.
And  if  there  had  not  been  some
pretty  strong  places,  such  as  a  set-
tlement on  Salt  Creek,  a  settlement
t  Beaver,  a  settlement  at  Paro  wan,
a  settlement  down  here,  etc.,  we
never  would  have  been  able  to  carry
out  the  will  of  God.  and  we  should
have  been  in  a  different  position
with  regard  to  other  settlements
fur  titer  south  than  we  are  to-day.
Now  your  young  men  are  begin-
ning to  say,  they  want  room.
There  is  plenty  of  room  south.  Here
Brother  Snow,  who  hte  been
orking  like  a  beaver,  and  there  are
thers,  who  are  doing  the  same,
establishing  settlements  in  the
various  valleys  south,  in  Arizona,  in
Colorado,  and  all  through  this
southern  country,  until  we  now  oc-
cupy, as  J  have  stated  in  other  |
places,  some  800  miles  of  country  in
a  direct  line,  running  north  and  south.

What  did  we  have  when  we  left
Nauvoo  1  Not  much.  Any  property
to  spare?  I  think  not.  I  think
many  of  us  would  have  gone  with- 1
Out  shoes,  without  clothing,  unless
God  had  interposed  in  a  miraculous
manner  in  sending  down  —  I  was

foing  to  say,  a  shower  of  clothing.
_roii  remember  that  Brother  Kim-
ball prophesied  at  a  certain  time
that  clothing  would  be  as  cheap
ere  as  in  the  East  Regarding
this  some  people  felt  a  good  deal  like
the  man  did  when  Elijah  prophe-
sied about  a  measure  of  meal  being
sold  for  so  much.  Says  one  man  ;  it
the  heavens  were  to  open  this  could


not  happen  ;  but  it  did  happen  ;  and
the  other  happened  that  Brother
Kimball  talked  about.  When  the
gold  fever  burst  out,  people  brought
clothing  by  the  wholesale  and  sold
it  for  a  mere  song,  and  let  you  sing
the  song ;  until  the  wants  of  the
people  were  all  supplied.  Who  sup-
plied them  ?  These  men.  Did  they
want  to  do  it  1  No,  it  was  the  Lord
who  controlled  these  matters.  He
started  up  this  feeling  which
brought  the  people  here,  and  they
acted  more  like  crazy  men  than  any
I  ever  saw.  They  were  ready  to
irive  us  their  soods  almost  for
nothing.  The  Saints  at  that  time  in
Salt  Lake  City  were  supplied  with
all  the  necessaries  of  life  brought  by
traders  whom  they  knew  nothing
about,  and  they  traded  off  their  cat-
tle and  Iheir  horses  and  anything
these  people  could  pack  away.  Here
was  a  manifestation  of  the  work  of
the  Lord,  of  the  will  of  God,  and  the
■  protecting  care  of  our  heavenly
Father  over  His  Saints.
;  As  I  told  you  yesterday  we  have
traveled  among  the  Saints  and
found  thousands  of  happy  homes,
good  farms,  good  gardens  at  id  orcl^
ards,  cattle,  sheep,  horses,  etc.,  and
that  the  people  generally  are  now  in
a  very  prosperous  condition.  W  hat
has  it  originated  from  1  We  certainly
did  not  bring  it  about,  God  has
blessed  our  labors  on  the  land  and
increased  the  water  for  our  sake.

Now,  having  said  so  much  upon
this  subject  I  will  turn  to  our  poli
tical  position.  We  have  already  made
in  Salt  Lake  City  numbers  of  very
nice  places.  You  have  also  got
:  some  very  beautitul  buildings  here,
I  am  sorry  to  see  so  much  saleratus
yet  in  the  land  ;  I  wish  you  had
a  little  easier  times ;  but  while
J  I  am  inclined  to  smpathize  with
you,  yet  I  do  not  want  my
sympathy  to  overcome  my  judg-


16,


JOURNAL  UK  WS(X>i;i:SF>


merit  about  matters  of  this  kind.

Now,  we  have  really  the  founds
tiou  for  a  prosperous  State.  We
started  with  nothing  a  little  while
ajjo.  I  think  we  have  made
pretty  well  at  it  You  have  lnu I
hat\l  times  ;  still  you  are  living  and
thriving:  there  are  none  of  you
naked  or  without  shoes,  hats  or
bonnets.  You  seem  to  b«  provided
with  a  great  many  of  the  good
thing-;  of  this  life.  You  seem  to
h  1  doing  tolerably  well  I  know
very  well  that  you  have  a  hard
struggle  to  make  two  ends  meet  ;  I
understand  it  But  there  is  one  ad-
vantage you  have — -no  one  will  want
to  steal  away  your  place  from  you  ;
will  they  ?  (Laughter.)  I  do  not
think  they  would  want  to  carry  it
oft*  I  do  not  think  they  would  want
to  drive  you  away  because  of  your
extraneous  wealth  ;  consequently,
you  are  free  from  this  trouble.  That
is  not  the  fix  of  the  nations  of  the
earth.  Go  to  some  of  the  nations
to-day  and  look  at  their  condition.
Take  England  for  instance ;  they
are  prospering  very  well,  but  look
at  the  trouble  they  have  had  in  Ire-
land. They  have  tried  to  benefit
that  people  in  one  way  or  another,
but  they  seem  to  spurn  those  bene-
fits, and  are  inclined  to  stir  up  com-
motion which  is  not  unlikely  to  end
in  bloodshed*  We  are  not  troubled
in  that  way.  In  Russia,  look  at  the
horrible  condition  they  are  in.  They
have  secret  societies,  m  spoken  of
in  the  Book  of  Mormon.  They  are
engaged  in  all  kinds  of  plots,  plans
and  calculations.  They  have  tried
to  kill  their  present  Czar,  after
having  asassinated  his  father.
There  seems  to  he  a  feeling  of
uneasiness  and  trouble  among  the
nations.  Then  again,  in  Turkey,
they  have  had  a  great  deal  of  trouble
there.  It  has  leaked  out  lately  that
tha  Sultan,  who  was  said  to  have


died  a  natural  death,  was  strangled,
and  they  have  lately  been  prose-
cuting his  assassins.  There  are
terrible  forebodings  anions;  the  na~
tious  of  the  earth  because  of  troubles
that  seem  to  be  threatening  them.
Here  we  have  had  our  own  President
killed,  and  a  little  while  ago  President
Lincoln  was  assassinated,  and  there
seems  to  be  a  spirit  of  that  kind
rampant  and  it  will  grow  worse  and
worse.  Not  loug  ago  in  Pittsburg
there  was  a  shocking  state  of  things,
where  they  burnt  up  ami  destroyed
property  to  the  amount  of  three  mil-
lions of  dollars  or  more. We  have


apparency  prosperous  times.  There
is  now  a  lull  in  the  storm,  but  it  is
only  a  lull  to  burst  out  more  violently
by  and  by.  Yon  will  see  it  There
are  elements  at  work  to  uproot  the
government  and  destroy  the  foun-
dation of  society,  and  to  take  away
the  rights  of  men  and  pull  down  the
bulwarks  of  this  government,  and
scatter  to  the  four  winds  the  prin-
ciples by  which  it  has  been  governed,
and  to  let  loose  the  wiliest  passions
of  men.  These  are  some  of  the
things  that  are  taking  place.  These
are  the  elements  that  are  at  work
today.  They  are  running  around,
and  through,  and  among  the  people
almost  everywhere.  Ami  it  will  not
be  long  before  there  is  trouble  again
in  the  United  States.  The^e  inflated
times  will  by  and  by  bring  about  a
-ivat  reaction,  and  then  there  will
be  trouble  and  difficulty;  and  so
these  things  will  continue  to  in-
crease.

Now,  we  are  here  in  the  tops
of  the  mountains,  far  away  from
these  things.  We  are  here  learning
the  laws  of  life  and  the  principles
of  truth,  and  we  are  here  as  saviors
upon  Mount  Zion,  operating  in  the
interests  of  humanity,  sending  forth
missionaries  to  the  nations  of  the
earth, gathering  people  together ;


THE  SETTLING  OF  SOUTHERN  UTAH,  ETC


17


and  when  they  are  gathered  toge-
ther, we  build  temples  aad  admin-
ister in  them.  We  are  here,  forming
closer  connections  with  the  heavens,
with  God  our  Heavenly  Father,
with  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  New
Covenant,  and  with  the  ancient
Apostles,  Prophets  ami  men  of  God.  I
We  are  here  participating  iu  some  of
the  greatest  blessings  that  ever  were
conferred  upon  mankind  since  the
world  was  formed.  We  are  here  as
those  that  God  has  selected  from
the  nations  of  the  earth,  that  He
may  plant  among  us  the  principles
of  eternal  truth,  and  that  we
may  operate  with  Him  and  with  the
Priesthood  belli nd*  the  vail  in  the
interests  of  all  humanity  that  have
ever  lived  upon  the  face  of  the
earth.  We  are  a  blessed  people  if
we  could  only  comprehend  our  posi-
tion. And  we  need  not  be  too
anxious  about  the  affairs  of  the  world.
Men  of  wealth,  men  of  standing,
men  of  position,  men  who  stand  in
high  places,  are  beginning  to  trem-
ble and  quake  everywhere-  They
are  looking  forward  with  terrible
forebodings  to  something  that  they
fear  is  coming  upon  the  earth.  They
do  not  know  what  it  is,  but  it  will
burst  upon  them  and  their  fore-
bodings will  be  realized.

Bub  we  will  look  at  this  matter
again.  Could  we  be  in  a  better
place  ?  I  think  not  Let  me  show
you  the  reason  for  that  We  are  a
very  small  people,  and  we  are  in  the
midst  of  a  very  large  people.  We
occupy  these  valleys  among  these
rugg«d  mountains,  and  we  dwell  in
deserts,  and  in  many  of  the  most
forbidding  places.  We  see  people
living  in  little  places,  on  little
streams  of  water  trickling  along,  and
perhaps  all  of  it  would  go  through
an  inch  pipe  without  much  pressure!,
•  and  they  are  professing  to  farm  an<jl
raise  fruits,  vegetables  and  vines  in
No,  %


such  places,  wrenching  their  living
from  the  barren  desert  soil*  And
they  do  live,  but  it  is  hard  sledding,
and  there  is  a  great  deal  of  it  here.
Now  then,  go  ov«r  the  ground  we
have  traveled  to  get  here,  say  starting
from  Utah  County  to  Juab,  from
Juab  to  Fillmore,  from  Fillmore  to
Beaver,  from  Beaver  to  Parowan,
and  so  on  down  through  here,  and
among  these  rocks  where  little  set-
tlements are  placed,  and  up  and
down  your  rivers,  how  very,  very
few  comparatively  they  are.  Yet
what  an  extent  of  land,  is  there  not  1
We  occupy  the  country  it  is  true  ;
but  I  tell  the  people  sometimes  that
our  mountains  have  very  large  feet,
and  that  our  deserts  occupy  very
large  tracks  of  land. But  wherever
there  is  a  habitable  place,  Latter-day
Saints  "are  living  on  it,  and  conse-
quently living  in  these  little  places
they  control  the  mountains  and  the
country. Is  not  that  a  fact  1  And
suppose  we  did  not  have  these  little
forbidding,  barren  places,  the  little
springs  and  little  rivulets  that  come
along  reminding  one  of  oases  in  the
deserts  —  if  we  did  not  have  them
we  could  not  have  the  country,  but
we  have  them  and  God  has  given  us
possession of  them. If  we  had
not  possessed  these  narrow  valleys
and  defiles  they  would  have  been
in the possession  of bands  of
I  Gadianton  robbers,  who  would  hitve
preyed  upon  the  people  and  their
property,  as  "  cowboys'*  and  gueril-
i  las  are  now  doing  in  Arizona.  But
our  possessing  them  gave  strength
i  and  protection  to  our  more  impor-
tant settlements.

We  have  paid  for  what  we  have
got  I  expect  your  land  is  all  en-
tered here?

Answer — Yes,  sir.
, Tou  have  paid  for  the  land  then,
,  and  you  have  paid  for  it  up  here  An
i  Pine  Valley. There  is  a  big  moun-

Vol.  XXIIL


IS


JOUUXAL  UK  DISCOURSES


tain  between,  and  you  own  that  in
the  bargain,  and  all  those  sand
ridges  and  rough  places,  including
Jacob's  Twist  are  thrown  in  for
nothing.  Vuu  own  the  country
here  and  there  and  all  the  way
through.  How  far  is  it  from  these
mountains  to  Kanab  1

Answer. — About  80  miles,  sir.
The  most  of  it  is  mountainous,
But  there  are  little  places  here  and
there  which  enable  you  to  control
all  of  it ;  the  mountains  are  thrown
in  us  chips  and  whetstones. It  is
the  same  all  the  way  from  here  to
Nephi  ;  there  are  little  places  here
and  there  ;  we  own  them  and  have
got  our  titles  for  them,  and  we  are
the owners  of  the soil  and  the
mountains  are  thrown  in. So  that
owing  to  the  small  quantity  of  laud
we  have  been  compelled  by  circum-
stances to  go  into  Idaho,  Arizona
and  Colorado,  We  cannot  hide  from
ourselves  that  these  things  give  us
some  political  rights  in  these  places;
but  who  are  we  injuring,  whose
political  or  religious liberties  are
infringed  upon  by  us? Nobody's  !
If  we  live  on  and  conquer  those  for-
bidden districts  we  ought  not  to  be
begrudged  the  limited  intluencc  that
those  positions  naturally  award  us  ;
and  while  we  do  not  interfere  with
others  and  their  political  arrange-
ments, we  think  we  ought  to  possess
that  meagre  share  that  these  forbid-
ding circumstances  place  in  our  pos-
session*

There  is  another  remarkable
thing.  Who  is  it  that  we  are  to
thank  for  this  1  The  Lord.  Did  he
inspire  President  Brigham  Young
in  these  things — to  occupy  these
places  !  Yes.  Is  it  right  for  us  to
■occupy  them  1  Yes.  Is  it  right  for
us  to  build  temples  %  Yes,  Is  it  I
right  for  us  to  administer  in  them  ?
Yes.  Is  it  right  for  us  to  seek  to
establish  the  kingdom  of  God  on  the


earth  ?  Yes.  Is  it  right  for  us  to
seek  wisdom  from  God  to  do  itt
Yes,  That  is  what  wo  have  been
doing  for  a  great  many  years  and  we
I  are  doing  it  to-day.  Here  is  Brother
Cannon.  He  is  going  to  Washington
as  our  representative  in  the  general
.  government.  Only  think  about  it
Here  is  a  Territory  several  hundred
miles  long  and  1  do  not  know  hour
wide.  Let  me  see  (the  speaker
turning  and  addressing  himself  to
President  Cannon)  George,  how
many  representatives  have  they  in
Congress  ?

Answer  :  293  representatives  and
9  delegates.

And  then  there  is  the  Senate  %

Answer  :  76  members.

And  we,  a  little  people  in  the
valleys  of  these  mountains,  right  in
the  tops  of  these  mountains,  in  the
midst  of  50  millions  of  people,  all
the  representation  we  have  is  jut>t
one  delegate,  and  he  has  not  a  right
to  vote  !  And  yet  what  have  they
done  to  tist  Not  much.  Have
they  been  plotting  against  us  ?  Yes,
they  have.  Are  they  seeking  to  in-
jure us  to-day  1  Yes.  Who  1  All
classes  of  men,  and  especially  the
religious  kind.  Our  feeling  is  to  save
people,  not  to  curse  them.  It  must
be  a  miserable  feeling  for  men  to
have  when  they  are  seeking  to  de-
stroy their  fellow-men,  yet  they  are
doing  it.  It  is  because  they  have
not  the  intelligence  to  cope  with  the
principles  that  God  has  revealed  to
us,  that  they  want  to  drag  the
strength  of  the  government  to  put
down  by  arms  that  which  they  have
not  the  power  to  do  by  argument  or
on  any  just  or  regular  principle.  I
would  be  ashamed  if  I  were  one  of
them ;  I  would  be  ashamed  if  I  could
not  do  something  else  besides  pray-
ing to  destroy  a  few,  weak  people  in
the  tops  of  the  mountains  of  Utah,
far  away  from  everybody,  and  pre-


THE  SETTLING  OF  SOUTHEHN  UTAH,  ETC*


19


tending  that  we  are  so  awfully  cor-
rupt that  they  are  afraid  we  shall
demoralize  them,  God  save  the
mark  !  They  themselves  are  killing
off  their  own  children  by  tens  of
thousands  and  by  hundreds  of  thou-
sands before  they  are  born.  That
is  the  feeling  that  is  growing  up
among  them,  It  is  adultery,  forni-
cation, lasciviousness  that  is  under-
mining the  constitutions  of  the
people.  They  are  rotting  by  thou-
sands and  tens  of  thousands,  and
they  will  come  here  and  preach  mo-
rality to  us*  We  do  not  want  them.
We  tell  them  to  go  among  their  own
lepers  and  cleanse  their  own  social
evils,  sweep  out  their  own  Augean
stables,  and  purify  themselves  from
their  own  corruptions,  and  then
come  and  talk  purity  to  us.  That
is  what  I  would  say  to  those  people.
We  understand  them  as  well  as
they  understand  themselves,  and
for  that  reason  we  do  not  want  any
of  that  kind  of  hypocrisy  here.

Now,  then,  we  come  to  ourselves.
We  are  here.  Could  we  have  been
-  placed  in  any  better  position  than
we  are  to  day  1  No.  What  has
been  the  object  of  God  for  some-
time? In  the  first  place  He  operated
upon  Columbus  to  come  and  find
this  land.  He  then  operated  upon
the  Puritans  and  other  men  in  Eng-
land and  other  places  to  come  to  this
land,  and  many  of  them  were  good,
honorable,  high-minded,  virtuous
people.  The  grandfathers  and  grand-
mothers of  this  nation  were  not
murderers  ;  they  did  not  murder
infants  ;  they  were  honorable  people
who  cherished  human  life,  and  con-
sidered it  a  blessing  to  have  a  large
posterity  and  to  take  care  of  them.
The  spirit  of  the  early  fathers  was,
if  their  land  was  poor  they  could
ttise  men.  What  are  they  doing
now  1  Raising  murderers  and  milr-
-deresses. From  among  those  people


and  from  Europe  and  other  parts
the  Saints  have  been  gathered.  The
Lord  is  gathering  them  together,
and  His  kingdom  is  spreading  and
growing,  audit  is  our  privilege  to
grow  and  expand  with  it,  and  we
should  be  true  to  ourselves,  be  true
to  our  religion,  be  true  to  God,  and
operate  in  the  interests  of  humanity.
We  could  not  find  a  better  place  for
Latter-day  Saints  than  in  these
valleys  of  the  mountains,  nor  in
those  rugged  parts  further  south.
We  expect  to  go  on  and  to  increase
and  seek  to  the  Lord  for  his  guid-
ance, protection  and  sustenance,
while  we  must  learn  to  do  right  and
observe  his  laws  and  keep  his  com-
mandments. The  kingdom  of  God
is  onward.  It  is  accelerating  in  its
speed.  God  has  called  the  First
Presidency,  the  Twelve,  High
Priests,  Seventies,  Elders,  Bishops,
High  Councilors,  Priests,  Teachers
and  Deacons — he  has  called  upon
them  to  devote  themselves  to  him.
He  expects  us  to  be  willing  in  the
day  of  his  power.  He  expects  us  to
be  true  to  our  integrity,  and  having
taught  us  eternal  principles,  he  ex-
pects that  we  shall  have  the  law  of
God  written  in  our  hearts  and  be
valiant  for  the  truth  and  for  God.
God  and  all  the  intelligences  that
he  is  surrounded  with  are  on  our
side  and  are  enlisted  in  our  protec-
tion and  for  the  sustenance  of  this
people  ;  and  for  the  rolling  forth  of
his  work,  and  the  accomplishment
of  the  objects  that  he  designed  in
the  introduction  of  the  Gospel  in  the
last  days,  even  in  the  dispensation
of  the  fulness  of  times,  when  he
would  gather  all  things  into  one.
Being  called  to  live  in  a  land  like
this,  in  the  midst  of  rugged  moun-
tains and  barren  deserts  we  will
sing,  u  For  the  strength  of  the  hills
we  bless  thee,  our  God,  our  fathers*
God  f  for  the  wisdom  Thou  hast


20


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


displayed  we  praise  Thee,  0  God,
our  father^'  God-  And  we  will  be
true  to  God,  to  our  religion  and
will  keep  our  covenants  ;  we  will
main  tain  strict  integrity  to  our
vows  which  we  have  vowed  in
sacred  places  \  we  will  follow  tin1
guidance  of  the  Holy  Priesthood,
and  God  will  lead  us  from  strength
to  strength,  from  victory  to  victory,
from  i»ower  to  power,  until  the  king-
dom of  God  shall  be  established,  and
no  man  can  stay  its  progress  to-day,
God  being  our  helper.  Let  us  go
to  him  and  put  our  trust  in  him,  !


and  all  will  be  well  with  us  in  time*
and  through  all  eternity.  .

Brethren  :  God  bless  vout  atid
prosper  you  in  all  your  journeyings,
and  enable  you  to  accomplish  your
object,  and  frustrate  all  the  designs
of  your  enemies,  and  let  all  the  con-
gregation say,  Amen  [the  congrega-
tion responded,  Amen.]  May  God
bless  this  people.  Hold  on  a  little
longer,  for  this  motto  which  I  see
in  your  house  will  be  fulfilled,
"After  the  clou  I  there  will  be
sunshine/'  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  in  the  Assembly  Hall,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sun  DAY  AfTIS^*

noon,  December  11,  1881.


Reported  ly  John  Irvine*

TRAVELS  OF  THE  FIRST  PRESIDENCY  AND  THE  TWELVE — TEMPORAL  AND
SPIRITUAL  CONDITION  OF  THE  SAINTS — THEIR  EDUCATIONAL  PRO-
GRESS—  TEMPLE  BUILDING,  ITS  OBJECT  —  ORGANIZATION  OF  THE
PRIESTHOOD,  ITS  DUTIES — THE  GATHERING  AND  GENERAL  DUTIES
OF  THE  SAINTS  OF  GOD,  THEIR  ULTIMATE  DESTINY*


I  am  pleased  to  have  the  opportu-
nity of  meeting  with  and  addressing
the  Saints  in  this  place.  Since  our
last  Conference  I  have  traveled  a
great  deal  among  the  Saints  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  Territory,  in  part
accompanied  by  some  of  my  coun-
sel and  the  Twelve*  Personally
within  a  short  time  I  have  visited
all  the  leading  settlements  of  the
Saints  both  north  and  south,  east
and  west,  and  it  may  not  be  unin-


r  teresting  to  yon  to  hear  a  brief
statement  of  the* position  which  the
Saints  occupy  in  their  various  loca-
tions and  settlements  ;  because  we
all  of  us  feel  more  or  less  interested
in  the  welfare  of  all  It  was  in
view  of  this  that  I  felt  a  desire  to
visit  the  Saints  at  their  own  homes,
to  associate  with  them  at  their  own
'firesides,  or  at  least  to  meet  them  in
their public assemblies. It  has

1  been  very  interesting  to  myself  and


TRAVELS  OF  THE  JIKST  PRliSIDENCY,  ETC.


^accompanying  brethren  to  find  out
tlie  true  position  which  the  Saints
<Jccupy?  to  know  what  their  standing
is  in  relation  to  their  religious  views
Mid  sentiments,  and  also  to  ascertain
their  moral  status  and  how  they
conduct  themselves  not  only  reli-
giously but  socially.  And  then
atiother  thing  that  we  felt  desirous
to  understand  was  the  true  educa-
tional condition  of  the  Saints  ;  and
what  they  were  doing  to  enlighten
the  minds  of  the  youth  and  to  train
them  in  the  right  paths,  and  how
far  literature,  science  and  those
principles  of  intelligence  which  arfe
calculated  to  exalt  and  ennoble
men  when  under  proper  influen-
ces, prevailed  among  our  people,
-and  in  what  manner  they  deported
themselves  in  regard  to  all  these
things.  We  have  felt  the  more
desirous  to  do  this  because  many  of
the  Saints  live  far  from  the  seat  of
the  Presidency  of  the  Church.  I  sup-
pose so  far  as  we  have  been  in  this
Territory,  in  the  adjoining  Territory
of  Idaho,  in  some  portions  of
Wyoming,  and  in  other  portions
south,  tiiat  we  have  not  traveled
less  than  from  500  to  600  miles  in  a
direct  course  north  and  south,
besides  visiting  nearly  all  the  promi-
nent settlements  east  and  west,  and
our  feeling  and  impressions  after
visiting  the  whole  of  the  Saints  in
afl  of  their  locations  are  to  us  very
interesting  and  encouraging.  So
far  as  the  temporal  position  of  the
people  is  concerned,  they  seem  to  be
in  possession  of  a  reasonable  share
of  the  good  things  of  life  ;  their
habits  of  industry  and  perseverance,
their  self-abnegation,  the  desire  to
comprehend  and  "sustain  correct
jpiuciples,  together  with  the  blessing

the  Almighty,  have  tended  to
promote  their  welfare  in  a  temporal
point  of  view.

We  do  not  find  so  many  very


wealthy  people  as  there  are  in  some
communities,  but  our  people,  so  far
as  our  observation  goes  (and  we  have
had  a  pretty  fair  opportunity  of
investigating  all  these  matters),  are
second  to  none  in  regard  to  the
comforts,  conveniences  and  neces-
saries of  life  ;  and  perhaps  there
is  no  place  nor  people  (at  least,
none  that  I  have  any  knowledge  of,
and  I  have  traveled  quite  exten-
sively myself  in  the  world),  that
are  better  situated  as  a  whole  than
are  the  Latter-day  Saints  in  this  and
the  adjoining  territories,  nor  where
more  of  the  people  dwell  in  their
own  homes.  We  find  thousands
upon  thousands  of  happy  homes,
ami  the  people  that  inhabit  them  are
sober,  industrious,  frugal  and  God-
fearing, fee  line;  a  strong  desire  to
observe  the  laws  and  keep  the  com-
mandments of  the  Lord;  and  not-
withstanding the  many  aspersions
cast  upon  them  by  wicked  and  de-
signing men,  they  nevertheless  evince
a  strong  desire  to  observe  the  laws
and  institutions  of  the  land.  We
find  them  in  possession  generally  of
good  houses,  farms,  orchards,  gar-
dens, and  in  many  instances,  of  cat-
tle, sheep,  horses,  and  all  the  appli-
ances of  life  which  tend  to  promote
comfort  in  a  social  and  family  capa-
city. We  find,  too,  that  this  season
has  been  a  very  prosperous  one,  with
very  few  exceptions,  throughout  the
length  and  breadth  of  the  Territory.
The  Lord  has  blessed  our  labors,
exceedingly,  and  I  presume  that  the
crops,  as  a  general  thing,  have  been
increased  at  least  20  to  25  percent.,
I  think  we  should  be  quite  safe  in
saying  20  per  cent,  ;  and  this,
of  course,  tends  to  make  exis-
tence more  pleasant  and  agreeable,
and  to  enable  the  people  to  more
easily  struggle  in  the  battle  of  life
in  its  various  forms  and  phases.
In  addition  to  this  we  find  that  they


92


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


are  generally  seeking  to  live  their
religion  and  to  keep  the  command-
ments of  God.  And  the  various
organizations  which  you  have  among
you  here,  in  this  city,  prevail
throughout  all  the  settlements  of
the  Saints  with  very  few  exceptions,
very  few  indeed.  We  find  that  the
Relief  Societies  which  are  so  active
and  energetic  among  you  here  and
which  are  operating  so  creditably  in
looking  after  the  interest  and  welfare
of  the  female  portion  of  our  society,
also  exist  all  over  the  Territory,  and
that  there  is  a  creditable  zeal  and
intelligence  without  that  obti  u*ive-
ness  which  we  see  among  many — a
desire  to  promote  the  well-being  of
those  with  whom  they  are  associated,
and  to  make  themselves  useful  in  all
the  affairs  of  life  :  and  we  feel  when-
ever  we  find  a  disposition  of  this
kind,  to  appreciate  it.  We  find,  also,
that  our  Young  Men's  and  Young
Women's  Mutual  Improvement
Associations  prevail  almost  every*
where,  and  that  there  is  a  desire  to
elevate  the  youth  and  lift  t tie m  up
from  the  sloughs  uf  ignorance  and
darkness,  and  to  implant  within  their
minds  true  and  correct  principles,
putting  them  in  possession  of  a
knowledge  of  science*  literature,  and
the  arts,  and  cultivating  those  prin-
ciples that  are  calculated  to  elevate
and  ennoble  mankind,  as  well  as
to  correct  their  morals  and  govern
them  in  their  religious  pursuits.
We  find,  also,  that  their  Primary
Associations  are  attended  to  with  the
same  vigilance  that  they  are  around
us  here,  and  that  the  most  wise,
prudent  and  intelligent  ladies  are  J
selected  for  the  purpose  of  super-
vising their  movements  and  in
*' teaching  the  young  idea  how  to
shoot"  \Ve  find,  also,  that  through-
out the  Territory  our  Sunday  Schools
receive  that  attention  which  we  con*
eider  all  such  institutions  ought  to


merit  and  do  merit,  and  that  the
best  of  men  and  women  are  selected
for  their  teachers,  who,  as  wTe  see,
take  an  interest  in  the  welfare  of
our  rising  posterity.

It  is  not  for  me  to  enter  into  all
particulars;  I  merely  wish  to  give  a
brief  outline  of  these  matters.  All
of  these  institutions  that  I  have
referred  to  are  in  a  very  creditable
position  ;  are  managed  with  great
care,  ami  many  of  your  old  neighbors
who  used  to  live  here  in  the  city,
both  men  and  women,  and  who  were
known  as  high  minded,  honorable
persons — we  find  mixed  in  the
various  societies  throughout  the  set-
tlements and  organizations,  exerting
an  influence  which  is  truly  interest-
ing to  all  who  feel  desirous  to  pro-
mote the  welfare  of  Zion  and  the
building  of  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth.  Then,  again,  in
regard  to  our  scholastic  affairs,  we
find  that  there  is  very  great  progress
being  made  in  our  common  schools,
or  rather  what  are  termed  our  dis-
trict schools.  We  find  that  a  more
intelligent  class  of  teachers  is  being
employed,  and  that  with  the  ope-
rations of  the  normal  department
of  the  University,  with  the  Brigham
Young  Academy  in  Prove,  and  other
institutions  of  learning,  they  are
telling  very  favorably  upon  our
youth,  and  as  better  teachers  are
obtained,  there  seems  to  be  a  greater
desire  manifested  among  the  people
to  acquire  intelligence  of  every  kind.
From  the  best  information  that  I  am
able  to  obtain,  I  suppose  there  are  at
least  thirty  normal  students  turned
out  every  year.  They  are  prepared
in  our  University  and  in  the  other
scholastic  institutions  referred  to,
and  as  these  teachers,  coming  from
their  own  counties  and  peoples,  return
to  their  several  homes,  properly  qual-
ified as  instructors,  they  do  a  great
deal  of  good  among  the  community.


TRAVELS  OF  THE  FIRST  PRESIDENCY,  ETC,


23


In  relation  to  other  matters,  such
as  the  building  of  Temples,  they  are
also  progressing  very  favorably.  I
need  not  say  anything  about  the
one  we  are  building  here ;  you  are
all  acquainted  with  that  The  one
which  is  being  built  in  Logan  is
now  covered  in.  A  large  force  of
carpenters  are  engaged  in  finishing
the  interior  department  thereof,  and
another  year  will  count  very  favor-
ably in  the  work  on  that  structure.
It  is  a  beautiful  liuihiin _r,  and  stands
in  a  very  imposing  position  on  an
elevated  plateau  in  Cache  County,
ear  Logan,  About  200  miles  from
that,  in  the  south,  in  Sanpete  Coun-
iy,  there  is  another  Temple  lining
>uilt.  That  also  occupies  a  very
eligible  position.  A  very  large
amount  of  labor  has  been  per-
formed in  preparing  the  site.  The
point  of  a  mountain  has  Wen  re-
moved, and  a  great  amount  of  labor
has  been  expended  on  the  walls
which  surround  the  Temple,  forming
nearly  a  semi-circle.  There  are
three  terraces  elevated  one  above
another,  the  same  as  the  gallery
may  be  elevated  above  the  lower
part  of  this  house ;  they  surround
the  Temple,  being  wider,  of  course,
at  the  lower  part  and  narrower  as
they  approach  towards  the  Temple.
A  very  large  amount  of  means  and
labor  have  been  expended  in  prepar-
ing these  terraces  and  also  in  pre-
paring the  Temple.  The  Temple
it*elf  is  a  beautiful  structure.  They
expect  to  have  the  walls  up  to  the
square  in  another  season.  I  think
they  have  built  up  the  wall  this
year  some  28  feet.  It  is  built  of
beautiful  white  rock — or  at  least
very  light,  clear  rock — and  is  hewn
on  the  outside  where  the  joints  come
together,  and  presents  a  very  beauti-
ful and  creditable  appearance.  It  is
interesting,  too,  to  find  how  strongly
the  feelings  of  the  people  are  drawn


out  in  relation  to  these  edifices.
They  seem  to  think  that  no  sacrifice
is  too  great  to  accomplish  the  object
which  they  have  in  view  ;  indeed  in
both  of  these  Temple  districts  they
seem  to  take  very  great  pride  in
prosecuting  this  labor,  I  was  in-
formed that  the  superintendent  was
a  little  short  of  means  a  short  time
ago  at  the  Matitt  Temple,  and  lie  asked
if  he  nuist  slacken  the  labor.  They
tohl  him  no,  he  was  to  proceed  with
it.  and  1  think  in  a  very  short  time
a  number  nf  people  fro**  different
parts  subscribed  7,000  bushels  of
wheat  to  assist  in  the  construction
of  the  Temple,  and  there  seems  to
be,  generally,  a  strong  desire  for  the
accomplishment  of  this  work.

The  religion  that  we  have  espoused,
connects  time  with  eternity,  heaven
with  earth,  this  world  with  the  next,
and  while  the  Lord  has  revealed
unto  us  w  hat  is  termed  a  new  Gos-
pel, and  hence  it  is  called  the  new
and  everlasting  Gospel — new  indeed
to  the  people  of  the  world,  but  ever-
lasting so  far  as  God  is  concerned
and  the  interests  of  mankind  both
living  and  dew  I  ;  for  God  is  inter-
ested in  the  welfare  of  all  humanity
that  has  ever  lived,  that  now  lives,
or  that  ever  will  live.  He  is,  ware
told,  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all
flesh,  and  he  has  introduced  princi-
ples which  have  been  made  known
to  us  for  the  benefit  of  all  The
principles  that  we  are  associated
with  reach  back  into  eternity  and
forward  into  eternity.  They  are
not  the  ideas,  the  theories  or  no-
tions of  men,  they  emanate  from
the  Almighty.  And  in  regard  to  the
ideas  which  have  been  developed
pertaining  to  the  past,  the  present
and  the  future,  none  of  us  can  claim
ourselves  to  be  the  founders  or  the
originators  of  any  one  idea  associated
with  Jthe  Church  and  kingdom  of
God,  neither  was  Joseph  Smith,


34


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


neither  was  Brigham  Young,  neither
are  any  of  the  Twelve,  nor  is  any-
body that  now  exists  or  has  existed  ;
all  of  these,  things  come  from  the
Lord-  And  having  preceded  from
him  he  has  dictated  the  whole
matter  from  first  to  last.  We  did
not  receive  our  ideas  from  any
theologian,  from  any  scientist,  from
any  man  of  renown,  or  of  position
in  the  world,  or  from  any  body  or
conclave  of  religionists,  but  from
the  Almighty,  and  to  him  we  are
indebted  for  all  life,  all  truth,  ami
all  intelligence  pertaining  to  the
past,  pertaining  to  the  present,  or
pertaining  to'  the  future.  Therefore
we  feel  our  dependence  upon  him.
Neither  are  we  indebted  to  any  man
for  any  doctrine  that  we  have  re-
ceived, nor  for  the  organization  of
our  Church,  nor  for  the  Holy  Priest-
hood, whether  it  be  the  Melchesidec
or  the  Aaronic  ;  all  of  these  proceed
from  the  Almighty,  and  if  lie  had
not  given  them  we  should  have
been  as  ignorant  of  them  as  others
are,  for  they  do  not  generally  com-
prehend the  law,  the  word,  the  will,
or  the  design  of  the  Almighty ;  for
no  man  knows  the  things  of  God
but  by  the  Spirit  of  Go  I ;  and  if  the
Father  did  not  reveal  them  we
should  be  very  ignorant  indeed,  as
are  the  reft  of  mankind  pertaining
to  these  matters,  But  the  time
having  come  to  introduce  what  is
teuned,  the  "dispensation  of  the
fulness  of  times/'  when  God  would
gather  together  all  things  in  one,
whether  they  be  things  in  heaven  or
things  on  the  earth,  it  became  ne-
cessary, because  of  the  ignorance  of
mei:,  hecause  they  did  not  compre-
hend God,  nor  his  laws,  nor  the
jJrine iples  of  eternal  truth,  that
men  should  be  taught  of  the
Almighty,  that  God  should  be
£heir  instructor,  and  hence  -he
introduced through the  medium


of  the  Holy  Priesthood  that  had
existed  heretofore  upon  the  earth ,
those  principles  which  are  calculated
to  bless  and  exalt  the  human  family,
prepare  them  to  carry  out  the  word
and  will  of  God,  and  to  accomplish
those  purposes  which  he  had  de-
signed from  before  the  foundation
of  the  world.  Hence  he  organized
the  First  Presidency  and  the  Twelve,
he  organized  the  Seventies,  he
organized  Elders,  Priests,  Teachers,
and  Deacons,  he  organized  Bishops
and  High  Councils  and  all  the
various  adjuncts  associated  with  the
organization  ;;f  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints.  And
why,  it  may  he  asked,  should  these
institutions  be  introduced  in  our
midst  7  For  certain  obvious  reasons
when  we  reflect  upon  this  all-im-
portant matter.  Having  revealed
his  will  to  man,  to  Joseph  Smith,
as  he  had  (lone  to  other  men  in  for-
mer ages,  it  was  necessary  that  that
will  should  be  made  known  to  all
nations,  kindreds,  tongues  and  peo-
ple, that  men  might  be  informed  of
the  things  that  he  revealed  for  the
salvation  and  exaltation  of  humanity.
Hence  the  Twelve  were  set  apart.
For  what  purpose?  That  they
might  introduce  the  Gospel  to  the
nations  of  the  earth,  and  preach,  the
principles  of  life  as  they  emanate
from  God,  Then  the  Seventies
also  were  ordained  until  we  now
have  upwards  of  seventy  times
seventy.  What  is  their  business?
Under  the  direction  of  the  Twelve,
to  preach  the  Gospel  to  the  nations
of  the  earth.  Are  they  doing  it?
Tfes.  Have  they  been  doing  it?
Yes.  And  the  Twelve  1  Yes,  for
these  many,  very  many  years,  and
are  still  doing  it,  We  still  feel  the
same  responsibility  devolving  upon
us  to  spread  forth  that  light,  that
truth,  and  that  intelligence  which
lias  emanated  from  God  our  heavenly


TRAVELS  OF  THE  FIRST  PRESIDENCY,  ETC


Father/  through  i  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ.-  And  these  men  are  going  [
fotth 'bearing  precious  seeds,  even
thto  seeds  of  eternal. life,  and  when
th&/  people  'believe  the  Gospel  what*
dci  they  do?  Their  testimony  to
the  people  is  that  God  has  spoken,
that  the  Gospel  has  been  restored ;
they  explain  what  the  Gospel  is  ;
they  call  upon  the  people  to  repent
and  to  be  baptized  in  the  name  of
Jesus  for  the  remission  of  sins,  pro-
mising that  the  obedient  shall  re-
ceive the  Holy  Ghost,  Do  they
baptise  them  ?  Yes.  Do  they  lay  on
hands  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost  ?  Yes.  Do  the  people  receive
the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Yes,  and  you  here
to  day  ai  e  my  witnesses  in  relation
to  these  tilings,  and  you  know  what
I  say  is  true.  And  what  will  the
Holy  Ghost  do?  It  takes  of  the
things  of  God,  and  shows  them  unto
us  ;  it  brings  things  past  to  our  re-
membrance ;  it  leads  us  into  all  truth
and  shows  us  things  to  come.  Does  it
do  that  1  Yes,  and  it  is  because  of
this  principle  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  feel  as  they  do  ;  having  par-
taken of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  tasted
the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,  and
having  received  a  hope  that  enters
within  the  vail,  whither  Christ  the
forerunner  is  gone,  and  knowing
to-day  that  they  are  the  sons  of  God,
and  that  they  have  rights  and  privi-
leges pertaining  not  only  to  time
btot  to  eternity,  they  feel  to  act  and
operate  under  the  directions  of  that  ■
spirit  And  being  partakers  of  that
spirit,  there  is  a  communication
opened  between  them  and  their
heavenly  Father  through  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  and  being  inspired  by
that  spirit,  their  prayers  ascend  unto
the  God  of  the  whole  earth  ;  they
lestm  to  place  their  confidence  in
hita  and  to  obey  his  laws  ;  and  then
having  bean  baptized  into  one  bap-
tism, they  all  partake  of  the  same


spirit — that  is, « those,  who  are  living
their  religion, ,  observing  tUe  laws  of
God  and  keeping,  his  ■  command-
ments, and  who  have  not  grieved,
the  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  they  are
sealed  to  the  day  of  redemption*
Then,  that  same  spirit  that  brought
them  into  the  Church  and  led  them
to  obey  the  laws  of  God,  led  them
to  gather  together  as  we  are  here  to-
day. It  is  a  false  idea  entertained
by  many  very  ignorant  men  that  we
gather  men  together  on  some  kind
of  emigration  principle.  The  people
get  the  principle  of  gathering  in
their  own  hearts  by  the  Spirit  of
God,  and  that  draws  them  here.
There  needs  no  argument,  no  influ-
ence, no  power  of  suasion,  or  any-
thing of  the  kind  to  bring  them
here.  Their  desire,  when  they  re-
ceive the  Gospel,  is  to  come  to  Zion,
And  why!  That  they  may  learn
more  fully  of  the  laws  of  life.  As
the  scriptures  say — il  I  will  take  you
one  of  a  city  and  two  of  a  family,
and  I  will  bring  you  to  Ziou.  And
what  will  you  do  with  them  when
you  get  them  to  Zion  V  "  I  will  give
you  pastors  according  to  mine  heart,
which  shall  feed  you  with  know-
ledge and  understanding/1  Hence
we  have  come  together  as  we  are
here  in  this  city  and  in  this  Terri-
tory. Our  object  is  to  fear  God,  to
observe  his  laws,  to  magnify  our
calling,  to  fulfil  our  destiny  upon
the  earth,  and  to  operate  with  thosw
who  are  behind  the  vail  in  the  in-
terests of  humanity,  to  lay  aside  our
selfishness,  our  covetousuess,  our
evils  of  every  kind  whatever  they
may  be,  and  to  purge  ourselves  from
unrighteousness,  that  we  may  be  fit
receptacles  for  the  Holy  Ghost  and
be  prepared  to  do  the  will  of  God  on
earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven.  I
know  a  great  many  men  object  to  us
doing  this.  No  matter  ;  with  God's
help  we  will  try  to  do  it ;  no  matter


J6


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


what  the  opinions  and  ideas,  the
feelings  and  theories  of  men  are-
God  has  laid  on  us  a  mission,  and  in
the  name  of  Israel's  God  we  will
fulfil  it,  and  let  alt  Israel  say  Amen.
[The  congregation  responded  aloud,
Amen]. We  will  try  and  carry  out
what  God  has  given  us  to  do,  no
matter  what  men's  theories,  opinions
or  id,  as  may  be. We  are  here,  then,
for  that  purpom And  we  feel  that
God  is  our  heavenly  Father  ;  we  feel
that  we  are  his  children  ;  we  feel  that
we  are  doing  his  work  by  his  assis-
tance, we  feel,  too,  that  he  is  engaged
just  as  much  as  we  are,  and  a  thou-
sand times  more,  in  carrying  on  this
work,  and  therefore  we  feel  ea^y
and  satisfied  in  our  minds  and  know
that  all  is  well God  our  heavenly
Fa  titer,  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the
new  covenant,  the  ancient  patriarchs
and  prop] lets  and  men  of  God  who
have  lived  upon  the  earth  years  and
years  ago,  Adam  the  Father  of  man-
kind, and  Noah, another  great
father,  and  Abraham  the  father  of
the  faithful  and  all  the  Prophets,
Apo-stles  and  men  of  God  who  have
lived  upon  the  earth  are  interested
as  n  e  are  in  the  welfare  of  humanity
and  in  seeking  to  introduce  ami
carry  out  the  word  and  will  of  God
which  he  designed  before  the  world
rolled  into  existence  or  the  morning
stars  sang  together  for  joy.  God  will
accomplish  his  work  and  we  will
tiy  and  help  him  do  it. It  needs
the  co  operation  of  all  these  men
who  have  held  this  Priesthood,  who
administer  in  time  and  in  eternity —
it  needs  the  co  operation  of  all  those
and  of  the  Gods  in  the  eternal  worlds
to  assist  us  in  the  labors  in  which
we  are  engaged, Therefore,  God
has  introduced  the  system  of  things  i
that  we  have  been  speaking  of  lor
the  purpose  of  gathering  together  a
people  w  ho  would  listen  to  his  voice,
and  they  are  the  only  people  on  the


earth  to  day  who  will  listen  theretor
and  then  it  is  as  much  as  the  bar-
gain for  many  of  us  to  do  it.  God
expects  to  have  a  people  who  will  be
men  of  clean  hands  and  pure  hearts,
who  withhold  their  hands  from  the
receiving  of  bribes,  who  will  swear
to  their  own  hurt  and  change  not,
who  will  be  men  of  truth  and  in-
tegrity, of  honor  and  virtue,  and
who  will  pursue  a  course  that  will
he  approved  hy  the  Gods  in  the
eternal  worlds,  and  by  all  honorable
and  upright  men  that  ever  did  live
or  that  now  live,  and  having  taken
upon  us  the  profession  of  sainthood,
he  expects  us  to  be  Saints,  not  in
name,  not  in  theory,  but  in
reality.  And  then  he  expects
us  to  do  just  what  we  are  doing,
that  is,  to  build  Temples,  and  to
preach  the  Gospel  to  an  unthankful
world.  Have  we  done  it  T  Yes,  we
have.  I  have  done  it.  I  have
traveled  thousands  of  miles  to
preach  this  Gospel  without  purse  or
scrip,  trusting  in  God,  Did  1  ever
lack  anything]  No,  Here  is
Brother  Woodruff,  and  many  other
men  who  have  done  just  the  same
thing.  High  Priests,  Seventies,
Elders,  and  others  have  gone  forth
to  the  wurld,  bearing  the  precious
principles  of  eternal  life,  and  have
returned  again,  as  the  Scripture  say,
bringing  their  sheaves  with  them.
What  are  we  doing  besides  t  Build-
ing our  Temples,  What  fur  1  That
we  may  have  places  to  enter  into
that  are  dedicated  to  the  God  of  the
whole  earth.

The  world  have  forgotten  that
God  is  the  fountain  of  all  truth,  the
source  of  all  intelligence,  of  every-
thing that  is  calculated  to  elevate
and  exalt  mankind  ;  but  we  will
give  to  God  all  the  glory.  We  are
seeking  to  build  up  the  Zion  of  our
God.  And  shall  we  accomplish  it  I
With  the  help  of  the  Lord  we  will.


RAVELS  OF  THE  FIRST  PRESIDENCY,  ETC.


Will  we  all  do  right  t  No,  many  will
fall  by  the  wayside  as  they  have
done  ;  but  the  work  of  God  will  go
on  and  prosper  and  increase,  and  the
Lord  will  be  with  Israel  if  they  will
only  cleave  to  the  truth,  obey  his
laws  and  keep  his  commandments.
Are  all  good  I  No,  you  know  that
many  of  us  do  man/  things  that  are
far  from  right  Let  me  say  unto
you  that  our  only  safety  is  in  obedi-
ence to  the  laws  of  Gnu.  You  need
not  fear  the  clamor  that  is  now
being  raided  against  us,  nor  any
of  this  nonsense,  this  spite  of  the
world  ;  you  need  not  fear  the  illiher-
ality  of  religionists  who  are  clam-
oring to  deprive  you  of  your  liberties,
you  need  care  nothing  about  that.

You  all  know  that  they  are  pro-
claiming falsehoods  against  us,  and
that  we  are  misrepresented  by
them.  No  matter,  they  are  in  the
hands  of  God,  and  we  are  in  the
hands  of  God  ;  and  while  we  seek
to  maintain  righteous  principles,
virtue,  purity,  and  the  laws  of  the
land,  we  can  afford  to  leave  them  in
the  hands  of  God,  and  let  him  be
their  judge*  Let  us  be  for  God,  for
righteousness,  for  virtue,  for  purity,
for  truth  and  integrity,  and  if  our
enemies  prefer  to  wallow  in  their  in-
iquities, and  lend  themselves  to  vice


and  falsehood,  we  can  stand  these
things  if  they  can,  it  is  better  to  suf-
fer than  do  wrong.  The  Lord  will
judge  both  them  and  us,  and  all
will  be  well  with  those  who  cleave
to  the  truth.  We  need  not  be
troubled  about  their  intrigues  and
mendacity.  God  will  protect  the
right  and  will  save  and  bless  and
deliver  us  despite  their  mendacious
assertions,  if  we  fear  him,  observe
liis  laws,  and  keep  his  command-
ments. They,  nor  any  other  men,
nor  any  power,  can  go  further  than
God  permits  them,  and  when  he
says  stop,  they  must  stop.  He  will
control  all  things  according  to  the
counsels  of  his  own  will.  It  is  for
us  to  be  willing  to  obey  his  laws,  to
preserve  our  bodies  and  spirits  pure,
to  cleave  to  righteousness,  to  honor
the  Lord  our  God,  that  we  may  al-
ways have  his  spirit  to  he  with  us.
And  if  we  are  faithful  by  and  by,  it
will  be  said  of  us,  Well  done,  thou
good  and  faithful  servant :  thou  hast
been  faithful  over  a  few  things  and
I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  many
things  :  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of
thy  Lord*

May  God  bless  you  and  lead  you
in  the  paths  of  life,  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  Amen.


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  at  the  Assembly  Hall,  on  Sunday  Afternoon,

March  5th,  1882.


(Reported  bij  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

THE  DISPENSATION  OF  THE  FULNESS  OF  TIMES  —  RESTORATION  OF  THE
GOSPEL  —  DUTIES  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD  —  THE  FUTURE  OF  ZION —
INCONSISTENCY  OF  THE  SAINTS1  PERSECUTORS  —  INCIDENTS  OF
CHURCH HISTORY,  ETC.


are  living  in  peculiar  times ;
we  are  operating  in  an  eventful  era  j
we  are  associated  with  a  peculiar
dispen Ration,  and  we  have  a  labor
to  perform  which  in  many  respects
differs  from  that  of  all  other  ages  or
times.  The  dispensation  that  we
are  connected  with  is  called  in
Scripture  the  dispensation  of  the
fulness  of  times  in  which,  it  ip  re-
corded, God  will  gather  together
all  tilings  in  one,  whether  they  be
things  on  the  earth  or  things  in  the
heavens.  There  are  ideas  associated
with  this  dispensation  that  are  in
many  respects  distinct,  and  dis-
similar from  those  that  have  been
■enunciated  and  proclaimed  in  for-
mer ages  and  dispensations ;  and  in-
asmuch as  the  present  dispensation  is
to  embrace  everything  that  has  been
connected  with  all  past  dispensa-
tions—all the  prominent  features  as
well  as  the  minor  ones  that  charac-
terized the  Church  and  kingdom  of
God  in  former  days,  that  were  es-
sentially necessary  to  its  growth  and
development  —  must  re- appear  in
connection  with  the  work  of  God  in
this  our  day.  If  the  manifestations
and  developments  of  other  dispen-
sations have  been  made  known  to


us,  we  have  had  revealed  to  us  doc-
trines, theories,  organizations  and
systems  that  have  existed  among
the  whole  of  them  j  because  it  is
emphatically  the  dispensation  of
the  fulness  of  times.  If  they  had
anything  that  was  peculiarly  char-
acteristic in  the  days  of  the  ancient
Patriarchs,  we  have  the  same  re-
vealed to  us.  If  they  had  anything
prominent  and  important  in  the  dis-
pensation of  Noah,  we  have  it,  and
if  Noah  was  called  upon  to  preach
the  Gospel  to  the  world  in  his  dayflt
before  its  destruction,  so  are  we.

If  in  the  Abrahamic  or  Mosaic  dis-
pensations God  revealed  important
principles,  we  have  a  clear  knowledge
of  those  things  made  known  to  us,
and  the  reasons,  the  whys  and
wherefores,  pertaining  to  them.  If
they  had  anything  among  the  an-
cient Prophets  ana  men  of  God,  we
have  the  same  principles  developed.
If  in  the  days  of  Jesus  they  had
mani  testations,  revelations,  doc-
trines or  organizations,  those  things
are  made  known  to  us.  Or  if  the
people  upon  this  continent,  to
whom  God  revealed  his  will— either
the  people  that  came  from  the  Tower
of  Babel,  or  those  who  came  from


THE  DISPENSATION  OF  THE  FULN-KS*:  OF  TIMES,  ETC


29


Jerusalem  during  the  reign  of  Zede-
kiah — if  anything  was  revealed  to
them,  we  have  had  it  revealed  unto
us.  And  this  is  why  certain  things
exist  pertaining  to  organizations,
etc.,  referred  to  by  Brother  Hatch*
We  have  here  on  the  ceiling  of
this  building  pictured  to  us,  Moroni
making  known  to  Joseph  Smith
the  plates,  from  which  the  Book
of  Mormon  was  translated,  which
plates  had  been  hidden  up  in  the
earth  ;  and  in  connection  with  them
was  the  urim  and  thnmmin,  by
wiiich  sacred  instrument  Joseph
was  enabled  to  translate  the  ancient
characters,  now  given  unto  us  in  the
form  of  the  Book  of  Mormon  ;  in
which  is  set  forth  the  theories,  doc-
trines, principles,  organizations,  etc,,
of  these  peoples  who  lived  upon  this
continent.  People  talk  about  their
disbelief  regarding  these  things.
That  is  a  matter  of  no  moment  to
us,  I  do  not  intend  to  bring  any
argument  upon  this  question,  caring
nothing  about  what  people  believe.
We  know  certain  things,  and  know-
ing tbem  we  regard  them  as  matters
of  fact.  If  we  #ere  to  take  the
world  and  its  ideas  and  theories,  we
should  find  that  there  is  hardly  one

Sersou  in  every  thousand  who  be-
eves the  Bible,  The  Christian
World  professes  belief  in  the  Bible  ;
that  isf  they  believe  it  when  shut,
but  not  when  open.  Consequently,
I  do  not  propose  this  afternoon,  at
least,  to  address  myself  to  infidels,
whether  they  go  under  the  name  of
Christian  or  any  other  name.  I  am
speaking  of  certain  principles  to  a
people  who  believe  them  to  be  true ;
and  I  wish  to  refer  more  particularly
to  some  events  associated  with  the
dealings  of  God  with  his  earthly
children.

When  John  was  on  the  isle  of
Patmos,  certain  things  were  revealed
to  him  that  were  to  transpire  in  the


last  days,  and  he  prophesied  of
them.  While  wrapped  in  prophetic
vision,  gazing  on  the  purposes  of  God
as  they  were  to  be  unfolded  in  later
times,  among  other  things  he  saw  an
angel  flying  in  the  midst  of  heaven,
having  the  everlasting  Gospel  to
preach  unto  them  that  dwell  on  the
eArth,  to  every  nation,  kindred,
tongue  and  people  ;  saying  with  a
loud  voice,  Fear  God  and  give  glory
to  him,  for  the  hour  of  his  judg-
ment is  come.  This  was  a  declara-
tion made  by  this  ancient  Apostle
and  Prophet  of  God  while  banished
for  his  religion,  as  certain  men  to-
day would,  if  they  could,  banish  us.
We  now  declare  to  the  world  that
this  part  of  the  visions  of  John  has
been  fulfilled ;  that  the  angel  has
come  and  appeared  to  man  upon  the
earth,  i  conferring  upon  him  this
heavenly  charge,  namely,  the  re-
sponsibility of  opening  up  a  new
Gospel  dispensation  ;  and  we  declare
that  God  himself  took  part  in  it,
and  that  Jesus,  the  Mediator  of  the
new  covenant,  accompanied  him,
both  of  whom  appeared  to  Joseph
Smith,  upon  which  occasion  the
Father,  pointing  to  the  Son  said,
"This  is  my  beloved  Son,  hear
him."  Following  this  the  Gospel
was  to  be  preached  to  every  nation.
What  Gospel!  The  same  Gospel
that  was  preached  to  Adam,  and
to  the  Patriarchs  and  men  of  God;of
every  age;  the  Gospel  of  salvation
and  deliverance  from  sin  through
the  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ,  the
resurrection  from  the  dead,  life
immortal  and  all  the  blessings
associated  therewith.  And  when
this  Gospel  was  first  proclaimed
in  this  age,  who  knew  anything
about  it?  Nobody;  it  was  not
and  had  not  been  among  men  for
centuries.  The  world  of  mankind
had  been  left  without  dirtct
communication  from  the  heavens,


30


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


and  as  a  natural  consequence  while
grovelling  in  the  dark,  they  followed
the  devices  and  desires  of  their  own
hearts  ;  they  were  governed  by  man-
mad  systems,  and  bowed  to  the
dictum,  to  the  notions,  the  theories
(grid  follies  of  men*  There  was
no  Apostle,  no  Prophet,  no  inspired
men  of  God,  holding  His  Holy
Priesthood  to  say,  Thus  saith  the
Lord,  this  is  the  way,  walk  ye
in  it

In  connection  with  this  I  may
allude  to  an  incident  in  my  personal
experience,  to  show  the  state  of  the
trend  religiously  some  forty  or  fifty
years  ago.  Not  being  then  ac-
quainted with  this  Church,  a  number
of  us  met  together  for  the  purpose  of
searching  the  Scriptures  ;  and  we
found  that  certain  doctrines  were
taught  by  Jesus  and  the  Apostles,
which  neither  the  Methodists,  Bap-
tists, Presbyterians,  Episcopalians,
nor  any  of  the  religious  sects  taught ;
and  we  concluded  that  if  the  Bible
was  true,  the  doctrines  of  modern
Christendom  were  not  true;  or  if
they  were  true,  the  Bible  was  false.
Our  investigations  were  impartially
made,  and  our  search  for  truth
was  extended.  We  examined  every
religious  principle  that  came  under
our  notice,  and  probed  the  various  I
systems  as  taught  by  the  sects,  to
ascertain  if  there  were  any  that  were
in  accordance  with  the  word  of  God,
But  Ave  faded  to  find  any,  In
addition  to  our  researches  and
investigations,  we  prayed  and  fasted
before  God  ;  and  the  substance  of
our  prayers  was,  that  if  he  had  a
people  upon  the  earth  anywhere,
and  ministers  who  were  authorized
to  preach  the  Gospel,  that  he  would
send  us  one.  This  was  the  con-
dition we  were  in.  We  knew  all  that
the  Methodists  knew  then,  and  all
that  they  know  now.  We  knew  all
that  the  Presbyterians  knew  then,


and  all  that  they  know  now.  We
knew  all  that  the  Episcopalians
knew  then,  and  all  that  they  know
now,  We  knew  all  that  the  Bom  an
Catholics  knew  then,  and  all  that
they  know  to  day  ;  for  we  made  our-
selves conversaut  with  the  doctrines
and  examined  them  thoroughly,  as
well  as  the  theories  of  all  men  who
pretended  to  have  knowledge  of
G  uspel  1  i  gh  t.  We  prayed  earnestly ;
and  in  answer  to  our  prayers,  the
Lord  sent  us  Elder  Parley  P.  Pratt,
who  gives  an  account  of  this  in  his
auto-biography  which  has  been  pub-
lished since  his  death.  Brother
Pratt,  in  relating  the  circumstances,
says  that  Brother  Heber  C  Kimball
came  to  his  house  one  night  after  lie
had  retired  ;  that  Brother  Kimball
requested  him  to  get  up,  which  he
did,  and  then  began  to  prophecy
to  him.  He  told  him  there  was  a
people  in  Canada  who  were  seeking
for  a  knowledge  of  the  Gospel,  and
they  were  praying  to  God  to  send
them  a  minister  who  should  reveal
to  them  the  truth.  Brother  Kim-
ball then  commissioned  him  to
repair  to  Canada,  telling  him  that
the  Lord  would  bless  him  and  open
up  his  way,  Just  previous  to  that
time  the  Saints  had  been  engaged
j  in  building  the  Temple  in  Kirtland,
Ohio,  and  were  all  very  much
embarrassed  as  to  means.  Brother
Pratt  with  the  balance  having
devoted  every  tiling  he  had  to  spare
for  that  purpose.  Among  other
things  that  Brother  Kimball  told
him  was,  that  where  he  was  going
he  would  find  moans  to  relieve
himself,  and  that  many  of  the  people
would  embrace  the  Gospel,  and  that
it  would  be  the  means  of  introducing
the  Gospel  to  England-  And  fur-
thermore, said  he,  your  wife  who  is
I  now  childless  shall  have  a  son.  In
,  the  course  of  time  she  did  have  a
son,  and  they  named  him  Parley*


THE  DISPENSATION  OF  THE  FULNESS  OF  TIMES,  ETC.  31


.o  not  know  but  that  he  may  be

f resent ;  but  I  was  going  to  say,
knew  him  before  he  was  bora.
{Laughter.  ]

I  speak  of  this  to  show  that  there
was  at  that  time  nobody,  of  whom
we  had  any  knowledge,  from  whom
we  could  obtain  any  information
with  regard  to  the  Gospel  of  the  Son
of  God,  or  that  could  teach  us  the
doctrines  Jesus  and  His  Apostles
taught,  as  contained  in  the  Scriptures.
Brother  Pratt  came  and  found  iu,
and  he  came  in  answer  to  our  prayer;
at  least,  that  is  my  faith  in  regard
to  the  matter.  And  were  all  these
things  accomplished  Yes  :  I  was
baptized  myself  and  others,  and  I
baptized  many  others  in  that  coun-
try ;  and  it  was  the  means  also  of
sending  the  Gospel  to  England.
John  Goodson,  who  apostatized  long
ago,  John  Snyder,  a  good,  faithful
man  who  was  one  of  the  committee
of  the  Nauvoo  House,  and  who  died
in  the  17th  Ward  of  this  City,  Isaac
Russell,  and  Joseph  Fielding,  uncle
to  Brother  Joseph  F.  Smith,  were  of
our  number,  embraced  the  Gospel,
arid  were  afterwards  called  to  accom-
pany Brother  Heber  C.  Kimball
and  Orson  Hyde  to  England  for  the
purpose  of  opening  up  the  work  in
that  land  ;  and  I  was  the  first  persoti
that  wrote  a  letter  to  England  on
the  subject  of  the  Gospel ;  I  did  it  at
the  request  of  Brother  Fielding,  who
got  me  to  write  for  him  to  a  brother
and  brother-in-law  of  his  who  were
ministers  in  England.  These  were
the  men  that  helped  to  introduce
the  Gospel  into  England  in  that
early  day,  I  speak  of  this  for  the
information  of  many  of  you.

Wheu  Brother  Pratt  came  to  me
I  was,  perhaps,  as  well  read  in  the
letter  of  the  Bible  as  I  am  to-day,
And  as  soon  as  he  commenced  to
talk  about  Prophets,  I  said,  Yes,  we
Relieve  in  them. And  he  talked


about  Apostles  and  I  remarked,  Yes,
we  have  been  looking  for  such  men,
but  we  cannot  find  them.  He  talked
about  the  *  organization  of  the
Church  as  it  was  anciently ;  and
about  the  gift  of  tongues  and  the
gift  of  healing,  etc.,  and  we  were
delighted  with  his  message,  it  was
something  we  were  seeking  for,  and
it  was  all  new  to  us.  We  had  heard
rumors  about  the  Mormons,  just  as
people  hear  rumors  now-adays  of  us;
and  the  rumors  we  heard  were  not
of  the  most  complimentary  charac-
ter, any  more  than  are  those  that
are  circulated  about  us  to-day  5  or
those  that  were  circulated  about
Jesus  and  the  former-day  Saint?.
You  know,  the  pious,  hypocritical
clergy  of  that  day  put  the  Savior
down  as  the  vilest  creature  that
ever  liv|*d,  and  influenced  the  popu-
lace against  him  j  for  said  they,  if
he  heals  fclie  sick,  give  God  the  glory,
for  we  know  that  this  man  is  a  sin-
ner ;  and  wheu  he  cast  out  devils,
this  same  class  attributed  it  to  the
power  of  Beelzebub,  the  prince  of
devils  ;  aud  they  spoke  of  him  as
being  a  bastard,  and  cast  all  manner
of  reflections  upon  him.  The  Savior
in  speaking  to  his  disciples  gave
them  to  understand  that  inasmuch
sis  they  had  persecuted  him,  they
would  also  persecute  them  ;  and  said
he,  further,  when  they  persecute
you  in  one  city,  flee  to  another  ;  aud
he  also  told  them  to  be  exceeding
I  glad  when  they  were  persecuted  for
i  righteousness  sake.  What,  to  be
i  lied  about  by  adventurers  and  poli-
1  tical  demagogues  who  seek  to  rob
and  plunder  you  1  Yes  ;  that  is  a
[  good  and  favorable  3ign.  If  Ave
were  guilty  of  the  infamies  that  they
seek  to  lay  at  our  door,  that  would
be  another  matter.  But  whilst  we
are  not  as  good  as  we  might  be,  we
do  know  that  what  they  say  and
publish  to  the  world  about  us,  which


e


82  *  JOUHNAl)  OF

has  had  a  tendency  to  arouse  the
feelings  of  the  general  public  against
us,  are  infernal  falsehoods.  14  Blessed
;ire  you  when  men  shall  revile  you,
and  persecute  you,  and  shall  say
all  manner  of  evil  against  you
falsely,  for  my  fake.  Rejoice  and
be  exceed!: -!a  l"  etc.  In  this  we
but  share  the  lot  of  the  honorable
of  other  age?,  the  men  of  God  who
stood  the  abuse  of  their  fellow-man,
and  who,  in  many  instances,  were
persecuted  much  worse  than  we  are.
Our  present  assailants  have  not
learned  how  yet ;  but  they  are  try-
ing upon  a  small  scale  to  introduce  ;
the  inquisition,  and  may,  by  and
by,  in  some  degree,  succeed  in  car-
rying out  their  nefarious  objects.
This  is  their  work,  if  they  can  stand
it  we  think  we  can.  There  are
thousands  of  honorable  men  who
will  look  down  with  contempt  upon
all  such  unprincipled  and  mendacious
efforts.

After  the  Lord  had  spoken  to
Joseph  Smith,  and  Jesus  had  mani-
fested himself  to  him,  and  after
Moroni  had  revealed  to  hkn  the
hidden  plates  containing  the  history
of  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  this  1
continent,  which,  in  the  wisdom  of
God,  have  been  translated  into  our
own  language  in  the  form  of  the
Book  of  Mormon,  and  which,  in
connection  with  the  Bible,  is  to  be
the  means  of  confounding  false  doc-
trines,  the  one  being  corroborative
of  the  other  in  principle  and  doc-
trine and  in  relation  to  the  designs
and  purposes  of  God— after  this  it
was  necessary  that  the  Priesthood
held  by  men  in  former  days  should
be  restored  in  these  latter  days,  that
people  now,  as  men  in  those  days,
might  be  authorized  to  act  in  the
name  of  the  Lord.  Hence  John  the
Baptist,  who  held  the  keys  of  the
Aaronic  Priesthood,  came  and  laid
his  hands  upon  the  heads  of  Joseph


nrscouhiffis.

Smith  and  Oliver  Cowdery,  usiftg
these  words:  "Upon  you,  my  fel-
low-servants, in  the  name  of  Mes-
siah, I  confer  the  Priesthood  of
Aaron,  which  holds  the  keys  of  the
ministering  of  angels,  and  of  the
;  gospel  of  repentance,  and  of  bap-
i  tism  by  immersion  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins ;  and  this  shall
never  be  taken  again  from  the
earth  until  the  sons  of  Levi  do
offer  again  an  offering  unto  the
Lord  in  righteousness*"  After
having  been  ordained  to  this  Priest-
hood which  is  after  the  order  of
Aaron,  it  was  necessary  that  they
should  have  another  Priesthood
which  is  after  the  order  of  Mel-
chisedek,  and  after  the  order  of
the  Son  of  God.  And  conse-
quently Peter,  James  and  John
,  came  and  conferred  that  Priesthood.
Why  did  they  come  ?  Because  they
were  the  last  who  held  the  keys  of
that  Priesthood*  After  this  order
of  Priesthood  was  introduced,  the
organization  which  we  possess  to-day
was  gradually  effected,  which  is  as
full  and  complete,  perhaps,  as  ever
existed  upon  the  earth.  How
perfect  it  was  in  the  days  of  Enoch
we  are  not  told,  but  everything  that
they  had  revealed  to  them  pertaining
to  the  organization  of  the  Church  of
God,  also  pertaining  to  doctrine  and
ordinances,  we  have  had  revealed  to
us,  excepting  one  thing,  and  that  is
the  principle  and  power  of  transla-
tion ;  that,  however,  will  in  due
time  be  restored  also.  And  if  they
in  their  day  built  a  Zion,  we  have
one  to  build  in  our  day,  and  when
this  shall  be  done  and  everything  is
in  readiness,  the  Zion  which  the
people  of  Enoch  built  and  which
was  translated,  will  descend  from
above,  and  the  Zion  of  the  latter
days  which  this  people  will  buiid,
will  ascend  by  virtue  of  this  principle
I  and  power,  and  the  former  and  the


THE  DISPENSATION  OF  THE  FULNESS  OF  TIMES,  ETC.


latter-day  Zion  will  meet  each  other,
and  the  dwellers  in  both  will  em-
brace and  kiss  each  other,  so  we  are
told  in  the  revelations  of  God,

We  are  indebted  to  no  one  ex-
cepting God,  our  heavenly  Father,
for  the  organization  which  we  pos-
sess ;  and  as  a  little  circumstance
with  regard  to  its  practical  working
occurs  to  me,  I  will  mention  it
Among  other  places,  we  sent  to  Bear
Lake  a  copy  of  the  form  of  petition
which  we  are  now  presenting  to  Con-
gress* I  think  it  was  on  Wednesday
that  it  was  sent  out  from  here,  and
on  Saturday  night  it  was  returned
with  thousands  of  signatures.  That
is  the  way  we  do  things  here.  In  a
few  days  we  had  some  fifty  thousand
signatures,  and  I  presume  before
this  there  are  some  ten  or  twenty
thousand  more  from  the  more  distant
settlements.  What  does  it  manifest  1
Union  and  sympathy  one  with
another,  all  testifying  to  one  thing,
which  I  was  very  glad  to  see.  Peo-
ple have  said  that  we  know  that
polygamy  is  not  a  principle  of  our
religion ;  but  here  are  petitions
signed  by  some  seventy  or  eighty
thousand,  all  of  whom  testify  to
their  faith  in  regard  to  this  prin-
eipla  I  think  the  testimony  of
seventy  or  eighty  thousand  persons
living  right  among  it,  and  most  of
whom  are  born  in  it,  ought  to  be  as
strong  as  that  of  a  few  quidnuncs
who  Know  little  or  nothing  about  it

The  Gospel  was  then  revealed,
what  for — for  you  and  me,  or  for  this
man  and  that  man  J  No ;  it  was  for
the  benefit  of  the  world  ;  it  was  in
the  interests  of  humanity ;  and  it
was  to  be  proclaimed  to  every  nation,
kindred,  people  and  tongue,  by  men
commissioned  of  God  to  do  so.  That
duty  belongs  to  the  Twelve  espe-
cially, to  either  do  so  in  person  or
see  that  it  is  done*  I  have  traveled
myself  tens  of  thousands  of  miles,

No.  3.


and  so  have  my  brethren,  visiting
the  nations  of  the  earth  in  their
most  prominent  cities  declaring  to
them  the  principles  of  the  Gospel  as
God  has  revealed  them.  And  could
we  find  men  upon  the  earth  that
could  successfully  oppose  us  ?  I
declare  before  God  I  never  found
one,  taking  the  Bible  as  a  standard  ;
neither  can  any  one  be  found  to  day
that  can  do  it,  and  that  is  the
trouble.

In  that  day,  we  are  told,  the  meek
shall  rejoice  in  the  Lord  ;  and  the
poor  among  men  shall  rejoice  in  the
holy  one  of  Israel.  God  has  had
his  people  scattered  among  the  na-
tions, and  his  testimony  was  to  go
forth  to  all  lands ;  and  it  becomes
the  duty  of  the  Twelve,  the  Seven-
ties, the  High  Priests  and  Elders  to
carry  thii  message  and  present  it  to
them  in  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel,  not
to  cram  the  truth  down  the  throats
of  men,  as  certain  individuals  tfould
cram  their  peculiar  views  down  our
throats.  But  when  we  were  sent
forth  we  were  sent  to  teach,  and  not
to  be  taught  We  could  not  learn
anything  from  them  about  the
Gospel,  for  they  did  not  know  it
They  could  not  teach  us,  hence  the
Lord  in  sending  out  the  first  EMeri?
told  them  they  were  sent  to  teach
and  not  to  be  taught  We  went  ia
the  midst  of  opposition  and  persecu-
tion, mobbings  and  drivings,  and
were  subjected  to  every  insult,  in-
dignity and  infamy  that  wicked  and
corrupt  men  could  invent,  and  we
have  put  up  with  such  things  all  the
time,  and  many  have  had  to  lay  down
their  lives  in  the  conflict*  and  they
will,  as  others  formerly  did,  when:
the  time  comes,  gain  a  better  resur-
rection. And  we  are  still  struggling-
on,  in  the  face  of  a  general  opposi-
tion, trusting  in  our  God  to  sustain
us,  while  we  shall  continue  to  sow
the  precious  seed  of  the  everlasting

Vol.  XXIIL


34


JuLKNAL  ut  MSCQUKSKS


Gospel,  ami  maintain  in  our  own
.jni<lst  the  principles  of  life  eternal,
ami  freedom,  liberty  ami  equality  to
the  human  nice.  And  our  son* who
have  grown  up  are  now  doing  what
we  have  done  :  ami  they  too  are
full  of  the  Spirit,  full  of  life,  light
.and  intelligence,  having,  as  we  had
and  still  have,  the  interests  of  hu-
manity at  heart,  as  they  move  among
the  people  as  messengers  of  life  and
salvation.  Our  course  is  onward  ;
and  are  we  going  to  stop  ?  No.
Zion  must  be  built  up,  God  has
decreed  it  and  no  power  can  stay
its  progress. Do  you  hear  that  i  1

fropheey  that  in  the  name  of  the
viOrd  Jesus  Christ.  For  Zion  must
ami  will  be  built  up  despite  all  op-
position, the  kingdom  of  God  esta-
blished upon  the  earth  in  accord-
ance with  the  designs  and  purposes
of  God.  That  is  true,  and  you  will
find  it  to  be  true  if  you  live  long
pnough,  and  if  you  die  you  will  find
it  to  he  true  ;  it  will  make  no  differ-
ence. "  15 ut  shall  we  not  be  perse-
cuted?" Yes,  and  does  no^  Jesus
say,  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  revile
you  and  persecute  you,  eta, — would
you  be  deprived  of  that  blessing.
"But  we  have  had  enough  of  it."
O,  have  you  1  no  matter,  you  will
have  to  put  up  with  it  <s  But,"  say
you,  i4  have  we  not  certain  constitu-
tional rights  f  Yes,  on  paper,  but
when  you  get  through  with  them,
the  paper  does  not  amount  to  much ;
it  is  like  pie-crust,  easily  broken.
We  do  not  pay  much  attention  to
these  things.  Honorable  men  will
he  governed  by  constitutions,  and
laws,  and  principles,  but  dishonor-
able persons  will  not  Therefore,  we
have  to  do  the  best  we  can,  taking
a  righteous  course  that  we  may  be
Entitled  to  the  blessings  of  God.  j
"What  will  be  the  result  of  this!"
1  care  nothing  about  what  the  result
maj  be>  it  is  a  matter  of  very  little


importance  to  me.  (;  Do  you  expect
;  such  things  T  Yes,  and  have  done
|  for  years  ;  I  have  never  expected
I  any  tiling  else  associated  with  the
•  Gospel.  When  1  first  embraced  it  I
considered  it  a  life-long  affair  ;  and
when  1  came  to  look  at  it  squarely
in  the  i  if  1  could  have  satisfied
my  conscience  by  getting  along
without  it,  I  would  have  done  so  ;
j  but  1  could  not,  and  1  apprehend
that  many  of  you  have  been  in  the
same  situation.  1  believed  it  was
true,  and  so  did  you  ;  and  af  ter  1  was
baptized  and  had  hands  hud  upon
my  head  for  the  reception  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  I  knew  it  was  true  by
the  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit
upon  my  heart.  And  this  is  the
common  experience  of  all  Saints,
Some  people  seem  to  think  that  we
are  going  to  throw  away  our  religion
at  the  14  drop  of  the  hat."  1  do  not
know  of  any  such  feeling  among
this  people,  There  have  been  men
who  lean  led  to  endure  things  quite
as  bail  as  those  which  afflict  us.  My
mind  runs  back  to  Daniel  who  was  a
man  that  feared  God,  There  was  a
set  of  political  plotters  in  his  day —
and  probably  a  fair  share  of  religious
ones  associated  with,  them — who
con  spired  against  him,  for  Daniel
was  a  man  of  God  in  great  favor
with  the  king  ;  and  the  only  way
they  could  accomplish  their  plans
was  by  laying  a  trap  to  catch  him
through  an  edict  of  the  king.  They
did  it  by  getting  the  king  to  issue  a
proclamation  that  no  man  should
ask  a  petition  of  any  God  or  man  for
thirty  day?,  save  of  the  king,  that
if  he  did  he  .should  be  cast  into  the
den  of  lions.  This  was  done  ex-
piwssly  to  catch  Daniel,  but  the
king  was  not  made  acquainted  with
the  secret  Their  request  was
granted  and  the  decree  established
by  the  .kings,  signature,  which  then,
could  not  be  changed,  according  to


THE  DISPENSATION  OF  THE  FULNESS  OP  TIMES,  ETC


35


the  law  of  the  Medes  and  Persians,
which  altered  not  When  Daniel
heard  of  this,  we  are  told  that  he
went  into  his  house,  and  the  win-
dows of  his  chamber  being  open
towards  Jerusalem,  he  bowed  down
before  his  God,  and  prayed  and  gave
thanks  to  him,  as  aforetime,  three
times  a  day.  He  did  not  falter,
although  he  knew  the  nature  of  the
decree  and  the  laws  which  governed
it  ;  but  he  knew  too  that  the  God
whom  he  served  was  able  to  deliver
him.  They  watched  him,  of  course,
.and  finally  complained  against  him  j
and  he  was  adjudged  guilty  of  vio-
lating the  law.  The  law  had  to
take  its  course,  although  the  king,
when  the  thing  was  made  known
to  him  fait  very  sorrowful,  and  set
his  heart  on  Daniel  to  deliver  him.
He  did  not  feel  like  some  feel
towards  us;  although  there  have
been  praiseworthy  efforts  made  by  a
few  to  maintain  constitutional  prin-
ciples, and  we  recognize  them  as
the  sentiments  and  feelings  of  hon-
orable men,  who  wish  to  see  correct
principles  maintained  in  our  land.
There  was  no  appeal  in  Daniel1  s
♦case  ;  or  as  a  certain  class  of  Chris-
tians to-day  would  say,  *'  Daniel  had
to  go,"  They  cast  him  into  the  den
of  lions.  The  king  went  to  the  den
early  the  following  morning,  feeling
much  concerned  about  him,  and  he
cried  out,  "O  Daniel,  servant  of  the
living  God,  is  thy  God  whom  thou
servest  continually,  able  to  deliver
thee  from  the  lions  ?"  Daniel  spoke
up  and  said,  **  0  King,  live  for  ever.
My  God  hath  sent  his  angel,  and
hath  shut  the  lions'  mouths,  that
they  have  not  hurt  me."  Now,  he
dared  to  do  that  which  showed  there
was  some  manhood  in  him.  We
have  another  example  in  the  three
Hebrew  children,  who  refused  to
bow  down  to  a  golden  image  that
had  been  set  up. Shall  we  call  it


monogamy?  [Laughter.]  The  con-
ditions were  that  if  they  did  not
bow  down  to  this  golden  image,
they  should  be  cast  into  a  burning
fiery  furnace.  They  did  refuse  to
obey  this  royal  decree,  saying,  "  Our
God  whom  we  serve  is  able  to  de-
liver us  from  the  burning  fiery  fur-
nace, and  he  will  deliver  us  out  of
thine  hand,  O  King,  But  if  net
(said  they),  be  it  known  unto  thee,
O  King,  that  we  will  not  serve  thy
gods,  nor  worship  thy  golden  image
which  thou  hast  set  up/'  This,  of
course,  was  considered  a  great  in-
dignity on  their  part  to  refu.se  to
bow  down  to  this  God.  These  three
men  were  ca§t  into  the  furnace  and
their  persecutors  in  their  animus
and  religious  zeal,  heated  it  to
such  a  degree — evincing  in  this
respect  the  same  feeling  we  see
manifested  toward  us  in  a  different
form  —  that  the  men  who  cast
Shadrach,  Meshach  and  Abed-nego
into  the  furnace  were  themselves
destroyed  by  the  flames.  And  it
seems  the  King  himself  was  curious
to  look  into  the  furnace  to  know
of  their  fate,  and  in  doing  so,  to  his
astonishment,  he  beheld  four  per-
sons in  the  midst  of  the  flame?,
one  of  whom  appeared  to  be  like  unto
the  Son  of  God.  Nebuchadnezzar
then  called  to  these  three  men  to
come  out,  which  they  did ;  and  even
the  smell  of  fire  was  not  found
upon  their  clothing,  nor  was  a  hair
of  their  heads  singed.  Such  was
the  faith  of  those  young  men,  and
such  their  conduct  that  all  honorable
men  could  approve  and  appreciate
the  nobility  of  their  course,  and
even  the  Gods  could  admire  them  ;
and  their  integrity  to  God  was  the
means  of  their  beiug  promoted  to
the  favor  of  the  King,  and  to  dis-
tinction in  the  land.  Let  us  hope
that  the  descendants  of  those  people
in  these  days,  in  the  trials  that  they


;>G  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


have  to  pass  through,  which  are  now
being  enacted  in  Russia,  in  Europe,
and  in  other  places,  and  apparently
commencing  in  this  land,  may  be
found  as  true  to  their  integrity  as
were  these  noble  examples  of  man-
hood and  faith  in  God.

But  to  return  to  the  Christian's
idol  The  pious,  zealous,  religious
and  hypocritical  in  our  day,  uniting
with  political  demagogues,  have  set
up  a  God  for  us  to  worship,  which
they  boastfully  represent  as  the  em-
bodiment of  everything  that  is  pure
and  virtuous,  embodying  the  en-
lightenment and  civilization  of  the
nineteenth  century.  Their  god  is
overlaid  with  gilt  and  tinsel,  but
inside  it  is  pregnant  with  the  social
evil  with  its  twin  adjuncts  foetecide  j
and  infanticide.  Like  a  great
Moloch  it  is  crushing  out  female
virtue,  trampling  upon  innocence,
and  prostituting  and  destroying
millions  of  the  fair  daughters  of
Eve.  Yet  this  loathsome,  filthy,
debauched,  degraded  monster  is
held  up  for  our  veneration  and  wor-
ship by  its  corrupt  Christian  de-
votees as  the  essence  of  everything  !
that  is  great  and  grand,  noble  and
praiseworthy  ;  and  we  are  called
npon  to  fall  dow  n  and  worship  this
loathsome  monster  under  the  threat
of  unconstitutional  pains  and  penal-
ties, and  the  violation  of  every
principle  of  liberty  and  protection
guaranteed  under  the  Constitution.

Shall  we  worship  this  unnatural,
lascivious  Moloch !  Shall  we  bow
down  before  the  shrine  of  this  foetid,
corrupt  and  debauched  monster!
No  !  We  will  worship  the  Lord  our
God,  yield  obedience  to  his  behests,
and,  if  we  are  faithful,  live  our  reli-
gion and  keep  his  copimand men ts,
the  God  whom  we  worship  will
deUver  us  out  of  the  hands  of  our
enemies,  and  we  shall  triumph  over
all  our  foes.


;  There  have  been  men  living  nearer
our  own  times  who  could  meet  the
,  inquisition  with  its  fagot,  rack  and
j  thumbscrew,  and  in  the  midst  of
I  their  sufferings  could  commit  them-
selves in  all  serenity  and  calmness
into  the  hands  of  God  ;  and  we  can
surely  do  the  same.  If  th«  rulers
of  this  nation  can  afford  to  tamper
with  the  sacred  rights  of  the  people
guaranteed  by  the  Constitution  of
this  great  nation,  and  ruthlessly
tear  down  the  temple  of  freedom
erected  at  the  cost  of  so  much  blood
and  treasure,  instead  of  anticipated
glory,  they  will  bring  destruction
upon  the  nation  and  ruin  and  infamy
upon  themselves.  The  sacred
bulwarks  of  freedom  once  tampered
with,  the  floodgates  of  anarcy  and
confusion  wall  be  thrown  open  and
dissolution  and  ruin  will  follow  in
their  train  in  rapid  succession.  It
is  for  us  to  sustain  and  maintain  the
principles  guaranteed  in  that
sacred  palladium  of  human  rights —
the  Constitution  of  the  LTnited
States,  and  to  contend  inch  by  inch
in  every  legal  and  constitutional
manner  for  our  own  rights  and
human  freedom,  leaving  misrule,
anarchy,  violations  of  law  and  the
trampling  under  foot  of  the  rights  of
man  and  constitutional  guarantees
to  religious  fanatics  and  clamoring
demagogues  ;  and  if  they  can  afford
to  tamper  with  those  sacred  guaran-
tees, we  certainly  can  afford  to  have
them  doit.  It  is  for  us  to  seek  more
exalted  ideas,  to  abide  by  constitu-
tional law,  to  maintain  inviolate  the
principles  of  human  freedom,  and  to
contend  with  unwavering  firmness
for  those  inalienable  rights  of  all
men — life,  liberty  and  the  pursuit  of
happiness  ;  and  to  seek  continually
to  our  God  for  wisdom  to  accomplish
so  great,  noble  and  patriotic  a  pur-
pose.

One  of  the  first  things  I  ever


THE  DISPENSATION  OF  TH


E  FULNESS  OF  TIMES,  ETC


3;


heard  preached  by  the  Elders  of  this
Ghurcli  was  thaf-  the  world  would
grow  worse  ami  worse,  deceiving
and  being  deceived.  Should  we  be
surprised  at  its  coming  to  pass?
Another  thing  that  I  have  heard  from
the  beginning  is,  that  people  would
persecute  us,  commencing  with
neighborhoods  and  villages,  and
then  it  would  extend  to  cities  and
counties,  and  then  to  States,  and
then  to  the  United  States,  and  after-
wards to  the  world.  We  have  got
about  fifty  millions  of  people  on  our
backs  now — and  it  is  a  pretty  heavy
load  to  carry,  too ;  but  the  Lord  will
see  us  through.  We  are  acting  in
the  interests  of  humanity :  we  are
proclaiming  salvation  to  a  fallen
world,  and  in  this  we  are  carrying
out  the  word  and  will  of  God  made
known  and  manifested  directly  to
us.  We  are  warning  the  people  of
their  position,  and  we  will  continue
to  send  forth  our  missionaries  for
this  purpose  until  God  says,  it  is
■enough.  And  if  they  persecute  us
in  one  city,  we  wilt  do  as  Jesus  told
his  disciples,  we  will  flee  to  another,
searching  out  the  honest  in  heart.
Persecution  has  been  our  lot  from
the  beginning,  and  it  has  followed  us
to  this  day.  I  am  reminded  of  a  cir-
cumstance that  occurred  in  Missouri,
which  I  will  mention  to  show  the
kind  of  feeling  that  Joseph  Smith
was  possessed  of.  Some  25  years
ago,  in  Far  West,  a  mob  —one  of
those  semi-occasional  occurrences —
had  come  against  us  with  evil  in-
tent, placing  themselves  in  position
to  give  us  battle  ;  and  there  were  not
more  than  about  200  of  us  in  the
place.  We  had  one  fellow  who  was
taken  with  a  fit  of  trembling  in  the
knees,  and  he  ordered  our  people  to
letreat  As  soon  as  Joseph  heard
this  sound,  he  exclaimed,  "Retreat !
where  in  the  name  of  God  shall  we
retreat  to  I" He  then  led  us  out  to


the  prairie  facing  the  mob  and  placed
us  in  position  ;  and  the  first  thing
1  we  knew  a  flag  of  truce  was  seen
coming  towards  us.  The  person  bear-
ing it  said  that  some  of  their  friends
were  among  our  people  for  whose
safety  they  felt  anxious.  I  rather
think  it  was  a  case  in  which  the
;  wife  was  in  the  Church  but  not
the  husband,  and  the  mob  wished
these  parties  to  come  out  as  they,
he  said,  were  going  to  destroy  every
man,  woman  and  child  in  the  place.
But  these  folks  had  a  little  "  sand*'
in  them,  as  the  boys  say  ;  they  sent
word  back,  that  if  that  was  the  case
they  would  die  with  their  friends.
Joseph  Smith,  our  leader,  then  sent
word  back  by  this  messenger,  said
he,  "Tell  your  General  to  withdraw
his  troops  or  I  will  send  them  to  hell"
I  thought  that  was  a  pretty  bold
stand  to  take,  as  we  only  numbered
about  200  to  their  3,500  ;  but  they
thought  we  were  more  numerous
than  we  really  were,  it  may  be  that
our  numbers  were  magnified  in
their  eyes ;  but  they  took  the  hint
and  left ;  and  we  were  not  sorry.
(Laughter.)  The  Lord,  through
simple  means,  is  able  to  take  care  of
and  deliver  His  people,  but  they
must  put  implicit  faith  and  confi-
dence in  Him  ;  and  when  they  are
crowded  into  a  tight  place  they
must  not  be  afraid  to  make  sacrifice
for  the  sake  of  maintaining  the
truth,  and  all  will  be  well  with  us
whether  living  or  dying,  in  time  or
in  eternity.

Well,  what  shall  we  dol  We  will
serve  the  Lord ;  we  will  live  our
religion  ;  we  will  be  true  to  our
covenants,  keep  his  commandments
and  be  one,  and  we  will  sustain  one
another,  and  not  sustain  men  among
us  who  have  it  in  their  hearts  to  cut
our  throats ;  let  them  alone  to
pursue  their  own  course,  and  let
them  draw  their  sustenance  from


38


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


their  own  kith  and  kin  ;  ami  let  us
pursue  the  even  tenor  of  our  way,
operating  together  as  a  band  of
brethren  ;  and  if  any  have  sinned,
let  them  sin  no  more  ;  and  inasmuch
as  this  people  are  found  faithful
to  God  and  true  to  themselves  and
their  fellow-men,  I  wiil  risk  the  re-
sults of  what  our  enemies  may  do  to
injure  us. We  are  in  the  hands  of


God,  and  this  nation  is  in  His  hands,
and  he  will  do  with  us  and  them
according  to  the  pleasure  of  His

will.  -*  rsfrs  jja

Brethren  and  sisters,  God  bless
you,  and  God  bless  the  honorable  of
tlie  earth,  and  may  tin-  wrath  of  the
wicked  be  made  to  praise  Him,  and
the  remainder  may  He  restrain.
Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER JOHN  MORGAN,

Delivered  in  the  Assembly  Hall,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  After*

koon,  December  18,  1881.

(Reported  hy  Geo.  F.  Cibbs.)

THE  SOUTH KRX  STATES  MISSION — FA ITH FU LN ESS  OF  YOUNG  ELDERS  — *
OPPOSITION  TO  THE  TRUTH — GRADUAL  SPREAD  OF  THE  GOSPICL  —
CHANGES  IN  RELIGIOUS  AND  POLITICAL  SENTIMENT  —  HARD  TIMES
IK  THE  SOUTH — VICE  AND  DEGRADATION — THE  COLORADO  SETTLE-
MENTS.


It  is  a  very  pleasant  thought  that
we,  as  Elders,  have  when  traveling
abroad  preaching  the  Gospel,  to  look
forward  to  the  time  when  we  shall
have  the  privilege  of  again  meeting
with  our  friends  and  loved  ones  iu
the  valleys  of  the  mountains,  to
again  share  their  love  and  to  partake
of  the  spirit  of  those  who  compose
the  body  of  this  Church.

During  the  past  summer  and
until  a  few  days  1  have  been  engaged
in  missionary  labor,  chiefly  in  the
Southern  States,  Our  labors  there
have  been,  as  have  been  the  labors
of  the  Elders  in  other  missions,
crowned  with  a  certain  degree  of


success.  We  have  realized  the  bless-
ings of  God  upon  us  in  all  our  labors
in  the  midst  of  the  people,  for  which
we  feel  to  rejoice  ai\d  give  thanks
and  praise  to  him.  The  brethren
who  have  gone  from  the  different
parts  of  the  Territory  to  labor  in
the  mission  have  as  a  general  thing,
enjoyed  good  health  ;  and  they  are
feeling  well,  as  a  rule,  temporally
and  spiritually  ;  and  especially  the
younger  brethren  who  have  gone
forth  bearing  the  glad  tidings  of
salvation-  There  has  been  evinced  a
feeling  that  certainly  is  most  praise-
worthy, a  desire  to  emulate  the
example  set  by  their  lathers  in


THE  SOUTHERN  STATES  MISSION,  EI  a


33


preaching  the  principles  of  eternal  j  ready  and  willing  to  add  to  the  ex-
truth,  otten  under  unpleasant  cir-  tent  of  their  ability  and  strength  in
curiistances.  Because,  however  much  carrying  out  any  measures  thought
the  work  of  God  may  progress  ami  |  necessary  for  the  good  of  the  cause,
be  received  abroad  there  is,  as  there  even  to  the  risking  of  their  livfes!
has  been,  and  doubtless  will  be,  a

spirit  of  opposition  which  has  to  be

met  by  every  Elder  in  the  perform-  ;  who  have  come  under  my  obsbrval
ance  of  his  duty.  It  is  true  our  j  tion,  that  the  great  majority  of  our
young  brethren  have  the  benefit  of  young  people,  "growing  up  in  these


And  1  am  led  to  believe  from  what
I  have  witnessed  in  the  young  men


the  experience  of  their  fathers  and  of
men  prominent  in  the  Church,  to
encourage  them,  and  which  is  highly
appreciated  by  them,  but  after  all
they  have  to  get  the  experience  for
themselves,  in  order  that  they  may
know  what  their  fathers  know,  and
that  they  may  be  able  to  stand
shoulder  to  shoulder  with  them.  I


mountains  have  planted  in  their
hearts  the  principles  of  truth,  bf
which  they  will  be  governed  in
their  lives.  And  in  this  connection
there  is  this  peculiarity.  In  our
travels  in  the  South  we  often  meet
with  families  M'ho  were  once  mem-
bers of  the  Church,  who  during  the
trying  times  of  Missouri  and  Illinois,


have  scarcely  found  an  exception  or  at  some  other  time  in  the  history
among  the  scores  of  young  men  who  j  of  the  Church,  had  stop^d  by  the
have  been  called  from  the  different  |  way-sidewind  where  they  stopped
avocations  of  jife  to  go  forth  and  \  tern porally  they  stopped  spiritually  ;


proclaim  the  Gospel,  but  what  they
were  worthy  bearers  of  gla  1  tidings.
There  is  an  idea. entertained  by
the  pious  world,  whose  sympathy
for  fidlen  humanity  is  so  great  as  to
be  exercised  towards  us.  that  the
old  and  gray- liea  h*d  of  the  "  Mor-
mon" peopte,  "you  can  do  uotluu&r


the  cessation  of  their  temporal  work
was  the  milestone  that  marked  their
spiritual  t  esting  place — but  notwith-
standing this  falling  away  on  the
part  of  the  parents,  we  found,  as  a
general  thing,  that  in  the  hearts  of
their  child  ten  there  was  a  love  for
the  principles  of  denial  truth  ;  and


with,  they  having  becoming  fossilized  that  if  an  elder  was  knotfn  to  be  in
in  their  religious  ideas  and  petrified  '  their  vicinity  they  would  send  for


in  their  faith  ;  but  the  young  may  b*-
induced  to  depart  from  the  faith  of
their  fathers/*  This,  however,  has
not  been  the  experience  we  hav«
ha  i  in  the  Southern  States  mission
with  our  young  Elders,  On  the
contrary,  we  have  found  their  feces
set  hke  flint  toward  the  building  up
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  the  pro-
claiming of  the  principles  of  truth.
It  often  occurs  in  out  missionary
labors  that  Eiders  are  called  upon  to
pass  through  trying  circuinsutuees,
but  I  do  not  remember  of  a  single
instance  in  which  a  young  Eldtv
flinched  from  the  performance  of
his  duty. Tney  have  always  been


him  and  make  themselves  known  to
him,  and  open  their  doors  to  him,
and  ninety- j  line  times  out  of  a  hun-
dred they  would  ask  to  be  baptized.
Tins  being  true  of  the  children  of
such  families,  who  ate  isolated  from
the  body  of  the  Church,  we  might
reasonably  expect  that  the  youth  of
Ziou  will  be  found  true  and  faithful
to  the  precepts  of  truth  taught  to
them,  through  the  force  and  benefit)
ot  example  they  receive  from  their
partite  who  are  members  of  the
Church.

in  our  labor*  we  at  times  meet
with  considerable  opposition,  but  we
notice  that  it,  in  the  long  run,  in*


40


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


to  our  injury,
And what  is
in  this  respect
case  elsewhere,
enemies  inflict


stead  of  working
results  in  good,
true  in  the  Smith
is  doubtless  the
That  which  our
upon  us  in  the  hope  of  breaking
us  up  or  weakening  our  position
is,  through  an  overruling  providence,
turned  to  result  iu  good  by  bringing
the  honest  in  heart,  the  Israel  of  God,
to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth.  The
widespread  feeling  of  opposition  that
exists  toward  us  throughout  the
United  States,  arguing  from  past
experiences,  may  be  set  down  as  a
good  omen  for  the  future.  But  not-
withstanding this  general  hubbub
which  the  people  seemingly  have  to
indulge  iu  tienii-occasionally,  we  tind
in  traveling  and  moving  among  the
people  very  many  upright  noble  men
and  women,  and  we  find  them
belonging  to  various  churches  and
religious  bodies  ;  ami  then  we  meet
with  others  who  are  not  connected
with  any  sect  or  denomination,  and
who  are  seeking  lor  truth  let  it  come
from  where  it  may.  And  this  class,
in  my  opinion,  is  not  small  through-
out the  United  States ;  in  fact,  I
might  with  safety  say,  that  there
are  thousands  of  such  people  who
have  not  heard  the  sound  uf  the
everlasting  Gospel,  there  being  vast
districts  of  country  occupied  by
hundreds  or  thousands  of  peoples
who  do  not  know  whether  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  believe  in  God  or  not,
whether  they  accept  the  Bible  or
leject  it,  people  who  are  totally
ignorant  in  regard  to  our  views  j  and
among  these  there  are  many  thou-
sands of  the  honest  in  heart.  We
find  that  the  spirit  of  opposition
that  v  e  have  to  meet,  as  a  rule,  cul-
minates in  violence ;  and  that  the
more  .success  we  have  in  baptizing
people,  the  more  bitter  the  feeling
manifested  toward  us  by  our  oppo-
nents.


We  are,  doubtless,  traveling  in
the  Southern  States  Mission,  by
way  of  making  converts  as  fast  as
it  would  be  prudent.  If  our  labors
should  be  crowned  with  any  greater
success,  that  is,  to  any  considerable
extent,  the  opposition  would  be  cor-
respondingly more  ripe,  and  the
consequence  would  be,  we  would
have  a  bigger  row  on  our  hands  than
we  would  care  to  face.

We  find  a  great  many  prominent,
leading  men  in  our  travels  who  are
willing  to  act  fairly  ami  honorably
by  us  ;  men  who  use  their  influence
with  their  friends  in  our  behalf  by
endeavoring  to  place  in  their  minds
correct  ideas  in  relation  to  us  and
our  situation.  To  illustrate  this
idea,  I  will  relate  aa  incident  that
occurred  during  the  summer.  The
Legislative  Assembly  of  one  of  the
States,  Missou  r  i — w  h  o  se  in  eni  bers
had  been  urged  on  by  sectarian
bigotry,  had  a  bill  introduced  that  it
was  supposed  would  act  against  the
"  Mormons"  in  that  State.  Some  of
the  distinguished  citizens,  honor-
able, fair-minded  people,  said  to  cer-
tain of  the  legislators  :  (l  You  pass
that  bill  and  one  half  of  the  State
will  become  Mormons ;  that  will
evidently  be  the  result.  Why  T  Be-
cause the  moment  you  adopt  such
measures  you  are  in  the  wrong,  let
them  be  what  they  may."  There
are  many  men  of  that  way  of  think*
ing  who  have  moral  courage  suffi-
cient lo  speak  their  minds  ;  and  the
influence  of  such  men  is  felt  for
good.  And  here  let  me  say  to  the
credit  of  the  press  that,  bitter  as  the
opposition  is,  we  scarcely  ever  find
a  daily  newspaper  of  any  prominence
but  what  will  open  its  columns  for
us  to  vindicate  our  course.  And
in  addition  to  what  I  have  said
in  alluding  to  the  class  of  people
who  aie  liberal  and  cosmopolitan  in
their  views,  we  find  such  people  ever


THE  SOUTHERN  STATES  MISSION,  ETC


41


ready  and  even  anxious  to  learn  in
regard  to  our  religious  belief.
And  notwithstanding  the  fact
that  among  this  class  are  found  men
of  learning  and  deep  research,  men
who  are  looked  up  to  by  their  fellow-
men,  strange  as  it  may  seem  to  a
people  who  keep  pace  with  the  age,
we  find  the  great  majority  of  them
much  astonished  when  they  learn
that  we  believe  in  the  Bible,  and
that  we  take  the  teachings  of  that
Book  to  substantiate  our  doctrines.
Among  this  class  who  are  so  un-
informed as  to  our  theological  status
are  Congressmen,  governors,  legis-
lators and  others  of  distinction  and
character.

We  find  also  in  the  ordinary  walks
of  life  honest-hearted  people*  We
find  them  in  the  churches  and  out
of  the  pale  of  the  church.  We  meet
with  men  belonging  to  the  sects  of
the  day  who  say,  "  If  we  have  not
got  the  truth,  we  wish  to  obtain  it/1
And  we  meet  with  others  who  do
not  belong  to  any  religious  denomi-
nation who  say,  We  have  examined
the  doctrines  taught  by  the  different
churches ;  they  will  not  do.  Now
we  are  willing  to  investigate  what
vou  teach,  But,  then,  we  cannot
Iielp  but  notice  this  kind  of  expres-
sion in  their  faces  :  "  Can  any  good
thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  V  Can
any  good  come  out  of  Utali  1  This,
of  course,  is  owing  to  the  widespread
misunderstanding  in  regard  to  our
religious  views.  j

The  newspapers  to-day  are  teem-
ing with  articles  in  regard  to  the
Latter-day  Saints.  We  are  written
about  by  editors  and  special  corres-
pondents ;  local  editors  gather  up
items  respecting  us  and  our  labors
among  the  people  of  their  vicinity  ;
reporters  appear  to  be  greedy  for  au
interview  with  a  **  Mormon  min-
isters preach  about  us  from  their  j
stands,  and  lawyers  have  to  allude


to  us  from  the  forum  ;  and  to  such
an  extent  is  this  spirit  and  feeling
indulged  by  the  people  of  all  grades
and  classes,  that  to-day  "  Mormon-
ism"  is  a  living  question  in  the  Uni-
ted States.  Recently  some  poli-
ticians endeavored  to  work  up  an
issue,  and  make  a  live  question  out
of  the  tariff,  and  it  was  rather
amusing  ^  to  witness  after  their
exertions  how  slow  the  public  were
to  take  the  bait  And  especially
amusing  did  such  efforts  appear  to
those  who  watch  with  a  lively  in-
terest the  progress  of  this  latter-day
work  called  "  Mor monism,"  in  view
of  the  fact  that  if  a  couple  of
H  Mormon"  Elders  go  into  a  town,
almost  without  any  effort  on  their
part  to  make  themselves  known,  the
whole  town  is  stirred  up.  In  my
opinion  &he  w  Mormon'  iron  is  red-
hot,  and  it  is  a  proper  time  for  the
Elders  to  beat  it  into  shape.

We  observe  changes  taking  place
in  the  minds  of  the  people  continu
ally.  Indeed,  I  can  notice  marked
changes  in  the  people  of  the  United
States  during  the  past  six  years*
For  instance,  quite  recently  I  lis-
tened to  a  sermon  preached  by  one
of  the  distinguished  ministers  of  the
United  States,  the  Rev,  Henry
Ward  Beecher,  and  was  very  much
surprised  to  hear  him  enunciate  an
idea  like  this  :  '?  What  shall  be  done
with  all  the  thousands  and  millions
of  the  human  family  who  knew  not,
even  of  the  existence  of  the  Bible,
j  Shall  they  perish  1 "  "  No,"  said  he,
"  not  if  my  God  reigns  in  the  next
world."  But,  continued  he,  <;  what
shall  be  done  ?  They  wilt  have  the
Gospel  preached  to  them  in  the  spirit
world."  Another  minister,  the  Rev.
Dr.  Thomas,  of  Chicago,  of  the
Mbthodist  Church,  made  similar
assertions ;  but  he  was  not  as  strong
as  Mr*  Beecher,  and  they  therefore
excommunicated him from  the


42


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


church.  But  Beech er  could  make
it,  and  no  one  dare  say  nay.  So  Ave
find  religious  ideas  undergoing  a
change,  until  there  is  scarcely  a
religious  denomination  to-day  but
what  has  done  what  the  Pharisees
of  old  did—  j hi t  new  wine  into  their
old  sectarian  bottles,  and  the  pro-
bable  result  will  be,  as  Jesus  said,
their  bottles  will  burst  They  are
endeavoring  to  patch  their  old  sec
tarian  clothts  with  pieces  of  new
cloth,  and  the  result  will  be  that  they
will  be  obliged  to  keep  patching  in
order  to  keep  the  garment  together.
And  thus  their  religious  ideas  are
drifting  to  and  fro.

And  what  is  true  with  regard  to
their  religious  views  is  also  true
with  regard  to  their  political  ideas,
I  had  an  excellent  opportunity
recently  to  witness  a  remarkable
change  in  public  sentiment  Public
sentiment  you  know,  is  a  very
strong  argument  in  the  minds  of
some  people,  "Why,  public  sen-
timent is  against  you,"  they  say,  I
remember  listening  to  Gov.^Bross,
of  Illinois,  who  spoke  in  front  of  the
Town  send  House,  one  night,  some
years  ago.  The  foundation  of  his
argument  was  that  thirty-five  mil*
lions  of  people  in  the  United  States
were  opposed  to  us  ;  that  in  short,
public  sentiment  was  opposed  to  us.
I  had  my  mind  directed  to  the  fickle
nature  of  public  sentiment  quite
recently  in  Nashville,  Tennessee.
Some  25  years  ago  a  certain  race
of  people  were  held  in  slavery  there.
Slavery  was  an  adjudicated  question
at  that  time.  But  it  was  claimed
by  the  opponents  of  slavery  that  if  a
negro  and  his  wife  could  be  taken
out  of  Missouri  through  Illinois,  that
they  were  entitled  to  their  freedom
because  they  were  then  upon  free
feoil.  It  was,  however,  decided  in
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United
States,  by  Chief  Justice,  Roger  B.


Tan new  that  black  men  had  no
rights  that  a  white  man  was  bound
to  respect,  that,  in  fact,  they  were
chattel  property.  And  the  people  of
the  United  States  almost  en  Tnasse
applauded  the  decision,  a  few  only
dissenting,  they  being  what  were
called  abolitionists  Wendell  Phil-
lips, a  distinguished  orator,  under-
took to  lecture  in  Boston  against
slavery,  and  learned  as  Boston  was,
educated  as  Boston  was,  the  noted
lecturer  was  egged  off  the  platform,
having  to  make  his  escape  from  the
mob.

Twenty-five  years  have  gone  by
since  Phillips  was  mobbed,  and  now
for  the  contrast  Some  four  or  five
weeks  ago  I  boarded  a  through  pas-
senger car  at  Nashville,  IVnn,,  to
Cincinnati,  there  were  seated  in  the
car  some  25  ladies  and  gentlemen.
After  I  got  comfortably  seated
alongside  a  person  who  proved  to
be  a  Christian  minister  of  the
Campbellite  persuasion,  and  an  edi-
tor, we  perceived  a  little  tiifficulty  at
the  car-door.  On  investigation  we
learned  that  a  neero  woman  held  a
first  class  ticket,  and  demanded
admittance  to  a  seat  in  this,  a  lirst-
class  car.  She  was  entitled  to  a  seat
there,  having  procure*!  a  ticket,
according  to  the  provisions  of  the
civil  rights  bill ;  but  the  rules  of  the
railroad  company  would  not  permit
it.  The  manager  was  sent  for,  and
after  some  conversation  with  the
colored  woman,  addressing  himself
to  the  passengers  already  seated  in
the  car,  he  said  :  Ladies  and  gen-
tlemen, will  you  please  take  seats  in
the  car  to  the  rear.  We  did  so.  It
proved  to  be  a  smoking  second-class
car.  He  then  admitted  the  old
negro  woman,  who  occupied  our
car.  After  we  had  taken  in  the  situa-
tion and  were  re-seated,  addressing
myself  to  the  gentleman  whose  ac-
quaintance I  formed  on  entering  the


THE  SOUTHERN  STATES  MISSION,  ETC.


car,  I  said,  "Mr.  Editor,  twenty  five  [of  the  people  to  receive  principle,
years  ago,  had  a  man  dared  to  do  what  good  or  bad,  from  the  lips  of  their


this  negro  woman  has  done,  you
would  have  hung  him  to  a  lamp-post.
Now,  I  will  dare  say,  there  is  not  a
paper  in  the  city  of  Nashville  that
will  venture  to  write  one  line,  in
condemnation  of  this  piece  of  impu-
deuce."  He  acknowledged  there
was  not  And  why  this  change  1
Public  sentiment  had  revolutionized
in  a  quarter  of  a  century.  The
negro  blave  of  Phillip's  day  is  the
sovereign  citizen  of  to-day.

The&e  are  revolutions  that  are
occurring  among  the  children  of  men
that  are  of  a  serious  nature.  And
what  is  true  in  a  political  sense,  is
true  in  a  religious  sense.  It  is  a  very
common  observation  anion sf  the
people  everywhere  that  we  are  not
taught  religiously  what  we  were
twenty  five  }ears  ago,  or  ten  years
ago.  They  are  drifting  to  and  fro
religiously  as  well  as  politically.

Another  feature  associated  with
this  :  About  forty  years  ago  a  num-
ber of  our  Elders  traveled  through
the  Southern  States — it  may  have
beeu  in  1844. Ami  as  they  jour-


own  minister,  reminds  one  of  the
same  state  of  things  that  existed  in
the  days  of  the  Savior,  as  indicated
by  these  words  :  Woe  unto  you
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites  !
for  ye  shut  up  the  kingdom  of
heaven  against  men  :  for  ye  neither
go  in  youi selves,  neither  suffer  ye
them  that  are  entering  to  go  in.1'

It  is  a  self-evident  fact ;  it  is  a
truth  patent  to  the  most  casual  ob-
server that  the  teachings  of  Joseph
Smith  have  revolutionized  the  reli-
gious world.  And  the  spirit  that
is  working  this  change  is  growing
and  extending,  until  to  day  there  is
inquiry  upon  the  right  hand  and  the
left.

.As  a, general  thing  those  who
receive  the  Gospel  in  the  Southern
States"  are  to  be  from  what  are
termed  the  middle  classes,  people
who  are  the  owners  of  small  posses-
sions which,  when  sold,  realize  them
sufficient  to  provide  themselves  a
suitable  outfit  and  take  them  to
their  emigrating  point.  There  have
been  some  instances,  however,  when


neyed  along,  they  scattered  all  over  their  possessions  have  been  sold
the  country  tracts  and  books,  setting
forth  our  faith  and  doctrines.  And
to-day  it  is  not  un frequent,  on  our
going  into  a  neighborhood  and  talk-
ing to  the  people,  that  they  will  say,
"Our  minister  has  been  preaching
that"  Ah,  indeed.  Well,  can  we
see  him  ?  0,  yes  ;  we  will  ask  him
to  come  and  see  you,"  On  our  con-
versing with  him,  we  have  found
that  he  has  a  Voice  of  Warning
hidden  away  in  his  saddle  pockets,
which  he  had  been  reading,  and
believing  some  of  its  pages,  he  had
been  preaching  some  ot  the  principles
of  the  Gospel  to  his  own  congrega-
tion, which  they  would  believe,  and
receive  without  even  "a  grain  of
salt." This  willingness  on  the  part


even  where  they  possessed  good
homes,  that  the  proceeds  of  the  sale-
have  been  insufficient  to  emigrate
t  lie  UK  This  has  been  due,  in  part,
to  the  peculiar  circumstances  by
which  they  have  been  surrounded.
In  the  first  place  a  terrible  war
devastated  their  country  ;  and  since
that  time  they  have  been  under
Carpet-bag  rule.  And  the  conse-
quence is,  in  many  places  property
has  depreciated,  life  has  been  inse-
cure, laws  have  beeu  trampled  under
foot,  and  little  progress  has  been
made.

The  people  living  in  Utah  can
scarcely  sense  the  true  situation  of
the  Southern  States  people.  There
has  been  a  dreadful  droutli  Xlm


JOUKNAL  OF  UISCOUKSK.S.


summer.  I  suppose  the  majority —
I  may  say  the  entire  South  h:ts  not
raised  sufficient  jirain  to  bre;ul
themselves  to  the  first  of  April.  The
corn  yield  will  not,  it  is  said,  exceed
four  bushels  to  the  acre,  and  the
cotton  crop  may  be  a  little  rising
of  one-third  the  usual  harvest.  The
result  will  he  more  or  less  suffering
among  the  poorer  people  this  winter.
Wage*  are  very  low.  A  man  can
be  employed,  a  strong,  able-bodied
man,  either  white  or  colored,  for
from  $6  to  9$  per  month  including
board  ;  ami  from  $10  to  SI  2  when
they  board  themselves.  Flour  is  5
dollars  per  100  pounds,  and  other
provisions  in  proportion.  I  noticed
that  dry  goods  were  as  high  in
Nashville  as  they  were  iu  our
settlements  in  Colorado.  Wages  are
at  such  a  low  figure  that  ii  seems
almost  impossible  for  the  people  to
live,  when  they  depend  upon  day's
wages  for  a  living.  In  addition  to
this  there  seems  to  be  a  wasting
away  of  the  earth,  a  weakening  in
its  strength,  affecting  its  ability  to
produce  abundantly.  Fields*  that
a  few  years  ago  yielded  good  crops,
are  bordering  on  sterility  to  day.
There  are  hundreds  and  thousands
of  acres  of  land  that  formerly  were
very  prolific  have  to-day  become
4i  commons,"  covered  with  edge
grass  and  sassafras  bushes.  And
it  is  talked  about  by  the  landowners,
and  commented  upon  by  the  people
generally  ;  and  they  believe  that
something  is  wrong,  but  what  it  is  or
where  it  is,  they  do  not  know.

Monopolies  and  corporations  have
also  a  tight  grip  upon  the  people.
Where  there  are  iron  works,  where
there  are  railroads,  where  there  are
factories,  they  are  owned  by  a
few  men,  and  these  few  men  hold
$uch  power,  that  the  people  cannot
make  any  move  and  succeed  in  it,
that  would  be  opposed  to  the  in-


terest of  the  monopolists.  And
t inlay,  it  is  one  of  the  strongest
points  of  pppositiou  that  we  have
to  meet  in  that  mission  in  pleaching
the  Gospel.  Laboring  men  say,  If
I  take  you  to  my  house  and  receive
you  as  my  guest,  these  men  who
own  this  property  will  turn  me
out ;  these  men  who  employ  me
in  their  factory  will  drive  me  away,
my  family  will  snffer,  as  I  have
nothing  laid  up.  Under  the  cir-
cumstances, they  have  not  the  faith
sufficient  to  meet  the  issue,  and
consequently  our  labors  are  not
crowned  with  that  success,  as  they
evidently  would  be  if  the  people
enjoyed  their  liberty.  But  even
under  these  circumstances,  many  do
receive  us  and  proclaim  openly  their
faith.

In  addition  to  this,  all  experience
that  opposition  which  is  as  old,
doubtless,  as  the  preaching  of  the
truth  ;  and  this  comes  from  the
clergy.  And  here  let  ire  say,  that
the  opposition  we  meet  with  from
that  quarter,  to  a  great  extent,  has
its  foundation  in  Salt  Lake  City.
There  walk  the  streets  of  our  city
men  who  produce  and  feed  the  flame
of  prejudice  that  exists  to-day  in
the  United  States  ;  men  who  pro-
fess to  be  the  friends  of  their  fellow-
uien  ;  men  who  come  here  with  a
smile  on  their  faces  pretending  to  do
us  good,  pretended  followers  of  the
meek  and  lowly  Savior.  These  are
the  characters  that  send  these  in-
famous lies  abroad  in  regard  to  the
Latter-day  Saints,  They  are  preju-
dicing the  mind  of  the  people  of  the
United  States  against  our  mission-
aries and  against  the  truth*  When
1  have  visited  the  cities  where  these
men  came  from  who  have  come  to
Utah  as  reformers,  I  have  been
deeply  impressed,  and  deeply  moved
at  the  condition  of  their  society  con-
trasted with  that  of  this  people.


TIIK  SOUTHERN  STAT KS  MISSION  KTC


ome  time  Last  summer  I  had
business  in  Louisville,  Kentucky,
connected  with  our  emigration,  and
was  detained  there  two  or  three
days,  having  nothing  particular  to
do  but  to  walk  around  the  city  and
see  what  was  to  be  seen  of  interest,
And  in  walking  the  streets  of  that
city  I  thought  that  in  all  my  travels
I  had  never  before  seen  such  evi-
dences of  wickedness,  corruption  and
degradation.  There  are  portions  of
that  city  that  seem  to  have  become
corrupted  to  such  an  extent,  that
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  would  have
blushed  at  the  mention  thereof.
Men  and  woven  could  be  seen  in
the  most  beastly  state  of  drunken-
ness, and  little  children,  bearing  the
marks  of  the  lowest  degradation —
waifs  of  society,  growing  up  as
hoodlums,  with  no  sense  of  the  dif-
ference between  right  and  wrong
excepting  that  which  nature  itself
has  planted  there,  to  furnish  future
material  for  the  gallows.  1  thought
in  contemplating  the  scene  that  pre-
sented itself  in  the  streets  of  the
city  of  Louisville,  ay,  even  at  noon-
day, to  say  nothing  of  that  which
the  recording  angels  are  obliged  to
look  upon  in  the  darkness  of  the
night — I  thought  of  the  reformers
who  come  to  Utah  fresh  from  such
haunts  of  vice  and  corruption,  and
then  I  thought  of  you,  my  brethren
and  sisters  ;  and  you  can  better  im-
agine my  feelings  than  I  can  de-
scribe them.

I  went  to  one  of  their  hospitals
and  sought  an  introduction  to  one
of  the  physicians  ;  on  learning  who
I  was  he  expressed  himself  pleased
to  meet  me,  and  proffered  his  own
services  to  accompany  me  over  the
building,  which  I  gladly  accepted.
On  passing  through  the  different
wards  I  iaw  sights  that  I  trust  my
eyes  shall  never  be  called  to  look
upon  again. He  opened  his  book  in


which  was  recorded  the  names  of
the  patients  who  had  been  admitted
during  the  past  twelve  mouths,  and
I  had  the  curiosity  tu  ask  him  to  tell
me  the  nature  and  character  of  the
disease  of  these  people.  He  informed
me  that  three- fourths  of  all  cases
were,  what  is  termed  venereal  dis-
ease. This  is  not  hearsay ;  these
are  facts  that  exist  of  which  the
records  testify.  And  from  the  win-
dows of  this  hospital,  this  living
monument  of  the  morals  of  Louis-
ville, Kentucky,  was  pointed  out  to
me  the  resilience  of  one  of  these
14  reformers "  of  the  Latter-day
Saints.  And  in  conversation  with
one  of  these  "  reformers"  who  had
been  here,  whose  acquaintance  I
had  formed  when  he  was  here — he
recognizing  me  while  traveling  in  a
railway  <!ar,  and  came  and  shook
hands  with  me,  and  sat  down  along-
side of  me — he  asked  me  "how  our
friends  were  getting  along  in  Utah."
"  Whom  do  you  mean,"  said  I,  "by
our  friends!"  I  mean  the  minis-
ters who  have  gone  there,"  he  re*
plied.  They  are,  I  think,  getting
along  in  their  way  pretty  welL
What  have  they  done!  They
have  established  whiskey  shops  I
they  have  imported  houses  of  prosti-
tution, and  they  have  brought  hood-
lems  into  our  midst,  and  they  thrive
under  their  spiritual  care.  They
have  caused  sorrow  on  the  hearts
of  fathers  and  mothers,  by  ruining
the  prospects  of  sons  and  daughters
whom  they  have  led  astray  from
the  paths  of  honor  and  credit.
Now  is  not  that  glorious  work  to  be
engaged  in  !  Do  you  not  congratu-
late yourselves  in  having  been  con-
nected with  men  whose  object  and
labor  has  been  to  turn  men  and  wo-
men from  the  truth,  from  bearing
the  fruits  of  morality  and  righteous-
ness, and  failing  in  that  to  join  hand
in  hand,  heart  and  soul,  with  those


46


JULUNAL  Of  DISCUUKSJCS


whose  mission  is  to  introduce  into
our  midst  the  seeds  of  ruin  ami  de-
cay,  to  deprive  and  demoralize  your
fellow- men.  Certainly  it  is  a  noble
calling  to  bp  engaged  in*  Think  of
it !  Latter-day  Saints,  Here  are
men  engaged  in  the  work  of  trying
to  lead  our  sons  and  daughters  astray,
and  they  are  bold  enough  to  publish
boastfully  to  the  world  that  they
would  rather  see  our  young  people
frequent  dens  of  iniquity,  saloons,
gambling  houses,  and  houses  of
prostitution,  than  that  they  should
adhere  to  the  "  Mormon"  faith.
Strange  as  it  may  seem,  with  all  the
enlightenment  of  this  the  Nineteenth
Century,  with  our  glorious  constitu-
tion, and  our  declaration  of  the
rights  of  man,  and  the  hoasted
civilization  of  to-day,  officials  of
the  government  of  the  United  States
will  back  men  up  in  this  damnable
work.  It  may  be  that  an  Elder
abroad  devoting  his  time  and  ability
to  the  conversion  of  souls  would
feel  tiiis  more  keenly  thau  those
who  are  in  the  midst  of  it  every
day,  *

These  are  some  of  my  medita-
tions as  an  Klder  in  the  missionary
field.

Our  brethren  and  sisters  who  have
emigrated  to  the  State  of  Colorado,
are  succeeding  fairly  well  ;  they
have  their  fields  fen  ceil  in,  and  they
harvested  a  pretty  fair  crop  tins  year.
The  Railroad  Companies  have  been
kindly  disposed  to  them,  offering
them  assistance  in  various  way*,  by
way  chiefly  of  affording  them  em-
ployment at  remunerative  wages,
and  seeking  after  them,  in  fact  to
'do  their  work  in  preference  to  others.
They  have  their  organizations — the
Seventies,  Elders,  Fries ts,  Teachers
and  Deacons1  -  Quorums  ;  they  have
their  young  people's  Mutual  Im-
provement Societies  organized  ;  and
I  had  the  pleasure  of  attending  one


of  their  meetings  in  the  meeting-
house which  the  people  built  two
and  a  half  years  ago.  I  remember
attending  one  of  the  first  meetings
that  was  held  in  that  house,  and
there  were  present  not  more  than
27  all  told,  and  said  to  them  that  in
the  course  of  four  or  five  years  this
same  house  will  not  hold  t  he  people  ;
and  to-day  it  is  entirely  too  small,  in
fact  it  would  not  comfortably
seat  the  young  people  of  Man-
tissa. The  first  location  was
mad*1  there  in  the  spring  of  1878,
Since  then  some  two  or  three  set-
tlements have  been  organized
besides  ;  our  brethren  in  that  quarter
are  spreading  out  and  wresting  from
the  barren  wastes  comparatively
comfortable  homes.  Their  associa-
tions with  the  Mexicans  are  cordial.
While  they  have  been  kindly  dis-
posed towards  our  people,  our  breth-
ren have  acted  honrably  towards
them,  and  hence  mutual  good  feel-
ings exist  between  them.  I  also
spent  a  few  days  with  our  brethren
who  are  locating  Sunsetf  Brigham
City  and  St  Joseph.  They  have
had  rather  a  bad  year,  as  to  crops,
on  account  of  high  waters,  the  Little
Colorado  flooding  the  valleys,  and
destroying  to  a  great  extent  their
crops.  But  the  building  of  the  rail-
road in  their  borders  has,  through
Brother  John  W.  Young,  the  con-
tractor, furnished  them  with  labor,
and  it  will  continue,  I  understand,
for  some  12  or  18  months  jet,  so
they  will  not  suffer  so  much  as  they
otherwise  would,  in  consequence  of
the  loss  of  their  crops.

As  Elders  traveling  without  purse
or  scrip,,  proclaiming  the  principles
j  of  eternal  truth,  we  need  the  iaith
,  and  prayers  of  the  Saints  in  our  bp-
i  half,  for  the  devil,  it  would  seem,  is
.  even  more  determined  now  than
I  ever  to  put  it  into  the  hearts  of
'  wicked  and  bigoted  men  to  oppose


THE  SOUTHERN  STATES  MISSION,  ETC.


ami,  if  possible,  finder  us  in  the
performance  of  our  duty.  And  one
item  that  comes  to  my  mind  I  will
mention.  I  have  noticed  when
abroad  that  if  anything,  in  the  world
would  cheer  and  encourage  an  Elder
when  far  from  home,  it  is  to  receive
word  from  his  family  that  they
were  cared  for,  and  did  not  want
for  the  necessaries  of  life.  And
there  is  nothing  that  will  weaken
an  Elder  so  effect ually  and  so  dis-
courage him  in  his  labor  as  to  re-
ceive word  from  those  whom  he
holds  near  and  dear,  to  the  effect
that  they  are  in  need  of  the  neces-
saries of  life,  that  they  are  unpleas-
antly situated,  that  the  house  they
live  in  does  not  afford  them  suffi-
cient protection  from  the  inclemen-
cies of  the  weather.  In  one  or  two
instances  Elders  have  come  to
me  to  relieve  their  minds  of  such


a  burden,  and,  as  I  say,  there  is
nothing  that  I  have  witnessed  that
so  effectually  unfits  a  man  for  mis-
sionary labor  as  the  receipt  of  such
intelligence.  Therefore,  in  behalf
of  1 1  lose  who  have  left  their  all  to
proclaim  to  their  fellow- men  the
principles  of  eternal  truth,  let  me
solicit  the  good  offices  of  their  friends
at  home,  in  behalf  qf  such  families
who  may  not  be  so  well  prepared  to
live  during  the  absence  of  husband
and  father.  Any  little  attention
shown  them  under  such  circumstan-
ces not  only  does  good  to  the
family,  but  is  appreciated  by  him
whom  duty  has  called  elsewhere  ;
and  often,  under  trying  circum-
stances, the  knowledge  of  such
kindnesses,  cheers  and  encourages
him,  and  makes  comparatively  easy
labors  that  would  otherwise  be  hard
to  bear.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  on  Sunday  Afternoon,

Aprip  9th,  1882,


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibhs.)


THE  GOSPEL'S  RESTORATION  —  1  i^S  PRIESTHOOD  AND  PRINCIPLES  —  THE
SAINTS  MISREPRESENTED  —  THE  "  MQRMON"  WAlt  —  COMPARATIVE
STATISTICS — THE  IMPENDING  JUDGMENTS  OF  GOD — -DUTIES  OF  TILE
SAINTS — -A  WARNING  TO  THEIR  OPPRESSORS —  TH E  WICKEDNESS  OF
THE  WORLD — EXHORTATION  TO  RIGHTEOUSNESS.

In  attempting  to  address  the  congregation  hear  in  this  place,
congregation  this  afternoon,  I  trust  especially  in  so  large  an  assembly ,
that  all  will  be  as  quiet  aa  possible,  when  there  is  the  least  confusion.
It  is  extremely  difficult  to  make  the  j  While  I  address  you,  I  wish  to  speak


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES


such  words  as  shall  be  interesting,
edifying  and  instructive,  and  I  de-
sire an  interest  in  the  prayers  of  the
faithful,  that  I  may  be  able  to  do  so
intelligently,  that  we  may  be  the
better  for  our  corning  together,

I  am  aware  of  the  position  that
we  occupy  to  day*  I  feel  that  I  am
surrou tided  by  a  large  number  of
intelligent  men  and  women,  and
while  I  am  addressing  you,  I  am
also  addressing  the  world,  for  the
remarks  I  make  w  ill  be  reported
and  published  to  the  world.  There-
fore, I  am  desirous  to  advance  such
sentiments  as  will  be  in  accord  with
the  enlightenment  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  with  the  intelligence  of  the
19th  century,  and  with  the  princi-
ples that  have  emanated  from  God.

Any  intelligence  which  we  may
possess  and  wThich  we  may  be  able
to  impart,  is  not  of  ourselves,  but  of
God,  It  did  not  originate  with  us  ;
it  did  not  originate  with  Joseph
Smith,  with  Brigham  Young,  with
the  Twelve  Apostle©,  nor  was  it  re-
ceived from  any  institution  o£  learn-
ing, nor  of  science,  either  religious,
political,  or  social-  Our  philoso-
phy is  not  the  philosophy  of  the
world;  but  of  the  earth  and  the
heavens,  of  time  and  eternity,  and
proceeds  from  God.

A  message  was  announced  to  us
by  Joseph  Smith  the  Prophet,  as
a  revelation  from  God,  wherein  he
stated  that  holy  angels  had  appeared
to  him  and  revealed  the  everlasting
Gospel  as  it  existed  in  former  ages  ;
and  that  God  the  Father  and  God
the  Son  had  also  appeared  to  him  :
the  Father  pointing  to  the  Son,
said,  **  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  hear
ye  hira/'  Moroni,  a  prophet  that
had  lived  on  this  continent,  revealed
unto  Joseph  the  plates  containing
the  Book  of  Mormon,  and  by  the
gift  and  power  of  God  he  "was
enabled  to translate them  into


what  is  known  as  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon. That  book  contains  a  record
of  the  ancient  inhabitants  who
dwelt  upon  this  continent,  a  part  of
whom  came  from  the  tower  of  Babel
at  the  time  of  the  confounding  of
tongues,  and  another  fart  came
from  Jerusalem  in  the  time  of  Zedi-
kiah,  king  of  Judah,  600  years
before  the  advent  of  our  Lord  and
Savior  Jesus  Christ,  This  book
contains  a  record  of  the  dealings
of  God  with  those  people  ;  it  con-
tains a  record  of  their  worship,  of
their  wars  and  commotions,  of  their
righteousness  and  iniquity,  and  of
the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
unto  them,  and  of  His  preaching
unto  them  the  same  Gospel  that  was
taught  on  the  continent  of  Asia,
attended  by  the  same  ordinances*
the  same  organization  and  the  same
principles,

I  shall  not  attempt  to  bring  any
proof  with  regard  to  these  matters
to  day ;  I  am  simply  making  state-
ments, the  truth  of  which  you  Lat-
ter-day Saints  know,  as  it  would  be
impossible  to  enter  into  all  the  de-
tails in  a  short  discourse.  Suf-
fice it  to  say,  that  the  Father
having  presented  His  Son  to
Joseph  Smith,  and  commanded  hiia
to  hear  Him,  Joseph  was  obedient
to  the  heavenly  call,  and  listened  to
the  various  communications  made
by  men  holding  the  Holy  Priesthood
in  the  various  a^es  under  the  direc-
tion  of  the  Only  Begotten,  He  and
Oliver  Cowdery  were  commanded
to  baptize  each  other,  which  they
did.  John  the  Baptist  came  and
conferred  upon  them  the  Aaronic
Priesthood,  Then  Peter,  James  and
John,  upon  whom  was  conferred^
in  the  Savior's  day,  the  keys  of
the  Melchisedee  Priesthood  came>
and  conferred  that  Priesthood  upon
them.  Then  Adam,  Noah,  Abraham,
Moses, Elijah, El  fas,  and  many


other  leading  characters  mentioned  in
the  Scriptures,  who  had  operated  in
the  various  dispensations,  came
and  conferred  upon  Joseph  the
various  keys,  powers,  rights,  privi-
leges and  immunities  which  they
enjoyed  in  their  times.

Again,  Joseph  was  commanded
to  preach  this  Gospel  and  to  bear
this  testimony  to  the  world.  He
was  taught  the  same  principles  that
were  taught  to  Adam,  the  same
principles  that  were  taught  to  Noah,
to  Enoch,  to  Abraham,  to  Moses,
to  Elijah  and  other  Prophets,
the  same  principles  that  were  taught
by  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Apostles  in
former  times  on  the  continent  of
Asia,  accompanied  with  the  same
Priesthood  and  the  same  organiza-
tion,  only  more  fully,  because  the
present  dispensation  is  a  combina-
tion of  the  various  dispensations
that  have  existed  in  the  different
ages  of  the  world,  and  which  is
designated  in  the  Scriptures  as
the  dispensation  of  the  fulness
of  times,  in  which  G^d  would
gather  together  all  things  in  one,
whether  they  be  things  in  heaven
or  things  on  earth.  Therefore,
whatever  of  knowledge,  of  intelli-
gence, of  Priesthood,  of  powers,  '
of  revelations  was  conferred  upon
those  men  in  the  different  ages,
wits  again  restored  to  the  earth  by
the  ministration  and  through  the
medium  of  those  who  held  the  holy
Priesthood  of  God  in  the  different  I
dispensations  in  which  they  lived.

Under  the  direction  of  the  Al-  j
mighty,  Joseph  organized  a  church  ;
and  when  people  were  called  upon  to
believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to
repent  of  their  sins,  to  be  baptized
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the
remission  of  sins  and  to  have  hands
laid  upon  them  for  the  reception  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  those  who  did  be-
lieve and  obey  received  the  at  ten-
No.  4.


dant  blessings. Then  the  various
offices  of  the  Priesthood  began  to  be
conferred  upon  men  who  believed,
and  in  due  time  the  quorum  of  the
Twelve  was  organized,  whose  com-
mission was  to  proclaim  this  Gospel
to  every  people,  to  every  nation,  to
every  kindred,  to  every  tongue.  Then
a  quorum  of  seventy  Elders  was
selected,  known  by  the  name  of
Seventies ;  and  we  now  have  some
76  times  70  of  those  Elders.
! A  First  Presidency  was  also  or-
ganized to  preside  over  the  whole
Church  in  all  the  world.  Then
there  were  High  Priests  ordained
I  whose  office  was  principally  to  pre-
side as  well  as  to  preach  the  Gospel.
Then  there  were  Elders,  Priests,
Teachers  and  Deacons ;  and  this
organization  was  given  by  direct  re-
velation, 'by  which  the  Church  has
been  governed  from  that  time  until
the  present Bishops  were  also  ap*
pointed  whose  position  in  the  Church
was  clearly  defined  by  the  word  of
the Lord. Then  High  Councils
were  organized  for  the  adjustment
of  all  matters  of  difficulty,  for  the
correction  of  incorrect  doctrine,  for
the  maintenance  of purity  and
correct principles among  trie
Saints, and  for  the  adjudication
of all general matters  pertain*
ing to Israel This was  the
testimony  and  this  is  our  testimony
to-day  to  the  nations  of  the  earth.
The  Lord  stood  at  the  head  at
instructor, guide and director ;
and  the  Elders  were  told  to  go
forth  and  to  preach  the  Gospel
to  every  creature,  because  confusion,
disorder, sectarianism and  the
theories  of  men  had  been  substi-
tuted for  the  word  and  wiU,  and  the
revelation,  law  and  power  of  God.
These  Elders  were  told  that  wfr
approached  the  latter  times,  when
God  would  have  a  controvery  with
the  nations,  and  the  message  which

Vol.  XX1IL


50


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


they  had  to  proclaim  was  that  which
was described by John  when

rapped  in  prophetic  vision  upon
the  Isle  of  Patrnos,  Among  other
great  and  important  events  he  said,
"  I  saw  another  angel  fly  in  the
midst  of  heaven,  having  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  to  preach  unto  them
that  dwell  on  the  earth,  and  to
every  nation  and  kindred,  and
tongue,  and  people,  saying  with  a
loud  voice,  Fear  God  and  give  glory
to  Him.  for  the  hour  of  His  judg-
ment is  come/'  This  was  t  he  com-
mission given  by  the  Lord  to  the
Latter-day  Saints.  This  is  the  mis-
sion we  have  been  trying  to  carry
out  from  that  time  to  the  present ;
and  I  myself  have  traveled  tens  of
thousands  of  miles  without  purse  or
scrip,  trusting  in  God,  to  teach  these
holy  principles,  and  so  have  many
of  my  brethren  by  whom  I  am  sur-
rounded.

When  we  started  we  wen;  told
that  we  weie  not  sent  to  be  taught,
but  to  teach*  Why  %  Because  the
world  was  not  in  possession^ of  the
principles  or  life,  and  therefore  could
not  teach  them.  We  went  in  obe-
dience to  the  direct  command  of  God
to  us  through  his  servant  Joseph,
and  we  have  spread  forth  the  Gospel
among  the  nations.  And  is  there
anything  unreasonable  about  it?
No.  Ls  it  truel  Yes*  Is  it  scrip-
tural i  Yes,  Is  it  philosophical  1
Yes.  And  I  say  to-day,  not  by
way  of  boasting,  because  we  have
nothing  to  boast  of  ( I  have  no
intelligence  but  what  I  am  in-
debted to  God,  my  heavenly  Father
.and  my  brethren  for,)  that  while  I
Jbave  traveled  through  various  parts
of  the  United  States  and  the
Oanadas,  also  in  England,  Ireland ,
Scotland,  Wales,  France,  Germany,
and  different  parts  of  the  earth,
among  the  wise  and  intelligent  as
jrceH  as  the  poor  and  ignorant,


among  all  classes  of  men — I  have
stood  in  their  halls  and  talked  with
their  professors,  ministers,  legislators,
rulers,  divines,  judges  and  wise  men
of  every  class,  grade  and  position  in
life — but  I  have  never  met  with  a
man  who  could  gainsay  one  principle
of  tlie  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,
and  1  never  expect  to ;  because
truth,  eternal  truth.  it  emanates
from  God,  cannot  be  controverted.

And  what  is  the  nature  of  the
Gospel  ?  It  is  the  same  as  that
taught  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  by
the  Apostles,  when  they  cried  out
to  the  multitude,  H  Repent  and  be
baptized  every  one  of  you  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins,  and  ye  shall  receive  the
jjift  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  That  was
the  testimony  which  they  bore  to
the  people.  That  is  the  testimony
which  the  Elders  of  this  Church
bear.  There  is  something  about  this
that  is  reasonable,  that  is  intelligent,
and  that  is  susceptible  of  proof.  It
was  a  very  fair  proposition  for  the
Apostle  to  make,  promising  the
people  who  would  obey  the  require-
ments which  the  Gospel  imposes
upon  its  adherents,  that  they  should
receive  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  what
should  this  do  for  them  ?  It  was  to
cause  their  old  men  to  dream  dreams
and  their  young  men  to  see  visions,
it  was  to  make  their  sons  and
daughters  prophecv,  it  was  to  bring
things  past  to  their  remembrance,
to  lead  them  into  all  truth,  and  to
show  them  things  to  come.  This
proposition  was  not  alone  of  a  re-
ligious nature,  but  it  was  also
strictly  philosophical  The  farmer
sows  oats  or  wheat,  or  plants  corn,
and  what  does  he  expect  1  He  ex-
pects oats,  wheat  or  corn,  as  the  case
may  be,  and  nothing  else.  There
are  laws  and  principles  in  nature,  in
the  vegetable,  the  animal  and  the
mineral  kingdoms,  as  well  as  in  all


THE  GOSPEL'S  RESTORATION,  ETC


the  works  of  God,  that  are  true  In
themselves  and  they  are  eternal.
There  are  such  metals  as  gold,  silver,
copper  or  iron,  each  possessing  cer-
tain distinctive  elements  which  they
always  did  possess ;  and  the  dif-
erent  bodies  in  their  chemical  rela-
tions possess  principles  that  are
always  true  to  unchangeable  laws.
It  is  so  also  in  regard  to  all  the  ele-
ments by  which  we  are  surrounded,
and  also  in  regard  to  the  heavenly
bodies.  Because  of  these  unchang-
ing laws,  we  know  precisely  when
the  sun  will  rise  and  when  it  will
set.  We  know  when  certain  planets
or  comets  will  appear  and  disappear.
All  their  movements  are  un deviat-
ing, exact  and  true  according  to  the
laws  of  nature.

Now  here  is  a  principle  of  the
Gospel  that  will  admit  of  as  strong
evidence  as  anything  in  nature.
What  is  it 7  "Repent,  and  be
baptized  every  one  of  you  in
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the
remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall
receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost."
Or  in  other  words,  sow  wheat  and
you  reap  wheat  j  plant  corn  and
you  gather  corn,  It  was  a  bold
position  to  take*  I  remember  that
on  these  points  I  questioned  the
Elder  who  brought  the  Gospel  to
me.  I  asked,  What  do  you  mean  by
this  Holy  Ghost  ?  Will  it  cause  your
old  men  to  dream  dreams  and  your
young  men  to  see  visions ;  will  it
bring  to  pass  the  scripture  which
saith  :  And  on  my  servants  and  on
my  handmaidens  I  will  pour  out
in  those  days  of  my  Spirit,  and  they
shall  prophecy  %  Yes,  Will  it  give
you  the  permeating  influence  of  the
Spirit  of  the  living  God,  and  give
you  a  certain  knowledge  of  the
principles that you believe  inl

"Yes,"  he  answered,  "and  if
it  will  not,  then  I  a,m  an  impostor."
Said  I,  That  is  a  very  fair  proposi-


tion. Finding  the  doctrine  to  be
correct,  I  obeyed,  and  I  received
that  Spirit  through  obedience  to
the  Gospel  which  gave  me  a  know-
ledge of  those  principles  which  I
'  simply  believed  before,  because  they
were  scriptural,  reasonable  and  in-
telligent, according  to  that  scripture
which  saith,  "If  any  man  will  do
His  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doc-
trine, whether  it  be  of  God,  or  whe-
ther I  speak  of  myself."

I  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  the
proper  authorities,  and  I  went  forth
to  preach  this  Gospel  Other  Elders
went  forth  as  I  did  to  the  civilized
nations, preaching  the  same  doc-
trine and  holding  out  the  same  pro-
mises. Some  of  them  were  not
very  learned  ;  some  were  not  very
profoundly  educated. We  send  a
singular  class  of  people  in  our  Elders,
Sometimes a missionary is  a
merchant,  sometimes  a  legislator,  a
blacksmith,  an  adobe  maker,  a  plas-
terer, a  farmer,  or  common  laborer,
as  the  case  may  be. But  all  under
the  same  influence  and  spirit,  all
going  forth  as  missionaries  to  preach
the  Gospel  of  light,  of  life  and  of
salvation. They  have  received  the
treasures  of  eternal  life,  and  they
are  enabled  to  communicate  them
to  others  ;  and  they  hold  out  the
same promises. You  who  hear
me this afternoon, as well  as
thousands  upon  thousands  of  others,
have  listened  to  those  principles,
you  have  had  held  oat  unto  you
those  promises j and when  you
obeyed  the  Gospel,  you  received
this  same  spirit;  and  you  are  my
witnesses  of  the  truth  of  the  things
that I now proclaim in  your
hearing, and  of  the Spirit  and
power  of  God  attending  the  obedi-
ence to  the  Gospel,  and  you  will
not  deny  it. This  congregation  will
not  deny  it When  you  yielded
obedience  to  the  laws  of  God,  obeyed


52  joi:ksal  nv

His  commandments,  were  bap-
tize 1  for  the  remission  of  your
sins  and  bad  hands  laid  upon  you
for  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
you  did  receive  it ;  and  you  are  liv-
ing witnesses  before  God.  This  is  a
secret  that  the  world  does  not  com-
prebend.  Its  people  have  not  obeyed
it  and  they  do  not  know  it ;  and
the  things  of  God,  say  the  scriptures,
no  man  knoweth  but  by  the  Spirit
of  God  ;  and  this  Spirit  has  im-
parted to  us  that  intelligence  and
that  knowledge.  This  people  have
in  their  possession  a  hope  that
enters  within  the  vail,  whither
Christ,  our  forerunner,  has  gone.
They  are  living  and  acting  and
operating  for  eternity.  God  is  their
Father,  and  they  know  it.  Some
people  think  we  are  a  set  of  igno-
rant  boobies,  who  do  not  know  what
we  are  talking  about,  and  they  try
to  overrun  the  faith  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  by  sophistry,  falsehood
and  folly.  Whilst  the  fact  is,  we
are  in  possession  of  the  principles
of  eternal  life,  and  are  operating  for
eternity ;  and  then  we  are  operating
to  build  up  the  Zion  of  God,  where
righteousness  can  be  taught  and
where  men  can  be  protected,  and
where  liberty  can  be  proclaimed  to
all  men  of  every  color,  of  every
creed  and  of  every  nation.

Being  placed  in  communication
with  God,  the  sophistry,  nonsense
and  dogmas  of  men  have  no  influence
upon  us.  We  are  built  upon  the
rock  of  revelation,  as  Peter  was,  and
on  the  same  principle.  Said  Jesus  I
to  him,  "  Whom  do  men  say
that  I,  the  Son  of  Man,  am?"
The  answer  was :  "  Some  say
thou  art  one  of  the  Prophets  ;  some
say  thou  art  the  Elias  who  was  to
come/'  etc,  "  But  whom  say  you
that  I  am  V  Peter  answered  and
said  :  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  !
Son  of  the  living  God/' Jesus  I


rUKUOUKKEK

replied,  "Blessed  art  thou,  Simon
Barjona,  for  flesh  and  blood  hath
not  revealed  this  unto  thee,  but  my
Father  which  is  in  heaven  ;  and  I
say  also  unto  thee,  that  thou  art
Peter,  and  upon  this  ruck  will  I
build  my  Church,  and  the  gates  of
hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it*9
What  rock  1  The  rock  of  revelation
— upon  the  intelligence  communi-
cated by  tlve  Holy  Ghost  to  those
who  obey  the  Gosj>ei  of  the  Son  of
God  ;  by  this,  men  shall  know  for
themselves,  and  stand  as  the  rock
of  ages,  invulnerable,  immovable
and  unchangeable.  That  is  the
position  which  we  the  Latter-day
Saints  occupy.

This,  then,  is  the  religious  part
of  the  question.  What  do  we  be-
lieve in  t  We  believe  in  purity,  in
virtue,  in  honesty,  in  integrity,  in
truthfulness  and  in  not  giving  way
to  falsehood  ;  we  believe  in  treating
all  men  justly,  uprightly  and  honor-
ably ;  we  believe  in  fearing  God,
observing  His  laws  and  keeping  His
commandments.  Do  we  all  da
it!  No,  not  quite,  I  wish  we  did.
But  a  great  majority  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  are  doing  this  ;  and  if
there  are  those  that  are  not,  let
them  look  well  to  their  path,  for
God  will  be  after  them,  and  their
brethren  will  be  after  them,  for  God
cannot  look  upon  sin  with  any  de-
gree of  allowance.  And  as  we  ate
here  for  the  purpose  of  building  up
Zion,  He  expects  that  we  will  be
j  upright  and  honorable  in  all  our
dealings  with  one  another  and  with
all  men.

One  part  of  the  Gospel  is  that  we
should  be  gathered  together  to  a
land  that  should  be  called  Zion.
Have  we  been  doing  this !  Yes*
Some  people  are  very  much  opposed
to  it.  Have  we  injured  anybody  by
i  gathering  in  this  way  ?  Is  this  in*
i  deed  the  land  ot  the  free,  the  home


of  the  brave,  and  the  asylum  fur  the
oppressed  I  Cannot  the  people  of
this  nation  afford  to  listen  to  the
principles  of  truth,  and  allow  men
who  are  fearing  God  to  assemble  to-
gather  to  worship  Him  according  to
the  dictates  of  their  own  consciences  I
Have  we  violated  any  law  of  the
United  States  in  thus  gathering
together  and  in  thus  worshiping
our  God?  Not  that  I  know  of.
Have  we  been  opposed  to  the  United
States  1  No  !  no  !  no  !  we  never
have,  and  we  are  at  the  defiance  of
all  men  to  prove  anything  of  the
kind.  There  are  falsehoods  set  afoot
by  low,  degraded,  unprincipled
men.  We  believe  that  the  Con-
stitution of  the  United  States  was
given  by  inspiration  of  God,  And
why!  Because  it  is  one  of  those
instruments  which  proclaims  lib-
erty throughout  the  land,  and  to  all
the  inhabitants  thereof.  And  it
was  because  of  those  noble  senti-
ments, and  the  promulgation  of
those  principles  which  were  given  by
God  to  man,  we  believe  that  it  was
.given  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Al-
mighty. We  have  always  esteemed
it  in  this  light,  and  it  was  so  declared
by  Joseph  Smith.  Did  we  do  any
wrong  in  coming  here  in  the  way
we  did?  I  think  not.  Did  we
transgress  any  of  the  laws  of  the
United  States  1  1  think  not.
Did  we  transgress  any  of  the
Jaws  of  the  nations  we  left  1  I
think  not.  We  gathered  together
simply  because  we  were  told  there
was  a  Zion  to  be  built  up.  And
what  was  that  Zion  !  The  term
means  the  pure  in  heart.  In  con-
nection with  our  gathering,  I  would
remark,  that  a  short  time  ago,  at
one  of  our  public  ceiebratious,  there
were  twenty-seven  nationalities
represented.  This  is  in  accordance
with  the  scripture  which  says  :  I
will  take  them  one  of  a  city  and  two


of  a  family,  and  bring  them  to  Zion*
;  And  I  will  give  them  pastors  after
mine  own  heart,  that  shall  feed  them
with  knowledge  and  understanding.
This  is  what  we  find  in  the  Chris-
tian Bible,  and  there  is  certainly  no
harm  in  believing  the  Bible.  The
Christians  send  their  Bible  mission-
aries among  us  to  circulate  it,  and
we  are  always  glad  to  receive  the
Bible  and  be  governed  by  it,
.  Noiv,  -.then,  being  gathered  to-
gether, we  necessarily  required  some
kind  of  social  relations  with  each
other,  for  when  we  came  here  we
brought  our  bodies  with  us  as  well
!  as  our  religion,  and  we  brought  our
wives  and  families  with  us  as  well
as  our  religion  ;  and  we  needed  to
cultivate  the  earth  and  build  houses,
and  plant  orchards,  and  vineyards,
and  gar tlens,  and  attend  to  the  com-
mon affairs  of  life.  And  then  as  we
began  to  increase  we  began  to  open
and  build  farms,  hamlets,  villages
and  cities.  Is  there  anything
wrong  in  this  1  No,  Finally,  when
we  came  here  we  petitioned  for  a
State  government,  the  people  held
a  convention  and  a  constitution  was
framed,  and  forwarded  to  Wash-
ington. Congress  refused  our
application  for  a  State,  but  they
gave  us  a  Territorial  form  of  gov-
ernment and  named  the  Territory
Utah  ;  and  strange  to  say,  how  men
and  nations  change,  they  are  trying
to  interfere  with  us  because  of  our
polygamy,  and  at  that  time  the
government  appointed  a  polyga-
mous governor,  Brigham  Young*
People  change  in  their  sentiments
and  views  j  I  suppose  they  call  it
progress.  Apostle  Orson  Pratt,
whom  you  all  knew,  as  soon  as
that  revelation  was  made  public,
went  down  to  the  city  of  Washington,
and  there  published  the  doctrine  of
plural  marriage  and  also  lectured
upon  it. The  paper  he  published


54


JOURNAL  OF  MSCUUKSES


was  called  The  Seer,  which  inanv  of
you  brethren  remember  vciy  well.
They  were  not  in  ignorance  in  rela-
tion to  these  matters,  It  was  then
well  understood  by  the  nation  that
these  were  our  sentiments,  and  that
President  Young  was  a  polygamist
But  passing  on.  Sometime  after
that,  we  had  some  United  States
officials  sent  out  here,  who  were  not
polygamic*,  but  one  of  them  went
so  far  as  to  show  us  what  beautiful
civilization  they  had  where  he  came
from,  ami  he  left  his  wife  at  home
and  brought  with  him  a  strumpet
and  took  her  on  to  the  bench  with
him,  to  let  the  people  see  how  intel
ligent  and  enlightened  the  people
were  in  the  Unite!  States.  How-
ever, fortunately  for  him,  there  was
no  Edmunds  bill  then.  Still,  we  were
not  much  edified.  It  might  be  ac-
cording to  some  people's  sjstem  of
ethics;  it  may  he  considered  beau
tiful  or  aesthetic  by  the  admirers  of
this  fast  and  progressive  civilization;
but  we  could  not  appreciate  it,  and
the  consequence  was,  that  the  people
felt  indignant,  they  looked  upon  him
as  a  profligate,  and  that  lie  had  de-
filed and  disgraced  the  ermine.
These  were  the  sentiments  of  the
people  then,  and  they  are  yours
to  day,  for  you  have  never  been
Uught  anything  else.  He  and
some  others  went  back  to  Washing*
ton,  and  reported  that  the  4  Mor-
mons *  were  in  a  state  of  rebellion  ;
that  they  were  a  very  wicked  people,
very  corrupt  and  very  depraved ,
almost  as  bad  as  some  of  our  truth-
telling  ministers  make  us  out  to  be,
for  some  of  them  are  not  very  noto-
rious for  telling  the  truth,  nobody
believes  them  here ;  but  then  they
have  reverend  put  before  their  names
and  that,  of  course,  covers — what
is  it  1  a  multitude  of  sins.  And
therefore,  the  mendacious  stories
that  they  tell and circulate  are


received  as  actual  truth  by  thou-
sitmis  of  blind,  iguorant,  bigoted
people,  who,  doubtless,  are  far  more
sincere  and  far  more  honest  ami  pure
in  their  lives  than  these  specimens
of  fallen  humanity  who,  in  the  garb
of  sanctity,  manufacture  falsehoods
and  prepare  the*ri  specially  for  the
vitiated  taste  of  the  age.

But  to  return  ;  judges  and  other
officials  were  sent  here,  and  suffice
it  to  say,  we  did  not  like  their  civil-
ization ;  and,  then,  they  were  not
much  enamored  with  ours,  because
whatever  we  may  be  in  the  estima-
tion of  the  world  generally,  we  are
utterly  averse  to  anything  like  licen-
tiousness and  debauchery  ;  and,  if
there  is  any  among  us,  we  are  fan
deb  ted  to  our  Christian  friends  for
it,  and  to  our  Christian  judges  for
maintaining  and  protecting  it  in
our  midst.  We  have  uo  affiliation
with  such  tilings  ;  they  cannot  ex-
ist among  us  as  a  people,  only  by
the  force,  the  power  and  influence
of  tli is  federal  Christianity  that  lias
been  introduced  among  us.  Until
these  people  came  into  our  midst
we  had  no  house  of  ill-fame  ;  and  a
lady  could  travel  as  safely  in  our
streets  at  any  time  of  night  as  in  thfr
day  ;  we  had  no  occasion  to  lock  our
doors  to  prevent  thieves  from  prey-
ing upon  us  ;  we  had  no  drunken-
ness, ribaldry  or  blasphemy  in  our
streets  ;  all  these  things  have  been
introduced  among  us  by  our  good,
kind,  pure,  pious  Christian  friencls,
and  in  scores  of  our  remote  settle-
ments where  this  civilization  lias
not  penetrated,  they  are  free  from
these  vices  to-day.

Now  we  will  go  back  to  the  state-
ment of  these  men.  They  were  be-
lieved in  Washing tou.  What  did
they  state  t  Among  other  things
they  said  that  we  had  burned  the
United  States  library,  and  the
court  records,  and  that  a  dreadful


THE  GOSPEL'S  RESTORATION,  ETC.


statt1  of  anarchy  was  in  existence  ;
au<l  ins;  eat  I  ot  the  United  States
sending  out  a  commission  to  enquire
into  these  matters,  they  took  the
statement  of  a  Lothario  and  his
associates,  and  sent  out  an  army  to
destroy  us.  And  these  troops  were
reduced  to  gnawing  mules'  legs
about  the  vicinity  of  Bridge r,  re-
fusing salt  when  we  sent  it  to  them
— for  we  would  have  done  them
good,  notwithstanding  they  came  as
our  enemies.  I  rememher  writing
a  letter  to  one  of  the  officers  who
had  a  letter  of  introduction  to  me,
and  forwarded  it  by  a  messenger  ;  I
told  him  that  I  was  very  sorry,  that
as  a  United  States'  officer,  as  an
honorable  man,  he  should  be  placed
in  the  situation  he  was  then  in  ;  be-
cause he  could  not  help  it,  as  an  offi-
cer, any  more  than  we  could,  as  he
was  operating  as  a  servant  of  the
government  under  military  rule  and
had,  therefore,  to  obey  orders.  And
that  while  we  esteemed  him  and
other  officers  as  patriots  and  high-
minded,  honorable  men,  who  had
exhibited  their  patriotism  and
bravery  in  Mexico  a: id  other  [daces,
and  while  we  heard  of  their  ex-
cellent military  equipments,  we  did
not  like  the  idea  of  their  trying  the
temper  of  their  steel  upon  us,  I
told  him  that  republics  which  re-
flected the  voice  of  the  people
were  in  many  instances  excirable'
and  erratic,  and  that  i  looked  for  a
reaction  in  public  opinion,  and  that
when  that  change  came  1  exacted
the  difficulties  that  the  "ovem  merit
had  placed  us  in  would  be  done
away,  ami  that  then  I  would  be
glad  to  extend  to  him  that  courtesy
in  our  city  that  one  gentleman
should  extend  to  another,  and  would
then  be  happy  to  see  him.  But  we
could  not  meet  then  of  course  ;  they
could  not  come  to  us,  and  we  could
not  very  well  go  out  to  them,


it


So  that  the  Latter-day  Saints  may
lEOffiw  the  truth  or  falsity  ot  the  alle-
gations  made  by  Judge  Druinmond,
I  will  have  the  official  statement  of
Governor  Gumming,  who  came  out
with  the  army,  read  to  this  congre^
gation.

It  would  be  unfair  and  disengenu-
ous  to  blame  one  administration  for
the  acts  of  another,  yet  when  we
see  a  disposition  to  listen  to  the
same  kind  of  popular  clamor  that
then  existed,  we  cannot  but  notice  a
reat  similarity  of  circumstances*
[Elder  L  John  Nut  tall  then  read
the  following  extracts  from  the  offi-
cial  statement  of  Governor  Gum-
ming, which  was  dated  Great  Salt
Lake  City,  April  15th,  1858  :J

f  Since  my  arrival  1  have  been
employed  hi  examining  the  records
of  the  Supreme  and  District  Courts,
which  I  am  now  prepared  to  report
as  being  perfect  and  unimpaired.
This  will,  doubtless,  be  acceptable
information  to  those  who  have
entertained  an  impression  to  the
contrary*

1  have  also  examined  the  Legis*
lative  Records  ami  other  books
tjclouging  to  the  office  of  Secretary
of  State,  which  are  in  perfect  pre-
servation, i


■

The  condition  of  the  large  and
valuable  Teiritorial  Library  has  also
commanded  my  attention  :  and  I  am
pleased  in  being  able  to  report  that
Mr.  W.  C.  Staines,  the  librarian,
has  kept  the  hooks  and  records  in
most  excellent  condition.  I  will,
at  an  early  day,  transmit  a  catalogue
of  this  library,  and  schedules  of  the
other  public  property,  with  certified
coph  *  of  the  recur* Is  of  the  Supreme
ami  District  Courts,  exhibiting  the
character  and  amount  of  the  public
business  last  transacted  in  them."

Thus  it  appears  that  the  allega-
tions made  by  our  enemies  were


56


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


false,  and  the  army  was  sent  out
under  false  representations,  and
their  own  Governor  furnishes  the
evidence  for  their  own  refutation.
Yet  we  were  subjected  to  the  indig-
nity and  outrage  of  having  an  army
sent  among  us,  predicated  upon
these  false  statements.

From  the  above  and  other  similar
actions  manifested  towards  us  as  a
people  we  have  learned  in  the  sad
school  of  experience,  and  by  the
things  that  we  have  suffered,  the
-excitability  of  the  populace,  and  the
unreasonable,  savage  and  relentless
feelings  that  frequently  possess  the
people  in  their  antagonism  towards
us,  to  be  very  careful,  in  all  our  acts
among  men,  not  to  excite  that  feel
ing  of  bate  which  seems  to  be  im-
planted in  the  human  bosom  against
the  principles  taught  by  the  servants
of  the  Lord  in  all  ages  of  the  world*
•  Our  mission  is  and  always  has
been  peace  on  earth  and  goodwill  to
man,  to  all  meu.  We  have  in  our
midst  Baptists,  Methodists,  Presby-
terians, Roman  Catholics  and  all
kinds  of  Mtes/'  Does  anybody
interfere  with  them  1  Not  that
I  know  of  Yet  there  was  a  man,
a  professed  minister  in  Sanpete
County —  [addressing  President
Canute  Peterson  of  Sanpete  Stake]
Brother  Peterson,  did  you  not  have
a  man  in  your  Stake  who  got  up  a
sersation  by  publishing  far  and  wide
that  he  Lad  to  preach  the  Gospel  in
Sanpete  with  a  revolver  on  his  de.sk,
to  prevent  the  "  Mormons"  from
interfering  with  him  — was  not  that
the  purport  ot  his  statement?
[President  Peterson  :  Yes,  >h\]  Do
you  know  the  man  T  [Ans.  :  Yes,
Is  he  there  yet  1  [Ans.  :  No,
[Laughter]  Others  have
stated  lately  that  we  were  in  a  state
of  sedition,  and  that  in  our  different
counties  there  were  armed  holies
ot  men  prepared  to  light  the  United


air,
sii


States.  The  person  that  made  and
published  this  last  statement  was,  as
I  understand,  also  a  minister,  one  of
these  reverend  gentlemen.  Do  any
of  you  know  his  name  1  [A  voice  :
Sheldon  Jackson.]  I  am  told  it  was
one  Sheldon  Jackson  ;  a  reverend
gentleman  with  a  big  R,  a  pious
man,  of  course,  and  therefore  what
he  says  must  be  true.  [Laughter.]
We  have  f  set  of  people  that,  seem
to  be  prowling  about ;  I  suppose,
however,  they  are  as  necessary  as
anything  else;  I  do  not  know  but
what  they  are.  We  have  a  species
of  birds  called  buzzards,  whose
natural  tastes  are  for  any  kind  of
nauseous  food  ;  nothing  suits  them
better  than  to  gorge  on  carrion.
Like  them,  these  delamers  are  fond
of  trying  to  root  up  something
against  our  people  here.  They  them-
selves fabricate  all  kinds  of  notions
and  opinions,  similar  to  the  above
that  I  have  mentioned,  that  every-
body here  knows  to  be  false,  and
they  circulate  them,  and  they  have
fanned  the  United  States  almost  into
a  furore.  People  generally  are  igno-
rant of  what  these  men  and  women
are  engaged  in.  They  think  the^e
persons  are  honorable  men  and  wo-
men ;  and  they  get  up  a  lot  of  stories
about  some  poor  woman  or  some
poor  girl  who  has  been  crowded  upon
by  her  husband,  and  that  in  this
state  of  polygamy  there  is  the  most
ahjeet  misery,  and  the  greatest  dis-
tress that  can  be  found  anywhere.
Are  they  true?  Some  individual
cases  may  be  true*  Some  of  our
men  do  not  treat  their  wives  right,
and  then  some  wives  do  not  treat
their  husbands  right.  We  do  not
all  do  right  by  a  gnat  deal.  I  wish
we  all  did  right.  But  supposing  we
were  to  go  down  to  the  places  where
tlnjM"  people  hail  from,  to  the  slums
of  Chicago,  bt.  Louis,  Cincinnati,
Philadelphia,  New  York,  and  other


THE  GOSPEL'S  RESTORATION,  ETC


57


cities,  beginning,  say,  in  New  York,
with  the  gitued  palaces  of  4th  and
5th  Avenues,  and  trace  the  thing
down  to  Five  Points,  and  then  go
through  other  cities  in  the  same  way,
and  what  would  we  find  there  t  Do
you  not  think  one  could  get  up  some-
thing as  dirty  and  filthy  as  the  most
foul-minded  person  can  get  up  about
us  1 A  thousand  times  more  so.

They  say  we  are  an  ignorant  peo-
pie.  We  admit  that  we  are  not  so
very  intelligent,  and  we  never  boast
of  our  learning  or  intelligence  ;  but
then,  they  should  not  boast  of  theirs
■either.  However,  we  can  compare
favorably  with  them  any  day  ;  and
while  they  have  had  millions  of  the
public  funds  to  sustain  their  educa-
tional establishments,  we  have  been
despoiled,  pluudered  and  robbed
over  and  over  again,  yet  we  are
prepared  to  compare  notes  with
them  on  education,  and  also  on  vir-
tue, honesty  and  morals,  any  way
they  can  fix  it  And  I  would  be
ready  to  say,  as  one  said  of  old,  Thou
fool,  first  take  the  beam  out  of  thine
own  eye,  that  thou  may  est  see  the
more  clearly  to  take  the  mote  out  of
thy  brother  s  eye.

We  will  have  read  some  figures
for  the  information  of  the  brethren
who  come  from  a  distance,  who  may
not  be  acquainted  with  these  mat-
ters,

[President  Taylor  then  called
upon  his  secretary,  Elder  L  John
Nuttall,  to  read  some  extracts  from
a  work  published  by  an  ex- United
States  official  in  New  York  City,
which  were  as  follows  :  ]

Before  citing  from  the  still  incomplete
c«naus  report**  of  1880,  let  us  take  that  of
1870  ud  compare  Utah  and  Massachusetts  I
the  new  theocracy  with  thv  descendant*  of  !

tld  theocracy—  priest-ridden  Utah  with
^cultured"  Massachusetts,  also  adding  the
District  of  Columbia,  which  has  the  enlight-
ening presence  of  the  American  Congress
to  add  to  its  advantages,  and  is  under  its
^direct  government.


v

> 3  »

if"

a  a

5  2


Utah

District  of
Columbia


m

P

<

t


35
25

27


c5  3

III

k~  gi


E

V
3


11

12
40


6

55

23


¥■1— F

-3


1


-2


Si'


5
23

35


3
11

9


Caw


14
11

11


19
12

8


*'  From  statistics  contained  in  the
Report  of  the  Commissioners  of
Education  for  ls77t  it  is  shown  that
in  the  percentage  of  enrolment  of
her  School  population,  Utah  is  in
advance  of  the  general  average  of
the  United  States,  while  in  the  per-
centage in  actual  daily  attendance
at  school,  she  still  further  exceeds
the  average  of  the  whole  Union*

In  1877,  when  the  school  popula-
tion of  Utah  numbered  50,792,
there  M  as  invested  in  the  Territory
in  school  property  the  creditable
sum  of  $5ti8,9{J4,  being  about  eigh-
teen and  on e- half  dollars  per  capita
of  the  school  population.

In  contrast  with  this,  take  the
amount  per  capita  of  their  school
population,  which  some  of  the  States
have  invested  in  school  property :
North  Carolina,  less  than  $0  60 ;
Louisiana,  $3  00;  Virginia,  about
$2  00;  Oregon,  less  than  $9  00  ;
Wisconsin,  less  than  $11  00 ;  Ten-
nessee, less  than  $2  50  ;  Delaware,
less  than  fK  00.

In  respect  to  the  amount,  per
capita,  of  her  school  population,
which  Utah  has  invested  in  school
property,  she  exceeds  several  other
Southern  and  Western  States,  is  in
advance  of  the  great  States  of  In-
diana and  Illinois,  and  I  believe  in
advance  of  the  general  average  of
the  entire  Union.

Tims,  in  the  matter  of  education,
Utah  stands  ahead  of  many  old  and


r>8


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


wealthy  States,  and  of  the  general
average  nf  the  United  States  in  tlnee
very  important  respects,  namely,
the  enrolment  of  her  school  popula-
tion, the  percentage  of  their  daily
attendance  at  school,  and  the  amount
per  capita  invested  in  school  pro-
perty.

From  the  census  of  1880  I  have
compiled  the  following  :

Comparison  of  I  litkfacv.—

The  United  State*  &  Utah  Territory:

United  States  Utah,
Total  population  - -  60,155,783
Total  over  10  years  of

age  who  cannot  read
Percentage  who  cannot

read,  1U  years  k  over
Total  over  10  years  of

a<re  who  cannot  write
Percentage  who  cannot

write,  10  yr.s.  &  over
Total  white  population  43,402,970
Total  white  population

over  10  year*  of  a^e

who  cannot  write
Percentage of  white

population  who  can-
not write,  10  years  k

over  -


4,923,451
9.82
6.230,958
12.14


143,i>W
4,851

3,37
8,826

6.13
142,423


- 3,019,080  8,137


&9ti


5.71


Of  all  the  States  and  Territories
in  the  Union  there  are  but  thirteen
showing  a  lower  percentage  of  total
population  who  cannot  read,  Con-
necticut having  the  same  5.37.  The
rest  range  all  the  way  up  32.3^.
per  centre  of  total  population  in
South  Carolina.

We  will  now  produce  souse  evi-
dence with  regard  to  crime,  etc.,
drawn  from  official  sources  :

The  population  of  Utah  by  the
census  of  1880  is  about  144,000,
divided  as  follows  :

Mormons 120,283

Gentiles 14,155

Apostate  Mormons.  6,988

Josephites  .t  820

Doubtful 1,717

  23,680


Total  143,963

"It  will  be  seen  that  the  11  Gen-
tiles"  constitute,  only  ten  percent.


of  the  population,  yet  from  this
small  minority  are  taken  the  incum-
bents of  nearly  every  position  of
influence  and  emolument.  They
have  the  Governor,  with  absolute
veto  power,  Secretary,  Judges,
Marshals,  Prosecuting  Attorneys,
Land  Register,  Kecorder,  Surveyor-
General,  Clerks  of  the  Courts,  Com-
missioners, principal  Post  -  office
Mail  Contractors,  Postal  Agents,
Hevenue  Assessors  and  Collectors,
Superintendent  of  Indian  Affairs,
Indian  Agencies,  Indian  Supplies,
Army  Contractors,  express,  railroad
and  telegraph  lines,  the  associated
jress  agency,  hall  the  jurors  in  law,
jut  at  least  three-fourths  and  always
the  foreman  in  practice,  in  I  ac  t,
every  position  not  elective.

Last  winter  there  was  a  census
taken  of  the  Utah  penitentiary  and
the  Salt  Lake  City  and  County  pri-
sons, with  the  following  result :  Iu
Salt  Lake  City  there  are  about
seventy-five  Mormons  to  twenty-
five  non-Mormons.  In  Salt  Lake
County  there  are  about  eighty  Mor-
mons to  twenty  non-Mormons.  In
the  city  prison  there  were  ivveuty-
nine  convicts,  all  non-Mormons  j
in  the  county  prison  there  were
six  convicts,  all  non-Mormons.  The
jailor  staled  that  the  county  convicts
J  or  the  live  years  past  were  all  auti-
Mornions  except  three.

In  Utah  we  have  seen  that  by  the
United  States  Census  the  proportion
I  of  orthodox  Mormons  to  all  others
is  as  eighty-three  to  seventeen.
In  the  Utah  penitentiary  there  were
fifty -one  prisoners,  only  five  of  whom
w  ere  Mormons,  and  two  of  the  five
were  in  prison  for  imitating  Father
Abrahair  in  their  domestic  menagef
so  that  the  seventeen  per  cent,
"outsiders"  had  forty-six  convicts
in  the  penitentiary,  while  the  eighty-
three  per  cent.  Mormons  had  but
five  ! The  total  number  of  Utah


THE  GOSPELS  RESTORATION,  ETC


59


lockups,  including  the  penitent iary,
is  fourteen  :  these  aitt»reuated  outs
hundred  and  twenty-live  inmates.
Of  these  one  hundred  and  twenty-
five,  not  over  eleven  were  Mor-
mons, several  of  whom  were  incar-
cerated for  minor  offences  and
polygamy ;  while  if  all  the  anti-
Mormon  thieves,  adulterers,  black-
legs,  perjurers,  murderers  and  other
criminals  who  are  at  large,  were  sent
to  prison,  the  Mormons  churn  that
their  prisons  could  not  hold  them.
In  1878  a  Mormon  publication
made  the  fallowing  boastful  state-
ment :

Out  of  the  twenty  counties  of
the  Territory,  most  of  which  are
populous,  thirteen  are,  to-day,  with-
out a  dram-shop,  brewery,  gam-
bling or  brothel  house,  bowling  or
billiard  saloon,  lawyer,  doctor,  par-
son, beggar,  politician  or  placedmn-
ter,  and  almost  entirely  free  from
social  troubles  of  every  kind  :  yet
these  counties  are  exclusively  4  Mor-
mon j*  and  with  the  exception  of  a
now  and  then  domestic  doctor  or
lawyer,  the  entire  Territory  was  free
from  these  adjuncts  of  civilization  (?)
till  after  the  advent  of  the  profess-
ing Christian  element,  boas  tin  gly
here  to  4  regenerate  the  Mormons,1
and  to-day  every  single  disreputable
concern  in  Utah  is  run  and  fostered
by  the  very  same  Christian  (?)
element.  Oaths,  imprecations,  blas-
phemies, invectives,  expletives,
blackguardism,  the  ordinary  dialect
of  the  **  anti-Mormon, 11  were  not
heard  in  Utah  till  after  his  ad  verify
nor  till  then,  did  we  have  litigation,
drunkenness,  harlotry,  political  and
judicial  deviltries,  gambling  and
kindred  enormities.

This  is  what  the  Mormons  assert
Let  us  see  how  the  case  stands  to-
day, and  what  the  facts  attest*

Out  of  the  two  hundred  saloon,
billiard,  bowling  alley  and  pool  table


keepers,  not  fiver  a  dozen  even  pro-
fess in  be  Mormon All  of  the
bagnios  and  other  disreputable  eon-
corns  in  the  Territory  are  run  and
sustained  by  anti-Mormons.  Ninety-
eight  per  cent,  of  the  gamblers  of
Utah  are  of  the  same  element.
Ninety-five  per  cent,  of  the  Utah
lawyers  are  Gentiles,  and  eighty  per
cent  of  all  the  litigation  there  is  of
outside  growth  and  promotion.

Ot  the  two  hundred  and  fifty
towns  and  villages  in  Utah,  over
two  hundred  have  no  **  gaudy
sepulchre  of  departed  virtue,"  and
ihese  two  hundred  and  odd  towns
are  almost  exclusively  Mormon  in
population.  Of  the  suicides  com-
mitted in  Utah,  ninety  odu  per  cent
are  non-Mormon  ;  and  of  the  Utah
homicides  and  infanticides,  over
eighty  per  cent  are  perpetrated  by
the  seventeen  per  cent.  **  outsiders,"

The  arrests  mnde  in  Salt  Lake
City  from  January  1,  1881,  to  De-
cember t*.  1881,  are  classified,  as  fol-
lows :  *  lit  r

Men  uv; 782

Women  „  200

Boys „ 38


Total  1,020

Mormons,  Men  &  Boys  163

„ Women *i  169

A  n  t  i  -  Mo  rmo  n  -  M  e  n  &  Boy  s-  G  5  7

„ Women  194  851


Tntil  1  (YH\

A-  \J  W  *  1  * ^ 1 * * » * * + * * I * * * * * * +  *  ■ ■ I ■ Ik  J  *  /  *  \rf

A  number  of  the  Mormon  arrests
were  for  chicken,  cow  and  water
iresjixtss,  petty  larceny,  etc.  The
arrests  of  anti-Mormons  were  in
most  cases  for  prostitution,  gam-
bling, exposing  of  person,  drunken*
ness,  unlawful  dram  selling,  assault
and  battery,  attempt  to  kill,  etc.

If  the  seventy-five  per  cent
Mormon  population  of  Salt  Lake
City  wei»  as  lawless  and  currupt  aa


60


JOURNAL  O*  Dl;SCUUKr>E*S>


the  record  shows  the  twenty-five
per  cent,  anti-Mormons  to  he,  there
would  have  been  2,443  arrests  insult*
from  their  ranks  during  the  year
1881  instead  of  the  comparatively
trifling  number  of  109  shown  on  the
record ;  while  if  the  twenty  five
per  cent.  anti-Mormon  population
had  as  law-abiding  and  upright  a
record  as  the  seventy- five  per  cent.
Mormons,  instead  of  the  startling
number  of  851  anti-Mormon  arrests
during  the  year,  there  would  have
been  but  5C  made."

I  give  these  statements  of  facts
for  the  information  of  the  brethren
who  are  here  from  a  distance  ;  but,
then,  they  know  them  as  facts  ;  that
is,  they  know7  how  these  soi  disanl
regenerators  act,  but  many  of  them
do  not  know  what  their  civilization
is  here,  and  what  is  sought  to  be
introduced  among  us,  and  the  in-
famous statements  circulated  con-
cerning us.  We  are  ready,  as  I  said
before,  to  compare  notes  with  them
or  the  people  of  this  or  any  nation
at  any  time.  .And  then  again,  we
ought  to  be  more  pure  and  virtuous
than  they,  for  we  do  profess  to  be
the  Saints  of  the  Most  High  God,
With  this  view,  when  this  Edmunds
bill  was  being  canvassed,  and  there
was  a  prospect  of  its  passing —
although  we  thought  at  first  it  was
impossible  that  such  a  concern  could
pass  through  Congress  ;  hut  when
we  saw  the  falsehoods  that  were
being  circulated,  the  furore  that
was  being  raised  and  fanned  by
religious  fanatics  and  political
demagogues,  petitions  were  gotten
up  by  the  people  here,  one  of  them
representing  the  male  class,  another
our  Relief  Societies,  another  our
young  men,  and  another  our  joung
ladies'  Improvement  Societies.  All
of  them  represented  that  we  were  a
virtuous  people — that  polygamy  was
4EL  religious institution  ; and  the


young  people  asserted  that  it  had
been  taught  to  them  by  their  parents
from  their  youth  up,  and  that  the
principles  of  purity,  virtue,  integrity
and  loyalty  to  the  government  of  the
United  States  had  been  instilled  into
their  minds  and  hearts  since  their
earliest  childhood  ;  and  further,  that
they  had  been  taught  and  under-
stood that  chastity  was  their  greatest
boon,  far  above  jewels  or  wealth,
and  more  precious  than  life  itself.
In  a  few  days  we  had  165,000  signa-
tures, and  they  were  forwarded  to
Washington. The  request  was  that
Congress  would  not  act  as  the  gov-
ernment had  before — first  send  out
an  army  and  then  send  commission-
ers to  inquire,  but  that  they  w  ould
send  commissioners  first  to  inquire
into  the  facts  of  the  case.  But  they
did  not  choose  to  listen. In  fact,
there  has  been  a  great  furore  in  the
United  States  in  relation  to  these
matters,  and  that  has  originated  to
an  extent  through  our  Governor.
Now  I  am  very  much  averse  to
talking  about  official  men  ; I  do
not  like  to  do  such  things.  They
ought  to  be  honorable  men  ;  the
most  charitable  construction  I  could
put  upon  his  acts  would  be  to  say
that  his  education  had  been  sadly
neglected, and that  he  was  not
acquainted  with  figures. He  might
have  learned  to read and  write
perhaps,  but  I  would  question  his
having  gone  so  far  as  arithmetic  ;
because  he  did  not  apparently  know
the  difference  between  1,300  votes
and  18,o 00  votes. It  does  denote  a
lamentable  absence  of  a  knowledge
of  the  rudiments  of  a  common  edu-
cation ;  but  then,  a  man  should  not,
perhaps,  be  blamed  for  that  which
he  does  not  know. And,  indeed,  it
would  seem  that  some  of  our  law-
makers in  Washington  are  not  edu-
cated. With all due respect  to
i  them,  with  these  facts  before  them


and  condemned  throughout  the
United  States,  they  did  not  think  it
was  any  crime  for  a  man  to  be  thus
ignorant,  or  they  would  not  have
sent  him  back  again.  We  hope  the
Commissioners  will  he  better  edu-
cated, that  they  will  be  men  who  can
tell  the  difference  between  1,300
and  1$, 5 00.  Now  we  may  be  very
ignorant — and  we  do  not  boast  much
of  our  intelligence,  but  when  such
people  perpetrate  such  palpable,
flagrant  outrages,  we  have  to  resort
to  a  political  phrase  in  order  to  ex
press  our  disgust  towards  them  hy
saying,  u  There  is  something  rotten
in  Denmark/'  I  have  to  be  a  poli-
tician as  well  as  everything  else.

Still,  in  the  midst  of  these  things,
what  are  you  going  to  do  1  Do  the
very  best  we  can*  Are  you  going
to  rebel )  That  would  please  our
enemies,  but  we  do  not  have
uch  of  that  spirit  in  us.  We  feel
,o  sympathize  with  people  who  have
no  better  judgment  than  to  adopt
so  suicidal  and  dishonorable  a  course
as  that  which  has  been  pursued
towards  us.  Ynt  notwithstanding
this,  we  are  unshaken  towards  the
principles  of  our  government  and
believe  that  we  have  got  the  best  on
the  earth,  these  evils  arising  from
the  corruptions  of  men  and  mal
administration.  It  is  said  that  error
nnd  falsehood  will  run  a  thousand
miles  while  truth  is  putting  on  its
boots,  but  truth  ultimately  will
triumph,  as  according  to  the  old
adage,  <l  Truth,  crushed  to  earth,
will  rise  again/'  And  what  will  you
do  ?  Contend  for  constitutional
principles,  or  lie  down  and  let  tht?
vicious,  the  mendacious  and  un-
principled run  over  and  overslaugh
you  T

We  have  peacefully,  legally  and
honorably  possessed  our  lands  in
these  valleys  of  the  mountains,  and
we  have  purchased  and  paid  for


them  ;  we  do  not  revel  in  any  ill-
gotten  gain.  They  are  ours.  We
have  complied  with  all  the  requisi-
tions of  law  pertaining  thereto,  and
we  expect  to  possess  and  inhabit
them.  We  covet  no  man's  silver  or
gold,  or  apparel,  or  wife,  or  servants,
or  flocks,  or  herds,  or  horses,  or
carriages,  or  lands,  or  possessions.
But  we  expect  to  main  tain  our  own
rights.  If  we  are  crowded  upon  by
unprincipled  men  or  inimical  legis-
lation, we  shall  not  take  the  course
pursued  by  the  lawless,  the  disso-
lute and  the  unprincipled  ;  we  shall
not  have  recourse  to  the  dynamite
of  the  Russian  Nihilists,  the  secret
plans  and  machinations  of  the  com
munists,  the  boycotting  and  threats
of  the  Fenians,  the  force  and  disor-
der of  the  Jayhawkeers,  the  regular
tors  or  the  Molly  Maguires,  nor  any
other  secret  or  illegal  combination  ;
but  we  still  expect  to  possess  and
maintain  our  rights ;  but  to  obtain
I  them  in  a  legal,  peaceful  and  consti-
tutional manner.  As  American
citizens,  we  shall  contend  for  all  our
liberties,  rights  and  immunities,
guaranteed  to  us  by  the  Constitu-
tion ;  and  no  matter  what  action
may  be  taken  by  mobocratic  influ-
ence, by  excited  and  unreasonable
men,  or  by  inimical  legislation,  we
shall  contend  inch  by  inch  for  our
freedom  and  rights,  as  well  as  the
freedom  and  rights  of  all  American
citizens  and  of  all  mankind  As  a
people  or  community,  we  can  abide
our  time,  but  I  will  say  to  you  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  that  there  is  nothing
of  which  you  have  been  despoiled
by  oppressive  acts  or  mobocratic
rule,  but  that  you  will  again  possess,
or  your  children  after  you.  Your
rights  in  Ohio,  your  rights  in  Jack-
son, Clay,  Caldwell  and  Davis  coun-
ties in  Missouri,  will  yet  be  restored
to  you.  Your  possessions,  of  which
you  have  been  fraudulently  des-


62


JOURNAL  O*  lUSUUL-KSES.


poili^l  iii  Missouri  and  Illinois,  you
will  again  possess,  and  that  without
force,  or  fraud  or  violence.  The
Lord  lias  a  way  of  His  own  in
regulating  such  matters.  We  are
told  the  wicked  shall  slay  the  wicked.
He  has  a  way  of  His  own  of
"  emptying  the  earth  of  the  inhab-
itants thereof."  A  terrible  day  of
reckoning  is  approaching  the  nations  j
of  the  earth  ;  the  Lor* I  is  romim*
out  of  Mis  hiding  place  to  vex  the
inhabitants  thereof ;  and  the
destroyer  of  the  Gentiles,  as  prophe-
sied of,  is  already  on  his  way.  Al-
ready the  monarchs  of  the  earth  are
trembling  from  conspiracies  among
their  own  people ;  already  has  one
Czar  of  Russia  been  destroyed  and
another  holds  his  life  by  a  very  un-
certain tenure  through  the  perpetual
threats  and  machinations  of  an
infuriated  populace  ;  already  have
the  Emperor  of  Germany,  the  King
of  Italy,  the  Queen  of  England,  the
King  of  Spain,  the  Sultan  of  Tur-
key, and  many  others  of  the  honor-
able and  noble  rulers  of  the  earth
had  their  lives  jeopardized  by  the
attacks  of  regicides ;  already  have
two  of  the  Presidents  of  this  Re-  I
public  been  laid  low  by  the  hands  |
of  the  assassin  ;  and  the  spirit  of
insubordination,  misrule,  lynching,
and  mobocracy  of  every  kind  is
beginning  to  ride  rampant  through
the  land  ;  already  combinations
are  being  entered  into  which  are
very  ominous  for  the  future  pros-
perity, welfare  and  happiness  of
this  great  Republic.  The  volcanic
fires  ol  disordered  and  anarchical
elements  are  beginning  to  manifest
themselves  and  exhibit  the  internal
forces  that  are  at  work  among  the
turbulent  and  unthinking  masses  of
the  people.  Congress  will  soon  have
something  else  to  do  than  to  pro-
scribe and  persecute  an  innocent,
-law-abiding  and patriotic  people*


Of  all  bodies  in  the  world,  they  can
least  afford  to  remove  the  bulwarks
that  bind  society  together  in  this
nation,  to  recklessly  trample  upon
human  freedom  and  rights,  and  to
rend  and  destroy  that  great  Palla-
dium of  human  rights — the  Consti-
tution of  the  United  States.  Ere
long  they  will  need  all  its  protecting
influence  to  save  this  nation  from
misrule,  anarchy  and  mobocratic
influence.  They  can  ill  afford  to  be
the  foremost  in  tampering  with
human  rights  and  human  freedom,
or  in  tearing  down  the  bulwarks  of
safety  and  protection  which  that
sacred  instrument  has  guaranteed,
Tt  is  lamentable  to  see  the  various
disordered  and  disorganized  elements
seeking  to  overthrow  the  greatest
and  best  government  in  existence
on  the  earth.  Congress  can  ill  afford
to  set  a  pattern  of  violation  of  that
Constitution  which  it  has  sworn  to
support.  The  internal  fires  of  revo-
lution are  already  smouldering  in
this  nation,  and  they  need  but  a
spark  to  set  them  in  a  flame.  Al-
ready are  agencies  at  work  in  the
land  calculated  to  subvert  and  over-
throw every  principle  of  rule  and
government ;  already  is  corruption
of  every  kind  prevailing  in  high
places  and  permeating  all  society  j
already  are  we,  as  a  nation,  departing
from  our  God,  and  corrupting  our-
selves with  malfeasauce,  dishonor,
and  a  lack  of  public  integrity  and
good  faith  ;  already  are  licentious-
ness and  debau chery  corrupting,
undermining  and  destroying  society;
already  are  we  interfering  with  the
laws  of  nature  at  id  stopping  the
functions  of  life,  and  have  become
the  slayers  of  our  own  offspring,
and  employ  human  butchers  in
the  shape  of  physicians  to  assist
in  this  diabolical  and  murderous
work.  The  sins  of  this  nation,  the
licentiousness,  the  debauchery,  the


THE  GOSPEL'S  KESTORATION,  ETC.


murders  rae  entering  into  the  ears
of  the  Lonl  uf  Sabbaoth,  ami  I  tell
yon  now,  from  the  tops  of  these
mountains,  as  a  humble  servant  of
the  living  God,  that  unless  these
crimes  and  infamies  are  stopped,
this  nation  will  be  overthrown,  and
its  glory,  power,  dominion  and
wealth  will  fade  away  like  the  dews
of  a  summer  morning,  I  also  say
to  other  nations  of  the  earth,  that
unless  they  repent  of  their  crimes,
their  iniquities  and  abominations?,
their  thrones  will  he  overturned,
their  kingdoms  and  governments
overthrown,  and  their  lands  made
desolate.  This  is  not  only  my  say-
ing, but  it  is  the  saying  of  those
ancient  prophets  which  they  them-
selves profess  to  believe  ;  for  God
will  speedily  have  a  controversy
with  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and,
as  I  stated  before,  the  destroyer  of
the  Gentiles  is  on  his  way  to  over-
throw governments,  to  destroy
dynasties,  to  lay  waste  thrones,
kingdoms  and  empires,  to  spread
abroad  anarchy  and  desolation,  and
to  cause  war,  famine  and  bloodshed
to  overspread  the  earth.

Besides  the  preaching  of  the  Gos-
pel, we  have  another  mission,  name-
ly, the perpetuation  of  the  free
agency  of  man  and  the  maintenance  .
of  liberty,  freedom,  and  the  rights  of
man. There  are  certain  principles  J
that  belong  to  humanity  outside  of
the  Constitution,  outside  of  the  laws,
outside  of  all  the  enactments  and  j
plans  of  man,  among  which  is  the
right  to  live  ;  God  gave  us  the  right  j
and  not  man  ;  no  government  gave  ,
it  to  us,  and  no  government  has  a
right  to  take  it  away  from  us. We  j
^ve  a  right  to  liberty  —  that  was  a
right  that  God  gave  to  all  men;
and  if  there  has  been  oppression,
fraud  or  tyranny  in  the  oarth,  it
has  been  the  result  of  the  wicked*
ness  and  corruptions  of  men  and


has  always  been  opposed  to  God  and
the  principles  of  truth,  righteous-
ness, virtue,  and  all  principles  that
are  calculated  to  elevate  mankind.
The  Declaration  of  Independence
states  that  men  are  in  possession  of
certain  inalienable  rights,  among
which  are  lif>,  liberty  and  the
pursuit  of  happiness.  Tins  belongs
to  us;  it  belongs  to  all  humanity.
I  wish,  and  the  worst  wish  I  have
for  the  United  States,  is,  that  they
could  have  liberality  enough  to  give
to  all  men  equal  rights,  and,  while
they  profess  to  have  delivered  the
black  slaves,  that  they  strike  off  the
fetters  of  the  white  men  of  the  South,
who  have  been  ground  under  the
heel  of  sectional  injustice,  and  let
the  in  feel  that  we  are  ail  brothers  in
one  great  nation,  and  deliver  all
people  from  tyranny  and  oppression
of  every  kind,  and  proclaim,  as  they
did  at  the  first,  liberty  throughout
the  land  and  to  all  people.  That  is
the  worst  wish  I  have  for  them.  And
when  I  see  them  take  another  course
I  feel  sorry  for  it.  I  would  like  if  I
had  time  to  talk  a  little  upon
constitutional  rights  ;  I  would  like  a
little  to  discuss  the,  unconstitution-
ality of  that  Edmunds  bill  ;  but  it
was  ably  done  by  many  senators  of
the  United  States,  and  by  others  in
the  House  of  Representatives.
Very  abiy  done ;  and  I  honor  the
men  who  maintain  such  sentiments.
It  is  true  that  most  of  them  apolo-
gized and  said  that  they  were  as
much  opposed  to  polygamy  as  any-
body. Well,  that  is  a  matter  of
their  own  ;  they  have  a  right  to  their
opinions  as  much  as  I  have  a  right
to  my  opinion.  Would  I  deprive
them  of  that  right?  No,  I  would
not.  I  preach  the  Gospel  to  the
world.  What  is  it  ?  Force,  tyranny
and  oppression  {i  No  :  it  is  all  free
grace  and  it  is  all  free  will.  Is
anybody  coerced  1 Did  anybody


04


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


coerce  you,  Latter-day  Saints  ?  Are  i
any  of  you  forced  to  continue  Lat-
ter-day Saints  if  you  do  not  want
to]  If  you  think  you  are,  you  are
all  absolved  to-day.  We  know  of  no
such  principle  as  coercion  ;  it  is  a
matter  of  choice.  The  principle  that
1  spoke  of  before — that  is,  men  re-
ceive the  Holy  Ghost  within  them-
selves, is  the  cementing,  binding,
uniting  power  that  exists  among  the
Latter-day  Saints,  What  right  have
I  to  expect  that  members  of  the
House  of  Representatives  or  the
people  of  the  United  States  should
advocate  polygamy  1  They  would
not  understand  it.  Nor  would  it
be  reasonable  for  us  to  expect  it  at
their  hands  ;  but  what  I  admired  in
those  Senators  and  Members  was
their  fealty  to  the  government,  to
the  Constitution  and  the  mainte-
nance of  the  freedom  and  the  in-
alienable rights  of  man,  of  every
color,  creed  and  profession*

I  will  relate  a  little  conversation
that  I  had  with  President  Hayes,
when  he  was  here,  on  ihe  subject  uf
polygamy,  I  said  to  him,  we  are  not
generally  understood  by  the  people
of  the  world,  by  the  outsiders ;  and
I  can  look  with  very  great  leniency
upon  the  action  of  members  of  the
House  of  Representatives  and  the
Senate,  the  governors,  and  others
who  have  expressed  strong  indigna-
tion against  this  principle.  From
your  standpoint,  you  think  we
are  a  corrupt  people ;  you  think
it  is  a  part  or  portion  of  the  thing
you  call  the  social  evil,  that
permeates  all  classes  of  society,
and  is  sapping  the  foundation
of  the  life  of  so  many  throughout
the  land.  You  think  that  we  are
trying  to  introduce  something  that
is  encouraging  licentiousness  and
other  kindred  evils  among  the
people,  and  to  legalize  these  things
by  legislative  enactment  and  other-


wise, and  trying  to  popularize  and
make  legal  those  infamies.  I  con-
tinued, that  is  a  false  view  to  take
of  the  subject  Mr,  President,
I  have  always  abhorred  such  prac-
tices from  the  time  I  was  quite
young  ;  when  I  have  seen  men  act
the  part  of  Lotharios,  deceiving  the
fair  sex  and  despoiling  them  of  their
virtue,  and  then  seeing  those  men
received  into  society  and  their  vio
tims  disgraced,  ostracised  and  es-
teemed as  pariahs  and  outcasts,  I
could  not  help  sympathising  with
a  woman  that  was  seduced.  I
looked  upon  the  man  who  seduced
her  as  a  villain  ;  I  do  so  to-day.
Said  I,  when  Joseph  Smith  first
made  known  the  revelation  con-
cerning plural  marriage  and  of
having  more  wives  than  one,  it  made
my  flesh  crawl ;  but,  Mr,  President,
I  received  such  evidence  and  testi-
mony pertaining  to  this  matter,
scriptural  and  otherwise,  which  it
was  impossible  for  me  as  an  honest
man  to  resist,  and  believing  it  to
be  right  I  obeyed  it  and  practised  it
I  have  not  time  now  to  enter  into
all  the  details  ;  but  in  regard  to
those  honorable  gentlemen  in  the
Senate  who  maintained  the  principle
of  constitutional  rights  and  who
declare,  as  I  declare  to-day,  that  that
instrument  which  was  then  gotten
up  was  unconstitutional  in  several
particulars,  I  could  not  expect  them
to  advocate  my  religion  ;  it  is  not
their  business,  but  is  mine  and
yours.  Th^y  can  take  what  reli-
gion they  please ;  we  do  not  w  ish
to  force  our  religion  nor  our  marital
relations  upon  them,  nor  have  we
ever  done  it,  nor  could  we  do  it  if
we  wished,  for  this  principle  is  con-*
nected  with  the  Saints  alone^
and  pertains  to  eternity  as  well  afl
time,  and  is  known  to  us  by  th6
appellation  of  "celestial  marriage/1
It  does  not  belong  to  them,  nor  does


it  pertain  to  all  of  our  own  people.
None  but  the  more  pure,  virtuous,
honorable  and  upright  are  permitted
to  enter  into  these  associations.
Now  I  speak  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
who  are  acquainted  with  what  I  say.
If  I  state  untruths,  tell  me,  and  I
will  consider  you  my  friends,  and
the  friends  of  this  community.
Should  we  preach  the  doctrine  of
plurality  of  wives  to  the  people  of
the  United  States  ?  No  ;  you  know
very  well  that  it  is  only  for  honorable
mon  and  women,  virtuous  men  and
women,  honest  men  ami  women  who


and  contemplate  an  eternal  union  of
the  sexes  worlds  without  end.

We  believe  in  the  resurrection  of
the  dead  and  the  life  in  the  world
to  come  ;  and  not  onlv  in  the  resur-
rection  of  the  male,  but  also  of  the
female.  We  believe  also  in  eternal
unions,  union  on  earth  and  in  hea-
ven. And  as  the  heavens  declare
the  glory  of  God,  and  the  stellar
universes  roll  on  according  to  eter-
nal laws  implanted  in  them  by  the
Deity,  and  perform  their  revolutions
through  successive  ages,  so  will  man
progress  and  increase — himself,  his


can  be  vouched  for  by  those  who  wives,  his  children  —  through  the


preside  over  them,  and  whom  they
recognize  as  their  Presidents  ;  it  is
only  such  people  as  these  that  can
be  admitted  to  participate  in  this
ordinance.  You  know  it,  I  know
it,  you  Presidents  of  Stakes  know  it
and  the  people  know  it  There  are
any  number  of  people  in  this  Terri-
tory who  are  good  people  in  many


eternities  to  come.  Who  is  injured
by  this  faith  ?  Cannot  a  great  and
magnanimous  nation  afford  the  pri-
vilege to  enjoy  these  principles
without  passing  bills  of  pains  and
penalties  for  the  belief  and  enuncia-
tion of  such  divine,  ennobling  and
Godlike  principles  1

Man  is  a  dual  being,  possessed  of


respects,  but  who  cannot  come  up  to  •  body  and  spirit,  made  in  the  image
that  standard.  That  is  the  position  j  of  God,  and  connected  with  Him
we  occupy  in  relation  to  this  princi-  '  and  with  eternity. He  is  a  God  in


pie.

If  the  United  States  were  to  ask
us,  if  we  could  give  to  them  the
same  ordinance,  we  would  say,
No  ;  no,  we  cannot.  Why  can  you
not  I  Because  it  is  a  religious  ordi-
nance, as  I  have  stated  ;  because  it
connects  men  and  women  together
for  time  and  for  eternity  ;  because
it  associates  people  of  this  world  in
the  next;  because  it  makes  provi-
sion for  our  marital  associations
in  the  other  world,  and  that  while
we  have  our  wives  here  we  expect
to  have  them  in  eternity ;  and  we
believe  in  that  doctrine  that  reaches
beyond  time  into  eternity.  Others
make  their  marital  relations  to  end
in  death  ;  their  covenants  last  only
frill  death  does  them  part  Ours
take  hold  of  eternity,  they  enter
into  the  eternal  state  of  existence,

N*.  5,


embryo  and  will  live  and  progress
throughout  the  eternal  a^es,  if  obe-
dient  to  the  laws  of  the  Go  head,
as  the  Gods  progress  throughout  the
eternal  ages.  Is  it  a  thing  men?  lit
ble  in  this  generation  that  G  >  I  s Vdl
raise  the  dead]  Is  it  a  tiling  in-
credible  that  the  finest  aud  most
exalted  ties  and  sympathies  of  hu-
manity, sanctified  by  family  rela-
tions— pure  un defiled  love,  should
continue  in  the  resurrection  t

We  have  no  fault  to  find  with*
our  government.  We  deem  it  the
best  in  the  world.  But  we  have*
reason  to  deplore  its  maladministra-
tion, and  I  call  upon  our  legislators,
our  governors  and  president  to
pause  in  their  career  and  not  to
tamper  with  the  rights  and  liberties
of  American  citizens,  nor  wantonly
tear down the bulwarks  of

Vol  XXllL


66


JOUUNA!.  *>Y  IJISCOURSKS.


American  ami  human  liberty.
God  lias  given  to  us  glorious  in-
stitutions ;  let  us  preserve  them
intact  and  not  pander  to  the  vices;,
passions  and  fanaticism  of  a  de-
praved public  opinion.

Cannot  the  enlightenment*  civili-
zation and  statesmanship  of  the
nineteenth  century  in  this  great
American  nation  find  a  more
worthy  object  than  to  fetter  human
thought,  to  enslave  its  own  citizens,
to  forge  chains  for  the  suppression
of  human  progress,  to  bind  in
Cimmerian  darkness  the  noblest
aspirations  of  the  human  soul,  to
tear  down  the  pillars  of  the  temple
of  liberty,  to  inaugurate  a  system
of  serfdom  and  oppression,  and
to  copy  after  Egypt,  Russia,  and
the  late  practice*  of  this  nation  in
enslaving  and  brutalizing  humanity,
tearing  to  pieces  that  great  palladium
of  human  rights,  the  Constitution
of  the  United  States!  Can  they
afford  to  do  this  1  If  there  are
supposed  wrongs,  can  they  not  find
a  legal  and  constitutional  way  of
correcting  these  wrongs?  Surely,
the  tearing  down  of  the  bulwarks,
the  very  temple  of  freedom,  will  not
aid  them  in  the  solution  of  this,  to
them,  vexed  question,  for  if  they  tear
away  the  strongholds  of  society,
they  themselves  will  perish  in  the
ruins.

But  with  regard  to  those  not  of
us,  I  will  tell  you  what  1  believe
about  the  matter,  I  believe  it
would  be  much  better  for  them
to  have  even  polygamy  in  their
state  of  existence  than  this  cor-
roding, corrupting,  demoralize  ug
and  damning  evil  that  prevails  in
their  miJsL  We  look  upon  it
that  polygamy  is  the  normal  con-
dition of  man  ;  but  that  has  nothing
to  do  with  Mormon  plurality  of
wives,  or  what  is  termed  "  celestial
.marriage/' 1  would  state  also,  that


when  we  speak  of  its  being  the
normal  condition,  it  has  so  existed
throughout  all  ages.  And  when  we
talk  about  polygamy,  1  have  read
the  speeches  of  men  in  Congress
when  speaking  about  the  Mormon
position,  telling  us  that  the  British
in  India  put  down  suttee,  winch  is
the  burning  of  widows  on  the
funeral  pile  of  their  husbands  ;
casting  children  into  the  Ganges,
etc. — that  the  British  put  that  down
by  force  of  law.  But  the  British,  if
my  memory  serves  me  right,  have
about  two  hundred  millions  of  poly-
gamists  under  t  heir  jurisdiction,  and
they  can  afford  to  treat  them  right
and  to  give  them  the  protection  of
law  ;  but  our  free  government  can-
not. And  when  we  talk  about  the
suttee,  that  is  the  destruction  of  life,
while  polygamy  means  the  propaga-
tion of  human  life.  One  tends  to
destruction  ami  death,  the  other  to
the  propagation  of  life.  1  will  guar-
antee Unlay,  without  fear  of  contra-
diction, that  there  is  more  of  the
suttee  in  the  United  States  to-day
pertaining  to  infants  than  there  ever
was  in  India  among  the  same  num-
ber of  population.  It  has  become  un-
fashinable  in  the  east  for  women  to
have  la ri;e  families.  I  have  heard
remarks  like  this :  one  lady  was
asked,  How  many  children  have  you]
One  or  two.  Is  that  all  ?  W  hat  do
you  take  me  for,  do  you  think  I  am
a  cow  ]  Why  no,  you  are  not  a  cow,
for  cows  do  not  murder  their  off-
spring. What  a  terrible  tale  is  here
told  !  What  a  horrible  state  of  affairs
is  here  exhibited.  And  I  am  told
that  some  of  these  iniquities  are
being  introduced  here.  1  tell  you,
in  the  name  of  God,  if  you  do  we  will
be  after  you.  I  am  told  of  physi-
cians who  are  acting  as  they  do  in
the  east — as  the  butchers  of  infants.
Let  us  look  after  these  things,  you
Bishops,  and  if  you  do  find  it  out,


THE  GOSPEL'S  RESTORATION,  ETC


67


bring  them  up.  As  God  lives  we
will  not  permit  such  infamies  in  our
midst ;  you  will  not  commence  your
fashionable  murders  here.  And  I
will  say  now,  Wo  to  this  nation
and  to  the  nations  of  Europe,
or  any  people  among  any  nation,
that  sanctions  these  things.  Have
you  not  read  that  no  "murderer
hath  eternal  life  abiding  in  him  V
What  shall  be  thought  of  those
unnatural  monsters,  the  slayers
■of  their  own  offspring  ?  This
revolting  unnatural,  damnable
vice  may  he  fashionable,  but  God
will  require  this  crime  at  their
hands.  Wo  to  men  and  to  wo-
men that  are  licentious  and  cor*
Tupt,  depraved  and  debauched,  and
-especially  wo,  tenfold  wo,  to  the
murderers  of  helpless  innocence.  I
tell  you  this  in  the  name  of  the
Lord,  If  these  things  are  not  stop-
ped, God  will  arise  and  shake  the
nations  of  the  earth  and  root  out
their  infamies.

Now  then  what  shall  we  do  1
We  do  not  wish  to  place  ourselves
in  a  state  of  antagonism,  nor  to  act
defiantly,  towards  this  government.
We  will  fulfil  the  letter,  so  far  as
practicable,  of  that  unjust,  inhuman,
oppressive  and  unconstitutional  law,
so  far  as  we  can  without  violating
principle  •  but  we  cannot  sacrifice
every  principle  of  human  right  at
the  behest  of  corrupt,  unreasoning
and  unprincipled  men  ;  we  cannot
violate  the  highest  and  noblest
principles  of  human  nature  and
make  pariahs  and  outcasts  of  high-
minded,  virtuous  and  honorable
women,  nor  sacrifice  at  the  shrine
•of  popular  clamor  the  highest
ami  noblest  principles  of  hu-
manity !

We  shall  abide  all  constitutional
law,  as  we  always  have  done  ;  but
while  we  are  Godfearing  and  law-
abiding,  and  respect  all  honorable


men  and  officers,  we  are  no  craven
serfs,  and  have  not  learned  to  lick
the  feet  of  oppressors,  nor  to  bow  in
base  submission  to  unreasoning  cla-
mor. We  will  contend,  inch  by
inch,  legally  and  constitutionally,
for  our  rights  as  American  citizens,
and  for  the  universal  rights  of  uni-
versal  man.  We  stand  proudly
erect  in  the  consciousness  of  our
rights  as  American  citizens,  and
plant  ourselves  firmly  on  the  sacred
guarantees  of  the  Constitution  j  and
that  instrument,  while  it  defines  the
powers  and  privileges  of  the  Presi-
dent, Congress  and  the  judiciary,
also  directly  provides  that  "the
powers  not  delegated  to  the  United
States  by  the  Constitution,  nor  pro-
hibited by  it  to  the  States,  are  re-
served to  the  States  respectively  or
to  the  people."

I  have  heard  it  boasted  by  British
statesmen,  that  as  soon  as  a  slave
planted  his  foot  on  British  sail,  his
fetters  were  broken  and  lie  was  a
free  man.  It  is  the  proud  boast  of
Americans  that  her  flag  floats  for
all ;  and  while  Congress  claims  the
right  of  dominion  and  legislation
over  territories,  with  that  same
right  is  associated  the  right  of  man-
hood, freedom  and  American  citi-
zenship. We  need  have  no  fears,
no  trembling  in  our  knees,  about
these  attempts  to  deprive  us  of  our
God  given  and  constitutional  liber-
ties, God  will  take  care  of  His
people,  if  we  will  only  do  right,  I
am  thankful  to  say  that  you  are
doing  pretty  nearly  as  well  as  you
know  how.  There  are  many  things
among  us  that  are  wrong,  ^  many
things  that  are  foolish,  but  gene-
rally you  are  seeking  to  iear  God
and  keep  His  commandments,
Nowr,  treat  your  wives  right,  but  do
not  subject  yourselves  to  the  infa-
mous provisions  of  the  Edmund's
act  more"  than  you  can  help,  avoid


68


all  harsh  expressions  and  i in  proper
actions,  act  carefully  and  prudently
in  all  your  social  relations. Be  wise
as  serpents  and  harmless  as  doves.
A  gentleman  in Washington  tnld
another,  who  related  it  to  me,  in
answer  to  the  question.  What  will
the "  Mormons " do with  their
wives  and  children  when  this  bill
passes?  he  was  told: Turn  them
out  in  the streets  as  we  do  our
harlots. I  say  in  the  name  of  God
we  will  not  do  any  such  thing,  and
let  all  Israel  say  Amen. [The  vast
congregation,  amounting to  from
1 2,000  to  14,000  persons,  responded
Amen  ] We  will  stand  by  ottr  cove-
nants, and  the  Constitution  will  bear
us  out  in  it Among  other  things,
that  instrument  says  that  Congress
shall  make  no  law  impairing  the
validity of  contracts. You  have
contracted  to  be  unite!  with  your
wives in time ami in  eternity,
and  it  would  not  do  for  us  to
break  a  constitutional  law,  would
it  ? [Laughter,] Others  may  do
it,  but  we  cannot. We  cannot  lay
aside our  honor, we  cannot  lay
aside  our  principles  ;  and  if  people
cannot  allow  us  freedom,  we  can
allow  freedom  to  them  and  to  all
men. We  will  be  true  to  our  wives
and cherish them and  maintain
them,  and  stand  by  them  in  time,
and  we  will  reign  with  them  in
eternity,  when  thousands  of  others
are  weltering  under  the  wrath  of
God. Any  man  that  abuses  his
wife,  or  takes  advantage  of  this  !
law  to  oppress  her,  is  not  worthy  of


a  standing  in  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  ;  and
let  the  congregation  say  Amen*
[The  immense  congregation  re-
sponded by  a  loud  Amen.]

Now,  what  will  we  do  in  our  rela-
tioii<  with  the  United  States  T  We
will  observe  the  law  as  we  have
done,  and  be  as  faithful  as  we  have
been.  We  will  maintain  our  prin-
ciples ui id  live  our  religion  and  keep
the  commandments  of  God,  and
obey  every  constif utional  law,  pur-
suing that  course  that  shall  direct

'  us  in  all  things.

Brethren  and  sisters,  God  bless
you  and  lead  you  in  the  paths  of
life,  and  give  you  wisdom  ;  be  calm

j  and  quiet ;  all  is  well  in  Zion.  You
need  not  be  under  any  fears  about
anything  that  may  transpire,  as
though  some  strange  thing  had
happened.  We  have  met  such
things  before  ;  we  can  meet  them
again. God  has  delivered  us  before.

'  He  will  deliver  us  again,  if  we  put
our  trust  in  Him  and  remain  true

I  to  the  covenants  we have  made

I  with  HinL  Our  trust  is  in  God.
You  have  heard  me  say  before,
Hosauna,  the  Lord  God  Omnipotent
reigneth  :  and  if  this  congregation
feels  as  I  do  we  will  join  together
in  the  same  acclaim. Follow  me.

[The  speaker  then  repeated  and
was  followed  by  the  congregation  :
Hosanna  !  Hosanna  !  Hosauna  !  to
God  and  the  Lamb,  for  ever  and

ever  worlds  without  end,  Amen>
Amen  and  Amen.]


THE  LAWS  OF  GOD  AND  THE  LAWS  OF  THE  LAND,  ETC


69


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOSEPH  F.  SMITH,

Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  ox  Sunday,

April  9th,  1882.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gihbs.)


THE  LAWS  OF  GOD  AND  THE  LAWS  OF  THE  LAND  — THE  *  SAINTS  AN
OBEDIENT  AND  LAW-ABIDING  PEOPLE  —  THEIR  PERSECUTIONS  PRO-
DUCTIVE OF  PROSPERITY  —  THEIR  PAST  AND  PROSPECTIVE  EXPERI-
ENCE AND  EVENTUAL  TRIUMPH,


Nearly  all  the  brethren  who  have
spoken  at  this  Conference  have
referred  to  the  circumstances  in
which  we,  as  a  people,  are  now
placed  ;  and  it  would  seem  unneces-
sary for  me  to  make  any  further
reference  to  this  alhprevailing  sub-
ject with  which  the  people  generally
are  more  or  less  familiar,  and  in
which  we  necessarily  are  consider-
ably interested.  But  while  the
brethren  who  have  spoken  have
merely  referred  to  some  of  the  say-
ings of  the  Prophet  Joseph,  and  to
items  in  the  revelations  through
him,  to  the  Church,  1  feel  impressed
to  read  in  the  hearing  of  the  con-
gregation one  or  two  passages  from
the  revelations  previously  referred
to.  I  will,  therefore,  call  the  atten-
tion of  the  congregation  to  a  verse
or  two  in  the  revelation  given  in
1831,  which  will  be  found  on  page
219  of  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants  :

"  Let  no  man  break  the  laws  of  the
land,  for  he  that  keepeth  the  laws  of
God  hath  no  need  to  break  the  laws
of  the  land.

Wherefore,  be  subject  to  the
powers  that  be,  until  He  reigns
whose  right  it  is  to  reign,  and,  sub-
dues all  enemies  under  His  feet


Behold,  the  laws  which  ye  have
received  from  my  hand  are  the  laws
of  the  Church,  and  in  this  light  ye
shall  hold  them  forth.  Behold  here
is  wisdom."

The  following  I  quote  from  a  reve-
lation given  December,  1833,  page
357  :

"  Accord  ins  to  the  laws  and  the
Constitution  of  the  people  which  I
have  suffered  to  be  established  and
should  be  maintained  for  the  rights
and  protection  of  all  flesh,  according
to  just  and  holy  principles.

That  every  mau  may  act  in  doc-
trine and  principle  pertaining  to
futurity,  according  to  the  moral
agency  which  I  have  given  unto
them,  that  every  mau  may  be  ac-
countable for  his  own  sins  in  the
day  of  judgment.

Therefore  it  is  not  right  that  any
man  should  be  in  bondage  one  to
another,

And  for  this  purpose  have  I  estab-
lished the  Constitution  of  this
land,  by  the  hands  of  wise  men
whom  1  raised  up  unto  this  very
purpose,  and  redeemed  the  land  by
the  shedding  of  blood  "

Again,  in  a  revelation  on  page
242:


70


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


'*  Ami  now,  verily  I  say  unto  you
concerning  the  laws  of  the  land,  it  is
my  will  that  my  people  shall  observe
to  do  all  things  whatsoever  I  com-
mand them*

And  that  law  of  the  land  which
is  constitutional,  supporting  that
principle  of  freedom  in  maintaining
rights  and  privileges,  belongs  to  all
mankind,  and  is  justifiable  before
me.

Therefore  I,  the  Lord,  justify
you  and  your  brethren  of  my  Church,
in  befriending  that  law  which  is  the
constitutional  law  of  the  land  ;

And  as  pertaining  to  law  of  man,
whatsoever  is  more  or  less  than
these  cr»me th  of  evil.

I,  the  Lord  God,  make  you  free,
therefore  ye  are  free  indeed  ;  and
the  law  also  maketh  you  free  ;

Nevertheless,  when  the  wicked
rule,  the  people  mourn  ;

Wherefore,  honest  men  and  wise
men  should  be  sought  for  diligently,
and  good  men  and  wise  men  ye
should  observe  to  uphold ;  other-
wise, whatsoever  is  less  than  these
conieth  of  evil

And  I  give  unto  you  a  command-
ment, that  ye  shall  forsake  all  evil
and  cleave  unto  all  good,  that  ye
shall  live  by  every  word  which  pro-
ceeded! out  of  the  mouth  of  God  ;

For  He  will  give  unto  the  faith-
ful, line  upon  line,  precept  upon
precept ;  and  I  will  try  you  and
prove  you  herewith  ;

And  whoso  layeth  down  his  life
in  my  cause,  or  my  name's  sake,
shall  find  it  again,  even  life  eternal ;

Therefore,  be  not  afraid  of  your
enemies,  for  I  have  decreed  iu  my
heart,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will
prove  you  in  all  things,  whether  you
will  abide  in  my  covenant,  even
unto  death,  that  you  may  be  found
worthy  ;

For  if  ye  will  not  abide  in  my
covenant,  ye  are  not  worthy  of  me."


This,  as  I  understand  it.  is  the
Jaw  of  God  to  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  in  all  the
world.  And  the  requirements  here
made  of  us  must  be  obeyed,  and
practically  carried  out  in  our  liv^s,
in  order  that  we  may  secure  the  ful-
filment of  the  promises  which  God
has  made  to  the  people  of  Zion,
And  it  is  further  written,  that  in-
asmuch as  ye  will  do  the  things
which  I  command  you,  thus  baith
the  Lord  then  am  I  bound  ;  otherwise
then;  is  no  promise.  We  can  there-
fore 01  dy  expect  that  the  promises
are  made  and  will  apply  to  us  when
we  do  the  things  which  we  are  com-
manded.

We  are  told  Ik* re  that  no  man
need  bleak  the  laws  of  the  land  who
will  keep  the  laws  of  God.  But  this
is  further  defined  by  the  passage
which  I  read  afterwards — the  law
of  the  laud,  which  all  have  no  need
to  break,  is  that  law  which  is  the
Constitutional  law  of  the  land,  and
that  is  as  God  himself  has  defined
it.  And  whatsoever  is  more  or  less
than  this  cometh  of  evih  Now  it
seems  to  me  that  this  makes  this
matter  so  clear  that  it  isuat  possible
for  any  man  who  professes  to  be  a
member  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter  -  day  Saints  to
make  any  mistake,  or  to  be  in
doubt  as  to  the  course  he  should
pursue  under  the  command  of  God
in  relation  to  the  observance  of  the
laws  of  the  land.  1  maintain
that  the  Chuich  of  Jesus  Christ
of  Latter-day  Saints  has  ever  been
faithful  to  the  constitutional  laws
of  our  country.  I  maintain  also,,
that  I  have  a  right  to  this  opinion,
as  an  American  citizen,  as  one  wha
was  not  only  Lorn  on  American  *oil^
but  who  descended  from  parents,
who  for  generations  were  Ijorn
in  America.  1  have  a  right  to  in-
terpret the  law  in  this  manner,  and


THE  LAWS  OF  GOD  AKD  THE  LAWS  OF  THE  LAND,  ETC,


71


to  form  my  own  conclusions  and
express  my  opinions  thereon,  regard-
less bf  the  opinions  of  other  men.

I  ask  myself,  What  law  have  you
broken  1  What  constitutional  law
have  you  not  observed?  1  am
bound  not  only  by  allegiance  to
the  government  of  the  United  States,
but  by  the  actual  command  of  (rod
Almighty,  to  observe  and  obey  every
constitutional  law  of  the  land,  and
without  hesitancy  I  declare  to  this
congregation  that  I  have  never  vio-
lated, nor  transgressed  any  law,  I
am  not  amenable  to  any  penalties
of  the  law,  because  1  have
endeavored  from  my  youth  up  to
be  a  law  abiding  citizen,  and  not
only  so,  but  to  be  a  peacemaker,  a
preacher  of  righteousness,  and  not
only  to  preach  righteousness  by
word,  but  by  example.  What  there-
fore have  1  to  fear?  The  Lord
Almighty  requires  this  people  to  ob-
serve the  laws  of  the  land,  to  be
subject  to  **  the  powers  that  be,"  so
far  as  they  abide  by  the  funda-
mental principles  of  goo  I  govern-
ment, but  He  will  hold  them  re-
sponsible if  they  will  pas*  uncousti
tut  ion  al  measures  and  frame  unjust
and  proscriptive  laws,  as  did  Nehu
chaduezzer  ami  Darius,  in  relation
to  the  three  Hebrew  children  and
Daniel.  If  lawmakers  have  a  mind
to  violate  their  oath,  break  their
covenants  and  their  faith  with  the
people,  and  depart  from  the  pro  vi-
sions of  the  Constitution  where  is
the  law  human  or  divine,  which
binds  me,  as  an  individual,  to  out
wardly  and  openly  proclaim  my  ac-
ceptance of  their  acts  1

I  firmly  believe  that  the  only  way
in  which  we  can  be  sustained  in
regard  to  this  matter  by  God  our
Heavenly  Father  is  by  following
the  illustrious  examples  we  find  in
holy  writ.  And  while  we  regret,
and  look  with  sorrow  upon  the  acts


of  men  who  seek  to  brim;  us  into
bondage  and  to  oppress  us,  we  must
obey  (jod,  for  He  has  commanded
us  to  do  so  ;  and  at  the  same  time
He  has  flee  hired  that  in  obeying  the
laws  which  He  has  given  us  we  will
not  heeessarily  break  the  constitu-
tional laws  of  the  land.

1  wish  to  enter  here  my  avowal
that  the  people  called  Latter-day
Saints,  as  has  been  often  repeated
from  this  stand,  are  the  most  law-
abiding,  the  most  peaceable,  long-
suffering  and  patient  people  that
can  t o-i lay  be  found  within  the  con-
tines  of  this  republic,  and  perhaps
anywhere  else  upon  the  face  of  the
earth  ;  and  we  intent!  to  continue
to  be  law-abiding  so  tar  as  the  con-
stitutional law  of  the  land  is  con-
cerned ;  and  we  expect  to  meet  the
consequences  of  our  obedience  to
the  laws*and  commandments  of  God-
like men.  These  are  my  sentiments
briefly  expressed,  upon  this  subject.

Now  I  desire  to  read  another  pas-
sage in  a  revelation  given  in  Is 34,
which  will  be  found  on  page  364
of  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  com-
mencing at  t!ie  first  verse  :

44  Verily  1  say  unto  you,  my
friends,  behold  1  will  give  unto  you
a  revelation  and  commandment,  that
you  may  know  how  to  act  in  the
discharge  of  your  duties  concerning
the  salvation  and  redemption  of
your  brethren,  who  have  been  scat-
tered on  the  land  of  Xiou.

Being  driven  and  smitten  by  the
hands  of  mine  enemies,  on  whom  I
will  pour  out  my  wrath  without
measure  in  mine  own  time ;

For  I  have  suffered  them  thus  far,
tha*.  they  might  fill  up  the  measure
of  their  iniquities,  that  their  cup
might  be  full.  ;

And  that  those  who  call  them-
selves after  my  name  might  be
chastened  for  a  little  season  with  a
sore  and  grievous  chastisement,  be*


72


JOURNAL  0¥  DISCOURSES.


cause  they  did  not  hearken  alto-
gether unto  the  precepts  and  com-
mandments which  I  gave  unto  them.

But  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  1  j
have  decreed  a  decree  which  my
people  shall  realize  inasmuch  as
they  hearken  from  this  very  hour,
unto  the  counsel  which  I,  the  Lord
their  God,  shall  give  unto  them.

Behold  they  shall,  for  I  have  de-
creed it,  begin  to  prevail  against
mine  enemies  from  this  very  hour.

And  by  hearkening  to  observe  all
the  words  which  I,  the  Lord  their
God,  shall  speak  unto  them,  they
shall  never  cease  to  prevail  until  the
kingdoms  of  the  world  are  subdued
under  my  feet,  and  the  earth  is
given  unto  the  Saints,  to  possess  it
for  ever  and  ever.

But  inasmuch  as  they  keep  not  |
my  commandments,  and  hearken  nut
to  observe  all  my  words,  the  king-
doms of  the  world shall  prevail
Against  them-

For  they  were  set  to  be  a  light
unto  theworld,  and  to  be  the  saviors
of  men.

And  inasmuch  as  they  are  not  the
saviors  of  men,  they  are  as  salt  that
has  lost  its  savor  and  is  thenceforth
good  for  nothing  but  to  be  cast  out
and  trodden  under  foot  of  men.

But  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  have
decried  that  jour  brethren  which
ha>e  been  scattered  shall  return  to
the  land  <f  their  inheritances,  and
build  up  the  waste  places  of  Ziom*

It  is  somewhere  written  as  the
word  of  (iod,  that  the  enemies  of  the
people  of  (  oil  can  do  nothing  against
but  fur  Zion,  Mow  let  us  review  for
a  few  moments  the  history  of  the
Church,  and  see  how  far  the  acts  of
the  enemies  ol  this  people  have  gone

towards  siiHifjmg  those  words.

"When  Joseph  first  looked  upon
the  face  of  the  Father  and  the  Son
in  1820,  until  the  Book  of  Mormon
was  translated  and  published  to  the


world  in  1829,  his  enemies  did  not
cease  their  efforts  to  destroy  him  ;
they  sought  his  life  continually  ;
they  blackened  his  character  ;  they
maligned  and  proscribed  him,  and
his  name  was  cast  out  as  evil  among
all  men. But  mark  you,  at  the  be-
ginning of  this  period  Joseph  w  as  a
lad  of  a  little  over  fourteen  years  of
age ;  and  during  the  nine  years  of
persecution  he  was  but  a  boy ;  he
had  no  vast  Congregation  as  we  see
before  us  this  morning  to  sustain,
encourage,  or  cheer  him  in  his  min-
istry and  labors. He  stood  alone
in  the  world,  friendless  and  despised,
cast  out,  maligned  and  persecuted
on  every  hand. But  did  the  work
cease  1 Did his enemies  prevent
him  from  performing  the  mission
which he  had been sent  to  ac-
complish ? They tried and  they
did  their  utmost. They  not  only
made  frequent  attempts  to  imprison
him  under  the  law,  but  they  made
several  attempts  to  take  his  life,  and
thus  stop  the  progress  of  the  work
in  which  he  was  engaged.  They
spared  neither  pains  nor  means,  nor
did they  shrink from  hypocrisy,
ialsehood  and  misrepresentation  to
accomplish  their  purposes  ;  but  they
signally  laded,  and  lie  continued  to
steadily  pursue  his  course,  ami  per-
formed  his work, translated  tin*
plate*,  published  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, and  in  1830  organized  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints,  according  to  the  law  of
the  land.

When  the  Book  of  Mormon  was
published  and  the  Church  organized,
tlid  they  cease  their  endeavors!
did  the  hatred  of  the  world  dimin-
ish 1  did  the  wicked  stop  their  per-
secutions? did  they  refrain  from
slandering,  misrepresenting,  and
otherwise  attempting  to  obstruct
the  j  l ogress  of  this  work  I  No,
they  tlid  not,  but  on  the  contrary,


THE  LAWS  OF  GOD  AND  THE  LAWS  OF  THE  LAND,  ETC.


73


as  the  work  developed,  as  the  Church
increased  in  numbers  and  be^an  to
spread  on  the  ri^lit  ami  on  the  left,
the  feeling  of  hatred,  animosity,
bitterness  and  persecution  increased
proportionately,  and  as  the  Church
became  stronger,  her  enemies  become
more  numerous  and  gained  strength.
But  notwithstanding,  we  moved  on  ;
built  a  Temple  in  Kirtland,  Ohio,
from  whence  we  colonised  Jackson
County,  Missouri  We  were  after-
wards driven  into  Clay,  Caldwell
and  Davies's  Counties,  Missouri,
where  we  founded  new  colonies.
Like  the  snowball  starting  from  the
summit  of  the  mountain  which  gath-
ers not  only  in  bulk  but  in  velocity,  so
did  the  work  of  God  increase  in  the
midst  of  the  opposition,  persecution
and  hatred  of  the  world.  In  the
midst  of  all  the  powers  that  were
exerted  to  stop  it,  it  moved  right
on.  (  But  did  they  succeed  in  expell-
ing our  people  from  Jackson  County,
and  finally  from  the  State  of  Mis-
souri 1  Yes,  they  drove  the  Saints
from  their  homes,  deprived  them  of
their  rights  as  citizens  and  freemen,
murdered  many  of  them  in  cold
blood,  while  others  they  confined  in
dungeons  feeding  them  on  the  flesh,
-(as  those  heartless  wretches  them-
selves  boasted) of  their  own  brethren;
nand  they  dispersed  the  people,  as
they  supposed,  to  the  four  winds  of
heaven,  rejoicing  in  the  belief  that
they  had  finally  consummated  the
destruction  of  the  "  Mormons/'  But
like  the  phceuix  rising  from  the
ashes  of  its  supposed  destruction,
they  gathered  like  swarms  of  bees  iu
Illinois,  founded  a  city,  and  built
another  Temple,  which  cost  a  mil-
lion dollars  —  the  most  beautiful
structure  in  the  Western  States  at
that  time  ;  and  they  continued  to
thrive.  Here  they  gained  something
which  they  never  possessed  before,
a  city  charter  granted  to  them  by


the  State  government  of  Illinois.
They  soon  became  notable  for  their
union  and  their  tenacity  to  the  prin-
ciples which  they  had  espoused,  tor
their  faith  in  God  and  in  His  ser-
vant the  Prophet,  for  their  uncon-
querable, irrevocable  will  to  prose-
cute what  they  knew  to  be  the  work
of  God,  and  to  accomplish,  so  far  as
in  their  power  lay,  His  purposes  and
designs,  concerning  this  great  latter-
day  work.

In  all  these  vicissitudes  and  dur-
ing all  the  persecutions  of  fourteen
years  which  were  as  ceaseless  against
the  Prophet  Joseph  as  the  forces
of  nature  are  endless,  did  they
diminish  the  numbers  of  Saints  1
Did  they  break  the  Saints  to  pieces  ]
Did  they  destroy  them  1  No  j  you
know  they  did  not,  and  it  seems
that  our  enemies  themselves  are
fully  aware  of  this  fact  But  when
they  thought  they  had  torn  up
"  Mormouism"  by  the  roots  aud  cast
it  out  to  dry  up  and  wither  under
the  parching,  blighting  influence  of
hostile  public  sentiment,  behold,
they  had  only  transplanted  the  tree
into  new  and  better  watered  soil
Instead  of  destroying  our  confidence
in  the  promises  of  God  to  us,  it  had
the  tendency  to  strengthen  our  faith,
to  increase  our  knowledge  and  ex-
perience, thus  fitting  and  preparing
us  tor  the  future  that  lay  before  u*.

Finally  they  succeeded  in  taking
the  life  of  the  Prophet  and  that  of
his  brother;  and  they  shed  the  blood
of  our  honored  President  who  kits
here  to-day  upon  this  stand.  They
thought  then  they  had  accomplished
their  hellish  work,  they  thought
then  the  head  and  front,  or  root  and
branch  of  i4  Mormonism"  was  de-
stroyed. But  was  it  1  No  ;  it  only
made  us  stronger  iu  faith  aud  more
united  in  purpose,  ''The  blood
of  the  martyrs  became  the  seed  of
the  Church,"


74


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


They  next  drove  us  from  our
homes  in  Nauvoo,  1  remember  the
circumstances,  although  at  the  time
I  was  but  a  lad,  I  also  remember
my  thoughts  on  the  day  the  mob
besieged  the  City  of  Nauvoo,  My
widowed  mother  had  been  compelled
a  day  or  two  previously  to  take  her
children  and  ferry  them,  in  an  open
flat  boat  across  the  Mississippi  river
into  Iowa,  where  we  cam  pud  under
the  trees  and  listened  to  the  bom-
bardment of  the  city.  We  had
left  our  comfortable  home  with  all
the  furniture  remaining  in  the
house,  together  with  all  our  earthly
possessions,  with  no  hope  or  thought
of  ever  seeing  them  again  ;  and  I
well  remember  the  feelings  I  had
when  we  made  our  camp  on  the
Iowa  si'Ie  of  the  river.  They  wore
not  feelings  of  regret,  sorrow  or  dis-
appointment, but  of  gratitude  to
God,  that  we  had  the  shelter  of  even
the  trees  and  the  broad  bosom  of
the  "  father  of  waters"  to  protect  us
from  those  who  sought  our  lives;  I
felt  to  thank  (Jod  that  we  still  pos-
sessed our  lives  and  freedom,  and
that  there  was  at  least  some  pros-
pect of  the  homeless  widow  and  her
family  of  little  ones,  helpless  as
they  were,  to  hide  themselves  some-
where in  the  wilderness  from  those
who  sought  their  destruction,  even
though  it  should  be  anionic  the  wild,
so-called  savage,  native  tribes  of  the
desert,  but  who  have  proved  them-
selves more  humane  and  Christlike
than  the  so-called  Christian  and
more  civilized  persecutors  of  the
Saints,

After  the  expulsion  of  the  Saints
from  Nauvoo,  and  from  the  State  of
Illinois,  our  enemies  thought  surely
the  "Mormons"  are  now  broken  up,
and  that  this  would  be  the  last  oi
"  Mormon  ism."  But  it  is  strange
how  hard  we  are  to  kill  ;  it  would
seem  that  we  olject  to  being  killed  ;


!  there  is  something  dreadful  in  the
[  thought  of  being  destroyed — annihi-
|  lated.  We  naturally  recoil  from  such
a  doom  and  seek  to  preserve  and
perpetuate  our  existence.  The  fact
i$S  we  think  we  have  a  right  to  44  life,
liberty,  ami  the  pursuit  of  happi-
ness," so  long  as  we  do  not  interfere
with  the  rights  of  others  ;  we  there-
fore most  decidedly  object  to  being
demolished  -  we  do  not  like  nor  do
we  intend  to  be  destroyed.  Not
that  we  presume  to  be  able  to  de-
fend ourselves  unaided  by  divine
1  power,  against  our  numerous  and
unrelenting  foes  ;  but  knowing  in
whom  we  trust,  and  the  nature  of
the  work  in  which  we  are  engaged,
we  are  not  slow  to  believe,  H either
are  we  afraid  to  openly  maintain
that  we  were  born  to  live  and  to
uphold  truth,  to  defend  virtue,  to
establish  righteousness,  and  to  stand
by  the  right,  and  bj  the  help  of  God
we  intend  to  fill  the  measure  of  our
creation.

Let  us  follow  the  wanderings  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  across  the
plains  to  these  mountain  valleys,
and  look  at  our  condition  to-day
compared  with  our  condition  in  Illi-
nois, Missouri,  Ohio,  or  New  York,
or  compared  with  our  condition  at
any  period  of  our  existence  as  a
church.  What  do  we  see  to-dav  t
We  see  the  promises  of  God  made
on  certain  conditions  fulfilled  ;  and
that  is  an  evidence  tome  that  the
majority  of  the  people  have  complied
witli  the  conditions,  although  many
may  not  have  done  as  they  should
have  done.  We  have  prevailed  thus
far,  in  accordance  with  the  word  of
God,  And  what  of  the  future  ?  So
far  as  the  ultimatum  of  this  work  is.
concerned,  there  is  no  man  in  Jsiael
who  has  a  spark  of  the  inspiration
of  the  Almighty  in  his  heart  who
does  not  know  just  as  well  as  he
|  knows  that  God  lives  or  that  he


himself  lives,  that  it  will  be  trium-
phant. But  I  < to  not  suppose  it
would  be  wisdom  in  Goil  to  show
us  all  the  vicissitudes  and  changes,
the  trials  and  persecutions  through
which  we  may  have  to  pass  in  order
to  reach  this  consummation,  because
if  He  did  *we  might  get  faint-
hearted before  we  were  prepared  to
enter  into  that  trial  We  may  have
to  be  driven  again,  I  do  not  say  we
shall  be  driven  ;  I  do  not  believe  we
shall — but  what  has  been  done  may
be  done  again.  And  supposing
we  were  driveu  again,  what  would
be  the  result  1  Is  it  not  fair  to  pre-
sume— have  we  not  good  grounds  to
believe  from  the  experience  of  the
past,  that  if  we  should  be  again
driven  and  despoiled  of  our  homes,
we  shouid  rise  up  somewhere  else,
many  fold  greater  and  more  numer-
ous than  we  are  now  1  The  enemies
of  God  can  do  nothing  against,  but
much  for,  the  work  of  God,  Is
it.  not  written  that  the  God  of  hea-
ven has  set  His  hand  for  the  last
time  to  establish  His  kingdom  upon
the  earth,  never  more  to  be  thrown
down,  and  no  more  to  be  left  to
another  people  1  Are  we  not  assured
by  the  won!  of  God,  ancient  and  mo-
dern, that  its  destiny  is  onward  and
upward,  until  the  purposes  of  God
concerning  this  great  latter-day
work  are  consummated  1  This  seems
to  be  a  point  difficult  for  many  to
comprehend  ;  but  when  compre-
hended it  is  a  key  to  the  whole  mat-
ter. What  God  has  decreed  cannot
be  annulled  by  the  learning,  wisdom,
wealth,  power,  numbers  or  cunning
of  man  !  There  is  no  power  be-
neath the  celestial  kingdom  that
can  stop  or  impede  its  progress  one
iota.  Its  destiny  is  onward  and
upward — man  may  fail,  but  the  pur-
poses of  God  will  not  All  His  ene-
mies, combined  with  the  cunning
and  perfidy  of  the  infernal  spirits


hj  which  they  are  moved  to  hate,
hound,  and  pursue  him  unto  death,
failed,  signally  failed,  even  in  the
crime  of  murdering  him,  to  prevent
Joseph  Smith  from  accomplishing
his  mission;  he  filled  his  destiny
and  sealed  his  testimony  with  his
blood.  And  his  blood  is  upon  this
nation  and  upon  all  the  nations  that
haw  confuted  to  that  terrible  deed
inasmuch  as  they  do  not  repent  of
their  sins  and  obey  the  Gospel  of
salvation  which  is  being  pleached
unto  them.

My  childhood  and  youth  were
spent  in  wandering  with  the  people
of  God,  in  suffering  with  them  and
in  rejoicing  with  them.  My  whole
life  has  been  identified  with  this
people,  and  in  the  name  and  by  the
help  of  God  it  will  be  to  the  end.  I
have  no  other  associations  or  place
of  aboda  I  am  in  this  respect  like
Peter  when  the.  Savior,  on  seeing
the  people  turn  away  from  Him,
asked  him,  Will  ye  go  also  ]  Said
Peter,  Lord,  if  1  leave  Thee  whither
can  I  go,  Thou  hast  the  words  of
eternal  life.  We  have  nothing  else
to  do  save  to  keep  in  the  narrow
path  that  lea«ls  back  to  God  our
Father.  That  is  the  channel  He  has
marked  out  for  us  to  pursue,  and  it
is  our  duty  to  press  on  ;  we  cannot
turn  aside,  we  cannot  switch  off;
there  is  no  side  track,  it  is  a
**  through  train"  and  its  destiny
is  already  fixed  and  mapped  out.
We  have  got  to  meet  opposition  aa
it  presents  itself,  battling  against  it
with  the  weapons  of  truth  which
God  has  placed  in  our  hands,  And
we  must  make  up  our  minds  that
this  world  with  all  its  pleasures  is
as  dross  compared  with  the  excel-
lency of  the  knowledge  of  God.  He
intends  to  try  us  and  prove  us,  and
He  has  a  right  to  do  it,  even  to  the
death  if  need  be,  and  only  those  who
endure  to  the  end,  who  will  not


76


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


flinch,  but  will  maintain  their  integ-
rity at  the  risk  and  sacrifice  of  their
all,  if  need  he,  will  gain  etennd  He,
or  be  worthy  uf  the  reward  of  the
faithful

I  am  thankful  to  God  that  cir-
cumstances are  as  well  with  us  as
they  are.  He  has  delivered  His  peo-
ple thus  far  and  blessed  them  from


the  -  beginning.  His  word  has  been
fulfilled  concerning  them,  and  will
he  fulfilled  from  this  time  henceforth
until  His  purposes  thall  be  accom-
plished with  regard  to  them,  pro-
viding they  keep  his  commandments,
which,  that  they  may  do,  is  my
prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  APOSTLE  WILFORD  WOODRUFF,

Delivered  in  the  Assembly  Hall,  Salt  Lakk  City,  Sunday  After-
noon, March  26,  1882.

( Hqjorted  by  Geo,  F.  Gibbs.)

span's  free  agency — the*  gospel  restored— opposition  to  god's
work — increase  of  wickedness  —  the  would  warned  of
retribution — the  saints  exhorted  to  righteousness.


I  feel  disposed  to  read  a  few
verses  from  section  43  of  the  Doc-
trine and  Covenants,  a  book  con-
taining the  revelations  of  God  to
the  Latter  day  Saints,  communicated
through  the  prophet  Joseph  Smith.

(The  speaker  then  read  the  whole
of  the  section,  commencing  at  the
17th  verse.)

There  is  one  thing  I  wish  to  say
to  the  congregation,  and  I  would  .say
the  same  to  the  whole  world  if  I
had  the  power — it  is  this  :  I  have
heard  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith
say  on  several  occasions  when  speak-
ing on  the  agency  of  man,  and  the
liberty  and  rights  of  men,  that  if  he
were  emperor  of  the  earth,  having


control  of  the  whole  human  family,
he  would  give  every  man,  woman
and  child  the  right  to  worship  God
according  to  the  dictates  of  their
own  conscience,  leaving  them  to  be
responsible  alone  to  their  Creator
for  their  individual  acts.  These
are  my  sentiments,  and  they  are  the
sentiments  of  this  people  to-day,
and  have  been  from  the  beginning
of  the  organization  of  this  Church,
and  I  trust  will  be  to  the  end  of
time.  And  this  we  believe  to  be  a
principle  emanating  from  heaven  ;
and  while  we  accord  this  right  to
our  fellow-men,  and  while  we  declare
it  to  be  a  heaven-born  right  guar-
anteed unto  all  American  citizens


MAN  S  FRKK  AGENCY,  ICTC.


through  the  Constitution  of  our
country,  we  claim  the  exercise  of
the  same  right  ourselves  ;  and  we
claim  this  right  and  privilege  under
the  Constitution  under  which  we
live,  and  we  claim  it  hy  the  laws  of
God  to  man*  And  whenever  any
people  rise  up  and  attempt  to  make
war  upon  the  rights  of  men  because
of  their  religion,  they  go  beyond
their  right,  they  transcend  their
own  powers,  whether  their  power
be  derived  either  from  God  or  man.

You  may  wish  to  know  why  I
make  these  remark I  will  tell  you.
Because  God  himself  grants  this
right  to  every  human  being  upon
the  earth  irrespective  of  race  or
color ;  it  is  part  of  the  divine  econo-
my not  to  force  any  man  to  heaven,
not  to  coerce  the  niind  but  to  leave
it  free  to  act  for  itself.  He  lays  be-
fore His  creature  man  the  everlast-
ing Gospel,  the  principles  of  life  and
salvation,  and  then  leaves  him  to
choose  for  himself  or  to  reject  for
himself,  with  the  definite  under-
standing that  he  becomes  respon-
sible to  Him  for  the  results  of  his
acts.

It  is  upon  this  principle  that  we
as  Latter-day  Saints  assert  our  rights
and  endeavor  to  enjoy  our  privileges.
And  we  are  accorded  this  right  in
accepting  the  Gospel  dispensation  in
which  we  livet  and  in  believing  in
the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  the
records  of  God's  people  who  lived  in
what  is  called  the  old  world,  as  well
as  in  the  Book  of  Mormon,  the  his-
tory of  the  ancient  inhabitants  of
our  land,  which  records  are  in  har-
mony with  each  other,  bearing  wit-
ness of  the  one  great  Head  and  of
the  Gospel  which  He  taught  in  Jeru*
salem  and  Judea,  and  which  His
Apostles  preached  after  He  left
them.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  same  Gos-
pel that  has  been  taught  to  man  in
every  age  and  dispensation,  as  there


is  but  the  one  Gospel,  and  that  Gos-
pel is  adapted  to  the  wants  and  con-
ditions of  all  men*  It  is  the  Gospel
of  Truth,  and  truth  alone  can  make
us  free,  free  from  sin  and  from  the
power  of  the  adversary.  And  this  is
the  Gospel  which  we  have  received,
and  which  we  tako  the  liberty  of
preaching  to  our  fellow-men.

I  do  not  suppose  that  there  has
been  any  dispensation  upon  the  earth
in  which  a -greater  variety  of  evidence,
or  important  evidence  of  the  divi-
nity of  the  latter-day  work  has  been
given  than  that  which  is  occurring,
and  that  will  continue  to  occur  until
the  second  coming  of  the  Sou  of
Man.  There  is  no  man  upon  the
earth  who  believes  in  the  literal  ful-
fillment of  prophecy  as  contained  in
tlie  Old  and  New  Testament,  but
who  must  in  his  heart  believe  that
the  God  of  heaven  will  in  the  latter
days  set  His  hand  to  perform  a  great
work  and  a  wonder  in  the  earth  ;
that  He  will  call  forth  His  Church
out  of  the  wilderness  of  darkness  and
establish  it  upon  the  foundation  of
Apostles  and  Prophets  with  Christ
Jesus  as  the  chief  corner  stone.
There  is  no  man  who  believes  in  the
Revelations  of  St,  John  who  does
not  believe  in  his  heart  that  in  the
last  dispensation  the  angel  as  seen
and  described  by  John  in  his  vision,
will  fly  through  the  midst  of  heaven
having  the  everlasting  Gospel  to
commit  to  man  again  upon  the
earth,  and  that  this  Gospel  is  to  be
preached  in  plainness  and  power  to
every  nation,  kindred,  tongue  and
people  upon  the  whole  earth.  There
is  no  man  that  believes  in  the  literal
fulfillment  of  the  revelations  of  God
through  the  Prophets  who  doei  not
believe  that  the  Lord  will  in  th#
latter  days  gather  a  people  together
out  of  every  nation  inder  heaven  5
and  that  He  will  also  gather  the  dis-
persed of  Judah — the  Jews— Ahab


78


JOURNAL  OF  LUSUOURSKS,


have  been  trodden  under  the  feet  of
the  Gentiles  tor  the  last  1,800  years
for  shedding  the  blood  of  the  Mes-
siah.

I  wish  to  bear  my  testimony  to  all
men  within  the  sound  of  my  voice
and  those  to  whom  my  words  shall
come,  that  we  are  living  in  that  dis-
pensation of  God  to  man  that  every
Prophet  and  Apostle  that  has  ever
breathed  the  breath  of  life  has
pointed  to.  I  hear  my  testimony
that  God,  in  fulfillment  of  the  Reve-
lations of  St.  John,  has  sent  the
heavenly  messenger  to  communicate
to  man  the  everlasting  Gospel  And
why  did  the  Lord  reveal  to  John
that  this  would  be  done  1  Because
the  "tailing  away"  spoken  of  by
Paul  had  already  commenced ;  be-
cause John  in  Iris  exiled  condition
sensed  keenlj  that  the  Church
would  be  overcome  and  driven  from
the  e*rth,  and  by  way  of  encourage-
ment to  him  and  information  to  all
who  would  believe  his  word,  the
Lord  showed  him  what  should  take
place  in  the  future.  The  Jews  had
^ejected  the  Messiah,  they  had  cru-
cified the  Lord  of  life  and  glory  and
they  had  also  persecuted  and  taken
the  life  of  the  Apostles  and  others
w  ho  were  left  to  represent  his  cause;
and  John  only  was  left,  and  they
tried  to  take  his  life ;  but,  in  conse-
quence of  the  promise  lie  had  re-
ceived from  the  Savior  prior  to  his
death,  they  could  not  do  it  :  and
hence  they  exiled  him  on  this  island
— called  Patraos.  When  they  re-
jected the  Gospel,  they  rejected  it  in
all  its  power  and  glory,  its  blessings,
its  gifts  and  graces,  and  also  the
ordinances  of  the  Holy  Priesthood —
Aaronic  and  Melchisedek.  With
regard  to  Priesthood  we  differ  from
the  Christian  world.  We  believe
there  is  no  man  in  heaven  or  upon
earth  that  administers  in  the  ordi-
nances of  the  Gospel  without  the


Priesthood,  and  we  defy  the  whole
world  to  point  to  a  single  passage  of
scripture  from  the  time  of  father
Adam  down  to  Jesus  Christ,  showing
that  any  man  had  power  to  admin-
ister in  any  of  the  ordinances  of  the
Gospel  without  the  Priesthood
And  we  say  as  Paul  said,  in  refer-
ring to  this  delegated  power  of
heaven,  that  *(  no  man  taketh  this
honor  to  himself,  but  he  that  is
called  of  God,  as  was  Aaron  : n  and
he  was  called  of  God  through  Moses
with  whom  he  communicated.
Therefore  men  cannot  legally  and
authoritatively  go  forth  to  preach
the  Gospel  until  they  are  sent ;  and
men  cannot  hear  the  word  and  be
converted  by  the  same  unless  they
hear  it  through  the  mouth  of  a
preacher  who  is  sent,  and  who  has
power  to  administer  in  the  ordi-
nances of  the  Gospel.

The  Lord  has  established  his
Church  and  his  kingdom  ;  and  we
have  been  laboring  now  fifty  years
and  upwards  in  carrying  out  the
instructions  which  he  has  revealed
unto  us  in  connection  with  this
work.  And  as  men  were  formerly,
so  we  have  been  commanded  to  go
forth  and  call  upon  men  to  believe
ou  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to
repent  and  be  baptised  for  the  re-
mission of  their  sins  ;  and  as  they
were  authorized,  so  have  we  been
authorized  to  say  to  all  men  who
comply  with  these  requirements,
that  they  shall  receive  the  Holy
Ghost  But  say  the  Christian  sects,
these  things  are  no  longer  necessary,
these  outward  ordinances  are  not
now  essential  to  salvation.  We
believe  they  are.  In  this,  of  course,
we  differ  from  them,  and  we  have  a
perfect  right  to,  Jesus  himself  went
to  John  when  he  was  baptizing  in
Jordan,  and  requested  baptism  of
him.  John  demurred,  thinking
himself  unworthy,  but  Jesus  satis-


fied  him  by  saying,  "Suffer  it  to  be
so  now;  for  thus  it  becometh  us  to
fulfil  .all  righteousness.  Then  he
suffered  him."

Baptism  by  immersion  is  one  of
the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  and
the  law  had  to  be  com  plied  with,
And  hence  Jesns  set  the  example.
But  the  Jews,  as  a  nation,  rejected
him  and  his  teachings ;  and  the
Apostles  were  commanded  to  turn
to  the  Gentiles.  I  say  Gentiles — we
are  all  Gentiles  in  a  national  capacity;
and  the  same  Gospel  that  was
taught  to  the  /ews  was  preached  to
the  Gentiles,  It  never  varied  one
iota  ;  it  was  sent  to  them  with  all
its  gifts  and  graces,  its  priesthoods,
powers  and  ordinances  without  any
change  whatever.  And  Paul  in
warning  the  Gentiles,  told  them  to
take  heed  and  fear  lest  they  fall,
through  the  same  example  of  unbe-
lief ;  for  if  God  spared  not  the  natu
ral  branches,  which  were  the  Jews,
why  should  he  spare  them  who
were  the  wild  branches  grafted
into  the  olive  tree.  We  all
understand  that  the  blindness  in
part  which  happened  to  Israel  and
which,  Paul  said,  should  continue
until  the  fulness  uf  the  Gentiles
come  in,  did  befall  the  churches
which  had  been  built  up  by  the
Apostles,  and  that  the  Gospel,  with
its  gifts  and  graces,  its  Prophets  and
Apostles,  has  long  since  ceased
to  exist  among  men.  The  Gen-
tiles fell  through  the  same  example
of  unbelief,  until  today  a  man  is
looked  upon  as  a  deceiver  who  will
rise  up  and  declare  himself  a  be-
liever in  the  same  Gospel  that  Jesus
and  his  Apostles  preached.  Paul
told  the  people  in  his  day  that  God
hath  set  in  the  Church  first,  Apos-
tles, secondarily  prophets,  thirdly,
teachers,  after  that  miracles,  then
gifts  of  healings,  helps,  governments,
diversities  of  tongues;  and  they  were


for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the
edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ,  for
the  perfecting  of  the  Saints,  until
all  come  to  a  perfect  man  in  the
stature  of  Christ.  But  the  Chris-
tian world  do  not  believe  in  these
things ;  they  say  they  are  done  away,
as  not  beiiii;  needed.  We  believe
differently,  and  we  have  a  right  to  ;
we  say  the  Lord  lias  restored  the
Gospel  as  it  was  preached  to  the
Jews  and  the  Gentiles  by  Jesus  and
the  Apostles,  and  we  know  whereof
we  speak:  Joseph  Smith  received
the  ministration  of  angels,  in  fultil-
ment  of  the  revelations  of  St.  John,
and  we  know  it.  He  received  the
keys  of  the  Holy  Priesthood  under
the  hands  of  John  the  Baptist,  and
under  the  hands  of  Peter,  James
ami  John,  and  from  that  day,
through  the  preaching  and  admin-
istrations of  the  Elders  o+*  this
Church.  fcGod  has  given  a  testimony
to  hundreds  of  thousands,  of  the
truth  of  this  work.  We  believe
this,  and  we  have  received  the  tes-
timony for  ourselves  of  its  divinity.

In  looking  upon  this  congregation
assembled  in  this  beautiful  building,
I  am  reminded  of  the  mercy  and
goodness  of  God  to  us  as  a  people.
On  the  24th  of  July,  1847,  1  came
here  in  company  with  the  pioneers.
At  that  time  Utah  was  a  barren  de-
sert, there  was  no  mark  of  the  white
man,  everything  was  wild  and
barren.  To  day  you  may  travel
thousands  of  miles  through  this
country,  and  you  find  towns  and
cities,  farms,  gardens  and  orchards,
temples,  and  tabernacles,  and
sch  no  I  houses,  and  large  congrega-
tions of  the  people,  and  hosts  of
children.  And  where  did  all  these
people  come  from,  and  what
prompted  them  to  come  here  ]  You
came  from  your  native  lands,  from
the  different  civilized  nations,  im*
pelled  by  the  spirit  of  the  gathering


80


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


which  God  has  restored  in  connec-
tion with  the  Gospel ;  and  you  came
in  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies  of
Isaiah.  Ezekiel,  Jeremiah  and  David,
and  others  of  the  Prophets  who  have
spoken  of  you,  The  question  that
arises  in  the  minds  of  persons  who
pass  tli rough  our  country  and  see
the  labors  of  this  people  is,  are  we
the  dupes  of  impostors?  Was  Joseph
Smith  a  deceiver  ?  There  is  a  way
to  test  this,  and  we  have  tested
it  to  our  satisfaction.  The  great
promise  made  to  us  when  we  first
heard  the  preaching  of  the  Elders  of
this  Church  was,  that  if  we  obeyed
certain  requirements  of  the  Gospel,
we  should  receive  the  Holy  Ghost ;
and  this  same  promise  is  extended
to  the  world  of  mat i kind  by  our  El-
ders who  are  still  proclaiming  these
glad  tidings  of  great  joy.  If  that
promise  had  fallen  we,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  would  not  have  been
here  to-day  ;  ami  Utah  would  doubt-
less be  as  barren  as  it  was  when  we
found  it  in  T47.  There  is  no  ques-
tion in  our  mind,  as  to  the  divinity
of  the  work  in  which  we  are  engaged.
The  Christian  world  questions  it.
This,  of  course,  we  cannot  help,

I  want  to  say  to  the  Latter-day
Saints,  you  are  living  in  an  im-
portant and  interesting  time  in
your  history,  a  time  when  the
principles  of  the  everlasting  Gospel
are  being  brought  prominently  be-
fore the  world,  anil  it  is  hut  natural
that  they  should  find  their  opposite
in  misrepresentation  and  persecu-  I
tion.  Jesus  himself,  together  with
every  servant  of  God  of  every  age,
while  endeavoring  to  bless  and  save
mankind  through  teaching  correct
principles,  made  themselves  un-
popular and  become  the  subjects  of
hatred  and  persecution.  And  there
is  no  doctrine  so  unpoplar  to-day
as  the  principles  of  life  and  salva-
tion as  God  has  revealed  them ;  and


there  are  none  so  unpopular  as  those-
who  believe  in  and  practice  the
same.  Truth  revealed  from  heaven
for  the  salvation  of  mankind  al ways
was  unpopular,  and  always  will  be
so  long  as  the  world  exists  in  its
present  state.  Men  do  not  want
truth,  and  therefore  they  reject  it,
and  they  reject  it  to-day  for  the-
same  reason  that  men  rejected  it
formerly,  because  they  love  dark-
ness  rather  than  light.  If  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  expect  to  become
popular  in  this  day  and  generation,
they  will  find  themselves  greatly
mistaken.  There  is  a  warfare  going
on  between  truth  and  error,  and
this  warfare  will  continue  until  He-
shall  reign  whose  right  it  is  to  reign.

I  also  want  to  say  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  you  should  exercise
faith  in  God;  you  should  make  your-
selves acquainted  with  the  revela-
tions of  God,  and  with  the  promises
He  has  made  to  His  people,  fully
believing  that  all  will  come  to  pass
as  He  has  spoken  it.  And  each
man  claiming  a  standing  among  this
people  should  do  his  duty  to  the
trust  committed  to  our  charge.  Our
responsibility  is  great  before  God
and  man.  Any  people  into  whose
hands  is  committed  a  dispensation
of  the  Gospel  has  a  great  responsi-
bility. And  Joseph  Smith,  Brigham
Young,  and  the  Twelve  Apostles,
would  have  been  under  condemns
tion  and  would  have  rendered  them-
selves liable  to  the  curse  of  God  if
they  had  not  gone  forth  into  the
world  and  borne  record  of  this  work.
Paul  was  placed  in  the  same  posK
tion  and  he  sensed  it,  as  is  inferred
from  these  words  :  "  Woe  unto  me
if  I  preach  not  the  Gospel"  Ami
this  is  our  position  to-day  in  relation
to  the  world.

I  have  been  with  this  Church
almost  from  its  organization,  and
have  passed  through  the  various


man's  free  agency,  etc


81


scenes  of  its  early  history,  I  have
seen  its  rise  and  progress,  and  have
witnessed  the  power  of  God  mani-
fested in  behalf  of  this  people  ;  and
I  want  to  bear  my  testimony  that
the  God  of  heaven  has,  in  fulfilment
of  the  prophecies,  set  His  hand  to
establish  His  Church  and  kingdom
in  the  earth,  which  means  no  more
and  no  less  than  His  rule  and  His
government,  and  that  He  will  accom-
plish it.  and  there  is  no  power  upon
the  earth  or  under  the  earth  that
can  stay  the  progress  of  Almighty
God.  But  notwithstanding  this,
we  expect  to  meet  with  opposition,
with  the  hatred  of  the  world  ;  this,
in  fact,  is  the  legacy  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints.  Said  the  Savior  to  his
Apostles,  I  have  chosen  you  out  of
the  world,  therefore  the  world  hates
you  ;  if  you  were  of  the  world,  the
world  would  love  you  as  its  own.
It  hated  me  before  it  hated  you.
And  what  are  we  going  to  do  1
We  are  going  to  trust  in  God.
I  have  no  fears  myself;  I
have  never  had  since  I  heard
the  first  Gospel  sermon  by  the  El-
ders of  this  Church  ;  for  I  know
that  God  lives,  and  that  he  has  set
his  hand  to  establish  his  kingdom,
and  it  will  continue  to  grow  and
increase  until  it  shall  fill  the  whole
earth.  He  has  called  upon  us  to
proclaim  to  the  whole  world  the
Gospel  of  Christ,  and  we  are  doing
it  as  fast  as  circumstances  and  wis-
dom permits ;  and  we  promise  all
men  what  the  first  Elders  promised
us,  that  is,  if  they  yield  to  the
requirements  they  shall  know  for
themselves  whether  this  work  is  of
God  or  man.  Is  there,  I  ask,  any
man  or  set  of  men  dare  make  such
promises  to  their  fellow-men  1  I
answer,  nay ;  neither  could  we  do
it,  did  we  not  know  that  God  would
back  op  the  word  by  imparting  the
Holy  Ghost  He  has  done  so  from
No,  6,


the  beginning,  and  these  people  can
bear  me  witness.

The  question  may  be  asked.  What
about  the  course  our  government
is  taking  with  us  t  Whatever  our
nation  does  or  may  do,  it  will  be
held  responsible  before  God  ;  and
every  emperor,  king  and  ruler  will
be  held  responsible  for  the  use  they
make  of  the  po^er  committed  into
their  hands.  The  Lord  inspired  the
men  that  framed  the  Constitution
of  our  country,  and  has  guarded
the  nation  from  its  foundation,
in  order  to  prepare  free  people
in  which  to  establish  his  kingdom.
Columbus  was  inspired  of  God  to
persevere  a*  he  did  to  discover  this
continent,  and  thus  prepare  the  way
for  a  class  of  people  upon  whom  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  moved  to  follow;
and  when  they  were  oppressed  hard
enough  thev  declared  themselves
independent,  and  by  the  help  of  God
they  established  and  have  main-
tained the  government  which  God
gave  our  forefathers,  which  is  one  of
the  best  constitutional  governments
ever  known  among  men.  One  of
its  chief  and  prominent  character*
istics  is  its  guaranty  of  religion*
liberty,  permitting  every  ma  i  to
worship  God  according  to  the  diet  it es
of  his  own  conscience  This  is  &
sacred  right  granted  by  (iod  himself
to  all  men  ;  and  when  the  rulers  or
legislators  of  any  land  undertake  by
enactments  of  law  to  step  between
man  and  his  God,  they  by  that  act
become  responsible,  and  must
sooner  or  later  be  made  to  answer
for  interfering  with  a  divine  law.
This  is  the  light  in  which  we  regard
the  position  of  our  own  nation  in
the  steps  they  have  recently  taken
against  us,  as  a  people.  However^
if  I  were  to  express  my  feelings  to
Congress  and  the  leading  men  of
our  nation,  and  to  our  enemies  and
the  whole  Christian  world,  I  would

VoL  XXIIL


U*t  KN  AL  «>K  DISCOURSES


say,  do  not  weep  for  us — and  we
are  sensible  of  the  fact  that  they
will  not — hut  rather  weep  for  your-
selves an*l  your  children,  for  as
sure  as  the  Lord  lives  the
evils  that  men  seek  to  bring  upon
us,  will  return  in  due  time  upon
their  own  heads,  heaped  up,  pressed
down  and  running  over.  For  it  is
an  eternal  law,  and  a  law  by  which
we  are  governed,  that  what  measure
we  mete,  shall  be  measured  back  to
us  again.  Our  nation  knows  not
what  awaits  it  ;  the  Christian  world
knows  not  what  awaits  it,  and  the
blind  guides  that  lead  the  people
cannot  tell  them,  and  the  result  will
be  that  both  the  people  and  their
guides  will fall into  the  ditch

together.

I  will  say  another  thing.  The
Lord  never  did  bring  judgment
upon  any  people  of  any  generation
until  he  raised  up  prophets  to  warn
them  of  the  impending  danger.  You
may  read  the  history  of  the  great
and  ancient  cities  of  Tyre  and
Sid  on,  Nineveh  and  Bahylen  and
other  cities  that  were  built  to  defv
all  time  and  every  power  but  that
of  God  ;  but  when  they  were  ripened
in  iniquity  they  were  cut  of\)  the
Lord  raised  up  men  to  warn  them
and  to  call  upon  them  to  repent  j
but  when  they  rejected  them  the
Lord  brought  judgment  upon  them
and  they  were  cut  off  in  their  sins.
And  so  it  will  he  with  our  nation
and  all  others,  when  they  shall  be
fully  warned  and  they  reject  the
message  that  is  sent  to  them.  The
heavens  are  full  of  judgment  and
as  the  prophets  have  said,  they  will
•commence  at  the  House  of  the  Lord
and  then  go  to  the  nations  of  the
earth*  These  things  are  beginning
to  make  themselves  manifest  and  the
righteous  and  pure  in  heart  can  see
it.

I  want  to  see  the  Latter-day  Saints

*1  i !  jl  iC  Jo  v


live  their  religion ,  keep  their  faith
and  do  their  duty,  and  trust  in  God.
And  if  men  persecute  you  for  the
sake  of  your  religion,  what  can  you
do  ? You  can  go  to  God,  and  make
your  wants  known  to  him ;  and  that
is  our  duty  as  Latter-day  Saints,
And  as  to  our  nation,  they,  as  well
as  we,  are  in  the  baud*  of  God  \  and
I  have  nothing  to  say  about  them.
God  will  deal  with  t  lie  in  ;  and  what
they  sow  they  ™  ill  reap,  and  he  will
deal  with  us  upon  the  same  prin-
ciple. The  history  of  the  ancient
inhabitants  of  this  land,  as  it  has
come  down  to  us  through  the  mercy
and  goodness  of  God,  fully  testifies
to  this  principle ;  as  long  as  they  did
what  was  right  the  blessings  of  God
followed  them,  but  after  they  be-
came disobedient  and  wicked  the
hand  of  God  rested  upon  them.  At
times  when  I  reflect  upon  the  great
change  that  has  taken  place  in  our
own  land  in  the  morals  of  the  peo-
ple during  my  time,  I  feel  in  my
spirit  to  mourn  and  to  fear  as  to  the
consequences. I  was  between  -0
and  21  years  of  age  before  I  heard
of  a  murder  having  been  committed
in  the  whole  of  the  New  England
States. The  ^rst  murder  that  was
committed  in  our  land  from  the
time  I  could  remember  until  I
gained  my  majority,  was  committed
in  New  Haven  ;  and  I  well  remem-
ber how  the  news  of  it  shucked  all
New  England. What  effect  has
such  news  upon  the  people  of  the
same  region  to-day  ?  Throughout
the  whole  of  Christendom  to  day,
murder,  whoredom,  blasphemy,  and
their  kindred  evils  and  vices  are
indulged  in,  and  unbelief  reigns  in
the  hearts  of  men* Men  profess  to
believe  in  the  Bible  ;  but  confront
them  with  the  doctrines  and  prophe-
cies it  contains,  and  they  will  at  once
either  raise  a  doubt  as  to  their  real
meaning  or  they  will  openly  deny


MAN'S  FREE  AGJfiNCY,  ETC.


them  ;  and  the  few  that  accept  the
literal  meaning  of  God's  word,  and
confess  him  and  acknowledge  him
in  all  things,  do  it  at  the  risk  of
their  reputation,  and  some  of  them,
even  of  their  rights  as  American
citizens*.  What  the  result  of  all
this  will  be  is  already  written  ;  and
it  will  come  to  pass  as  sure  as  the
Lord  hath  spoken  it..

I  rejoice  in  the  Gospel  of  the  Son
of  God  as  he  has  revealed  it  in  this
our  day  ;  I  rejoice  in  the  organiza-
tion of  the  church  and  kingdom  of
God,  and  in  the  revelations  of  hea-


ven. I  read  them  with  a  great  deal
of  interest,  for  I  know  they  are  true ;
and,  therefore,  I  look  forward  with
assurance  to  their  fulfilment  in  the
earth #  We  have  but  a  little  time  to
spend  on  earth  even  though  we  live
to  be  a  hundred  years  of  age,  and
we  have  no  time  to  waste.  We  should
live  in  such  a  manner  that  the  Spirit
and  blessing  of  God  may  attend  us ;
and  then  when  we  cease  our  labors
here  we  shall  pass  hence  to  continue
them  in  the  same  cause  iof  salvation
and  redemption,  and  all  will  be  well
with  us.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  APOSTLE  Eli  AST  US  SNOW,

Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  Salt  Lake  City,  Friday

Afternoon,  April  7,  1882,


(Reported  by  Geo.  F,  0  ibis  J


THE  LAST  DISPENSATION — THE  SAINTS'  RELIGION  PRACTICAL — HOSTILITY
TO  GOD'S  WORK— DIVISIONS  IN  SECTARIAN  CHURCHES — UNITY  OF
THE  SAINTS  —  EARLY  HISTORY  OF  UTAH  —  k< 'MORMON"  THRIFT  AND
ENTERPRISE — THE  ONE-MAN  POWER — GOD*S  PEOPLE  A  FREE  PEOPLE
— INCREASE  OF  CORRUPTION — THE  SAINTS  HOPEFUL.


I  regard  the  mission  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  as  the  most  important
that  has  fallen  to  the  lot  of  man
because  we,  as  the  people  of  God,
live  in  the  most  important  period  of
the  world's  age — the  dispensation  of
the  fulness  of  times,  in  which  the
God  of  heaven  has  set  his  hand  a
second  time  to  recover  his  people,
the  house  of  Israel ;  to  lay  the  foun- !


dation  of  the  fulfilment  of  the
promises  made  to  the  fathers
through  Moses  and  the  Prophets,
and  to  bring  to  pass  the  covenants
made  with  Abraham,  Isaac  and
Jae6b,  and  those  made  with  Joseph
the  son  of  Jacob,  concerning  his
seed.  The  Book  of  Mormon  gives
a  brief  history  of  a  portion  of  the
house  of  Joseph  who  came  to  this


84


journal  1 1 v  hisrounsKs.


land  from  Palestine,  their  native
land  ;  and  it  not  only  gives  an  ac-
count of  this  people  but  it  foretells
their  future,  A  great  future  lies
before  this;  people  in  connection  with
the  Latter-Way  work.

Our  mission  is  nut  a  mission  of
blood  ;  it  is  not  a  mission  of  war,
of  strife  or  contention,  but  a  mis-
sion of  peace  on  earth  ami  good  will
to  men  ;  a  mission  to  bring  li'e  and


among  thorns,  and  the  cares  of  the
world  and  the  deceit  fulness  of  riches
choke  the  word,  and  it  becomes  un-
fruitful* But  blessed  are  those  who
break  up  the  fallow  ground  of  their
hearts, thereby preparing  them-
selves by  suitable  reflection,  medi-
tation, humility  and  prayer,  over-
coming the  evil  that  is  in  them  by
tike  good,  that  the  seed  when  sown,
may  take  deep  root  ami  spring  forth
salvation  unto  the  children  of  men  j  ami  bear  precious  fruit,  some  thirty,
who  will  receive  it ;  a  mission  to
make  known  the  things  that  Ood
has  revealed  for  the  happiness,  glory
and  exaltation  of  his  children,  both
in  this  world  and  the  world  to  come*
And  what  God  has  revealed  to  us,
which  we  call  our  religion,  is  not
only  theoretical  but  eminently  prac-
tical. It  could  not  be  otherwise
anil  be  the  Gospel  of  life  and  salva-
tion. A  religion  that  is  exclusively
theoretical,  that  is  merely  a  matter
of  faith producing no  legitimate
works  or  fruits  of  that  faith  is  dead.
There  are  many  'lead  forms  of  reli-
gion in  the  world  ;  and  as*a  matter
of  course  they  are  without  force  and
effect. But  the  Gospel  of  the  Son
of  God  revealed  anew  from  heaven
in  our  age  and  time,  and  which  his
people  have  espoused, is  a  living
faith,  producing  in  its  votaries  its
legitimate  fruits — love,  joy,  peace
and  good  works. I  am  sorry  to  say,
however,  that  we  are  not  all  exam-
pies  of  that  living  laith  to  the  extent
that  fiod  requires  at  our  hands.
In  this  respect  it  is  with  us  as  it  was
with others who preceded us  ;
some  of  the  seed  has  fallen  by  the
way  side,  producing*  little  effect  in
the  in  that  received  it ;  some  has
fallen  in  stony  places,  and  as  an-
ciently,  such  rejoice  for  the  time
being,  but  alas  !  when  tribulation  or


some  sixty,  and  some  one  hundred
fold,  according  to  the  depth  of  the
soil  and  the  strength  ami  cultiva-
tion of  the  mind.

I  said  our  religion  was  eminently
practical,  as  true  religion  cannot  he
separated  from  true  practice.  It
teaches  us  to  visit  the  fatherless  and
the  widow  in  their  affliction,  and  to
keep  ourselves  unspotted  from  the
world  ;  it  teaches  charity  and  love
one  toward  another,  and  to  assist  to
bear  each  other's  burdens,  and  be
one  in  Christ  Jesus*  Just  before  the
Savior  was  offered  up  upon  the  cross
he  prayed  to  his  Father  in  behalf  of
his  disciples  and  those  who  should
believe  on  him  through  their  minis-
trations, that  they  might  be  one
with  him  as  he  was  one  with  the
Father.

Now  it  is  quite  a  fine  thing  in  the
estimation  of  the  Christian  world  to
preach  about  Jesus  and  his  doc-
trines ;  but  when  it  comes  to  practice
it  is  quite  another  thing.  One  of
the  main  objects  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  is  to  become  united,  both
s  uritually  and  temporally.  The
clergymen  of  America  who  have  been
foremost  in  working  up  the  late
furore  against  the  "  Mormon  *
people,  who  have  met  in  solemn
conclave  and  dictated  resolutions
and  gotten  up  memorials  to  Con-
persecution  arises,  they  having  not  gross,  and  who  have  traveled  and
much  depth  of  soil,  are  easily  up-  visited  the  noted  cities  as  lecturers,
rooted. Some again has fallen among  whom  may  be  mentioned


THJi  LAST  mSPENSATIU*,  KiU.


the  celebrated  Parson  Newman  and
the  celebrated — what  shall  I  sav  !

-to

— well,  Mr.  Schuyler  Colfax,  and
others  have  arou&ed  the  nation  and
moved  the  mom  ben  of  Congress  to
hostile  legislation  against  the  Lat-
ter day  Saints,  Their  general  de-
claration has  been  that  polygamy
— though  polygamy  was  the  war-cry
— was  not  to  be  dreaded  like  "  Mor-
mon" unity.  They  term  it  priestly
influence,  or  the  influence  of  the
"  Mormon11  hierarchy.  In  reflecting
upon  this  declaration  which  was
freely  expressed  on  numerous  occa-
sions during  last  winter  and  spring,
in  the  tirades  made  against  the
Latter-day  Saints,  it  has  caused
some  curious  reflectious.  What
would  have  been  the  result  if  the
Methodists,  the  Presbyterians,  the
Baptists  and  all  the  prominent  de-
nominations of  America,  had  been
true  disciples  of*.  Christ,  and  had
come  under  that  rule  laid  down  in
the  Savior's  prayer — if  they  had  all
become  one  in  Oh  list  as  he  was  one
with  the  Father]  What  would
have  been  the  result  1  Methiuks
things  would  be  very  different  in
the  history  of  American  government
from  what  we  now  see.  We  will
refer,  for  example,  to  the  condition
of  things  prior  to  the  late  civil  war,
and  about  the  time  the  republican
party  incorporated  in  their  platform
at  the  Philadelphia  convention  in
1856,  the  celebrated  plank  known
as  the  twin  relics — in  winch  they
pledged  themselves  to  exterminate
the  twin  relics,  slavery  and  polygamy.
What  was  the  condition  of  the  reli-
gious sects  of  America  at  that  timet
Those  who  are  familiar  with  the
history  of  those  times  will  remember
that  preparatory  to  that  great  strug-
gle which  resulted  in  the  great  civil
war,  there  had  been  a  complete  sepa-
ration and  two  distinct  organiza-
tions of  all the  prominent  sects


of  America.  The  Methodist  church
was  divided  into  the  Methodist
church  north  and  the  MethodisG
church  south ;  the  Presbyterians
were  divided  into  the  Presbyterian
church  north  and  the  Presbyterian
church  south  ;  the  Baptists,  the
Campbellites  ami  the  other  various
sects  were  divided  in  like  maimer,
the  Mason  and  Dickson  line,  as  it
was  called,  was  the  line  of  division
between  the  churches  north  and  the
churches  south  ;  and  substantially
the  same  line  marked  the  boundary
between  the  southern  confederacy
and  northern  States  during  the
war,  for  the  division  commenced  in
the  churches,  and  it  was  the  various
religious  sects  of  America  that
worked  up  the  war.  They  divided
one  against  another,  and  brought
ou  the  war.  And  when  the  North-
ern and  Southern  armies  were  march-
ing against  and  slaying  each  other
by  hundreds  of  thousands,  every
regiment  and  division  of  the  army
ou  both  sides  were  encouraged  by
the  prayers  and  preaching  of  their
respective  chaplains  of  the  various
sects  on  both  sides,  each  praying  for
the  success  of  their  arms,  that  each
side  might  succeed  in  using  up  the
opposite  side-
Now  imagine  them,  for  a  moment,
to  be  the  true  disciples  of  Christ,
Ministers  of  the  true  and  everlast-
ing Gospel  holding  power  and
authority  from  him.  What  would
have  been  the  result  if  the  Lord  had
heard  the  prayers  of  the  religious
elements  of  these  two  contending
parties  1  The  only  thing  we  can
chink  of  as  expressing  the  idea,  is
the  old  fable  ot  the  Kilkenny  cats,
whk::,  it  is  said,  tough t  each  other
and  devouied  each  other  all  but  the
tails,  and  they  began  to  jump  at
each  other.  Prom  the  results  oue
would  suppose  that  the  Lord  heard
the  prayers  on  both  sides  to  a  con-


JOURNAL  UF


DISCOURSES.


siderable  extent  But  it  is  too
serious  a  matter  to  be  treated
in  a  jocose  style.  And,  yet,  one  can
hardly  resist  the  temptation,  it  is
so  ludicrous  to  see  people  professing
the  same  holy  religion,  to  be  follow-
ers of  the  meek  and  lowly  Jesus
and  his  righteousness,  and  preachers
of  his  Gospel  arrayed  on  each  side,
stirring  up  the  people  to  war,  urging
them  on,  and  praying  to  the  same
God  for  the  success  of  each  others'  I
arms.  Now,  I  ask,  is  this  an  eusam-  '
pie  of  Christian  unity  such  as  the
Savior  prayed  for,  when  he  asked
the  Father  that  all  that  should  be-
lieve on  him  through  the  words  of
his  disciples  might  become  one  even
as  lie  and  the  Father  were  one!

The  Latter-day  Saints,  as  I  have
before  remarked,  are  far  from  bffl&ft
as  yet  what  the  Lord  requires  them
to  he,  But  that  spirit  which  ac-
companies the  fulness  of  the  Gospel,
and  which  the  Latter-day  Saints
have  received  through  the  preach-
ing of  the  Gospel  and  through
obedience  to  its  requirements,  has  |
so  far  made  cheir  hearts  is  one,
causing  them  to  see  eye  to  eye,  and
to  gather  together  upon  this  land  of  i
Joseph,  that  they  might  learn  more
fully  the  ways  of  the  Lord  and  walk
in  his  paths,  and  cultivate  the
Christian  unity  which  the  Savior
prayed  for.  And  this  appears  to  be
the  head  and  front  of  our  offending.
Polygamy  is  ostensibly  the  cry  ;  but
what  i  ejecting  man  that  is  posted
in  the  history  of  the  times,  believe*
that  this  has  a  particle  of  influence
upon  our  statesmen  1  They  admit,
according  to  their  own  showing,  that
there  is  more  immorality,  depravity,  ;
whoredom,  and  the  terrible  conse-
quences of  the  social  evil  in  one  of
the  great  cities  of  the  Union  in  a  I
single  year  than  has  been  in  Utah
ever  since  it  has  been  founded
They  know  this  full  well  They


know  that  we  are  a  people  of  energy,.  \
of  industry  ami  honest  labor,  a
people  who  do  not  labor  with  a  view
and  desire  to  build  ourselves  up  at
the  expense  and  ruin  of  our  neigh-
bors ;  but  a  people  who  labor  to
gather  from  the  elements  around  us,,
producing  the  comforts  of  life  for
ourselves  and  families.  They  re-
cognize in  us  a  people  who  have
planted  a  flourishing  commonwealth
in  the  heart  of  the  great  American
desert,  and  made  it  possible  to  popu-
late the  surrounding  Territories*

In  1847  the  standard  of  the
American  nation  was  planted  ou  this*
Temple  block.  I  assisted  in  plant-
ing it  j  and  many  around  me  to-day
participated  in  those  early  scenes.
At  the  same  time  the  country  lying
west  of  the  Sierra  Nevada  and  be-
tween it  and  the  Pacific  Coast,  was
held  under  the  American  flag  by  the
Mormon  Battalion,  w  ho  under  Gene-
ral Kearney  captured  the  State  of
California  froir  the  Mexican  gov-
ernment and  held  it  for  the  United
States  government  until  this  coun-
try was  ceiled  to  the  United  States
by  treaty  on  the  22nd  of  February,
IS 48.  The  stars  and  stripes  were
planted  between  the  Itocky  Moun-
tains on  the  east  and  the  Sierra
Nevadas  west  by  "Mormon1*  colo-
nies, and  west  to  the  Pacific  coast
by  the  "  Mormon  Battalion/*  and
the  country  held  for  the  American
government.  We  proceeded  to  the
establishment  and  organization  of
civil  government.  This  great  basin
country  between  the  mountains  was
incorporated  into  the  State  of  Dese-
ret,  a  provisional  government  was
organized  for  the  State  of  Deseret,  ;
a  republican  constitution  was  framed
and  adopted  by  the  people ;  the
country  was  divided  into  counties  j
and  precincts,  local  govern  meat
was  organized,  laws  adopted  and
delegates  sent  to  Congress  to  ask  for


au mission  into  the  Union.  At  the
same  lime  lite  gold  hunters  were
flocking  to  California  after  the
li  Mormon  Battalion''  revealed  the
first  gold  which  they  brought  to
light  while  dragging  Captain  butters
mill  race.  Some  of  the  men  are
still  in  our  midst  who  brought  about
these  results,  who  lirsfc  revealed  to
the  astonished  world  the  gold  of
California,  and  who  raised  the  first
furore,  which  resulted  in  thousands
flocking  to  the  Pacific  coast.  And,
mark  you,  the  first  colony  of  settlers
upon  that  Pacific  coast  after  the
capture  of  that  country  through  the
valor  of  the  "Mormon"  Battalion,
was  a  **  Mormon"  colony  ship-
ped from  the  New  England  States,
who  took  with  them  a  printing  press,
and  planted  their  feet  upon  the  shores
of  ban  Francisco,  and  there  issued
the  Calif  or  nil  Star,  in  1847,  which
was  the  first  publication  in  the
English  language  west  of  the  iiocUy
Mountains  —  the  first  free  press
hailing  the  American  flag  and  pro-
claiming American  lihertv,  the
principles  of  tiee  government ;  and
Lit  the  same  time  we  planted  a  free
press  in  this  city,  whence  was  issued
the  Dk*ki*kt  Nlws,  proclaiming
those  principles  to  all  the  woilt.

Both  California  and  Deseret  pre-
seated  themselves  at  the  same  tune,
through  their  delegate.-,  knocking
at  the  door  of  Cougiess,  praying  for
admission  into  the  Union.  The
prayer  of  California  was  accepted  ;
that  of  Deseret  was  rejected.

Jesus  had  occasion  to  ask  this
question  of  the  Jews:  ll  a  son
shall  a*k  bread  of  any  of  you  that
is  a  lather,  will  ye  give  him  a  *tone  f
or  ii  he  ask  a  rish,  will  he
give  him  a  serpent  2  It  migiit  iA
become  me  perhaps,  to  apply  these
words  to  our  national  uovvriiiueut-j
but  the  tacts  are  that  when  we  pre-
sented ourselves  as  trie  Stale  of


Deseret,  precisely  on  equal  footing
with  that  of  California,  with  equally
a  democratic  government  and  repub-
lican constitution,  both  of  which
States  had  been  organized  out  of  the
old  Mexican  States  of  Upper  Califor-
nia, and  which  had  been  recently
captured  from  the  Mexican  govern-
ment, and  presented  themselves  to
Congress  o*i  equal  footing  j  one  was
accepted,  the  other  rejected.  In-
stead of  granting  to  Deseret  a  State
government,  Congress  gave  us  a
territorial  form  of  government  under
the  Organic  act  of  ISoO.  it  is  true
it  extended  to  us  certain  rights  of
self-government,  but  to  a  limited
ex  lent  We  had  the  right  of  repre-
sentation in  the  Legislative  Assem-
bly, but  those  rights  were  clipped
by  the  absolute  veto  of  a  Federal
Governor;  nor,  indeed,  is  the  abso-
lute veto  of  a  Federal  Governor  the
only  veto  Jield  over  the  Territorial
Legislature,  Congress  itself  reserv-
ing to  itself  a  right  to  annul  the
acts  of  the  Legislative  Assembly,
though  receiving  the  signature  of
the  Governor.  But  if  the  Governor
choose*  to  wiihlmld  hi*  signature  no
matter  how  wholesome  or  necessary
the  measure,  it  cannot  become  law,
nor  would  lie  be,  under  the  Organic
Act,  required  to  assign  any  reason
for  it,  The  mere  whim  of  a  man,
a  stranger  u>  our  country  w  ho  lias
but  little,  if  any,  practical  know-
ledge of  our  nee  is,  aad  who  himself
is  not.  a  tax- payer,  probably  may
ueprivea  wnolecn  nun  unity  or  people
oi  Uitrir  legal  rights  hucn  is  the
territorial  lonu  ot  government,  not
of  all  Territories,  lor  with  the  excep-
tion ot  U tali  and  Aew  Mexico,  this
ai.K>i*.ULe  veto  power  dues  not  exist  on
American  &ou.  Other  territories  as
well  the  2MUie>,  and  the  United
btaiea,  may,  tnrutigh  a  two* thirds
vote  of  their  legis  lata  le,  pass  any  mea-
sure over  the  veto  ot  its  executive.


88


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


But  what  does  this  signify  ?  It
says  to  us,  H  we  are  not  willing  to
trust  you  with  the  rights  and  privi-  i
leges  of  self -government  in  common  .
with  other  American  citizens;  and
it 13 deemed  advisable that  we
should  hold  this  cheek  upon  your
legislature." But  notwithstanding
we  have  been  shut  out  from  State-
hood, we  have  prospered  and  grown  j
into  a  flourishing community  of
people.

On  several  occasions  we  have
renewed  our  efforts  by  appealing  to
Congress  for  the  rights  of  self-gov-
ernment j  but  on  every  occasion  we
have  been  put  off.  But  we  have
continued  to  prosper,  and  yet  we
have  receive*!  no  aid  from  the  gene-
ral government  in  establishing  and
maintaining  schools,  as  other  por-
tions of  the  country  have.  We
have  built  our  school-houses  and
maintained  our  schools,  and  educated
our  children  as  best  we  could.  And
here  let  me  say  that  Utah  will  com-
paie  favorably  in  educational  mat-
ters with  any  portion  of  the  United
States,  even  the  older  and  richer
States  ;  and  while  the  number  of
children  is  three  times  that  of  other
populations,  yet,  they  are  all  en-
joying the  benefits  of  a  common
school  education  at  least ;  anil  as  the
higher  schools  aie  being  established
the  facilities  for  more  extensive
education  are  accessible.

We  have  opened  up  fauns  ami
established  towns  and  cities  over
tins  vast  count  iy,  of  5U0  miles  in
extent.  We  have  established  mills
and  have  produced  the  various
cereals  and  vegetables  and  fruits,
ami  r;  i-ed  the  href  and  mutton,  and
the  uoui  to  sii|  ,  a  vnii  factories  and
cotton,  to  manufacture  to  a  con-
siderable extent,  the  clothing  that
we  wear  ;  and  we  have  manufactured
to  a  considerable  extent  our  fann-
ing implements, and  yet  we  are


under  the  necessity  of  largely
importing  manufactured  goods.
And  t  o-i  lay,  Utah  enjoys  pros-
perity equal,  if  nut  superior  to  any
other  Territory,  and,  indeed,  some
of  the  Western  b  tales.

Now  these  are  facts  patent  to  the
world.  And  with  such  facts  can
they  in  their  inmost  souls  look  upon
this  people  as  a  vicious  people,  or  as
a  wicked,  licentious  people,  as  a
people  who  are  influenced  by  worldly
considerations  and  fleshly  lusts  ?
Are  these  the  works  of  the  licentious
and  dissolute  ?  We  invite  the
people  of  the  United  States  to  attend
our  Sabbath  School  Unions  and
attend  the  public  gatherings  of  the
people  where  they  congregate  ;  we
invite  their  statesmen  and  honorable
men  and  women  of  all  classes  to
come  and  visit  us  and  learn  facts  as
they  exist,  instead  of  swallowing
greedily  the  malicious  calumnies
and  misrepresentations  set  afoot
concerning  us  by  those  who  know
little  or  nothing  about  us  ;  or  if  they
have  known  anything  about  us,  they
have  sold  themselves  to  the  Devil
long  since,  and  they  are  of  their
father  the  Devil,  who  was  a  liar  from
the  beginning,  and  his  works  they
will  do;  and  when  honest  people  come
among  us  -  we  ask  them  not  to  sit
themselves  down  and  allow  them-
selves to  be  corralled  by  the  lying
hypocrites  that  are  fanning  the
flame  of  persecution,  and  never  come
in  contact  with  the  people  they  de-
■  sire  to  know  and  understand.  Why
is  it  that  honorable  men  should  act
as  though  they  were  ashamed  to
learn  the  truth  1  Why  is  it  they
do  not  come  and  hear  and  see  for
themselves  bulk  sides  ]

We  are  accused  of  disloyalty.  We
are  accused  ot  being  governed  by
priestcraft,  and  that  we  are  subjects
of  the  one  man  power.  Here  we
would  pause  and  respectfully  say,  in


THE  LAST  DXSl'KMSATIOKj  ETC


89


the  language  of  Scripture,  "Thou
hypocrite,  first  cast  out  the  beam
out  of  thine  own  eye ;  and  then
shall  thou  bee  clearly  to  cast  out  the
mote  out  of  thy  brother's  eye/
Where,  I  would  ask,  could  we  look
for  a  more  decidedly  marked  e  xpres-
sion  of  the  one-man  power  than  in
the  case  we  have  recently  had  in  Utah,
in  which  the  Governor  gave  the
certificate  of  election  to  the  man  for
whom  the  insignificant  number  of
1,300  votes  was  cast,  withholding  it
from  the  rightful  representative  of
the  people  for  whom  18,000  votes
were  recorded  ]  The  persistency
with  which  he  and  his  friends,  the
enemies  of  this  people,  have  sought
to  fasten  this  fraud  upon  the  people
in  tliis  Territory,  not  to  say  any-
thing about  the  one-man  power
provided  for  in  the  organic  act  !
A  federal  governor,  a  stranger  sent
among  us  with  an  absolute  veto,
possessing  the  power  to  wipe  out  the
doings  oi  a  whole  session  of  the  peo-
ple1 s  representatives  !

I  will  further  direct  attention  to
all  reflecting  men  to  the  scenes  in
the  Senate  and  the  House  of
Representatives  of  tlie  United  States
when  the  Edmunds'  bill  was  put
through  under  what  is  called  the
gag  law  of  the  previous  question,
cutting  off  amendments  and  limiting
debate.  I  will  appeal  to  every
hotiest  man — if  there  be  an  honest
politician  in  the  land — by  asking,
Who  among  them  possesses  the  free-
dom of  speaking  and  acting  only  in
obedience  to  the  party  lash,  and
what  Senator  or  Representative
date  try  to  air  his  sentiments  or
vote  contrary  to  the  dictum  of  his
party  leaders  ?  Shame  upon  them
when  they  talk  about  the  exercise
of  one-man  power  in  Utah  !  If  there
is  a  people  upon  the  earth  that  exer-
cise greater  freedom  of  speech  or
action  than  the  Latter-day  Saints,


I  hope  and  pray  that  we  may  grow
until  we  become  their  equals  at
least.

Every  principle  in  our  holy  reli-
gion tends  to  freedom,  or  in  the
language  of  the  New  Testament,  the
Gospel  is  the  perfect  law  of  liberty.
The  reason  that  it  is  so  is,  because  it
lifts  the  spirits  of  man  above  the
law,  or,  in  other  words,  it  teaches
him  to  work  righteousness  and
thereby  escape  the  penalties  of  the
law,  and  enables  him  to  enjoy  that
perfect  freedom  which  God  has
ordained  for  all  flesh — the  freedom
to  do  right,  but  there  is  no  liberty
to  dc  wrong  without  incurring  the
penalty  of  that  wrong  doing,  there-
fore, every  one  who  does  wrong  must
accept  ol  the  consequences  ot  that
wrong,  and  may  expect  to  suffer  the
penalty  either  in  time  or  in  eternity.
The  Gospel  then  extends  to  us  the
freedom  to  do  rhdit,  and  the  laws  of
our  common  cuuntry  used  to  extend
this  right  and  privilege  to  its  citi-
zens. This  was  declared  by  the
fathers  in  the  famous  Declaration  of
Independence,  and  which  was  con-
solidated by  the  fathers  of  the  Con-
stitution ot  our  country,  which  was
one  (if  the  fruits  of  their  great
struggle.

This  famous  declaration  enun-
ciated the  doctrine  that  "all  just
powers  of  government  are  derived
trom  the  consent  of  the  governed
and  upon  this  principle  are  the  in-
stitutions of  our  country  founded;
and  it  is  only  through  the  guarantees
of  this  fundamental  doctrine  under-
lying our  institutions  that  there  can
be  any  freedom.  This  declaration
of  the  fathers  embodied  in  that
celebrated  instrument,  signed  on
the  4th  of  July,  1870,  is  the  em-
bodiment of  the  principles  of  civil
and  religious  liberty,  such  freedom
as  God  has  ever  taught  and  sought
to  establish  amuiig  his  children  from


90


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSKS.


the  beginning  of  the  world.  And
whenever  there  has-been  a  people
who  have  listened  to  the  voice  of
God,  they  have  been  made  free,  and
oppression  has  been  a  stranger  to
them.  The  careful  student  of  the
Bible  will  at  once  perceive  that
everything  which  God  sought  to
establish  among  his  people,  tended
to  freedom  and  the  enjoyment  of
the  common  rights  of  humanity.
Never  did  ai  dent  Israel  enjoy  as  free
and  happy  a  government  as  under
the  reign  of  the  judges,  from  the
time  Moses  l*d  them  out  of  Esrvp-
tian  bondage  until  they  clamored  for
a  king.  For  430  years  they  tri *
umphed  over  their  foes,  and  they
dwelt  in  peace  and  unity,  and  love
and  freedom  existed,  and  every  tribe
was  a  commonwealth  managing  its
own  local  affairs,  while  they  all  sus~
tained  a  central  power  which  coun-
seled and  directed  them  ;  and  their
rulers  were  judges  inspired  of  God,
were  prophets,  seers  and  revelators,
who  judged  in  righteousness,  and
exercised  no  control  over  the  liber-
ties and  consciences  of  men,  The
same  principle  is  observed  in  reading
the  history  of  the  American  conti-
nent. The  Book  of  Mormon  is
replete  with  testimony  in  this  direc-
tion. And  during  the  palmy  days
of  the  Neph ites  there  was  no  king
among  them ;  ami  that  long  and
Uappy  period  that  pieceded  the  com-
ing of  the  Savior,  and  for  hundreds
of  years  that  followed  during  the
reign  of  the  judges  among  the
Nephites,  liberty  and  freedom  and
happiness  prevailed.  And  although
they  had  at  one  time  in  accordance
with  their  pronounced  and  per-
sistent desire,  a  king — King  Ben-
jamin and  King  Mesial* —  jet,
these  were  kings  more  in  name  than
i»  fact  ;  they  were  only  patriarchs  or
fathers  among  their  people,  and  the
term  they  apply  to  them  might


quietly  have  a  tendency  to  cause
them  to  augment  power  to  them-
selves and  to  exercise  oppressive
jurisdiction  over  the  people,  and
foreseeing  this  Kir-g  Mosiah  be-
seech ed  the  j>eop!e  to  abolish  the
office,  and  establish  and  maintain
free  government,  and  elect  their
chief  judge  or  governor  by  the  voice
of  the  people.  He  reasoned  and
explained  to  them  the  dangers  which
would  result  to  them  by  having  a
ruler  who  was  not  elected  by  the
people.  When  Israel  began  to
fall  into  darkness  and  transgres-
sion, in  the  days  of  Samuel,  and
they  clamored  for  a  king  to  lead
them  to  war  and  thus  be  like  the
Gentile  nations  around  them,  it
grieved  Samuel  the  Seer  to  his
heart  ;  and  he  besought  the  people
to  desist  from  their  determination,
and  he  warned  them  of  the  dangers
that  would  follow,  telling  them  that
it  would  lead  to  oppression  and
tyranny,  and  that  taxes  would  be
levied  and  heavy  bun  lens  would  be
laid  upon  the  people  grievous  to  be
borne,  and  that  it  would  finally  lead
to  war,  bloodshed  and  bondage.  But
they  wouid  in-t  li^en,  Aini  when
the  prophet  inquired  of  the  Lord
what  ln»  should  mo,  he  answered
and  said  to  Samuel :  Hearken  unto
the  voice  of  the  people  in  all  they
say  unto  thee  :  lor  ihey  have  not
reject eil  thee,  but  they  have  rejected
me,  that  1  should  not  reign  over
them,"

Furthermore,  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon tells  that  God  will  cause  a  free
government  to  be  established  upon
this  land  in  the  latter  days,  and  in-
asmuch as  the  people  will  serve  the
Lord  they  shall  forever  be  a  free
people.  And  in  the  Doctrine  and
Covenants  is  contained  a  revelation
which  was  given  to  the  Latter  day
Saints  in  the  early  history  of  the
i  Church,  commanding  us  to  uphold


ami  maintain  the  principles  of
freedom  and  liberty,  as  claimed
by  our  fathers  and  consolidated  in
the  Constitution  of  the  United
States,  and  in  which  is  written  this
remarkable  declaration  :  "  Let  no
man  break  the  laws  of  the  land,  for
he  that  keepeth  the  laws  of  God  has
no  need  to  break  the  laws  of  the
laud  and  we  are  further  toM  that
we  should  uphold  and  maintain  that
law  which  is  the  Constitutional  law
of  the  land  ;  for,  the  Lord  said,  the
Con&titiiUoii  was  established  by  wise
men  whom  he  raised  up  for  that
purpose,  after  the  land  had  been
redeemed  by  bloodshed.  This  doc-
trine was  taught  by  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith,  in  the  early  days  of
this  people,  and  cannot  he  separated
from  the  religion  we  have  embraced  ;
and  by  the  help  of  the  Lord  we  mean
to  maintain  those  principles  to  the
end,  notwithstanding  that  some  of
our  American  statesmen  wax  wanton
in  their  feelings  and  tyrannical  in
their  acts  and  expressions,  while
religious  bigots  and  political  dema-
gogues are  undermining  the  founda-
tions of  our  American  institutions.
They  commence  to-day  upon  Utah  ;
but  it  is  not  the  first  time.  From
the  time  the  declaration  was  made
in  Philadelphia  by  the  republican
party  there  have  been  divers  de-
partures from  those  principles  em-
braced in  our  American  Constitu-
tion, Had  the  people  of  America
listened  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord
through  the  Prophet-  Joseph  Smith,
they  would  have  long  since  need
their  slaves  in  an  amicable,  an  hon-
orable and  economical  manner  wi t li-
on t  the  shedding  of  blood,  But
they  disdained  the  counsels  of  the
Lord,  The  Prophet  Joseph  pub-
lished his  views  in  pamphlet  torm
on  the  powers  and  duties  of  the
national  government  on  the  then
much-mooted  question  of  slavery,


in  which  he  treated  upon  ihe  com-
pact of  the  United  Srates  as  be-
tween the  North  and  South  on  this
question  of  slavery  ;  and  proposed
an  easy  and  honorable  plan  of  set-
tling the  question  without  violating
that  compact  or  encroaching  upon
the  rights  of  each  other ;  and  that
was,  to  negotiate  with  the  Southern
States  for  the  gradual  emancipation
of  their  slaves,  the  consideration  to
he  met  by  the  national  treasury,  and
fixing  a  time  after  which  all  children
should  be  I »orn  free,  thus  providinj
for  a  gradual  emancipation,  an<
that  they  might  not  feel  that  they
were  robbed,  and  by  their  being
gradually  emancipated  they  would
have  been  prepared  gradually  for
free  government  and  free  labor,
and  thus  the  ill  and  unpleasant
consequences  would  have  been
measurably  averted,  at  least,  of  turn-
ing looste  a  horde  of  uncultivated
people,  who  were  totally  unprepared
for  American  citizenship.  Had
they  listened  to  this  proposition,
less  than  a  tenth  part  of  the  co*t  of
the  war  would  have  freed  all  the
slaves,  and  that  too  without  blood-
shed,and  the  utter  devastation  of  the
Southern  States  would  have  been
spared.

But  we  have  seen  it.  And  fol-
lowing the  war  has  been  inaugurated
an  era  of  degeneracy  in  public
moials,  degeneracy  in  politics  and
religion,  a  degeneracy  in  the  minds
of  our  statesmen  which  has  shown
itself  in  a  desire  on  their  part  to
tamper  with  the  sacred  rights  of
man,  to  tamper  with  every  part  of
the  government,  not  even  excepting
the  Supreme  Court,  which,  up  to
the  time  of  the  civil  war,  was  looked
upon  by  the  American  people  as
almost  beyond  temptation,  and
beyond  the  probability  of  being
corrupted  or  bribed.  But  alas  !  the
Supreme  Court  itself  has  been  tain-


92


JOURNAL  UF  DISCO  UKSKS.


pered  with.  Ami  far  many  years,  j
almost  from  the  commencement  of
that  elfurt  to  btvak  down  the  bar-  [
riers  at  the  Constitution  and  to  mfr  i
tie  this  vexed  question  of  slavery  by
violence — from  that  time  politicians
have  sought  to  sustain  themselves
in  violent,  revolutionary  ami  uncoil-  \
stitutional  measures  by  foisting  into
the  Supreme  Court  partisans  who
are  already  imbued  with  extreme
political  notions  and  ideas,  whose
carrying  them  with  them  on  the
bench  has  resulted  in  many  deci-
sions which  after  ages  will  greatly
deplore  and  point  out  as  the  stepping
stones  to  the  destruction  of  our  free
institutions.  But  it  remains  for
the  Congress  of  the  United  States
in  1682  to  strike  the  blow  at  human
freedom  which  places  a  vast  people
who  have  enjoyed  their  freedom  in
part  only  for  ■  5  years  in  thete  moun-
tains, at  the  disposal  of  a  returning  !
board  to  be  sent  here  by  the  Presi-
dent This  is  the  object  of  the  Ed-
munds1 bill.  Its  framers,  its  advo-
cates and  supporters  scarcely  expect
anything  from  it  toward  the  extin-
guishing of  polygamy  ;  but  they  do
expect  from  it  the  transfer  of  our
flourishing  Territory  into  the  hands  ;
of  the  enemies  ot  the  44  Mormon"
people.  And  they  expect  to  disfran-  j
chise  whom  they  will,  and  decide
■who  may  vote  and  who  may  hold
office,  who  may  become  members  of
the  Legislature,  etc.,  and  vice  verm;
and  then  dictate  what  laws  they
shall  make,  and  then  dictate  how
the  people  shall  be  taxed  to  pay
their  salaries  and  expenses,  unless
forsooth,  Congress  shall,  according
to  the  recommendation  of  President
Arthur,  reconsider  that  part  of  the
law  and  make  provision  for  their
salaries.


It  is  not  my  purpose  to  attempt
to  foretell  the  consequences  of  this
class  of  legislation,  W  e  tdiall  all
see  lor  ourselves ;  but  if  our  neigh-
bors, our  Gentile  friends  can  stand
it  we  can  ;  and  if  our  nation  can
stand  it  we  can ;  and  if  our  states-
men and  the  people  who  elect  them
and  countenance  their  acts  can  stand
it,  we  can  j  and  if  merchants,  miners,
bankers,  agents,  speculators,  etc,,
among  us  can  stand  it,  we  can.
If  the  taxes  should  be  doubled  up,
and  burdens  put  upon  the  people,
and  they  can  stand  their  share  of  it,
we  can  stand  ours,  because  we  are
used  to  it,  and  they  are  not.  If
th«y  can  confine  themselves  to  one
woman  I  know  we  can.  (Laughter.)
The  proof  uf  the  pudding  you  know,
is  in  the  eating.  We  do  not  intend
to  be  worried ;  we  have  already
passed  through  many  very  trying
places,  and  we  still  expect  to  find  an
outlet.  I  am  reminded  often  of  our
experience  when  traveling  through
some  of  the  narrow  gorges  in  our
mountains;  it  often  appears  that
our  road  has  come  to  an  end  against
a  mountain,  but  when  we  get  close
up  to  it,  we  find  a  turn,  and  we  keep
traveling;  and  this  is  sometimes
often  repeated  in  a  day's  travel,
until,  at  last,  our  road  opens  out
and  a  broad,  beautiful  valley  is  in
sight,  which  never  fails  to  bring
feelings  of  relief  to  the  weary  trav-
eler, especially  if  he  is  not  familiar
with  the  road.  Such  lias  been  our
experience  in  the  pilgrimage  of  life
up  to  the  present  time,  and  we  con-
fidently expect  that  He  who  has  led
us,  thru  ugh  His  Holy  Priesthood,
will  continue  to  open  up  our  way,
and  He  will  do  so  if  we  keep  our
covenants  with  Him.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,


Delivered  in  this  Assembly  Hall,  Salt  Lake  Ccty,  Sunday  After-

koon,  November  20th,  1881,


(Reported  hj  John  Irvine.)


RACK  AND  PROSPERITY  OF  THE  SAINTS — GROWING  IMPORTANCE  OF  THE
CHURCH  FROM  ITS  ORGANIZATION  —  THE  W'»RK  OF  GOD  AND  NOT
OF  MAN — GOD'S  BLESSING  UPON  THE  RIGHTEOUS  J  HIS  CURSE  UPON
THE  UNRIGHTEOUS  —  THE  LIBERTY  OF  THE  GOSPEL  —  THE  SAINTS
PRESERVED  FROM  WAR  AND  BLOODSHED  — THEIR  UNION  AND  UNI-
VERSAL GOODWILL.


There  is  a  passage  in  the  Book  of
Mormon  winch  has  suggested  itself
to  my  mind,  which  I  will  read.  It
contains  the  words  of  Alma  unto
Ids  son  Helaman,  and  were  among
the  last  words  which  he  spoke  unto
him.  They  will  be  found  recorded
on  page  308  of  the  new  edition,
namely  :

u  And  it  came  to  pass  that  after
Alma  had  said  these  things  to
Helaman,  he  blessed  him,  and  also
his  other  eons  ;  and  he  also  blessed
the  earth  for  the  righteous*  sake  ;

And  he  said,  Thus  saith  the  Lord
God  :  cursed  shall  be  the  land,  yea,
this  land,  unto  every  nation,  kindred,
tongue,  and  people,  unto  destruc-
tion, which  do  wickedly,  when  they
are  fully  ripe ;  and  as  I  have  said  so
fill  all  it  be ;  for  this  is  the  cursing
and  the  blessing  of  God  upon  the
land,  for  the  Lord  cannot  look  upon
sin  with  the  least  degree  of  allow-
ance*

And  now  when  Alma  had  said
these  words  he  blessed  the  Church,
yea,  all  those  who  should  stand  fast
in  the  faith  from  that  time  hence-
forth."


President  Cannon  then  continued :
Eg  rising  to  speak  unto  you  this  af-
ternoon^ my  brethren  and  sisters,  I
do  so  with  a  desire  in  my  heart  that
that  which  I  may  say  may  be
prompted  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and
may  be  for  your  edification  and  com
fort  as  well  as  my  own,  I  am  glad
to  have  this  opportunity  uf  meeting
with  you — not  so  much  for  the
privilege  of  speaking  as  of  being
here.

Some  of  us,  as  you  know,  have
been  traveling  considerably  of  late,
visiting  the  various  settlements,  and
I  believe  President  Taylor  and  party,
when  they  return  to  this  city,  will
have  completed  the  entire  round
of  the  Territory  and  of  all  the
Stakes  outside  of  Arizona — that  is
so  far  as  Utah  and  Idaho  are  con-
cerned. We  have  found  the  people
in  a  very  prosperous  condition  and
feeling  exceedingly  well  In  almost
every  settlement  the  crops  have
been  larger  than  they  have  been
known  to  be  before.  And  the  peo-
ple are  prospering  in  their  temporal
circumstances  and  of  course  are
feeling  well,  and  I  believe  I  do  not


94


JUL/llNAL  UK  MiiUU


overstate  the  matter  when  I  fay
that  they  are  as  attentive  to  their
duties  generally  as  I  have  ever  seen
them. Good  health  has  generally

Ere  vailed.  1  think  probably  we  have
ad  more  sickness  in  this  city  and
neighborhood  than  in  any  other
part  of  the  Territory,  The  people
are  increasing  and  spreading  abroad,
taking  root  in  the  land.  In  the
southern  part  of  the  Territory  they
are  not  prospering  to  so  great  an
extent  as  they  are  in  the  middle  and
northern  part,  owing  to  various
causes.  Still  there  is  an  excellent
feeling  throughout  all  these  settle-
ments, and  they  are  looking  hope-
fully to  the  future.

I  liave  often  thought  in  looking
at  the  calmness  and  serenity  of  the
people,  and  the  peace  which  pre-
vails in  their  hearts,  and  in  their
habitations  and  settlements,  that  it
is  not  among  the  least  wonderful
features  of  this  organization  that  a
people,  who  are  so  much  maligned,
attacked  and  threatened  as  are  the
Latter-day  Saints,  should  be  found
living  so  undisturbed  by  thesa  things
and  apparently  enjoying  themselves
as  they  do.  There  is  scarcely  a
week  passes,  or  has  passed  for  years
in  which  there  have  not  been  some
threats  uttered  and  circulated
against  us.  \*  Terrible  things  going
to  be  done  with  the  Mormons ;  we
are  going  to  have  them  all  disposed
of  now;  we  shall  have  this  Mormon
question  all  settle"!,  and  the  problem
so  thoroughly  solved  that  it  will
never  require  to  be  meddled  with
again/'

Threats  of  this  character  have
been  in  circulation  now  for  years,
and  every  time  they  have  been
alluded  to  it  seemed  to  those  who
made  them  as  though  their  plans
|  would  be  likely  to  be  successful.  In
the  case  of  any  other  people  it
would  repress  all  energy  and  devel-


opment, it  would  frighten  every-
body, and,  in  fact,  no  one  would
want  to  live  in  a  community  that
was  in  such  constant  jeopardy.  But
so  far  as  my  observation  has  ex-
tended the  people,  as  I  have  re-
marked, are  full  of  peace  and  quiet,
undisturbed  by  the  prospects  for  the
future.  In  fact  they  feel  quite
happy  and  rejoice  that  they  are
counted  worthy  to  have  their  names
cast  out  as  evil.  It  is  one  of  the
most  remarkable  features  connected
with  this  work  that  a  people  so  few
in  number,  naturally  so  quiet  and
inoffensive,  molesting  no  one,  inter-
fering with  no  one's  peace  or  enjoy-
ment, threatening  no  one,  minding
their  own  business,  peacefully  pur-
suing their  varied  pursuits,  should
create  such  a  stir  in  the  world  as
we  are  doing.  It  might  be  thought
that  the  1^0,000  people  who  live
in  the  Territory  of  Utah,  would  be
such  an  insignificant  people  and
so  utterly  beneath  the  notice — so
far  as  numerical  strength  is  con-
cerned—of  the  world  at  large,
that  they  might  be  permitted  to
pursue  the  course  which  is  marked
out  for  them  without  interference
and  without  so  much  agitation  res-
pecting them.  But  I  was  told  yes-
terday by  a  federal  official  who  had
just  returned  from  the  east — and  I
suppose  it  is  true — that  there  was
no  subject  to-day  that  seemed  to
have  the  importance  in  men's  minds
that  Utah  had,  and  that  wherever
he  went,  when  it  was  known  that
he  was  from  Utah,  everybody  wanted
to  talk  with  him  abmit  its  affairs
and  its  people.  Newspaper  reporters
were  after  him  to  find  out  what  he
could  tell  them  about  us,  and  I  am
informed  that  members  of  Congress
and  other  leading  men  are  making
the  (<  Mormon  question"  a  special
study.  I  hope  they  will  thoroughly
investigate  it  while  they  are  at  it  •


PEACB  AND  PROSPERITY  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


95


I  think  the  investigation  will  prove
profitable  to  them,  it"  it  is  only  done
in  the  right  spirit  ;  but  the  object,  I
suppose,  in  making  it  a  special  study
is  to  do  something,  to  deal  with  its
imaginary  evils,  to  devise  some  plan
that  will*  reach  this  system  that  ap-
pears to  be  so  hateful.  Well,  now,
I  call  this  a  remarkable  feature  of
this  work.  I  think  it  is  exceedingly
Wonderful  that  so  small  a  people— a
people  whom  every  one  must  admit
who  visits  this  country,  are  peaceful
— should  create  such  a  disturbance
in  the  earth  ami  be  the  cause  of  so
much  thought,  so  much  writing  and
speech  maid  tig.  Ami  it  has  not
been  the  case  in  Utah  alone,  that  is,
since  the  Latter- day  Saints  came  to
Utah,  but  it  has  been  a  peculiarity
of  this  work — the  work  of  God —
from  the  day  of  its  inception  in  these
last  days  until  the  present  And
what  is  st  ill  more  remarkable,  it  was
predicted  that  this  would  be  the  case
about  it  when  it  first  started  and
before  it,  in  fact,  had  an  organiza-
tion.

Doubtless  the  most  of  you  re-
member that  when  Joseph  Smith  was
visited  by  an  angel  oF  God  when  he
was  quite  a  youth,  it  was  said  to
him  by  the  angel  that  his  name
should  be  known  for  good  and  evil
throughout  the  earth,  and  most
wonderfully  has  that  statement  been
fulfilled  in  his  case  and  in  the  case  of
all  those  who  have  embraced  the
everlasting  Gospel.  This  was  said
before  the  Church  was  organized  ;  it
was  published  directly  after  the
organization.

Doubtless  you  are  all  familiar — or
most  of  you  are — with  the  letters  of
Oliver  Co vvdery  to  W.  W.  Phelps,
in  which  this  was  published  among
the  earliest  writings  that  were  sent
forth  by  this  Church,  and  when  to
all  human  appearances  there  was
not  the  least  probability  of  it  being


fulfilled,  except  a  man  should  have
the  spirit  of  revelation  to  discern  the
future.  But  when  the  Church  was
organized  it  created  a  sensation  in
the  neighborhood  —  it  attracted
attention — men's  minds  were  drawn
towards  it.  As  it  increased  the
excitement  spread,  and  among  the
earliest  predictions  that  I  remember
hearing,  connected  with  this  work,
was,  that  it  had  called  forth  the  at-
tention of  townships  and  of  counties
and  of  States,  and  it  was  said  of  it,
that  it  should  spread  until  it  would
attract  the  attention  of  the  United
States  and  of  the  world.  This
was  one  of  the  earliest  predictions
that  was  uttered  connected  with
the  work,  and  it  was  also  predicted
concerning  it,  that  its  missionaries
should  go  to  every  land  ami  to  every
people,  and  cany  the  glad  tidings
of  salvation,  and  should  be  the
means  *of  gathering  out  of  every
nation,  kindred,  tongue  and  people,
the  honest  in  heart,  who  should
gather  together  in  one  place,  and
should  be  known  by  the  name  of
ZioiL  I  often  think  of  this.  The
wonderful  manner  in  which  this
people  called  Latter-day  Saints  dwell-
ing in  Utah  have  been  gathered
together  is  a  subject  of  never-ceasing
interest  to  me.

Before  the  organization  of  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints,  Joseph  Smith  received
revelations  which  hp  said  were  reve-
lations from  God.  Tuey  are  now
embodied  in  this  book,  which  we
call  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants and  among  the  earliest  of
these  revelations  is  found  a  state-
ment given  by  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  through  Joseph  Smith,  to
the  effect  that  lie  intended  to  bring
forth  and  establish  Zion,  an  1  that
He  would  gather  together  the  peo-
ple who  would  obey  His  Gospel,
This  prediction  is  particularly  note-


9G


journal  of  mseouusKs


worthy,  because  at  the  time  when
the  first  of  these  revelations  was
riven,  there  was  no  such  organiza-
tion as  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ
of  Latter-da}  Saints  upon  the  earth  ;
it  did  not  have  an  existence  ;  and  in
the  September  following  its  organi-
zation— that  is  five  months  after*
wards  —  another  revelation  was
given,  in  which  it  was  stated  still
more  plainly  who  were  to  be  gath-
ered, and  the  purposes  for  which  they
were  to  be  gathered,  and  this,  too,
before  there  was  a  place  designated
as  a  place  of  gathering.  I  have
often  said  that  if  the  Pivphet  Joseph
Smith  had  no  other  evidence  to  show
to  the  world  of  the  divinity  of  his
mission,  and  of  his  prophetic  office,
than  that  revelation  alone,  it  was
sufficient  in  and  of  itself  to  establish
it  5  for  this  reason  ;  that  at  the  time
it  was  uttered,  as  I  have  said,  there
was  no  organization  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints;
there  was  no  gathering  place  ;  no
person  had  ever  witnessed  such  a
proceeding  as  a  people  belonging  to
one  church  gathering  togetlver  and
dwelling  together  in  one  organiza-
tion. There  was  nothing  of  the  kind
known  ;  there  was  no  organization
among  the  children  of  men  that
could  have  given  a  hint  of  the  pos-
sibility or  probability  of  such  a  great
event  taking  place.  If  other  churches
had  done  the  same,  then  it  might
have  been  thought  that  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith  could  easily  have  pre-
dicted that  the  people  that  he  would
be  the  means  of  gathering  together,
might  do  so  also.  But  there  was  no
accessible  record  extant  of  the  gath-
ering together  of  any  people  in  this
manner  at  the  time  that  Joseph  pro-
claimed this  principle.  Yet  he,  in-
spired of  God,  dared  to  make  this
statement  to  the  world,  and  to  pub-
lish it,  and  to-day,  we  who  are  here
are  living  witnesses  of  its  fulfil  men  t


—not  of  its  complete  fulfilment,  but
sufficiently  to  make  it  one  of  the
strangest  events  that  has  ever  been
witnessed  among  men.  There  have
been  many  circumstances  surround-
ing the  people  which  have  been  of
such  a  character  as  to  operate  against
their  gathering.  It  is  not  long
since  a  Secretary  of  State  issued  a
circular  to  the  nations  of  Europe
to  check  this  very  business  of  gath-
ering. I  do  not  suppose  that  he
knew  that  Joseph  Smith  had  made
such  a  prediction,  or  that  God  had
inspired  him  to  give  such  a  revela-
tion, or  that  he  ever  imagined  for
a  moment  that  the  word  of  God
was  recorded  upon  this  subject  ;
but  he  thought  it  would  ht  a  good
tiling  to  stop  the  immigration  of
"  Mormons/'  Mobs  have  also
done  their  part  to  accomplish  the
same  end,  by  endeavoring  to  break
up  the  community  ami  scatter  its
members  and  frighten  those  who
had  not  gathered,  so  that  they
might  be  deterred  from  coming.
But  notwithstanding  all  these  in-
fluences which  have  been  operating
from  the  beginning — commencing
as  I  said  in  a  township,  then  spread-
ing to  a  county,  afterwards  to  a
State,  and  to  States,  and  then  the
Secretary  of  State  of  our  nation
taking  the  matter  in  hand — not-
withstanding all  these  influences
which  have  been  operating  to  check
the  gathering  of  the  people  together,
they  have  gathered  as  we  see  them
to-day,  and  are  still  gathering,  be-
cause God  has  said  they  should,  and
1  there  is  no  earthly  power  that  can
prevent  their  gathering  together,
though  it  need  not  surprise  you  if
more  thorough  measures  than  ever
have  been  should  be  taken  to  pre-
vent the  Saints  from  obeying  this
command,

When  the  Elders  of  this  Church
first  went  out,  they  went  out  without


PEACE  AND  PROSPERITY  OP  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


97


the  ordinary  advantages  that  men
who  call  themselves  ministers  pos-
sess. They  were  men  selected  from
the  various  avocations  of  life.
Joseph  Smith  himself  wa^  a  farmer.
He  was  not  a  man  that  was  .schooled
for  the  ministry.  He  had  had  no
education  to  fit  and  qualify  him  as
me  a  are  ordinarily  supposed  to  be
qualified  in  these  days  who  teach
their  fellow  men  what  is  called  the
Gospel  of  /esus  Christ.  He  did  not
go  to  a  theological  seminary.  But
inspired  of  God,  having  been  or
dained  of  God  to  the  everlasting
Priesthood  (that  authority  that  had
been  withdrawn  from  the  earth  in
consequence  of  the  wickedness  of
men  ;  and  been  restored  to  the  earth
and  bestowed  upon  him  by  angelic
agency)  he  stood  up  in  the  midst  of
his  fellow-men  and  proclaimed  the
truth,  and  by  the  power  of  God  he
was  the  means  of  bringing  many  to
its  knowledge  :  and,  as  I  have  said,
inspired  of  God,  he  selected  others
and  laid  his  hands  upon  them,  that
being  the  ordination  necessary  to
qualify  them  to  preach  the  word  of
God.  They  were  taken  from  the
plow,  they  were  taken  from  the
blacksmith's  shop,  from  the  me-
chanic's bench,  from  the  counting
room,  and  from  all  the  vocations  of
life  in  which  they  were  found  ;  they
were  taken  and  were  thus  ordained
and  sent  out  to  preach  the  Gospel,
without  purse  and  scrip,  without
salary,  without  that  which  the
world  had  considered  necessary — an
education,  an  education  suited  to
the  calling.  In  this  way  they  went
forth  and  preached  the  Gospel — not
in  men's  wisdom,  not  in  their  own
strength,  but  calling  upon  God  in  the
name  of  Jesus  to  bestow  His  Holy
Spirit  upon  the  people  and  to  carry
their  words  by  that  spirit  to  their
hearts,  and  to  help  them  find  the
honest,  the  meek,  and  the  humble,
No.  7.


This  is  the  way  in  which  they  went.
They  could  not  glory  in  man.  They
could  not  take  glory  to  themselves,
for  there  was  nothing  about  them
in  which  they  could  glory.  And
the  result  was  that  wherever  they
went  they  met  honest-hearted  peo-
ple— people  who  were  waiting  to
receive  their  message ;  and  these
peole  as  soon  as  they  were  baptized
were  seized  with  a  desire  to  gather
together  with  the  people  of  God,
without  knowing  what  God  had
said  upon  the  subject

Nnw3  when  God  does  a  work  he
does  it  in  his  own  way,  and  he  is
determined — he  always  was  appa-
rently  from  all  we  read — to  have  the
glory  of  that  work.  If  a  man  were
to  go  forth  qualified  by  education
and  preached  by  the  power  of  edu-
cation and  of  learning,  who  is  it
that  gets  the  glory  1  Why,  you  will
find  it  everywhere  that  man  is  glo-
rified, if  there  is  a  fluent  preacher,
if  there  is  a  successful  orator  in
what  is  called  the  Christian  Church,
he  gets  the  glory  of  it,  and  he  gets
a  salary  in  proportion  to  it.  Com-
mencing, as  some  of  them  hav<*
done,  to  preach  in  humble  places/
the  fame  of  their  oratory  has  spread*
and  they  have  had  calls  to  the  luirw
is  try  from  other  places,  such  cAU*
being  accompanied  by  an  increase
of  salary,  and  a  man  goes  from  one
place  to  anothor  according  to  the
addition  he  receives  in  his  salary
until  he  becomes  noted  as  ma,uy
are  to  day.  The  fame  of  their
oratory  goes  throughout  the  United
States.  Who  is  it  that  gets  the
glory  for  this  ?  Why,  it  is  the  meiL
themselves,  and  they  get  the  salary^,
too.  They  not  only  get  the  glory;
of  men,  but  they  get  their  pay+r
Mans  education  is  praised,  the  cot.
lege  where  he  received  it  receives,
credit  for  it  according  to  the  ability
that  he  may  display,  and  God  is  v'ejy*

•  r  m Vol  xxmr  '


98


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


little  thought  about  in  tlie  matter,
and  ct*rt;ii:ily  the  Holy  Ghost  gets
no  credit,  for  it  is  supposed  that  the
Holy  Ghost  has  nothing  to  do  with
it.  Well,  uow,  God  has  taken  a
different  method  in  our  day,  and  he
is  showing  forth  his  power.  He  is
taking  the  meek  and  the  lowly  and
the  humble  men  who  are  desirous
to  keep  his  commandments,  and  he
is  making  them  mighty  through
his  power.  But  they  cannot  give
any  glory  to  any  one  but  the  Al-
mighty for  this.  Let  a  man  attempt
to  travel  without  purse  ami  scrip,  as
the  Eldert  of  this  Church  have
done,  and  as  the  ancient  Apostles
did,  and  if  he  is  successful  he  is
successful  through  faith,  through
his  reliance  upon  God  through  keep-
ing his  commandments,  through
being  humble,  meek  and  lowly  of
heart,  and  if  he  reaches  the  hearts
of  the  honest,  the  only  way  he  can
hope  to  do  it  is  by  having  the  Spirit
of  God,  and  having  that  power  ac-
companying his  words.  He  cannot
do  it  m  any  other  way.  And  who
is  there  in  this  Church  th^t  gives
Joseph  Smith  the  glory  of  this  work  ?
Yet  it  is  the  most  wonderful  organi-
zation ever  beheld  among  men.
There  is  nothing  like  it  There
is  no  limit  to  the  power  connected
with  it ;  there  is  no  limit  to  the
union  connected  with  it ;  there  is
no  limit  to  the  capacity  for  expan-
sion connected  with  it.  You  may
expand  it  and  make  it  as  wide  and
broad  as  you  please,  and  the  organi-
zation is  equal  to  it  If  it  only  con-
sisted of  six  members  it  answered
the  purpose ;  if  it  consisted  of  six
thousand  it  answered  the  purpose.
If  it  were  to  consist  of  six  millions
it  would  answer  the  purpose  ;  if  it
should  embrace  the  whole  world  it
would  be  found  equal  to  the  neces-
sity. No  man  can  look  upon  the
organization  of  this  Church  and  ex-


amine it  in  its  details  without  being
wonderfully  impressed — if  he  be  a
man  who  does  not  give  glory  to
God — with  the  ability  of  the  man
who  framed  it ;  but  if  he  be  disposed
to  give  glory  to  God,  he  cannot  ex-
amine it  without  praising  God  in
his  heart  for  giving  so  wonderful
and  ho  simple  an  organization  on
the  earth  for  a  church.  But  though
this  is  the  case,  who  is  there  tha'
gives  any  glory  to  Joseph  Smith  1
Who  is  there  that  gives  any  glory
to  Brigham  Young  1  I  have  been
told  repeatedly  that  we  do  not  honor
our  men  enough,  we  do  not  give
them  praise  enough;  but  it  is  a  fact,
the  people  look  behind  the  instru-
ment. Joseph  Smith  was  a  man  ;
yet  we  have  been  falsely  accused  of
worshiping  Joseph  Smith  in  the
place  of  the  Savior,  and  the  same
lias  also  been  said  of  Brigham
Young.  But  the  true  feeling  is  to
look  behind  Joseph  Smith  and  Brig-
ham  Young  to  the  Power  who  raised
them  up,  to  that  Being  who  gave
tli em  all  their  gifts  and  endowments,
who  inspired  them  and  who  made
them  perform  the  work  that  they
did.  And  when  Elders  in  this
Church  are  successful  there  is  very
little  disposition  to  give  them  the
glory  or  the  praise  therefor.  The
praise  is  given  to  God,  who  is  the
author  of  these  blessings  and  of  the
gathering  of -this  people  together*
The  world  say  it  was  the  shrewdness
of  Joseph  Smith  that  first  suggested
this,  and  that  it  was  the  executive
ability  that  Brigham  Young  had
that  carried  it  out.  They  do  not  re-
cognize God  in  it ;  it  was  Brigham
Young,  But,  my  brethren  and  sis-
ters, yon  know  who  it  was.  You
know  that  it  was  no  power  of  man
that  could  have  touched  your  hearts
and  made  you  desire  to  leave  your
homes  and  come  to  Zion,  This
makes  every  man  and  woman  in


FXACX  AND  PROSPERITY  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


this  Church,  who  comes  from  the
nations  of  the  earth,  a  living  wit-
ness for  himself  and  for  herself,  not
depending  upon  the  Elders,  for  the
Elders  could  not  do  this,  they  could
not  offer  the  inducements,  but  every
man  and  every  woman  becomes  an
interested  person,  a  witness  himself
and  herself  to  the  truth  of  these
things,  and  especially  to  the  doe-
trine  of  gathering.  Why  the  desire
is  so  strong  and  has  been  in  the
hearts  of  the  people  that  if  it  were
necessary  they  would  walk  on  foot
any  distance  to  join  the  gathered
Saints.  If  they  could  walk  on  the
water  they  would  do  it.  They  would
push  hand-carts  across  the  plains  if
they  could  not  come  across  in  any
other  way,  carrying  their  packs  on
their  backs*  \V  hy  ?  Because  the
Spirit  of  God  was  poured  out  upon
them,  and  it  filled  their  hearts  with
this  desire  that  I  said  is  irrepressible*
They  could  not  be  content  to  stay
away.

In  this  way  God  has  built  up  this
Church.  It  did  not,  as  we  have
often  heard,  depend  upon  one  man.
Men  thought  if  they  killed  Joseph
Smith  they  would  destroy  the  key-
stone ;  that  his  existence  was  the
means  of  upholding  the  work  and
giving  it  solidity.  But  he  was
killed,  and  still  the  work  prospered,
anil  it  will  prosper  if  every  man
that  is  now  in  position  in  the  Church
should  be  killed  or  should  die.  The
testimony  of  Jesus  is  in  the  hearts
of  the  people.  You  travel  through-
out the  Territory,  and  call  the
people  together  and  ask  them :
"What  influence  brought  you
here  ?"  Every  one  who  is  an  adult,
and  has  retained  the  faith,  will  tell
you  that  it  was  the  Spirit  and  power
of  God.  No  other  influence  nor
power  could  have  done  this  but  that.
Well,  now,  men  will  fight  it,  men
are  fighting  it. It  is  strange  to-day


to  see  people  who  call  themselves
religious,  advocating  all  manner  of
means  to  be  brought  against  this
people  to  destroy  them.  To  shed
their  blood  is  thought  to  he  justifia-
ble the  killing  of  people  in  order
to  destroy  an  organization  that  they
think  is  so  full  of  menace ;  and  yet
we  are  told  in  the  Bible — and  we
have  been  taught  it  from  childhood,
that  the  righteous  never  persecute
the  wicked,  but  it  has  always  been
the  case  that  the  wicked  persecute
the  righteous  ;  and  we  are  told  by
the  Savior  himself  that  his  followers
should  be  hated  of  sdl  men,  and
that  men  in  seeking  to  kill  them
would  think  they  were  doing  God's
service.  It  wa3  not  the  Apostles
of  Jesus  who  persecuted  the  wicked,
it  was  not  the  righteous  who  hated
them  and  who  sought  their  destruc-
tion. There  were  no  petitions
went  out  from  the  humble  followers
of  Christ  against  the  Pharisees
and  against  the  religious  sects  of
that  day  to  have  them  destroyed,  to
have  governmental  aid  to  assist  them
in  extirpating  their  heresies ;  nothing
of  this  kind  has  ever  been  witnessed,
but  here  we  find  to  day  the  profess-
edly righteous,  the  ministers,  advo-
cating the  most  dreadful  measures.
Why  I  heard  here  a  few  days  ago
'  from  one  of  our  returned  missionaries
that  the  sermon  of  a  notorious
preacher  in  the  East,  delivered
some  time  since,  in  which  he  ad-
vocated the  wiping  out  of  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  by  the  use  of  arms
and  cannon  and  weapons  of  war —
I  was  told  that  the  sermon  when  it
reached  England  was  re-printed  and
distributed  gratuitously  at  the
doors  of  the  churches.  People
rejoiced  over  it,  thought  it  an  excel-
lent scheme,  and  yet  you  tell  thos©
people  they  are  not  Christians  and
they  would  be  shocked,  feel  insulted
and  think  themselves  terribly  abused


by  such  a  statement,  and  at  the
same  tima  were  rejoicing  over  the
prospect  of  the  Latter* lay  Saints
being  killed  and  the  system  being
broken  up  by  violence*

How  shall  we  feel  respecting  these
matters  ?  I  have  said  that  the  peo-
ple, so  far  as  my  observation  has
extruded  throughout  this  Territory,
were  rejoicing  and  feeling  contented.
How  shall  we  feel  f  Shall  we  be
disturbed  1  The  man  or  woman  who
entered  into  this  Church  who  was
old  enough  to  understand  these
matters,  and  expected  any  tiling
different  to  this,  was  not  properly
informed,  When  I  became  old
enough  to  understand  the  character
of  this  work  I  made  up  my  mind
that  it  might  cost  me  everything
before  I  "Ot  through.  I  did  not
know  what  might  be  involved  in  it,
\vh;i:  consequences  ;  but  I  knew  that
others  who  had  started  out  for  sal-
vation hail  been  slain,  and  that
Saints  of  God  in  every  age  have  had
to  lay  down  their  lives  for  the  truth
and  that  my  Lord  and  Master  Jesus
Christ,  had  been  crucified,  and  if  I
expected  to  liw  and  reign'  with
Him,  that  I  must  also  be  prepared
to  endure  all  things.  The  salvation
that  God  has  promised  unto  \n  is
worthy  of  all  this,  or  it  is  worth
nothing.  If  we  cannot  sacrifice
every  tiling  there  is  upon  the  face  of
the  earth,  that  men  hold  dear  to
them,  then  we  are  unworthy  of  that
great  salvation  that  God  has  pro-
mised unto  the  faithful  The  man
that  cannot  bring  every  appetite
into  subjection  to  the  mind  ami  will
of  God,  that  cannot  forego  every-

,  thing  of  this  kind,  and  that  is  not
willing  to  sacrifice  houses  and  lands,
and  father  and  mother,  wives  and

.  children  and  ever}- thing  that  men
hold  dear  to  them,  is  unworthy  that
gr?at  salvation  that  God  has  in  store

■  for  His  faithful  children. Whfeu  I


hear  people  say  that  they  are  Latter-
day  Saints,  and  will  drink  with  the
drunken  ;  when I  ht'ar  men  talk
about  being  Latter-day  Saints  who
will  not  conquer  their  appetites,  and
will  not  bring  them  in  subjection  to
the  mind  and  w  ill  of  Go  ],  I  think
very  little  of  their  professions.  fif
we  value  this  salvation  as  we  should,
there  is  nothing  that  will  stand  be-
tween ns  and  it We  may  love  our
wives  as  we  love  our  own  lives ;  we
may  love  our  children  as  we  do  our-
selves ;  we  may  be  willing  to  step
between  death  and  our  wives  and
children  and  say,  "  If  any  be  killed,
let  us  be  killed  ;  if  there  is  to  be  any  I
hardship,  let  us  endure  it  ;"  we  may
have  this  feeling,  but  at  the  sam$\
time  we  must  love  the  Gospel  of  the  >^
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  cause
that  He  established,  better  than  we  ^\
do  our  wives  and  our  children,  bet-  ^
ter  than  we  do  our  own  lives.  There  *
is  nothing  upon  the  face  of  the  earth
that  we  should  love  as  we  do  the  *  *
(J os pel. God  requires  this  of  us*  A
Therefore, if  we  are  Latter-day  ^
Saints,  what  difference  does  it  maEk  ^
what  is  brought  against  us  ?  Sup-\J^
pose  armies  should b*  launched
against  us;  suppose  the  measures
urged  by  some  so  called  divines,  >J^
should  be  carried  out  ;  will  it  make
any  difference  io  regard  to  us  and
our  future? Shall  we  be  disturbed
because  of  these  threats  being  ful-
minated against  us? Not  m  the
least ;  for  the  reason  that  God  is  our
Father — He  stands  at  the  head,  and
not  one  l^ir  of  our  heads  sliall  fall
to  the  ground  without  His  notice.
Nothing  can  occur  that  He  does
not  take  cognizance  of. He  watches
over  us  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the
human  family,  and  He  will  overrule
every  tiling fox our good*  We
should,  therefore,  be  the  happiest
people — as  I  fully  believe  we  are —
on  the  face  of  the  earth.' We  may


PEACE  AND  rilOSPEKlTY  OF  THE  SAIMS,  ETC.


he  persecute  J,  maligned  and  threat-
ened, it  ought  not  to  make  the  least
difference  to  us  ia  regard  to  out*
enjoyment.  Our  trust  should  be
in  something  higher  thaft  man.
There  is  one  Being  whom  we  call
our  Father,  and  that  is  God,  whom
we  should  fear ;  we  should  hohl
Him  in  reverence  and  be  so  afraid
that  we  would  never  do  anything  to
offend  Him  or  to  grieve  His  noly
Spirit  But  as  for  mau  !  What  is
man  1  What  is  there  about  mau  that
we  should  fear  him  ?  We  have  seen
men  in  the  plenitude  of  their  power
aj ray  themselves  against  the  work  of
(jrod,  and  they  have  passed  away  one
after  another  ;  but  the  work  of  God
live*  and  will  live.  Opposers  may
fight  it,  rave  against  it  ;  organiza-
tions may  be  formed  for  the  purpose
of  crushing  it,  but  they  will  pass
aWay  just  as  sure  as  God  has  spoken
and  as  we  live.  This  work  that
God  has  established  will  roll  forth.
The  power  connected  with  it  cannot
be  crushed.  Men  may  apostatize,
as  many  have  done,  but  it  will  not
affect  the  work.  The  three  wit-
nesses of  this  Book  of  Mormon,
from  which  I  have  read — Oliver
Cowdery,Daviil  Whitmerand  Martin
Harris — two  of  them  are  now  dead
— testified  all  their  days  that  an  holy
angel  came  and  showed  them  the
plates  from  which  this  book  was
translated — even  they  fell  away.
They  disagreed  with  the  Prophet
Joseph,  and  fell  away  from  the
Church,  one  of  them  at  least,  because
of  un chastity,  the  cause  most  fruit-
ful above  all  others  of  apostacy.
When  a  man  indulges  in  unchaste
desires  or  practices  he  cannot  stand
in  this  Church,  he  will  apostatize
sooner  or  later  unless  he  repents.
One  of  the  witnesses — Oliver  Cow-
dery — upon  whose  head,  with  that
of  Joseph  Smith,  the  hands  of  John
the  Baptist  were  laid,  upon  whose


hea«it  in  company  with  Joseph
SiniLh,  the  hands  of  Peter,  James
and  John  were  laid,  even  he  fell
away  from  this  Church,  and  yet
he  never  denied  his  testimony  of  the
truth  of  this  work,  nor  did  Martin
Harris,  David  Whitmer,  the  only
surviving  witness,  is  in  the  same
condition.  He,  too,  fell  away  from
the  Church  during  Joseph's  lifetime,
and  became  Joseph's  enemy  ;  but  he
never  denied  the  truth  of  his  testi-
mony connected  with  the  Book  of
Mormon,  and  still  bears  testimony
to  it  to-day.  These  men,  it  might
have  been  suppose rl,  would  have
shaken  the  Church,  Oliver  Cowdery
had  the  idea,  notwithstanding  the
revelations  he  had  received,  that
when  he  fell  away  the  Church  would
receive  a  great  shock*  There  were
twelve  men  chosen  as  Apostles  from
the  midst  of  the  people,  and  of  these
twelve  six  fell  away  from  the  Church
and  ranged  themselves  against  the
Prophet  of  God.  They  were  deter-
mined to  destroy  the  work  if  they
could.  This  reminds  one  of  the
parable  of  the  ten  virgins.  There
were  five  wise  and  five  foolish  ;  one-
half  of  them  were  unprepared  to  go
out  and  meet  the  bridegroom.  So
with  the  Apostles,  half  of  them  fell
away.  But  did  the  Church  stop!
no  ;  and  if  all  the  Apostles
had  apostatized  it  would  not  have
arrested  the  onward  progress  of  this
work,  for  God  has  spoken  concern-
ing it,  and  His  word  will  be  fulfilled.
And  shall  we  fear  man  ?  Shall  we
fear  earthly  organizations  %  Shall
we  fear  threats  1  Shall  our  knees
tremble  and  our  hands  and  our
hearts  falter  because  men  array
themselves  against  the  work  of  Godl
If  we  do,  then  we  mistake  entirely
its  character.  No  such  feeling
enters  into  the  heart  of  any  faithful
man  or  woman  connected  with  this
Chuich.


102


JOUKNAX  OF  DISCOURSES.


Now,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
the  Lord  has  made  great  promises
unto  us.  I  have  read  you  one  from
this  Book  of  Mormon.  This  land
is  a  blessed  land  uuto  all  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  earth  who  will  act
righteously,  but  is  and  will  be  cursed
to  those  who  will  not.  There  is  a
cui'M'  and  a  blessing  upon  the  land.
No  nation  can  prosper  in  this  land
that  works  unrighteousness,  and  it
is  a  painful  thing  to  say  that  our
own  nation,  unless  it  repents,  will
meet  with  disasters  sooner  or  later.
It  pains  us  to  say  this,  but  it  is  true.
God  has  said  it.  It  will  be  true
about  us.  This  land  cati  only  be
blessed  to  us  if  we  work  righteously.
Let  us  turn  round  ami  oppress  the
weak  and  do  wrong,  and  God  will
curse  the  land  to  us,  There  will
be  trouble  in  the  land  among  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  as  long  as
they  work  wickedness,  just  as  sure
as  God  has  spoken.  There  has
been  no  nation  prospered  as  our
nation  has.  No  government  was  ever
framed  by  man  that  is  so  strong  and
so  good  and  well  adapted  to  the
happiness  of  human  beings  as  our
government  is.  There  never  was  a
better  instrument  framed  for  the
happiness  of  man  than  the  Constitu-
tion of  the  United  States.  The  men
who  framed  it  were  inspired  of  God.
The  men  who  fought  the  battles  of
the  Revolution  were  the  same,
Washington  was  inspired  of  God  ;
he  was  sustained  by  the  fflmighty
arm  of  God  ;  and  the  defeats  that  the
mother  country  received  were  in
accordance  with  the  plan  of  God.
This  land  was  kept  for  this  purpose.
For  centuries  it  was  hidden  from
all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  It  was
not  until  the  15th  century  that  God
inspired  Columbus  to  go  forth  and
seek  a  passage  across  the  Atlantic,
and  land  upon  -some  of  the  islands
adjacent  to this  continent  His


track  was  followed  by  others.  All
this  was  in  the  mind  of  God.  We
have  it  all  plainly  stated  to  us  in
this  book  {the  Book  of  Mormon),
and  tLe  reasons  for  it,  the  best  pos-
sible reasons  that  could  be  given*
It  is  said  that  the  Norwegians  had
visited  this  country  and  that  the
stone  tower  at  Newport  is  evidence
of  it.  The  Scandinavian  antiqua-
rians claim  that  it  was  thus  discov-
ered ;  but  if  so,  it  was  not  peopled.
It  remained  hidden  until  the  15th
century,  and  there  was  good  reason
for  it.  This  laud  would  have  been
overrun  by  other  nations  had  it  beeu
discovered  earlier,  and  there  would
have  been  no  place  for  that  which
we  now  behold.  But  God  preserved
it ;  and  He  has  said  in  the  Book  of
Mormon,  that  so  long  as  the  inhabi-
tants of  this  land  serve  the  God  of
the  land,  who  is  Jesus  Christ — they
bhall  prosper  and  no  nation  shall
have  power  over  them.  The  Lord
has  also  said  that  there  shall  be  no
kings  upon  this  land.  The  attempt
of  Maximillian  is  an  evidence  of  the
truth  of  it.  Backed  as  he  was  by
the  power  of  France  and  Austria,
particularly  by  France,  he  was  killed
for  his  attempt ;  for  the  Lord  has
.said  there  shall  be  no  kings  upon
this  land,  and  that  it  shall  be  a  land
of  liberty  unto  the  inhabitants
thereof  as  long  as  they  serve  the
Lord.  And  the  prosperity  that  has
attended  the  land  ihus  far  is  due  to
this  blessing.  Those  who  con  tended
for  liberty  in  early  days  were*  men
who  desired  to  serve  the  Lord,  They
may  have  been  mistaken  in  many
things,  but  they  were  zealous  in
this  and  devoted  to  it,  and  many  of
them  were  willing  that  every  human
being  should  have  the  rights
that  they  contended  for  themselves.
But  this  is  all  changed  to-day*
There  is  a  great  change.  You  and
I  cannot  worship  God  as  we  desire,


PEACE  AND  PROSPERITY  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


without  being  in  clanger  We  are
told  that  it  h  because  we  are  polv-
gamists.  Why,  the  earliest  priva-
tions which  we  had  to  contend  with,
the  scenes  which  are  seared  in  the
memories  of  these  aged  people,  arid
these  of  middle  age,  were  all  passed
through  by  us  when  polygamy  was
not  known.  When  we  chose  to
worship  God,  and  said  He  was  a  God
of  revelation  to-day,  the  same  as
He  was  1800  years  ago.  There
were  men  then,  and  there  are  men
to  day,  who  would  destroy  us  be-
cause we  exercise  that  belief.  Hence,
I  say,  prosperity  cannot  attend  a
people  who  will  trample  upon  liberty
in  that  manner,  and  the  party  that
arrays  itself  against  the  work  of
God  cannot  prosper.

When  men  have  power  and  do
right  they  will  be  sustained  ;  but
when  they  do  wrong  they  go  against
the  eternal  principles  of  justice  and
against  Uod.  There  are  many
thousands  of  men  who  know  that
Utah  has  not  been  fairly  treated,
but  they  have  not  the  courage  to
say  so,  because  with  many  who  hold
office  it  might  co*t  them  position.
Visitors  come  here  and  are  impressed
with  what  they  see,  but  many  of
them  yield  to  the  force  of  public
opinion  and  say  what  they  do  not
believe  in  their  hearts.  Tuns  i;
is  that  the  tide  of  calumny  has
swelled  and  there  is  no  one  to  throw
obstacles  in  its  way  ;  we  have  en-
dured its  full  force  as  it  has  rolled
upon  us,  and  must  still  stand  up
ami  endure  it.  Although  it  is  so
painful,  it  is  not  without  profit ;  it
teaches  us  many  valuable  lessons.
I  hope  it  will  have  a  good  effect  upon
us.  I  suppose  it  is  to  chasten  us
and  to  keep  us  humble,  and  if  it
will  teach  us  to  be  liberal  and  not
to  oppress  others,  1  shall  be  glad  :
liberty  for  every  man  in  the  land  and
every  woman — liberty  to  the  fullest


possible  extent  for  all,  as  long  as
they  do  not  trespass  upon  the  rights
oi  their  tVllows.  If  a  man  wishes
to  worship  an  idol  or  an  animal,  a
bull,  a  calf,  a  dog,  or  a  serpent  or
anything  else — liberty  to  do  so  as
long  as  his  worship  (toes  not  inter-
fere with  the  rights  of  his  fellows.
If  he  wishes  to  worship  the  God  of
Heaven,  all  right,  he  should  not  be
interfered  with.  God  has  blessed
the  land  in  the  words  that  I  have
read  in  your  hearing,  and  if  we
were  driven  out  of  it,  in  five
years  it  wuuM  return  to  its  ori-
ginal desolation.  This  land  of
desolation  God  has  changed  into  a
fruitful  field,  because  of  the  blessing
on  the  land,  and  as  long  as  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  live  righteously  the
land  shall  be  blessed  to  them.  The
climate  will  be  ameliorated  ;  the  soil
will  be  fertilized  ;  fruits  will  grow
as  they  hkve  done  in  this  valley.

When  we  first  came  here  I  re-
member the  thoughts  of  many*
They  did  not  believe  that  we  could
raise  any  fruit  here,  and  the  man
who  first  set  out  peach  stones  was
laugh e  1  at  becaiue  of  the  idea  he
e riter tain ed  that  they  would  grow.
Very  few  believed  they  would  grow.
And  to-day  where  can  you  had  a
better  land  for  fruit  than  this  I  I
suppose  when  we  came  many
thought  if  we  could  raise  bread
enough,  it  would  be  as  much  as  we
could  do,  there  being  frost  every
month  ot  the  vear.  But  now  it  is
so  charming  a  place  that  many  covet
it.  When  they  got  up  that  raid
against  us  a  lew  years  ago,  I  was
credibly  informed  that  there  were
certain  men  here  who  actually  went
rou  d  and  selected  the  places  they
would  occupy  !  They  indicted
Brigham  Young,  Daniel  H.  Wells,
and  others  fur  alleged  crimes,  and
the  hope  was  that  we  would  scare
away  trom  here  and  then  places


104


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


could  be  had  for  the  choosing.
But  we  came  here  to  stay,  here
we  expect  to  stay,  and  here  we  shall
fit  a)  as  long  as  we  Jo  right.  And
\ve  shall  not  only  stay  here,  but  we
shall  spread  abroad,  and  the  day  will
come—  and  this  is  another  predic-
tion of  Joseph  Smith's — I  want  to
remind  you  of  it,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  when  good  government,
constitutional  government — liberty
— will  be  found  among  the  Latter-
Hay  Saints,  and  it  will  be  sought  for
in  vain  elsewhere  ;  when  the  Con
«~£titution  of  this  land  and  republican
government  ami  institutions  will  be
upheld  by  this  people  who  are  now
%.q  oppressed  and  who^e  destruction
is  now  sought  so  diligently.  The
day  will  come  when  the  Constitution,
ami  free  government  under  it,  will
be  sustained  and  preserved  by  this
people.  This  is  saying  a  great  deal,
but  it  is  not  saying  any  more  than
1$  said  concerning  the  growth  of  this
jwork,  and  that  which  is  already  ac-
complished. I  have  just  turned  to
the  revelation  upon  this  subject,
which  says  :

"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,
among  the  wicked,  that  every  man
'that  will  not  take  his  sword  against
his  neighbor,  must  needs  ilee  unto
Zion  for  safety.  And  there  shall  be
gathered  unto  it  out  of  every  nation
under  heaven  :  and  it  shall  be  the
only  people  that  shall  not  be  at  war
que  with  another."

This  revelation  was  given  on  the
7th  of  March,  :631.  We  have  ah
ready  beheld  and  are  now  beholding
its  fulfilment  :  the  righteous  are
being  gathered  and  they  are  coming
with  songs  of  everlasting  joy:  ami
this  u'ii.s  given  before  there  wa&  a
gathering  place,  and  only  eleven
months  after  the  Church  wae  organ-
ized. And  it  is  a  remarkable  fact
that  to-day — I  do  not  say  it  out  of
any  improper  feeling — our  hands


as  a  people,  by  a  singular  providence,
are  free  from  the  blood  of  our  fellow-
men,  AVe  were  driven  out  of  this
land.  Our  enemies  were  not  con-
tent to  let  us  remain  in  the  States,
on  the  land  that  we  had  purchased,
they  would  not  permit  us  to  occupy
the  homes  we  had  built,  but  com-
pelled us  to  leave,  and  we  came  to
the  Eoeky  Mountains.  And  when
the  civil  war  broke  out  President
Lincoln  sent  a  communication  to
Governor  Young,  asking  him  if  he
could  send  troops  to  guard  the  con-
tinental highway  and  preserve  it
from  the  attacks  of  Indians.  He
responded  by  sending  out  companies
of  cavalry.  They  spent  the  time  iu
guarding  the  mail  route  against  the
Indians,  and  thus,  as  I  nave  said,
our  hands  to  day  as  a  people,  are
free  from  the  blood  of  our  fellow-
citizens  by  this  singular  providence,
through  the  acts  of  our  enemies.
Had  we  remained  in  the  State  of
Illinois,  or  in  Missouri,  we  should
have  been  compelled — unless  we
had  chosen  to  occupy  a  very  anoma-
lous position — to  have  taken  sides
in  this  fratricidal  war,  a  war  which
Joseph  Smith  iu  the  year  1832,
predicted  would  take  place.  The
revelation  was  printed  in  1850 —
though  known  to  the  church  lonj
before — stating  that  the  war  shouh
commence  between  the  north  and
soutl],  at  South  Carolina.  I  suppose
there  is  not  a  boy  who  has  been
brought  up  in  this  community  who
did  not  know  of  the  revelation  years
befote  it  was  published,  and,  still
longer,  before  it  was  fulfilled.
I  ki.ow  1  was  taught  concerning
this  revelation,  when  a  boy,  and  I
knew  the  time  would  come  when
there  would  be  a  bloody  war  be-
tween the  north  and  south  and  that
it  would  commence  iu  South  Caro-
lina. Did  it  commence  there  ?  Yes.
Joseph  Smith  predicted  it  28  years


PEACE  AND  PROSPERITY  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


before  it  occurred.  And  in  the
manner  to  which  I  have  alluded,
we  were  driven  out  and  occupied
a  position  where,  though  we  did  not
go  to  the  war,  our  loyalty  to  the
Union  could  not  he  questioned,  for
we  responded  to  every  ciill  that  was
made  upon  us.  Though  we  deplored
the  war,  and  did  all  we  could  by  our
preaching,  counsels  and  warnings
to  avert  it,  we  were  true  to  our  obli-
gations ;  and  yet  at  the  same  time
— though  we  have  men  among  us
who  took  part  in  the  war — as  a  peo-
ple our  hands  are  clean  from  the
blood  of  our  fellow- men.  Our
Church  has  not  been  divided  into  a
church  north  and  a  church  south.
It  is  a  church  that  belongs  to  the
whole  people  of  the  north  and  of
the  so  ulIi,  aud  there  are  no  sec-
tional heart-burnings  in  our  midst.
God  in  his  providence  had  made
this  a  place  of  refuge  from  the  north
and  from  the  south*  They  can
come  here  without  heart-burnings
and  without  prejudice ;  no  civil
broils,  no  disunion  ;  they  have  noth-
ing to  remember  or  forget  connected
with  us.  It  is  a  church  that  is
adapted  to  all.  The  black  man  is
welcome,  and  lie  is  entitle  d  to  the
rites  of  the  Gospel,  though  the  Lord
has  shown  that  to  his  race  the
Priesthood  is  forbidden.  The  red
man,  and  the  yellow  man  and  every
man  of  every  race  and  of  every
kindred  and  of  every  tongue,  has  a
light  in  this  Church  and  will  be  re-
ceived into  it  and  have  place  in  it,
just  as  sure  as  God  has  spoken.
And  we  shall  be  preserved  from  fu-
ture broils  and  disunion  when  they
break  out ;  we  shall  stand  in  places
where  we  can  maintain  our  loyalty
and  our  truthfulness  and  our  honor,
and  at  the  same  time  not  interfere
with  the  rights  of  any  human  being.

1  have  talked  longer  than  I  in*
tended  to. It  is  probably  the  last


opportunity  I  will  have  of  addressing
you  for  some  little  time.  I  expect
to  leave  for  Washington  before
another  Sunday  comes,  I  desire
earnestly  in  my  heart  that  I  may
have  your  faith  and  prayers.  I
have  felt  great! j  strengthened  by
the  knowledge  that  I  have  had
your  faith,  your  confidence,  and
your  prayers,  and  I  go  out  now
hoping  I  shall  still  have  these,  for
they  are  more  valuable  to  me  than
anything  else.  I  should  go  weak
indeed  if  I  did  not  have  the  faith
and  prayers  and  confidence  of -my
brethren  aud  sisters.  I  do  not  be-
lieve there  is  another  representative
in  the  wrorld,  it  may  be  said — and
certainly  not  in  our  nation — who  has
more  cause  for  thanksgiving  in  this
respect  than  I  have.  1  know  I  am
backed  and  sustained  by  my  entire
constituency  ;  I  know  1  have  their
love  and  affection  ;  I  know  their
hearts  go  with  me,  and  their  feelings
aud  affections  are  always  towards
me  ;  I  know  in  almost  every  house-
hold prayers  are  offered  in  my  behalf;
it  gives  me  strength  ;  and  when  1  am
assailed  and  when  our  people  are
assailed  and  our  Territory,  it  gives
me  strength  to  know  we  are  united,
and  that  when  I  am  in  Washington,
though  I  may  be  alone— which  I  am
in  one  sense  of  the  word — I  have  an
influence  and  a  power  attending  me,
in  consequence  of  this,  that  others
do  not  have,  God  has  preserved
us,  and  he  will  preserve  us  and
overrule  evil  for  good,  I  feel
hopeful  and  cheerful  :  this  is  a
blessing  God  has  given  unto  me.
In  the  midst  of  the  darkest  hours
I  have  always  felt  exceedingly
cheerful  :  fear  has  been  taken
away  from  me.

I  pray  that  you  may  be  blessed
exceedingly  of  the  Lord  ;  that  HLs
Holy  Spirit  may  be  poured  out
upon  you  ;  that  peace  may  be  given


100


JOV  KNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


unt  you  and  union  fill  your  hearts  :
I  a*k  this  in  the  name  of  Jesus


Christ,  Amen


DISCOURSE  BY  APOSTLE  F.  D.  RICHARDS,

Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  Salt  Lake  City,  Saturday

Morning,  April  8,

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gihbs.)


THE  LORD'S  WORK— WARFARE  NOT  REQUIRED  OF  THE  SAINTS — AN
OVERRULING  PROVIDENCE  —  CORRUPTION  AND  PERJURY  IN  HIGH
PI  ACES — VIOLATION  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION — FALSE  ACCUSATION*
AGAINST  THE  SAINTS — WORDS  OF  COMFORT  AND  EXHORTATION.


The  greatly  increased  numbers  of
Israel,  an  J  the  greatly  diversified
and  multifarious  necessities  which
are  occurring,  and  which  increase
like  the  brandies  upon  a  great  *tree,
call  upon  us  each  and  ail,  to  seek
continually  for  the  mind  of  the
Lord,  that  in  all  our  varied  minis-
trations, labors  and  duties,  we  may
perform  the  same  acceptably  to  him
and  profitably  to  all  of  his  chil-
dren ;  not  only  to  the  Saints  but  to
the  inhabitants  of  all  the  earth,  in-
asmuch as  they  will  hearken  to  his
word.

We  have  a  vast  number  of  wit-
nesses and  evidences  of  the  mercy,
the  favor  and  blessing  of  God  unto
us,  as  a  people,  as  well  as  to  our-
selves individually  and  as  families,
it  being  the  privilege  of  all  who  liw
faithfully  in  Christ  Jesus  to  see  and
acknowledge  the  hand  of  God  in  all
things  throughout  their  checkered
lives.


This  morning  I  am  reminded  of
some  choice,  precious  promises
which  the  Lord  has  made  to  us  in
the  dispensation  in  which  we  live,
having  a  peculiar  application  unto
us,  though  like  blessings  may  have
been  promised  to  people  in  foimer
generations,  those  now  referred
to  were  given  'especially  to  the
Saints  of  the  last  days.  There  is
one  very  significant  saying  in  the
revelations,  you  will  find  it  in  the
Doctrine  am!  Covenants,  section
103,  beginning  at  the  19th  verse-
It  is  as  follows  :

"  Therefore  let  not  your  hearts
faint,  for  I  say  not  unto  you,  as  I  said
unto  your  fathers,  mine  angel  shall
go  up  before  you?  but  not  my  pre-
sence, but  I  say  unto  you.  mine
angel  shall  go  before  you,  and  also
my  presence,  and  in  time  ye  shall
possess  the  goodly  land/'

Here  is  a  very  definite  and  positive
assurance  that  this  work  is  His,  that


THE  LORD'S  WORK,  ETC.


107


he  is  particularly  to  figure  in  it  him-
self; that  he  has  not  entirely  com-
mitted it,  even  to  angels  ;  as  repre-
sented in  the  parable,  so  beautifully
expressed  in  the  Book  of  Mormon,
where  the  husbandman  calls  upon
his  servants  to  come  and  help  him
to  prune  his  vineyard  for  the  last
time  ;  we  are  given  to  understand
that  so  we  are  called  to  be  helpers
to  the  Lord  our  God,  to  prune  his
vineyard  for  the  last  time.

We  should  not  allow  the  cares  or
corruptions  of  the  world  to  lead  us
to  forget  that  the  work  in  which  we
are  engaged  is  the  Lord's  work ;
we  should  never  forget  that  the
work  to  which  all  are  called,  God
lias  undertaken  to  direct  Himself ;
especially  as  it  was  commenced  in
former  dispensations,  hut,  for  ob-
vious reasons,  remains  to  be  con-
summated and  perfected  in  the  dis-
pensation of  the  fulness  of  times  in
which  we  live.  The  Lord  has  also
told  us  specifically  in  his  revelations
that  it  is  his  business  to  provide
for  his  people.  Most  encouraging
words — calculated  to  increase  con-
fidence in  the  hearts  of  all  those  who
walk  by  faith  before  him.

Furthermore,  he  has  condescended
to  tell  us  in  the  revelations  given
through  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,
"For  behold  I  do  not  require  at
their  (the  Elders)  hands  to  fight
the  battles  of  Zion  ;  for  as  I  said  in
a  former  commandment,  even  so  will
I  fulfil  1  will  fight  your  battles,"
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  section
105,  verse  14.

One  after  another  passages  might
be  repeated  relating  to  the  designs
and  purposes  of  God,  all  going  to
show  that  he  has  not  let  out  the
work  to  be  done  by  chance  or  to  be
controlled  by  others,  but  that  lie
will  direct  it  himself,

Have  we  not  evidence  of  these
facts? We  have  as  pointed  and


conclusive  evidence  of  these  things,
already  before  us,  as  t  lie  Apostle  Paul
had  when  he  told  the  Hebrews  that,
through  faith  the  worlds  were  framed
by  the  word  of  God  ;  through  faith
Abraham,  when  he  was  called  to  go
out  into  a  place  which  he  should
afterwards  receive  for  an  inheritance,
obeyed  ;  by  faith  he  sojourned  in  the
land  of  promise,  etc.  Let  us  look
at  two  or  three  prominent  features
of  our  history  for  evidences  of  his
divine  favor  in  overruling  affairs  for
our  welfare  according  to  the  coun-
sels of  his  own  will.

In  former  times  there  was  much
destruction  of  life  and  a  great  deal
of  contention  between  the  enemies
of  God's  work  and  his  people.  The
latter  have  at  different  times  gone
forth,  and  that  by  the  holy  command
of  heaven,  to  mortal  combat.  The
Lord  has  told  us  in  his  revelations
of  the  last  days  concerning  the  laws
which  governed  warftire  in  the  days
of  Abraham,  of  Lehi  and  Nephi,
etc,  which  are  detailed  very  minute-
ly in  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants.
He  says  :

u  Behold  this  is  the  law  I  gave
unto  my  servant  Nephi,  and  thy  fa-
thers Joseph,  and  Jacob,  and  Isaac,
and  Abraham-,  and  all  mine  ancient
prophets  and  apostles.

And  again,  this  is  the  law  that  I
gave  unto  mine  ancients,  that  they
should  not  go  out  unto  battle  against
any  nation,  kindred,  tongue  or  peo-
ple, save  1,  the  Lord,  commanded
them.  (Doctrine  and  Covenants,
sec,  98,  verse  32,  33.)"

For  an  account  of  the  laws  that
justify  warfare  the  Saints  can  read
this  section  from  the  23rd  verse  to
the  end.

In  those  days  there  was  more  con-
tention or  mortal  combat  permitted
and  required,  in  order  to  main  tain
the  rights  oi  God's  people  and
establish righteousness  before  his


1D8


JUtllNAL  Oh  DlSUUinsES,


fece,  when  idolatrous  and  all  man-
lier of  worship,  except  that  of  the
true  and  living  God,  prevailed
among  the  nations  generally.  Bat
it  is  not  given  unto  us  that  we
should  contend  with  weapons  of
war;  that  inasmuch  as  we  serve
him,  he  will  fi^ht  our  battles  for
us.  How  has  he  done  this  1  Have
we  forgotten  how  he  managed  to
keep  us  out  of  the  late  terrible  frat-
ricidal war,  when  our  great  country
Was  divided  in  a  sanguinary  strug-
gle ?  How  did  he  graciously  regard
us?  It  Mas  by  telling  us  to  arise
aiul  go  hence.

Some  of  you  well  remember  in
what  haste  we  gathered  our  little
remaining  substance  in  Nauvoo,
leaving  our  homes  in  the  winter
season,  and  how  we  crossed  the
ri'ver  on  the  ice.  History  attests
the  fact  that  we  left  none  too
soon  to  escape  the  dire  necessity
of  taking  up  weapons  of  wiir  against
our  ft  1  low-man.  The  great  reason
Why  David  Was  not  allowed  to  build
a  house  to  the  Lord,  was  because
he  had  been  a  man  of  hlood.  Hp
had  commenced  to  gather  His  thou-
sands of  talents  of  gold  and  silver
together,  and  was  ready  to  build,
but  the  Lord  told  him  he  should
not,  that  he  had  been  too  much  a
man  of  war,  had  shed  too  much
blood  ;  but  that  he  might  get  the
materials  together,  and  thai  Solo-
mon, his  son,  should  build  a  temple
to  his  name.  It  is  plainly  to  be
seen,  in  the  wisdom  of  God,  that
the  Saints  are  not  tu  take  that  course ;
but  on  the  contrary,  the  Lord  re-
quires of  them  that  they  preserve  to
themselves  pure  hearts  and  clean
ban db  to  build  His  Temples.  ^Yas
not  this  a  great  and  wonderful  mani-
festation of  his  loving  kindness,  was
it  not  a  demonstration  to  a  great
people  of  his  tender  mercy  in  pre-
serving us  from  tli at  fratricidal  strife


that  arose  in  the  nation-  Where  is
the  heart  that  cannot  be  thankful
for  this!  Here  js  one  great,  we
may  say,  worldwide  demonstratidrt
of  his  kindness  and  goodness  ib
provide  for  his  people,  and  to  pre-
serve them  from  dire  calamities,  the
direst  of  calamities  that  overtake
the  human  family.  Let  us  then
sense  the  feeling  and  spirit  of  the
ancient  prophet  Isaiah  when
speaking  of  the  judgments  of  the
latter  days,  that  the  watchmen  should
lift  up  their  voices  and  speak  com-
forting words  to  Zion.  And  what
should  they  say?  u  Thy  God
reigneth."  That  is  the  word  to  us,
brethren  and  sisters.  u  Thy  God
reigneth."  Let  us  learn  to  know
and  sense  it,  put  our  trust  in  him,
and  learn  that  it  is  he  that  builds
up  nations,  and  it  is  he  that  levels
them  to  the  dust  ;  that  it  is  he  that
raises  up  and  makes  rulers  and  peo
pie  to  become  mighty  in  the  earth,
and  that  it  is  he  that  permits  them
to  go  down  into  insignificance,  shame
and  contempt.

How  has  it  been  when  our  ene-
mies in  our  midst,  in  violation  of  a
sacred  principle  of  the  Constitution,
have  said  that  we  should  not  bear
arms,  which  we  had  been  wont  to  do
in  celebrating  the  anniversary  of
our  national  independence,  and  for
our  own  protection  in  this  new  and
Indian  country,  and  that  too  in
accordance  with  a  provision  of  the
Constitution  ;  when  we  submitted
in  silence  to  this  indignity,  what
has  been  wrought  out  in  our  behalf?
As  if  the  heavens  took  momentary
record  of  it,  from  that  day  to  this
the  enmity  that  has  existed  a  mom
the  unprincipled,  low  and  degraded
Lamanites  upon  our  borders  has
been  hushed  to  silence  ;  the  manner
in  which  we  have  dealt  with  them
has  been  felt  for  good.  Terrible
wars  have  been  prevented  by  the


influence  of  the  Latter  day  Saints
among  them,  until  to-day  it  is  not  [
necessary  that  any,  hi  this  region  of
country,  should  have  arms  to  pro-
tect themselves  unless  it  be  from
professed  friends,  Is  there  no  God
in  this?  Look  all  aruuud  us,  God
has  made  even  our  adversaries  to  be
at  peace  with  us.  He  has  made  the
blessings  of  peace  to  be  multiplied
around  us,  until  the  very  occasion
for  weapons  of  defence  is  removed.
The  wicked  had  no  sooner  fori >iddeu
us  to  bear  anus  when  God  in  his
tender  mercies  and  parental  solici-
tude removed  the  very  occasion  of  j
defence,  leaving  us  at  peace  with  all
around  us.  The  glorious  tidings,
'  peace  on  earth  and  goo  1  will  to
man/1  have  come  sounding  to  us
through  the  ages,  and  they  are  being
echoed  and  re-echoed  to  us  by  the
voice  of  those  who  hold  the  keys  of
the  kingdom,  and  we  see  it  not  only
in  word  but  in  power  and  demon-  [
stration  of  truth.

These  are  none  other  than  the
blessings  of  God  unto  us,  my  breth-
ren and  sisters.  We  ought  to  think
of  these  things;  we  ought  to  acknow-
ledge in  gratitude  this  dispensation
of  his  providence  ;  and  we  should
make  it  our  business  to  sanctify  our-
selves before  him  ;  yea,  let*  the  man
that  has  taken  to  his  cups  depart
from  them  ;  and  let  he  who  has
drunk  of  the  spirit  of  the  world,
and  who  fraternizes  with  the  un-
godly, turn  from  the  error  of  his
ways,  wash  himself  from  the  filth
of  unrighteousness  and  purify  him:
self  before  God,  and  call  upon  his
name  that  he  may  forgive  and  extend
his  pardoning  favor  It  is  to  be
deplored  that  there  are  so  many  that
are  so  easily  to  be  civilized  by  this  '
damning  "  civilization1  that  has
.come  among  us  ;  it  is  an  occasion  of
sorrow  to  the  Latter-day  Saints  that  j
so  many  are  so  easily  drawn  away  to


affiliate  with  the  ungodly.  When
we  remember  the  mercies  and  bles-
sings of  God  to  us,  it  is  a  fitting
time  to  turn  and  seek  his  face  ana
favor  afresh,  arid  renew  our  cove-
nauts  before  him,  and  become  wor-
thy  iu  his  sight.

I  might  enumerate  many  other
instances  of  the  goodness  and  mercy
of  God  unto  us,  how  he  fed  the
suffering  Saints  with  quails  on  the
banks  of  the  Mississippi,  how  he
sunt  gulls  to  rid  us  of  the  crickets
when  they  threatened  us  with  star-
vation here.  H  iV  •  •

I  must  refer  to  the  time  when  the
Lord  permitted  the  United  States  to
send  ati  army  to  Utah.  It  was  told
to  us  that  there  were  a  million  of
bayonets  in  the  States  ready  to  be
turned  toward  Utah.  We  did  not
count  them,  but  we  know  the  de-
tails of  their  coming  and  how  the
soldiery  arrived  here.  They  came
with  their  mouths  full  of  ribaldry^
full  of  threatening*,  full  of  animus
ami  destruction  towards  President
Young,  his  family,  the  Apostles,
and  towards  all  that  were  imme-
diately associated  with  them,  threat-
ening to  hang  them  like  Hainan
upon  a  tree.  But  God  in  his  mercy
before  they  got  here  very  much
cooled  their  ardor  ;  and  when  they
arrived  they  came  as  harmless  as
any  4th  of  July  celebrators.  They
marched  in  quiet  through  our  streets,
no  man  daring  to  commit  an  indig-
nity as  they  passed.

Our  Heavenly  Father  sanctified
this  to  our  good,  for  while  they
scattered  much  means  among  us,
scarcely  an  act  of  hostility  was  com-
mitted, and,  when  the  time  of  terri-
ble destruction  came  they  marched
away  to  the  violence  of  death.  Is
not  the  hand  of  God  to  be  seen  in
this  i  If  so,  should  we  not  acknow-
ledge with  thanksgiving  his  mercy
in  thus  making  us  the  objects  of


110


JOURNAL  uK  msuoL  iisE*.


such  care.  We  ought  to  bestow
the  best  efforts  and  energies  of  our
lives  to  build  up  his  kingdom,
establish  his  righteousness,  and
make  him  our  friend  for  time  and
eternity.

1  would  not  dwell  too  lengthily
upon  these  things,  although  they
show  the  divine  goodness  and  ten-
derness.  Is  there  a  loving  father
that  deals  more  affectionately  with
his  children  than  thi*  1  Could  the
Lord  deal  more  lovingly  with  us  ?  It
is  to  be  feared  that  his  tender  mer-
cies are  so  abundant,  and  we  become
bo  used  to  them  as  to  grow  un-
grateful

A  few  words  in  regard  to  the  fun-
damental law  established  for  the
guidance  of  the  people  of  this  great
nation,  called  the  Constitution  of
the  United  States,  that  instrument
was  framed  by  our  forefathers,  who
purchased  the  power  to  do  so  with
their  blood  ;  t  icy  were  men  who
went  into  the  revolutionary  war
pledging  their  lives,  their  fortunes,
their  sacred  honor,  and  placed  every-
thing they  possessed  upon  ttye  altar
of  liberty.  The  Constitution  they
adopted  has  been  admitted  by  Eu-
ropean statesmen  to  be  the  grandest
palladium  of  human  rights  known
upon  the  earth.  The  Hag  of  our
nation  has  commanded  respect  in
every  part  of  this  habitable  globe,
whether  on  land  or  sea.

All  representatives  and  officers  of
the  government,  state  or  national,
from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  lift
tip  their  hands  to  heaven  and  swear
that  they  will  observe  that  Constitu-
tion and  the  laws  of  the  nation  or
State,  as  the  office  may  require,  to
the  best  of  their  knowledge  and
ability,  so  help  them  God.  When
Congress  so  far  descends  as  to  make
special  laws,  and  send  forth  its  legis-
lative missiles  to  us  bearing  the
odor,  power,  and  character  of  at-


tain «ler,  and  ex  post  facto  laws;
when  they  can  provide,  directly  or
indirectly,  for  conviction  without
trial  by  jury ;  when  they  frame  and
pass  measures  having  for  their  ob-
ject the  deprivation  or  spoliation  of
rights  common  to  all  citize  ns,  and
that  in  direct  opposition  to  the  pro-
visions of  the  Constitution,  as  ap-
pears on  the  face  of  the  Edmunds'
bill,  they  themselves  violate  that
oath  of  office  which  they  took  before
God  and  their  country.  They  may,
standing  in  high  places,  think  that
it  does  not  become  citizens  to  ques-
tion their  acts;  but  citizens  of  this
Republic  are  the  sovereigns  of  the
nation  ;  and  when  the  Constitution
was  created  it  was  provided  that
every  power  not  granted  by  that
instrument  was  retained  by  the  peo-
ple. Public  men,  in  the  true  spirit
of  the  Constitution  of  our  govern-
ment, are  the  servants  of  the  people,
put  in  office  to  administer  the  will
of  the  people  as  defined  in  that
instrument.

When  men  in  high  places  forget
themselves,  and  in  violation  of  their
oaths  dictate  or  forbid  what  shall  or
what  shall  not  be  observed  as  reli-
gious rites,  they  become  amen  aide
to  the  higher  laws,  and  will  have  to
answer  to  the  charge  of  perjury
to  an  immortal  court,  from  whose
decisions  mortals  have  found  no
mode  of  appeal  by  any  bill  of  ex-
ceptions.

The  principles  upon  which  our
government  is  founded  are  most  ex-
cellent, and  to  all  intents  and  pur-
poses most  satisfactory.  The  great
I  and  learned  Webster,  C!ay,  and
their  contemporaries,  considered
them  a  standard  of  liberty — far
above  that  of  any  other  country
upon  our  globe ;  something  that
every  American  had  cause  to  be
proud  of.  If  the  American  nation
will  be  governed  by  its  doctrines,  it


will  extend  to  the  whole  human
family  the  precious  boon  of  liberty,
and  will  make  this  laud  in  reality
au  asylum  for  the  oppressed  of  all
nations.  But  Ave  have  come  to  a
time  when  Congress  has  undertaken
to  dictate  our  ethics,  to  declare  what
we  may  or  may  not  accept  as  tenets
of  religion.  This  is  a  right  or  power
that  is  not  conveyed  in  the  Constitu-
tion ;  but  on  the  contrary,  Congress
is  expressly  prohibited  from  making
any  law  establishing  any  form  of
religion  or  preventing  the  free  exer-
cise: thereof;  this  right  of  worship-
ing God  according  to  the  dictates  of
one's  own  conscience  is  the  riidit  of
every  American  citizen.

Aside  from  what  may  be  pro-
nounced legal,  there  is  an  equity
side  of  the  court  to  which  all  God-
fearing people  have  recourse*  One
principle  of  which  the  courts  of  the
natiou  seem  to  have  taken  no  con-
sideration, hut  which  the  Latter-day
Saints  cannot  afford  to  pass  un-
noticed,  is  this  : Wherein  it  is

flven  in  the  Constitution  that  the
tates  shall  make  no  law  to  impair
the  obligation  of  contracts.  I  wish
to  ask  the  people,  nob  in  the  legal
sense,  but  in  the  sense  of  equity,  of
righteousness  and  eternal  truth,  if
the  marriage  relation  is  not  to  all
intents  and  purposes  a  contract]
Do  we  *not  enter  into  a  covenant,
a  contract,  an  agreement  with  our
wives.  Yes  ;  not  only  a  contract,
an  agreement  of  a  civil  nature,  as  it
is  regarded  in  the  world,  but  our
contracts  are  of  a  higher  order,  of
a  more  sacred  nature  extending  as
they  do  in  perpetuity  from  time  into
eternity,  Now,  if  it  is  a  violation
of  States  rights  to  pass  a  law  im-
pairing the  obligation  of  contracts
in  common  financial  matters,  is  it  ,
not  a  graver  and  more  serious
violation  of  the  Constitution  to  pass
a  law  impairing  the  obligation  of


contracts  as  between  man  and  wife  ?
It  is  laid  down  by  the  most  eminent
,  law  writers  of  our  country  that  pro-
1  perly  maintained  marital  relation-
ship is  the  true  basis  of  all  hu-
man society  ;  it  needs  the  solemn
covenants  of  husband  and  wife  to
be  taken  into  account,  and  then
what  follows  I  The  reasons  why
i  contracts  and  faith  in  them  should
not  be  violated  is  because  of  vested
rights  that  accrue  under  those  con-
tracts ;  and  have  you  any  vested
rights,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
under  the  contracts  that  you  have
made  with  your  wives  and  husbands,
|  have  you  not  acquired  under  those
covenants  and  contracts  the  most
precious  of  vested  rights— those  of
sons  and  daughters  given  you  in  the
flesh  1  These  are  possessory  rights,
the  value  of  which  bear  no  com-
parison with  any  thing  that  can  be
called  gdods  or  chattels.  We  look
upon  the  increase  of  our  families,
as  the  foundation  of  our  eternal
dominion,  we  cannot  but  look  upon
any  hand  impairing  the  obligation
of  these  contracts  as  striking  at  the
very  root  of  our  prosperity.  Our
|  children  are  our  vested  rights  grow-
ing out  of  these  holy  relations,  rights
not  only  of  a  temporal  but  of  an
eternal,  and  finally  immortal  charac-
ter, and  of  the  highest  possible  con-
sideration.

I  apprehend  while  I  talk  upon
this  subject,  that  it  is  very  improba-
ble that  the  courts  of  the  world
would  regard  these  matters  in  any
such  light,  but  they  are  matters
which  pertain  to  the  laws  of  the
living  God  before  whose  court  we
shall  all  appear  and  our  rights  be
vindicated  ;  those  who  have  under-
taken to  deprive  us  of  these  rights
will  also  appear  and  on  such  a  writ
of  errors  as  will  bring  them  effec-
tually within  the  jurisdiction  of  the
court


112


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


The  Lord  has  given  unto  us  those
rights,  which  we  are  learning  to  ap-
preciate, but  which  the  world  know
nothing  of.  Is  it  to  be  wondered  at
that  they  do  many  things,  as  did
those  who  slew  the  Savior,  concern*
ing  whom  he  said,  **They  know
not  what  they  dof

The  rulers  of  our  land  have  un-
dertaken to  set  snares  for  our  feet,
to  bring  us  into  subjection  to  the
political  will  of  the  Republican  party
to  teach  us  how  to  promote  party
discord,  be  oppressed  with  heavy
taxes  and  become  burdened  with
debt.  Let  us  put  our  trust  in  the
living  God,  and  see  that  while  we
violate  no  law  of  man  unnecessarily,
that  we  do  not  violate  any  of  the
laws  of  God,  so  that  we  may  be
entitled  to  His  protection  and  that
his  blessing  may  abide  with  us.

Not  desiring  to  occupy  too  much
time,  I  won  1<1  exhort  my  brethren
ittid  sisters  to  renew  their  diligence
in  trying  to  honor  the  Lord  by  keep
ing  his  commandments,  remembering  j
our  obligations  to  each  other ;  that
we  continue  preaching  the  Gospel
to  the  nations,  gathering  the  honest
in  heart  who  receive  the?  word
through  the  ministrations  of  the
Elders;  and  inasmuch  as  this  is
God's  work  we  have  no  need  to  fear.
There  are  those  who  dwelt  here  in
1848  -9,  who  for  clays  and  weeks,
scarcely  tasted  bread.  Those  who
hnve  passed  through  these  scenes
will  never  fear  anything  that  may
come  upon  us  again.  I  often  think
of  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the
Savior  when  upon  the  earth,  who
when  Herod  the  Great  pent  word  to
him,  inquiring  who  this  Jesus  of
Nazareth  was ;  the  answer  of  the
Savior  being,  Go  tell  him  that  the
birds  of  the  air  have  nests,  and  the
foxes  have  holes,  but  the  Son  of  Man
hath  not  where  to  lay  His  head.
Think  of  ii  my  friends  ;  He  by  whom


the  worlds  were  created,  who  gave
the  law  upon  Mount  Sinai  ;  He  who
communicated  with  the  brother  of
Jared,  directing  him  to  cross  the  sea
and  people  this  continent  ;  He  who
was  and  is  our  great  Ruler  came  and
dwelt  in  the  flesh,  instead  of  making
himself  the  possessor  of  houses  ami
lands  and  earthly  substance,  had  not
where  to  lay  His  head.  And  after
passing  through  a  life  of  sorrows  he
was  tried  for  His  life,  wheu  the  judge
washed  his  hands,  saying,  he  found
no  fault  in  1  lira*  The  fact  was
He  was  above  the  law,  He  was  with-
out, sin,  and  of  the  tilings  of  which
they  tried  to  convict  him  he  was  not
guilty,  wherein  he  said  he  was  the
Sou  of  God,  which  they,  in  their
blind  ignorance,  looked  upon  as
blasphemy.

Now,  we  are  charged  with  blas-
phemy, because  we  believe  and  de-
clare that  the  holy  Priesthood  has
been  restored  to  us  from  heaven.  It
is  made  blasphemy  to  believe  that
Peter,  James  and  John  were  sent
from  heaven  to  earth  to  ordain
Joseph  and  Oliver,  and  because,  as
they  had  been  instructed  to  do,  they
ordained  others  to  the  same  Priest-
hood,  and  then  commissioned  them
to  go  to  all  the  world  and  preach  the
Gospel.  This  is  put  forth  and  pub-
lished as  one  of  the  blasphemies
that  we  believe  in  which  has  made
us  to  incur  the  displeasure  and
wrath  of  this  self-righteous  genera-
tion. While  we  contemplate  that
the  Prophets  of  God  have  been
slain,  their  blood  ruthlessly  shed,
and  the  nation  has  never  made  an
expression  to  exculpate  themselves
from  the  act,  they  have  never  eveii
expressed  their  disapproval  ofr  jt,
but,  on  the  contrary,  multitudes
have  said,  they  were  glad  of  it,  but
that  they  disliked  the  way  in  which
it  was  done.  '  i[

While  this  is  upon  the  nation  and


THE  I/IRD'S  WOKK,  ETC.


113


until  they  wash  their  h rinds  of  it,  we
can  but  look  upon  them  with  sorrow
and  apprehension  and  dread  for
thus  acquiescing  in  breaking  and
overriding  the  fundamental  laws  of
the  land  ;  for  if  these  things  can  be
inflicted  upon  us  they  can  be  done
to  others.  And  they  have  been  to
others.  Do  you  not  recollect  when
the  army  came  here,  it  was  the  na-
tion's first  effort  against  the  u  Mor-
mons/' against  what  they  were
pleased  to  term  a  M  twin  relic" —
polygamy ;  and  having  extirpated
the  *4  twin  relic"  of  the  south-
slavery,  which  was  deemed  necessary
to  secure  the  triumph  of  the  repub-
lican arms,  now  the  attack  is  made
again  upon  the  people  representing
the  remaining  11  relic."  They  and
we  are  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  it
becomes  us  to  move  on  in  all  our
duties  quietly,  peaceably  and  prayer-
fully. The  nation,  of  course,  can
cause  us  a  great  deal  of  bodily  and
mental  suffering  if  God  permits.
They  have  already  shown  what  they
are  capable  of  doing  by  their  depri-
vations and  arbitrary  rule  in  the
south  ;  and  we  have  every  reason  to
believe  they  would  du  as  much  for
us  were  it  the  pleasure  of  the  Al-
mighty to  permit  them.

The  few  men  now  sitting  in  Con-
gress, from  the  Southern  States,  who
had  the  manhood  and  the  moral
courage  to  protest  against  the  inea- !
sure,  which  has  since  become  a  law,
aimed  directly  at  our  liberty  arid
rights, knew  from  experience  the
effects  of  military  law,  and  those
usurpations  which  have  tended  to
ruin  their  country  after  the  desola-  j
tion  caused  by  the  war. They  had
been  through  the  furnace,  they  could
feel  anew  the  burnings  of  the  fire,  r
and  they  could  see  the  grief  into
which  m  c  are  to  be  crowded.

The  question  with  us  is,  are  we
sufficiently  devoted  to  the  interests

No.  8.


of  the  kingdom  of  God  to  enable  us
to  confidently  believe,  without  a
doubt,  that  he  will  sustain  us  in  all
that  we  may  be  called  upon  to  pass
through  1  If  we  are  he  certainly
will  not  permit  any  more  to  come
upon  us  than  we  can  endure  and
that  will  be  lor  our  good  ;  because
he  is  that  God  who  is  nearer  to  us
than  a  friend  or  a  brother.

He  had  told  us  that  those  who
kept  his  commandments  had  no  need
to  break  the  laws  of  the  land.  We
made  no  law  nor  passed  any  ordi-
nance contrary  to  the  laws  of  the
laud  ;  the  law- makers  of  the  nation
ma-le  the  law  which  brought  us  in
conflict  with  our  government ;  aud,
!  therefore,  we  must  look  to  him  to
overrule  this  conflict,  and  trust  that
he  will  do  better  for  us  than  we
know  how  to  ask  or  even  to  think
for  ourselves  ;  provided,  we  pursue
the  path  of  duty  faithfully  and
steadfastly.

|  I  pray  that  we  may  so  take  con-
:  sideratiou  of  our  ways  that  we  shall
i  not  feel  vindictive  to  those  who  are
vindictive  towards  us  ;  but,  oti  the
contrary,  rise  above  such  a  feeling
upon  the  more  elevated  platform
which  was  introduced  by  the
Savior,  in  which  he  tauirht  his
disciples  to  do  good  to  them  who
ftespitefully  used  and  persecuted
them.  This  is  a  lesson  that  we  have-
not  fullv  learned.

May  the  Lord  bless  and  prosper
all  who  seek  to  do  his  will,  and  may
his  mercy  be  multiplied  to  all  na-
tions until  the  ends  of  the  earth
shall  see  the  salvation  of  our  God,
and  until  the  kingdoms  of  this  world
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  God
and  of  His  Christ  ;  may  we  live
aud  our  generations  after  us  to  per-
form efficient  and  faithful  service  in
bringing  about  his  purposes.  Oh,
that  our  enemies  might  see  the  error
of  their  trays,  repent  as  in  dust  and

VoL  XXIII,


Jfi1


JOTKNAL  Oh  DISCOURSES


ashes  and  place  themselves  in  aeon
dit  ion  to  receive  the  favor  of  God,
and  thereby  escape  the  terrible
judgments  that  must  sooner  or  later
overtake  those  who  wilfully  battle
against  the  truth.

It  remains  tor  us  to  continue  to
bear  our  testimony  to  the  world,  to
build  our  Temples,  in  which  to  per-


form the  work  for  ourselves  and
our  dead,  essential  to  salvation  and
exaltation  in  his  kingdom,  and  to
i  build  up  a  Ziou  to  the  glory  of  God.
That  this  may  be  our  determined
purpose  to  a  faithful  consummation,
I  humbly  pray,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
our  Lord,  Allien.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afteknoon,  Ape  a  ft  1881,


(Reptrrted  by  Geo,  F.  Gibbs.)


MODKKX  FULFILLMENT  OF  ANyiKNT  PROPHECY  —  RISE  OF  JOSKPH  THE
PROPHET  — ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST  —  PERSECU-
TIONS OF  THE  SAINTS  —  THEIR  UNDYING  FAITH  IN  GOD  —  THE
WORLD  PROVING  JOSEPH  SMITH  A  PRuPHET  —  SATAN  RUSILY  AT
WORK— THE  GOSPEL  OF  LIBERTY  AND  HUMANITY.


It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I
meet  with  you,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  in  Conference  to-day.  And
though  in  some  respects  I  am  not
feeling  very  eager  to  address  so  large
a  congregation  as  has  assembled  this
afternoon,  still  we  all  know  that  if
we  can  get  the  influence  and  assis-
tance of  t lie  Spirit  of  the  Lord,
there  is  no  difficulty  in  speaking  or
advancing  such  thoughts  and  sug-
gestions as  are  suitable.

It  seems  to  me  that  of  all  men  I
ought  to  be  most  thankful  I  cer-
tainly feel  exceedingly  happy  in  being


in  your  midst,  in  beholding  your
faces,  in  sharing  in  your  meetings,
in  partaking  of  your  spirit;  I  am
thankful  I  have  this  privilege,  for
such  I  esteem  it,

I  have  been  absent,  as  you  all
know,  for  some  sixteen  weeks.
During  my  absence  I  have  enjoyed
myself  very  much,  that  is,  consider-
ing the  circumstances-  I  have  had
excellent  health,  and  I  do  not  know
that  I  ever  felt  better  in  my  life,
under  the  circumstances,  than  I
have  during  the  past  winter.  Of
course  there  has  been  considerable


MODERN  FULFILLMENT  UF  ANCIENT  PROPHECY,  ETC.  115


discussion  upon  our  cause  and  ques-
tion, and  considerable  has  been  said
about  us ;  but  so  far  as  my  individ-
ual feelings  have  been  concerned,  I
have  not  been  disabled,  not  for  a
single  second.  There  is  an  excite-
ment  about  this  warfare,  and  the
consciousness  that  victory  will  even-
tually perch  upon  our  banners  and
that  we  are  on  the  winning  side,
that  makes  such  a  contest  pleasura-
ble. I  know  this,  that  when  every-
thing is  still — when  the  stream  is
quietly  flowing  along  without  a  rip-
ple— I  begin  to  be  uneasy.  I  expect
you  do.  We  have  been  accustomed  ,
now  for  so  many  years — in  fact  it
may  be  said  from  the  begin  Ding-
to  contending  with  the  turbulence
of  the  elements  ;  to  battling  with
angry  waves,  that  it  seems  to  be  the
natural  condition  for  us  to  be  in.
At  any  rate,  we  know  when  this  is
the  case  that  somebody  is  a  little
disturbed  about  us,  and  that  some
think  it  necessary  to  be  stirring  up
opposition  against  us.  With  the  ac-
tivity which  prevails  at  home  in  the
various  departments  of  the  work,  the
zeal  that  is  being  manifested  among
the  Saints  by  the  leading  men  in  the
various  Stakes  of  Ziou  :  with  the
labors  of  the  home  missionaries,  tl\e
Young  Men's  and  Young  Women's
Mutual  Improvement  Associations,
the  Relief  Societies,  the  Sunday
Schools,  and  the  various  organiza-
tions which  have  taken  shape  in  our
midst,  together  with  the  union  of
the  people,  and  the  sending  of  mis-
sionaries abroad  in  such  numbers  :
with  all  these  things  at  work,  tend-
ing to  consolidate  the  people,  to
make  them  of  one  heart  and  one
mind,  to  preach  the  principles  of
truth,  to  declare  to  the  in  habitants
of  the  earth  the  salvation  of  our
God,  and  to  leave  them  without  ex-
cuse for  rejecting  the  truth  ;  I  say,
with  all  these  activities  at  home


and  abroad,  together  with  the
building  of  Temples— a  great  work
which  devolves  upon  us  as  a  people  ;
with  all  these  things,  it  is  no  won-
der to  me  that  opposition  should  be
fierce,  and  that  there  should  be  a
great  deal  of  talk  about  the  "  Mor-
mons." We  have  been  taught  from
the  beginning  that  this  would  be
the  case  ;  the  earliest  teach iugs  that
I  can  remember  were  to  this  effect,
leading  me  forward,  as  you  were  led
forward,  to  anticipate  just  such
things,  just  such  a  warfare  as  that
in  which  we  are  involved.  Year  by
year,  as  this  work  develops,  as  the
purposes  of  God  unfold,  do  we  see
the  literal,  the  definite  fulfillment  of
the  predictions  that  were  uttered
years  and  years  ago  concerning  the
work  of  God.

The  Prophet  Joseph  Smith's  name
has  been  known  for  good  and  evil
among  all  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  being  regarded  by  some  as  a
man  divinely  inspired,  a  prophet  of
the  living  God,  his  words  treasured
up  as  the  words  of  a  prophet  should
be  ;  and  by  others,  he  is  looked
upon  as  an  imposter,  an  ignoramus,
a  man  in  fact  too  bad  to  live.  This
Joseph  Smith,  who  is  thus  known
and  has  this  repute  among  various
people,  is  gradually  being  lifted  up
and  made  prominent,  and  through
his  being  lifted  up  and  made  promi
nent  the  name  of  our  God,  whose
■  servant  he  was,  is  being  glorified.
Thus  Joseph  Smith,  whose  predic-
tions were  uttered  fifty  years  ago,
and  from  that  time  down  until  he
sealed  his  testimony  with  his  blood
nearly  37  years  ago— this  Joseph
Smith  is  being  proved  to  be  a  pro-
:  phet,  not  by  the  Latter-day  Saints
j  alone— for  we  are  doing  compara-
tively little  towards  the  vindication
of  his  prophetic  views,  of  this
divine  calling;  for  we  are  a  feeble
people  ;  we  are  a  people  few  in  num


KG


JolKNAL  oy [»ist  ui'i;M>.


■

ber,  but  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,
numerous  as  thev  aie,  by  their  words
hi  d  fccts,  are  establishing  thedhinity
of  his  musion  and  proving  fchit  lie  is
the  man  that  we  liave  testified  lie  was
fr*  in  i lie  Wginitii  g.

To  me  the  wavs  of  the  Lord  aie
Vfiy  wonderiul  when I  thus  con-
template them. How  wonderful  are
the  Lord's  w  01  ks ; How  wondrous
air  His  doings  in  the  midst  of  the
inhabitants  of  the earth  !  How
strangely, and by  what  sirtuiar
meant*  he  brings  to  pass  bis  jjrent
and  glorious  purposes,  using  men,
using  nations,  using  governments,
as  seems  good  to  him,  to  effect  Iris
divine  purposes  ! Those  of  us  who
have  been  brought  up  in  this  Chun  h,
who  can  remember  the  days  1 1  at
are  past,  the  days  of  our  weakness,
the  days  of  our  oppression,  the  days
when  we  wen-  ;i  broken  and  a  peeled
people,  can  call  to  mind  how  unlikely
it  was  that  the  teachings  we  have
received  concerning  this  wmk  would
ever  be  fulfilled. We  had  taiih
thnt  they  Would  be*  But  it  required
the  eye  of  faith  and  a  heart  of  laith
to  see  or  to  comprehend  tlnrt  they
would  be,  as  they  have  been,  devel
oped  through  the  years  that  have
intervened  until  the  present  lime.
The  fulfillment  of  these  teachings
and  predictions  has  brought  to  us
confirmation  of  our  faith ;  brought
to  us  more  and more with  the
greatest  hupressiveness  the  truth  of
that  w  hich  w  e  were  told,  and  which,
as  I  have  said,  was  so  unlikely  to  be
fulfilled.

In  the  beginning,  this  work,  be-
fore it  was  an  organized  body,  that  is
when  it  was  in  its  embryo,  when
but  a  few  men  had  any  knowledge
concerning  the  purposes  of  God  con-
nected with  it,  excited  hatred  and  j
brought  forth  contention.  An  ob-
scure young  man,  w  ithout  worldly  |
ii  fluenee, without  advantageous


tin  foundings,  declared that  God
l  ad  Again  spoken  from  the  heavens
and  that  angels  had  again  descended
to  the earth  ; testified that  the
Chinch  of  Christ  was  about  to  be
re-established  with  its  old  powers,
and  that  the  everlasting  (Jospel,  the
old  plan  of  salvation  was  to  be  again
reMoied  in  its  original  purity,  and
with  it  the  c>3d  authority,  the  ever-
lasting  Priesthood,  by  means  of  which
men  ;;nd  women  could  1  e  inducted
into  the  Chinch  of  God  bv  the  ad-
ininistiation  of  the  old  ordinances,
and  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
with  its  attendant  powers  and  bles-
sings. The  mere  declaration  of  these
tilings  by  a  young  man  who  w  as  thus
obscure,  without  influence,  without
the  prestige  of  education  or  birth,
immediately  excited  a  fever  in  the
neighborhood  ;  an  excitement  was
aroused,  and  men  began  to  perse-
cute him  ;  they  began  to  tell  lies
about  him ;  they  began  to  bring
false  charges  against  luun  There
was  a  restlessness begotten  that
could  not  be  accounted  for  upon
natural  principles,  or  upon  anything
they  could  see  with  their  natural
eyes  ;  it  was  entirely  unaccountable.
His  family  was  calumniated  ;  he  was
calumniated  and slandered  ;  every
act  of  his  life  was  turned  over  and
made  evil  of,  and  charges  of  wrong-
doing were  bulled  against  him  of

which  he  was  entirely  innocent,  and
for  which  there  was  not  even  the
color  or  semblance  of  truth.

On  next  Wednesday,  fifty-one
years  will  have  elapsed  since  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints  was  organized.  It  then
consisted  of  six  members.  Not
very  numerous  ;  you  can  count  them
on  yuur  lingers.  It  might  be  thought
that  so  insignificant  a  body  of  people
would  escape  attention.  Not  so,
however.  The  whole  countryside
was  aroused. A  terrible  thing  had


MuDEKX  FULFILLMENT  UF  AN  (.-IK  NT  PROPIIKCY,  ETC


117


ken  place.  This  Joseph  Smith
had  dare* I  to  organize  a  Church.
He  had  found  some  gold  plates,  had
a  "golden  Bible/1  He  had  been  a
money  digger ;  and  he  had  done  a
great  many  things,  and  at  last  his
audacity  had  culminated  in  the  or-
ganization of  a  church.  As  I  have
said  the  whole  countryside  was  in  a
flame.

"  We  cannot  endure  this  ;  it  is  a
disgrace  to  our  city,  our  country,  our
township,  to  let  such  a  vile  fellow
as  he  palm  his  impositions  on  the
public. We  must  put  a  stop  to  it.*'

The  result  was,  accusations,  crim-
inal accusations.  Joseph  Smith  was
brought  before  officers  of  the  law
upon  every  conceivable  complaint.
The  papers  heralded  his  disgrace
throughout  all  the  neighborhood,  as
far  as  they  had  circulation,  deter-
mined to  lie  him  down.  There  are
certain  fabulous  attributes  incor-
rectly ascribed  to  the  creature  called
the  octopus — or  devil-fish.  It  is
said  that  when  it  wants  to  devour
its  victims,  it  ejects  an  inky  sub-
stance that  fills  the  whole  water
around  so  that  it  can  the  more  easily
capture  its  prey.  It  was  something
in  this  manner  that  the  press  and
pulpit  endeavored  to  stifle  the  truth
and  to  destroy  those  who  testified
that  they  had  received  it.  The
whole  country  was  filled  with
every  kind  of  slander.  Human
imagination  was  racked  to  invent
stories.  They  said  that  Joseph
Smith  had  tried  to  establish  his
divine  calling  by  attempting  to  walk
upon  the  water,  with  cunningly
arranged  planks  placed  a  short  dis-
tance beneath  the  surface  of  the
water,  but  that,  fortunately,  he
had  been  detected  in  his  imposition.
They  said  he  had  tried  to  raise  the
dead,  and  that  the  man  whom  he
tried  to  raise  nearly  died,  because
the  apparatus  which  he  had  arranged


for  him  to  get  air  became  accidently
deranged.  There  was  no  end  of
stories  told  by  iguoranc  people,  vile
people,  deluded  people,  wicked
people,  and  even  by  men  who
called  themselves  ministers  of  the
GospeL  You  cannot  think  of  any-
thing that  was  not  told,  that  was
not  sworn  to — any  number  of  wit-
nesses could  be  obtained  to  testify
to  the  truth  of  these  falsehoods.
At  the  same  time  it  was  said  it
would  only  be  a  little  while  until
the  system  of  which  he  was  the  head
would  burst  up.  "  We  have  only
to  wait  a  while  and  it  will  disap-
pear." But  it  did  not  disappear.

The  Elders  went  forth  regardless
of  the  slanders,  regardless  of  the
falsehoods,  regardless  of  the  calum-
nies, preaching  the  word  of  God,
pleaching  it  in  the  spirit  aud  power
of  God.  Regardless  of  all  these
tilings  Uiey  went — persecuted,  de-
rided, their  names  cast  out  as  eviL
Men  considered  it  almost  a  disgrace
to  talk  to  them  ;  if  they  received
them  into  their  houses  their  neigh-
bors looked  upon  them  as  though
they  were  entertaining  lepers.
11  What,  have  you  got  a  i  Mormon'
in  your  house  I  Do  you  know  what
these  people  are  f

Traveling  without  purse  or  scrip,
as  their  predecessors  had  done  in
primitive  days  of  Gospel  purity,  from
town  to  town,  from  village  to  village,
from  hamlet  to  hamlet,  bearing  all
kinds  of  insults  and  persecutions
aud  hardships,  they  traveled  the
land,  lifting  up  their  voices  every-
where where  they  had  the  opportu-
nity, testifying  in  all  humility  that
God  had  again  spoken  from  the  hea-
vens ;  that  God  had  again  restored
the  truth  in  its  ancient  purity  and
power  ;  that  God  had  restored  the
ordinances  of  the  Gospel  as  they  once
existed  upon  the  earth ;  and  declaring
uuto  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth


118


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


that  God  \?  ;i  hearef  of  prayers  ami  j
ih.it  lit-  will  answer  their  petitions
when  they  call  upon  him  in  faith.
Thus  they  went,  traveling  through
the  United  States  and  Canada,  and
afterwards  crossing  the  ocean  to  the
Old  World  proclaiming  there  the
sain*:'  truths,  A  strange  thing  to
be  heard  in  Great  Britain— Great
Britain  !  who  had  been  sending  out
her  missionaries  by  thousands  to  the
remotest  parts  of  the  earth  ;  who
considered  herself  as  dwelling  in  the
blaze  cif  Gospel  truth,  and  occupy-
ing the  foremost  rank  among  civil-
ized ami  enlightened  nations  !  A
strange  thing  for  men  from  the
wilds  of  America  to  come  and
preach  to  them  the  truth  uf  heaven,
to  tell  them  the  contents  of  their
Bible.  Presumptuous  as  it  seemed,
the  Elders,  nevertheless,  did  this.
They  had  received  the  dispensation
of  the  Gospel,  and,  likr  Paul,  they
felt  it  would  be  woe  unto  them  if
they  did  not  preach  it.  And  they
went  from  land  to  land  until  every
continent,  almost  every  land,  has
been  visited  by  them,  *

While  the  missionaries  were  thus
engaged,  the  work  at  home  did  not
cease.  Persecution  at  home  was  not
arrested.  Mobs  continued  to  gather
together  as  they  had  done  before  the
Elders  crossed  the  ocean  ;  and  it
was  not  then  the  cry  that  "these
Mormons  were  introducing  patriar-
chal marriage^  which  we  think  hurt-
ful to  our  civilization  ;Tr  that  was  not
the  charge.  In  the  early  days  the
charges  urged  against  the  Saints
when  they  went  out  West  to  the
limits  of  the  Kepublic,  were,  that
they  believed  in  anointing  and  in
laying  hands  upon  the  sick  ;  that
they  believed  in  revelation  ;  that
they  believed  in  prophets ;  that  they
listened  to  the  counsels  and  teach-
ings of  those  prophets.  Was  not
this  very  dangerous? But  this  was


not  all. It  swim  Is  very  queer  in
these  days  to  think  that  one  of  the
gravest  charges  made  against  the
Latter-day  Saints  by  the  mob  that
drove  them  from  their  homes  in
Jackson  County  was  that  they  were
Yankees and abolitionists !  De-
signing men,  seeking  for  pretexts
that  would  answer  the  purpose  of
inflaming  the minds  of  ignorant
people,  seized  and  used  this  as  a  good
ground  upon  which  to  base  designs
for  expulsion. Missouri  was  a  slave
State,  and  the  Latter-day  Saints
were  in  the  main  New  England  peo-
ple ;  they  who  were  not  were  from
New  York,  Pennsylvania  and  other
middle  States.  But  they  were  known
ns  Yankees,  and,  as  their  enemies
asserted, abolitionists — a  suitable
people  to  be  pounced  uponand  driven
out. Thev  were  driven  out  from
Jackson  County,  and  finally,  to  get
rid  of  them,  Lilburu  W.  Boggs,  gov-
ernor and  commanderdn  chief  of  the-
mil  ilia  of  the  State  of  Missouri,  is-
sued an  exterminating  order,  threat-
ening the  Latter-day  Saints  with
extermination  unless  they  left  the
State. There  was  one  alternative
left  to  them  if  they  remained  in  the
State — apostacy. But  Missouri's
favor  was  not  so  desirable  to  the
Latter-day  Saints  as  the  favor  of  their
God,  and  they  cho^e  to  abandon
their  homes  and  they  marched  out
of  the  State  as  best  thtry  could.
Now, during  all  these  years,  and
subsequently,  when  we  were  being
mobbed,  plundered,  and  driven,  the
Latter-day  Saints  had  an  abiding
faith,  based  upon  the  revelations  that
God had given through  brother
Joseph  Smith,  that  the  day  would
come  when  we  should  be  a  great  peo
pie,  when  our  virtues  would  be  recog-
nized, when  our  patriotism  would  be
vindicated,  when  our  loyalty  to  truth
and  to  the  principles  of  virtue  and
of  good  government,  of  pure  reput*


MOUKUN F  V  LF I L  LM  hST fF ANClK.xT Pft  ■PHkCV,  KTu


119


licanistn  would  be  established  arid
the  wuik  of  (!od  with  which  we
are  connected  become  universal.
Brother  Joseph  had  predicted  this.
The  Elders,  the  Saints,  the  people
old  and  young  believed  it  with  all
their  hearts.  The  hatred  of  mobs,
the  burning  of  houses,  the  destruc-
tion of  property,  the  expulsion  from
homes  never  weakened  their  confi-
dence in  the  truth  of  these  predic-
tions, and  their  eventual  fulfillment.
That  feeling  had  been  implanted
there  by  the  Almighty  j  the  Spirit
of  God  had  borne  testimony  to  it  in
their  hearts,  and  they  never  doubted
it  Hated  by  a  township,  they
foresaw  the  time  when  they  would
be  hated  by  a  county  ;  hated  by  a
county,  they  foresaw  the  time  when
they  would  be  hated  by  a  State ;
hated  by  a  State,  they  foresaw  the
time  when  they  would  be  hated  by
men  who  constituted  a  party  who,
it  might  be  said,  were  the  represen-
tatives of  the  nation  ;  hate  1  by  a
nation,  they  foresaw  the  time  when
they  would  he  hate  1  by  other
nations,  until,  as  I  have  said,  their
loyalty  to  truth,  to  virtue,  to  good
government,  to  good  order  and
everything  Uut  is  pure,  holy  and
Godlike,  would  be  vindicated  and
established  in  the  eves  of  all  men —

HP

by  the  nations  at  large,  as  well  as
their  fellow-citizens.

How  unlikely  a  thing  to  have
been  when  there  were  but  six  per
sons  composing  this  church  !  Yet
the  revelations  given  previous  t<>
that  organization,  the  word  of  Gud
as  it  has  come  down  to  us  embalmed
in  that  sacred  book  which  contains
the  revelations  given  through  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  foretelU
in  plainness  just  such  results  aa
these  that  I  have  alluded  to.  The
spirit  of  this  work,  its  c  laracter,  the
results  which  should  follow  it  were
plainly  mapped  out  beforehand  as


though  all  the  events  connected
with  il  had  ahead v  taken  place  and
were  written  by  the  pen  of  the  his-
torian, instead  of  that  of  the  prophet.
The  historian  can  delineate  with  no
greater  accuracy  (though  he  may
give  more  details)  when  he  writes
the  history  of  this  people  and  the
results  of  the  labors  of  the.  elders  of
this  Church,  than  it  has  been  writ-
ten for  half  a  century.

The  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  con-
trary to  their  will,  and  despite  their
wishes,  are  contributing  to  establish
the  prophetic  calling  of  Brother
-Joseph  Smith,  and  to  fulfill  the
revelations  of  God  given  through
him.  Hated  as  he  has  been  ;  des-
pised as  he  has  been  ;  derided  as  he
has  been,  tins  is  the  result  of  their
actions.  The  destiny  of  this  people
has  been  clearly  foretold.  Here  are
men  wjiom  I  see  arouiui  me,  whose
heads  are  whitened  with  years,
whose  bodies  are  frail  and  trem-
bling, and  women,  too,  who  have
been  connected  with  this  Church
from  its  earlit-st  (lays,  who  knotv  of
i lie  truth  of  what  1  am  stating,  who
know  that  there  is  nothing  that
they  behold  to-day  that  they  did
not  behold  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy
and  with  the  eye  of  faith  years  and
years  ago.  And  many  things  that
are  ye&  unfulfilled,  that  yet  remain
in  the  womb  of  time,  to  be  yet
brought  forth.  The  destiny,  as  I
have  said,  of  the  people,  is  written
in  heaven,  it  is  enrolled  in  the  ar-
chives of  eternity*  God  has  spoken
it ;  the  eternal  Hat  ha*  gone  forth,
and  it  will  never  be  revoked.  We
play  our  part ;  we  figure  as  actors  in
these  scenes.  By  an < I  by  others  will
come  ;  the  column  of  humanity
will  march  on  ;  tue  column  trom  the
eier.ul  wnrl  Is  will  continue  to  de-
scend. Myriads  of  the  just  are
watching  with,  I  might  say,  eager-
ness, the  de wlopme.it  of  tiiU  work


120


JOUUNAL  OF  DISUOUUSKS


ami  they  are  doing  their  pnrt,  and
unborn  myriads  are  looking  forward
to  the  future  of  this  work,  small  as
it  i*  to-day,  insignilicaat  ;ts  it  is
to-day. It  is  no  enthusiasm  or
fanaticism  that  inspires  these  words  ;
Ibut  it  is  the  plain  truth  not  half
told  ;  it  is  merely  to  hint  of  that
which  will  be. For  this  is  the  work
of-  the  eternal  Jehovah,  the  work
spoken  of  by  all  the  holy  prophets
since  the  world  began  ;  the  great
work  that  is  to  prepare  the  earth
and  its  inhabitants  for  the  coming
of  the  Sou  of  God, Who  that  reads
this  sacred  book,  the  Bible,  does  not
know  that  Prophets  and  Apostles,
■  Seers  and  Kevelators — all  looked
forward  to  the  time  when  a  great
work  should  be  done  in  the  earth  I
Tliey  predicted  it,  they  dwelt  upon
it,  in  inspired  strains. Poets,  too,
who  never  hud  claim  to  inspiration,
have  looked  forward  to  the  "golden
age/1  have  dwelt  with  delightful
language  and,  it  may  be  said,  with
inspired  pen,  upon  that  great  time
that  should  come  in  the  history  of
our  race,

It  is  true  as  I  have  said,  that  from
the  beginning  calumny  and  slander
of  every  conceivable  kind  have  been
circulated  concerning  this  work.  It
is  so  to- day.  It  goes  the  rounds  of
the  country,  ami  is  believed  in  by
the  great  masses  of  the  people.  The
Latter  day  Saints  are  looked  upon
by  many  a*  guilty  of  every  conceiv-
able crime.  Their  true  eliaiaeters
are  M>  be  ogged  by  misrepresenta-
tion, that  strangers  almost  come
into  our  borders  as  though  they
were  about  to  enter  a  den  ot  thieves
— that  is,  strangers  who  do  not  know
better  Murder,  outrage,  robbery,
perjury,  villainy  of  every  kind  is
attributed  to  this  people.  Why
.  should  each  a  world-wide  notoriety
be  given  to  a  people  who  number
no  more  than  we? Why  should


such  lengths  be  gone  to  in  falsifying
an  innocent  people? It  might  be
thought  that  we.  beiiiLf  h»  insi^ni-
ticant numerically, might  escape
notice  ;  or  at  least  such  prominent
notice  ;  it  might  have  been  thought
in the beginning that  Brother
Joseph Smith and  his  compeers
would have escaped notice.  It
might  be  thought  that  when  they
were  few  in  numbers  and  their  influ-
ence did  not  extend  beyond  a  town-
ship, that  they  might  have  escaped
notice.  Hut  no,  the  world  lias  seemed
determined  in  a  way  that  to  the
natural  eye  seems  unaccountable,  to
uplift  this  people  to  importance,  to
give  them  a  wo  rid*  wide  reputation,
to  advertise  them  throughout  the
earth. And  why  is  this  ? The  Lat-
ter-day Saints  ought  to  understand
it,  ami  many  of  them  do  understand
it. You  know  the  powers  that  kt%
at  work — the  same  powers  that
blackened  the  Son  of  God,  that  made
him  appear  so  hideous  that  men  in
crucifying  him  thought  they  were
doing  God  service—  and  were  per-
fectly willing  to  have  all  the  conse-
quences fall  upon  them  and  their
children  ;  the  same  influence  that
caused  an  Isaiah  to  be  sawn  asun-
der, that  caused  a  Daniel  to  be
thrust  into  the  lion's  den,  and  that
caused  the  death  of  nearly  all  of  the
prophets, and  that  produced  the
martyrdom  of  eleven  of  the  Twelve
Apo&tles,  according  to  tradition  ;  it
is  that  same  influence  that  never
rested until  every  inspired  man
was  destroyed  from  the  face  of  the
earth, that is  still busy.  This
Satanic  power  has  kept  at  work
slaying  the  servants  of  the  Almighty,
including  the  holiest  being  that  ever
trod  the  earth — the  Son  of  God,

Is  it  not  astonishing  that  the
world  cannot  see  these  things'?
Think  of  the  long  list  of  martyrs,
coming  down  through  the  ages  from


MODKBtf  FULFILLMKtfT  OF ANCIKNT  PAQPHKCV,  KTC


121


Abel  ;  the  best  and  the  holiest  men
Itiiled  by  their  fellows,  not  because
they  thought  them  virtuous,  not
because  they  thought  them  holy,
not  because  they  looked  upon  them
as  pure ;  but  because  they  were  con-
sidered too  dangerous  to  be  suffered
to  live,

I  wonder  when  I  know  that  this
has  been  the  case  that  the  world  can-
not see  to-day,  that  the  same  spirit
is  abroad  in  the  earth.  It  is  not
usual  for  wicked  people  to  kill
wicked  people,  that  is,  in  the  way
the  prophets  and  apostles  were
killed,  '

Here  is  a  feeble  people  in  these
mountains  who  have  come  here  flee-
ing from  persecution,  carrying  with
them  when  they  left  their  native
States  and  launched  forth  into  an
untrodden  and  unknown  wilderness,
a  love  for  the  principles  of  liberty
for  which  their  fathers,  many  of
them,  had  fought  Notwithstand-
ing their  persecutions  and  the  vile
treatment  they  had  received  at  the
hands  of  their  fellow-citizens,  they
did  not  allow  that  feeling  to  domi-
nate in  their  hearts  ;  but  loving  the
flag,  the  stars  and  stripes  ;  loving
the  republic  ;  loving  the  institutions
of  freedom,  loving  the  Constitution,
loving  the  laws,  and  carrying  with
them  that  love  into  the  heart  of  the
wilderness,  and  there  laying  the
foundation  of  a  great  commonwealth
they  sought  for  ad  mission  as  a  State,
and  to  have  in  that  State  every  hu-
man right  fully  guarded  and  civil
and  religious  liberty  secured  for  peo-
ple of  every  creed,  and  of  no  creeds,
not  seeking  for  alliance  with  Mexico,
whose  land  they  occupier!,  not  seek-
ing alliance  with  Great  Britain,  who
was  their  neighbor  on  the  north  ;
not  seeking  alliance  with  the  wild
races,  or  endeavoring,  or  seeking  to
set  up  an  independent  republic,  but
their  hearts  going  back  fondly  to  the


home  of  their  fathers,  to  the  land
which  their  fathers  had  helped  to
redeem  and  make  five,  to  the  Con-
stitution upon  which  the  government
of  the  land  was  founded,  to  the  flag
for  which  their  fathers  had  fought
and  bled,  they  showed  to  the  world
that  persecuted  as  they  might  be,
hated  as  they  might  be,  despised  as
they  might  be,  and  driven  as*  they
might  be,  they  could  not  extinguish
within  them  the  love  of  liberty,  the
love  of  true  republicanism.  This
was  the  testimony  which  this  people
bore  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  ;
and  it  might  be  thought,  as  I  have
said,  that  the  people  who  had  done
this,  working  with  unceasing  toil  to
reclaim  the  waste  places  and  make
them  habitable  and  beautiful  and  a
fit  abode  for  themselves  and  their
children;  sending  out  missionaries
at  untold  sacrifice  to  the  nations  of
the  earth  to  proclaim  the  Gospel  and
gather  in  the  honest  from  their  own
land  and  from  the  remotest  nations
of  the  earth  ;  doing  this  for  years,
until  gradually,  as  we  see,  the
stately  structure  of  a  great  common-
wealth rises  up  around  U3  j  law  exe-
cuted ;  liberty  preserved ;  the  ut-
most freedom  extended  to  every
human  being  throughout  the  length
and  breadth  of  these  mountain  val-
leys ;  life  and  property  as  secure  here
as  they  ever  were  in  any  of  the  States
of  the  Union  ;  strangers  coming  in
here  before  the  railroad  was  built,
weary  and  foot- sore,  received  with
hospitable  kindness.  This  taber-
nacle, after  it  was  erected,  and  be-
fore this  was  erected,  the  old  taber-
nacle, and  before  that  was  erected,
the  bowery,  opened  to  preachers  of
every  denomination,  men  of  every
creed  united  to  proclaim  their  tenets,
to  give  us  their  views  ;  women  pro-
tected throughout  this  laud  with  such
sac  redness  that  they,  old  or  young,
beautiful  or  homely,  could  traverse


122


JOlMtNAL  UK  PISt^iUKSKS


every  vaHey  and  pass  through  every  1
town  north  and  south,  night  or  day,
without  hearinq  a  word  that  would
be  improper,  wit  hout  ever  witnessing
a  gesture  that  would  annoy  them  ;
emigrants  with  their  wagons  coming
in  and  leaving  them  in  town  un-
guarded, and  not  a  thing  h armed  or
taken  ;— I  say*  it  might  be  thought*  '
viewing  and  witnessing  these  results
— the  virtue,  the  temperance,  the  [
good  order,  the  frugality,  the  indus-
try, the  enterprise,  the  liberality,  |
the  honesty  of  the people,  that
somebody  would  think  and  say  :

"What  do  all  these  attacks  mean  ]
Why  is  this  crusade  being  waged
against  a  people  of  this  kind.
Surely  fifty  millions  of  people  with  all
the  advantages  of  the  age — the  press,
telegraph  wires,  pulpit,  day  and
Sabbat  1  schools,  the  wonderful  im-
provements that  are  being  brought
out, — everything  in  fact,  in  their
power,  including  the  wealth  of  the
world  at  their  command,  surely
these  fifty  millions  of  people  should
suffer  a  few  thousands  of  people  in
Utah,  to  dwell  in  some  degree  of
peace  without  n instantly  urgmg  on
the  dogs  of  war  against  them  ;  with-
out hounding  on  every  vile  fellow  in
the  nation  to  rob  them  and  to  engage
in  crusades  against  them,  with  the
assurance  that  they  will  be  justified
in  doing  so."

But  no,  this  is  not  to  be;  it  is  not
thus  written  ;  it  is  not  the  destiny
of  this  people.  We  would  never  be
the  propie  God  intends  and  designs
us  to  be-  if  we  were  to  be  let  alone.
The  waif  are  must  go  on  ;  it  is  an
unceasing  one  ;  the  powers  are  ar-
raved  one  against  another,  with  God
on  one  side  and  the  Adversary  on
the  other.  The  devil  is  not  going  to
relinquish  his  ground.  He  has  tried
falsehood  from  the  beginning,  and
tried  it  successfully  in  many  instan-
ces. It  has  been  said  of  him  that


he  was  a  liar  from  the  iteinnuin"  :
and  it  is  certain  he  lm>  not  lost  his
old  characteristics. He lias  suc-
ceeded by  means  of  murder  many
times  in  the  history  of  our  race.
He  has  contrived  by  this  age t icy
to  maintain  Ins  foothold  in  the  earth
for  a  long  time. He  thinks,  like
men  think  who  steal  things  and  keep
them  for  a  long  time,  that  he  is  the
owner of the stolen  property.
The  man  who  jumps  another  man's
land  or  claim,  the  longer  he  possesses
it,  the  more  assured  he  becomes
that  he  ought  to  have  it. Satan  is
imbued  with  this  same  idea  ;  and
he  has  recourse  to  the  old  method
of warfare — lying ; and lies  are
being  circulated  until  the  ear  is  tired
listening  to  them. Every  conceiv-
able falsehood  ! Then  he  supple-
ments lies  with  violence,,  and  even
murder  has  been  resorted  to.  He
thinks,  if  he  can  kill  a  man  that
puts  an  end  to  him  ;  if  he  can  kill  a
people  that  destroys  them  and  their
influence. But  thU  time  it  is  ano-
ther sort  of  a  work* God  has
spoken  concerning  this  work;  this  is
the  last  work  that  the  Prophets  or
the  Apostles  have  called  the  dispen-
sation of  the  fullness  of  times.  There
was  to  be  a  time  when  Satan  should
have  to  recede  inch  by  inch,  step  by
step. That  time  has  come.  The
column  of  the  righteous,  of  the  true
is  pressing  onward  ;  there  is  an  irre-
sistible power  behind  it. It  will  go
forward  gathering  into  its  ranks  the
honest and virtuous from  every
nation;  just  as  sure  as  we  live  this
will  be  the  case. It  will  gather
people  from  every  nation. It  seems
like  a  very  strange  t  hing  to  say,  but
on  all  proper  occasions  1  say  It  with
a  great  deal  of  pleasure,  at  home
and  from  home,  that  1  have  been
taught  from  early  life  that  the  day
would  come  when  republican  institu-
tions would  be  in  danger  in  this


MtJDKR.Y  FULFILLMENT  OF  ANCIENT  rROPHBCY,  BTC.


123


nation  and  upon  this  continent,
when,  in  fact,  the  republic  would  be
so  rent  asunder  by  factions  that  there
would  be  no  stable  government  out-
side  of  the  Latter  day  Saints  ;  and
that  it  is  their  destiny  as  a  people,
to  uphold  constitutional  government
upon  this  land  Now,  a  great  many
people  think  this  is  a  chimera  of  the
brain  ;  they  think  it  folly  to  indulge
in  such  an  idea  ;  but  the  day  will
coma  nevertheless.  There  are  those
in  this  congregation  who  will  wit-
ness  the  time  that  the  maintenance
of  true  constitutional  government
upon  this  continent  will  he  depend-
ent upon  this  people,  when  it  will
have  to  be  upheld  by  us.

We  are  battling  all  the  time  for
human  rights.  We  did  so  in  the
States  before  we  were  driven  out;
we  have  done  so  throughout  these
mountains,  and  are  doing  so  to-day,
con i ending  fur  our  rights*  Even
before  the  great  tribunal  of  our  na-
tion, Cougi ess,  the  contest  i.s  going
on ;  for  attempts  are  constantly  I  eing
made  to  wrest  from  us  our  liberties,
as  citizens  ;  and  we  are  standing
our  ground  as  best  we  can,  pleading
for  our  rights,  pleading  for  liberty
of  conscience,  pleading  for  that
freedom  which  belongs  to  the  coun-
try, which  God  has  guaranteed
through  the  Constitution  ;  not  for
ourselves  alone,  but  for  every  creed,
for  every  member  of  the  human
family.  We  do  not  want  liberty  for
ourselves  alone  :  we  desire  everv
man  to  have  it:  liberty  for  lngersoll,
and  all  who  believe  as  he  does  ;  lib-
erty for  the  followers  of  Mohammed
and  all  who  believe  in  the  Koran  ;
liberty  for  Beecher  and  for  those  of
his  way  of  thinking  ;  and  even
Talmage  who  has  talked  so  badly
about  us,  we  would  have  him  enjoy
liberty ;  yes,  and  permit  him  to  say
what  he  pleases  about  us,  to  take
what  view  he  pleases  of  our  belief
and  practices,  and  to  tell  every-


body what  he  thinks  about  them*
We  would  give  him  the  utmost  lib-
erty to  do  this,  and  every  other  man,
to  say  what  they  please  about  us  or
about  anybody  else,  as  long  as  they
do  not  interfere  with  the  rights  and
the  liberties  of  the  people  against
whom  they  are  opposed,  protesting
always,  however,  that  men  in  criti-
cising others,  should  confine  them-
selves strictly  to  the  truth,  or  be
held  responsible  to  the  laws  for
slanders  ar:d  falsehood,  All  sects
and  all  people  should  have  this
liberty,  that  is,  liberty  of  con-
science, liberty  of  speech  and  liberty
of  the  press,  as  long  as  it  does  not
degenerate  into  license,  and  interfere
with  the  rights  of  others.  We
claim  this  for  ourselves  :  we  contend
for  it,  and  we  shall  contend  for  it
until  it  is  gained.

Now,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  I
forgot  thar.  it  is  Sundav  :  T  do  not
know,  however,  but  what  this  is  as
good  (1  us  pel  as  I  can  declare  ;  it  is
the  Gospel  of  humanity;  it  is  the
Gospel  of  truth.  And  I  hope  that
you  will  ever  be  trtu*  to  these  prin-
ciples* It  makes  no  difference  really
whether  you  will  or  not,  so  far  as  this-
great  work  is  concerned  ;  but  it  is
a  glorious  reflection  to  know  that  we
are  striving  to  accomplish  these
ends*  :  f!

When  I  look  at  the  wonderful
deliverance  that  has  been  wrought
out  for  us,  it  is  a  subject  of  amaze*
ment  to  me.  Still  our  enemies  con-
tinue to  plot  and  get  up  machina-
tions. It  is  all  right,  let  them  have
their  agency,  let  them  do  as  they
please ;  it  ought  not  to  disturb  us-
or  cause  us  a  moment's  uneasiness.
Let  them  do  as  they  please  as  long
as  they  keep  hands  off.

I  pray  God  to  bless  you  and  fill
you  with  His  Holy  Spirit,  and  to
bless  His  servants  who  may  address
us  during  tins  Conference,  in  the
name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


324


JOURNAL  UK  mSCuUKSEtf,


DISCOURSE  BY  APOSTLE  WILFORD  WOODRUFF,


Delivered  in  the  Tabguxacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday,  May  14,

1882.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)


LIBERTY  OF  CONSCIENCE  —  MAN  AC(/OU N TAIVLK  TO  GOD  —  THE  KALE  OF
ADAM  AND  EVE  PREORDAINED — REDEMPTION  AND  RESURRECTION —
THE  GOSPEL  IN  ANCIENT  AND  IS  MODERN  TIMES  —  FULFILLMENT
OF  PROPHECY — A  FALSEHOOD  REFUTED — PATRIARCHAL  MARRIAGE
— ITS  PURITY  AND  ITS  ETERNAL  PURPOSE,


I  feel  disposed  to  read  a  chapter
in  the  Bible  ;  the  chapter  that  I
shall  read  contains,  perhaps,  a
stronger  chain  of  truth  concerning
life  and  death,  the  fall  and  redemp-
tion of  man,  the  redemption  and
resurrection  of  the  dead,  than  any
other  I  know  of  in  the  Bible.

The  speaker  then  read  the  1  *■  tli
chapter  of  1st  Corinthians,  and
said  :

Before  proceeding  to  malge  any
remarks  upon  this  chapter,  I  wish
to  say  that  there  is  no  person  who
knows,  before  entering  this  building,
who  is  going  to  address  the  assem-
bly, and,  therefore,  we  have  no  pre-
pared sermons  to  deliver,  it  may  he
a  miller,  or  it  may  be  a  mason,  it
may  be  a  carpenter,  or  it  may  be  a
farmer,  a  lawyer,  a  merchant,  or
otherwise;  this  practice  is  peculiar
to  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
Latter-day  Saints,  and  the  tendency
is  to  make  the  speaker,  whoever  he
may  be,  depend  upon  the  spirit  of
inspiration  to  guide  his  thoughts
and  dictate  his  remarks.  And,  as  a
general  thing  if  God,  thtough  this
means,  gives  us  nothing  to  say,  we
can  say  nothing  to  instruct  the
people.


1  ha vi'  often  expressed  my  views
with  regard  to  the  position  we
occupy  before  heaven  and  earth,
before  God,  angels  and  men,  and  the
views  of  Jesus  and  His  Apostles  and
Elders,  as  they  have  come  down  to
us  j-ive  a  key  to  what  I  wish  to  say
upon  this  subject  If  there  is  an
Emperor,  a  King,  a  President,  a
ruler  of  any  nation  or  peoph\  whether
a  monarchy,  kingdom  or  republic—
that  takes  away  from  any  of  his
subjects  or  fellow-citizens  the  right
to  Worship  God  according  to  the
dictates  of  their  own  consciences,
lie  deprives  them  of  a  right  which
the  God  of  heaven  has  guaranteed
unto  them.  These  are  the  senti-
ments of  the  Latter-day  Saints.
We  believe  in  giving  to  all  men
freedom,  freedom  in  spirit  and  ac-
tion ;  we  believe  in  religionists  of
every  creed  and  faith  enjoying  the
liberty  to  worship  God  according  to
the  dictates  of  their  own  consciences,
which  right  is  guaranteed  unto  them
by  God  Himself;  ami  the  man  or
set  of  men  that  would  deprive
their  fellows  of  this  God-given
right,  assume  a  responsibility  that
they  must  answer  for  before  the
bar  of  God, If  1  had  the  power  and


control  of  the  whole  world  I  would
never  think  of  depriving  any  man,
woman  or  child  of  this  natural,  this
inherent  right,  whether  their  reli-
gions views  were  true  or  false*  Can
you  find  from  history  that  God  at
any  time  forced  any  man  to  heaven
or  hell  ]  No,  you  can  not*  And
we  as  Latter-day  Saints  claim  this
right  and  privilege  for  ourselves  to
worship  God,  to  believe  in  God,  and
to  believe  in  the  records  of  divine
truth— the  Bible,  the  Book  of  Mor
monf  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants
and  the  Revelations  ot  God.

A  public  speaker,  a  teacher  of  the
people  is  held  responsible  before  God
and  his  fellowmen  for  the  doctrine
he  teaches  ;  if  he  teaches  any  other
gospel  that  that  laid  down  in  the
Bible  and  taught  by  the  ancient
Prophets  and  Apostles  he  is  under
condemnation,  no  matter  who  lie
may  be.  Paul  realized  this  fact  so
keenly  that  he,  in  speaking  about  it
on  cue  occasion,  said  :  "  Though  we
or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach
any  other  gospel  unto  you  than  that
which  we  have  preached  unto  you,
let  him  be  accursed;*1  and  he  repeats
this  sentiment  two  or  three  times
over,

I  wish  to  say  a  few  won  Is  on  one
of  the  verses  I  have  read,  the  22nd;
"For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in
Christ  shall  atl  be  made  alive/1
The  world,  more  or  less,  has  found  a
great  deal  of  fault  with  Mother  Eve
and  with  Father  Adam,  because  of
the  fall  of  man  ;  what  1  have  to  say
with  regard  to  it,  1  express  as  my
own  opinion.  Adam  and  Eve
came  to  this  world  to  perform  ex-
actly the  part  that  they  acted  in  the
garden  of  Eden  ;  and  I  will  say,  they
were  ordained  of  God  to  do  what
they  did,  and  it  was  therefore  ex-
pected that  they  would  eat  of  the
forbidden  fruit  in  order  that  man
might  know  both  good  and  evil  by


passing  through  this  school  of  expe-
rience which  tins  life  affords  us.
That  is  all  I  want  to  say  about
Father  Adam  and  Mother  Eve.
Adam  fell  that  man  might  be,  and
men  are  that  they  might  have  joy  ;
ami  some  have  found  fault  with
that.  It  has  been  said  that  God
commanded  Adam  to  multiply  and
replenish  the  earth ;  and  it  has  been
said  that  Adam  was  not  under  the
necessity  of  tailing  in  order  to  mul-
tiply and  replenish  the  earth,  but
you  will  understand  that  the  woman
was  deceived  and  not  the  man;
and  according  to  the  justice  of  God
she  would  have  been  cast  out  into
the  lowly  and  dreary  world  alone,
and  thus  the  first  great  command
could  not  have  been  complied  with
unless  Adam  had  partaken  of  the
forbid d en  fruit.  We  acknowledge
that  through  Adam  all  have  died,
that  death  through  the  fall  must
pass  upon  the  whole  human  family,
also  upon  the  beasts  of  the  field,
the  fishes  of  the  sea  and  the  fowls
of  the  air  and  all  the  works  of  God,
as  far  as  thi*  earth  is  concerned.
It  is  a  law  that  is  unchangeable  and
irrevocable.  It  is  true  a  few  have
been  translated,  and  there  will  be
living  upon  the  earth  thousands  and
millions  of  people  when  the  Messiah
comes  in  power  and  great  glory  to
reward  every  man  according  to  the
deeds  done  in  the  body,  who  will  be
changed  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,
f r  o  m  t  u  o  r  ta  1  i  t  y  to  i  m  t  no  r  tal  i  ty.
Nevertheless  they  must  pays  through
the  o ideal  of  death  involved  in  the
change  that  will  come  upon  them.
The  Savior  himself  tasted  of  death  ;
He  died  to  redeem  the  world  ;  His
body  was  laid  in  the  tomb,  but  ib
did  not  see  corruption  ;  and  after
three  days  it  arose  from  the  grave
and  put  on  immortality.  He  was
the  first  fruit  of  the  resurrection-
There  was  no  prophet,  no  saint  or


12(3


JOURNAL  OF  MSUOLKSfe,


sinner,  from  t lie  days  of  Father
Adam  to  the  days  of  Jesus  that  ever
rose  from  the  dead  through  the  keys
and  power  of  the  resurrection.
Although  we  read  ot  some  who  were
restored  to  life,  but  this  was  not
what  is  termed  the  resurrection,

AVitli  regard  to  redemption,  Paul
said  ;  All  the  children  of  Adam  are
redeemed  from  the  fall  by  the  aton-
ing blood  of  Jesus,  and  all  infants
are  redeemed  as  well  as  other  peo-
ple. There  is  no  infant  or  child
that  lias  died  before  arriving  at  the
years  of  accountability,  but  what  is
redeemed,  and  is  therefore  entirely
beyond  the  torments  of  hell,  to  use
a  sectarian  term.  And  any  doctrine,
such  as  the  sprinkling  of  infants  or
any  religious  rite  for  little  children
is  of  no  effect  whatever  neither  in
this  world  nor  in  the  world  to  come*
It  is  a  man-made  doctrine,  and
therefore  not  ordained  of  God  ;  and
I  will  defy  any  man  to  find  in  any
of  the  records  of  divine  truth  any
-ordinance  instituted  for  the  salva-
tion of  little  innocent  children  ;  it
would  be  unnecessary  on  the  face  of
it,  and  the  only  thing  thqjt  can  be
found  is  where  Jesus  took  the  little
ones  in  his  amis  and  blessed  them,
which  is  and  wuuld  be  perfectly
right  to  do  according  to  the  order  of
God.  But  the  sprinkling  of  infants
or  the  doctrine  that  infants  go  to
hell  under  any  circumstances,  is  a
doctrine  ordained  of  man  and  not
of  God,  and  is  therefore  of  no  avail
and  entirely  wrong  and  displeasing
in  the  sight  of  God.  So  much
about  the  infants,  I  will  say  again
they  are  redeemed  by  the  blood  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  when  they  die,
whether  of  Christian,  Pagan  or
Jewish  parentage,  their  spirits  are
taken  home  to  God  who  gave  them,
and  never  go  to  suffer  torments  of
.any  kind.

Another  subject  I  wish  to  say  a


few  words  upon  :  u  In  Christ  all  are
made  alive."  Since  the  day  that
sin  entered  into  the  world  men  have
been  held  accountable  for  their  own
acts,  and  it  has  been  known  upon
this  earth  from  the  day,  at  least,
that  Cain  sleM'  his  brother  Abel.
And  sin  has  presented  itself  in  dif-
ferent grades ;  there  are  murder,  blas-
phemy, lying,  stealing,  whoredom,
and  abominations  of  many  different
forms,  which  have  followed  man
from  generation  to  generation.  For
there  was  a  power  that  dwelt  upon
the  earth  in  the  form  of  thousands
and  millions  of  fallen  spirits,  one-
third  of  the  hosts  of  heaven,  which
had  been  cast  out  of  heaven  with
the  devil  in  the  great  rebellion,  who
remain  in  that  condition  and  who
do  not  possess  tabernacles,  and  they
make  war  upon  the  Saints  of  God,
wherever  or  whenever  they  are
found  upon  the  earth,  and  upon  all
men;  they  seek  to  destroy  the  whole
human  family,  and  have  done  so
from  the  beginning  until  the  present
day,  and  they  have  not  ceased  their
labors,  nor  do  they  it i tend  to  while
Satan  remains  unbound.  All  the
children  of  men  who  arrive  at  the
years  of  accountability  are  guilty  of
.sin,  all  being  inclined  to  do  evil  as
the  sparks  are  to  fly  upwards.  What
shall  we  do  to  be  saved"  was  the  cry
of  the  people  who  beard  the  preach-
ing of  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,
and  the  same  may  be  said  to  be  ap-
plicable to  all  men  in  every  genera-
tion. The  answer  would  be,  obey
the  law  of  the  Gospel.  Tim  is  the
safe  means  given  for  the  salvation  of
the  human  family.  The  law  of  God,
the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  which
Gospel  contains  the  laws  of  God ;  it
contains  the  ordinances,  it  contains
the  commandments,  and  any  raaa
that  breaks  them  is  guilty  before
God,  And  1  will  here  say,  as  I  wish
to  be  understood  by  all  men,  that


LIBERTY  OF  CONSCIENCE,  ETC


127


our  faith  is,  there  never  has  been
but  one  Gospel  upon  the  earth,
though  to-day  there  are  six  hundred
three  score  and  six  different  reli
"ous  faiths,  all  more  or  less  diverse
one  from  another  ;  but  there  is  but
.he  one  true  and  everlasting  Gospel,
and  never  will  be  any  more,  and  it
is  the  same  Gospel  that  was  taught
to  Adam,  to  Noah,  to  Abraham,
Isaac,  Jacob  and  the  Patriarchs,  and
which  Jesus  and  the  Apostles
preached  ;  it  never  did  vary  iu  the
least  in  one  single  instance,  nor
never  will.  And  I  say,  if  we  teach
any  other  Gospel  thau  that  which
was  taught  by  Jesus  and  His  Apos-
tles, we  teach  a  false  Gospel  and
shall  be  under  condemnation  before
God,  angels  and  men.

What  is  the  dospel  as  taught  by
Jesus  himself  !  The  very  first  prin-
ciple was  faith  in  the  Messiah  ;  this
was  the  first  principle  ever  taught
to  man.  When  Adam,  after  beim;
driven  from  the  garden  of  Eden,
went  to  Adam-ondi  Ahman  to  offer
sacrifice,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  asked
him  why  he  <li*T  so,  Adam  replied
that  he  did  not  know,  but  the  Lord
hail  commanded  him  to  do  it.  He
was  then  told  that  the  blood  of  bulls
and  goats,  of  rams  and  lambs
should  be  spilt  upon  the  altar  as  a
type  of  the  great  and  last  sacrifice
which  should  be  offered  up  for  the
sins  of  the  world-  The  first  prin-
ciple, then,  ever  taught  to  Father
Adam  was  faith  iu  the  Messiah,  who
was  to  come  in  the  meridian  of  time
to  lay  down  his  life  for  the  redemp-
tion of  man.  The  second  principle
was  repentance.  And  what  is  re-
pentance! The  forsaking  of  sin.
The  man  who  repents,  if  he  be  a
swearer,  swears  no  more  ;  or  a  thief,
steals  no  more  ;  he  turns  away  from
all  former  sins  and  commits  them
no  more.  It  is  not  repentance  to
1  say,  I  repent  to-day,  and  then  steal


to-morrow ;  that  is  the  repentance
of  the  world,  which  is  displeasing  in
the  sight  of  God.  Repentance  is
the  second  principle,

I  have  heard  many  men  say,  no
ordinances  are  necessary,  that  belief
only  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is
necessary  to  be  saved*  I  have  not
learned  that  myself  from  any  reve-
lation of  God  to  man,  either  ancient
or  modern.  But  on  the  contrary,
faith  in  Christ,  repentance,  and
baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins
were  taught  by  patriarchs  and  pro-
phets and  by  Jesus  Christ  and  His
Apostles,  Baptism  for  the  remission
of  sins  is  an  ordinance  of  the  Gospel.
Says  one,  baptism  is  not  essential  to
salvation.  Jesus  not  only  taught  it
but  lendered  obedittic^  himself  to
that  requirement,  not  that  He  was
baptized  for  the  remission  of  sins-
but,  as  He  said,  "  to  fulfill  all  righte-
ousness," thus  in  this,  as  in  all  other
respects  giving  the  example  for  all
who  follow.  When  these  principles
of  the  Gospel  are  complied  w  ith  a
man  is  then  a  fit  subject  to  receive
the  Holy  Ghost  ;  and  this  holy  gift
is  bestowed  to  day  as  it  was  an-
ciently, by  the  laying  on  of  hands
by  men  possessing  the  authority  to
administer  in  the  ordinances  of  the
Gospel.  These  are  the  first  princi-
ples of  the  Gospel  which  we  Latter-
day  Saints  believe  in  and  teach  to
our  fellow-men,

Joseph  Smith  received  the  minis-
tration of  Angels,  and  he  by  revela-
tion organized  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  and  he
was  taught  by  those  who  ministered
unto  him  what  to  teach  to  the
people,  which  was  the  everlasting
Gospel.

Again,  men  received  the  Holy
Ghost  through  the  imposition  of
hands,  after  being  baptized  for  the
remission  of  sins.  The  Holy  Ghost
was  imparted  in  that  way,  according


l2S


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


to  the  promise  of  those  who  preached
the  Gospel.  Joseph  fSmitli  when  lie
organized  this  Church  in  it<30}  or-
gan ized  it  by  revelation  ;  and  while
we  Lad  hundreds  of  churches  and
systems  and  religions,  not  a  single
denomination  upon  the  earth  at  that
time  preached  the  Gospel  as  taught
by  the  ancient  prophets  and  apos-
tles, or  had  a  church  organized  on
the  earth,  with  Prophets  and
Apostles,  or  with  signs  following  the
believers  as  in  ancient  days.  Can
you  tell  of  one?  I  never  heard  of
one  until  I  heard  the  Elders  of  this
Church  preach  the  Gospel  and  set
forth  the  order  of  God.  When  God
commanded  Joseph  Smith  to  go
forth  and  organize  the  Church,
what  authority  had  he  to  do  so?
None  at  all  until  he  was  ordained
under  the  hands  of  those  M  ho  had
held  the  keys  of  the  Priesthood
upon  the  earth.  And  I  will  say  to
this  assembly  in  the  days  of  Jesus
Christ,  he  taught  these  principles
to  the  Jews  ;  lie  brought  the  Gos-
pel to  the  Jews,  and  established
his  kingdom  among  them,  and  it
came  with  all  its  gifts,  graces  and
powers:  the  sick  were  healed  ;  devils
were  cast  out  ;  the  gifts  were  mani-
fested among  them.  But  the  Jews
rejected  hini,  and  they  finally  put
him  to  death, — He  and  His  Apos-
tles* He  came  to  His  own  Father's
house  but  He  was  not  received  :  and
then,  according  to  command,  this
Gospel  went  to  the  Gentiles — we  are
all  Gentiles  in  a  national  capacity,
we  are  not  Jews,  the  Jews  are
another  class  of  men  ;  they  put  the
Savior  to  death,  and  have  suffered
for  1800  years  in  consequence,— they
have  been  trodden  under  the  feet  of
the  Gentiles  even  until  the  present
day.  Those  that  took  part  in  that
deed  ami  those  who  sanctioned  it,
said,  Let  His  blood  be  upon  us  ami
our  children  after  us. Tin*  Gentile


Judge  was  willing  to  release  Him
because  he  could  find  no  fault  in
Him  ;  but  the  feeling  and  sentiment
of  the  Jews  was,  "  Crucify  him  I
Crucify  him  V1  What  infidel  is
there,  no  matter  who  he  is,  who
does  not  believe  in  God,  let  him
read  the  revelations  of  heaven  and
see  the  fulfillment  of  prophecy  from
the  beginning  of  Genesis  to  our  day,
and  he  will  see  them  fulfilled  to  the
very  letter.  There  is  nothing
that  has  been  predicted  by  Jesus  or
the  Apostles,  but  what  has  already
been  fulfilled  to  the  very  letter  as
far  as  time  will  admit,  and  what  has
not  will  be.  When,  I  say,  the
Gospel  was  preached  to  the  Gentiles,
ii  went  to  them  in  all  its  power,  its
beauty  and  glory,  Priesthood  and
ordinances  as  it  was  offered  to  the
Jews.  And  Paul,  in  writing  to
the  Romans,  told  them  not  to  be
highmindeil,  but  to  fear;  for  if
God  spared  not  the  natural  brandies,
who  were  the  Jews,  because  of  "their
unbelief,  how  could  he  be  more
meiciful  to  the^unnatural  branches,
who  were  the  Gentiles  ?  Has  there
been  the  true  Church  of  Christ  upon
the  earth  since  the  Apostles  were
slain  1  Can  you  find  a  Church
upon  the  earth  organized  as  it  was
in  that  day?  No,  not  one.  The
Gentiles  followed  the  example
of  the  Jews  in  their  unbelief,  and
in  putting  to  death  those  who  bore-
the  holy  Priesthood  ;  and  instead
of  the  Church  of  Christ  has  sprung
up  every  kind  of  Church  during
the  last  1,8U0  years*  But  in  these
the  last  days,  God  has  again
restored  the  everlasting  Gospel  ;  and
any  man  who  believes  the  Bible
must  believe  the  fulfillment  of  reve-
lation, and  he  cannot  believe  in  the
fulfillment  of  prophecy  without  be-
lieving that  God  would  send  agah
to  the  earth  angels  to  deliver  that
Gospel. And  why  send  an  angel


LIBKUTY  OF  CONSCIHNCK,  ETC*


for  this  purpose  1  Because  the  Gos-
pel was  taken  from  the  earth  in  con-
sequence of  the  unbelief  of  the
Gei i tiles,  and  the  powerful  apposi-
tion that  was  brought  against  the
comparative  few  who  represented  it
And  in  fulfillment  of  the  revelation
of  St.  John,  John  the  Baptist  came
to  Joseph  Smith  and  conferred  upon
him,  after  a  period  of  preparation
on  his  part,  the  Aaronic  Priesthood,
which  authorized  him  to  preach  and
to  baptize  for  the  remission  of  sins,
and  to  administer  the  sacrament,
but  not  to  lay  on  hands  for  the  re-
ception of  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  due
time,  however,  Peter,  James  and
John  appeared  to  him  also  and  con-
ferred upon  him  the  Melchisedek
order  of  Priesthood  and  Apostle-
ship,  which  gave  him  the  power  to
organize  the  kingdom  of  God  upon
the  earth.  These  are  truths  whether
the  world  believes  them  or  not  It
makes  no  difference  j  it  is  the
work  of  Almighty  God,  and  he  is
the  originator  of  it.  How  is  it
with  the  Elders  of  Israeli  God
has  called  men  from  the  plow,  the
hammer  and  anvil,  from  the  car-
penter's bench,  etc.,  unlearned  and
weak  mortals,  and  they  have  been
•ent  out  to  the  world  to  bear  record
of  this  new  and  everlasting  Gospel
restored  in  our  day.  And  what  have
they  said  to  the  Methodists,  the
Baptists,  and  all  other  religionists
and  classes  of  men.  God  Almighty
has  given  unto  me  a  dispensation  of
the  Gospel  and  I  offer  it  to  you  ;  he
that  believes  on  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  and  that  I  am  his  servant
having  His  Gospel  message  to  de-
clare to  all  those  to  whom  I  am  sent,
and  repents  and  is  baptized  for  the
remission  of  his  sins,  shall  receive
the  Holy  Ghost.  This  has  been
the  purport  of  the  message  we  have
borne  to  men  and  nations  for  the
last  fifty  years.  And  now  if  God
Na  8.


has  nothing  to  do  with  this,  how
is  it  that  we  have  been  able  to
gather  together  thousands  and  tens
of  thousands  from  about  all  na-
tions under  heaven  by  the  simple
proclamation  of  the  Gospel -message  ?
How  long  would  it  be  befure  Joseph
Smith  or  any  other  man  who  would
go  forth  bearing  the  message  that
we  do,  and  making  the  promises  that
we  make,  would  be  found  out  to  be
an  imposter  unless  the  promises  he
made  vi  ere  genuine  and  looked  upon
in  such  a  way  as  to  give  entire  satis-
faction to  those  who  hearkened  to
his  word  ?  The  whole  secret  of  our
success  as  far  as  making  converts  is
concerned  is,  that  we  preach  the
same  Gospel  in  all  its  simplicity  and
plainness  that  Jesus  preached,  and
that  the  Holy  Ghost  re*ts  upon
those  y^ho  receive  it,  filling  their
hearts  with  joy  and  gladness  un-
speakable, and  making  them  as  one  ;
and  they  then  know  of  the  doctrine
for  themselves  whether  it  be  of  God
or  man.  And  this  Gospel  of  Christ
which  we  offer  is  what  has  led  this
Church  from  its  first  organization
until  to-day.  And,  as  I  have
often  said,  had  it  not  been  fur  Hie
Gospel  revealed  to  us,  we  friigKt
have  labored  until  we  were  a*  *»ld
as  Methusaleh,  and  Utah  to-tiay
would  have  been  as  barren  as  it  was;
in  1847,  when  we  first  came  to  these
valleys.  At  that  time  we  found  a
barren  desert,  yes,  as  barren  as  the
desert  of  Sahara,  with  no  mark  of
the  Anglo-Saxon  race.  But  travel
through  Utah  to-day,  and  we  fin4
houses  and  cities,  gardens  and  or-
chards, meeting-houses  and  taber-
nacles and  school-houses  and  dwell-
ings, with  the  blessing  of  God
attending  the  labors  of  the  people ;
and  a  community  of  people  from
almost  every  nation  taken  from  the
various  sects  and  parties,  and  they
are  here  through  the  inspiration  of

Vol  XXJli


130


JUUKNAL  UK  PISWURSEK,


Almighty-God,  and  I  know  it.  We
have  not  had  power  of  ourselves  to
influence  any  man  or  woman  with
regard  to  these  things.  They  have
been  influenced  by  the  testimony  of
Jesus  Chiist,  and  by  the  tio&pel  of
the  Son  of  God.  These  are  prin-
ciples by  which  all  men  aie  saved.
All  men  aie  saved  by  and  through
the  blood  uf  Jesus  Christ,  through
obedience  to  the  GospeL

I  realize  our  condition  and  the
position  occupied  by  this  geneiation.
I  know  we  are  looked  upon  ;is  u  bad
people,  and  we  are  considered  a  very
ignorant  people.  There  never  were
more  epithets  heaped  upon  Jesus
Christ  and  the  Apostles  than  upon
the  Latter-day  Saints,  Why  is
this!  Are  we  so  much  worse  than
the  world  1  No,  we  are  not.  What
then  is  the  matter]  The  Lord  Al-
mighty lias  set  His  hand  to  gather
His  peoplet  and  to  build  up  his  Zion
and  tu  establish  his  Church  in  these
the  last  days  ;  and  the  world  do  not
like  the  doctrine  we  teach,  as  it  lay*
the  axe  at  the  root  of  the  tree,  and
consequently  we  have  been  perse-
cuted from  the  time  that  tlus/  'hmch
was  organized  until  to  day  ;  and  the

{)ersecutioH  will  continue  more  or
ess  until  He  reigns  whose  right  it
is  to  leign,  until  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  comes  in  the  clouds  of  heaven
to  reward  every  man  according  to
the  deeds  done  in  the  body.

Now  I  want  to  say  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  we  are  called  to  a  certain
work,  and  we  have  been  called  of
God,  and  we,  as  Elders,  have  gone
forth  whithersoever  we  were  sent,
taking  our  lives  in  our  hands,  trav-
eling hundreds  and  thousands  of
miles  without,  purse  or  scrip*  I
have  waded  swamps  and  swum  rivers,
and  have  asked  my  bread  f  rom  door
to  door ;  and  have  devoted  nearly
fifty  years  to  this  work-  And  why  ?
Was  there  gold  enough  in  California


to  have  hired  me  to  do  it?  No,
verily  j  and  what  I  have  done  and
what  my  brethren  have  done,  we
have  done  because  we  were  com-
manded of  God*  And  this  is  the
position  we  occupy  to-day.  We  have
preached  and  labored  at  home  and
abroad,  and  we  intend  to  continue
our  labors,  by  the  help  of  God,  as
long  as  we  can  have  liberty  to  do  it,
and  until  the  Gentiles  prove  them-
selves unworthy  of  eternal  life,  and
until  the  judgments  of  God  overtake
the  world,  which  are  at  the  door.
Does  this  generation  know  what
awaits  them  ]  Does  our  own  nation  1
No,  the  world  is  ignorant  of  ■  hat
must,  sooner  or  later,  befall  them.

Here  is  the  Christian  world  pro-
fessing to  believe  the  Bible,  can  you
show  me  wherein  any  of  the  predic-
tions of  the  prophets,  whether  those
of  Jonah  to  the  city  of  Nineveh,  or
those  of  Isaiah  to  Israel,  or  to  Tyre
and  Sidon  and  other  ancient  cities
ami  peoples,  have  fallen  unfulfilled  ]
No,  there  is  no  man  can  point  to  a
single  prophecy  of  the  servants  of
God  that  has  failed  in  its  fulfillment.
Does  not  the  Christian  world  know
that  the  Bible  is  full  of  revelation
pointing  to  this  day  and  age  of  the
world  ?  Let  them  read  the  revela-
tions of  St.  John  given  him  while
upon  the  Isle  of  Patmos  and  they
will  know  what  judgments  await
this  generation  before  the  coming  of
the  Son  of  Man.  There  is  a  work
for  somebody  to  perform.  But  when
we  undertake  to  declare  in  all  seri-
ousness that  God  has  anything  to  do
with  the  work  in  which  we  are
engaged  they  will  laugh  you  in  the
face,  and  the  reason  is,  they  have
departed  from  God  and  are  entirely
unable  to  comprehend  his  ways  or
his  purposes ;  and  instead  of  believ-
ing the  plain  and  literal  meaning  of
the  word  of  God,  they  spiritualize  it
to  suit  themselves. Daniel  was


LIBKltTY  OF  CONSCUfiNClfi,  ETC


lol


prepared  to  enter  the  den  of  lions  ;
the  three  Hebrew  children  were  not
afraid  of  the  fate  that  awaited  thera  ;
the  Apostles  were  valiant  for  the
truth  and  shrank  not  from  death  for
its  sake,  and  why  could  those  men
.and  others  under  similar  circumstan-
stances  stand  by  their  convictions
without  flinching  ?  Because,  in  the
first  place,  they  had  the  truth  and
they  knew  it  for  themselves ;  and  in
the  second  place,  the  Holy  Ghost,  the
Comforter,  sustained  them  as  that
power  alone  can  in  all  the  trying
scenes  through  which  the  people  of
God  are  called  to  pass.  And  this  is
so  to-day.  What  the  Latter-day
Saints  have  done  by  way  of  preach-
ing the  Gospel  under  all  kinds  of
difficulties,  building  up  cities  and
subduing  waste  lands,  and  estab-
lishing themselves  in  the  earth,  they
have  done  by  the  revelations  and
-command  me  tits  of  God  to  them.

I  will  say  a  few  words  concerning
a  certain  principle,  and  why  I  say  it
is  because  we  cannot  help  looking
At  the  signs  of  the  times  as  they  ap-
pear to-day,  I  was  reading  in  the
News  last  evening  a  sj>eech  reported
to  have  been  made  by  Joseph  Smith,
son  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,
in  which  he  accuses  us  of  pursuing
an  entirely  different  course  from
that  of  his  father  ;  that  his  father
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  endow-
ments which  form  a  part  of  our  re-
ligious faith;  and  that  his  father  had
nothing  to  do  with  the  patriarchal
order  of  marriage  ;  and  he  accuses
our  bishops  of  polluting  the  women
of  their  several  wards  so  that  they
are  not  fit  for  wives.  This  last  ac-
cusation is  so  palpably  false  and  so
utterly  mendacious  as  to  be  entirely
unworthy  of  our  notice,  and  I  be-
lieve I  ought  to  apologise  to  this
♦congregation  for  referring  to  it  at  all.
But  it  shows  how  weak  must  be  the
hope  and  faith  of  men  who  pretend


to  be  teachers  among  the  people
when  they  descend  to  traduce  the
character  of  innocent  men  by  wil-
fully lying  in  the  hope  of  bolstering
up  and  establishing  their  own  pecu-
liar cause. And  with  regard  to  the
others  :  I  wish  to  say,  that  Joseph
Smith  utters  falsehoods  when  he
says  what  he  is  reported  to  have
said  about  his  father  :  for  I  bear  re-
cord to  this  congregation,  ami  I  ask
our  young  people  to  bear  it  in  mind
after  I  am  gone,  that  Joseph  Smith
first  made  known  to  me  the  very
ordinances  which  we  give  to  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  in  our  endowments.
I  received  my  endowments  under
the direction  of Joseph  Smith.
Emma  Smith,  the  widow  of  the
Prophet,  is  said  to  have  maintained
to  her  dying  moments  that  her  hus-
band h$d  nothing  to  do  with  the
patriarchal  order  of  marriage,  but
that  it  was  Brigham  Young  that  got
that  up. I  bear  record  before  God,
angels  and  men  that  Joseph  Smith
received  that  revelation  ;  and  I  bear
record that Emma Smith  gave
her  husband in  marriage  several
women  while  he  was  living,  some
of  whom  are  to-day  living  in  this
city,  and  some  may  he  present  in
this congregation, and who,  if
called  upon,  would  confirm  my  words.
But  lo  and  behold,  we  hear  of  pub-
lication after  publication  now-a-days#
declaring  that  Joseph  Smith  had
nothing  to  do  with  these  things.
Joseph Smith himself  organized
every  endowment  in  our  Church
and  revealed  the  same  to  the  Church,
and  he  lived  to  receive  every  key  of
the  Aaron  ic  and  Melchisedec  priest-
hoods from  the  hands  of  the  men
who  held  them  while  in  the  flesh,
and  who  hold  them  in  eternity.

I  feel  to  say  to  the  Latter-day
Saints  everywhere,  brethren  and
sisters,  do  good  and  you  will  reap
good ;  what  you  sow  you  will  also


132


JOURNAL  Ul+  DISCOURSES


reap.  What  our  nation  sows  that  it
will  aUo  reap,  and  what  it  measures
to  others  will  be  meted  hack  to  it
heaped  up,  pressed  down  and  run-
ning over.  I  have  peculiar  feelings
in  reflecting  upon  the  condition  of
our  own  nation.  Here  are  the
Methodists  and  Presbyterians  and
others  all  combining  to  use  their
iiiiluvctf  religiously  and  politically
to  put  down  m  Mormon  ism, 1
which  they  say  is  an  abomination
in  the  land,  and  a  great  stain  upon
our  nation'*  escutcheon.  "  0,  my
God,"  I  tVel  to  say,  "  I  would  our
nation  could  see  and  understand
things  a*  they  really  are."  I  want
to  ask  a  question.  When  the  sixth
angel  sounds  his  trump  revealing
the  secret  acts  of  men  to  an  assem-
bled world,  which  will  include  us,
what  will  be  the  feelings  of  the
present  generation  and  the  rulers
and  leading  men  and  women  of  our
nation  as  well  as  those  of  other  na-
tions, and  the  leaders  of  the  Chris-
tian world  when  that  angel  declares
unto  all  those  who  have  condemned
and  cried  against  the  Latter-day
Saints,  especially  those  who  have
taken  a  leading  part,  saying,  "  You
yourselves  are  defiled  with  women,
and  your  own  acts  which  are  recorded
on  high  will  rise  in  judgment  against
you.  I  say  to  this  nation,  and  espe-
cially to  those  who  are  actively  en-
gaged in  bringing  about  a  crusade
against  us  under  the  cloak  of  religion,
"  Sin  lies  at  your  own  doors,  and
what  you  measure  unto  us  will,  Ac-
cording to  the  eternal  law  of  retribu-
tion, he  meted  back  to  you,  and  you
cannot  escape  it."  We  declare  to  all
men  that  the  God  of  heaven  com-
manded Joseph  Smith  to  introduce
and  practice  the  patriarchal  order  of
marriage,  including  the  plurality  of
wives.  And  why  1  Because  it  was
the  law  given  to  Abraham,  Isaac  and
Jacob  for  certain  purposes ;  that  holy


men  might  have  their  wives  and  chil*
dren  with  them  in  the  morning  of
the  first  resurrection  in  their  family
organization  to  inherit  kingdoms,
thrones,  principalities  and  powers  in
the  presence  of  God  throughout  the
endless  ages  of  eternity.  Ladies
and  gentlemen,  the  Latter-day  Saints
are  not  the  people  you  think  they
are ;  they  are  not  guilty  of  the  crimes
and  wickedness  they  are  accused  of,
but  on  the  contrary,  they  are  as  a
people,  free  from  the  sins  and  abom-
inatiniis  of  this  generation.  We
are  represented  as  being  a  commu-
nity of  adulterers,  and  as  being
murderers.  We  are  no  more  guilty
of  such  crimes  than  were  Abraham*
Isaac  ami  Jacob,  What  God
has  revealed  unto  us,  and  that  which
we  know  ourselves  to  be  right  and
true,  we  cherish  and  revere  ;  and
the  covenants  that  we  have  entered
into  in  consequence  of  the  revela-
tions of  God  to  us,  we  hold  sacred.
Our  wives  and  children  we  love  and
respect,  and  we  could  no  more  deny
them  their  claims  upon  us  as  hus-
bands andifathers,  than  we  could
deny  our  God,

Another  thing,  there  is  no  man
that  has  ever  lived  who  can  claim
a  wife  or  child  in  the  resurrection
unless  he  and  she  were  married  and
sealed  by  divine  authority  by  a  man
delegated  of  heaven  to  perform  the
ordinance  of  marriage.  All  contracts
not  ordained  of  God  entered  into
by  men,  eud  with  this  life,  and  are
therefore  without  binding  effect  in
the  world  to  come.  And  herein  is
the  difference  of  the  position  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  and  of  the
Christian  world  with  respect  to  the
married  state.  The  nature  of  our
marriage  covenant  is  sacred  and
binding  both  for  time  and  eternity,
and  I  would  just  as  soon  think  of
denying  my  God  as  to  sever  the  rela-
tionship existing  between  me  and


y  wives  and  children.  Our  plural
wives  and  our  children  are  just  as
dear  to  us  as  the  one  wife  ami  the
-children  of  the  Gentiles  are  to  them  ;
and  what  is  more,  we  have  married  j
our  wives  by  command  of  God,  and  '


by  authority  of  His  Holy  Priesthood,
which  has  been  restored  again  to
earth  ;  and  if  we  prove  faithful  and
true  to  Him  and  to  one  another,  we
shall  claim  our  wives  and  children
in  the  world  to  coma  Amen,


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  at  the  Assembly  Hall,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  After-
noon, November  14,  1880*

a,  ( Reported  by  John  Irvine.)


HOW  THE  GOSPEL  IS  PREACHED  15  V  THE  ELDERS — VALUE  OF  THE
TRAINING  THEY  RECEIVE — HISTORICAL  COMPILATION  OF  EXPERIEN-
CES OF  THE  ELDERS  WOULD  BE  INTERESTING  —  PROSPECTS  OF  THE
RISING  GENERATION — FAITH  OF  THE  ANCIENTS  RESTORED  —  FUL-
FILLMENT OF  THE  DESTINY  OF  THE  CHURCH  CANNOT  BE  HIN-
DERED— THE  SAINTS  PURIFIED  BY  TRIAL.

It  is  exceedingly  pleasing  to  ine —  thousands  of  men  who  profess  to  be

and  I  have  no  doubt  it  is  to  all  the  ministers  of  life  and  salvation,  and

Latter  day  Saints — to  hear  the  tes~  to  he  ser  vants  of  the  Lord  Jesus

timony  or  the  servants  of  God  who  Christ,  who  devote  their  lives  to  the

have  gone  forth  as  missionaries  to  proclamation of those  principles

the  nations  of  the  earth,  ami  have  which they esteem necessary  to

returned  bearing  a  faithful  testi-  salvation.  But  it  is  not  a  common
mony  concerning  the  work  of  Go* I,  '  thing  for  men  to  go  forth,  putting

and  giving  their  experience  in  de-  their  trust  in  God  and  relying  upon

daring  the  word  unto  the  people.  him for that sustenance  which

The  labors  of  the  Elders  of  this  is  necessary  to  enable  them  to  live

Church  are,  in  some  respects,  the  and  to  perform  their  missions.  We

most  extraordinary  of  all  the  labors  have  missionaries  of  various  deno-

of  the  children  of  men  with  which  minations  who  have  come  here,  as

I  am  acquainted. The  preaching  of  they  say,  to  enlighten  us,  to  dissi-

what  is  called  the  Gospel  is  not  un-  pate  our  errors,  to  put  us  on  the

common. There  are  thousands  upon  right  path,  and  to  point  out  to  us  a


MjV  us  a  l  <ik  i>is<;ouksks


better  plan  of  salvation  than  that
which  we  possess.  But  they  come
here  because  they  are  paid  to  come,
They  make  their  living  by  corning.
It  is  a  profession  like  that  of  the
physician  or  surgeon,  who  comes
here  to  administer  to  our  physical
ailments*  In  this  respect  the
Elders  of  this  Church  differ  from  all
others.  They  go  out  without  purse
and  scrip,  relying  upon  the  Lord,
putting  their  trust  in  him,  devoting
their  time,  their  energies,  and  the
ability  that  God  has  given  unto
them  for  the  purpose  of  enlighten-
ing their  fellow-men  concerning  that
which  they  know  to  be  the  ti  utlu  I  '
do  not  know  any  greater  evidence
than  this  that  men  could  give  to
their  fellow-men  of  their  sincerity.
And  when  men  ^o  forth  in  this  way
they  are  very  lik<  ly  to  live  so  that
the  spirit  of  the  mighty  God  of  Ja-
cob will  be  with  them,  they  are  likely
to  feel  after  it,  to  seek  in  faith  to
obtain  God's  blessing.  When  a  man
is  hungry,  when  he  is  without  money,
when  he  has  no  friends,  he  is  veiy
apt  to  feel  after  some  Being  that
has  power  ;  if  he  has  any  faith  in
God  lie  is  very  apt  to  exercise  it,
and  by  the  constant  exercise  of  that
faith,  if  he  did  not  know  before  he
went  upon  his  mission  that  God
lives  that  God  is  near,  that  he  hears
and  answers  prayer,  lie  would  be
very  likely  to  learn  these  tilings  be
fore  a  great  while,  and  so  become
strengthened  in  his  faith  so  that  he
would  atsk,  believing  when  he  did
ask  that  he  would  receive  the  very
thing  that  he  desired.  God  in  his
mercy  lias  commanded  his  people
to  take  this  course.  He  has  com*
manded  his  Elders  to  qo  forth  and
preach  I  lis  Gospel,  not  for  a  salary,
not  for  hire,  not  for  the.  sake  of  en-
joying pleasant  times  and  the  favor
of  mankind,  but  that  they  may  be
the  means  in  his  hands  of  savin  <:


the  world  and  of  hearing  f-ucli  a  tes-
timony to  the  world  concerning  this
Gospel,  that  it  will  be  left  without
excuse,  at  the  same  time  promising
his  servants  that  he  would  raise  up
friends  to  them  that  they  should
have  their  needs  supplied.  It  is
one  of  the  most  remarkable  things
connected  with  this  Church,  that
from  the  day  it  was  founded  until
the  present  time  no  man  has  gone
forth  called  of  God  to  proclaim  the
Gospel  in  faith,  but  he  has  returned
bearing  testimony  that  God  has
opened  his  way,  that  God  has  fed
him,  that  God  has  clothed  him,  that
God  has  put  it  into  the  hearts  of
people  to  assist  him,  that  he  has
traveled  by  sea,  traveled  by  land,
traveled  amongst  strangers  in  lands
where  strange  languages  were
spoken — yet  at  no  time  has  he  ever
lacked  fnr  food,  raiment,  or  any  of
those  things  which  were  necessary
to  enable  him  to  accomplish  the
mission  upon  which  he  had  been
sent.

As  a  people,  brethren  and  sisters,
we  do  not  appreciate  the  value  of
this  training.  I  am  satisfied  that
we  ourselves  scarcely  comprehend
the  blessing  there  Ls  in  such  educa-
tional conditions.  In  an  age  of
almost  universal  skepticism  it  is  of
the  utmost  value  to  us  as  a  people
that  we  should  receive  the  training
that  our  Elders  get  when  they  go
abroad  among  the  nations  of  the
earth  preaching  the  Gospel  With-
out it  we  should  lack  opportunities
of  testing  the  Lord,  of  being  tested
ourselves  in  regard  to  our  faith,  of
proving  to  our  own  satisfaction  that
God  lives,  and  that  God  hears  and
answers  prayer,  and  that  he  does
interpose  in  behalf  of  the  humble,
the  weak  and  the  insignificant  when
they  approach  him  in  faith  in  the
name  of  Jesus  and  ask  for  this  in-
terposition. A perusal of  the


HOW  THK GUSPJ-L 18 FRKACUt  D  BY  THK  KLDUlP,  K'C


135


journals  of  the  Riders  of  tins  Church
who  have  kept  daily  record  of  that
which  tltey  have  endured  and  wit-
nessed, and  the  various  incidents  of
their  missions  would  be  as  interest-
ing as  the  acts  of  the  Apostles  in
the  New  Testament ;  for  God  lias
manifested  Himself  in  the  most
extraordinary  manner  in  their  behalf.
Many  of  this  people,  before  they
heard  of  the  organization  of  the
Church,  read  the  acts  and  teachings
of  the  Apostles  and  of  the  Savior,
and  also  Pauls  Epistles,  and  their
souls  yearned  for  a  day  of  such
power  upon  the  earth.  Many  who
are  here  to-day,  many  thousands
throughout  this  Territory,  who  are
no  v  connected  with  this  Church,
have  wished  that  they  could  have
lived  at  a  time  when  these  acts  were
being  performed,  when  such  men  as
are  described  in  the  New  Testament
had  an  existence  upon  the  earth.
But  the  history  of  the  Elders  of  this
Church — the  miracles  and  manifes-
tations of  God's  power  which  they
have  witnessed  and  been  the  instru-
ments in  performing — would  make,  a
book  far  larger  than  any  record  we
have  handed  down  to  us.

To-day,  the  existence  of  God  nriy
be  said  to  be  only  knowu  by
sonal  experience,  to  com  para  ivety
few  people.  Thousands  throughout
Christendom  think  they  know,  lie-
cause  of  their  traditions,  that  God
lives  an  l  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of
God.  Their  fathers,  their  mothers,
their  priests,  their  school  teachers,
have  indoctrinated  them  with  the
idea  that  there  is  such  a  Being  as
God,  and  that  Jesus  his  Son  is  the
Savior  ami  redeemer  of  the  world,
and  they  fancy  they  know  an  i  un-
derstand these  thiugs.  But  how
many  are  then;  who  can  testify,  by
personal  experience  that  they  know
that  God  lives]  Ho  v  many  cad  say
that  they  have  asked  for  an  1  re


ceived,  through  imploring  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  the  very  blessings
that  they  de*ire  1  and  needed  ?
Comparatively  few  people  out  of  the
massses  that  live  upon  the  earth.
Hence  it  is  that  God  has  removed
himself  far  from  them,  and  they  say
there  is  no  use  in  calling  upon  God,
there  is  no  use  in  inculcating  a  be-
lief that  he  will  hear  and  answer
prayer,  that  he  will  interpose  in
behalf  of  individuals,  or  that  he
will  suspend — to  use  another  phrase
— great  natural  laws  to  accomplish
certain  results.  Yet  God  does  not
suspend  natural  laws  when  he  in-
terposes in  behalf  of  his  people.
We  are  told  in  the  New  Testament
that  Jesus  ascended  in  the  sight  of
certain  individuals  into  heaven.
The  law  of  gravitation  apparently
may  be  .said  to  have  been  suspended,
or  the  law  which  confines  bodies  to
the  earth — the  law  by  which  we  are
governed  ;  but  the  Savior  under-
stood a  higher  law  ;  he  understood
laws  by  which  he  could  accomplish
tbu,  and  at  the  same  time  not  in-
terfere with  the  gen  end  law  that
governs  human  bodies,  and  so  in
all  these  matters  God  can  interpose
his  power ;  he  cm  bear  and
answer  the  prayers  of  those  who  are
humb  e  and  seek  unto  him.  He
can  give  unto  them  the  desires  of
their  hearts  in  a  way  that  is  his
own  ;  He  can  operate  by  unseen  in-
fluences upon  men's  minds,  and
lead  thft&a  to  do  certain  thin  us  that
will  result  in  the  fulfillment  of  the
desires  of  others,  concerning  which
they  have  offered  their  prayers  unto
the  Lord.  In  this  i>sp**et  the  Lat-
ter-ay Saints  occupy,  so  far  as  1  know
a  unique  position.

Brother  Nicholson  remarked  that
he  e^idu  see  amo  ig  the  young  rneri
who  had  gsoe  fort.i  to  pleach  of
late  years,  a  wonderful  zeal,  and
growth  in  faith. This  m  ill  be  more


136


JOUKNAL 0>"  D1SUOU1LSKK


and  more  the  case. The  agencies
that  are  now  ;it  work  in  our  midst ,
our  Sunday  Schools — th$  scholars  o
which  number  upwards  of  thirty
thousand  — our  Young  Men's  and
Young  Women1*  Associations— the
meml>ers  of  which  are  numbered  by
thousands — are  doing  a  vast  amount  j
of  good.  The  young  are  being  trained
in  the  leading  of  the  Scriptures,  I
And  who  can  read  the  Scriptures
without  believing  that  God  is,  and
that  he  hears  ami  answers  prayers  1!
What  is  there  in  the  Bible  to  lead  a
reader  to  believe  that  faith  shall  not  j
b$  jp3t#rcised  to-day  as  much  as  at  [
any  time  in  the  world's  history,  or
that  revelation  from  God  shall  not
be  enjoyed  to-day  as  much  as  1S0U

Ssrars  ago? He who reads  the
ible  and  believes  in  the  equality  of
man,  believes  lit  the  justice  of  God,
and  his  unchangeable  character,  that
he  is  thfe  same  yesterday,  to-day, !
and  foreve  r,  will  have  faith  spring
up in his heart concerning  the
possibility of having  knowledge
from  God,  ami  of  God's  speaking,  of
sent  ling  his  messages  to  the  earth
to-day  as  well  as  he  did  in  ancient
days, I  do  not  believe  that  a  child
can  be  found  who,  if  the  New  Tes-
tament be  given  to  him  or  to  her,
and  he  or  she  read  it  without  the
bias  which  conies  from  the  interpo-
sition of  friends  and  the  comments
of  teachers,  will  not  have  faith  in
God,  ami  will  not  desire  ro  know
why  it  is  that  liod  does  i*ot  work
miracles  in  these  days,  and  why
God's  power  is  not  manifested  now
as  it  was  in  ancient  days.  These
inquiries  will  naturally  spring  up
in  their  hearts,  and  their  desire  to
share in  these blessings will  be
a*  natural  to  them  as  any  other
thoughts  would  be. Certainly,  they
will  have  no  idea  unless  they  are
taught  it,  that  these  gifts  and  bles-
sings are  no  longer  to  be  enjoyed


by  men  upon  the  earth.  It  is  falsa
teaching  that  generates  such  ideas
in  the  mind  of  the  children  ot  menf
not  the  Bible  itself,  not  the  New
Testament,  not  arty  thing  that  is
written  within  either  of  those  Imoks,
but  they  are  ideas  that  come  from
outside  of  the  Bible,  But  it  is  said
if  these  things  have  not  erased,  if
it  was  not  the  will  of  God  that  they
should  cease,  why  is  it  tliat  we  do
not  have  these  manifestations  now
as  they  had  in  ancient  days?  Why
is  it  that  God  does  not  speak  now  1
Why  is  it  that  angels  do  not  min-
ister unto  men  now  ?  Why  is  it
that  the  Holy  fihost  is  not  poured
out  now]  Why  are  there  no  per-
sons possessing  the  gift  of  healing,
and  other  manifestations  of  the
power  of  God  1  Why  is  it  that
Christendom  has  been  for  a^es  with-
out  these  blessings  and  gifts  in  their
midst  1

These  are  very  reasonable  in-
quiries, and  the  answer  to  them  is
to  be  found  in  the  history  of  the
Church,  in  this  fact  ;  that  mankind
would  not  permit  a  servant  of  Jesus
to  live  in  their  midst  who  did  such
things,  from  the  days  of  himself
and  his  apostles  down  to  the  days
of  the  restoration  of  the  Gospel  in
its  ] unity  to  the  earth.  Inspired
men  have  not  been  permitted  to  live
in  their  midst  Even  men  who  pro-
fessed  to  have  a  little  light,  who  did
not  profess  to  have  received  revela-
tion, but  who  claimed  that  it  was  their
privilege  lo  seek  unto  God  and  to
find  him  and  obtain  knowledge  from
him,  to  a  certain  extent,  were  per-
secuted unto  death.  Read  the  his-
tory <>f  the  vat  ions  reformed  churches
from  the  days  of  the  A  jostles  down
until  the  present  time,  or  to  within
fifty  years,  and  you  will  find  that

,  this  has  always  been the  result.
Mankind have been  determined

> that  a  reformed  religion,  and  cer-


MOW  THE  GOSPBL.  IS  PUKACHKD  BY  THR  KLDER8,  KTC,  137


tainly  revelation  from  God,  should
not  be  introduced  in  their  midst.
They  would  not  have  it  We  have
seen  it  in  our  own  age,  in  this  en-
lightened nation,  occupying  the
foremost  rank  of  all  the  nations  of
the  earth,  prominent  for  liberty,  and
for  the  freedom  of  its  government,
laws  and  institutions,

Joseph  Smith,  the  Prophet  ot
God,  did  not  arrogate  to  himself
any  superiority  over  his  fellows,  but
he  said  that  every  man  might  be  a
prophet  of  God,  might  have  the  tes-
timony of  Jesus  Christ,  if  he  would
live  for  it.  He  did  not  go  among
the  people  and  say,  "  I  have  been
chosen  and  elected  to  be  something
superior  to  all  the  rest  of  you  ;  I  have
received  blessings  which  no  other
man  can  receive/'  This  was  not  his
doctrine  nor  his  teaching,  but  he
said  that  every  man  that  would  obey
the  Uospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
and  have  the  ordinances  administered
to  him  by  one  having  authority,
should  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
that  would  make  him  a  prophet,  it
would  fill  him  with  the  Spirit  of  God,
which  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy  ;  and
because  he  declared  this,  because  he
declared  the  equality  of  man  before
God,  because  he  contended  that  the
souls  of  men  in  the  nineteenth  cen-
tury were  as  precious  in  the  sight  of
God  as  they  were  in  the  first  cen-
tury of  the  Christian  Era,  or  at  any
time  anterior  to  that  era  ;  because
he  declared  that  God  was  the  same
in  these  days  as  he  was  in  ancient
days  ;  because  he  declared  that  God
was  not  a  God  who  made  distinction
among  his  creatures  ;  that  he  did
not  manifest  light  to  one  generation
and  refuse  it  to  another  who  were
equally  faithful  in  seeking  for  it-
because  he  declared  these  doctrines
in  this  nation  and  in  this  age  his  life
was  sacrificed.  Our  existence  to-
day in  these  mountains,  the  existence


of  Utah  as  a  Territory  in  its  present
form,  is  due  to  religious  intolerance,
ami  is  due*  also  to  the  fact  that  a
community  has  grown  up  who  con-
tend for  religious  equality  before
God,  who  claim  that  they  are  as
good  as  their  fathers  in  the  sight  of
Godt  who  contend  that,  however
weak  and  fallible  they  may  be,  they
at  least  are  the  children  of  God,  and
the  heavens  are  open  to  them,  if
they  have  equal  faith,  as  they  were  to
their  fathers  who  lived  1,8U0  or  2,000
or  3,000  years  ago.  Utah  became  an
organized  territory  because  of  this
fact  ;  that  there  had  been  begotten
in  the  hearts  of  the  people  the  feel-
ing to  seek  after  God  as  their  fathers
did.  to  seek  for  Mm  that  they  might
find  him  and  obtain  knowledge  I  mm
him  for  themselves,  not  content  to
read  of^the  blessings,  of  the  powers,
and  gifts,  and  of  the  ordinances  of
salvation  that  were  extended  to
others,  thousands  of  years  ago.  The
mere  reading  of  these  things  would
not  satisfy  this  people.  Not] dug
short  of  the  actual  realization  of  the
blessings  would  satisfy  the  yearnings
of  their  soul.  And  they  stand  to-
day as  a  living  protest  against  reli-
gious intolerance,  and  in  favor  of
the  old  faith  that  existed  upon  the
eartli  thousands  of  years  ago,  seek-
ing for  the  old  paths,  teaching  their
children  that  God  is  the  same  to-
day that  he  ever  was,  and  that  they
must  seek  unto  him  as  they  did
in  ancient  days  to  obtain  knowledge
of  him  and  from  him*  And  we
began  in  this  way  ;  The  Lord
commanded  us  to  go  without  purse
or  scrip — a  good  way  of  testing  us
to  see  whether  our  desires  to  know
him  were  real  or  not — to  go  out  in
the  midst  of  a  cruel  and  unfeeling
world,  opposed  to  us,  opposed  to  the
ideas  we  entertained,  priests  feeling
as  they  did  in  ancient  days,  that
their  craft  was  in  danger. "  Why/'


138


lUt'KNAL  Ob  DIsroUKSKs


said  tht-y,  "here  are  men  who  will
destroy  all  our  creed.  We  shall
have  no  pay  for  our  preaching  if  this
becomes  popular,  our  profession  will
be  destroyed/'  and  from  the  day  that
proclamation  was  made  to  the
present  time  the  strongest  opponents
of  this  Church  and  of  this  people
have  been  men  who  preach  for  hire,
and  whose  creeds  have  been  in  dan-
ger by  tli*  proclamation  of  these
truths.  To-day  religions  conven-
tions cannot  be  held  without  41  Mor-
mon Urn"  being  introduced  and  ad-
vanced as  something  against  which
t Vie  power  of  the  nation  should  be

directed,

Tltc  Lord  has  been  with  us  and
has  helped  us  or  we  could  not  have
done  what  has  been  done.  It  has
been  his  blessing,  it  has  been  the
manifestation  of  his  power,  that
has  shielded  and  upheld  this  people.
His  word  has  gone  foith  concerning
this  work.  It  will  not  return  unful-
filled* Commencing  with  six  mem-
bers, this  Church  has  increased  until
it  is  a  power  in  the  earth,  and  there
is  no  nation  which  lias  not  heard
of  this  strange  people  living  In  the
midst  of  the  Rocky  Mountains*
The  ideas  we  have  taught  are  re-
volutionizing the  earth,  silently
and  slowly  in  some  respects,  but
nevertheless  as  thoroughly.  We
are  few  in  number,  but  the  power
and  influence  of  the  ideas  which  we
advocate  wield  a  power  that  we
here  do  not,  fully  understand.  This
will  increase.  As  1  have  said  to
you  and  to  others,  the  qualities  that
are  possessed  by  the  Latter-day
Saints  will  never  die-  They  cannot
die  unless  you  kill  the  people  them-
selves. Talk  about  destroying
this  work  !  When  you  destroy  the
Church  of  Christ,  and  virtue,  union,
industry,  frugality  and  temperance
from  the  face  of  the  earth,  the  world
will  destroy  "  Mormonism,"  as  it  is


called.  But  a  people  with  such
qualities  as  we* exhi bit,  as  God  has
developed  within  us,  cannot  be  killed.
Ideas  have  been  begotten  and  given
birth  to  that  will  continue  to  grow
and  increase  until  they  fill  the
whole  earth,  because  they  are  true
and  divine.  If  there  were  only
half  a  dozen  men  left  alive  who  haul
this  organization  and  held  these
principles  they  would  continue  to
grow  ami  gather  ad h erants  and
spread  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the
left  The  principles  are  indescribable
in  their  character.  A  faith  has  been
begotten,  a  faith  been  born  that  will
continue  to  live  and  increase  and
sprea  1  abroad,  from  the  very  fact
that  it  is  true,  and  truth  always
finds  a  lodgement  ii  the  hearts  of
the  honest.  There  is  no  way  to  de-
stroy this  unless  those  who  enter-
tain a  belief  in  it  are  destroyed.
That  can  he  done,  bunt  is  not  likely
to  be  dom*.  It  was  done  in  t lie  days
of  the  Apostles,  fur  the  reason  that
the  churches  were  scattered  abroad,
here  and  there. Thev  were  sur-

ftr

rounded  by  their  enemies.  Satan
had  power  in  the  earth.  The  Apos-
tles were  slain  one  after  another.
Every  man  that  raised  his  voice  in
favor  of  divine  revelation  from  God,
or  contended  fur  the  equality  of  man
before  God,  and  the  unchangeable-
ness  ot  God,  was  slain.  The  Church
was  sea  tt e  red  abro  ad.  Pan  I  bu  i  1 1  u  p
1  "ranches  throughout  Asia  Minor
Other  Apostles  built  brioches  of
the  Church  wherever  they  could
find  a  place  where  the  people  would
receive  the  truth.  But  they  were
sun ou tided  by  adverse  influences,
and  the  Apostles  and  Saints  were
not  allowed  to  live.  And  we  in  this
day  would  be  destroyed  if  \vu  were
alone,  if  these  influences  were  left
to  operate  against  us.  You  sur-
round  a  few  people  by  multitudes
who  are  actively  hostile  and  aggres-


HOW  THE  GOSPEL  IS  PREACHED  BY  THE  ELDERS,  ETC.  139

s


sive  against  them,  and  how  difficult
it  is  for  them  to  maintain  their
foothold  !  This  was  the  condition
of  the  churches  in  the  days  of  the
Apostles*  They  were  scattered
abroad  throughout  Europe,  Asia
and  Africa,  and  on  many  islands.
The  Apostles  had  gone  forth  wher-
ever they  could  find  an  opening.
Thousands  had  been  organized  into
the  Church,  and  in  these  various
branches  there  were  men  who  had
inspiration  from  God,  who  had  the
authority  of  the  Holy  Priesthood,
who  could  ask  of  God  and  receive
from  him  knowledge  for  the  Lruid-
auce  of  the  people.  While  these
men  remained  the  Church  continued
to  grow.  But  persecution  sought
the  lives  of  men  of  this  character.
They  were  singled  out  and  slain
until  not  one  was  left,  until  a  uni-
versa!  silence  reigned.  Throughout
all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  hot «
voice  was  heard  to  disturb  the
silence,  no  he  avenly  messenger,  no
voice  from  the  eternal  world,  no  man
that  had  the  authority  to  say,  "thus
saith  the  Lord/1  The  heaves  is  he-
came  as  brass  over  the  heads  of  the
children  of  men,  all  communication
was  cut  off,  and  oF course  the  Church
fell,  the  Priesthood  departed,  the
ordinances  were  changed,  and  those
who  survived  with  a  little  faith
accommodated  therr selves  to  the
circumstances  surrounding  them.
That  was  the  condition  in  early
days,  u

But  how  the  condition  has
changed  !  God  in  his  mercy  con-
cealed this  continent  from  the  eyes
of  the  world.  Forages  it  remained
here  a  secret  place.  Neither  the
Atlantic  nor  the  Pacific  could  be
penetrated  until  the  set  time  came.
Then  a  man  was  found  who  was
moved  upon  by  the  Spirit  of  God.
He  became  possessed  of  an  idea  that
would  not  die,  and  his  idea  prevailed


eventually.  Ships  were  launched
upon  the  great  ocean,  and  the  con-
tinent of  America  was  discovered.
God  has  revealed  the  reason  this
continent  was  concealed  for  so  many
ages.  If  it  had  been  known  to  early
ages,  it  would  have  been  overrun,
and  there  would  have  been  no  room
for  the  great  wcrk  of  the  last  days.
But  lie  organized  a  government
upon  this  land.  Fie  sustained  the
men  who  founded  it.  He  filled  them
with  His  Spirit  and  enabled  them
to  fighc  all  the  battles  necessary  to
establish  religious,  social  and  poli-
tical freedom,  and  a  system  of  gov-
ernment was  formed  under  which
his  kingdom  could  he  set  up,  with
all  its  institutions,  without  interfer-
ing in  the  least  with  the  Constitu-
tion, In  the  Lord's  own  due  time
this  Church  was  brought  forth.  The
messengers  of  life  and  salvation  were
se  it  to  the  nations  of"  the  earth  pro-
claiming that  God  had  established
His  Church,  *wd  inviting  them  to
come  to  a  laud  of  liberty.  Thou-
sands have  been  gathered  here  from
that  day  to  this,  fulfilling  in  a  most
remarkable  manner  the  predictions
of  the  prophets  concerning  the
gathering  of  the  people  in  the  last
days.  The  circumstances  which
surrounded  us  are  very  different
from  those  which  surrounded  our
predecessors.  We  are  a  compact
body.  We  believe  in  gathering ;
we  believe  in  oi^e  people  of  one  faith
living  together,  worshiping  God
according  to  the  dictates  of  their
own  consciences.  This  presents  a
solid  phalanx  against  opposition  and
persecution.  We  cannot  be  slain
to-day  in  detail  as  our  brethren  were
1,800  years  ago.  The  ideas  we
believe  in  are  being  disseminated
anion g  our  children.  We  are  in-
creasing.  The  teachings  of  history
are  that  a  people  like  us  have  a
destiny,  and  they  cannot  be  pre-


140


journal  ob  iuscouksbs.


Yen+ed  from  fulfilling  it.  You  take
two  communities,  one  %  multiplying
community  ami  the  other  only  jwr- ,
tially  multiplying,  and  what  will  be  .
the  result  I  But  I  need  not  dwell
upon  this.  There  is  a  line  of  thought
connected  with  this  which  you  can
reflect  upon  at  your  leisure,

God  has  given  unto  us  the  condi-
tions that  are  suitable  for  the  ac-
complishment of  the  great  work
that  he  has  said  shall  be  established
and  carried  forward  in  the  last  days,
and  we  are  connected  with  it ;  and
there  is  this  to  distinguish  it  from
all  others — it  is  not  a  man-made
system. Men  may  say  ami  think
what  they  please  about  it,  but  from
the  President  of  the  Church  down
to  the  last  man  who  has  entered
into  the  Church  in  sincerity  there  is
a  faith  and  a  knowledge  that  this
work  is  of  God,  and  the  Presidency
believe  this  as  much  as  the  humblest
man  in  the  Church  and  more  too.
It  is  this  that  gives  power,  it  is  this
that  gives  iufluenee. It  is  because  1
they  are  tilled  with  a  knowledge
concerning  it  that  they  have  lived
it,  that  they  have  contended  for  it,
that  they  have  passed  through  per-
secutions to  establish  it,  that  they
are  not  unwilling  to  die  for  it,  if  it
should be necessary. And  this
is  the  case  with  the  whole  people.
Why  ? Because  they  are  deluded  t
Because they are dupes  1  Be-
cause they are deceived!  No,
but  because  God  has  opened  the
heavens  and  poured  out  His  Holy
Spirit  upon  them  and  given  them
a  testimony  for  themselves  of  the
truth of  this work. The  Nor-
wegian, the  Swede,  the  Dane,  the
native  of  Switzerland,  or  the  German,
Frenchman,  Irishman,  Englishman,
or  the  American,  together  with  the
Icelanders,  Sandwich  Islanders— all
receive  it  in  their  own  lands,  all
bearing  testimony  in  the  self-same


;  words,  that  God  has  given  them  a
testimony  of  the  truth  of  this  work,
1  Destroy  it !  You  might  as  well  try
to  destroy  the  heavens  themselves,
or  to  overthrow  the  throne  of  Jeho-
vah. It  is  true.  It  will  live.  Men
may  fall  away — for  men  are  weak
mortals — man  may  deny  the  faith,
man  may  say  this  is  all  a  delusion  ;
men  may  die,  but  the  grand  truth
still  lives.  It  has  found  a  lodgement
in  the  hearts  of  honest  men  and
women.  And  they  are  increasing.
Their  children  are  multiplying.
They  are  spreading  abroad  on  the
right  hand  and  on  the  left,  living
virtuous,  temperate,  frugal,  indus-
trious lives,  loving  God  and  loving
their  neighbors.

Are  there  exceptions! Yes,  we
are  human. The  devil  still  lives,
and  he  has  power  to  tempt  There-
fore  we have exceptions in  our
midst. Nevertheless  those  qualities
are increasing and  multiplying.
Men  are  found  who  possess  them,  and
those  growing  up  to  manhood  and
woman  hood  are  also  found  to  possess
them.  They  know  God  and  ask  Him,
believing  that  they  will  have  the  de-
sires, of  their  hearts  granted  unto
"theni. And  thus  the  work  of  God
is  spreading  abroad  throughout  the
earth,  finding  a  place  in  the  hearts
ot  people,  humble,  it  is  true,  but
people  who  are  independent — peo-
ple who  are  the  noblest  of  earth's
sons,  for  the  reason  that  they  are
not  afraid  to  embrace  that  which
is  unpopular. The  work  of  natural
selection  is  going  on  in  that  way.
This  Gospel  i*  naturally  selecting  the
best  of  the  people  from  the  midst  of
the  earth — men  and  women  in  hum-
ble station,  from  the  lower  ranks  of
life,  in the  most  of  instances,  al-
though  there  are  some  exceptions,
some  noble  exceptions ;  but  notwith-
I  standing  the lowliness of  their
i origin  and  their  surroundings,  they


HOW  THE  GOSPEL  IS  PREACHED  BY  THE  ELDERS,  ETC*  141


are  people  of  independent  thought,
people  who  dare  embrace  a  truth
though  it  be  unpopular,  and  cling
to  it  in  the  midst  of  all  the  influen-
ces that  are  brought  to  bear  against
them.  Out  of  such  materials  the
Lord  is  building  up  a  Church,
building  up  a  people,  bestowing  His
blessings  upon  them.

It  would  not  do  for  His  people  to
be  anything  else  but  valiant,  and
when  they  pass  through  the  ordeal
they  will  be  like  gold  seven  times
purified  In  days  gone  by  it  was
the  mob,  it  was  the  burning  of
houses,  driving  the  people  from
their  lands,  and  this  has  been  fol-
lowed by  ordeals  just  as  trying  in
their  character,  as  tar  as  testing  the
people  is  concerned.  By  this  pro-
cess the  people  are  becoming  stronger
in  the  Lord.  Their  feet  are  planted
upon  a  rock.  They  have  proved
God  for  themselves,  known  him
for  long  years  in  the  midst  of
trials,  temptations  and  vicissitudes
such  as  no  other  people  on  the  face
of  the  earth  know  anything  about.

I  thank  God  for  this*  I  thank
him  every  day  that  I  live  for  this
Church*  I  thank  him  that  I  am  a
Latter-day  Saint. If  I  can  only


have  a  name  among  this  people  I
1  feel  as  though  I  could  have  no
greater  comfort,  I  wish  to  be  asso-
ciated with  a  people  of  this  kind,
a  people  who  love  the  Lord  and  are
willing  to  do  anything  to  show
ther  faith  in  and  their  love  for  him,
and  if  it  were  necessary,  to  lay  down
their  lives  for  the  truth.  I  cannot
help  loving  a  people  of  this  kind.
They  have  weaknesses  and  faults.
I  have  them  too.  We  are  alike  in
this  respect.  If  they  will  bear  with
me  I  will  strive  to  bear  with  thera-
I  know  this  is  the  Church  and  King-
dom of  God.  I  know  that  those
who  cling  to  it  will,  in  the  name  of
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  receive  glory
and  exaltation  at  his  right  hand.  I
know  that  people  who  love  him,  as
the  Latter-day  Saints  do,  and  are
willing* to  make  sacrifice,  will  not  be
forgotten  by  him.  He  will  not  forget
them  in  the  day  that  he  makes  up
his  jewels  ;  he  will  bless  them  and
lion  or  them.

That  we  may  remain  faithful  and
true  unto  the  end,  and  be  counted
worthy  to  receive  an  exaltation  in
the  kingdom  of  our  God  is  my
prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,
Amen.


Jul  KM AL  U*  iilSCUUKSE.S.


I


DISCOURSE BY ELDKU GEOKGE G.  BYWATER,


Delivered  jn  the  Tabernacle.  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afteksoon,

June  4,  1882,


(Reported  by  Geo*  F.  Gibbs.J


HUttAN  RIGHTS —  ORIGIN,  DUTY  AND  DESTINY  OF  MAX  —  CORRECT
KNOWLEDGE  DUE  TO  DIVINE  REVELATION — TRUTH  EVER  ABSOLUTE
AND  UNWELCOME  TO  THE  WORLD  —  GOD'S  AUTHORITY  UNRECOG-
NIZED— THE  WORLD'S  PRESENT  STATE  AND  FUTURE  PROSPECTS.


Among  the  loftiest  conceptions
of  the  world  of  mind,  relative  to  the
purposes  and  being  of  man,  has,  in
human  wisdom,  been  formulated  to
be  the  right  to  life,  liberty  and  the
pursuit  of  happiness.  This  senti-
ment has  found  an  echo  in  every
age,  when  the  intelligence  with
which  man  is  inherently  endowed
has  been  favored  with  a  develop-
ment to  a  degree  adequate  to  this
conception.  And  although  this
principle  in  the  general  bebring
upon  human  interests  is  accepted  by
the  intelligence  of  all  countries  and
all  peoples,  we  discover  that  our
principles  and  sentiments  are  in  ad~
vance  of  the  moral  and  intellectual
culture  requisite  to  their  full  and
complete  development.  But  wher-
ever and  whenever  the  best  culti-
vated minds  have  been  moved  to
pronounce  their  conceptions  upon
the  destiny  of  man,  they  have  ever
incorporated  those  principles  and
those  rights  in  their  constitutional
manifestoes.  And  amid  the  multi-
tudinous concerns  and  divine  inter-
ests, in  which  the  human  mind  is
engrossed,  there  u  always  a  sacred
spot  reserved  for  the  welcoming
and  christening  of  those  principles
In  the  human heart.  Moreover,


whenever  these  principles  have  been
invaded  and  the  sanctity  of  the  con-
ditions involved  in  them  has  been
imposed  upon  by  ignorance  and
superstition  or  unbridled  and  un-
cultivated passions,  they  have  ever
resulted  in  sorrow,  distress  and  au»
guish  to  the  family  of  man.

In  speaking  a  few  Sabbaths  ago  I
made  reference  to  the  genesis  or  or-
igin of  things,  and  quoted  an  inquiry
which  was  very  beautifully  put  by
the  intelligent  individual  who  made
the  inquiry,  namely,  "  Whence  are
all  things,  and  whither  do  all  things
tend?"  and  then  remarked  that  the
highest  and  loftiest  aim  of  man  must
necessarily  be  to  obtain  the  concep-
tion of  his  origin  and  his  final  des-
tiny. Short  of  this,  his  life  would
be  an  aimless  life,  and  his  acts  would
be  acts  without  intelligent  motives  -
they  would  be  disconnected  :  they
would  bear  no  reference  to  the  past,
no  reference  to  the  future,  but
would  be  acts  produced  as  the  result
of  the  force  of  circumstances,  urging
an  acquiescence  and  recognition  of
the  pressure  by  which  he  was  sur-
rounded, and  yielding  to  the  au-
thority of  that  force.

But  to  the  free  and  intelligent
man  and  woman  who  ascend  above


the  narrow  zones  and  stratas  of  hu-
man life,  who  rise  to  a  higher  plain
of  intellectuality  and  who  begin  to
perceive  the  vast  extent  over  which
human  interests  are  spread  and  the
undoubted  right  of  association  of
those  interests  to  go  in  one  grand
fraternal  whole,  in  one  bond  of  hu-
man unity,  they  must  be  led  to  in-
quire into  those  matters,  and  in
doing  so  to  satisfy  themselves,  at
least,  according  to  their  highest
standard  of  knowledge,  and  their
widest  scope  of  experience  and  ob-
servation, so  that  they  might  have
in  view  an  object,  a  mark,  a  prize
towards  which  they  should  aim,  a
prize  for  which  they  should  run  a
race,  a  work  to  be  performed  for
which  they  should  receive  a  reward  ;
impelled  by  the  eternal,  heaven-
born  endowments  which,  under
favorable  influences  and  proper  cir-
cumstances, they  would  feel  awak-
ened within  them,  impelling  th*m,
urging  them  to  advance  to  a  higher
standard  of  moral  and  intellectual
excellence,  and  be  able  to  perform  a
work  for  the  advancement  of  their
race,  for  the  amelioration  of  the
com  lit  ion  of  human  society,  that
they  might  leave  the  world,  in  some
■small  degree  though  it  may  be,  the
better  for  their  living  in  it.
,  We  conceive,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  that  these  are  motives  that
no  well  directed  line  of  thought  can
escape,  that  these  are  feelings  that
no  heart  imbued  with  the  genuine-
ness of  its  nature,  which  we  inherit
as  the  patrimony  of  our  Father  and
God  can  entertain,  without  being
moved  thereby  ;  and  we  certainly
could  not  become  oblivious  to  these
considerations  whatever  may  be  the
-conditions  or  conceptions  iu  which
we  find  ourselves  and  those  with
whom  we  are  more  immediately  as-
sociated in  the  fabric  of  human
-society — we must  feel that  this


great,  grand,  dominating  principle
is  ever  presenting  its  modest  claim
upon  our  allegiance,  that  we  should
not  only  desire  to  enjoy  the  right  to
life  but  the  right  to  liberty,  and  the
right  to  pursue  happiness  according
to  our  highest  conceptions  of  that
happiness  and  that  liberty.

As  Latter-day  Saints  we  feel  that
this  is  our  prerogative  ;  we  fed  that
the  words  which  I  have  quoted,
although  I  stated  that  they  were
formulated  by  human  wisdom,  but
I  beg  to  qualify  that  statement  by  a
word  or  two  to  convey  my  meaning
more  clearly  to  you  upon  tiiis  sub-
ject. It  is  true  that  we  draw  a  line
of  demarcation  between  human
wisdom  and  wisdom  from  above —
between  the  human  and  divine;
that  we  draw  a  broad  line  by  which
we  distinguish  the  one  from  the
other;  but  when  we  expiess  our-
selves in  harmony  with  the  common
principle  which  enters  into  the
structure  of  our  faith,  as  Latter-day
Saints,  we  find  that  this  line  be-
comes more  and  more  attenuated  ;
we  find  that  it  loses  that  distinctness
which  we  once  thought  should  ever
exist  between  what  we  call  temporal
and  spiritual,  and  we  find  ourselves,
being  guided  by  the  inspirations
of  our  faith  and  the  principles  which
we  have  espoused,  coming  nearer
and  nearer  into  a  union,  and  more
closely  in  harmony  with  that  senti-
ment expressed  by  one  of  the
ancient  prophets:  i£Fear  God
and  keep  his  commandments  :
this  is  the  whole  duty  of  man."
This  sentiment  was  uttered  long
centuries  ago,  when  men,  according
to  modern  writers  and  speakers,
were  supposed  to  enjoy  only  the
j  light  of  Paganism,  guided  by  the
1  government  of  barbarism  in  the
lower  stages  of  the  scale  of  human
elevation — in  the  dark  ages.  But,
my  friends,  if  there  is  a  sage  or


JOURNAL  OK  DIKCOUBSKh


philosopher  that  has  ever  uttered  a
sentiment  or  declared  a  principle
or  enunciated  a  law  by  which  he
won lil  give  birth  to  his  conception
of  the  philosophy  of  life,  of  the  pur-
pose of  human  existence,  that  could
express  it  more  forcibly,  more  philo-
sophically or  in  stricter  harmony
with  the  principles  of  exact  science
than  this  ancient  Prophet,  then  I
know  not  his  name  nor  am  1  ac-
quainted with  him  as  an  author

Permit  me,  in  a  few  words,  to  il-
lustrate my  meaning  upon  this  prin-
ciple. We  will  suppose  that  a  mas-
ter builder  has  conceived  a  plan  for
a  magnificent  structure,  for  a  beau-
tiful residence,  for  a  temple  of  wor-
ship, for  a  temple  ot  science,  for
a  temple  of  freedom,  a  temple  of
truth  ;  and  he  would  embody,  as
the  result  of  his  deep  and  practical
investigation  into  the  wants  and  ne-
cessities embodied  in  his  conception,
a  necessary  provision  to  meet  those
wants,  to  supply  those  necessities,
and  to  accord  with  the  character  of
the  work,  or  the  results  to  be  pro*
duce<I  after  the  work  should  be  com
pleted,  tli at  there  was  no  part  of  the
plan  conceived  as  being  unnecessary
or  beyond  what  was  called  for,  or
any  part  of  the  structure  that  was
fault  for  nought,  and  that  might  as
well  be  disposed  of  as  to  have  it;
but  he  would  feel  that  he  had  com-
pleted his  ground  plan,  the  several
tioor  plans,  even  to  the  topmost  stone
or  the  last  elaborate  ami  artistic
touch  of  the  painter's  brush  or
mechanic's  chisel,  according  to  the
genius  of  decorative  art,  that  it
was  all  necessary  to  carrying  out  the
external  principles  and  character
and  importance  of  the  work  to  be

Srformed  and  of  the  results  to  fol-
w  the  completion  of  this  labor. $
If  this  be  true  in  works  of  art,  if
this  be  true  also  in  the  various
labors  of  life,  in  the  domain  of


agriculture  as  well  as  the  domain  of
art,  in  every  department  of  nature
as  well  as  in  every  department  of
art,  we  see  design  and  purpose,  we
see  invention  and  system,  we  see  the
indelible  mark  of  intent  upon  every
part  designed  to  constitute  the  en-
tire and  perfect  whole ;  and  we
would  say  that  the  man  who  would
conchule  that  the  work  of  such  an
architect,  of  such  a  master  builder,
was  unnecessary,  was  simply  an
utterance  of  mind  that  was  unfavor-
able to  more  mature  investigation
of  such  matters,  and  consequently
could  not  be  considered  a  competent
judge  upon  such  a  subject.

We  regard  man  as  the  highest
form  of  intellectual  and  moral  ex-
istence with  w  hich  we  are  acquainted*
We  regard  man  as  the  most  perfect
embodiment  of  all  the  creations  of
nature  with  which  we  are  acquainted.
He  possesses  the  highest  develop-
ment of  a  nervous  system,  the  most
complex  organization  in  all  its  parts,
the  most  fruitful  brain,  producing
the  grandest  results  witnessed  in
every  form  of  animated  existence  ;
and  if  this  be  true — and  I  have
never  yet  seen  a  man  who  could  be
considered  by  his  best  friends  to  be
sane  who  doubted  it — then  we  must
admit  that  if  man  who  is  created
with  a  complement  of  capabilities,
with  a  capacity  for  advancement  in
knowledge  of  a  variety  of  degree*
and  kinds,  and  that  he  is  adapted
in  his  mental  and  moral  nature  to
perform  works  that  are  productive
of  the  highest  possible  good,  not
only  to  himself  as  an  intelligent
being,  but  to  all  subordinate  or  in-
terior forms  of  life  with  w  hich  he  is
surrounded,  we  certainly  cannot  fail
to  come  right  into  the  presence  of
this  inquiry :  "  Whence  are  all
things,  and  whither  do  all  things
tend  T

j Many  and  wide  are  the  specula-


HUM  AX  KIGHTSj  ETC


145


tions  indulged  in  by  men  who  feel
free  to  give  themselves  the  most
unbounded  latitude  in  their  specula-
tions, forming  theories  not  only
devoid  of  ingeniousness,  not  only
devoid  of  truth  and  symmetry,  but
possessing  some  features  of  fascina-
tion for  the  intellectual  and  good
among  mankind  ;  yet,  where  do  we
find  in  the  whole  realm  jof  mind,
where  through  all  the  ages  that
have  gone  by,  men  that  have  wan-
dered and  gleaned  information  from
every  open  avenue  among  the  vari-
ous civilizations  which  the  words  of
history  give  unto  us  a  knowledge  of,
is  there  a  more  rational  and  consis-
tent solution  of  this  question  than
is  found  in  the  writings  of  the  most
ancient  historian  anil  primitive  law-
giver, Moses :  u  God  made  man  in
his  own  image  ;  in  the  image  of  God
created  he  him  ;  male  and  female
created  he  them/'

If  then,  my  friends,  we  have  an
origin — and  there  is  no  doubt  but
that  we  have  ;  and  there  are  very
few  men  with  whom  I  "have  come
in  contact  that  have  ever  hesitated
to  admit  man's  origin.  It  will  there-
fore be  rational  to  enquire  whence
are  we.  But  to  trace  back  through
the  ages  that  have  elapsed  and  take
a  retrospective  gaze  into  the  past  and
endeavor  to  unearth  the  history  of
lost  civilization  ;  to  exhume  from
the  buried  ruins  the  intelligence
that  existed  upon  the  surface  of  this
globe  during  the  long,  long  centuries
that  have  gone  by,  and  there  glean
the  very  cream  and  gather  together
the  most  precious  sentiments  ever
enunciated  by  sage  or  philosopher,
can  we  find  anything  superior  to
this  ?  No,  we  cannot,  my  friends  j
tht^re  is  none  on  record*  Pardon
my  freedom  in  making  so  broad  and
conclusive  a  statement ;  but  I  speak
after  many  years  reflections,  and  af-
ter considerable  research*

No.  ia


And  although,  my  beloved  breth-
ren and  sisters,  many  grand  and
cherished  principles  have  been
brought  to  light  by  man's  will  and
power  of  investigation,  by  seeking
to  open  natures  temples  and  explore
her  departments  and  endeavor  to
comprehend  law  through  phenomena,
and  formulate  the  laws  of  nature
in  harmony  with  the  connected  and
continuous  occurrences  of  events,
with  the  uniform  appearance  and
re  appearance  «f  her  operations,  and
they  have  been  gratified  with  the
glorious  results  which  have  fol-
lows] the  earnest,  the  honest  and
indefatigable  labors  of  good  men,
men  who  have  sacrificed  friends  and
homes  and  associations,  who  have
bid  at  lieu  to  their  dearest  friends
on  earth,  sacrificing  all  the  com-
forts and  luxuries  with  which  they
were  surrounded  to  embark  on  the
ocean  of  peril  and  uncertainty  in
pursuit  of  principles  which  they  felt
were  to  be  discovered,  and  results
to  be  attained  by  persistent  and
indefatigable  labor.  They  have
traveled  to  earth's  utmost  bounds  ;
they  have  endured  hardships,  and
many  of  them  have  sacrificed  their
lives  in  order  to  accumulate  a  fund
of  human  knowledge  to  add  lo  those
experiences  which  seem  indisputably
necessary  to  build  up  society  upon
its  more  enduring  basis.  Yet,  my
friends,  have  they  ever  brought  to
light  by  their  researches,  without
naming  those  worthies  for  whom  I
entertain  profound  respect,  a  great-
many  of  them,  have  they  ever  in-
troduced to  the  human  family  such  i
a  plain,  such  a  clear,  lucid  and  satis-
factory explanation  of  the  principles  *
of  which  I  have  spoken,  and  to  which  il
I  am  now  alluding — the  design  of
man  and  his  final  destiny  upon  the
earth — as  is  given  in  the  records  of
revelation.  It  is  true  that  the  scien-
tific man  is  satisfied  that  there  is  a

VoL  XXIIL


146  JOURNAL  OK

high  destiny  awaiting  man  ;  that
there  is  an  ultimatum  pertaining  to
his  beitijir  that  science  cannot  un-
fold, that  philosophy  cannot  teach,
that  man's  experience  ami  observa-
tion cannot  ga titer  the  materials  for
the  solution  of  ,  but  they  see  a  grand-
n ess  in  the  structure  of  the  human
frame,  t  hey  see  a  pi  oh  mildness  in
the  constitution  of  his  mind  ;  they
see  such  a  variety  of  adaptations
and  combinations  in  his  person  that
augur*  for  him  I  higher  life  and
nobler  results  and  grander  purples,
than  are  presented  within  the  nar-
row realm  of  his  mortal  sphere,  in
which  he  now  sojourns.  But  to  say
what  that  life  is,  to  explain  what
will  he  his  future  destiny  and  the
future  destiny  of  the  human  family
at  large,  the  earth  ;md  the  universe,
who  cati  tell  1  The  wisest  of  men
here  bow  their  heads  in  humility,
tlieir  countenances  become  more  or
less  sutlu*ed  with  expressions  of
humiliation.  They  stand  in  the
presence  of  the.  future,  the  effect  of
which  they  feel,  but  the  character
of  which  they  do  not  comprehend  ;
and  they  will  say  with  Professor
Proctor  and  others,  that  whatever
may  be  the  laws  that  will  bring  to
pass  the  resurrection  of  the  world,
as  the  prophets  have  said,  it  will  die
and  pass  away  ;  what  will  be  the  laws
and  powers  and  forces  that  will  make
themselves  manifest  in  the  resur-
rection or  regeneration  of  matter,
they  do  not  know,  but  they  believe
that  there  exists  in  nature  an  intel-
ligent power  which  will  conduct  her
operations  to  eternal  perpetuity.

My  friends,  we  are  indebted  to
revelation  as  the  source  of  know-
ledge ;  we  are  indebted  to  God  and
angels,  and  the  spirit  of  revelation,
for  our  understanding  of  those  divine
principles  which  afford  a  clear  and
final  solution  to  these  important  and
vital  inquiries*  As  Latter-day  Saints


DISCOURSES.

we  appeal  to  this  source  ;  and  while
we  do  not  ignore  any  truth,  come

I  from  where  it  may,  or  wherever
found,  whether  upon  Christian  or
heathen  ground,  we  hail  the  light
of  the  everlasting  Gospel  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  which  has  been
revealed  in  our  day  and  dispensation
;is  t ho  only  unerring,  as  the  only
truthful  and  unqualifiedly  certain
mode  of  interpretation  by  which  we
can  attain  to  a  knowledge  of  these
things.  We  may  say,  the  works  of
God  and  the  word  of  God  both  con-
stitute the  avenues  of  human  iufor
mation,  and  that  whoever  ignores
the  one  deprives  himself  of  much  of

I  the  benefits  which  flow  from  ac-
cepting the  other ;  that  there  are
two  doors  which  open  to  the  temple
of  truth,  and  they  are  both  indis-
pensably necessary  to  engage  man's
full  capacity  and  to  endow  him
with  the  principles  of  knowledge,
and  with  the  purposes  of  his  being
here  upon  the  earth,  together  with
his  origin  and  final  destiny,

My  beloved  friends,  I  feel  grateful
for  a  knowledge  of  these  things;  I
feel  thankful  that  God  has  restored
again  the  fulness  of  the  Gospel  of
our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,
and  that  we  are  living  in  the  dispen-
sation in  which  God  ha*  foretold
through  his  ancient  servants  the
prophets  that  he  would  make  known
his  mind  and  will  concerning  the
earth  and  its  inhabitants,  and  his
purposes  in  relation  to  them  ;  and
that  he  will  bring  to  pass  all  of  his
great  and  grand  designs  as  they  have
been  foreshadowed  in  the  volumes
of  revelation  from  the  earliest  period
of  his  speaking  to  the  children  of
men  to  the  present  hour.  And  as
Latter-day  Saints  we  rely  especially
and  entirely  upon  him  for  absolute
truth.  Although  men  deny  this,
they  say  there  is  no  such  thing  as
absolute  truth,  that  all  truth  is


HUMAN  RIGHTS,  ETC


147


relative.  But  we  have  learned,
through  the  revelations  of  God,  and
taking  them  as  a  standard,  that
there  is  a  great  deal  of  false  reason-
ing here.  Truth  is  absolute  in  its
nature,  Man's  apprehension  of  it
may  be  only  partial  and  imperfect }
he  may  know  two  few  of  its  sides,
com  pre  lien  ding  it  not  in  its  entirety;
and,  therefore,  to  form  a  perfect  and
unerring  judgment  as  regards  its
force  and  power  and  character  re-
quires a  thorough  application  of  its
elements.  I  aver  that  truth  is  ab-
solute. It  is  admitted  by  our  wisest
men  that  the  existence  of  God  is  an
absolute  existence  ;  we  accept  this
admission,  and  say  that  whatever
truth  emanates  from  him,  is  an  ab-
solute truth.  It  may  be  beyond  our
■comprehension.  Truth  may  come
unto  man  in  relative  quantities.  It
may  be  revealed  in  the  form  of  line
upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,
here  a  little  and  there  a  little.  It
nevertheless  comes  to  us  in  the
character  and  absoluteness  of  his
character,  and  this,  we  say,  is
stamped  upon  every  principle  that
emanates  from  his  divine  presence.

As  a  community  of  people  we  have
received  this  Gospel ;  we  have  em-
braced its  first  principles.  We  have
gathered  ourselves  together  to  these
mountain  valleys  in  fulfillment  of
prophecy  to  be  further  taught  of
him.  We  are  entering  into  the  de-
velopment of  that  work  which  has
been  the  theme  and  burden  of  the
prophetic  song  of  men  who  lived
long  ages  ago.  We  live  in  an  age  of
revelation.  We  live  in  an  age  of
Prophets  and  Apostles  and  inspired
men.  But  who  believes  this  1  Here
is  a  question,  who  believes  it  ?  It
was  asked  in  the  day  of  the  Savior,
When  the  Son  of  Man  cometh  shall
he  find  faith  on  the  earth  1  When
and  where,  I  ask,  has  a  dispensation
of  God  to  the  children  of  men  found


a  universal  acceptance  ?  We  know
of  no  time  in  the  world's  history
when  the  intelligence  of  the  masses
of  mankind  has  been  of  that  ad-
vanced arid  refined  culture  as  to  ac-
cord the  right  to  the  Creator  of  the
universe  to  dictate  a  government
for  the  children  of  men.  They
have  ever  assumed  the  role  en  masse
or  in  the  great  majority,  that  they
had  the  right  to  dictate  to  them-
selves. This  is  strikingly  illustrated
in  the  parable  of  the  Savior,  in  which
is  represented  a  vineyard  and  the
giving  charge  of  it  to  stewards  to
cultivate  it  and  take  care  of  its  fruit.
This  having  been  done,  the  Lord  of
the  vineyard  sends  his  servants  or
messengers  to  investigate  as  to  the
management  and  working  of  their
stewardship.  But  when  they  came,
making v  known  their  business  to
those  in  charge,  were  they  received
as  they  should  have  been?  No,
but  on  the  contrary,  they  agreed
among  themselves  that  it  was  their
right  to  manage  their  own  affairs
according  to  their  own  will  and  in
their  own  way,  and  that  it  was  their
right  to  dictate  to  themselves.
Vox  pojmli  vox  del  We  are  the
voice  of  God ;  we  know  what  is
best  for  ourselves,  etc.  Ami  they
took  the  messengers  that  were  sent
unto  them  by  the  master  and  owner
of  the  vineyard,  and  beat  one  and
stoned  another,  etc.  ;  and  they  re-
turned and  reported  the  cruelties
that  had  been  inflicted  upon  them.
By  this  act  they  ignored  the  right
and  authority  of  the  Master  to  make
any  inquiries  as  to  the  management
of  affairs.  Finally  the  Lord  of  the
vineyard  said  :  u  I  will  send  my  Son,
surely  they  will  reverence  my  Son,"
He  came,  and  they  recognize  d  him  ;
said  they,  u  He  is  the  heir,  let  us
kill  him:'

My  beloved  brethren  and  sisters,
and  friends,  this  is  a  very  truthful,


14S


JOL'RNAJ,  OF  IiIKCUCK.SK^


a  Veiy  forcible  illustration  of  the
spirit  that  has  been  manifested  by
tile  generation  of  the  children  of
men  in  our  own  age,  when  God  has
again  sent  a  divine  messenger,  cry-
ing repentance  to  the  people  and
inviting  them  to  forsake  their  sins
and  return  to  the  Lord  their  God,
and  iecognize  his  right  to  dictate  to
them  the  form  of  government  they
should  live  by.

Hoav,  is  it  to-day  in  this  nation,
that  boastingly  iterates  and  re-iter-
ates from  one  part  of  our  common
country  to  the  other  the  rights  of
men  which  are  embodied  in  the
noble  Constitution  of  the  country,
and  expressed  in  the  words  I  quoted,
"  Life,  liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of
happiness,1'  Do  they  recognize
God  s  right  to  rule!  No,  my  friends,
and  I  must  say,  pardon  the  allusion,
in  the  sarcastic  though  too  truthful
article  of  Mrs.  Gail  Hamilton,  with
regard  to  the  power  and  effects  of
science  and  the  power  and  effect  of
the  Christian  world  in  their  prayers
fpr  our  late  lamented  President
Garfield,  when  she  tauntingly  tlrrows
up  to  them  that  they  have  no  frith ;
that  the  prayers  of  the  whole  world
were  turned,  that  the  whole  Chris-
tian world  bowed  itself,  asking  and
pleading  with  heaven  to  save  unto
us  our  President;  but  the  only
prayer  answered  was  that  of  the
wretched  and  despised  Guiteau,
the  assassin*  There  is  too  much
truth  in  this  sarcasm.  Would  we
rule  God  out  of  the  government ;
would  we  rule  Him  out  of  the  Con-
stitution, claiming  the  right  to  rule
ourselves  and  dictate  the  conditions
upon  which  we  would  live,  or  would
we  say  with  one  of  old,  that  "  to
fear  God  and  keep  his  command-
ments is  the  whole  duty  of  man-"
It  is  with  regret  that  we  have  to  re-
cord the  admission,  that  the  general
sentiment  of  to-day,  is,  that  God  has


nothing  to  do  with  human  affairs,
which  only  expresses  the  real  state
of  things  as  they  now  exist.  But
then  this  is  merely  a  fulfillment  of  a
prophetic  utterance.  In  the  latter-
day^,  said  Timothy,  many  false  pro-
phets should  arise  and  also  false
teachers,  who  would  teach  the  doc-
trine of  devils.  Forbidding  to  marry,
(but  tolerating  prostitution)  ;  that
men  would  become  "  covetous,
boasters,  proud,  blasphemers,  that
they  would  be  "without  natural  af-
fection, trucedjreakers,  false  accusers,
incontinent,  fierce,  despisers  of  them
that  are  good.1'  That  they  would
also  be  traitors,  heady,  high  minded,
lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers
j  of  God.  "  Having  a  form  of  god-
liness but  denying  the  power  thereof."

What  is  the  state,  not  only  of  our
own  glorious  Republic,  but  of  the
governments  of  the  world — whither
are  we  drifting  ?  We  have  e  yes,  but
whether  we  can  see  enough  of  the
circumstances  that  are  to  constitute
the  grand  panorama  spoken  of  in
Holy  Writ,  is  another  question.  It
may  be  that  they  are  too  close  to
our  doors  to  be  seen  distinctly,  and
that  we  are  unable  in  consequence
to  comprehend  their  magnitude  and
foretell  their  results*  Be  that  as  it
may,  we  nevertheless  are  right  in
the  presence  of  these  sorrowful  facts
of  human  history.

May  we,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  be
faithful,  trusting  in  God,  May  we
be  like  Daniel  of  old,  though  the
king  should  forbid  we  should  pray  ;
though  princes  and  rulers  should
tell  us  we  shall  not  worship  God
only  as  we  are  permitted  to,  that  we
must  accept  and  abide  by  popular
opinion  and  bow  in  deference  to
popular  prejudices,  shaping  our  con*
victions  after  the  ethics  and  theories
of  men,  may  we  still  trust  in  Him,
and  still  be  found  at  the  post  of  duty
and  devotion.


Is  this  the  age  of  lift',  liberty  and
the  pursuit  of  happiness?  Is  this
the  age  when  we  are  to  enjoy  those
immunities  and  guarantees  which
the  highest  conservators  of  human
wisdom,  the  iounders  of  our  great
Constitution  were  enabled  to  give
unto  us,  to  bequeath  unto  us  as  their
patrimony  1  Alas  !  alas  !  It  is  in
this  instance  as  in  that  expressed  by
Oliver  Goldsmith  :

III  fares  the  land,  to  hastening  ills  a  prey.
Where  wealth  accumulates  and  men  decay.

When  men  will  tell  you  that  the
constitution  is  not  sufficient;  that
we  have  grown  beyond  it — that
there  is  no  sacredness  to  be  attached
to  any  institution  that  comes  short  in
its  provisions  to  supply  means  by  ,
which  party  purposes  and  popular
prejudices  can  be  fostered  and  car-
lied  into  execution,  that  all  these
things  must  go  by  the  way— I  fear
for  my  country ;  I  fear  for  any  nation
and  any  people  so  situated.  For
remember,  this  is  not  the  only  age
that  mankind  has  lived.  We  go  to  ,
Egypt,  we  go  to  Chaldee  and  to
Central  Arabia,  and  we  find  these
relics  of  an  ancient  civilization,
many  phases  of  which  would  put  to
the  blush  the  vanity  and  pride  of  the
intelligence  of  the  age  in  which  we
live* They  have  gone  ;  the  genera-


tions then  living  have  melted  away.
And  the  generations  that  now  live
will  pass  away  ;  but  God  lives  and
rules,  and  his  purposes  will  roll  on.
And,  pardon  me,  I  will  close  my  re-
marks with  another  couplet :

f*  Yet  I  doubt  not  through  the  ages
One  eternal  purpose  runs,
And  the  thoughts  of  men  are  widened
By  the  process  of  the  suns  "

And  by  the  development  and  the
upholding  of  the  principles  of  nature
God  is  consummating  his  designs,
which  will  terminate  in  the  salva-
tion of  man  ami  the  perfection  of
the  earth  as  a  resilience  for  the
redeemed  of  all  past  ages,  when  the
light  of  the  sun  will  not  be  needed,
for  the  glory  of  God  will  be  the  light,
and  intelligence  and  truth  shall  How
as  the  mighty  ocean,  and  knowIeJge
shall  cover  the  great  deep,  and  no
man  then  need  say,  Know  ye  the
Lord,  for  all  shall  know  him  from
the  least  to  the  greatest ;  and  every
man  in  every  place  will  meetabrother
and  a  friend.

May  God  in  His  own  due  time
hasten  these  things,  and  we,  His
children,  be  prepared  for  every  dis*
pensation  of  His  providence,  is  my
prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen.


150


JOURNAL  Ob  D;S  rUL-KSKs.


- DISCOUKSE  BY  APOSTLE  LORENZO  SN'JW,

Delivebed  at  the  General  Conference,  Feiday,  a.  m«,  April  7th,

1882,  0

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

ANCIENT  AND  MODERN  ISRAKL  C<  >MPARED —  GOD'S  WORK  PROGRESSIVE

— HIS  OVERRULING  PROVIDENCE


The  speaker  read  the  10th,  1  Ith,
12th,  13th,  14th  and  15th  verges  of
the  14th  chapter  of  Exodus,  aud
then  said  :

There  is  an  important  lesson  con-
tained in  these  verses,  and  the  lee-
son  is  not  only  applicable  to  this
community  as  a  whole,  hut  to  each
individual.  It  ap|*ears  that  the  chil
dren  of  Israel  at  the  time  referred  to
in  the  passage  I  have  read,  were  not
very  well  acquainted  with  the  Lord,  i
or  with  his  ability  to  carry  ou^  hi*
purjH>*es.  They,  however,  had  not
the  opportunities  of  becoming  ac-,
quainted  with  him,  as  have  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints.  They  had  seen  some
of  the  works  of  the  Lord  wrought
in  the  presence  of  the  Egyptians  as  ;
well  as  in  their  own  presence ;  but
their  hearts  had  not  been  touched,
neither  bail  their  understandings
been  enlightened  by  the  intelligence
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  has  been  the
case  with  the  Latter  day  Saints,  and
therefore,  when  they  were  brought
to  face  the  Red  Sea,  which,  to  all
human  appearance,  was  impassable,
and  with  the  armies  of  the  Egyp-
tians pressing  close  upon  them,
their  hearts  failed  th^rn,  -

The  Latter-day  Saints  in  latter
days  have  been  placed  in  circum-
stances very  similar. I  well  remem-


ber in  my  own  experience  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  being  placed  in  situa-
tions were  it  became  very  necessary
for  them  to  rely  upon  their  know-
ledge of  the  things  of  God  and  their
faith  in  His  power  to  carry  out  His
purposes,

i  It  is  not  at  all  strange  that  the
Israelites  at  that  time,  possessing
the  little  knowledge  they  did,  should
be  consh lei  ably  alarmed,  or  that
they  should  display  a  great  amount
of  ignorance  and  folly,  having  ex-
pressed themselves  to  Moses  as
being  in  doubt  as  to  the  propriety
of  attempting  to  deliver  them  from
their  fettered  condition,  notwith-
standing the  Egyptians  had  been  &o
severe  upon  them,  and  had  taken
the  lives  of  their  children,  yet  they
had  so  little  faith  in  the  word  of  the
Lord  through  their  deliverer,  Moses,
that  they  were  willing  to  still  con-
tinue slaves  rather  than  place  them-
selves under  the  direction  of  the
Almighty,  They  wished  to  know
of  Moses  if  there  were  not  sufficient
graves  in  Egypt  that  it  became  ne-
cessary for  them  to  be  destroyed  by
the  army  of  Pharaoh  in  the  w  ilder-
ness, and  eluded  Moses  for  the
course  he  had  pursued,  and  wished
themselves  back  in  bondage.

I  do  not  think  the  Latter-day


ANCIENT  AND  M^DBRX ISR\KL  CuMPAitSD,  KTU


151


Saints  in  any  period  of  their  history
have  tlisplaye<t  such  weakness  and
Lick  of  faith  ;  however  trying  our
circumstances  may  have  been,  we
have  never  been  guilty  of  such  pro*
nounced  ingratitude  to  God.  At
the  time  the  mob  came  against  us
in  Missouri  there  were  but  a  few  of
us,  and  the  circumstances  w*jre  such
it  was  impossible  to  expect  deliver-
ance except  through  the  interven-
tion of  the  Almighty.  There  may,
it  is  true,  have  been  some  persons  at
that  time  whose  hearts  failed  them
under  the  very  trying  circumstances
in  which  we  were  placed  ;  but  they
were  very  few.  The  Latter-day
Saints  had  received  the  Gospel  ac-
companied by  the  Holy  Spirit  ;  and
it  was  in  consequence  of  that  miracu-
lous influence  and  power  that  was
and  had  been  upon  them  at  various
times,  which  caused  them  to  have
iai tlx  in  their  deliverance.  They
did  not  display  the  weakness  and
folly  that  we  see  manifested  in  the
children  of  Israel  on  the  occasion
re  ferret  I  to  in  the  verses  1  have  read*
as  well  as  on  many  otlier  occasions.
There  were  a  few,  however,  that
wished  to  turn  back  to  Babylon  ant  I
give  up  their  faith,  the  ordeal  being
too  severe.  In  reading  ecclesias-
tical history  we  find  that  even  tue
prophets  on  certain  occasions,
displayed  more  or  less  weakness ;
and  1  have  thought  that  Moses
exhibited  a  little  on  this  occasion,
that  is,  if  the  translation  he  strictly
correct*  He  saw  the  difficulties,
and  although  he  had  more  faith
and  knowledge  in  his  bosom  than
all  the  fait  I  i  and  knowledge  of  the
people  put  together,  yet  there
seemed  to  be  a  feebleness  in  the
course  that  he  advised  on  this  occa
sion.  With  the  Red  Sea  in  fruit
and  the  army  of  Pharaoh  pressing
closely  in  the  rear,  the  state  of
affairs,  of  course,  seemed  critical,


and  it  was  apparent  to  all  :  and
while  the  people  were  bewailing
their  condition  Muse*  gave  instruc-
tions, saying,  "  Fear  ye  not"—
now  that  part  of  it  was  excellent,
and  may  apply  to  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  will  always  be  applicable
in  whatever  condition  they  may  be
placed  ;  but  the  after  part  of  the  in-
struction I  would  scarcely  think  was
exactly  applicable  on  that  occasion,
and  it  certainly  would  not  be  to  the
Latter-day  Saints  in  any  situation  or
circumstance,  namely,  u  Stand  still,
and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord-'*
It  appears  from  this  verse  winch  I
will  read,  that  Moses  began  to  cry
unto  the  Lord  for  deliverance  ;  and
the  Lord  answered  him  saying:
"  Wherefore  cryest  thou  unto  me  1
Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel
that  they  go  forward."  There  was
no  standing  still :  there  never  has
been  since  the  day  that  the  Almighty
commenced  to  establish  His  work,
the  people  have  always  been  re-
quired to  move  on  and  never  stand
still.  Although  the  Lord  will  work
and  accomplish  wonders  in  regard
to  the  deliverance  of  His  people
when  iin|jediments  arise  in  the  path
of  their  progress  and  no  human
power  or  ability  can  remove  the  in,
then  God  by  His  power  will  do  so,
but  it  is  the  business  of  tho  e  who
profess  to  be  engaged  in  His  work  to
move  on,  to  go  forward,  and  that  too
without  murmuring  or  having  to  be
urged  ;  so  long  as  tnere  remains  a
step  forward  to  be  taken,  that  step
should  be  taken.  As  in  this  ease  it
was  not  wisdom  tor  the  people  to
stand  still  to  see  the  salvation  of  the
Lord,  but  the  word  was,  move  on,
go  forward,  have  faith,  so  that  when
they  should  come  to  the  water  s  edge
an »l  place  their  feet  therein,  that
then  the  Lord  would  eiiher  move
upon  the  Egyptians  to  stay  the  hand
of  destruction,  or  show  His  power  in


JOURNAL  Q¥  DISCOURSES


delivering  them  in  some  other  way ;
but  so  long  as  they  could  make  a
move  in  the  direction  that  God
through  Moeci-  had  appointed,  it  was
their  duty  to  do  so.

I*  may  appear  through  our  igno-
rance in  not  understanding  fully  the
ways  of  the  Lord  and  His  purposes,
that  in  our  onward  uuich  in  carry-
ing out  the  programme  before  us,
we  some  times  come  to  i  stopping
place  for  the  time  being,  but  the  fact
is,  there  is  no  such  thing  in  the  pro-
gramme, ard  there  cannot  be  pro-
viding the  people continue  their
labors  putting  their  trust  in  the
promises  of  God. The  Apostles,
notwithstanding the  opportunities
they  had  of  acquainting  themselves
witli  the  purposes  of  the  Almighty,
through  personal  converse  with  the
Son  of  God,  thought  theie  was  a
time  when  they  would  have  to  stand
■still,  and  cease  their  labors  as  min-
isters of  God, 'When  they  saw  the
Savior  hanging  upon  the  cross  in  the
agonies  of  death,  their  hearts  failed
them,  and  they  concluded  that  all
was  over  with  them. They  had
thought  that  Jesus  was  to  be  king
of  Israel,  and  deliver  them  from  the
Gentile  yoke,  but  now  their  hopes
seemed  vain  and  all  was  lost ;  now
said  their  leader,  let  us  go  a  fishing.
Was  there  a  cessation  of  the  work  of
God,  when  Jesus  was  suffering  upon
the  cross? No,  the  work  was  still
going  on,  but  the  Apostles  did  not
understand  it ;  they  did  not  seem  to
compieliend  the  .act  that  the  pur-
poses of  God  were  being  carried  out
when  He  was  suffering  upon  the
cross ;  but  when  Jesus  appeared  to
thera  after  He  arose  from  the  tomb,
He  gave  them  to  understand  that  in
His  suffering  and  death  the  words
of  the  prophets  were  being  fulfilled  ;
and  He  opened  their  understanding
that  they  might  understand  the
Scriptures. But  the  High  Priests


of  the  Jewish  faith,  and  all  those
who  were  foremost  in  the  cruci-
fixion of  the  Savior,  believed  they
had  accomplished  their  purpose  in
putting  to  death  Him  whom  they
feared  would  take  away  their  name
and  nation,  and  doubtless  felt  satis-
fied witli  their  work,  especially  as
He  failed  to  come  down  from  the
cross,  when  they  cried  out,  If  He  be
the  Son  uf  God  let  Him  come  down
from  the  cross.

There  is  no  standing  still  with  the
Latter-day  Saints. When  we  were
driven  from  Kin  land  and  -Jackson
County  by  mob  violence,  the  pur-
poses of  God  were  being  fulfilled  and
the  work  was  undergoing  changes
necessary  to  its  growth  and  pro-
gress, and  the  trials  and  afflictions
incident  thereto  were  necessary  to
the  proving  of  the  Saints  and  the
establishment  of  the  kingdom  of
God  upon  the  earth. And  I  would
say,  let  the  motto  be  to  every  Elder
in  Israel,  and  to  every  person  wor-
|  thy  to  be  called  a  Saint, Fear  not,
and  never  stand  still,  but  move  on.
Let  the  farmer  go  forward  making
improvements,  plow  and  sow  and
reap;  and  those  engaged  in  proper
and  useful  enterprises  continue  to  do
what  seems  good  according  to  the
Spiiit  of  God  that  may  operate  upon
then),  and  let  every  man  be  faithful
and  very  diligent  in  keeping  the
commandments  ot  God,  and  culti-
vate the  dcjdre  to  do  good  to  those
around  him  ;  and  if,  in  reflecting  on
the  past,  we  find  we  have  not  acted
strictly  in  accordance  with  the  dic-
tates of  our  consciences  and  duty,  let
us  make  ourselves  right  before  Go
,  and  man,  that  we  may  be  prepared
for  every  event  that  may  transpire.
Let  the  work  of  building  temples
and  houses  of  worship  go  on  ;  let
Israel  continue  to  educate  their  chil-
1  dren  and  bring  them  up  in  the  fear
I  of  the  Lord,  and  let  the  Gospel  still


ANCIENT  AND  MODERN


ISRAEL  COMPARED,  ETC.


153


l)e  carried  to  the  nations  afar,  and
Israel  be  gathered  and  the  people
always  be  found  moving  on  as  the
purposes  of  God  continue  to  be  ful-
filled. Do  not  stand  still  and  expect
to  see  the  salvation  of  God,  but
move  on  so  long  as  there  is  a  step  to
be  made  in  the  direction  that  he  has
commanded,  and  then  see  the  salva-
tion of  the  Almighty,  This  is  the
work  of  God,  and  he  is  directing  its
course  and  progress  in  the  earth,  and
this  work  should  ever  be  uppermost
in  our  minds  ;  and  so  long  as  we  are
found  in  the  path  of  duty  Mre  can
surely  remain  fixed  and  unmoved
and  determined  in  our  purpose,  and
thus  exhibit  to  the  world  our  faith
and  devotion  to  the  principles  of
truth  which  God  has  revealed,  as  did
the  Saints  when  they  were  driven
from  their  homes  as  recorded  in  the
history  of  the  Church,  And  because
of  this  exhibition  of  faith  God
blessed  us  wonderfully  and  miracu-
lously after  we  had  passed  through
the  trials  which  followed  in  the
accomplishment  of  this  work,  trials
which  seemed  indeed  to  the  world
almost  unbearable.  However  we
regard  those  afflictions,  they  were
not  so  very  disagreeable.  When
the  three  Hebrew  children,  for  in-
stance, had  been  brought  to  a  cer-
tain position,  cast  into  the  fiery
furnace  because  of  their  undying
faith  and  integrity,  they  could  not
after  all  perhaps  have  been  placed  in
more  pleasing  and  agreeable  circum-
stances. A  holy  being,  it  is  said,
•appeared  and  walked  with  them,
aide  by  side  in  the  midst  of  the
flames ;  and  so  with  Daniel  under  ■
similar  circumstances.  Did  they
wait  to  see  what  God  would  do  for  |
them  1  No  ;  it  was  **  move  on"  with  f
them.  They  knew  that  in  the
hands  of  their  Master  were  held  the
issues  of  life  and  death,  and  that  to
die  iii  Him  is  to  live,  live  eternally,  |


to  go  on,  on  to  perfection  until  they
should  become  even  like  unto  Him  ;
and  having  a  living,  an  abiding
faith,  and  a  knowledge  of  the  true
!  and  living  God  they  were  ready  to
live  and  they  were  ready  to  die  for
the  truth.  It  was  not  with  those
men  as  it  was  with  the  children  of
Israel  of  whom  I  have  read.  They
were  in  possession  ot  knowledge
through  the  operation  of  the  Holy
Ghost  which  prepare  I  them  for  any
circumstances  in  which  they  might
be  placed.  And  so  with  regard  to
the  Latter  day  Saints  :  When  com-
pelled to  sign  over  our  property  to
the  mob  in  Missouri,  we  were  ad-
vised to  disperse  and  mix  up  among
the  people  and  not  attempt  to  gather
together  again  ;  and  yet  under  these
circumstances  the  Lord  moved  upon
the  legislature  of  the  State  of  Illi-
nets  to  grant  us  a  city  charter  in
which  there  were  favorable  pro-
||  visions  that  were  not  found  in
any  other  charter.  And  this  was
as  he  had  told  us  he  would  do,
namely,  that  he  would  soften  the
hearts  of  rulers  from  time  to  time
that  they  should  show  favor  to  his
people.  I  do  not  believe,  as  some
do,  that  no  good  can  come  out  from
Nazareth.  We  talk  sometimes
rather  harshly  about  some  of  the
politicians  of  our  country,  and  de-
servedly, too  ;  but  notwithstanding
the  illiberal  and  unjust  policy  they
show  towards  us,  I  believe  they  can
tin  us  ;i  great  deal  of  good  provided
the  Lord  operates  upon  the  hearts
of  ruling  men,  as  he  lias  done  in
the  past,  and  as  he  will  do  in  the
future,  which  will  result  in  their
showing  and  granting  us  favors  and
blessings  that  many  now  little  im-
agine.

The  circumstances  under  which
:  we  came  to  these  mountain  valleys
are  well  known  ;  they  need  not  be
I  recited  now. After  we  had  passed


154


Jul  KXAL  UK  IUSIX>UKSKS.


through  the  chastisement,  the  Lord
moved  upon  our  nation  at  govern-
ment to  bestow  favors  upon  the  peo
pie  of  God. They  gave  us  what  is
called  the  Organic  Act,  a  bill  of
rights  as  good  as  we  could  expect
from  their  hands,  and what  was
more,  they  couf erred  political  favor
upon  our  leader,  our  Prophet  and
President, Brig  ham Young,  by
making  him  Governor  of  the  Terri-
tory.  And  who  would  have  thought  i
of  such  a  thing? Any  man  that
would  have  predicted  such  a  thing  I
at  the  time  we  were  being  driven
from Missouri, would  have  been
considered  to  say  the  bstst ,  an  enthu-
siast. And  besides  that,  one  of  our
United  States  judges  was  a  Mormon
Elder ;  the  Secretary  of  the  Terri-
tory was  also  a Mormon  Elder
Ami  who, let  me  ask,  did  this  7
Was  it  the  Congress  or  the  President
of  the  United  States? Well,  now,
I  would  dislike  very  much  to  say  any-
thing that 'could  be  construed  into
ungratefulness  on  our  part  or  in  tail-
ing to  recognize  all  the  good  that
our  nation  has  designed  to  do  us,  for  i
we  recognize  it  as  our  uncle,  audi
sometimes  it  has  been  a  pretty  good
uncle  j hut, notwithstanding,  we
see  in  all  this  the  hand  of  our  God,
who  through  them,  has  wrought  out
this  good  and  this  deliverance  lor  his
peo  [tie,  while  we  are  ready  a  Jul  willing
to  acknowledge  an  overruling  Provi-  j
dence  in  the  gf»od  that  comes  to  us  j
and  for  one  X  am  ever  ready  to  ac-
knowledge that  good  also  can  come
out  of  ISazareth. We  can  certainly
aflbrd  to  suffer  a  little  when  at  times
we  perceive  magnanimity  displayed
towards us by our  government,
which  has  been  the  case  in  the  past,
and  which  I  firmly  believe  will  be
in  the  future  despite  the  pressure
that  is  being  brought  to  bear  against
us  and  the  nature  of  the  means  that
are  being  now  employed.


The  Lord  moved  upon  rulers  in
former  generation  ;  he  moved  upon
infidel  kings  to  favor  his  people,  and
he  is  the  same  God  now  as  then.

We  talk  about  the  Edmunds  bill,
what  it  is  going  to  do  I  do  not  pre-
tend to  say,  neither  do  I  think  that
its  tranters  and  abettors  know  what
is  going  to  come  of  it.  One  thing
I  have  noticed,  and  that  is  that  Con-
gressmen themselves  differ  widely
with  regard  to  certain  of  its  provi-
sions ;  and  that  being  the  case  it
would  perhaps,  become  us  to  wait
and  watch.  But  there  is  one  singu-
lar feature  about  it  relating  to  plural
marriage.  And  about  that  allow
me  here  to  say,  1  happen  to  have
some  knowledge  of  it  as  a  principle
of  revelation  belonging  to  the  reli-
gion we  have  espoused.  I  was  per-
sonally acquainted  with  Joseph
Smith  during  twelve  or  fourteen
years  and,  of  couise,  through  him
1  first  learned  what  I  now  know
about  that  principle.  And  as  to  his
being  a  man  of  truth  and  honor  I,
nor  any  one  else  that  knew  him?
have  any  reason  to  question  for  a
moment.  But  then  I  never  went
forth  to  preach  thr  principles  of
this  Gospel  depending  entirely  upon
any  information  I  received  through
him  or  any  other  man  ;  but  I  be-
lieved on  his  words,  coming  as  they
did  to  me  as  the  words  of  truth,
from  an  inspired  man  of  God  ;  and
from  that  hour  the  Spirit  of  God,
the  Holy  Gliost  which  all  men  may
receive  and  enjoy,  has  confirmed
the  truth  of  what  he  had  told  me,
and  it  became  knowledge  to  me  of
that  nature  which  no  man  can  give
or  take  away.  And  now,  as  there
is  good,  more  or  less,  to  he  found
elsewhere,  the  Edmunds  bill  is  not
without  its  good  ;  and,  therefore,  I
say,  let  us  accept  the  good  and  feel
thankful  therefor.  That  extraordi-
nary bill  legalizes  the  ksue  of  plural


ANCIENT  AND  MODERN  HISTORY  COMPARED,  ETC


155


marriage  up  to  the  1st  clay  of  Janu-  |
ary,  1883*  Now,  who  could  have
expected  so  much  good  to  come  out
of  Nazareth  ?  Uncle  Samuel  is
now  and  then  a  pretty  good  uncle
after  all  (Laughter).  And,  mark
you,  the  framers  of  the  BUI  have
been  to  considerate  as  to  distinctly
provide  that  the  children  thus  legal-
ized must  he  the  offspring  of  mar-
riages performed  according  to  the
rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  sect
known  as  the  Latter-day  Saints.  In
the  language  of  the  small  boy  I  say,
"good  enough,"  (Laughter.)  Now,
if  any  of  our  Gentile  friends  have
been  indiscreet,  or  should  hereafter
be  guilty  of  bigamy,  their  offspring
of  course  are  not  so  favored.  (Laugh-
ter.) We  ought  to  be  thankful  for
this  unexpected  favor,  and  indeed
I  have  no  doubt  we  are.  I  really
never  expected  that  the  law-makers
of  uur  nation  would  ever  legalize
plural  marriages  as  performed  for
the  last  thirty  years  or  more.  If
the  Lord  is  able  to  do  a  thing  of  this
kind  through  men  whu  frame- 1  that
strange  and  singular  bill,  our  i,pen
and  avowed  enemies,  what  is  he  not
able  to  do  t  What  may  we  not  ex-
pect  if  we  remain  faithful  and  true
to  the  trust  reposed  in  us  1  |


|  The  Lor  J  very  possibly  may  cause
a  heavy  pressure  to  bear  upon  us,
such  as  will  require  great  sacrifice
at  the  hands  of  his  people.  The
question  with  us  is,  will  we  make
that  sacrifice  f  This  work  is  the
work  of  the  Almighty,  and  the  bles-
sings we  look  for  which  have  been
promised,  will  come  after  we  have
proven  ourselves  and  passed  through
the  ordeal,  I  have  no  special  word
to  this  people  that  there  is,  or  that
there  is  not,  before  them  a  tiery
ordeal  through  which  they  will  be
called  to  pass  ;  the  question  with  me
is,  am  I  prepared  to  receive  and  put
to  a  right  and  proper  us  a  any  bles-
sing the  Lord  has  in  store  for  me  in
common  with  His  people  ;  or,  on  the
other  hand,  am  I  prepared  to  make
,  any  sacrifice  that  he  may  require  at
my  hands  i  I  would  not  give  the
ashes  of  a  rye  straw  for  any  religion
that  was  not  worth  living  for  and
that  was  not  worth  dying  for  ;  and  I
would  not  tiive  much  tor  the  man
that  was  not  willing  to  sacrifice  his
all  for  the  sake  of  his  religion.

Well,  I  close  my  remarks  by  say-
ing to  one  ami  all,  Move  on  !  move
on,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the
Lord,  and  not  stand  stilL  Amen.


1 01}  JOUKNAL  UK  UlgCOUL.SEM.


REMARKS BY ELDER CIIAS. W.  PENROSE,

Delivered  jn  thk  Tabkrnacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday;

June  4,  1882.  .


(lUtpmied  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)


HOW  TO  FIND  OUT  GOD  —  HOW  KAN  MAY  KNOW  HIMSELF — NECESSITY
OF  DIVINE  REVELATION — HOW  AND  BY  WHAT  MEANS  RECEIVED —
TESTIMONY  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS — THE  NATURE  AND  ORIGIN
OF  MAN  —  HIS  MORTAL  EXPERIENCE  AND  ITS  PURPOSE — THE  FATE
OF  THE  WICKED  THE  LOT  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS — ETERNAL  LIFE  AND
HOW  IT  MAY  BE  ATTAINED.


It  is  written  in  the  Scriptures,
that  *'  man  by  searching  cannot  find
out  God  ;"  and  the  experience  of  all
ages  has  proven  the  truth  of  this.
We  are  living  in  an  age  of  great  in-
telligence, at  a  time  when  the  wise
things  which  have  been  said  and
written  by  sage,  philosopher  and
prophet  centuries  ago  can  be  read
and  reflected  upon  ;  and  whfen  men
can  bring  to  bear  their  own  re-
searches, their  own  experience  and
the  facilities  which  they  have  fur
gaining  information,  upon  the  in-
Testigation  of  the  subject  of  Deity;
yet,  we  find  that  people  who  now
live  are  as  much  at  sea  in  regard  to
thk  matter  as  any  people  who  lived
in  former  times.  If  we  take  up  the
works  of  the  wise  men  who  live
upon  the  earth  in  our  times  and
read  their  remarks  concerning  God,
we  are  forced  to  the  conclusion  that
they,  like  the  people  for  wham  they
write,  kuow  little  or  nothing  of  the
subject  uj>on  which  they  touch*

Many  years  ago  certain  divines  of
the  Church  of  England,  chosen  for
the  purpose,  endeavored  to  formu-
late a  creed  in  w  hich  they  tried  to  |


explain  to  the  people  what  God  is.
And  after  making  a  number  of  very
contradictory  and  foolish  assertions,
they  came  to  the  conclusion  that
God  is  "incomprehensible/1  Man,
by  searching  cannot  find  out  God,
the  only  way  whereby  man  can
come  to  the  knowledge  of  God  is
by  communication  from  God,  and
if  the  people  receive  what  he  does
communicate  they  may  find  out
clearly  and  truthfully  what  he  is,
and  what  are  his  designs  and  pur-
poses in  relation  to  them.

"Man  know  thyself,"  is  another
saying ;  not  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,
but  just  as  good  as  though  it  wen
Man  cannot  know  himself,  cannot
comprehend  himself  any  more  than
he  can  comprehend  Deity  by  his  own
reflections.  Unless  the  Creator  who
made  him,  and  who  comprehends
what  he  was  made  for  reveals  it  to
him,  he  cannot  comprehend  even
his  own  being.  Who  is  there  that
understands  the  nature  of  that  in-
telligent spirit  which  inhabits  the
tabernacle  of  man  i  A  good  surgeon
can  take  the  human  body  and  dis-
sect it ;  point  out  its  various  parts


and  their  relation  one  to  another,
and  name  every  bone  and  every
muscle  and  every  sinew  and  every
nerve.  But  there  is  something
even  pertaining  to  the  body,  (leav-
ing out  the  spiritual  part  of  man)
that  liives  the  body  lite,  which  he
cannot  grasp  or  comprehend-  The
vital  force  that  gives  animation  to
the  body  is  beyond  his  ken.  And
every  man  who  has  studied  himself
to  any  degree  whatever,  knows  that
there  is  something  about  himself
besides  the  life  of  the  body  ;  that
there  is  something  superior  to  the
body,  and  to  thai  vital  force  which
animates  the  human  frame*  How
did  that  intelligent  being  get  into
his  physical  nature,  and  where  did
it  come  from  ?  Did  it  come  into
existence  with  the  earthly  body,  or
did  it  exist  before  t  When  the  com-
mon lot  of  humanity  comes  and  we
"  shuffle  off  this  mortal  coil'1  and  our
bodies  go  into  the  ground,  each  part
separating  from  the  other,  and  the
elements  go  back  whence  they  came,
does  this  spiritual,  this  intelligent
being  which  inhabited  the  body  still
exist,  or  does  that  also  separate  into
particles  1  Who  knows  of  himself,
and  who  can  comprehend  this  by  his
own  reflections  ?  No  man.  Unless
we  get  some  information  from  the
Being  who  made  man,  we  cannot
comprehend  ourselves,  much  less  can
we  of  ourselves  comprehend  the
Being  that  made  us.

The  inhabitants  of  the  earth  in
the  different  ages  have  had  a  great
many  duties ;  they  have  formed
ideas  concerning  God  in  their  own
minds,  and  they  have  worshipped
that  which  seemed  to  them  the
clearest  representation  of  Deity-
Some  of  the  idols  which  men  have
worshipped  appear  very  foolish  to
us  ;  they  are  no  doubt  indications  of
the  low  degree  of  development  of  the
people  who  set  them  up  as  objects  of


worship.  But  here,  in  the  19th  cen-
tury, among  people  called  Christians,
we  hear  a  great  ileal  about  God,  the
God  of  the  Bible,  the  God  that  made
man,  the  God  that  rules  the  uni-
verse, and  when  we  inquire  of  the
wisest  men  we  have  in  Christendom
in  regard  to  this  Being,  they  tell  us
that  he  is  incomprehensible  ;  they
tell  us  that  he  is  an  immaterial  being
whose  centre  is  everywhere  and
whose  circumference  is  nowhere  :
that  he  has  no  body  and  no  parts
and  no  passions ;  that  there  is
nothing  which  can  represent  him  :
there  is  nothing  like  him  in  the
heavens  above  or  in  the  earth  be-
neath, and  that  man's  mind  cannot
grasp  anything  about  I  dm.  They
say  he  is  one,  and  yet  he  is  three  *
that  he  is  not  three  but  is  one.
That  there  are  the  Father,  the  Son
and  the  Holy  Ghost — three  separate
substances,  and  yet  not  three
but  only  one.  They  say  that  one
of  these  three  beings  without  a  body
had  a  body  ;  that  one  of  the  three
parts  of  this  part  less  being  had  both
a  body  and  parts,  and  that  he,  the
Son,  was  in  all  tilings  like  the  Fa-
ther, and  was  also  like  us  excepting
that  he  was  without  sin,  but  had
passions  as  we  havjj.  This  is  the
result  of  the  attempt  on  the  part  of
the  wise  men  of  Christendom  to
find  out  God  for  themselves.  It  is
impossible,  and  is  so  laid  down  in
Holy  Writ;  ** man  by  searching
cannot  find  out  God/'  The  only  way
that  can  be  relied  upon  whereby
man  can  find  out  God  is  by  obtain-
ing information  from  the  Almighty
Himself.  u  Well,"  gay  the  people,
H  but  he  does  not  communicate  any*
thing  to  any  of  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth,"  Why  not?  Has  he
not  power  to  manifest Himself
to  mortals?  Is  He  so  great  and
mighty  and  so  far  above  the  human
family  that  He  cannot  reveal  Him-


]58  JOURNAL  U*

self  to  humanity  ? fi£  No* He  used
to  do  so  hundreds  of  years  ago/1
And  why  does  he  not  do  it  now?
"  Because  the  day  of  revelation  has
gone  by," they say. Who  told
them  so  ? The  fact  is  that  for  a
long  period  the  people  have  not  been
expecting  to  receive  revelations  from
God. They  have  not  sought  for
them  and,  therefore,  have  not  ob- 1
tailed  them, But  we  find  in  the
Old  Scriptures  a  promise  something
like  1 1  lis.  :  Li  Return  unto  me  and  I
will  return unto you,  saith  the
Lord  :  Even  from  the  days  of  your
fathers  you  have  gone  away  from
mine  on  li  run  ices  ami  have  not  kept
them,"  you  have  tl  transgressed  the  I
laws,  changed  the  ordinances  and  ;
broken  the  everlasting  covenant  ft  \
now  "return  unto  me  and  I  will  re-
turn unto  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  I
hosts,"

We  also  find  in  the  scriptures  the
declaration,  that  God  chaugeth  not,
that  he  is  '*  the  same  yesterday,  to-
day and  forever."  And  we  may
reasonably  infer  that  if  God  was  a
God  of  revelation  hundreds  of^years
ago,  he  is  the  same  God  of  revela-
tion to-day,  only  the  people  do  not
inquire  of  him,  they  do  not  seek
unto  him  in  the  right  way  that  they
may  obtain  communications  from
him.  The  Apostle  James  declares,  I
*  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let
him  ask  of  God  who  giveth  to  all
men  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not;
and  it  shall  be  given  him.  But  let
him  ask  in  faith,  nothing  wavering.
For  he  that  wavereth  is  like  a  wave
of  the  sea  driven  with  the  wind  and
tossed,"

It  appears  then  'that  God  may  be
approached  ;  that  we  may  ask  of
him,  but  if  we  do  ask  of  him  we
must  ask  in  faith.  We  must  be-
lieve. If  we  do  not  believe  we  will
not  obtain.  This  principle  of  faith
seems  to  be  the  means  of  approach-


DLSUOUKSES.

ing  the  Almighty.  If  we  take  up
the  Bible  anil  read  how  the  ancients
received  revelation,  we  find  that
they  approached  God  by  faith.
And  further,  we  learn  that  when
God  communicated  anything  to
them  they  tried  to  curry  it  out  in
their  practice  ;  they  tried  to  embody
in  their  lives  those  instructions  and
communications.  As  Brother  By-
water,  who  preceded  me  this  after-
noon, has  quoted  :  "Fear  God  and
keep  his  commandments.  This  is
the  whole  duty  of  man."  Those
holy  men  of  old,  when  they  learned
anything  from  God  were  willing  to
carry  it  out,  no  matter  what  the  cost
mi  id  it  be. God  held  communion

i  t

with  them  by  means  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  which  seems  to  be  the  natural
means  of  communication  *  between
God  and  man.

The  word  and  will  of  God  were
revealed  to  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith.  Why  should  we  not  receive
this  blessing  of  heavenly  communi-
cation in  our  day  ]  A*  Latter-day
Saints  we  have  our  names  cast  out
as  evil,  simply  because  we  believe
in  this  doctrine  of  receiving  com-
munication from  God.  We  are
simple  enough  to  believe  that  God
will  speak  to  people  now  if  they  will
approach  him  in  the  right  way.
Men  have  borne  testimony  that  they
have  received  communication  from
above,  and  have  made  known  the
same  to  us  ;  and  having  believed
on  their  word  and  done  exactly  as
they  directed  us,  God  has  confirmed
the  truth  of  their  words  upon  our
hearts,  with  signs  following.  And
now  we  can  say  ourselves  we  know
that  God  lives,  that  he  communi-
cates to  men ;  we  know"  the
channel  of  communication  is  opened
up  between  the  heavens  and  the
earth,  and  that  the  people  of  the
nineteenth  century,  by  taking  a
proper  course  ^and  exercising  faith


in  the  right  way,  and  being  humble
enough  to  cany  into  effect  the  com-
ma mime i its  which  the  Lord  gives
when  he  does  manifest  himself  unto
them,  can  obtain  communication
from  on  high  by  the  gift  and  power
of  ihe  Holy  Ghost,  by  dreams  and  ,
visions,  o  id  by  the  visible  manifes-
tation of  God's  power  in  the  midst
of  his  people.

This  is  our  testimony  to  the  world,
and  it.  is  for  this  that  we  are  opposed;
this  is  the  ground  work  of  the
opposition  applied  to  us  in  what  is
called  the  Christian  world*  For  if
the  fact  he  admitted  that  the  Latter-
day  Saints  are  the  people  of  God  ,
and  those  who  preside  over  them
are  the  servants  of  God,  that  they
receive  communications  from  him,
and  that  this  is  His  Church,  that
would  be  to  admit  also  that  all
other  churches  are  the  churches
of  men  and  not  of  Christ ;  that
those  who  minister  in  them  are  not
delegated  of  heaven  and  that  the
doctrines  they  teach  are  merely  the
doctrines  and  commandments  of
men*  Thus  our  faith  comes  in
contact  with  the  established  systems
of  Christendom.

Now,  the  Lord  has  made  known
to  us  a  few  simple  truths  in  regard
to  our  being — who  we  are,  where  we
came  from,  what  we  are  here  for,
where  we  are  going  to,  and  what  is
to  be  our  final  destiny.  These  things
in  our  minds  are  not  mere  articles
of  faith,  they  are  not  myths,  they
are  not  mere  opinions  or  sentiments,
but  they  are  to  us,  to  use  the  lan-
guage of  Brother  By  water,  "  abso-
lute truths  ;"  they  have  been  re-
vealed from  the  Almighty,  and  are
his  word  to  us  and  not  the  say-so  of
men.  God  has  borne  testimony  of
the  truth  of  them  in  our  owrn  hearts  ;
and  to  us  they  have  become  absolute
truths.  We  are  not  left  in  doubt
about  them  ;  they  are  to  us  facts  as


palpable  as  the  fact  of  our  existence.

1  have  not  time  to  dwell  upon  this
subject,  but  I  will  mention  two  or
three  Tacts  that  God  has  made  known
to  us,  and  will  leave  them  for  the
reflection  of  the  congregation,  God
has  ma  le  kno'.vu  to  us,  in  the  first
place,  that  we — the  real  beings,  the
intelligent  spirits  which  are  en  taber-
nacled in  these  mortal  frames — are
the  offspring  of  Deity,  the  children
of  God,  as  much  so  as  our  bodies  are
the  offspring  of  the  children  of  men;
that  just  as  men  and  women  aw  the
sons  and  daughters  of  men,  so  far  as
their  earthly  bodies  are  concerned,
so  the  spirits  which  inhabit  these
bodies  are  beings  born  of  the  Al-
mighty God  in  the  eternal  worlds.
This  spark  of  intelligence  that  exists
in  the  human  form  is  stricken  off
from  the  eternal  flame  of  Deity  ;  the

\  children  of  men  are  the  offspring  of
God.  And  when  Jesus  told  his  dis-
ciplc-s  in  addressing  the  throne  of
grace,  to  say,  u  Our  Father  who  art
in  heaven,"  he  said  that  which  was
absolutely  true,  not  in  a  spiritual  or
Methodistical  sense,  but  as  an  ab-
solute fact  God  is  our  Father,  and
we  are  his  sons  and  daughters.  Our
earthly  bodies  are  framed  in  the
image  of  God  ;  they  are  framed  to
fit  our  spirits  which  are  the  offspring
of  God,  which  are  therefore  in  his

|  image,  according  to  the  law  that
every  seed  brings  forth  its  own  kind,
A  comprehension  of  the  offspring  of
God  will  therefore  lead  to  an  under-
standing of  God  Himself.

These  spiritual  beings  now  so-
journing  upon  the  earth  in  mortal
tabernacles,  dwelt  in  the  bosom  of
eternity  and  were  with  the  Eternal
Father  "  when  the  morning  stare
sang  together  and  the  sons  of  God
shouted  tor  joy"  on  beholding  the
organization  of  this  earth,  We
were  there  and  we  joined  in  the
heavenly  chorus. Said  the  Apostle


1  CO


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


John  :  "  Beloved,  now  are  we  the
scm  of  God,  "ind  it  doth  not  yet
appep  what  we  shall  be  :  but  we
know  that,  when  he  shall  appear,
we  shall  be  like  him  ;  for  we  shall
see  him  as  lie  is."  By  that  time  we
will  be  able  to  comprehend  God,
notwithstanding  the  assertion  of  the
learned<uf  the  world  to  the  contrary.
\\  e  were  sent  down  upon  the  earth
to  dwell  for  a  time  that  we  might
learn  the  laws  which  govern  this
lower  sphere,  that  we  might  have  a
portion  of  it  framed  as  a  body  in
which  we  should  dwell,  that  in  it
and  through  it  we  miidit  become
acquainted  with  sin  which  is  the
transgression  of  law,  and  learn  that
only  bf  obedience  to  law  is  happi-
ness powible  for  the  offspring  of
God  ;  tlmt  only  by  obedience  to  eter
nal  laws  and  wholesome  regulations
can  man  be  made  happy  in  time  and
in  eternity.  And  by  becoming  ac-  j
quainpaa  with  darkness  we  can  ap-
preciate the  light ;  by  becoming
acquainted  with  pain  and  sorrow  we
can  appreciate  perfect  bliss  and  hap-
piness; by  coming  in  contact  with
death,  and  understanding  it  through
experience  we  may  comprehend  the
blessings  of  life,  preparatory  to  an
endless  existence  in  the  presence  of
the  Falser  to  dwell  in  perfect  sub-
mission to  his  eternal  laws.  We
are  here  for  experience,  and  while
we  1 1  well  in  mortality  there  are  les-
sons to  -fee  learned  and  that  must  be
learned,  if  needs  be  through  suffer-
ing.  It  is  our  privilege,  while 'here
in  the  scbotiKot  experience  and  ad-
versity, far  from  our  ancient  home^ to
struggle  up  to  the  light  from  whence
we  came,  and  by  the  power  of  the
Holy  Spirit  ?to  obtain  a  knowledge
of  the  pas&ft  comprehension  of  the
present,  aj^Vau  unfoldment  of  the
future ;  forr*when  the  spirit  of  truth
is  come  he  shall  guide  you  into  all
truth, and  he  shall  take  of  the


things  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son
and  show  them  unto  you  ;  he  shalli
show  you  things  to  come,  and  shall
bring  to  your  remembrance  things
that  are  past,  he  shall  give  you
knowledge  of  the  present  and  shall
unfold  to?you  the  future/'  This  is*
the  office  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  be-
stowing  its  gifts  and  blessings  upon
men.  *

Now  We  can  learn  our  duty,  we
can  learn  What  is  the  mind  and  will
of  God  concerning  us.  The  Lord
has  manifested  a  great  many  things
to  us  while  in  mortality  which  has
had  the  effect  of  stirring  up  the
opposition  of  the  world  and  the
powers  of  darkness  against  us.  This
is  a  necessary  experience  as  it  tends
to  develop  our  Jbeing,  and  so  long
as  we  have  this  warfare  to  fight,  if
we  carry  out  strictly  the  command-
ments of  God,  we  shall  have  more
present  joy#  more  present  satisfac-
tion and  more-present  pleasure  than
if  we  were  in^ccord  with  the  worlds
as  we  have  tie  consciousness  that
we  are  doinawhat  is  right,  and  we
also  have  the.gtatificatiou  of  know*
ing  that  the  Lord  will  plant  our  feet  i
upon  the  rockS>of  eternal  truth  and  >
in  his  own  time  will  bring  us  up  to
mingle  and  dwell  with  those  who-
have  overcome,  and  who  move  in  a
higher  sphere  of  intelligence.  Our
duties  are  pointed  out  and  made-
known  to  us  ift  fast  as  we  are
prepared  for  J  them;  We  have
the  nceans  whereby  we  can  learn
the  will  of  God,  line  upon  liner
precept  upon  precept,  here  a  lHtle
and  there  a  little,  as  fast  as  we  de-
velop and  crew  up  to  the  compre-
hension of  higher  truths  ;  and  in
every  man's  heart  who  walks  in  th<*
ways  of  life  is  this  spirit  prompting
and  directing,  and  encouraging  him
to  refrain  from  evil.

After  we  haye  performed  our  mis-
sion upon  the  earth  the  spirit  will


HOW  TO  FIND  OUT  GOD,  ETC.


161


be  liberated  from  the  body  and  will
go  to  a  place  prepared  for  it,  and
that  place  will  be  according  to  the
acts  of  the  individual  while  dwelling
in  earthly  life.  The  spirits  of  the
wicked  will  gravitate  together,  while
the  righteous  will  go  to  their  place
in  the  paradise  of  God,  where  they
rest  from  their  labors.  The  wicked
go  to  a  place  prepared  for  them,  not
however,  a  place  of  literal  fire  and
brimstone  as  taught  by  some  reli-
gious teachers,  but  a  place  where
they  will  have  a  knowledge  and  re-
membrance of  their  wickedness,  and
at  the  same  time  be  without  a  know-
ledge of  the  future;  their  condition
will  be  a  state  of  awful  suspense,
not  knowing  what  their  fate  will  be  j
while  the  righteous  will  dwell  toge-
ther, and  having  served  and  com-
muned with  God  while  tabernacling
in  the  flesh,  they  will  have  closer
communion  in  the  spirit,  and  be  pre-
pared for  the  glorious  reign  to  come.
Then  when  the  resurrection  dayshall
dawn,  the  righteous,  they  that  have
been  faithful,  who  have  been  planted
in  the  likeness  of  Christ's  death
and  raised  in  the  likeness  of  his
resurrection ;  having  walked  in  his
w  ays,  and  followed  his  example,  will
be  brought  forth  in  the  morning  of
that  great  day;  for  the  trumpet
shall  sound  and  the  voice  of  Christ
shall  be  heard,  and  they  will  come
forth  and  stand  erect  again  upon
the  earth  in  their  own  bodies,  every
part  and  particle  restored  to  its  pro-
per part,  making  a  whole  and  perfect
frame;  not  a  natural  body,  but  a
spiritual  body ;  not  a  corruptible
body,  but  an  incorruptible  body,
made  out  of  the  same  elements,  pu-
rified and  quickened  by  the  power  of
God.  And  they  will  stand  upon
their  feet  again  and  enter  into  the
presence  of  the  Father,  and  be  made
like  him.  They  will  be  in  his  per-
fect image  and  in  his  perfect  like-
No.  11.


ness.  And  while  eternal  ages  roll
along  they  will  pattern  after  the
works  of  their  Eternal  Father  j  as
he  does,  so  will  they  do,  and  they
will  all  work  together  in  perfect
harmony  with  celestial  beings,  one
spirit  pervading  the  whole.

I  have  briefly  outlined  a  few  ideas
embodied  in  our  religious  faith  and
have  not  time  to  pursue  the  subject
further ;  suffice  it  to  say,  that  man
is  the  offspring  of  God,  and  was  born
in  another  sphere  ;  that  he  is  only  a
sojourner  upon  the  earth  for  a  short
time;  that  his  destiny  is  to  be  made
in  every  respect  like  the  Father,
possessing  as  he  does  an  immortal,
eternal  spirit,  which,  in  course  of
time,  through  obedience  to  the  laws
of  life  and  sajvation,  will  dwell  in
an  immortal,  eternal  body,  by  means
of  whicl\  he  will  be  in  communion
with  all  that  is  good  and  beautiful,
great  and  glorious  throughout  the
boundless  universe,  and  he  will  be
under  the  inspiration  and  direction
of  the  Father,  and  in  the  presence
of  the  Son  and  all  holy  beings  who
are  like  him.  In  respect  to  the
rest  of  the  children  of  men,  they
will  each  occupy  that  station  for
which  they  are  fitted  by  their
earthly  acts.  But  to  enter  into
the  presence  of  God  and  enjoy  a
fullness  of  his  glory  and  be  associa-
ted with  him  in  the  government  of
the  universe,  there  is  but  one  path,
one  gate  to  enter  in  by,  one  place
of  salvation,  and  that  is  the  Gospel
of  Jesus  Christ  as  preached  by
himself  when  upon  the  earth  and
revealed  anew  in  this  our  day  ;  the
systems  that  men  have  invented
being  ineffectual  and  powerless  to
save.  All  the  sects  of  Christendom
in  that  respect  are  like  the  sects  of
heathendom,  they  must  pass  away.
What  truth  they  have  emanated
from  God,  for  all  truth  comes  from
Him  ;  but  their  systems  are  organic

VoL  XXIIi


162


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


zations  of  men,  and  they,  therefore,
must  all  perish  in  their  time  and
season,  whilst  the  kingdom  of  God
which  is  being  set  up  on  the
earth  will  remain  and  continue  to
spread  forth  and  prevail,  until  the
whole  earth  is  subdued  to  our  Father
and  brought  into  complete  subjec-
tion unto  him  ;  that  it  may  be  puri-
fied from  evil  and  the  dominion  of
sin  which  has  invaded  it  for  cen-
turies, and  that  Satan  and  his  hosts
may  be  banished  for  ever  from  its
pale,  and  this  world  be  made  radiant
and  glorious,  transfigured,  as  the
Savior  was  upon  the  mount,  and
come  up  among  the  worlds  redeemed,
refulgent  in  its  own  splendor,  shin-
ing like  the  sun  in  the  firmament.
And  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  will


walk  thereon,  clothed  in  white  rai-
ment, rejoicing  in  the  presence  of
the  Eternal  whom  they  will  recog-
nize again  as  their  Father ;  for  the
past,  now  shut  out  by  the  veil  of
the  flesh,  will  come  back  to  them,
and  all  their  fonner  history  will
return  to  their  minds ;  those
memories  which  were  shut  out  by
j  tabernacling  in  the  flesh  will  corns
;  back  again,  and  all  their  past  expe-
rience upon  the  earth  and  in  the
!  spirit  world  will  be  fresh  to  their
minds,  never  to  fade  away.  Then
will  they  comprehend  God,  being
quickened  in  him  and  by  him,
dwelling  in  his  presence  and  filled
with  the  fullness  of  his  glory,  for
ever  and  even  Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  APOSTLE  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  at  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  After-
noon, September  6t  1880.

(Reported  by  John  Irvine, )

THB  PREACHING  OF  THE  O08PKL  IN  THE  LATTER  DAYS  SIGNS  PROMISED

TO  FOLLOW  BELIEVERS  AS  ANCIENTLY  THE GOSPEL  IN  FORCE  UPON

ALL  THE  WORLD  8IXCERITY  NO  EXCUSK  FOR  WILFUL  DISOBEDIENCE

 A  POSITIVE  PERSONAL  TESTIMONY  ATTAINABLE  THROUGH  OBKDIKKCB

 UNAUTHORIZRD ADMINISTRATIONS UNRECOGNIZED OF GOD  NEW

REVELATION  ESSENTIAL  AND DKglRALX  TRUE AND FALSE  CHARITY,


In  the  year  1832  the  Lord  gave  a
revelation  concerning  the  11  calling
and  sending  forth  of  his  servants,  the
missionaries,  among  the  nations.  I
will  read  you  a  few  paragraphs  or


verses  in  relation  to  their  calling,
commencing  at  the  64th  verse  of  the
revelation  that  was  given  on  the
22nd  day  of  September,  1832.
"Therefore,  as  I  said  unto  mine


HOW  TO  FIND  OUT  GOD,  ETC*


Apostles  I  say  unto  you  again,  that
every  soul  who  belie veth  on  your
words,  and  is  baptized  by  water  for
the  remission  of  sins,  shall  receive
the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  these  signs
shall  follow  them  that  believe.  In
my  name  they  shall  do  many  won-
derful works ;  in  my  name  they
shall  cast  out  devils  ;  in  my  name
they  shall  heal  the  sick  ;  in  my  name
they  shall  open  the  eyes  of  the
blind,  and  unstop  the  ears  of  the
deaf ;  and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb
shall  speak  ;  and  if  any  man  shall
administer  poison  unto  them  it  shall
not  hurt  them ;  and  the  poison  of  a
serpent  shall  not  have  power  to
harm  them,"  That  is  a  very  curious
commission  to  be  given  in  the  nine-
teenth century  of  the  Christian  era
to  those  that  are  called  in  our  day  ;
very  curious.  If  Joseph  Smith,
through  whom  this  revelation  was
given,  was  not  called  of  God,  the
promises  here  made  would  not  be
fulfilled.  On  the  other  hand,  if  God
is  the  author  of  this  revelation,  then
all  the  world  may  prove  for  them-
selves the  divinity  of  His  word.  An
imposter  would  take  very  good  care
to  so  word  his  language  in  the  pro-
mises that  there  would  be  a  double
meaning  to  them,  and  if  they  were
not  fulfilled  in  one  sense  they  might
perhaps  be  fulfilled  according  to  a
second  interpretation,  and  thus  he
would  escape  the  obloquy  of  being
an  imposter.  But  the  Lord  does
not  deal  with  the  human  family  in
this  double  kind  of  dealing.  All  his
promises  are  yea  and  amen,  plain,
pointed,  definite,  no  two  meanings
about  them.  Here  we  are  told  that
inasmuch  as  the  servants  of  God,
the  missionaries,  should  go  forth
"  that  every  soul" — meaning  every
person  among  all  people,  languages,
nations  and  tongues, — "who  be-
lieveth  in  your  words/' — believeth
-on  the  testimony  of  these  mission-


aries that  go  forth — "and  is  bap-
tized by  water  for  the  remission  of
sins  shall  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,"
Now  can  you  make  out  two  meanings
to  that  1  Or  is  there  only  one  mean*
ing  %  u  They  shall  receive  the  Holy
Ghost "  And  then  in  order  that
every  soul  in  all  the  world  might
know  whether  they  were  true  be*
lievers  or  not  there  were  certain
signs  promised  to  them,  "  And
these  signs  shall  follow  them  that
believe."  Believe  what  ?  Believe
in  your  words,  the  words  of  you
missionaries.  What  shall  they  do  t
'*  In  my  name  they  shall  do  many
wonderful  works ;  in  my  name  they
shall  cast  out  devils ;  in  my  name
they  shall  heal  the  sick  ;  in  my  name
they  shall  open  the  eyes  of  the
blind/and  unstop  the  ears  of  the
deaf ;  and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb
shall  speak ;  and  if  any  man  admin-
ister poison  unto  them  it  shall  not
hurt  them;  and  the  poison  of  a
serpent  shall  not  have  power  to
harm  them/'  Is  there  anything  in-
definite in  that  1  Does  it  say  that
these  signs  possibly  may  follow  those
that  believe  t  Does  it  say  perhaps
you  will  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,
perhaps  you  may  have  power  to
heal  the  sick,  perhaps  you  may  have
power  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind,
etc.  No,  that  is  not  the  language.
Here  is  a  definite  promise  made  to
them.  To  the  missionaries  alone?
To  whom  was  this  promise  madel
To  every  soul  in  all  the  world  that
would  believe  and  receive  the  testi-
mony of  these  missionaries.  Here
we  see  something  very  similar  to  the
commission  that  was  given — and  re-
ferred to  by  Brother  Reid  in  his
remarks — in  the  last  chapter  of
Mark,  The  ancient-day  servants  of
God  were  sent  forth  to  all  the  world,
to  every  creature,  and  the  language
of  our  Savior  to  them  was  that  all,
in  every  part  of  the  earth  that


JOURNAL  <JF  DISCOURSES.


should  believe  their  testimony
afcould  be  saved.  Then  in  order  that
there  might  be  no  mistake  in  regard
to  believers  and  unbelievers,  he  told
them  that  certain  signs  should  fol-
low them  that  believe.  Do  you  dis-
cover any  difference  between  the
former-day  commission,  1800  years
ago,  and  the  latter  day  commission  1
I  do  not  discover  the  least  difference
between  the  two.  Did  the  Lord
verify  and  fulfill  his  promises  to  the
former-day  missionaries  1  He  did.
In  the  same  last  chapter  of  Mark  we
are  told  that  the  seivauts  of  God,
the  Apostles,  went  forth  and  preach ed
everywhere,  the  Lord  working  with
them,  and  con  finning  the  word
with  signs  following*  How  did  he
confirm  it?  By  fulfilling  the  prom-
ises in  the  last  chapter  of  Mark,  that
they  in  all  the  world  might  know
whether  they  were  Gospel  believers
or  not  Well,  what  was  to  become
of  all  other  sects  that  did  not  be-
lieve? They  shall  be  damned,  says
the  Savior.  "He  did  not  say,  "  If
you  are  sincere  in  your  belief  you
will  get  into  heaven  whether  you
receive  the  message  I  sent  you  or
not"  lie  did  not  say, -"If  you
Qome  across  any  sincere  people  don't
baptize  them,  dont  try  to  get  them
to  believe  your  message,  for  they
will  get  into  heaven  anyway/'  They
had  only  one  proclamation  to  deliver
to  all  people  whether  that  people
were  sincere  or  insincere  ;  whether
that  people  worshipped  idols  or  wor-
shipped something  else,  whether
they  were  infidels  or  whatever
might  be  their  profession,  the  com-
mission was — tell  them  that  if  they
do  not  believe  your  message  they
shall  be  damned.  No  half  way
business  about  it,  it  was  not  half  a
commission.  Does  the  latter- day
commission  testify  of  the  same
things]  Let  me  read  a  little  fur-
ther. "  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto


you,  they  who  believe  not  on  your
words,  and  are  not  baptized  in  wa-
ter, in  my  name,  for  the  remission
of  their  sins,  that  they  may  believe
the  Holy  Ghost,  shall  be  damned,
and  shall  not  come  into  my  Fa-
ther's kingdom,  where  my  Father
and  I  am/1  Just  the  same  as
the  ancient  commission.  It  did  not
excuse  the  ancient  commission  ;  it
did  not  excuse  one  person  in  all  the
world  however  sincere  whatever
the  profession  might  be,  every  man,
every  woman  among  all  nations,
kindreds  and  tongues,  all  were  to  be
damned  if  they  did  not  receive  the
message  that  these  servants  of  God
took  to  them,  Just  so  it  is  in  the
latter-days.  If  it  was  anything  else
we  would  not  believe  it,  we  could
not  look  upon  it  as  divine.  God
only  had  one  message  for  the  people
to  receive,  and  all  that  received  it
were  to  be  blessed,  and  all  that
would  not  receive  it  were  to  be
damned,  That  is  our  charity,  that
is  the  charity  of  the  ancient  Apos-
tles and  servants  of  God,  that  is  true
charity.  If  we  should  come  and
tell  you  that  you  Protestants,  and
you  Methodists,  and  you  Baptists,
and  you  Campbellites,  and  you
Church  of  England  members,  and
you  Roman  Catholics,  that  if  you
are  only  sincere  you  would  all  get
to  heaven  we  should  have  no  charity
for  you  ;  but  when  we  come  and  teU
you  that  if  you  do  not  repent  of
your  sins — you  Catholics,  Protest-
ants, and  all  other  denominations —
and  receive  the  message  that  God
lias  commissioned  his  servants  to
declare  in  your  hearing  that  every
one  will  be  damned.  This  is  true
charity,  just  as  it  was  in  the  ancient
days.  But  is  this  in  force  upon  all
people,  says  one  f  Yes ;  we  will  read
the  next  verse.  "  And  this  revela-
tion unto  you  and  commandment,  is
in  force  from  this  very  hour  upon  all


HOW  TO  FIND  OUT  lioD,  KTC,


tlie  world,  and  the  Gospel  is  unto  all
Ttfho  have  not  received  it  It  is  a  wit-
ness unto  all  nations  that  they  may
receive  the  truth  and  be  prepared
for  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  The  Lord,  in  relation  to
.sending  this  mission  forth  among
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  did  not
desire  that  the  people  should  have
Any  dubiety  upon  their  minds.  He
did  not  want  them  to  hope  merely
that  they  were  right  and  to  be  all
the  time  trembling  and  quivering
for  fear  they  were  not  right;  but  in
order  that  they  might  be  sure,  as
the  ancient  believers  were,  he  tells
«very  soul  that  will  receive  this  work
that  these  signs  shall  follow  them.

Now,  then,  here  in  this  house,
probably  are  many  hundreds  of  be-
lievers that  have  manifested  their
faith  by  receiving  the  message  of
the  Gospel,  and  they  have  further
manifested  their  faith  by  gathering
out  from  the  .various  nations  and
coming  here  to  Utah  Territory,
They  are  believers.  Is  there  any
chance  for  them  to  doubt]  How  can
you  doubt  if  you  yourself  heal  the
sick,  cast  out  devils,  open  the  eyes
of  the  blind,  or  cause  the  lame  to
leap!  If  you  yourselves  have  re-
ceived the  Holy  Ghost,  and ;
these  signs  are  following  you,  is
not  this  a  testimony  that  you  are
Gospel  believers*  "And  if  these
signs  do  not  follow  you,  on  the
other  hand,  you  know  that  you  are
not  Gospel  believers.  No  dubiety,
no  uncertainty,  no  hanging  our
heads  down  and  doubting  whether
we  are  believers  or  not  Here  is  an
undoubted  testimony  to  every  Lat-
ter-day Saint  that  it  they  are  true
Gospel  believers  these  signs  shall
follow  them,  and  if  these  signs  do
not  follow  them  they  are  not  true  I
Gospel  believers.  Does  this  apply
not  only  to  Latter-day  Saints  but  to
all  people  ?  Yes. If  the  Methodists


want  to  know  whether  they  are  true
Gospel  believers  let  them  ask  them-
selves  the question  if  the  signs
follow  them  that  are  promised  to
believers  ;  if  they  do  not,  they  know
they  are  not  Gospel  believers.  So
with  the  Presbyterians,  so  with  the
Baptists,  so  with  every  Christian
denunciation  under  the  whole  hea-
vens. They  can  all  prove  them-
selves by  the  word  of  God  ;  they  can
all  know  whether  they  are  true  be-
lievers according  to  the  true  Chris-
tian religion,  or  whether  they  havp
false  hopes — merely  something  that
is  leading  them  along  in  a  crooked
path. When  people  have  the  signs
they  have  a  good  foundation  for
their  hopes  ;  their  hopes  are  built
upon  something  that  is  like  a  rock ;
they  stand  firm  and  steadfast.  But
when  they  have  not  the  signs  and
the  promises  are  not  fulfilled  to
them,  where  are  their  hopes?  They
are  gone,  they  are  the  hopes  of  those
that  are  flattering  themselves  they
are  Christians  when  they  are  not
And  they  are  afraid  to  compare
themselves  with  the New  Testa-
ment and  the  Gospel  contained
therein  ;  they  are  afraid  to  come  to
the  light  of  the  Gospel ;  they  are
afraid  to  read  the  promises  of  Jesus,
or  if  they  happen  to  read  them  ex-
claim, "We  must  do  away  with
these. It  won't  do  for  us  to  acknow-
ledge that  the  promises  of  God  made
to  believers  can  be  enjoyed  in  our
day/ Let  us  read  the  first  promise
in  the  last  chapter  of  Mark.  Not
oidy  were  the?e  signs  promised,  but
Jesus  said  :  <(  He  that  belie veth  and
is  baptized  shall  be  saved  ;  but  he
that  belie  veth  not  shall  be  damned,"
Do  you  Christians  believe  that  you
will  be  saved  t Do  the  various  de-
nominations among  the  four  hun-
dred millions  of  Christians  in  Amer-
ica, in  Europe,  and  in  other  parts
of  the  earth — do  these  four  hundred


166


JOURNAL  OY  DISCOURSES,


millions  of  Christians  expect  to  be
saved  1  Oh,  yes.  What  makes  you
think  so  1  You  don't  have  the  signs
which  follow  the  believers,  and  how
can  you  hope  for  salvation  1  Why
should  you  hope  for  it  f  Why  ex-
pect to  be  saved  in  the  kingdom  of
God?  The  promises  are  made  to  be-
lievers, they  were  not  made  to  those
that  have  not  the  signs.  One  pro*
mise  was  just  as  sacred  as  the  other,
and  if  you  have  not  the  signs  of  be-
lievers you  have  not  the  promise  of
salvation.  Very  curious  Gospel,  says
one.  Well,  there  is  no  mistaking
that  gospel,  we  can  all  of  us  know
on  what  ground  we  are  place*  1.  If
we  cannot  obtain  the  promises  made
to  the  people  anciently,  namely  the
signs,  how  shall  we  obtain  the  greater
promise  of  eternal  life  and  salvation
in  the  world  to  come  1  Surely  if
the  people  cannot  have  faith  to  get
the  little  promises,  how  can  they
expect  to  get  the  greater  promise  1
All  their  faith  is  foolishness,  their
faith  is  all  founded  upon  sand,  and
they  go  blindfold  to  the  othe^sideof
the  vail  to  wake  up  and  find  they
never  had  received  the  Gospel.  But,
says  one,  we  have  received  the  Gos-
pel, Our  ministers  have  preached
it  long  and  loud  generations  before
"  Mor monism"  came  upon  the  earth ;
we  and  our  fathers  have  heard  it  It
is  one  thing  to  hear  the  Gospel  as
recorded  in  the  New  Testament,  and
another  thing  to  enjoy  the  blessings
of  it.  It  is  one  thing  to  read  about
people  receiving  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  it  is  another  thing  for  you  to  be
baptized  and  receive  the  Holy  Ghost.
It  is  one  thing  to,  be  baptized  by  a
man  holding  authority  from  God
who  has  the  right  to  baptize,  and
another  thing  to  be  baptized  by  one
holding  no  authority  from  God,  and
no  right  to  baptize.  Do  you  suppose
that  the  signs  would  follow  those
that  had  the  ordinance  of  baptism


administered  bv  a  man  that  had  no
authority  No.  For  instance  there
is  the  Methodist  baptizer,  the
Presbyterian  baptizer,  and  the
baptizers  of  the  various  religious
denominations — most  of  them  bap-
tize, some  of  them  for  the  re-
mission  of  sins,  and  some  because
they  suppose  their  converts  have
already  received  a  remission  of  sins.
Perhaps  they  may  perform  the  ordi-
nance by  immersion — the  true  mode
of  baptism  ;  but  can  an  unautho-
rized man  baptize  his  neighbor  and
that  be  called  baptism  in  the  sight
of  heaven  %  No.  A  man  that  is
not  called  of  God,  a  man  that  has
no  revelation,  and  says  there  has
been  none  since  the  close  of  the
first  century  of  the  christian  era,  all
his  administrations  are  as  invalid  as
it  would  be  for  a  heathen  priest  to
baptize  you,  or  for  any  person  upon
the  face  of  the  whole  earth  to  come
and  baptize  you.  Such  baptisms  are
not  good  ;  they  are  illegal ;  they  are
unlawful  ;  they  are  not  accepted  of
God  unless  the  administrator  is  a
true  servant  of  God,  and  if  he  be  a
true  servant  of  God,  the  signs  will
follow  him,  and  if  the  signs  do  not
follow  him  lie  has  no  authority  to
baptize.  No  wonder  then  that  four
hundred  millions  of  people  have
been  without  the  signs.  There  has
been  nobody  authorized  to  baptize
them  to  begin  with.  A  true  believer
is  a  man  that  receives  the  ordinances,
and  not  only  believes  in  them  but
manifests  his  faith  by  his  works.  He
obeys  the  ordinances  and  the  bles-
sings follow.  The  blessings  do  not
follow  the  four  hundred  millions
because  they  have  not  obeyed,  and
they  cannot  obey  without  there  is  a
man  authorized  to  administer  the
ordinances.

Well,  says  one,  what  do  you  Lat-
ter-day Saints  say  about  the  author-
ity to  administer  these  ordinances  1


We  say,  an<1  have  said  from  the  be-
ginning of  this  Church,  that  the
Lord  God  Almighty,  who  sits  upon
His  throne  in  yonder  heavens,  has
spoken  again  to  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth.  He  has  called  by  name
his  servants.  He  has  sent  forth
angels  in  glory  from  his  holy  pre-
sence, and  they  have  administered
the  authority  of  the  apostleship,  and
bestowed  it  upon  the  heads  of  men
to  administer  again  among  the  chil-
dren of  men  in  all  the  ordinances  of
the  Gospel,  This  is  our  testimony*
Has  it  ever  been  that  since  the  rise
of  the  Church  I  It  has.  We  never
have  varied  from  that  testimony.
What  further  do  we  sayl  We  say
that  among  all  people,  nations,
kindreds  and  tongues.  Christians,
heathens,  Mahommedans,  and  the
savages  upon  the  islands  of  the  sea
— that  among  all  these  nations  there
is  no  authority,  not  one  person
among  all  their  denominations  that
has  the  least  particle  of  right  to
baptize  you,  or  to  administer  the
sacrament,  or  to  lay  on  Lands  that  1
you  may  be  baptized  with  fire  and
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  according  to
the  ancient  pattern  and  order  of
things  ;  not  one  of  them ;  they  are
all  powerless,  they  are  all  without
authority,  without  revelation,  with- 1
out  any  knowledge  that  comes  from
God  direct  to  themselves  in  this  age.
No  man  among  them  has  been  called
ot  God,  as  was  Aaron.  Everybody
knows  that  Aaron  was  called  by
new  revelation.  He  did  not  have
to  go  back  to  revelations  given  1 800
years  before  he  was  born  to  tell  him
how  God  commissioned  somebody
before  the  flood ;  he  did  not  have
to  do  that ;  but  says  he,  "  I  have
been  ordained" — how  ? — By  a  reve-
lation from  God.  **  Moses  set  apart
Aaron.  He  is  thy  brother.  1  call
him  by  name.  Set  him  apart  to
the  Priesthood, ordain him,  let


him  be  clothed  upon  with  priestly
garments,  let  him  at  J  minister  aud
Ins  administration  1  will  accept."
This  was  the  substance  of  the
revelation,  and  calling  and  commis-
sion that  was  given  to  Aaron,
the  servant  of  God,  Is  it  true
1  what  Paul  said,  that  no  man  can
take  the  honor  of  the  Priesthood
to  himself  unless  he  was  called  of
God  as  was  Aaron  1  If  that  be
true  there  must  be  more  revelation
in  order  that  there  may  be  a  calling.
You  that  say  the  canon  of  scripture
is  full,  that  no  more  scripture  has
been  given  since  John  the  Revelator
left  the  earth,  what  becomes  of
your  callings?  You  have  none —
that  is,  that  are  divine.  No  won-
der, then,  that  while  the  world  were
wandering  in  darkness  without  God,
without  any  true  knowledge  from
the  heavens  direct  to  themselves,
without  the  gift  and  power  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  without  the  organiza-
tion of  any  true  church,  without
prophets,  without  revelators,  with-
out  inspired  men — no  wonder  that
God  has  again  commissioned  an
angel  from  the  heavens  to  begin
the  work  on  the  earth.  Brother
Reid  spoke  during  his  discourse
about  Joseph  the  Prophet — how
he  was  called,  that  the  Lord  ap-
peared to  him,  that  Jesus  appeared
to  him,  and  that  angels  appeared  to
him  and  conferred  ii[>on  him  autho-
rity and  power.  There  is  no  wonder
that  the  Lord  should  send  his  an-
gels and  thus  appear  in  order  to
begin  the  work  on  the  earth  where
so  much  darkness  reigns.  It  is
called  a  day  of  Gospel  light  by  these
four  hundred  millions  of  people.  A
day  of  Gospel  light !  Well,  all  the
Gospel  light  they  have  is  the  history
of  a  Uospe!  preached  1800  years  ago.
Tiiey  have  no  power  to  administer
in  it.  They  have  the  history  of
something,  without  any  power  to


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES


partake  of  it ;  that  is,  you  cannot
be  baptized,  you  cannot  receive  the
Holy  Ghost  by  the  laying  on  of
hands,  you  cannot  receive  the  Lord's
Supper  for  want  of  administrators  ;
but  can  read  about  it,  you  can  read
how  the  authority  was  once  on  the
earth. That  is  some  satisfaction,  is
it  not  ? How  much  satisfaction  I  do
not  know, It  is  something  like  the
case  of  a  man  who,  after  traveling
a  long  journey,  arrived  at  a  place
where  he  knew  there  was  a  splenr
(iidly  spread  table. }^t  the  door
was  locked  and  tbt  key  was  lost —
nobody  could  Vtitroduce  him  to  that
table  to  eat  that  he  might  appease
his  hunger How  very  satisfactory
it  miiat  be  to  that  man  to  know  the
iiisiory  of  buch  a  good  spread  table,
and  yet  no  power  to  get  to  the  table.
Just  so  it  is  with  these  four  hundred
millions  of  Christians,  It  is  so  much
satisfaction  to  read  bow  the  believers
in  ancient  days  were  baptized  by
one  holding  authority  to  baptize,
and  how  they could  distinguish
themselves  from  unbelievers  ;  but,
alas,  say  they,  44  We  cannot  partake
of  it ;  no  blessings  of  the  Gospel  for
us  ;  no  one  to  let  us  receive  the
same  GospeL We  would  like  to
feast  like  unto  the  ancient  Saints,


but  is  it  not  enough — our  priests  say
it  is — to  know  how  others  enjoyed
th  blessings  ?"  Now  that  is  pre-
cisely the  situation  of  this  genera-
tion.

This  is  true  charity.  If  I  were
to  come  and  tell  you  that  you  are  all
in  the  right  path  inasmuch  as  you
are  honest  and  sincere,  and  walk  in
your  various  doctrines  and  princi-
ples, it  would  be  false  charity,  it
would  be  flattering  you  to  walk  in
paths  that  were  wrong,  it  would  be
flattering  you  that  you  had  hopes
of  salvation  when  you  had  none.
But  we  do  not  do  this.  This  flat-
tery we  leave  to  other  portions  of
the  world,  we  leave  that  to  the
Christian  denominations  that  are
without  any  of  the  powers  and  gifts
of  the  ancieut  GospeL  Let  them
flatter,  let  then:  occupy  this  position,
let  them  have  this  false  charity  ;  but
as  for  us  we  have  the  plain  naked
truth— plain  as  words  can  make  it —
to  tell  unto  all  people,  namely,  if
you  will  believe  and  receive  the
Gospel  you  shall  be  blessed,  not
with  common-place  blessings,  but
with  the  supernatural  gifts  of  the
Gospel,  and  on  the  other  hand  that
every  snul  of  you  that  do  not  receive
it  shall  be  damned  Amen.


*


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOSEPH  P.  SMITH,


Delivered  jn  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday,

June  18,  1882.


( Rejmted  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs* )


AN  A  MORTAL  AND  AN  IMMORTAL  BEING — TEMPORAL  AND  SPIRITUAL
DEATH  —  REDEMPTION  THROUGH  THE  ATONEMENT  AND  GOSPEL  OF
CHRIST — SONS  OF  PERDITION  —  MAN'S  FRE-EXISTENT,  DISEMBODIED
AND  RESURRECTED  STATES — JESUS  CHRIST  THE  GREAT  EXAMPLE —
THE  RIGHTEOUS  TO  BE  CONFORMED  TO  HIS  IMAGE — HIS  SIMILARITY
TO  THE  FATHER  —  HIS  MISSION  NOT  COMPLETED  AT  HIS  DEATH  —
HIS  RESURRECTION  AND  THE  REDEMPTION  OF  HUMANITY,


We  are  called  mortal  beings  be-
cause in  us  are  the  seeds  of  death,
ftut  in  reality  we  are  immortal  be-
ings  because  there  is  also  within  us
the  germ  of  eternal  life*  Man  is
a  dual  being,  composed  of  the  spirit
which  gives  life,  force,  intelligence
and  capacity  to  man,  and  the  body
which  is  the  tenement  of  the  spirit
and  is  suited  to  its  form,  adapted  to
its  necessities,  and  acts  in  harmony
with  and  to  its  utmost  capacity
yields  obedience  to  the  will  of  the
spirit.  The  two  combined  constitute
the  soul.  The  body  is  dependent
upon  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  during
its  natural  occupancy  of  the  body  is
subject  to  the  laws  which  apply  to
and  govern  it  in  the  mortal  state.
In  this  natural  body  are  the  seeds
of  weakness  and  decay,  which,  when
fully  ripened  or  untimely  plucked
up,  in  the  language  of  scripture,  is
called  "the  temporal  death/1  The
Spirit  is  also  subject  to  what  is
termed  in  the  scriptures  ami  reve-
lations from  God,  "  spiritual  death,"
The  same  as  that  which  befel  our
first  parents,  when  through  disobe-
dience and  transgression,  they  be-


came subject  to  the  will  of  Satan,
and  were  thrust  out  from  the  pre-
sence of  the  Lord  and  became  spirit-
ually dead,  which  the  Lord  says,
"  is  the  first  death,  even  that  same
death  which  is  the  last  death,  which
is  spiritual,  which  shall  be  pro-
nounced upon  the  wicked  when  I
shall  say,  Depart,  ye  cursed  r  And
the  Lord  further  says,  "  But,  behold
I  say  unto  you,  that  I  the  Lord  God
gave  unto  Adam  and  unto  his  seed,
that  they  should  not  die  as  to  the
temporal  death  until  I  the  Lord
God  should  send  forth  angels  to
declare  unto  them  repentance  and
redemption  (from  the  first  death)
through  faith  on  the  name  of  mine
only  begotten  Son.  And  thus  did
I,  the  Lord  God,  appoint  unto  man
the  days  of  his  probation,  that
by  his  natural  death  he  might  be
raised  in  immortality  unto  eternal
life,  even  as  many  as  would  believe,
and  they  that  believe  not  unto  eter-
nal damnation,  for  they  cannot  be
redeemed  from  their  spiritual  fall
because  they  repent  not*"  From
the  natural  death,  that  is  the  death
ot  the  body,  and  also  from  the  first


170


j or  UN  A  L  UK  DIS<X>UK8»


death,  "  which  is  spiritual"  there  is  |
redumption  through  belief  on  the  :
name  of  the  u  only  Begotten  Son/1
in  connection  with  repentance  and
obedience  to  the  ordinances  of  the
Gospel,  declared  by  holy  angels,  for
if  one  " believes"  he  must  also  obey ;
but  from  the  "  second  death,"  even
that  same  death  which  is  the  first
death,  "  which  is  spiritual,"  and
from  which  man  may  be  redeemed
through  faith  and  obedience,  and
which  will  again  be  pronounced
upon  the  wicked  when  God  shall
say,  u  depart  ye  cursed/1  there  is  no
redemption,  *o  far  as  light  on  this
matter  has  been  revealed.  It  is
written  that  "  all  manner  of  sin  and
blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  unto
men  who  receive  me  and  repent  ;
but  the  blasphemy  against  the  Holy
Ghost,  it  shall  not  be  forgiven  unto
men."  If  men  will  not  repent  and
come  unto  Christ,  through  the  ordi-
nances ot  His  Gospel,  they  cannot
be  redeemed  from  their  spiritual  fall,
but  must  remain  forever  subject  to
the  will  of  Satan  and  the  con^quent
spiritual  darkness  or  death  into
which  our  first  parents  fell,  subject-
ing all  their  posterity  thereto,  and
from  which  none  can  be  redeemed
but  by  belief  or  faith  on  the  name
of  the  "only  Begotten  Son'*  and
obedience  to  the  laws  of  God.  But,
thanks  be  to  the  Eternal  Father,
through  the  merciful  provisions  of
the  Gospel  all  mankind  will  have
the  opportunity  of  escape  or  deliver*
ance  from  this  spiritual  death  either
in  time  or  in  eternity,  for  not  until
they  are  freed  from  the  first  can
they  become  subject  unto  the  second
death,  still  if  they  repent  not  "they
cannot  be  redeemed  from  their
spiritual  fall,"  and  will  continue
subject  to  the  will  of  Satan,  the  first
spiritual  death,  so  long  as  u  they  re-
pent not."  I  have  been  speaking
of  those  who  repent  not,  and  there-


by reject  Christ  and  His  GospeL  m
but  what  of  those  who  do  believe,
repent  of  their  sins,  obey  the  Gos-  1
pefenter  int0  it8  covenants,  receive  .

the  keys  of  the  Priesthood  and  the
knowledge  of  the  truth  by  revela-
tion and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  afterwards  turn  away  wholly
from  that  light and  knowledge  1
They  4<  become  a  law  unto  them-
selves/1 and  "  will  to  abide  in  sin,"
of such  it  is  written, *'  Whoso
breaketli  this  covenant  after  lie  hath
received  it,  and  altogether  turneth
therefrom  shall  not  have  forgive-
ness in  this world nor  in  the
world to come." And again —
"Thus  saith  the  Lord  concerning  all
those  who  know  my  power  and  who
have  been  made  partakers  thereof,  ■
and  suffered themselves  through
the  power  of  the  devil  to  be  over-  j
come  and  to  deny  the  truth  and
defy  my  power — they  are  they  who
are  the  sons  of  perdition  of  whom  I
say  that  it  had  been  better  for  them
never  to  have  been  born,  for  they
are  vessels  of  wrath doomed  to  j
suffer  the  wrath  of  God  with  the  j
devil  and  his  angels  in  eternity  y
concerning  whom  1  have  said  there
is  no  forgiveness  iu  this  world  nor
in  the  world  to  come ;  having  de-
nied the  Holy  Spirit  after  having
received  it,  and  having  denied  the
only  Begotten  Son  of  the  Father^
having  crucified  him  unto  them-
selves  and  put hini  to  an  open
shame." Now,  there  is  a  difference  j
between  this  class  and  those  who
simply  repent  not  and  reject  the
Gospel  in  the  flesh. Of  these  latter
it  is  written,  "  they  shall  be  brought
forth  by  the  resurrection  of  the  dead
through  the  triumph  and  the  glory
f  of  the  Lamb/1  and  "  shall  be  re*
I  deemed  in  the  due  time  of  the  Lord
i  after  the  sufferings  of  his  wrath/*
But  of  the  others  it  is  said,  "  they
jshidl  not  be  redeemed/' for  "they


MAN  A  MORTAL  AND  AN  IMMORTAL  BEING,  ETC.


171


are  the  only  ones  on  whom  the  se-
cond death  shall  have  any  power/'
The  others  never  having  been  re-
deemed  from  the  first,  cannot  be
doomed  to  the  second  death,  or  in
other  words,  cannot  be  made  to
suffer  eternally  the  wrath  of  God,
without  hope  of  redemption  through
repentance,  but  must  continue  to
suffer  the  first  death  until  they  re-
pent, and  are  redeemed  therefrom
through  the  power  of  the  atonement  j
and  the  Gospel  of  salvation,  thereby
being  brought  to  the  possession  of
all  the  keys  and  blessings  to  which
they  will  be  capable  of  attaining  or
to  which  they  may  be  entitled,
through  the  mercy,  justice  and
power  of  the  ever- living  God,  or
on  the  other  hand  forever  remain
bound  in  the  chains  of  spiritual
darkness,  bondage  and  banishment
from  his  presence,  kingdom  and
glory*  The  "  tern  [►oral  death1'  is
one  tiling,  and  the  "spiritual  death1'
is  another  thing.  The  body  may
be  dissolved  and  become  extinct  as
an  organism,  although  the  elements
of  which  it  is  composed  are  in-
destructible or  eternal,  but  I  hold
it  as  self  evident  that  the  spiritual
organism  is  an  eternal,  immortal
being,  destined  to  enjoy  eternal
happiness  and  a  fullness  of  joy,  or
suffer  the  wrath  of  God,  and  misery
— a  just  condemnation,  eternally.
Adam  became  spiritually  dead,  yet
he  lived  to  endure  it  until  freed
therefrom  by  the  power  of  the  atone-
ment, through  repentance,  etc.
Those  upon  whom  the  second  death
shall  fall,  will  live  to  suffer  and  en-
dure it,  but  without  hope  of  re-
demption. The  death  ot  the  body
or  natural  death  is  but  a  temporary
circumstance  to  which  all  were  sub-
jected through  the  fall  and  from
winch  all  will  be  restored  or  resur-
rected by  the  power  of  God,  through
the  atonement  of  Christ.


Man  existed  before  he  came  to
this  earth,  and  he  will  exist  after
he  passes  from  it ;  and  will  continue
to  live  throughout  the  countless
ages  of  eternity.

There  are  three  classes  of  beings,
or  rather  man  exists  in  three  sepa-
rate conditions  before  and  after  his
probation  upon  this  earth — first  in
the  spirit  or  pre  existent  state,  se-
cond in  the  disembodied  state,  the
condition  which  exists  after  the  dis-
solution of  the  body  and  spirit  until
the  resurrection  takes  place,  and
third  in  the  resurrected  state.  For
instance,  some  fourteen  hundred
years  before  the  coming  of  Christ
into  the  world  to  sojourn  in  the
flesh,  he  showed  himself  to  the
brother  of  Jared  and  said,  "  Behold,
this  body,  which  ye  now  behold,  is
the  body  of  my  spirit,  and  man
have  1 'created  after  the  body  of
my  spirit  ;  and  even  as  I  appear  unto
thee  to  he  in  the  spirit,  will  I  ap-
pear unto  my  people  in  the  flesh/*
He  further  declared,  "  Behold  I  am
he  who  was  prepared  from  the  foun-
dation of  the  world  to  redeem  my
people,  Behold  I  am  Jesus  Christ."
Here  "Jesus  showed  himself  unto
this  man  in  the  spirit,  even  after  the
manner  and  in  the  likeness  of  the
same  body,  even  as  he  shewed  him-
self unto  the  Nephites" — that  is
prior  to  his  coming  in  the  flesh.
This  I  consider  typical  of  the  first
condition  of  all  spirits.  Again  it
is  written,  "for  Christ  also  hath
once  suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for
the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us
to  God,  being  put  to  death  in  the
flesh,  but  quickened  by  the  spirit,
by  which  also  he  went  and  preached
unto  the  spirits  in  prison,  which,
sometime  were  disobedient,  when
once  the  longsuffering  of  God  waited
in  the  days  of  Noah,  while  the  ark
wasia  preparing  wherein  few,  that
is,  eight  souls,  were  saved  by  water,


172


JOURNAL  U>'  DI.SUUUUSKS.


.etc.  Thus  we  see  that  while  the
body  of  our  Savior  slept  in  the
tomb,  He  went  in  the  spirit,  ami
preached  Mis  glorious  Gospel  to
*'  the  spirits  in  prison,"  who  were
disobedient  in  the  days  of  Noah,
and  were  destroyed  in  the  flesh  by
the  flood.  This  was  their  second
condition  or  state  in  the  spirit  await-
ing the  resurrection  of  their  bodies
which  were  slumbering  in  death.
"  Marvel  not  at  this,"  saith  Jesus,
u  for  the  hour  is  coming  in  the
which  all  that  are  in  their  graves
shall  hear  his  {the  Redeemer's)
voice  and  shall  come  forth,  they
that  have  done  good  unto  the  resur-
rection ot  life  and  they  that  have
done  evil  unto  the  resurrection  of
damnation."  In  reference  to  the
third  condition  or  state  we  will
refer  to  the  account  given  of  the
risen  Redeemer  before  his  ascen-
sion. John  tells  us  that  he  ap-
peared unto  his  disciples  three
times  after  his  resurrection,  on
which  occasions  he  ate  bread,
broiled  fish  and  honeycomb,  and
Opened  the  eyes  of  their  under-
standing, that  they  began  to  com-
prehend the  Scriptures  and  the
prophecies  concerning  Christ.  But
when  he  appeared  unto  them  11  they
were  terrified  and  affrighted  and
-supposed  that  they  had  seen  a  spirit.
And  he  said  unto  them,  Why  are
ye  troubled  1  And  why  do  thoughts
arise  in  your  hearts  1  Behold  my
hands  and  my  feet  that  it  is  I  my-
self ;  handle  me  and  see  rae  ;  *br  a
spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones  as  je
see  me  have.**  Here  is  presented
the  true  type  of  the  resurrected
being.  And  after  this  manner  are
all  those  who  have  their  resurrected
bodies,  aud  there  are  many  of  these,
for  we  are  told  in  the  scriptures,
that,  "  the  graves  were  opened,
and  many  bodies  of  the  Saints  which
slept  arose  and  came  out  of  the


graves,  after  his  resurrection,  and
went  into  the  holy  city  and  appeared
unto  many."  This  class  of  beings
dwell  in  heaven,  or  ia  the  paradise
of  the  just,  having  been  counted
worthy  to  come  forth  in  the  first
resurrection,  even  with  Christ,  to
dwell  with  him  aud  to  be  associates
with  and  members  of  the  kingdom
of  God  and  his  Christ  These  com-
prise the  three  conditions  or  estates
of  man  in  heaven.  Not  all,  how-
ever, of  the  disembodied  spirits
enjoy  the  same  privileges,  exaltation
and  glory*  The  spirits  of  the  wicked,
disobedient,  and  unbelieving  are
denied  the  privileges,  joy  and  glory
of  the  spirits  of  the  just  and
the  good.  The  bodies  of  the  Saints
will  come  forth  in  the  first  resurrec-
tion, and  those  of  the  unbelieving,
etc.,  in  the  second  or  last.  In  other
words,  the  Saints  will  rise  first,  and
those  who  are  not  Saints  will  not
rise  until  afterwards,  according  to
the  wisdom,  justice  and  mercy  of
God.

Christ  is  the  great  example  for
all  mankind,  and  I  believe  that
mankind  were  as  much  foreordained
to  become  like  hini,  as  that  he  was
foreordained  to  be  the  Redeemer  of
man.  Whom  God  did  foreknow —
and  whom  did  he  not  foreknow!
"  He  also  did  predestinate  to  be  con*
formed  to  the  image  of  His  Son,  tha
He  might  be  the  firstborn  among
many  brethren."  It  is  very  plain,
that  mankind  are  very  far  from  being
like  Christ,  as  the  world  is  to-day,
only  in  form  of  person.  In  this  we
are  like  him,  or  in  the  form  of  his
person,  as  he  is  the  express  image
of  His  Father's  person.  We  are
therefore  in  the  form  of  God,  physi-
cally, and  may  become  like  him
spiritually,  and  like  him  in  the  pos-
session of  knowledge,  intelligence,
wisdom  and  power.

The  grand  object  of  our  coming


MAN  A  MORTAL  AND  AN  IMMORTAL  BEING,  ETC.


17*


to  this  earth  is  that  we  may  become
like  Christ,  for  if  we  are  not  like
him,  we  cannot  become  the  sons  of
God,  and  be  joint  heirs  with  Christ.

The  man  wfho  passes  through  this
probation,  and  is  faithful,  being
redeemed  from  sin  by  the  blood  of
Christ,  through  the  ordinances  of
the  Gospel,  and  attains  to  exaltation
in  the  kingdom  of  God,  is  not  less
but  greater  than  the  angels,  and  if
yon  doubt  it  read  your  Bible,  for
there  it  is  written  that  the  Saints
shall  "judge  angels,"  and  also  they
shall  "judge  the  world/1  And  why  1
Because  the  resurrected,  righteous
man  has  progressed  beyond  the  p re-
existent  or  disembodied  spirits,  and
has  risen  above  them,  having  both
spirit  and  body  as  Christ  has,  hav-
ing gained  the  victory  over  death
and  the  grave,  and  having  power
over  sin  and  Satan,  in  fact  having
passed  from  the  condition  of  the
angel  to  that  of  a  God.  He  pos-
sesses keys  of  power,  dominion
and  glory  that  the  angel  does  not
possess — and  cannot  possess  without
gaining  them  in  the  same  way  that
he  gained  them,  winch  will  be  by
passing  through  the  same  ordeals
and  proving  equally  faithful  It
was  so  ordained  when  the  morning
stars  sang  together,  before  the  foun-
dations of  this  earth  were  laid*
Man  in  his  pre-existeut  condition  is
not  perfect,  neither  is  he  in  the  dis-
embodied estate.  There  is  no  per-
fect estate  but  that  of  the  risen
Redeemer,  which  is  God's  estate,
and  no  man  can  become  perfect  ex*
cept  he  becomes  like  them.  And
what  are  they  like  ?  I  have  shown
what  Christ  is  like,  and  he  is  like
his  Father,  but  I  will  refer  to  an  un-
doubted authority  to  this  people,  on
this  point,  "  The  Father  has  a  body
of  flesh  and  bones  as  tangible  as
man's,  the  Son  also,  but  the  Holy
Ghost  has  not  a  body  of  flesh  and


bones,  but  is  a  personage  of  spirit ;
were  it  not  so  the  Holy  Ghost  could
not  dwell  in  us."  Doc,  and  Cov^
Sec.  130.  There  is  not  time  to  refer
to  the  many  scriptural  passages
which  might  be  cited  in  proof  of
these  important  facts,  enough  al-
ready has  been  referred  to,  to  place
the  matter  beyond  a  doubt.

It  is  believed  by  many  in  the
Christian  world,  that  our  Savior
finished  his  mission  when  he  ex-
pired upon  the  cross,  and  his  last
words  on  the  cross,  as  given  by  the
Apostle  John — "  it  is  finished  "  are
frequently  quoted  as  evidence  of  the
fact ;  but  this  is  an  error.  Christ
did  not  complete  his  mission  upon
the  earth  until  after  his  body  was
raised  from  the  dead.  Had  his
mission  been  completed  when  he
died,  his  disciples  would  have  con-
tinued fishermen,  carpenters,  etc,,
for  they  returned  to  their  several
occupations  soon  after  the  crucifixion,
not  yet  knowing  the  force  of  their
holy  calling,  nor  understanding  the
mission  assigned  them  by  their
Master,  whose  name  would  soon
have  been  buried  with  his  body  in
the  grave  to  perish  and  be  forgotten*
"  for  as  yet  they  knew  not  the  scrip-
ture that  He  must  rise  again  from
the  dead"  But  the  most  glorious
part  of  his  mission  had  to  be  accom-
plished after  the  crucifixion  and
death  of  his  body.  When  on
the  first  day  of  the  week  some
;  of  the  disciples  went  to  the  tomb
with  certain  preparations  for  the
body  of  their  Lord,  they  were  met
there  by  two  men  clothed  in
"  shining  garments,"  who  said  unto
them,  "Why  seek  ye  the  living
among  the  dead  ]  He  is  not  here  but
is  risen.  Remember  how  He  spoke
unto  you  when  He  was  yet  in  Galilee,
saying  the  Son  of  Man  must  be
delivered  into  the  hands  of  sinful
men  and  be  crucified,  and  the  third


174


JOURNAL  Of  DISCOURSES,


day  rise  again/' And  not  until
then  did  the  disciples  remember
these  words  of  the  Savior,  or  begin
to  understand  their  meaning.  Why
were  they  thus  forgetful,  and  seem-
ingly ignorant  of  all  they  had  been
taught  by  the  Savior  respecting  the
objects  of  his  mission  to  the  earth?
Because  they  lacked  one  important
qualification,  they  had  not  yet  been
4i  endowed  with power  from  on
high." They  had  not  yet  obtained
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  And  the
presumption  is,  they  never  would
have  received  this  important  and
essential  endowment  had  Christ's
mission  been  completed  at  the  time
of  his  death. It  may  seem  strange
to  some  who  may  not  have  reflected
on  this  matter  fully,  that  the  disci*
pies  of  Christ  were  without  the  gift
of  the  Holy  Ghost  until  after  his
resurrection. But  so  it  is  written,
notwithstanding  the  Savior  on  one
occasion  declared,  "  blessed  art  thou
Simon,  etc,,  for  flesh  and  blood  hath
not  revealed  this  unto  thee,  but
my  Father  which  is  in  heaven/'
While  Jesus  was  with  them  he  was
their  light  and  their  inspiration.
They  followed  him  by  sight,  and  felt
the  majestic  power  of  his  presence,
and  when  these  were  gone  they  re-
turned to  their  nets  and  to  their
various occupations and  to  their
homes  saying,  "  we  trusted  that  it
had  been  he  which  should  have  re-
deemed Israel,  but  the  chief  priests
and  our  rulers  have  delivered  him  to
be  condemned  to  death,  and  have
crucified  him." No  wouder  that
Jesus  exclaimed  unto  some  of  them,
uO  fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  be-
lieve all  that  the  Prophets  have
written."

If  the  Disciples  had  been  en-
dowed with  the  "  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost,"  or  £  with  power  from  on
high,"  at  this  time,  their  course
would  have  been  altogether  different


from  this  as  the  sequel  abundantly
proved.  If  Peter,  who  was  the
chief  Apostle,  had  received  the  gift
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  power
and  testimony  thereof  prior  to  the
terrible  night  on  which  he  cursed
and  swore  and  denied  his  Lord,  the
result  would  have  been  very  different
with  him,  for  then  he  would  have
sinned  against  "  light  and  know-
ledge," and  '*  against  the  Holy
Ghost/'  for  which  there  is  no  for-
giveness. The  fact,  therefore,  that
he  was  forgiven,  after  bitter  tears  of
repentance,  is  an  evidence  that  he
was  without  the  witness  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  never  having  received  it.
The  other  disciples  or  apostles  of
Christ  were  precisely  in  the  same
condition,  and  it  was  not  until  the
evening  of  the  day  on  which  Jesus
came  out  of  the  grave,  that  he  be-
stowed upon  them  this  inestimable
gift.  John  gives  a  careful  description
of  this  important  event  which  con-
cludes as  follows  :  "  Then  said
Jesus  to  them  again,  Peace  be  unto
you  ;  as  my  Father  sent  me,  even  so
send  I  you.  And  when  he  had  said
this  he  breathed  on  them  and  said
unto  them,  Receive  ye  the  Holy
Ghost,  whosoever  sins  ye  remit,
they  are  remitted  unto  them,"  etc.
This  was  their  glorious  commission,
and  now  were  they  prepared  to  re-
ceive the  witness  of  the  Spirit — even
the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ.
Yet  they  were  told  to  l(  tarry  in
Jerusalem  until  they  were  endued
with  power  from  on  high,"  which
they  did.  Jesus  further  told  them
that  if  he  went  not  away  the
"  Comforter"  —  that  is  the  Holy
Ghost— would  not  come  unto  them,
but  if  ha  went  away  he  would
"  send  him,"  and  he  it  was  who
should  testify  of  Christ,  and  of  the
Father,  and  bring  to  their  remem-
brance H  all  things  whatsoever"  he
had  commanded  or  taught  them,


MAN  A  MORTAL  AND  AN


IMMOBTAL  KING,  ETC


175


and  it  should  "  lead  thetn  Into  all
truth.  Thus  we  see  that  the  resur-
rection from  the  dead,  not  only  of
Christ  but  of  all  mankind ,  in  the
due  time  of  the  Lord  ;  the  endow-
ment of  the  Apostles  with  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  their  glorious  commission
from  Christ,  being  sent  out  by  him
as  he  was  sent  by  the  Father ;  the
opening  of  the  eyes  of  the  disciples
to  understand  the  prophecies  of  the
Scriptures,  and  many  other  things
did  Jesus  after  he  cried  out  upon  the
cross,  u  it  is  finished/'  Further,
the  mission  of  Jesus  will  be  unfin-
ished until  he  redeems  the  whole


human  family,  except  the  sons  of
perdition,  and  also  this  earth  from
'  the  curse  that  is  upon  it,  and  both
the  earth  and  its  inhabitants  can  be
presented  to  the  Father  redeemed,
I  sanctified  and  glorious.

Things  upon  the  earth,  so  far  as
they  have  not  been  perverted  by
wickedness,  are  typical  of  things  in
heaven.  Heaven  was  the  prototype
of  this  beautiful  creation  when  it
came  from  the  hand  of  the  Cieator,
and  was  pronounced  "  good,"

Much  might  be  said  in  continua-
tion of  this  subject,  but  I  see  that
my  time  has  expired.  Amen.


i


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  at  the  Funeral  Services  of  Bishop  Reuben  Miller,

at  Mill  Creek,  Monday,  J uly  24,  1882.

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

THE  DEATH  OF  THE  FAITHFUL  NO  CAUSE  FOR  MOURNING  —  THE  PER-
PETUITY OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD — PROBATIONARY  INGRESS  AND  EGRESS
— ALL  KNOWLEDGE  COMES  FROM  GOD  —  TEMPLE-BUILDING  AND  ITS
PURPOSES — EXHORTATIONS  TO  THE  SAINTS.


I  thought  I  would  come  here  to-
<day  to  mingle  my  condolence  and
sympathy  with  yours  while  paying
the  last  token  of  respect  to  the  re-
mains of  your  husband,  your  father,
your  friend,  your  Bishop,

These  are  occasions  that  cause  us
to  feel  sorrowful,  and  yet  we  should
not  sorrow  at  the  departure  of  a
good  man — a  high  minded,  honorable


man,  a  good  Latter-day  Saint,  as  I
have  always  esteemed  Bishop  Miller
to  be*  I  am  told  that  many  of  you
were  not  born  when  Brother
Miller  was  first  installed  Bishop;
that  there  are  only  two  women,  of
whom  his  wife  is  one,  and  three
men  that  are  now  living  in  the
Ward  when  he  was  first  ordained
Bishop  here;  and  that  he  has  during


176  JOURNAL  OF

his  bishopric  blessed ,  when  children,
a  great  many  of  the  congregation
assembled  here  to-day*

When  a  man  who  has  been  faith-
ful and  true  leaves  the  world  to  go
into  another  state  of  existence,  what
is  there  to  mourn  for?  Should  his
family  mourn  ?  No*  They  cannot
help  the  natural  feelings  of  sym-
pathy that  well  up  in  the  heart  at
the  departure  of  their  friends ;  wives
cannot  help  having  sympathy  for
their  husbands,  and  husbands  for
their  wives,  parents  for  their  chil-
dren, and  children  for  their  parents.
Tin*  family  of  Brother  Miller  have
lost  a  good  husband,  a  loving  father,
a  faithful  friend,  and  under  such
circumstances  they  mourn  when
they  are  deprived  of  his  society  and
his  counsel

When  men  leave  this  earth  they
leave  it  to  occupy  another  sphere  in
another  state  of  existence.  And  if,
as  is  the  case  with  Brother  Miller,
they  hold  the  Priesthood  that  ad-
ministers in  time  and  in  eternity,
having  fulfilled  this  part,  as  many
others  have  done  who  have  left  the
world,  and  As  our  deceased  brother
has  done,  they  hold  that  Priesthood
in  the  eternal  worlds,  and  operate  in
it  there.  It  is  an  everlasting  Priest-
hood, that  administers  in  time  arid
in  eternity.  And  the  Gospel  that
we  have  received  unfolds  to  us  prin-
ciples of  which  we  were  heretofore
entirely  ignorant  It  shows  us  the
relationship  that  exists  between
God  and  man,  and  it  shows  us  the  1
relationship  that  exists  between
men  who  have  dwelt  upon  the
earth  before  and  those  who  exist  to-
day. It  shows  that  while  God  has
revealed  the  Priesthood  to  us  upon
the  earth  and  conferred  upon  us
those  privileges,  that  in  former  gen-
erations he  revealed  the  same  Priest-
hood to  other  men,  and  that  those
men  holding  that  Priesthood  min-


DISCOURSES.

!  istered  to  others  here  upon  the
I  earth  ;  and  that  we  are  operating
with  them  and  they  with  us  in  our
interests  and  in  the  interests  of  the
Church  and  kingdom  of  God,  in
assisting  to  build  up  the  Zion  of
God,  and  in  seeking  to  establish
truth  and  righteousness  upon  the
earth ;  and  that  there  is  a  connect-
ing link  between  the  Priesthood  in
the  heavens  and  the  Priesthood
upon  the  earth.

God,  our  heavenly  Father,  has
gathered  unto  himself,  through  the
atonement  of  Jesus  Christ,  very
many  great  and  honorable  men  who
have  lived  upon  the  earth,  and  who
have  been  clothed  with  the  powers
of  the  Priesthood,  Those  men
having  held  that  Priesthood  and
administered  in  it  upon  the  earth
are  now  in  the  heavens  operating
with  the  Priesthood  in  the  heavens
in  connection  with  the  Priesthood
that  exists  now  upon  the  earth.
Consequently  I  do  not  feel  sorrow-
ful when  I  see  a  good  man  go,  and
yet  in  some  respects  I  do.  There
is  something  painful  about  the  sepa-
ration. But  I  look  upon  it  a  good
deal  as  it  was  with  us  when  we  were
coming  to  this  land.  Said  you  to
your  friends  when  they  were  leaving :
ffThomas,  Mary,  James  or  William,
you  are  going  away  to  Zion  ;  I  am
sorry  to  see  you  go,  and  yet  I  am
glad  you  are  going."  We  feel  sorry
to  part  with  our  friends  ;  but  when
the  struggle  is  over,  when  they  have
battled  with  the  world  and  the
powers  of  darkness,  and  by  the
Spirit  and  power  of  God  have  over-
come and  triumphed,  having  re-
mained true  and  faithful  to  the  last,
and  have  gone  to  join  the  hosts  in
the  eternal  worlds,  to  associate  with
the  eternal  Priesthood  that  exists
there,  do  we  feel  to  mourn  ?  No,  I
do  not ;  there  is  no  cause  to  mourn;
it  is  a  cause  of  rejoicing. By  ana


THE  DEATH  OF  THE  FAITHFUL  NO  CAUSE  FOR  MOURNING,  ETC-  177


by  we  shall  follow  :  for  we  expect  to
mingle  with  them*

A  few  days  ago  I  attended  the
funeral  of  one  of  my  wives;  and
while  doing  so  I  looked  upon  the
great  city  of  the  dead,  I  thought
to  myself,  here  are  thousands  of
honorable  men  and  women  who
are  sleeping  the  sleep  of  peace,  who
have  served  their  God,  and  who
have  got  through  with  the  affairs  of
this  world  ;  and  that  while  their
bodies  arc  decaying  here,  their
spirits  are  soaring  in  the  heavens.
Do  I  feel  sorry  for  them  ?  Mo,  they
have  gone  to  rest,  and  all  is  peace
with  them,  according  to  the  mind
and  will  of  God  in  relation  to  those
matters,  He  having  appointed  unto
man  that  he  must  die.

Since  the  organization  of  the
world  myriads  have  come  and  have
taken  upon  themselves  bodies,  and
they  have  passed  away,  generation
after  generation,  into  another  state
of  existence.  And  it  is  so  to-day.
And  I  suppose  while  we  are  mourn-
ing the  loss  of  our  friend,  others  are
rejoicing  to  meet  him  behind  the
veil ;  and  while  he  has  left  us,  others
are  coming  into  the  world  at  the
same  time,  and  probably  in  this  our
territory.  There  is  a  continuous
change,  an  ingress  of  beings  into  the
world  and  an  egress  out  of  it.  As
near  as  my  memory  serves  me,  from
one- third  to  one- fourth  of  our  popu-
lation to-day  are  children  under
eight  years  of  age.  There  are  thou-
sands of  men  upon  the  earth  to-day,
among  the  Saints  of  God,  of  whom
it  was  decreed  before  they  came  that
they  should  occupy  the  positions
they  have  occupied  and  do  occupy,
ami  many  of  them  have  performed
their  part  and  gone  home  ;  others
are  left  to  still  fulfill  the  duties  and
responsibilities  devolving  upon
them.

I  was  remarkably  struck  on  look-
No.  II


ing  at  the  three  mottoes  before  me,
one  if%  Holiness  to  the  Lord,  which
I  suppose  was  placed  there  by  your
late  Bishop* There  is  something
beautiful  and  glorious  in  the  con-
templation. And  when I  heard
Brother  Gardiner  speak  about  his
visits  with  Brother  Miller  to  talk
over  the  things  of  the  kingdom  of
God,  it  indicated  to  me  that  his  heart
and  feelings  were  interested  in  it,  as
well  as  interested  in  the  welfare  of
the  county,  as  others  have  testified
of. We  should  all  have  those  feel-
ings, not  only  Bishops  and  Presi-
dents but  all  the  people  ought  to  be
interested  in  one  another's  welfare.
Our  welfare  ami  happiness  depends
upon  our  obe  lie  nee  to  the  laws  of
God,  upon  our  conduct  before  him
in  all  our  acts. We  wish  to  have
inscribed  not  only  in  our  meeting-
house, but  in  our  hearts  and  acts,
Holiness  to  the  Lord,  God  is  mv
God,  God  is  my  Father, God  is
my  friend  ;  and  I  wish  to  devote
and  dedicate myself  unto  Him,
ought  to  be  the  feeling  of  every
man  and  woman,  and  especially  of
every  Latter-day  Saint, Let  there
be  no  act  of  my  life,  no  prin-
ciple that  I embrace, that s  rail
be  at  variance  with  these  words
which  were  first  inscribed  by  the

Mr

Almighty,  and  prophesied  of  thai  it-
should  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days,
that  even  upon  the  bells  o.  the
horses  should  be  written  "  Iloli  e.->s
to  the  Lord/' That  is  not  in  name
only,  but  it  is  to  be  written  on  the
tablets  of  our  hearts,  as  with  a  pen
of  iron,  for  when  this  principle  shall .
become  universal,  righteousness  will
extend  *'  from  the  rivers  to  the  ends  j
of  the  earth."

Then,  here  is  another  motto :
"Thy  kingdom  come."  All  these
things  are  full  of  meaning  and  in-
terest. This  was  taught  by  Jesus
to  his  disciples  when  they  came  to

Vol.  XXIII.


178


JUl-KNAL  UF  DISCOURSES


him,  saying,  teach  us  to  pray,  as
Jolm  taught  his  di^cifiles.  Said  he,
"When  you  pray,  say,  Our  Father,
who  art  in  heaven/'  Who?  Our
Father.  What,  my  Father  ami
your  Father?  Yes;  ami  the  God
ami  Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh.
Our  Father  who  art  ill  heaven  ;  hal-
lowed *je  Thy  name.  Let  me  reve-
rence Thee,  0  God,  in  all  my  doings,
in  all  my  acts,  in  all  my  proceedings,
in  all  my  associations  with  men  and
with  theChurch  and  kingdom  of  God
and  with  the  world — let  me  always
reverence  Thee,  Hallowed  be  thy
name.  Thy  kingdom  coma  W  hat
kingdom  ?  What  is  the  meaning
of  "thy  kingdom  cornel"  It
means  the  ride  of  God  j  it  means
the  law  of  God  ;  it  means  the
government  of  God  ;  it  means  the
people  who  have  listened  to  and
who  are  willing  to  listen  to  and
observe  the  commands  of  Jehovah  ;
and  it  means  that  there  is  a  God
who  is  willing  to  guide  and  direct
ami  su>tain  his  people.  Thy  king-
dome  come,  that  thy  government
may  be  established,  and  the  prin-
ciples of  eternal  truth  as  they  exist
in  the  heavens  may  be  imparted  to
men  ;  and  that,  when  they  are  im-
parted tu  men,  those  men  maybe
in  bulijivtinn  to  those  laws  and  to
that  govern  men  t,  and  live  in  the
fear  of  God,  keeping  his  command*
ments  and  being  under  his  direc-
tion. Thy  kingdom  come ;  that  the
confusion,  the  lasciviousncss  and
corruption,  the  evil  and  wickedness^
the  murder  and  bloodshed  that  now
exist  among  mankind  may  he  done
away,  and  the  principles  of  truth
and  right,  the  principles  of  kindness,
charity  and  love  as  they  dwell  in  the
bosom  of  i he  Gods,  may  dwell  with
us.

"  Thy  will  be  done."  Not  my
will,  iiot  my  desires,  not  my  wishes.
I  do  not  know,  you  do  not  know,


king-
have
and
years
trni  h


what  would  be  good  for  us  ;  I  do  not
know  what  would  be  uuod  for  this
people  only  as  God  teaches  me  I
do  not  want  to  teach  my  ideas  ;  I
want  to  know  the  will  of  God,  and
tli en  teach  it  We  should  all  seek
to  know  the  will  of  God,  and  then
do  it.  Thy  will  be  doi*e.  What
brought  you  ami  me  here  1  Did  we
have  any  knowledge  of  the  will  of
God]  Not  until  he  revealed  it.
Did  we  have  any  knowledge  of  the
kingdom  of  God  ?  Not  until  He
revealed  it;  and  numbers  of  us
have  very  little  knowledge  of  it  to-
day, very  little  indeed*  We  have
very  little  knowledge  of  the
dom  of  God  ;  and  yet  we
been  here  year  after  year,
have  been  taught  for  many
the  sacred  principles  of
communicated  hy  the  holy  Priest-
hood, but  we  hardly  comprehend
them.  Is  there  a  principle  that
we  have  received  associated  with
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  that
we  should  have  received  if  God  had
not  revealed  it  to  Joseph  Smith  His
Prophet  ?  No;  we  knew  nothing
about  them.  Is  there  anybody  among
these  aged  and  gray-haired  men  who
came  to  an  understanding  of  even
the  first  principles  of  the  Gospel
until  he  revealed  them  anew  1  No.
Do  you  know  it?  I  know  it  to  be
a  fact,  I  knew  Joseph  Smith  and
Biigham  Young  very  well  and  other
prominent  men  of  this  Church;
and  I  have  met  with  men  in  differ-
ent nations,  of  all  grades  ami  classes
of  position  and  intelligence,  and  I
know  that  they  do  not  know  the
principles  of  eternal  truth  as  God
has  revealed  them  to  us.  Have  we
anything,  then,  to  boast  of  or  to
glory  in  1  1  have  not,  only  in  God.
But  1  thank  God  our  Heavenly  Fa-
ther  and  His  Sou*  Jesus  Christ  and
the  Holy  Priesthood  that  existed,
that  God  in  his  mercy  has  been


TliK  I*  K AT  H  OF  TliK  Fa  I  A"  11  b  L  I*


So  VAUBH  FOlt  MOUttMNO;  FAC.  171)


pleased  through  their  instrumental-
ity to  again  restore  the  everlasting
Gospel,  bringing  with  it  light,  im-
mortality and  eternal  life.

What  did  we  know  about  the  or-
dinances of  the  Gospel — could  I  find
them  anywhere  1  There  is  not  a
man  living  to  day  that  could,  only
as  God  revealed  them,  and  I  am  at
the  defiance  of  any  man  to  say  that
he  knew  anything  about  the  princi-
ples of  the  everlasting  Gospel  until
God  revealed  them.  Did  any  of  us
find  out  anything  about  the  Gospel?
No.  Who  knew  anything  about
the  gathering  1  The  prophets  had
spoken  about  it,  but  who  compre-
hended their  words  ?  Nobody,  Did
they  know  anything  about  gathering
men  together  to  a  laud  of  Zion
that  should  be,  or  about  the  king-
dom of  God  that  was  to  be  set  up  ]
Some  of  them  would  talk  about
what  Daniel  saw,  but  they  knew
nothing  about  it ;  and  they  are  in  the
dark  about  it  to  day,  for  no  man  can
know  the  things  of  God  but  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  and  they  cannot  ob-
tain that  Spirit  only  by  obedience  to
His  law,  and  hence  there  is  so  much
misapprehension  about  us,  and  they
will  remain  in  the  dark  until  they
obey  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God.
What  do  they  know  about  the  fu-
ture ?  Nothing.  What  do  they
know  about  the  celestial,  or  the  ter-
restrial or  the  telestial  glory  !  No-
thing  ;  they  do  not  comprehend  any-
thing about  these  matters ;  and
when  they  leave  this  world,  as  a
prominent  philosopher  has  said,
they  take  a  leap  in  the  dark.  We
know  where  we  are  going  ;  we  know
where  Brother  Miller  has  gone,  God
has  revealed  thuse  things  to  us,  and
consequently  we  are  enlightened.
But  did  we  find  it  out  by  our  own
-wisdom  and  intelligence  1  No,  it
was  the  Lord  who  revealed  it

And  what  about  our  dead,  and


what  about  our  Temple  building  1
That  is  a  singular  thing  for  men  to
be  engaged  in. Do  you  find  any-
thing like  it  anywhere  else  ?  No.  I
remember  talking  with  Baron  Roths-
child when  showing  him  our  Tem-
ple. He  asked  what  was  the  mean-
ing of  it Said  I,  Baron,  your  Pro-
phets centuries  ago,  when  under
1  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty,  said
that  the  Lord  whom  you  seek  shall
suddenly  come  to  his  temple.  "Yes,"
he  said,v"I  know  they  .said  that."
"  Will  you  show  me  a  place  upon
the  face  of  the  earth  where  God  has
got  a  temple  to  come  to  V Said  he,
"I  do  not  know  of  any  such  place."
But  if  your  Prophets  told  the  truth,
then  there  must  be  a  Temple  built
before  your  Messiah  can  come.  Said
I  he,  Is  this  that  Temple  %  .  No,  sir,
1  What  is  this  then  ? It  is  a  Temple
but  not  the  Temple  your  fathers
spoke  of. But  you  will  yet  build  a
Teniplo  in  Jerusalem,  and  the  Lord
whom  you  seek  will  come  to  that
Temple. What  is  this  for,  he  en-
quired ? Among  other  things  that
we  may  perform  the  sacred  ordi-
nances about  which  we  are  so  much
maligned,  wherein  we  make  eternal
covenants  with  our  wives,  that  we
may  have  a  claim  upon  them  in  the
resurrection. Who  revealed  this  ?
(iod  our  Heavenly  Father.  And
because  he  has  revealed  these  things,
and  because  we  are  fulfilling  these
things, our  nation,  groveling  in
darkness, wrapped in  midnight
gloom,  knowing  no  more  about  God
and  eternity  than  that  piece  of  iron
railing,  makes  it  criminal  for  us  to
form  associations  that  are  to  exist
"  while  life  or  thought  or  being  lasts
or  immortality  endures" — associa-
tions with  our  wives  arid  children,
with  our  fathers  and  mothers,  with
our  friends  and  associates,  so  that
when  the  last  trump  shall  sound  and
the  dead  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of


180


JOURNAL  U>  LJlSCUl'liSKs


God,  that  we  with  them  may  come
forth  to  obtain  the  exaltation  which
God  has  prepared  for  those  that  love
him,  kv*  p  his  commandments,  and
are  obedient  to  his  laws.  Shall  we
forego  tl  ese  things  and  give  up  our
hopes  of  eternal  lives  and  exaltations
at  the  instance  of  low,  degraded,
corrupt,  besotted  and  benighted
m^ii.  Verily  1  say  unto  you,  Kay.
We  are  after  truth,  exaltation  and
eternal  lives;  exaltation  for  ourselves,
for  our  fathers  and  mothers  and  for
all  men  and  women  who  can  com-
prehend the  law  of  God,  and  who  j
will  obey  his  precepts  and  not  reject
the  Gospel  of  his  Son,

These  are  the  things  that  we  seek,
and  God  is  with  us  and  will  he  with
us,  and  will  sustain  us,  and  no  power
on  earth  or  in  hell  can  stop  tire  pro-
gress of  this  work  ;  for  it  is  onward
according  to  the  decree  of  Almighty
God,  and  will  be  from  this  time
henceforth  and  forever.  And  as
the  prophets  have  said,  so  say  I,
woe  to  those  men  and  woe  to  that
nation  or  to  those  nations  th&t  lift  {


up  their  hands  against  Zion,  for  God
will  destroy  them. I  prophecy  that
in  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of
hosts. And  he  will  be  with  his
Israel,  and  will  sustain  his  people
and  bring  them  off  victorious;  and
if  faithful  to  the  end  we  shall  ob-
tain tli rones,  principalities,  powers,
dominions,  exaltations,  and  eternal
lives  in  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and
Brother  Miller  will  be  there.  Let
us  tiy  to  emulate  his  good  example
and  .seek  to  do  that  which  is  right
in  the  sight  of  God  and  man.  God
has  given  Ets  great  principles  and
put  us  in  possession  of  great  bles-
sings. Let  us  appreciate  them.  Let
us,  in  all  sincerity,  be  honest  and
virtuous,  truthful,  holy  and  pure.
Let  us  abstain  from  covetousness,
fraud,  lasciviousness  and  corruption,
of  every  kind,  and  be  indeed  and  in
trutli  what  we  profess  to  be,  the
faints  of  the  living  God.

God  bless  you  in  time  and
throughout  the  eternities  to  come,,
in  the  name  of  Jesus,  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  APOSTLE  ERASTUS  SNOW,


+


Delivered  at  Logan,  Saturday  Afternoon,  May  (5,  18S2.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gihhs.  )

GUl/s  PECULIAR  PEOPLE  CALLED  A  KINGDOM  OF  PRIESTS  —  TFIKIR  MIN'-
ISTRY  THUS  FORESHADOWED  —  THE  MELCHISEDEH  AND  AARON IC
PRIESTHOODS  —  THEIR  KESTQRATION  IN  THE  LATTER-DAYS  —  THE
PREACHING  OF  THE  GOSPEL — EPHRAIM  AND  MANASSKK— TUB  LINE-
AGE OF  THE  PKuPHET  JOSEPH  SStlTH—  PRE! >ESTf NATION  AND  ELEC-
TION -THE  DISPERSION  AND  GATHERING  OF  ISRAEL  — THE  PRIEST-
HOOD EN  D L  ESS,  A  DM  E  N  1ST  EU 1 X  G  I N  T 1 M  E  A  N  D  KT ERNITY  —  THE
BLINDNESS  OF  THE  GENTILES  TO  THE  THINGS  OF  GOD  —  THE  RE-
SULTS OF  PERSECUTION— THE  FUTURE  OK  THE  FAITHFUL,


I  will  call  the  attention  of  the
congregation  to  the  won  is  of  the
Lord  through  Moses,  spoken  to  the
children  of  Israel,  contained  in  the
5th  and  (ith  verses  of  the  1 9th  chap-
ter of  Exodus :

"  Now,  therefore,  if  ye  will  obey
my  voice  indeed  and  keep  my  cove-
nant, then  shall  ye  be  a  peculiar  trea-
sure unto  me  above  all  people:  for
all  the  earth  is  mine*

And  ye  shall  be  unto  me  a  king-
dom of  priests,  and  an  holy  nation/'

In  connection  with  this  passage  I
will  read  the  words  of  the  Apostle
Peter,  as  recorded  in  the  5th  verse,
2nd  chap,  of  1st  Peter  :

*'  Ye  also,  as  lively  stones,  are
built  up  a  spiritual  house,  an  holy
Priesthood,  to  offer  up  spiritual  sac-
rifices, acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus
Christ/'

Also  the  9th  verse  of  the  same
chapter :

"  But  ye  are  a  chosen  generation,
a  royal  priesthood,  an  holy  nation,  a
peculiar  people  ;  that  ye  should  show
forth  the  praises  of  him  who  hath
called  ye  out  of  darkness  into  this
marvelous  light"


Elder  Penrose  referred  this  morn-
ing to  the  fact  of  so  large  a  portion
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  being  called
and  ordained  to  bear  some  portion
of  the  Priesthood,  remarking  that
at  times  he  had  queried  in  his  mind
as  to  why  this  was  so  appointed
unto  us.  This  reminded  me  of
the  Scriptures  I  have  just  read  in
your  hearing-  The  consideration
of  the  subject  involves  the  whole
mission  of  the  Latter-day  Saints.
The  promise  of  God  to  ancient  Israel
contained  in  the  first  text  sets  forth
the  purposes  of  Jehovah  in  choosing
the  seed  of  Abraham  especially  and
separating  them  from  other  peoples
and  nations,  and  taking  them  under
His  especial  care  and  guidance,  and
leading  them  as  he  did  out  of  Egyp-
tian bondage  with  a  mighty  hand
and  an  out-stretched  arm  and
planting  them  in  Canaan  in  fulfil-
ment of  the  promises  ma  le  to  their
father  Abraham,  and  to  Isaac  ami  Ja-
cob. And  when  God  called  Abraham
to  leave  his  father  s  house  and  go  to
a  land  which  he  should  show  him
and  which  he  after  wan  Is  promised
to  him  ami  his  seed  for  an  inherit


182


JOU  KN  a  l  OK  DISCOURSES


anee,  lie  had  this  in  view,  to  make
of  him  and  his  seed  a  peculiar  peo-
ple j  to  make  of  them  instruments
in  his  hands  of  accomplishing  good
for  the  benefit  of  the  world.

He  promised  Abraham  on  another
occasion  that  in  him  ami  his  seed
all  the  nations  of  the  earth  should
be  blessed.  And  although  this  had
reference  chiefly  to  the  coming  of
the  Son  of  God  through  h's  lineage,
who  was  to  be  the  Chief  Apostle
and  High  Priest  of  our  profession,
the  Redeemer  of  the  world,  it  im-
plied the  fact  also  that  through  his
seed  the  Pospel  should  be  carried  to
all  the  world,  and  the  oracles  of  God
delivered  to  men  ;  that  prophets  and
righteous  men  should  be  raised  up
who  should  act  as  the  mouthpiece
of  '"od  to  the  people  among  whom
they  should  live,  and  they  should
have  A brali am  for  their  father.
Atuo  ig  his  descendants  also,  his
Temple  as  well  as  the  Tabernacle
should  be  established,  and  the  ordi-
nances were  to  be  revealed  through
them  and  the  Priesthood  conferred
upon  them,  and  the  word  of  God
preserved  among  them  and  handed
down  to  future  generations,  thus
maintain  in  »  the  true  character  and
knowledge  of  (Jod,  and  perpetuating
the  same  upon  the  earth.  This  was
a  great  work  that  the  Lord  purposed
concerning  the  seed  of  Abraham,
and  it  was  for  this  reason  and  pur-
pose that  he  promised  to  establish
his  covenant  with  them  forever.

Now  the  Priesthood  referred  to  in
Scripture  had  not  reference  alone
to  that  lower  or  lesser  order  known
as  the  Levitical  Priesthood  which
was  confirmed  by  covenant  upon
Aaron  and  his  seed  and  upon  the
house  of  his  fathers,  the  tribe  of
Levi,  which  Priesthood  officiated  in
offering  sacrifices  and  all  the  lesser
duties  pertaining  to  the  law;  but  it
comprehended  something  more  than


this,  the  Priesthood  as  a  whole,  in-
cluding the  Melchiseuek  or  that
holy  order  of  Priesthood  after  the
order  of  the  Son  of  God.  And  when
Moses  was  made  the  mouthpiece  of
the  Lord  to  Israel  in  this  precious
promise  we  find  them  hearkening
to  him  and  keeping  his  covenants,
they  being  a  peculiar  people  unto
him,  above  all  the  earth,  a  chosen
generation,  a  royal  Priesthood  ;  mid
he  referred  to  them  as  a  whole  peo-
ple and  not  to  the  Levites  alone,
and  to  the  Priesthood,  as  I  before
remarked,  as  a  whole  including,  of
course,  the  Melchisedek  Priesthood,
hence  the  words  of  Peter  :  Ye  are  a
chosen  generation,  a  royal  Priest-
hood, an  holy  nation."

The  same  great  purpose  and  ob-
ject prevail  at  the  present  time.
The  calling  and  mission  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  are  to  fulfill  what  is
here  promised  in  the^e  Scriptures —
to  bring  ,  about  the  restoration  of
scattered  Israel,  the  establishment
of  Zion,  the  preparing  a  peo  *le  for
the  coming  of  Christ ;  a  people  who
are  to  be  Saviors  upon  Mount  Zion,
and  thus  fulfilling  one  of  the  pro-
phesies of  one  of  the  Jewish  pro-
phets concerning  the  Zion  of  the
latter  days,  that  Saviors  should
come  up  upon  Mount  Zion  to  save
the  house  of  Ksau,  but  the  kingdom
should  be  the  Lord's.  No  matter
how  many  might  be  employed  in
this  work  of  salvation,  as  Saviors
upon  Mount  Zion,  all  should  labor
as  helpers  and  co  laborers  with
Christ  in  the  salvation  of  mem

God  has  promised  in  the  revela-
tions given  to  the  Latter-day  Saints
to  matte  known  unto  them  the  full-
ness of  all  former  dispensations,  and
he  has  confirmed  upon  his  servants
in  this  dispensation  of  the  fullness
of  times  the  keys  of  all  former
dispensations  and  revealed  all  the
ordinances  made  known  to  the  an-


Gi'l/s PKCULIAU PKUPLH,  ETC*


183


cienfs;  and,  therefore,  it  is  our  c:ill-
ing  to  complete  the  work  that  was
inaugurated  in  former  dispensations
of  God  to  man.  At  first  Joseph
Smith  received  the  irift  of  seeing
visions  and  the  gift  of  translating
dearl  languages  by  the  Urim  and
rhumniim,  and  when  he  had  exer-
cised himself  in  these  sifts  for  a  sea-
sou,  he  received  the  keys  of  the
A  a  ro  i  lie  Priesthood,  together  with
his  lirother  Oliver,  under  the  hands
of  John  the  Baptist,  who  was  a
resni  reeled  being,  ami  who  was  the
last  of  the  Jewish  HLdi  Priests  un-
der  the  dispensation  of  the  law,  the
only  son  of  Zacariah  the  High
Priest,  and  a  child  of  promise,
who  was  beheaded  by  order  of
Herod,  having  first  performed
his  mission  in  pre  paring  the  way
of  the  Loid,  and  having  preached
the  bahtUm  of  repentance  for  the
remission  of  sins  testifying  of  Je*us
that  was  to  come, and  baptizing  those
who  received  him,  including  the  Sa-
vior himself  John  having  finished
his  mission,  sealed  his  testimony
with  his  blood,  rose  again  from  the
dead  and  continued  to  hold  those
keys  of  the  Priesthood  which  he  in-
heriied  from  his  fathers  and  which
were  confirmed  ujpon  him  by  the
angel  of  the  Lord  when  he  was  eight
days  old.  And  he  was  a  fit  and  pro
per  person  to  send  to  confer  those
keys  of  Priesthood  upon  Joseph  and
Oliver.  In  due  course  of  time,  as
we  read  in  the  history  which  he  lias
left,  Peter,  James  and  John  appeared
to  hiui — it  was  at  a  period  when
they  were  being  pursued  by  their
enemies  and  they  had  to  travel  all
night,  and  iix  the  dawn  of  the  com
ing  day  when  they  were  weary  and
wor.i  who  should  appear  to  them
but  Peter,  James  and  John,  lor  the
purpose  of  conferring  upon  them
the  Apostleship,  the  keys  of  which
they  themselves  had  held  while  upon


the  earth,  which  had  been  be-
stowed upon  them  by  the  Savior,
This  Priesthood  conferred  upon  them
by  those  three  messengers  embraces
within  it  all  offices  of  the  Priesthood
from  the  highest  to  the  lowest.  Aft
has  been  often  taught  us  that  the
keys  of  the  presidency  of  this  A  pos  tie-
ship  represent  the  highest  authority
conferred  upon  man  in  the  flesh.
A  nd  by  virt  ue  of  t  hese  keys  of  Priest-
hood the  Prophet  Joseph  from  time
to  time  proceeded  to  ordain  and  set
in  order  the  Priesthood  in  its  vari-
ous quorums  as  we  see  it  to-day  in
the  Church.  And  if  the  question
be  asked  why,  and  for  what  purpose,
the  answer  would  he  the  idea  con-
veyed in  the  language  I  have  quoted :
In  accordance  with  the  design  of  the
Lord  to  raise  up  a  peculiar  people  to
himself,,  a  holy  nation,  a  royal
Priesthood — a  kingdom  of  Priests,
that  shall  be  saviors  upon  Mount
Zion,  not  only  to  preach  the  Gospel
to  the  scattered  remnants  of  Israel,
hut  to  save  to  the  uttermost  the  na-
tions of  the  (Jen tiles,  inasmuch  as
tiiey  will  listen  and  can  be  saved  by
the  plan  which  God  has  provide  I,

The  first  important  labor  of  this
ministry  is  to  go  abroad  and  preach
tie  Gospel  to  the  nation. T.ie  Gos-
pel of  the  kingdom  must  be  preached
to all people and nations  and
tongues  before  the  end  can  come;
and  by  the  preaching  of  the  word
ami  the  administering  of  the  ordi-
nances of the  Gospel,  is  Israel
sought  out  from  ainoag  the  nations
among  which t  <ey  aie  scattered,
especially  the  see  l  of  Kphraira  unto
whom  tne  first  promises  appertain,
the  promise  of  the  keys  of  the  Priest-
fciuoo. For  it  must  be  remembered
that  of  all  the  seed  ui"  Ahraham
whom  the  Lord  c  lose  to  hear  the
keys  pertaining  to  this  holy  order  of
Priesthood,  the  seed  of  Ephraim,  the
son  of  Joseph,  were  the  first  arid


■luUi.NAL  UK  I>ISCULUSi>.


chief.  While  the  tribe  of  Levi,  unto
which  Pluses  9tit\  Aaron  belonged,
M'ns  specially  charged  with  the
adn.iuUtiutiuiMj;  affairs  of  the  lesser
Priesthood  under  the  law,  yet
Ephraini,  the  peculiar  ami  chosen
son  of  Joseph,  was  the  one  whom
the  Lord  had  named  by  his  own
mouth  and  through  the  Prophets,
to  inherit  the  keys  of  presidency
of  this  High  Priesthood  the
order  of  the  Sun  of  Goth  In  this
also  we  see  the  fulfillment  of  tie
covenants  and  promises  of  God  j
not  that  Joseph  by  birthright-  in-
het  ited  this  blessing,  for  Reuben
was  the  first-born  among  the  twelve
sons  of  Jacob  ;  but  we  ate  told  in
Chronicles,  the  7th  chapter,  that
Reuhen  forfeited  this  birthright
by  his  adultery,  and  that  God  took
it  from  him  and  conferred  it  upon
the  sons  of  Joseph  ;  and  of  the  sous
of  Joseph  In-  chose  Ephraim  as  the
chief;  and  while  the  Patriarch  Jacob,
a*  we  read  in  the  41)th  chapter  of
Genesis,  adopted  into  his  own  fam-
ily two  of  the  sons  of  Joseph,
Ephraim  and  llanasseh,  yet  he
placed  Ephraim  the  younger  fore-
most, and  blessed  him  with  the
chief  blessing,  saying,  that  Mannas-
seh  shall  he  great,  but  Ephraim
shall  be  greater  than  he  ;  he  shad
become  a  multitude  in  the  midst  of
the  earth.  Another  Scripture  also
says  concerning  scattered  Israel,  that
Ephraim  has  mixed  himself  among
the  pt-ople  ;  ami  speaking  of  the
gathering  of  Israel  in  the  latter-day
dispensation,  the  Prophet  Jeremiah
has  said  that  God  would  gather
Israel  and  lead  them  as  a  shepherd
does  Li*  flock,  and  says  he,  I  am
Father  to  Israel,  but  Ephraim  is  my
fir&t  horn.  Now,  if  Ephraim  has
been  scattered  and  has  mixed  him-
self with  the  people  until  their  iden-
tity is  lost  among  the  nations,  how
are  they  going  to  be  recognized  and


receive  the  promised  blessings — how
is  it  that  Ephraim  shall  be  the  first-
born of  the  Lord  in  the  ureal  gather-
ing of  the  lattrr-diiys]  If  we  turn
back  to  the  blessing  which  Moses
gave  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,
as  found  in  Deuteronomy,  we  shall
there  see  that  in  blessing  the  tribe
of  Joseph,  he  especially  charged
them  with  the  duty  of  gathering
the  j*eople  from  the  ends  of  the
earth.  Said  he,  Joseph's  horns  are
like  the  horns  of  unicorns,  which
shall  push  the  people  together  from
the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  they  are
the  thousands  of  Matia^eh  and  ten
thousands  of  Ephraim  :  showing
that  it  shall  be  the  ten  thousands
of  Ephraim  and  thousands  of  Mun-
asseh  who  shall  be  in  the  foremost
ranks  of  bearing  the  Gospel  message
to  the  md>ol  the  earth,  and  gather-
ing Israel  from  the  lour  quarters  of
the  world  in  the  last  days.  Who-
ever has  read  the  Book  of  Mormon
carefully  will  have  learned  that  the
remnants  of  the  house  of  Joseph
dwelt  upon  the  American  continent;
and  that  Lehi  learned  by  searching
the  records  of  his  fathers  that  were
written  upon  the  plates  of  brass,
that  he  was  of  the  lineage  of  Man-
asseh.  The  Prophet  Joseph  in*
formed  us  that  the  record  of  Lehi,
was  contained  on  the  110  pages  that
were  first  translated  and  subse-
quently stolen,  and  of  which  an
abridgement  is  given  us  in  the  first
Book  of  Nephi,  which  is  the  record
of  Nephi  individually,  lie  himself
being  of  the  lineage  of  J I  an  as.- eh  ;
but  that  Ishmae)  was  of  the  lineage
of  Ephraim,  and  that  his  sons  mar-
ried into  Lehi's  family,  and  Lehi's
sous  married  IshraaePs  daughters,
thus  fulfilling  the  words  of  Jacob
upon  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  in
the  48th  chapter  of  Genesis,  which
says  :  *'  Ami  let  my  name  be  named
on  them,  and  the  name  of  my  fathers


GOl/s  PECULIAR  PEOPLE,  ETC*


185


Abraham and Isaac  ; and  let
them  grow  into  a  multitude  in
the  midst  of  the  land" Thus  these
descendants  ut'  Manasseh  and  Eph-
raim grew together upon  this
American  continent,  with  a  sprink-
ling from  the  house  of  Judah,  from
Mulek  descended,  wlio  left  Jerusa-
lem  eleven  years  after  Lehi,  and
founded  the  colony  afterwards  known
as  Zaraheuda  and  found  by  Mosiah —
thus  making  a  combination,  au  in-
termixture  of  Ephraim  and  Manas -
seh  with  the  remnants  of  Judah,
and  for  aught  we  know,  the  rem-
nanfcs  of  some  other  tribes  that
might  have accompanied  Mulek.
And  such  have  grown  up  on  the
American  continent. But  we  are
not informed that the  Prophet
Joseph  and  the  first  Elders  of  this
Church  who  were  called  and  chosen
of  God  to  bear  the  Pries tliood  and
lay  the  foundation  of  this  work,  were
descended  from  any  portion  of  those
remnants that peopled  America
anciently, and whose history  is
given  us  in  the  Book  of  Mormon.
Vet  we  find  in  the  Doctrine  and
Covenants  the  declaration  concern-
ing the  first  Elders  of  this  Church,
that  they  were  of  the  house  of
Ephraim  ;  and  another  passage  re-
ferring to  the  wicked  and  rebellious,
says, they shall  be  cut  off  from
among  the  people,  for  the  rebellious
are  not  of  the  seed  of  Ephraim.
And  there  is  a  passage  in  the  Book
of  Mormon  which  is  a  part  of  the
prophecy  of  Joseph  written  on  the
plates  of  brass  and  quoted  by  Lehi,
concerning the Prophet  Joseph
Smith,  who,  it  Hays,  was  to  be  raised
up  in  the  latter  clays  to  translate
the  records  of  the  Nephites,  and
whose  mime  should  be  Joseph,  and
who  should  be  a  descendant  of  that
Joseph  that  was  sold  into  Egypt,
anil  also  that  that  should  be  the
name  of  his  father.


Now  if  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith
was  that  chosen  vessel  out  of  the
loins  of  Joseph,  it  may  be  asked  by
some,  what  evidence  have  we  of
this  lineage  ?  I  answer,  the  testi-
mony of  God,  the  best  of  all  testi-
mony, for  no  record  kept  by  mortal
man  can  be  equal  to  it ;  and  that,
too,  by  reason  of  that  quaint  but
sensible  old  maxim,  "  it  takes  a  wise
man  to  know  who  his  father  was,
but  a  fool  may  find  out  who  his
mother  was."  And  even  if  we  had
the  lineage  of  the  fathers,  it  would
not  be  as  sure  ami  certain  to  us  as
the  word  of  the  Lord.  For  he  has  had
his  eye  upon  the  chosen  spirits  that
have  come  upon  the  <  arth  in  the
various  a<;es  from  the  begiiinini;  of
the  world  up  to  this  time  ;  and  as  he
said  to  Abraham,  speaking  of  the
multitudes  of  spirits  that  were
shown  unto  him  in  heavenly  vision,
you  see  that  some  are  more  liable

pi

than  others  1  Yes.  Then  you  may
know  there  were  some  others  still
more  noble  than  they  ;  and  he
speaks  in  the  same  manner  of  the
multitude  of  the  heavenly  bodies  ;
and  said  he  to  Abraham,  thou  art
one  of  those  noble  ones  whom  I
have  chosen  to  be  my  rulers.  The
Lord  has  stmt  those  noble  spirits  into
the  world  to  perform  a  special  workj
and  appointed  their  times  ;  and  they
have  always  fulfilled  the  mission
given  them,  and  their  future  glory
and  exaltation  is  secured  unto  them  ;
and  that  is  what  I  understand  by
the  doctrine  of  election  spoken  of  by
the  Apostle  Paul  and  other  sacred
writers  :  "  For  whom  he  did  fore-
know, he  also  did  predestinate  to  be
confirmed  to  the  image  of  His  Son,
that  he  might  be  the  first-born
anions  many  brethren."  Such  were
called  and  chosen  and  elected  of  God
to  perform  a  certain  work  at  a  certain
time  of  the  world's  history  and  in
due  time  he  fitted  them  for  that


1*S


IOTKNAL  or  Ulsn  »tTKSKS


work.  It  will  be  remembered  when
Jeremiah  was  culled  of  God  in  his
vouth  that  he,  in  order  to  excuse
himself,  complained  of  his  youth
and  of  his  being  slow  of  speech,  that
the  Lor  1  said  unto  him  that  he
would  l»e  mouth  fur  him  and  mat-
ter to  his  heart,  for,  he  said,  he
knew  him  and  called  him  from  his
mother's  womb  to  be  a  prophet  unto
the  nations.  And  so  lie  called  Joint
the  Baptist  by  sending  his  angel
Gabriel  to  Ins  father  Zacbariah,  ami
giving  him  a  promise  that  his  wife
Elizabeth,  though  old  and  birren,
should  yet  co  iceive  and  be  ar  a  sun,
and  that  his  name  should  l-e  John,
who  should  be  a  forerunner  to  tin*
Savior  to  prepare  the  May  before  his
face.  And  so  he  elected  the  seed
of  Ephraim  tu  he  that  peculiar  peo-
ple I  have  referred  to,  that  holy
nation,  a  kingdom  of  Priests,  a  peo-
ple to  receive  the  covenants  and
oracles,  and  to  be  witnesses  to  cer-
tain nations  of  the  God  of  Israel
And  how  strict  were  his  commands
that  they  should  have  nu  otherjGods
But  him,  that  they  might  be  a  stand
ing  rebuke  to  the  idol  worshippers,
and  to  all  who  believe  not  in  the
true  and  living  God.

Now  the  same  spirit  of  revelation
tha:  sought  out  the  Prophet  Josej  h
from  the  loins  of  Joseph  who  was
sold  into  Egypt,  anil  that  raised  him
up  in  this  dispensation  to  receive
the  keys  of  the  Priesthood  and
to  lay  the  foundation  of  this  great
work  in  the  earth,  has  also  called
the  children  of  Abraham  from
among  the  kingdoms  and  countries
of  che  earth  to  first  hear  and  then
embrace  the  everlasting  Go  .-pel
and  the  remnants  of  the  seed  of
Ephraim  who  were  scattered  from
Palestine  and  who  colonized  the
shores  of  the  Caspian  Sea  and  thence
made  their  way  into  the  north  of
Europe, western  Scandinavia  and


northern  Germany,  penetrating
Scotland  and  England,  and  con-
quering those  nations  and  reigning
as  monarchs  of  Great  Britain,  and
mingling  their  seed  with  the  Anglo-
Saxon  race,  and  spreading  over  the
waters  a  fruitful  vine,  as  predicted
by  Jacob,  whose  branches  should
run  over  the  wall  Their  blood  has
permeated  European  society,  and  it
coursed  in  the  veins  of  the  early
colonists  of  America,  And  when
the  books  shall  be  opened  and  the
lineage  of  all  men  is  known,  it  will
be  found  that  they  Lave  be<-n  first
and  foremost  in  everything  noble
among  men  in  the  various  nations
in  breaking  off  the  shackles  of  king-
craft and  ] »riestcraft  ami  oppression
of  every  kind,  and  the  foremost
among  men  in  upholding  and  main-
taining the  principles  of  liberty  and
free-lorn  upon  this  continent  and
establishing  a  representative  govern-
ment, and  thus  preparing  the  way
for  the  coming  forth  of  the  fullness
of  the  everlasting  Gospel.  And  it
is  the  foremost  of  those  spirits
whom  the  Lord  has  prepaied  to
receive  the  Gospel  when  it  was  pre-
sented to  them,  and  who  did  not
wait  for  the  Elder*  to  hunt  them
from  the  hills  and  corners  of  the
earth,  but  they  were  hunting  for  the
Elders,  impelled  by  a  tpirit  which
then  they  could  not  understand  ;
and  for  thi>  reason  were  they  among
the  first  Elders  of  the  Church  ;
they  and  the  fathers  having  been
watched  over  from  the  days  that
God  promised  those  blessings  upon
Isaac  and  Jacob  and  Joseph  and
Kphiainr  And  these  are  they
that  will  be  found  in  the  front
ranks  of  all  that  is  noble  and  good
in  their  day  and  time,  and  who  will
be  found  among  those  whose  efforts
are  directed  in  establishing  upon
the  earth  those  heaven-burn  prin-
ciples which  tend  directly  to  bles-


sing  anil  salvation,  to  ameliorating  I
the  con  lit  ion  of  their  fellow-men,
and  elevating  theiii  in  the  scale  of
their  being ;  and  among  those  also
who  receive  the  fullness  of  the
Everlwfcing  Gospel,  and  the  keys  of
Priesthood  in  the  last  days,  through
whom  God  determined  to  gather  up
again  unto  himself  a  peculiar  peo-
ple, ^  holy  nation,  a  pure  seed  that
shall  stand  upon  Mount  Zion  as
saviors,  not  only  to  the  house  of
Israel  but  also  to  the  house  ot  Ivan.

Now  the  work  of  carrying  the  Gos-
pel to  the  nations  and  gathering
the  people,  mighty  as  it  is,  is  not  the
Chief,  it  is  but  laying  the  founda-
tion fur  the  .still  greater  work  of  the
re  iemptiou  of  the  myriads  of  the
dead  uf  the  seed  of  Israel  that  have
perished  without  the  lullnessof  the
Gbspel,  who  too  are  heirs  to  the
promised  blessings ;  but  the  time
hat  I  not  come  when  ,they  passed
away  for  the  fulfillment  of  all  that
God  had  promise. I  Abraham,  Isaac
and  Jacob  concerning  their  seed  :
Ezekiel  in  the  37th  chapter  of  his
book  beautifully  illustrates  this  doc*
trine  in  his  vision  of  the  valley  of  dry
bones.  I  respectfully  refer  you  to  it
The  substance  of  the  vision  is  this  :
The  Lord  showed  Ezekiel  a  valley  j
full  of  dry  human  boues  ;  and  he
asks  him  if  those  bones  can  live.
Ezekiel  answered,  "  0  Lord  God,
thou  kuowest"  The  Lord  then
tells  him  to  prophecy  to  the  bones :
Oh  ye  dry  bones.  Hear  the  word
of  the  Lord  ;  and  as  lie  did  so  there
was  a  shaking,  and  behold  the  boues
came  together,  bone  to  its  bone  ;  :
and  according  to  the  word  of  the
Lord  through  him,  th'sh  and  skin
and  sinews  came  upon  them,  and
the  breath  of  life  came  into  them,  |
and  lo,  and  behold,  they  stood  I
upon  their  feet  an  exceedingly  great
army.  The  Lord  then  tells  the
Prophet  that  these  are  the  whole


house  of  Israel  ;  and  that  they  com-
plain of  the  non- fulfillment  of  the
promises  upon  their  head,  saying,
41  Our  bones  are  dried,  and  our  hope
is  lost  :  all  are  cut  off*  for  our  parts.
But  he  further  tells  him  to  prophecy
unto  them,  saying,  "Thus  saith
the  Lord  God ;  Behold,  0  my
people,  I  will  open  your  graves,
and  cause  you  to  come  up  out  of
your  graves,  and  bring  you  into
the  land  of  Israel,"  etc.  And
by  whom  shall  this  great  and  mar-
velous work  be  accomplished  "J  I
answer,  by  the  thousands  of  Ma-
nasseh  and  the  ten  thousands  of
Ephraim  ;  by  this  same  people  who
shall  search  out  and  gather  together
the  house  of  Israel,  and  who  will
come  up  a*  saviors  upon  Mount
Zion.

Paul  tells  us  concerning  the  Mel-
clusedek  Priesthood,  that  it  is  after
the  order  of  an  endless  life,  without
beginning  of  days  or  end  of  years  ;
or,  in  other  wjrds,  that  it  is  eternal;,
that  it  ministers  in  time  and  also  in
eternity.  Peter,  James  and  John
and  their  fellow-laborers  still  min-
ister in  their  Priesthood  on  the  other
side  of  the  veil ;  and  Joseph  Smith
and  his  fellow-brethren  still  minister
in  their  office  and  calling  under  the
counsel  and  direction  of  the  ^ame
Peter,  James  and  John  who
ministered  on  earth,  and  who  con-
ferred upon  Joseph  the  keys  of  their
Priesthood;  and  all  the  Elders  of
this  dispensation  who  prove  faith-
fill  and  magnify  their  calling  in
the  flesh  will,  when  they  pass  hence,
continue  their  labors  in  the  spirit
world,  retaining  the  same  holy  char-
acter and  high  responsibility  that
they  assume  here.  And  these  men
will  be  engaged  there  hunting  up
the  remnants  of  their  fathers  ot  the-
house  of  Joseph  through  Ephraim
and  Mamtsseh  ;  and  then  all  the
other  tribes  of  Israel;  while  their


188


JUL" UNAL  OF  lUSUUURSLh


children  and  children's  children
remaining:  in  the  flesh,  holding  the
same  Priesthood,  are  budding  an  if
will  continue  to  build  Temple*  and
enter  into  them,  and  there  officiate
for  the  whole  house  of  Israel  whose
bones  are  dry  and  ho])e  lost ;  but
with  whom  it  will  be,  as  the  Apostle
Peter  has  expressed  it,  *'  Blessed
be  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  which  according  to  his
abundant  mercy  hath  begotten  us
again  unto  a  lively  hope  by  the  re-
surrection of  Jesus  Christ  irom  the
dead/1  When  Peter  buried  his  Lord
he  buried  his  hope  also,  and  when  in
this  state  of  mind  he  said,  "  I  go  a
fishing/  He  returned  to  the  old
mode  of  living,  and  his  fellow  Apos-
tles accompanied  him.  After  toil
ing  all  night  and  catching  no  fish,
the  Savior  appeared  to  them,  but
the  disciples  did  not  know  him  ;  and
.after  learning  that  they  had  caught
nothing,  he  told  them  to  cast  the
net  on  the  other  side  of  the  ship,
and  instantly  the  net  was  full  of
fishes.  And  straightway  tlw*  in-
spiration of  the  Almighty  was  upon
Peter,  who  said,  that's  the  Lord  ;
that's  one  of  his  tricks.  Ami  the
impetuosity  of  his  nature  was  such
that  he  could  not  wait,  but  threw
himself  into  the  water  to  go  and
meet  the  Savior,  knowing  that  it
was  lie  just  as  well  as  if  the  Father
himself  had  told  him  so.  And  when
they  got  ashore  they  found  that
their  Lord  had  prepared  food  for
them,  of  which  they  all  partook.
And  then  the  Savior  takes  Peter  to
task  by  giving  him  to  understand
that  He  had  called  him  and  fellow*
apostles  to  be  fishers  of  men,  and
says  to  Simon  Peter,  "  Simon,
son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  me
more  than  these,1*  (fish)  ?  Peter
answered,  "Yea,  Lord,  thou  know-
-est  that  I  love  thee/'  The  Sa-
Tior  said  unto  him,  then  u  feed  my


lambs  ;  "  repeating  his  question  and
admonition  three  times.  This  re-
buke was  sufficient  for  Peter  all  the
rest  uf  his  days  ;  we  never  hear  of
his  going  fishing  again.

The  morning  of  the  resurrection
dawns  upon  us.  Ere  long  we  will
find  Joseph  and  Ins  brethren  over-
seeing and  directing  the  labors  of
the  Elders  of  Israel  in  the  Temples
of  our  God,  laboring  for  the  redemp-
tion of  the  dead,  which  work  will
continue  during  the  thousand  years
rest  when  the  Savior  will  hear  rule
over  the  whole  earth.

The  Centile  nations  comprehend
not  these  things.  Congress  and  the
hireling  priests  are  blind  and  igno-
rant to  them.  And  why  ?  Because
they  have  not  been  "  born  again,"
being  in  the  same  condition  that
Nicodemus  was  when  the  Savior
told  him  that  except  a  man  were
born  again — that  is  born  of  the  water
and  the  Spirit —he  could  not  enter
into  (or  see)  the  kingdom  uf  God.
They  talk  about  religion,  and  they
profess  to  be  teachers  of  Christianity;
so  far  as  they  honestly  believe,  and
show  by  their  works,  that  Christ  was
the  Son  of  God,  so  far  God  will  have
them  in  remembrance ;  so  far  as
they  honestly  receive  those  princi-
ples of  morality  that  should  govern
men  in  their  walks  of  life  and  their
intercourse  with  their  fellows,  and
do  respect  and  strive  to  live  them,  so
far  will  he  hold  them  in  honorable
remembrance,  and  they  will  be  num-
bered among  the  honorable  of  the
earth,  and  the  mercy  of  the  Lord
will  reach  them  in  bis  due  time  j
but  the  hypocrite  who  conceals  his
wicket  1  heart  under  the  cloak  of
religion,  who  has  a  form  of  godliness,
j  but  denies  the  power  thereof,  all
such  will  he  waste  away.

Understanding  this  as  we  under-
stand them,  we  do  not  wonder  at
this  class  of  per. sons  combining  with


I  HE  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  CHARACTER,  ETC,  189

the  powers  of  earth  to  throw  stum .  if  he  suffers  the  wicked  to  combine  *
bliug  blocks  in  the  w  ay  of  this  com-  \  against  us,  he  will  overrule  it  for  th<*
munity. But  will  the  Lord  sutler  salvation of  the  righteous.  The-
them  to  bring  persecution  upon  usf  righteous  can  endure  trials,  realizing
Perad  venture  he  may ;  and  he  will as  they  do  that
it  it  is  necessary  to  prune  the  vine-  j Behind  a  frowning  providence,
yard,  to  cleanse  his  people  from  sin,  He  hid**  a  smiling  face

to  purge  out  evil  and  frighten  away And  that  after  much  tribulation
the  hypocrites  in  Zion  ;  for  it  has  comes  the  blessing. And  such  are
been  ueereed  that  tearfulness  shall of  Ephraiui.  Amen,
surprise  the  hypocrites  in  Zion  ;  and  j


DISCOURSE  BY  APOSTLE  LORENZO  SNOW,
Deliver at  Logan,  Sunday,  May  6ih,  1882,


(Reported  by  Geo.  f\  Gibbs.)


THE  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  CHARACTER — TRAITS  THAT  ARE  ADMIRABLE —
HOW  TO  HAVE  INFLUENCE  WITH  HEAVEN  — WHY  MEN  SHOUID  DO
RIGHT  —  THE  CULTIVATION  OF  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS  - —  THK  THINGS  OF
GOD  MUST  BE  SOUGHT  AFTER  —  FASTING,  PRAYER,  DEVOTION  AND
SACRIFICE.


The  speaker  commenced  by  read-
ing the  first  ten  verses  and  the  1 8th
verse  of  the  35tli  chapter  of  Jere-
miah ;  also  part  of  the  139th  Psalm  ;
and  then  said  :

I  read  these  verses  with  a  view  of
riveting  more  forcibly  upon  our  un-
derstanding a  principle  which  I
desire  to  present  for  consideration,
namely,  the  establishing  of  a  proper
character,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  be-
fore God  our  Father

1  am  under  the  strongest  impres-
sion that  the  most  valuable  considera-
tion, and  that  which  will  be  of  the


,  most  service  when  we  return  to  the
spirit  world,  will  be  that  of  having
established  a  proper  and  well-de-
fined character  as  faithful  and  con-
sistent Latter  day  Saints  in  this
state  of  probation. In  cases  where

j  a  stranger  applies  for  employment,
or  an  office  of  trust,  it  is  often  re-
quired that  he  produce  papers  attest-

j  ing  his  worthiness,  from  reliable
parties,  letters  of  recommendation
and  of  introduction  which  are  ex-

;  ceedingly  useful  in  their  way,  as-
sisting in  obtaining  favors  and  privi-
leges winch otherwise  would  be


190


JOURNAL  OF  DIsCOUKSlte.


difficult  to  secure*  It  is,  however,
comparatively  easy  to  obtain  a  writ-
ten character,  as  it  is  termed,  a  char-
acter that  one  can  put  in  his  pocket;
and,  indeed,  according  to  my  obser-
vation it  is  not  infrequently  the  case
that  people  are  the  bearers  of  writ-
ten characters  which  their  real  and
true  character  fails  to  attest
There  are  those  among  us  who
are  recognized  as  members  of  this
Church  who  take  a  (rast  amount  of
pains  to  be  favorably  known  by
those  around  them,  but  whose  real
character,  or  the  inwardness  so  to
speak,  of  >ueh  people,  is  veiled  or
disguised,  being  to  all  outward
appearance  reputable  Latter-day
Saints,  but  whose  inward  character,
the  character  that  is  written  indel-
ibly upon  their  own  hearts,  would,
if  known,  render  them  unfit  for  the
association  and  fellowship  of  the
people  of  God.  Now  this  prayer
that  I  have  referred  to — "Search
me,  O  God,  and  know  my  heart ;
try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts ;
and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked
way  in  me,  and  lead  me  in  the
way  everlasting" — is  very  signifi-
cant ;  it  was  a  prayer  that  David
in  the  principal  course  of  his  life
could  conscientiously  and  with  a
degree  of  confidence  offer  up  to
the  Lord.  But  there  were  times
when  he  would  feel  the  faltering
and  <jui\  d  ing  sensation  of  weakness
in  offering  up  a  prayer  of  this  kind,
I  have  reason  to  believe  that  many
of  the  Latter- day  Saints,  during  a
great  portion  of  their  lives,  cculd
approach  the  Lord  in  all  confluence
and  make  this  same  prayer —
"Search  me,  O  God,  and  kimw
my  heart,  and  see  if  there  be  any
wicked  way  in  ine;1'  but  it  we,  as
a  people  could  live  so  as  to  be  able
at  ail  times  to  bow  before  the  Lor- 1
ami  offer  up  a  prayer  like  this,  what
a  delightf  ul  tiling  it  would  be,  what


an  attainment  we  should  have
acquired  in  righteousness  and
-nod  works  ;  To  every  person  who
has  at  heart  the  preparing  of  him-
self for  the  great  change,  that  is  the
work  of  regeneration,  1  would  re-
commend that  he  adopt  this  prayer
of  David,  and  see  how  near  he  can
live  according  to  the  light  that  he
h  is,  ^>  as  to  make  it  in  all  sincerity
part  of  his  devotions  to  God.
Many  fail  in  coining  up  to  this
standard  of  excellence  because  they
do  things  in  secret  where  mortal  eye
cannot  penetrate,  that  has  a  direct
tendency  to  alienate  them  from  the
Almighty,  a  Jul  to  grieve  away  the
Spirit  of  God.  Such  persons  cannot
in  their  private  closet  use  this
>rayer j  they  could  not  unless  they
lad  repented  of  their  sins  and  re-
paired the  wrong  they  may  have
committed,  and  determined  to  do
better  in  the  future  than  they  had
done  in  the  past,  and  to  establish  a
character  before  God  that  could  be
relied  upon  in  the  hour  of  trial,  and
that  would  fit  them  to  associate  with
holy  beings  and  with  the  Father
himself  when  they  shall  have  passed
into  the  spirit  world*  In  order  to
arrive  at  the  state  of  perfection  that
David  did  when  he  poured  out  his
soul  to  the  Lord  in  the  prayer  that
I  have  referred  to,  we  must  be
true  men  and  true  women ;  we
must  have  faith  largely  developed,
and  we  must  be  worthy  of  the
companionship  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to
aid  us  in  the  work  of  righteousness
all  the  day  long,  to  enable  us  to  sac-
rifice our  own  will  to  the  will  of  the
Father,  to  battle  against  our  fallen
nature,  and  to  do  right  for  the  love
of  doing  right,  keeping  our  eye  sin-
gle to  the  honor  and  glory  of  God.
To  do  this  there  must  be  an  inward
feeling  of  the  mind  that  is  conscious
of  the  responsibility  that  we  are
under,  that  recognizes  the  fact  that


THtfi ESTABLISHMKWT  up  CHARACTER,  KTC*


the  eye  of  God  is  upon  us  and  that
our  every  act  and  the  motives  that
prompt  it  must  be  accounted  for  ;
and  we  must  be  constantly  en  rapport
with  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  We
should  strive  earn es fly  to  establish
the  principles  of  heaven  within  us,
rather  than  trouble  ourselves  in
fostering  anxieties  like  the  foolish
people  of  the  Tower  of  Babel,  to
reach  its  location  before  we  are  pro-
perly and  lawfully  prepared  to  be-
come its  inhabitants.  Its  advan-
tages and  blessings,  in  a  measure,
can  be  obtained  in  th is  probationary
state  by  learning  to  live  in  confor-
mity with  its  laws  and  the  practice
of  its  principles.  To  do  this,  there
must  be  a  feeling  and  determination
to  do  God's  will

There  are  many  things  that  I
admire  in  the  character  of  the  pro-
phets, and  especially  in  that  of
Moses.  I  admire  his  determination
to  carry  out  the  .word  and  will  of
God  with  regard  to  Israel,  and  his
readiness  to  do  everything  that  was
in  the  power  of  man,  assisted  by  the
Almighty;  and  above  all  I  admire
his  integrity  and  fidelity  to  the  Loid,
There  is  something  very  beautiful
and  lovely  to  contemplate  in  the
character  of  the  children  of  Kechab
of  whom  I  have  read  :  there  is  some-
thing that  ought  to  command  the
admiration  of  all  men,  and  indeed,
God  himself  admired  it  and  re-
cognized it  in  the  great  premise
that  he  made  their  father  as  a
recognition  of  this  remarkable
virtue  exhibited  in  their  character,
namely,  "  Jonadab  the  son  of  Rechab
shall  not  wTant  a  man  to  stand  be-
fore rue  forever/'  How  comforting
and  consoling,  what  a  feeling  of
gratification  and  joy  to  the  heart  of
a  parent  to  receive  such  a  promise
from  the  Lord,  because  of  the
obedience  of  his  children  in  strictly
adhering  to  this  counsel ;  his  pos-


terity forever  should  be  represented
fflttong  those  who  should  stand  be-
fore the  Lord.  And  God  admires
the  men  and  women  to-day  who
pursue  a  course  of  rectitude  and
w h o ,  not wi th stan d ii \ g  th e  po we rs
of  Satan  that  are  arrayed  against
them,  can  say,  Get  thee  behind  me
Satan,  and  who  live  a  righteous,  a
godly  life,  and  such  people  have
influence  with  liodand  their  prayers
avail  much,  Moses,  for  instance,
had  such  power  with  the  Almighty
as  to  change  his  purposes  on  a  cer-
tain occasion.  It  will  be  remem-
bered that  the  Lord  became  angry
with  the  Israelites,  and  declared
to  Moses  that  lie  would  destroy
them,  and  he  would  take  Moses
and  make  of  him  a  great  people,
and  would  bestow  upon  him  and
hi*  posterity  what  he  had  promised
to  Israel.  IJut  tins  great  leader  and
lawgiver,  faithful  to  his  trust,
stood  in  the  gap  and  there  plead
with  the  Lord  on  behalf  of  his  peo-
ple; by  the  power  that  he  could
exercise  and  did  exercise,  he  was  the
means  of  saving  the  people  from
threatened  destruction.  How  noble
and  glorious  Moses  must  have  ap-
peared in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and
what  a  source  of  satisfaction  it  must
have  Keen  to  him  to  know  that  his
chosen  people,  in  their  obstinate
and  ignorant  condition,  had  such  a
man  at  their  head.

In  donah  again  we  find  an  inter-
esting trait  of  character.  When
upon  the  raging  waters,  and  fears
were  expressed  by  the  sailors  as  to
their  ability  to  save  the  ship,  Jonah,
feeling  conscience-stricken  at  the
course  he  had  taken  in  not  proceed-
ing to  Nineveh  as  commanded  of
the  Lord,  came  forward  and  con-
fessed himself  as  being  the  cause  of
the  disaster  that  was  about  to  befall
them,  and  was  willing  to  be  sacrificed
in  the  interest  of  tho^e  on  board


I


192  JOURNAL  OF

Also  in  other  prophets  and  men  of
God,  although  they  may  have  on
certain  occasions,  like  Jonah,  exhib-
ited weaknesses,  there  is  something
really  grand  and  admirable  shown  ;
in  their  character.  Hut  such  traits  of  j
character  as  we  find  evinced  in  the
ancient  worthies  are  not  the  pro-
ducts of  accident  or  chance,  neither
are  they  acquired  in  a  day,  a  week,
a  mouth,  or  a  year,  but  aie  gradual
developments,  the  results  of  con*
tinned  faith  fulness  to  God  and  to
truth,  independent  of  either  the
plaudits  or  criticisms  of  men.

Written  characters  do  not  always
amount  to  much  ;  they  are  well
enough  in  their  place  however.  It
is  important  that  we,  as  Latter-day
Saints,  should  understand  and  hear
in  mind  that  salvation  conies  through
the  grace  of  God,  and  through  the
development  in  us  of  those  princi-
ples that  governed  those  righteous
people  before  mentioned.  The  idea
is  not  to  do  good  because  of  the
praise  of  men  ;  but  to  do  good  be-  ;
caute  in  doing  good  we  develop  god-
liness within  us,  and  this  being  the
ease  we  shall  become  allied  to  god-
liness, which  will  in  time  become
part  and  portion  of  our  being,  I
will  refer  again  to  the  Iiec  ha  bites,
and  the  strong  temptation  that  they
were  under  when  invited  to  the
Temple  of  God,  and  there,  in
one  of  the  apartments,  asked  by
Jeremiah,  one  of  the  greatest  Pro-
phets, to  drink  wine;  or,  in  other
words,  to  do  something  that  they
had  been  instructed  by  their  fa-
ther not  to  do.  But  they  could
not  be  moved,  the  teaching  of  their
lather  had  found  an  abiding  place  !
in  their  heart?,  and  the  consequence
was  that  they  utterly  refused  to  do
what  the  Pro  [diet  of  God  told  them
to  do.  The  Lord  Himself  admired
the  course  that  they  took  in  this
matter,  and  was  led  as  I  before  said,  J


DISCOURSES.  v

to  make  such  a  glorious  promise  to
the  house  of  Kechab  ;  and  I  would
not  be  astonished  to  know  that
[  among  tins  people  may  now  be  found
some  of  the  descendants.

Do  we  not  at  times  do  things  that
we  feel  sorry  tor  having  done!  It
maybe  all  very  well,  provided  we
stop  doing  such  things  when  we
know  them  to  be  wrong  ;  when  wre
see  the  evil  and  then  reform,  that
is  all  we  can  do,  and  all  that  can  be
asked  of  any  man.  But  undoubt-
edly, it  is  too  much  the  case  with
some  that  they  consider  and  fear  the
publicity  of  the  wrong  they  commit,
more  than  committing  the  wrong
itself;  they  wonder  what  people  will
say  when  they  hear  of  it,  etc.  And,
on  the  other  hand,  some  are  induced
to  do  certain  things  in  order  to
receive  the  approbation  of  their
friends,  and  if  their  acts  fail  to  draw
forth  favorable  comments  or  to  be
recognized,  they  feel  as  though  their
labor  had  been  lost,  and  what  good
thev  may  have  done  was  a  total
failure.  Now,  if  we  really  desire  to
draw  near  to  God  ;  if  we  wish  to
place  ourselves  in  accord  with  the
good  spirits  of  the  eternal  worlds ;
if  we  wish  to  establish  within  our-
selves that  faith  which  we  read
about  and  by  which  ancient  Saints
performed  such  wonderful  works,  we
must,  after  we  obtain  the  Holy
Spirit,  hearken  to  its  whisperings
and  conform  to  its  suggestions,  and
by  no  act  of  our  lives  drive  it  from
us.  It  is  true  that  we  arc  weak,
erring  creatures,  liable  at  any  time
to  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  but  so
soon  as  we  discover  ourselves  in  a
fault,  we  should  repent  of  that  wrong-
doing and  as  far  as  possible  repair
or  make  good  the  wrong  we  may
have  committed.  By  taking  this
course  we  strengthen  our  character,
we  advance  our  own  cause,  and  we
|  fortify  ourselves  against  temptation;


■


TIIK  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  CHARACTER,  ETC.


193


*  and  in  time  we  shall  have  so  far
overcome  as  to  really  astonish  our-
selves at  the  progress  we  have  made
in  self-government  and  improve-
ment.

We  have  receive*  1  a  Gospel  that
is marvelous in its operations :
through obedience  to  its  requi re-
men we  may  receive  the  choicest
blessings  that  have  ever  been  pro-
mised to  or  bestowed  upon  mankind
in  any  age  of  the  world. But,  like
the  child  with  the  toy  or  the  play
thing,  we  too  often  satisfy  ourselves
with  the  perishable  things  of  time,
forgetting  the  opportunities  we  have
of  developing  within  us  the  great,
the  eternal  principles  of  life  and
truth.  The  Lord  wishes  to  establish
a  closer  and  more  intimate  relation-
ship between  himself  and  us  ;  He
wishes  to  elevate  us  in  the  scale  of
being  and  intelligence,  and  this  can
only  be  done  through  the  medium
of  the  everlasting  Gospel  which  is
specially  prepared  lor  this  purpose.
Says  the  Apostle  John: "  Every
man  that  has  this  hope  in  him  pari-
fieth  himself,  even  as  He  (Christ)  is
pure." Are  the  Latter-day  Saints
applying  the  principles  of  the  Gos-
pel to  their  lives,  and  thus  accom-
plishing'the  design  of  God  ?

We  sometimes,  though  perhaps
not  to  a  great  extent,  trouble  our-
selves about  some  probable  or  pos-
sible persecution  that  our  enemies
may  bring  upon  us.  We  look  upon
the  past  history  of  the  Church  and
see  that  the  Lord  has  suffered  our
enemies  on  certain  occasions,  to
destroy  our  houses,  despoil  us  of  our
property  and  drive  us  from  one  place
to  another.  We  say,  such  things
have  been  allowed  ;  and  we  query  in
our  minds,  whether  they  will  still
be  permitted  to  bring  trouble  upon
us,  and  if  so,  to  what  extent  We
acknowledge  that  God  has  blessed
us — that  he  has  given  us  houses  and

No.  13.


lands,  flocks  and  herds,  and  has  put
us  in  the  way  to  obtain  the  conve-
niences and  comforts  of  life  .  We,
no  doubt,  appreciate  our  temporal
condition,  ami  would  dislike  very
much  to  be  deprived  of  these  bless-
ings we  enjoy* And  some  wonder
as  to  how  far  the  hand  of  oppression
|  will  be  allowed  to  disturb  the  quiet
of  our  mountain  homes,  and  whether
we  as  individuals,  will  ever  pass
through  what  this  people  endured
in  parly  day*. Tins  is  a  matter  that
should  not  trouble  the  Saints  of
God  particularly  ;  hut  what  to  my
mind  is  far  more  important  is,  what
can  we  do  under  the  circumstances
to  elevate  ourselves  still  higher  in
the  righteousness  of  our  God,  What
advantage*,  Messing.-*  and  privileges
does  this  system  of  salvation,  which
wh  ha\e  obttyedj  afford,  and  what
means  shall  he  employed  to  realize
them  1 If  there  should  be  a  sacri-
fice demanded  it  will  be  very  op-
portune for  all  those  who  wish  to
make  their  religion  a  study,  and  who
are  endeavoring  to  conform  to  its
requirements,  by  living  it  in  theit
everyday  life,  to  show  their  willing-
ness to  bow  to  the  will  of  Jehovah,
acknowledging  his  hand  in  adversity
as  in  prosperity.

I  remember  vary  well  the  cloudy
and  stormy  djiys  of  Kirtland,  and
how  foolishly  some  people  acted.
There  were  men  who  occupied  high
standing  in  the  Church,  who  dis-
graced themselves,  having  behaved
in  a  manner  tfhich  afterwards
brought  the  blush  of  shame  to  their
cheeks.  There  was  a  reason  for
that  Hail  they  lived  so  that  they
could  have  offered  up  in  their  heart*
David's  prayer,  they  would  not  have
been  numbered  among  those  who*
apostatized  and  fell  in  the  hotir  *o£
trial.  It  would  be  well  to  examine
ourselves,  hold  communion  with
ourselves  in  the  secret  closet,  to

Vol  XXIII.


194


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ascertain  how  we  stand  as  Elders  in
Israel  before  the  Lord,  to  that  if
need  be  we  may  renew  our  diligence
and  faithfulness,  and  increase  our
good  woi  kg.

Tin-re  is  no  doubt,  speaking  of
the  people  as  a  whole,  that  we  are
greatly  improving  in  the  sight  of
God-  But  although  this  is  un-
doubtedly the  case,  1  am  convinced
there  are  persons  among  us  endowed
-with  spiritual  gifts  and  susceptible
of  cultivation,  that  could  be  exer-
cised, if  they  chose,  to  a  far  greater
extent  than  they  are,  and  who  could
move  much  faster  in  the  ways  of
holiness  and  get  much  nearer  to  the
Lord.  But  the  spirit  which  at-
tends the  things  of  this  World  is
operating  upon  them  to  that  extent
that  they  do  not  increase  those
spiritual  powers  and  Ides  sings ;
they  do  not  place  themselves  in  that
close  relationship  to  the  Lord  that
it  is  their  privilege,  as  men  holding
the  holy  Priesthood,  called  and
chosen  to  perform  a  special  work  in
the  midst  of  man  kind.  As  It  was
with  Peter  and  the  rest  of  the  Apos-
tles in  the  days  of  their  gloom,  w  hen
the  Master,  the  Savior  of  the  world,
hung  upon  the  cross,  their  hope
and  prospects  sunk  in  darkness,
having  lost  the  real  spirit  of  the
mission  to  which  they  had  been
called,  in  their  despair,  they  said,
Let  us  go  a  fishing  ;  let  us  return  to
our  nets,  to  our  former  business.
So  it  is  w  ith  some  in  our  day.  There
are  men  among  us  upon  whom  the
Spirit  of  the  Almighty  once  rested
mightily,  whose  intentions  were
once  as  good  and  pure  as  those  of
angels,  and  who  made  covenants
with  God  that  they  would  serve
Him  and  keep  His  commandments
under  every  and  all  circumstances ;
and  many  of  such  were  ready  and
willing  to  leave  their  wives  and
children  to  go  or  come  as  the  case


might  be  in  the  interest  of  the  cause
they  had  espoused.  But  how  is  it
now  with  some  of  those  Elders  J
They  do  not  feel  so  lo-day.  Their
affections  are  set  upon  the  things  of
this  world  which  the  Lord  lias
enabled  them  to  acquire,  that  they
wait  now  until  they  are  called,  and
in  many  instances  when  called,  they
obey  more  out  of  a  desire  to  retain
their  standing  and  position,  than  a
real  heart-felt  love  of  the  labor
to  which  they  may  have  been
called.

This  is  the  condition  of  all  me^
no  matter  how  well  they  start  out,
who  allow  their  thoughts  and  affec-
tions to  run  after  the  world  and  its
ways,  and  it  is  a  plain  and  indispu-
table proof  that  when  this  is  the
case  with  men  they  love  the  world
more  than  they  love  the  Lord  and
(  His  work  upon  the  earth.  Having
received  the  light  of  the  everlasting
Gospel,  and  partaken  of  the  good
things  of  the  kingdom,  and  being  of
the  seed  of  Israel  and  heirs  to  great
and  glorious  promises,  we  should
labor  with  fidelity  and  diligence  to
accomplish  what  God  has  designed
to  do  through  us  ;  we  should  be  men
and  women  of  faith  and  power  as
well  as  good  works,  and  w  hen  we
discover  ourselves  careless  or  indif-
ferent in  the  least,  it  should  be  suffi-
cient for  us  to  know  it  in  order  to
mend  our  ways  and  return  toHhe
path  of  duty.

When  our  friends  are  stricken
i  down  by  sickness  and  disease,  or
when  our  little  ones  are  in  the  ago-
nies of  pain  and  death,  there  should
be  Elders  in  our  midst  who  have
educated  themselves  so  thoroughly
in  developing  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit
within  them,  and  in  whom  the
Saints  have  such  perfect  confidence,
that  they  would  always  be  sought
after  instead  of  doctors.  There  are
men  among  us  who  possess  the  gift


THE  ESlABLLSHJUtiNT


OF  CHARACTER,  ETC.


of  healing,  and  might  have  great
faith ;  but  they  do  not  exercise  the
gift,  they  do  not  live  for  it,  and,
therefore,  do  not  have  the  power  to
rise  it  so  effectually  as  they  might
There  are  men  in  this  Church  who
are  as  good  in  their  hearts  and  feel*
ings  as  men  ever  were,  but  lack  faith
and  energy,  and  do  not  obtain  really
what  it  is  their  privilege  to  receive.
If  their  faith,  their  energy  and  de-
termination were  equal  to  their
good  feelings  and  desires,  their
honesty  and  goodness,  they  would
indeed  be  mighty  men  in  Israel  j
and  sickness  and  disease  and  the
power  of  the  evil  one  would  flee  be-
fore thein  as  chaff  before  the  wind*
Yet,  we  say  we  are  a  good  people
and  that  we  are  not  only  holding
our  own  but  making  great  advances
in  righteousness  before  God  ;  and
no ; doubt,  we  are.  But  I  wish  to
impress  upon  you,  my  brethren  and


sisters  that  there  are  Elders  among
us  endowed  with  Spiritual  gifts  that
may  be  brought  into  exercise  through
the  aid  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The
gifts  of  the  Gospel  must  be  culti-
vated by  diligence  and  perseverance.
The  ancient  Prophets  when  desiring
some  peculiar  blessing,  or  important
knowledge,  revelation  or  vision
would  sometimes  fast  and  pray  for
days  and  even  weeks  for  that  pur-
pose.

As  Saints  of  God,  Elders  of  Israel,
we  should  be  willing  to  devote  time
and  labor,  making  every  necessary
sacrifice  in  order  to  obtain  the  pro-
per spiritual  qualifications  to  be
highly  useful  in  our  several  callings.
And  may  the  Lord  inspire  every
heart  with  the  importance  of  these
matters  that  we  may  seek  diligently
and  energetically  for  the  gifts  and
powers 'promised  in  the  Gospel  we
I  have  obeyed*


JOl'KNAl.  OK  IUSCOUKSES


DISCOURSE  BY  APOSTLE  MOSES  THATCHER,


Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  Saturday,  April  8th,  1882,


(Reported  ly  Geo.  F.  Gibls.)


THE


MISSION  OF  TFfK  HOLY  GHOST —  COMMISSIONS  t)F  THE  ANCIENT
AND  MODERN  APOSTLES —  UNBELIEF,  DIVISION,  SUPERSTITION  AND
FANATICISM  —  SINCERITY  NO  EVIDENCE  OF  TRUTH,  BUT  ALWAYS
ENTITLED  TO  RtfSPECT —  MARRIAGE  COMMANDED  OF  GOD  AND  FOR-
BIDDEN BY  MAN — MORAL  ROL'UAGK  AND  ANT1-"  MORMON"  LEGIS-
LATION— RlfiHTEOrs  AND  UNRIGHTEOUS  DOMINION— THE  PURITY
Of  tftlE  ELDERS  OF  ISRAEL — THE  WORSHIP  OF  WEALTH  AND  ITS
POVERTY  —  PUBiTC  OPtNION  AND  INDEPENDENCE  OP  CHARACTER
—THE  LA'ITEIMMY  SAINTS  NEVER  DESTINED  TO  BE  SLAVES — PER-
SECUTION AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES  —  EXHORTATION  TO  LOYALTY,
LONG-SUFFERING, KIhDNKSS, INTEGRITY AND  RIGHTEOUSNESS,


I  have  been  wry  happy  in  attend-
ing the  meetings  of  this  Conference,
I  have  rejoiced  in  listening  to  the
remarks  of  brethren  who  have
spoken  ;  and  earnestly  hope  that  I
maybe  influenced  and  guided  in  the
remarks  I  may  make,  by  the  same
spirit  ami  power  which  has  actuated
them*  Realizing  as  I  do,  that  Uod
is  working  in  the  hearts  of  the
Saints  and  is,  at  the  same  time,
holding  as  in  Ids  hands  the  destiny
of  nation?,  I  have  seen  no  happier
day  than  this.  Ami,  while  prescrip-
tive, ex  post-Judo  laws,  abridging  the
liberties  of  the  people  have  been,
and  others  nuy  hereafter  be  enacted
by  the  law-makers  of  the  nation,
still  the  honest  and  good,  the  meek
and  pure  in  heart  rejoice  in  the
Holy  One  of  Israel,  who  while  pre-
serving their  lips  from  uttering  yuile
makes  steadfast  their  feet  in  Zlon,
that  they  slip  not.


I  am  not  aware  that  we,  as  a  peo-
ple, have  any  policy  marked  out  by
which  to  meet  the  issues  or  over-
come the  annoyances  which  may  be
forced  upon  us,  but  with  those  who
merit  the  constant  companionship
(if  the  Holy  Ghost,  all  will  be  welt
The  sight  of  the  eye,  the  hearing
of  the  ear,  the  touch  of  the  hand
may  each  and  all  be  deceived,  but
the  instructions  of  the  spirit  are  in
all  things  correct. The  combined
senses  may  misguide  or  fail,  but  he
who  happily  secures  the  companion-
ship of  the  Holy  Spirit,  walks  in  the
ways  of  life  and  neither  fears,  be-
comes weary  nor  faints  by  the  way-
side, Christ  as  the  author  of  hu-
man redemption — himself  a  willing
sacrifice  —  comprehending by  his
divine  nature,  the  fulness  of  this
great  truth, commanded  his  dis-
ciples to  tarry  at  Jerusalem  until
endowed  with  power  from  on  high


THK  MISSION  OF  TUK  IIULY GUOsT,  KTC.


— —until  he  should  send  the  Comforter
whose  mission  it  was  to  show  them
things  to  come,  bring  all  things
which  he  had  taught  to  their  re-
membrance and  lead  them  into  all
truth.

The j  had  listened  to  the  words  of
life  and  light  as  the  marvelous  ser-
mon on  the  Mount  came  from  the
divine  lips  of  their  Lonl  and  Master:
they  had  seen  him  touch  the  eyes
of  the  blind,  making  them  to  see
again,  the  ears  of  the  deaf  to  hear,
and  had  witnessed  his  power  quicken  |
into  life,  the  decomposing  body  of
the  dead  ;  they  had  traveled
throughout  the  land  of  Judea  with,
and  perhaps  watched  many  weary
nights  to  keep  him  from  the  injury
of  those  who  desired  to  harm  him  ;
they  had  eaten  and  drank  with,  and
$lept  by  him,  listening  by  night
and  day  to  the  inspired  instruc-
tions ;  but,  notwithstanding  all  the
experience  thus  gained  during  years
of  unsurpassed  opportunity  for
learning  the  truth  as  it  was  in  him,
they  were  not  yet  fully  qualified  and
authorized  to  preach  that  perfect  law
of  liberty — the  Gospel  of  their  Re-
deemer, Hence  the  command,
*'  Tarry  ye  in  the  City  of  Jerusalem
until  ye  be  endowed  with  power
from  on  high  "

The  Comforter  which  came  to
them  is  the  same  that  has  come  to
us,  and  his  mission  then,  as  we
have  demonstrated  it  now  to  be,  was
to  bring  things  to  the  remembrance,
show  things  to  come  and  lead  into  j
all  truth*  No  man  has  authority  to  |
preach  the  Gospel  and  administer  its
ordinances  without  a  commission
from  Jesus  Christ ;  and  the  seal  of
such  commission  has  always  b**en,
and  always  will  be  the  gifts,  bless-
ings and  endorsement  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  which,  not  only  leads  to  the
form,  but  also  to  the  power  of
godliness.


Tt  is  this  that  cheers  the  hearts  of
the  Latter-day  Saints,  brings  know*
ledge  of  things  past,  present  and  to
come,  unites  and  makes  them  in
their  testimony,  hopes  and  aspira-
tions, distinct  from  all  the  world — a
peculiar  people.

The  Elders  of  Israel  acting  under
the  authority  of  an  endless  Priest*
hood,  bear  the  message  of  peace,  of
life  and  salvation  to  the  inhabitants
of  a  fallen  world.  Without  money
and  without  price  they  visit  the
ends  of  the  earth  and,  while  warn-
ing the  wicked  of  the  judgments  to
come,  they  urge  the  honest  and  good
to  gather,  before  the  coming  of  the
great  and  dreadful  day  when  Baby-
lon shall  fall.  Bearing  a  faithful
testimony,  they  speak  of  that  which
they  know  and  testify  of  that  which
they  have  experienced,  saying,  **  do
the  will  of  the  Father  and  you  shall
know  whether  the  doctrine  is  true  or
false/'  In  this,  their  testimony  dif-
fers from  that  of  the  ministers  of
al!  other  religious  denominations,
and  they  not  only  speak  as  having
authority,  but  they  have  it.  Where,
outside  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  is  there
a  man  authorized  to  make  the  pro-
mise of  the  knowledge  of  God  by
revelation  as  the  reward  of  obe-
dience to  the  principles  of  the
Gospel]  Who,  beside  the  Elders
of  this  Church  are  commissioned
to  perform  ordinances  in  the  name
of  the  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost
through  which,  and  by  which  the
Comforter  comes  to  the  obedient
penitent,  leading  hira  into  all  truth
and  showing  him  things  to  comet
Who,  beside  them  are  authorized
by  God,  commissioned  by  Jesus
and  endorsed  by  the  Holy  Spirit
to  preach  repentance,  baptism  and
the  laying  on  of  hands,  saying  to
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  "  be-
lieve in  the  doctrines  of  Jesus


198


JOURNAL  OK  DISCUURSKS


Christ,  repent  of  all  sins,  be  im-
mersed in  water  for  their  remission
and  have  hands  laid  upon  you  for
the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  you  shall  know  these  things  to
be  true,  for,  through  obedience  to
the  law  of  life,  comes  the  testimony
of  Jesus,  which  is  the  spirit  of
prophecy.

Ask  the  members  of  the  so  called
Christian  sects  if  their  ministers
come  to  them  offering  such  a  test  of
their  authority  to  speak  in  the  name
of  Him  who  descended  beneath  all
things  that  he  might  arise  above  all
things — ask  them  for  the  testimony
of  Him  who  led  captivity  captive,
and  gave  gifts  to  men,  what  gifts
they  have  to  offer,  what  promises  of
godly  knowledge  they  have  to  make  1
Ask  them  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus
and  to  show  the  plan  of  salvation
built  upon  the  rock  of  revelation
against  which  the  gates  of  hell  can-
not prevail,  and  you  will  be  made
painfully  to  feel  that  they  have  none
of  these  things.  A  form  of  godli-
ness they  may  exhibit,  but  the  jWHtw,
they  do  not  have.

**  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and
preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature.
He  that  believe th  and  is  baptized
shall  be  saved,  but  he  that  believeth
not  shall  be  damned.  And  these
signs  shall  follow  them  that  believe.
In  my  name  they  shall  cast  out
devils;  they  shall  speak  with  new
tongues;  they  shall  take  up  serpents,
and  if  they  drink  any  deadly  thing
it  shall  not  hurt  them."

Such  was  the  commission  given  to
the  Apostles  anciently,  and  the  gifts
and  blessings,  some  of  which  I  have
enumerated,  following  the  believer
whose  faith  led  to  works,  were  evi-
dences of  the  authority  of  the  Lord's
disciples  who  bore  that  commission.
Their  testimony  being  true  and
faithful,  received  the  endorsement
of  the  Holy  Spirit


Unlike  ministers  of  the  various
Christian  denominations  the  Elders
of  this  Church  claim  no  part  of  the
commission  given  by  the  Lord  to
his  ancient  Apostles,  but  they  do
claim,  and  do  have  authority  from
Jesus  Christ  to  preach  his  Gospel,
and  the  signs  that  followed  believers,
then  follow  them  now,  as  thousands
can  testify.  Most  so-called  Chris-
tians have  long  since  discarded  the
idea  of  works,  holding  that  salva-
tion coming  oidy  by  grace,  belief
alone,  is  essential*

Now,  I  hold  that  they  have  not
only  discarded  all  works,  but  belief
as  well.  My  reason  for  so  doing  is  I
think  logical  and  conclusive,  Jesus
declared  that  certain  signs  should
follow  them  that  believe,  but  modem
divines  do  not  even  pretend  that
any  one  of  the  signs  enumerated
follow  those  that  accept  their  teach*
ings.  Therefore,  relying  upon  the
words  of  the  Lord,  we  must,  we  are
bound  to  conclude  that  they  do  nut
even  believe  the  Gospel,  or  if  they
do  the  promise  of  Christ  certainly
fails.  I  am  aware  that  such  a  con*
elusion  gives  a  choice  between  but
two  horns  of  a  disagreeable  dilemma,
but  we  had  nothing  to  do  in  the
arrangement  of  matters  which  have
brought  it  about  ;  we  only  speak
of  facts  as  they  exist  Again,  ask
the  ministers  of  any  of  the  Pro-
tectant churches  where  they  got
their  authority  to  preach  1  They  will
tell  you  not  from  the  Roman  Mother
Church  which  claims  Apostolic  suc-
cession from  Peter,  bat  they  will
refer  you  1  think,  in  most  instances,,
to  the  words  of  J esus  already  quoted,
wheiein  he  instructed  his  disciples
to  go  into  all  the  world  and  preach
the  Gospel  to  every  creature,  etc*
They  wall  tell  you  that  here  is  where
they  get  their  authority,  and  they
claim  that  commission  is  to  them  as
well  as  to  those  to  whom  it  was  di-


THK  MISSION  OF  THK II  'LY  GH  »6T, K  1*0.


199


given.  Let  us  submit  the
test  a? nl  see  how  this  claim  stands.
Those  who  anciently  had  the  com-
mission and  authority  were  endorsed
by  t lie  spirit  and  power  of  God  which
caused  certain  heavenly  gifts  and
blessings  to  follow  those  who  believed
their  testimony  and  teachings.  Do
any  *>f  those  gifts  and  blessings
follow  ihe  believers  in  the  teachings
of  modern  divines  who  claim  the
same  authority  and  commission  ?
No,  not  one.  They  the  ministers
themselves  hold  them  non-essential,
and  lie  nee  done  away.  They  are,
indeed,  done  away  so  far  as  our
Christian  friends  are  concerned,  and
so  is  the  authority  and  commission
of  their  ministers  done  away,  so  far
as  the  endorsement  of  their  teaching
by  the  Holy  Ghost  is  concerned.

I  desire  here  to  bear  my  testimony
that  the  gifts  and  blessings  en  numer-
ated by  the  Savior  as  those  that
should  follow  believers,  do  follow  in
this  day,  the  authoritative  preaching
and  administration  of  the  ordinances
of  the  Gospel,  and  that  the  Elders
of  this  Church  are  clothed  with  au-
thority from  Go  1.  It  did  not  come
from  the  Roman  Mother  Church,
nor  from  any  of  her  Protectant
daughters,  but  was  restored  to  earth
in  uur  day  by  Peter,  James  and
John,  to  whom  Jesus  Himself  gave
it.  In  their  charge  it  was  authority
that  bore  fruit  as  testimony  of  its
efficacy  and  divine  power  ;  commit-
ted to  the  charge  of  God's  servants
it  does  likewise  in  this  age  amo:ig
this  people.

Lacking  the  revelations  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  men  and  self -constitu-
ted ministers  are  not  led  into  all
truth  but  teach,  instead  thereof,
opinions  and  vain  imaginings.  As
an  instance  I  refer  to  a  sermon
preached  not  lung  since  by  an  emi-
nent divine  in  the  East  tor  whose
liberal  views  and  outs[>oktip  advo


cacy  of  them  in  many  respects  I
entertain  admiration,  for  they  have,
in  my  opinion,  a  tendency  Lo  liberal-
ize the  i i  leas  of  some  who  otherwise
would  have  inclined  to  religious  big-
otry or,  on  the  other  hand  to
infidelity-  In  seek im;  to  illustrate
how  the  various  Christian  sects
were  moving  heavenward  this  di-
vine, compared  the  kingdom  of
God  to  the  city  of  Philadelphia,
which  has  numerous  railway  con-
nections leading  from  almost  every
direction  but  all  centering  in  that
city,  Upou  these  numerous  rail-
ways daily  move  many  trains  com-
posed of  numerous  cars  containing
many  people  traveling  from  various
directions  on  d liferent  roads,  but
all  bound  for  the  city  of  Phila-
delphia. Now  this  doctrine  being
broad  and  liberal  would  certainly
commend  itself  to  every  thoughtful
and  c !iar i table  Christian  did  it  not,
when  tested  by  the  Master's  perfect
standard,  reveal  a  defect — a  fatal
one  too,  which  all  who  rely  upon  it
must  eventually  find  to  their  disap-
pointment au  l  sorrow.  The  doc-
trine however  attractive,  Is  absolutely
untrue,  for  Jesus  Himself  has  de-
clared tint  there  is  but  one  way,
"Straight  is  the  sate  and  nnrov  is
the  way,  (not  many  ways  like  the
roads  leading  to  the  city  of  Phila-
delphia), and  few  there  be  that  find

it."

Now  why  do  eminent,  educated,
influential  men,  who  have  chosen
the  minUtrv  as  a  profession,  and  who
pretend  to  teaeii thelJospel  toothers,
advocate  as  doctrine  i  leas  so  diame-
tried ly  opposed  to  the  eternal  truths
ad va: tee  I  by  Christ  himself  ]  The
ati»vver  is  simple,  lacking  tne  inspira-
tion and  revelations  of  the  Holy
Spirit — having  no  Comforter  to  lead
them  into  all  truth,  bring  things  to
their  remembrance  and  show  them
things  to  come,  they  teach  for  doc-


1300  Jul* UN a>l  of

trine  the  opinions  of  men.  Being  i
filled  with  worldly  wisdom  but  riot
the  power  of  God.  "They  divine  for
money  and  preach  for  hire.'1  Again
Christ  prayed  that  his  disciples
might  be  one  with  Him  as  He  was
with  the  Father,  and  that  all  should
believe  the  word?  of  the  disciples
that  they  might  be  one  with  Him,
as  He  waft  one  with  the  Father.  Are
Christians  claiming  belief  in  those
words,  one  1  No,  the  various  deno-
minations are  not  only  divided
against  each  other,  but  in  some  in-
stances are  divided  among  them
gelve^  During  the  tale  civil  war,  as
was  stated  yesterday,  members  of
the  same  church  south  of  the  Mason
and  Dixon  line  were  praying  for  the
destruction  of  their  brethren  of  the
same  church  north  of  it,  while,  on
the  other  hand,  those  north  were
making  a  like  petition  to  the  same  !
God  ujiaiust  their  brethren  south  of
that  line.  According,  however,  to
their  own  idea  of  uud,  lie  could
hardly  have  heard  and  answered
either  party  ;  for,  having  no  pody
be  could  not  heir,  and  having  uu
assions  he  would  have  been  iu-
iffereut,  had  he  been  able  to  hear.
Notwithstanding  this,  however,
many,  very  many  on  both  sides  were
destroyed  and,  as  we  believe,  need-
lessly. Of  one  thing  we  may  be
certain,  ami  that  is  the  members  of
the  various  Christian  denominations
are  not  one  Therefore  there  is  but
one  of  two  conclusions  at  winch  the
reasoning  and  thoughtful  can  arrive.
Either  God  has  ceased  to  answer
the  prayer  of  His  Son,  or  the  various
conflicting  religious  sects  are  not  be-
liever* in  tiie  Gospel  And  as  they
put  great  stress  upon  faith  or  belief,
I  have  endeavored  and  think  I  have
not  failed  to  show  that  they  are  not
even  true  believers,  for  they  are
certainly  not  united  and  one  with
Christ  as  He  is  one  with  the  Father,


nor  as  His  ancient  disciples  were  one
with  Him.

In  mentioning  these  matters*  I
have  tried  to  do  ao  in  a  respectful
manner,  having  regard  for  the  feel-
in  us  of  those  who  differ  from  us  in
religious  affairs.  There  are  many
people  in  the  world  who  do  not  be-
lieve jus  we  do,  but  for  whom  I
entertain  a  high  personal  regard  ;
for  according  to  the  light  they
have,  they  are  moral,  honest  and
just,  and  are  as  devoted  towhat  they
believe  to  be  right  as  we  possibly
can  be.  Thousands  and  hundreds
of  thousands  of  people  in  the  world
are  just  as  sincere  as  we  are  ;  but  to
be  sincere  in  a  matter  does  not  make
that  matter  true.

Wliile  at  the  City  of  Mexico  re-
cently, I  saw  many  exhibitions  of
religion*  devotion  and  sincerity.
On  certain  feast  days  people  there
do  strange  things.  1  have  seen  wo-
men walk  upon  t heir  knees  three
mile*  over  lou^h  stony  roads,  being
rewarded  at  the  end  of  their  painful
journey  with  a  plaited  crown  of
thorns  placer!  upon  their  heads,
while  being  carried  upon  the  shoul-
ders of  strong  men,  amid  the  cheer-
ing multitude,  who  praised  them  for
having  accomplished  what  they  be-
lieved to  be  a  saintly,  Writorious
task.  Again,  I  have  seen  ladies
of  refinement,  wealth  and  influence
trail  their  rich  satin  and  velvet
roiVtj  through  the  dirt  and  tilth
accumulated  upon  the  floors  of  the
great  cathedral,  for  hours  they
would  k^eel  in  adoration  be  tore  an
image,  while  beiug  jostled  by  igno-
rant, degraded,  vermin  covered  In-
,  dial  is.  worshipping  at  the  same
shrine*  On  other  occasions  I  have
witnessed  fur  weeks  together  the
revelry  of  Catholic  maskers  who
,  frequented  the  streets,  theatres  and
balls,  night  and  day.  At  some  of
those masked balls  it  was  said


scenes  were  enacted  that  were  so
immoral  in  their  tendency  that  the
neral  of  the  Mexican  army  issued
orders  prohibiting  officers  and  men
of  the  army  from  attending  them.
And  yet,  at  the  termination  of  the
thirty  days*  dissipation,  religious
sincerity  caused  those  poor,  ignorant
people  to  feel  free  from  sin  after  con-
fessing to  their  priests  and  receiving
absolution  for  all  their  abominations
and  securing  a  great  black  mark  in
the  form  of  a  cross  in  their  fore-
Heads.  Now,  while  these  things
and  many  others  which  I  have  no
time  to  mention,  appeared  very  re*
poignant,  immoral  and  debasing  in
their  practice  and  tendency,  yet
I  respected  those  people  in  their
religious  belief,  customs  and  cere-
monies as  I  desire  to  respect  the
people  of  other  creeds  so  long  as
they  do  not  infringe  upon  the  lights
and  liberties  of  others.  For  God
intends  that  all  should  be  absolutely
ftee  in  such  matters.  When  Adam
and  Eve  were  placed  in*the  Garden,
the  doctrine  of  free  agency  was  fully
established  and  endorsed  by  the
Creator,  for  He  there  gave  a  con-
ditional commandment,  obedience
to  which  was  to  perpetuate  life,
disobedience  was  to  bring  death,
but  the  choice  was  left  with  the
man  and  woman,  and  from  that
day  to  this  he  has  intended  that
man  should  act  upon  his  own  agency;
that  he  should  be  permitted  to
receive  the  truth,  choosing  the
path  that  leads  back  to  the  presence
of  God  and  the  knowledge  that
comes  from  above  ;  or,  on  the  other
hand,  to  reject  it,  following  in  the
path  which  leads  to  ruin  and  destruc-
tion.

In  this  great  American  govern-
ment a  man  should  be  free  to  wor-
ship the  Father,  the  Son  and  the
Holy  Ghost ;  he  should  be  equally
free to  worship  a  mountain,  a


stream,  the  sun,  moon,  or  anything
or  not  to  worship  at  all ;  so  long  as
his  practice  and  belief  do  not  inter-
fere with  the  inalienable  rights
guaranteed  to  man,  so  long  should
he  be  free.

From  the  time  when  God  gave  to
man  and  woman  their  free  agency
in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  making
the  law  and  defining  the  penalty  for
breaking  that  law,  I  can  find  nothing
in  the  revelations  that  would  bind
or  fetter  the  soul  or  the  body  of  the
children  of  men.  There  was,  how-
ever, one  unconditional  command  ;
it  was  given  in  the  generation  of
the  heavens,  when  God  created  man
and  woman  in  His  own  image ;
and  that  command  still  rests  upon
the  fishes  of  the  sea,  upon  the  fowls
of  the  air,  upon  the  beasts  of  the
field,  a^d  all  beating  throbbing  na-
ture naturally  obeys  the  edict,
u  multiply  and  replenish  the  earth."
This  great  unconditional,  unrepealed
law  is  still  in  force.  The  Roman
Catholic  church,  as  it  has  done  here-
tofore, may  issue  edicts  binding  cer-
tain members  of  that  church  to
celibacy,  making  the  union  of  man
and  woman  obnoxious,  but  that
great  command  is  nevertheless  still
binding.  The  Roman  church  and
our  own  Government,  in  their  blind
efforts  to  defeat  the  purposes  of  God,
may  continue  to  forbid  marriage,
and  thus  fulfill  ancient  prophecy,
but  their  efforts  should  not  surprise
us,  Is  there  anything  occurring  in
the  midst  of  the  Nation  to-day  that
we  have  not  anticipated  \  I  have  re*
cently  returned  from  the  east,  and  I
rejoice  exceedingly  in  what  I  saw
manifested  there.  Does  God  hold
the  members  of  Congress  responsible
for  their  acts  as  he  does  the  Elders
of  this  Church  ?  No.  They  will  be
judged  by  the  light  they  have  and
no  more.  They  are,  many  of  them,
educated,  and  are  men  of  influence,


202


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


possessing,  however,  but  little
genuine  moral  courage.  Notwith-
standing the  evident  disregard  for
principle  manifested  by  some  of
them  touching  affairs  in  which  wr
are  interested,  I  confess  that
I  lose  confidence  in  them  with  the
deepest  regret,  and  find  it  most
difficult  to  withdraw  the  faith  for-
merly reposed  in  the  law  makers  of
our  great  nation,  I  still  desire  and
hope  to  he  able  to  continue  praying
for  them  and  for  the  President  and
cabinet,  that  they  may  honor  the
positions  to  which  the  people  have
called  them.  We  will  uphold,  sus-
tain and  pray  fur  them  at  least  until
God  rejects  and  condemns  their
works.  There  is  salt  in  the  nation
yet.  I  try  to  comprehend  the  feel-
ings of  faithful  Abraham  when
pleading  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  ;
which,  had  they  contained  five
righteous  men,  might  have  been
spared*

Now,  I  think  there  are  a  great
many  more  than  five  righteous  men
— righteous  according  to  the  liyht-
they  have,  in  the  United  StMes :
good'meu  too,  who,  while  they  can-
not see  as  we  see,  and  while  they
cannot  endorse  our  peculiar  ideas  in
regard  to  the  plan  of  human  salva-
tion, love  liberty,  cherish  the  mem-
ory of  our  forefathers,  and  regard
the  foundations  of  this  great  gov-
ernment so  highly  that  they  could
not  even  under  the  pressure  of  pub-
lic opinion,  vote  for  a  measure  so
radically  wrong,  a  measure  so  tho-
roughly unconstitutional  as  every
lawyer  must  know  the  Edmunds
law  to  be.  There  were  a  few  hou-
,  orable  members  of  Congress  whose
high  regard  for  the  labors  and  sac-
rifices of  our  forefathers  precluded
them  from  advocating  that  infamous
measure  which  strikes  with  deep
intent  and  a  spirit  born  of  hatred,
at  the  very  foundation  upon  which


our  government  and  the  liberties  of
the  people  rest  Tlutee  honorable
gentlemen,  in  opposing  the  bill,
counted  the  cost  by  realizing  that
their  course  in  the  matter  might
offend  their  constituents,  who  by
reason  thereof,  might  retire  them
forever  from  the  Malks  of  public
political  life,

Now  I  must  admit  that  it  would
have  required  nerve  and  genuine
moral  courage  to  enable  members  of
the  Republican  party  to  vote  against
the  passage  of  that  bill  when  the
party  lash  was  being  swung  around
them  as  I  have  never  before  ^een  a
party  lash  used.  To  overcame  the
fear  arising  from  the  contemplated
action  of  constituents  at  home,  and
the  cut  and  the  sting  of  the  party
leaders  in  Congress,  required  more
coinage  than  we  could  reasonably
expect  from  members  of  the  domi-
nant party.  Moral  courage  is  a
virtue  possessed  by  few  men  in  this
gilded  age  in  which  ambition,
rather  than  principle,  too  frequently
ia  the  moving  cause  which  prompts
to  action.  When,  therefore,  party
leaders,  sarcastic  and  uu. scrupu-
lous, shake  th^ir  fists  under  the
noses  of  their  timid  followers,
daring  them  to  place  themselves
upon  record  as  advocates  of  li  Mor-
n ionium"  by  opposing  measures  in-
tended for  the  bondage  of  "  Mor-
mons/' it  is  indeed  difficult,  and
we  ought  not  to  expect  weak  men,
under  such  circumstances,  to  do  what

is  right.

I  remember  before  going  East,  cer-
tain petitions  to  Congress  were  being
circulated  in  the  midst  of  the  Lat
ter-day  Saints,  which  were  after-
wards, I  understand,  signed  by
about  65,000  people,  and  what  was
the  prayer  of  those  petitioners — did
they  ask  Congress  to  endorse  poly-
gamy, or  in  the  least  manifest  sym-
pathy for  the  marital  relations  of


THlb  MISSION  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST, KTC.  203*


he  Latter-day  Saints  1  No.  The
burden  of  the  prayer  of  this  com-
munity was  to  give  us  a  trial  before
condemning  us,  to  hear  our  cause
before  convicting  and  executing  us  ;
in  other  words,  that  an  investigating
committee  be  sent  to  the  people  of
Utah  to  see  them  as  they  are  ;  to
come,  if  need  be,  into  our  homes
and  pry  into  every  detail  of  our  social
relations,  and  then  judge  the  tree
by  its  fruits.  If  the  children  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  as  lias  been  as-
serted, are  fiail  in  body  and  weak  in
intellect,  we  asked  the  statesmen  of
our  laud  to  come  a  id  demonstrate
it  far  our  benefit  and  their  informa-
tion, or  send  a  competent  and  relia-
ble commission  to  investigate  the
matter  for  them*  If  we  are  an  im-
moral people  —  as  we  have  been
accused  of  being— we  want  the  na-
tion to  say  so  through  the  mouths
of  honorable  men.  That  is  what
we  prayed  tor,  Our  petitions  were
not  heard,  1  doubt  if  they  were
even  read,  and,  yet,  have  we  any
feelings  of  enmity  towards  our
nation  because  of  it?  I  have  not,
not  in  the  least.  There  is  not  a  man,
woman  or  child  in  all  this  broad
land  for  whom  1  have  one  particle
of  hatred.  Thank  God  for  that.
That  is  what  my  religion  has  taught
me.  And  while  I  know  that  I  am
by  no  means  perfect  in  keeping
that  higher  law  which  Jesus  gave,
namely,  Love  your  enemies,  bless  them
that  curse  yov,  do  good  to  them  that
hate  youf  and  pray  for  (hem  which
despite/idly  use  wu,  and  persecute
you,  I  am  trying  to  become  so.
That  is  a  law  of  the  Gospel  which
we  must  all  eventually  observe  in
spirit  and  practice.  I  am  trying
to  pray  for  men  who  by  night  and
day  use  their  influence  and  every
means  in  their  power  to  crush  out
a  people  whom  I  love,  and  who
are  innocent  before  God  of  the


vile  slanders  constantly  heaped
upon  them.  When  we,  as  Saints
of  the  Most  High,  shall  have
learned  to  love  our  enemies  and  pray
for  those  who  despiteful ly  use  us —
shall  have  learned  it  so  well,  that
prayerful  humble  practice  im-
presses it  upon  the  tablets  of  our
hearts,  from  which  every  desire  to
oppress  our  fellowman  has  been
eradicated,  then,  and  not  till  then
will  the  government  rule,  and  do-
minion be  given  into  the  hands  of

,  this  people,

Zion  will  be  redeemed,  God's
kingdom  bear  sway  and  His  people,
under  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  will
rule  when  the  law  goes  forth  from
Zion,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from
Jerusalem.

Much  has  been  said  about  the  do-
mination of  the  "  Mormon*1  Priest-
hood, tn  Europe,  in  the  States  ot
the  Union,  and  even  in  Mexico  it
has  been  stated  that  44  Mormons"
are  controlled  like  slaves,  being
obliged  to  yield  obedience,  right  or
wrong,  to  the  behest  of  Church
leaders,  I  hear  my  testimony  that
the  statement*  is  utterly  untrue.
No  part  of  the  Union  possesses  a  freer
and  more  independent  people  than
these  mountain  valleys. Indeed  I

!  hesitate  not  to  say  that  their  equal
in  fearlessness  of  wrongful  church,
political  or  other  influences  cannot
be  found  elsewhere*  They  neither
crouch  beneath  public  opinion  nor
cower  before  the  pulpit  and  press.
The  names  of  prominent  business
men  of  Eastern  cities,  with  whom
for  years  our  merchant*  have  done
business,  appeared  in  the  public
prints  as  the  vice-presidents  of  anti-
■*  Mormon"  meetings  ;  thus  making
them  seem  to  join  in  the  raid
against  our  people*  When  asked
regarding  the  matter  a  number  con-
fessed that  their  names  had  been
used  without  either  their  knowledge


2lH


or  consent.  But  thev  had  not  the
moral  courage  necessary  to  stem  the
current  of  public  opinio^  am)  run
the  rink  of  inclining  the  displeasure
of  the  press  by  withdrawing  their
names ;  and,  while  disclaiming  to
me  personally,  any  sympathy  with
the  anti-"  Mormoun  rai«ls,  then  so
numerous  in  the  East  they  dare  not
publicly  so  express  themselves,
How,  while  expressing  sympathy
for  those  who,  under  any  circum-
stances, could  be  placed  in  such  a
position,  I  am  bold  to  assert  that
nowhere  in  Utah  among  Latter-day
Saints  could  such  a  thing  be  found.
Such  domination/  ecclesiastical,
political  or  social  does  not  exist  in
Utah  among  the  "Mormons  pos-
sibly it  may  exist  in  the  midst  of
those  comprising  their  enemies,  and
known  here  as  the  "ring."  What*
ever  may  have  been  said  or  what-
ever may  hereafter  be  asserted  re-
garding the  domination  of  the
4i  Mormon"  Priesthood,  1  know  no
people  who  regard  more  highly  the
individual  rights  of  man  or  who
are  more  willing  to  defend  them
than  the  people  called  "  Mormons,'1
who  here,  as  elsewhere,  have  the
moral  courage  to  protect  and  defend
their  names  while  maintaining
their  individuality.  I  don't  think
they  would  hesitate  to  defend  the
oppressed  whether  Jew,  Gentile  or
41  Mormon/1  nor  would  they  sacrifice
in  their  lack  of  independence,  prin-
ciple or  persons  at  the  shrine  of
public  opinion  or  popular  prejudice.
The  M  Mormon"  Priesthood  domi-
nates the  affairs  of  the  "  Mormon"
people  upon  the  principles  of  right-
eousness and  equity,  Outside  of
these  it  has  neither  power  nor  au-
thority. I  wrish  this  were  equally
true  with  the  religious,  political  and
social  organizations  throughout  the
Union  ;  but  it  is  not,  as  I  have  al-
ready shown. When  principle  is


sacrificed  to  prejudice  there  can  be
neither  safety  nor  Stability.  Acting
upon  such  a  basia  men  become  great
in  small  things,  buf  small  in  greater
matters*

Did  principle  or  a  proper  regard
for  the  rights  of  man  prevail  in  the
Senate  and  House  of  our  National
Congress,  pending  the  passage  of
the  Edmunds  law  ?  It  is  true  a
number  of  honorable  members  in
each  branch  recognized  i  and  pro-
tested against  the  passage  of  that
unconstitutional  and  un-American
measure,  but  how  fewT,  if  any,  com-
prehended the  opportunity  afforded
a  great  statesmen  to  stem  the  cur-
rent and  by  the  force  of  patriotism
ami  the  power  of  right,  rise  above
the  waves  of  popular  prejudice  and,
striking  out  of  disguises  stand
proudly  upon  the  solid  foundations
of  constitutional  law  while  victori-
ously battling  for  human  freedom
and  the  natural  rights  of  man*  Such
an  opportunity  had  made  Webster,
Clay  or  Sumner  even  greater  than
t  he  great  men  we  now  esteem  them.
The  thought  of  such  as  they  were,
the  devotion  to  principle,  liberty
and  ri<zht  exhibited  by  Washington,
Jefferson,  Adams,  and  others  in
their  struggles  for  human  freedom,
have  made  me  proud  to  be  an
American  citizen.  But  when  I  see
sacred  principles,  for  the  establish-
ment of  which  our  .fathers  devoted
property,  honor  and  lives,  trampled
under  foot  by  our  national  law-
makers, in  order  to  answer  the  fana-
tical demands  of  religious  bigots
against  a  few  thousand  loyal  citizens
in  Utah,  I  blush  and  almost  wish  I
had  been  foreign  born.

Aside  from  these  drawbacks  evi-
dencing the  degeneracy  into  which
statesmen  are  falling,  I  have  ever
been  proud  of  my  citizenship.  Of
but  one  thing  have  I  ever  been
prouder  and  that  is  of  my  allegiance


THK MISSION  OF  THK HOLY  GHOST,  E1C


205


to  God  an  J  His  laws,  and  a  love
for  His  kingdorn  and  people.  For
these  I  have  patiently,  and  almost
uncomplainingly,  endured  the  scorn
and  ridicule  of  many  people  in  vari-
ous countries.  This  I  could  never
have  endured,  being  naturally  proud
and  perhaps  over- sensitive,  had  it
not  been  for  the  comforting  influ-
ence which  accompanies  a  knowledge
of  truths  revealed  in  our  day.

During  twenty  five  years  of  ex-
perience in  the  Church,  having  been
ttiore  or  less  in  the  missionary  field
gift  fie  I  was  fifteen  years  of  age,  I
have  met  thousands  of  people  in
Europe  and  America  who  thought
Of  "Mormon ism"  and  the  "Mor-
mons" only  with  contempt,  believing
the  system  to  be  a  fraud  they
thought  of  its  advocates  as  wicked
deceivers.  Under  other  cireum-
Stances  I  have  been  thrown  into
Contact  with  men  and  women  who,
while  appearing  chaste  and  fair
without,  were  foul  and  corrupt  with-
in,  but  who  nevertheless,  would
act  as  though  the  touch  of  a  "Mor-
mon" Elder  was  pollution,  Hun-
dreds of  times  I  have  been  forced  to
notice  the  Reluctance  of  men,  them-
selves not  averse  to  the  destruction
of  chastity,  to  publicly  appear  in  the
company  of  Elders,  whom  I  knew,
would  suffer  their  right  hands  to  be
burned  from  their  bodies  rather  than
look  upon  a  woman  witli  lust,  much
less  seek  to  destroy  virtue,  or  defile
themselves  with  the  unclean.

Whatever  the  world  may  think  or
say  to  the  contrary,  the  Elders  of
this  Church  are  the  purest  men  on
earth,  and  there  are  abundance  of
facts  with  which  to  substantiate  the
assertion.  They  are  not  all,  per-
haps, what  they  should  be,  hut  take
them  as  a  whole  —  consider  their
works,  their  sacrifices,  trials  and
temptations,  ami  in  that  virtue  that
comes  of  chaste  thoughts,  words  and


1  actions,  they  have  no  rivals  in  this
world  ;  for,  as  married  men,  they  are
true  at  home  and  abroad  to  their
marital  vows ;  as  single  men  they
are  equally  true  to  God  and  their
covenants.  With  men  of  the  world
these  things  may  be  of  but  little
moment,  with  us  they  are  of  vital
importance,  for  upon  the  basis  of
sexual  purity  shall  be  perpetuated
that  which  is  noble,  good  and  lovely.

The  love  of  wealth,  a  desire  for
luxury,  or  an  ambition  for  fame  may
move  the  world,  and  stir  men  to
c  easeless  activity  ;  but  for  us  and  our
chihl  ten  there  is  more  hap  pit  teas,
peace  and  salvation  in  the  quietness
and  purity  of  our  simple  hornet,
than  can  bo  found  anywhere  else.

In  some  of  the  Eastern  States^
especially  in  the  larger  cities,  the

!  evidences  of  increasing  prosperity
appear  numerous.  Trade  and  com-
merce, pushed  by  enterprise  and

i  capital,  are  accumulating  wealth  in
the  hands  of  the  far-seeing  and
shrewd  very  rapidly,  and  the  luxu-
rious habits  manifested  in  the  erec-
tion and  decoration  of  magnificent
palatial  residences,  is  only  equalled
by  the  rich  personal  ornaments  of
their  owneiu,  To  excel  in  these
things  the  highest  ambition  of  the
worldly  is  excited  to  the  utmost  ex-
tent, and  intelligent  men  and  wo-
men too  often  sacrifice  truth  and
honor  in  the  mad  strife  for  gain.
Wealth,  or  the  love  of  it,  is  fast
becoming  the  God  of  the  Christian
world.  To  what  extent  their  idola-
trous worship  produces  happiness  I
am  not  aware,  but  am  personally
satisfied  to  cast  my  lot  with  the
poor,  despised  people  of  Utah  ;  who,
having  less  of  the  things  of  this  m
world,  have  more  of  the  imperish-
able tilings  of  God,  Possessing  the
keys  of  inspiration,  we  are  able  to
draw  upon  the  only  true  source  of
happiness,  and  our  path,  if  we  are


306


JOURNAL  OJ?  D1SUU UU8K5.


faithful,  will  grow  brighter  and
brighter,  until  the  perfect  day.
Were  we  able  to  convince  the  rulers
of  nations  of  this  fact,  they  would,  I
have  no  doubt,  willingly  forego  all
earthly  hopes  of  worldly  fame  and
the  honors  of  men,  and  meekly  re
ceive  that  which  has  been  so  freely
given  to  us.  If  God  were  to  open
the  eyes  of  the  Queen  of  Eng-
land and  the  President  of  the
United  States,  as  He  has  opened
our  eyes,  I  think  they  would  rejoice
as  we  have  rejoiced,  with  a  bound-
less gladness.  But  they,  like  mil-
lions of  others,  having  never  been
born  of  water,  cannot  even  see,
much  less  enter  the  kingdom  of
heaven.  Could  they  do  so  and  re-
ceive the  manifestations  and  re  vela*
tions,  the  companionship  and  in-
structions of  the  Holy  Ghost,  they
would  willingly  exchange  the  hon-
ors and  emoluments  of  their  offices,
for  the  persecution  and  slander  to
which  all  who  live  godly  in  Christ
Jesus  are  subject.

They  have  their  mission  and  work
to  perform  ;  we  have  ours,  i  We
would  gladly  confer  upon  them  and
others  a  knowledge  of  that  which
we  have  received  frcm  God,  if  we
-could,  but  we  cannot.  The  wealth
of  this  world  can  neither  purchase
such  knowledge,  nor  can  the  influ-
ence of  the  mighty  and  great  ever
become  potent  enough  to  secure  it
for  themselves  and  convey  it  to
others,  except  upon  the  simple  con-
ditions prescribed  by  the  Master
.and  to  which  we  have  yielded  a
willing  obedience.

As  this  people  have  been  obedient
±o  God,  so  have  they  been  loyal  to
tthe  government  I  desire  to  ask
those  composing  this  vast  congre-
gation, if  you  are  a  disloyal  people  ?
You  are  frequently  accused  of  being
sa  Do  you  not  regard  the  Con-
stitution of  our  nation  with  respect


and  veneration?  Have  you  not
taught  your  children  that  the
Declaration  of  Independence  is  the
highest  bill  of  rights  which  man
has  ever  bequeathed  to  man  ?
Have  you  not  held  up  to  them  for
emulation  the  character  of  the  father
of  his  country,  the  great  George
Washington  ?  When  recently  gazing
upon  his  monument  in  Washington,
D.  C.  which  has  been  so  many  years
in  building,  I  asked  myself  the  ques-
tion :  Is  all  this  mass  of  polished
marble  being  accumulated  and  put
together  with  such  accurate  nicety
and  at  such  vast  expense  because
George  Washington  was  willing
to  float  with  the  current  of  public
opinion,  right  or  wrong,  or  is  it  be-
cause he  had  those  noble  sentiments
which  beat  and  throb,  in  gen-
erous hearts  ior  freedom  1  He,
while  possessing  many  ideas  of  the
English  aristocratic  school,  was  no
weather-cock  to  be  turned  by  the
passing  breeze.  How  few  men  in
the  Senate  and  House  of  Represen-
tatives of  the  United  States,  appear
to  have  been  close  students  of  his-
tory. Had  they  been  such  they
would  have  seen  in  the  characters  of
Washington,  Jefferson,  and  the
Adams's  something  far  different
from  that  possessed  by  the  average
statesmen  of  our  day.  Close  students
of  history  should  be  able  to  sense
the  fact,  that  in  emergencies  when
the  waves  of  popular  feeling  run
high,  great  men  whose  hearts  beat
for  liberty  and  freedom  come  to  the
front  but  they  do  not  float  with  the
tide,  nor  are  they  swerved  by  preju-
dice or  biased  by  public  opinion.

Public  opinion  followed  Jesus
Christ  into  the  garden  of  Geth-
semane  when,  alone  and  unwatched
by  His  Apostles,  He  prayed  to  the
Father  for  strength  to  endure  suffer-
ing w  hich  caused  drops  of  blood  to
ooze  from  every  pore  of  his  agonized


THK  MISSION  OF  TMK  HuLY  GHOST,  ETC


ody.  Public  opinion  followed  him
to  the  bench  of  the  heathen  judge
who,  being  above  the  prejudices  of
the  age,  washed  his  hands  of  in  no-
en  t  blood  and  said  :  "I  find
o  guilt  in  this  man/1  But  the  self-
ightous  Jew  —  the  hypocritical
Scribe  and  Pharisee — cried  out,
"Crucify  Him!"  Crucify  Him  T
<(  His  blood  be  on  us  and  our  chil-
dren/' Public  opinion  has  caused
ivers  of  human  blood  to  flow  ;  sac-
rificing, it  is  said,  sixty  millions  of
'ves  during  the  reign  of  the  inqui-
sition: Who  can  think  of  the  dark
and  cruel  work  of  those  days  and
ears  ot  religious  superstition  and
igotry  without  a  shudder  of  hor-
ror 1

In  the  museum  at  the  City  of
Mexico  I  have  gazed  upon  the  nmm-
ied  forms  of  men  and  women  who
ost  their  lives  under  the  pressure  of
he  religious  public  opinion  that  fed
ames,  and  instituted  racks,  in  that
and.

Public  opinion,  backed  by  perse-
ution,  drove  our  fathers  across  the
eep,  and  planted  the  Pilgrims  upon
ly mouth  Rock,  ready  to  perish  if
eeds  be  for  God  and  liberty.  Had
hey  been  of  the  class  predominate
ng  to-day  in  our  National  legisla-
ture, a  free  government  on  this
Jand  would  have  been  unknown  to
the  present  generation.  But  they
were  noble,  self-sacrificing  men  who,
loving  liberty  better  than  life,  could
neither  cringe  to  the  dictates  of
kingly  power  now  bow  to  the  behest
of  priestly  authority.  Hence,  that
conscience  might  be  free  and  God
worshipped  accordingly,  they  braved
the  dangers  of  the  sea  in  search  of
a  land  of  freedom,  a  home  for  the
-oppressed.  And  here,  upon  the
choice  land  of  Joseph,  still  perse-
cuted and  hated,  the  survivors  pros-
pered and  grew  and  became  strong
under  the  blessings  of  God,  until


their  noble  hearts  and  generous
brains  produced  thoughts  and  ac-
tions that  led  to  one  of  the  grand-
est and  most  successful  efforts,  in
the  interest  of  human  freedom,  the
world  has  ever  known.  How  strange,
how  unreasonable  it  seems  that  the
children  of  those  noble  ones,  should
ever  become  oppressors.  Thus
attesting  the  truthfulness  of  the
saying  :  "  The  oppressed  of  to-day
may  become  the  oppressors  of  to-
morrow,"

Persecution,  prompted  by  religious
bigots,  and  urged  forward  by  public
opinion  incited  to  deeds  of  violence,
and  sacrificed  in  a  cool,  premedi-
tated ami  bloody  manner  the  Pro-
phet J oseph  and  the  patriarch  Hyrum
Smith,  at  Carthage  in  the  free  and
sovereign  State  of  Illinois.  Unap-
peased  with  the  blood  of  martyrs,  it
devastated  cities,  villages  and  farms,
pillaged  homes,  killed  defenceless
women  and  children,  and  finally
drove  us  as  a  people  into  these
mountains.  I  remember  as  a  child,
the  pains  and  sorrows  of  those  days
of  destitution  when  the  aged  and
the  young  together  walked  weary
miles  with  blistered  feet  in  the  hot
sands  that  formed  a  part  of  the  wil-
derness which  stretched  out  between
the  so  called  civilization  and  the
place  of  peace  and  rest,  so  much  de-
sired by  our  people.  Heat  and  cold,
hunger  and  thirst,  were  each  and  all
forgotten  in  the  intense  desire  to  be
free  from  the  cruel  persecution  of
our  enemies.  We  asked  for  neither
riches  nor  fame,  but  around  the  camp
fires  at  nigh  t  the  people  were  inspired
with  but  one  prayerduring  the  weary
days  of  that  long  journey — it  was
for  peace  and  rest — freedom  to  wor-
ship God  without  being  molested,
without  being  persecuted  by  cruel,
relentless  enemies.  For  the  enjoy-
ment of  these  blessings  we  were
willing  to  forego  the  comforts  of  life,


208


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


associate  with  savages,  and  dig  roots
with  which  to  keep  body  and  soul
together,  as  many  of  us  had  to  do.

For  a  time  we  enjoyed  compara-
tive peace,  but  bitter  prejudice  man-
ufactured atul  fostered  by  Christian
divines  ami  political  demagogues,
has  followed  us  with  malice  unpar-
alleled. Securing  the  support  of
public  opinion  it  sent,  in  1857,  an
army  to  Utah  to  despoil  our  people,
while  sedition  ripened  in  the  heart
of  the  nation-  In  1862  it  culminated
in  a  congressional  enactment  against
a  religious  tenet,  not  withstanding
the  positive  and  explicit  prohibition
of  the  Constitution  which  forbids
Congress  to  pass  any  law  M  respect-
ing the  establishment  of  religion  or
preventing  the  free  exercise  thereof,"
it  urged  and  succeeded  in  passing
the  Poland  law,  under  the  provi-
sions of  which  u  Mormon'1  citizens
were  deprived  of  trial  by  i  n  impar-
tial jury  of  their  peers,  and  by  the
decision  of  biased  judges  were  not
only  subject  to,  but  some  of  them
actually  were,  tried  by  packed  juries.
At  the  demand  of  the  clergy  fof  the
various  religious  denominations
throughout  the  Union  the  Edmunds
bill,  substantially  as  it  was  drafted
by  clergymen  and  carpet-bag  officials
here,  became  law  ;  and  without  ex-
cuse or  apology  citizens  in  Utah  are
deprived  of  franchise,  a  sacred,  blood
bought  right,  without  which  no
American  can  ever  feel  proud  or
properly  exercise  the  liberties  be-
queathed by  our  fathers  to  their
children.

Now  what  does  it  all  ineanl
W  hat  can  be  the  object  of  this  un-
just, inexcusable,  unholy  raid  ?  Can
it  be  possible  that  the  dominant
party  holding  the  reins  of  govern*
meat,  desire  to  make  of  the  people
of  Utah  a  race  of  slaves — fit  sub-
jects for  fetters  and  chains  1  I  hope
not.  But  if  such  is  the  object  would


H  not  be  well  to  transport  us  to  the
flats  of  the  Mississippi  river,  to  the
swamps  of  Louisiana,  where  asso-
ciation with  the  black  freed  man
might  accustom  us  to  the  chains  of
slavery  that  now  lie  rusting  in  the
blood  of  thousands -that  were  brave
and  true — willing  sacrifices  at  the
shrine  of  human  liberty  and  the
equal  rights  of  man.

There,  perhaps,  restraining  bonds
might  fret  and  gall  until  the  love  for
liberty  and  the  rights  of  free  men
might  be  forgotten.  Not  so  in  these
mountains.  They  are  high  and  no-
ble and  grand.  They  are  the  mighty
bulwarks  of  our  God.  The  snows
that  drift  upon  their  lofty  i^ks,
the  waters  that  leap  down  their
steep  sides  and  rush  through  their
rugged  gorges,  are  full  of  the  har-
mony that  accords  with  our  love
for  freedom.  The  very  air  we  breathe,
the  water  we  drink,  the  food  we  eat,
the  soil  we  walk  upon,  inspire  the
soul  with  thoughts  and  a  love  for
liberty  undreamed  of  in  lands  that
produce  oppressors.  Loyal  citizens
of  a  great  government,  honest,
frugal,  just,  charitable  and  obedient
to  constitutional  law,  we  desire
to  continue  while  fulfilling  our
mission  of  peace  on  earth  and  good
will  to  man,  but  while  our  surround-
ings remain  unchanged  and  Na-
ture's bulwarks  stand,  with  the  bles-
sings of  God  we  never  can  become
slaves.  Oppressions,  frauds  and
wrongs  we  may  for  a  time  endure*
We  may  as  in  the  past  be  subjected
to  annoyances  and  to  the  petty
tyranny  of  small  tyrants,  but  we
know  in  whom  we  trust,  and  we
are  not  ignorant  of  what  the  final
result  will  be.  Traitors  may  arise
and  seek  to  trample  upon  the  pro-
visions ot  the  Constitution,  but  right
here  in  these  mountains — on  the
backbone  of  the  continent — will
grow  the  men  who  will  preserve


THE MISSION  OF  THK  HOLY  GHOST,  ETC


209


intact  that  sacred  inspired  charter  of  to  transfer  the  revenues  of  the  Ter


human  rights,  under  the  just  provi-
sions of  which  millions  will  rejoice
long  after  usurpers  and  traitors  shall
have  been  buried  in  oblivion  Aim
right  here  in  this  connection  I  desire
to  repeat  what  I  have  said  in  public
once  before.  In  reviewing  the  tribu-
lations through  which  the  Saints


ritory  and  virtually  the  property  of
the  majority  of  the  people  through
Increased  and  excessive  taxation,
to  the  control  of  the  insignificant
minority  in  this  Territory,  then  I  am
neither  a  prophet  nor  the  son  of  a
prophet.  The  passage  of  the-  Ed-
mund* bill  and  the  means  used  to


have passed, and  while  coutern-  ,  in  ke  it  law,  are  but  a  part  of  the

igs  which  they  have  '  plot  concocted  in  this  city  t


plating  the  wron


ty  and  en-


endured  at  the  hands  of  despoilers, dnrsed  by  certain  parties  east  against
I  have  felt  and  said,  rather  than  be  ;  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  people
robbed  as  my  father  on  several  occa-
sions was,  on  account  of  his  religion,
I  would endeavor  to  have  facts


plainly  submitted  to  the  President
of  these  United  States,  so  that  he
might  fully  understand  the  situa-
tion, and  then,  before  I  would  per-
init  my  possessions — the  hard  earn-
ings of  years  of  toil — to  go  into  t he
hands  of  those  who  covet  our  pro-
perty, and  who  would  rob  us,  as  our
fathers  were  robbed,  I  would  deed  it
to,  and  make  a  present,  if  he  would
accept  it,  of  all  the  property  I  have


>r


to  the  President  and  his  succ
in  office  forever,  as  a  perpetual  re-
nun  der,  that  here,  in  free  America,
whole  communities  of  citizens  have
been  plundered,  persecuted  and
deprived  of  the  peaceful  possession
of  property  without  cause  and  with-
out redress.

It  is  said  "  there  are  no  persons
in  Utah  who  desire  the  property  of  the
"Mormons"  except  upon  the  fair
basis  of  purchase."  I  would  be  glad
if  this  were  true,  for  I  wish  to  think
well  of  all  men,  and  especially  of
fellow-citizens,  but  I  fear  recent
movements  and  present  indications
will  scarcely  warrant  belief  in  the
statement,  and  if  future  develop-
ments of  the  plot  of  conspirators  do
not  demonstrate  that  polygamy  was
the  chosen  pretext  with  which  to
excite  and  blind  the  public  mind,
while  unscrupulous  tricksters  sought

No.  14.


fUtah.  Th  e  peculiar  mathematical
calculation  by  which  Governor  Mur-
ray succeeded  in counting  about
1,3  h)  votes  for  a  person  almost  un-
known here,  a  greater  rumher  than
over  18,000  cast  for  lion.  George  Q.
Cannon,  the  people  s  choice  for  De-
legate to  Congress,  was  but  another
p-irt  of  £he  programme,  and  one
which  h<is,  thus  far,  deprived  us  of
representation  in  the  National  Le-
gislature, and  rendered  nugatory,
to  the  majority  in  this  Territory,
the  sacred  right  of  franchise.  The
late  President  Garfield,  in  a  public
State  document,  declared,  in  effect,
that  as  a  person  who  plotte*  1  against
the  life  of  the  king  in  a  monarchical
government  committed  treason,  so
one  who  tampered  with  the  ballot-box
and  thereby  deprived  the  citizen  of
his  right  of  franchise  also  commit-
ted treason. If  this  be  sound  doc-
trine and  authoritatively  en  undated,
what  crime  has  the  Governor  of
Utah  Territory  committed  X If  the
canvassing  of  those  votes  and  the
issuance  of  a  certificate  of  election
to  a  man  who  received  only  about
one  fifteenth  of  the  whole  number,
foreshadow  the  future  action  of  our
chief  executive,  what  have  the  peo-
ple of  Utah  to  expect,  by  way  of
justice,  from  him] Being  neither
of,  nor  from  among  us — depending
upon  others  for  the  tenure  of  his
office  and  the  amount  and  pavmeni

Vol  XXIII


210


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


of  his  salary,  we  have,  perhaps,  no
reason  to  expect  sympathy  or  disin
terested  service,  but  we  do  have  a
right  to  expect  unbiassed  justice  in
the  ad  mini st ration  of  official  duties.

No  American  citizen  having  the
love  of  liberty  and  the  rights  of  man
at  heart,  can  endorse  the  courts  pur-
sued* by  the  Governor  in  the  Can-
non-Campbell case.  I  cannot  and
never  expect  to.  From  childhood  1
have  been  taught  to  respect  officials
because  of  the  dignity  ot  their  offices,
and  it  may  be  possible  to  respect
the  office  after  having  lust  confi-
dence in  the  man  occupying  it.  As
people,  our  regard  lor  the  Govern-
ment ought  perhaps  to  enable  us  to
do  this  in  the  future,  as  in  the  past
Faithful,  loyal  citizens  can  afford  to
doit,  and  much  more,  if  necessary.

Buc  says  one,  4t  You  are  thought
to  be  neither  faithful  nor  loyal  to
the  Government,  and  it  is  believed
by  many  that  you  make  secret  cove-
nants  against  it."  In  answer  I  have
this  to  say  :  The  brain  that  con-
cocted and  the  heart  that  prompted
such  accu&ations  uere  possessed  by
the  wicked  and  cruel.  We  have
proven  our  loyalty  under  circum-
stances most  trying  circumstances
in  which  actions  were  more  weighty
than  words,  deeds  than  promises.

The  patient,  heroic  endurance  of
the  "Mormon"  battalion  while
making  their  wondrous  merch  of
2,030  miles,  the  planting  of  the
Stars  and  Stripes  on  these  mountains
and  in  these  valleys,  then  Mexican
soil  by  their  fathers,  brothers,  sisters
and  wives  are  historical  facts,  and  so
are  the  circumstances  under  which
these  things  were  done,  historical
facts  establishing  love  for,  and  loy-
alty to  our  country  that  no  honest
man  can  ever  question.  As  to
making  secret  covenants  against
the  Government,  I  never  was  re-
quested to  do  it,  and  would  have


spurned  the  request  and  the  person
making  it  if  I  had  been.  As
applied  to  this  people  the  charge
is  false  as  those  who  make  it.
I  think,  however,  I  can  understand
why  these  false  and  unjust  accusa-
tions are  made.  We  have  beeu
treated  from  the  beginning  like  an
unloved  child,  when  asking  for
bread  we  have  been  given  a  stone,
for  a  fig  we  have  been  given  a  ser-
pent Now,  who  ever  knew  a  father
to  be  just  to  an  unloved  child  1  Or
one  unwilling  to  listen  to  the  accusa-
tions of  the  favored  against  hicut
And  here  may  be  applied  the  saying
4i  We  can  forgive  those  who  injure
us,  but  those  we  injure,  never."
And  that  is  just  the  position  we
occupy.  We  have  been  injured,
repeatedly  injuied,  and  those  who
have  injured  cannot  forgive  us.
They  hate  us  bttause  they  know
they  have  wronged  us.  If  states*
men  and  lawmakers  disregard  the
Constitution  by  overriding  and
trampling  on  its  provisions  in  their
efforts  to  solve  the  tfi  Mormon"  prob-
lem, I  hold  the  act  to  be  no  less
treasonable  than  if  performed  by
private  citizens.  1  say  treasonable
because  disregard  for  the  Constitu-
tion by  the  nation's  lawmakers,
must  ultimately  result  in  their  re-
jection by  the  people,  or  in  the  dis-
solution of  the  Government,  Thus
the  charge  of  law-breaking  and  dis-
loyalty might  more  consistently
come  from,  than  against  us.  Of
one  thing  we  are  certain  :  that
which  is  a  crime  to  an  individual  or
a  community  cannot  become  a  vir-
tue in  law- makers,  even  though  ad-
vocated as  an  expedient.  George
Washington,  in  his  farewell  address
to  the  American  people,  foreseeing,
perhaps,  what  might  occur,  uttered
the  following  forcible  sentiments :
"  If,  in  the  opinion  of  the  peo-
ple, the  distribution  or  modifica-


IKK  AUadli'N  Q*  TUK  HuLV UUOsiT,  *TC.


tion  of  the  constitutional  powers
be  in  any  particular  wrong,  let  it  be
corrected  by  an  amendment  in  the
way  which  the  Constitution  desig-
nates. But  let  there  be  no  change
by  usurpation  ;  for  though  this,  in
one  instance,  may  be  the  instrument
of  good,  it  is  the  customary  weapon
by  which  free  governments  are
destroyed."  Very  different  are
these  sentiments  from  those  uttered
not  many  years  since  by  a  promi-
nent republican  leader  in  the  House
of  Representatives,  who,  when  asked
if  he,  as  a  lawyer,  would  state  to
the  House  that  the  measure  intro-
duced by  hira,  and  then  under  con-
sideration by  it,  was  in  its  provisions
in  harmony  with  the  Constitution,
answered  with  a  sneer,  "  Why,  any
justice  of  the  peace  would  tell  the
gentleman  it  is  not  constitutional,
but  it  is  a  measure  we  want  and  one
we  shall  pass,  and  by  the  time  its
constitutionality  is  tested,  it  will
have  accomplished  the  object  we
have  in  view."  The  same  senti-
ments as  those  we  have  referred  to
were  clearly  and  unhesitatingly  ut-
tered by  members  of  Congress  pend-
ing the  final  passage  of  the  Edmunds
bilL  They  show  the  drift  of  the
party,  perhaps  the  spirit  of  the
times,  in  which  the  sentiments  of
Washington  are  below  pan  Other
members,  while  not  entertaining
such  views,  lacked  moral  courage  to
oppose  them.  Some  of  them  came
privately  and  confessed  that  the
Edmunds  bill  was  an  infamous
measure ;  but,  said  they,  what  can
we  do  ?  Public  sentiment  is  against
yonr  peoples  and  we  dare  not  defend
you  ;  if  we  do,  our  constituents  will
withdraw  their  support,  and  we
shall  be  retired/'  The  force  of  such
reasoning  we  may  not  comprehend,
but  we  do  feel  that  we  have  no  de-
sire to  have  any  man  sacrifice  him-
self or  his  prospects  tor  us. We  are


used  to  oppressions,  and  with  the
help  of  God  we  can  stand  all  the
special  ex  post  facto  laws  and  bills
of  attainder  which  Congress  may
pass  and  the  President  approve,  and
we  don't  expect  much  sympathy  or
friendship  from  the  outside  either ;
for  we  have  proven  years  ago  that  a
man  never  has  fewer  friends  than
when  he  needs  them  most,  nor  more
than  when  he  needs  them  least.
Does  a  knowledge  of  this  fact  tend
to  destroy  our  confidence  in  man  1
No,  I  think  not,  but  it  does  tend,
by  showing  how  weak  and  unreliable
man  is,  to  increase  our  trust  in
God.

In  asking  for  a  commission  of
honorable  gentlemen  to  visit  Utah
to  investigate  affairs  before  passing
judgment  upon  us,  we  did  express
as  I  said  before,  a  hope  that  we
might  'be  fairly  tried  before  being
convicted.  The  signers  of  these
petitions  knew,  and  their  enemies
here  knew  that  the  charges  con*
stantly  heaped  up  against  this  peo-
ple could  be  proven  utterly  false  if  a
chance  to  do  so  were  afforded.  But
that  is  just  what  certain  parties  did
not  want,  fearing  that  a  thorough
investigation  conducted  by  honor-
able men  would  defeat  their  plot
against  the  people  of  Utah.  I  speak
of  these  matters  aft  I  understand
them.  I  am  not  and  never  have
been  radical,  but  have  desired  always
to  view  things  from  an  impartial
standpoint

Irrespective  of  creed  or  color,  I
think  there  is  room  in  Utah  for  all
who  wish  to  locate  in  the  Territory,,
and  those  who  arte"  here  and  others
who  may  come  hereafter,  should  be-
protected  in  the  enjoyment  of  their
rights,  and  should  be  free  to  exercise
them  so  long  as  they  do  not  infringe
upon  the  rights  of  others.  In  these
matters  Gentile,  Jew  and  Mormon
should  stand  upon  the  same  level.


212


jouitXAL  ok  nrscuru^Ks


So  far  as  I  am  concerned  I  would
contend  for,  ami  it  necessary  defend
the  liberties  of  the  one  as  soon  as
1  would  these  of  the  other*  Na-
turally I  am  inclined  to  be  timid,
and  am  disposed  to  shrink  from
troubles  rather  than  to  court  them,
believing  it  to  be  better  to  suffer
wrong  than  to  do  wrong  ;  hut  there
are  circumstances  under  which  even
the  cowardly  throw  off*  their  tim-
idity, and  fearlessly  assert  their
rights.  1  am  not  able  to  >d\  how
patient,  long  suffering  and  kind
this  people  may  prove  under  the
oppressions  which  wicked  plotters
may  bring  upon  them  ;  but  of  one
thing  I  am  certain  and  that  is,  God
will  permit  nothing  to  occur  to  our
hurt  Nor  will  he,  if  we  aie  faith-
ful, permit  the  wicked  to  do  any-
thing that  will  not  ultimately  prove
beneficial  to  those  who  love  and
obey  Him.  With  the  companion-
ship of  the  Holy  Spirit  the  doc-
trines of  the  Priesthood  will  distil
upon  our  minds  as  the  dews  of  hea-
ven, and  we  have  nothing  to  fear.
The  time  may  be  near  at  hand* when
men's  souls  will  be  tried,  but  those
po^e.^ing  the  inspiration  of  the
Almighty,  will  bear  the  test  as  the
faithful  ami  true  ifti  other  ages  have
done.  Unaided  by  ihe  power  of
God,  we  might  be  placed  under  cir-
cumstances that  would  cause  us  to
fear  and  tremble  and  possibly  plead
for  life  at  the  sacrifice  of  allegiance
to  Him.  Under  the  pressure  of  tear
Peter  denied  his  Lord  and  Master,
but  that  transpired  before  lie  wis
"endowed  with  power  from  on
high*"  From  the  day  of  Pentecost,
when  he  received  the  Comforter,
until  his  death  no  power  on  earth  or
beneath  could  have  induced  him  to
do  such  a  thim;.  This  fact  is  attested
beyond  doubt,  by  what  we  know  of
his  life  and.  labors  subsequent  to
that  awful  night,  when  the  powers


of  earth  ami  hell  seemed  to  prevail
even  over  the  San  of  God.

Deprived  of  the  sustaining  power*
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Latter  day
Saints  might  yield  to  the  fear  of  ar-
tilleiy,  hid  lets  and  bayonets,  so  of-
ten recommended  by  Christian
divines  as  the  best  means  with  which
to  xohv  the  "Mormon'  problem;
but  with  that  spirit  such  agencies
become  impotent  Confidence  in  God
destroys  fear,  and  a  knowledge  of
the  resurrection  of  the  just,  takes
away  the  sting  of  death.  The  in-
spiration and  guidance  of  the  Holy
Spirit  have  prompted  the  Presi-
dency and  Apostles  of  this  Church
to  open  meeting-houses  and  Taber-
nacles for  ministers  of  various  reli-
gious denominations  to  preach  in ;
w  idle  our  Elders  were  being  perse-
cuted, hunted  aud  sometimes  whip-
ped by  members  of  these  same
denominations.  The  contrast  be-
tween the  treatment  which  we  have
given  and  that  which  we  have  re-
ceived is  very  great.  And  if  we
have  nut  under  every  circumstance
"  turned  the  other  cheek  to  be  smit-
ten," we  have  at  least  tried  to  do
gond  for  evil.  Without  purse  or  scrip
our  Elders  have  faithfully  sought  to
preach  the  Gospel  in  every  Christian
land  ;  and  while  we,  here  in  Utah,
have  extended  courtesy  and  kindness
to  ministers  of  Christian  denomina-
tions, many  of  our  Elders  have
wandered  like  outcasts,  sleeping  un-
der the  hedges  and  in  the  woods
with  leaves  as  their  only  covering,
like  their  Master,  having  no  place
other  than  that  provided  by  nature,
to  lay  their  heads.  Others  when
provided  with  places  of  rest  have
been  called  out  aud  flaved  wit
hickory  withes.  Poison  has  been
administered  in  the  food  of  some,
and  others  have  been  killed.

How  exactly  similar  this  treat-
ment is  to  that  received  by  the


#


THK  MISSION*  OF I  HE  HOLY  OIIOST,  JC1C,


U13


Saints  of  old  ;  and  yet  Christians
appear  to  be  utterly  unable  to  learn
a  lesson  from  the  parallel.  To  them
nothing  good  can  come  oat  of  Naza
reth,  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven
they  cannot  see,  for  they  have  not
been  born  again.  The  world  loves
its  own,  but  it  loved  not  the  disci-
ples of  Jesus  because  he  called  them
out  of  the  world.  On  the  same
principle  the  world  cannot  love  us.
Let  us  realize  this  fact,  and  while
being  just  to  all  men,  let  us  live  the
religion  of  Jesus  Christ,  ami  trust
In  God.  If  we  are  pressed  on  all
sides  from  without,  it  will  tend  to
unite  and  make  us  all  the  more
Solid.  Snow  is  soft  and  yielding,
melting  easily  under  the  genial  rays
of  the  sun,  but  press  it  hard  from
every  side  ami  it  congeals  into  a
frozen  mass,  and  in  that  state  is  ca-
pable of  resisting  mighty  forces.

Pressure  from  without,  as  ob-
served before,  will  tend  to  unite  and
make  us  better  and  stronger.  Better
because  the  spirit  manifested  to-
wards us  by  the  wicked,  will  cause
us  to  lay  aside  the  little  envies  and
jealousies  that  may  have  existed
among  us.  Stronger,  because  the
hatred  of  our  enemies  will  teach  us
to  trust  more  fully  in  God,  And  in
doing  this  we  shall  learn  to  follow
the  example  of  the  faithful  and
true,  A  special  law  was  passed  for
the  sole  purpose  of  entrapping  the
three  Hebrew  boys.  It  failed*
When  questioned  by  the  wrathful
iing  they  could  not  say  whether
God  would  preserve  or  suffer  them
to  perish,  but  they  could  say
that  "  they  would  not  fall  down
and  worship  the  image  which  the
king  had  made.11  No  fault  could  be
found  with  Daniel,  so  those  who
were  jealous  of  bis  growing  influence
and  power  succeeded  in  securing  the
enactment  of  a  special  law  which
they  knew  he  must  violate  or  be


false  to  his  God.  But  Daniel  was
true  to  Goilt  and  with  his  face
turned  toward  Jerusalem,  prayed
as  before.  How  many  Daniels  or
Hebrew  boys  we  have  among  us
I  do  not  know.  Lions'  dens  and
heate-I  caldrons,  prisons  and  dun-
geon cells,  the  rack  and  the  rope,
have  each  and  all  been  used  to  pun-
ish those  un  willing  *  to  forsake  God,
or  disobey  His  laws.  They  have
their  terrors,  but  the  blood-stained
pages  of  history  attest  that  they
have  been  failures  when  aj  plied
as  means  with  which  to  change
men's  religion,  violate  conscience,
or  coerce  the  human  mind.  As  it
has  been  in  the  past,  so  it  will  be  in
the  future  :  the  faithful  beina  in-
spired  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  will  set
their  hearts  upon  the  redemption  of
Zion,  and  relying  upon  the  pro-
mises, will  turn  their  faces  towards
Jerusalem,  pray  as  before,  and  fol-
low Jesus  Christ  in  life  and  death.
Let  the  wicked  rage  and  the  adver-
sary exert  his  power,  the  righteous
will  gain  the  victory,  and  when
thrones  are  cast  down  the  Saints
shall  prevail.

Let  us  maintain  the  Constitution
of  our  country,  and  all  laws  enacted
in  conformity  therewith,  realizing
that  the  destruction  of  the  Con-
stitution must  lead  to  the  ruin  and
destruction  of  the  Union.  Let  us
j  honor  the  rulers  of  the  nation  and
uphold  them,  by  faith  and  prayers
as  long  as  it  is  possible  to  do  so.
I  desire  to  regard  the  President  as
an  honorable  man.  As  the  chief
executive  of  a  great  nation  he  should
have  the  confidence  and  respect
of  the  people.  Should  he  select
honorable,  unbiassed  gentlemen
for  the  Utah  commission,  as  I  have
reason  to  hope  he  will,  they  can  do
much  towards  modifying  the  unjust
law  under  which  they  must  act,
but  whether  such  are  appointed


214  JOURNAL  OF

or  not,  we  must  continue  to  pray  for
our  enemies  and  those  that  despite-
fulJy  use  us,  until  by  and  by  we
shall  learn  the  lesson  so  well  that
when  t lie  little  stone  cut  out  of  the
mountains  without  hamls  shall  roll
forth,  become  a  mighty  mountain,
fill  the  whole  earth,  and  the  Saints
of  the  Most  High  have  the  rule  and
dominion  they  will  never  be  dis-
posed to  oppression.

I  pray  fur  the  peace  and  blessings
of  God  to  be  with  all  Israel,  and
with  the  honest  everywhere.  Thou-
sands are  misguided  and  deceived
by  priests  who  preach  for  money  and
divine  for  hire  ;  ministers  who  make
merchandize  of  the  souls  of  men.
The  mother  of  Harlots  has  "made
all  nations  to  drink  of  the  wine  of
the  wrath  of  her  fornication,"  just  as
John  the  Revelator  saw  she  would
do,  but  among  those  nations  are
many  honest,  upright  ones.  For
them  I  pray.  In  conclusion  let  me
impress  upon  your  minds  the  spirit
of  inspiration  given  through  Joseph
the  Prophet,  while  incarcerated  in
Liberty  Jail,  while  suffering  the
abuse  of  his  enemies,  and  while  being
deprived  of  his  liberty  and  the  as-
sociation of  family  and  friends  for
the  Gospel's  sake,  he  says.  "No
power  or  influence  can  or  ought  to
be  maintained  by  virtue  of  the
Priesthood,  only  by  persuasion,  by


DISCOURSES.

long-suffering,  by  gentleness  and
meekness  and  by  love  unfeigned.

By  kindness  and  pure  knowledge,
which  shall  greatly  enlarge  the  soul
without  hypocrisy,  and  without
guile.

Reproving  betimes  with  sharpness,
when  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  then  showing  forth
afterwards  an  increase  of  love
toward  him  wdiom  thou  hast  re-
proved, lest  he  esteem  thee  to  be
his  enemy  ;  that  he  may  know  that
thy  faithfulness  is  stronger  than  the
cords  of  death.

Let  thy  bowels  also  be  full  of  char-
ity towards  all  men,  and  to  the  house-
hold of  faith,  and  let  virtue  garnish
thy  thoughts  unceasingly,  then  shall
thy  confidence  wax  strong  in  the
presence  of  God,  and  the  doctrine
of  the  Priesthood  shall  distil  upon
thy  soul  as  the  dews  from  heaven.

The  Holy  Ghost  shall  be  thy  con-
stant companion,  and  thy  sceptre
an  unchanging  sceptre  of  righteous-
ness  and  truth,  and  thy  dominion
shall  be  an  everlasting  dominion,
and  without  compulsory  means  it
shall  flow  unto  thee  for  ever  and
ever.  c

May  God  enable  us  to  learn  these
things,  and  to  be  true  and  faithful
to  Him,  is  my  prayer  in  the  name
of  Jesus.  Amen.


^  *  ■  m


11


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  at  Logan  Conference,  Sunday  Afternoon,  August  6th,

1882,


(Reported  by  Geo.  R  Gibbs.)


THE  TEMPLE  AT  LOGAN — THE  LIQUOR  TRAFFIC — CHURCH  ORGANIZATION
— DUTIES  OF  ITS  OFFICERS — TREATMENT  OF  TRANSGRESSORS  —  AN

interesting  anecdote  and  ITS  MoRAL  —  VARIOUS  OFFICES  AND

CALLINGS  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.  — THE  GUIDANCE  OF  GOD  —
HONOR  DUE  TO  HIS  PRIESTHOOD  —  GROWTH  AND  PROGRESS  OF
GOD'S  WORK — ITS  OPPOSITION  BY  THE  WORLD — THE  REGENERATION
OF  THE  LAMANITES  AND  GENERAL  SALVATION  OF  MAN.


There  is  one  thin?  I  wish  to  speak  |
about  which  has  already  been  refer- !
red  to,  that  is,  in  regard  to  your  I
Temple. I  can  join  with  the  breth-
ren in  saying  that  I  am  very  well 3
pleased  with  the  progress  made  on
that  building,  and  with  the  energy
and  liberality  that  has  been  mani-
fested towards  it. Fur  one  I  have
not  a  word  of  cum  plaint  to  make
about  anything  ;  I  think  that  things
have  been  done  and  managed  very
well. Some  of  the  speakers  have  1
given the  Trustee-in-Trnst  credit
for  doinir  something  towards  it ;
but then, that  is  nothing— it  is
your  means  not  mine  particularly,  :
only as one  of  you. And  what
you  have  done  you  have  done  out-  '
side  of  these  things, and  conse-1
quently  I  think  there  is  a  little  more
credit  due  to  you  than  to  the  Trus*  j
tee  in-Trust. The  people  in  this
Temple  district  have  furnished  about
three-fourths  of  the  means,  and  the  :
Trustee-in -Trust  about  one-fourth
Now  wh  do  not  wish  to  have  any  of
the  employees  deprived  of  what  is
justly  their  due ;  for  the  laborer
is  worthy  of  his  hire — I  did  not
like  to  hear  some  of  the  remarks


this  morning  to  the  effect  that  we
were  in  debt  ;  we  calculate  to  pay
our  debts  as  we  go  along,  and  then
we  feel  that  we  have  acted  justly
and  are  free  from  all  responsibilities
and  care  ;  for  all  just  demands
ought  always  to  be  met.  We  have
kept  things  along  pretty  well,  and  I
think  that  we  will  be  able  "  to  put
it  through.  I  have  been  talking
with  Brother  Card,  who  is  the  su-
perintendent of  the  Temple,  and
also  with  the  Temple  committee;
an  I  I  will  tell  yon  what  I  am  pre-
pared to  do,  it  you  are  prepared  to
follow  suit,  and  thus  stop  all  remarks
about  tardiness  of  pay,  for  it  is
proper  that  all  just  obligations
ought  to  be  and  must  he  met.
Brother  Card  thinks  that  th*  sum
of  $20,000  will  complete  the  build-
ing. I  do  not  know  whether  his
figures  are  too  much  or  too  little,
hut  if  that  is  sufficient,  it  senilis  as
nothing  compared  with  what  we
have  already  done.  We  have  got
accustomed  to  it;  and  it  is  much
easier  domi*  a  thin*;  when  you  are
used  to  it  than  when  you  are  not
There  is  a  proposition  to  the  effect
that  a  fifty  cent  donation  be  made  ;


JiK  KNAL OP  niSLOUKSKS


if  that  he  done  and  the  people  are
willing  to  mboud  to  it,  all  well  m j; *  1
good  ;  and  whatever  amount  is  sub-
scribed, 1  will,  as  Trustee-in -Tru*t,
add  my  proportion  to  it,  according
to  the  pro-rata  in  the  figures  men-
tion ed.  What  do  you  say,  do  you
think  you  can  stand  it  1  (President
W.  B.  Preston,  I  think  we  can,
we'll  try),  Brother  Preston  saj/s  he,
thinks  you  can  or  will  be  found  try-
ing. I  iio  not  know  what  your'
donation  will  amount  to,  and  there-
fore I  will  undertake  to  gay  now  that
tin*  Trustec-in-Tru^t  will  he  pood
for  £5,000,  which  it  is  stated  will  be
a  fourth  of  the  sum  required  to  finish
the  work,  I  would  like  to  know
now  whether  you  are  willing  that  %
as  Tru^tee-in-Tru*u,  should  help  you
tu  i  lie  amount  of  $5,000  ?  All  that
gre  willing  iai*e  up  the  right  hand.
(A  forest  of  hands  went  up)  I
believe  that  is  carried,  (Laughter.)
Sow  I  want,  you  to  but  to  that  the
sum  of  $10,000.  (Here  President
Taylor 6  attention  was  called  to  the
fact  that  he  had  made  a  mistake,
that  the  proportion  of  the  people
would  be  $15,000  instead  of
•  10,000.)  I  am  reminded  that  1
have  made  a  mistake,  that  it  should
be  $15,000.  Will  the  clerk  please
give  us  the  correct  figures  so  that
we  may  do  things  understand*
ingly.  (The  clerk  ascertained
that  the  Trust  ee-in-Trust  had  paid
more  than  oue-iourth  but  not  quite
ope- 1  hi  I'*.,)  V*  e  will  not  be  too  precise
about  the.-e  matters,  perhaps  it
would  be  as  well  to  err  on  that  side  j
as  on  tlu-  other,  for  in  any  event,
we  are  all  of  us  desirous  to  see  the
work  progress  and  have  all  our  lia-
bilities met.  Well,  we'll  let  it  go  at
10,000.  I  propose  to  give  you  my
portion  on  demand  that  these  men
may  get  their  pay,  and  then  allow
you  a  little  time  to  get  in  your
harvest  which  will  give  you  an  op-


portunity to  accomplish  your  end  of
the  matter  What  do  you  say?
The  question  was  put  to  vote  and
carried  unanimously.

There  were  some  remarks  made
about  liquor  drinking  this  morning,
and  some  people  seem  to  think  that
there  is  a  great  difficulty  about
managing  these  things,  but  I  don't
think  there  is  if  we  can  only  man-
age ourselves.  1  feel  like  giving  you
credit  for  what  you  have  done  in
this  respect,  and  hope  that  you  will
be  able  to  keep  it  up,

I  want  to  state  here,  that  God  has
organize*!  II Church  hi  such  a  way
that  all  of  these  matters  can  be  ar
ranged  within  the  Church,  law  or
no  law,  if  we  will  only  do  our  duty,
ami  each  of  us  magnify  our  calling
and  our  Priesthood  in  the  various
positions  that  we  oecupj  in  the
Church  and  kingdom  of  God.  And
it  is  a  much  better  principle  than
the  civil  law,  as  the  civil  law  is  fre-
quently perverted  by  mal-ad minis-
tration and  made  to  operate  in  such
a  way  as  to  trample  on  the  rights  of
man.

The  organization  of  the  Church  is
after  the  plan  that  exists  in  heaven,
and  according  to  the  principles  that
God  has  revealed  in  the  interest  of
His  Church  upon  the  earth  and  for
the  advancement  and  rolling  forth
of  his  kingdom.  We  start  in  with
the  Teacher  and  with  the  Priest,
wlio^eduty  it  is  to  know  the  position
of  all  the  members  in  their  several
districts  ;  if  they  do  their  duty  they
will  know  really  and  truly  the  posi-
tion of  all  those  who  come  under
their  charge.  Their  duty  is  very
simple*  What  is  it  1  They  are  to
see  that  there  is  no  hard  feeling  ex-
isting in  the  breasts  of  the  Saints
one  towards  another  ;  that  there  are
no  dishonest  or  fraudulent  acts,  no
lasciviousness  orcorruption,  no  lying,
false  accusations,  profanity  or  drunk-


THE  TEMPLE  AT  LOGAN,  ETC,


217


enness  ;  and  that  the  people  call
upon  God  in  prayer  in  their  various
house) iolds — the  father  and  mother
and  children,  and  that  all  perform
their  various  duties  and  do  right.
I  look  upon  it  that  the  Teachers  and
the  Priests  occupy  a  very  importan  t
position  in  the  Church  and  kingdom
of  God  ;  and  that  if  they  perform
their  duty  aright,  there  will  be  no
hard  speaking ;  there  will  be  no
hard feelings, no bitterness  or
wrath ; there will  be  no  fraud
no lasciviousness of any  kind,
no  drunkenness,  nor  will  there  be
any  bitter  or  improper  feelings  of
any  kind  ;  for  it  is  their  right  and
privilege  to  look  after  these  things,
and  not  only  their  right  and  privi-
lege but  their  duty ;  and  if  they  do
not  fulfill  this,  they  are  not  magni-
fying their  calling  and  Priesthood,
But  if  they  are  and  people  are  dis-
posed to  listen  to  them,  then  every-
thing will  be  right  in  regard  to  this
matter. And  if  there  are  those  who
are  not  disposed  to  listen  to  them
and  to  do  right,  then  it  becomes  the
duty  of  the  Teachers,  after  pleading
with  them  and  doing  the  best  they
can,  to  report  them  to  their  Bishop ;
and  then  it  devolves  upon  Itim  to
do  his  part,  not  in  anger  or  animos-
ity or  in  the  spirit  of  vindictiveness,
but  as  a  savior ;  and  the  Teacher  and
the  Priest  ought  to  act  in  the  same
way, And  while  God  has  organized
His  Church  upon  the  earth  after  the
plan  that  exists  in  the  heavens,  it
is  for  the  various  officers  in  the
Church  to  fulfill  the  duties  devolving
upon  them,  acting  in  all  kindness,
long-sufTering  and  mercy  before  the
Lord,  yet  with  justice  and  judg-
ment, that  the  law  of  God  may  be
honored,  that  the  principles  of  right-
eousness may  be  exalted,  that  the
workers  of  iniquity  may  be  ashamed,
that  the  meek  may  increase  their
joy  in  the  Lord,  and  the  poor  among


I  men  may  rejoice  in  the  Holy  One
|  of  Israel  ;  that  righteousness  and
truth  may  prevail  among  the  people
of  God ;  and  we  may  act  not  in  name
only,  but  in  reality  as  the  Saints  of
God,  without  rebuke  in  the  midst  of
a  crooked  and  perverse  generation.

If  any  persous  then  mould  feel
that  they  are  aggrieved  by  the  acts
of  the  Teacher  or  the  Bishop  ;  if
they  should  think  that  they  have
been  unnecessarily  harshly  dealt
with,  they  have  the  right  of  appeal
to  the  High  Council—High  Priests
selected  from  among  the  people  and
set  apart  because  of  their  fidelity,
their  integrity,  their  honor  and  their
justice — at  least  these  are  the  kind
of  qualifications  necessary  to  fill  this
calling.  And  if  upon  an  appeal  to
the  High  Council  on  any  of  these
matters  {of  course  including  drunk-
enness), they  find  there  has  been
unnecessary  harsh nes?,  it  would  be
for  them  to  remedy  the  evil,  to  see
that  justice  is  done  and  that  no  man
is  oppressed ;  on  the  contrary  that
all  have  their  rights,  freedom,  liber-
ty and  equal  justice  in  righteousness
without  fear  ur  favor.

When  things  are  attended  to  in
this  way  they  move  along  all  right.
If  professed  Saints  will  not  obey  the
law  of  God,  bu^  violate  the  com-
mands of  the  Almighty,  they  are
not  fit  to  be  the  servants  and  hand-
maids of  the  Lord,  We  are  told  that
they  must  be  dealt  with  according
to  rules  laid  down  in  the  law  of  God,
by  the  proper  persons  that  He  has
placed  in  His  Church  for  that  pur-
pose,

I  heard  a  man  not  long  ago  say
that  in  the  place  he  lived  he  had
seen  a  great  many  people  drunk;
it  was  one  of  those  places  abounding
with  saloons  in  which  they  could  get
beastly  drunk ;  and  that  some  of
those  who  thus  indulged  were
Elders,  High  Priests,  etc. The  man


218


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


himself  was  a  High  Priest  If  I
had  seen  such  men  I  should  have
gone  to  them  and  told  them  what
course  to  pursue  to  stop  those  in-
famies. Every  Elder  in  Israel  ought
to  be  on.  the  watch-tower  as  watch-
men upon  the  walls  of  Zion,
Where  iniquity  prevails  or  evil  of
any  kind,  it  is  for  them  to  do  what
they  can  to  stem  the  current  of  evil
and  to  lift  up  and  exalt  the  people
that  they  may  comprehend  correct
principles,  live  their  religion  and  be
prepared  to  receive  the  blessings  of
Jehovah.  When  I  was  quite  a  boy
— I  was  not  a  Mormon  then,  but  I
had  principles  of  humanity  never-
theless-— there  was  an  old  gentleman
whom  I  respected,  he  was  a  good
man,  a  praying  man  —  he  had  a
wife  who  diil  not  want  to  pray,  and
who  interfered  with  his  devotions  ;
she  was  uneasy  and  turbulent,  and
a  kind  of  thorn  in  bis  flesh.  Under
these  trials  he  got  along  very  well,
but  it  used  to  drive  him  to  the
Lord.  After  a  while  she  died  and
he  married  again  ;  -  this  time  to  a
very  amiable  lady ;  his  wife  was  so
pleasant  and  agreeable  that  the
change  in  his  circumstances  was  very
great  Being  thus  comfortably
situated  he  became  remiss  in  some  of
his  religious  duties,  and  commenced
by  giving  way  to  the  temptation  of
liquor.  Seeing  the  course  he  was
taking  I  went  to  him.  I  felt  a  little
bashful  on  account  of  my  youth  at
the  time,  but  because  of  long  friend-
ship and  out  of  respect  for  his  many
good  qualities,  I  telt  it  a  duty  to
bring  these  delinquencies  to  his  no-
tice ;  I  told  him  that  I  had  seen  him
drunk  a  few  days  previously,  and
that  it  had  hurt  me  very  much  to
see  him  in  such  a  state,  a*  his  course
had  always  been  exemplary  and  he
was  a  man  whom  1  respected  very
highly.  He  appreciated  my  good
feelings,  saying  that  lie  felt  disgraced


arid  promised  to  mend  his  ways.
Now  that  was  not  l*  Mormonism/'
but  it  was  a  correct  feeling.  Cannot
we,  as  Latter  day  Saints,  do  as  much
srood  as  those  who  are  not  Latter-
day  Saints  ?  Cannot  we  go  after  our
brethren  and  sisters  when  they  do
wrong,  with  love  and  affection,  and
lead  them  in  the  paths  of  life  I  But
then,  if  they  will  not  do  it  after
much  persuasion,  it  becomes  our
duty  to  deal  with  them  as  the  law
of  God  directs ;  but  in  doing  this
we  ought  to  be  full  of  love  and  kind-
ness one  toward  another,  and  not  be
harsh,  acrimonious  or  desirous  to
place  them  in  a  wrong  ;  such  feelings
do  not  become  Latter  dav  Saints.
We  ought  to  cherish  feelings  of
kindness  and  love  and  Ion gsuffe ring  ;
but  we  do  not  want  our  charity  to
cover  too  many  sins*  Everybody  is
at  liberty  to  do  this,  whoever  he  may
be,  it  being  our  privilege  to  do  good*
to  try  to  redeem  and  exalt  our  fel-
low-men, and  to  act  as  saviors  upon
Mount  Zion.  But  when  people  will
not  do  ri^ht,  are  we  to  foster  the
wrong?  No,  God  forbid.  \\\t  talk
sometimes  about  the  celestial  glory,
the  terrestrial  glory  and  the  telestial
glory,  do  you  think  that  a  man  will
get  the  celestial  glory  if  he  does  not
abide  the  law  of  the  celestial  king-
dom 1  You  Latter-day  Saints  know
better.  Well,  then,  if  men  are  dis-
posed  to  do  wrong,  to  violate  the
commandments  of  God  and  yield
to  evils  of  various  kinds,  is  a  Bishop
authorized,  or  is  the  High  Council
authorized  to  cover  up  those  sins  and
allow  them  to  go  on  ?  I  t*11  you  No,
they  are  not  And  if  the  Priest  and
the  Teacher  do  not  do  their  duty,  it
is  for  the  Bishop  to  look  after  them
to  see  that  they  do  their  duty.  And
if  the  Bishop  does  not  do  his  duty  in
this  respect,  it  becomes  the  duty  of
the  President  of  the  Stake  to  do  it,
to  see  that  righteousness  prevails,


THE  TEMPLE  AT  LOGAN,  ETC


21*


that  the  principles  of  truth  are  sus-
tained, that  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God  is  honored,  and  that  the  princi-
ples of  equity,  justice  and  righteous-
ness and  the  fear  of  God  are  main-
tained in  their  purity  in  the  Stake
over  which  he  presides.  And  if  the
President  of  the  Stake  does  not  at-
tend to  this  duty,  then  it  devolves
upon  the  First  Presidency  to  see
that  no  iniquity  exists  in  the
Church.  And  when  these  things
are  done  we  are  then  in  a  position
to  approach  God  our  Heavenly
Father  to  ask  and  receive,  to  seek
and  find  and  to  knock  ami  have  the
door  opened  unto  us.

And  besides  these  offices,  which
are  the  leading,  prominent  media
or  channels  through  which  these
things  are  reached,  there  are  other
methods  by  which  they  can  he  ad-
justed. The  Twelve,  where  they  [
go,  are  expected  to  regulate  matters
uf  this  kind.  We  have  a  Quorum
of  High  Priests  in  each  Stake,  and
it  is  for  them  to  exercise  themselves
and  their  influence  individually  and
as  a  Quorum  in  the  interests  of
righteousness  and  virtue  .  and  the
maintenance  of  the  principles
connected  with  the  kingdom  of  God.
They  have  no  particular  position  or
calling ;  they  are  ordained  to  the
High  Priesthood,  and  it  is  for
their  President  to  meet  with  them
and  have  them  humble  themselves
before  God,  and  seek  for  the  guidance
of  His  Holy  Spirit  and  the  light  |
of  revelation  ;  "  for  this  ordinance"
we  are  told  in  the  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  "is  instituted  for  the
purpose  of  qualifying  those  who
shall  be  appointed  standing  Pre-
sidents or  servants  over  different  '
Stakes  scattered  abroad,  .  and
they  may  travel  also  if  they  choose,
but  rather  be  ordained  for  standing
Presidents ;  this  is  their  office
and  calling  saith  the  Lord  your  I!


God  ;*  that  they  may  comprehend
the  principles  of  law,  of  govern-
ment, of  justice  and  equity,  and
watch  over,  not  only  themselves,
but  their  families  and  friends,  asso-
ciations and  neighborhoods,  and  act
as  fathers  in  Israel,  looking  after  the
welfare  of  the  people  and  exerting  a
salutary  influence  over  the  Saints  of
the  Most  High  God-
Again,  we  have  our  organization
of  Seventies,  and  they  ought  to  see
that  there  is  no  iniquity  among
their  quorums — 10  drunkenness,  no
whoredom,  no  fraud,  nothing  that
is  wrong  or  improper,  unholy  or  im-
pure ;  but  that  they  are  men  of  God
chosen  and  set  apart  as  messengers
to  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and
wherever  they  reside  it  is  their  duty^
and  it  is  the  duty  of  all  men  in  Is-
rael, to  fcpe  that  there  is  no  iniquity,
to  use  their  influence  on  the  side  of
right,  and  to  put  down  wrong.

Then  again,  the  same  thins;  will
apply  to  Elders.  The  Elder  is  or-
dained in  many  instances  to  act  as  a
standing  minister  among  the  peo-
ple, to  preach  to  them,  to  instruct
them  as  we  are  doing  and  as  your
missionaries  are  doing  and  as  others
are  doing,  preaching  among  the
people  at  home,  and  frequently  going
abroad  as  circumstances  may  re-
quire.

Now,  while  we  are  here,  we  do  not
want  to  hear  a  man  laugh  and  say,
"Brother  so-and-so  is  as  drunk  as
a  fool"  Why  do  you  not  go  to  him
and  speak  of  this  evil  to  himself?
Why  do  you  not  go  and  try  to  put
him  on  the  right  road,  and  tell  him
to  walk  in  it1  Why  not  ask  him
to  go  with  you  before  the  Lord  to
confess  his  sins,  to  seek  for  assist-
ance to  overcome  his  weakness!
In  doing  this  you  help  him,  and
you  help  one  another  to  do  right,
not  in  the  spirit  of  laughter  or  light-
ness I that  is  not becoming  the


220


Jul  US  XL  OJ'  DISCOURSES.


Saints  of  the  Most  High,  but  it
stoonld  he  in  the  spirit  of  kindly  re-
gard and  affection.

We  have  also  our  Young  Men's
Mutual  Improvement  Associations,
and  I  am  pleased  to  find  so  good  an
influence  prevailing  among  them,
yet  there  are  many  things  that  are
wrong  even  among  them.  They
need  watching  over  ;  they  require
to  look  after  one  another  and  use  a
kind  supervisory  care  over  their
moiale,  and  if  any  among  them
should  go  astray,  to  admonish
them  and  lead  them  in  another
path.  Then  we  have  our  Young
Ladies1  Associations;  they  are
trying  what  they  can  do  in  lead-
ing the  female  youth  in  the  right
way.  And  when  they  see  the
daughters  of  Israel  liable  to  be  led
astray,  let  them  labor  with  them,
treat  them  kindly,  preserve  them
from  evil,  and  guide  them  in  the
pat  lis  of  life.  We  none  of  us  are
pre^  rved  only  as  we  are  preserved
of  God.

Brother  Joseph  F.  Smith  1>poke
rightly  this  morning  when  he  said,
that  no  man  could  guide  this  king-
dom ;  he  cannot  unless  God  be  with
him  and  on  the  side  of  the  Elders
of  Israel,  But  with  Him  on  their
side,  all  things  will  move  on  aright,
and  the  intelligence  and  the  revela-
tions of  God  will  be  poured  out
His  law  will  be  marie  known  and
the  principles  of  truth  be  developed;
-or  it  is  not  the  kingdom  of  God,
And  we  all  of  us  ought  to  humble
ourselves  before  God,  and  seek  for
the  guidance  of  the  Almighty.

There  are  forces  at  work  in  the
world  that  will  in  time  overturn  the
ivorld,  which  are  to-day  sapping  the
foundation  of  all  governments  and
eating  as  a  canker  the  foundation  of
all  rule  and  dominion  ;  and  by  and
by  their  thrones  will  be  cast  down
and  nations  and  empires  will  be


overturned,  for  God  will  arise  to
purge  the  world  from  its  iniquities,
its  evils  mid  corruptions.  Ami  W
have  more  or  less  of  the  principle
of  insubordination  nmong  us.
But  there  is  a  principle  associated
with  the  kingdom  of  God  that
recognizes  God  in  all  things  ;  and
that  recognizes  the  Priesthood  in  all
things  ;  and  those  who  do  not  do  it
had  better  repent  or  they  will  come
to  a  stand  very  quickly  ;  I  tell  you
that  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Do
not  think  that  you  are  wise  and  that
you  can  manage  and  manipulate
the  Priesthood,  for  you  cannot  do
it,  God  must  manage,  regulate,
dictate  and  stand  at  the  head  an
every  man  in  his  place.  The  ark
of  God  does  not  need  steadying}
especially  by  incompetent  men  with
out  revelation  and  without  a  know-
ledge of  the  kingdom  of  God
and  its  laws.  It  is  a  great  work
that  we  are  engaged  in  ;  and  it  is
for  us  to  prepare  ourselves  for  the
labor  before  us,  and  to  acknowledge
God,  His  authority,  His  law  and  His
Priesthood  in  all  things.

I  have  men  come  to  me  sometimes
with  some  great  complaints  to  make
ah  out  their  Bishop.  I  hear  them,
but  I  either  send  them  back  to  their
Bishop  or  to  their  President  as  cir-
cumstances dictate.  Then  I  have
Bishops  come  to  me  finding  fault
with  their  Presidents.  I  send  the
back  to  their  Presidents,  and  w ri1
to  those  whose  business  it  is  to  a
tend  to  it.  I  acknowledge  every
man  in  Ins  place  and  office,  whether
President,  Bishop,  Priest,  Teacher
or  Deacon  ;  and  then  they  should
acknowledge  everybody  over  them,
or  God  will  destroy  them.  I  tell
you  that  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.
I  know  what  I  am  saying,  I  te
you  it  is  the  word  and  the  will  of
the  Lord.  Do  not  be  wise  above
what  is  written. Do  not  be  too


THE  TEMPLti  AT  LOGAN,  ETC,


221


anxious  to  be  too  smart,  to  manage
and  manipulate  and  to  put  things
right  ;  but  pray  for  those  that  God
has  placed  in  the  different  offices  of
this  Church  that  they  may  be  enabled
to  perform  their  several  duties.
The1  Lord  will  sustain  I  lib  servants
and  give  them  His  Holy  Spirit  and
the  light  ut  revelation,  if  they  seek
Him  in  the  way  that  he  has  ap-
pointed, and  He  will  lead  them  and
lead  you  in  the  right  path.  This  is
the  order  of  the  kingdom  of  God,
as  1  understand  it,  and  not  the  other*
And  it  is  fur  us  to  learn  that  order
and  be  obedient  to  it.  And  thus  by
obedience  to  the  law  of  the  Priest*
hood,  drunkenness  and  all  other  im-
moralities can  be  rooted  out  and
overcome.

The  work  of  God  is  growing  and
increasing,  and  it  will  continue  to
do  so  until  the  words  of  the  prophet
will  be  fulfilled  who  said,  "  A  little
one  shall  become  a  thousand  ;  and
a  small  one  a  strong  nation  ;  I  the
Lord  will  hasten  it  in  his  time"  but
He  expects  every  man  iu  his  place
to  magnify  his  calling  and  to  honor
his  God.  And  while  there  are  evils
of  the  kind  I  speak  of,  there  is  a
great  amount  of  good,  of  virtue,  of
self-abnegation,  and  a  great  desire
to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  carry  out
His  purposes.  And  it  is  for  every
man  and  every  woman  to  do  his  and
her  part.

The  Relief  Societies  are  doing  a
great  work  generally  throughout  the
land  ;  and  the  Young  Men  sand  the
Young  Women's  Associations  are
doing  a  great  work  ;  but  I  am  sorry
to  say  I  sometimes  hear  of  occasional
acts  of  fornication  among  our  young
people.  Our  young  men  go  to  labor
on  railroads  and  mix  up  with  the
foul  mouthed  and  corrupt,  and  I  am
sorry  to  say,  that  once  in  a  while
they  copy  after  their  ways.  Fathers
and  mothers,  look  after  your  sons.


You  members  of  the  different  socie-
ties, look  after  your  members  and
try  to  save  the  erring  and  lead  thera
iu  the  paths  of  life.

There  is  a  great  zeal  and  a  great
interest  manifested  in  Sunday
schools,  which  is  also  very  praise-
worthy*  It  is  a  good  work  for  us  to
be  engaged  in.  Continue  in  it.  And
let  all  perform  their  parts,  whether
in  Sunday  school,  in  Relief  Societies,
in  Mutual  Improvement  Associa-
tions or  otherwise  ;  and  let  all  seek
to  act  with  a  single  eye  towards  the
glory  of  God.

We  are  living  in  an  important
age.  Time  is  marching  on,  and
events  of  great  magnitude  and  im-
portance are  transpiring.  The
nation  in  which  we  live  has  been
moved  against  us.  That  is  all  right
so  far  as  <God  permits  it ;  but  if  we
fear  him  and  keep  his  command-
ments as  a  people,  no  power  arrayed
against  us  can  harm  us.  God  will
come  forth  to  the  deliverance
of  his  people,  and  he  will  save  his
elect  if  they  will  only  do  right  and
obey  his  laws.  We  can  do  nothing
unless  assisted  by  the  Almighty,
neither  can  this  nation,  only  as  he
permits.  If  we  do  right  he  has  told
us  41  the  wrath  of  man  shall  praise
me,  and  the  remainder  I  will  re-
strain." God  lives,  and  his  eyes  are
over  us,  and  his  angels  are  round
and  about  us,  and  they  are  more
interested  in  us  than  we  are  in  our-
selves, ten  thousand  times,  but  we
dn  not  know  it.  We  become  self-
willed  and  captious,  and  lack  in  a
great  many  instances  that  liberality,
kindness  and  charity  that  ought  to
dwell  iu  the  bosoms  of  the  Saints  of
God.  The  Lord  is  a  great  deal  more
interested  in  hie  work  than  we  are.
We  think  a  great  deal  about
our  farms  and  our  houses,  our  wives
and  our  children,* which  is  all  very
proper. He  is  thinking  about  the


^22  JOUKNAL  U*

redemption  of  the  earth,  the  regene-
ration of  the  world,  the  salvation
of  the  living  and  the  dead,  and  the
accomplishment  of  the  purposes
spoken  of  by  all  the  holy  Prophets
since  the  world  began.  And  it  is
for  us  to  be  co-workers  with  him.
He  is  pleased  with  your  efforts  in
building  this  Temple  ;  and  the  an-
gels rejoice  as  they  see  you  go  forth
to  prepare  a  place  in  which  you  may
labor  for  the  living  and  the  dead,
Peuple  will  be  called  upon  to  labor,
as  a  mission  in  those  Temples  when
built.  And  you  will  rejoice  too,  for
while  you  are  engaged  in  the  work  of
God,  it  always  brings  peace  and  joy.
A  Temple  built  to  the  name  of  the
Lord  U  a  most  delightful  place  to
labor  in  :  wc  feel  that  we  are  saviors
upon  Mount  Zion,  and  that  the
kingdom  is  the  Lord's,  and  that  we
are  operating  for  God  and  not  for
ourselves,  but  in  the  interest  of  our
common  humanity  and  in  the  sal-
vation of  the  world.

Let  us  attend  to  our  duties  and
<lo  not  get  up  any  quarrels  In  our
families.  Husbands  treat  your
wives;  with  kindness  and  try  to
make  your  home  a  heaven  for  them  ;
and  train  your  children  in  the  fear
of  God.  Then  you  sisters,  treat
your  husbands  aright ;  be  full  of
kindness,  for  we  are,  as  the  old  wo-
man says,  all  "  poor,  miserable,  in-
dependent sinners,"  We  have  need
of  more  longsufferiug,  we  need  the
assistance  of  one  another,  and  the
help  of  the  Almighty.  Let  us  try
to  do  right.

There  are  a  great  many  things
open  to  my  mind  which  I  would
like  to  talk  about  ;  there  are  one  or
two,  however,  to  which  I  will  refer,
We  have  a  great  work  to  perform  1
Who  1  We  Seventies,  we  Elders  we
Priests.  What  have  we  to  dol  We
are  required  to  build  Temples  and
administer  in  them. What  else  1


We  have  to  take  the  Gospel  to  th
world,  as  we  have  been  doing*  and
are  doing,  and  to  progress  with
it;  to  advance  correct  principles
among  men,  and  to  lead  them  in
the  paths  of  life  and  salvation  ;  to
gather  them  to  Zion  and  to  teach
them  when  we  get  them  here  ;  to  go
on  and  control  matters ;  to  learn  to
manage  ourselves  and  our  own  af-
fairs, and  not  trouble  ourselves  too
much  with  outside  mat  Lets.

We  talk  sometimes  about  the  na-
tion being  inimical  to  us.  Whoever
dreamed  of  anything  else  ?  I  never
did.  What  did  the  Elders  preach
to  you,  say  10,  30  or  40  years  ago  1
It  was  that  the  people  of  the  wrorld
would  grow  worse  and  worse,  de-
ceiving and  being  deceived.  Do
you  expect  it  is  going  to  get
better?  I  do  not  What  did
Jesus  say  in  his  day  1  He  said :
"  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world
would  love  its  own,"  that  is  the
kind  of  love  that  exists  in  the  world*
It  does  not  amount  to  much  —it  is
love  to-day  and  hate  to-morrow,  as
the  case  may  be.  But  continued
the  Savior :  u  Because  ye  are
not  of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen
you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the
world  hate tli  you."  What  did  he
say  again  1  "  Blessed  are  ye  when
men  shall  revile  you  and  persecute
you  and  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil
against  you  falsely,  for  my  sake,
Kejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad,  for
great  is  your  reward  in  heaven  ;  for
so  persecuted  they  the  prophets
which  were  before  you."  Then  there
is  nothing  strange  about  it,  is  there?
Some  people  think  that  because  the
priests  of  Baal  lie  so  outrageously
about  us,  that  we  ought  to  be  angry.
Why  that  is  their  profession ;  for  they
are  of  their  father  the  Devil,  his
works  they  will  do,  and  he  was  a  liar
from  the  beginning.  By  and  by  when
we  and  they  get  through,  we  shall


THE  TEMPLE  AT  LOGAN,  ETC


223


find  that  all  liars  will  have  their
portion  with  hypocrites  and  unbe-
lievers ;  and  they  together  with
whoremongers  and  sorcerers,  will
be  fcund  outside  the  holy  city.  But
we  have  to  take  the  brunt  of  it.
No  matter,  we  can  stand  it.  As  I
said  to  some  prominent  gentlemen —
Members  of  Congress — who  were
here  recently,  You  are  cutting  up
rather  peculiar  antics  down  in
Washington.  It  does  not  matter
much,  however,  as  our  potatoes
grow  all  the  same-  That  is  how  I
feel  about  it.  Let  them  attend  to
their  fathers  business,  and  we  will
attend  to  our  Father's  business,
and  trust  in  him  and  pursue  that
course  that  will  be  right  in  his  sight.
We  do  not  want  to  get  up  any  ex-
citement about  anything.  Let  us
lean  upon  the  Lord,  seek  to  Him
and  ask  for  what  we  want,  do  right
And  wc  shall  receive.  And  while
they  are  treating  us  badly  we  will
treat  them  as  well  as  the  circum-
stances will  admit  of,  and  follow  out
the  instructions  of  Jesus,  who  told
us  to  do  good  for  evil ;  and  so  far
as  we  are  concerned  we  will  save
them  if  possible,  in  spite  of
themselves.

The  Lord  is  operating  upon  the
Lamanites,  and  many  of  them  are
being  baptized  into  the  Church.
Some  people  think  all  that  we  have
to  do  is  to  baptize  them,  that  they
are  a  poor  miserable  set  of  outcasts.
This  is  not  the  case.  Some  of  us
were  poor  miserable  outcasts  before
we  came  into  the  Church,  aud  we
needed  the  ministrations  of  the
Eld  era,  the  teachings  of  the  Holy  j
Priesthood,  and  the  blessings  arising  |
from  the  organization  of  the  Church*
Do  not  you  think  that  they  need
the  same  kind  of  treatment  1  How
would  you  like  a  mission,  some  of
you  High  Priests  and  Seventies,
to  proclaim  the  Gospel  to  that  fallen


race,  that  Israel  may  have  an  equal
chance  with  us,  for  God  expects
it  at  our  hands.  We  received
that  record  (Book  of  Mormon)
through  their  ancient  prophets  and
those  same  prophets  are  now  be-
ginning to  communicate  with  them
and  to  unfold  unto  them  the  work
that  he  has  commenced  with  us,  and
we  shall  have  mure  of  these  things
by  and  by-  It  is  proper  that  our
feelings  should  be  drawn  out  after
those  whom  the  Lord  is  operating
upon,  that  we  may  act  in  conjunc-
tion with  the  Lord  iu  leading  them
in  the  paths  of  life.

This  is  a  duty  that  devolves  upon
you  Elders  of  Israel,  for  as  he  has
commenced  to  labor  with  them  we
ought  to  be  one  with  him.  I  have
taken  the  liberty  recently  to  request
the  Twelve  to  attend  to  this ;  and
they  tfill  call  upon  the  Seventies,
the  High  Priests  and  others,  that  is,
they  will  if  they  do  their  duty.
What  do  you  think  of  it  1  I  think
that  the  field  is  enlarging  and  that
our  labors  are  increasing  and  becom-
ing more  extensive.  We  ought  to
feel  like  little  children  ;  we  ought
to  feel  like  humbling  ourselves  be-
fore God,  seeking  to  be  one  and  to
enjoy  the  light  of  His  Holy  Spirit,
.saying  0  Lord  God,  I  am  a  poor
feeble  creature,  thou  hast  called  me
to  Thy  work  and  hast  clothed  me
with  the  Holy  Priesthood ;  and  now
I  want  to  magnify  it ;  I  want  to  be  a
savior  on  Mount  Zion  ;  I  want  to
preside  anywhere,  or  preach  any-
where, or  do  any  labor  that  Thou
shalt  call  upon  me  to  do,  that  I  may
feel  that  I  am  Thy  servant  and  that
Thou  art  my  God,  and  that  I  am  for
Israel,  and  for  the  salvation  of  the
white  man,  the  red  man  and  ail
mankind.  That  is  the  position  we
are  in.  These  are  some  of  the
things  of  which  you  will  hear  more
by  and  by. I  thought  I  would  only


224


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


tell  you  a  part  as  perhaps  you  could
not  bear  it  all

God  bless  you,  and  God  bless  all
Israel,  and  God  bless  all  who  are  in
favor  of  righteousness,  truth  and


equal  rights  ;  and  may  the  Lord  God
confound  the  enemies  of  Israel,  and
all  who  are  opposed  to  just  rule  and
righteous  govern  me  tit,  in  the  name
of  Jesus*  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  APOSTLE  ERASTUS  SNOW,

Delivered  in  the  Salt  Lake  Assembly  Hall,  Sunday  Afternoon,

February  26th,  1881


(Reported  by  Geo.  F*  Gihbs.)


THE MARIiXAGK QUKSTION LAWFUL CONCUBINAGE AND ITS  UNLAWFUL

COUNTERFRIT VARIOUS VIEWS CONCERNING THE UNION OF  THK

SHXKS PLURAL  MAKHIaGK  AMONG THK LATTKii-DAY SAINTS  THE

KXAMPLR  AND  CHARACTKtt  f OF  ABRAHAM —  EXHORTATION TO  JUSTICE

AND EQUITY  CHRISTIAN CRIMkS IN NEW  KNGLAND  OPPRESSION

WITH ITS  RKAL  AND PllKTKNDED OBJECT  FRUITS  OF *'  MOHMonISm"

phis  -ns and  pknaltiks  powkblkss  to  stop  thk  lord's  wore  —

thk  oodoivkn  boon  of  libkrty  to  man  thk  final  triumph  of

hib  cause.


Since  coming  to  the  stand  I  have
been  requested  to  address  the  con-
gregation,

i  will  read  the  5th,  6th,  7th  and
8th  verses  of  the  2  »th  chapter  of
Genesis.

"  And  Abraham  gave  all  that  he
had  unto  Isaac.

But  unto  the  sons  of  the  concu-
bines, which  Abraham  had,  Abraham
gave  gifts,  and  sent  them  away  from
Isaac  his  son,  while  he  vet  lived,  an
hundred  threescore  and  fifteen
years.

Then  Abraham  gave  up  the  ghost,
and  died  in  a  good  old  age,  an  old
man,  and  full  of  years  ;  and  was
gathered  to  his  people'1


How  far  I  shall  confine  myself  to
the  matter  contained  in  this  passage
1  cannot  say.  The  present  eventful
[>eiiod  of  our  lives,  the  prejudices
which  uuw  move  the  people  of  our
nation  concerning  us,  and  the  pres-
sure that  is  being  brought  upon  us
chiefly  through  the  religious  ele-
ment of  the  country  to  influence
Congress  to  extraordinary  legisla-
tion against  us,  are  perhaps,  the  rear
sons  why  my  mind  reverte  to  the
historical  facts  contained  in  the
Scripture  I  have  just  read,  which
was  given  unto  us  by  men  of  old
who,  until  quite  a  recent  date,  have
been  generally  revered  by  all  Chris-
tians j  and  even  now  a  large  majority


THE  MARRIAGE  QUESTION,  ETC.


of  the  Christian  sects  of  America
respect  and  reverence  the  ancient
fathers,  their  teachings  ami  writings
while  the  sacred  Book  is  closed,  but
ignore  in  their  daily  lives  what
those  worthies  believed  and  prac-
tised/

The  word  translated  concubine  in
this  Scripture  must  not  be  con-
founded with  the  modern  practice
which  obtains  so  largely  in  the  great
cities  of  Christendom,  and  with  the
more  wealthy  portions  of  old  com-
munities. I  refer  to  the  practice
sometimes  called  concubinage,  the
practice  of  marrying  under  the  law
one  wife,  and  at  the  same  time  keep-
ing privately  one  or  more  mistresses
who  are  not  obtruded  upon  society,
having  no  claim  to  the  honored
name  of  wife — a  practice  which  per-
mits those  who  indulge  in  it  to
gratify  the  carnal  passions  at  the
expense  of  public  virtue,  and  at  the
risk  of  entailing  disease  upon  unborn
posterity,  as  well  as  at  the  expense
of  the  present  and  eternal  welfare  of
their  partners,  I  will  say  in  sin ;  for
no  right-minded,  correct-thinking
person  can  pronounce  it  otherwise
than  it  has  been  pronounced  by  the
sacred  writers  both  of  the  old  and
New  Testament — a  species  of  lewd-
ness and,  if  not  classed  with  open
harlotry,  a  violation  of  sacred  marital
vows.  Those  who  have  solaced
their  consciences  or  justified  them-
selves in  this  departure  from  law
and  public  sentiment,  no  doubt  feel
partial  justification  from  the  prac-
tices of  the  ancients  who  were  looked
up  to  and  revered  ;  but  such  was
not  the  concubinage  of  Abraham,
nor  any  of  the  ancient  patriarchs,
such  was  not  the  system  that  ob-
tained under  the  law  of  Moses  in
ancient  Israel*

The  word  translated  concubinage
in  King  James  version  of  the  Bible,
is  translated  by  Luther  and  h  found

No.  15,


in  Scandinavia  and  Germany,  where
the  Lutheran  translation  still  pre-
vails, as  meaning  an  associated  >vife.
In  the  Danish  Bible  it  is  huustro  for
wife  and  medhustro  for  coWcubine,;
the  sacred  name  of  wife  i^giTtn  to
both  classes,  the  prepositicm  med
connecting  them  together  and  con-
veying the  idea  of  the  second  class
being  an  associated  wif^  or  a  wife
in  a  secondary  or  subordinate  posi-
tion, in  contradistinction  to  the
first.  Close  studeuts  of  the  Bible
have  not  failed  to  recognize  this  as
being  the  character  of  the  plufal
wives  of  Moses  and  the  prophets.
And  it  was  practised  as  an  institu-
tion of  the  Jewish  nation  down  to
the  coming  of  our  Savior,  and,  so
far  as  any  scriptures  appear  in  the
New  Testament,  this  institution
was  neither  abrogated  nor  in  any-
wise condemned,  while  harlotry  and
promiscuous  intercourse  of  the  sexes
— adultery  and  fornication  are  con-
demned in  the  severest  language.

We  have  a  great  variety  of  views
in  Christendom,  as  to  the  will  and
mind  of  God  pertaining  to  the  union
of  the  sexes  as  relating  to  t-ach
other,  to  the  state  and  to  our  present
and  future  happiness.  Ttio  Latter-
day  Saints  regard  the  intercourse  of
the  sexee,  both  in  time  and  in  eter-
nity, as  regulated  by  sacred  la»v
given  by  our  Father  in  heave u  who
has  organized  us  male  and  female
for  a  wise  purpose  in  Himself,  ami
that  purpose  is  made  manifest  in  the
first  great  command  given  to  our
first  parents,  namely,  to  multiply
and  replenish  the  earth.  And  the
saying  to  the  woman  after  her  trans*
gression  as  written  in  the  book  of
Genesis,  that  her  desires  should  be
towards  her  husband  and  he  should
rule  over  her — the  desires  planted
iu  the  breast  of  the  woman  tending
to  draw  to  the  opposite  sex  culmin-
ating iu  a  union,  is  a  wise  dispensa^

Vol.  XXIII.


22b*  JOURNAL  OK

tion  of  Providence  for  the  accom-
plishing of  the  great  etui  in  view  to
encourage  ami  stimulate  them  to
multiply  and  replenish  the  earth,
ami  take  upon  themselves  the  care?,
labors,  anxieties  and  resjxHieibilities
attending  the  rearing  of  families
And  among  the  many  different
views  entertained  in  Christendom
concerning  the  commerce  uf  the
sexes  we  might  say,  tit  ere  exists
every  variety  of  belief  and  practice  i
gmwing  out  of  these  beliefs.  We
have  in  Christian  America  a  religious
sect — not  vi»rv  numerous  to  be  sure —

m

who  held  the  union  of  the  sexes  to
be  sinful  in  1  ny  form  whatever.
This  stct  I  hardly  need  say  is  the  |
Shaking  Quakers;  and  to  become  a
member  of  their  *ociety, — a  person
already  married  would  be  required
to di>H>he his marriage  rela-
tionship; a  husband  and  wife  joining
that  society  would  be  required  to  do
the  same,  and  to  abstain  from  each
other  for  ever  afterwards,  all  con-
nection with  the  sexes  being  ^trictly
forbidden  as  an  evil  that  may  be
tolerated  in  the  carnal  world,  but  j
not  among  those  who  desire  to  ap-
pear pur*  and  holy  before  the  Lord,
This  first  commandment  referred  to,
4»  having been given to  father
Adam  and  mother  Eve,  was  in  the
days  of  their  purity,  before  their
^transgressions, when they were  j
worthy  to  converse  with  God  face
ito  face  ;  this  being  the  case,  if  there  (
was  no  other  reason,  what  philo  [
sop  by  can  condemn  that  command
■or  a  proper  ami  just  effort  to  keep  ;
it  1  There  is  no  reason,  to  my  mind,  J
to  condemn  it,  when  regulated  by
law^  as  an  act  of  impurity  ;  to  do  so  '
would  l>e  a  direct  reflection  upon  the  \
wisdom  and  purity  of  God  Himself,
Of  course,  this  is  the  general  view
taken  of  it  by  Christian  nations,  as
shown  in  their  acts  and  in  their
laws  regulating  it. Although  the


DISCOURSES.

Roman  Catholic  Church  prohibits
intercourse  with  the  sexes  to  sacred
orders,  they  being,  according  to  the
ritets  of  the  church  forbidden  to
marry.  And  however  much  some
may  doubt  the  iniquity  of  t lit  ir  holy
vows,  it  is  a  matter  too  well  known
to  call  in  question.  The  more  gene-
ral sentiment  of  Christians  lecog-
nizes  the  purity  and  uprightness  of
marriage  of  a  man  to  one  womau  ;
and  they  quote  the  following  words
of  the  Apostle  Pan!  to  testify  to  it,
"  Marriage  is  honorable  in  all,  and
the  bed  undefiled  ;  but  whoremong-
ers and  adulterers  God  will  judge?
But  tlie  majority  of  modern  Chris*
tians  consider  that  for  a  man  to
marry  more  than  one  wife  while  she
lives  and  is  his  wife  is  sin.  Now  1
will  undertake  to  say  respecting
the  two  conditions  of  marriage,  sin-
gle and  plural,  that  where  the  Julie*
and  obligations  are  the  same,  ami
the  husband  is  equally  honorable,
just  and  virtuous,  faithful  and  true
to  his  wives  and  children,  that  there
is  not  necessarily  any  greater  im-
purity existing  between  such  a  man
and  his  plural  family,  than  between
a  man  and  his  single  family  ;  that
there  is  not  necessarily  a  defilement
of  the  marriage  bed,  that  there  is
not  necessarily  defilement  of  thy
body  or  spirit*  When  the  institu-
tion of  marriage  is  founded  in  reli-
gious sentiment  and  is  confirmed
by  the  enduring  love  of  husband,
wives  and  children,  and  the  respon-
sibilities attending  that  relation-
ship, as  we  find  it  in  many  of  the
ancient  worthies,  there  is  not
necessarily  any  defilement  in  plural
marriage.  There  was  not  necessarily
defilement  in  father  Abraham  and
other  ancient  patriarchs  and  prophets
who  took  to  themselves  a  second  or  a
thin!  or  a  fourth  wife,  any  more  than
there  was  in  those  who  confined
themselves  to  one  wife, Nor  have


I ever  heard  from  anj  creature  j
i — and  I  have  read and  heard
much  ami  reflected  much,  because
our institution of  marriage  has
invited discussion  and  reflection
upon  this  subject. I  have  never
yet  i  heard  an  argument  that,  to
my  mind,  appeared  sound  against
the  marriage  of  an  honorable  man
to  two  women  any  more  than  to
one. And  the  only  argument  that
has  ever  been  presented  that  has
had  a  semblance  of  soundness  is  the
generally  admitted  fact  of  the  near
equality  of  the  sexes  which  would
seem  to  foreshadow  the  general  pur-
pose and  design  of  providence  that
one  man  should  have  only  one  wife,
I  have  never  heard  an  argument
relating  to  the  physical  effects  of  the
Institution,  nor  as  relating  to  the
state  of  society  that  could  not  be
applied  just  as  appropriately  to  mon-
ogamy. The op  posers of  plural
marriage  make  many  declarations
against  us  which  are  untrue,  which
they  do  not  understand  because  they
accept  the  reports  of  certain  persons
who  give  way  to  a  lying  spirit,  and
misrepresent  and  belie  people  far
tetter  than  themselves. The  selfish-
ness and  weakness  of  human  nature,
the  evils  which  manifest  themselves
from  time  to  time  between  families
and  between  husband  and  wife,  and
between  wives  and  children  are
quoted  as  evils  greatly  to  be  deplored
as  growing  out  of  this  system.  I
will  only  say  in  regard  to  this,  that
those  best  acquainted  with  the  in-
ner workings  of  the  system  among
the  Latter -day  Saints  throughout
all  of  their  settlements,  if  they  tes-
tify honestly  and  truthfully  as  to  the
result  of  their  careful  observations
extending  over  a  period  of  over
thirty  years— the  time  that  this
system  of  plural  marriage  has  been
practised  by  us  in  these  mountains,
they  would,  in  effect,  say,  that  there


is  less  discontent,  less  strife  and
fewer  family  broils  and  less  divorce,
and  less  casting  off  wives  and  casting
upon  the  community  of  children
without  care,  than  would  be  found
in  the  same  number  of  monogamic
families.  And  I  may  here  say,  that
statistics  will  bear  me  out  in  making
this  assertion.  To  those  who  are
not  posted  in  the  matter  this  may
appear  incredible  ;  and  the  majority
of  the  christian  world  would  think
it  impossible  judging  from  their
standpoint ;  and  what  they  see
and  hear  among  themselves,  and
judging  by  the  spirit  by  which  they
are  animated,  they  would,  I  admit,
pronounce  this  a  thing  impossible,
But  it  is  simply  because  they  art
not  imbued  with  the  faith  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  and  this  being
the  case  they  cannot  understand  the
motives  that  prompt  us  to  enter
into  this  relationship.  They  can-
not comprehend  the  spirit  that
governs  us,  the  devout  God  fearing
spirit  of  self-sacrifice  which  leads  us
onward  to  all  that  is  noble,  forbear-
ing and  long-suffering,  that  teaches
us  to  love  one  another  and  to  he
charitable  to  all  men,  and  wliich
teaches  us  that  the  relationships
which  we  make  through  the  mar-
riage covenant  are  but  the  foundar
tion  of  eternal  glory  and  exaltation
in  the  worlds  to  come ;  and  it  also
teaches  us  that  the  glories  of  the
future  that  open  up  before  us  are
greatly  dependent  upon  the  faithful-
ness of  our  relationships  and  asso-
ciations in  this  life ;  and  that  a  man
must  be  found  capable  to  properly
govern  and  guide  his  family  and
preserve  in  time  the  wives  and
children  that  are  given  to  him,  lead-
ing them  in  the  way  of  life  and  sal-
vation, and  rearing  his  children  in
all  that  is  pure  and  praiseworthy,
so  that  he  can  receive  them  in  the
1  morning  of  the  first  resurrection,


*


1*28


JOUKNAL  UK  l>lSUuUKSfc>.


there  to  have  the  Father  confirm
tippn  him  Ink  wives  and  children,  the
foundation  of  his  individual  king-
dom which  will  exist  for  ever  mid
ever.  The  outside  world  cannot
comprehend  this,  and  simply  because
th£y  cannot  believe  it  It  is  this
same  religious  sentiment  that
prompts  women  and  the  best  of
women,  the  most  devout  women,
women  of  the  purest .  motive  and
character  to  enter  into  this  sacred
relatibiiship,  and  to  cause  tliem  to
determine  in  their  owli  minds  that
■tR'ijj  would  sooner  be  associated
with  a  man  who  has  proven  himself
a  m'M  of  integrity,  a  man  of  strict
'  virtue  and  honor,  who  can  be  relied
upon  hy  God  and  man — they  Would
rather  trust  themselves  with  such  a
itiairlhan  to  he  the  only  wife,  of  a
man  dpymd  of  these  qualifications,
nfth  Who,  perhaps,  for  the  want
fof  sqcli  Jngli  motives  would  be  the
victim  uf  many  vices,  of  whoredom,
of  ;<!6ijcubinage  or  illicit  intercourse
^vitli  the  sexes,  and  defile  himself
and  destroy  the  confidence  of  his
family  in  him,  or  he  would  perhaps
indulge  in  drunkenness  and  other
kindred  vices  which  would  he  the
means  of  producing  the  same  result*
And  such  has  been  the  experience
ot  many  women  in  monogamy.
And  1  do  not  say  that  the  weak-
nesses of  mankind  do  nut  manifest
themselves  in  plural,  families ;  I  do
not  say  that  there  are  not  some  who
may  be  urged  on  by  fleshy  lust,  but
if  there  at  e  it  results  in  their  making
shipwreck  of  their  faith  and  becom-
ing, in  time,  a  lasting  disgrace  to
themselves.  Btft  where  there  is  one
example  of  this  kind,  under  our
polygamic  system,  there  are  at  least
two  tinder  the  monogamic  older
thai  might  be  cited,  who  make  ship-
wnrk  of  their  faith,  who  sacrifice
tt.tir  honor,  and  whose  family  send
forth  a  wail  of  grief  for  the  loss  of


confidence  in  husband  and  father.
A d u  1 1  e it,  f o vi i i cut  ion,  w  1 1 or«! cto,
God  will  judge  ;  every  form  of  licen-
tiousness He  hafi  condemned  in  His
word  from  the  beginning  of  *he
world  to  the  present.  And  if  folhes
are  manifested  by  some  who  profess
to  be  Latter-day  Saints  in  this  diifec-
tioni  so  we  may  cite  similar  weak-
ness manifested  by  ancient  ineivof
God  ;  not,  however,  to  justify  such
cases  but  merely  as  example??  of  hu-
man weaknesses.

Referring  again  to  Abraham,  and
his  wife  Sarai.  They  are  held  up  in
sacred  Scripture  as  models  of  noble
character,  purity  of  purpose,  piety,
devotion  ami  superior  integrity  to
(Jod,  who  hesitated  not  to  obey  Him
at  ail  hazards  even  to  the  sacrifice  of
that  which  was  nearest  and  dearest
unto  them.  This  Sarai,  une  of  the
noblest  of  women,  received  the
promise  of  her  son  Isaac  while:  in
old  age,  a  promise  made  to  her -by
the  angel  of  God,  and  this  because
of  her  barrenness  and  because  too
of  the  integrity  of  her  heart  towards
her  husband  and  her  willingness
to  sacrifice  her  womanly-  feeling  in
uiviiiff  to  her  husband  other  wives.
And  after  she  had  given  to  Abraham
Hagar,  that  she  might  bear  him
children,  mark  the  Scripture  :  It  was
for  the  purpose  that  he  might  not  be
childless  because  she  was  childless.
It  was  after  she  had  thus  sacrificed
her  womanly  feeling,  thereby  mani-
festing ber  love  and  integrity  lo  her
husband,  that  the  Lord  had  compas-
sion upon  her  and  granted  the  desire
of  her  heart,  promising  her  that  she
should  in  course  of  time  bring  forth
a  son,  and  telling  her  that  his  name
should  be  Isaac,  in  whom  and  in
whose  seed  all  the  nations  of  the
earth  were  to  be  blessed.  And  it
was  af  ter  this  lad  was  paitly  grown,
that  God  commanded  Abraham  to
take  this  promised  child  on  to  the


THE  MARRIAGE  QUESTION',  ETC,


»9


Mount  Moriab,  and  there  build  an
altar  ami  offer  him  up  as  a  sacrifice.
Abraham  in  this  was  tried  as  few
men  ever  were  tried  ;  tor  his  love
was  great  for  his  son  whom  he
would  naturally  regard  as  a  special
gift  of  the  Lord  to  him,  through
whom  no  lees  a  personage  than  the
Messiah  himself  should  come.  Yet
Abraham  doubted  not,  he  paused
not  to  consider  what  the  possible
result  might  he  of  keeping  this  com-
mand ;  but  he  trusted  in  God  as
Paul  said  of  him,  "that  God  was
able  to  raise  him  up,  even  from  the
dftad  *  from  whence  also  lie  received
him  in  a  figure."  He  trusted  in
God  and  doubted  not  ;  and  proceeded
to.  Mount  Moriah  and  there  built
an  altar*  and  when  everything  was
ii*  readiness  he  bound  the  lad,  and
while  in  the  act  of  raising  the  deadly
knife,  he  heard  a  voice  saying,
"-Abraham,  Abraham,  lay  not  thine
hand  upon  the  lad,  .neither  do  thou
anything  unto  him  ;  for  now  I  know
that  thou  fearest  God,  seeing  that
thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,
thine  only  son  from  me.w  And
then  the  Lord  went  on  to  say,  that
because  of  this  willingness  on  the
part  of  Abraham  to  obey  Him  even
to  the  sacrificing  of  his  only  son,
"  That  in  blessing  I  will  bles^  thee,
and  in  multiplying  I  will  multiply
thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  the  heavens,
and  as  the  sand  which  is  upon  the
sea  shore/1  etc.  Now,  I  will  give
back  unto  you  your  son,  and  in
blessing  I  will  bless  him  and  multi-
ply him,  and  in  him  and  his  seed
shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be
blessed.  It  was  because  of  this
precious  promise,  no  doubt,  that  he
desired  to  give  his  sons  opportuni-
ties to  develop  and  to  make  manifest
amon"  the  surround  in  e  tribes  the
character  that  was  in  him,  that  he
divided  out  his  goods  and  gave  gifts
to  the  sons  of  the  other  wives  and


sent  them  away,  but  gave  his  chief
inheritance  to  his  son  Isaac,

While  contemplating  this  I  can
hardly  refrain  from  dropping  a  word
of  exKortation  to  my  brethren  who
may  be  drawing  near  the  <dose  of
life,  not  to  neglect  to  make  such
disposition  of  their  wordly  effects  as
will  suitably  provide  for  their  wives
and  children  while  they  (the  breth-
ren) yet  live,  following  the  example
of  Abraham,  not  that  by  any  means
would  I  encourage  .this  example  in
all  particulars  ;  for  it  is  not  always
as  it  was  in  the  case  of  Abraham
that  Go  !  has  made  choice  of  one
particular  son  in  whom  their  seed*
shall  be  called  ;  but  common  justice
and  equity  requires  of  every  father
to  deal  fairly  with  each  wife  and
child  according  as  God  has  dealt
with  him  in  this  world's  goods,  that
he  may  retain  their  esteem  after  he
shall  have  departed  from  them.
Nor  should  he  trust  too  much
to  the  uncertainty  of  courts  at
the  present  time ;  for  we  have
in  too  many  instances  seen  to  our
sorrow  that  federal  courts,  when-
ever they  have  had  it  in  their  power,
or  wherever  they  could,  either  by
•iraiued  construction  of  the  law,  or
by  omissions  of  the  law,  wrong  a
plural  family  by  giving  to  the  first
wife  and  her  heirs  that  which
should  have  been  equitably  divided
among  all  the  family,  they  have
never  missed  the  opportunity  of
doing  it,  thinking  that  by  bringing
oppression  and  injustice  to  bear
they  will  succeed  in  discouraging
the  practice  of  this  system  of  mar-
riage. There  is  nothing  in  the
faith  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  or  in
the  laws  of  God  touching  this  mat-
ter that  would  prompt  aught  but
justice  and  equality  to  all  the  wives
and  children.  The  duty  of  the
husband  is  plain  in  this  respect.
And  the  duty  of  all  wives  and  chil-


230  JOUKNAL  OK

dren  is  to  love  each  other  and  the
husband  antl  father;  all  cherishing
that  love  of  the  Gospel  which  binds
our  hearts  together,  and  which  alone
can  carry  us  through  the  trials  and  j
tribulations  of  life,  and  lift  us  up  at
the  last  day.

One  would  suppose  from  the  hue
and  cry  abroad  in  the  land,  which
emanates  chiefly  from  the  clergy,
that  they  are  afraid  the  institutions
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  will  con-
taminate the  whole  land.  What
hypocrisy  !  I  can  hardly  exercise
patience  sufficient  to  treat  it  with
any  degree  of  sobriety.

I  am  a  native-born  American  ;  I
was  reared  it)  the  State  of  Vermont
In  my  early  days  the  doctrine
taught  to  our  first  parents,  to  mul-
tiply and  reilenigh  the  earth,  was
popular;  but  during  the  period  of
my  life  that  has  elapsed,  it  has  been
altimst  totally  ignored  by  the  social
circles  of  New  England,  When  I
last  visited  the  old  homestead,  an
old  aunt  nearly  ready  to  go  hi  to
her  grave,  told  me  that  it  was
irregular  for  people  now-a-days  to
have  large  fa  in  il  its.  And  it  seems  ;
that  this  is  the  prevailing  sentiment
of  that  region ;  for  in  traveling
through  New  England  it  was  rarely
I  saw  a  woman  with  more  than  two
or  three  children,  Any  of  the
older  families,  those  honored  matrons
of  New  England,  who  lived  con-
temporary with  my  mother,  thought
it  honorable  to  raise  large  families  j
but  my  old  aunt  who  was  one  of  the
last  of  that  stock,  has,  by  giving
way  to  allowing  the  influence  of
death,  has  imbibed  false  notions ;
and  when  she  thus  expressed  herself
to  me  I  knew  she  was  not  speaking
the  honest  sentiments  of  her  heart
To  day  infanticide  and  foeticide  are
popular,  Modern  doctors  and
doc  tresses  have  arisen,  men  and
women  who  are  skilled  in  what  are


niscuuiisKs,

called  the  diseases  of  women,  whose
special  practice  is  preventing  fecun-
dity, thereby  securing  to  husband
and  wife  the  pleasures  of  self  grati-
fication without  beating  the  re-
sponsibilities of  maternity,  and  the
tiouble  and  expense  of  rearing
children.  These  doctors  and  doc-
tresses  and  the  American  students
who  have  learned  to  practice  their
hellish  arts,  are  to-day  engaged  in
undermining  the  constitutions  of
wives  and  mothers ;  yes,  child
murder,  this  damnable  -doctrine  of
devils  has  become  popular  through-
out New  England,  and  is  fast  spread*
ing  over  the  American  continent*
And  now  it  is  the  Irish  woman  f
who  bid i eves  in  raising  children*
the  foreign  element  that  comes
to  the  country  that  are  considered
the  vulgar  people ;  and  were  it
not  for  this  flood  of  foreign  im-
migration the  btuid  New  England
element  would  &oon  become  ex-
tinct, ami  1  say,  in  the  name  of
Israel's  God,  the  sooner  the  better
unless  they  rejjent  of  their  murders,
their  whoredoms  and  their  abomina-
tions that  ascend  to  the  heavens
|  and  are  a  stench  in  the  nostrils  of
the  Almighty.  And,  yet#  it  is
this  New  England  element  whose
garments  are  stained  with  the  blood
of  innocence,  that  has  found  its  way
through  our  western  States,  that
has  worked  heart  ami  soul  with
the.  hireling  priesthood  in  firing  up
the  national  heart,  and  that  is
urging  on  hostile  legislation  against
the  best  and  purest  j>eople  that
exist  upon  the  American  continent.
Is  it  public  morality  they  seekt
Is  it  the  cause  of  public  and  private
morality  they  champion  ?  If  so,
we  may  repeat  what  we  have  so
often  said,  which  is  so  extremely
unwelcome  for  them  to  hear  :  Weed
your  garden  first  at  home,  and  then
let  your  virtues  be  directed  to  the


THE  MARRUGK  QUESTION,  ETC.


231


crywg  evils  and  sins  of  your  large
cities ;  find  let  child-murder  cease,
and  hang  those  infernal  doc  tors  wKo
by  means  of  their  hellish  aits  are
destroying  the  life  of  your  offering,  j
anil  thus  preventing  the  fulfillment
of  the  first  great  command  that  God
gave  to  our  first  parents ;  first  peti-
tion Congress  to  pass  laws  to  deal
with  the  murderers  am]  murderesses
of  the  nation,  the  adulterers  and
adultresses  and  all  those  who  deal  in
shame,  through  whose  wickedness
the  seeds  of  decay  and  death  are
transmitted  to  posterity.  But
me  thinks  I  hear  one  say,  if  this
were  done,  and  the  laws  were
enforced,  the  large  majority  of  the
nation  would  he  convicted.  And  !
it  reminds  me  of  a  remark  ma  le
recently  by  a  gen  tie  man  in  Congress,
It  was  propose  1  that  the  bill,  now
being  urged  in  Congress  against
polygamy,  be  so  amended  as  to
include  adultery  ;  the  gentleman
to  whom  the  proposition  was  made
was  at  first  incline)  I  to  endorse  the
amendment,  but  on  reflection,  he
turned  to  his  friend  and  said,  if  that
be  done  it  would  leave  us  without  a
quorum  in  the  House.  No,  my
friends,  it  is  not  adultery  they  wish
to  jmnish  ;  it  is  not  whoredom  they
wish  to  punish  ;  it  is  not  the  cause
of  public  or  private  virtue  they
champion  ;  it  is  merely  the  hue  and  I
cry  of  t  he  bigotry  of  our  time  against
a  people  who  are  aiming  at  a  higher
morality  than  now  exists,  who  arc
aiming  to  do  away  with  and  effec-
tually destroy  out  of  their  midst  the
evil  that  is  sapping  the  strength  and
vitality  of  our  nation — a  community
that  does  not  seek  to  shun  the  re-
sponsibility and  the  cares  and  labors
and  expense  and  trouble  of  rearing
families  and  of  educating  them  and
making  their  children  honorable
men  and  women,  husbands  and
wives,  fathers  and  mother*,  citizens


of  the  state-arid  dere  ider<  <>  humeri  *
liberty.

We  are  accused  of  being  governed
by  priestcraft  and  priestly  influence,
I  do  not  believe  there  is  any  portion
of  thi*  community  in  any  part  of
the  land  who  are  moved  by  priestly
influence  to  half  the  extent  that
Judge  Edmunds  and  the  advocates
of  the  bill  that  he  champions  against
us  are  ;  and  their  consciences  must
teach  them  that  they  are  hypocrites,
and  that  they  are  hut  pandering  to
bigotry,  and  that  their  acts  are  not
the  acts  of  statesmen,  but  the  acts
of  cringing  politicians  and  dema-
gogues. The  Priesthood  of  the
Latter  flay  Saints  belongs  not  to
the  lords  but  the  commons  ;  to  men
who  have  helped  make  the  roads,  to
budd  sthe  bridges  and  to  kill  the
snakes ;  to  men  who  have  bat-
tled with  the  difficulties  of  a  new
country,  and  who  by  their  hardihood
and  toil  have  subdued  the  wastes
and  redeemed  the  desert ;  men
who  have  turned  the  mountain
streams  out  of  their  courw  on  to  the
new  and  virgin  soil,  making  the
laud  fruitful  with  fields  and  farms,
gardens,  orchards  ami  vineyard*  ;
men  who  build  house*,  mill*  and
factories,  school  houses  and  c  ms  c  tes,
and  who  raise  families  and  who
take  care  of  and  educate  their  chil-
dren. These  are  the  men  who  hold
the  Priesthood,  and  who  wield  an
influence  in  the  midst  of  this  people;
and  this  class  of  men  is  properly
repiesented  in  the  legislature
now  in  session,  and  they  are
asked  to  step  down  and  out  and  let
the  government  of  the  country  pass
into  the  hands  of  adventurers.  Not
that  I  would  insinuate  that  there
are  not  a  goodly  number  of  honor-
able men  among  us  who  are  engaged
in  legitimate  business  pursuits,  men
who  could  be  trusted  to  a  I  minister
the  government  affairs  of  the  Ter-


2sa


JUL  H  N  A  I -  >  K D  1 SI  Otf  liSJC*v  .


ritory  if  they  would  follow  their  own
hearts  and  consciences,  and  not
allow  themselves  in  h*  hull  dozed
as  certain  member*  of  Congress  are
by  the  hireling  Priesthood  of  the
age.  We'cuutd  trust  the  judgment
of  such  men  ;  we  could  trust
their  natural  good  sense,  and  their
business  habits ;  hut  there  are
fW  who  can  be  trusted  tn  stand  like
a  towering  rock  in  the  midst  of  the
raging  ocean,  prooi  again&t  the  waves
and  surges  of  j  opular  prejudice
that  pass  over  the  land.  And  lie-
cause  uf  this  the  Latter-day  Saints
have.  1  \ veil  chary  with  regard  to
whom  the}  exalt  to  power  ;  and  the
fw  that  have  their  confidences  in
this  respect,  are  men  who  have
never  rubbed  or  I  betrayed  them.
And  honorable  business  men,  hank-
ers, merchant*,  miner?,  railroad
men,  etc.,  who  have  no  political  or
religious  standing  to  jeopardise  are
satisfied  that  the  ali'aiis  of  our
Territory  have  been  administered
honorahh  and  In  really.

-  Tricksters  and  advent ureis  clamor
for  free  schools,  hut  how  many  of
them  ami  those  whose  sentiments
they  voice  really  want  to  support
them  ?  A  hobby  is  a  nice  tiling  to
ride,  and  such  people  have  many,
but  they. must  he  hobbies  that  do
not  cost  much.  It  is  rumored
throng!  out  the  land  that  the  chil-
dren of  the  Latter-day  Saints  are
growing  up  in  i-i  om  ce  ;  t!u>>e  who
Utter  those  statements  either  know
nothing  of  what  they  *ay,  or  they
wilfully  and  dehberaiely  lie.  Some
may  think  these  are  hard  words  ;  it
is  Janguage  admissible  under  the
circumstances,  and  it  ib  easy  to  un-
derstand, plain  and  right  to  the  sub-
ject, and  1  inean  every  word  of  it.
T h<*  statistics  of  the  country  bear  me
out  in  it  ;  and  whoever  will  examine
the  census  for  the  last  decade  may
satisfy  themselves  on  this  point,


namely, ..that  percent  age pi  illiteracy
in  Utah  is  less  than  onedialf  of  that
of  the  whole  United  Htate>.  They
say  the  offspring  of  |>lti ral  marriage
tends  to  idiocy  as  well  as  illiteracy,
which,  however,  is  fallacious  and
(.dearly  witjiogt  foundation  in  fact
Let  men  of  discernment  and  honor
pass  through  our  land,  &x;imiue  our
schools  and  see  the  turnout  of  our
forty  thousand  children  at  our  Sab-
bath schools,  and  hear  the  questions
put  to  them  and  their  answers  to
the  same  ;  let  them  attend  our  child-
ren's jubilees  in  our  Tabernacle  and
look  upon  fifteen  thousand  faces
radiant  with  youth  and  beauty,  and
hear  their  songs  and  other  exercises,
and  the}* -may  at  once  satisfy  them-
selves whether  the  children  of  the
Latter  day  Saints  are  either  igno-
rant or  idiotic.  The  ht;e  census
shows  that  Utah's  percentage  uf
idiocy,  as  well  as  illiteracy,  is  moie
than  fifty  per  cent  less  than  that  qf
the  United  Staler ;  it  may  also
show  that  nowhere  upon  the  Ameri-
can continent  is  there  a  place  of
the  same  age  as  Utah  that  basso
many  common  schools  in  which  are
taught  the  common  branches  of  an
English  education,  and  that  too*
without  a  dollai's  aid  from  the  gene-
ral government.  And  our  numer-
ous children  are  all  wjdl  care* l  for  ;
and  if  we  cannot  indulge  in  all  the,
excesses  uf  fashion  that  are  com-
mon in  aristocratic  ciicles.  we  are
content  tn  kntnv  that  we  are  doing
well ;  we  are  content  where  our  wives
are  well  housed,  well  ted  and  well
clothed  with  fair  advantages  of  edu-
cation, self  reliant  and  loving  one
another.  And  we  are  satisfied  that
ere  lung  they  will  be  a  lower  of
st  length  in  the  laud,  not  to  menace
the  institutions  of  our  country  as
enemies,  as  foolish  men  and  women
insinuate  ;  not  to  menace  public
morality  or  private  virtue  ;  but  to  the


THE -  MARRIAGE-  QUESTION,  ETC.


ontraryi  when  the  nation*  ripe  in  «i>
and'  iniquity,  led  on  by  reckless -de-
nmgogues  and  politicians,  a  hail  ap-
]4aiui  the  acts  of  the  legislators  and
jadgea  and  leading  men-  in  laying
the  axe  deep  in  the  tree  of  liberty,
until  they  shall  sap  the  juices  that
give  life  to  our  institutions,  and  thus
■luiermme  the  foundation  of  good
govern  men  t,  it  will  he  sons  and
daughters  of  polygamous  Utah,  that
will  he  found  the  true  friends  of
human  liberty,  the  true  friends  ot
that  heaven-born  freedom  that  has
tome  to  us  through  the  fathers  of
our  nation.  Tl*e  love  of  liberty  is
ljora  in  them,  and  human  liberty  is
a  part  of  the  everlasting  gospel ;  and
God  Almighty  has  decreed — and  let
Judge  Edmunds  and  Congress  and
all  the  world  hear  it — that  the  gus-
]>el  of  the  kingdom  is  established,
irever  more  to  be  thrown  down  or
given  to  another  people,  that  its  des-
tiny is  to  grow  and  increase  and
spread  abroad  until  it  shall  fill  the
whole  earth,  and  no  power  in  «arth
or  hell  can  stop  it.  "0,  but,  say
they,  u  we  are  going  to  imprison
you  polygamists  and  disfranchise
you/'  Supposing  you  do  stop  our
voting,  will  that  stup  our  tongues  1
*vO,  but  ; well  imprison  you."
Imprison  and  be  damned*  [Amen,
by  voices  in  the  congregation]  for
you  will  be  damned  anyhow.
[Laughter]  44 We  will  imprison
your  wives,  too,  ami  we  will
not  only  stop  from  voting  the  men
who  have  more  than  one  wife,  and
we  will  not  only  stop  the  second  or
thir  l,  but  also  the  first  wife  from
voting."  And  why!  Because  she,
like  Sarah  of  old,  gave  to  her  hus-
band other  wives.  Some  of  the
law-makers  of  our  nation  would  nut
only  imprison  Abraham  were  be
living  now,  and  also  his  plural
wives,  but  they  would  disfranchise
and  imprison  Sarah,  his  first  wife,


because  ske  cousented  tor  Ids  marry-,
ing  other  wives,  ►

Well,  this  war  is  not  a  war  of
Hesh  and  bjood.  We  are  not  going
to  fight  it  with  swards  aud  cannons
and  weapons,  but  by  the  power  of.
truth,  by  the  word  of  God,  and  the
eternal  principles  that  our  fathers
fought  for  arid  established  upon  this
American  continent,  and  which
God  has  decreed  shall  prevail  u  pan
this  land.  And  blessed  are  they
whose  livfs  are  ben t  on  maintain-
ing the  principles  ot  civil  and  reli-
gious liberty,  for  thpy  will  reap  their
reward,  if  not  in  this  life,  in  the
hereafter.

In  all  ages  when  the  people  of
God  listened  to  the  voice  and  coun-
sel of  apostles  and.  prophets,  they
enjoyed  the  blessings  growing  .out
of  human  freedom,  and  the  tyranny
and  oppression r of  king*  and  rulers
was  impossible.  There  never  was  a
kingly  power  placed  over  aneiernt
Israel  except  against  the  remon-
strance of  the  prophets  ;  and  it  will
be  remembered  especially  in  the
case  of  Israel  when  they  openly
clamored  tor  a  king  to  ride  over
them  and  to  lead  them  to  battle,
how  that  Samuel  warned  them  and
plead  with  them,  foreseeing,  as  he
did,  what  the  results  would  be*  And
the  students  uf  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon know  how  the  Nrphites  pro-
gressed in  establishing  the  princi-
ples of  civil  and  religious  liberty,
and  how  that  freedom  extended
throughout  their  bo  i  dels,  and  how
that  prosperity  and  greatness  at-
tended their  administrations  under
the  counsels  and  teachings  of  the
wise  and  just  men  who  lived  in
their  day.

Those  who  suppose  that  prisons
and  penalties  are  going  to  stop  the
spirit  of  truth  in  its  onward  march
to  triumph  and  greatness,  or  the  in-
fluence and  'power  of  the  truths  of


234


JOt'KNAL  OK  DISCO


heaven  which  Got!  has  established
in  the  hearts  of  the  Latter- clay
Saints,  comprehend  not  the  designs
of  God,  nor  the  spirit  by  which  this
people  is  actuated,  that  spirit  which
is  leading  them  on.  and  which  en-
abler  1  them  to  take  joyfully  the
spoiling  of  their  goods  in  Missouri
and  Ohio,  and  which  still  will  enable
thern  to  sacrifice  their  all  for  the
sake  of  the  liberties  of  the  everlast-
ing Gospel,  if  God  shall  permit  it
to  be  so.  What  are  houses  and
lands,  what  are  goods  and  chattels,
what  is  this  city  or  thousands  of
cities  like  this  compared  with  the
liberties  of  the  Gospel,  the  principles
of  worshipping  and  serving  God
according  to  His  revealed  will  I  God
still  lives  who  has  led  us  all  our  life
long  to  these  valleys,  and  He  will
guide  and  direct  our  steps.  But  oh
how  strange  that  men  pretending  to
be  statesmen  should  read  history  so
poorly  as  to  suppose  that  by  might
and  power,  by  bonds  and  penalties
they  can  chain  men's  thoughts  or
prevent  them  from  acting  according
to  their  convictions*  The  power  of
might  may  destiny  me — destroy
you  ;  it  may  break  up  liomes  and
demolish  cities,  but  it  will  be  like
the  Canada  thistle  when  it  first
made  its  appearance  in  New  Kug-
land. Tins  weed  was  a  great  pest


to  the  farmers,  and  it  became  a
question  among  that  class  how  to  pre-
vent its  spreading.  Some  attempted
to  dig  the  thistles  out,  but  they
would  spring  up  again  all  around
the  old  stalk,  and  it  was  conceded
by  others  that  they  could  not  be
controlled.  There  was  one  man
who  owned  a  plantation  who  was
determined  to  work  vigorously  for
their  extinction  ujmn  their  first
appearance  on  his  land  ;  and  so  de-
termined was  he  that  when  he  first
discovered  their  whereabouts  upon
Ids  plantation  he  built  a  log  heap
over  them  and  set  fire  to  it,  leaving
a  pile  of  ashes  to  mark  the  spot
where  the  thistles  appeared.  Ou  the
following  season,  to  his  great  sur-
prise, he  found  that  where  the  log
heap  stx>od  there  was  a  perfect  bed
of  Canada  thistles,  that  the  ashes
left  from  the  fire  was  just  the  food
for  the  thistle  to  thrive  oil  So  you
will  find  it  will  be  with  us.  After
political  demagogues  and  hireling
priests  and  adventurers  shall  have
expended  their  strength  in  trying
to  dig  up  and  fire  out  of  the  land
what  they  term  *'  Mormoitistn."

May  the  Lord  help  us  to  prove
true  to  the  trust  that  He  has  re-
posed in  us,  is  my  prayer,  in  the
name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,


BLIVERED  AT  EPHRAIM,  SANPETE  COUNTY,  SUNDAY MoilNING,  AUGUST

20TH,  1882,


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)


THE  WORK  OF  GOD  AND  BUILDING  UP  OF  ZION  —  PREACHING,  TEMPLR
BUILDING  AND  OTHER  DUTIES  —  CORRUPTION  AND  HYPOCRISY  OF
CHRISTENDOM  —  RIGHTS  OF  J  HE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS  AS  AMERICAN
CITIZENS — THE  SAINTS  COUNSEL KD  TO  BE  PUftK,  HONEST,  UPRIGHT,
CHARITABLE,  LOXGSUFFKKINtt  AND  FORGIVING  —  DIFFERENCE  BE*
■  TVVEEN  BIGAMY  AND  POLYGAMY  —  UNJUST  LEGISLATION  AN1>
AMERICAN  JUSTICE  —  GOD  FOR  ISRAEL  AS  LONG  AS  ISRAEL  IS  FOR
RIGHT.


The  walk  of  God  is  on  ward,  and
we  33  His  servants  and  people  pro*
pose  with  His  help  to  carry  it  on  to
completion.  Some  people  do  not
like  it  very  well*  but  we  cannot  help
that*  I  do  not  think  Lucifer  likes
it,  but  we  cannot  help  that  either.
We  are  here  as  the  representatives
of  God  upon  the  earth  to  accom-
plish his  purposes,  and  to  carry  out
his  designs,  to  spread  forth  his  Gos-
pel, to  build  up  J  lis  kingdom,  to  es-
tablish his  Zion,  and  to  promote
the  welfare  and  happiness  of  alt
people  of  every  color  and  of  every
clime,  according  to  the  mind  and
will  of  the  Lord  as  it  shall  be  made
known  to  us  from  time  to  time.
Tins  is  what  we  are  here  for,  as  I
understand  it.  and  this  is  what  we
will  do,  God  being  our  helper,  and
no  man  nor  set  of  men  can  stay  the
purposes  of  Jehovah,  for  the  enemies
of  God  will  wither  and  weaken
from  this  time  forth  and  forever.  I
will  say  that  in  the  name  of  the
Lord.  The  Lord  is  with  his  people,
but  he  does  not  approre  of  all  our
acts. Still  we  are,  generally,  striv-


ing to  do  what  is  ri"ht  and  observe
his  laws.

We  have  a  great  work  before  us ;
a  very  great  work  to  accomplish,
r  God  has  laid  it  u[k>ii  us  and  we  ex*
pect  to  do  it  with  his  assistance.
We  have  the  Gospel  to  preach  to
the  nations,  a  message  that  th*
Lord  has  given  unto  us  to  pro-
mulgate to  all  peoples  ;  and  to
|  accomplish  this  purpose  the  Church
of  God  is  organized  with  Presidents
and  Apostles,  with  Seventies,  High
Priests,  El  tiers,  etc*  A  large  amount
of  tli is  labor  is  being  done,  and  ha*
already  been  done  by  my  brethren
around  me  as  well  as  by  myself.
We  have  been  among  the  nations
of  Christendom  traveling  without
purse  or  scrip,  trusting  in  the  living
God,  tc  make  known  to  the  peoples
of  the  earth  the  great  things  which
he  has  revealed  for  the  salvation
and  the  exaltation  of  the  world.

Our  mission  has  principally  been
to  preach  the  first  principles  of  the
Gospel,  calling  upon  men  every-
where to  believe  in  the  Lord  God
of  heaven,  he  that  created  the  hea-


236

0


JOURNAL  Ol  UISCUUKSK.%


Yens  and  the  earth,  the  sens  and  t lie
fountains  of  waters  ;  to  believe  in
His  Sou  .le.-us  Christ,  repeuting  of
their  sins,  to  be  baptized  for  the  re-
mission of  the  f=ame  ;  and  then  we
have  promised  them  the  Holy  Ghost.
In  doing  this  the  Lord  has  stood  by
us,  sustaining  those  principles  that
we  have  advanced  ;  and  w  hem  we
have  ministered  unto  men  the  ordi-
nances of  the  Gospel,  they  have  re-
ceived for  themselves  the  witness  of
the  Spirit,  even  the  Holy  Ghost,
m&king  known  to  them  fur  a  surety
that  the  principles  thac  they  had
received  were  from  God.  And  in
regard  to  this  I  can  say  Paul  said
oii  a  certain  occasion—"  Ye  are
my  witnesses/'  for  this  whole  con-
gregation, with  few  exceptions,
know  this  to  be  true.  The  Twelve
and  the  Seventies,  the  High  Priests
and  the  Elders  are  called  upon  to
visit  the  various  nations  of  the  earth
and  see  that  the  word  and  will  of
God  pertaining  to  them  is  carried
out.  For  we  are  all  the  offspring  of
Gbd,  and  as  we  are  interested  in, the
welfare  of  our  children,  so  our  heav-
enly Father  is  interested  in  the  wel-
fare of  all  his  children.  He  has  sent
forth  the  light  of  his  truth  and  the
apirit  of  revelation  to  gather  together
his  sheep,  and  in  this  respect,  as  it
was  in  the  days  of  Jesus,  so  it  is
to-day.  tl  My  sheep  {he  said)  hear
uiy  voice  ;  they  know  tne  and  follow
me,  and  a  stranger  they  will  not
follow,  for  they  know  not  the  voice
of  a  stranger/'  Under  the  influ-
ence of  this  spirit  and  Gospel  we
have  1  een  gathered  together  in  one
in  our  Stake  organizations,  in  our
"Ward  organizations,  in  our  Priest-
hood organizations,  and  in  all  those
principles  that  God  has  revealed  for
the  guidance,  protection  and  in-
struction of  the  Saints,  that  we  may
be  prepared  to  operate  and  co-oper-
ate with  God  in  all  things  in  the  iu-


terest  of  his  people,  in  the  interest
of  the  nations,  in  the  interest  and
welfare  of  ad  men  who  will  listen  to
the  words  of  life,  and  then  to  do  the
very  best  with  others,  as  God  does.
That  is  about  the  position  we  occupy
to-day.

We  are  gathered  here  to  the  place
wre  denominate  Zion.  There  have
been  Zion s  before*  Enoch  had  a
Zion  which  was  translated  and  which
is  reserved  till  the  latter  days.
And  we  have  a  Zion  to  build  up,
which  we  shall  do  with  the  help  of
the  Lord.  We  certainly  shall  ac-
complish these  things  no  matter
what  the  ideas  and  feelings  of  men
may  be  in  regard  to  it.  Zion  is
onward  and  upward,  and  the  Lord
is  directing  and  manipulating  the
affairs  of  His  Church.

We  have  our  Temples  to  build,
and  we  are  doing  it,  and  I  certainly
have  no  complaints  to  make,  and  I
do  not  think  that  the  Lord  has,  I
think  that  the  Lord  is  well  pleased
with  the  actions  of  the  people  in  this
respect,  and  with  their  zeal  in  car-
rying out  some  of  these  leading
principles  which  he  lias  had  in  his
mind  from  the  commencement  of
the  world.

We  are  living  in  the  latter  times,
iu  the  dispensation  of  the  fullness
of  times  when  God  will  gather  all
things  in  one,  whether  they  be  things
in  heaven  or  things  on  the  e&rth.
We  are  living  in  a  time  when  we
have  to  operate  and  co-operate  with
the  Almighty,  and  with  the  Priest-
hood, that  has  existed  upon  the
earth  before  we  Came  here  for  the
benefit,  blessing  and  salvation  of
the  human  family.  Many  of  the
purposes  of  God  have  been  spoken
of  and  pie-figured,  in  some  instan-
ces dark  y  and  dimly,  in  others  more
vividly  and  plain,  pointing  out  and
portraying  the  purposes  of  God  per-
taining  to  the  human  family  ;  and


Ulh  WO  UK  OF  MU»,  ETC.


23T


these  purposes  will  all  be  fulfilled.
Tiifv  will  not  be  tli wart ed  ;  God
wiii  jiot  permit  them  to  b*.  He
has  liis  work  to  perforin  and  he  is
interested  in  the  welfare  of  his
Israel,  and  in  the  accomplishment
of.,  those,  tilings  spoken  of  by  all
the  holy  prophets  since  the  world
Wfts  ;  and  he  will  carry  out  his  own
purposes  in  his  own  way  and  time  as
he  sees  best

Now, what are wc doin^  f


We  are  sending  the  Elders  abroad
aatt  they  have  been  and  are  still
going  ;  the  Twelve  and  the  Presi-
dents of  Seventies  are  selecting  and
calling  upon  them  and  they  are
going  to  the  different  nations,  and
I  am  pleased  to  see  the  spirit  gene-
rally manifested  ;  I  think  that  the
brethren  begin  to  comprehend  the
nature  of  their  missions  and
calling  from  the  fact  that  there
are  very  few  excuses  made  now  a-
day£.  The  tenor  of  the  letters  that
I  receive  now  in  answer  to  those  sent
to  brethren  calling  them  to  perform
a  mission,  is  something  like  this  :  I
have  received  your  letter  and  am
grateful  to  be  considered  worthy  to
be  called.  I  will  be  ready  at  the
time  appointed/'  When  men  com-
prehend their  position  they  feel  it
au  honor  to  be  engaged  in  building
up  the  kingdom  of  God  and  of  being
heralds  of  salvation  to  the  nations
of  the  earth.

When  we  build  our  Temples,
what  then  1  The  brethren  of  the
Twelve  have  been  calling  some  men
and  women  to  go  and  labor  in  them.
The  old  men  whose  heads  are  whit-
ened with  the  passage  of  time  are
not  without  zeal,  but  they  have  not
the  strength  to  cope  with  the  hard-
ships attending  a  foreign  mission  ;
and  therefore  some  of  them  will  be
called  to  minister  in  Temples,  I
should  esteem  it  a  very  great  pri-
vilege, if  my  time  were  not  engaged


in  other  things  to  he  engaged  in
such  a  Jab'>r,  hec:iu*e  there  is  a
spirit  and  influence  about  that  kind
of  work  that  is  happi  tying,  pro-
ducing peace  and  joy,  and  tending
to  enlarge  the  mind  of  those  that
are  engaged  in  ministering  for  others
as  Saviors  on  Mount  Zion,  whilst
the  kingdom  is  to  be  the  Lord's,
We  feel  in  our  hearts  a  desire'  to
bless  ami  benefit  mankind,  and  to
present  the  Gospel  to  all  to  whom
the  Lord  gives  us  the  power.  That
is  one  work  that  we  have  to  perform.
Another  is,  the  building  of  Tern-
pies.  Another  is,  the  rearing,  of
i  our  children  in  the  principles  of
righteousness.  And  in  doing  this
do  we  need,  the  assistance  of  out-
siders] I  think  not.  When  our
Elders ^  go  abroad,  they  are  sent  to
teach  not  to  be  taught ;  and  if  they
should  need  teaching  the  ministers
of  Christendom  coul  l  not  teach
them  for  they  are  not  competent  to
,  do  so.  That  reminds  me  of  a  st^te-
j  ment  that  I  heard  in  which  a  pious
.  minister  figures  conspicuously.  .  It
!  was  this :  He  stated,  and  his  state-
ment  was  published  widely  through-
out the  United  States,  in  the  reli-
gious journals,  that  whilst  preaching
to  some  of  you  Sanpete  people*  he
held  the  Bible  in  one  hand  and  was
obliged  to  hold  a  pistol  in  the  other.
Where  i*  this  said  to  have  occurred  T
(Pres.  Peterson  answered,  11  In  this
house  over  here,"  pointing  to  the
!  old  meeting  house.)  But  then  he
was  a  pious  man,  and  other  pious
men  published  it,  and  it  was  copied
in  all  the  pious  newspapers  and
|  published  as  truth  ;  and  probably
many  pious  men  made  it  the  text
for  their  Sunday  sermon.  What  a
I  fortunate  thing  you  did  not  hurt
him.  (Laughter.)  Now,  do  we
want  our  children  taught  by  such
people]  I  think  not.  We  want
something  of  truth  ;  we  want  some-


238  JubK*NAL  OK

thing  of  integrity  and  lienor;  we
want  something  after  the  character
referred  to  by  David  :  44  Lord,  who
shall  dwell  in  the  holy  hill  T  He
that  walketh  uprightly,  and  worketh
righteousness,  and  speaketh  the
truth  in  his  heart.  *  *  He
that  swareth  to  his  own  hurt,  and
change th  not.  He  that  doeth  these
things  shall  never  be  moved."  We
wan i  men  and  women  of  integrity
and  truth  as  the  teachers  of  our
children,  in  order  that  our  children  |
may  grow  up  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord
and  full  of  i  ntegritySaud  righteousness,  j
Then  they  talk  to  us  about  our
virtue.  I  think  that  some  of  these
people  had  better  attend  to  their
own  affairs.  We  do  not  want  their
system  of  what  they  call  morality  in-
troduced  amongst  us;  we  can  do
without  it  very,  very  well.  Why  do
we  speak  of  these  things  t  Because
they  are  matters  which  concern  us.
AVhilst  men  and  women  come
here  ostensibly  to  promote  your
welfare,  they  hail  from  places  where
the  most  outrageous  infamies  are
perpetrated.  Do  we  wish  these
corrupting  influences  introduced
into  our  midst  1  I  think  not.  Let
them  cleanse  their  own  Augean
e tables  where  they  came  from,  and
then  talk  to  us  if  they  wish  about
purity.  Do  we  want  them  to
teach  our  wives  and  daughters  how-
to  murder  their  children — a  practice
that  is  prevalent  in  the  places  they
came  from  ]  I  should  rather  think
not,  nor  do  we  wish  the  influence  of
people  so  educated  to  introduce  their
contaminating,  corroding  and  damn-
ing practices  amongst  us,  the
emanations  from  such  a  source  are
like  a  pestiferous  plague  endanger-
ing, polluting  and  contaminating
everything  that  comes  within  its
reach.  Newborn  children  are  mur-
dered by  the  thousands  in  the  large
pities  of  the  east ;  and  do  they  stop


this  evil  1  No.  I  have  been  told  over
and  over  again  that  it  is  not  fashion-
able for  women  of  the  places  where
many  of  our  would-be  u  Christian1'
teachers  hail  from,  to  have  more
than  one  or  two  children.  And
what  do  they  do  with  the  rest  ?  To
tell  it  in  plain  terms,  they  have  a
fashionable  way  of  murdering  them
—either  before  or  after  they  come
into  the  world.  This  started  with
what  was  called  Res  tell  i*ra  ;  it  was
then  denounced  as  infamous  ;  the
plague  has  now  spread  until  nearly
the  whole  nation  is  inoculated  with
'  it.  Are  these  the  kind  of  people  that
we  wish  to  correct  our  morals.  I
speak  of  these  tilings  for  your  infor-
mation. But  what  will  you  do  with
these  people,  would  you  persecute
theml  No  ;  but  we  do  not  want
them  for  our  teachers,  I  w  ould  not
'  introduce  such  people  to  my  family,
neither  would  1  introduce  them  to
our  schools  to  contaminate  our  chil-
dren with  the  vices  that  prevail  in
the  places  they  come  from.  I  do
not  know  anything  about  the  per-
sons that  are  among  you,  neither
have  I  heard  anything  about  them
excepting  this  heroic  minister  of
pistol  notoriety.  (Laughter.)  I
am  reminded  too  of  a  move
that  a  number  of  these  so-called
ministers  of  the  Gospel  made  a
short  time  ago  in  appealing  to  the
nation  to  help  them  to  root  out  the
abominations  which  they  affirm  exist
here.  Why  do  I  speak  of  this
thing?  Because  I  have  a  duty  to
perform  as  your  teacher.  We  ob-
serve all  laws  and  principles  that
are  correct,  true  and  virtuous,  and
if  there  is  anything  else  contrary  to
this  we  have  from  time  to  time  called
upon  our  Bishops  to  purge  them-
selves and  their  wards  from  it,  and
I  call  upon  them  here  to  do  the  same
thing.  I  have  been  abroad  among
the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  so  have


taany  of  my  brethren,  and  did  I
ever  go  into  England,  Scotland ,
France,  Wales,  Germany,  or  any
other  nation  where  I  have  been,  and
attempt  to  stir  up  sedition  and  trou-
ble, or  defame  the  people  I  was
among!  No,  never.  The  Elders
of  this  Church  have  been  taught  dif-
ferently and  they  have  acted  in  ac-
cordance with  the  teachings  they
received.  We  came  to  this  land  as
religionists  to  serve  God,  fleeing
from  the  face  of  persecution  ;  we
came  here  because  we  could  not  be
protected  in  the  places  we  left.  Now
that  we  have  come  here  have  we
practiced  anything  that  is  contrary
to  correct  principles?  Not  that  I
know  of.  Have  we  the  rights  of
American  citizens  1  We  most  assur  j
edly  have.  Has  any  person  in  this
nation  any  more  Lights  than  we  1
Not  if  we  have  our  rights  given  unto
us.  As  American  citizens  we  pos-
sess as  many  rights  and  privileges
as  any  other  citizens  in  these  United
States.  What  have  we  to  do  1
We  do  not  propose  to  barter  them
away,  nor  to  relinquish  them  with-
out a  struggle.  I)o  you  mean  to
get  up  a  revolution  ]  Oh,  no.  We
mean  to  contend  for  all  principles
that  belong  to  free  American
citizens ;  and  while  there  is  law,
justice  or  equity  in  the  land,  we
design  to  contend  for  our  rights
inch  by  inch,  and  we  do  not  mean
to  be  despoiled  of  our  rights
without  a  struggle.  We  propose
to  maintain  our  franchise  in  this
boasted  land  of  liberty.  This
is  the  position  we  propose  to  take.
If  they  disfranchise  us  as  they  did
Brother  Cannon  ;  if  we  have  men
who  do  not  know  the  difference
bet  wen  1,300  and  18..000  we  do,
and  we  will  contend  for  those
principles  that  God  has  com-
mitted to  us.  In  reading  some  of
-  the histories pertaining to  the


dealings  of  God  witfe  mm  and
the  dealing*  of  the  dewiEwith  him
you  will  find  that  Satai*  sought  to
rob  mm  of  his  free  agency,,  as  mmj
of  hi*  agents  are  seeking:  to  do  to-
day ;  and  for  this  cause  Satan  w»
cast  out  of  heaven.  Godt  will  haw
a  free  people,  and  while  we  have  a
duty  to  perform  to  preach  the
Gospel,  we  have  another  fen  perform,
that  isT  to  stand  up  in  tin*  defence
of  human  lights — in  the  oUfeuce-of
our  own  rights,  the  rig  litis  of  our
children,  and  in  defence  of  tdie  rights
of  this  nation  and  of  all  men,
no  matter  who  they  may  belaud  God
being  our  helper  to  maintain  those
principles  and  to  lift  up  a  standard
for  t lie  hooorable  of  this  and  cither
nations  to  flock  to,  that  they  may
be  free  from  the  ty ran  ivy  and  op-
pression that  is  sought  to  be
crowded  upon  them*  This  is  a
duty  we  have  to  perform* and  in  the
name  of  Israel's  God  w*  will  do  it,
It  is  a  duty  that  our  families  demand
of  us  ;  it  is  a  duty  thai  the  honest
in  this  nation  demand  of  us,  and
that  God  demands  of  us ;  and  we
will  try  and  carry  it  out,  God  being
our  helper.  And  if  other  people
can  afford  to  trample  wilder  foot  the
sacred  institutions  of  this  couutry,
we  cannot.  And  if  other  people
trample  upon  the  Constitution  and
pull  it  to  pieces,  we  will  gather
together  the  pieces  and  rally  around
the  old  flag,  or  what  is  left  of  it,  and
proclaim  liberty  to  the  world,  as
Joseph  Smith  said  we  would,  Js
that  treason  t  I  do  not  know  ;  no
matter,  it  is  true.  Are  we  going  to
hurt  anybody  !  No.  If  they  were
hungry  I  would  feed  them  ;  if  they
w  ere  naked  I  would  clothe  them,  and
learn  to  do  good  for  evil  as  Jesus
did.  But  I  would  say,  44  0  my  soul,
come  nut  thou  into  their  secret,  unto
their  assembly,  mine  honor  be  not
thou united" Do them good  I


240


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES .


Yes,  but  do  not  enter  into  the  asso-
ciations referred  to.  We  want  to
mix  up  with  honorable  men  and
women.

I  have  made  some  plain  re  murks,
but  they  are  nevertheless  true,  and
I  have  nothing  to  take  back.  Will
we  rebel  against  the  nation  1  No*
This  nation  has  done  a  verv  great
deal  towards  propagating  human
liberty.  WVread  it  iu  our  school-
book*,  and  we  hear  it  sometimes
proclaimed  on  the  4th  of  July,  when
we  talk  of  the  brave  things  the
fathers  of  this  nation  performed  in
the  defence  of  human  right*,  and  it
is  a  great  pity,  I  think,  that  it
should  have  I  Teen  so  short  lived,  for
while  the  altar  of  liberty  is  )Tet
stained  with  the  blood  of  the  patri-
ots who  fought  for  human  rights,  it
seems  almost  too  bad  to  make  that
same  altar  a  forge  whereon  to  make
chains  to  fetter  the  human  mind,  to
retard  the  progress  of  freedom,  and
to  deprive  man  of  his  inalienable
rights.  It  is  a  lamentable  thing  to
reflect  upon,  yet  it  is  true.  It  was  a
sad  spectacle1  that  we  noticed  some
time  ago  in  Mr  Evarts,  secretary  of
the  nation,  calling  upon  the  nations
of  Europe  to  assist  the  United  States
in  crushing  out  a  religious  people.
We  have  seen  a  great  many  things
of  a  similar  kind.  Jud^e  Poland
and  his  operations  ;  then  the
course  pursued  by  Senator  Edmunds
against  an  innocent  and  persecuted
people  will  place  him  in  a  very  unen-
viable position.

What  course  shall  we  pursue  1  We
purpose  to  contend  for  human  rights,
for  the  Constitution  of  the  United
States,  and  for  the  rights  and  privi-
leges of  man  and  the  freedom  of  hu-
manity. We  will  try  to  live  our  re*
ligion  and  keep  the  commandments
of  <Jod.  People  are  wondering;  what
the  Commissioners  will  do.  They
will  do  <  what  the  Lord  will  permit


them  to  do  and  nothing  mor$
Shall  we  trouble  ourselves  about  the
action  of  Congress  1  No.  We  will
put  iu  a  word  for  the  liberty  of  man,
equal  rights  and  constitutional
principles,  and  these  we  will  main-
tain so  far  as  God  gives  us  jrfwer.
When  we  have  done  that  wb*  will
live  our  religion;  we  will  ufcave
unto  God  and  unto  truth,  mam  tain
virtue,  purity  and  righteousness,
and  seek  for  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  ;  I
we  will  be  humble,  faithful  and  {Ur-
gent, and  we  will  pray  for  our  ene-
mies anil  for  all  men,  Jesus  when
he  was  put  to  the  test  and  men  were
clamoring  against  him,  not  only
clamoring  but  they  had  nailed  hiru
to  the  cross,  used  these  words  :
"Father,  forgive  them,  for  they
know  not  what  they  do  they  are
ignorant,  besotted  and  dark,,  tjpt
acquainted  with  the  principles  of
righteousness  ;  they  know  not  what
they  do,  Father,  forgive  them.
Then  we  find  the  Apostles  speak-
ing, calling  upon  them  to  repent
and  be  baptized  that  their  sins  might
be  blotted  out.  Wheal  Thep?
No,  When  1  When  the  times  o£
refreshing  shall  come  from  the  pre-
sence of  the  Lord,  and  he  shall
send  Jesus  Christ,  who  was
before  preached  unto  you  j"  and
not  till  then.

What  more  have  we  to  do  ]  To
become  saviors  upon  Mount  Zion  ;  to
be  full  of  kindness  and  longsuffering
and  contend  against  the  sins  and
corruptions  of  the  world,  and  cherish
purity  and  holiness  in  the  Lord  eur
God.  What  else  1  Some  people  tell
us  we  ought  to  proclaim  polygamy.
We  have  no  such  mission.  Further,
if  we  werti  to  proclaim  the  principle
that  they  call  polygamy,  they  could
not  obey  it.  We  believe  in  celestial
marriage,  in  celestial  covenants,  in
men  and  women  being  united  for
time and  for  all  eternity.  Are


THE  WORK  OF  GOD,  ETC


we  going  to  suffer  a  surrender  of
this  point  1  No,  never !  No,
never  !  We  intend  to  be  true  to
our  covenants  in  time  and  in  the
eternities  to  come.  They  call  it
bigamy.  What  is  a  bigamist  1  A
man  who  marries  one  wife  promising
to  be  true  to  her,  and  afterwards
representing  himself  as  an  honor-
ble  man,  marries  another  one  and
deceives  both  of  them.  He  is  a
breaker  of  covenants.  A  poly  gam  ist
does  not  do  that.  Abraham,  Jacob,
David  and  Solomon  did  not  perpe-
trate such  infamies.  Nor  do  we,
igamy  is  an  institution  of  a  per-
erted  Christianity1  and  not  ours.
We  make  covenants  with  our  wives,
and  we  will  be  true  to  them  and
they  to  us  in  time  and  i  i  eternity.
Supposing,  I  say,  we  were  to
►reach  this  doctrine  to  the  world,
nd  tell  them  what  David  and
braham  and  the  Patriarchs  did,
and  they  were  to  say  we  accept  it ;
could  we  administer  in  it?  No,
and  they  could  not  enter  into  this
thing.  There  are  only  a  few  in
Utah  associated  with  this  matter,
comparatively,  and  those  none  but

No,  16,


the  most  honorable,  pure  and  vir-
tuous, yet  our  nation  has  seen  fit
to  condemn  everybody,  the  non-
polyga  mists  as  well  as  the  polyga-
mies, because  the  non-polygaraists
1  happen  to  live  in  the  same  place  as
the  polygamies.  Thus  nine  tenths
are  proscribe  I  fur  what  the  other
tenth  are  alleged  to  have  done.
That  is  the  kind  ot  justice  we
have  administered  nowadays.

But  if  the  nation  can  stand  this
kind  of  legislation,  we  can  as  long  as
they  can.  We  will  try  to  do  right
and  fear  Go<l,  and  observe  His  laws,
and  seek  to  pursue  that  course  that
our  Heavenly  Father  will  approve,
and  we  will  have  His  Spirit  to  be
with  us  and  rejoice  together  in  the
fullness  of  the  Gospel  of  peace.
And  we  will  build  Temples  ;  and  we
will  build  up  the  kingdom  of  God,
and  God  will  be  on  the  side  of  Is-
rael, if  Israel  will  only  be  on  the
side  of  lijjht,  laying  aside  covetous-
ness,  corruptions  and  follies  of
every  kind,  and  will  cleave  to  the
truth,  He  will  bless  us  and  we  will
be  blessed  in  time  and  throughout
the  eternities  to  come.  Amen,

Vol.  XXIII.


2TJ


JOURNAL UK  UJSCOUKSKS.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER JOSEPH K TA  V  LOU,

DELIVERED  JN  THE  TABERNACLE,  SALT  LAKE  ClTY,  SUNDAY  AfTKRSOO^

fS  eft  ember  3rp,  1882.


(Reported  by  John  Irvine.)

BEPENDKNCK  UPON  THE  HuLY  SPIRIT — THK  OATH  Kit  I  NO  AM)  ITS  OBJECT
— SACRIFICED  BKQUIRKD  OF  THE  SAINTS-  111  K  RISK  UF  RKJECTInG
THE  TESTIMONY  OF  THE  TKUTU — PROFESSION  AND  PRACTICE,  PRK-

'X  ENMUN,  AM) I'illNVJri.E —  impendixq  trials  and  troubles,

TlU  Sr  IX  HMD—  TIME  AND  ETERNITY,  BODY  AND  SPIRIT —  "  MORE
BLESSED  ARE  1  HEY  THAT  BELIEVE  AND  HAVE  NOT  SEEN**  —  THE
SPIRIT  OF  TRUTHFUL  INTUITION  THE  SAFEST  GUIDE  —  EXHORTA-
TION, COUNSEL  AND  INSTRUCTION,


It  is  it  matter  of  surprise  to  people
not  of  oui"  faith  when  they  are  made
acq  nam  tod  with  the  fact  that  Eiders
of  this  Church  are  called  promis-
cuously, as  it  were  accidentally,  to
address  the  congregation*  that  are
assembled  from  time  to  time  in  this
and  other  places  in  the  midst  of  this
people  ;  that  they  appear  before  the
congregation  without  any  text,
without  any  sermon,  without  giving
any  thought  whatever  to  preparing
the  subject  or  subjects  upon  which
they  may  speak,  And  these  Elders
have,  by  experience,  learned  the
ieeson  that  it  is  very  necessary  and
-essential  for  them  to  depend  upon
the  Holy  Ghost  for  their  inspiration,
for  its  assistance,  for  its  influence,
to  enable  them  to  speak  and  instruct
the  people  as  the  Lord  desires  they
should  he  instructed.  What  do  I
know  about  this  audience  this  after-
noon 1  Here  is  a  sea  of  faces  before
me  beaming  with  intelligence,  I
feel  the  influence  of  the  various
spirits  of  the  people  composing  this
congregation.  They  are  all  centered
.upon  myself,  or  if  my  Brother  was


speaking,  they  would  he  centered
upon  hi  in  or  whoever  the  speaker
might  be.

Some  have  come  to  worship  God
with  honesty  of  purpose,  to  partake
of  His  holy  sacrament  with  clean
hands  and  pure  hearts,  and  are  wor-
thy of  partaking  of  these  sacred
emblems  of  the  death  of  our  Lord
and  Savior  Jesus  Christ  They  also
come  to  listen  to  words  of  instruc-
tion, and  many  of  the  in  have  a
yearning  desire,  perhaps,  to  receive
comfort  to  their  souls,  information,
perchance,  upon  some  particular
point  of  doctrine  connected  with
their  holy  religion.  And  then  again,
there  are  those  in  this  congregation
who  have  come  here  simply  out  of
curiosity,  having  no  particular  inter-
est in  anything  pertaining  to  the
worship  of  this  people,  or  the
sacrament  of  which  they  are  par-
taking ;  having  no  particular
fondness  for  the  doctrines  taught  by
the  Elders  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  nor
any  of  the  principles  incorporated
in  the  faith  of  this  people,  but  sim-


L>43


ply  to  see  and  out  of  sheer  curiosity
to  listen -that  they  may  afterwards
talk  about  what  they  have  seen  and
heard  according  to  their  capacity
and  intelligence  to  understand  and
to  comprehend  that  which  they
hear,  A  great  number  of  this  vast
congregation  have  come  from  dis-
tant nations  ;  they  have  hear  J  the
testimony  of  the  servants  of  God,
thousands  of  mil  eg  from  the  place
they  now  occupy.  They  have  re-
ceived that  testimony;  they  accepted
and  cherished  that  testimony  in
their  hearts  and  it  has  led  them  to
hid  adieu  to  fatherland,  to  scenes  of
childhood,  of  youth,  of  mature  age
m  many  instances,  to  come  to  this
land  which  thev  believed  then  and
stiJ I  believe  to  be  the  land  of  Zion,
to  be  taught  in  the  ways  of  the
Lord,  to  be  made  acquainted  with
the  principles  of  eternal  truth,  to
comprehend  the  law  of  God,  and  to
have  an  opportunity  to  practice  that
law  in  their  lives  and  couducfc.
They  have  come  also  for  the  pur-
pose of  enjoying  the  companionship
of  the  people  they  love — a  people
who  feel  as  they  feel,  who  believe
as  they  believe,  who  are  inspired  as
they  have  been  inspired,  and  are  to-
day inspired ;  they  have  come  to  this
land  for  the  purpose  of  receiving
ordinances  pertaining  to  their  future
existence,

By  far  the  greater  portion  of  the
people  who  have  thus  come,  have
made  sacrifices  for  this  purpose,
have  checked  natural  feelings  that
have  arisen  in  their  bosoms,  have
severed  kindred  ties,  associations,
affinities  and  affections.  What  for?
"  I  want  to  It  ear  the  voice  of  God  ;
I  want  to  hear  the  words  of  inspira-
tion ;  I  want  to  become  acquainted
with  the  law  that  vmy  Father  has
;iven  for  met  as  well  as  the  rest  of
lis  children  to  be  governed  by  ;  I
wrant  to  be  placed  under  the  imme-


diate teaching,  instruction  and  coun-
sel of  those  whom  Go  J  has  raised  up
and  inspired  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  I
love  you,  my  father  j  I  love  you,  my
mother ;  I  love  you,  my  sister,  my
brother  and  my  child  ;  but  I  love
God  more.  I  must  yield  your
society ;  I  must  sacrifice  the  as-
sociations that  I  have  enjoyed
with  you,  because  you  cannot
think  as  I  think  ;  because  you
cannot  feel  as  I  feel ;  because  you
are  not  inspired  as  I  am  inspired*"
We  might  mention  other  sacrifices
that  have  had  to  be  made,  other
things  that  have  had  to  be  yielded,
given  up,  parted  with,  for  this  holy
purpose  and  this  holy  desires  that  I
nave  named  this  afternoon  ;  for  the
feeling  that  permeates  the  hearts  of
these  Latter-day  Saints  permeates
their  ^entire  being,  absorbs  their  en-
tire thought,  and  their  entire  affec-
tion, for  a  true  Latter-day  Saint  is
fully  devoted  to  his  God  and  to  his
religion,  spirit  and  body  ;  it  affects
his  time,  his  talent,  every  energy
that  he  possesses,  and  wherever  can
be  found  among  this  people  a  man
who  has  any  reserve,  he  is  not  de-
voted to  his  God  as  his  religion
demands  that  he  should  be.

Those  present  have  had,  in  the
main,  equal  opportunities  with  my-
self to  become  acquainted  with  the
truths  of  eternal  life.  They  have
been  taught  where  I  have  been
taught ;  they  have  eaten,  figurative-
ly speaking,  at  the  same  tabln  where
1  have  partaken  ;  and  yet  this  after-
noon I  stand  hefore  you  as  a  teacher
and  an  instructor  of  the  very  people
that  have  had  equal  opportunities
with  myself  to  learn  and  become
acquainted  with  the  law  of  God.
How  can  I  teach  you  1  How  can  I
instruct  you  1  Upon  what  principle
can  I  furnish  you  with  the  bread  of
life  t  Only  by  the  power  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  by  its  inspiration,  by  possess-


244


J  or  UN  A  I.  OF  DISCOURSES.


ir.g  its  gifts.  Is  tli ere  any  man  with-
out this  Spirit,  without  the  inspira-
tion of  this  agency  among  the
Latter  day  Saints,  from  the  President
of  the  Cliuich  down  tliruu^h  nil  the
ramifications  of  the  Priesthood,
tli at  is  prepared  to  leach  the  people
the  law  of  God  uf  himself  t  No,
and  1  am  hold  to  declare  it  tin*
afternoon  ;  neither  is  there  a  minis-
ter upon  the  face  of  this  broad  land
or  in  all  Christendom  that  can  go
before  his  congregation  and  feed
them  with  the  "bread  of  life,  unless
he  possesses  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  speaks  by  virtue  of  that
gift

We  send  our  Elders  abroad,  thou-
sands of  them  ;  we  have  sent  them
for  many  years  that  are  past,  and
until  the  Lord  says  to  his  servants
stop,  we  shall  continue  to  send
them  even  to  the  most  distant
parts  of  the  earth.  For  what
purpose?  To  preach  the  Gospel,  to
proclaim  the  simple  truths  of  eternal
life,  to  explain  to  the  understanding
of  the  smallest  mind  what  God  ex-
pects and  desires  of  the  people  in
this  hist  dispensation  of  the  fullness
of  times.  What  Elders  have  been
successful  ?  The  men  that  have
stood  before  the  people,  and  by  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  have  de-
clared the  word  of  the  Lord  God  to
them ;  and  here  let  me  say  in  this
coin  net  ion,  there  never  was  a  con-
gregation that  listened  to  a  discourse
delivered  by  an  Elder  of  Israel,  and
that  discourse  was  delivered  by  the
power  and  demonstration  and  Spirit
of  the  Almighty,  but  there  came  to
every  man  and  woman  in  that  con-
gregation a  response  by  that  same
Spirit,  14  that  is  true/1  It  bore  tes-
timony there  and  then  to  the  truth
of  the  remarks  of  the  servant  of
God,  and  by  this  means,  and  by  this
means  only  will  those  who  reject  the
truth  stand  condemned  before  God


in  the  day,that  they  will  appear  he-
fore  Him  to  give  an  account  of"  their
acts  in  this  life.

Simply  as  a  man  ;  is  not  every
man  equal  to  iin>elft  As  far  as
opinions  go,  are  not  my  neighbors
just  as  precious  and  of  as  much  value
to  him  as  mine  are  to  me?  Any
ideas  that  I  may  possess,  no  matter
how  rational,  apparently  logical,  no
matter  how  reasonable  they  may
sound ;  are  not  the  opinions  of  every
other  man  just  us  much  value  to
him  as  mine  are  to  me  ?  Certainly
they  are.  We  occupy  the  same
place,  we  are  on  an  equality  in  this
respect  j  but  when  we  proclaim  the
word  of  the  Lord,  when  we  under-
take to  make  known  the  decrees  of
the  Almighty,  and  the  plan  of  salvar
tion,  and  we  do  it  by  the  power  and
demonstration  of  the  Spirit,  every
irau  who  rejects  that  proclamation
will  do  so  at  his  own  risk,  and  will
stand  condemned  before  God,  be-
cause he  will  not  receive  of  that
Spirit,  not  because  he  did  not  receive
the  reasoning  of  the  man  who  spoke*
but  because  he  rejected  the  influence
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  by  which  he
spoke.

I  remarked  at  the  outset  that  a
part  of  this  congregation  had  un-
doubtedly been  gathered  from  dis-
tant nations  having  an  object  in
view,  with  a  design  in  their  minds*
Let  me  ask  a  few  questions  in  con-
nection with  this  :  Are  we  pursuing
this  object  ?  Are  we  following  out
this  design  1  Are  we  continuing  in
the  faith  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
and  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God?
Are  we  developing  righteousness  in
our  lives  ?  Are  we  making  that
righteousness  manifest  in  our  con-
duct I  Are  we  sustaining  the  prin-
ciples that  charmed  our  hearts  many
years  ago,  thousands  of  miles  dis-
tant from  here  1  Have  Ave  grown  in
knowledge  of  the  principles  of  life


■


DKPKNDKNCK UPON  THK  H  jLV  SI*I1UT,  KTC.


2  45


and  salvation  over  and  above  that  abandoned,  drink  with  the  drunken,
which  we  understood  many  years  j  shake  hands  with  the  evil  doer,
ago!  What  is  our  stan-ling  in  the  fraternize  with  the  sinner,  defile
midst  of  the  people  and  before  God  ourselves  before  God,  and  forsake
to-day  ]  These  are  plain  questions,  the  holy  covenants  that  we  have
but  pertinent;  and  we  should  pro-  made?  These  are  plain  questions,
pound  these  questions  to  ourselves  ;  We  have  gone  too  far  ;  we  have  be-
often  and  thus  become  our  own  cate  come  possessed  of  too  much  under-
chisers.  If  we  find  we  are  lacking  standing ;  we  have  professed  too
in  any  one  particular  we  should  take  much  to  be  able  to  afford  to  go  back
immediate  steps  to  remedy  any  de-  again  and  partake  of  any  of  the


feet,  any  neglect,  and  should  cease
any  wrong-doing  of  which  we  may
have  been  guilty.  We  can  afford  to
serve  God,  but  we  cannot  afford  to
take  a  contrary  course  ;  we  cannot
afford  to  apostatize  and  deny  the
truth  ;  we  cannot  afford  to  become
recreant  to  the  principles  we  have
espoused  ;  we  cannot  afford  to  go
back  upon  our  covenants.  We
profess more. We  declare  mote,

I  may  use  another  term,  which
may  be  strictly  correct,  we  pretend
more  than  any  other  people  upon
the  face  of  the  earth.  We  have  a
right  to  do  this,  but  when  our  pre-
tensions arn  made  known,  when
our  professions  become  the  pro-
perty of  others,  to  the  extent
that  these  -pretensions  are  under-
stood, we  should  be  consistent  there-
with. Many  of  us  were  asked  by  our
friends, will you not  abandon

II  Mormon  ism  ?  "  No.  Will  you
not  leave  the  society  uf  that  people,
and  not  go  out  to  that  wild  wilder*
ness  country,  but  stay  with  us  J  We
answered  most  emphatically,  No.
And  our  presence  here  to  day  and
for  the  many  years  that  are  past,
testifies  that  that  was  what  we
meant,  if  we  did  not  say  so  in  so
many  words.  Now  the  same  scenes,
tfce  same  conditions,  the  same  so-
aety,  the  same  influences,  the  same
evils,  unbidden,  unsought  for,
undesired,  have  presumed  to  locate
themselves  in  our  midst.  Shall  we
affiliate  with  that  which  we  once


evils  that  we  left  in  Babylon,  years
and  years  ago.  And  if  we  do  so  we
shall  do  it  at  our  own  risk,  and  that
risk  and  its  consequences  will  be  most
terrible  for  us.

We  are  threatened,  we  are
menaced  ;  we  feel  it  strongly,  very
sensitively,  very  keenly;  and  we  shall
remember  well  in  the  days,  in  the
years  ^nd  in  the  times  that  are  to
come  the  instruments  that  have
made  these  threaienings,  and  that
have  dared  to  raise  their  arms  and
their  voice  and  their  influence  against
us,  while  in  the  pursuit  of  the  prin-
ciples of  eternal  life.  What  then
is  our  course]  In  whom  is  our  trust  ?
In  God ;  in  his  power  ;  in  his  arm  ;
in  his  strength.  Have  we  not  made
his  acquaintance  ?  Has  he  not
revealed  himself  to  us  in  the  Gospel
that  we  have  received  1  Do  we  feel
tremulous  in  the  day  of  trouble-
that  God  will  leave  us  and  forsake
us?  Is  this  our  condition?  If  it
is  we  are  not  living  our  religion ;  if
it  is  we  are  not  keeping  our  cove-
nants; if  it  is  we  have  not  cherished
the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  the
Gospel  of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus
Christ,  or  it  would  produce  other
results.

It  is  true  we  number  a  very  few
people ;  numerically  speaking  our
strength  is  weak.  Many  other
things  might  be  quoted  concerning
our  position  that  are  equally  true  ;
but  understand  this  one  thing — and
the  world  of  mankind  will  know  it


JOURNAL  OK  DISCO  TKSI-X


by  ami  by — that  we  have  set  out  to
serve  God,  to  keep  his  command-
ments, to  builil  up  his  Church,  to
redeem  his  Ziou  upon  this  earth,
without  considering  any  consequen-
ces in  the  least  That  is  the  condi-
tion. We  have  accepted  the  conse-
quences ;  accepted  conditions  as
they  exist,  with  the  powers  of  hell
perchance  sometimes  combined  to-
gether to  force  those  unpleasant
conditions  upon  us.  Yes,  when
death  itself  shall  stare  us  in  the  face
ami  seem  to  be  inevitable,  for  to  that
extent  will  the  Lord  try  and  prove
some  of  His  people,  to  see  if  they
will  keep  His  commandment  a.
Even  then  God  expects  us  to  remain
firm  ami  unshaken.  Shall  we  turn
to  the  right  hand]  No.  Or  turn
to  the  left  hand  ?  Never.  Turn
round  entirely  and  take  a  backward
course  t  No,  not  by  the  help  of  the
Eternal  One.  And  this  world  will
know,  and  the  enemies  of  God's
people  will  know  hy  and  by  of  the,
strength  and  the  power  and  the
might  of  Him  who  has  revealed  ,
Himself  to  His  servant  Joseph  ;
who  has  conferred  his  authority,  his
Priesthood  upon  men,  authorizing
them  to  act  in  his  name.

There  is  a  very  singular  expression
in  this  book— m  i  I  think  the
Savior  who  used  the  expression  had
an  eye  to  this  last  dispensation,
which  reads  :  "  Whosoever  shall  fall
upon  this  stone  shall  be  broken."
Mark  it,  not  perhaps,  not  maybe,
not  conditionally.  And  again :
"  But  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fall  it
will  grind  him  to  powder,"  Thus
hath  said  the  Lord  God,

Now,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
have  you  questioned  yourselves  as
to  your  standing,  as  to  your  faith,  as
to  your  confidence  in  yourselves,  in
your  religion  and  the  Priesthood  of
God  that  administers  to  you,  and  in
God  the  Eternal  Father  ]


e  are  in  a  dark  land.  Our  mind&
are  beclouded,  the  heavens  are  shut,
and  the  veil  can  only  be  lifted  by
the  power  of  faith.  Who  possesses
it  1  The  veil  never  has  been  lifted
from  the  day  that  God  hid  himself
from  Adam  in  the  Garden  of  Eden ;
it  never  has  been  lifted  in  any  age
of  the  world  only  by  the  power  of
the  Priesthood  and  the  gift  of  faith,
and  then  only  fur  a  short  time.  We
are  compelled  nowr  to  exercise  the
principle  of  faith.  Whence  comes
it  1  It  is  a  gift  of  God  ;  but  it  needs
cherishing  ;  it  needs  cultivation  j  it
needs  nourishing,  and  it  will  grow
within  you  and  me,  if  we  will
cherish  it  to  the  extent  that  it  is  our
privilege,  until  it  will  become  so
mighty  within  us,  that  we  never  can
be  moved  not  even  by  death  staring
us  in  the  face.

The  world  seem  to  measure  their
entire  existence  by  tins  hit*,  this
being,  these  few  paltry  years  upon
this  dark,  cold  and  cruel  earth.  They
say — if  not  in  words  in  acts— give
ine  enjoyment  to-day  ;  give  me
pleasure  to-day ;  give  me  what  I
conceive  to  be  happiness  to-day,"
"  But,"  says  the  man  of  inspiration,
the  man  of  forethought,  the  man
whose  mind  reaches  into  the  future,
"  what  about  eternity  f  Oh,"  say
the  world,  "  never  mind  eternity,,
let  eternity  take  care  of  itself;  let
us  gratify  passion  ;  let  our  ambl-
tions  be  satisfied  and  realized  here  ;
it  is  all  we  ask."  And  they  live  like
the  brute  although  they  have  an
existence  like  you  and  L  It  is  true
they  move  upon  the  same  earth,  are
surrounded  bv  the  same  circumstan-
ces,  but  their  minds  have  never
reached  out  after  God,  and  they  are
stultified,  they  are  stunted  in  their
growth,  in  the  development  of  their
mind ;  they  know  nothing  and  care  to
know  less  of  the  object  of  their  crear
tion  and  existence. They  never  con-


ceivfnl  the  idea  of  what  dwells  in
their  tabernacles — the  power  iude-
pen?  lent of the tabernacle,  but
necessary  to  the  life  of  that  taber-
nacle ;  a  fully  organized  identity  that
can  exist  without  the  tabernacle  and
possesses  all  the  powers  an 'I  a  great
many  more  than  it  can  make  mani-
fest through  the  tabernacle,  an  exis-
tence separate  from  the  tabernacle
that  came  from  God. And  yet  these
men and  women,  many  of  them,
when  you  talk  to  them  upon  the
principles  of  eternal  life,  will  say,
44  Will  you  reason  that  out  to  me  *o
that  I  can  understand  it  in  a  way  to
satisfy  my  natural  sense. Can  I
see  what  you  talk  about  f No,  you
cannot  see  it  with  the  natural  eye.
Can  I  hear  it? No,  you  cannot
hear  it  with  the  natural  ear*  Can
1  handle  it  with  these  hands?  No,
you  cannot  handle  it  with  the  natu-
ral hands. Then  1  shall  not  listen,
I  will  ignore  everything  you  say  upon
this  subject. Your  parents  can  ap-
proach you  through  your  natural
senses  ;  they  address  themselves  to
the  tabernacle, B;it  when  we  come
to  the  constitution  of  the  spirit  that
dwells  within  the  tabernacle,  and
then  come  to  understand  that  that
spirit  emanated  from  God  the  Fa-
ther, to  whom  will  (lod  the  Fattier
speak  1  Will  He  speak  to  the  taber-
nacle that  is  the  result  of  the  agency
of  man  and  woman  in  producing  til
No,  only  seldom  and  then  to  chosen
ones,  God  the  Father  speaks  to  his
own  ;  and  the  angels  that  minister
and speak, address  themselves
to  the  mind,  as  we  call  it,  to  thus
spirit  that  cannot  be  seen,  that  can-
not  be  ha? idled,  that  cannot  be
heard  by  the  ears  of  the  natural
man. Here  is  the  grand  difficulty
with  the  human  family  to-day,  uod
cannot  speak  to  them  fur  they  want
to  compel  Him  to  come  down  to  the
grossuess  of  the  earthly  tabernacle


I  a  id  rei>o:i  everything  out  to  the
!  sense  of  that  tabernacle  ] [trj  will
not  do  it. He  did  not  -six  thousand
years  ago  ;  and  he  will  not  doit  now,
I  nor  in  ail  time  to  come* The  very
|  medium through which  inspira-
tion comes, the very*  medium
through which knowledge  comes
I  that  benefits the human  family,
no  matter  whether  it  be  scientific,
philosophical or  otherwise,  there
not  a  truth  extant  upon  the  earth
to-day  that  has  been  utilize- J,  or
many truths combined  together
that have been utilized  but
have  been  the  result  of  divine  in-
spiration directly  to  the  spirit  of
man,  to  the  mind  of  man  which  is
sometimes incorrectly called  the
I  soul  of  Man, God  will  talk  with
His  own  creation,  and  if  that  spirit
in  man  will  place  itself  in  a  position
to  listen  to  the  voice  of  God,  what
will  he  say  to  that  spirit,  *' Control
that  tabernacle,  I  yave  it  to  you  for
a  greater  exaltation  ;  I  gave  it  to  you
tluu  after  it  shall  have  pa*se  i  away,
it  may  be  resurrected  from  the  grave,
and  if  you subdue its  passions,
its  unholy  desires,  if  you  sanctify
that  tu berime le  before  M»-,  then  [
am  bound  to  bring  that  tabernacle
from  the  grave  auo  io  b;-i.jg  u  to  the
enjoyment  of  the  full  lies*  of  My
glory,  which  was  the  destiny  of  the
spirit  when  it  wm  tirsw  created"
And,  by  the  way,  let  me  here  say
that  there  are  a  great  many  Latter-
day  Saints,  good  men  and  some  few
good  women,  who  seem  to  be  pos-
sessed of  a  sceptical  turn  of  mindf
they  want  everything  reasoned  out ^
it  they  receive  any  knowledge  at  all
they  want  it  to  come  through  the
gross,  cold  reasoning  of  humanity*
In  this  connection  there  comes  to
my  tttmd  a  little  circumstance  that
is  recorded  here  in  tuis  Testament.
The  disciples  of  Jesus,  who  had
listened  when  together  many  tunes-


248  JOURNAL  OF

no  doubt  to  His  explanations  of  Hie
own  resurrection  from  the  grave,
found  Thomas,  ami  told  him  that
the  Savior  had  ari>t»n.  Said  he  :  "I
will  not  believe  it.  Unless  1  get  more
positive  proof  through  these  natural
senses  of  mine  that  such  is  the  fact,
I  will  not  believe  it  though  you  say
it,  and  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt
your  word-"  Undoubtedly  they  had
been  truthful  with  each  other  ;  they
had  been  taught  to  be  truthful  by  I
their  Lord  and  Master.  The  Savior
after  a  while  appeared  to  his  disci-
ples. Thomas  was  there.  The
Savior  understand  ini;  Thomas's
thoughts  said  :  "  Keach  hither  thy
finger  and  behold  my  hands,  and
reach  hither  thy  hand  and  thrust  it
into  my  side,  and  be  not  faithless,
but  believing."  Whereupon  Thomas
exclaimed,  "My  Lord  and  my  God/'
What  did  Jesus  say !  Did  he  re-
proach Thomas  I  Did  he  use  harsh,
cruel  and  severe  words,  because  of  j
Thomas's  unbelief,  as  one  of  the
chosen  ?  No.  He  said,  u  Blessed
art  thou,  Thomas,  because  thou  hast 1
believed"  —  upon  any  condition  ;
if  you  have  received  a  testimony
now,  you  are  blessed ;  but  more
blessed  are  they  that  have  not
seen,  and  yet  have  believed.  I
think  again  of  the  beloved  disciple
John  upon  the  isle  of  Patmos,  who
had  the  visions  of  the  future  opened
to  him  for  many  ages  to  come,  even
unto  the  winding-up  ^cene  ;  be  sau
this  earth  eventually  celestialized
and  mad*  like  untu  a  Uiim  and
Th um mini — a  sea  of  glass,  every-
thing pertaining  to  it  redeemed,  and
the  earth  clothed  in  the  presence  of
God.  When  the  angel  commenced
to  unfold  that  beautiful  vision  to
John,  suppose  John  had  questioned  !
and  queried  and  asked  to  have  his
natural  senses  gratified  before  he
would  receive  that  revelation,  do
you  think  we  should  have  been  in


DISCOURSED

possession  to-day  of  this  beautiful
vision  showing  the  grand  winding-
up  scene  of  all  things  1  I  think  not.
1  can  say  to  this  congregation — I
want  to  be  understood  clearly  upon
this  point  —  wherever  it  exists  in
truthfulness,  intuition  -proper,  cor-
rect and  legitimate  intuition  is  the
safest  rule  and  guide  for  the  people,
and  Latter-day  Saints  should  *eek
to  become  possessed  of  the  spirit  of
intuition  that  comes  by  virtue  of
the  possession  of  the  Holy  Ghost.

J! ut  to  n  t  tun  now,  my  bretl  ivn
and  sisters,  where  do  we  stand  1
What  is  our  faith  ]  How  much  is  our
confidence  t  Have  we  lost  any  of  it  1
If  so,  let  us  regain  it.  There  is  a
time  yet  for  repentance  ;  there  is  a
time  yet  left  for  us  to  manifest  our
humility  before  God  ;  there  are  op-
portunities for  us  tj  retrace  our
steps  if  we  have  traveled  in  the
wrong  direction.  The  time  will
come,  as  far  as  this  earthly  existence
is  concerned,  when  these  opportu-
nities and  advantages  will  cease,
j  Can  you  be  baptized  h$re  in  the
flesh  for  the  remission  of  your  sins]
Yes,  Can  you  yourself  attend  to
that  ordinance  when  your  tabernacle
is  laid  away  in  the  grave]  No  you
cannot ;  that  ordinance  was  revealed
especially  for  th  is  time.  Can  you
have  hands  laid  upon  you  for  the
reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  this
)ife  1  Yes.  Can  you  enjoy  this
privilege  when  your  body  is  laid
away  in  the  grave  ?  No  ;  and  to
prove  that  this  ordinance,  as  well  as
otheis  pertains  to  this  life,  this  time,
1  need  only  say  that  when  we  under-
take to  extend  the  principles
of  salvation  to  those  that  are  dead,
somebody  in  the  flesh  must  repre-
sent the  person  for  whom  the  ordi-
nances are  intended  who  may  have
neglected  or  iia^e  had  no  opportu-
nity to  attend  to  these  ordinances
themselves while in the  flesh.


depknd  knch  upon  ihic  HOLY  SPIRIT,  ETC


249


When  we  get  to  tlie  other  side  of  the
veil,  we  shall  find  another  state  of
things  existing  there  ;  we  shall  find
other  conditions,  other  surroundings,
other  laws,  pertaining  to  that  pecu-
liar existence  of  spirit  ;  we  shall
find  already  existing  there  other
organizations.  Our  bodies  will  have
been  left  in  the  grave  with  all  their
weaknesses,  with  all  their  imperfec-
tions. Our  spirits  will  not  go  down
into  the  grave,  They  live  in  the
presence  of  God  ;  they  will  be  held
responsible  for  that  tabernacle,  for
its  acts,  for  its  development  ;  they
will  be  held  responsible  before  God,
before  the  heavens,  for  the  faith
they  have  exercised,  or  for  the
wrongs  that  they  have  allowed
themselves  to  be  guilty  of  in  the
flesh  ;  for  I  say  right  here ;  I  repeat
it  a^im  that  it  is  the  business  of
the  spirit  to  preside  over,  to  be
master  of  and  to  control  this  fleshy
tabernacle  to  all  intents  and  pur-
poses and  to  hold  it  subject  to  all
the  laws  of  God.  But,  says  one,
there  are  weaknesses  that  pertain  to
the  flesh,  are  they  all  sins  ?  No,
What  about  those  weaknesses]
The  man  who  has  been  pure  in  his
spirit,  pure  in  his  heart,  pure  in
his  intentions  and  desires  before
God,  when  he  lays  that  body  down
in  the  grave  there  will  be  found  in
the  very  elements  with  which  his
body  will  mingle,  a  power  to  cleanse
and  purify  all  weaknesses  as  per-
taining to  the  flesh  which  cannot  be
regarded  as  sins  before  God.
Yes,  give  mother  earth  time  and  she
will  so  effectually  purify  the  taber-


nacle that  she  will  get  it  ready  for
the  resurrection  from  the  grave  to
be  re-united  with  the  spirit.  Then
after  a  while  we  shall  become  ac-
quainted with  the  higher  laws,  with
principles  altogether  different  to
those  taught  to  us  in  the  flesh  and
which  also  pertain  to  eternal  lives.
And  then  again,  when  we  come  to
be  resurrected  from  the  grave  we
shall  find  other  conditions  in  advance
of  those  ;  we  shall  find  God's  Priest-
hood there,  his  law  tlie  re,  his  power
there,  Ins  influence  there,  as  there
will  be  teachings  and  instructions  to
be  given  even  then  ;  and  thus  shall
we  keep  going  on  from  condition  to
condition  of  perfection  and  glory
until  we  become  possessed  of  the
glory  that  belongs  to  God.  Is  it
worth  Jiving  for]  Is  it  worth  en-
during a  few  threats  for  ]  Is  it
worth  being  quiet  when  you  are
menaced,  and  as  passive  as  tlie  Lord
wants  you  to  be  1  Yes,  Is  it  worth
making  any  sacrifice  fori  Is  it  worth
leaving  home,  father,  mother,  sis-
ter, brother  \  It  is.  And  why  ?  The
day  will  come,  perchance,  even  in
the  spirit  world,  when  that  father
and  mother,  sister  and  brother,  who
despised  you,  will  be  seeking  after
salvation  and  will  want  to  have  con*
f erred  upon  them  the  powers  of
eternal  life.  And  you  will  have
placed  yourself  in  the  position  to  act
for  them  though  your  body  may  be
in  the  grave,  for  your  spirit  still
lives  and  you  can  preach  and  even
become  a  minister  of  salvation  to
those  of  your  own  house.  Amen,


250  JOL'RNAL  Ob'  DISCOURSES.


DISCOUIISE BY ELDER GEO, G.  BYWATER,


Delivered  ix  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

August  27,  1882,


Reported  hy  John  Irviiu.


THE  GOSPEL  OF  CHRIST  OR  ANCIENT  CHRISTIANITY  —  ITS  GROWTH  AND
PROGRESS  DKSPITE  OF  OPPOSITION  —  CHRIST'S  SERMON  ON  THE
MOUNT—  SIMILARITY  OP  ANCIENT,  To  MODERN  OPPOSITION  TO  THE
TRUTH  —  THE  EARLY  APOsTACV  AND  THK  GOSPEl/S  LATTER-DAT^
RESTORATION  —  THE  OBJECT  OF  AN*!  !-**  MORM'iN"  LEGISLATION  WOT

THE  SrrPRKSSiuN  OF  IMMORALITY THE FAINTS  MILLING TO  ABIDE

THE  ISbl'E.


*'  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel
of  Christ,  for  it  is  the  power  of  God
unto  salvation  to  every  one  that
belie veth  ;  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also
to  the  Greek/'  These  words  were
uttered  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  who,
prior  to  his  acceptance  of  the  Chris-
tian religion  wag  a  vehement  perse-
cutor uf  the  new  cause  that' had
sprung  up  in  Galilee,  and  in  the  re-
gions round  about,  but  who  upon
being  divinely  inspired  in  a  miracu-
lous manner  became  convinced  of
the  power  of  this  Gospel  of  which
he  speaks  in  the  language  I  have
just  quoted.  It  will  he  remembered
that  at  the  period  of  the  world's
history  when  these  words  were
enunciated  by  the  inspired  Apostle
the  Christian  religion  was  not
then  as  it  is  now,  the  professed  re-
ligion of  a  large  portion  of  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth.  It  was  then
a  new  cause  ;  it  was  then  considered
a  sect  which  was  everywhere  spoken
against.  The  doctrines  and  princi-
ples ot  this  new  faith  appear,  from
the  history  of  its  incipient  develop-
ment, to  have  aioused  very  bitter


feelings  in  the  hearts  of  the  profes-
sors of  the  popular  creeds  and  philo-
sophies of  that  age.  The  history  of
the  rise  and  progress  of  Christianity
presents  to  the  intelligent  student
a  history  of  many  of  the  most  im-
portant principles  and  lessons  con-
nected with  the  unfohlment  of  civil-
ization and  the  purification  of  the
moral  ethics  of  that  age  and  through
the  succeeding  ages,  I  may  add,
even  down  to  modern  times.
The  readers  of  sacred  history,
as  well  as  the  students  of  universal
history,  know  full  well  that  there
has  been  in  the  history  of  the
struggle  of  our  common  humanity,
rising  upward  from  the  lower  strata
of  society  or  masses  of  the  human
family  who  could  not  well  be  de-
nominated societies  in  the  sense
in  which  the  term  is  employed  to-
day; they,  1  repeat,  know  full  well
the struggles which have  been

OCT

made  by  mankind  to  emancipate
themselves  and  to  be  emancipated
through  the  instrumentality  of  the
light  and  intelligence  that  sur-
rounded them  and  the  revelations


of  Gotl  to  man — what  mighty  strug-
gles those  have  been  !  They  know,
furthermore,  that  there  never  has
been  in  all  past  history  any  marked
strides  made  in  the  growth  and
progress  of  men's  intellectual  and
moral  nature,  but  that  growth
has  been  attended  with  a  series,  I
will  not  say  uninterrupted,  but  with
a  series  of  persistent  appositions,  a
series  of  impeding  obstacle*  thrown
in  the  way,  and  the  most  intense
hate  has  been  manifested  by  the
maintained  or  supporters  of  ortho-
dox systems  of  popular  creeds  and
time-honored  institutions.  We  can
look  back  through  the  a?es  that
have  gone  by,  we  can  take  a  retros-
pective glance  into  the  ages  that
have  rolled  into  eternity,  and  there
see  the  things  that  have  marked
distinctively  those  ages,  and  which
are  the  landmarks  uf  human  history,
and  there  we  can  discover,  my
brethren,  sisters  ami  friends,  the
effects  to  which  I  am  now  alluding
that  there  never  has  been  any  great
improvement  made,  nor  marked
advancement  effected,  no  growth
attained,  but  it  has  met  with  oppo-
sition, which  has  been  the  child  of
ignorance  and  of  superstition,  and
has  been  succored  by  that  spirit  and
power  which  we  denominate,  in  the
language  of  the  Scripture,  the  spirit
and  power  of  evil,  the  power  of  the
devil.  IVday  Christianity  is  ac-
cepted professedly,  by  every  enlight-
ened nation  on  the  face  of  this  globe.
There  is  not  a  nation  speaking  the
spoken  languages  of  the  world  but
what  recognizes  the  cardinal  princi-
ples of  the  Christian  religion  as  pos-
sessing vitality  aud  power  that  has
emanated  from  a  source  divine,  and
that  which  is  best  adapted  to  the
amelioration  of  the  condition  of  our
common  humanity.  When  we  com-
pare, when  we  draw  lines  of  com*
parison  between those  gr  nd  and


immutable  principles  that  possess
within  themselves  a  potency,  aud
that  carry  in  their  very  nature  the
sanctity  and  purity  of  the  source
from  whence  they  have  come,  bear-
ing upon themselves  the  seal  of
divinity,  and  remembering  the  oppo-
sition  which  those  principles  met
with  by  the  learned  doctors  of  the
law,  by  the  expounders  of  the  writ-
ings of  Moses  and  the  Prophets,  bjr
those  who  were  living  in  expectancy
of  the  fulfillment  of  the  prophecies
concerning  the  coming  of  the  Ales-
si aht  in  the  coming  of  Shiloh,  and
then  to  discover,  as  the  ages  and
centuries  have  gone  by,  the  growth
and strength that these  fun-
damental doctrines  have  acquired  *r
and  although  generations  have  coma
and  generations  have  gone,  melted
away  and  become  absorbed  as  the
dew  before  the  morning  sun,  yet
the  result  of  the  labors  of  these
generations  have  been  witnessed  in
their  accumulating  forces,  in  their
beneficent  and  redeeming  influences
almost imperceptibly  advancing
over  the  minds  and  seating  them-
selves in  the  hearts  and  affections  of
the  good  and  the  great  that  have
lived  in  every  age, where  those
principles  have  been  proclaimed  in
the  ears  of  man, When  we  reflect
upon  these  things  and  then  take  a
careful  review  of  what  it  bus  cost  in
life  and  its  energies,  the  potency  of
its  powers  that  have  been  employed
and apparently consumed,  the
places  thereof  being  supplied  by  new
stores  unfolded  in  the  rising  genera-
tions,  from  generation  to  generation,,
until,  towering  up  high  and  percep-
tibly above  the  dogmas  and  tradi-
tions of  the  heathen  world,  those
down* trodden  principles,  those  doc-
trines that  have  been  everywhere-
spoken  against,  have  been  accepted,
professedly,  by  the  Christian  world
as  the  Balm  of  Gilead,  as  the  power


2  o  i


.Jul' UNA  I-  UK  l»LSCUUKSi;s,


by  winch  the  nations  were  to  be
healed  of  their  mord  maladies,  by
•which  they  were  to  be  enlightened
from  their  heathen  (Jai'kue.ss.  ami
by  which  they  were  to  be  elevated
to  an  intellectual  ami  moral  plane
that  should  bring  them  up  to  the
high  destiny  which  their  Creator
had  ordained  fur  them,  and  to  bring
to  pass  that  perfection  which  was
augured,  not  only  in  the  religion  of
Jesus,  but  also  plainly  indicated
in  the  constitution  of  man.  To-day
we  have  a  nominal  acceptance  of
Christianity  as  a  revealed  religion.
There  are  but  few  people  living  who
are  so  obtuse  in  their  minds,  or  who
are  so  morally  degraded  in  their
nature,  or  so  far  lost  to  every  sense
of  personal  respect  and  Chris-
tian propriety,  as  to  deny  the
goodness  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  of  which  the  Apostle  Paul
avowed  himself  as  not  ashamed —
very  few  indeed.  The  5th,  6th  and
7th  chapters  of  Matthew  containing
the  sermon  on  the  Mount  are  an
embodiment  of  divinity,  are  a  com-
pilation of  principles,  are  an  associa-
tion of  ideas,  that  are  unparalleled
and  are  inimitable  in  the  yritings
and  learning  of  the  world.  They
contain  the  principles  that  constitute
the  groundwork  upon  which  correct
nature  is  to  be  established.  Now
then,  my  friends,  if  this  be  true  in
the  light  of  modern  science,  of  mo-
dern philosophy,  in  the  light  of  the
■civilization  of  the  nineteenth  century,
these  principles  appear  as  brilliant,
undimmed  and  as  transcendent  in
lustre  as  any  of  the  axiomatic  prin-
ciples, proverbs,  and  sayings  of  the
learned  and  the  wise  of  all  the  ages
that  are  gone  by.  Zoroaster  never
chronicled  their  equal  ;  Matthew
never  penned  a  compilation  of  such
principles  as  are  to  be  found  there  ;
Confucius  never  left  on  the  record  of
his  time  principles  that  reach  down


into  the  innermost  depth  of  human
nature,  and  there  bring  up  into
mau*s  destiny  the  design  of  Ins
creator  as  has  been  revealed  in  those
principles*  And  yet,  my  friends,
these  were  the  doctrines  and  prin-
ciples that  were  opposed,  mark  me,
and  the  propagandists  of  thos
principles  were  the  men  that  wer
followed  up  with  the  most  untirin_
opposition,  that  were  persecuted
with  the  mo4  relentless  hand  ;  the
men  who  represented  these  world-
redeeming  doctrines,  the  purifying,
elevating  institutions  of  Christianity
were  the  men  that  suffered  martyr-
dom, the  men  that  lost  their  lives
that  they  might  find  them,  even
lives  eternal,  and  they  lost  them,
too,  at  the  hands  of  men  who  were
considered  the  representative  men
of  the  time,  the  learned  expounders
of  prophecy,  the  expounders  of
law,  the  teachers  of  t  le  principles
of  civil  and  criminal  jurisprudence,
men  who  were  deeply  versed  in  the
lore  of  the  time,  familiar  with  every
branch  of  the  literature  of  their  age,
and  yet  these  were  the  most  cruel
and  uncharitable  elements  which
Christianity  had  to  cope  with  in  its
growing  influence  in  the  day  when
the  Apostle  Paul  averred  that  he
was  not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel  of
*  'hrist,  for  it  was  the  power  of  God
unto  salvation  to  all  who  would  be-
lieve.

To-day  we  have  the  principles  of
this  same  Christianity  presented  to
the  world  in  the  same  attitude,  pre-
senter! with  the  same  conditions —
avowed  with  the  same  sincerity,  and
its  doctrines  inculcated  with  the
same  assiduity  and  zeal  that  marked
the  Apostles  of  the  Gosi*el  of  Jesus
Christ  over  1S0U  years  ago.  And
does  it  meet  with  any  opposition  to-
day 1  Need  I  ask  this  question  f
Scarcely.  The  people  called  Lat-
ter-day Saints  have  for  a  number


T1JK Oi^eKL up  r!l»I,iT,  *.TC,


of  years  proclaimed  the  Gospel  of  |
Chri>t  in  its  primitive  simplicity,
iu  iu  primitive  integrity,  iu  its  .
primitive  organization,  and  in
all  its  evangelical  detail*,  10  ttte
inhabiteutfl  of  this  nineteenth  cen-
tury,— which  by  some  people  is  tie*
nominated  the  full  Idaze  of  civiliza-
tion, almost  approaching  the  same,
the  highest  pinnacle,  the  last  pos-
s ilily  attainable  point  of  elevation  in
tlie  growth  of  moral  worth  and  in
telleetualijfcy  ami  power— and  if  it
meets  with  the  ojip.iM'u  .>i  winch  \w
know  it  has  met  with,  wo  are  con-
fronted  iu  our  own  minds  with  the
inquiry— who  are  the  men,  what  are
the  character  ami  denomination  of  I
the  people  who  raise  their  voices
against  the  Gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  in  its  apostolical  purity  in  this
the  dispensation  of  the  fullness  of
times  t  Is  it  the  infidel  1  Is  it  the
atheist,  the  man  who  believes  that
there  is  no  God  nor  any  controlling
power  but  that  which  exists  iu  the  I
forms  of  matter  we  behold  1  Is  it !
the  man  who  ignores  the  Supreme !
Being,  the  ruler  of  the  universe-?!
Is  it  that  class  of  people  who  live
without  God,  and  without  hope  and
without  faith  in  the  world  to  come  1
Not  exactly  that  class  ;  but  it  meets
with  opposition  from  precisely  a  cor-
responding class  of  men  that  this
cause  met  with  in  the  early  days  of
Christianity,  namely,  from  Christian
ministers,  from  the  propotmders  of
the  doctrines  of  Christianity,  from
commentators,  from  men  who  pro*
fess  to  have  studied  the  law  of
God,  and  the  revealed  religion  of
Jesus  Christ— these  are  the  men
who  to-day,  in  our  midst,  here  in
Salt  Lake  City,  in  our  cities  and
villages  throughout  this  Territory
and  elsewhere,  claim  to  be  the  fol-
lowers of  the  meek  and  lowly  Jesus
of  Kaaireth,  the  crucified,  the
Redeemer, as the  Savior  of  the


"hole  world,  of  nil  mankind,  the
men  who  tell  you  he  came  into  this
world  and  that  In*  endure  I  persecu-
tion and  every  fnim  nf  ignominy,
every  form  of tthumy  and'ieproacfr
m  order  to  introduce  the  glorious
principles  ot  Christianity,  to  intro-
duce the  doctrine  of  faith  in  God  as
the  Supreme  Creator  of  the  universe,
fni tit  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  as  the
world's  Redeemer,  faith  in  the  Holy
Spirit  as  the  only  guide  of  mankind
unto  all  truth,  the  spirit  of  truth
which  was  promised  by  Jesus  that
should  come  and  make  the
ministry  of  his  Apostles  effective,
and  reveal  unto  them  things  past,
things  present,  and  show  thein
things  to  come,  Men  who  teach
these  principles  are  the  men  who*
"I'puse  the  teachings  of  the  Gospel
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  which  was
preached  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  which
was  preached  by  Teter,  which  was
pleached  by  ail  the  Apostles,  and
above  all,  which  was  illustrated,  not
only  in  the  teachings,  but  in  the
entire  life  and  ministry  of  Christ,
and  of  his  immediate  followers.
Well,  is  this  not  very  strange.  Has
it  never  occurred  to  home"  of  cur
people  that  there  must  be  some
cause  for  this  ?  Why  was  it  that
the  Jewish  Rabbis  and  teachers  of
the  law,  those  men  who  looked  so  con-
•  Mjjptuously  upon  the  poor  despised
Xazarene  and  his  equally  contemp-
tible followers,  the  fishermen,
whom  he  had  gathered  together  as
his  disciples  from  the  sea  coast  of
Galilee ;  men  who  had  studied  the
prophecies,  men  who  claimed  to
have  Abraham  for  their  father,  men
who  claimed  to  be  well-disposed  to-
wards every  agency  which  tended
to  bring  to  pass  the  fulfillment  of
prophecy  and  execute  the  terms
thereof— why  was  it  that  they  of  all
other  men  should  be  the  meu  from
whom  the  Savior  and  his  disciples


25±


met  the  severest  opposition  1  Has
it  ever  occurred  to  us  that  this  is  a
strange  inconsistency]  If  this
position  had  been  developed  among
a  peopie  and  had  been  exerted  by  a
class  uf  i urn  and  women  who  were
unbelievers  in  revelation,  who  were
professedly  infidel  to  the  doctrines
of  prophets,  to  the  teachings  of
patriarchs,  to  the  spirit  and  re  vela-
tions  of  Evangelists  and  of  Apostles,
we  would  not  be  surprised  ;  but  we
find  that  the  most  powerful  agencies
that  hud  been  brought  to  bear  for
the  suppression  of  Christianity,  for
the  overthrow  of  its  doctrines,  for
the  retardation  of  its  success
throughout  the  land,  were  fostered
by  men  who,  from  their  professed
adherence  to  the  scriptures  of  divine
truth,  to  the  writings  of  Moses  and
the  Prophets  which  they  claimed  to
be  in  possession  of,  should  have  been
its  wannest  friends  ;  it  should  have
received  from  them  the  most  effec-
tive support ;  but  on  the  contrary,
it  received  from  them  the  most
heartless  and  unprincipled  opposi-
tion. And  it  appears  that  there
was  but  one  solution  to  the  problem,
and  t  ha!  >nlu!  ion  in  their  minds  was
this  :  This  man  is  a  promoter  of
sedition,  we  must  have  him  taken
out  of  the  way,  and  so  clamorous
become  the  demand  for  the  surrender
of  the  great  teacher  and  founder  of
Christianity,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,
that  the  populace  cried,  "  away  with
him,  away  with  him,  crucify  him,
cruelly  him;"  and  when  the  judges
of  the  land,  after  investigating  the
charge  brought  against  him,  had
discovered  there  was  no  cause  for
death  in  that  man,  and,  moreover,
as  it  was  announced  u  in  this  just
man  f  while  they  did  not  choose
to  impugn  the  judgment  of  the
judge  as  to  his  purity,  or  call  in
question  his  reading  of  the  law,  yet
they  nevertheless  cried  out ffi  his


blood  be  upon  our  heads ;  never
mind  if  it  is  not  right,  never  mind
if  it  is  not  legsd,  we  do  not  care  for
that,  away  with  him  ;  release  unto  us
Barrabas  ;  give  us  a  robber,  give  us  a
thief,  give  us  any  kind  of  individual
and  release  him  in  this  jubilee  of
release  to  criminals  ;  give  any  one  a
chance  but  Jesus  of  Nazareth."
This  was  the  state  of  affairs.  And
why  did  they  want  to  get  rid  of  him]
Why  did  they  wish  to  dispose  of  him
in  tins  way  ]  What  had  he  done  to
them]  What  doctrines  had  he  taught
that  were  in  opposition  even  to  the
law  or  to  good  morality]  None
whatever.  He  was  acquitted  before
the  highest  tribunal  of  his  land,  and
one  of  our  ablest  jurists,  Alexander
Innis,  in  reviewing  the  trial  of  Jesus
of  Nazareth,  concluded  that  in  the
light  of  the  nineteenth  century,  in
the  advanced  state  of  the  science  of
jurisprudence,  the  crucitixion  of
Jesus  Christ  was  a  judicial  murder.
He  went  about  continually  doing
good.  He  berated  men  for  their
sins,  to  be  sure.  He  chastised  them
for  their  iniquity.  He  did  call  them
hypocrites,  he  did  call  them  some
uncomplimentary  names,  but  they
richly  deserved  it,  and  any  man  who
is  acquainted  with  the  history  of  the
times,  with  the  morality  of  that  age,
with  the  depths  of  degradation  to
which  men  and  women  had  sunken,
and  the  almost  extinction  of  the  first
conception  of  morality,  knows  full
well  that  his  accusations  were  only
too  just,  that  there  was  no  other
cause  for  their  ire  being  raised
against  him  other  than  it  was  true,
and  they  could  not  endure  it
There  are  a  great  many  people  in
this  world  of  ours,  in  this  age,  as
there  were  in  the  age  of  which  1
am  speaking,  who  cannot  endure
sound  doctrine.  They  prefer  having
men  who  will  teach  them  plausible
and  flattering  theories, who  will


THK  GOSPEL  OF  CHUIST,  ETC.


pander  to  their  power,  who  will  cringe
before  the  influence  of  wealth,  who
will  bow  clow  a  at  the  shrme  of  the
almighty  dollar t  and  who  dare  not
let  Jesus  and  his  Apostles  lift  up
their  voices  and  proclaim  against  the
crying  evils  of  the  land.  As  Latter-
day  Sail  its  we  are  teaching  the  same
principle?,*  the  same  doctrines  ;  and
I  need  not  say  here,  that  there  are
rio  Christian  ministers  to-day  that
attempt  from  their  pulpits  to  take
up  the  subject  of  our  religion,  to
take  up  any  of  the  leading  doctrines
and  principles  of  our  faith,  and  with
the  word  of  God  in  their  hand  and
with  sound  reason  brought  to  hear
upon  the  doctrines  taught  by  the
Latter-day  Saints  and  by  those  taught
in  ancient  times,  to  show  that  our
doctrines  are  anti-scriptural,  that
they  are  un biblical ;  but  they  will  say
that  they  are  unchristian,  that  it  is
not  in  accord  with  the  popular  sym-
pathies and  popular  sentiments  of
the  tunes  ;  that  it  is  not  in  accord
with  men's  ideas  of  morality,  of  re-
spectability and  of  cultivation.  Yet
show  me  where  there  are  any  doc-
trines or  principles  taught  by  the
Latter  day  Saints  that  are  not  in  the
strictest  accord,  in  the  most  perfect
harmony,  in  the  closest  union  with
the  teachings  and  doctrines  taught
centuries  ago]  There  are  not  any
to  be  found  ;  and  yet  we  hear  the
cry  of  immorality;  we  hear  the  cry
of  barbarism,  of  infidelity,  of
names  that  1  hardly  like  to  repeat,
applied  to  the  Latter-day  Saints
just  as  they  were  applied  to  Jesus
and  \  the  Apostles,  1800  years
ago.

My  friends,  if  the  popular  preju-
dices of  the  first  or  second  century
of  the  Christian  era  had  continued
to  be  the  dominant  influence  of  the
world  anil  Iiad  suppressed  the  pro-
mulgation of  the  principles  of  Chris-
tianity  and the maintenance  of


their  claim  upon  men  and  women,
where  would  your'  boasted  Chris-
tianity be  to-day  i  where  would  your
enlightenment  he  to-day  if  the  reve-
lations of  Jesus  Christ  had  been
swept  out  of  existence,  if  the  world
had  been  deprived  of  them  entirely,
what  would  be  our  state  at  the  pre-
sent time  1  It  is  true  we  have  had
a  long  reign  of  apostacy  ;  it  is  true
that  from  1,400  to  L500  years
have  passed  away  without  any  sem-
blance of  the?  Church  of  Christ
upon  the  earth.  We  have  had
apostate  churches,  we  have  had
churches  built  up  according  to  the
doctrines  of  men ;  we  have  had
sects  and  parties  multiplied  by
the  hundreds;  but  we  have  never
had  a  Christian  Church,  When  the
Church  of  Christ  of  Former- day
Saint*  with  its  Prophets,  Apostles,
and  inspired  men ;  with  its  miracles,
gifts  and  powers  disappeared  from
the  earth,  and  the  great  '-'Mother
of  harlots"  that  sitteth  upon  many
waters,  established  a  church,  and
she  begat  children  in  her  own  like-
ness, until  the  whole  world  has
been  filled,  comparatively  speaking,
with  the  effects  of  the  degraded  sys-
tem that  has  grown  out  of  an  apos-
tate Christianity — I  say,  that  from
the  time  the  Church  of  Christ
disappeared  from  the  earth  until  it
was  restored  and  built  upon  the
foundation  of  living  Prophets,  Apos-
tles, Evangelists,  and  the  living
powers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  there  was
no  Christian  church  upon  the  earth.
And  this  has  all  taken  place,  not
for  the  purpose  of  giving  any  class  of
men  an  opportunity  of  lifting  them-
selves up  in  the  pride  and  vanity  of
their  hearts,  because  they  have  be-
come instruments  in  the  hands  of
Cod  in  bringing  to  pass  the  restora-
tion of  those  things  which  were  pre-
dicted by  the  ancient  Prophets,  and
were  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  last  days,


256


JOURNAL  Oh'  DISCOURSES,


but  it  has  been  brought  to  pass  in
thf  fulfillment  of  measured  pro-
phecy, of  explicit  and  well-defined
terms  of  revelation  with  no  ambigu-
ity or  uncertainty  about  tliem  ;  the
terms  are  as  explicit,  the  conditions
are  as  comprehensive,  as  clear  and  as
conspicuous  as  the  terms  of  any  con-
tract that  was  ever  made  between
any  two  intelligent  beings,

I  must,  however,  bring  my  re-
marks to  a  close.  I  am  thankful
for  the  opportunity  of  announcing
my  feelings  ;  of  announcing  our
views  as  a  people  with  regard  to  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  We  offer  to
the  world  the  same  Gospel  that  was
proclaimed  anciently — faith  in  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  ;  repentance  of
sin  ;  baptism  for  the  1  emission  of
sins,  and  the  laying  on  <>f  hands  for
the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
And  3io w  is  it  that  we  meet  with
opposition  1  We  have  the  same
opposition  that  the  enemies  of
Christianity  waged  against  the
Former-day  Saints.  Some  people
are  finding  fault  with  the  treatment
that  we  are  receiving  to-day  at  the
hands  of  our  government.  I  think
many  of  us  are  laboring  under  a
mistake.  Home  people  are  aston-
ished at  the  partiality  that  is  mani-
fested in  the  law,  and  in  the  condi-
tions in  which  the  law  is  to  be  applied
to  one  class  of  the  citizens  of  this
Territory  and  not  against  another.
We  are  laboring  under  a  mistake.
Tlie  government  is  not  seeking  to
legislate  against  immorality  ;  and  if
we  think  they  are  doing  so  we  are
deceiving  ourselves.  I  consider
myself  that  there  is  more  consis-
tency to  be  accorded  to  those  who
are  administrators  of  the  laws  of
our  nation  and  the  makers  of  those
laws  than  some  of  us  are  in-
clined to  credit  them  with  ;  but
if  we  expect  that  the  recent  law
which  has  been  enacted  .to  apply


to  the  people  of  Utah  —  to
u  polygamists  and  bigamists"  —  is
intended  to  suppress  the  social  evil,
it  is  a  mistake  ;  it  is  not  to  touch
anything  outside  14  the  marriage
relation  there  is  no  infringement
on  the  liberties  of  abandoned
people  ;  they  can  do  as  they  please.
The  object  of  the  law  is  to  restrict
marriage;  is  to  restrict  the  legiti-
mate and  divine  associations  of  the
sexes  ;  and  if  we  suppose  that  it  is
intended  for  anything  else  we  are
laboring  under  a  mistake.  Let  us
be  consistent,  my  friends,  and  wait.
If  ourgovernmen  t  wishes  to  deal  with
this  question  first,  it  has  the  right
to  do  so  ;  if  it  wishes  to  do  it,  it
has  the  right  to  do  it  in  the  sense
that  the  age  regards  might  greater
than  right  ;  but  we  are  in  the  hands
of  the  All-wise  and  Supreme  Ruler
of  the  universe.  We  are  in  the
hands  of  Him  who  setteth  up  kings
and  who  dethroneth  kings ;  who
buildeth  up  empires  and  casteth
down  thrones  at  His  will  and  plea-
sure. We  are  willing  to  abide  the
issue.  It  is  God  and  the  rulers  of
our  land  for  it.  We  cannot  measure
arms  with  them  only  with  our  prin-
ciples, but  they  will  not  fight  us  on
that  ground  ;  they  slink  back  out  of
sight,  they  will  not  touch  us  with
the  divine  records  in  their  hands  ;
they  dare  not  come  to  the  front  and
challenge  a  comparison  of  the  prin-
ciples of  Christianity  with  the  record
upon  which  they  profess  to  found
their  faith.  Excuse  the  freedom
I have taken to express  these

T  am  a  little  as-
apparent  inconsis-
in  the  legislative
discriminations  enacted  against  the
Latter-day  Saints,  and  would  say,
Oh  consistency,  thou  art  a  jewel
rarely  to  be  found.

May  God  sustain  this  people  ;  may
He  fill  their  hearts  with  faith  and


thoughts  ;  but
tonished  at  the
tency  manifest


THE  (j  OS  PEL  OF  CHIUST,  ETC,


257


hope  and  confidence.  We  will  seek
to  live  our  religion,  and  to  praj  to
the  God  of  Daniel,  the  God  of  Moses,
to  the  God  of  our  forefathers,  to  tht
God  of  Joseph  Smith  and  Brigham
Young,  to  the  God  of  the  universe,
the  Father  of  all ;  that  He  will
direct  and  guide  us  in  this  great


contest — I  mean  the  contest  that  is
being  waged  between  pure  Chris-
tianity aud  the  errors  of  the  world,
until  this  earth  shall  be  filled  with
the  knowledge  of  God  ;is  the  waters
cover  the  mighty  deep.  This  is
my  prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon.

October  8,  1882.

Reported  by  John  Irvine.

THE  MIGHTY  MISSION  OF  THE  SAINTS  —  GOD'S  DEALINGS  WITH  THE
WOULD  IN  ANCIENT  AND  MODERN  TIMES  —  GOD'S  AUTHORSHIP  OF
CREATION  AND  RIGHT  TO  RULE— MAN'S  AGENCY,  THE  GOSFEL  AND
THE  GATHERING  —  ITS  ATTEMPTED  SUPPRESSION,  CONTRASTED
STATESMANSHIP  —  THE  MOTHER  OF  HARLOTS  AND  HER  DAUGHTERS
— THE  POLITICAL  SITUATION  IN  UTAH— THE  RIGHTS  OF  MAN,  THE
SUPPORTERS  AND  SUBVERT  ERS  OF  LAW  AND  ORDER  —  RELIGIOUS
INTOLERANCE  AND  POLITICAL  INJUSTICE—THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS
THE  FUTURE  SAVIORS  OF  AMERICA  —  THE  EDMUNDS  ACT  AND  ITS
UNJUST  OPERATION —  REVEREND  FALSIFIERS  AND  THEIR  DUPES  —
EXHORTATION  TO  THE  PRIESTHOOD  AND  THE  PEOPLE.


We  have  had  a  very  interesting
Conference,  and  a  great  ^many
thoughts,  ideas  and  reflections  have
been  presented  to  the  people  in  a
clear  and  pointed  manner,  and  I
have  been  pleased  to  see  the  unanim-
ity and  harmony  that t have  existed
in  our  midst.  And  whUe  I  attempt
to  speak  to  you  I  shall  ask  au  inter-
est in  your  prayers  that  I  may  be
strengthened  to  perform  the  labor.
It  is  difficult  for  a  people  to  under-

No.  17.


stand  and  to  retain  everything  that
may  be  said  in  a  Conference  like
this,  where  there  are  so  many  sub-
jects dwelt  upon  and  so  many  prin-
ciples enunciated  ;  but  it  is  a  great
blessing  for  us  that  we  are  situated
as  we  are,  and  that  we  possess  the
intelligence  which  has  been  commu-
nicated from  time  to  time.  Many
great  and  precious  principles  having
been  revealed  unto  us,  it  becomes
necessary  for  us  to  try  to  compre-

Vol  XXIII.


258


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOUttSEfc


hend  them,  that  we  may  understand
the  position  we  occupy  before  God,
before  the  world  in  which  we  live,
and  before  the  intelligences  that
exist  behind  the  veil  in  the  eternal
worlds.  We  have  a  great  and  im-
portant mission  committed  unto  us,
and  it  is  for  us  to  seek  to  compre-
hend that  mission  and  fulfill  tin-
various  duties  and  responsibilities
devolving  upon  us.  The  Lord
has  given  unto  us  a  form  of  govern-
ment, an  organization,  priesthood
and  authority  to  enable  us  to  perform
these  several  duties,. and  he  has  cer-
tain plans,  purposes  and  designs  to
accomplish  pertaining  to  us,  pertain-
ing to  this  nation,  to  other  nations,
and  to  the  world  in  which  we  live, —
pertaining  to  those  who  have  lived
and  are  now  in  another  state  of  ex-
istence, ami  also  pertaining  to  those
who  shall  yet  live.

The  time  in  which  we  live  is  de-
nominated in  Scripture  "  the  dis-
pensation of  the  fullness  of  times,1*
wherein  it  is  said  God  will  gather
together  all  things  in  one,  whether
they  be  things  in  the  earth  or  things
in  the  heavens.  This  dispensation
embraces  all  other  dispensations,  all
principles  and  powers,  rights,  privi-
leges, immunities  and  developments
that  have  existed  among  men  in  the
various  ages  that  are  past.  This
globe  did  not  originate  with  man,
nor  was  it  constructed,  designed  or
.manipulated  by  him,  nor  were  any
,of  its  organisms,  sentient  or  inani-
mate; for  we  are  told  that  in  the
beginning  God  created  the  heavens
and  the  earth  and  all  that  in  them
is  ;  nor  did  this  dispensation  with
which  we  are  associated,  nor  have
any  of  the  dispensations  associated
with  the  works,  plans  or  designs  of
the  Almighty  originated  with  man.
After  man  had  fallen,  and  it  became
necessary  that  he  be  driven  i  from
the  garden,  it  needed  the  interposi-


tion  of  the  Almighty,  for  as  is  sai
in  the  Book  of  Job,  it  was  necessai
to  "  deliver  his  soul  from  the  pit  ;  I
have  found  a  ransom."  That  ran-
som was  the  Only  Begotten  Son  of
God  who  offered  himself  in  the  be-
ginning to  meet  the  demands  of  jus-
tice, to  carry  out  the  purposes  of  the
Almighty,  and  to  be  a  Savior  and
Redeemer  to  man.  Adam  was  per-
fectly helpless  in  this  respect,  and
it  needed  the  direct  interposition  of
the  Almighty  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  this  object  In  the
patriarchal,  *or  antediluvian  age,
when  men  were  put  in  possession  of
any  hope,  any  intelligence,  any
knowledge,  or  any  revelation  per-
taining to  God,  these  things  did  not
originate  with  man,  they  came
from  the  Lord  ami  were  given  by
inspiration ;  and  wdien  on  account
of  the  wickedness  and  corruption  of
mankind  the  old  world  had  to  be
destroyed,  a  way  was  provided  for  a
small  remnant  to  be  spared,  By
whom  %  By  man  ?  No.  God  dic-
tated it.  The  Prophets  prophesied
about  it.  They  taught  the  antedi-
luvians as  the  people  of  this 'day  are
being  taught,  they  warned  them  of
the  impending  ruin  that  would
overwhelm  them,  of  the  prison
house  to  which  they  would  go,  and
of  the  wrath  and  indignation  of
Heaven  which  would  be  poured  out
upon  the  peoples  of  the  earth.  It
came  to  pass  as  they  had  declared.
But  God  provided  a  way  for  the  per-
petuation of  the  human  family.  It-
was  foretold  to  Methuselah  that  Ins
seed  should  be  preserved*  to  perpet-
uate the  human  family  upon  thb  earth,
and  it  was  so,  Noah,  who  was  one  of
his  descendants,  fulfilled  that  decree.

Again,  in  later  ages  when  the
children  of  Israel  were  in  bondage
in  Egypt,  they  did  not  originate  the
method  of  their  own  deliverance,
or  point  out  the  way  for  its  accom-


i  ii i ;  Miliar*  mi^iua  u*'  iua  &aim&,  kic


2^9


plishment.  They  were  in  a  state  of
bondage  and  vassalage,  God  raise!
them  up  a  Moses,  revealed  His  will
to  him,  set  him  apart  for  this  mis-
sion, told  him  what  to  do,  and  after
some  little  difficulties  arising  from
human  weaknesses  were  removed,
Moses  was  accepted,  and  the  Lord
became  his  instructor,  and  pointed
out  in  all  instances  the  course  that
he  should  pursue,  and  in  what  man-
ner the  children  of  Israel  were  to
be  delivered,  and  He,  the  Holy  One
of  Israel,  gave  them  His  law  and
ordinances,  and  revealed  unto  them
His  will,  ami  stood  by  and  sustained,
guided  and  directed  them.  This
salvation  did  not  come  from  the
people,  it  did  not  originate  with
their,  they  owed  it  all  to  God,  the
source  of  all  truth,  all  light,  all  in-
telligence, all  power  and  blessings.
The  time  at  length  arrived  that  the
Son  of  God  was  to  come.  Neither
the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  the  High
Priests  and  Saducees,  nor  any  of
the  sects  and  parties  of  the  day
comprehended  the  things  that  were
about  to  transpire,  and  had  nothing
to  do  with  bringing  them  to  pass.
His  advent  was  announced  to  His
mother  hy  an  angel,  and  His  birth
was  heralded  to  shepherds  by  an
angelic  host,  and  the  wise  men  of
the  East  Mere  led  by  his  star  to
Bethlehem  of  Judea,  where  they
found  the  infant  Savior,  whom  they
recognized  as  the  Messiah,  and  to
whom  they  brought  presents  of  gold,
frankincense  and  myrrh  j  and  whom
they  worshipped.

It  is  said  in  speaking  of  the  Son
of  God,  that  he  did  not  come  to  do
His  own  will,  nor  to  carry  out  His
own  purposes,  nor  to  fill  till  any  par-
ticular plan  of  his  own,  but  he  came
to  do  the  will  of  his  Father  who
sent  him.  Jesus  in  selecting  his
disciple*,  took  one  man  here  and
another  there — a  tax  gatherer,  a


fisherman,  and  others  who  it  was
thought  were  the  most  unlikely  of
any  men  to  carry  out  the  purposes
of  God,  He  left  the  great  men  out
of  the  question,  that  is  the  High
Priests  and  the  popular  and  pioua  of
all  classes,  and  he  selected  his  own
laborers  to  perform  his  own  work  ;
and  he  subsequently  told  them,  You
have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have
chosen  you  and  set  you  apart  unto
this  missson.  When  a  message  had
to  be  proclaimed  to  the  world  in
these  last  days  the  agents  were
chosen  on  the  same  principle.  There
was  any  amount  of  teachers  of  di-
vinity, any  amount  of  professors  of
theology,  any  amount  of  reverend,
and  right  reverend  fathers  and  all
classes  of  religious  men  and  reli-
gious ^teachers ;  but  God  did  not
recognize  them.  He  chose  a  young
uneducated  man  and  inspired  him
with  the  spirit  of  revelation,  and
placed  upon  him  a  mission  and
required  him  to  perform  it  ;  and
he  was  obedient  to  that  requirement.
I  speak  of  this  to  show  that  we  none
of  us  had  anything  to  do  with  the
introduction  of  this  work,  but  that,
as  in  ail  other  dispensations  in  the
various  ages  of  the  world,  God  was
the  originator  of  every  tiling  that
tended  to  develop  a  knowledge  of
Himself  and  ot  his  plans  and  pur-
poses ;  to  unfold  the  past,  to  develop
the  present,  and  to  make  manifest
the  future.

To  whom  are  we  indebted  for  this
book,  called  the  Bible.  We  are  told
that  holy  men  of  old  spake  as  they
were  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Ghost  And  from  whence  did  they
receive  that  Holy  Ghost]  Not  of
man,  nor  by  man,  but  by  the  reve-
lations of  God,  through  our  Lord
and  Savior  Jesus  Christ.  We  some-
times feel  to  exalt  ourselves  a  little
i  i  the  position  that  we  occupy  per-
taining to  the  Priesthood,  pertainin


260


JOURNAL  UF


to  our  organization,  and  peitaining
to  ordinances,  etc,  What  have  we  to
glory  in  1  Nothing.  None  of  us
knew  anything  until  it  was  revealed,
None  of  us  could  comprehend  any
of  these  principles  only  as  they  have
been  made  man  it  est.  But  by  obedi-
ence to  the  Gospel  we  have  received
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  Spirit  takes
of  the  things  of  God,  and  shows
them  to  us,  We  have  received  this
and  hence  have  been  baptized  into
one  baptism,  and  all  partaken  of  the
self-same  Spirit,  as  Paul  expressed
it,  11  dividing  to  every  man  severally
as  he  will."  The  question  arises,
What  is  the  object  of  this  T  It  is
that  the  vox  Id  should  be  visited
from  time  to  time  and  communica-
tions made  to  the  human  family.
Because  light  cleaves  to  light,  truth
cleaves  to  truth,  intelligence  cleaves
to  intelligence ;  and  as  we  are  all
made  in  the  image  of  God,  and  as
God  is  the  God  and  Father  of  the
spirits  of  all  flesh,  it  is  His  right,
it  is  His  prerogative  to  communi-
cate with  the  human  family,
We  aye  told  that  there  is  a  spirit  in
man  and  the  inspiration » of  the
Almighty  giveth  it  understanding.
God  having  made  the  earth,
marie  th$  people  to  inhabit  it,  and
made  all  things  that  exist  therein,
has  a  right  to  dictate,  has  a  right  to
make  known  His  will,  has  a  rigbt
to  communicate  with  whom  he
will  and  control  matters  as  he  sees
proper  :  it  belongs  to  lain  by  right  ;
and  he  has  seen  proper  in  these  last
days  to  restore  His  Gospel  to  the
earth,  and,  as  I  said  before,  intelli-
gence cleaves  to  intelligence.  We
read  in  the  Scriptures  concerning
man  being  a  son  of  God,  We  read
in  the  Scriptures  about  men  becoming
the  adopted  sons  of  God  tli rough
obedience  to  the  Gospel,  Hence  it
is  said  :  "  Now  are  we  the  sons  of
God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear


DISCOURSES.

what  we  .-hall  It-:  1  ut  we  know
that  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall
be  like  him ;  for  we  shrill  see  him
as  he  is,"  By  what  m*ans?  Through
the  atonement  of  Jesns  Christ  attd
by  the  medium  of  the  G«>spel,
which  has  been  introduced  iu  dif-
ferent ages  for  that  purpose.  Giwi
having  felt  disposed  to  reveal  tfte
Gospel  in  these  la*t  days,  has  gwm
the  same  principles  and  powers,  the
same  light,  revelation  and  intelli-
gence that  he  did  in  former  ages,
for  the  accomplishment  of  the  saitte
work,  and  for  the  fulfillment  of  his
purposes  relating  to  the  human
family  who  are  his  children.  Hence
we  occupy  a  very  peculiar  position
in  relation  to  God,  in  relation  to  the
earth  in  which  we  live  and  the  peo-
ple thereof — in  relation  to  both— to
the  living  and  to  the  dead,

It  is  proper  for  us  to  comprehend
the  position  that  we  occupy.  We
sometimes  arrive  at  curious  con-
clusions pertaining  to  the  wickedness
of  the  world,  and  a  variety  of  other
things  associated  therewith.  And
permit  me  to  say  here,  that  wre  had
no  more  to  do  with  the  peoples  of
the  world,  or  the  placing  of  them
in  the  position  they  occupy,  than
we  had  in  restoring  the  Gospel,  We
find  ourselves  a  few  people  mixed
up  with  the  world.  We  find  too
that  when  the  word  of  God  is  made
manifest  and  the  revelations  of  God
are  developed,  that  many  things  as
they  exist  amongst  mankind  are  out
of  order.  There  is  a  great  amount
of  priestcraft,  idolatry,  corrupt  ion,
oppression,  tyranny,  murder,  blood-
shed, covetousness,  licentiousneh^
and  every  kind  of  iniquity  that  can
be  conceived  of ;  and  that  is  more
clearly  made  manifest  to  us  because
the  Lord  bis  been  teaching  us
through  tlie  Prophets,  and  inspiring
us  with  other  feelings,  and  given
unto  us  to  comprehend  things  mere


'JHK MIGHTY  MISSION  OF T UK SAINTS, K  TC.


201


clearly  than  others  do.  But  what
have  we  to  do  with  the  people  of  the
"war Id  %  We  complain  sometimes
that  they  do  not  ttvat  us  exactly
right.  Well,  they  do  not  in  all
respects,  and  I  do  not  think  this  is
very  difficult  to  understand.  But
there  is  nothing  new  about  that,
God  has  revealed  unto  us  His  law,
and  they  do  not  comprehend  it,
neither  do  they  want  to  ;  nor  did
the  antediluvians.  They  were  very
wicked,  very  corrupt  ami  very
depraved,  very  immoral  and  very
dishonest ;  but  that  was  a  matter
between  them  and  the  Lord,  and  he
dealt  with  them  ;  and  it  is  his  busi-
ness to  deal  with  the  nations  of  the
earth  at  the  present  time  and  not
ours  further  than  we  are  directed
by  him,  What  is  the  mission  that
we  have  to  perform  to  this  nation  ?
It  is  to  preach  the  Gospel  That  is
one  thing.  That  was  the  mission
given  to  the  disciples  of  Jesus  in  his
day  :  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and
preach  the  Gospel ;  he  that  believe th
and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved";  and
he  that  helieverh  not  shall  be
damned.  This  mission  is  being
carried  out  in  the  fact  of  our  sending
representatives  of  this  latter-day
work  to  all  the  civilized  nations  that
will  receive  our  missionaries.  But
we  are  not  placed  here  to  control
people  ;  we  are  not  placed  here  to
use  any  improper  influence  over  the
minds  or  consciences  of  men.
It  is  not  for  us  to  attempt  to  do
what  Mahomet  did — to  say  that
there  was  but  one  God,  and  Ma-
homet was  his  prophet,  and  by
force  compel  all  others  to  acknow-
ledge it.  To  attempt  to  do  that
would  be  to  attempt  to  interfere
with  the  agency  of  man ;  and  any-
thing of  that  kind  is  altogether
foreign  to  the  character  and  spirit  of
our  mission.  We  preach  the  Gospel
to  the  people,  and  it  is  for  them  to


receive  or  reject  as  they  may  choose.
We  have  done  this  to  a  great  extent.
Many  of  you  Elders  who  are  before
and  around  me — and  there  are  some
thousands  — ■  have been en  gaffed
preaching  this  Gospel,  but  none  of
you  ever  used  coercion,  none  of  you
ever  attempted  to  force  any  man  to
obey  the  message  you  had  to  declare.
If  you  did,  you  did  not  understand
your  calling. And  when  you  have
been  among  the  different  nations
preaching  this  Gospel, have  you
sought  to  interfere  With  their  gov-
ernments or  with  their  laws,  or
endeavored  to  stir  up  commotion  or
rebellion  or  trouble  of  any  kind?
No. I  am  at  the  defiance  of  the
world  to  prove  any  such  statement.
That  does  not  belong  to  our  faith.
When  the  Elders  are  sent  forth,  they
go  as  servants  of  God  with  a  mes-
sage from  the  Lord,  to  unfold  the
Scriptures,  and  to  bear  testimony  of
the  things  that  they  themselves  are
witnesses  of  ;  and  to  administer  the
ordinances  of  the  Gospel  to  all  those
who  believe  on  their  words.  This
is  the  position  that  we  occupy  in
f  heae  matters. And  what  else  do  we
do  %  We  gather  the  people  together j
and  they  no  sooner  receive  this
Gospel  than  they  are  anxious  to
gather  with the  people  of  God.
Why  ] Because  the  Scriptures  say
that  they  would  1 Because  the
Scriptures  say,  "gather  my  people,
those  that  have  made  covenant
with  me  by  sacrifice  f No,  but  be-
cause they  have  obeyed > the  Gospel
and  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
that  Holy  Ghost has  instructed
them  pertaining  to  these  matters,  as
it  instructed  the  prophets  in  former
times that  such  an  event  would
transpire.  The  people  have  gathered
together,  and  you  could  not  keep
them  back  if  you  were  to  try  to*
They  have  been  trying. You  know
that  Mr,  Evarts  wrote  communica-


2G2


JOUKNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


tions  to  the  European  ministers  re*  j
questing  them  to  use  their  influence  ,
by  way  of  putting  a  stop  to  the
u  Mormon "  emigration.  It  is
rather  a  sorry  comment  upon  the
government  of  this  nation,  that
boasts  of  being  "  the  land  of  the
free,  the  home  of  the  brave,  and
the  asylum  for  the  oppressed,"  and
that  a  little  over  a  hundred  years '
ago  the  chief  complaint  against  the
nation  from  whence  the  colonist k
came,  was  the  lack  of  religious  tol-
eration ;  to  think  that  they  should  so
far  forget  their  original  condition  as
to  call  upon  what  they  term  the
effete  monarchies  of  Europe  to  assist
them  in  suppressing  religious  liberty
and  controlling  human  freedom.
And  when  this  subject  was  brought
before  Mr.  Glad  stone,  the  Prime
Minister  cf  Great  Britain,  a  short
time  ago  by  some  pragmatical  zealot
in  the  British  Parliament,  calling
Ids  attention  to  the  request  of  the
American  Secretary,  he  very  distinct-
ly rold  him  that  "lie  was  unable
to  interfere  with  the  operations  of
the  Mormons  in  England,  as  he
presumed  their  converts  went  with
them  willingly;1*  Thus  while  the
American  government  is  trying  to
exert  force  and  to  interfere  with  reli
gious  matters  and  bind  the  con-
sciences of  men,  the  British  govern-
ment pleads  for  and  guarantees  to
its  subjects  religious  and  social
liberty,  I  am  told  that  Mr*  Evarts
is  a  great-grandson  of  lioger  Sher-
man, one  of  the  signers  of  the
Declaration  of  Independence.  I
should  not  have  thought  that  that
gentleman  would  have  so  soon  for-
gotten the  position  occupied  by  his
ancestor.  But  it  seems  that  such  is
the  fact,  nevertheless,

I  repeat,  our  mission  is  to  preach
the  Gospel,  and  then  to  gather  the
people  who  embrace  it  And  why?
That  there  might  be  a  nucleus  |


formed,  a  people  gathered  who
would  be  under  the  inspiration  of
the  Almighty,  and  who  would  be
willing  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  God,
a  people  who  would  receive  and
obey  ±3  is  word  when  it  was  made
known  to  them.  And  this  people
in  their  gathered  condition  are  called
Zion,  or  the  pure  in  heart,  I  wish
w  e  were  pure  in  heart ;  that  is,  I  wish
\vt>  were  more  so  tlun  we  are  And
this  is  something  that  \\q  all  need
to  reflect  upon,  to  consider  the  pit
from  whence  we  were  dug,  and  the
rock  from  whence  we  were  hewn,  I
have  heard  people  say,  they  were
born  in  sin,  and  cradled  in  iniquity.
It  is  probably  very  true.  Many  of
us  have  b* en  locked  in  the^e  cra-
dles, and  we  have  been  nurtured
amidst  infamies,  and  we  have  been
surrounded  by  and  enveloped  in
eviU  of  all  kinds.  We  talk  some-
times about  Babvlon — "Come nut  of
her  O  my  people,  that  ve  partake
not  of  her  sins,  nor  receive  of  her
plagues"  We  need  not  say  too
much  about  those  people,  for  we
came  out  from  them  ourselves  ;  and
it  would  not  be  becoming  on  our
part  to  speak  badly  about  our  former
status.  That  reminds  me  of  a  con-
versation I  had  some  years  ago
with  some  Protestants  who  were
abusing  the  Catholics.  I  reminded
them  of  the  fact  that  they  descended
from  them.  They  were  calling
the  Catholic  Church  the  Mother  of
Harlots.  Well,  said  I,  if  that  be
true,  she  has  brought  forth  ascurvey
offspring.  History  certainly  informs
us  that  the  Protestants  came  out
from  the  Catholics,  and  therefore,
if  the  Catholic  Church  is  the  mother,
they  certainly  must  be  the  daughters,
and  one  would  think  there  should
be  some  affinity  between  them.  It
is  not  considered  proper  for  persons
to  rail  against  their  mother.  1
It  is  well  for  us  to  comprehend  our


TliK MIGHTY  MISSION OF  THK SAINTS,  ETC


sition  with  regard  to  the  nation, the  circumstances  in  which  we  are


Being  gathered  together,  as  a  people,  placed  ;  and  I  suppose  it  is  thought
we  have  assumed  a  political  status,  by  a  great  many  that  we  ought  to
for  we  not  only  brought  our  religion  consider  it  a  great  privilege  to  be
and  our  spirits  with  us,  butourbudies  allowed  to  live.  We  do  think  so,  but
also  ;  and  by  thus  being  gathered  J  we  are  not  indebted  to  any  officials


in  this  land  we  become  naturally  an
integral  part  of  the  United  States,
We  have  received  by  the  act  of  the
government  of  the  United  States
a  territorial  form  of  government,  in
which  we  are  authorize  !  to  perform
certain  functions  of  a  political  na-
ture, and  to  enjoy,  as  do  all  other
Territories,  the  free  and  full  rights
of  American  citizens  therein,  and


for  it ;  they  did  not  give  us  our  life,
neither  did  this  government.  There
are  certain  principles  that  are  in-
herent in  man,  that  belong  to  man,
and  that  were  enunciated  in  an  early
day,  before  the  United  States  govern-
ment was  forme* I,  and  they  are  prin-
ciples that  rightfully  belong  to  all
men  everywhere.  They  arc  described
in  the  Declaration  of  Independence


thus  have  become  a  part  of  the  body  as  inalienable  rights,  one  of  which


politic  ol  these  United  States,  with
all  the  rights,  privileges  and  immu-
nities pertaining  thereto,  as  exer-
cised and  enjoyed  by  all  American
citizens  throughout  this  broad  land  ;
and  these  are  guaranteed  unto  us  in
the Constitution  of  the  United
States  and  by  the  Congress  of  the
United States, in  an  instrument
denominated the Organic  Act.
And  I  will  say  this  much  for  the
United  States  ;  with  all  her  faults
and  infirmities,  I  do  not  believe
there  is  a  nation  upon  the  face  of
the  earth  to  day,  where  we  could
have  as  much  liberty  as  \v\>  here  enjoy,
and that  is  precious  little,  Gud
knows* We  are  told  sometimes
that  we  live  under  popular  govern-
ment, and  that  the  voice  of  tin*
people  rules. It  used  to,  but  who
rules now  ? Well, no  matter,
we  have  got  to  make  the  best  \w  can
of  it. \\  e  have  a  territorial  form
of  government,  with a  governor


appointed  by  the  administration*
I  was  going  to  say,  God  save  the
mark.  We  have  judges  and  other
officers  ;  and  we  have  a  nominal
legislature  that  makes  our  laws,
but  those  laws  can  be  vetoed  by  one
man.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  ab-
solutism about  it. But  these  are


is  that  men  have  a  right  to  live;
another  is  that  they  have  a  right  to
pursue  happiness  ;  and  another  is
that  they  have  a  right  to  be  free  and
no  nan  has  authority  to  deprive
them  of  those  God  given  rights,
and  none  but  tyrants  would  do  it.
These  principles  I  say.  are  inalien-
able in  man  ;  they  belong  to  him  ;
they  existed  before  any  constitutions
were  framed  or  any  laws  made.
Men  have  in  various  ayjes  striven  to
strip  their  fellow-men  of  these
rights,  and  dispossess  them  of  them.
And  hence  the  wars,  the  bloodshed
and  carnage  that  have  spread  over
the  earth.  We  therefore  are  not
indebted  to  the  United  States  for
these  rights  ;  we  were  free  as  men
born  into  the  world,  having  the
right  to  do  as  we  please,  to  act  as
we  please,  as  long  as  we  do  not  trans-
gress constitutional  law  nor  violate
the  rights  of  others.

Being  organized,  then,  into  a  gov-
■  eminent  such  as  it  is — that  is,  the
j  name  of  a  government,  the  name  of
a  legislature,  the  name  of  a  free
j  people — being  organized  as  we  are,
i  what  next  ]  We  are  necessarily
obliged  to  look  after  our  affairs  as
men,  our  political  affairs.  Our  mis-
sion to  the  world  is  a  mission  of


204


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


peace,  the  Gospel  proclaims  peace
on  earth  and  good  will  to  mam
Then,  being  organ ized  in  a  govern-
mental capacity,  we  have  certain
rights.  They  profess  to  give  them
to  us,  but  they  don't  They  try  to
deprive  us  of  them  while  professing
to  impart  them.  I  might  enter  into
a  long  line  of  argument  here  ;  no
matter,  I  am  merely  speaking  upon
some  general  j  principles.  What
then  is  our  duty  here,  say  as  a  peo-
ple—leaving religion  out  of  the
question  altogether!  As  men  and
as  American  citizens,  we  have  the
right  to  all  the  privileges,  and  im-
munities, protection  and  rights  of
every  kind  that  any  men  in  these
United  States  have,  and  no  honor-
able man  or  men  would  seek  to
deprive  us  of  them.  When  we  talk
about  rights,  these  are  the  rights,
as  I  understand  them,  that  we'pos-
aess  in  this  nation.  Is  it  proper,
therefore,  lor  us,  as  men  and  as
citizens  of  the  United  States  to
look  after  our  rights?  I  think  it
is.  Do  firs  want  to  violate  law  ]  No,
we  do  not,  although  we  know  many
of  these  laws  aie  wrong,  corrupt  and
unconstitutional.  We  have  no  right
to  fmd  fault  with  others  about  their
religion.  We  preach  the  Gospel  ;
they  receive  or  reject  it  as  they
please.  If  wo  have  found  the  bene-
fit of  embracing  it,  let  us  be  thank-
ful  ;  but  we  will  not  interfere  with
them  in  their  religion.  Are  they
Methodists?  They  can  worship  as
they  please — Presbyterians,  Catho-
lics, I'apiists,  or  any  other  "  ists"
can  warship  as  they  please,  that  is
none  of  our  business,  that  is  a  mat-
ter between  them  ami  their  God.
But  when  they  interfere  with  our
rights  us  citizens  of  the  United
States,  it  becomes  our  business  to
look  after  our  liberties.

As  religionists  we  call  upon  them,
as  a  duty  committed  to  us,  as  we


aver,  by  the  Almighty.  Our  mis-
*i<m  is  to  upon  this  nation  and
all  nations  to  repent  of  their  sins,
of  their  lasciviousness,  adulteries,
fornications,  murders,  blasphemies
and  of  all  dishonest  and  corrupt
practices.  But  in  this  we  use  no
force ;  having  laid  these  mat-
ters before  them,  they  have
their  free  will  to  receive  or  re-
ject. As  religionists  they  may  pro-
claim us  bigamists  or  polygamists  or
wliat  they  please,  that  is  their  busi-
ness, and  they  must  answer  for  their
own  acts ;  as  politicians  or  states-
men they  must  at  least  gi^e  us  the
benefit  of  the  Constitution  and  laws ;
these,  as  a  portion  of  the  body  politic,
we  contend  for  as  part  of  our  politi-
cal lights.  We  do  not  claim,  nor
profess,  nor  desire  to  interfere  with
any  man's  religion  or  conscience.
We  have  nothing  to  do  with  their
religion,  nor  they  with  ours,  Ee-
ligious  faith  or  belief  is  not  a  political
factor.  The  Constitution  haft
debarred  its  introduction  into  the
arena  of  politics;  and  every  officer  of
the  United  States  has  pledged  him-
self  under  a  solemn  oath  to  abide  by
and  sustain  that  Instrument,  and
not  one  of  them  can  interfere  with
it  without  a  violation  of  his  oath.

What  have  we  done  in  defense  of
cur  liberties  1  1  have  heard  several
poo ph  say  that  we  are  inclined  to
be  aggressive.  I  think  we  are  not
a^ivssivi*.  but  some  of  the  laws  are
very  aggressive.  We  have  a  grand
jury  organized  of  some  fifteen  men.
How  many  of  them  are  Latter-day
Saints?  Two,  I  think.  So  I  sup-
pose there  is  one-tenth  of  the  citizens
of  tli is  Territory  loyal,  patriotic
and  honorable,  and  the  jest  are
roiEM-Irsou  to  be  unpatriotic,  disloyal,
etc.  But  we  ought  at  least  to  he
tried  before  we  are  condemned  ;  that
is  the  law  as  1  understand  it  Now
this  one-tenth  of  loyal,  good  and


TH  ft  MIGHTY  MISSION"  OF  THE  SAINTS,  KTC


virtuous  people  get  thirteen  men
empaneled,  and  the  nine  tenths  get
but  two  to  represent  them.  Bat
unfortunately  for  these  loyal  and
patriotic  people  carefully  prepare*  1
statistics  show  that  this  ten  per  cent.  1
of  population  supplies  eighty  per
cent,  of  the  criminals.  How  is  it  in
other  tilings  %  There  is  considerable
said  about  offices  and  officers.  Where
is  there  a  man  appointed  from
among  the  people  to  hold  any  office
in  the  gift  of  the  national  govern-
ment! To  use  the  words  of  a
thoughtful  non-*1  Mormon"  observer,
though  the  { Gentiles'  constitute
only  ten  per  cent,  of  the  population,
yet  from  this  small  minority  are
taken  the  incumbents  of  nearly
every  position  of  influence  and
emolument  They  have  the  gover-
nor, with  absolute  veto  power,  sec-
retary, judges,  marshals,  prosecuting
attorney,  land  register,  recorder,
surveyor-general,  clerks  of  the
courts,  commissioners,  principal
post-office  mail  contractors,  postal
agents,  revenue  assessors  and  col-
lectors, superintendent  of  Indian  \
affairs,  Indian  agencies,  Indian  sup-
plies, army  contractors,  etc."

According  to  the  common  usages
of  men,  we  have  at  least  a  reason-
able right  to  our  proper  proportion,
but  it  is  evident  we  do  not  have  it.  \
And  then  our  educational  interests
are  interfered  with  by  these  very
men  who  state  how  ignorant  we  are.
For  instance,  the  Legislature  of
Utah  appropriated  the  means  of
the  people  to  help  build  a  university.
Who  was  to  furnish  the  means  1  The
people  of  this  territory.  Who  said
they  should  not  do  it ?  The  Gover-
nor, and  through  his  action  the
appropriation  was  vetoed.  These
are  some  of  the  tilings  we  have  to  con*
tend  with.  On  the  other  hand,  laws
are  enacted  inimical  to  the  interests
of  this  people. And  then  His  Ex-  *


cellency  goes  to  work  ami  appoints
a  set  of  officers  contrary  to  the  law
of  the  land  ;  goes  beyond  the  act  of
Congress  and  appoints  officers  to  fill
nearly  every  office  in  the  Territory,
vacant  or  not,  as  the  case  may  be.
I  am  not  going  to  enter  into  the
details  of  it,  but  we  have  generally
found  that  there  were  people  in
those  offices  ;  that  they  had  a  right
there,  and  that  the  law  provided
that  they  should  hold  over  until  their
successors  were  elected  and  qualified.
I  believe  the  law  so  reads  ;  indeed,  I
am  told  that  the  law  not  only  reads
so,  but  that  the  Governor's  commis-
sions to  many  of  these  officers  also
reads  so,  and  hence  his  present  action
is  violative  of  his  own  commission.

These  are  some  of  the  things  we
have  to  contend  with. — Do  we  wish
to  fft;ht  the  government  of  the
United  States  ?  No.  What  shall
we  dot  Stand  up  for  the  rights
granted  to  us  by  the  laws  and  con-
stitution of  the  United  States  as
American  citizens.  We  have  ex
pott  fttcto  laws,  religious  inquisito-
rial laws,  we  have  laws  which
smack  strongly  of  bills  of  attainder,
and  we  have  test  oat  lis  presented,
all  of  which  and  many  others  are
unconstitutional  and  are  violative
of  our  constitutional  rights.  I  have
the  opinion  of  some  of  the  best
jurists  of  the  nation  to  the  effect
that  all  these  things  are  a  violation
of  law,  and  that  men  have  no  busi-
ness to  be  subjected  to  such  infamies,
nor  become  their  own  accusers.  An
eminent  jurist  speaking  of  this
queried  how  this  kind  of  thing
would  apply  in  Washington,  where
miscegenation  has  prevailed  to  so
great  an  extent.  Suppose  some  of
those  who  practised  this  thing  were
placed  under  such  a  law,  how  would
it  operate  with  them  ]  Why  several
members  of  Congress  have  said  that
if  the  Edmunds  law  had  been  made


26G


JOURNAL  OF  DlSCUL'KSKS


applicable  to  adulterers,  and  men
had  to  become  their  own  accusers,  it
woul  1  unseat  three  fourths  of  the
members  of  Congress.  Ex  post
facto  laws,  have  hern  passed,  which
are  clearly  unconstitutional,  and  it
is  for  us  to  test  them  in  the  courts,
and  we  mean  to  do  it  ;  for  although
as  religionists  we  go  as  messengers
of  peace  to  the  nations,  yet  as
American  citizens  we  mean  to  con-
tend for  our  rights,  inch  by  inch,
legally  and  constitutional!}',  God
being  our  helper.

Another  thing  God  expects  us  to
do,  and  that  is  to  maintain  the
principle  of  human  rights.  I  have
felt  sorrowful  in  watching  the  ac-
tion of  Congress  towards  us — sor-
rowful, not  only  on  our  own  account,
but  on  theirs.  We  fear  no  evil
arising  from  those  things,  for
we  are  anxiously  performing  our
duty  before  God.  But  we  owe
it  tu  ourselves  as  men,  we  owe  it
to  our  families,  our  children,  and
to  posterity ;  Ave  owe  it  to  the
lovers  of  freedom  in  this  land,  of
which  there  are  thousands,  yea,
millions,  who  despise  acts  of  oppres-
sion and  tyranny  ;  we  owe  it  to  all
liberty-loving  men,  to  stand  up  for
human  rights  and  protect  human
freedom,  and  in  the  name  of  God
we  will  do  it,  and  let  all  the  congre-
gation say  Amen.  (The  immense
congregation  responded,  Amen/)

Joseph,  the  despised  of  his  father's
house  became  their  deliverer,
Moses,  the  foundling  and  outcast
of  Egypt,  became  the  deliverer  and
lawgiver  of  Israel.  Jesus,  the
despised  Nazarene,  introduced  prin-
ciples that  revolutionized  the  moral
ideas  and  ethics  of  the  world.  And
it  may  not  be  among  the  improba-
bilities, that  the  prophecies  of  Joseph
Smitli  may  be  fulfilled  and  that  the
calumniated  and  despised  Mormons
may  yet  become  the  protectors  of  the


Constitution  and  the  guardians  of
religious  liberty  and  humati  freedom
in  these  United  States.

Now  these  are  some  of  my  feel-
ings upon  some  of  these  points.
Ami  I  will  proceed  a  little  further
and  say  that  I  do  not  blame  many
men  for  entertaining  the  sentiments
which  they  do  towards  us.  There
is  a  feeling  and  desire  to  see  fair
play  and  honesty  deep  down  in  the
hearts  of  millions  of  the  people  of
these  United  States,  who  ardently
desire  to  see  justice  equally  and
honorably  administered  to  ail  people
within  the  nation.  That  was  mani-
fested very  clearly  during  the  pas-
sage of  the  Edmunds  bill,  and  while
many  of  those  venerable  Senators
and  honorable  members  of  the
House  could  not  conscientiously  with
their  limited  information  and  the
false  statements  made  by  our  ene-
inies  sustain  Polygamy,  \v l .  to  their
honor  be  it  spoken,  they  endeavored
to  maintain  human  rights,  free
toleration  and  religious  liberty,  and
the  rights  of  man  without  distinc-
tion of  party  throughout  the  realm.
We  honor,  appreciate  aud  respect

such  men  as  honorable  representa-
tives of  the  founders  of  this
nation,  and  of  the  thousands  who
to- 1 lay  embrace  similar  s  opinions.
It  is  the  debauched,  the  corrupt,
the  violators  of  principles  and  law
and  desecrators  of  the  sacred
principles  of  liberty,  it  is  their  per-
nicious practices  which  are  striking
at  the  foundation  of  the  institutions
of  this  country  and  which  are  de-
moralizing and  destroying  the  nation,
and  there  are  thousands  of  high-
minded  and  honorable  men  to-day
who,  on  account  of  trickery,  hypo-
crisy, dishonesty  and  crime  stand
aloof  from  the  filthy  pool  of  politics*
They  have  seen  honor,  truth,  integ-
rity and  virtue  trampled  underfoot,
they  have  seen  corruption  aud  crime


THK  MIGHTY  MISSION  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


like  a  repulsive  octopus  pushing  its
Briarean  anna  into  every  depart-
ment of  State  ;  they  have  seen  cor-
ruption and  crime  like  a  deadly
simoom  permeating  every  department
of  the  hoJy  politic,  and  debauching
and  corrupting  the  nation,  and  they
have  shrunk  from  the  disgusting
contact  ;  how  for  they  can  reconcile
this  with  their  ideas  of  patriotism  it
is  for  these  aggressors  to  say.  It  is
not  the  honorable  and  upright,  the
men  of  virtue  and  integrity  that  IPts
would  proclaim  against ;  it  is  the
vicious,  the  uu truthful,  the  calum-
niators, the  corrupt  and  debauched,
the  stirrers  up  of  sedition  and  strife,
and  tlic  enemies  of  law,  order,  virtue,
righteousness,  justice,  human  lib-
erty and  the  rights  of  man  to  whom
our  remarks  would  apply.

Again,  Presbyterians,  Baptists,
Methodists,  Catholics,  and  all  classes
have  come  among  us,  and  who  has
interfered  with  them  ]  Has  any-
body interfered  with  their  worship?
No.  Has  any  violence  of  any  kind
been  offered  them  1  No,  you  cannot
find  it.  We  are  at  their  defiance
to  show  any  such  thing  here.
What  have  we  done !  We  have
fostered  them,  as  has  been  referred
to;  we  have  treated  them  courteously
and  kindly  and  gentlemanly  as  hon-
orable people  ought  to  do.  What
have  they  done  ?  Combined  together
to  publish  some  of  the  most  abomin-
able falsehoods  that  were  ever  circu-
lated with  regard  to  any  community.
Now,  this  becomes  rather  a  serious
matter.  Talk  about  love  fur  these
people  !  I  would  do  them  good.  If
they  were  hungry  I  would  feed
them  ;  if  they  were  naked  I  would
clothe  them;  if  they  were  sick  I
would  administer  to  them  ;  but  if
they  lied  about  me  and  about  this
people  I  would  tell  them  they  were
liars  and  defamers  ;  I  do  not  care
how  pious  they  are,  or  how  much


religion  they  have  got,  I  would  tell
them  the  naked  truth  in  relation  to
these  matters.

They  are  the  avowed  advocates  ol
moral  reform,  profess  to  be  shocked
at  our  moral  obliquity  and  complain
of  us  as  being  licentious  and  corrupt.
Even  every  prominent  Christian
minister  in  this  city  joined  in  a  pro-
test against  customs  inculcated  in
the  Scriptures  by  the  Almighty,  and
practised  by  Abraham,  Jacob,  David,
and  hosts  of  the  most  venerated
and  honorable  men  that  ever  lived,
practices  which  they  aver  are  lasciv-
ious and  corrupt  ;  and  these  same
ministers  issued  a  circular  calling
upon  their  fellow- ministers  and
brother  Christians  throughout  the
United  States  to  petition  Congress
for  legislation  which  should  stop,  as
they  fchiim,  the  "foul  system  of
polygamy,"  and  hypocritically  in-
serted, to  blind  the  eyes  of  those
not  familiar  with  Utah  matters,  a
request  for  legislation  for  the  sup-
pression of  " adultery,  seduction,
lewd  and  lascivious  cohabitation
and  kindred  offences/1  that  they
might  "  be  punishable  as  in  the
States  and  other  Territories  of  the
Union  and  political  demagogues
joined  with  them  in  the  crusade*

Predicated  upon  these  solicitations
scores  of  petitions  were  for  wan  led
to  Congress  to  this  effect.  They
obtained  their  legislation  and  in
their  frantic  Christian  zeal  to  stamp
out  polygamy,  a  Bible  institution,
Congress,  under  this  priestly  influ-
ence  so  far  forgot  the  inalienable
rights  of  man,  constitutional  guar-
antees and  forma  of  jurisprudence,  as
to  disfranchise  nine-tenths  of  this
community  for  the  alleged  crime  of
the  one-tenth,  and  that  too,  without
trial  ;  thus  making  the  innocent
suffer  for  the  alleged  acts  of  the
guilty.  And  to-day  an  infamous^
expurgatory  test  oath  is  introduce  1,


SOS


JOUJ5.NAL  Ot  1HSUUU


at?  variance  with  all  precedents  in
this  nation,  which  us  stated  bv
Judge  Black,  is  altogether  "odious
uwjust  and  unconstitutional/1  which
"  reverses  those  rules  of  evidence
which  lie  at  the  foundation  of  civil
liberty/'  and  is  a  flagrant,  violent
atid  direct  attack  upon  the  inherent
rights  of  man.  Thus  in  their  in-
temperate, religious  zeal  making  a
direct  onslaught  upon  the  bulwarks
of  republican  institutions,  jeopard-
izing the  safety  of  the  state,  and
thoughtlessly,  recklessly  and  incon-
siderately ignoring  every  just  prin-
ciple ;  assailing  the  fundamental
doctrines  of  political  and  religious
freedom ;  and  exerting  all  their
energies  in  attacking  a  phantom  to
tear  down  the  pillars  of  state  and
t*  destroy  the  Temple  of  Liberty,
though  they  themselves,  as  a  Sam-
son, perish  in  the  ruins,

'  What  is  the  moral  effect  f  This
same  test-oath,  while  it  assails  a
scriptural  usage  practised  by  the
most  renowned,  revered  and  honor-
able men  of  antiquity,  who  are
denominated  men  of  righteousness
and  the  friends  of  God,  protects
and  sustains  the  degraded,  corrupt
and  licentious  who  are  supposed  to  he
good  Christians  and  not  polygamists.

A  very  honorable,  upright  and
virtuous  gentleman,  whom  no  one
will  accuse  of  immorality  or  vice —

w

the  respected  ex-mayor  of  this  city,
who  has  filial  that  office  with  dig*
nityand  honor  for  the  last  six  years,
has  a  son  who  was  appointed  regis-
trar for  the  Fifth  Precinct  in  tin?
city  ;  this  son  had  the  painful  and
humiliating  duty  to  perform  of
refusing  to  register  his  father's  name,
because  many  years  ago  he  had  had
more  than  one  wife,  but  who,
through  death,  was  for  some  time
without  a  wife  at  all,  and  has  lately
married  one  wife ;  and  yet  this  young
man  had  to  perform  the  disgusting


task,  according  to  the  provisions  of
said  test  -oath,  of  registering  a  no  te-
nons keeper  of  a  bagnio,  and  many
of  her  harlot  associates.  Another
circumstance  occurred  of  a  urentle-
man  who  came  to  be  registered,  but
thought  it  would  be  impracticable
for  him  to  take  the  test-oath.  More
honorable  than  many  of  his  pious
associates,  he  suggested  that  he  did
not  know  that  he  could  take  the
prescribed  oath,  for  he  not  only  had
a  wife,  but  kept  a  mistress,  but  on
examination  he  found  the  oath
exempted  all  those  who  might
engage  in  illicit  intercourse,  provided
the  association  was  not,  as  expressed
in  the  oath,  "  iii  the  marriage  rela-
tion." On  discovering  this,  he  ob-
served, "  I  can  take  that  oath,  for  I
am  only  married  to  one  ;"  and  he
was  accepted.  Another  you  ng  man
in  this  city,  whilst  having  the  test
oath  read  to  him,  said  he  could  not
take  it,  as  ho  could  not  swear  that
he  had  not  cohabited  with  more
than  one  woman  ;  but  when  the
reading  was  continued  and  the
words  "in  the  marriage  relation'*
sounded  in  his  ears,  be  said,  M  I  can
go  that/'  and  was  duly  sworn.

Thus  these  moral  and  religious
reformers  and  teachers,  these  profes-
sors of  high  moral  ideas,  these  in-
veighers  against  a  scriptural  prac-
tice professedly  because  it  is  immoral,
have  introduced  safeguards  to  pro-
tect the  libertine,  the  voluptuary
and  the  harlot,  whilst  they  have
made  criminals  of  those  who  have
been  observing  a  law  instituted  by
the  Almighty.  Perhaps  it  would
be  considered  too  severe  to  call  these
"  reverend  gentlemen1'  and  those
"venerable  seigneurs"  who  occupy
honorable  positions  in  Congress  by
the  harsh  name  of  hypocrites,  yet  it
is  very  humiliating  to  the  sensitive
and  virtuous  to  contemplate  the
result  of  their  ill-timed  and  intern-


THK  MIGHTY  MISSION


OP  'I  UK SAINTS,  KTC


perate  acts,  for  they  have  thus  niaoe
themselves,  while  professing  purity,
the  si  1 1  vacates  and  abettors  of  vice,
licentiousness,  immorality  and
crime.  '  >:  :;.:•,>

1  wish  here  to  apologize  a  little
for  the  people  of  the  United  States,
for  I  think  sometimes  we  carry  the
tiling  too  far  in  relation  to  them.
Here  ure  men  supposed — would  be
in  any  other  community  —  to  be
honorable  men,  reverend  men  that
are  teachers  of  religion,  combining
against  us.  And  because  they  are
considered  honorable  men,  people
say,  why  there  is  the  Reverend  Mr,
So  and  So  and  So  and  So,  they  have
requested  us  to  send  petitions  to
Congress,  to  do  this  and  that  because
of  the  wickedness  and  abominations
of  this  people,  and  their  misrepre-
sentations and  falsehoods  have  been
circulated  in  the  religious  magazines
and  in  the  political  papers,  until
the  people  abroad  hardly  know
what  to  think.  Many  ot  them
think  we  are  a  very  infamous  people;
they  think  we  are  a  great  deal  more
corrupt  than  they  are,  and  that  we
need  not  be.  And  they  go  to  work
to  legislate  to  correct  our  morals.
Now,  with  thousands  of  papers
circulating  these  falsehoods,  and
these  falsehoods  coming  from  sup-
posed religious  and  honorable  men,
is  it  any  wonder  that  the  people
should  be  deceived  with  regard  to  us.
I  read  to  day  an  account  of  an  attempt
to  dri  ve  our  Elders  from  some  of  their
fields  of  labor  ]  What  for  ?  Because
they  are  "  Mormons."  They  are  so
wicked  and  so  corrupt,  and  allbecause
the  papers  and  reverend  ministers
said  so  and  so ;  and  thus  thousands
of  honorable  men  are  deceived }
but  many  of  them,  when  they  come
to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth,  will
rejoice  in  it  I  want,  then,  to  stand
in  defence  of  many  of  the  people
of  the  United  States  who  are  thus


deceived  It  is  said  in  the  scriptures
that  the  serpent  cast  out  of  his
mouth  water  as  a  flood,  Wq  have
certainly  hud  fioo  Is  wf  falsehoods,
originating,  many  of  them,  with
these  pious  people  Di>  we  w&gfc
much  association  with  tIiH.se  people?
I  think  not.  If  they  circulate  false-
hoods about  us,  can  we  respect  them
very  much]  I  think  not  We  can-
not hold  communion  with  people
who  are  corrupt,  low  and  degraded.
We  were  down  in  the  sloughs  a  little
while  ago  ourselves  ;  we  have  come
out  from  anion  <;  them  and  know
what  they  are.  We  know  the  in-
famies which  exist  there,  the
licentiousness,  the  corruption,  the
social  evil,  adulteries,  fornication,
sodomy,  child  murder,  and  every
kind  of  infamy.  And  they  come
here  4and  want  to  teach  our  children
these  things.  We  have  got  to  be
careful  how  we  guard  our  homes,
our  firesides,  our  wives,  our  sons
and  our  daughters,  from  their
association.  We  don't  want  these
practices  insidiously  introduced
among  us.  We  want  to  preserve
our  purity,  our  virtue,  uur  honor,  and
our  integrity.

The  time  is  hastening  on,  and  I
shall  have  to  stop,  I  wish  to  make
some  further  remarks,  and  would
have  liked  to  have  talked  some
time  longer.  But  what  shall  we
do  ]  I  will  tell  you  what  I  will  try
to  do-  I  will  try  arid  humble  myself
before  the  Lord  and  .seek  for  his
blessing,  and  say  as  one  of  old  said  :
M  Search  me,  Oh  God,  and  know
my  heart;  try  me  and  know  my
thoughts  ;  and  see  if  there  be  any
wicked  way  in  me,  and  lead  me  in
the  way  everlasting.'1  I  have  talked
with  my  counselors  in  the  same  way,
and  they  are  of  the  same  mind-  We
have  talked  with  the  Twelve  about
these  things,  and  they  are  of  the
same  mind. Now,  we  call  upon  all


27U  jouun^l  u*'

you  Seventies,  High  Priests  and
Elders,  you  Bishops,  Priests,  Teach-
ers and  Deacons  individually  and
your  quorum  capacity,  upon  the
heads  of  families,  upon  the  various
organizations  in  the  Church,  upon
all  the  Saints  who  profess  to  revere
His  name,  to  humble  yourselves
before  God,  po  lay  aside  your  covet-
ousness  and  your  evils  of  every  kind
And  when  you  have  done  so,  you
that  meet  together  for  prayers  in
your  holy  places,  call  upon  God  for
guidance,  direction  and  deliverance,
and  he  will  hear  your  prayers  and
deliver  you,  and  your  enemies  shall
have  no  power  over  you,  for  God  is
on  the  side  of  Israel,  and  he  will
preserve  his  people.  No  power
can  stay  the  progress  of  this  work,
for  it  is  onward,  onward,  onward,
ami  will  be.  until  the  kingdoms  of
this  world  become  the  kingdoms  of
our  God  and  His  Christ,  and  until
every  creature  in  heaven  and  in  the
earth  and  under  the  earth  shall  be
heard  to  exclaim,  Blessings  and
glory  and  honor  and  power  and
might  and  majesty  and  dominion
be  ascribed  to  Him  that  titteth  upon
the  throne  and  unto  the  Laiffb  for
ever.

We  will  leave  the  wicked  in  the
hands  of  t  ied  :  He  will  deal  with
them  in  his  own  way.  We  are  told
that  the  wicked  .shall  slay  the
wicked  ;  and  one  thing  that  I  am
sorry  over  in  this  nation  is  this  :
that  they  are  striking  at  the  tree  of
liberty  and  trying  to  fetter  humanity


and  bring  men  into  bondage,  they
are  laying  the  axe  at  the  root  of  this
government,  and  unless  they  speed
ily  turn  round  and  repent  and  follow
the  principles  they  have  sworn  to
sustain — the  principles  contained  in
the  Constitution  of  the  United
States  —  they  will  be  overthrown,
they  will  be  split  up  and  divided,  be
disintegrated  and  become  weak  as
water ;  for  the  Lord  will  handle  them
in  his  own  way,  I  say  these  t  hings
in  sorrow  ;  but  as  sure  as  God  lives
unless  there  is  a  change  of  policy
these  thing!  will  most  assuredly
take  place-
Let  us  be  pure,  let  us  be  virtuous,
let  us  be  honorable,  let  us  maintain
our  integrity,  let  us  do  good  to  all
men,  and  tell  the  truth  always,  and
treat  everybody  right,  no  matter
their  profession  or  creed,  and
love  our  religion  and  keep  the  com-
mandments of  God,  and  it  shall  be
well  with  Zion  in  time  and  throughout
eternity*

God  bless  you.  God  bless  all  the
Latter-day  Saints.  God  bless  all
rulers  and  all  men  everywhere  in
responsible  situations  who  seek  to  do
right  and  to  preserve  law  and  justice
and  equity,  and  to  maintain  the
rights  of  all  men,  and  let  his  wrath
and  indignation  rest  upon  the  per-
verters  of  justice  and  those  who  seek
to  bind  down  the  human  conscience
and  enslave  their  fellow-men*  God
bless  you  and  lead  you  in  the  paths
of  life,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


A**.It,>WLUTlON  *ULE1LLINU I'KOPMECV,  ETC.


271


DISCOURSE  BY  PKESIDENT  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Morning,

October  8,  1882.


(Pieported  by  Geo.  K  Gibbs.)


PERSECUTION  FULFILLING  PROPHECY  —  VERMONT,  THE  BIRTHPLACE  OF
PROMINENT  "  MORMONS"  AND  THEIR  OPPRESSORS  —  THE  FAITH
AND  INTEGRITY  OF  THE  SAINTS  Tu  RE  TESTED  —  PEACE  AMONG
Gul/s  PEUPLK  A  PECULIAR  CHARACTERISTIC— IN  TIME  OF  TROUBLE

THUST  IN  GOD, "WATCH  THK CAPTAIN*'  THR ACTS OP THB  UTAH

COMMISSIONERS  GOD's  OVKRHULINO POWER  AND  WISDOM  - — A  OR  HAT

WORK  REQUIRES  GREAT SACBIF1CK NON-PERFORMANCE  OF  DUTY  NO

CAUSK  V  tlt SKLF-GBATULATIOIT  MAN^S PKNALTIKS  MORE  ENDURABLE

THAN GOD'S  THE TRUE SAVIORS OF THE LATTER-DAY  SAINTS

BKTTKR  TO  DISOBEY  MAN THAN GOD  THE  DANGER  OF  DISOBKBIHNCE,

OF  DIVERSE  TEMPORAL  INTERESTS  AND  CLASft  DISTINCTIONS — -ALL  GO 0*3
GIFTS  INTENDED  FOR  THE  GENERAL  BENEFIT  AN  K  BLESSING.


We  assemble  together  in  the
capacity  of  a  conference  for  the
purpose  of  being  taught  concerning
our  duties  as  Latter  day  Saints,  as
members  of  the  Church  of  Christ,
and  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance
that  when  we  thus  meet,  that  we
should  have  the  presence  and  assist-
ance of  the  Spirit  of  God.  I  should
not  dare  this  morning  to  arise  with
the  intention  of  speaking  to  you  if  I
did  not  hope  that  I  should  have  the
assistance  of  that  spirit  I  could
not  of  myself  tell  that  which  is  best
adapted  to  you  and  to  your  circum-
stances. It  requires  the  all-search-
ing Spirit  of  our  God  to  reveal  unto
us,  his  servants,  those  items  of  doc-
trine, of  instruction,  of  counsel,  and
if  need  he,  of  reproof  and  warning,
which  will  be  of  benefit  to  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  who  are  assembled  as
we  are  to-day.


We  are  living  in  a  momentous
time.  At  no  period  in  the  history
of  the  children  of  God  in  this  dis-
pensation have  events  been  of  more
importance  than  those  which  are
now  taking  place  in  our  midst  and
around  about  us,  I  have  been  ex-
ceedingly thankful  for  one  thing.
Amid  the  threats  and  menaces  and
all  the  attempts  which  have  been
made  against  us  to  curtail  our  lib-
erties, to  embarrass  us,  and  if  pos-
sible destroy  our  religion,  one  fee  ing
has  been  uppermost  in  my  mind,  a
feeling  of  thankfulness  that  the
Lord  our  God  in  this  manner  is  per-
mitting us  to  see  the  fulfillment  of
the  words  he  has  spoken  through  his
servant  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,
and  through  others  who  have  also
been  inspired  of  him.  Among  the
earliest  predictions  that  were  made
concerning  this  work  by  the  servants


272


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


of  God,  was  one  to  this  effect,  that
the  time  would  come  when  we
should  not  only  be  opposed  by  a
small  circle,  a  few  individuals  con-
fined to  a  neighborhood,  but  as  the
work  should  spread  and  increase,
the  opposition  to  it  would  be  in
proportion  to  its  growth  and  its  ex-
pansion, untiil  it  would  not  be  the
act  of  the  mob,  or  the  acts  of  mobs
confined  to  counties  or  confined  to
States,  but  that  the  time  would  ;
come  that  in  a  national  capacity
blows  would  be  aimed  at  us  by  the  1
nation  of  which  we  form  a  part
To-day,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
these  predictions  are  being  fulfilled
in  our  sight.  Not  one  word  that
God  has  spoken  concerning  this
work  will  fall  to  the  ground  unful-
filled, and  the  very  enemies  of  this
work, — those  who  are  most  anxious
to  destroy  it,  and  to  prove  the  falsity
of  its  claims  are  the  very  instru-
ments in  the  providence  of  our  God,
used  to  fulfill  his  word  and  ac-
complish his  designs.  Do  you
think  for  one  moment  that  Senator
Edmunds  in  framing  the  bill  called
by  his  name,  or  in  presenting  it  to
tlie  Senate  for  its  action,  lu^d  any  ;
idea  in  his  mind  that  he  was  an
instrument  in  fulfilling  the  predic-
tions of  God,  through  his  servant
Joseph  ?  Have  you  any  idea  that  the
House  of  Representatives  in  passing
that  bill,  after  it  had  passed  the
Senate,  supposed  for  one  moment
that  they  were  helping  to  establish
the  claims  of  Joseph  Smith  as  a  pro-
phet of  the  living  God  1  Or  do  you
imagine  that  President  Arthur,  m
selecting  the  five  Commissioners  to
go  to  Utah  Territory  to  act  in  ac-
cordance with  the  provisions  of  this
same  law,  supposed  that  he  was  help-
ing in  any  manner  to  establish  the
claims  of  what  is  called  "  Mormon  -
ism"  to  divinity;i  or  that  the  Com-
missioners themselves, in  coming


here,  have  once  thought  that  they
were  playing  a  part  in  the  great
drama  or  the  last  days,  that  they  in
their  sphere  were  helping  or  are
helping  to  establish  the  truth  of  this
work,  the  downfall  of  which  is
j  sought  to  be  accomplished?  And
yet  these  are  th»  truths  connected
with  this  work  ;  these  are  the  facts.
The  man  who  framed  that  bill,  the
I  man  who  introduced  it  in  the  Senate,
;  the  judiciary  committee  who  passed
upon  it,  the  Senate  who  adopted
the  report  of  its  commit  tee  of  judi-
ciary and  passed  the  bill,  the  House
of  Representatives  who  took  the
bill  up  and  ma  le  it  law,  so  far  as
their  action  was  concerned,  and  the
President  of  the  United  States  who
signed  the  Act  and  who  appointed
the  Commissioners  under  it,  and
the  Commissioners  themselves  who
were  thus  appointed  —  all  these
men  in  their  official  capacity  have
helped,  though  they  thought
they  were  doing  the  very  opposite,  to
establish  the  truth  of  the  predic-
tions of  the  Prophet  Joseph,  and  of
President  Young  and  of  the  Apostles
who  have  been  inspired  of  God  from
the  commencement  of  this  work
until  this  time,  and  who  have  pre-
dieted  that  these  events  would  most
assuredly  take  place.

Thus  we  see  that  the  wrath  of
man  is  made  to  praise  God.  The
acts  of  men  are  converted  to  the
glory  of  God,  and  fight  as  they  may,
contend  as  they  may,  resist  this
work  as  they  may,  this  work,  the
foundation  of  which  I  !od  has  laid,
they  can  do  naught  against  it.
On  the  contrary,  everything  they
do  contributes  to  its  establishment ;
contributes  to  prove  its  divine  au-
thenticity, to  show  that  there  is  an
overruling  power  greater  than  that
of  man,  even  the  power  of  the
Most  High  God,  and  that  he  causes
the  nations  of  the  earth  and  the


PERSECUTION  FULFILLING  PROPHECY,  ETC.


273


powers  of  the  earth  to  praise  him,
to  add  to  his  glory  and  to  the  ac-
complishment of  his  purposes.

Before  leaving  this  subject,  there
is  one  thing  worthy  of  remark — I
have  been  exceedingly  struck  with
it.  The  man  who  introduced  the
law  of  1862  was  a  native  and  repre-
sentative from  the  State  of  Ver-
mont. The  man  who  introduced
the  bill  of  March  23d,  1882,  was  a
Senator  from  the  State  of  Vermont
— Senator  Edmunds.  The  Pre-
sident who  signed  that  bill  was
from  tha  State  of  Vermont.
We  had  another  bill  passed  June
231,  1874,  known  as  the  Poland  law,
special  legislation  for  Utah  Territory.
The  framer  of  that  bill,  its  champion,
the  man  who  did  more  than  any
other  single  man  towards  pushing
it  through  the  House  of  Represen-
tatives, and  having  it  become  law,
was  a  Representative  from  the
State  of  Vermont  The  champions
of  the  Edmunds  law  in  the  House
of  Representatives,  some  of  them
were  from  the  State  of  Vermont,
notably  Mr.  Haskell,  Representative
from  Kansas,  a  Vermonter  by
birth.  It  is  a  remarkable  thing  that
Vermonters  should  be  the  chief  in-
struments in  framing,  urging  anil
securing  the  passage  of  legislation
against  us.  On  the  other  hand  the
man  who,  in  the  name  of  God,  was
the  chief  instrument  in  laying  the
foundation  of  this  great  work  in
these  last  days,  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith,  was  a  native  of  the  State  of
Vermont,  and  Hyrum  Smith,  his
brother,  whose  blood  mingled  with
the  Prophet's  at  Cartilage  jail,  was
also  a  native  of  Vermont,  Brigham  1
Young,  Heber  C,  Kimball,  Eras t us
Snow,  the  Snow  family,  Albert
Carrington,  the  Farrs,  the  Calls,  the
Hatches,  and  numbers  of  the  lead-
ing families  in  this  church  were '
born  in  that  State.  How  remark-
No.  18


able  it  is,  is  it  not,  that  we  should
have  received  so  many  blessings
through  men  born  in  the  Green
Mountain  State,  and  that  our  chief
enemies,  apparently  stirred  up  by
the  adversary  to  destroy  the  work
which  their  fellow-citizens,  men
born  upon  the  same  soil,  were  the
means,  in  the  hands  of  Cod,  of  es-
tablishing— that  they,  Vermonters
also,  should  be  stirred  up  to  seek  for
its  destruction,  >

We  may  expect  from  this  time
forward  the  same  warfare  ;  no  ces-
sation, no  letting  up,  so  far  as  the
hatred  of  the  wicked  is  concerned.
A  part  only  of  the  predictions  of  the
Prophet  have  been  fulfilled  concern-
ing this  latter-day  work.  We  have
been  told  from  the  beginning  that
opposition  to  this,  the  work  of  God,
should  not  be  confined  to  one  na-
tion, but  that  it  should  extend  to
other  nations,  and  that  they  who
array  themselves  against  us,  as
others  have  done  in  the  past,  will
continue  to  do  so  until  the  whole
earth  shall  be  warned  and  its  in-
habitants be  left  without  excuse,
and  the  kingdom  of  God  be  estab-
lished in  power  and  in  great  glory
upon  the  earth.

A  great  many  of  our  brethren
and  sisters  have  thought,  and  may
still  think,  that  we  are  likely  to  see
very  hard  times,  as  the  result  of  the
attacks  now  being  made  upon  us.
The  hearts  of  some  may  almost  fail
them  in  looking  forward  to  the  fu-
ture, anticipating  that  there  will  be
such  intense  hatred  and  such  active-
exertions  made  against  us  that
it  will  he  very  difficult  for  us  to  sus-
tain ourselves.  No  doubt  we  shall
have  all  we  can  endure.  No  doubt
the  Lord  will  require  us  to  pass
through  and  endure  ordeals  that
will  test  our  faith  to  the  uttermost,
and  it  will  seem  at  times  as  though
we  were  about  to  be  overwhelmed.

Vol  XXIII.


274  JOURNAL  QY

The  powers  of  darkness  will  gather
around  us  and  everything  will  look
so  threatening,  so  black  and  so  im-
penetrable, that  except  to  those
who  look  at  these  things  with  the
eye  of  faith,  it  will  teem  almost  im-
possible for  us  to  escape.  There  will
be,  doubtless,  many  such  hours  and
many  &uch  times  in  our  history  in
the  future  as  there  have  been  in  the
past.  But  what  of  that?*  As  the
trial  may  be,  so  will  be  the  strength
to  endure  it.  There  is  a  wise  de-
sire of  the  Lord  our  God  in  permit*
ting  these  tests  to  our  faith,  to  see
whether  in  the  midst  of  gloomy
and  threatening  surroundings  we
shall  falter,  shall  shrink  and  become
timid  and  be  overcome,  or  whether
in  the  midst  of  this  gloom,  in  the
midst  of  these  forbidding  appear-
ances, our  faith  will  still  be  strong
in  our  God,  and  in  the  promises,  the
precious  promises,  which  He  has
made  to  us.  Now  we  may  calculate
upon  this  just  as  sure  as  he  has  spoken.
There  is  this  that  is  most  extraor-
dinary connected  with  us  as  a  peo-
ple. God  in  the  beginning  made  a
promise  to  us,  which  has  been  oft
repeated,  that  notwithstanding  all
our  enemies  should  do  against x  us,
we  should  have  peace,  peace  should
reign  in  our  hearts  ami  in
-our  habitations,  peace  should
be  in  our  land  and  brood  over
us  as  a  people.  This  is  one  of
the  great  promises  God  made  to  us
in  the  beginning.  Head  the  cloMiig
verses  of  the  45th  section  of  the
Doctrine  and  Covenants  and  see
what  God  has  ha  id  concerning  Zion,
and  the  promises  that  are  therein
•  embodied  respecting  us  as  a
people  ;  that  when  other  nations
should  be  at  war — when  neighbor
should  rise  against  neighbor,  when
.every  man  that  will  not  take  his
eword  against  his  neighbor  must
'.needs  .ffce  to  Zion  for  safety,  in


discourses.

Zion  there  should  be  peace.
Now,  as  I  have  said,  it  is  one
of  the  most  extraordinary  features
connected  with  this  work  of  our  God,
that  when  it  seemed  as  though  the
whole  power  of  the  nation  was
combining  from  every  part  of  the
land,  execrations  loading  the  air
against  the  "Mormons11  of  Utah  Ter-
ritory,  petitions  coming  up  by  thou-
sands, popular  prejudice  appealing
to  popular  prejudice  and  entreating
the  use  of  bayonets,  of  cannon  and
musketry  to  destroy  us,  and  when  it
seemed  as  though  Congress  was  in
such  a  mood  that  it  was  ready  to
pass  any  law  or  to  frame  any  enact-
ment to  accomplish  those  ends  ;  that
in  the  midst  ot  all. this  unreasoning
excitement,  in  Utah  Territory,  in
the  breasts  of  Latter-day  Saints
wherever  they  dwelt  in  these  moun-
tain fastnesses  or  scattered  abroad
anion"  the  nation*  of  the  earth,
there  was  a  spirit  of  unfailing  pi-ace,
a  spirit  of  quietude,  a  spirit  of
serenity,  a  spirit  of  calm  and
undismayed  resignation,  awaiting
quietly  and  patiently  the  good
providence  of  our  God,  knowing
that  in  and  of  themselves  they  were
helpless  to  defend  themselves
against  these  attacks,  but  having
unshaken  confidence  in  the  promises
which  God  had  made  to  his  people.
O  most  wonderful  !  Most  wonder-
ful exhibition  of  calmness  !  Most
wonderful  exhibition  of  consistent
faith  !  Most  wonderful  exhibition
of  .fortitude,  of  courage,  and  of
unfailing  trust  in  the  almighty  power
of  that  God  whose  existence  so  many
in  the  world  deny-  A  rare  ex-
ample to  the  nations  of  the  earth  of
the  willingness  of  a  people  to  put
their  trust  in  their  God,  even  to  the
very  uttermost.  Now,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  if  there  is  any  great
peculiarity  connected  with  us  as  a
people  that  is  noticeable  it  is  this :


PERSECUTION  FULFILLING  PROPHECY,  ETC.


275


You  can  notice  it  in  yourselves  ;  you
can  notice  it  in  your  brethren  and
sisters  ;  you  can  notice  it  in  your
children  ;  Presidents  of  Stakes  can
notice  it  ;  the  Bishop  can  notice  it;
the  Bishops1  counselors  can  notice
it ;  the  High  Councilors  are  witnesses
of  it  ;  the  entire  body  of  Priesthood
must  see  the  exhibition  of  these
qualities  among  the  people  to  this
wonderful  extent.  God  be  praised
for  it,  1  feel  to  praise  Him  from
the  bottom  of  my  heart  that  He
has  poured  out  upon  His  people  this
spirit  of  peace.  We  have  laid  down
in  peace,  we  have  slept  in  peace,  we
have  risen  in  peace,  we  have  gone
out  in  peace,  we  have  come  in  in
peace,  we  have  prayed  in  our
families  in  peace,  we  have  gone
forth  to  our  labors  in  peace,  we  have
returned  therefrom  in  peace,  we
have  met  together  in  our  assemblies
in  peace.  Tiie  peace  of  heaven,  the
peace  of  Almighty  God,  has  descended
upon  this  people,  and  it  has  rested
upon  them  in  their  congregations,
in  their  social  associations;.  God
has  given  unto  us  this  precious  bless-
ing. It  is  beyond  price.  How
thankful  we  ought  to  be,  that  amidst
.all  these  murderous  threats  that
have  been  made  against  us,  He  has
[iven  unto  us  this  feeling  which  has
ieprived  us  of  all  fear.  Such
a  spectacle  is  unexampled  in  the
history  of  the  earth  and  of  its
inhabitants, — that  is  in  our  day.
Look  where  you  will,  travel  where
you  will,  mingle  with  people  where
you  may,  you  behold  nothing  like
this  j  and  thus,  God  is  bearing
witness  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  that  he  is  able  to  fulfill  his
promises,  to  protect  his  people,  and
to  pour  out  upon  them  that  precious
and  heavenly  gift  that  is  beyond  all
price,  and  they  dwell  in  it  and  they
enjoy  it — their  wives  and  their
children  enjoy  it ;  and  there  is  no


fear  in  the  hearts  of  any  faithful
man,  or  woman  or  child  within  the
confines  of  our  land  or  in  any  of  the
adjacent  territories  where  our  people
dwell.  Whj,  if  we  had  no  other
blessing  than  this,  it  would  be  worth
all  the  world  to  us*  But  we  have,  in
addition  to  that,  other  blessing?.
God  is  teaching  us  many  lessons.
He  is  teaching  us  to  put  our  trust  in
him.  He  is  teaching  us  that ' 6  suffi-
cient for  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof/'
Why  should  we  borrow  trouble  for
to-morrow,  as  long  as  we  enjoy
to-day,  as  long  as  we  have  peace  to-
day, so  long  as  we  ha^e  the  pre-
sence of  the  Holy  Ghost  to-day,  let
the  morrow  take  thought  fur  the
things  of  itself  Let  us  enjoy  this
day  in  peace.  Let  us  lay  down  this
night  hi  peace,  putting  our  trust  in
God  for  the  morrow.  If  we  thus  live
day  by  day — tor  it  is  written  that
the  just  shall  live  by  faith — if  we
thus  live  day  by  day,  I  tell  you  in
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
there  is  no  power  upon  the  earth  or
in  hell  that  can  disturb  the  peace,
the  quietude,  the  prosperity  and
success  of  this  people  or  interrupt
the  progress  of  this  great  and
glorious  work  of  our  God,  I  dare
prophesy  that  in  the  name  of
Jesus  Christ,  for  I  know  that
it  will  be  justified,  every  word
of  it,  God  has  stretched  forth  his
hand  to  accomplish  a  work,  and
that  work  will  roll  forth*  Men  rntir
die,  men  may  be  slain,  men  may
fall  oil  the  right  hand  and  on  the
left,  but  the  column  will  still  press
forward,  it  will  still  march  onward
gathering  in  from  every  laud  and
from  every  nation  the  honest,  the
meek,  the  lowly,  and  those  who
love  righteousness  and  who  desire  to
serve  our  God.  I  can  truthfully  say
1  do  not  believe  that  there  ever  was
a  time  when  threats  were  made
against  us,  when  greater  peace  and


27G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


less  fear  rested  down  upon  the  ser- 1
vants  of  God  than  at  the  present
time.  I  look  at  our  President — I
always  did  watch  the  captain  of  the
ship  with  peculiar  interest,  when
on  the  ocean  surrounded  by  ice-
bergs,  or  when  in  the  midst  of  great
storms,  as  I  have  been  a  few  times,
I  watched  his  eye  and  his  demeanor,
and  I  fancied,  and  I  think  very  cor-
rectly, that  I  could  form  a
good  idea  of  our  peril  by  watching
him.  1  have  been  in  storms  when
everybody  on  board,  excepting  the
Elders,  expected  to  go  down.  I  did
the  same  thing  when  a  boy,  watching
the  Prophet  Joseph,  the  few
opportunities  that  I  had  of  doing  so.
I  did  the  same  with  President  Young
when  he  lived.  In  times  of
threatening  danger  and  of  anxiety  I
noticed  the  spirit  that  moved  upon
him  as  well  as  its  operations  upon
myself.  I  do  the  same  to* day  with
President  Taylor:  I  have  watched;
his  bearing  and  have  listened  to  his
words ;  and  I  have  taken  notice  of
his  spirit,  as  I  have  also  of  the  breth-
ren associated  with  him:  "I  have
witnessed  but  one  spirit,  and.  felt  but
one  feeling,  and  have  had  but  one
thought  impressed  upon  me  by  their
demeanor ;  and  this  spirit  and  the
impression  it  makes  corresponds
exactly  with  my  own,  I  feel  that  1
am  in  accord  with  him  and  with
them,  and  while  this  is  the  case  I
feel  that  there  is  no  real  danger  for
Zion  j  that  God  our  heavenly  Father,
is  still  watching  over  us,  and  is  per-
mitting us  to  pass  through  these
trials  for  an  express  purpose.  As  I
have  already  said,  the  predictions
of  the  holy  Prophets  could  not  be
fulfilled  unless  these  things  did
occur.  And  why  should  we  shrink  {
from  them?  Why  should  we  feel
sorry  about  them  1  Why  should
we  wish  it  otherwise  ?  I  can. truth-
fully say,  that  I never  saw  a


single  moment  from  the  time  that
I  left  here  tu  go  to  Washington  until
I  returned  that  I  felt  the  least  dis-
couraged, or  any  tiling  approaching
a  feeling  of  despair  or  gloom,
or  anything  of  the  kind  connected
with  the  work  of  God  ;  although,
as  you  know,  1  was  afflicted
and  bowed  down  in  sorrow  because
of  domestic  affliction ;  but  aside
from  that  (and  even  that  did  not
discourage  me)  at  no  moment  when
in  the  midst  of  the  worst  contest
I  ever  engaged  in,  did  1  have  a  feeling
of  discouragement  or  gloom.  I
knew  very  .well  that  all  that  was
taking  place  was  in  accordance  with
the  plan  of  our  God,  with  His  pur-
poses  and  His  designs.  These  things
must  be,  in  order  to  accomplish  the
work  of  God,  in  order  that  every
man  may  be  judged  according  to  hi«
works,  and  in  order  that  this  nation,
as  a  nation,  may  he  held  to  a  strict
accountability  for  its  acts,  or  the  acts
of  its  representatives.  I  havoj
nothing,  therefore,  to  regret  about
tliis.  My  feelings  I  have  expressed
in  this  stand  since  my  return  ;  they
were  expressed  by  the  brethren  that
spoke  upon  these  subjects.

Referring  to  the  acts  of  the  Com-
missioners,  I  am  exceedingly  thank-
ful for  everything  that  has  been
done.  I  have  never  desired  to  see
us  as  a  people  reduced  to  the  de-
graded level  of  wicked  men  and
wicked  women ;  no,  not  for  one
moment.  What,  my  sisters  who
have  entered  into  holy  covenants,  in
sacred  places,  who  have  in  their
priestly  garments  been  administered
to  by  the  Priests  of  the  Most  High
God  in  the  holiest  sanctuaries  that
are  upon  the  earth,  for  them  to  be
placed  upon  the  same  level  with
common  prostitutes  !  My  soul
revolts  at  the  thought.  And  my
brethren  who  have  in  like  manner
gone  into  holy  places  and  taken  upon


PERSECUTION  FULFILLING  PKOPHECY,  ETC.


277


them  sacred  rovenants,  in  the
name  of  the  Most  High  God,  and
have  had  the  honest  ordinances
that  God  ever  revealed  to  man,
administered  unto  them  by  that
authority  which  He  has  given — for
them  to  be  reduced  to  the  level  of
adulterers  and  whoremongers  !  God
forbid  that  such  should  be  the  case.
From  the  very  moment  that  I  read
that  oath  (the  oath  prescribed  by
the  Commissioners)  I  thanked  God
in  my  heart  for  it  I  would  not  have
it  otherwise*  I  would  not  have  the
rules  changed  in  the  least  degree,
unless,  of  course,  our  brethren  who
represent  the  political  interests  of
the  people  could  by  applying,  have
them  changed:  but  I  did  not  believe
they  could  accomplish  this,  and  I
am  thankful,  therefore,  that  the
rules  were  not  changed,  because
they  draw  a  sharp  line  of  distinction
between  the  Latter-day  Saints  and
the  wicked.  It  sustains  the  claim
that  we  have  made  all  the  day  long,
that  it  is  our  religion  that  is  assailed  ;
that  it  is  the  solemnization  of  the
holy  marriage  ordinances  that  the
blow  is  aimed  at,  and  not  the  illicit
commerce  of  the  sexes*  And  I
am  glad  too  that  every  man  and
every  woman  that  ever  were  open
to  the  charge  of  having  engaged  at
any  time  in  plural  marriage  are  in
the  same  condition  ;  that  the
rule  has  been  so  rigidly  made  and
so  sweeping  in  its  character,  as
to  include  all  who  have  lived  in
plural  marriage.  It  is  an  hon-
orable distinction  to  belong  to  a
class  whose  only  offence  is  that  they
married  women,  or  married  men,
instead  of  living  together  in  violation
of  God's  law;  If  there  are  any
who  think  they  did  not  act  honora-
bly in  tli us  living,  let  them  ask  for- 1
givcness.  If  they  have  done  some-
thing they  are  ashamed  of  they
can  sue  for  amnesty. While  those


wdio  have  done  nothing  that  they
are  ashamed  of,  or  that  the  whole
world  should  nr>t  know  of,  are
relieved  from  the  unenviable  task
of  seeking  forgiveness,

God  is  ordering  this  matter  just
right ;  and  if  we  should  fail  in  any
point,  lie  will  make  it  up,  He  will
supplement  it  by  his  overruling
power  and  wisdom.  He  is  watching
our  affairs.  He  knows  exactly
our  circumstances  ;  and  he  knows
exactly  how  much  we  can  bear  ;  and
when  we  have  to  pass  through  deep
waters  he  will  be  near  us  ;  when  we
have  to  p;iss  through  the  fire,  he
will  be  on  our  right  and  on  our  left
hand.  Ho  will  not  forsake  us  in  our
hour  ot  distress  and  tribulation,
but  he  will  be  nearer  to  us  then,  if
possible,  than  at  any  other  time  in
our  lives.  Therefore,  of  all  people
upon  the  face  of"  the  earth,  we  have
the  greatest  cause  to  rejoice  because
of  these  things.

I  was  very  much  struck  with  some
remarks — I  did  not  hear  all  of  his
discourse,  having  been  called  out  to
attend  to  some  business  that  could
not  be  postponed — by  Brother
Lorenzo  Snow ;  they  struck  me  with
a  great  deal  of  force,  I  refer  to  his
allusion  to  the  three  Hebrewchiidren
ami  the  glory  that  followed  their
submission  to  the  will  of  God,  and
their  resistance  to  the  decree  ot  the
pagan,  the  heathen  king  I  believe
that  glory  will  be  added  to  the
name  of  our  God  by  our  fortitude
and  our  endurance,  and  by  our
maintaining  the  right.  No  great
principles,  like  those  to  which  we
are  wedded  ;  no  great  work  like  that
in  winch  we  are  engaged,  can  be
established  in  the  earth,  in  the  pre-
sent  condition  of  mankind  at  least,
without  great  sacrifice  on  the  part
of  those  connected  with  it.  We  need
not  expect  anything  else  than  this.
The  Lord, through the  Prophet


278  JOURNAL  01  DISCOURSES.


Joseph  Smith,  in  early  revelations,
told  to  the  church  :  You  are  laying
the  foundation  of  a  great  work  j  how
great  you  know  not.  And  the  same
words  are  just  as  applicable  to  us  to-
day, notwithstanding  the  growth  of
the  work  up  to  the  present  time.
We  with  the  light  we  now  possess
even,  cannot  coneeiveof  its  greatness.
It  has  not  entered  into  our  hearts,
neither  are  we  capable  of  conceiving
of  it  But  we  are  laying  its  foun-
dation, nevertheless ;  and  God  has
chosen  us  for  this  work.  He  has
inspired  us,  and  he  has  blessed  us
thus  far  in  our  endeavor  to  carry  it
out,  and  he  will  continue  to  do  so
to  the  end ;  and  victory  and  glory
will  be  the  result  of  our  faith  and
our  diligence  in  keeping  his  com-
mandments*

There  is  one  thing  that  I  wish  to
refer  to  ;  it  isa  delicate  subject,  still
I  feel  to  touch  upon  it.  The  idea
was  suggested  to  me  a  short  time
ago,  while  in  conversation  with  one
or  two  of  the  brethren  who  were
speaking  about  the  influence  that  is
bow  being  brought  against  the
Church,  how  fortunate  it  was  that
there  were  some  who  had  not  obeyed
the  law  of  God  in  regard  to  plural
marriage.  There  was,  as  I  thought,
a  spirit  of  self-gratulation  among
some  who  have  not  obeyed  that  law,
because  they  could  now  act  as  they
appeared  to  think,  in  some  sort,  as
saviors  to  the  people,  I  hope  there
never  will  enter  the  minds  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  a  feeling  of  that
kind,  or  division  of  feeling  upon  this
point.  I  believe  there  are  very  ex-
cellent, very  worthy,  very  true  and
Very  faithful  Latter-day'  Saints  of
both  sexes  who  have  not  entered
into  the  practice  of  plural  marriage;
and  it  is  not  for  me  to  cast  reflec-
tions upon  any  of  my  brethren  or
sisters  about  not  having  obeyed  that
principle,  unless  there  has  been- posi-


tive disobedience.  It  is  not  for  me
to  judge  the  circumstances,  the
feelings  and  the  motives,  and  the
hearts  of  men  and  women,  my
brethren  and  sisters  in  the  Church,
God  will  do  this  ;  that  is  his  pro-
vince. But,  on  the  other  hand,  I
hope  there  never  will  be  a  feeling
grow  up  in  the  midst  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  to  congratulate  them-
selves because  of  their  reluctance,  or
their  refusal,  to  obey  the  command
of  God,  and  to  think  that  they  have
done  more  wisely  in  refraining  from
obeying  that  command,  arid  that
their  position  is  a  better  one  because
of  their  lack  of  obedience  ;  or,  be-
cause circumstances  have  been  such
that  the}T  have  not  obeyed  or  been
required  to  obey  that  law.  I  hope,
I  say,  that  no  such  feeling  will  ever
be  known  among  us — to  judge  each
other  and  to  comment  upon  each
other,  and  to  indulge  in  self-gratu-
lation because  of  anything  of  this
kind*

The  Lord  has  said  :  "Again  I  say
unto  you,  if  ye  observe  to  do  what
soever  I  command  you  I,  the  Lord,
will  turn  away  all  wrath  and  indig-
nation from  you,  and  the  gates  of
hell  shall  not  prevail  against  you,1'

Now,  I  want  to  say  for  myself
personally,  if  I  had  not  obeyed  that
command  of  God,  concerning  plural
marriage,  I  believe  that  1  would
have  been  damned.  That  is  my
position ;  but  I  do  not  judge  any
other  man.  I  am  so  organized  that
I  could  have  lived,  if  necessary,
and  God  had  commanded  it,  as  a
Catholic  priest  is  supposed  to  live,
wit  1) out  knowing  woman.  I  be-
lieve that  with  Gods  help  I  could
have  done  that  all  the  days  of  my
life,  if  it  had  been  necessary  for
my  salvation  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,
when  I  had  taken  one  wife,  after  I
had  returned  from  one  of  my  mis-
sions, a  spirit  rested  upon  me  that


PERSECUTION  FULFILLING  PROPHECY,  ETC


1>79


I  could  not  resist ;  I  felt  that  I
should  be  damned  if  I  refused  or
neglected  to  obey  that  law  of  God,
It  was  not  prompted  by  any  improper
feeling  -3  it  was  not  prompted  by  a
feeling  of  lust,  or  a  desire  for
women  ;  but  it  was  an  overpowering
anxiety  to  obey  the  commandments
of  God,  Since  I  have  passed  through
the  ordeals  I  have,  connecter!  with
this  principle,  I  can  see  the  wisJom
of  it,  and  acknowledge  the  hand  of
God  in  it.  For  if  I  had  taken  wives
without,  being  thus  prompt*1!  and
impressed,  there  might  have  been
times  in  my  experience  when  I  j
would  have  questioned  myself  and
sail  I  :  Perhaps  you  were  too  hasty
in  embracing  this  principle.  But
under  the  circumstance*  I  could  not
do  that,  I  have  never  known  the
time  that  I  could  do  that.  I  knew
that  God  had  commanded  me,
whether  He  had  other  men  or
not ;  ami  I  did  obey  it  because
of  this  overpowering  command,
believing,  as  I  have  said,  that  I
should  be  damned  if  I  did  not.
Whatever  may  he  my  fate  in  regard
to  this  principle — I  have  been
deprived  of  my  seat  in  Congress
because  of  it  ;  and  whatever  be
my  fate  hereafter,  I  have  no  reflec-
tions against  myself  to  indulge  in
concerning  my  action  in  the  matter.
I  have  done  that  which  I  conscien- 1
tin u >ly  believe  to  be  the  will  of  God;
and  1  believe  the  majority  of  my
brethren  and  sister.1?  have  done  the
same,  have  obeyed  the  principle  in
the  same  way.  Do  I  believe  that
God  will  bear  those  out  who  have
thus  embraced  that  principle  ;  do  I
believe  that  He  will  sustain  them  ?
I  know  that  He  will  sustain  those
who  have  obeyed  it;  I  know  that  He
wdl  sustain  this  people.  The  Prophet
Joseph  Smith  said,  and  so  taught,
when  he  first  communicated  this
principle,  that  there  had  come  a


time  in  the  history  of  God's  people,
when  if  they  did  not  obey  that  law,
all  progress  would  cease,  that  the
kingdom  coal ■  I  go  no  further.  And
He  commanded  the  servants  of  God,
His  associates,  the  Apostles,  to  obey
it\  underpenalty  of  losing  the  Spirit
of  God,  under  penalty  of  their  ceas-
ing to  progress  in  the  work  of  our
God,  Now,  there  was  on  the  one
hand  condemnation  ;  on  the  other
hand,  the  fear  of  the  world,  the
prejudices  of  the  world,  the  punish-
ment which  the  world  would  inflict
upon  those  who  should  disobey  laws
already  enacted  against  such  prac-
tices. What  could  they  do  ?  We
are  to-day  precisely  in  the  same  posi-
tion that  other  servants  of  God  have
been  in,  who  have  been  required  by
men's  laws  to  do  things  which  their
conscience  and' all  their  reason,  and
the  good  spirit  within  them  revolted
against.  That  is  our  position  to-day.
Whatever  men's  laws  may  "be  we
cannot  deny  the  truth  of  God,  the
revelations  of  God.  I  cannot  do  it,
I  would  be  damned  and  go  to  hell  if
I  were  to  do  it  There  is  no  alter-
native for  me?  but  to  suffer  all  the
penalties  that  man  may  inflict  upon
me  ;  and  I  cannot  evade  them  only
as  God  shall  preserve  me.  That  is
my  position  to-day.  Whatever
man  may  do,  1  must  be,  I  hope  to
be,  true  to  myself,  and  to  my  con-
victions, and  to  my  God.  1  must
endure  all  tilings  ;  I  cannot  evade
them.  And  there  are  hundreds  in
the  same  position,  hundreds  of  men,
hundreds  of  women.  And  is  there
any  law  of  man,  is  there  any  penalty
that  man  can  inHict  that  compares
with  tlie  penalty  that  God  will
inflict  upon  those  that  will  disobey
His  commandments?  I  must
trust  my  God  ;  I  must  rely  upon
His  protecting  arm  ;  I  must  throw
myself  under  His  protecting  care,
or  1  must  perish. There  is  no  other


280


JOURNAL  0¥  DISUUUKSK.S.


course  for  me;  thai  is  the  only  alter-
native before  me.  To  be  untrue  to
my  God,  to  be  untrue  to  the  reve-
lations of  my  God  ;  to  be  untrue  to
the  convictions  of  my  nature  ;  to
be  untrue  to  the  women — wives —
whom  I  have  covenanted  for  time
and  all  eternity  to  love,  to  revere
and  to  protect,  and  to  my  children,
children  borne  to  me  by  those  women
— to  be  untrue  to  these,  or  to  endure
all  the  consequences  that  man  may
inflict  upon  me  for  disobeying;  laws
winch  are  framed  against  my  reli-
gion. I  am  willing  to  trust  to  my
God.  He  has  never  deserted  me
in  the  deepest  trouble  and  distress,
in  the  iiii«i>t  v:f  the  most  fiery  ordeals,
lie  lias  Urn  at  n,y  right  hand  and
on  my  left,  as  he  has  been  at  yours.
He  has  been  around  about  us,  and  I
am  still  willing  to  trust  Him.  He
has  never  failed — -His  word  and  pro-
mise  have  always  been  sure  and
reliable.

Now,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
you  who  have  not  entered  into  this
covenant,  do  not  imagine,  do  not
let  the  adversary  instill  into  your
hearts  that  you  are  now  saviors  t*>  the
Latter-day  Saints.  Do  not  do  it
Let  me  warn  you  against  it ;  it  is  a
dangerous  thought  You  will  find  it
delusive,  for  it  is  not  true.  If  God
saves  this  people,  as  I  firmly  helieve
he  will,  it  will  be  through  those
men  and  through  those  women
whom  men  have  placed  under  a  ban  ;
whom  men  have  said  shall  have  no
power  brruuhe  of  the  laws  that  are
enacted  against  them,  I  tell  you,
the  salvation  that  will  come  to  this
people,  will  be  through  the  faithful-
ness of  the  men  of  God  and  the
Women  of  God  who,  in  the  face  of
an  opposing  world,  contrary  to  their
traditions,  to  their  education,  to
their  p re-conceived  notions  and  to
the  popular  prejudices  of  the  day  —
who  have  in  the  midst  of  all  this


stepped  fotward  in  the  vanguard
and  obeyed  the  command  of  God,
and  have  dared  to  endure  all  the
consequences,  and  been  willing  to
endure  all  the  penalties,  Mark  it,  it
is  true.  I  believe  that  which  I  now
say  to  you  as  firmly  as  though  an
angel  of  God  had  spoken  it ;  and
you  will  see  it  fulfilled,  every  word
of  it.  Let  not  the  fears  of  the  world,
let  not  the  threats  of  men  extinguish
the  love  of  God,  extinguish  the  faith
of  God  in  your  hearts  and  make  you
tremble  concerning  these  things.
Let  no  such  feeling  as  this  take  pos-
session of  you,  1  do  not  want  to
be  defiant  ;  I  never  had  that  feeling;
but  if  I  cannot  obev,  I  must  suffer,
That  is  the  position  I  have  taken.
It  I  cannot  obey  the  law  of  man,
I  must  suffer  the  consequences  :  I
prefer  to  do  so  rather  than  sutler  the
consequences  of  disobeying  the  com-
mands of  God.  It  is  better  for  me
to  do  thin  than  to  do  the  other.  I
do  not  wish  to  defy  man  ;  I  say,  if
yuu  wi>h  to  enforce  the  law,  that  is
your  business.

Now,  brethren  and  sisters,  let  us
go  from  this  Conference  in  calm-
ness, pursuing  our  various  occupa-
tions, ami  endeavoring  to  profit  by
the  teachings  that  we  have  had  in
the  past  If  this  people  could  only
have  carried  into  effect  the  teach-
ings they  have  had  from  the  servants
of  God  from  the  beginning,  how
different  would  our  position  be  to-
day !  Elders  have  worn  themselves
out  Presidents,  Apostles,  and
Prophets  have  worn  themselves  out
and  have  gone  to  their  graves,
laboring  with  this  people,  and  teach-
ing them  woids  of  life  and  salvation,
words  that  it  would  have  been  to
their  eternal  interest  to  have  listened
to  and  to  have  obeyed.  We  are
like  the  man  who,  moved  with  pity,
took  the  frozen  snake  and  put  it  into
hiii  bosom  to  restore  its  life,  and  in


PERSECUTION  FULFILLING  PROPHECY,  ETC


a  little  while,  after  the  warmth  of
his  bosom  revived  the  frozen  reptile,
it  stung  him  and  killed  him.  We
have  nourished  in  our  bosom  the
viper  that  is  doing  us  more  injury
to-day  than  anything  else.  If  we
had  listened  to  counsel,  if  we  had
obeyed  the  commandments  of  God  ;
if  we  had  been  united,  if  we  had
not -looked  so  much  to  our  temporal
advantage,  or  that  which  we  thought
to  be  our  temporal  advantage,  how
different  would  our  position  be
to-day  !  Bat  this  people  are  like
children  ;  the  servants  of  God
entreat  them  and  talk  to  them,  hut
how  quickly  they  forget  !  They
imagine  that  the  counsels  they
receive  are  prompted  by  some  spirit
that  is  not  exactly  the  Spirit  of  God,
But  we  will  find  that  we  have  to
come  to  it.  I*believe  that  God  will
throw  us  in  circumstances  that  will
compel  us  to  come  to  the  posi-
tion that  He  has  designed  we
shall  occupy,  however  reluctant
we  may  be  about  it.  I  tell  you
there  is  more  to  be  dreaded,  there
is  more  to  be  feared — and  you  may
attach  what  importance  you  like  to
my  words,  but  I  know  they  are  true
— there  is  more  to  be  feared  to-day
in  our  midst  from  the  growth  of
wealth  in  a  few  hands,  in  a  single
class,  than  there  is  from  all  the
legislation  that  can  be  enacted
against  us  by  the  Congress  of  the
United  States,  more  to  be  dreaded
by  us  as  a  people.  That  condition
is  upon  us,  the  growth  of  wealth  in
the  hands  of  a  few  individuals,
threatening  us  with  greater  danger
to  day,  than  anything  that  can  be
done  by  outsiders  ;  more  than  the
Commissioners  can  do,  more  than
the  registrars  can  do,  more  than  the
judges  of  election  can  do,  or  all  that
can  be  done  by  the  Congress  of  the
United  States,  I  know  that  this
is  true, God  does  not  design  to


have  a  people  of  this  kind.  He
does  not  design  that. there  shall  be
classes  among  us,  one  class  lifted  up
above  another,  one  class  separated
from  the  rest  of  the  people,
with  diverse  interests ;  interests
that  are  not  strictly  in  accord  with
those  of  the  masses  of  the  people.
Because  when  this  is  the  case,  there
is  a  lack  of  union.  Men  are  more
disposed  to  compromise  principle
who  have  great  monied  interests  at
stake.  In  fact,  it  is  a  characteristic
of  human  nature  that,  as  a  class,
this  class  is  a  compromising  class;
their  temptation  is  to  yield  principle,
to  yield  ground  ;  and  it  cannot  be
helped  from  the  very  nature  of  things,
because  of  their  circumstances.  I
can  see  it  in  myself;  I  do  not
preacji  something  to  yuu  that  I
do  not  preach  to  myself  I  have
to  guard  against  it,  and  my  brethren
have  to  do  *o.  It  does  not  belong
to  any  one  man  or  class  of  men,  it
belongs  to  human  nature  this  feel-
ing of  which  I  speak.  God  designs
in  the  organization  of  his  kingdom
on  the  earth  to  prevent  this,  If  it
is  not  prevented,  then  the  Zion  of
God  is  not  established.  Is  any  one
injured  by  its  prevention  1  No.
The  time  must  come  when  the  talent
of  men  of  business  shall  be  used  for
the  benefit  of  this  whole  people,  just
as  the  talent  of  President  Taylor,
just  as  the  talent  of  President
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  that  of
President  Wilford  Woodruff,  and
that  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  and
that  of  the  leading  Elders  of  this
Church  ;  as  their  talent  is  used  for
the  benefit  of  Zion,  so  must  the
talent  of  men  who  are  gifted  with
business  capacity  be  used  in  like
manner — not  for  individual  benefit
alone,  not  for  individual  aggrandize-
ment alone,  but  for  the  benefit  of
the  whole  people,  to  uplift  the
masses,  to  rescue  them  from  their


282


JOURNAL  OF  lUSCOi  KSKS


poverty.  That  is  one  of  the  objects
in  establishing  Zion,  and  anything
short  of  that,  as  I  have  said,  is  not
Zion,  -it  is  not  the  Zion  that  the
Prophets  have  foreseen,  it  is  not  that
which  God  has  promised.  We  may
as  well,  therefore,  every  one  of  ns,
shape  our  thoughts  to  this  end  and
endeavor  to  kt-ep  it  in  view,  tor  I
tell  you  God  will  not  permit  any-
thing very  different  to  this  for  any
length  of  time.  He  will  scourge
us,  and  drive  us  if  necessary.  He
will  tear  us  up  by  the  roots  ;  and  as
sure  as  God  lives  it  will  be  so?  if  we
cannot  come  to  it  without  violent
means  *of  this  kind,  He  will  have  a
people  that  will  <fo  these  thing*,  and
He  will  bring  us  into  a  position  to
do  it,  and  any  one  who  thinks  dif-
ferently deludes  himself  or  herself  ;
it  is  not  *o  written  i  i  the  book  ;  it


1  is  not  the  design  of  God.  I  would
tWd  very  sorry  if  I  thought  it  would
do  so,  I  suppose  I  am  as  selfish  as
other  men.  I  would  like  to  benefit
!  my  own  family.  I  have  to  war
against  this  feeling  as  all  have.  I
do  not  know  that  I  am  any  worse
than  any  other  people,  but  J  know
this  feeling  has  to  be  warred  against.
The  tendency  of  human  nature  is  to
look  after  one's  own  dear  self,  to
look  after  one  s  own  family,  to  use
one's  talent  for  one's  own  and  their
benefit,  without  bestowing  any
benefit  upon  the  people  of  God,
Yet  I  know  it  is  not  a  right
feeling.

God  bless  you,  my  brethren  and
sitters,  and  fill  you  with  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  inspire  those  who  speak
to  us  by  the  power  of  God,  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  Amen,


-


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOSEPH  F.  SMITH,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Saturday  After-
noon, (in  General  Conference)  October  7,

( Reported  by  John  Irvine.)


LOVE  FOR  AND FORCUV  i:\ESS OF EN  KM  IKS  —  SUCH THINGS  POSSIBLE

WITHOUT  ASSOCIATION  AND  ASSIMILATION— THE  SA1MS  EXHORTED

AGAINST  BARTERING  AWAY  THEIR  INHERITANCES  —  THE  IDOLATRY

OF  RICHES — MAN  CANNOT  BUILD  UP  ZION,  BUT  GOD  CAN  AND  WILL

•

I  have  been  requested,  to  occupy  and  prayers  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
the  remaining  portion  of  the  time,  '  that  the  time.  I  may  occupy  may  be
and  I  trust  in  so  doing  I  may  enjoy  profitably  spent,  as  I  have  no  desire
the  liberty  of  the  Spirit  and  the  faith  |  to  hold  the  attention  of  this  vast


LOVE  FOR  AND  FORGIVENESS  UF  EN  Ell  IKS,  ETC.


285

m


congregation  un  profitably  ;  but  I
realize  that  without  the  aid  of  the
Spirit  of  tlie  Lord  I  am  not  capable
of  imparting  to  this  congregation
the  word  of  life.

I  am  thankful  for  the  opportunity
that  we  enjoy  of  meeting  together
under  such  favorable  circumstances.
I  am  pleased  to  see  the  vast  numbers
that  are  in  attendance  at  this  con-
ference,  and  I  trust  that  we  may  be
amply  repaid  by  the  instructions
which  we  receive,  for  tin*  time  and
trouble  which  it  has  cost  to  attend.
In  order,  however,  that  we  may
receive  the  blessing  which  we  need,
it  is  necessary,  in  my  judgment,  for
all  to  come  with  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  in  their  hearts,  in  the  spirit  of
prayer,  and  the  love  of  truth,  having
a  desire  for  the  upbuilding  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  and  for  the  accom-
plish merit  of  all  the  purposes  and
designs winch have been  made


the  path  of  duty  to  return  blow  for
blow,  to  inflict  evil  for  evil,  to
persecute  because  we  may  be
persecuted,  we  forget  the  injunction
of  the  Lord  and  the  covenants  we
have  made  with  God,  to  keep  His
commandments.  It  is  a  difficult
matter,  I  am  aware,  for  human
nature  to  become  subject  to  these
scriptural  injunctions,  It  is  difficult
for  men  to  curb  their  passions,  to
restrain  their  feelings,  and  to  resist
the  temptation  to  rebel  and  a  1  min-
ister measure  for  measure,  but  it  is
enjoined  upon  us.  We  have  been
actually  commanded  in  the  revela-
tions given  to  us  in  this  dispensation
to  forgive  our  enemies,  without  their


asking  forgiven


It  is  la'ni  down


concerning


this


great


man
work.

Jesus  tausht  the  doctrine  that  we
should  pray  for  those  that  despite-
fully  use  us  ;  that  we  should  love  our
enemies  ;  that  we  should  do  good  to
them  that  do  evil  to  us;  that  we
should  not  return  evil  for  evil,  but
good  for  evil  There  is  no  particular
credit  1 1 ue  to  any  person  who  returns
good  for  good.  Even  the  publicans
and  sinners  did  this,  but  it  is  some-
what difficult  to  return  good  for  evil
Nevertheless  to  do  so  was  enjoined
hv  the  commandments  of*  the  Lord
Jesus,  We  are  to  love  our  enemies ;
do  good  to  them  that  hate  and  per
secute  us  ;  and  when  we  are  perse-
cuted, persecute  not  again;  when  we
are  derided,  deride  not  in  return  ;
if  we  are  injured,  seek  not  to  injure
those  who  injure  us  ;  that  which
is  required  at  our  hands  is  to  estab-
lish peace  on  earth  and  good  will  to
man.  Hence,  when  we  forget  the
object  of  our  calling  and  step  out  of


that  if  your  enemies  come  up  against
you  hp  destroy  you,  the  first  time>
if  the  Lord  delivers  you  out  of  their
hands,  you  shall  forgive  them  ;  and
if  they  come  the  second  time,
you  shall  forgive  them  ;  and  if
they  come  the  third  time  against
you,  the  Lord  has  said  they  are
then  in  your  hands  to  do  with  them
whatsoever  you  will  ;  but  it  will
redound  to  your  honor,  credit  and
glory  if  you  forgive  them  the  third
time,  even  if  they  have  not  repented
and  have  not  asked  forgiveness.
Now  tins  may  seem  to  be  rather  a
difficult  requirement ;  nevertheless
it  is  so  written  and  is  so  required  of
the  Latter-day  Saints,  But  how
often  shall  we  forgive  them  if  they
repent  of  their  sins  and  ask  forgive-
ness ?  Jesus  has  laid  down  the  law
that  ^  e  should  forgive  them  as  often
as  they  will  repent  and  ask  forgive-
ness, I  am  speaking  now  of  indi-
vidual trespasses ;  of  people  who
offend  me  or  you  or  trespass  against
us  ;  1  am  not  speaking  of  those  who
trespass  against  the  immutable,  the
righteous  and  the  holy  laws  of  God ;
they  come  under  another  law,  and
God  and  His  servants  will  reckon


284


JOURNAL  OF  DISL'UUI'SES.


with  them.  It  is  for  us  to  obtain
the  spirit  of  forgiveness,  to  feel  to  love
those  that  are  so  ignorant  as  to  do
evil  to  their  fellow-creatures  with-
out a  cause;  we  shouM  feel  as  Christ
felt,  when  upon  the  cross.  He  said,
u  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they
know  not  what  they  do."  It  was
urged  yesterday  by  one  of  the  breth-
ren, that  we  could  scarcely  claim
this  fur  many  of  those  who  were
engaged  in  persecuting  the  Saints
to-day,  for  they  do  know  what  they
are  doing,  and  they  are  not  ignorant
of  the  course  that  they  are  pursuing.
They  are  in  a  position  to  learn  the
truth,  if  they  would,  and  to  compre-
hend the  fact  that  they  are  lying
about  us'.  Yet  how  do  we  feel  to-
wards them  for  this  offence  1  Do  we
feel  that  we  should  retaliate  1  Do  we
feel  that  we  should  execute  venge-
ance upon  them  because  we  know
that  thev  are  tell  inn;  falsehoods,  and
are  misrepresenting  and  slandering
the  people*  of  this  Church  ?  No*  j
For  years  and  years  we  have  sat
quietly  down  and  listened  to  their
abuse,  insults,  slanders,  misre-
presentations and  falsehoods,  which  !
they  have  spread  broadcast  through-
out the  laud  to  the  utmost  of  their
power,  and  no  man  has  so  much
as  said,  "Why  do  you  so?"
They  enjoy  the  utmost  liberty  to  lie  1
and  slander  and  go  to  the
fullest  extent  ot  their  power  to
accomplish  their  wicked  and
nefarious  desires  and  purposes,  and
•we  are  w  illing  to  risk  the  judgment
of  God  in  these  matters  in  His  own
due  time.  We  do  not  propose  to  !
keep  ourselves  eternally  in  hot  water,
wrangling,  contending;  and  snarling
with  our  enemies;  if  we  did  we
should  soon  become  as  sour,  as
vicious,  as  foul,  as  low  and  as  con-
temptible as  they  are  themselves.
Well,  do  you  love  them?  Now  here
is  the  rub  ! Do  you  love  these  slan-


derers, these  liars,  these  defamers,
these  persecutors  of  the  innocent
and  of  the  unoffending— do  you  love
theml  [several  voices,  No,  no.]  I
can  scarcely  blame  you-  [Laughter.]
But  that  is  not  according  to  the  law
of  God.  I  want  to  tell  you  how  I
feel  towards  them.  I  love  them  so
much  that  if  I  had  it  in  my  power
to  annihilate  them  from  the  earth
I  would  not  harm  a  hair  of  their
heads — not  one  hair  of  their  heads.  I
love  them  so  well  that  if  I  could
possibly  make  them  better  men,
convert  them  from  the  error  of  their
ways  I  would  do  it,  God  being  my
helper.  I  love  them  so  much  that  I
would  not  throw  a  straw  in  their
way  to  prosperity  and  happiness,
but  so  far  as  possible  I  would  hedge
up  their  headlong  and  downward
course  to  destruction,  and  yet  I  de-
test and  abominate  their  infamous
actions  and  their  wicked  course.
That  is  how  1  feel  towards  them,  and
that  is  how  much  I  love  them,  and
if  this  is  not  the  love  that  Jesus  tie-
sired  us  to  have  for  our  enemies,  tell
me  what  kind  of  love  we  should
have  for  them  ?  I  do  not  love  them
so  that  I  would  take  them  into  my
bosom,  or  invite  them  to  associate
with  my  family,  or  that  I  would  give
my  daughters  to  their  embraces,  nor
my  sons  to  their  counsels,  I  do  not
love  them  so  well  that  I  w  ould  invite
them  to  the  councils  of  the  Priest-
hood, and  the  ordinance*  of  the
House  of  God,  to  scoff  and  jeer  at
sacred  things  which  they  do  not
understand,  nor  would  1  share  with
them  the  inheritance  that  God,  my
Father,  has  given  me  in  Zion  ;  I  do
not  love  them  well  enough  for  this,
and  1  do  not  believe  that  God  ever
designed  that  I  should  ;  but  I  love
them  so  much  that  I  would  not  hurt
them,  I  would  do  them  good,  I
would  tell  the  truth  about  them,
I  would  benefit  them  if  it  was  in


LOVE  FOR  AND  FORGIVENESS  OF  ENEMIES,  ETC.


285


my  power,  an  J  I  would  keep  them
to  the  utmost  of  my  ability  from
doing  harm  to  themselves  and  to
their  neighbors,  I  love  them  that
much  ;  but  I  do  not  love  them  with
that  affection  with  which  I  love
my  wife,  my  brother,  my  sister
or  my  friend.  There  is  a  difference
between  the  love  we  should  bear
towards  our  enemies  and  that  we
should  bear  towards  our  friends.
Do  not  say  that  it  is  hatred  of  our
enemies  when  we  would  keep  them
from  hurting  themselves  and  their
neighbors,  do  not  call  that  hatred,
that  is  leve  for  them.  If  it  were
possible  to  find  one  of  this  class  of
people  who  had  been  deceived,  and
who  had  slandered  the  Saints  of
God  ignorantly,  as  Paul  did,  and  we
could  prevail  upon  him  to  repent  of
his  sins,  to  turn  away  from  wicked-
ness, and  to  acknowledge  God  and
His  laws,  then  we  should  love  him
as  a  brother,  as  a  friend,  and  as  a
neighbor.  That  would  be  the  dif-
ference. But  we  do  not  love  to
associate  with  our  enemies,  and  I  do
not  think  the  Lord  requires  us  to  do
it  If  He  does  He  will  have  to  re-
veal it,  fori  cannot  find  it  anywhere
revealed.  I  have  never  read  it  in
any  of  the  books,  I  have  never  heard
it  taught  that  we  are  to  love  our
enemies  so  much  as  to  become  like
them,  or  condescend  to  their  vile
and  contemptible  ways,  or  as  to
share  the  inheritance  God  has  given
us  with  them,  or  as  to  suppose  for
a  moment  that  the  wicked  and
the  ungodly  will  ever  inherit  the
kingdom  of  God,  or  enter  into
His  presence,  or  enjoy  the  society,
blessing  and  award  of  the  faithful ;
they  never  will,  they  cannot,
for  they  are  not  worthy ;  they
have  not  obeyed  the  law  and
therefore  cannot  receive  the  blessing
thereof

We  should  keep  ourselves  aloof


from  the  wicked  ;  the  dividing  line
should  be  distinctly  drawn  between
God  and  Belial,  between  Christ  and
the  world,  between  truth  and  error,
and  between  right  and  wrong.  We
ought  to  cleave  to  the  right,  to  the
good,  to  the  truth,  and  tbrsake  the
evil  I  am  going  to  read  a  little
scripture  upon  this  subject,  lest  our
friends  or  this  consnesxation  should
feel  that  counseling  the  Latter-day
Saints  to  keep  aloof  from  the  wicked
and  ungodly,  to  not  divide  their
inheritances  with  them,  etc,  is  un-
warranted by  the  scriptures.  I  will
read  a  little  scripture  on  this  very
paint,  which  will  be  found  in  2nd
Corinthians,  6th  chap.,  beginning  at


the  14  tli  verse


He  ve  not  un-


equally yoked  together  with  un-
believers :  for  what  fellowship  hath
righteousness  with  unrighteousness  ?
and  what  communion  hath  light
with  darkness]  And  what  concord
hath  Christ  with  Belial  ?  or  what
part  hath  he  that  believeth  with  an
infidel  ? And  what  agreement  hath

*  *

the  temple  of  God  with  idols?
for  ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living
God  ;  as  God  hath  said,  I  will
dwell  in  them,  and  walk  in  them  ;
and  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they
shall  be  my  people.  Wherefore
come  out  from  among  them
and  be  ye  separate,  saith  the  Lord,
and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing;
and  I  will  receive  you.  And  will  be
a  Father  unto  you  and  ye  shall  be
my  sons  and  daughters,  saith  the
Lord  Almighty."  Now,  here  is  the
law  of  God  upon  the  subject  ;  it  is
the  word  of  the  Lord  :  u  Come  out
from  among  them  and  be  ye  separate,
and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing."
What  affinity  can  we  have  for
them?  Let  them  alone,  let  them  go
their  own  way.  Help  them  to  all
the  happiness  that  it  is  possible  for
them  to  obtain  in  this  world  ;  for  it
will  be  all  that  they  will  ever  get,


*


28  G


JOURNAL  OK  DISCO L'KSKS


unless  they  repent  of  their  sins,  and
forsake  their  wicked  ways.

Ill  conclusion  I  desire  to  say  a  few
words  in  relation  to  some  remarks
that  were  made  by  one  of  the  breth-
ren  yesterday.  It  is  written  in  the
scriptures  that,  "  The  kingdom  and
dominion  and  greatness  of  the
kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven,
shall  lie  given  to  tbe  people  of  the
Sainu  of  the  Most  High,  whose
kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom,
and  all  dominion*  shall  serve  and
obey  him."  This  passage  of  Scrip*
ture  u;is  in  part  quoted  yesterday,
by  one  of  the  brethren  who  spoke
in  the  Conference,  and  then  the
question  was  asked,  "When  will
the  kingdom  be  given  to  the
Saints  f  The  answer  was,  "When
the  ] 1 1 -  become  wise  enough  not
to  turn  it  right. over  into  the  lap  of
the  enemy  the  moment  they  obtain
possesion  of  it,  and  not  till  then."
There  never  was  a  truer  saying  than
this.  It  takes  several  tilings  to
make  a  kingdom.  First,  there
must  be  a  king  ;  second,  there  must
be  a  people  ;  third,  there  mu>t  be
territory  or  a  place  for  the  people  to
dwell.  Then  come  the  laws  and  the  |
tale*  of  government  of  the  king-
dom. Now,  the  territory  or  dwelling
place  is  a  part  of  the  royalty  of  that
kingdom,  is  it  not  %  Could  yon  have
a  kingdom  without  a  place  to  put  it  1
No,  We  must  have  a  place  to  put
the  kingdom,  and  it  is  as  ne-
cessary to  have  such  a  place  as  it  is
to  have  the  king  and  the  people.
Now,  which  is  worst,  to  sell  out  our
interest  in  the  king,  the  people  or
the  territory  to  the  enemy  ?  If  you  ,
betray  the  king  to  the  enemy,  you
are  a  traitor.  Yet  there  are  some
people  who  betray  the  king  ;  they
do  not  care  much  about  Christ,  the
King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  Lords,
and  they  sell  out  their  interest  in
Him,  or  betray  Him  with  very  little


compunction  of  conscience.  And
there  are  some  people,  as  I  have
heard,  that  bell  their  neighbors  or
betray  them.

1  have  heard  of  some  people  who
had  sunken  so  low  that  they  would
sell  anything  for  money  ;  mother  or
father,  or  brother  or  sister,  or  friend
or  neighbor  would  never  stand  in
the  way.  They  would  do  anything
to  obtain  money  j  money  is  their
God.  Such  people  would  cell  out
their  interest  in  their  king,  their
people,  and  their  country,  for  money.
We  only  want  to  find  out  who  will
sell  God  and  the  people  for  filthy
lucre  ami  we  bring  them  to  trial,
and  in  a  very  short  time  we  manage
to  sever  connection  with  them.
We  say  he  has  departed  from  the
faith,  and  we  cut  him  off  from  our
fellowship  in  the  Church.  But
what  do  we  do  with  those  who  sell
their  inheritances  to  the  enemy  I
Why  we  pat  them  on  the  shoulder,
we  hug  them  to  our  bosoms,  we  love
and  cherish  them  and  it  is  all  right ;
no  apostacy  tit  ere  !  But  suppose
we  should  all  sell  our  inheritance,
we  should  then  have  to  move
to  some  other  clime.  It  may  not
be  considered  prudent  to  thus
publicly  express  our  feelings  on
this  subject,  as  slanderers  and  vili-
fiers  are  apt  to  wrest  the  truth  and
misquote,  and  misrepresent  the
facts.  Yet  I  feel  as  though  I  would
be  chargeable  with  a  neglect  of  duty
if  I  did  not  say  at  least  this  much
on  tins  subject,  and  I  am  not  afraid
nor  ashamed  to  meet  this  view  of
the  matter.  If  men  will  ;<ell  out
their  homes,  and  their  inheritances
to  the  wicked  and  the  ungodly  for
money,  when,  I  ask,  will  they  be
prepared  to  go  and  build  up  the
center  stake  of  Zion?  Who  of  this
class  will  be  called  to  do  this  work?
And  will  they  have  an  inheritance  in
the New Jerusalem? Why,  I


LOVE  FOR  AND  FORGIVENESS  OF  ENEMIES,  ETC


287


suspect  they  would  pull  up  the
paving  stones  ami  sell  them  for
money  ;  they  would  steal  the  dia-
monds, pearls  and  precious  stones
from  the  pearly  gates  of  the  New
Jerusalem,  and  sell  them  for  the
coveted  "  cash  !"  I  am  opposed  in
my  feelings  to  parting  with  my  in-
heritance to  those  that  would
destroy  the  people  of  God  from  the
earth  ;  and  God  helping  me  I  never
will  do  it  Ami,  furthermore,  if  I
have  an  inheritance  I  will  see,  so  far
as  I  have  it  in  my  power,  that  it  is
placet!  in  such  a  position  that  neither
I  nor  my  family  shall  turn  it  over  to
the  enemy.  You  can  do  as  you  please,
I  am  telling  you  what  I  am  going  to
do,  what  I  will  do,  God  being  my
helper.  You  can  do  the  same  if  you
want  to. It  is  a  free  country


is,  it  would  be  if  it  were  not  for
some  tilings,  which  the  biethren
have  mentioned  here,  and  I  have  not
time  to  reiterate  them.

May  the  Lord  bless  this  congre-
gation and  the  Saints  universally.
May  He  bless  all  who  are  assisting
to  build  up  Zioti  and  the  good  of  the
earth  everywhere.  Zion  will  be  built
4ip,  for  God  will  do  it ;  and  no  man


should  deceive  himself  by  entertain-
ing the  opinion,  the  thought  or  the
feeling  in  his  heart  that  it  is  he  that
will  build  up  Zion,  for  men  cannot
do  it.  God  has  said  :  "  I  will  do
it ;  it  is  my  work ;  it  is  my  kingdom;
I  have  cut  the  stone  out  of  the
mountain  with  mine  own  hands,  and
I  will  roll  it  forth  ;  I  will  accomplish
my  purposes  and  my  designs  and
my  people  .shall  triumph."  God
hath  said  it,  and  He  will  do  it,  and
man  will  not  do  it,  for  he  cannot  do
it,  though  he  will  be  the  agent  in
the  hands  of  God  iu  accomplishing
much  good,  God  will  bestow  great
power  upon  His  servants  and  will
bless  them  with  light  and  wisdom,


knowledge  and


understanding,


power  and  authority,  ami  the  keys
of  the  Priesthood  to  accomplish  a
great  and  mighty  work.  But  He
will  have  the  honor  and  the  glory  ;
for  it  is  he  that  will  give  the  power
to  accomplish  the  work  ;  man  has
no  power  in  and  of  himself  to  do

SO.  .» f  U<; f'q r  v

May  God  bless  us,  and  give  us
power  to  overcome  evil  with  good,
is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen.


288


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  LORENZO  SNOW,

DELIVERED  IN'  THE  AssKM liLY  HaLL,  S,\LT  LAKE  ClTY,  THURSDAY  AFTER-
NOON, (General  Conference  J  October  5,  1882*

Meported  by  John  Irvine*


THE  RRVBLATIOITS  OF  THE HOLY  SPIRIT  SACIUFICK  BRINGS  FORTH  SALVA-
TION,  EPISODE  OF QUKKN KSTH  EE WHERE KNOWLEDGE IS  GlVJtN

OBEDIENCE IS  REQUIItED  NOAH AN  I) THE ANTEDILUVIANS,  FENALT

OF  DISOBEDIENCE THE  KNOWLEDGE  WHICH  COMFORTS  THE  PEOPLE

OF GOD, THE  SKEPTICISM  OF  THE WORLD THE  TESTIMONY  OF  TH

LATTER-DAY SAINTS  THE INDESTRUCTIBILITY OF "  MuRMONISm"

GOD  WILL  OVERUl'LK  AND  DELIVER ?  IP  THE  SAINTS  WILL  DO  THEIR
DUTY.


It  might  not  be  improper  for  us
as  Latter-day  Saints  in  assembling
together  on  occasions  of  this  kind
to  remind  ourselves  that  the  infor-
mation and  intelligence  that  it  is
our  privilege  to  receive,  depend  very
much  upon  the  assistance  we  get
from  the  Holy  Spirit — that  Spirit
which  the  Savior  told  us  would  bring
all  tilings  to  our  remembrance,  and
open  up  unto  our  understanding  all
things  that  might  be  profitable.
Of  course  we  learn  a  great  many
things  through  reflection  and  by  the
exercise  of  the  intelligence  which  we
have  acquired  through  the  cultiva-
tion of  the  principles  of  truth  ;  but
those  things  which  are  of  the  greatest
importance  to  the  Latter-day  Saints
are  derived  through  the  revelations
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Many  principles
of  vast  importance,  principles  that
will  assist  greatly  through  all  the
scenes  of  lite,  may  be  developed
through  the  revelations  of  the  Holy
Spirit  on  occasions  of  this  kind
when  we  come  together  to  hear  the
word  of  the  Lord  through  His  ser-
vants.


I  will  read  a  portion  of  Scripture
— not  that  I  intend  to  confine  myself
particularly  to  any  text ;  but  there
are  some  things  contained  in  a  short
history  that  will  be  found  in  th
Book  of  Esther,  from  which  I  think
we  may  derive  much  profit  and  con*
solation  under  the  circumstances
that  surround  us  at  the  present  tim,
as  well  as  the  circumstances  that
may  surround  us  in  the  future.  In
the  4th  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Esther,
beginning  at  the  15th  verse,  we
read  :

"  Then  Esther  made  them  return
Mordecai  this  answer :

"  Go,  gather  together  all  the  Jew
that  are  present  in  Shushan,  an
fast  ye  for  me,  and  neither  eat  no
drink  three  days,  night  or  day  :
also  and  my  maidens  will  fast  like-
wise ;  and  so  will  I  go  unto  the  king
which  is  not  according  to  the  law
and  if  I  perish,  I  perish.

So  Mordecai  went  his  way  and
did  according  to  all  that  Esther  had
commanded  hirn.:*

Now  we  find  in  tracing  the  history
of  the*  Lord's  dealings from  the


I  THE  BETELATTONS  OP  THE  HOLT  SPIRIT,  ETC.


beginning  to  the  present  time — we
find  it  in  our  own  history,  *  we  find
it  in  the  histories  contained  in  the
Bible,  the  New  Testament,  and  the
Book  of  Mormon,  that  where  cir-
cumstances arose  or  events  trans-
pired of  a  peculiar  nature,  it  re-
quired the  action  of  men  and  women
to  accomplish  certain  duties  that
were  devolving  upon  them  in  the
interest  and  the  salvation  of
the  people,  or  for  a  class  of  people,
or  perhaps  for  certain  individuals,
we  find  this  in  tracing  the  history
of  God's  dealings  with  the  human
family.  Now  to  my  mind  there  is
something  very  singular  in  the  his-
tory of  a  certain  people  connected
with  the  events  related  in  the  Book
of  Esther,  There  was  a  people  at
this  time  scattered  throughout  the
provinces  of  the  Medes  and  Persians,
Ahasuerus  being  then  king  of  Persia
and  Media.  This  people  were  the
people  of  Gorl,  they  had  .been  ac-
knowledged of  God  as  his  people  for
several  centuries,  commencing  with
Abraham  ;  but  in  consequence  of
their  dissipation  and  transgression,
and  because  they  sought  to  worship
other  Gods,  he  scattered  them
throughout  those  127  provinces,
and  they  were  in  captivity.  But  in
consequence  of  a  certain  feeling
that  was  gotten  up,  a  feeling  of
hatred  and  a  determination  to  des-
troy this  people,  they  were  placed  in
very  imminent  jeopardy.  A  decree
had  been  passed  by  the  king  that  on
a  certain  day  they  should  all  be  de-
stroyed, and  there  was  weeping  and
wailing  from  one  end  of  the  kingdom
to  the  other.  But  it  appears — as  it
will,  and  has  appeared  in  our  history
in  the  past — that  the  Lord  had  con-
cealed his  plan  for  the  deliverance
of  his  people.  It  was  for  the  pur-
pose of  destroying  Mordecai  that
the  decree  was  established,  Haman,
who  was  the  author  of  the  difficul-
No.  19


ties,  had  determined  in  his  mind
that  lie  would  destroy  Mordecai,  but
disdained  to  execute  his  vengeance
on  Mordecai  alone,  therefore  desired
to  make  a  sweeping  arrangement
which  would  include  the  destruction
of  all  his  people  scattered  throughout
the  provinces,  and  Haman  sue*
ceeded  in  influencing  the  king  to
accomplish  this  business.  He  had
informed  the  king  that  this  was  a
people  who  had  laws  that  were
different  from  the  laws  of  any  other
people,  and  that  they  were  actually
in  some  instances  living  in  disobedi-
ence to  his  laws,  that  disobedience
consisting  in  not  worshipping  the
false  gods  that  were  worshipped  in
those  days.  He  succeeded  in  blind-
ing the  mind  of  the  king  to  that
extent*  that  4  he  was  given  the
privilege  of  accomplishing  the
destruction  of  thousands  and  tens
of  thousands  of  this  people,  the
people  of  God.  On  account  of  this,
Mordecai,  we  are  told,  rent  his
clothes  and  put  on  sackcloth  and  sat
in  ashes  ;  and  finally  he  conceived
the  idea  that  the  salvation  of  this
people  was  in  Queen  Esther,
his  niece.  So  he  sent  her  word  to
the  effect  that  it  was  her  business  to
take  a  course  to  accomplish  this  ob-
ject. But  she  sent  back  word  when
she  received  this  communication
that  it  was  a  very  difficult  matter
for  her  to  get  an  audience  with  the
king,  because  according  to  the  Jaw
it  was  death  for  any  person  to  go
into  the  inner  court  and  ask  any*
thing  of  the  king  uncalled,  and  if
she  went  in  it  would  be  at  the  risk
of  her  life.  The  answer  to  this  was
that  if  she  felt  that  under  the  cir-
cumstances she  could  not  risk  all
she  possessed,  then  should  their  de-
liverance arise  from  another  source,
but  she  and  her  fathers  house
should  be  destroyed.  Esther-took
all  these  things  into  consideration,

vol.  xxm


290


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


and  finally  sent  word  to  Mordeeai
in  the  language  I  have  read  in  those
verses.  Accordingly  after  this  fasting
she  went  into  the  king,  the  desire  of
her  heart  was  granted  and  the  people
were  saved.

In  many  instances  of  a  similar
nature  where  the  destruction  of  the
people  of  God  seemed  imminent,
and  there  appeared  no  way  of
escape,  suddenly  there  arose  some-
thing or  another  that  had  been
prepared  for  their  salvation  to  avert
the  impending  destruction.  We
find  this  in  the  case  of  the  Israelites
when  led  by  Moses.  When  they
came  to  the  Red  Sea  and  the  Egypt
ian  army  in  their  rear  threatened
their  destruction,  there  seemed  no
way  of  escape,  but  at  the  very  mo-
ment when  deliverance  was  required,
behold,  it  appeared  and  they  were
delivered.  So  it  has  been  and  so  it
ever  will  be  with  us.  Notwith-
standing our  difficulties  may  appear
very  great,  yet  there  will  be  means
provided  for  our  escape  if  we  our-
selves perforin  the  duties  inc  umbent
upon  us  as  the  children  of  God,
But  it  may  become  necessary  ih  the
future — and  this  is  the  point  I  wish
to  make — for  some  of  the  Saints  to
act  the  part  of  Esther,  the  queen,
and  be  willing  to  sacrifice  anything
and  everything  that  is  required  at
their  hands  for  the  purpose  of  work-
ing out  the  deliverance  of  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints*

First  we  should  know  that  we  are
the  people  of  God.  In  every  dispen-
sation of  importance  pertaining  to
the  Lord's  people,  there  is  an  oppor-
tunity given  whereby  persons  may
receive  a  knowledge  of  that  which
is  required  of  them.  Before  the
destruction  of  the  Antediluvians,
there  was  a  medium  through  which
that  people  could  have  come  to  a
knowledge  of  those  things  that
Noah  declared Had  it  not  been  so


there  would  have  been  an  apparent
inconsistency  in  the  Lord  demand-
ing that  the  people  should  pursue
a  certain  course  contrary  to  their
feelings,  contrary  to  their  wishes,
contrary  to  their  traditions,  and  that
required  a  great  deal  of  sacrifice — I
say,  unless  they  could  be  confident
within  themselves  that  the  course  he
wished  them  to  pursue  was  the  right
one,  there  would  be  an  apparent
inconsistency  in  demanding  it.  But
when  Noah  stood  up  before  the  people,
he  preached  to  them  the  everlasting
Gospel.  He  preached  the  same
Gospel  that  Adam  preached.  He
preached  the  same  Gospel  that  the
people  of  old  preached.  He  preached
the  same  Gospel  the  Apostles
preached.  He  preached  the  same
Gospel  that  we  preach,  through
which  a  knowledge  from  God  could
be  obtained  as  to  its  truth.  All
those  who  would  repent  of  their  sins,
and  be  baptized  for  a  remission  of
them,  should  have  the  privilege  of
receiving  the  Holy  Ghost,  which
would  give  them  a  knowledge  of  the
things  of  God,  and  a  knowledge  of
the  things  required  at  their  hands.
And  so  it  is  in  our  day.  The  Gospel
is  proclaimed,  a  channel  is  opened
through  which  individuals  may
receive  a  knowledge  of  things  per-
taining to  life  and  salvation,  of
those  things  that  are  required  at
their  hands,  and  of  the  course  they
should  pursue  as  the  servants  and
handmaids  of  God,

The  world  thinks  that  the  Latter-
day  Saints  will  be  destroyed  ;  they
think  that  the  Latter-day  Saints
will  be  scattered  ;  they  think  that
the  time  will  come  when  the  Latter-
day  Saints  will  be  disunited  and
become  like  the  sectarian  world,  and
they  have  foolishly  set  to  work  to
accomplish  this  purpose.  Well,  now,
as  Brother  Woodruff  has  *  said,  we
know  better. We  understand  that


THE  REVELATIONS  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT,  ETC


291


this  is  the  kingdom  that  was  spoken
of  by  Daniel  the  Prophet,  that
should  be  set  up  in  the  last  days,
that  should  be  no  more  thrown
down  nor  given  to  another  people.
Now,  is  this  a  fact?  There  are  but
few  people  who  believe  in  these
matters  ;  there  are  but  few  people
who  profess  to  understand  them.
But  the  faithful  Latter-day  Saints
Jiave  attained  to  a  knowledge  in
these  matters  that  is  highly  satis-
factory :  highly  comforting ;  it  is
something  that  is  of  great  conse-
quence in  the  position  we  find  our-
selves placed  from  time  to  time ;
it  is  something  that  is  comforting
because  of  the  sacrifices  we  are  re-
quired to  make,  and  which  we  may
be  required  to  make  of  such  a  nature
that  no  man  could  be  expected  to
make  unless  he  has  a  perfect  know-
ledge of  what  he  is  about  These
principles  have  been  manifested  to
us,  and  have  established  happiness
in  our  hearts,  and  given  us  knowledge
in  reference  to  the  outcome.  We
understand  that  the  days  of  our
probation  here  are  but  short,  and
that  when  we  leave  this  stage  of  ac-
tion and  go  into  the  spirit  world,  we
iave  the  privilege  of  dwelling  in  the
presence  of  holy  beings ;  and  we
understand  fully,  that  as  Jesus
|  Christ  dwelt  here  in  a  body,  and  that
he  received  that  body  and  now  dwells
in  it  glorified,  that  we  are  entitled
to  the  same  blessing,  the  same  exal-
tation, and  the  same  glory*  The
Christian  world  profess  to  believe
that  J esus  rose  from  the  dead,  they
profess  to  believe  that  he  lives;  but
yet  the  real  spirit  of  that  belief
does  not  amount  to  a  very  great  deal
They  do  not  believe  that  there  are
any  persons  living  that  have  seen
individuals  that  have  lived  upon  the
earth  and  have  received  their
-glorified  bodies.  John  upon  the
Isle  of Patmos, had  the  privi-


lege of  beholding  and  conversing
with  an  individual  that  had  lived
upon  the  earth  and  had  gone  back
to  the  spirit  world  and  received  a
resurrected  body.  He  describes
the  glory  with  which  that  per-
son was  covered  and  says,  **  His
eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire  ;  and  his
feet  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if  they
burned  in  a  furnace ;  and  his  voice
as  the  sound  of  many  waters/*
Does  anybody  really  believe  this?
There  were  two  persons  with  whom
I  was  very  well  acquainted  who  saw
a  personage  of  this  description  in
the  Temple  in  Kirtland,  Ohio.
We  are  told  that  there  appeared,
standing  upon  the  breastwork
of  the  pulpit  of  that  Temple,  our
Lord  and  Savior,  the  same  that
the  Revelator  beheld,  and  they
describe  him  in  about  the  same
manner.  Kow,  I  have  been  in
the  Kirtland  Temple  and  preached
from  the  pulpit  therein  several
times.  This  person  stood  upon  the
breastwork  of  that  pulpit,  and  he  is
described  as  follows,  ik  His  eyes
were  as  a  flame  of  fire,  the  hair  of
his  head  was  white  like  the  pure
snow,  his  countenance  shown  above
the  brightness  of  the  sun,  and  his
voice  was  as  the  sound  of  the  rushing
of  great  waters,  even  the  voice  of
Jehovah,  saying,  1  am  the  first  and
the  last,  I  am  He  who  liveth,  I  am
He  who  was  slain,  I  am  your  advocate
with  the  Father.  Behold  your  sins
are  forgiven  you,  you  are  clean  be-
fore me,  therefore  lift  up  your  heads
and  rejoice,"  I  have  seen  Joseph
Smith  and  Oliver  Cowdery  ;  they
were  the  individuals  who  saw  that
person  and  conversed  with  him.
And  they  also  saw  Moses,  .Elias  and
Elijah.  Now,  who  believes  this?
What  testimony  has  the  sectarian
world  in  regard  to  these  things,  or
in  regard  to  the  Gospel  as  preached
in  former  days,  or  in  regard  to  Jesus


292  *  JOURNAL  OF

Christ  ?  Have  they  a  testimony  to
declare  to  their  congregations  ?
If  so,  what  is  the  nature  of  their  tes-
timony ?  What  is  the  nature  of  our
testimony  ?  It  is  this  :  That'this
is  the  dispensation  of  the  fullness  of
times;  that  the  angel  that  John  the
Re  vela  tor  saw  flying  through  the
midst  of  heaven  having  the  everlast-
ing Gospel  to  preach  unto  them  that
dwell  on  the  earth,  and  to  every
nation,  and  kindred  and  tongue  and
people — that  that  angel  has  made
his  appearance  and  restored  the
Gospel  to  the  earth,  Joseph  Smith
being  the  instrument  through  which
the  restoration  was  effected.  Joseph
Smith  was  authorized  to  open  up  a
channel  and  lay  down  a  plan
through  which  man  could  receive
a  knowledge  of  these  things,  so  that
we  might  not  be  left  to  depend  upon
the  testimony  of  the  Prophets,  or
the  testimony  of  the  ancient
Apostles,  or  to  the  testimony  of  the
Apostles  of  the  present  day,  or  to
the  Book  of  Mormon,  or  to  anything
that  was  done  or  said  in  the  past,
but  that  we  might  know  for  ourselves.
It  is  an  individual  knowledge.
And  if  people  in  ancient  times  had
faith,  they  had  grounds  upon  which
to  found  their  faith,  and  so  have
we.

Well,  what  have  we  to  fear  with
regard  to  persecution  and  with  regard
to  attempts  that  are  made  to  destroy
the  principles  of  *u  Mormomsm."
*  We  know  they  cannot  be  destroyed,"
Our  enemies,  if  permitted,  may
kill  the  President  of  our  Church,
they  may  kill  his  Counselors  and
the  Twelve  Apostles,  they  may  de-
stroy the  Seventies,  and  even  the
whole  of  the  Priesthood,  but  the
principles  of  *£  Mormon  ism"  they
cannot  destroy.  The  principles  of
" Mormomsm"  are  eternal;  they
emanate  from  the  God  of  heaven,
and  never  can  be  destroyed*  When


DISCOURSES,

men  have  received  a  knowledge  of
the  truth,  they  will  bear  testimony

!  of  that  truth  so  long  as  they  are  able.
Any  number  of  decrees  proscribing
their  actions  and  belief  will  not  avail.
We  have  an  instance  of  this  in  the
case  of  Shadrach,  Meshach  and
Abednego.  These  men  had  received
knowledge  from  the  eternal  world,
and  they  chose  to  worship  the  true
and  the  living  God,  they  objected  to
worshipping  the  golden  image  set

!  up  by  King  Nebuchadnezzar.  For
this  act  of  disloyalty  they  were
brought  before  the  king  and  were
ordered  to  be  cast  into  the  liery  fur-
nace. Even  at  this  they  were  not
dismayed,  for  said  they,  "If  it  be
so,  our  God  whom  we  serve  is  able  to
deliver  us  from  the  burning  furnace
and  he  will  deliver  us  out  of  thine
hand,  O  king.  But  if  not,  let  it  be
known  unto  thee,  0  king,  that
we  will  not  serve  thy  gods,  nor
worship  the  golden  image  which
thou  hast  set  up."  They  were
accordingly  thrown  into  the  fiery
furnace,  and  all  the  people,  as  it
were,  said,  Amen,  let  them  be  de-
stroyed But  there  was  deliverance
the  moment  deliverance  w  as  needed.
When  Nebuchadnezzar  saw  four  men
loose,  walking  in  the  midst  of  the
fire,  unhurt  j  and  the  fourth  like
unto  the  Son  of  God — how  changed
was  the  scene  !  Nebuchadnezzar  was
converted  by  the  power  that  he  saw
manifested,  and  he  issued  a  decree
saying,  "  That  every  people,  nation,
and  language  which  spake  any-
thing amiss  against  the  God  of  Sha-
drach, Meshach,  and  Abednego,  shall

i  be  cut  in  pieces,  and  their  houses
shall  be  made  a  dunghill."  In  this
way  was  the  Lord  able  to  touch  the
heart  of  a  heathen  king,  and  to  tura
the  heart  of  a  nation.  And  I  will
say  to  the  Latter-day  Saints — you
may  call  it  prophecy  if  you  choose — •
that  it  this  people  will  be  united


THE  REVELATIONS  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT,  ETC


293


and  will  keep  the. commandments  of
God,  God  will  turn  the  popular  sen-
timent of  this  nation  in  our  favor;
the  nation  will  feel  disposed  to
^bestow  upon  us  favor  instead  of  per-
secution and  destruction.  But  it  is
-our  business  to  step  forward  as  did
Esther,  and  be  willing  to  risk  all  for
the  salvation  of  the  people.
In  undertaking  her  task,  Esther
said,  "If  I  perish,  I  perish."  Here
is  a  lesson  for  our  sisters.  But
the  people  of  Gud  will  not  perish.
'There  will  always  be  a  ram  caught
in  the  thicket  for  their  deliv-
erance.

Now,  I  know  of  the  things  of  which
I  speak.  A  little  spiritual  knowledge
is  a  great  deal  better  than  mere
opinions  and  notions  and  ideas,  or
even  very  elaborate  arguments  ;  a
little  spiritual  kno\vledge  is  very
important  and  of  the  highest  con-
sideration. We  have  received  that
knowledge,  and  we  will  stand  by  it,
the  Lord  being  our  helper.  It  is
now  time  for  the  Latter  day  Saints
to  humble  themselves  before  the
Almighty,  as  did  the  people  that
T^ere  at  the  point  of  destruction  by
the  decree  of  Ahasuerus.  It  is  time
now  for  the  Latter-day  Saints  to
find  out  wherein  they  have  com-
mitted themselves  ;  it  is  time  for
the  Lattter-day  Saints  to  repent  of
their  sins  and  follies  and  call  upon
the  Almighty,  that  his  aid  may  be
given ;  that  those  fetters  and
chains  that;  are  being  forged  for  us
,may  fall  to  the  ground,  and  that  we


may  have  the  deliverance  that  is
necessary  \  that  we  may  go  forward
and  accomplish  the  great  work
entrusted  to  our  care.

Well,  I  ask  God  to  bless  the  Lat-
ter day  Saints,  to  bless  His  Holy
Priesthood ;  to  bless  President
Taylor,  his  Counselors,  and  the
Apostles;  that  we  may  do  that  which
is  right  and  acceptable  before  the
Lord,  and  humble  ourselves  before
him,  and  call  upon  him  in  mighty
power  ;  that  we  may  do  those  things
required  at  our  hands  no  matter  at
what  sacrifice.  The  Lord  has  said,
44 1  have  decreed  in  my  heart,  that  I
will  prove  you  in  all  things,  whether
you  will  abide  in  my  covenant,  even
unto  death,  that  you  may  be  found
worthy  ;  for  if  ye  will  not  abide  in
my  covenant,  ye  are  not  worthy  of
me/'  tVe  have  something  to  live
for  ;  we  have  everything  to  die  for.
But  there  is  no  death  in  these  mat-
ters. There  is  salvation  and  there
is  life  if  the  people  of  God — those
that  call  themselves  after  the  name
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — will  keep
his  commandments  and  do  that
which  is  acceptable  in  his  sight  It
is  not  in  the  economy  of  the  Al-
mighty  to  permit  his  people  to  be
destroyed.  If  we  will  do  right  and
keep  his  commandments  he  will
surely  deliver  us  from  every  diffi-
culty.

May  God  bless  and  pour  out  His
Holy  Spirit  upon  us,  is  my  prayer,
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,
Amen.


294


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE  BY  APOSTLE  ERASTUS  SNOW,


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Saturday  Morning*

(in  General  Conference,)  October  7,  1882.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibhs.)


THE  "TWIN  RELICS,"  SLAVERY  AND  POLYGAMY —  CONFOUNDING  OJ
POLYGAMY  WITH  BIGAMY,  "  CHRISTIAN"  STATESMANSHIP  —  JOSEPH
SMITH'S  PROPOSITION  FOR  THE  ABOLITION  OF  SLAVERY — THE  GREAT
REBELLION,  CHURCH  DIVISION— THE  BIBLE  AND  POLYGAMY,  ORIGUT
OF  MONOGAMY  —  THE  WORK  OF  GOD  IN  THE  LATTER  DAYS,  THE
MISSION  OF  EPHRAIM  —  THE  TEN  TRIBES  AND  SCATTERED  ISRAEL,
THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON  —  PRESENT  PERSECUTION  AND  FUTURE
PROSPECTS  OF  THE  SAINTS,

I  believe  it  was  in  1856,  that  the  1  wickedness  exists  upon  the


Republican  party  was  organized ;
at  their  first  convention  held  in
Philadelphia,  they  incorporated  in
their  platform  the  noted  plank,  "the
twin  relics  of  barbarism— slavery  and
polygamy/1  and  pledged  themselves
to  rid  the  country  of  these  two  evils.
For  sixteen  years  they  have  labored
incessantly  to  this  end  ;  but  they
know  not  the  thoughts  of  the  Lord,
nor  understand  his  counsels*  Never-
theless, they  are  his  servants  to
execute  his  purposes,  and  they
doubtless  have  a  desire  to  accom-
plish all  that  he  designs  with  regard
to  them.  Have  they  succeeded  in
strangling  the  twins  I  So  far  as
slavery  is  concerned  they  have  suc-
ceeded in  abolishing  it  in  the  obnox-
ious forms  in  which  it  prevailed  in
the  Southern  States ;  but  still  it
exists  and  is  likely  to  continue  to
c;xi3ts  in, a  modified  form,  while


Africans  and  white  men  are  in  bond'
age,  not  in  the  same  form  as  that  ia
which  the  southern  slaves  were  held
before  the  war,  for  the  extreme
excesses  perpetrated  under  that
system,  in  many  particulars,  were-
very  great  wrongs  to  mankind,  and
very  grievous  in  the  sight  of  heaven
and  of  right-thinking  people.  And
changes  were  determined  in  the
mind  of  Jehovah,  and  have  beea
effected.  The  authors  of  this  repub-
lican plank  have  taken  polygamy  as
taught  by  the  Latter-day  Saints  a*
being  synonymous  with  the  poly-
gamy of  oriental  nations,  and  the
bigamy  of  the  Christian  nations  j
this  is  clearly  shown  in  the  law  of
1862,  passed  by  the  Congress  of  the
United  States,  designed  for  it&
suppression,  the  term  bigamy
being  used  instead  of  polygamy.
The  offence  was  made  to  consist  ia


THE  "  TWIN  RELICS,"  SLAVERY  AND  POLYGAMY,  ETC.  295


the  marriage  rather  than  in  the
cohabitation  ;  following  the  old
English  statutes  of  the  New  Eng-
land States  on  the  subject  of  bigamy,
classing  our  system  of  marriage  with
that  which  was  made  criminal  by  the
English  statutes  and  by  the  statutes
of  the  Northern  States  ;  when  in
reality  there  was  very  little,  if  any,
similarity.  The  bigamy  of  England
and  the  American  States  con-
sists in  crime  and  deception,  the
betraying  and  wronging  of  two
innocent  and  unsuspecting  women.
While  the  corrupt,  lying,  deceiving,
unprincipled  husband  was  feigning
virtue  and  integrity,  both  violating
their  confidence  by  lying  and
deception,  and  by  violating  all  the
duties  and  obligations  of  marriage
— the  duties  that  the  father  owes
to  the  wife  and  children  and  also  to
the  State.  But  the  fact  that  our
law-makers  took  this  view  of  our
social  system  when  they  passed  tins
law,  shows  how  poorly  and  ill  they
comprehended  the  system  of  mar-
riage as  taught  by  the  Latter-day
Saints.  The  republican  party  had
this  view  of  the  case,  no  doubt,  when
they  first  announced  this  noted
plank.  Further  experience  and
knowledge  among  the  people  of  the
United  States  has,  in  some  measure,
changed  their  view  upon  this  subject,
and  they  have  attempted  to  shape
their  legislation  accordingly  ;  and  in
the  recent  law  of  Congress,  known
as  the  Edmunds  law,  they  have  espe-
cially, in  the  amendment  they  have
adopted  to  the  law  of  1862,  classed
polygamy  with  bigamy  and  enacted
penalties  against  both.  And  still
further,  they  made  it  a  continuous
offence,  by  providing  penalties  for
cohabitation  as  well  as  for  the  mar
riage ;  for  cohabitation,  however,
the  penalties  consist  of  light  fines
and  short  imprisonment,  but  for
marriage,  heavy  fines  and  long  im-


prisonment. This  is  the  view  taken
by  our  Christian  Statesmen  in  rela-
tion to  the  moral  aspect  of  this  ques-
tion.

Anciently,  when  God's  laws  pro-
vided a  government  for  ancient
Israel,  marriage  was  honorable  both
plural  and  single,  as  all  students  of
the  Bible  know  full  well.  At  the
same  time  adultery  was  punished
by  death.  From  the  days  that  King
Abtmelech  attempted  intimacy  with
Sarah,  whom  he  supposed  to  be
eligible  to  marry,  but  afterwards
found  her  to  be  the  wife  of  Abraham,
from  the  time  that  the  angel  of  the
Lord  warned  him  that  he  would  be
a  dead  man  if  he  persisted,  from
that  time  to  the  coming  of  the
Savior,  adultery  was  punishable  by
death,  while  marriage  both  single
and  plural  was  honorable,  ordained
and  appointed  of  God,  and  pro-
vision was  made  for  the  protection
and  rights  of  each  wife  and  her  off-
spring. But  our  Christian  states-
men are  offering  premiums,  for
licentiousness,  and  are  seeking  to
make  odious  the  honor  and  purity
of  marriage.  This  is  all  wrong.  They
are  in  error  in  the  view  they  take  of
it.  If  their  bishops,  priests,  poten-
tates and  religious  teachers  would
betake  themselves  to  the  task  of
first  seeking  the  light  of  heaven
upon  this  question,  and  would  then
strive  to  enlighten  our  statesmen
and  the  people  of  the  United  States,
pertain iug  to  social  ethics  and  the
purposes  of  heaven  in  the  union  of
the  sexes,  and  seek  to  encourage
honorable  marriage  and  honorable
increase  in  the  earth,  instead  of
encouraging  licentiousness  and  child-
murder,  they  would  thereby  secure
the  favor  of  Heaven  and  the  perpe-
tuity of  His  blessings  upon  them  as
a  nation  and  people.

The  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  the
year  before  he  was  slain, .  testified


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES


of  thc^e  things  ;  and  although  he
taught  this  social  system  to  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  and  to  the  more  de-
vout, wise  ami  prudent  of  the  women
of  Israel,  as  hundreds  can  testify,
have  testified,  and  are  able  to  testify
to-day,  yet  it  was  necessary  in  in-
troducing it  and  facing  the  opposition
and  the  prejudices  of  the  age,  to
proceed  wisely  in  these  instructions.
And  while  his  name  was  before  the
people  of  the  United  States  as  a
candidate  for  the  Presidency,  and
national  questions  were  being  dis-
cussed pro  and  con  by  the  Latter-day
Saints  and  throughout  the  nation
by  all  the  political  societies  of  the
time,  Joseph  Smith  took  occasion
to  issue  a  pamphlet  containing  his
views  on  the  powers  and  policy  of
the  Gove  run  lent  of  the  United  States;
lie  also  preached  some  sermons  upon
the  subject  in  Nauvoo  ;  and  in  this
the  Prophet  counselled  the  people
of  the  United  States  in  relation  to  the
manner  of  disposing  of  the  vexed
question  of  slavery,  which  he
recognized  as  an  evil — that  is,  the
form  in  which  it  existed  in  the
United  States,  which  should  be
abolished;  but  rather  than  "f  pro-
ceed to  its  abolishment  by  waging
"war  against  the  institution,  as  the
anti-slavery  men  were  trying  to  do,
counselled  that  this  desired  change,
the  modification  of  this  system
of  labor  in  the  south,  be  effected
on  a  principle  uf  honor,  equity  and
peace  ;  that  a  fund  should  be  created,
a  sinking  fund  of  Ihe  nation,  for  the
abolishment  of  slavery;  and  to
negotiate  with  the  States  in  behalf
of  the  slave-owners,  for  the  gradual
emancipation  of  the  slaves,  their
owners  to  be  reasonably  compen-
sated for  the  freedom  of  their  ser-
vants, and  in  process  of  years  to
change  the  status  of  the  negro,
make  his  labor  free,  and  place  him
in  a  condition  to  be  educated  and


elevated ;  and  still  maintain  the
faith  of  the  nation  and  the  faith  of
the  northern  states  with  the  south-
ern states.  Thus  it  was  that  the
true  policy  and  counsel  of  heaven
to  our  nation  was  manifested  and
spurned.  The  extremists  of  the
north,  the  anti-slavery'  agitators
heeded  it  not ;  and  neither  party
approached  the  subject  with  any
earnest  determination  to  effect  an
honorable  settlement  of  this  ques-
tion* The  few  statesmen  that  made
I  propositions  in  the  Congress  of  the
United  States  looking  to  this  result,
to  the  accomplishment  of  the
liberation  of  the  slaves,  settling  this
question  on  the  basis  prup-^i'd  by
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith ;  but
whether  they  were  influenced  by
his  advice,  or  whether  the  same
spirit  that  moved  upon  Joseph,
moved  also  upon  these  statesmen —
there  were  some  that  made  ad  winces
looking  to  the  accomplishment  of
the  object  in  this  way — but  it  was
not  generally  received  or  favored,  or
it  was  deemed  impracticable.  At
all  events  the  sequel  proved  that  the
opposing  elements  warred  against
each  other,  culminating  in  that  great
fratricidal  war  which  resulted  in
the  shedding  of  so  much  blood,  and
the  impoverishing  of  one- half  of  the
nation.

Prior  to  this,  however,  the  union
and  fraternal  feeling  that  formerly
existed  had  been  gradually  weaken-
ing in  the  various  religious  organi-
zations of  the  nation,  All  the  lead-
ing churches  of  the  nation  had
divided  at  what  was  known  as  the
Mason  ami  Dixon  line — the  line
separating  the  free  from  the  slave
states.  We  had  the  humiliating
spectacle  throughout  the  land,  of
the  Methodist  church  of  the  North,
I  and  the  Methodist  church  of  the
South  ;  the  Presbyterian  church  of
the  north  and  the  Presbyterian  church


THK  "TWIN  RELICS/'  SLAVERY  AND  POLYGAMY,  ETC.


297


of  the  South ;  the  Baptist  church  of
the  North,  and  the  Baptist  church
of  the  South.  I  believe  the  only
Christian  church  in  America  that
did  not,  over  the  slavery  question,
split  the  blanket,  divide  its  property,
its  franchises  and  ecclesiastical  or-
ganization, was  the  Roman  Catholic
church,  who  recognized  the  necessity
of  a  united  body  under  one  grand
head.  This  division  of  sects  pre-
pared  the  hearts  and  minds  of  the  peo-
ple for  the  deadly  conflict  that  ensued.
On  the  subject  ot  the  other  twin
relic,  there  appears  no  such  division.
Both  the  North  and  the  South  and
religious  sects  of  whatever  name
or  belief,  are  united  in  the  denun-
ciation of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  and
the  system  of  marriage  introduced
by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  This,
as  I  have  already  said,  is  founded
partly  in  their  ignorance  with  regard
to  the  true  spirit  and  nature  of  the
doctrine  taught  by  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith,  and  believed  in  by
the  Latter-day  Saints.  As  I  have
already  said,  they  have  classed  it
with  the  bigamy  of  England  and  the
American  States,  and  they  have
classed  it  with  Oriental  polygamy.
For  it  is  known  to  all  students  of
history,  to  all  who  are  familiar  with
the  conditions  of  the  nations  at  the
present  time,  and  the  history  of  na-
tions in  past  ages,  that  polygamy
has  been  the  rule — I  will  not  say
that  it  has  been  the  rule  among  the
common  people  of  all  nations,  but
polygamy  lias  existed,  and  has  been
recognized  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,
so  far  as  its  practice  was  consistent
with  the  conditions  of  the  people
of  the  various  nations,  it  has  been
the  rule  from  time  immemorial ;  and
there  has  never  been  a  time  in  the
history  of  the  world  when  it  has  not
been  common  and  recognized
among  the  nations  of  the  earth,
with  the  exception  of  modern  Eu-


rope. The  Christians  of  our  time
claim  the  prevailing  system  of  mar-
riage in  modern  Europe  and  in  the
United  States,  as  the  result  of
Christianity.  To  this  I  reply,  that
neither  Christ  nor  his  Apostles
ever  uttered  one  word  in  condemna-
tion of  that  system  of  marriage
that  was  in  vogue  in  their  days,  and
that  had  been  recognized  and
acknowledged  in  the  house  of  Israel
from  the  days  of  Abraham  until
Christ,  In  fact  Christ  Himself  was
the  fruit  of  polygamy,  so  far  as  the
flesh  was  concerned.  And  nowhere
is  there  to  be  found  one  word  in  con-
demnation of  this  system,  or  any-
thing intimating  that  he  intended
to  change  the  then  existing  relations
of  the  sexes  ;  but  while  he,  as  well
as  his  Apostles  and  the  ancient
Pro  pi  lets  and  Patriarchs  denounced
adultery  and  fornication  they
recognized  and  sustained  honorable
marriage  whether  single  or  plural  ;
and  every  form  of  illicit  intercourse
with  the  sexes  was  condemned  by
!  the  primitive  Christians,  as  well  as
by  the  Prophets  and  Patriarchs  of
old.  The  only  passage  of  Scripture
that  I  have  ever  heard  quoted  as
appearing  to  limit,  the  early  Chris-
tians to  single  marriage  was  the
saying  of  one  of  the  Apostles,  St.
Paul  to  Timothy,  in  which  he  said
that  a  Bishop  should  be  the  husband
of  one  wife,  having  faithful  children
and  one  who  knows  how  to  govern
his  own  house,  for,  said  he,  if  he
knows  not  how  to  rule  well  his  own
house,  how  shall  he  rule  the  Church
of  God.  Now  this  scripture,  taken
as  a  whole,  evidently  shows  that
his  olgect  was  not  to  intimate  that
a  Bishop  should  have  one  wife  only,
but  he  intended  to  make  this  im-
pression, that  he  must  be  a  man  of
family,  one  who  has  had  experience
in  household  affairs,  one  that  under-
stood  all  those tender  relations


298


JOURNAL  01


DISCOURSES.


existing  between  husband  and  wife
and  parent  and  child,  one  who  had
shown  himself  a  wise  and  discreet
father ;  one  who  was  capable  of
guiding  his  own  house  and  of  lead-
ing his  family  in  the  ways  of  recti-
tude  and  of  controlling  them  in  the
fear  of  God  ;  for  except  he  is  able  to
govern  his  own  house,  how  could  it
be  expected  that  lie  could  govern
the  Church  of  God,  Now,  if  in  this
respect  a  Bishop  had  proved  himself
■  wise  and  discreet  father  and
husband,  a  man  who  knew  how  to
rule  well  his  own  family,  this  was  a
qualification  recommending  him  as
a  suitable  person  to  be  trusted  with
the  office  of  a  Bishop.  And  how
much  more  suit  aide  would  he  be
for  that  position  if  he  were  perfectly
able  to  govern  two  or  more  wives,
and  to  rear  their  children  in  tin*  fear
of  God  ?  The  very  fact  that  a  Bishop
must  be  the  husband  of  one  wTife,  if
we  admit  the  correctness  of  the
views  of  our  Christian  friends  in
this  regard  (which,  however,  we  do
not  by  any  means)  the  logical  infer-
ence is,  that  any  other  officer  or
member  in  the  Church  but  a  Bishop
was  at  liberty  to  have  more  than  one
wife.  For  if  he  intended  it  to  be  a
general  prohibition,  why  should  he
confine  it  to  the  Bishop,  why  did  he
not  make  it  general  1  It  is  sheer
sophistry  on  the  part  of  our  sectarian
friends  and  groundless  assertion
that  monogamy,  to  the  exclusion
of  polygamy  was  introduced  into
Europe  by  the  primitive  Christians  ;
for  that  system  of  marriage  was
introduced  prior  to  the  establishment
of  Christianity  in  Europe,  by  the
Roman  empire,  ami  became  the
form  of  marriage  in  early  times
when,  as  history  alleges,  men  were
more  numerous  in  Rome  than
women.  And  the  earlier  settlers  of
Rome  were  political  refugees,  rene-
gades and  scape-graces  from  sur-


rounding nations,  and  were  under
the  necessity  of  making  raids  upon
their  neighbors  to  procure  wives  ;
and  it  became  a  matter  of  necessity
and  for  mutual  protection,  to  limit
the  number  to  one. It  was  the
Roman  state  that  limited  the  num-
ber of  a  man's  wives  to  one,  and  not
the  Christian  church  ;  and  this  being
done, it  was  perpetuated.  And
history  teaches  us  that  under  that
monogamic  system,  Rome  became
the  most  licentious  of  all  nations,
I  do  not  intend  to  enter  into  an
argument  in  favor  of  polygamy  ;  my
spirit  rather  leads  me  to  impress
upon the Latter-day Saints  the
character  of  this  great  social  ijuestion
and  the  duties  and  responsibilities
which  rest  upon  us  as  a  people,
principles  that  have  emanated  from
heaven  ; obligations that  we
cannot ignore, and duties  that
we  cannot shirk. For  God  has
set  his  hand  to  gather  Israel,  accord-
ing to  the  Prophets  ;  God  has  set
his  hand  to  establish  his  Zion  ;  God
lias  set  his  hand  to  build  his  king-
dom in  the  earth,  according  to  the
prediction of  the holy  prophets.
God  is  determined  to  work  a  work
that  shall  be  a  marvelous  work  and
a  wonder,  w  hich  he  has  commenced-
and  will  carry  on -to  completion  in
his  own  peculiar  way, I  lis  arm  is
stretched  out,  and  it  will  not  return
void — it  will  not  fail  to  accomplish
the  thing  that  it  has  commenced  to
perform. It is to raise  up  and
establish  to  himself  a  holy  nation,
a  kingdom  of  priests,  a  peculiar  people,
composed  of  the  blood  of  IsraeL
He  has  declared that  in  the  last
days  Ephraim  shall  be  his  first-born  ;
them  he  would  gather  together,  and
upon  them  he  would  place  his  holy
Priesthood,  and  them  lie  would  use
as  his  servants  and  as  his  instru-
ments to  push  the  people  together
from  the  ends  of  the  earth.  For


THE  "  TWIN  RELICS, SLAVERY  AND  POLYGAMY,  ETC.  29  !>


Moses,  while  blessing  the  tribe  of
Joseph  before  his  death,  says  :
"His  horns  are  like  the  horns  of
unicorns,  and  with  them  shall  he
push  the  people  together  from  the
ends  of  the  earth  ;  and  they  are  the
ten  thousands  of  Ephraim  and  the
thousands  of  Manasseh."  Speaking
of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  Jacob  says  :
"The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from
Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between
his  feet,  until  Shiloh  cou*e.T*  Now,
the  motto  or  insignia  of  Judah  was
the  lion,  while  the  unicorn  was  that
of  the  house  of  Ephraim  ;  and  in  the
days  of  Rehoboam  the  kingdom  of
Israel  was  divided ;  and  Jeroboam
an  Ephraimite,  reigned  in  Samaria
over  the  ten  tribes,  whilst  Rehoboam
continued  to  reign  over  the  kin^-
dom  of  Judah,  which  included  the
tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  and
fragments  of  other  tribes  that  re-
mained with  them.  After  a  time
the  ten  tribes  so  far  corrupted  their
way  that  the  Lord  gave  them  into
the  hands  of  the  enemy.  The  king
of  Assyria  who  made  war  against
them  am!  carried  them  captive  into
his  own  land ;  he  took  the  nobility
and  the  more  wealthy  portions  of
the  people,  and  planted  them  in
distant  portions  of  his  empire  far  to
the  eastward,  and  sent  back  his  own
people  to  marry  with  the  poor  that
he  had  left  in  the  land  of  Israel,
and  thus  grew  up  that  mongrel  race
that  were  afterwards  known  as  the
Samaritans.  But  Esdras  tells  us
that  Israel  after  they  were  led  into
captivity,  planted  in  the  far  east  of
the  Assyrian  Empire,  took  coun-
sel among  themselves  and  began
to  repent,  and  they  said  among
themselves  in  council  :  Let  us  call  j
upon  the  Lord  and  see  if  he  will  not
lead  us  into  a  country  where  we  may
dwell  together,  and  keep  the
commandments  and  judgments
which  he  gave  unto  our  lathers,


which  we  never  kept  in  our  own
land.  And  God  heard  their  prayersr
and  the  Lord  led  them  and  they
journeyed,  a  year  and  a-half  s  jour-
ney to  what  he  called  the  north
country,  and  God  divided  the  waters-
before  them,  and  he  planted  them
in  a  land  by  themselves  j  and  the
Book  of  Mormon  clearly  shows,  in
that  notable  parable  about  the  olive
tree,  that  God  has  planted  branches
of  the  house  of  Israel  not  only  on
the  American  continent,  but  on
other  distant  portions  of  the  globe,,
where  he  nourishes  them.  And  our
Savior  tells  us  in  one  of  his  graphic
parables,  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
is  likened  to  leaven  hid  in  three-
measures  of  meal,  till  the  whole  was
leavened.  Now,  one  of  these  mea-
sures ,of  meal  in  which  the  leaven
was  deposited,  was  the  people  of
Israel  in  Palestine  ;  another  measure
of  meal  in  which  the  leaven  was
deposited  was  upcn  xhh  American
continent ;  and  a  third  measure  of
meal  in  which  the  leaven  was  de-
posited was  among  the  tribes  of
Israel  whom  the  Father  led  out  of
the  land  into  a  country  yet  to  be
discovered.  And  this  leaven  was  to
work  until  the  whole  should  be
leavened.  And  this  the  Savior  clearly
explained  in  that  saying  to  the
Jews:  "And  other  sheep  I  have,,
which  are  not  of  this  fold  ;  them
also  I  must  bring,  and  they  shall
hear  my  voice  ;  and  there  shall  be
one  fold  and  one  shepherd,"  When
the  Savior  showed  himself  to  the
Nephites  on  the  American  continent,
he  quoted  that  saying  and  said  unto
the  Nephites  that  they  were  the
other  sheep  referred  to.  And
he  still  told  them  that  he  had  other
sheep  that  were  not  of  that  fold
either,  to  whom  also  he  would  show
himself,  and  among  whom  he
would  minister.  And  the  time  will
come  that  they  shall  be  gathered.


300  -  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


into  one,  when  there  shall  be  one
fold  and  one  shepherd.  And  he  com-
manded the  people  that  they  should
write  the  things  which  he  taught
then* ;  both  those  at  Jerusalem  and
those  upon  this  continent  were  com-
manded  to  write  what  they  saw  and
heard.  And  he  gave  the  Nephites
to  understand  that  when  he  should
ahow  himself  to  the  other  tribes  of
Israel ,  whom  the  Father  had  led
away,  that  they  also  should  write ;
and  the  time  should  come  when  the
Jews  would  have  the  writings  of  the
Nephites,  ami  the  Nephites  would
have  the  won  is  and  writings  of  the
Jews;  and  both  the  Jews  and
Nephites  would  have  the  writings
of  the  Ten  Tribes,  and  the  Ten  lost
Tribes  would  also  have  the  writings
of  the  Jews  and  Nephites ;  nay,
more,  that  the  time  would  come  when
all  the  people  of  God  should  be
gathered  together  in  one  ;  and  the
things  they  wiite  shall  also  be  gath-
ered together  in  one  ;  and  there  shall
be  one  fold  and  one  shepherd,  and
then  shall  we  see  the  three  measures
of  meal  all  leavened  together.  And
let  me  say,  there  is  no  power  inHhc
United  States,  neither  is  there  in
Europe,  nor  in  the  whole  world  that
can  hinder  the  accomplishment  of
the  purposes  of  the  Almighty,  which
are  outlined  in  the  predictions  of
the  Prophets.

The  Book  of  Mormon  contains
the  fullness  of  the  everlasting  Gospel
— the  record  of  the  ancient  Nephites,
translated  by  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith,  by  the  gift  and  power  of
God  hi  him — that  we  may  come  to
a  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  the
Gospel  in  simplicity  and  in  purity-
It  makes  clear  many  dark  sayings
of  the  Jewish  Scriptures,  as
they  have  come  down  to  us.  It
sheds  a  flood  of  light  over  the  Bible  ;
it  contains  the  key  of  knowledge
and  understanding ;  and  it  is  more


precious  than  all  the  works  of  modern
times,  and  is  worth  more.  And  the
youth  of  Israel  should  read  and
become  familiar  with  it,  and  com-
pare it  with  the  Jewish  Scriptures;
there  is  more  to  be  learned  out  of  it,
my  young  friends,  that  is  calculated
to  prove  of  real  worth  and  blessing
to.  the  soul,  than  can  be  acquired  at
all  the  universities,  colleges  and
schools  of  science  and  of  modern
times.  And  in  saying  this,  I  say
nothing  prejudicial  to  science,  nor
anything  in  the  least  degree  to
discourage  the  acquisition  of  science,
but  the  more  forcibly  to  impress
upon  the  minds  of  the  youth  of
Israel  everywhere  not  to  neglect
those  things  which  are  the  weightier
matters — the  Holy  Scriptures,  the
Book  of  Mormon  and  the  levelations
of  God  as  contained  in  the  Doctrine
and  Covenants;  for  the  fear  of  the
Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom.
And  a  knowledge  of  the  only  true
and  living  God,  and  of  his  purposes
concerning  us  and  our  being  upon  the
earth,  the  object  of  our  creation,  and
that  which  is  designed  concerning
us,  both  iu  time  and  in  eternity,
is  of  paramount  importance,  and  of
greater  value  than  anything  that
can  be  bestowed  upon  mortal  man.
The  greatest  of  all  the  gifts  of  God
is  the  gift  of  eternal  life  ;  and  eternal
life  is  only  attainable  by  a  true
knowledge  of  God,  through  obedience
to  his  laws  and  commandments.
Therefore,  study  the  Scriptures;
acquaint  yourselves  with  the  Book
of  Mormon. Read  them  in  vour

IF

Sunday  Schools  ;  read  them  at  your
firesides  ;  let  them  always  be  found
upon  your  tables,  and  never  permit
your  families  to  be  without  them  ;
and  if  you  are  poor  sell  your  coat
and  buy  them ;  for  you  are  far  better
without  a  coat  than  without  the
word  of  God  to  teach  your  children.
Let  our  Bishops, and  Elders  and


THE  "TWIN  RELICS/*  SLAVERY  AND  POLYGAMY,  ETC*


301


Teachers  attend  to  it ;  and  enquire
whether  you  are  surrounded  by  th»s^
milk-and-water  Saints  who  love  fine
dress  more  than  the  love  of  God,
and  who  love  to  furnish  their  child-
ren with  musical  instruments  and
toys,  and  who  neglect  to  furnish
them  the  words  of  life ;  if  you  are,
labor  with  them  and  teach  them  in
all  sincerity  the  duties  of  a  Latter-
day  Saint,  a  Saint  of  the  living
God  ;  and  God  will  bless  you  in  your
labors,  and  you  will  have  more  joy
in  doing  this  than  anything  else  you
could  do.

I  started  to  give  briefly  the  views
which  I  entertain  with  regard  to  the
providences  of  God  that  are  over-
ruling all  things.  Our  Christian
statesmen  have  mistaken  the  spirit
of  Mormonism  ;  they  have  not  un-
derstood it.  Our  Christian  persecu-
tors, of  the  various  religious  sects,
would  urge  on  our  American  states-
men to  persecute  this  people,  but
they  know  not  what  they  are  doing.
True,  as  some  one  said  here  yester- 1
day,  they  do  know  when  they  insert
in  the  oath  which  has  been  specially
prepared  for  our  people,  that  extra-
ordinary  clause,  ''in  the  marriage
relation/*  that  they  mean  to  exclude
from  the  polls  honorable  men  and
women  who  are  in  every  respect
justly  entitled  to  take  part  in
the  affairs  of  the  government  of
this  land  ;  but  to  do  so  they  must
deny  their  religion  and  ■  abandon
their  wives,  or  wives  their  husbands,
and  they  betake  themselves  to  the
Greets  as  common  prostitutes,  and
they  mean  to  include  at  the  polls,
whoremongers  and  adulterers.
This  is  well  understood,  and  when
this  form  of  oath  was  adopted  by
Governor  Murray  and  the  Commis-
sioners for  special  purposes,  they
knew  what  they  were  doing.  And
so  did  the  Congress  of  the  United
States  know  what  they  were  doing


in  passing  the  Edmunds  Bill,  for
when  an  amendment  was  introduced
making  that  proposed  law  binding
upon  adulterers,  it  was  quickly  dis-
posed of ;  and  one  gentleman  who
was  sitting  near  Captain  Hooper  at
the  time,  remarked,  that  if  that  were
to  carry,  it  would  leave  the  House  of
Representatives  without  a  quorum.
Such  an  ameninent,  of  course,  did
not  express  the  mind  of  our  Amer-
ican statesmen  ami  that  of  hireling
priests  ;  they  needed  adulterers,
whoremongers,  and  fornicators,  to
carry  out  the  vote  in  Utah  over  the
Mormons.  I  thank  God  that
they  have,  as  a  matter  of  political
necessity,  been  compelled  to  hoist
their  true  colors  and  nail  them  to
their  mast,  so  that  all  honorable
mem  of  their  party  cannot  mistake
it.  They  ignore  it ;  they  close  their
eyes  to  it ;  they  do  not  want  to  talk
about  it ;  they  are  self  condemned  ;
and  the  great  party  of  boasted  moral
progress  is  weighed  in  the  balance
and  found  wanting.  It  is  not
morality  they  seek ;  it  h  not  public
puritj  they  wish  to  maintain.  The
decision  of  the  heavens  is  already
passed  upon  them,  and  they  will  go
down  like  a  mighty  millstone  cast
into  the  depths  of  the  sea.  They
cannot  hold  the  reigns  of  government
of  this  American  soil,  only  to  work
out  their  own  destruction,  God
spoke  by  the  mouth  of  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith,  in  a  sermon  de-
livered by  the  Prophet  at  Nauvoo  a
short  time  before  his  death,  on  the
powers  and  policy  of  this  govern-
ment of  the  United  States  and  the
I  freedom  and  liberty  secured  in  the
American  Constitution,  that  it  was
broad  and  ample  in  its  provisions,
extending  human  freedom  to  every
soul  of  man  and  protecting  them  in
every  natural  right ;  and  he  classed
among  others  the  Jew,  the  Moham-
medan, and  the  oppressed  of  every


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


nation  who  desired  to  find  an  asy-
lum under  the  broad  folds  of  the
Constitution-  Yes,  the  Patriarchs,
as  well  as  the  Mohammedans,  and
their  descendants  who  may  believe
in  plural  marriage,  may  come  with
their  tin  ee  or  four  wives,  as  the  case
may  be,  and  enjoy  freedom  and
liberty  dear  to  all.  Referring  at
the  same  time  to  those  narrow,
contracted,  bigoted,  sectarian  laws
of  some  of  the  States  against  plural
marriage,  ho  said  they  were  not  in
harmony  with  the  Constitution* nor
the  purposes  of  heaven  ;  that  God
had  caused  our  fathers  to  establish
this  constitution,  to  maintain  the
liberty  of  all  people  of  every  creed,
and  it  will  become  the  duty  of  all
lovers  of  freedom  throughout  the
land  to  maintain  those  principles
of  human  freedom  ;  but,  says  one,
are  we  not  between  the  upper  and
nether  ;millstone  ;  shall  we  not  be
ground  into  fine  powder  ?  Just
wait  and  see.  As  for  myself,  I  feel
as  calm  as  a  summer's  morning  ;  I
have  the  utmost  assurance  in  my
heart  that  God  reigns ;  that  he
overrules  in  the  armies  of  heaven
and  of  earth  ;  that  he  overrules
presidents,  senators  and  governors,
and  that  they  have  no  power  only
that  which  is  given  of  our  Father
in  heaven.  He  curtails  their  power
when  it  pleases  him  ;  he  pulls
down  and  he  sets  up,  tand  he  over-


rules all  things  for  the  good  of  those
who  fear  him  and  keep  his  com-
mandments ;  and  whatever  persecu-
tion there  may  be  in  store  for  us,
whatever  trying  scenes  we  may  have
to  pass  through,  as  a  people,  it
will  only  prove  us,  and  redound  to
his  glory  and  to  the  sanctificatiou
of  his  people.  It  is  necessary,  per-
adventure,  that  the  hypocrites  in
Zion  become  afraid,  and  fearfulness
surprise  them ;  it  is  necessary,  per-
haps, that  many  that  cannot  be
restrained  by  the  persuasion  of  Pre*
sidents,  nor  Bishops,  but  who  have
crowded  themselves  forward  fol-
lowing the  spirit  of  the  world  rather
than  the  Spirit  of  the  Almighty,
and  "  who  have  done  despite  to  the
spirit  of  grace,"  and  lost,  perad-
venture,  wives  and  children,  and  if
they  have  not  they  will ;  it  is  need-
ful that  such  should  be  restrained,
and  that  fear  seize  hold  of  them,
and  all  others  who  are  prompted  by
sordid  motives  }  for  the  wicked  flee
when  no  man  pursue th  ;  but  the
righteous  are  bold  as  lions  in  the  fear
of  their  God,  and  like  Daniel  will
never  shirk  from  duty.  But  in  all
this  God  will  overrule  the  wrath  of
the  wicked  to  the  best  good  of  those
who  fear  and  serve  him,  and  the
residue  of  their  wrath  will  he  restrain,
God  bless  the  people,  in  the  name
of  Jet  us,  Amen.


%


"mormonism"  as  tkue  now  as  ever,  etc.


303


DISCOURSE BY ELDER DANIEL  H.  WELLS,


Delivered  in  the  Assembly  Hall,  Salt  Lake  City,  Friday  Morn-

ing,  (General  Conference)  October  6,  1882.

( Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gihbs.)

u  MORMON  ISM"  AS  TRUE  NOW  AS  EVER —  MANY  CALLED  BUT  FEW
CHUSEN — GOD*S  PEOPLE  TO  BE  TRIED  AND  TESTED — RAPID  GROWTH
OF  HIS  KINGDOM — THE  BLINDNESS  OF  THE  WORiD— ANIMOSITY  OF
SATAN — BLESSINGS  CANNOT  BE  WITHHELD  FROM  THE  FAITHFUL —
EXHORTATION  AGAINST  COVETOUSNESS  AND  OTHER  EVILS  —
ORDEALS  ORDAINED  FROM  THE  BEGINNING — THE  REWARD  OF  THE
FAITHFUL*


It  is  with  a  degree  of  pleasure  that
I  stand  before  you  to-day  to  bear  my
testimony  in  regard  to  the  truths
that  we  have  heard,  the  truths  of
the  everlasting  Gospel  ;  for  I  know
that  **  Mormon  ism"  is  just  as  true
to-day  as  it  ever  was,  and  that  God
has  not  forsaken  His  people,  Wc
live,  ,it  is  true,  in  an  eventful  age
when  the  words  of  the  Prophets  are
being  fulfilled  ;  when  the  God  of
Israel  is  going  to  establish  and  build
up  His  kingdom  on  the  earth,  estab-
lish His  government  and  his  taws.
I  know  that  this  work  will  be  accom-
plished through  the  instrumentality
of  His  children  ;  that  those  who  live
in  this  day  and  age  will  have  the
privilege  of  being  the  honored  in-
struments in  the  hands  of  God  of
bringing  to  pass  His  purposes,  of
establishing  his  kingdom  never
more  to  be  thrown  down,  if  we  will
let  the  Lord  work  with  us,  if  we
will  only  work  with  Him,  if  we  will
be  obedient  to  His  laws  and  work
under  His  direction.  We  have  been
reserved  from  ^coming  forthyin  the
-apirit  world  until  that  day  when


the  everlasting  Gospel  should  be
established,  that  we. might  have  the
privilege  of  bearing  a  hand  in  this
great  work,  this  glorious  work  of  the
last  days.  It  is  not  a  haphazard
matter  with  the  Lord  ;  everything
is  in  perfect  order  in  regard  to  this
matter.  He  knew  when  he  revealed
His  Gospel  to  his  servant  Joseph,
that  Joseph  would  receive  it ;  and
lie  knew  there  were  those  spirits
upon  the  earth  that  would  also  re-
ceive it  when  it  should  be  presented
to  them.  It  was  rejected  in  the
days  of  the  Savior ;  they  crucified
Him ;  they  drove  the  Priesthood
from  the  earth.  The  hearts  of  the
children  of  men  are  of  the  same  na-
ture to-day,  to  a  greater  or  less  ex-
tent ;  but  there  are  those  that  come
forth  in  this  day  that  receive  the
Gospel  when  it  is  presented  to
them.  Whether  the  people  of  those
ages  when  the  Gospel  was  not  upon
the  earth  would,  have  received  it  I
am  not  prepared  to  say.  Suffice  it
to  say  when  it  was  not  revealed,
they  had  not  the  opportunity  of  re-
jecting it ;  and  that,  in  the  economy


304  JOURNAL  OF

of  God, those who  would  have  I
received  it  when  the  opportunity
was  not  afforded  them  in  the  flesh,
will  receive  it  when  it  shall  be  pre-
sented to  them  in  the  spirit.

We  have  been  called,  and  all  peo-
ple are  called  to  this  work.  It  is
said  that  many  are  called  and  few
are  chosen.  But  all  have  been
called,  and  it  is  their  blessed  privi-
lege to  bear  a  hand  to  help  bear  off
this  kingdom,  if  they  chose  to  do  so ;
and  if  they  will  be  faithful  to  the
call  that  is  made  upon  them,  the
time  will  come  when  they  will  be
chosen  instruments  to  bear  off  His
kingdom  and  in  maintaining  the
principles  of  truth  and  righteousness
as  revealed  to  us  through  the  influ-
ence and  spirit  of  the  living  God.
Because  it  tg  the  privilege  of  all  to
hear  testimony.  Now,  a  man's
judgment  will  ofttimes  be  convinced
by  the  weight  of  testimony,  whether
he  be  willing  to  admit  it  or  not ;
whether  he  is  will  in  y  to  acknowledge
the  Lord  publicly,  making  a  public
profession  of  his  belief,  or  not.
There  are  many,  I  do  believe, nvhose
judgment  has  been  convinced  by
the  weight  of  testimony,  who  have
not  been  willing  to  admit  the  truth
of  and  make  a  public  profession
of  faith  in  the  Holy  Gospel  ;
AVhen  a  person  embraces  the  ever-
lasting Gospel — which  j  by  the  way,
seems  to  be  very  unpopular  now,  as
in  other  ages ;  whether  it  will  con-
tinue to  be  so  I  do  not  know — it
requires  a  good  deal  of  moral  courage
to  sacrifice  his  associations  in  life,
his  property,  social  standing  and
good  name,  and  everything  that
pertains  to  this  life  that  is  considered
worth  having.  Still  there  are  those
spirits  in  the  flesh  that  have  the
courage  to  do  it ;  those  that  have  the
honesty  of  heart  to  receive  this  tes-  '
timony  and  to  stand  up  and  bear  it
in  the  face  of  every  opposing  ob-


DISCOURSKS,

!  stacle  and  every  opposing  foe.  It
is  a  life's  labor  for  the  Latter-day
Saint  to  live  his  religion,  to  perform
his  duty,  to  till  up  the  measure  of
his  creation  with  honor  to  his  God
and  credit  to  himself.  Our  religion
is  not  a  matter  of  enthusiasm  to  work
the  mind  up  to  a  high  pitch  for  an
hour,  a  day,  a  week,  in  some  pro-
tracted meeting  or  under  some
peculiar  influence,  but  day  by  day,
week  by  week,  month  by  month,
year  by  year,  as  long  as  life  shall
last,  the  Latter-day  Saint  does  not
see  an  hour  nor  a  moment  that  he
can  afford  to  lay  off  the  armor  of
righteousness,  or  lay  aside  his  holy
religion.  It  is  he  that  endures  to
j  the  end  that  is  promised  salvation.
The  word  "  endure1'  is  there;  and  we
may  naturally  expect  to  have  to
endure  some  things*  God  will  have
a  tried  people  j  and  all  will  be  put  to
the  test  in  one  way  or  another.
Some  things  will  try  some  people  at
one  time,  and  will  not  try  them  at
another  time.  Some  things  will  try
some  people,  and  they  will  have  no
|  such  effect  on  others*  God  leads  his
people  through  a  great  variety  of
changes,  that  all  may  be  tried ;
and  you  may  depend  upon  it  that  all
who  come  to  this  point  in  their  trav-
els in  the  journey  of  life,  will  be
tested  to  the  heart's  core.  I  have
heard  some  people  say,  0,  I  wish  I
had  been  in  Zion's  Camp,  and
through  the  persecutions  of  Missouri;
and  1  wish  I  had  been  with  the
Saints  in  the  days  of  Illinois,  etc.  ;
I  can  promise  every  Latter-day  Saint
that  is  faithful,  that  he  will  have
sufficient  to  try  him  before  he  gets
I  through,  and  the  nearer  that  he  lives
to  his  God,  the  more  sore,  perhaps,
the  test  that  will  be  made  of  him  j
he  may  rest  assured  that  he  will  be
tried,  and  tried  severely,  if  he  re-
I  main  faithful.  There  is  and  there
will  be  an  opportunity  for  all  peoplfe


*■  MORMOXISM"  AS  TRUE  NOW  AS  EVER.  ETC,


305


to  prove  their  integrity  to  their  God,
and  their  integrity  to  their  brethren,
and  to  the  principles  of  the  Gospel
that  we  have  espoused.  If  a  person
is  going  to  fly  the  track  the  moment
that  difficulty  arises,  which  it  is
necessary  to  overcome,  what  be-
comes of  his  integrity,  and  where  is
it  1  It  proves  to  God  and  to  angels
and  to  all  good  men  that  he  has  not
integrity,  does  it  not  1  It  is  to  stand
firm  and  steadfast  through  every
trial,  to  overcome  every  obstacle,
that  brings  the  prize,  allowing
nothing  to  intervene  between  us  and
the  Lord,  or  between  the  Gospel
that  we  have  espoused,  or  between  us
and  the  Holy  Priesthood  who,  under
God,  guides  the  affairs  of  His  church
and  kingdom  upon  the  eartli ;  it  is
to  stand  up  in  defence  of  the  truth,
and  bear  off  the  principles  of  the
Gospel  in  this  wicked  and  untoward
generation.  It  requires  some  test,
and  the  Lord  will  have  that  kind
of  people  that  He  can  rely  on.  He
could  not  bestow  His  kingdom  in  its
power  and  fullness,  in  its  might  and
glory  upon  a  people  whom  He  did
not  know  had  sufficient  integrity  to
hold  sacred  that  which  had  been
entrusted  to  them  for  Him  and  His
cause.

I  have  often  been  asked  the  ques-
tion, "  When  will  the  kingdom  be
given  into  the  hands  of . the  Saints
of  the  most  high  God  and  I  have
always  answered  it  in  this  way  :
just  so  soon  as  the  Lord  finds  that
He  has  a  people  upon  the  earth  who
will  uphold  and  sustain  that  king-
dom, who  shall  be  found  capable  of
maintaining  its  interests  and  of  ex-
tending its  influence  upon  the  earth.
When  he  finds  that  he  has  such  a
people,  a  people  who  will  stand  firm
and  faithful  to  him,  a  people  that
will  not  turn  it  over  into  the  lap  of
the  devil,  then,  and  not  until  then,
will  he  give  "  the  kingdom"  into  the

No.  20


hands  of  the  Saints  of  the  most
high,  in  its  power  and  influence
when  it  shall  fill  the  whole  earth.
The  promise  is,  that  the  kingdoms
of  this  world  shall  become  the  king-
doms of  our  God  and  His  Christ ;
and  it  shall  be  given  to  the  Saints
of  the  most  high,  and  it  shall  stand
forever.  That  is  when  we  may  ex-
pect it,  and  we  could  not  reasonably
expect  it  any  sooner.  Therefore,  it
depends,  in  a  great  measure,  upon
the  people  themselves,  as  to  how
soon  the  kingdom  spoken  of  by
Daniel  shall  be  given  into  the  hands
of  the  Saints  of  God.  When
we  shall  prove  ourselves  faithful  in
every  emergency  that  may  arise,
and  capable  to  contend  and  grapple
with  every  difficulty  that  threatens
our  peace  and  welfare,  and  to  over-
come every  obstacle  that  may  tend
to  impede  the  progress  of  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth,
then  our  heavenly  Father  will  have
confidence  in  us,  and  then  he  will  be
able  to  trust  us.  And  it  is  the
Lord's  will  that  it  should  be  so.
And  if  we,  as  a  people,  do  not  hold
ourselves  on  the  altar  read)'  to  be
used,  with  our  means  and  all  that
God  has  bestowed  upon  us,  accord-
ing to  the  Master's  bidding,  for  the
upbuilding  of  his  kingdom  upon
the  earth,  he  will  pass  on  and
get  somebody  else  ;  because  he  will
get  a  people  that  will  do  it  I  do
not  mean  to  say,  that  he  will  pass
on  and  leave  this  people  ;  no,  there
will  come  up  from  the  midst  of  this
people  that  people  which  has  been
talked  so  much  about — for  the
kingdom  will  not  be  taken  from  us
and  given  to  another  people  ;
it  is  too  late  in  the  dajr,  as  it  has
already  commenced  to  grow,  and
it  is  growing  and  will  continue  to
grow.  This  kingdom  of  Gad  has
been  of  rapid  growth,  although  we
may  think sometimes  that  it  is

Vol  XXIH


30G

I


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


slow,  that  the  purposes  of  the
Almighty  are  being  slowly  developed,
but  the  time  will  come  that  this
people  will  look  back,  say  forty  years
hence,  and  exclaim  how  wonder-
fully, how  rapidly  has  the  kingdom
progressed,  and  how  powerful  lias
it  become  in  the  earth  !  We  can  look
back  to-day  from  the  time  that  we
were  located  in  Missouri,  and  it  any
man  had  predicted  the  progress  that
we  have  made  since,  he  would  have
been  considered  somewhat  enthu-
siastic, to  say  the  least  of  it ;  and  he
could  not  possibly  have  foretold  by
Ms  own  natural  foresight  the  pro-
gress and  the  prosperity  that  have
attended  the  labors  of  the  people,
and  the  strength  and  power  that  we
have  attained  unto  in  so  short  a
time.  Therefore,  we  may  take
courage  and  press  onward,  and  con-
tinue to  sustain  the  holy  principles
that  have  been  revealed  in  our  day
for  our  reformation  and  salvation.
Por  these  principles  tend  to  reforma-
tion, and  they  will  produce  the
greatest  reformation  that  God  has
undertaken  to  bring  to  pass  ajnong
the  children  of  men*  When  we
consider  the  nature  of  this  work
and  its  results  among  men,  it
would  be  quite  proper  to  call  it
:&  reformation.  It  is  reformation
.and  it  is  restitution ;  it  brings  us
back  to  first  principles  ;  it  brings  us
back  to  the  purity  of  the  most  holy
faith  ;  it  is  also  reformation  from
the  .status  of  the  evil-doer  and  from
,the  evils  that  are  prevalent  in  the
i  earth.

The  world  have  forsaken  God ;
they  have  not  the  least  true  concep-
tion of  the  attributes  of  the  Deity  j
they  know  no  more  about  the  true
and  living  God  than  those  lampposts
do.  They  go  blundering  along
worshipping  an  imaginary  God,  a
something  that  they  know  nothing
.at  all  about Their  teachers  are


blind  a-s  to  His  true  character,  and
the  people  are  blinded  by  their
teachers,  and  they  seem  to  be  satis-
fied with  their  condition.  They  talk
about  their  colleges,  their  theological
seminaries  and  their  institutions  of
learning;  they  are  simply  machines,
the  body  without  the  spirit ;  it  is  not
possible  for  them  to  furnish  a  line
of  Scripture,  they  never  have  since
the  Apostles  fell  asleep,  and  they
never  will  down  to  the  end  of  time.
It  is  not  in  them ;  it  cannot  come
out  of  them.  Why  they  openly  de-
nounce all  belief  in  revelation  from
God — the  very  life-giving  element
of  all  scripture,  as  nothing  but  that
can  produce  scripture.  The  Bible
itself  was  made  up  by  revelations  to
the  servants  of  God  from  time  to
time.  Men  spoke  as  they  were
moved  upon  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
it  was  written  for  the  benefit  of
posterity,  and  became  the  word  of
the  Lord  to  us.  Ever  since  the
Apostles  fell  asleep,  there  has  been
no  further  light;  the  heavens  have
been  closed,  and  no  communication
has  been  made  to  the  "gentlemen
of  the  cloth,"  nor  to  anybody  else
of  this  generation  until  the  Lord  re-
vealed himself  and  spoke  to  Joseph
Smith.  And  why  did  he  speak  to
himt  One  reason  was  because  he
prayed  to  the  Lord  in  faith,  be*
lieving  that  He  would  hear  him.
The  religions  of  his  time  he  saw
were  many,  they  differed,  and  each
claimed  to  be  the  right  way  of  the
Lord.  He  did  not  know  which  to
join,  and  yet  he  wanted  to  espouse
some  one  among  the  many  that
then  existed.  And  he  was  in  this
state  of  mind  when  reading  the
writings  of  the  Apostle  James,  who
says  :  "If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,
let  him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to
all  men  liberally, and  upbraideth  not;
and  it  shall  be  given  him."  He  ap-
proached the  Lord  with  an  honest


"  MORMONISJl"  AS  TRUE  NOW  AS  EVER,  ETC.


307.

I


"heart,  and  the  Lord  heard  his  prayer*
He  Himself,  together  with  His
Son,  appeared  to  him,  and  among
other  things  that  he  was  told  on
that  occasion  was  to  not  join  any
of  the  sectarian  churches,  that  none
of  them  were  right,  that  they  were
the  systems  of  men  and  not  the
system  of  God*  And  Joseph  had
the  temerity  to  tell  it ;  and  of  course
that  was  enough  to  bring  upon  him
the  enmity  of  professing  Ch  ristianity,
and  especially  of  the  "gentlemen
of  the  cloth'''  whose  craft  was  at
once  in  danger  ;  and  their  animosity
to  this  people  has  continued  from
that  day  to  this  increasing  with  our
growth  ;  and  we  expect  that  it  will
still  continue  to  manifest  itself
against  us  until  the  kingdom  of  God
shall  triumph  in  the  earth,  and
God,  the  righteous  Judge,  and
His  people  be  recognized,  ami
their  rights  acknowledged.  We
well  understand  the  reason  why  this
people  are  a  reproach  to  the  world  :
they  are  ro  high  above  them  in
morals  and  in  the  principles  of
truth,  and  the  world  know  that  we
are  their  superiors  in  every  respect
as  far  as  the  fundamental  principles
of  life  and  intelligence  are  concerned.
The  devil  knows  it,  and  he  puts  it
into  the  hearts  of  the  wicked  and
those  who  are  deceived  by  his  cun-
ning, to  hate  us  for  that  reason.
Their  animosity  is  not  enkindled
against  us  because  of  our  iniquity,
for  they  cannot  put  their  linger
upon  a  single  line  of  iniquity  charge-
able to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  as  a
people.  Not  but  what  there  is
many  a  one  who  does  wrong  for
which  he  needs  to  repent  and  do  his
first  works  over  again,  or  be  severed
from  the  Church ;  but  as  for  the
Church  its  enemies  cannot  lay  their
finger  upon  the  first  'iniquitous
thing  brought  against  it  that  can  be
brought  against  it  as  true.  The


fact  is  we  are  a  reproach  to  them,
and  they  feel  it ;  their  anger  is
enkindled  against  us  on  that  account,
and  hence  they  seek  to  destroy  the
holy  Priesthood  from  off  the  face  of
the  earth.  Who  is  it  that  invents
the  lies  that  are  circulated  about
this  people  ?  They  are  begotten  by
and  become  the  weapons  of  the
clergy  of  the  present  day,  and  it
certainly  is,  as  it  was  said  it  should
be,  men  will  believe  a  lie  but  reject
truth  ;  and  this  class  of  persons  par-
ticularly is  engaged  in  trying  to  de-
stroy the  work  of  our  God,  as  mani-
fested through  His  people,  and
through  the  authority  of  the  holy
Priesthood  that  is  now  amomj  men,
Satan  is  anxious  to  trample  it  under
foot,  as  he  has  done  before  ;  but  that
is  something  which  cannot  be  done,
it  is  too  late  in  the  day.  It  has  taken
root  downward,  and  it  is  bearing
fruit  upward.  It  is  too  strong  to
be  trampled  out  Though  they  may
bring  fifty  millions  to  bear  on  us,
what  does  it  signify  ]  If  they  bring
the  whole  world,  what  difference  1  I
have  no  fears  with  regard  to  the
success  of  the  work  of  God  in  these
the  last  days,  for  its  success  is
already  established  as  far  as  we  have
gone,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt,  in
my  mind,  neither  can  there  be  in
yours,  that  as  the  work  of  God  is
developed  success  will  attend  our
labors,  even  until  the  Savior
shall  come  in  power  and  glory
to  rule  from  the  rivers  to  the  ends
of  the  earth,  I  know  this,  and
so  do  you,  and  so  does  all  Israel,
The  Lord  knows  it,  and  the  devil
knows  it ;  and  that's  what's  the
matter  with  the  clergy.  This  great
and  marvelous  work  of  the  latter-
days  will  be  prolonged  or  hastened
according  to  the  faith  and  good
works  of  the  people  engaged  in
it.  If  we  pray,  therefore,  the  Lord
to  hasten  His  work ;  to  hasten  the


308


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


time  when  Zion  shall  be  built  up
and  redeemed  ;  when  the  great  and
glorious  Temple  shall  be  erected  to
the  name  of  the  Most  High  God,
and  when  His  glory  shall  rest  upon
it  in  the  form  of  a  cloud  by  day  and
a  pillar  of  fire  by  night,  let  our
righteousness  conform  with  our  holy
desires;  let  us  so  live  as  to  call  down
the  blessings  of  heaven  upon  us*
For  if  we  are  "faithful  in  all  things,
and  are  united,  blessings  cannot  be
withheld  from  us;  the  Lord  is  bound,
according  to  the  covenant,  to  hear
the  prayers  of  His  faithful  children.
"We  have  an  example  in  the  Book  of
Mormon  of  a  man  exercising  such
exceeding  faith  that  his  vision  could
not  be  withheld  from  penetrating
behind  the  vail,  when  he  taw  the
person  of  the  Lord,  and  was  there
redeemed  from  the  fall  The  Lord
is  perfectly  willing  to  bestow  bless-
ings upon  His  people,  and  to  estab-
lish His  work  upon  the  earth,  just
as  willing  as  His  people  can  be  to
have  him,  and  whenever  the  time
comes  that  he  finds  that  he  has  a
people  upon  whom  he  can  bestow
these  blessings,  they  will  come.  We
need  have  no  fears  with  regard  to
that ;  and,  in  fact,  they  do  come  now
as  fast  as  we  can  receive  them  and
hold  their  in  righteousness,  and  I
think  sometimes,  they  come  too  fast
for  a  great  many.  When  I  have
seen  men  who  have  risen  to
power  and  influence  through  wealth
in  this  Church,  it  seemed  as  though
the  Lord  could  not  make  men  rich
but  what  they  would  grow  fat  and
kick  the  traces,  and  go  to  the  devil.
Look  at  the  history  of  such  men
from  the  beginning,  and  see  how
they  have  acted.  They  have  perhaps
run  fair  for  a  while,  especially  whilst
they  were  in  a  somewhat  destitute
condition  as  regards  this  world's
goods  ;  but  as  soon  as  they  have  be-
come rich,  where  are  they?  All


along  the  line  of  our  history,  as  a
church,  we  have  seen  them  strewn
by  the  way  side,  they  have  gone  out
of  the  church;  instance  after  instance
I  could  recite  within  my  own
knowledge,  and  you  would  know  of
a  great  many  more  than  I  do.  This
is  not  necessarily  bo*  The  remedy-
to  all  such  cases  is  the  same  to-day
as  that  which  applied  to  the  young
man  that  came  to  Jesus,  namely,
"  sell  all  that  thou  hast  and  give  to
the  poor,  and  come  and  follow  me  ;
and  thou  slialt  find  treasures  in
heaven."  That  is  the  test.  If  a  man
is  prospered  of  the  Lord,  that  is  no
reason  why  he  should  let  his  riches
get  between  him  and  his  God  ;  if  he
does,  he  will  make  shipwreck  of  his
faith •  The  Lord  does  not  care  how
wealthy  a  man  becomes,  so  long  as
he  holds  his  wealth  fur  the  building
up  of  His  kingdom,  and  for  the
carrying  out  of  His  purposes  upon
the  earth.  But  when  he  becomes
covetous,  and  allows  his  means
to  get  between  him  and  his  God,
his  riches  become  a  canker  to  his
soul  ;  he  forsakes  his  God,  and
soon  forgets  the  reason  why  they
were  given  to  him.  Instead  of
using  his  means  for  the  purpose
intended  by  the  Lord  in  bestowing
them  upon  him,  he  aggrandizes  to
himself,  and  the  spirit  of  greed  and
covetous n ess  takes  hold  of  him,  and
he  is  then  ready  to  swap  off  his
religion  for  filthy  lucre.  He  becomes
covetous,  and  covetousness  is
idolatry;  he  serves  his  stilish
purposes  instead  of  serving  the  Lord.
It  is  a  great  pity  for  a  man  in  this
Church  to  get  rich,  if  he  cannot
hold  everything  upon  the  altar,  to
be  used,  if  necessary,  for  God  and  his
kingdom  This  is  the  duty  of  every
true  Latter- day  Saint.  The  Lord
will  strip  men  of  everything  if  need
be  to  prove  His  servants.  Indeed,
men  have  to  strip  themselves  for


"  MORMON  ISM" AS TRUE NOW AS EVER,  ETC


309


this  work  in  order  to  show  that  all
things  else  are  but  dross  compared
with  the  excellency  of  Christ  and
the  principles  of  the  holy  Gospel
that  he  has  revealed  to  us,  saving  in  .
his  heart,  "  For  one  I  am  determined
to  know  nothing  else,  except  Jesus
and  Him  crucified  ;  I  am  determined
to  seek  firat  the  kingdom  of  Ood
and  His  righteousness/'  And  then
other  things  come  in  right  enough.
In  fact  we  are  told  that  if  we  do
seek  first  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
all  other  things  shall  be  added.
"This  was  the  promise  of  the  Savior
unto  His  servants ;  and  in  one  sense
It  comes  with  greater  assurance  to
the  Latter  day  Saints  than  to  those
of  former  days,  because  this  is  a  dif-
ferent dispensation,  it  is  the  dis-
pensation of  the  fullness  of  times.
"When  this  promise  was  made  it  was
nevertheless  well  known  to  him  who
made  it,  that  the  kingdom  would
be  destroyed  out  of  the  earth.  But
now  it  is  not  to  be  trodden  out.
They  will  not  be  permitted  to  j
crucify  the  Savior  of  the  world  when
He  comes  a^ain,  because  then  He
will  come  in  power  and  great  glory
and  not  as  He  did  before  ;  and  the
kingdoms  of  this  world  will  be
given  into  the  hands  of  the  Saints
of  the  Most  High  God,  and  they
will  then  become  t he* wealthiest  of  j
all  people,  in  fact,  the  only  really
wealthy  people  there  will  be ;  but
then  it  will  be  because  they  hold  the
kingdom  for  Go  I,  because  they  and
all  they  have  are  upon  the  altar
ready  to  be  used  to  bring  about  the
purposes  of  the  Lord  and  not  because
they  seek  to  gratify  their  own  selfish
desires,  and  to  bring  about  their
own  pur  poses,  and  to  build  them-  '
selves  up  in  this  world.  And
there  is  more  true  speculation  that
promises  a  rich  reward  in  that
than  in  anything  else  than  I  can
think  <-of  after  all We  cannot


afford  to  swap  off  our  eternal
welfare  for  the  things  of  this  world
—  "things  that  perish  with  the
handling,"  as  some  one  has  said.
This  would  be  poor  speculation,
indeed.

One  of  the  purposes  for  which  we
were  placed  upon  this  earth  was,
that  we  might  pass  the  ordeals  and
prove  to  God  our  faithfulness  to  the
principles  of  life  and  salvation.  To
pass  the  ordeals  1  Yes.  All  through
life,  from  the  cradte  to  the  grave,
we  have  trials  and  difficulties  to
encounter.  We  suffer  affliction  that
is  permitted  to  corm>  upon  us,  which
is  incident  to  this  life — the  loss  of
parents,  the  loss  of  children,  the
oss  of  husband  and  the  loss  of  wife  ;
besides,  the  pain  and  affliction  of  the
hojly,  and  the  many  ills  that  flesh
is  heir  to  ;  and  all  this  to  test  our
faith  and  integrity  to  our  God  Some
have  endured  manfully  all  that  the
devil  and  wicked  men  have  been
able  to  bring  upon  them,  even  to
the  test  of  their  lives.  And  if  we
will  not  be  willing  to  give  our  lives
to  the  Lord  for  the  advancement
of  His  cause  and  kingdom  in  the
earth,  we  would  not  be  worthy  of
Him,  neither  would  He  acknowledge
us  as  His.  It  is  true,  He  may  not
put  us  to  that  test,  but  he  will  test
us  sufficiently  to  know  whether
we  would  be  equal  to  the  occasion
or  not  It  is,  I  say,  to  pass  these
ordeals  that  we  came  here  ;  to  prove
our  integrity  and  worthiness  to
come  back  into  his  presence  to  in-
herit thrones,  kingdoms,  princi-
palities, powers  and  dominions  that
are  prepared  for  the  righteous.  This
is  not  a  thing  of  a  moment  j  it  was
in  the  programme  before  we  came
here.  We  are  called  to-day,  the
time  of  choosing  will  come  by  and
by,  when  Christ  shall  make  up  his
jewels.  If  we  are  faithful  over  a
few  things,  He  will  make  us  ruler


310


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


over  many.  You  see  it  is  upon  the
priuciple  of  faithfulness,  and  upon
the  principle  of  endurance.  I  have
no  fears  in  regard  to  the  Latter-day
Saints,  as  a  people,  passing  these
ordeals  and  remaining  faithful  to
the  trust  reposed  in  them  ;  although
many  will  drop  out  by  the  way-side
and  be  lost,  for  a  time  at  least,  in  the
gulf  that  will  receive  them.  You
take  those  that  do  not  live  their
religion,  those  who  swear  a  little,
and  who  do  a  great  many  naughty
things,  who  never  think  of  uttering
a  prayer ;  and  let  the  enemy  come
against  us  in  formidable  array,  and
even  that  class  would  be  found  ready
with  their  guns  to  protect  the  lives
and  liberties  of  their  friends,  this
people  ;  they  would  not  flinch  either.
Yes,  these  wild  boys  would  be  ready
to  walk  up  to  the  cannon's  mouth
in  defence  of  the  Latter-day  Saints.
I  have  seen  it  in  times  past,  and  I
have  no  doubt  they,  if  called  upon
and  it  were  necessary,  would  do  it
again.  But  does  that  excuse  them
for  not  living  their  religion  ti  No.
They  should  quit  their  evil  practices
that  i hey  might  be  useful  in  build-
ing up  the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the
earth,  and  receive  a  greater  reward,
and  be  saved  in  the  world  to  come,
and  receive  glory  and  exaltation
which  they  might  otherwise  not
have.  Because  a  man  may  clip  his
own  glory  and  exaltation  by  taking
an  unwise  course  j  in  fact,  he  would
be  sure  to  do  it Blessed  is  that


man  who  grows  up  without  sin  from
the  purity  of  his  youth,  who  lives
and  dies  a  fit  temple  for  the  abode  of
the  Hoi  y Spirit.  A  man  may  in  au
hour,  iu  an  unguarded  moment  say
and  do  things  that  would  affect  him
throughout  the  never-ending  ages  of
eternity,  We  should,  therefore,  be
the  more  careful  of  our  course  and
conduct  in  life,  and  hold  fast  to  that
which  is  given  unto  us,  and  progress
and  go  on  from  perfection  to  perfec-
tion, and  try  to  become  as  godly  in
our  lives  as  it  is  possible  for  us  to  be
in  this  probation.  Be  pure  then  in
your  sphere  as  God  is  pure  in  His,
And  purity  does  not  consist  in  going
a ro u  nd  with  a  lo ng  -  d  raw 1 1  face
mourning  over  the  sins  of  the  world,
which  is  something  that  you  cannot
particularly  help  ;  but  with  purity  of
mien,  with  a  joyful  couutenance
going  forth  performing  your  duties,
and  keeping  yourself  pure  and  un-
spotted from  the  world,  from  their
wicked  and  abominable  practices.
God  will  have  a  pure  people,  for  the
Zion  oi  God  must  be  pure  in  heart.
There  is  plenty  of  material  to  cany
on  this  great  and  glorious  work,  and
God  will  find  it.  through  the  instru-
mentality uf  His  servants,  and  if  we
wish  to  have  part  in  it,  we  should
be  pure  ourselves,  working  the  works
of  righteousness,  proving  day  by  day
our  faithfulness  and  our  integrity  to
Him.  And  that  we  may  stand  firm
and  faithful  to  the  end,  is  my  prayer,
in  the  name  of  Jesus,  Amen,


TITHES  AND  OFFERINGS,  ETC


DISCOURSE BY ELDER F. D.  RICHARDS,
Delivered  at  Logan,  on  Saturday  Afternoon,  Nov.  6,  1882,

(Reported  btf  Geo.  F.  Gihbs.)


TITHES  AND  OFFERINGS  —  CONSECRATIONS  AND  STEWARDSHIPS  —  THE
LAW  OF  THE  LORD  TO  THE  LATTER  DAY  SAINTS  —  THE  MEANING
OF  **  SURPLUS  PEOPERTr" — TITHES  AND  OFFERINGS  IN  ANCIENT
TIMES — THE  YEAR  OF  JUBILEE  OR  RELEASE — THE  IMPORTANCE  OF
PAYING  TITHING  — GOD  THE  GIVE  11  OF  EVERY  GOOD  GIFT — TITHES
AND  OFFERINGS  HIS  DUE*


My  dear  brethren  and  sisters  and
friends,  I  am  much  edified  by  the
remarks  which  have  been  made
here  to  day,  I  believe  that  your
president  is  looking  after  his  work
throughout  this  Stake  over  which
he  presides,  and  I  hope  you  will
take  into  careful  consideration  the
subjects  lie  has  presented  to  you,  as
they  are  matters  of  practical  im-
portance. We  feel  that  we  are  num-
bered with  God's  people,  and  that
it  is  very  well  with  us  in  a  general
way,  but  there  is  a  time  coming
when  we  shall  each  and  every  one
of  us  be  brought  to  a  solemn,  serious
and  faithful  understanding  of  our
true  relationship  to  God  and  to  each
other,  as  well  as  to  the  work  in
which  we  are  now  called  to  labor.
We  all  have  our  free  agency  to  do
good  or  evil.  Every  faithful  Saint
will  have  a  desire  to  find  the  bless*
ing  that  legitimately  belongs  to
each  particular  ordinance  and  labor
in  the  Church,  for  there  is  a  bless-
ing belonging  to  each  office  and
calling,  to  each  labor  and  duty,  and
to  each  particular  ministration  and
work  required  of  u&

The  Llders  who  spoke  this  morn-
ing made  allusions  to  the  subject  of


tithing,  which  particularly  pleased
me ;  some  may  think  this  a  hack-
neyed subject  and  wish  we  would
talk  about  something  else,  believing
that  they  know  all  that  has  been
spoken  or  written  about  it ;  but  I
think  there  are  a  few  things  per-
taining to  this  matter  which  we  may
not  have  considered.  If  there  is
any  brother  here  who  feels  that  to-
day his  tithing  is  onerous  or  that
this  tithing  is  a  tax  upon  him,  and
that  he  has  got  so  much  he  cannot
afford  to  pay  tithing  on  it,  or  that  he
has  so  little  that  he  cannot  spare  a
tenth  of  it,  such  a  brother  does  not
realize  and  sense  the  blessing  that
flows  from  paying  an  honest  tithing,
for  if  he  did  he  would  deem  it  just
as  necessary  to  obey  that  law  of  God
to  us,  in  order  to  obtain  the  special
blessing  thereof,  as  he  would  of
going  to  his  meals  in  order  to  de-
rive the  temporal  blessing  of  health
and  strength  from  partaking  of  food.
If  we  could  take  home  to  our  hearts
and  understandings  the  sayings  of
Bishop  Hunter  here  last  Conference,
namely,  **  pay  your  tithing  and  be
blessed/1  the  subject  of  tithing
would  appear  of  greater  moment  to
us. I  recollect,  not  long  ago,  being


312


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


told  that  a  certain  person  worth  his
thousands  of  dollars  paid  one  dollar
and  fifty  cents  ;  perhaps  in  order  to
be  able  to  bay  at  the  end  of  the
year  that  he  paid  tithing,  Now,
this  land  of  compromise  with  one's
conscience  is  not  the  tiling  for  Saints
— hypocrites  may  indulge  in  it

"Will  you  engage  with  me  a  lew
minute*,  and  consider  the  subject
of  tithing  as  the  Lord  has  given  it
to  us,  and  see  if  we  can  get  to  un-
derstand it,  see  if,  perad venture,
there  is  something  in  it  worthy  to
be  sought  after.  Does  lie  give  us  a
requirement  that  is  not  fraught  with
blessing  and  consolation  to  us.  Not
at  all.  Every  requirement  lived
up  to  brings  consolation  and  bless-
ing. If  I  can  have  the  liberty  of  the
spirit  to  dwell  on  this  subject,  I  would
like  us  to  look  at  it,  and  see  if  there
is  not  something  in  it  which  we
have  not  found  out  and  which  is
both  desirable  and  profitable.

I  will  read  from  the  Doctrine  and
Covenants  a  short  but  very  compre-
hensive Revelation  upon  this  sub-
ject ;  but  before  doing  so  let  me
say  t  hat  wherever  tithing  is  Spoken
about,  the  word  offerings  is  frequent-
ly connected  with  it.  For  instance,
The  Lord  by  His  prophet  Malachi,
charged  Israel  with  having  robbed
him  of  His  tithes  and  offerings.
These  are  words  which  although  nut
strictly  synonymous,  are  so  nearly
alike  that  they  are  frequently  used
together,  and  sometimes  one  for  the
other.  But  as  used  in  the  ancient
scriptures  tithes  are  not  offerings,
and  offerings  are  not  tithes.  It
should  be  kept  in  mind  that  this
Church  was  organized  more  than
eight  years  before  the  Lord  gave  to
his  people  in  this  great  and  last  dis-
pensation a  law  on  the  subject  of
tithing,  Let  this  be  borne  in  mind
as  we  proceed.  The  beginning  of
this  work  was  founded  in  offerings


and  in  consecrations,  by  the  people
giving  themselves  and  all  they
possessed  to  the  work  of  God  when
they  embraced  it.  In  the  building
of  the  Temple  at  Kirtland,  the  law
of  tithing  was  not  known,  but  every
man  went  to  work  on  that  House
after  the  manner  of  bees  reluming
to  their  hive,  and  each  bringing  in
the  necessary  material  to  enable
them  to  carry  on  the  work.

When  the  first  Bishop,  Edward
Partridge,  was  appointed  to  the  high
position  of  Bishop  of  the  Church  iu
Zion,  his  duty,  as  given  by  revela-
tion, was  not  to  deal  with  tithing.
Indeed  tithing  was  not  even  men-
tioned in  the  whole  revelation,  but
be  was  required  to  receive  the  con-
secrations of  the  Saints,  and  to  set
off  to  them  their  inheritances.  No
revelation  had  yet  been  given  upon
the  subject  of  tithing.  When  the
Saints  had  go  le  up  from  Kirtland  to
Jackson  County  in  Missouri,  and  had
been  driven  to  Clay  County,  and
from  Clay  to  Caldwell  County,  and
when  Brothers  Joseph  and  Hyrum,
David  and  Oliver,  and  the  leading
authorities  of  the  priesthood  at  that
time  were  congregated  in  Far  West,
the  then  gathering  place  of  Israel,
a.v:d  where  a  Temple  was  appointed
to  be  built,  it  was  on  the  8th  of  J  uly,
183S,  that  the  Lord  gave  for  the
first  tune  to  this  people,  through  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  the  law  on
the  subject  of  tithing,  and  we  should
understand  this  in  order  to  approach
the  subject  in  a  correct  and  proper
manner.

Up  to  this  time  you  will  recollect
that  the  Saints  had  gone  to  Missouri
to  receive  inheritances  according^  to
the  order  of  stewardships,  conse-
crating all  they  had  to  the  Bishop  in
Zion  ;  and  in  turn  he  delivered  to
every  man  his  stewardship  and  gave
to  him  a  written  deed  and  covenant,
in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the


TITHES  AND  OFFERINGS,  ETC


313


authority  of  his  holy  ministerial  call-
ing which  could  not  be  broken  ;  and
as  you  well  know  who  are  familiar
with  the  history,  the  Saints  were
during  the  following  winter  of
IS 38-9,  driven  out  from  Missouri
altogether.

"We  will  now  look  at  this  short
"  revelation  given  through  Joseph,
the  Prophet,  at  Far  West,  Missouri,
July  8th,  1838,  in  answer  to  a  ques-
tion, uO  Lord,  show  unto  thy
servants  how  much  thou  requirest
of  the  properties  of  the  people  for  a
tithing."

1.  '*  Verily,  til  us  saith  the  Lord,
I  require  all  their  surplus  property,
to  be  put  into  the  hands  of  the
Bishop  of  my  Churcli  of  Zion.

2.  "  For  the  building  of  mine
house,  and  for  the  laying  of  the
foundation  of  Zion  ami  for  the
Priesthood,  and  for  the  debts  of  the
Presidency  of  my  Church,

3.  "  And  this  shall  be  the  begin-
ning cf  the  tithing  of  my  peo-
ple,

4.  "And  after  that,  those  who
have  thus  been  tithed,  shall  pay  one-
tenth  of  all  their  interest  annually  ;
and  this  shall  be  a  standing  law
unto  them  for  ever,  for  my  holy
Priesthood,  saith  the  Lr>nL

5.  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  it  shall
conie  to  pass,  that  all  those  who
gather  unto  the  land  of  Zion  shall
he  tithed  of  their  surplus  properties,
and  shall  observe  this  law,  or  they
shall  not  be  found  worthy  to  abide
among  you*

C,  "  And  I  say  unto  you,  if  my
people  observe  not  this  law;  to  keep
it  holy,  and  by  this  law  sanctify  the
land  of  Zion  unto  me,  that  my
statutes  and  my  judgments  may  be
kept  thereon,  that  it*  may  be  most
holy,  behold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,
it  shall  not  be  a  land  of  Zion  unto

you.

7.  "  And  this  shall  be  an  ensam-


ple  unto  all  the  Stakes  of  Zion.
Even  so.  Amen."

Before  going  further  I  want  to
stop  and  consider  the  question  asked
by  some,  what  He  means  where  the
Lord  requires  the  surplus  property
of  His  people  as  the  beginning  of
their  tithing.  Let  us  consider  for
a  moment  this  word  "  surplus."
What  does  it  mean  when  applied  to
a  man  and  his  property  1  Surplus
cannot  mean  that  which  is  indispen-
sably necessary  for  any  given  pur-
pose, but  what  remains  after  sup-
plying what  is  needed  for  that
purpose.  Is  not  the  first  and  most
necessary  use  of  a  man's  property
that  lie  feed,  clot  lie  and  provide  a
home  for  himself  and  family  ?  This
appears  to  be  the  great  leading  ob-
jects 4for  which  we  labor  to  acquire
means,  and  as,  until  the  time  that
this  revelation  was  given f  all  public
work?  and  raising  of  all  public  funds
had  been  by  consecration,  was  not
"  surplus  property,"  that  which  was
over  and  above  a  comfortable  and
necessary  subsistence  ?  In  the  light
of  what  had  transpired  and  of  sub-
sequent events,  what  else  could  it
mean  !  Can  we  take  any  other  view
of  it  when  we  consider  the  circum-
stances under  which  it  was  given  in
Far  V  est  in  Julv,  1838?

I  have  been  unable  in  studying
this  subject  to  find  any  other  defi-
nition of  tiie  term  surplus,  as  used
in  this  revelation,  than  the  one  I
have  just  given,  I  find  that  it  was
so  understood  and  recorded  by  the
Bishops  and  people  in  those  days,  as
well  a.s  by  the  Prophet  Joseph  him-
self, who  was  unquestionably  the
ablest  and  best  exponent  of  this
revelation.

Immediately  following  the  perse-
cutions of  the  Saints  in  the  expul-
sion from  the  State  of  Missouri,  the
Prophet  Joseph,  in  1839,  found  the
sickly  town  of  Commerce  so  nearly


314


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


depopulated,  by  disease,  that  its
remaining  inhabitants  were  glad  to
sell  out  to  him  their  sickly  place,
which  afterwards  became  the  de-
lightful Xauvoo — for  God  blessed  it
and  made  the  place  healthy  as  well
as  beautiful.  Soon  a  site  was  se-
lected on  which  to  build  a  Temple,
as  says  the  Lord,  u  which  my  people
are  always  commanded  to  build
unto  my  name/'  The  corner  stones
were  laid  and  the  gathered  saints
were  diligently  at  work  on  the
building

How  did  they  build  it  ?  Here  for
the  first  time  in  this  dispensation
the  principle  of  tithing  was  practiced
by  the  Saints  in  the  labor  of  build-
ing a  Temple.  Few,  if  any,  in  those
days,  who  came  to  Nauvoo,  had  any
surplus,  and  many  had  not  a  com-
fortable subsistence,  consequently
the  tithing  of  the  people  on  that
Temple  was  mostly  in  labor  as  I
well  recollect — for  I  worked  in  the
quarry  every  tenth  day  when  I  was
not  absent  on  missionary  service*  I
remember  very  well  that  every  man
who  was  dependent  on  rhi§  daily
labor  went  in  good  faith  and  per-
formed the  work  assigned  him,  and
it  was  considered  and  credited  to  him
a?>  his  tithing.  When  brethren  who
had  property  gathered  there  they
were  tithed  ot  their  surplus  property,
and  then  after  that  of  their  increase
of  the  residue  from  that  time  on.
So  abundant  was  the  spirit  of
consecration  among  the  Saints  in
those  days,  they  voted  rather  than
have  the  Temple  fail  of  completion
by  the  appointed  time,  they  would
appropriate  their  homes  and  the
lots  on  which. they  stood  for  its  ac-
complishment After  paying  such
surplus  as  the  beginning  of  their
tithing,  "those who  have  thus  been
tithed  shall  pay  one  tenth  of  all
their  interest  annually ;  and  this
shall  be  a  standing  law  unto  them


forever,  for  nay:  holy  Priesthood,,
saith  the  Lord."  Again,  **  Verily  I
say  unto  you,  it  shall  come  to  pass,
that  all  those  who  gather  to  the
land  of  2 Ion  shall  be  tithed  of  their
surplus  property,  and  shall  ob-
serve this  law,  or  they  shall  not  he
found  worthy  to  abide  among  you/'
This  is  a  command  ;  it  does  not
say  it  may  or  may  not  be,  but  they
shall  not  be  worthy  to  abide
among  you,  "And  I  say  unto
you,  if  my  people  observe  not
this  law,  to  keep  it  holy,  and  by
this  law  sanctify  the  land  of  Zion
unto  me,  that  my  statutes  and  my
judgments  may  be  kept  therein,  that
it  may  be  most  holy,  behold,  verily,
I  say  unto  you,  it  shall  not  be  a  land
of  Zion  unto  you,"  This  language
is  plain  ami  tree  from  ambiguity.
"  And  this  shall  be  an  ensampl*
unto  all  the  Stakes  of  Zion.

I  call  your  attention  to  this  that
we  may  look  at  it  and  come  tu  know
what  it  really  means  to  pay  tithing.
For  I  do  believe  that  the  majority
of  the  brethren  want  to  understand
what  is  the  mind  of  the  Lord  on
this  subject,  because  our  blessings
all  depend  upon  our  understanding
what  is  his  mind  and  will  and  then
carrying  it  out  to  the  best  of  our
ability.  Some  who  pay  their  tithing
think  they  ought  not  to  be  called
upon  for  any  offerings  to  the  Temple
or  poor,  and  say,  "If  I  have  to
make  donations  I  cannot  pay  tith-
ing j"  and  they  act  accordingly.

I  might  go  on  to  speak  about  a
great  variety  of  views  which  are
taken  of  this  subject,  but  suppose
we  take  a  look  at  what  the  Lord
said  and  did  about  these  things
anciently.  First,  a  word  concerning
offerings.  People  carry  something
to  the  poor  because  they  feel  it  to
be  a  requirement ;  but  do  they  do  it
in  the  way  that  they  may  receive
the  blessings  of  the  Lord  thai  per-


TITHES  AND  OFFERINGS,  ETC,


tain  to  the  giving  of  those  offerings!
There  is  a  great  deal  more  belong-
ing to  this,  than  I  shall  attempt  to
explain  now.  The  first  manifesta-
tion of  God's  favor  and  of  his  dis-
favor to  man  over  the  matter  of
offerings  was  towards  two  of  the  sons
of  Adam — Abel  and  Gain  ;  Abel
brought  the  firstlings  of  his  flock
and  of  the  fat  thereof,  such  an  offer-
ing was  acceptable  to  the  Lord,  and
because  of  this  the  favor  and  ble^s
ing  of  God  was  upon  him.  Cain,
his  own  brother,  child  of  the  same
parents,  brought  his  offering  to  the
Lord,  but  his  offering  the  Lord
could  not  accept,  it  was  displeasing
in  his  sight.  The  Bible  does  not
give  us  the  particular  reasons  for  the
acceptance  of  Abel's  and  the  rejec-
tion of  Cain's  offering  ;  but  the  Tal-
mud, an*  ancient  Jewish  record,  in-
forms us  that  is  while  Abel  selected
the  finest  and  best-conditioned
animals  of  his  flock,  Cain  offered  fruit
of  an  iuferior  quality,  the 'poorest
which  the  eartli  afforded.  Therefore,
Cain's  offering  was  unheeded,  while
the  fire  of  acceptance  fell  from  hea-
ven, consuming  the  gracious  gift
which  his  brother  had  presented  to
his  Maker/'

Cain's  offering  did  not  represent
that  gratitude  and  acknowledgement
which  was  witnessed  in  his  brother
Abel's,  And  while  God  could  pour
out  his  blessing  and  spirit  upon
Abel,  accepting  of  his  offering,  He
could  not  do  so  to  Cain,  We  may
take  this  down  to  the  times  of  Israel
in  the  laud  of  Canaan.  The  Lord,
when  he  gave  thera  the  law  of
tithiug,  gave  also  the  particular
item  of  offerings.  They  had  to
bring  peace  offerings  and  different
kinds  of  offerings  before  the  Lord,
that  by  complying  with  these  the
favor  of  God  might  rest  upon  them.
But  to  give  a  more  striking  and  sig-
nificant instance,  let  me  refer  you


to  the  case  of  Solomon,  who  wanting
a  certain  peculiar  blessing  from  the
Lord,  offered  a  sacrifice  unto  the
Lord  of  3,000  bullocks,  and  said  he,
"  0,  Lord,  if  thou  wilt  accept  of
my  offering,  I  desire  not  the  riches
nor  the  wealth,  nor  the  honor  of  the
world,  but  I  desire  wisdom,  that  I
may  be  able  to  lead  the  people  in
the  right  way  of  the  Lord."  What
effect  did  this  offering  produce  t  The
Lord  granted  the  desire  of  his  heart.
Here  was  a  standard  given,  Solomon
did  not  want  a  blessing  worth  a
certain  amount,  he  wanted  one  that
i  should  reach  his  people  through
him ;  the  blessing  that  he  might
be  enabled  to  rule  over  them  in
wisdom.  He  sought  such  a  blessing,
and  not  the  blessing  of  earthly
goods;  and  God  granted  it  to  him,
ami  he  made  the  wisest  of  men  and
the  best  ruler  that  ever  led  that
people  ;  although  his  heart  was  led
astray,  after  idols,  as  the  Lord  told
him  it  would  be  if  he  took  wives
from  other  nations  which  were  idol-
atrous* When  we  make  offerings
unto  God,  they  should  be  of  the  best
and  the  choicest  that  we  have,  and
when  this  is  the  case  we  can  with
moie  freedom  and  faith  ask  our
Father  for  some  of  the  best  of  His
blessings,  But  if  we  give  the  poorest
of  our  property  as  some  do,  will
5  it  be  acceptable  to  the  Lnrd,  and
shall  we  obtain  the  blessing  we
desire  ]

1  If  you  were  going  to  make  an
offering  to  the  nobles  of  the  earth,
you  would  never  think  of  presenting
anything  but  the  best  and  choicest
of  the  kind  of  gift  you  were  going
to  make,  I  do  not  want  to  speak
lengthily  upon  this  matter  of  offer-
ings, but  to  merely  remind  you  that
when  we  make  offerings  we  should
do  to  in  sincerity,  imparting  the
best  we  have,  as  did  Abel,  and  never
presenting  anything  that  our  better


316


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES,


nature  would  intimate  to  us  would
not  be  acceptable  to  God  or  His  ser-
vants, that  we  may  not  share  the
lot  of  Cain.

Let  us  now  return  more  particu-
larly to  the  subject  of  tithing.  The
Lord  gave  to  His  people  anciently
the  law  of  tithing.  It  is  recorded  in
the  14th  chapter  ot  Genesis,  thai
Abraham,  when  he  went  out  with
318  trained  men,  in  the  power
of  God,  slew  certain  wicked  Icings,
thereby  winning  the  admiration  of
God's  High  Priest  Mel ehisedek,  who
we  are  told,  went  out  to  meet  him
when  he  was  returning  home,  and
Messed  him.  Abraham  turned  over
one-tenth  of  the  spoils  that  he  had
taken  to  this  man  of  God  ;  he  did
not  even  take  them  home,  so  regard-
ful was  he  to  conform  to  this  law,
which  lie  respected  and  honored,
and  the  observance  of  which  brought
such  great  blessings  upon  his  own
head  and  upon  the  heads  of  his
generations  after  him,  who  also
observed  this  law,  Paul,  hundreds
of  years  afterwards,  quoted  it  as  an
example  for  those  of  his  d£\y.

The  Bible  informs  us  that  Jacob,
while  serving  for  his  wives,  recog-
nized this  law,  and  said  to  the  Lord  :
"  Of  all  that  thou  shalt  give  me  I
will  surely  give  the  tenth  unto
thee/'  The  Lord  blessed  him  with
the  desires  of  hi*  heart  arid  prospered
him  exceedingly.  He  paid  Ins
tithing.

So  also  the  Prophet  Joseph  and
other  leading  Elders  of  the  Church
in  our  own  day  have  covenanted
with  the  Lord  and  paid  their  tithing
with  most  careful  consideration.
When  Israel  was  being  brought  up
from  the  laud'  of  Egypt,  and  the
Xord  established  his  law  among
them  to  make  them  his  people,  he
gave  them  the  following  command-
ment in  regard  to  tithing.  Leviticus
27,  30,  34:  "All  the  tithe  of  the


land,  or  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  is  the
Lord's  ;  it  is  holy  unto  the  Lord."
And  if  a  man  will  at  all  redeem
aught  of  his  tithes,  he  shall  add
thereto  the  fifth  part  thereof.  Arid
concerning  the  tithe  of  the  herd,  or
of  the  flock,  even  of  whateverpasseth
under  the  rod,  the  tenth  shall  be
holy .  unto  the  Lord/'  "Whatsoever
passe th  under  the  rod."  Do  you
know  what  that  means?  I  will
relate  the  history  as  it  has  come
down  to  us,  When  they  came  to
pay  their  tithing  the  Lord  told  them
it  should  not  be  the  poorest  neither
would  he  ask  the  best ;  therefore
they  put  their  flock  or  herd  in  a  pen
having  an  outlet  just  large  enough
for  one  to  pass  out  at  a  time,  and  as
the  animals  passed  in  single- file,  the
owner  stood  by  with  a  rod  in  his
hand  that  had  been  dipped  in
some  sort  of  coloring  material,
counting  them  as  they  came  out,
and  touching  every  tenth  animal
with  his  colored  rod.  He  would
not  go  in  among  them  and  pick
them  lest  his  judgment  might  not
be  right,  but  the  flock  passed  out
according  to  their  own  inclination,
and  as  they  passed,  the  owner  stood
with  the  coloring  rod  and  marked
on  the  back  of  every  tenth  animal,
and  after  all  had  passed  out  to  an
adjoining  fold,  those  that  were
marked  were  then  picked  out  from
the  flock  "  He  shall  not  search
whether  it  be  good  or  bad,  nei-
ther shall  he  change  it ;  and  if
he  change  it  at  all,  then  both  it  and
the  change  thereof  shall  be  holy  j
it  shall  not  be  redeemed."  They
were  to  take  it  as  it  came,  not  to
pick  the  good  nor  the  bad  ;  this  was
the  requirement,  that  they  should
give  to  the  Lord  tithes  of  all :
Leviticus,  27,  3D  and  33,  There  is
another  feature  in  this
worthy  of  notice,  while
paid  these  offerings  and


which  is
all  Israel
tithes  of


TITHING  AND  OFFERINGS,  ETC,


their  seed  and  grain,  flocks  and
herds,  to  the  ones  appointed  to  re-
ceive it — -to  the  Levites  ;  that  tribe

;  of  Israel  was  forbidden  to  have  any
other  property,  but  they  had  to  live
on  the  tithing  thus  presented.  Still
they  were  required  to  pay  a  tithe  of
what  they  received  the  same  as  the
rest  of  the  people.  The  Scriptures
say  about  this  in  the  18th  chapter
of  Numbers  :  "  And  the  Lord  spake
unto  Moses,  saying,  Thus  speak  unto
the  Levites,  and  say  unto  them,
when  ye  take  of  the  children  of
Israel  the  tithes  which  I  have  given
you  from  them  for  your  inheritance,
then  ye  shall  offer  up  an  heave
offering  of  it  for  the  Lord,  even  a
tenth  part  of  the  tithe.  And  this
your  heave  offering  shall  be  reck-
oned unto  you,  as  though  it  were  the
corn  of  the  threshing  floor,  and  as
the  fullness  of  the  winepress.1'
Tli us  we  see  that  the  Levites  had

I  to  pay  tithing  of  all  they  re-
ceived*

Again,  the  Lord  called  upon  Israel
to  hold  at  certain  seasons  what  they
called  feasts.  He  told  them  that
they  should  bring  their  supplies,
provisions,  etc.,  at  the  times  of  these
feasts,  and  that  on  the  first  day
they  should  not  do  any  manner  of
work,  but  should  come  together  on
the  day  of  the  feast  of  Pentecost
and  the  passover,  and  should  re-
I  member  how  the  Lord  passed  by
them  in  the  land  of  Egypt ;  and  the
first  day  and  the  last  day  of  the
feast  they  were  required  to  keep
without  working. And  the  people

I  were  commanded  to  eat  before  the
Lord  with  clean  hearts  and  with
rejoicings,  and  were  particularly
requested  to  invite  the  Levite  who
was  without  part  or  inheritance
among  them.  The  Lord  pointed
out  things  definitely  for  His  people,
and  as  long  as  they  obeyed  strictly

II  the  requirements  made  of  them


they  flourished  and  prospered  in
the  land.  And  it  was  wont  I  erf ul
how  that  little  land  of  Canaan  was
made  to  support  the  millions  of
Israel,  with  all  their  flocks  and  herds.
It  was  truly  a  land  flowing  with
milk  and  honey.  And  it  was  be-
cause of  the  blessing  of  God  that
was  upon  it.

I  The  Lon]  our  God  wants  us  to
sanctify  this  land  unto  him  by  pay-

i  ing  our  tithing  and  offerings,  that
He  may  bless  it  unto  us  and  make
it  a  blessed  land  upon  the  face  of
the  earth,  not  only  to  us  but  to  our
generations  after  us.  He  has  geae
so  far  as  to  say  that  kings  should
not  rule  over  it,  and  that  if  the  peo-
ple who  live  upon  it"  should  become
wicked,  when  the  cup  of  their  in-
iquity btcame  full  they  should  be
cut  off.  These  are  great  promises
made  unto  us  if  we  carry  out  the
requirements  of  the  Gospel.  And
yet,  how  little  do  we  know  of  the
great  blessings  that  follow  obedience

]  to  the  law  of  tithing  1  Some  seem  to
forget  that  if  they  do  not  pay  tith-
ing, they  are  not  even  entitled  to  a
recommend  from  their  Bishop  to
partake  of  the  general  blessings  of
the  Lord's  house.  They  do  not
seem  to  realize  this.  The  day
is  coming  when  you  will  want  to  go
into  the  Temple  of  the  Lord  which
is  now  being  erected  in  your  city,
and  receive  your  ordinances  there,
the  records  will  be  searched  to  seo
if you have paid  your  tithing.

i  And  then  you  will  have  occasion  for
sorrow,  and  regret  if  you  have  not
been  faithful  to  tins  requirement
in  times  of  prosperity,  and  while
you  could  have  paid  as  well  as
not.

There  are  some  features  of  this
j  subject  which  seem  like  a  crowning
climax of  the  text. After  the
Lord  revealed  to  Israel  the  law  of
tithing,  and  after  telling  them  how


318


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


to  keep  the  feast  of  the  Passover,
etc.,  he  tells  them  another  peculiar
thing,  to  which  I  wish  to  call  your
attention,  as  it  is  connected  with
the  subject — in  Deuteronomy,  xxvi,
12,  13.

"When  thou  hast  made  an  end  of
tithing,  all  the  tithes  of  thine  in-
crease the  third  year,  which  is  the
year  uf  tithing,  and  hast  given  it
unto  the  Levite,  the  stranger,  the
fatherless  and  the  widow,  that  they
may  eat  within  thy  gates,  and  be
filled.  |

"Than  thou  shalt  say  before  the
Lord  thy  God,  I  have  brought  away
the  hallowed  things  out  of  mine
house,  and  also  have  given  them
unto  the  Levite,  and  unto  the
stranger,  and  to  the  fatherless,  and
to  the  widow,  according  to  all  thy
commandments  which  thou  hast
commanded  me  :  I  have  not  trans-
gressed thy  commandments,  neither
have  I  forgotten  them]  I  have  not
eaten  thereof  in  my  mourning,
neither  have  I  taken  away  aught
thereof  for  any  unclean  use,  nor
given  aught  thereof  for  the  dead ;
but  I  have  hearkened  to  the  voice
of  the  Lord  my  God,  and  have  done
according  to  all  that  thou  hast  com-
mauded.me."  j

Here  is  a  curious*  saying  :  When
thou  hast  made  an  end  of  this  tith-
ing, and  eaten  within  thy  gates,
then  thou  shalt  say  before  the  Lord  :
M  I  have  brought  away  the  hallowed
things  out  of  mine  house,  and  also
have  I  Lnven  these  unto  the  Levite,
and  the  stranger,  to  the  fatherless
and  to  the  widow,  according  to  all
thy  commandments  which  thou  hast
commanded  me ;  I  have  not  trans-
gressed thy  commandments,  neither
have  I  forgotten  them/1  Now,
supposing  there  was  ah  ordinance
of  that  kind  instituted  among  us  !
that  at  the  close  of  each  annual  set-
tlement, it  was  required  of  each


man  to  say,  I  have  paid  my  tithing,
the  tenth  of  all  the  Lord  has  given
unto  me  ;  I  have  delivered  it  to  my
Bishop  or  to  the  storehouse  of  the
Lord,  as  the  Lord  has  required.  And
then  to  say,  I  have  done  all  things
according  to  the  commandments  of
the  Lord  my  God,  and  have  not
failed  in  any  of  these  things.  How
many  of  us  could  lift  up  our  hands
and  say  that  we  have  done  all  that
God  has  required  t  There  was  the
point — God  brought  it  home  to  the
people,  and  when  a  man  could  say
this  his  neighbors  knew  he  was  liv-
ing the  law  of  God.  This  was  some-
thing that  created  confidence  and
fellowship  between  man  and  man.
When  they  could  thus  testify  that
they  had  done  all  that  was  required
of  them,  they  could  also,  with  good
grace  and  faith,  ask  the  blessings  of
God  upon  them  and  their  land  as
written  in  the  l~>th  verse  of  the
chapter  just  quoted  :  "Look  down
upon  thy  holy  habitation  from  hea-
ven and  bless  thy  people  Israel,  and
the  land  which  thou  hast  given  us,
as  thou  swarcst  unto  our  fathers,
a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and
honey."  As  the  Lord  has  in  like
manner  said  unto  us.

"And  1  say  unto  you,  if  my
people  observe  not  this  law,  to  keep
it  holy,  and  by  this  law  sanctify  the
land  of  Zion  unto  me,  that  my
statutes  and  my  judgments  may  be
kept  thereon,  that  it  may  be  most
holy,  behold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,
it  shall  not  be  a  land  of  Zion  unto
youJ'

There  is  one  other  thing  in  con-
nection with  this  wherein  the  Lord
gave  to  the  people  a  requirement
which  it  would  seem  was  intended
to  reach  home  to  their  hearts  and
to  prevent  greed  and  covetousness.
Every  seventh  year  was  a  year  of
jubilee  or  release  when  the  poor,
the  unfortunate,  the  bondmen  and


TITHING  AND  OFFERINGS,  ETC.


319


the  debtor  were  set  free.
If.  a  man  borrowed  of  his  neigh-
bor during  the  early  part  of  the  six
years,  he  had  more  time  which  gave
a, better  prospect  of  being  able  to
pay  before  the  seventh  year  arrived.
If  another  wished  to  borrow
during  the  sixth  year,  not  having
so  much  time  to  earn  or  make  the
pay,  persons  having  money  to  lend
would  naturally  feel  that  it  was
doubtful  if  they  would  get  their
money  back.

Upon  this  peculiar  feature  of
financial  policy  the  Lord  says,  u  if
there  be  among  you  a  poor  man  or  ,
one  of  thy  brethren  within  any  of
thy  gates  in  thy  land  which  the
Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee,  thou
shalt  not  harden  thine  heart,  nor
shut  thine  hand  from  thy  poor
brother.  But  thou  shalt  open  thine
hand  wide  unto  him  and  shalt  surely
lend  unto  him  sufficient  for  his
need,  in  that  which  he  wauteth.
Beware  that  there  be  not  a  thought
in  thy  wicked  heart,  saying,  'the
seventh  year,  the  year  of  release
is  at  hand/  and  thy  eye  be  evil
-against  thy  poor  brother,  and  thou
givest  I  dm  nought  ;  and  he  cry  unto
the  L<>rd  against  thee,  and  it  be  sin
unto  thee.  Thou  shalt  surely  give
him,  and  thine  heart  shall  not  be
grieved  when  thou  givest  unto  him;
beeaiLse  for  this  thing  the  Lord  thy
God  shall  bless  thee  in  all  thy  works,
And  in  all  that  thou  puttest  thine
hand  unto," — Deut,  xv.,  7-1 L

How  wonderfully  the  Lord  in  all
his  teachings  seeks  and  works  to  do
away  with  covetous ness,  that  sin
which  is  idolatry,  from  the  midst
of  his  people.  If  thy  brother  come
to  thee  on  the  sixth  year  thou  shalt
not  close  thine  hand  against  him,
but  thou  shalt  open  wide  thine  hand
unto  him.  Thou  shalt  not  let  thy
wicked  heart  say,  that  the  seventh
jear,  the  year  of  release  is  at  hand


and  I  perhaps  will  lose  it  all

Brethren,  since  so  exalted  senti-
ments of  charitable  benevolence
were  given  to  the  ancients,  under
tlie  law,  shall  we  to  whom  the  full-
ness of  the  Gospel  has  come,  let
these  precepts  pass  by  unheeded
without  treasuring  them  up  in  good
ami  honest  hearts  I

I  have  but  just  begun  to  open  the
door,  just  commenced  to  enter  into
some  details  that  environ  this  great
ami  vastly  important  subject.  I
have  only  aimed  at  the  importance
and  general  bearing  of  this  law  upon
the  Saints,  as  touching  all  that  the
Lord  gives  unto  us,  not  dealing  in
the  least  with  the  administration  of
His  law.

Let  us  consider — who  is  it  that
causes  the  grain  to  increase  when
we  pat  it  into  the  earth  ]  Who
makes  our  flocks  and  herds  to  in-
crease ?  Who  gives  us  the  vitalizing
air  we  breathe — the  liberty  we  en-
joy with  all  the  hopes  and  promises
of  eternal  life  and  glory  through
obedience  to  the  Everlasting  Gos-
pel ?  God  the  givur  of  every  good
gift.

From  the  foregoing  we  learn  that
the  law  of  tithing  is  a  strict  com-
mandment, a  law  which  if  obeyed
faithfully  by  God's  people  will  bring
blessing,  plenty  and  sanctification
of  the  land  occupied  by  them  unto
God  and  His  purposes,  but  if  dis-
obeyed the  disobedient  4i  shall  not  be
found  worthy  to  abide  among  the
Saints,  and  this  land  shall  not  be  a
land  of  Zion  unto  them."

That  the  difference  between  tith-
ing and  offering  is  that  tithing  is
designated,  meaning  one-tenth,
neither  more  nor  less  ;  while  offer*
ings  are  also  required,  the  amount
is  left  optional  with  the  giver— the
measure  he  metes  will  be  measured
to  him  again.

That  the  tithins  of  all  that  the


320


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Lord  gives  unto  us  belongs  unto
Him,  and  it  is  cur  first  duty  to  the
Church  to  pay  it,  and  after  that  the
sacred  precepts,  teach  offerings  and
a  generous  benevolence  to  the  poor
and  needy,  whether  in  gifts  or  loans
— discouraging  greed  or  covetous-
ness  of  this  worlds  goods,  which
is  idolatry.


I  earnestly  pray  that  the  Spirit
of  God  may  enable  us  to  master  this
and  all  other  principles  of  the  Gos-
pel, until  we  shall  possess  the  riches
of  eternal  life,  the  greatest  gift  of
God  to  man.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,
Delivered  in  Payson,  Thursday  Evening,  Nov.  23rd,  1882.

Reported  by  John  Irvifie,  .  t

MAN'S  NATURAL  SPIRIT  AND  THE  SPIRIT  OF  GOD — OUR  RELATIONSHIP
WITH  HIM  —  HIS  DEALINGS  IN  THE  LATTER  DAYS  —  WHAT  IS  EX-
PECTED OF  THE  SAINTS — THEIR  POSITION  AND  LABORS  AMONG  THE
NATIONS — CHRIST  THE  EXAMPLE  TO  ALL  HIS  FOLLOWERS — WORDS
OF  COUNSEL  TO  PRIESTHOOD  AND  PEOPLE.


We  are  living,  as  Brother  Canno  n
has  remarked,  in  a  most  important
day  and  age  of  the  world.  The
times  are  pregnant  with  greater
events  than  any  we  have  any  know-
ledge of  in  the  history  of  God's  deal-
ings with  His  people  among  the
nations  of  the  earth  in  the  different
ages.  The  very  fact  of  our  gather-
ing together  as  we  do  is  a  very  pecu-
liar thing*  It  differs  from  the  way
of  any  other  people*  It  is  a  part
of  the  Gospel,  and  inspired  by  the
spirit  of  revelation,  even  the  gift
of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  comes
through  obedience  to  the  GospeL
There  is  and  always  has  been  a  spirit


ali road  in  the  world  which  is  really
a  portion  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  which
leads  mankind,  in  many  instances,
to  discriminate  between  good  and
evil,  and  between  right  and  wrong*
They  have  a  conscience  that  accuses
or  excuses  them  for  their  acts ;  and
although  the  world  of  mankind  is
very  wicked  and  very  corrupt,  yet
it  will  be  found  that  almost  all  men,
though  they  may  not  do  good  them-
selves, appreciate  good  actions  ia
others.

The  scriptures  say  that  God  "hath
made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of
men  for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of
the  earth,  and  hath  determined


man's  natural  spirit,  etc.


3121


the  times  before  appointed,  and  ]
the  bounds  of  their  habitation ;
that  they  should  seek  the  Lord,  if
haply  they  might  feel  after  Him,
and  find  Him,  though  he  be  not
far  from  every  one  of  us."  The
Scripture  further  says,  He  has  given
unto  them  a  portion  of  his  spirit  to
profit  withal.  But  there  is  quite
a  distinction  between  the  position
that  these  people  occupy  and  the
one  which  we  occupy.  We  have
something  more  than  that  portion
of  the  Spirit  of  God  which  is  given
to  every  man,  and  it  is  called  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is
received  through  obedience  to  the
first  principles  of  the  Gospel  of
Christ,  by  the  laying  on  of_  hands  of
the  servants  of  God.  Hence,  when
the  Gospel  was  preached  in  former
times  among  the  people  they  were
told  to  repent  of  their  sins ;  to  be
baptized  in  the  name  of  Jesus  for
the  remission  of  their  sins,  and  then
to  have  hands  laid  upon  them  for
the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
They  were  told,  moreover,  what
this  Holy  Ghost  would  do  ;  that  it
would  take  of  the  things  of  God  and
shew  them  unto  them  ;  that  it  would
cause  their  old  men  to  dream  dreams
and  their  young  men  to  see  visions  ;
and  that  it  would  rest  upon  the
servants  and  handmaids  of  God,  and
they  should  prophesy.  These  are
the  operations  of  that  Spirit  which
dwells  with  God,  the  Father,  and
God,  the  Son,  namely  the  Holy
Ghost  It  is  this  Spirit  that  brings
us  into  relationship  with  God,  and
it  differs  very  materially  from  the
portion  of  spirit  that  is  given  to  all
men  to  profit  withal  The  special
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  obtained,
as  I  have  said,  through  obedience  to
the  first  principles  of  the  Gospel.  Its
province  is  to  lead  us  into  all  truth,
and  to  bring  to  our  remembrance
things  past,  present  and  to  come.  It
No.  21


contemplates  the  future  and  unfolds
things  we  had  not  thought  of  here-
tofore, and  these  things  are  very  dis-
tinctly described  in  the  Bible,  in  the
Book  of  Mormon,  and  in  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants.  Herein
lies  the  difference  between  us
and  others,  and  it  was  so  in  former
times.  One  of  the  ancient  Apostles
in  speaking  of  our  relationship  to
God,  says  :  u  Now  are  we  the  sons  of
God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear
what  we  shall  be  :  but  we  know  that,
when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be
like  him ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as
he  is"  Again  it  is  said  :  u  And  if
children,  then  heirs,  heirs  of  God,"
that  is,  rightful  inheritors  of  the
things  of  God,  "  and  joint  heirs  of
Jesus  Christ ;  if  so  b^  that  we  suffer
with  him,  that  we  may  be  also
glorified  together."  It  is  the  Gospel
of  the  kingdom  that  has  brought  us
into  this  relationship  with  God.  We
enjoy  the  same  spirit  that  the
Saints  enjoyed  anciently  in  -  the
days  of  Jesus,  in  the  days  of  Moses,
in  the  days  of  Enoch,  in  the  days  of
Seth,  back  to  the  days  of  Adam.
The  Gospel  which  we  have  received
is  the  everlasting  Gospel,  which,
through  the  atonement  of  Jesus
Christ,  brings  men  into  close  rela-
tionship to  God,  their  heavenly
Father,  and  makes  them  heirs  of
ail  the  promises  that  God  has
made  unto  His  people,  Hence  we
occupy  this  position — God  is  really
and  truly  our  Father  and  we  are
His  children.  He  is  <£  the  God  of
the  spirits  of  aU  flesh,"  and  he  has
told  us  to  draw  near  unto  Him.  He
has  taught  us  how  to  pray,  and  in
what  manner  to  approach  Him  and
to  ask  for  such  things  as  we  need.
This  i3  the  position  we  occupy  if  we
can  comprehend  it,  and  we  are
called  upon  by  the  Almighty  to  do
a  great  work.  He  has  taken  very
great  pains  in  introducing  the  prin-

Vol.  XXIII.


■


322


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


ciples  of  the  Gospel,  In  the  first
place  He  has  Himself  spoken  to  us
from  the  heavens,  as  also  has  His
Son  Jesus  Christ,  He  has  restored
the  everlasting  Priesthood  All
those  men  who  had  it  in  their  pos-
session heretofore — that  is  those  who
held  the  keys  of  it  upon  the  earth —
have  appeared  and  restored  the  au-
thority of  the  Holy  Priesthood  which
they  held.  Thus  John  the  Baptist
appeared,  and  laying  his  hands  upon
Joseph  Smith  and  Oliver  Cowdery,
ordained  them  to  the  Aaronie
Priesthood,  using  the  following
words  :  a  Upon  you,  my  fellow-ser-
vants, in  the  name  of  Messiah,  I
confer  the  Priesthood  of  Aaron,
which  holds  the  keys  of  the  minis-
tering of  angels,  and  of  the  Gospel
of  repentance,  and  of  baptism  by
immersion  for  the  remission  of  sins  j
anil  this  shall  never  be  taken  again
from  the  earth,  until  the  sons  of
Levi  do  offer  again  an  offering  unto
the  Lord  in  righteousness."  Peter,
James  and  «Jolm  afterwards  con-
ferred upon  Joseph  Smith  the
Melchisedec  Priesthood,  frhich
holds  the  key  of  the  mysteries  of
the  kingdom,  even  the  key  of
the  knowledge  of  God.  By  this
Priesthood  the  mind  and  will  of
God  is  made  known  unto  man  ;  by
it  man  can  walk  according  to  the  light
and  intelligence  which  God  imparts.
Men  have  been  ordained  to  this
Holy  Priesthood,  and  they  have
gone  forth  to  preach  the  Gospel  to
the  nations  of  the  earth.  In  this
labor  they  have  been  sustained,
blessed  and  upheld  by  the  Lord,  for
although  the  world  has  generally
been  opposed  to  them  in  their  min-
istrations, yet  He  has  given  unto
them  power,  wisdom  and  intelli-
gence, whereby  they  have  been  able
to  sustain  and  maintain  the  princi-
ples which  God  has  revealed.  And
hen  the  sheep  of  God — that  is,  the


thousands  that  have  been  gathered
together  from  among  tin?  nations —


t


have  been  led  to  see  and  believe  in
and  obey  the  Gospel  as  it  has  been
presented  to  them,  Jesus  said  that
His  sheep  would  know  his  voice,
;md  a  stranger  they  would  not  fol-
low. Through  the  medium  of  the
Gospel  we  have  been  gathered
together  in  these  valleys  of  the  moun-
tains to-day.  Why  did  the  Lord
call  upon  us  ?  That  He  might  have
a  people  who  would  obey  His  law  ;
for  the  world  generally  will  not
listen  to  the  voice  of  God;  the
nations  of  the  earth,  the  kings  of
the  earth,  the  princes  of  the  earth,
the  presidents  of  the  earth,  the
legislators  of  the  earth,  and  the
powers  of  the  earth,  will  not  listen
to  the  voice  of  God,  and  He  has
called  us  together,  as  He  said  He
would  do,  M  one  of  a  city  and  two  of
a  family/'  He  has  gathered  us
together  that  we  may  be  taught  of
Him.  It  is  written  in  the  Prophets
that  the  people  u  shall  be  all  taught
of  God  ;  11  and  we  want  to  progress
in  this  intelligence  and  in  the  prin-
ciples which  God  has  revealed  until
men  shall  not  say  one  to  another,
"  Know  ye  the  Lord,  for  all  shall
know  Him,  from  the  least  to  the
greatest."  This  is  the  position  that
we  are  expected  to  occupy.  Having
obtained  this  knowledge  of  God,  we
are  to  teaeli  it  to  others,  so  that  the
eternal  principles  he  has  revealed
may  be  disseminated  among  the  na-
tions of  the  earth,  until  the  honest
in  heart  shall  be  gathered  out,  until
all  that  love  truth  and  are  desirous
to  know  the  will  of  God  and  do  it,
will  be  under  the  direction  and
guidance  of  the  Lord.  And  then,
when  the  will  of  God  is  done  among
the  saints  of  God  upon  the  earth  as
it  is  done  in  heaven,  a  part  of  that
which  Jesus  prayed  for  will  be  ac-
complished. Jesus  taught  his  dis-


man's  natural  spirit,  etc*


323


triples  to  pray  that  the  will  of  God  [
might  be  clone  upon  the  earth  as  it  I
is  done  in  heaven.  At  the  present
time  it  is  not  done  in  all  the  earth,  1
but  it  may  be  done  among  us  if  we
will  subject  ourselves  to  the  law  of
God,  the  word  of  God,  the  will  of
God,  and  the  principles  of  eternal
truth,  and  follow  the  teachings  of
the  Spirit  of  God  ;  for  as  many  as
are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God  are  the
sons  of  God,  and  if  sons  then  are
they  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs
with  Jesus  Christ  Now,  it  is  the
rule  of  God  which  is  desired  to  be
introduced  upon  the  earth,  and  this
is  the  reason  why  the  Father  and
the  Son  appeared  to  Joseph  Smith,
why  John  the  Baptist  conferred  the
Aaron ic  Priesthood,  why  Peter,
James  and  John  conferred  the
Melchisedec  Priesthood,  why  Moses
came  to  bestow  the  dispensation
of  the  gathering,  and  why  other
manifestations  have  been  given
unto  us  as  a  people,  His  elect,  whom
He  has  chosen  from  among  the
nations.  This  is  an  honorable  posi-
tion for  us  to  occupy.  We  are
called  to  till  various  duties  that  God
requires  at  our  hands.  And  our
position  is  not  a  nominal  thing  ;  it  is
a  reality.  It  is  true  that  God  appeared
to  Joseph  Smith,  and  that  His  Son
Jesus  did  ;  it  is  true  that  John  the
Baptist  appeared  ;  it  is  true  that
Peter,  James  and  John  appeared;
and  conferred  upon  him  the  Holy
Priesthood ;  it  is  true  that  Moses
and  Elias  appeared  unto  him  and
that  these  all  conferred  upon  him
the  keys  of  their  various  dispensa-
tions ;  it  is  true  that  this  Priesthood
has  been  conferred  upon  us  j  it  is
true  that  the  Gospel  has  been
preached  by  the  Elders  of  Israel  to
the  nations,  so  far  as  they  have  yet
gone ;  it  is  true  that  those  who  have
obeyed  this  Gospel  have  received
the  Holy  Ghost  and  have  been


[  placed  in  communication  with  God
our  Heavenly  Father.  These  things
are  all  true.  It  is  also  true  that
Eli jali  has  appeared  that  the  hearts
of  the  fathers  might  be  turned  to  their
children  aud  the  hearts  of  the  chil-
dren to  their  tat  hers— that  is  Adam,
Seth,  Methuselah,  Noah,  Abraham,
and  the  men  of  God  in  different
.  ages — that  a  general  interest  might
be  manifested  towards  the  works  of
God  and  the  people  of  God  as  they
have  existed  upon  the  earth,  that
we  may  stand  as  saviors  upon
Mount  Zion,  and  build  up  temples
to  the  Lord,  and  then  go  and  ad*
minister  in  those  temples  for  the
living  and  for  the  dead,  that  there
may  be,  as  the  Prophet  Joseph  has
said,  a  welding  link  that  will
cement  and  bind  other  peoples  with
us  an4  we  with  them,  and  that
there  may  be  a  bond  of  union,  also,
between  the  people  on  earth  and
those  in  heaven,  that  we  may  operate
together,  they  in  the  heavens  and
we  on  the  earth,  for  the  accom-
plishment of  the  purposes  of  God
pertaining  to  the  peoples  that  have
lived,  that  now  live  and  that  will
live.

These  are  some  of  the  objects  of
our  existence,  and  this  is  the  reason
we  are  gathered  together  in  these
valleys  of  the  mountains.  It  is  a
curious  thing  wJien  you  reflect  that
when  you  were  baptized  into  this
Church  nobody  could  keep  you  from
gathering  here.  To  do  so,  many
wives  have  had  to  leave  their  hus-
bands, many  husbands  have  had  to
leave  their  wives,  children  have
had  to  leave  their  parents,  and
parents  have  had  to  leave  their
children.  But  we  are  gathered
together  that -we  might  learn  the
laws  of  life  and  the  word  of  God,
and  that  we  might  comprehend  the
duties  and  responsibilities  that  de;
volve  upon  us — that  we  might  learn


324  JOURNAL  OF

how  to  save  ourselves  and  how
to  save  our  wives  and  children,  our
fathers  and  mothers,  our  uncles
and  aunts,  our  grandfathers  and
great  grandfathers,  who  did  not
have  the  privilege  which  we  enjoy*
This  is  the  position  we  occupy,  that
is,  if  we  are  living  our  religion,
keeping  the  commandments  of  God
and  obeying  those  eternal  principles
which  1  le  has  revealed  to  us*  There  |
are  no  people  living  upon  the  face  of
the  earth  to-day,  who  enjoy  the  priv-
ileges that  this  people  enjoy,  nor
that  have  the  light,  the  truth,  or
the  intelligence  which  we  have.
The  world  does  not  understand  us,
nor  the  principles  we  have  received,
and  consequently  we  are  persecuted,
opposed,  and  abused  on  all  hands.
It  makes  no  difference,  however.
We  are  here  to  do  the  will  of  God,
to  buihJ  up  the  kingdom  of  God,  and
to  establish  the  Ziou  of  God,  And
we  have  been,  many  of  us,  to  the
ends  of  the  earth,  1  was  going  to  say,
but  we  have  not  been  quite  to  the
ends,  in  fact  I  do  not  know  where
the  fends  are  ;  but  we  have  been  up
and  down  the  earth  a  great  deal,  and
then  there  are  a  great  many  places
we  have  not  yet  visited.  It  is  true
the  world  has  not  treated  us  very
well,  ami  I  sometimes  think  that
we  entertain  too  much  of  the  same
spirit  that  the  world  exhibits  to-
wards us.  AVe  are  inclined  to
return  evil  for  evil  We  ought  not
to  do  that*  We  should  return  good
for  evil,  "  Bless  them  that  curse
you,  and  pray  for  them  that  des-
piteful ly  use  you/'  said  the  Savior.
We  have  had  the  Gospel  committed
to  us.  For  what  ?  That, we  might
be  the  messengers  of  life  and  salva-
tion to  others,  not  of  death,  damna-
tion and  destruction,  but  the  mes-
sengers of  life  and  salvation.  How
was  it  with  Jesus  when  he  was  upon
the  earth  ] "  God  sent  not  his


DISCOURSES.

Son  into  the  world  to  condemn  the
world ;  but  that  the  world  through
Him  might  be  saved. 11  He  came  to
be  a  Savior  to  the  world.  He  has
not  set  us  apart  to  condemn  the
world  but  to  preach  the  Gospel  of
life  and  salvation  to  the  world.  It
is  not  for  us  to  feel  in  our  hearts  a
principle  of  destruction,  but  a  prin-
ciple of  salvation,  and  to  seek  to
benefit,  to  bless,  and  to  exalt  the
human  family,  as  many  as  will  como
under  the  influence  of  the  Son  of
God,  and  that  those  that  wont,  why
we  will  leave  them  in  the  hands  of
God  ;  it  is  for  Him  in  His  own  way
and  in  His  own  time,  to  do  with
them  as  He  may  see  fit.  It  is  for  us
:  to  carry  out  His  designs  ;  it  is  for  the
Twelve,  the  Seventies  and  others  to
preach  the  Gospel  to  the  world  and
gather  out  the  honest  in  heart ;  it  is
for  us  to  give  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  fair  warning,  that  they  may
comprehend  the  true  state  of  things
and  have  the  principles  of  life  pre-
sented to  them,  "  But,"  says  one,
"  they  act  very  mean  towards  us/'
Well,  so  they  do.  But,  then  they
don't  know  any  better.  Don't  know
any  better  1  No,  they  don't.  Thej
don't  comprehend  things  as  we  com-
prehend them.  We  profess  to  be
acquainted  with  the  Spirit  of  God,
as  I  before  said,  and  with  the  light
of  revelation,  they  don't.  And
I  furthermore,  "  The  things  of
God  knoweth  no  man,  but  the
Spirit  of  God,"  Well,  but  don't
God  say  He  will  come  out  in  judg-
ment against  the  wicked?  Yes;
but  that  is  His  business  and  not
ours,  unless  He  calls  on  us  to  help
Hira,  and  we  must  continue  to  bless
them  that  curse  us,  and  pray  for
thern  that  despitefully  use  us,  Ifc
is  our  business  to  preach  the  Gospel,
and  gather  together  God's  elect
from  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth.
It  is  for  us  to  act  right — that  is  the


p


man's  natural  spirit,  etc.  325


First  Presidency,  myself  and  Coun-
selors. We  are  poor,  frail,  weak
creatures,  just  as  you  are,  and  you
^re  just  as  much  as  we  are  ;  there  is
nothing  to  boast  about  in  any  of  us.
Any  blessings  we  have  received  are
the  free  gifts  of  God  to  us.  And
He  expects  us  to  magnify  our  Priest-
hood and  calling  and  to  honor  Him-  \
What  else  shall  we  do?  We  will
preach  the  Gospel ;  we  will  try  ami
gather  the  people  when  we  have
preached  ;  we  will  build  Temples  as
we  are  doing,  and  we  will  ad  minister
in  them  when  they  are  finished,  in
accordance  with  the  pattern  God
has  shown  us,  and  we  could  not  do
so  unless  He  had  shown  us*  Those
men  that  prate  so  much  about  our
affairs  and  ignorance,  we  mig  ht
build  Temples  for  them,  but  would
they  know  how  to  administer  in
them  1  No  ;  they  would  not ;  and
there  is  nob  a  man  living  in  the
world  outside  of  this  Church  who
could  perform  the  first  ceremony  in
a  Temple  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  and
we  would  not  ourselves  have  been
in  possession  of  that  knowledge
had  God  not  revealed  it  to  us.  But
having  this  knowledge  we  can  enter
into  these  Temples  and  administer
for  the  living  and  for  the  dead.  But
we  must  humble  ourselves  before
the  Lord,  we  must  put  ourselves
right,  we  must  teach  our  families
the  principles  of  life,  we  must  do
right  by  our  neighbors  and  by
everybody,  we  must  magnify  the
Lord  and  observe  His  law,  purge
ourselves  from  everything  that  is
wrong,  and  say,  "  0  God,  try  me  and
prove  me.  Give  unto  me  Thy
Holy  Spirit  that  shall  light  up  the
candle  of  intelligence  in  my  soul,
that  I  may  be  enabled  to  see  myself
.as  Thou  seest  me,  and  if  there  is  any-
thing wrong  in  me  show  it  unto  me
and  give  me  power  to  put  it  away,
that  1  may  have  the  truth  and  be


full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  light  of
revelation,  and  the  power  of  God  "
We  want  to  put  ourselves  and  our
families  in  order.  And  then  let  us
learn  to  acknowledge  the  hand  of
God  in  all  things  and  obey  His  law
and  keep  His  commandments  in
everything  ;  not  in  one  thing  only,
but  in  everything,  that  the  Spirit
and  blessing  of  God  and  the  power
of  God  may  be  with  us,  that  we
may  be  the  sons  of  God  without
rebuke  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and
perverse  generation  ;  that  we  may  be
full  of  joy,  peace  and  thanksgiving
to  God  our  Heavenly  Father,  that
we  may  be  true  to  our  devotions  at
the  family  altar,  and  every  morning
ami  every  evening  bow  before  the
Lord  with  our  family  and  all  that
;  pertafns  to  us.  And  then  let  the
quorums  seek  the  spirit  and  power  of
the  Priesthood  that  belongs  to  them,
whether  High  Counselors,  Presi-
dents of  Stakes,  High  Priests,
Bishops,  or  whatever  they  may  be,
that  all  may  magnify  their  calling
and  be  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and
the  power  of  God,  laying  aside  our
follies,  ourcovetousness  and  our  evils,
and  wherein  we  have  done  any
wrong  make  restitution  for  that
wrong.  Now,  this  is  the  word  of
the  Lord  to  you  if  you  can  receive
it  Let  us  try  and  obey  the  word
and  will  of  God,  and  keep  His  com-
mandments, and  then  call  upon  the
Lord  and  He  will  hear  our  prayers.
His  eyes  are  over  His  people,  and
His  ears  are  open  to  their  cries  God
will  stand  by  His  Israel  and  he  will
deliver  His  people  if  they  will  only
serve  Him.  No  man,  no  power,  no
nation  can  harm  you  if  you  are  fol-
lowers of  that  which  is  good,  for
God  will  sustain  His  people.  Zion
is  onward,  onward  and  onward.
The  kingdom  of  God  will  be  estab-
!  lished.  No  power  upon  the  earth
i  can  stay  the  hand  of  the  Almighty.


326


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


Let  us,  then,  be  humble  and  faithful,
and  fear  God  and  keep  His  com-
mandments, that  the  Holy  Ghost
may  dwell  in  us,  that  the  peace  of
God  may  abide  in  our  habitations.
Let  us  dedicate  ourselves  and  our
families  and  all  that  pertains  to  us
to  the  Lord,  and  we  will  feel  that
we  are  blessed  of  Him.  The  work
we  are  engaged  in  is  not  a  phantom.
We  are  going  to  build  up  the  Zion
of  God ;  and  the  kingdom  of  God


will  continue  to  grow  and  increase
until  "the  kingdoms  of  this  world
are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our
Lord,  and  of  His  Christ ;  and  He
shall  reign  for  ever."  If  we  will  be
faithful,  God  will  bless  us  and  pros-
per us,  and  all  things  spoken  in  the
Prophets  will  be  fulfilled.

God  bless  you  and  lead  you  in  the
paths  of  life  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen*


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  WILFOKD  WOODPJJFF,


jn  the  Meeting  House,  Kaysvjlle,  Davis  County,  Sunday  Morning,

December  10th,  1882,

(Reported  by  John  Irvine.)

HARDSHIP  THE  HERITAGE  OF  THE  SAINTS — THE  NECESSITY  OF  TRIAL
FORGIVENESS  OF  ENEMIES — INSPIRED  DREAMS,  11  GET  THE  SPIRIT
OF  GOD" — THE  GREAT  WORK  .  EXPECTED  OF  THE  SAINTS  —  LABORS
AMONG  THE  LAMANITES.


We  have  met  again  this  morning
to  hear  and  receive  instruction  and
Worship  the  Lord  and  honor  Him
upon  this  holy  Sabbath  day.

The  heavens  are  full  of  knowledge,
full  of  instruction,  full  of  revela-
tion and  of  principle  and  decree,
and  I  may  say  of  judgment,  all  to  be
made  use  of  in  their  day  and  time,
and  we  have  a  right  to  all  the  know-
ledge, all  the  revelation,  all  the
principles  of  truth,  that  we  can
claim  by  faith  and  diligence  in  serv-
ing the  Lord  and  in  the  performance
of  our  duty.


I  look  upon  the  Latter-day  Saints
as  occupying  a  position,  I  may  say
equal,  at  least,  to  that  occupied  by
the  people  of  any  other  dispensation
that  God  has  ever  given  to  man.
We  are  a  blessed  people  ;  we  are
favored  of  heaven  and  have  received
at  the  hands  of  our  heavenly  Father
a  great  many  blessings  both  of  the
heavens  and  of  the  earth,  and  we,  as
a  people,  should  be  grateful  to  the
Lord  our  God  for  the  many  kind-
nesses He  has  bestowed  upon  us.
We  live,  in  fact,  in  the  dispensation
of  the  fullness  of  times,  the  last


HARDSHIP  THE  HERITAGE  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


327


dispensation  in  which  the  Lord  will
reveal  his  mind  and  will  to  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth,  the  last  time
in  which  the  Lord  will  prune  his
vineyard,  the  last  time  in  which  he
will  set  up  his  kingdom  upon  the
earth,  establish  His  Church,  and
build  up  HU  Zion,  to  prepare  for  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man,  And
while  we  sometimes  feel  and  have
felt  in  days  that  are  past  and  gone,
to  complain  because  we  meet  with
oppression,  persecution  and  afflic-
tion, yet  I  wish  to  say  to  my  breth-
ren and  sisters  that  these  things  are
the  heritage  of  the  Saints  of  (rod.
Any  people  whom  God  calls  will
meet  with  opposition  from  those
who  will  not  receive  the  Gospel  of
Jesus  Christ.  This  has  been  the
legacy  of  the  Saints  of  ;God  in  every
age  from  Father  Adam  d^wn  to
our  own  day.  Those  that  live
godly  in  Christ  Jesus  must  suffer
persecution.  I  believe  myself,
from  the  reading  of  the  revelations
of  God,  that  it  is  necessary  for  a
people  who  are  destined  to  inherit
the  celestial  kingdom  to  be  a  tried
people,  I  have  never  read  of  the
people  of  God  in  any  dispensation
passing  through  life,  as  the  secta-
rian world  would  say,  on  flowery
beds  of  ease,  without  opposition  of
any  kind-  I  have  always  looked
upon  the  life  of  our  Savior — who
descended  beneath  all  things  that
He  miirht  list;  above  all  things — as
an  example  fur  His  followers.  And
yet  it  has  always,  in  one  sense  of  the
word,  seemed  strange  to  me  that
the  Son  of  God,  the  First  Begotten
in  the  eternal  worlds  of  the  Father,
and  the  Only  Begotten  in  the  flesh,
should  have  to  descend  to  the  earth
and  pass  through  what  He  did —
born  in  a  stable,  cradled  in  a  manger,
persecuted,  afflicted,  scorned,  a  hiss
and  bye-word  to  almost  all  the  world,
and  especially  to  the  inhabitants  of


Jerusalem  and  Judea.  There 1  was
apparently  nothing  that  the  Savior
could  do  that  was  acceptable  in  the
eves  of  the  world  ;  anything  and
almost  everything  he  did  was  imputed
to  an  unholy  influence.  When  He
cast  out  devils  the  people  said  he
did  it  through  the  power  of  Beelze-
bub, the  prince  of  devils ;  when  he
opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  the
Pharisees  and  priests  of  the  day  told
the  man  to  "  give  God  the  glory ;  we
know  this  man  is  a  sinner/'  And
so  all  his  life  through,  to  the  day  of
his  death  upon  the  cross.  There  is
something  about  all  this  that  ap-
pears sorrowful ;  but  it  seemed
necessary  for  the  Savior  to  descend
below  all  things  that  he  might
ascend  above  all  things.  So  it  has
been  with  other  men.  When  I  look
at  th«.  hUtory  of  Joseph  Smith,  I
sometimes  think  that  he  came  as
near  following  the  footsteps  of  the
Savior — (although  no  more  so  than
his  disciples) — as  any  one  possibly
could,  Joseph  Smith  was  called
to  lay  down  his  life ;  he  sealed  his
testimony  with  his  blood,  ami  passed
tli rough  some  serious  trials  and
afflictions.  In  section  12U  of  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants —
the  word  of  the  Lord  given  to  the
Prophet  while  in  Liberty  jail — the
Lord  showed  him  his  condition
and  position.  He  refers  there
to  the  trials  and  troubles  he  was
called  to  pass  through,  and  then
compares  them  with  what  He  Him*
self  (the  Savior)  had  to  endure.  He
says  :  "  And  if  thou  shouldst  be  cast
into  the  pit,  or  into  the  hands  of
murderers,  and  the  sentence  of  death
passed  upon  thee ;  if  thou  be  cast
into  the  deep;  if  the  billowing  surge
conspire  against  thee  ;  if  fierce  winds
become  thine  enemy  ;  if  the  heavens
gather  blackness,  and  all  the  ele-
ments combine  to  hedge  up  the  way;
and  above  all,  if  the  very  jaws  of


328


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


hell  shall  gape,  open  the  mouth
-wide  after  thee,  know  thou,  my  Son,
that  all  these  things  shall  give  thee
experience,  and  shall  be  for  thy
good.  The  Son  of  man  hath  de-
scended below  them  all ;  art  thou
greater  than  He  ?  Therefore,  hold
on  thy  way,  and  the  Priesthood
shall  remain  with  thee,  for  their
bounds  are  set,  they  cannot  pass.
Thy  days  are  known,  and  thy  years
shall  not  be  numbered  less;  there-
fore, fear  not  what  man  can  do,  for
God  shall  be  with  you  for  ever  and
ever.*'  The  Lord  showed  him  in
this  revelation  that  these  afflictions
were  necessary.  We  have  been
called  to  pass  through  trials  many
times,  and  I  do  not  think  we  should
complain,  because  if  we  had  no  trials
we  should  hardly  feel  at  home  in
the  other  world  in  the  company  of
the  Prophets  and  Apostles  who  were
sawn  asunder,  crucified,  etc.,  for  the
word  of  God  and  testimony  of  Jesus
Christ.

How  should  we  feel  towards  our
enemies  ?  President  Taylor  of  late
has  called  upon  us,  to  eiereise
towards  them  the  same  spirit  that
was  manifested  by  our  Savior  upon
the  cross  :  '*  Father  forgive  them
they  know  not  what  they  do/'  We
should  endeavor  to  exercise  that
spirit  Our  persecutors,  those  who
would  seek  to  destroy  us,  do  not
know  what  they  do.  They  do  not
comprehend  us  at  m11.  Why,  bless
your  souls,  if  the  veil  was  lilted  from
off  the  eyes  of  the  President  of  the
United  States,  from  off  the  eyes  of
the  members  of  the  Congress  of  the
United  States,  and  from  off  the  eyes
of  our  enemies,  if  this  veil  were
lifted  they  would  bow  before  the
Lord  and  plead  for  thesie  f£  Mor-
mons;" they  would  do  this  if  their
eyes  were  open  to  see  the  future
consequences  of  taking  a  stand
against  this  Church  and  kingdom.


But  tli ere  is  a  veil  over  their  eyes,
because  of  their  works  of  evil ;  and
the  day  will  come  when  all  peoples
will  mourn  who  take  a  stand  against
the  kingdom  of  God,  the  Zion  of
God,  the  Church  of  God,  and  the
Lord's  anointed  ;  unless  they  repent
they  will,  when  they  pass  into  the
other  world,  go  into  outer  darkness,
where  there  is  weeping  and  wailing
and  gnashing  of  teeth.  It  is  impos-
sible, however,  for  the  Saints  of  God
to  inherit  a  celestial  kingdom  with-
out  their  being  tried  as  to  w he t her
they  will  abide  in  the  covenants  of
the  Lord  or  not

Well,  I  feel  we  are  a  blessed  peo-
ple. We  have  prospered*  The
Lord  is  fighting  our  battles.  The
Lord  holds  the  destiny  of  this  nation
aud  all  other  nations  in  His  hands.
<  hir  enemies  can  go  no  further  than
He  permits  them.

We  live  in  a  day  and  time  when
the  Lord  has  decreed  to  set  up  his
kingdom  for  the  last  time  upon  the
earth.  That  is  the  reaso  i  we  have
the  privilege  of  building  these
Temples  and  these  meeting-houses
in  the  mountains  of  Israel  The
Lord  ha^  set  his  hand  to  establish
his  kingdom  according  to  his  for-
mer promises,  and  it  is  going  to
prevail  upon  the  earth.  He  has
told  us  to  fear  not  our  enemies  j
that  though  earth  and  hell  combine
against  us,  they  shall  not  prevail,
if  we  are  built  upon  the  rock  of
Christ

We  have  come  to  this  earth  upon  a
mission  ;  and  we  have  been  gathered
to  the  valleys  of  these  mountains
that  we  may  be  taught  and  in-
structed in  the  things  of  God  ;  that
we  may  magnify  our  calling  before
theLord  ;  that  we  may  become  sa  viors
upon  Mount  Zion  ;  that  we  may
have  power  to  go  forth  and  warn  the
nations  of  the  earth.  I  look  upon
the  mission  of  the  Latter-day  Saints


HARDSHIP  THE  HERITAGE  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


329


as  being  as  important  as  that  of  any
people  that  ever  lived  in  any  age  of
the  world*  I  have  often  expressed
my  views  with  regard  to  this.  As
Elders  of  Israel,  very  few  of  us  fully
comprehend  our  position,  our  calling,
or  relationship  to  God,  our  responsi-
bility, or  work  the  Lord  requires  at
our  hands.  The  Lord  has  given  unto
us  the  Priesthood .  This  is  conferred
upon  us  that  we  may  administer  in
the  ordinances  of  life  and  salvation.
But  to  enable  us  to  perform  our
■duties  acceptably,  there  is  one  thing
we  need,  one  and  all  of  us,  and  that
is  the  Holy  Spirit  While  in  Winter
Quarters,  President  Young  had  a
dream  in  which  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith  appeared  to  him  and  said  :
**  Bi other  Young,  you  exhort  this
people  to  obtain  the  Holy  Spirit  ;
with  it  they  can  do  anything  that
is  necessary  j  without  it  they  cannot
build  up  the  kingdom  of  God.''  In
one  of  my  dreams  while  in  Arizona,
I  had  the  same  admonition  from
President  Young*  I  thought  he
was  attending  one  of  our  confer
ences,  I  .said  to  him  :  11  Can  you
speak  to  us  f  "  No/1  lie  replied,  u  I
have  done  bearing  my  testimony  in
the  flesh  ;  I  have  merely  come  to  see
the  people,  to  see  you,  to  see  what
you  are  doing.  But  I  want^you  to
teach  the  Latter-day  Saints  to  labor
to  obtain  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is
one  of  the  most  important  gifts  that
the  Saints  of  the  living  God  can
possess.  You  all  need  this,"  he
said,  "  in  order  to  build  up  Zion.  If
you  have  not  this  Spirit — the  Spirit
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  testimony  of
Jesus,  the  testimony  of  the  Father
and  Son — you  cannot  get  along.
But  if  you  are  in  possession  of  this
Spirit,  your  minds  will  be  open  to
comprehend  the  things  of  God."
This  is  true*  There  is  not  a  man  in
this  Church  and  kingdom  to- day,  (
who,  if  he  is  in  possession  of  this


spirit,  will  set  his  heart  upon  the
things  of  this  world.  Any  man  that
loves  the  world,  the  love  of  the
Father  is  not  in  him.  We  have
received  something  better  than  the
love  of  gold,  silver,  houses  and
lands  ;  we  have  received  the
promise  of  eternal  life.  We  have
had  conferred  upon  us  the  eternal
Priesthood  by  which  our  heavenly
Father  has  created  all  worlds  and
redeemed  all  worlds  and  has  per-
formed all  his  works  from  eternity
to  eternity,
j  Then,  we  should  labor  to  obtain
this  Spirit  while  we  are  upon  the
earth  that  we  may  overcome  every
evil.  We  have  a  mighty  warfare  on
hand.  We  have  to  contend  against
|  the  world,  the  flesh  and  the  devil.
Ther«  are  temptations  that  surround
every  man  and  woman,  that  is,  if
they  attempt  to  keep  the  command-
ments of  God,  and  no  man  or  woman
can  inherit  eternal  life  without
passing  through  this  warfare  in  the
flesh.  Other  generations  have  had
their  turn.  As  a  people  it  is  our
j  turn  to-day.  The  old  patriarch*
ami  prophets  have  gone,  their  mis-
sions are  ended,  so  far  as  their  testi-
mony in  the  flesh  is  concerned  ;  but
they  were  valiant  in  the  testimony
of  Jesus  Christ ;  they  kept  the  law,
and  they  will  inherit  a  celestial
!  glory.

I  often  reflect  upon  the  promises
made  concerning  the  Priesthood.
The  Lord,  in  a  revelation  upon  this
subject,  says,  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants, 33rd  to  41st  verses  :  "Whoso-
ever is  faithful  unto  obtaining  these
two  Priesthoods  of  which  I  have
spoken,  and  the  magnifying  their
calling,  are  sanctified  by  the  spirit
unto  the  renewing  of  their  bodies.
!  *  *  *  All  that  my  Father
hath  shall  be  given  unto  him.
Therefore,  all  those  who  receive  the
Priesthood,  receive  this  oath  and


330


JOURNAL  OF  DISCO URS ICS.


covenant  of  my  Father,  which  he
cannot  break,  neither  can  it  be
moved."  Now,  I  sometimes  ask
myself  the  question,  Do  we  compre-
hend these  things  1  Do  we  compre-
hend that  if  we  abide  the  laws  of  the
Priesthood  we  shall  become  heirs  of
God  and  joint-heirs  with  Jesus
Christ  %  I  realize  t  hat  our  eyes  have
not  seen,  our  ears  have  not  heard,
neither  hath  it  entered  into  our
hearts  to  conceive  the  glory  that  is
in  store  for  the  faithful  We  are
placed  in  a  position  to  be  proven  and
tried  ;  we  must  be,  we  have  been,  we
shall  he,  until  we  get  through  with
our  labors  in  the  flesh.  The  Lord
told  Joseph  Smith  that  he  would
prove  us  in  all  things,  whether  we
will  abide  in  his  covenant,  even
unto  death,  that  we  may  be  found
worthy:  %i  fur  if  we  will  not  abide  in
his  covenant,  we  are  not  worthy  of
him."  Jesus  Christ  abode  in  the
covenant ;  he  kept  all  the  com-
mandments while  he  was  upon  the
earth.  He  even  was  baptized  by  the
hands  of  John,  although  it  was
not  for  the  remission  of  sin,  but  to
fulfill  all  righteousness.  Thele  was
no  part  of  the  Gospel  that  Christ
did  not  fulfill,  and  he  called  upon
Joseph  Smith  to  fulfill  the  same.
This  he  did.  He  laid  down  his  life.
He  went  to  the  spirit  world,  and  he
is  there  watching  over  this  people.
He  has  power  there,  and  so  have  our
brethren  who  have  gone  to  the  other
side  of  the  veil.  They  are  laboring
for  us.  They  are  watching  to  see
how  we  perform  the  work  left  to  our
charge.

I  hope  we  live  our  religion,  1
hope  we  strive  to  keep  the  command-
ments of  God.  We  occupy  a  very
important  position  in  the  world.
There  are  very  few  of  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth  who  are  laboring  to
build  up  Zion.  There  are  very
few,  apparently,  who  are  able  to


abide  the  law  of  God,  There  are
very  few  who  are  willing  to  sacrifice
anything  for  eternal  life  as  id  salva-
tion, and  thousands  will  have  to
inherit  a  kingdom  other  than  the
celestial

Nevertheless,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  we  are  laboring  and  progress-
ing in  this  work.  Zion  is  advancing  ;
the  kingdom  of  Cod  is  rolling  on.
The  progress  of  this  kingdom  lias
never  stopped  from  the  day  of  its
organization  ;  it  never  will  until
it  has  accomplished  all  for  which  it
has  been  organized  and  established
on  the  earth  to  accomplish.  We
have  a  great  work  to  do.  We  are
commanded  to  preach  the  Gospel  to
the  nations  of  the  earth.  The
Elders  of  Israel  have  been  doing  this
for  the  last  fifty  years.  We  are  still
doing  it,  in  the  United  States  and
other  parts  of  the  world.  We  shall
continue  to  labor  among  the  Gen-
tiles just  as  long  as  the  Lord  says
we  must  do  so.  But  at  the  same
time  we  have  now  been  commanded
to  turn  to  a  branch  of  the  house  of
Israel  Here  are  the  Lamanites,
thousands  and  thousands  of  them
surround  us.  They  look  to  us  for
the  Gospel  of  Christ.  It  is  our  duty
to  go  to  them  and  organize  them,
and  preach  to  them  the  words  of  life
and  salvation.

Tli en,  again,  we  have  temples  to
build  in  our  day  and  time,  that  we
may  go  into  them  and  do  a  work
both  for  the  living  and  for  the  dead.
Our  mission  is  more  extended  and
extensive  than  we  realize.  There
have  been  no  Prophets,  no  Apostles,
upon  the  earth  for  the  last  1,8U0
years,  that  we  are  much  acquainted
with,  except  Nephij  who  dwelt  upon
this  continent  several  hundred  years
after  the  death  of  Christ.  There
has  been  no  one  upon  the  earth
with  authority  to  preach  the  Gospel
to  the  nations  of  the  earth.  Many


HARDSHIP  THE  HERITAGE  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


331


generations  have  passed  away.
Many  thousands  of  millions  have
passed  into  the,  spirit  world.  We
are  now  at  the  end  of  the  sixth
thousand  years.  We  are  bordering
upon  the  millennium.  We  are  living
in  the  great  and  last  dispensation,
in  the  which  the  God  of  Israel  ex-
pects us,  his  servants,  his  sons  and
daughters,  to  perform  the  work
which  has  been  left  to  our  charge.
It  is  our  duty  to  build  these  temples.
It  is  our  duty  to  enter  into  them
and  redeem  our  dead.  Joseph  Smith
is  preaching  to  the  spirits  in  prison  ;
so  are  all  the  Elders  who  have  died
in  the  faith.  There  are  millions
of  them  there,  and  they  must  have
the  Gospel  offered  to  them.  Joseph
Smith  and  others  cannot  baptize  the
spirits  in  water,  it  is  not  the  law ;
but  their  posterity,  their  sons  and
daughters  who  are  living  in  the  last
dispensation,  are  expected  to  go  into
these  temples  and  there  redeem
their  death  This  is  a  good  work,
and  it  is  a  great  blessing  lor  men  and
women  to  have  this  privilege.  We
have  one  of  these  temples  finished,
and  we  are  doing  a  great  work  in
that  temple.  A  hundred  and  sixty*
two  thousand  persons  have  been
baptized  for  the  dead,  and  nearly
seventy  thousand  endowments  have
been  given  in  that  temple.  We
have  only  just  begun  this  work.
We  want  the  Logan  temple  finished,
as  also  the  temple  at  Manti,  that
the  people  may  go  forth  and  redeem
their  dead,  Our  forefathers  are
looking  to  us  to  attend  to  this  work.
They  are  watching  over  us  with
great  anxiety,  and  are  desirous  that
we  should  finish  these  temples  and
attend  to  certain  ordinances  for
them,  so  that  in  the  morning  of  the
resurrection  they  can  come  forth
and  enjoy  the  same  blessings  that
we  enjoy.  We  are  living  in  the
flesh  and  have  the  privilege  of  receiv-


ing the  Gospel  of  Chrisc  for  our-
selves. Our  forefathers  had  not
this  privilege  ;  and  as  their
posterity  when  we  meet  them  ia
the  spirit  world  we  shall  have  the
joy  and  satisfaction  of  knowing
that  we  did  our  duty  by  them  while
here  upon  the  earth.  We  occupy
a  position  in  this  capacity  towards
them  the  same  as  we  do  to  this
generation.  We  occupy  the  po-
sition of  Saviors  upon  Mount
Zion.

There  are  a  great  many  things  I
might  mention  that  are  of  interest
to  the  Latter-day  Saints.  We  should
humble  ourselves  before  the  Lord.
We  have  been  called  to  set  our
houses  in  order,  that  we  should  seek
to  obtain  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  that
it  may  enable  us  to  magnify  our
callings  in  the  Priesthood.  '  We  are
under  great  responsibility.  It  won't
pay  to  apostatize;  *'  there  is  no  money
in  it."  Any  man  who  receives  this
Priesthood  and  tastes  of  the  word  of
God,  and  of  the  powers  of  the  world
to  come— any  man  that  turns  away
from  these  things,  apostatizes,  and
turns  away  from  the  Church  of
God,  shall  not,  in  accordance  with
the  revelations  of  the  Lord  to  Joseph
Smith,  "have  forgiveness  of  sins^in
this  world  nor  in  the  world  to
come/1

The  Lord  is  laboring  for  his
kingdom.  In  his  hands  he  holds
the  destiny  of  this  people  and  of  this
generation,  and  if  we  will  do  our
duty  he  will  sustain  and  uphold  us
and  Zion  will  not  be  moved  out  of
her  place.  I  am  anxious  to  see  the
Latter-day  Saints  rise  up  and  mag-
nify their  calling.  We  (the  Twelve
:  Apostles,  Seventies  and  others)  are
called  to  go  forth  to  preach  the  Gos-
pel to  the  Lamanites  and  organize
them.  I  am  glad  of  it.  I  have  felt
for  a  long  time  that  we  should  turn
our  attention  to  them*  They  are  the


332  JOURNAL  OF

literal  descendants  of  Abraham,
Isaac  and  Jacob,  and  the  Lord  is
working  in  their  midst  The  vision
of  their  minds  is  beginning  to  be
opened,  and  they  are  to  be  taught
the  things  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  I
have  thought  sometimes  that  they
have  more  faith  than  the  Latter-
day  Saints.  1  traveled  among  them
for  one  year  in  Arizona  and  New
Mexico.  1  visited  those  that  dwell
in  the  walled  cities.  They  have  some
seven  villages  on  the  top  of  a  moun-
tain from  MX)  to  1,500  feet  high.
One  thing  struck  me  very  forcibly
while  there.  Although  a  good  many
of  these  people  are  superstitious,
some  of  them  sun-worshippers  and  !
^o  forth,  yet  they  seem  to  be  im-
pressed with  the  idea  that  there  i*  go-
ing to  be  a  famine.  They  have  enough
grain  and  dried  squash  laid  up  to
last  them  for  years,  and  they  think
the  day  is  not  far  off  when  they  will
need  that  which  they  have  stored  up.
Don't  we  believe  that  a  famine  will
come  t  I  know  some  of  our  sisters
are  laying  up  wheat,  I  hope  the
Relief  Societies  will  continue  to  do
so,  and  the  brethren  should  help
them. I  believe  that  the  Latter-/


DISCOURSES.

day  Saints  ought  to  store  up  grain
against  a  day  of  want  The  Bible
tells  us  that  prior  to  the  coming  of
the  Son  of  Man  there  shall  be  wars
and  rumors  of  wars,  famines,  pes-
tilence, and  earthquakes.  All  these
things  will  come  to  pass.

It  is  a  good  time  with  us.  The
Lord  has  blessed  us.  He  has  blessed
the  earth  for  our  use  ;  and  we  ought
to  dedicate  our  families,  our  fields,
our  crops,  our  herds,  to  God.  We
should  pay  our  tithing  according  to
the  law  of  God.  We  should  attend
to  all  the  duties  required  at  our
hands.  We  should  not  neglect  our
prayers.  Men  should  seek  to  enjoy
t  he  spirit  of  God,  and  the  fellowship
of  His  Holy  Spirit.  We  should  seek
to  do  all  the  good  we  can,  so  that  we
may  feel  satisfied  when  we  get
through.

I  pray  God  to  bless  you  with  His
Holy  Spirit;  1  pray  that  he  will
give  us  power  to  fulfill  our  calling  in
the  Priesthood,  power  to  build  up
Zion,  power  to  finish* these  temples
in  which  we  may  redeem  our  dead.
This  is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
Jesus  Christ  Amen.


MEN  POWERLESS  EXCEPT  AS  GOD  PERMITS,  ETC,  333>


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  at  Grantsville,  Sunday  Evening,  Oct  29th,  1882,


( Reported  btj  Geo,  F.  Gibbs.)


MEN POWERLESS EXCEPT  AS GOD  PERMITS  —  ORDEALS  NECESSARY  TO

PURIFY — ZION  WILL  TRIUMPH.


I  am  pleased  to  have  the  oppor-
tunity of  again  ireeting  with  the
people  of  Grantsville.

In  regard  to  the  remarks  winch
we  have  just  heard  pertaining  to
the  desires  and  intentions  of  the
wicked  they  are  true  and  correct ;
but  at  the  same  time  I  do  not  feel
any  trembling  in  my  knees,  do  you  ?
It  has  been  said,  the  wicked  rage,
and  the  people  imagine  a  vain  thin


and  the  Lord  will  have  them  in
derision.  Again,  the  Lord  said
unto  my  Lord,  sit  thou  on  my  right
hand  until  I  make  thine  enemies
thy  footstool.  There  are  other  fen
markable  an  J  "significan  t  sayings  in
relation  to  these  things  ;  and  what-
ever the  opinions  and  ideas  of  men
may  he,  it  will  he  found  at  last
that  the  Lord  rules,  manipulates  and
manages  the  affairs  of  men,  of
nations  and  of  the  world,  and  there-
fore, neither  this  nation  nor  any
other  nation  can  do  anything  more
than  God  permits.  He  .sets  up
one  nation,  and  puts  down  ano-
ther, according  to  the  counsels  of
his  own  will  And  he  has  done
this  from  the  beginning,  whether
men  believe  it  or  not.  And  as
regards  what  are  called  the  mighty
ones — the  kings  of  the  earth — one
of  the  prophets  in  speakiug  of  them
says  that  he  saw  them  gathered
together  in  a  pit;  and  that  after


many  days  they  should  be  visited*
All  men  are  but  human ;  their
breath  is  in  their  nostrils,  and  they
have  no  power  but  that  which  God
gives  them.  Anything  beyond
this  they  are  powerless  to  do  ;  and
why,  then,  should  His  people  fear!
We  certainly  have  a  work  to  per-
form on  the  earth,  and  God  our
Father  has  selected  us  for  that  pur-
pose, He  raised  up  Joseph  Smith
and  other  men,  and  conferred  the
holy  Priesthood  upon  them  and
to-day  they  are  found  organized  as
Elders,,  High  Priests,  Seventies,
the  Twelve,  etc.,  by  whom  the
Lord  expects  to  lift  up  a  standard
to  the  nations,  and  an  ensign  to  the
people*  And  notwithstanding  the
calculations  and  plans  of  the  world,
we  are  told  that  when  this  standard
is  lifted  up,  the  Gentiles  shall  seek
unto  it,  a  and  his  rest  shall  be
glorious;'  That  is.  the  way  I  read
my  Bible :  I  expect  you  will  find
it  in  yours.  We  are  not  going  to
war.  We  did  not  originate  this
work  any  more  than  men  originated
any  work  in  which  God  called  them
to  labor,  at  any  former  time.  God
has  been  the  chief  mover  and  man-
ipulator of  men  in  the  different  ages
of  the  world  from  the  time  of  their
first  existence  upon  the  earth  to  the
present  He  has  given  men
their  own  agency,  and  they  have  the


JOUltNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


privilege  of  receiving  or  rejecting  '
it,  but  he  holds  them  responsible  for
their  acts. He  does  not  hold  us  '
responsible  for  the  acts of  other
men, nor for  the acts  -of  the
nations.

He  lias  given  unto  us  a  mission
to  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  crea-
ture ;  and  he  that  believes  shall  he
saved,  and  he  that  believes  not  shall
be  damned.  He  has  given  unto  us
authority  and  has  commanded  us  to
preach  this  Gospel  to  the  nations  of
the  ear tli  :  and  we  have  been  doing
it  now  for  some  fifty  years,  and  are
constantly  tending  out  missionaries
by  way  of  fulfilling  this  duty.  We
have  done  this  and  are  still  doing  it,
not  because  the  world  love  us  very
much  ;  if  they  did,  it  would  be  a
marvel,  lor  Jesus  in  his  day  said  :
"If  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know
that  it  hated  me  before  it  hated  you.
If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world
"would  love  its  own ;  but  because  ye
are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have
chosen  you  out  of  the  world,  there-
fore the  world  hateth  you,"  And
there  has  been  a  spirit  of  opposition
and  antagonism  to  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  God  in  all  the  various
ages  of  the  world,  Paul  speaks  of
men  who  had  to  wander  about  in
sheep  skins  and  goat  skins,  secreting
themselves  in  deserts,  in  dens  and
caves  of  the  earth  ;  of  whom  the
world  was  not  worthy.  Said  he,
these  men  showed  plainly  by  their
acts  that  they  desired  a  better  coun-
try ;  "wherefore  God  is  not  ashamed
to  be  called  their  God,  for  He  has
prepared  for  them  a  city"  which  is
incorruptible,  un defiled,  and  that ;
fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  the
heavens  for  them.  Such  men  had
a  knowledge  of  these  things,  and
they  did  not  seem  to  care  very  much
about,  the  consequences  of  their  obe-
dience tu  the  laws  of  God,

The  three  Hebrew  children  exem-


plified their  faith  in  God  when  they
were  told  to  do  a  certain  thing  ;  but,
said  they,  we  cannot  do  it  "  But
if  you  do  not  we  will  put  you  into  a
fiery  furnace/'  All  right  ;  it  is  not
a  very  pleasant  ordeal  logo  through,
but  one  thing  we  know,  we  will  not
bow  down  to  your  image,  nor  wor-
ship the  god  which  you  have  set  up.
And  that  is  a  fact  in  regard  to  us.
We  do  not  know  what  God  will  per-
mit men  to  do  or  what  lie  will  not ;
but  one  thing  we  do  know,  that  is,
we  will  not  worship  their  god  nor
bow  down  to  their  image ;  and  we
feel  quite  easy  about  the  result — at
least,  that  is  the  way  I  feel.  It  was
considered  criminal  for  Daniel  to
pray  to  his  God,  but  he  prayed  never-
theless j  and  the  Lord  was  merciful
to  him  and  took  careof  him.  The  king
felt  a  little  better  towards  him  than
some  of  our  pious  people  feel  towards
us.  He  was  called  a  heathen  king  ;
but  he  was  a  man  that  had  the  fear
of  God  in  his  heart,  and  die  had  re-
spect for  his  fellow-men.  And  when
Daniel  was  cast  into  the  lions'  den,
in  the  morning  early  the  king
repaired  to  the  place,  and  with  a
lamentable  voice  cried,  saying,  "  O
Daniel,  servant  of  the  living  God,
is  thy  God  whom  thou  servest  con-
tinually able  to  deliver  thee  from  the
lions  f  Daniel  answered  :  "O  king,
live  for  ever.  My  God  hath  sent
his  angel,  and  hath  shut  the  lions'
mouth,  that  they  have  not  hurt
me,"  I  do  not  know,  but  I  am  in-
clined to  think  that  if  some  of  you
Latter-day  Saints  had  the  same
ordeal  to  pass  through,  that  few,  if
any  of  the  authorities  of  the  land
would  feel  as  much  interested  in  you
as  the  heathen  king  did  in  DanieL
It  is  necessary  that  we  pass
through  certain  ordeals  in  order  that
we  may  be  purified.  People  some-
times do  not  comprehend  these
things  ;  they  think  it  would  be  very


MEN  POWERLESS  EXCEPT  AS  GOD  PERMITS,  ETC


335


nice  to  do  as  the  Methodists  sing


siug


about  sometimes — sit  and
themselves  away  to  everlasting
bliss.  And  where  is  that  ?  Some-
where they  say  beyond  the  bounds
of  time  and  space.  I  have  never
come  across  a  person  that  was  able
to  locate  that  place  ;  and  it  is  one  of
those  thing  I  never  could  compre-
hend. But  they  did  not  all  do  this
in  former  times.  When  no  other
powt*r  operated  against  them  Satnn
himself  undertook  to  interfere  ;  and
I  sometimes  think  that  lie  has  done
that  very  thing  in  our  day.  Job,
for  instance,  was  a  curious  sort  of  a
character.  It  is  said  that  on  a  cer-
tain occasion  the  sons  of  God  met
together,  and  that  Satan  also  pre-
sented himself  before  them — rather
a  strange  personage  to  meet  with  I
the  sons  of  God.  I  think  sometimes
that  we  have  exhibitions  of  that
here.  And  on  that  occasion,  as  usual,
he  was  lull  of  accusations  ;  you  know
he  always  has  represented  the
saints  of  (rod  as  the  meanest  set  of
people  that  ever  lived,  and  he  is  up
to  his  old  tricks  to-day  ;  but  then,
we  are  told  that  he  was  a  liar  from
the  bed  lining.  When  he  went
before  t  he  Lord  —I  suppose  he  had
been  complaining  to  Him  of  the
people  down  below,  for  he  is  called
the  accuser  of  the  brethren — -said  the
Lord  to  him  :  Lucifer,  hast  thou  con-
sidered my  servant  Job,  that  there  is
none  like  him  in  the  earth,  a  perfect
and  an  upright  man,  one  that  feareth
God  and  eschevveth  evil?  And
Satan  answered  the  Lord  :  Doth  Job
fear  God  for  naught  1  Hast  not  thou
put  a  hedge  about  him,  and  in-
creased his  substance,  and  blessed
the  work  of  his  hands — as  much  as
to  say:  "  I,  too,  would  serve  the  Lord,
if  he  would  treat  me  as  well  as  Job
has  been  treated ;  but  let  me  have
a  rap  at  him  aud  I  will  show  you
then  what  he  will  do." And  the


Lord  gave  him  permission  to  afflict
Job,  but  charged  him  that  he  was
not  to  take  his  life  ;  and  the  devil
did  afflict  him,  as  you  all  know.  Bat
in  all  that  he  did  he  found  that  Job
was  true  to  his  God,  and  that  the
confidence  he  reposed  in  him  was
not  misplaced.  Not  discouraged,
however,  the  devil  appeared  again
before  the  sons  of  God,  and  the  Lord
took  occasion  to  remind  him  that
Job  "  holdeth  fast  his  integrity,
although  thou  mo  vest  me  against
him,  to  destroy  him  without  cause/*
And  Satan  answered  the  Lord,  aud
said,  "Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a
man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life.
But  put  forth  thine  hand  now,  aud
touch  his  bone  and  his  flesh,  and  he
will  curse  thee  to  thy  face,"  The
Lord  then  permitted  the  devil  to
afflict  ius  body,  which  he  did  ;  and
on  the  back  of  that  he  got  Job's
friends  to  come  and  visit  hitn,  and
comfort  him — you  have  heard  of
"  Job's  comforters 1 — and  they  did
"comfort"  him?  they  would  have
him  believe  that  all  his  misfortunes
aud  sufferings  were  because  of  his
wickedness,  and  the  judgments  of
God  were  overtaking  him,  and  then
to  crown  the  climax  his  wife  comes
along  and  says,  Job,  I  would  not
stand  it  any  longer  ;  I  would  curse
God  and  die  like  a  man.  But,  says
Job,  thou  speakest  like  one  of  the
foolish  women.  What,  shall  we  re-
ceive good  at  the  hands  of  the  Lurd,
and  not  evil.  And  notwithstanding
all  that  was  brought  upon  him,
he  said,  Though  He  slay  me,
yet  will  I  trust  ,  in  Him,  for  I
know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth ;
and  that  He  will  stand  in  the  latter
day  upon  the  earth,  and  that
although  worms  may  wallow  in  my
ile>hT  and  revel  in  my  brain,  yet,  in
my  flesh  shall  I  see  God,  these  eyes
shall  behold  him,  aud  I  snail  see
him  for  myself  and*not  for  auothefg


336


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Job  had  faith  in  his  God,  and  lie
delivered  him  ;  and  in  his  latter  days
he  gave  him  more  children  and
more  property  than  he  had  ever  pos-
sessed before.

Again,  we  read  of  certain  people,
described  in  the  visions  of  John,  who
were  clothed  in  white  raiment,  sing-
ing a  song  that  no  man  knew  or
could  sing  excepting  those  that  were
acquainted  with  the  principles  that
they  were.  And  who  were  they  ?
They  were  those  that  had  come  up
through  much  tribulation,  who  hnd
washed  their  robes  and  made  them
white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.
And  are  we  not  tcld  that  we  must
be  made  perfect  through  suffering  ?
Are  we  not  told,  that  "  it  became
him,  for  whom  are  all  things,  and
by  whom  are  all  things  in  bringing
many  sons  unto  glory,  to  make  tin1
captain  of  their  salvation  perfect
through  suffering?'  I  think  that  is
the  doctrine  that  we  have  read  in
our  Bible  j  and  that  is  the  doctrine
that  I  have  always  believed  in.
There  are  many  of  our  good
Latter-day  Saints  who  are  grasping
and  covetous  and  who  takc^d van-
tage of  one  another,  and  who  fre-
quently act  dishonorably  and  who
say  things  that  are  improper  and
wrong,  and  that  are  contrary, to
the  principles  of  justice  and  equity  ;
and  sometimes  it  is  necessary  that
men  should  be  shook  up  a  little.
God  in  His  wisdom  lias  handled
us  from  time  to  time.  I  can  see
men  around  me  to-myht  whom  I
have  seen  and  known  for  forty  years
— do  you  remember,  brethren,  when
we  had  to  leave  the  State  of  Mis-
souri, "all  hands  and  the  cook T
And  did  we  cry  about  it  ?  I  think
not.  I  felt  as  happy  then  as  I  do
now,  and  I  feel  quite  comfortable
to-night.  I  feel  that  all  is  well  in
Ziom  As  long  as  people  have  within
tjijem  the  principles  of  eternal  life  ;


|  as  long  as  they  have  within  them
the  hope  that  blooms  with  immor-
tality and  eternal  life,  what  do  they
care  about  what  is  happening  or
going  to  happen  ;  what  dc  they  care
what  this  nation  can  do  or  is  going
to  do.  They  can  only  do  what  God
permits  them.

We  have  learned  many  things
through  suffering,  we  call  it  suffer-
ing ;  L  call  it  a  school  of  experience.
I  never  did  bother  my  head  much
about  these  things  ;  I  do  not  to-day.
What  are  these  things  for  ?  Why
is  it  that  good  men  should  be  tried  ?
Why  is  it,  in  fact,  that  we  should
have  a  devil  t  Why  did  not  the
Lord  kill  him  long  ago?  Because
he  could  not  do  without  him.  He
needed  the  devil  and  a  great  many
of  those  who  do  his  bidding  just  to
keep  men  straight,  that  we  may
learn  to  place  our  dependence  upon
God,  and  trust  in  Him,  and  to  ob-
serve his  laws  and  keep  his  com-
mandments. When  he  destroyed
the  inhabitants  of  the  antediluvian
world,  he  suffered  a  descendant  of
Cain  to  come  through  the  flood  in
order  that  he  might  be  properly  re-
presented upon  the  earth.  And
Satan  keeps;  busy  all  the  time,  and
he  will  until  he  is  bound ;  and  I
expect  they  will  then  have  good
times  until  he  is  loose  again.  The
time  will  be  when  he  will  be  cast
into  the  bottomless  pit,  and  he  will
not  be  able  to  decei  ve  the  nations
any  more  until  the  thousand  years
have  expired.  I  have  never  looked
at  these  things  in  any  other  light
than  trials  for  the  purpose  of  purify*
ing  the  Saints  of  God,  that  they
may  be,  as  the  Scriptures  say,  as
gold  that  has  been  seven  times  puri-
fied by  the  fire.

The  Lord  has  gathered  us  from
the  nations  of  the  earth  and  has
given  to  us  His  Holy  Spirit.  He
has  organized  His  Church,  and  He


*


MEN POWERLESS EXCEPT  AS GOD  PERMITS,  ETC.


337


has  conferred  upon  us  all  the  rights
and  privileges  of  the  Holy  Gospel.
He  has  taught  us  Low  to  save  our-
selves,  and  how  to  save  our  wives
and  children,  and  how  to  save  the
living  and  how  to  save  the  dead.
He  has  taught  us  how  to  be  saviors
upon  Mount  Zion,  and  he  has
taught  us  that  the  kingdom  is  the
Lords  j  He  has  taught  us  that  we
are  operating  for  him  and  his  king-
dorn  in  the  interests  of  humanity;
for  he  is  desirous  to  gather  out  from
the  nations  all  the  pure,  the  virtuous
and  the  noble,  men  and  women  who
will  observe  his  laws  and  keep  his
commandments.  [

Again,  he  has  given  unto  us
eternal  covenants,  as  referred  to  this
evening,  which  also  are  true  and
have  emanated  from  Him,  Can  we
violate  the  principles  of  eternal  life?
No,  never.  We  have  got  to  put  our
trust  in  God,  let  the  consequences
be  as  they  may*  And  as  long  as  we
do  this,  and  as  long  as  we  keep  the
holy  covenants  we  have  entered  into
with  hi  in  and  with  one  another,
Ziou  will  triumph  ;  and  the  wicked  .
will  waste  away  until  there  will  be  |
no  place  found  for  them  ;  and  the
man  or  the  nation  that  lifts  up  his
hand  against  Zion  will  wither  before
Almighty  God.  I  will  prophecy
that  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  I  will  meet  the  consequences
of  what  I  say.  But  I  will  tell  you
what  we  have  to  do,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  we  must  fear  God  in  our
hearts  ;  we  must  lay  aside  our  covet-
ous ness  and  our  waywardness,  our
self-will  and  foolishness  of  every
kind.  As  brethren,  we  must  hum-
ble ourselves  before  the  Lord,
repenting  of  our  sins,  and  henceforth
preserve  our  bodies  and  spirits  pure,
that  we  may  be  fit  receptacles  for


the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  and  be
guided  by  him  in  all  our  labors  both
for  the  living  and  the  dead.  Our
desires  must  be  for  God  and  his
righteousness,  until  we shall  ex-
claim with  one  of  old  :  U  God,  search
me,  and  try  me,  and  if  there  be  any
way  of  wickedness  in  me, bid  it
depart. It  is  for  us,  as  fathers  and
mothers,  to  go  before  the  Lord  in  all
humility  and  call  upon  him  that  his
peace  may  be  in  our  hearts  ;  and
wherein  we  may  have  done  wrong,
confess  that  wrong  and  repair  it  as
far  as  we  possibly  can  ;  and  in  this  way
let  every  man  and  woman  in  Israel
begin  to  set  their  houses  in  order,
and  forever  cultivate  the  spirit  of
peace,  the  spirit  of  union  and  love.
And  if  the  families  of  Israel  do  this
throughout  all  the  land  of  Zion,  all
fearin*  God  and  working  righteous-
ness, cherishing  the  spirit  of  humil-
ity and  meekness,  and  putting  our
trust  in  him,  there  is  no  power  in
existence  that  can  injure  us  ;  for
God  will  stand  by  and  sustain  his
people,  and  he  will  deliver  them
out  of  the  hands  of  their  enemies.
And  as  for  the  world  I  will  say
again,  and  as  I  have  said  on  other
occasions,  I  care  not  what  they  may
say  or  what  they  may  do  ;  the  wick-
ed, whether  men  or  nations  can  do
no  more  than  our  Father  in  heaven
permits  them  to  do,  and  so  long  as
we  are  doing  that  which  is  right  be-
fore him,  why  should  we  fear — are
we  not  in  his  hands,  and  is  not  the
whole  world  in  his  hands,  and  can
he  not  do  with  us  and  with  them
as  seemeth  hirn  good.

Brethren  and  sisters,  God  bless
you,  and  may  his  peace  continue
with  you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


No.  22


Vol  XXIIL


338


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE  BY  APOSTLE  LORENZO  SNOW,


Delivered  at  Logan,  on  Saturday  Afternoon,  Nov.  4,  1882,


(Reported  by  Geo.  F,  Gibbs.)


THE LORD INTERESTED IN THE  SALVATION OF  THE WHOLE  HUMAN
FAMILY  —  HIS  PLANS,  PURPOSES  AND  DEALINGS  ALL  TO  THAT  END

 NECESSITY  OF  CHARITY,  LOVE,  UNION,  ETC.,  IN  THE  CHURCH  OF

CHRIST  —  THE  LOGAN  TEMPLE  AND  A  PROPHETIC  GLIMPSE  AT  ITS
FUTURE,  .  • '  :


The  speaker  commenced  by  read-
ing the  lUth,  20th  and  21st  verses
of  the  1 7th  chapter  of  the  Gospel
according  to  St  John,  and  then

It  is  a  question  in  my  mind  when
reflecting  upon  the  subject  herein
contained  whether  we  take  into  pro-
per consideration  the  great  purposes
that  God  has  in  view  with  regard  to
the  human  family,  and  the  manner
in  which  he  proceeds  to  accorqpHsh
them.  When  the  Lord  calls  an
individual  or  a  class  of  individuals
out  from  the  world,  it  is  not  always
with  an  object  to  benefit  that  par-
ticular individual  or  individuals,
The  Lord  has  not  in  view  merely  the
salvation  of  a  lew  people  called  Lat*
ter-day  Saints,  who  have  been  cr  who
may  be  gathered  into  these  valleys,
but  the  salvation  of  all  men,  the
living  and  the  dead.  When  the
Lord  called  Abraham  he  made  him
certain  promises  concerning  the
glory  that  should  come  upon  him
and  his  posterity,  and  in  these  pro-
mises we  find  this  remarkable  say-
ing :  that  in  him  and  in  his  seed
all  the  nations  of  the  earth  should
be  blessed,  Paul  in  offering  an
explanation  to  this,  says,  in  speaking
of  seed,  it  did  not  have  reference


11  to  seeds  as  of  many,  but  one  which
was  Christ  Jesus  f  that  is,  in  Abra-
ham and  in  Christ  Jesus,  his  seed,
all  the  families  of  the  earth  should
be  blessed  ;  showing  that  in  calling
Abraham  and  in  making  this  pro-
mise, the  design  of  the  Lord  was
to  bless  not  only  him  and  his  pos-
terity, but  all  the  families  of  the
earth/

In  the  dealings  of  God  with  man,
we  find  that  he  often  called  upon
the  heathen  nations  with  a  view  to
the  accomplishment  of  certain  pur-
poses. The  Ninevites,  for  instance,
received  a  communication  from  the
Lord  through  the  Prophet  Jonah,
telling  them  that  in  forty  days  their
city  should  be  destroyed.  This
people  was  worthy  to  receive  warning
by  a  revelation  from  God,  as  they
manifested  afterward  in  their  re-
pentance. And  Jonah  fled  from
the  presence  of  the  Lord,  for  he  knew
that  the  Almighty  had  respect  for  not
only  one  nation  and  people,  but  for
all  nations  and  peoples  that  feared
Him,  and  liver!  according  to  the
light  which  they  possessed  ;.  and  he
believed  that  the  Lord  would  forgive
that  people  :  and  therefore  that  he,
as  a  Prophet,  would  fail  in  Ins  pre-
diction, and  would  sutler  in  his  char-


THE  LORD  INTERESTED  IN  THE  SALVATION,  ETC


339


acter  as  a  Prophet.  However,  we
find  That  Jonah  turned  up  at  last  in
Nineveh,  a  wiser,  if  not  a  better
man.  And  he  went  to  work  in
earnest,  performing  the  mission  to
which  he  had  been  called,  and  de-
livered the  message  to  the  people.
The  king  heard  of  it,  and  he  had
that  faith  in  and  that  knowledge  of
the  character  of  the  Almighty  that
he  believed  ami  humbled  himself,
and  used  his  influence  with  his
nobles  and  people  that  they  should
do  likewise,  that  the  wrath  of  God
might  be  turned  and  he  had  his  peo-
ple preserved.  So  he  came  down
off  his  throne  and  called  upon  his
nobles  to  put  on  sackcloth,  and
commanded  that  the  beasts  of  the
field  should  be  covered  with  sack-
cloth, and  the  people  repented  and
humbled  themselves  before  God  in
the  hope  that  he  would  turn  away
his  wrath  from  them.  And  they
so  fully  complied  with  the  require-
ments that  his  judgment  was
reversed,  and  the  great  city
preserved.

And  when  the  Lord  called  upon
the  Prophet  Jeremiah,  he  told  him
that  his  purposes  were  not  confined
to  the  people  of  Israel,  but  that  he
was  interested  in  the  welfare  and
salvation  of  all  nations.  On  a  cer-
tain occasion  he  was  commanded  to
make  yokes  and  to  place  them  upon
his  neck  ;  and  when  the  messengers
from  the  various  nations  should
come  to  visit  Israel,  he  was  to  send
those  yokes  to  their  musters,  their
kings,  and  tell  them  what  his  mind
and  will  were  concerning  them.
The  yokes  were  sent  to  six  different
nations,  with  a  message  requiring
of  those  several  kings  certain  duties.
Those  nations  did  not  profess  to
helieve  in  God  ;  they  worshipped
idols,  but  God  had  respect  to  them
notwithstanding.  And  it  would  not
be  a  matter  of ~  astonishment  to


know  that  those  people  stood  upon
a  far  higher  plane  of  morality  and
faith  in  God  than  the  people  of  our
.  boasted  nineteenth  century..  Now,
the  Lord  told  them  that  it  was  his
intention  to  make  a  certain  person
king  over  all  the  nations  including
theirs,  and  lie  required  them  to
submit  to  this  change  in  their  gov-
ern mental  affairs,  as  he  had  ap-
pointed Nebuchadnezzar  to  hold
dominion  over  all  nations  and
peoples,  and  over  the  beasts  of
the  field.  "  All  these  tilings
are  mine  (says  the  Lord)  arid
have  I  not  the  right  to  do  with
them  as  I  please  1  Now  you  natious,
if  you  do  not  wish  to  be  uprooted,
listen  to  the  voice  of  my  servant
Jeremiah,  and  bow  your  necks  to
the  ^oke  of  Nebuchadnezzar/'
Even  His  own  people  Israel  whom
He  had  called  and  proposed  to  lift  up
in  the  eyes  of  the  nations,  Jeremiah
was  commanded  to  tell  them  to  sub-
mit to  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  thus
permit  themselves  to  go  into  cap-
tivity j  which  if  they  did  not  they
should  be  overthrown,  and  Jerusa-
lem destroyed.  But  they  would  not
listen.  They  worshipped  false  gods,
and  they  obeyed  not  the  voice  of
the  Almighty  ;  but  were  guilty  of
all  kinds  of  abominations,  and  were
so  full  of  wickedness  that  the  anger
'  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against
them  ;  and  he  permitted  him,  whom
he  called  his  servant,  Nebuchad-
nezzar, to  destroy  their  Temple,
break  down  their  altars,  and  scatter
them  throughout  his  kingdom.  On
a  certain  occasion  the  Lord  inspired
King  Nebuchadnezzar  to  issue  an
edict  in  which  His  people  Israel
were  much  interested,  as  they  wen*
in  captivity.  Nebuchadnezzar  had
i  discovered  the  tru'3  and  living  God,
|  and  he  felt  to  honor  Him;  and  in
order  to  fully  satisfy  his  feelings  in
|  this  respect  he  passed  an  edict  to  the


■


340


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


effect  that  whosoever  would  not  re-
spect the  God  of  Shadraeh,  Meshach
and  Abednego  should  be  cut  to
pieces  and  a  dim  chill  be  made  of
their  hnu.es.  In  this  way  the  peo-
ple in  Jerusalem  and  in  the  country
round  about  while  in  captivity  were
compelled  to  have  regard  to  the
true  God,  according  to  the  edict  of
the  heathen  king.  This  is  the  way
God  worked  in  those  days,  '
Finally  when  Jesus  came,  lie
came  as  a  sacrifice  not  .simply  in  the
interest  of  Israel,  or  the  posterity
of  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  but
in  the  interest  of  the;  whole  human
family,  that  in  Him  all  men  might
be  blessed,  that  in  Him  all  men
might  be  saved  ;  and  His  mission
was  to  make  provision  by  which  the
whole  Inn  nan  family  might  receive
the  1  ►enefits  of  the  everlasting  Gospel,
not,  as  I  say,  Israel  alone,  but  the
whole  human  race  ;  and  not  alone
those  dwelling  upon  the  earth,  hut
those  also  in  the  spirit  world.  The
Apostles  at  first  did  not  comprehend
the  universality  of  the  purpose  of
the  Lord,  and  it  took  the  Lord  some  i
time  to  convince  them,  ThcrS  was
Peter,  he  had  the  idea  that  the  Gos-
pel was  to  be  confined  to  the  Jews  ;
and  in  order  to  show  him  to  the  con-
trary the  Lord  sent  a  special  mani-
festation, in  the  form  of  a  sheet  let
down  from  heaven  containing  all
manner  of  beasts,  and  then  com-
manded him  to  arise,  slay  and  eat*
But  Peter  demurred,  giving  as  a
reason,  that  nothing  unclean  had
entered  his  mouth.  But  lie  was  told  I
that  what  the  Lord  had  made  clean
no  man  should  call  unclean.  And
after  he  had  received  this  heavenly
vision,  he  was  waited  on  by  messen-
gers sent  by  a  distinguished  per-
sonage. It  appears  that  the  Lord
had  found  a  Gentile  who  honored
Him,  w  ho  [gave  much  alms  to  the
poor,  and  who  prayed  honestly  and


fervently  unto  Him.  When  Peter
was  conducted  by  the  messenger
to  the  place  he  learned  that  it
was  Cornelius,  a  Gentile,  who  had
sent  for  him  ;  who  had  assembled
with  his  friends  to  hear  what  the
Lord  had  to  communicate.  When
Peter  discovered  himself  in  the
company  of  Gentiles  he  considered
it  highly  improper  fur  one  who  was
a  Jew  to  be  seen  associating  with
that  class  of  people.  And  then
Cornelius  explained  how  that  aa
angel  had  appeared  to  him  instruct-
ing him  to  send  to  Joppa  to  the
house  of  one  Simon,  a  tanner,
etc.  On  hearing  this  Peter  com-
menced preaching  to  him  and  his
Gentile  friends.  And  whiln  lie  was
speaking  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  upoa
them,  and  they  spake  in  tongues
and  prophesied.  His  eyes  were
now  opened,  and  his  views  became
changed  from  those  narrow  concep-
tions that  he  had  entertained  in
regard  to  the  dispensation  of  the
blessings  of  the  Lord  being  confined
to  a  few.  But  when  he  saw  that
the  Holy  Ghost  was  upon  them  as  it
had  fallen  upon  Ids  own  people,  he
asked,  Who  can  forbid  water  that
they  should  not  be  baptized  %
And  lie  commanded  that  they  be
baptized,  Peter  learned  that  the
Gospel  of  the  kingdom  was  to  go
to  all  nations,  that  all  might  receive
the  benefits  of  the  same,  according
to  the  promise  made  to  Abraham,
that  in  him  and  in  Christ,  his  seed,
all  the  nations  of  the  earth  should
be  blessed.

It  was  equally  difficult  to  convince
the  other  Apostles  in  regaid  to  this
matter,  for  when  they  found  what
Peter  had  done  they  chided  him  for
so  doing  ;  so  he  explained  to  them
how  this  departure  occurred  j  how
that  the  Lord  had  convinced  him
as  to  the  propriety  of  allowing  the
Gentiles  to  be  baptized.


THE  LORD  INTERESTED  IN  THE  SALVATION,  ETC.


341


I  Lave  thought  sometimes  that  Ave
take  too  narrow  a  view  of  the  char-
acter and  purposes  of  God.  When
the  Lord  introduces  a  dispensation
to  His  servants,  as  a  general  thing
it  becomes  necessary  for  them  to
operate  in  the  interests  of  many.
Thero  is  one  thing,  however,  that
should  not  escape  our  notice.  From
the  verses  which  I  have  read  the
importance  and  the  necessity  of  the
Apostles  being  united,  was  shown,
in  order  that  the  purposes  of  the
Lord  might  he  effective  in  the
world.  For  unless  the  Apostles  and
those  that  believed  on  them  were
united,  the  world  could  not  believe
in  the  mission  and  purposes  of  the
Savior,  Therefore  Jesus  prayed  to
the  Father  that  all  those  whom  the
Father  had  given  Him  might  be  one
as  He  and  the  Father  were  one,  that
the  world  might  believe  that  the
Father  had  sent  Him.  In  fact  this
is  what  the  Lord  designed  to  effect
through  Israel  in  bringing  them  out
from  Egyptian  bondage;  He  wished
to  make  of  them  a  united  people,  a
peculiar  nation,  a  nation  of  people
whom  God  could  honor  and  respect
in  order  that  the  world  might
believe,  and  that  they  might  receive
the  blessings  which  He  wished  to
bestow  upon  them,  inasmuch  as  the  i
human  race  are  ail  the  offspring  of
God  ;  and  if  Israel  had  carried  out
His  requirements,  the  world,  no
doubt  would  have  been  greatly  bene-
fited thereby,  and  the  purposes  of
God  more  fully  effected.  The  Lord
wished  to  show  His  character,  and
the  character  of  the  heavens,  and
wished  to  extend  his  love  and  bles-
sings through  Israel  to  the  whole
human  family  ;  but  Israel  was  diso-
bedient and  would  not  hearken  to
His  voice.  And  as  to  the  Apostles,
so  far  as  their  fulfilling  the  wishes
of  the  Savior  concerning  their  being
one,  we  are  told  by  the  revelations


of  the  Lord  through  the  Prophet
Joseph,  that  his  disciples  in  days  of
old  had  feelings  one  against  an-
other, and  forgave  not  one  another
in  their  hearts,  and  for  this  reason
they  were  chastened,  yes,  they  were
sorely  chastened.  The  Apostles
were  persecuted,  and  with  one  ex-
ception perhaps,  were  finally  mar-
tyred* And  the  churches  they
established  never  came  to  that  union
which  the  Savior  prayed  for,  and
consequently  they  failed  to  stand
the  tide  of  opposition.  The  Latter-
day  Saints  are  trying  to  do  the  work
that  Israel  failed  to  do;  and  that  the
former  Saints  did  not  accomplish,
and  we  can  only  do  it  by  becoming
one  even  as  the  Father  and  the  Son
are  one,  and  this  in  order  that  the
world  may  believe  that  we  are  sent
of  God.  We  have  got  to  be  perfect,
and  come  to  the  measure  of  the
stature  of  Christ  Jesus,  in  order  that
the  world  may  know  that  Jesus  has
sent  and  commissioned  His  Apos-
tles, and  restored  the  holy  Priest-
hood. If  we  have  division  in  our
midst;  if  we  be  divided  either
spiritually  ortemporally,  we  never  can
be  the  people  that  God  designs  us  to
become,  nor  can  we  ever  become
instruments  in  His  hands  of  making
the  world  believe  that  the  holy
Priesthood  has  been  restored,  and
that  w^  have  the  everlasting  Gospel.
In  order  for  us  to  effect  the  pur-
poses of  God,  we  shall  have  to  do
as  Jesus  did — conform  our  individual
will  to  the  will  of  God,  not  only
in  one  thing,  but  in  all  things,  and
to  live  so  that  the  will  of  God  shall
be  in  us.  We  have  the  same  Priest*
hood  that  Jesus  had,  and  we  have
got  to  do  as  He  did,  to  make  sacrifice
of  our  own  desires  and  feelings  as
He  did,  perhaps  not  to  die  martyrs
as  He  di'i,  but  we  have  got  to  make
sacrifices  in  order  to  carry  out  the
purposes  of  God,  or  we  shall  not  be


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES,


worthy  of  this  holy  Priesthood,  and
be  saviors  of  the  world.  God  in*
tends  to  make  us  saviors  not  only  of
many  that  now  dwell  on  the  earth,
but  of  many  in. the  spirit  world  :  He
will  not  only  place  us  in  a  position
to  save  ourselves,  but  He  will  make
us  competent  to  assist  in  the
redemption  of  many  of  the  offspring
of  the  Almighty.  And  that  we
may  assist  in  the  salvation  of  other
people  we  are  building  the  Temple
on  yonder  plateau ;  and  all  Latter-
day  Saiuts  in  this  Temple  district
are  called  upon  to  aid  in  accomplish-
ing this  work.

I  have  come  now  to  what  I  wish
to  say  about  the  business  of  this
Temple,  in  reference  to  which  I
desire  to  speak  a  few  minutes.  I
suspect  that  many  of  the  Saints  are
anticipating  the  completion  of  this
Temple  next  spring.  As  to  when  it
will  be  finished  I  am  not  able  to  say;
I  think,  however,  it  will  depend
upon  the  efforts  we  make  to  that
end.

The  speaker  then  w?ent  on  to
speak  of  the  work  that  was  neces-
sary to  be  done,  and  proposed  a
way  to  accomplish  the  same  ;  and
then  said  :

I  would  not  be  afraid  to  prophesy,
if  I  were  in  the  habit  of  prophesying,
that  the  people  of  this  Temple  dis-


trict will  be  found  ready  and  willing
to  do  all  that  may  be  required  by
way  of  completing  this  building.
And  I  have  not  the  least  doubt  in
the  world — I  believe  it  lull,  that
angels  will  minister  to  the  people,
and  the  power  of  the  Almighty  will
be  made  manifest  to  a  greater  extent
than  at  any,  other  time,  or  in  any
other  house,  since  the  days  of  Jesus.
You  know  how  it  was  in  that  Kirt-
land  Temple,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,
appeared  in  His  glory  standing
upon  the  breastwork  of  the  pulpit,
His  eyes  like  a  flaming  fire,  and  His
hair  as  white  as  the  driven  snow,
while  His  countenance  shown  like
the  sun  in  his  brightness.  And
those  who  saw  Him  testify  to  this
fact,  and  they  describe  His  voice  as
the  sound  of  rushing  waters,  as  Ha
said  :  I  am  He  that  was  slain  ;^  I
am  He  that  lives ;  1  am  your  advo-
cate with  the  Father*  Your  sins
are  forgiven  you.  And  He  then
blessed  those  who  had  assisted  in
building  the  Temple  to  His  name,
and  He  accepted  it  at  their  hands.
And  this  people  will  be  entitled  to
those  blessings  that  Jesus  in  His
glory  pronounced  upon  those  who
aided  in  building  the  Kirtland
Temple,  inasmuch  as  they  contrib-
ute in  the  future  as  liberally  as  they
I  have  in  the  past.


REVEALED  RELIGION,  ETC.


343


I


DISCOURSE  BY ELDER  CHAS.  W.  PENROSE,
Delivered  in  the  Assembly  Hall,  Sunday,  Jan.  14th,  1883.


(Reported  hy  Geo.  F.  Gihhs.)


REVEALED  RELIGION  AND  MAN-MADE  METHODS  OF  WORSHIP — ONLY  ONE
TRUE  AND  ACCEPTABLE  WAY  TO  WORSHIP  GOD  —  ANCIENT  AND
MODERN  REVELATIONS  CORROBORATE  EACH  OTHER  —  GOD1!*  SPIRIT
THE  LIGHT  AND  LIFE  OF  THE  WHOLE  WORLD  —  MEN  GENERALLY
CHOOSE  DARKNESS  RATHER  THAN  LIGHT  —  THE  COMING  FORTH  OF
THE  LIGHT  IN  THE  LATTER  DAYS  — •  JOSEPH  SMITH  AND  HIS  DOC-
TRINES—THE  SPEAKER'S  PERSONAL  EXPERIENCE— THE  OPERATIONS
OF  THi  SPIRIT — THE  WAY  TO  OBTAIN  KNOWLEDGE  FROM  GOD —
THE  NECESSITY  OF  PRIESTHOOD  ANQ  CHURCH  GOVERNMENT  —  THE
HEAD  OF  THE  CHCRCH  GOl/s  MOUTHPIECE  TO  THE  CHURCH  —  THE
PERFECTION,  BEAUTY,  AND  HARMONY  OF  THE  LORD*S  WORK.


I  frel  thankful,  my  brethren  ami
sisters,  that  I  have  the  privilege,
with  you,  of  assembling  in  this
place  to  worship  God ;  and  I  feel  very
thankful  that  we  are  able  to  meet
and  worship  God  in  the  way  that  He
has  appointed ;  and  that  the  religion
that  we  have  embraced  is  no  cun-
ningly-devised fable  of  man,  but
is  the  veiy  truth  ot  the  eternal  God,
and  has  been  sent  down  from  hea-
ven in  these  latter  times  for  our
benefit,  for  our  guidance,  and  for
our  salvation,  if  we  will  hearken  to
and  obey  it.

The  God  whom  we  worship  is  not
a  God  of  our  own  invention,  but  a
God  who  lias  revealed  Himself  to
us,  to  a  certain  degree,  and  who  has
pointed  out  to  us  the  way  in  which
we  should  walk.  There  is  a  preva-
lent idea  in  the  world  that  all  the
God  there  is,  is  such  as  men  have
framed  and  fashioned  in  their  own
minds. It  is  true  that  the  people


of  the  earth  in  different  ages  have
imagined  a  great  many  things  iu
regard  to  Deity,  They  have  set  up
Gods  of  their  own,  worshipping
them  according  to  their  own  notions.
But  this  is  not  the  case  with  the
people  called  Latter  day  Saints,
They  have  not  framed  and  fashioned
a  being  to  fall  down  before  and
worship  ;  but  they  have  received
communication  from  a  Divine  Being
with  instructions  how  they  should
act,  and  ,  those  instructions  form
their  religion,  The  leaders  of  this
Church  have  not  invented  the  sys-
tem ;  but  every  principle  connected
therewith  has  been  revealed  from
high.

The  God  whom  the  u  Christians*1
worship  is  a  being  of  their  own  crea-
tion— if,  indeed,  there  can  be  such
a  being  as  they  describe  him  to  be  ;
they  have  formed  certain  notions
concerning  deity,  and  then  they
have  formulated  those  notions  into


on


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


articles  of  faith  or  religion.  So  with
the  heathen  nations,  so-called.  They
have  formed  idols  of  wood  and  stone;
others  have  chosen  the  heavenly
bodies,  such  as  the  sun,  which  re-
present to  them  certain  qualities
which  they  think  deity  should  pos-
sess. Not  that  the  heathen  nations
really  and  truly  worship  the  wood
or  the  stone,  as  such ;  but  the  images
which  they  set  up,  or  the  objects
which  they  adore  merely  draw  their
attention  to  something  behind  and
above  and  greater  than  those  objects.
So  with  the  Roman  Catholic,
When  he  bows  down  before  the
image  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  or  before
the  image  of  the  Savior  upon  the
cross,  lie  does  not  profess  to  worship
the  picture  or  the  image  ;  these  are
merely  methods  to  lead  the  mind  to
something  beyond  what  the  natural
eye  sees.  But  then,  these  various
deities  which  people  worship  are,
after  all,  the  emanation  of  their  own
minds  ;  they  are  gods  of  their  own
invention.  Herein  lies  the  great
difference  between  the  sects  of
Christendom  and  of  heathendom,
and  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
Latter-day  Saints.  The  people  of
this  peculiar  Church  worship  a  Being
who  has  to  some  extent  manifested
himself  to  them,  and  who  has
told  them  what  they  know  concern-
ing Him.  And  the  revelations  He
has  made  to  us  of  Himself,  and  of
the  Gospel  of  salvation  that  we
have  received  have  been  given  in
this  our  day  and  time  through  men
whom  He  Himself  has  chosen  for
this  purpose.  So  with  regard  to
the  different  ordinances  and  doc-
trines of  the  Church  to  which  we
belong  i  and  so  with  our  mode  of
worship,  and  everything  belonging
to  our  religion.  It  has  all  been  re-
vealed to  us,  and  we  accept  it  as
having  come  from  a  higher  source.
Our  religion  consists  of  that  which


;  God  reveals  to  us,  not  of  that  which
we  make  ourselves  and  then  offer  to
Him.  Some  people  seem  to  have
the  idea  that  God  ought  to  "receive
their  worship,  no  matter  in  what
way  it  is  made ;  that  He  ought  to
accept  the  ordinances  which  they
administer  or  receive,  no  matter
what  they  may  be;  that  all  the  wor-
ship which  they  offer  ought  to  be
accepted  by  Deity,  no  matter  in
what  shape  or  form  it  may  be  de-
vised. This  is  because  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth  do  not  understand  the
true  and  living  God  and  His  ways.
The  Lord  will  not  accept  that  which
He  Himself  has  not  a] (pointed  ;  He
will  not  acknowledge  that  which  He
Himself  has  not  revealed,  The
inhabitants  of  the  earth  are,  of
course,  at  liberty  to  devise  modes
of  worship,  and  they  may  frame
their  own  religious  tenets  and
doctrines,  but  these  are  not  accepta-
ble to  the  Lord,  neither  is  it  reason-
able that  He  should  be  expected  to
accept  them.  When  God  manifests
Himself  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  and  reveals  to  them  truth,
and  makes  known  to  them  ordinan-
ces, then  the  people  are  under  obli-
gations to  receive  that  which  God,
has  manifested  ;  but  God  Almighty
is  not  under  obligation  to  accept  that
which  man  has  invented.  It  is  true
that  the  doctrines  which  God  has
revealed  in  these  latter  days  are  not
new,  that  they  are  not  revealed  for
the  first  time,  because  we  are  living
iu  the  latter  days,  In  previous  ages
of  the  world  God  manifested  him-
self and  revealed  to  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth  His  ways  and  called
upon  them  to  walk  in  his  path  ;
and,  therefore,  a  great  many  things
which  God  has  revealed  to  ut  may
be  found  in  the  ancient  Scriptures.
Holy  men  of  old,  called  in  the  same
way  as  men  are  in  these  days,  have
left  on  record  some  things  which


God  manifested  to  them ;  and  they
are  written  in  the  Bible  and  the
Book  of  Morniou,  and  in  records
that  have  been  lost,  but  which  will
be  brought  forth  in  this  great  and
last  dispensation  of  God's  mercy  to
man.  So  we  may  take  up  the  book
called  the  Bible,  and  read  a  great
many  principle  which  have  been
made  manifest  to  us  in  our  day  ;  but
we  do  not  take  them  from  the  Bible
or  any  of  these  records.  We  receive
them  because  God  has  revealed
them  to  us ;  and  when  we  open  the
Bible  or  any  of  the  books  written
by  inspiration,  and  iind  written
therein  many  things  which  corres-
pond to  that  which  He  has  revealed
to  us,  they  serve  to  corroborate  the
living  word  of  God,  which  has  come
down  to  us  out  of  heaven.

The  different  sects  in  Christen-
dom profess  to  take  the  Bible,  the
Old  and  New  Testament,  as  their
guide  to  salvation  ;  and  they  say,
w  hatsoever  is  not  found  therein  and
cannot  be  proved  thereby  is  not  to
fete  received  as  an  article  of  faith.
That,  in  general  terms,  is  one  of  the
principles  which  runs  through  the
various  "Christian"  sects.  They
found  their  faith,  or  profess  to,  upon
the  Bible.  While  we  do  not  take
that  position,  while  our  faith  is  not
founded  upon  the  Bible  or  on  any
written  book,  when  we  compare  the
Bible  with  what  we  do  believe,
what  God  has  revealed  to  us,  we
find  it  corresponds  ;  we  find  that
God  is  the  ^anie  yesterday,  to-day
and  forever.  This  Book  says  that,
and  that  his  works  are  one  eternal
round.  Truth  is  not  new  ;  it  may
be  revealed  anew,  and  it  niavbe  new
to  the  people  to  whom  it  is  revealed.
But  there  is  only  one  plan  of  salva-
tion, one  true  and  everlasting  Gos-
pel. That  Gospel  God  revealed  in
the  beginning  ;  that  Gospel  God  has
revealed  at  different  times  ;  and  in


these  latter  days  lie  has  revealed
the  same  old  Gospel  again  in  great
plainness,  ami  prepared  the  way  so
that  all  people  who  desire  the  truth
may  come  to  the  knowledge  of  it,
wit  hunt  being  left  to  depend  upon
books  that  were  written  hundreds
of  years  ago,  He  having  poured  out
upon  man  again  the  same  spirit  to
guide  and  direct  them  and  to  enable
them  to  understand  God  and  His
purposes,  that  men  had  who  wrote
t  lie  things  contained  in  the
Bible  or  in  any  other  inspired  book
left  on  record.  And  herein  is  ano-
ther great  difference  between  the
religion  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
and  all  other  relisnons  in  the  world.
We  have  a  living  faith,  a  living
God.  and  the  living  word  of  God  to
guide  and  direct  us  every  day  of  our
livesf  When  we  read  the  hitter
of  the  word  of  the  Lord,  given
ages  ago,  and  that  has  been  handed
down  from  generation  to  generation,
we  have  the  satisfaction  of
knowing  that  the  things  which
God  has  revealed  to  us  were  re-
vealed to  the  ancients,  ami  that
by  receiving  these  things  they  came
to  know  God,  whom  to  know  is  life
eternal ;  and  we  are  thereby  encour-
aged to  imitate  their  examples,  and
alsj  to  avoid  the  errors  which  they
fell  into.

Now  although  we  do  not  base  our
faith  upon  the  Bible  or  any  other
written  work,  yet  at  the  same  time
then*  are  no  people  upon  the  lace
of  the  earth  who  believe  so  much  in
the  sacred,  scriptures  left  on  record
and  handed  down  to  us,  as  do  the
Latter-day  Saints.  Though  we  are
not  dependent  upon  books  for  our
religion — for  our  religion  would
exisit  if  there  were  no  books  in
existence,  at  the  same  time  we  mani-
fest by  our  works  that  we  have  more
faith  in  the  Bible  than  the  people  who
profess  to  base  their  faith  upon  it.


34G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


At  the  beginning  of  our  religion,
if  I  may  use  that  term— but  really
there  is  no  beginning,  for  it  is  true,
and  truth  is  eternal  without  begin-
ning and  without  end  ;  every  prin-
ciple of  truth  always  had  an  exis-
tence, and  when,  therefore,  i  say
beginning  of  our  religion,  I  mean
the  beginning  of  the  revelation  to
the  people  in  the  day  in  which  we
live — when  our  religion  was  first
revealed  the  world  was  in  ignorance
concerning  God  and  his  ways.
It  is  true  there  was  a  glimmering
of  light  concerning  him  which  was
obtained  through  reading  the  Bible,
and  other  works  containing  the
writings  of  men  who  in  former
times  were  to  some  extent .  in-
spired. For  the  inspiration  of  God-
in  olden  times  was  nut  confined  to
the  men  who  wrote  the  Jewish
Scriptures.  The  Jewish  prophets
revealed  the  word  of  God ;  the
holy  men  of  God  who  moved
among  the  people  in  that  nation
were  inspired  from  on  high  ;  but
God  has  permitted  His  Spirit,  which
is  the  light  of  truth,  and  which  man-
ifests truth,  to  be  poured  out  upon
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  eflrth  to
some  extent  ;  for  in  that  they  live
and  move  and  have  their  being,  ami
all  people  of  any  age,  race  or  coun-
try who  seek  unto  God  with  an  hon-
est heart  in  fervent  prayer,  desiring
truth  and  to  be  taught  of  God,  will
be  enlightened  by  Him.  There
have  been  inspired  bards  and  sages
and  poets,  who  have  uttered  words
of  truth,  words  of  inspiration  con*
cerning  things  of  which  they  had
been  enlightened  of  God.  And
many  things  that  such  men  wrote
have  been  recorded  aud  handed
down,  and  scraps  of  them  may  be
found  among  ^all  nations  and
peoples.  As  the  Apostle  Paul  says,
"God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all
nations  of  men  for  to  dwell  on  all


the  face  of  the  earth,  and  hath  de-
termined the  times  before  appointed,
and  the  bounds  of  their  habitation  ;
that  they  should  seek  the  Lord,  if
haply  they  might  feel  after  him,  and
filid  him,  though  he  be  not  far  from
every  one  of  us.  For  in  him  we
live,  and  move  aud  have  our  being  ;
as  certain  also  of  your  own  poets
have  said,  "  For  we  are  also  his
offspring."  His  Spirit  has  enlight-
ened mankind  in  all  a<:es  to  a  cer-
tain  extent ;  for  the  spirit  of  the
Lord,  winch  gives  light  to  the  hu-
man understanding  is  the  spirit  by
which  we  live ;  it  is  the  spirit  of
light ;  it  is  the  spirit  of  life.  And
as  the  light  that  proceeds  forth
from  that  glorious  luminary,  the
sun,  gives  light  to  the  earth,  and
also  light  to  vegetation,  and  to  man
and  beast,  so  the  spirit  of  Him  who
created  us  has  been  poured  out
upon  all  people,  and  upon  all  ani-
mated things  ;  indeed,  we  are  told
in  the  revelations  of  God,  that  the
light  which  lights  our  eyes  is
through  Him  that  enlighteneth  our
understandings,  and  is  the  same
light  that  proceeds  from  the  bosom
of  God,  and  fills  the  immensity  of
space  ;  that  it  is  the  same  light
that  lightens  every  man  that  cometh
into  the  world— the  Jew,  the  Gen-
tile, the  bond  and  the  free.  We
are  told,  that  "  there  is  a  spirit  in
man  and  the  inspiration  of  the
Almighty  giveth  them  understand-
ing/1 Tins  is  that  spirit.  It  is  the
light  of  Christ ;  it  is  the  light  of  God,
II  is  the  life  of  our  bodies,  and  it  is
also  the  light  of  our  minds.  This
spirit  is  not  confined  to  one  race  of
people,  or  to  one  country,  or  to  one
age  or  generation,  but  it  is  univer-
sal;  it  is  of  Him  in  whom  we  live
and  move  and  have  our  being.  It  is
the  true  light  that  lightetti  every
man  that  cometh  into  the  world.
And  if  all  men  would  be  guided  by


REVEALED  RELIGION,  ETC,


347


that  natural  light,  that  natural
inspiration  which  gives  them  under-
standing, and  by  which  they  exist,
they  would  be  guided  directly  to
Him  who  is  the  fountain  of  all  light;
they  would  then  be  in  a  condition
to  be  communicated  with  by  Him
who  is  their  Maker  and  Creator.
But  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
have  been  from  the  beginning  prone
to  walk  in  the  ways  of  darkness  rather
than  in  the  light,  because,  as  Jesus
explained  it,  "  their  deeds  are  evil/*
This  is  the  reason  why  there  is  so
much  ignorance  in  the  world  con-
cerning God  and  His  ways.

When  the  Lord,  at  different  times,
has  raised  up  men  who  sought  Him,
who  learned  of  Him,  and  who  put
themselves  in  such  a, condition  that
He  could  communicate  with  them,
and  through  them  to  the  rest  of
mankind,  generally  speaking,  those
men  have  been  despised  and  rejected
by  the  multitude.  The  great  masses
of  the  people  have  gone  downward
in  error  and  darkness  ;  it  has
been  hard  for  them  to  walk  in  that
straight  and  narrow  path  which
leads  upward  to  light,  to  intel-
ligence, to  purity,  to  the  presence
of  Him  who  is  the  author  of  truth  ;
and,  therefore,  the  vast  majority  of
the  servants  of  God,  who  have  been
called  to  be  special  witnesses  of  the
Almighty  to  a  fallen  world,  have
met  with  cruel  and  inhuman  treat-
ment from  those  to  whom  they
were  sent.  They  have  generally
been  persecuted ;  they  have  been
put  to  death  in  many  instances  in
the  most  ignominious  manner ;  they
have  been  beheaded;  they  have  been
torn  asunder  ;  they  have  been  cast
into  furnaces  and  into  dens  of  wild
beasts,  and  in  order  to  escape  mal-
treatment they  have  roamed  hills
and  mountains,  concealing  them-
selves in  dens  and  caves  of  the
earth  ;  men  bearing  a  heavenly  mes-


sage, a  message  fraught  with  peace
and  good  will  to  all  men,  a  message
too,  involving  their  eternal  welfare
and  happiness.  This  is  the  reason
why  there  has  been  so  much  ignor-
ance in  the  world  concerning  God  ;
and  it  is  in  consequence  of  their  diso-
bedience, in  consequence  of.  their
wickedness,  in  consequence  of  their
love  for  darkness  rather  than  light,
in  consequence  of  their  choosing  the
things  that  come  from  beneath  in
preference  to  things  that  come  from
above.  For  there  are  two  opposing
spirits  or  influences  upon  the  -earth,
just  as  there  are  light  and  darkness.
They  cannot  dwell  together  ;  they
always  were  and  always  will  be  at
war  one  with  another,  but  one  flees
away  at  the  approach  of  the  other,
as  when  the  light  of  the  morning
beams  forth  over  the  lull-tops,  dark-
ness *flees  away.

The  inhabitants  of  the  earth  have
been  willing  to  be  led  by  the  influ-
ence of  darkness  ;  for  there  is  a
spirit  of  darkness  upon  the  earth  as
well  as  the  spirit  of  light,  which
leads  to  death  as  surely  and  certainly
as  the  spirit  of  light  leads  to  life.
In  the  beginning  God  gave  to  man
his  agency,  leaving  him  to  choose
either  light  or  darkness,  truth  or
error,  as  he  might  please.  When
men  choose  to  receive  the  light  of
truth,  the  spirit  of  truth  prompt*
them  to  do  good,  but  it  does  not
force  them  to  do  so  ;  it  is  gentle  and
kind,  and  will  enlighten  and  bless  if
people  are  willing  to  receive  and  act
upon  its  promptings ;  but  if  men
choose  to  walk  in  their  own  ways,
they  are  at  liberty  to  do  so  without
let  or  hindrance,  so  far  as  the  spirit
of  light  forcing  itself  upon  them  to
compel  them  to  walk  in  the  way  of
the  Lord,  is  concerned.  The  inhab-
itants of  the  earth  generally  have
chosen  to  walk  in  the  paths  which
lead  to  death  ;  they  have  chosen  that


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES


which  h  evil  and  loved  it,  rather
than  that  which  is  good  ;  therefore,
they  have  not  been  led  upward  to
the  Source  of  Light,  or  been  able  to
■communicate  with  Him.

AVhen  our  Heavenly  Father  com-  j
menced  this  work  with  which  you
and  I  are  identified,  the  world  was
in  darkness  and  without  knowledge
concerning  God,  There  was  a  little
glimmering  of  light  among  them
concerning  some  things  pertaining
to  God  which  men  had  read  about
in  the  Bible  ;  and  there  were  some
individuals  in  other  irenerations
who,  searching  after  truth,  obtained
seine  comprehension  of  the  prin-
ciples of  truth,  but  they  knew  not
God  nor  the  ways  of  God.  Tiiere  1
was  no  definite  knowledge  in  this
age  concerning  Deity  until  God
manifested  himself  to  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith  in  I J  is  own  person
and  by  His  Son.  Joseph  saw  the
Lord,  and  heard  the  heavenly  voice
saying,  "  This  is  my  Beloved  Son,
hear  ye  Him  : n  and  he  was  in-
structed by  the  ministration  of  per-
sonages direct  from  the  presence  of
Deity,  in  regard  to  the  things  of  God.
So  that  when  he  came  to  lay  the
foundation  of  this  work,  he  did  not
at  tern]  it  to  lay  it  according  to  his
own  notions  and  ideas,  or  according
to  that  which  he  had  read  in  books,
or  that  which  he  had  pondered  over,
or  that  which  he  or  other  men  had
invented  ;  but  he  made  known  to
o tliers  what  God  had  revealed  to
him.  And  when  he  bore  testimony
that  God  lived,  that  Jesus  who  died
on  Calvary  was  the  Son  of  God,  he
testified  of  that  which  lie  knew,
because  these  Divine  beings  had
manifested  themselves  to  him.

Joseph  Smith  was  given  to  under-
stand of  the  existence  of  a  certain
record  written  by  men  who,  in  for-
mer times,  in  like  manner  had
received  the  word  of  God  upon  this


continent.  The  place  of  its  exis-
tence was  also  shown  to  him,  and
he  was  inspired  of  God  to  translate
that  record  into  the  English  lan-
1  guage.  Now,  Joseph  Smith  in
|  performing  that  great  work  received,
continually,  evidence  of  the  divine
origin  of  what  he  wrote  or  caused
others  to  write.  It  was  not  the
emanation  of  his  own  brain,  or
something  that  he  had  concocted,
but  was  the  work  of  the  Lord  as
written  by  the  servants  of  God  in
ancient  times,  revealed  to  him  by
the  power  of  the  Lord  God  that  lie
might  translate  it  into  our  language.
So  in  regard  to  the  revelations
given  to  this  Church,  and  concerning
every  doctrine  and  principle
pertaining  to  our  faith.  They  did
\  not  spring  from  his  thoughts,
they  were  not  the  product  of  his
mind  ;  but  they  were  revealed  to
him  by  the  ministration  of  holy
angels,  and  by  the  inspiration  of
that  Spirit  which  gives  light  to  the
u  n  d  en?  tan  din  g,  \  \  >  r  ]  t  e  recei  ved
blessings  to  a  greater  degree  than
are  poured  out  commonly  upon  the
children  of  men,  as  was  the  case
with  other  men  anciently  who  were
called  to  perform  a  special  work ;  his
mind  was  enlightened  far  beyond
the  condition  of  his  fellow* men,  for
God  bestowed  upon  him  at  the  pro-
per time  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
by  which  he,  as  well  as  men  an-
ciently, understood  and  spoke  and
wrote  the  mind  and  will  of  God.
And  Joseph  Smitli  learned  how  to
obtain  that  glorious  and  heavenly
gift  not  only  for  himself  but  for
others,  and  he  was  enabled  to
instruct  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
how  they  could  obtain  it,  how  they
could  come  to  a  knowledge  of  the
truth  for  themselves,  and  commune
with  God  for  themselves;  how  they
could  obtain  a  knowledge  of  His
existence  through  this  heavenly  gift,


REVEALED  RELIGION,  ETC.


349


so  that  they  might  he  guide  J  in  his
ways  and  know  that  they  were
walking  in  Ills  paths.  Joseph  couM
not  hud  this  out  in  and  of  himself ;
it  was  revealed  to  him  from  on  hvAi ;
and  so  with  every  doctrine  and
principle,  every  ordinance  and
commandment  that  is  in  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christy  of  Latter-day
Saints.

Now  although  this  religion  is
divine,  coming  from  God  direct,  it  is
not  a  mysterious  religion  .  as  some
suppose.  It  is  very  plain,  very  sim-
ple and  very  easy  to  be  understood
All  the  people  upon  the  face  of  the
earth  may  comprehend  it ;  it  may  he
brought  down  to  the  understanding
of  the  weakest  of  all  races ;  all  may
learn  and  comprehend  those  simple
principles  by  winch  they  may  come
to  a  knowledge  of  God  and  he  taught
of  him*  and  by  which  they  may
take  that  course  which  is  right  in
his  sight

The  first  principle  of  true  religion
is  faith.  Jesus  Christ  says,  "  Except
a  man  be  born  again  he  cannot  see
the  kingdom  of  God/'  This  is  verily
so.  All  people  must  be  "born  again"
to; be  able  to  see  the  kingdom  of
God,  or  to  be  able  to  comprehend
the  ways  of  the  Lord.  Is  this  a
mystery  ?  No,  it  is  plain  and  easily
understood  when  we  get  the  spirit
and  light  of  God  upon  it*  Jesus  said
also,  "  Except  a  man  he  born  of  the
water  and  of  the  spirit,  he  cannot
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God/'  A
change  must  take  place  in  the  hu-
man heart.  Men  must  first  he  born
of  the  word  of  God,  which  lives  q,nd
abides  for  ever.  As  the  Apostle
Peter  says,  "  being  horn  again,  not
of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorrup-
tible, by  the  word  of  God,  which
live tli  and  abide th  forever"  The
Apostle  James  says,  "  Of  his  own
will  begat  He  us  with  the  word  of
truth." And  again  we  read,  " Faith


cometh  by  hearing  *the  word  of
God."  God's  way  is  this  :  i£  He  calls
men  who  are  fitted  for  His  work,
and  inspires  them,  and  endows  them
with  authority  to  represent  Him,
and  sends  them  forth  to  preach
the  word  of  God.  When  they  hear
their  testimony  to  people  who  are
honest  in  their  hearts,  who  desire
the  truth  and  who  wish  to  know  of
God,  i  the  Holy  Spirit  that  is
in  the  servants  of  God,  the  Spirit
accompanying  the  word  spoken  by
authority,  enters  the  hearts  of  such
people,  and  they  are  born  of  the
word  of  God,  so  that  they  can  see
and  comprehend  the  truth.  A
change  is  wrought  upon  them  by
the  power  and  influence  of  divine
truth,  by  w  hich  they  are  able  to  see
the  truth  as  the  speaker  sees  it  •  the
word  %puken  by  the  gift  and  power
of  God  carries1  conviction  to  the
heart,  and  they  at  once  begin  to
recognize  the  authority  of  Him  who
imparts  the  words  of  life  to  them.
They  are  born  of  the  word  and  are
able  to  see  and  understand  to  a  cer-
tain degree,  their  faith  and  their
ideas  having  been  quickened  by
the  power  of  God,  The  light  and
influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  radiat-
ing and  proceeding  from  the  inspired
speaker,  accompanies  his  word*
As  his  testimony  is  borne  under  the
influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  by
authority  from  "on  high,  conviction
seizes  hold  of  the  people,  and  if  they
are  honest  in  their  hearts  and  desires,
it  hears  record  in  their  souls*
"Light  cleaveth  unto  light  and
intelligence,"  We  know  this  by
experience*  When  the  servants
of  God  first  bore  testimony  to  us,
a  different  impression  was  pro-
duced upon  us  to  any  that  we  had
experienced  when  listening  to  the
preachers  of  the  different  sects ;
it  was  the  effect  of  truth  preached
by  the  power  of  the  living  God;


350


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSE


it  bora  testimony  to  our  spirits,  and
we  felt  that  it  was  true*  We
could  not  explain  why  ;  we  couM
not,  perhaps,  comprehend  the
change,  but  we  knew  that  some-
thitm  had  come  to  us  different  from
any thing  wc  ha  l  evei  before  received ;
we  frit  that  it  was  tni4  J  the  *jirit
of  God  bore  record  in  our  souls  that
it  was»true;  we  wore  born  of  the
word,  and  we  could  see  that  this
was  the  work  of  God,  and  therefore
could  yield  willing  obedience  to  the
ordinance  of  baptism  for  remission
of  tins  by  one,  having  authority
from  God.  After  we  had  been  bap-
tized we  were  anxious  to  have  bands
laid  upon  our  heads  that  we  might
receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
In  lining  that  term,  the  "gift  of  the
Holv  Ghost,"  we  do  not  mean  some

At

particular  gift  of  the  Spirit,  but  the
gift  <>f  the  Spirit  itself — the  Holy
GHost  given  unto  us  as  a  gift  from
God,  We  will  find  that  term,  "gift
of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  used  in  the  old
Scriptures,  and  in  the  latter  day
Scriptures.  It  is  the  Holy  Ghost
itself  given  unto  us  as  a  gift  from
the  Almighty.  41  Then  laid*  they
their  hands  upon  them  and  they
received  the  Holy  Ghost."  The
promise  is  to  those  who  will  repent
and  I baptized  for  the  remission
of  pins;  thev  shall  receive  •*  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  What
is  it]  Ir,  is  a  greater  and  higher
endowment  of  the  same  spirit
\  Inch  enlightens  every  man  that
couie^  into  the  world;  a  greater
power  given  unto  us  as  an  abiding
witness,  to  be  a  light  to  our  feet  and
a  lamp  to  our  path  ;  as  a  restraint
as;aitj*t  sin,  to  guide  us  into  all
truth,  to  open  up  the  vision  of  the
mind,  to  bring  things  past  to  our
remembrance,  and  to  make  manifest
things  to  come.  It  is  the  spirit  of
truth  that  reveals  the  things  of  the
Father  and  the  Son,  proceeding


from  the  presence  of  the  Almighty
and  the  very  tdoiy  in  which  He  is
enrobed,  which  makes  him  like
unto  a  consuming  fire.  If  we  receive
that  heavenly  gift  all  are  brought
into  communion  with  Him  ;  we  can
understand  bonn  thing  concerning
Him,  that  we  may  pattern  after  Him
until  we  become  like  Him  ;  for  if  we
are  continually  guided  by  that  spirit,
eventual Iv  we  will  come  back  to  His
presence  and  be  able  to  enjoy  the
fullness  of  His  glory*  And  while
we  remain  in  the  flesh  He  will  not
be  a  stranger  to  us ;  we  will  not
walk  in  the  dark  like  the  majority
of  mankind,  but  we  will  be  the  chil-
dren of  the  light,  comprehending
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Him,  and
seeing  the  path  in  which  we  should
walk.

We,  then,  heard  the  word  and
believed  it ;  faith  sprang  up  in  our
hearts,  and  Ave  went  forth  in  faith
and  were  baptized  ;  and  when  the
servants  of  God  who  had  received
their  missions  from  the  Almighty,
who  had  been  ordained  under  the
hands  of  Joseph  Smith  or  others
whom  he  had  ordained,  laid  their
hands  upon  our  heads  we  received
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  What
was  the  nature  of  the  influence  that
was  brought  to  bear  upon  us  ?  some
physical  exhibition  of  power]  Xo,
Cuuld  anybody  perceive  that  there
was  a  change  in  us]  No,  I  think
not.  1  know  bow  1  felt,  1  can  bear
testimony  i i i  re-; ml  to  my  own  ex-
perience, an  1  1  think  that  my  expe-
rience in  this  respect  is  that  of
o  there.

When  I  heard  the  word  I  believed
it,  and  rejoiced  in  it,  and  I  prayed
tu  Go  1  fervently — I  was  but  a  boy
at  the  time — in  the  name  of  His  Son
Jesus,  that  He  would  manifest  to  me
whether  this  was  true  or  not,  that  I
might  not  be  deceived  by  any  cun-
ningly- devised  fable ;  that  1  might


REVEALED  RELIGION,  ETC.


351


not  be  lcri  astray ;  that  no  impostor
might  have  any  power  over  me;
but  that  I  might  be  guided  in  the
steps  I  was  about  to  tnke,  by  the
light  of  God.  1  prayed  earnestly
and  fervently  to  my  Heavenly
Father  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  time
and  time  again.  Being  fully  con-
vinced in  my  heart  that  this  work
was  true,  I  applied  for  baptism  ;  and
when  I  was  baptized  I  received  the
assurance  that  my  sins  were  remit-
ted, that  1  was  washed  and  made
spiritually  clean  and  that  1  came
from  the  water  spotless*  I  could  say
with  the  ancient  Apostle,  "Old
things  have  passed  away,  behold  all
things  have  become  new."  I  was  a
new  creature  ;  I  was  born  again.  A
change  had  been  wrought  upon  me;
and  my  desires  were  to  serve  God
with  all  my  heart,  with  all  my  soul,
and  with  all  my  strength.  And
when  hands  were  laid  upon  me  by
the  servants  of  God,  and  I  received
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  I  felt  no
physical  manifestation.  1  must  say,
I  felt  a  little  disappointed  at  first,
for  I  had  expected  some  such  mani-
festation, but  1  did  not  receive  any
at  that  time.  What  did  I  experi-
ence ]  1  found  that  my  mind  was
opened,  that  I  had  greater  light;
that  some^nng  had  come  upon  me
by  which  I  could  see  clearly  the  things
of  God ;  and  when  1  read  the
scriptures  new  light  dawned  upon
them.  1  was  brought  up  to  believe
in  the  Lhble.  I  had  read  it  when  a
child,  and  committed  a  great  deal  of
it  to  memory  ;  .aid  when  1  received
this  gift  from  the  Almighty  through
the  laying  on  of  hands,  it  brought
those  things  that  were  past  to  my
remenil>:aucr  ;  they  stood  up
clearly  and  in  bold  relief  before  me,
and  1  could  comprehend  something
concerning  God.  I  could  teel  that  1
was  in  communion  with  Him.
AY  hen  1  prayed  1  could  realize  that


my  words  were  heard,  that  God
hearkened  and  answered.  When  I
prayed  for  knowledge  and  under-
standing concerning  the  things  of
God,  they  were  manifested  t<>  me.
It  brought  to  me  that  which  is
called  in  the  Scriptures,  £i  the  peace
of  God  that  passeth  all  understand-
ing/ The  joy,  the  peace,  the  satis-
faction that  it  brought  to  me  could
not  be  described  in  words.  I  knew
that  my  Redeemer  lived  ;  I  knew
that  I  was  born  again  -  I  knew  the
Holy  Spirit  was  working  in  my
heart  Truths  were  manifested  to
me  that  I  had  never  heard  of  or  read
of,  but  which  I  afterwards  heard
preached  by  the  servants  of  the
Lord ;  all  this  was  testimony  to  me
that  I  had  received  the  truth*  I
make  mention  of  tins  because  I
know  this  to  be  the  experience  of
others.  When  I  saw  the  gifts  and
blessings  of  the  Gospel  manifested,
it  was  a  renewed  testimony  to  me.
When  I  saw  the  sick  healed,  heard
people  speak  in  tongues,  and  then
heard  others  give  the  interpretation,
and  afterwards  saw  the  same  ful-
filled, many  times  in  a  wonderful
and  marvelous  manner,  all  these
things  were  additional  testimonies
of  the  divinity  of  this  work.  \\  hen
I  was  only  a  boy  I  was  called  to  leave
my  home  and  friends  -none  of
whom  had  received  the  Gospel —
to  go  out  into  the  world  among
strangers,  turning  my  back  upon
home,  and  leaving  everything  to  go
and  preach  the  Gospel  without  purse
or  scrip,  I  received  further  evidence
of  the  truth  of  this  work,  for  a  great
many  things  were  made  manifest  to
me  during  my  missionary  experience*
When  1  baptized  people  and  laid
my  hands  upon  them,  confirming
them  members  of  this  Church,
they  bore  testimony  that  the  Holy
Ghost  came  upon  them,  which  bore
record  to  them  that  Uod  lived,  and


352


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


that  this  was  His  work.  And  when
I  laid  my  hands  upon  the  sick  they
Were  healed.  All  these  things  were
additional  testimonies  to  me,  and  to
tho.se  who  received  the  word  through
me,

I  refer  to  this  also  because  this  is
the  experience  of  so  many  of  the
Elders  of  this  Church;  and  you  have
the  testimony  in  your  hearts  that
what  I  say  is  true.  Wherever  the
servants  of  God  have  gone  bearing
this  ]  nessage,  an  (I  the  people  have
received  it  and  obeyed  the  require*  i
meats  of  the  Gospel,  they  have
received  the  Holy  Ghost  as  a  gift
from  on  high  ;  and  if  they  have  been
led  by  its  light  it  has  increased  in
them  day  by  day,  and  they  are  still
going  on,  their  light  growing
brig  liter  and  brighter  unto  the
perfect  day.  They  know  that  God
lives  ;  they  know  that  His  existence
is  not  a  myth  ;  they  know  that  He
is  a  veritable  Being,  that  He  is
their  Father  and  their  God,  ever
ready  to  hear  tire  cry  of  His  child-
ren when  they  are  willing  to  hearken
to  His  counsels  ;  and  they  know
that  they  are  framed  and  fashioned
after  His  likeness,  and  that  ail  the
functions  and  attributes  of  Deity
are  duplicated  in  them,  that  through
years  of  faithfulness  and  progress
in  the  scale  of  being  and  enlight-
enment, they  may  develop  into  the
full  majesty  of  His  perfections  and
become  like  Him,

The  Holy  Ghost,  this  greater  en-
dowment of  that  spirit  which  natu-
rally enlighteneth  every  man  that
comes  into  the  world,  is  conferred
upon  us  through  a  simple  process,
the  way  that  God  has  ordained;  and
it  can  come  in  no  other  way.  If
there  should  be  any  in  this  congre-
gation this  afternoon  who  desire  to
know  God,  or  if  they  desire  to  know
themselves,  they  must  take  this  one
course — they  can  do  as  they  please


about  it,  either  to  receive  or  reject
it,  but  if  they  want  the  blessing  of
it,  they  must  seek  tor  it  in  His  way.
They  cannot  get  it  through  man-
made  systems;  God  has  His  own
way.  He  acknowledges  not,  neither
does  lie  recognize  the  ways  of  men  ;
but  if  people  will  hearken  to  Him
and  walk  in  his  ways  he  will  be  nigh
unto  them,  and  will  bear  testimony
to  them  in  language  that  they,  by
the  power  and  gift  of  His  spirit  can
understand.  But  they  must  be-
lieve ;  they  must  also  repent  ;  and
that  repentance  that  is  necessary
dues  not  consist  in  weeping  and
mourning  over  sin,  but  in  turning
away  from  it.  No  man  can  make
God  his  friend  by  continuing  in  sin,
neither  can  any  woman.  In  order
to  come  near  unto  God  and  to  be
taught  of  Him,  they  must  be  hum-
ble and  child  like,  they  must  be
willing  to  receive  instruction,  being
determined  in  their  hearts  to  turn
away  from  wrong-doing  of  every
kind,  and  to  cleave  unto  that  which
is  right.  This  is  a  lesson  for
Latter-day  Saints  as  well  as  latter-
day  sinners.  If  we  want  to  learn
more  of  the  things  and  ways  of  God,
if  we  want  to  draw  near  to  Him,
we  must  be  humble  and  child-like,
tractable  in  our  nature,  making  our-
selves acquainted  with  that  which
God  has  revealed,  and  walking  in
the  way  which  he  lias  pointed  out.
If  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  will
walk  according  to  the  light  that  God
has  given  to  them,  whether  by  the
spirit  that  came  to  them  naturally
in  their  birth,  or  by  that  higher
endowment  called  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  they  will  receive  a  still
greater  degree  of  power  and  light,
and  their  pathway  will  become
brighter  and  brighter  even  to  the
perfect  day.  If  there  be  any
darkness  in  them,  it  is  because  they
walk  in  the  ways  of  darkness,  be*


REVEALED  RELIGION,  ETC


353


cause  they  do  the  deeds  of  evil  No
man  can  come  unto  God  unless  he
lias  put  away  his  sins  and  his  follies
and  is  willing  to  be  taught  of  God.  ■
If 'he  thinks  that  God  will  come  to
his  terms  and  accept  his  whims  and
notions,  he  will  make  a  failure  of  it.
It  he  is  willing  to  hearken,  is  child-
like, willing  to  be  taught,  saying  in
his  soul,  '  O  God,  manifest  thy  ways
to  me,  and  with  thy  help  I  will
walk  therein/1  the  Lord  will  hear
and  answer  him  and  he  will  learn
of  God,  and  the  more  he  walks  in
the  ways  of  the  Lord  the  closer  he
will  get  to  God,  But  only  by  faith,
repentance,  baptism,  and  by  the
laying  on  of  hands  of  those  whom
God  has  authorized,  can  the  inhabit-
ants  of  the  earth  receive  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Ghost  by  which  they  may
fully  learn  and  comprehend  divine
things.

People  marvel  at  the  condition  of
the  Latter-day  Saints,  at  their  trac-
tability,  at  the  mode  of  their  wor-
ship, at  the  manner  in  which  they
sustain  the  authorities  of  the
Church ;  and  they  conclude  that
we  are  a  people  led  by  the  craftiness
of  men,  that  we  are  under  men
who  are  desirous  to  exert  authority
and  power,  and  be  looked  up  to  as
superior  to  their  fellows.  They
reason  in  that  way  because  they  do
not  understand  us ;  because  they  do
not  comprehend  our  ways,  nor  the
way  of  the  Lord,  The  reason  why
the  Latter-day  Saints  are  as  united
as  they  are,  as  tractable,  as  willing
to  be  obedient,  is  because  they  have
learned  for  themselves  the  truth
of  the  Gospel  they  have  espoused.
They  know  there  is  a  God;  they
know  that  he  lives ;  they  know  Jesus
is  the  Son  of  God ;  they  know
by  experience  that  if  they  hearken
to  the  voice  of  the  Lord— the  word
of  the  Lord  given  to  them  through
His  servants — that  they  are  happy,

No,  23


that  they  have  that  peace  of  which
I  have  spoken  ;  and  on  the  contrary,
if  they  disobey  the  counsels  of  heav-
en, they  have  not  that  peace,  they
are  not  satisfied  with  themselves,
and  they  are  in  the  dark.  The  rea-
son why  the  Latter-day  Saints  are
so  tractable,  so  united,  and  so  de-
voted  to  the  Gospel  of  this  Church
is,  because  they  know  something
about  it  for  themselves  ;  they  know
it  is  true,  for  God  has  borne  witness
to  them,  they  have  been  brought
into  communion  with  him,  and  this
is  the  secret  of  it

Now,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  you
know  that  what  I  am  talking  about
is  true  ;  you  know  it  in  your  own
experience.  The  Holy  Ghost  has
borne  record  to  you  that  what  I  am
telling  you  is  not  fiction,  but  is  a
living  fact.  And  we  need  pot  take
up  the  Bible  to  read  the  books  con*
tained  therein  to  find  out  the  truth
of  our  religion  ;  we  know  it  is  true
!  without  that.  Yet,  when  we  read
the  contents  of  this  book  we  find  that
it  corresponds  with  that  which  God
has  revealed  to  us.  We  do  not  de-
pend upon  the  man  who  baptized
us,  or  him  who  laid  his  hands  upon
us  to  impart  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  a
knowledge  of  this  work,  we  depend
upon  the  inspiration  of  the  Lord —
the  only  source  of  knowledge  of  di-
vine things.  Every  man  and  every
woman  in  this  Church,  and  every  boy
and  girl  who  has  received  the  Gos-
pel in  sincerity  and  has  verily  been
born  again,  has  obtained  a  testimony
concerning  this  work  and  knows  of
its  divinity  tor  himself  or  herself.
But  God  has  set  in  the  Church  for
our  guidance  and  direction,  Apos-
tles and  Prophets,  Evangelists,
Pastors,  Teachers  and  Bishops,
and  other  authorities,  that  the
Church  with  all  its  branches  may
|  be  taught  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord,
I  that  there  may  be  order  in  the

Vol.  XXIIL


354


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Church,  and  that  all  things  may  be
governed  according  to  the  will  of
God.  And  we  know  that  when  we
hearken  to  the  voice  of  those  men  we
are  blessed  of  God,  and  when  they
speak  to  us  under  the  inspiration  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  the  same  Spirit  in  our
hearts  bears  witness  to  us  that  what
they  say  is  true.  Some  one  may
inquire,  if  all  the  people  have  the
Holy  Ghost,  if  all  the  people  are
brought  to  the  condition  that  they
may  ham  of  God  for  themselves
and  be  gradually  led  into  the  pres-
ence of  the  Father,  what  need  of
Apostles,  what  need  of  Prophets,
etc.  1  There  is  great  need  of  them.
They  are  absolutely  necessary  to  the
government  of  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  God.  Without  them
there  could  be  no  proper  church
government,  and,  indeed,  without
them  we  could  not  receive  the  bless-
ings that  come  from  the  ordinances.
God's  plan  is  to  call  certain  men
aiid  endow  them  with  authority,
and  place  upon  them  the  au-
thority to  act  for  Him.  This  is
called  the  Holy  Priesthood,  and  in
that  right  and  authority  they  preach
and  administer  the  ordinances  of
His  Church*  It  is  through  the
Authority  of  this  Holy  Priesthood
that  people  are  inducted  into  the
cChurch — through'  that  channel  they
^receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
■without  which  it  could  not  be  con-
fened.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  poured
out  universally,  as  I  have  before
remarked,  so  that  all  people  receive
it ;  but  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost  is  a  higher  endowment  by
which  man  may  be  brought  into
communion  with  the  Lord  after
having  received  the  ordinances,
which  must  be  administered  by
men  holding  the  Holy  Priesthood,
and  authorized  to  officiate  therein.
That  is  God's  way.  When  people
receive  this  divine  blessing  they


become  members  of  His  Church,
an  organization  ordained  for  the
benefit  and  blessing  of  God's  people  ;
an  organization  which  in  all  respects
is  after  the  ancient  pattern.  In
becoming  members  of  the  Church
we  suhscribe  to  the  rules  thereof.
No  undue  influence  is  used  to  induce
people  to  join  our  Church,  or  to
retain  their  membership  after  they
have  joined  it  ;  if  they  do  not  wish
to  subscribe  to  the  rules  of  the
Chuich,  they  are  at  liberty  to  sever
their  connection  with  it ;  but  if  they
do  retain  their  standing  in  it,  they
are  expected  to  subscribe  to  its
rules.  At  the  head  of  this  Church
are  three  men  who  are  united  in  all
things  as  to  its  government,  repre-
senting the  Holy  Trinity  who  also
are  one  ;  not  one  in  personality,  but
one  in  spirit,  one  in  faith,  one  in
action,  one  in  desire,  one  in  object.
We  have  a  President  and  two  Coun-
selors, who  stand  at  the  head  of  the
Church.  The  President  stands  at
the  head  of  that  quorum.  God  calls
him  to  be  His  mouthpiece  to  the
whole  body.  If  the  Lord  has  any
revelations  for  the  Church,  as  an
organized  body,  He  communicates
them  through  the  head.  In  the  rise
of  this  Church  He  warned  ami  fore-
warned the  Latter-day  Saints  as  an
organized  community,  not  to  receive
revelations  through  any  one  save
the  head  of  the  Church.  The  Lord
said,  "  And  this  ye  shall  know
assuredly  that  there  is  none  other
appointed  unto  you  to  receive  the
commandments  until  he  be  taken,  if
he  abide  in  me  *  *  *  for  if  it
be  taken  from  him  he  shall  not  have
power  except  to  appoint  another  in
his  stead  ;  and  this  shall  be  a  law
unto  you,  that  you  receive  not
the  teachings  of  any  that  shall  come
before  you  as  revelations  or  com-
mandments. And  this  I  give  you
that  you  may  not  be  deceived,  that


1  k  i  *


\  As,


T 1 ■  |


you  may  know  they  are  not  of  me.'
This  is  the  order*  While,  there-
fore, every  man  and  woman  can
receive  the  Holy  Ghost  and
know  that  God  lives,  can  ask  and
receive,  seek  and  find,  knock  and
have  the  door  opened  to  him ;
while  everyone  can  have  divine
light  and  comprehend  the  truth  for
himself,  while  it  is  the  privilege  of
every  man  to  so  live  that  his  soul
shall  be  full  of  the  light  of  heaven,
by  which  he  may  comprehend  the
purposes  of  God  as  they  shall  affect
men  and  nations,  yet,  as  a  member
of  the  Church  he  must  hearken  to
the  voice  of  Him  who  stands  at  the
head,  for  that  is  the  order*  "My
house  is  a  house  of  order,  saith  the
Lord,  and  not  a  house  of  confusion/'
If  He  has  anything  for  the  Church,
as  an  organized  body,  He  will  speak
through  the  head ;  and  if  we  are
enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit  we
will  see  the  safety  of  it,  wc  will  *ee
that  without  this  order  we  won  hi  be
liable  to  be  led  astray.  God  will
not  speak  to  His  Church,  through
the  "foot,  but  through  the  head.
And  if  the  body  is  of  the
same  spirit  as  the  head,  it  will  re-
spond, just  as  the  members  of  the
human  body,  if  in  a  healthy  condi-
tion, respond  to  the  will  of  the  head,
in  anything  that  the  individual
attempts  to  do.  The  man  standing
at  the  head  holds  the  keys  of  reve-
lation to  tlie  Church;  but  each  indi- I
vidu  il  may  receive  revelation  for
himself  ,  if  he  has  the  gift  of  thfe  Holy
Ghost.  And  the  Spirit  by  which  Cod
reveals  through  the  head,  is  the  same  ;
spirit  by  which  He  reveals  to  tlie
individual  for  his  own  benefit.  The
Church  of  Christ  is  a  united  body ;
it  is  not  divided  against  itself,  be-
cause it  is  true*  and  truth  is  indi-
visible,  it  is  eternal  and  cannot  b«
destroyed,  neither  does  it  bear  testi-
mony against  itself Herein  is  the


unity  of  the  Saints.  When  the
President  of  the  Church  speaks,  the
whole  body  responds,  and  when  he
brings  forth  anything  for  our  guid-
ance, we  say  in  our  hearts,  under
the  same  influence  by  which  he  is
inspired,  that  is  the  word  of  God,
and  we  rejoice  in  it  and  hearken  to
it.  Thereby  are  the  faith  and  obe-
dience of  the  Latter  day  Saints  made
manifest.  Ami  they  do  this  not  to
man,  but  in  ( !ud.  Through  the
head  of  the  Church  the  voice  of  God
conies  to  the  people,  and  when  they
obey  it,  it  is  not  to  man  they  bow,
for  the  Latter-day  Saints  are  not
man- worshipers.  They  have  come
out  from  the  midst  of  priestcraft,
they  have  thrown  off  the  yoke  of
bondage,  and  put  on  the  liberty
of  the  everlasting  Gospel  j  and
when  they  yield  to  the  authority  of
the  Holy  Priesthood,  they  bow
to  God  Almighty,  their  Father,
who  is  represented  in  His  servants
upon  earth,  and  not  to  man,
"  Cursed  is  he  that  puttetli  his  trust
in  man,  or  maketh  flesh  his  arm."
We  worship  God  our  heavenly  Father,
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  under
the  influence  of  tlie  Holy  Spirit,  and
that  which  we  obey  we  receive  as
coming  from  him  and  not  from
man.  That  is  the  order,  if  we  have
eyes  to  sec,  and  hearts  to  compre-
hend it.  And  it  is  the  same  with  all
the  different  authorities  of  the
Church,  each  one  in  his  place  and
calling  j  one  not  interfering  with
another,  every  part  ami  portion  of
the  holy  Priesthood  being  adapted
to  every  other  part,  as  each  part  of
the  human  system  is  adapted  and
essential  to  the  well-being  of  the
other  parts.  The  head  cannot  say
to  the  feet,  I  have  no  need  of  thee  ;
neither  can  the  foot  say  to  tlie  head,
1  have  no  need  of  thee,  but  each
part  has  need  of  the  other.  And
there  is  unison  in  it  j  there  is  beauty


in  it.  No  one  officer  or  member  of
the  priesthood  can  encroach  upon
the  privileges  of  another  ;  but  each
one  has  his  duties  defined,  and  all
are  necessary  for  the  order  and
government  of  the  Church,  for  the
preaching  of  the  Gospel,  for  the
gathering  of  the  Saints,  for  the
instruction  of  the  people  that
all  might  be  led  in  the  path  of  life,
until  they  come  to  the  fullness
of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of
God,  and  be  like  a  perfect  man
in  Christ  Jesus.  Apostles  are
-  necessary  in  their  place ;  Seven-
ties in  theirs ;  High  Priests  in
theirs ;  Elders,  Priests,  Teachers
and  Deacons  in  theirs;  Bishops  and
Presidents  of  Stakes,  etc.,  in  theirs,
all  having  been  appointed  and  or-
dained of  God*  This  organization
is  unique  in  its  character ;  there  is
nothing  like  it  among  the  institu-
tions of  men,  there  is  nothing  like
it  in  the  world.  There  is  nothing
of  an  earthly  character  to  be  com-
pared with  it  It  is  beautiful,  it  is
glorious,  it  is  harmonious,  it  is  per-
fect, because  it  is  the  work  of  God.


And  if  we  would  carry  it  out  fully
and  perfectly,  what  a  splendid  or-
ganization we  would  have  !  What  &
mighty  people  we  would  be  !  a  peo-
ple whose  God  is  the  Lord,  all
moving  along  in  perfect  harmony-
each  one  accomplishing  his  part  hi
this  great  and  mighty  work.  But
we  are  like  the  rest  of  mankind  to
some  extent — we  are  prone  to  do
evil,  we  are  prone  to  follow  our  own
ways,  to  take  our  own  course,  to  be
stiff-necked  and  willful.

Now,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  we
have  come  out  from  the  world,  we
have  come  measurably  to  a  know-
ledge of  the  truth,  to  a  knowledge
of  God  j  we  know  that  He  lives,
and  we  know  that  by  taking  the
course  pointed  out  to  us  by  the  ser-
vants of  God  who  have  been  ap-
pointed to  lead  us,  in  due  time  we
shall  return  to  our  Father  and  God,
and  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is,  and
be  like  him,  and  inherit  the  fullness
of  his  glory.

That  we  may  be  able  to  take  this
course  is  my  prayer,  in  the  name  of
Jesus.  Amen.


THE  IWJ£K  AMD  AUTHORITY,  jfiu


or?


DISCOURSE BY  PRESIDENT GEO,  Q.  CANNON,
Delivered  at  Tooele,  on  Sunday  Afternoon,  October  29th,  1882.


the


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  GibbsJ

POWER  AND  AUTHORITY  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD  CONTINUOUS  —
PSKUDO-PROPHETS  AND  THEIR  REVELATIONS  —  ORDINATION  PRE-
REQUISITE  TO  ACTION  IN  ANY  OFFICE  —  JOSEPH'  SMITH  THE  HEAD

>P  THIS  DISPENSATION— THE  TWELVE  ORDAINED  BY  HIM  TO  BKAR
OFF  THE  KINGDOM— JOSEPH'S  LEGAL  SUCCESSOR  AND  BRIGHAM's—
THE  PRIESTHOOD,  AS  IT  NOW  EXISTS,  THE  RIGHTFUL  AUTHORITY
OF  GOD  ON  EARTH,


Our  position,  as  Latter-day  Saints,
is  such  that  unless  we  have  the
guidance  of  the  Lord  our  God,  we
are  very  likely  to  become  involved
in  a  series  of  difficulties  and  trou-
bles* This  work  cannot  be  built  up
by  man,  Man's  power,  man's
wisdom,  man's  skill,  are  all  insuf-
ficient to  establish  and  to  carry  on
the  work  of  our  God  in  the  earth
connected  with  the  building  up  of
Zion.  It  is  a  glorious  reflection  that
from  the  time  this  work  was  founded
in  these,  the  last  days,  up  to  present
time,  there  has  never  been  a
moment  when  this  people  have  been
destitute  of  the  guidance  of  the
Lord,  and  of  the  revelations  and
counsel  necessary  to  enable  them  to
carry  out  the  mind  and  will  of  the
Lord,  At  no  time  have  we  been
left  to  ourselves.  At  no  time  have
the  Latter- day  Saints  been  at  a  loss
to  learn  and  to  find  out  the  mind
and  will  and  counsel  of  God  con-
cerning them,  either  as  individuals
or  as  a  people.

There  have  been  some  ideas  afloat
among  our  brethren  concerning  the
authority  and  the  power  of  those


who  have  been  in  charge  of  the
work  of  God  upon  the  earth.  I
have  not  heard  so  much  of  it  myself
of  late,  perhaps,  for  the  reason  that
my  position  has  been  such  that
I  have  not  had  the  opportunity  of
mingling  with  the  people,  and  learn-
ing from  them  their  ideas  and  feel-
ings respecting  this  matter.  But  at
the  death  of  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith,  and  probably  for  many  years
subsequent  to  his  death,  some  peo-
ple seemed  to  have  the  feeling  that
when  he  died,  there  died  with  him
some  power  and  some  authority  and
some  knowledge  that  could  not  be
regained  very  readily,  and  was  out
of  the  possession  of  those  who  pre-
sided over  the  Church,  This  feeling
may  prevail  to  some  extent  at  the
present  time — the  feeling  that  some
great  one  has  to  arise  in  our  midst
in  order  to  revive  the  old  power  and
restore  it  to  the  Church,  and  to  per-
form the  mighty  works  that  God
has  promised  shall  be  performed  in
connection  with  His  Zion  of  the  last
days,  I  do  not  believe  that  all  the
Latter-day  Saints  understand  as
they  should — I  speak  now  in  general


terms— the  authority,  the  gifts
and  qualifications  which  God  be-
stow eti  upon  His  servant  Brigham  ;
and  there  were  many  who,  after  the
Prophet's  death,  were  not  disposed
to  accord  to  President  Young  the
same  rights,  the  same  authority,  the
same  gifts,  that  they  were  willing  to
accord  to  the  Prophet  Joseph.  The
Rigdonites — the  followers  of  Sidney
Eigdon — originated  the  idea  that
the  prophetic  gift  did  not  rest  upon
President  Young,  that  he  did  not
possess  it  The  Strangites — the
followers  of  J.  J.  Strang —
labored  to  the  same  end.  Strang
set  up  a  claim  that  he  had  been  des
ignated  by  Joseph  to  preside  over
the  Church,  and  in  fact,  showed  a
letter  with  the  post-mark  of  Nauvoo
upon  the  envelope,  in  which  he
claimed  that  he  was  thus  authorized
to  preside*  Others  set  up  the  same
claim,  and  circulated  the  same  idea*
William  Smith  wished  it  understood
that  the  prophetic  office  belonged
to  the  Smith  family,  that  it  should
be  some  member  of  that  family
that  should  preside  over  the  Church.
He  entertained  the  same  idea,
and  circulated  it  to  some  extent,
that  has  been  entertained  and  cir-
culated by  the  son  of  Joseph —
young  Joseph,  as  he  is  called.  And
all  these  influences  combined
together  have  had  the  effect,  to  a
greater  or  less  extent,  to  create  in
many  minds  the  impression  of  which
I  speak — that  there  was  some  with-
holding of  power  ;  that  there  were
some  gifts  and  manifestations  of
power  that  ought  to  be,  but  were
not  in  the  Church ;  that  the  pro-
phetic gifts  did  not  follow  to  the
same  extent  that  God  designed  they
should  j  that  although  President
Young  and  his  Counselors  and  the
Twelve  .were  Apostles,  the  apostle-
ship  did  not  embody  in  itself  the
same  gifts,  the  same  powers  that


were  exercised  by  the  Prophet
Joseph.

I  remember,  when  on  one  of  my
early  missions,  meeting  with  an  old
member  of  the  Church  in  California,
a  man  of  some  prominence  at  one
time,  and  of  considerable  experience
in  the  Church,  who  contended  that
President  Young  was  not  entitled  to
be  called  Prophet,  Seer  and  lieve-
lator,  or  to  be  put  to  the  General
I  Conference  as  sucIl  His  idea  seemed
to  be  that  when  the  Prophet  Joseph
died,  the  office  of  Prophet,  Seer  and
Kevelator  died  with  him,  and,  there-
fore, this  claim  by  the  leaders  of  the
Church  was  a  piece  of  assumption
on  their  parts.

Now,  how  far  these  ideas  have
prevailed  and  are  held  I  cannot  say,
because,  as  I  have  remarked,  my
opportunities  of  mingling  with  the
people,  as  I  did  in  former  years,
have  not  been  such  as  to  enable  me
to  speak  from  personal  knowledge,
and  perhaps  if  I  were  to  do  so  they
would  not  talk  so  freely  with  me
about  such  things  as  they  once  did.
But  I  wish  to  say  that  those  who
look  for  some  increased  manifesta-
tion of  power  to  come  in  some  form
outside  of  that  which  we  recognize
as  the  governing  authority  of  the
Church,  are  in  danger  of  being  de-
luded and  of  being  led  astray.  Such,
persons,  if  there  be  any,  and  I  am
inclined  to  believe  there  are,  are  in
just  the  condition  that  the  adversary
would  like  people  to  be  in,  that  he
may  have  influence  with  them.

Since  my  return  from  Washing-
ton, in  the  middle  of  August  last,  I
have  heard  more  of  new  prophets
and  revelators,  and  their  revelations,
than  1  have  heard  for  several  years,
I  do  not  know  how  many  prophets
I  have  heard  of  who  have  arisen  ;  I
do  not  know  how  many  revelations
I  have  heard  of  that  have  been
given  ;  but  there  have  been  quite  a


THE  POWER  AND  AUTHORITY,  ETC.


359


number.  Many  revelations  have
been  sent  to  me  by  persons  who
claim  the  right  to  preside  over  the
Church  and  to  be  the  Prophet  of  the
Church.  President  Taylor  has  been
the  recipient  of  a  number  of  similar
communications,  each  one  setting
forth  his  claim  to  the  presidency  of
the  Church,  and  to  the  prophetic
office  j  and  some  of  them  requiring
us  to  accept  the  author  as  the  person
whom  God  has  designated  to  be
the  re  vela  tor  to  and  the  President
of  the  Church,  Where  there
is  a  feeling  to  look  for  some
authority  outside  of  our  present
organization  of  the  holy  Priesthood,
you  can  readily  see  how  the  adver-
sary could  take  advantage  of  it,  and
puff  vain,  weak  men  up  with  the
idea  that  they  are  to  be  some  great
ones*  No  greater  mistake  can  be
indulged  in  than  for  any  person  to
suppose  that  there  is  not  that  au-
thority in  the  Church  at  the  present
time  that  is  necessary  for  the  estab
lishmeut,  for  the  government  and
guidauce,  and  for  the  building  up
and  complete  control  of  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  our  God  upon  the
earth,  according  to  the  pattern
which  He  has  given,

God  revealed  to  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith  the  necessity  of  the
Priesthood,  and  until  the  Priesthood
was  bestowed,  though  he  had  the
gifts  which  constitute  a  Prophet,
Kevelator  and  Seer  prior  to  receiv-
ing it,  having  had  the  gift  of  pro-
phecy, and  revelations  from  God,
and  having  exercised  the  Seers  gift
by  looking  through  the  Uiim  and
Thummitn — he  never  attempted  to
act  in  any  capacity  beyond  that  in
which  God  authorized  him  to  act.
Although  he  possessed  the  gifts  that
I  have  referred  to,  he  never  attempted
to  act  in  any  ordinance  of  the  house
of  God,  or  that  belongs  to  the  Church
of  God,  until  he  received  authority


to  do  so. And  that  authority  was
not  conferred  upon  him  when  lie
first  saw  angels  and  had  some  of  the
gifts  of  which  1  have  spoken.  It
required  the  laying  on  of  the  hands
ot  some  personage  or  personages
who  had  the  authority  of  the  holy
Priesthood, No,  Joseph  never  ran
until  he  was  sent. He  exhibited  in
this  the  qualities  of  the  man  that
he  was  ;  because  there  are  few  men,
as  we  well  know,  who,  if  they  had  ob-
tained the  gifts  that  he  possessed,
would  not  have overs tepped  the
limit  of  their  calling  and  authority,
and  done  something  beyond  their
province. But  Joseph  did  not  err
in  this  way  ;  he  had  been  too  well
taught  of  the  Lord,  and  therefore
he  waited. He  never  attempted  to
preach  the  Gospel,  or  to  baptize  for
the  remission  of  sins. But  when
he  found  that  it  was  necessary  for
him  to  receive  the  Priesthood,  he
called  upou  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord
heard  his  prayer,  and  in  answer  to
his  call  and  that  of  Oliver  Cowdery,
sent  to  them  John  the  Baptist,  a
literal  descendant  of  Aaron  who,  by
virtue  of  his  descent,  held  the  keys
of  the  Aaronic  Priesthood,  he  being
the  last  man  upon  the  earth  that
held  these  keys. John  had  been
ordained  by  the  angel  of  the  Lord  at
the  time  he  was  eight  days  old  unto
this  power,  and  to  overthrow  the
kingdom  of  the  Jews,  and  to  prepai  e
the  way  of  the  Lord. Having  been
thus  ordained  by  the  angel  of  the
Lord, and having  been  baptized
while  he  was  yet  in  his  childhood,
and  holding  the  authority  and  the
keys  of  the  Aaronic  Priesthood,
he  was  a  fit  personage  to  come  and
j  bestow  the. keys  upou  Joseph,  who
had  been  chosen  to  stand  at  the
head  of  this  dispensation.  He  came,
and  he  laid  his  hands  upon  Joseph,
and  upon  Oliver,  and  conferred  upon
!  them  the  Aaronic  Priesthood,  which


360


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


authorized  them  to  administer  the  i
ordinance  of  baptism  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins.  When  Joseph  received  j
that  authority  he  administered  the
ordinance  of  baptism  unto  Oliver,
and  then  Oliver  unto  him.

They  afterwards  received  the
authority  of  the  Melchisedek  Priest-
hood, under  the  hands  of  those  who
last  held  the  kej  s  of  that  Priesthood  ,
upon  the  earth.  When  Jesus,  you
will  remember,  touk  His  three  disci-
ples into  the  mount,  He  was  trans*
figured  before  tl  ;em,  ami  Moses  and
Elias  administered  unto  them  ;  and
at  that  time  Peter  was  ordained  to
hold  the  koys  of  that  dispensation.
He  held  the  keys  in  conjunction
with  his  brethren,  James  and  John.
They  came  and  unitedly  laid  their
hands  upon  the  heads  of  Joseph  and
Oliver,  and  ordained  them  to  the
authority  that  they  themselves  held,
namely,  that  of  the  Apostlcship.
In  this  way  they  receiver!  the  au-
thority of  the  Melchisedek  Priest
hood,  ami  could  administer  in  the
ordinances  that  hi* long  to  that
Priesthood  ;  one  of  which  u
the  laying  on  of  hands  for  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  *  Until
that  time  they  had  not  received
that  ordinance.  Some  might  think
it  strange  that  a  man  like  Joseph,
so  gifted  of  the  Lord,  should  deem
it  necessary  to  be  administered  to
by  a  man  or  men  holding  the  holy
Priesthood,  in  order  to  receive  the
Holy  Ghost.  But  it  is  upon  the
same  principle  that  the  Son  of  God
had  to  be  baptized  in  order  to  fulfill
all  righteousness  ;  and  yet  He  was  a
pure  aral  holy  being.  And  when
John  said  to  him,  "  I  have  need  to
be  baptized  of  thee,  and  comest  thou
to  me  f  Jesus  said  to  him,  "Suf-
fer it  to  be  so  now  ;  for  thus  it  be-
cometh  us  to  fulfill  all  righteous-
ness :"  and  John  then  administered
the  ordinance  of  baptism  to  the  Son


of  God  j  pure  and  holy  as  He  was.
Our  Savior  could  not,  and  did  notf
refuse  to  comply  with  any  of  the
ordinances  which  are  placed  in  the
Church  for  the  salvation  of  Godfs
children  ;  on  the  contrary,  He  set
the  example  by  going  down  into  the>
water  and  being  baptized  by  John,
even  as  the  most  humble  of  his
followers  did.  In  like  manner  it
was  as  necessary  that  Joseph  should
be  baptized,  and  have  hands  laid
upon  him  for  the  reception  of  the
Holy  Ghost— for  there  is  no  doubt
in  my  mind  that  Joseph  Smith  was
called  just  as  the  Son  of  God,
our  Lord  and  Redeemer  was  called,
before  the  foundation  of  the  earth,
as  Jeremiah  in  his  record  says  he  was
—and  was  ordained  to  be  a  Pro-
phet, Seer  and  Revelator,  and
to  st ami  at  the  head  of  this  last
dispensation.  Although  this  was
the  case,  it  was  still  necessary
that  he  should  be  baptized  and
have  hands  laid  upon  him  for  the
reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
also  be  ordained  to  the  Priesthood
of  Aaron  and  Melchisedek-  You
remeccber  reading  in  the  Book  of
Mormon  that  the  Twelve  on  this
continent,  whom  the  Savior  chose
after  His  resurrection,  are  to  be
judged  by  the  Twelve  Apostles  that
were  at  Jerusalem.  It  was  with
Peter,  who  was  the  senior  Apostle
there,  that  the  keys  rested.  He
was  at  the  head  of  that  dispensation ;
therefore,  those  that  received  the
Apostlesbip  on  this  land  were  to  be
judged  by  the  Twelve  at  Jerusalem-
There  the  keys  were  ;  and  it  was
right  and  proper  that  Peter,  with
James  and  John,  should  come  and
bestow  them  upon  him  who  was  to
be  the  head  of  this  dispensation,
namely,  Joseph  Smith.

In  addition  to  this  the  Prophet
Joseph  informs  us  in  his  letter,  ad-
dressed to  the  Saints  when  he  fled


THE  POWER  AND  AUTHORITY,  ETC*


361


away  from  Nauvoo  to  escape  the
hands  of  bis  enemies,  that  **  It  is
necessary  in  the  ushering  in  of  the
dispensation  of  the  fullness  of  times,
which  dispensation  is  now  beginning
to  ushr-r  in,  that  a  whole  and  com-
plete and  perfect  union,  and  welding
together  of  dispensations,  and  keys,
and  powers,  and  glories  should
take  place,  and  be  revealed  from
the  days  of  Adam  even  to  the  pres-
ent time,*1  lie,  therefore,  re-
ceived the  ministration  of  divers
angels— heads  of  dispensations—
from  Michael  or  Adam  down  to  the
present  time  ;  every  man  in  his  time
and  season  coining  to  him,  and  all
declaring  their  dispensation,  their
rights,  their  keys,  their  honors,  their
majesty  and  glory,  and  the  power  of
their  Priesthood,  So  that  Joseph,
the  head  of  this  dispensation,
Prophet,  Seer  and  Revelator,  whom
God  raised  up,  received  from  all
these  different  sources,  according
to  the  mind  and  will  of  God,  and
according  to  the  design  of  God
concerning  him  ;  he  received  from
all  these  different  sources  ail  the
power  and  all  the  authority  and  all
keys  that  were  necessary  for  the
building  up  of  the  work  of  God  in
the  last  days,  and  for  the  accom-
plishment of  His  purposes  connected
with  this  dispensation.  He  stands
at  the  head.  He  is  a  unique
character,  differing  from  every  other
man  in  this  respect,  and  excelling
every  other  man.  Because  he  was
the  bead  God  chose  him,  and  while
he  was  faithful  no  man  could  take
his  place  and  position.  He  was
faithful,  and  died  faithful  He
stands  therefore  at  the  head  of  this
dispensation,  and  will  throughout
all  eternity,  and  no  man  can  take
that  power  aw  ay  from  him.  If  any
man  holds  these  keys,  he  holds
thein  subordinate  to  him.  You
never  heard  President  You  112  teach


any  other  doctrine;  he  always  said
that  Joseph  stood  at  the  head  of  this
dispensation  ;  that  Joseph  holds  the
keys ;  that  although  Joseph  had
gone  behind  the  veil  he  stood  at  the
head  of  this  dispensation,  and  that
he  himself  held  the  keys  subordinate
to  him.  President  Taylor  teaches
the  same  doctrine,  and  you  will
never  hear  any  other  doctrine  from
any  of  the  faithful  Apostles  or  ser-
vants of  God,  who  understand  the
order  of  the  Holy  Priesthood.  If
we  get  our  salvation  we  shall  have
to  pass  by  him  ;  if  we  enter  into  our
glory  it  will  be  through  the  aut  hority
that  he  has  received,  ^'e  cannot
get  around  him ;  we  cannot  get
around  President  Young;  we  cannot
get  around  President  Taylor  *  we
cannot  get  around  the  Twelve
Apostles.  If  we  ever  attain  to  that
eternal  glory  that  God  has  promised
to  the  faithful  we  shall  have  to  pass
by  them.  If  we  enter  into  our
exaltation,  it  will  be  because  they,
as  the  servants  of  God,  permit  us
to  pass  by,  just  as  the  revelation  says,
*'  pass  by  the  angels  and  the  Gods,
which  are  set  there,"  toourexaltatiom
You  know  that  Jesus  said  to  His
Apostles  in  ancient  days,  that  they
should  u  sit  upon  twelve  thrones
judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel"
And  Paul  says,  "The  Saints  shall
judge  the  world/'  This  is  true.
Joseph,  then,  stands  at  the  head ;
and  then  every  man  in  his  place
after  him  until  you  come  down  to
the  Elder,  the  most  humble  Elder
of  the  Church  who  has  proclaimed
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  to  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth*  He  will
hit  as  a  judge  to  judge  those  who
have  received  or  those  who  have
rejected  his  testimony.  He  will  stand
as  a  swift  witness  before  the  judg-
ment seat  of  God  against  this
generation.  He  will  lift  up  his  voice
testifying  as  to  that  which  he  has


362


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


done,  and  men  will  be  condemned,
and  men  will  be  justified  and  women
will  be  justified  according  to  the
testimony  of  the  faithful  servants  of
God,  each  one  in  Ids  place  and  sta-
tion;  but  Joseph,  holding  the  keys,
and  presiding  over  all,  subordinate,
however,  to  him  from  whom  he
received  the  keys,  as  lie  (Peter)  will
be  su Inordinate  to  the  Son  of  God
who  placed  them  upon  him  ;  each
one  in  his  dispensation ;  each  one  in
his  place  ;  each  exercising  the  author-
ity of  his  Priesthood ;  each  man
honoring  God  according  to  his  faith-
fulness and  diligence  in  magnifying
that  Priesthood  and  calling  that  Gad
has  placed  upon  him  ;  and  each
woman  in  her  place  receiving  her
share  of  glory  and  honor  according
to  her  faithfulness  in  keeping  the
commandments  of  God,  and  honoring
the  Priesthood.

I  present  this  matter  before  you
that  you  may  see  that  when  Joseph
died  he  had  embodied  in  him  all
the  keys  and  all  the  authority,  all
the  powers  and  all  the  qualifications
necessary  for  the  head  of  a  dispen-
sation, to  stand  at  the  head  of  this
great  last  dispensation.  They  had
been  bestowed  upon  him  through
the  providences  of  God,  and  through
the  command  of  God  to  his  faithful
servants  who  lived  in  ancient  days.
There  was  no  end  scarcely,  in  many
respects,  to  the  knowledge  that  he
received*  He  was  visited  constantly
by  angels  ;  and  the  Son  of  God  Him-
self condescended  to  come  and
minister  unto  him,  the  Father  having
also  shown  Himself  unto  him ;
and  these  various  angels,  the  heads
of  dispensations,  having  also  min-
istered unto  him,  Moroni,  in  the
beginning,  as  you  know,  to  prepare
him  for  his  mission,  came  and  min-
istered and  talked  to  him  from  time
to  time,  and  he  had  vision  after  vision
in  order  that  his  mind  might  be


[  fully  saturated  with  a  knowledge  of
the  things  of  God,  and  that  he  might
comprehend  the  great  and  holy  call-
ing that  God  has  bestowed  upon  him.
In  this  respect  he  stands  unique.
There  is  no  man  in  this  dispensation,
can  occupy  the  stat  ion  that  he,  Joseph
did,  God  having  reserved  him  and
ordained  him  for  that  position,  and
bestowed  upon  him  the  necessary
power.  Think  of  what  he  passed
through  !  Think  of  his  afflictions,
and  think  of  his  dauntless  character  1
Bid  any  one  ever  see  him  falter?
Did  any  one  ever  see  him  flinch !
Did  any  one  ever  see  any  lack  in
him  of  the  power  necessary  to  en-
able him  to  stand  with  dignity  in
the  midst  of  his  enemies,  or  lacking
in  dignity  in  the  performance  of  his
duties  as  a  servant  of  the  living
God  ?  God  gave  him  peculiar  power
in  this  respect  He  was  filled  with
integrity  to  God;  with  such  integrity
as  was  not  known  among  men.  He
was  like  an  angel  of  God  among  them.
Notwithstanding  all  that  he  had  to
endure,  and  the  peculiar  circum-
stances in  which  he  was  so  often
placed,  and  the  great  responsibility
that  weighed  constantly  upon  him,
he  never  i altered  ;  the  feeling  of  fear
or  trembling  never  crossed  him — at
least  he  never  exhibited  it  in  his
feelings  or  actions,  God  sustained
him  to  the  very  last,  and  was  with
him,  and  bore  him  off  triumphant
even  in  his  death.

While  he  was  in  possession  of  all
his  faculties,  and  likely  to  live  for
many  years  to  lead  the  Church — in
fact  the  people  believed  that  he
would  live  to  redeem  Zion — when  he
was  thus  situated,  impressed  by  the
Spirit  and  power  of  God,  he
called  together  our  leading  men,  and
he  bestowed  upon  the  Twelve  Apos-
tles all  the  keys  and  authority  and
power  that  he  himself  possessed
and  that  he  had  received  from  the


THE  POWER  AND


AUTHORITY,  \  ETC.


363


Lord*  He  gave  unto  them  every
endowment,  every  washing,  every
anointing,  and  administered  unto
them  the  sealing  ordinances  and
taught  them  the  character  of  those
ordinances,  and  revealed  unto  them
the  doctrine  of  celestial  marriage,
and  impressed  upon  them  the  im-
portance of  their  obedience  to  the
same,  and  made  it  obligatory  upon
them  that  they  should  obey  it  and
carry  it  out  in  their  lives,  and  teach
it  to  others.  He  taught  these  breth-
ren that  unless  they  did  this  the
kingdom  would  stop,  it  could  not
make  further  progress.  And  filled
with  the  power  of  God,  he  blessed
them  and  placed  those  keys  and  this
authority  upon  them,  and  told  them
that  he  had  thus  ordained  them  to
bear  off  the  kingdom.  There  was
no  key  that  he  held,  there  was  no
authority  that  he  exercised  that  he
did  not  bestow  upon  the  Twelve
Apostles  at  that  time.  Of  course,
in  doing  this  he  did  not  divest  him-
self of  the  keys  j  but  he  bestowed
upon  them  these  keys  and  this  au-
thority and  power,  so  that  they  field
them  in  their  fullness  as  he  did,  dif-
fering only  in  this  respect,  that  they
exercised  them  subordinate  to  him
as  t lie  head  of  the  dispensation.  He
ordain  eel  them  to  all  this  authority,
without  withholding  a  single  power
or  key  or  ordinance  that  he  himself
had  received.

Thus  you  see  these  men  whom
God  chose  to  hold  the  Apostleship
received  all  this  authority  from  Him.
Hence  he  told  the  people  before
he  was  taken,  "  I  roll  this  kingdom
off  on  to  the  shoulders  of  the
Twelve."  Probably  there  are  some
in  this  room  who  heard  him  talk  in
this  manner.  I  was  but  a  boy  at
the  time,  but  I  remember  it  very
distinctly.  He  evidently  wanted
his  brother  Hyrum  also  to  be  pre-
served, and  for  some  time  before  his


martyrdom  talked  about  him  as  the
Prophet.  But  Hyrum,  as  you  know,
was  not  desirous  to  live  away  from
Joseph  ;  it  he  was  to  be  exposed  to
death,  he  was  resolved  to  be  with
hitn.  Our  revered  President,  who
is  present  with  you  to-day,  was  with
the  Prophet  and  his  brother,  the
Patriarch,  at  the  time  of  their  martyr-
dom, and  was  himself  shot  down,
and  his  life  almost  despaired  of.
But  God  in  his  providence  reserved
him  for  something  else,  and  his
enemies  did  not  have  power  to  take
his  life,  *

After  the  martyrdom  of  the
Prophet  the  Twelve  soon  returned
to  Nauvoo,  and  learned  of  the  aspi-
rations of  Sidney  Rigdon.  He  had
claimed  that  the  Church  needed  a
guardian,  and  that  he  was  that
guardian.  He  had  appointed  the
day  for  the  guardian  to  be  selected,
and  of  course  was  present  at  the,
meeting,  which  was  held  in  the  open
air.  The  wind  was  blowing  toward
the  stand  so  strongly  at  the  time
that  an  improvised  stand  was  made
out  of  a  wagon,  which  was  drawn
up  at  the  back  part  of  the  congrega-
tion, and  which  he,  William  Marks,
and  some  others  occupied.  He
attempted  to  speak,  but  was  much
embarrassed.  He  had  been  tho
orator  of  the  Church  ;  but,  on  this
occasion  his  oratory  failed  him,
and  his  talk  fell  very  flat.  In
the  meantime  President  Young
and  some  of  his  brethren  came  and
entered  the  stand.  The  wind  by
this  time  had  ceased  to  blow.  After
Sidney  Rigdon  had  spoken,  Presi-
dent Young  arose  and  addressed
the  congregation,  which  faced
around  to  see  and  hear  him,  turning
their  backs  towards  the  wagon
occupied  by  Sidney.  Now  it  is  prob-
able that  there  are  some  here  to-
day who  were  present  on  that  occa-
sion, and  they,  I  doubt  not,  could,


3C4  JOURNAL  OF

if  necessary,  bear  witness  that  the
{WWer  of  God  was  manifested  at
that  time,  to  the  joy  and  satisfaction
of  the  Saints.  It  was  necessary  that
there  should  be  some  manifestation
of  the  power  of  God,  because  the
people  were  divided.  There  was
considerable  of  doubt  as  to  who
should  lead  the  Church.  People
had  supposed  that  Joseph  would
live  to  redeem  Zion,  They  felt
very  much  as  the  disciples  did  after
the  crucifixion  :  "  We  trusted/'
said  they  to  the  Savior,  whom  they
knew  not,  while  speaking  of  their
Lord,  "that  it  had  been  He  which
should  have  redeemed  Israel"  They
were  saddened  in  their  hearts.  So
the  Saints  were  when  the  Prophet
Joseph  was  taken  from  them.
Some  even  went  so  far  as  to  think
that  perhaps  (Mod  would  resurrect
him,  they  had  such  an  idea  about
his  con  tin  ned  earthly  connection
with  this  work.  But  no  sooner  did
President  Young  arise  than  the
power  of  God  rested  down  upon  him
in  the  face  uf  the  people.  It  did  not  |
appear  to  be  Brig  ham  Young  ;  it
appeared  to  be  Joseph  Smith  that
spoke  to  the  people — Joseph  in  his
look.*,  in  his  manner,  and  in  his
voice  j  even  his  figure  was  trans-
formed so  that  it  looked  like  that  of
Joseph,  and  everybody  present,  who
had  the  Spirit  of  God,  saw  that  he
was  the  man  whom  God  had  chosen
to  hold  the  keys  now  that  the  Pro-
phet Joseph  had  gone  behind  the
veil  j  and  thai  he  had  given  him
power  to  exercise  them.  And  from
that  time  forward,  notwithstanding
the  claims  of  Sidney  Rigdon  ;  not-
withstanding the  claims  of  Strang,
not  withstanding  the  claims  of
William  Smith,  John  E.  Page  and
others  who  drew  off  from  the  Church
in  the  days  of  Nauvoo ;  and  notwith-
standing the  claims  of  other  men
who  have  since  drawn  off  from  the


DISCOURSES.

Church  and  made  great  pretensions,
God  has  borne  testimony  to  the  acts
and  teachings  of  His  servant  Brig-
ham,  and  those  of  his  servants,  the
Apostles,  who  received  the  keys  in
connection  with  him.  God  *  sus-
tained him  and  upheld  him,  and  he
blessed  all  those  that  listened  to  his
counsel  No  man  that  ever  obeyed
all  his  counsels  and  teachings  was
ever  cursed,  but  was  always  blessed
of  God ;  while  those  who  disobeyed
I  his  counsel  did  not  prosper.  We
have  all  seen  this.  He  led  the  peo-
ple by  the  power  of  God  into  this
wilderness,  taking  upon  himself
such  responsibility  as  no  other  man
dare  take,  which,  of  course,  he  was
inspired  of  God  to  do,  In  various
ways  God  sustained  him  to  the
time  of  his  death.  All  the  authority,
all  the  power,  all  the  keys,  and  all
the  blessings  that  were  necessary
for  the  guidance  of  this  people  he
held.  He  held  them  as  his  I  el  low-
servants,  the  Apostles,  held  them  ;
only  he,  being  the  senior,  had  the
right  to  preside,  and  did  preside,
God  sustaining  him  in  so  doing.
Then  when  he  died  there  was  no
need  for  any  peculiar  or  overpower-
ing manifestation,  sucb  as  was
witnessed  when  the  Prophet  Joseph
died,  because  the  authority  of
the  Priesthood  was  recognized,  and
among  the  Twelve  there  was  no  dis-
sent. We  all  knew  the  man  whose
right  it  was  to  preside,  there  being
no  doubt  upon  this  matter.
We  knew  he  had  the  authority.
We  knew  that  there  was  only  one
man  at  a  time  upon  the  earth  that
could  hold  the  keys  of  the  kingdom
j  of  God,  and  that  man  was  the  pre-
siding Apostle.

Other  names  had  at  one  time  pre-
ceded President  John  Taylor  in  the
order  of  the  Twelve.  There  were
various  reasons  for  this.  Two  of
the  Apostles  had  lost  their  standing,


THE  POWER  AND  AUTHORITY,  ETC,


365


and  upon  deep  and  heartfelt  repent-
ance had  been  a^ain  ordained  to  the
Apostles  hip.  In  both  instances  this
had  occurred  after  the  ordination
of  President  Taylor *to  that  calling.
Still,  for  many  years  their  names
were  allowed  to  stain  1  in  their  old
places  and  preceded  his  in  the  pub-
lished list  of  the  Twelve.  The
revelation  designating  President*
Taylor,  Woodruff  and  Wilkin  1  Rich-
ards to  be  ordained  Apostles  was
given  July  8th,  183S;  John  E,  Page
was  called  to  the  same  office  in  the
same  revelation.  He  and  President
Taylor  were  ordained  at  Far  West
before  the  Saints  were  driven
from  there.  Brother  Woodruff  being
on  a  mission  at  the  Fox  Islands,  was
afterwards  ordained  on  the  corner
stone  of  the  Tern  pie,  April  2Gth,
1839.  Brother  Willard  Richards,
when  he  was  called,  was  on  a  mission
in  England,  and  was  ordained
in  that  laud  after  the  Twelve  went
there  on  their  mission.  In  this
way  Brothers  Richards  and  Wood-
ruff, though  the  seniors  of  President
Taylor  in  years,  were  his  juniors  in
the  Apostleship  ;  he  had  assisted  in
ordaining  them  Apostles.  For
some  years  attention  was  not
called  to  the  proper  arrangement  of
the  names  of  the  Twelve  j  but  some
time  before  President  Young's  death
they  were  arranged  by  him  in  their
proper  order*  Not  long  before  his
death  a  number  of  the  Twelve  and
leading  Elders  were  in  Sanpete
when,  in  the  presence  of  the  con-
gregation in  the  meeting-house,  he
turned  to  President  Taylor,  and
said,  "  Here  is  the  man  whose  right
it  is  to  preside  over  the  council  in
my  absence,  he  being  the  senior
Apostle/1

Therefore,  as  I  have  said,  when
President  Young  died  there  was  no
doubt  in  the  minds  of  those  who  un-
derstood principle  as1  to  who  was  the


man — it  was  the  then  senior  Apostle-
He  was  the  man  who  had  the  right
to  preside,  he  holding  the  keys
by  virtue  of  his  seniority,  by  virtue
of  his  position  in  the  Quorum;
and  he  became  the  President  of  the
Twelve  Apostles  j  and  became  Pre-
sident of  the  Church.

Now,  let  me  ask  you,  is  it  neces-
sary that  somebody  should  rise  up
outside  of  this  Priesthood  to  be  a
Prophet,  Seer  and  Revelator  to  the
Church  J  Is  it  not  consistent  with
the  wisdom  and  government  of  God
to  acknowledge  His  servants  who
have  been  faithful  all  their  lives,
who  have  proved  their  integrity  be-
fore Him,  who  have  never  swerved
to  the  right  or  the  left,  and  whose
knees  have  never  trembled,  and
who.se  hands  have  never  shaken — is
it  nbt  within  his  power  and  his
wisdom  to  endow  them  with  all  the
gif  ts  and  qualifications  necessary  for
the  guidance  of  His  Church  ?  Cer-
tainly it  is.  There  has  never  been
a  moment,  as  I  have  said,  since  this
Church  was  organized,  since  the  6th
day  of  April,  1S30,  when  God  has
been  without  ministering  servants
through  whom  he  has  revealed  his
mind  and  will  to  the  people.  Pre-
sident Young  might  have  received
and  given  revelations  to  the  people
in  the  same  manner  as  the  Prophet
i  Joseph  did.  He  had  the  authority,
and  he  did  give  his  revelations  to
the  people ;  he  gave  his  counsel.
President  Taylor  has  done  the  same.
The  Twelve  in  their  labors  have  done
the  same.  They  have  taught  the
people  the  word  of  God.  The
Twelve  have  the  right,  every
Apostle  has  the  right,  to  teach  the
people  by  the  spirit  of  revelation,  by
the  spirit  of  prophecy  and  the
power  of  God.  This  people,  as  I
have  said,  have  been  led  by  that
power  and  spirit ;  and  it  was  in  this
way  that  ancient  Israel  was  bd  when


3CG  .J**uu.\ A i  n¥

Moses  stood  at  their  head.  He  had
the  authority,  he  held  the  keys,  and
he  received  revelation  from  God  con-
cerning all  the  people.  It  has  been
so  in  our  day.  We  have  had  revela-
tions; and  we  have  revelations  still.
Our  brethren,  Brothers  George
Teasdale,  Ueber  J.  Grant  and
Seymour  II  Young  have  been,  lately
called  by  written  revelation,  to  hold
the  positions  to  which  they  have
been  assigned.  But  is  it  always
necessary  to  write  revelation  ?
Sometimes  it  is  necessary ;  some-
times it  is  not  necessary,  just  as  God
villeth.  When  the  word  of  God
is  given  through  His  servants,  as  for
instance,  this  morning  through
President  Taylor  making  a  certain
promise ;  that  promise  is  just  as
binding  as  if  written.  If  we  live
for  it,  it  will  be  fulfilled,  just  as
much  as  if  it  were  written*  God
has  bestowed  the  spirit  of  revelation
upon  His  servants.  In  fact,  no
man,  no  matter  what  his  office  may
be,  whether  it  be  Deacon,  Teacher,
Priest  or  Elder,  Seventy  or  High
Priest,  or  Apostle,  has  the  right  to
teach  the  people  unless  he  does  it
by  the  light  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by
the  power  of  God.  He  should  not
attempt  to  teach  the  people  that
which  he  may  have  framed  in  his
own  heart  to  say  to  them.  On  the
contrary,  he  should  treasure  up,  as
God  lias  said,  continually  the  words
of  life,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto
him  what  to  sav.  even  that  which
shall  be  suited  to  the  circumstances
of  the  people  and  of  each  individual.
God  lias  made  that  promise  to  the
Elders  of  this  Church,  unto  those
who  go  out  to  preach  the  Gospel,
and  to  every  man  who  seeks  to  teach
as  he  should  do — by  the  spirit  of
revelation.  It  is  then  carried  to
the  hearts  of  the  people,  and
they  are,  and  will  be,  judged  by
it,  and  will  be  held  accountable  be-


fore  God  according  to  the  spirit  and
|  knowledge  they  may  have  received.

I  have  presented  this  matter  be-
fore you,  because  I  am  led  to  think
there  is  not  that  disposition  to  look
to  and  recognize  the  authority  that
exists  in  the  Church  as  it  should  be
recognized.  There  is  at  the  present
time  a  contest  going  on  in  our  midst
and  the  tendency  to  tear  away  from
the  moorings  of  the  Priesthood,  from
the  authority  and  influence  of  the
Priesthood,  receives  every  encour-
agement The  threats  that  are
!  being  made  by  our  enemies  at  the
present  time  are  for  the  purpose  of
destroying  the  faith,  the  confidence,
and  the  spirit  that  are  begotten  in
the  hearts  of  the  people  towards  the
Priesthood  of  the  Son  of  God.  If
they  could  get  you  to  repudiate
your  Bishops,  the  President  of  the
Stake  ;  if  they  could  get  you  to
repudiate  the  Apostles  and  the  First
Presidency,  they  would  be  satisfied ;
because  they  would  know  then  that
they  had  struck  a  deadly  blow  at  the
kingdom  of  Gad,  so  far  as  you  are
concerned  at  least  That  is  their
aim  all  the  .time.  While,  on  the
other  hand,  it  is  the  aim  of  the
Elders  of  Israel  to  bind  the
people  together,  and  to  build  up  the
authority  and  influence  of  the  holy
Priesthood,  because  we  know  that
in  doing  so  we  are  acting  according
to  the  mind  and  will  of  God,  and
not  because  we  want  to  exercise
authority  over  you.  You  know  very
well  that  authority  has  never  been
exerciser!  over  you  improperly  by
any  faithful  servant  of  God  ;  that
you  never  have  had  reason  to  com-
plain because  of  anything  of  this
kind  coming  from  the  First  Presx-
i  dency,  or  from  the  Apostles,  or  any
good  man  ;  but  on  the  contrary,  the
servants  of  God,  of  whom  our  en-
emies complain,  have  worn  them-
selves out  in  your  midst,  teaching


THE  POWER  AND


AUTHORITY,  ETC.


367


you  the  doctrines  of  salvation.  They
have  traveled  under  all  circumstan-
ces, visiting  the  people  and  teaching
them  the  principles  of  eternal  life,
and  have  worn  themselves  out  at
this  labor.  They  have  not  spared
their  bodies,  nor  refrained  from
neglecting  all  their  earthly  affairs
when  necessary  for  the  good  of  this
people.  It  has  been  characteristic
of  the  Apostles  and  leading  men  of
this  Church  ;  and  if  we  had  not
that  spirit,  it  would  be  soon  seen
by  the  people,  and  our  influence
would  be  correspondingly  weakened.
It  is  the  aim  of  the  Priesthood  at
the  present  time  to  bind  the  people
together,  on  the  same  principle  that
you  adopt,  you  that  are  shepherds,
when  the  wolves  are  around.  You
get  your  sheep -together  in  as  com-
pact a  manner  as  you  can,  that  no
wolves  can  get  access  to  your  sheep.
You  feel  it  to  be  your  duty  to  take
care  of  the  flock  that  may  be  your
own,  or  that  may  be  entrusted  to
your  care,  that  not  even  a  lamb  may
be  torn  to  pieces,  or  be  carried  off
by  ei titer  dog  or  wolf.  It  is  the  same
with  the  servants  of  God.  The  bur-
den of  this  people  rests  upon  them.
It  is  upon  President  Taylor  night
and  day ,  I  know.  Every  thought
and  desire  of  his  heart  is  for  the  sal-
vation of  this  people,  and  to  estab-
lish and  build  up  the  Zion  of  our
God.  His  feelings  are  to  be  a  faith-
ful watchman  upon  the  walls  of  Zion,
a  faithful  shepherd  of  the  flock  of
Christ ;  so  that  when  he  goes  hence,
as  Brig  ham  has  gone,  he  can  report
to  Joseph  and  those  of  his  co-laborers
that  have  joined  him,  that  he  did
his  duty  faithfully  while  in  the  flesh,
in  caring  for  and  feeding  the  flock
of  Christ. I  know  this  is  the


feeling;  and  I  know  it  is  the  feel-
ing of  his  codaborers,  his  fellow-
servants.  And  it  is  because  of  their
intense  love  for  this  people,  and  for
the  salvation  of  the  children  of  men
that  they  are  impelled  to  do  as  they
do.  They  would  have  you  listen  to
the  voice  of  wisdom,  to  the  voice  of
revelation,  to  the  voice  of  the  Holy
Spirit  that  is  poured  out  upon  us,
which  bears  testimony  in  your
hearts  that  it  is  through  His  power
that  we  have  been  sustained,  and
which  convinces  you  that  we  are
His  servants.  You  know  when  you
hear  the  servants  of  God,  by  the
power  of  God  that  accompanies
their  words,  and  by  the  testimony
of  Jesus  that  He  gives  unto  you,
that  they  are  His  servants.  This  is
your  witness,  and  you  are  our  wit-
nesses as  to  the  truth  of  our  claims
and  the  divinity  of  the  authority
which  we  exercise  in  your  midst.
We  want  to  save  you.  We  want  to
teach  you  the  plan  of  salvation.
We  want  to  point  out  to  you  the
way  in  which  you  should  go.  We
do  not  ask  anything  of  you  of  an
earthly  character.  We  desire  not
to  aggrandize  ourselves.  All  we  ask,
and  we  ask  it  in  the  name  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  that  you  will
be  entreated  of  God,  that  you  will
listen  to  His  voice,  and  walk  in  the
strait  and  narrow  path  that  leads  to
lives  eternal.  And  we  promise  you
that  if  you  will  do  so,  we  will  lead
you  into  the  celestial  kingdom  of
God,  not  of  ourselves,  but  through
the  power  that  God  has  given  unto
us,  and  that  He  will  give  unto  us.

I  pray  God  to  bless  you,  my
brethren  and  sisters,  and  fill  you  with
His  Holy  Spirit,  in  the  name  of
Jesus.  Amen.


368


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  in  the  Assembly  Hall,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday,  Feb*

11th,  1883,

WHY  THE  SAINTS  MEET  TOGETHER — THEIR  PRETENSIONS— WHAT  THEIR
PROFESSION  IMPLIES  —  NO  RIGHT  TO  SIT  IN  JUDGMENT  ON  THE
WORLD — ALL  CHILDREN  OF  A  COMMON  FATHER— MANY  GOOD  MEN
INSPIRED  BY  THE  SPIRIT  OF  GOD  WHO  DID  NOT  POSSESS  THE  GIFT
OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST — HOW  JOSEPH  SMITH  OBTAINED  KNOWLEDGE
— THE  GOSPEL— WHAT  THE  SAVIOR  REQUIRED— OPERATIONS  OF  THB
HOLY  GHOST  —  WHAT  IS  REQUIRED  OF  THE  SAINTS— THEIR  FEEL-
INGS— DUTY  OF  MISSIONARIES  —  NATIONAL  FEELINGS  BURIED  IN
EMBRACING  THE  GOSPEL— RELATIONSHIP  TO  GOD — DESTINY  OF  THE
FAITHFUL— WHAT  HAVE  RELIGIONISTS  OF  THE  WORLD  TO  OFFER  %
— CHARACTER  OF  THE  WOULD-BE  REFORMERS — RIGHTS  TO  EE  CON-
TENDED FOR — CORRUPT  PRACTICES  CONDEMNED.


We  meet  together  from  time  to
time,  to  speak  and  to  hear,  to  medi-
tate and  reflect,  to  sing  and  to  pray,
to  attend  to  our  Sacraments,  and  to
seek  to  obtain  a  knowledge  of  the
duties  and  responsibilities  which
devolve  upon  us  to  attend  to^  And
then  we  are  desirous  to  worship  the
Lord  our  God  and  conform  to  his
laws  i  to  seek  an  acquaintance  with
him  and  with  his  purposes,  and  to
understand  the  position  we  occupy
in  relation  to  our  Heavenly  Father
and  the  world  in  which  we  live.
These  are  some  of  the  ideas  and
thoughts  that  flow  more  or  less
through  the  minds  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints ;  and  we  are  desirous  gen-
erally to  know  the  mind  and  will  of
God,  and  then  to  do  it;  at  least,
these  are  the  pretensions  of  the
Latter-day  Saints*  We  do  not
always  come  up  to  that  standard,
however ;  but  the  great  majority  of
the  people,  I  am  happy  to  say,  are
seeking  to  conform  to  the  mind,
and  will,  and  word,  and  law  of  (Ju  J.


It  has  given  me  great  pleasure
lately,  in  traveling  among  the  Saints
to  witness  a  spirit  and  feeling  of  this
kind,  which  has  been  abundantly
developed  in  the  d liferent  parts  of
the  Territory  that  we  have  had  the
pleasure  of  visiting.  And  it  is  a
matter  of  considerable  importance
to  us,  as  a  people,  that  we  compre-
hend the  position  that  we  occupy  in
the  world,  and  the  various  duties
and  responsibilities  that  devolve
upon  us.  There  are  various  theories,
notions  and  ideas  abroad  in  the
world  pertaining  to  the  future.  We,
ourselves,  have  been  gathered  from
the  nations  of  the  earth  under  the
influence  of  the  new  and  everlasting
Gospel,  and  under  the  guidance
and  dictation  of  God,  our  heavenly
Father  j  and  we  call  this.Ziou,  and
we  call  ourselves  the  people  of  Zion,
or  in  other  words,  the  Saints  of  the
Most  High  God.  We  really  make
very  great  pretensions.  To  "be  a
Saint  signifies  to  be  holy,  to  be
pure,  to  be  upright,  to  be  virtuous*


The  German  language  is  very  signifi-
cant on  this  point,  and  they  calling
us  according  to  our  name,  denomi-
nate ns  as  Iter  Ihligen  der
LeUzen  tage$  or  as  the  holy  of
the  last  days.  This  is  the  profession
which  we  assume.  We  say  that
we  have  come  here  to  learn  the  laws
of  God,  and  to  he  taught  in  His
ways,  and  that  in  us  is  fulfilled
many  of  the  ancient  prophesies
pertaining  to  these  matters,  one  of
which  is  :  4i  I  will  take  them  one  of
a  city  and  two  of  a  family,  and
bring  them  to  Zion  ;  and  I  will  give
them  pastors  after  mine  own  heart,
that  shall  feed  them  with  knowl-
edge and  understanding."  There
is  something  very  peculiar  in  the
position  that  we  occupy,  and  in  the
manner  in  which  we  have  been
brought  together,  which  is  not  gen-
erally understood  by  the  world  of
mankind.

We  profess  attain  to  be  the  Church
of  God,  and  to  be  the  kingdom  of
God  ;  in  fact  we  have  any  amount  oT
profession  ;  but  the  question  with
me  sometimes  is,  how  near  we  live
up  to  our  professions,  and  adhere  to
the  principles  that  we  profess  to  be*
lieve  in,  and  to  be  governed  liy*  For
we  are  toid  in  the  Scriptures,  that
it  is  "not  every  one  that  sayeth
unto  me  Lord,  Lor«l,  shall  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  but  he  that
doeth  the  will  of  my  Father
which  is  in  heaven/'  And  again
Jesus  said,  i4  Many  will  *ay  to  me  in
that  day  (that  is  speaking  of  the
day  of  judgment)  Lord,  Lord,  have
we  not  prophesied  in  thy  name?
And  in  thy  name  have  cast  out
devils,  and  in  thy  name  done  many
wonderful  works  *"  But  He  says,  He
will  fcay  unto  them,  "I  never  knew
you  ;  depart  irom  me,  ye  that  work
iniquity,"  Again  we  are  told  that
he  that  doeth  righteousness  is
righteous. Ami  further,  as  a  test


that  is  given  for  the  guidance  and
direction  of  His  people,  a  strict  com-
mand is  given  unto  them  pertaining
to  their  entertaining  an  undue  at-
tachment to  the  world,  John  says  :
"  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the
things  that  are  in  the  world-  If
any  man  love  the  world ,  the  love  of
the  Father  is  not  in  him/'  No
matter  what  their  professions  may
be,  no  matter  what  their  position
maybe;  it  applies  to  all.  "Love
not  the  world  nor  the  things  that
are  in  the  world11  We  are  indeed
called  here  to  this  land  of  Zion  to
perform  a  peculiar  work,  which  the
Lord  has  placed  -upon  us,  asso-
ciated with  what  is  termed
the  dispensation  of  the  fullness
of  times,  wherein  God  will  gather
together,  it  is  said,  all  things  in  one,
whether  they  be  tilings  in  the  heav-
ens or  things  on  the  earth.  It  is  a
dispensation  in  which  is  embraced
everything  that  is  connected  with
any  and  every  other  dispensation
that  has  ever  existed  siucr>  the
world  rolled  into  existence,  or  the
morning  stars  sang  together  for  joy;
and  embraces  all  these  dispen-
sations ;  it  is  proper  that  we  should
strive  to  comprehend  the  various
duties  and  responsibilities  devolving
upon  us.  We  differ  from  the  world
in  many  respects  ;  and  I  will  try  to
point  out  some  of  these  things
wherein  this  difference  exists.

We  are  apt  sometimes  to  he  too
censorious  of  tin*  world*  We  think
that  they  act  very  wickedly  and
badly,  and  that  is  true  ;  but*  then,
at  the  present  at  least,  we  arc  nut
their  judges;  It  is  not  any  part  of  our
duty  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  them.
Who  are  wt*  I  The  children  of  our
Heavenly  Father-  Who  are  the
world,  as  we  sometimes  denominate
those  that  are  not  of  our  Church  ?
The  children  of  our  Heavenly
Father. For  God  has  u  made  of  one

Vol.  XXIIL


370  JOURNAL  OF

blood  all  nations  of  men  for  to  dwell
on  all  the  face  of  the  earth/1  we  are
told,  "and  hath  determined  the
times  before  appointed  and  the
bounds  of  their  habitation  ;  that  they
should  seek  the  Lord,  if  haply  they  j
might  feel  after  him,  and  find  Him,
though  lie  be  not  far  from  every  one  of  1
us,"

Now  outside  the  Gospel,  outside
of  revelation,  outside  of  any  special
communication  from  the  Lord,  all
nu  n,  more  or  less,  everywhere  have
certain  claims  upon  their  Heavenly
Father,  who  is  said  to  be  the  God
ami  Father  of  the  spirits  uf  all  flesh.
Then  we  are  told,  when  Jesus  spake
to  his  disciples,  they  asked  him  bow
they  were  to  pray.  He  said,  Say,
Our  Father  who  art  in  heaven,
hallowed  be  Thy  name*  Who  I1
Our  Father— the  God  and  the  Father
Of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh.  When
you  approach  Him,  say,  our  Father
who  art  in  heaven.  Then,  they  be-
long to  our  Father,  as  well  as  we.
In  regard  to  the  operation  of  the
Spirit  upon  man,  let  me  draw  your
attention  to  a  fact  that  is  generally
understood  by  all  reflecting' men,
and  that  is,  no  matter  how  wicked
a  man  may  be,  how  far  he  may
have  departed  from  the  right,  such
a  man  will  generally  admire  and
inspect  a  good  man,  an  honorable
man,  and  a  virtuous  man  ;  and  such
a  man  will  frequently  say  j  u  1  wish
I  could  do  as  that  man  does,  but  1
cannot  ;  1  wish  I  could  pursue  a
■correct  course,  but  I  am  overcome  ot
►evil"  They  cannot  help  but  respect
the  good  and  the  honorable,  al-
though they  may  not  be  governed
by  principles  of  honor  and  virtue
tUemselves.  This  same  spirit  which
is  given  to  every  man  outside  of  the
Gospel  has  been  manifested  in  the
different  ages  of  the  world.  When
I  say  outside  of  it,  the  Latter-day
Saints  will  understand  me.  When


DISCOURSES.

I  speak  of  the  Gospel  I  speak  of  the
Gospel  revealed  by  our  Lord  and
Savior  Jesus  Christ-  and  which  lias
existed  at  times  through  the
different  ages,  and  which,  wherever
it  did  exist  brought  nien  into  close
communion  with  the  Lord  ;  hence
the  Gospel  is  called  the  everlasting
Gospel  The  Scriptures  unequivo-
cally state  that  our  Savior  "  brought
life  and  immortality  to  light  through
the  Gospel/'  ami  wherever  a  know-
ledge of  life  and  immortality  existed
it  was  through  the  Gospel  ;  and
whenever  and  wherever  there  was  no
knowledge  of  life  and  immortality
there  was  no  Gospel  But  outside
of  that  there  have  been  many  good
influences  abroad  in  the  world.
Many  men  in  the  different  ages,  who,
in  the  mid st  of  wickedness  and  corrup-
tion, have  tried  to  stop  the  current
of  evil,  have  placed  themselves  in
s  the  catalogue  of  reformers.  Some
of  those  have  been  what  are  called
heathen,  others  what  are  termed
Christian,  and  others  have  been
scientific  and  philanthropic— lovers
1  and  benefactors  of  the  human  race.
The  many  reformers  that  existed
in  former  ages  have  been  men  many
of  whom  have  been  sincerely  de-
sirous to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  to
carry  out  His  purposes,  so  far  as
they  knew  them.  And  then>there
are  thousands  and  tens  of  thous-
ands of  honorable  men  living  to-day
in  this  nation,  and  other  nations,
who  are  honest  and  upright  and
virtuous,  and  who  esteem  correct
principles  and  seek  to  be  governed
by  them,  so  far  as  they  know
them.

But  there  is  a  very  great  differ-
ence between  this  spirit  and  feeling
that  leads  men  to  do  right,  which  is
emphatically  denominated  a  portion
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  is  given
to  every  man  to  profit  withal,  and
|  what  is  termed  in  the  Scriptures  the


PRETENSIONS  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


371


gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Men  may
be  desirous  to  do  right ;  they  may
be  good,  honorable  and  conscientious;
and  then  when  we  come  to  the  judg-
ment pertaining  to  these  things  we
are  told  that  all  men  will  be  judged
according  to  the  deeds  done  in  the
body,  and  according  to  the  light
and  intelligence  which  they  pos-
sessed,

I  will  take,  for  instance,  the  posi-
tion of  the  reformers,  going  no
farther  back  than  Luther  and  Me-
iaacthon  ;  and  then  you  may  come
to  Calvin,  Knox,  Whitfield,  Wesley,
Fletcher,  and  many  others ;  men
who  have  been  desirous  in  their
day  to  benefit  their  fellow-men  ;
who  have  proclaimed  against  vice,
and  advocated  the  practice  of  virtue,
uprightness  and  the  fear  of  God.
But  we  all,  who  have  contem-
plated these  subjects,  know  that
those  men  never  did  restore  the
Gospel  as  it  was  taught  by  our  Lord
and  Savior  Jesus  Christ ;  neither
did  they  see  or  comprehend  alike  in
biblical  matters  ;  they  groped,  as  it
were,  in  the  dark,  with  a  portion  of
the  Spirit  of  God.  They  sought  to
benefit  their  fellow-man;  but  not
having  that  union  with  God  that
the  Gospel  imparts,  they  were
unable  to  arrive  at  just  conclusions
pertaining  to  those  matters,  Hence
one  introduced  and  taught  one
principle,  and  another  introduced
and  taught  another;  and  they  were
split  up  and  divided,  and  the  spirit
of  antagonism  was  found  at  times
among  them  ;  and  with  all  their  de-
sires to  do  good,  they  did  not,  and
could  not  restore  the  Gospel  of  the
Hon  of  God,  and  none  among  them
■were  able  to  say,  Thus  saith  the
Lord,  And  that -is  the  condition
of  the  religious  world  to  day  ;  it  is
Babylon  or  confusion;  confusion  in
ideas,  confusion  in  regard  to  doc-
trine, confusion  in  regard  to  ordi-


nances, etc.  And  what  shall  we  say
of  such  men  1  Shall  we  say  that
they  were  wicked  1  No.  It  is  law-
ful to  do  good  always,  and  anyone
who  seeks  to  promote  the  welfare
of  the  human  family  is  a  benefactor
of  mankind,  and  ought  to  be
sustained.  But  now  cumes  another
principle  which  is  different  to  that.
We  find  in  reading  the  Scriptures,
that  at  the  time  Jesus  made  His
appearance  upon  the  earth,  there
was  a  variety  of  sects  and  religious
parties  ;  there  were  the  Sadducees,
the  Pharisees,  the  Esseues,  and
others.  But  these  people  were  told
that  there  was  but  one  Lord,  not
many ;  one  faith,  not  many  j  one
baptism,  not  many  ;  and  one  God
who  is  above  all  and  through  all  and
in  yo*  all

Now  that  was  one  tiling  that
troubled  Joseph  Smith  in  his  youth-
ful days,  anil  a  recital  of  his  expe-
rience in  these  matters  I  have  had
myself  from  his  own  lips.  There
was,  in  his  young  days,  a  religious
revival  in  the  region  where  he
dwelt.  The  people  that  took  part
in  it  were  no  doubt  sincere.  I  look
at  such  things  differently  from  a
great  many  men.  We  cannot
reasonably  suppose  that  all  men  are
hypocrites  about  such  matter?.
Finally  they,  to  use  their  own  term,
(i  converted"  some,  and  then  there
began  to  be  a  scramble  as  to  which
church  the  converts  should  belong.
This  perplexed  Joseph  Smith.  And
having  one  day  while  reading  in  the
Bible,  come  across  that  passage  in
the  epistle  of  James,  where  it  says,
"  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom  let  him
ask  of  God  that  givetli  to  all  men
liberally  and  upbraideth  not  and  it
shall  be  given  him,"  he  went  and
asked  God  concerning  the  matter.
And  the  Lord  revealed  Himself  to
him,  and  among  other  things  that
He  told  him  at  the  time  was  that


37-


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


none  of  the  sects  were  right,  that
all  had  gone  out  of  the  way,  and
commanded  him  not  to  join  any  of
them,  ;  /

I  need  not  now  enter  into  the
details  of  his  history,  as  the.se  things
are  well  known  ;  but  I  will  proceed.
The  Gospel  that  was  restored  to  him
was  the  same  Gospel  that  Jesus
introduced  and  tan-lit ;  the  same
Gospel  that  was  taught  in  part  by
Abraham,  and  by  Moses — tor  we
read  that  the  children  of  Israel  had
the  Gospel  preached  to  them  in  the
wilderness,  #i  but  the  word  preached
ditl  not  profit  them,  not  being
mixed  ii  ith  faith  in  those  that  heard
it."  Therefore  the  law  was  added
because  of  transgression.  Added  to
what  1  To  the  Gospel.  What  dif-
ference is  there  between  the  Gospel
and  the  beliefs  of  other  sects  and
creeds  \  The  Gospel  always  did  and
always  will  u  bring  life  and  immor-
tality to  light."  That  is  the  differ-
ence. While  others  are  groping  in
the  dark,  though  their  intentions  in
many  instances. are  to  do  good  and
work  righteousness,  so  far  as  they
know,  yet  they  cannot  come  to  a
knowledge  of  God,  nor  become  ac-
quainted with  eternal  tilings  without
the  Gospel ;  without  the  gift  of  the
Holy  (  J host,  the  spirit  of  revelation
which  proceeds  from  God>  And
who  are  to  have  this  ?  All  who  obey.
"  But  I  thought,"  say  some,  "  that
that  was  confined  to  some  one  or
two,  or  to  half  a  dozen  or  a  dozen,
as  the  case  may  be,  and  that  the
whole  people  had  nothing  to  do
with  it."  This  is  a  wry  great  mistake,
and  J  will  now  show  yon  the  differ-
ence between  that  and  the  things
as  they  exist  in  the  world ;  between
the  position  that  we  occupy  and
the  position  that  the  world  occupy.

The  world,  as  I  have  told  you,
unaided  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost, unaided by  the  Gospel


and  the  light  of  revelation-  are
left  to  grope  a  good  deal  in  the  dark.
But  not  so  with  the  Saints  of  God  ;
no  matter  in  what  a^e  of  the  world
they  may  have  lived,  they  have  been
placed  under  other  circumstances  ;
they  have  had  the  light  of  truth  to
imide  them,  and  revelation  direct
from  the  Lord, And  here  is  the
difference  between  one  and  the  other.
When  Nicodemus  came  to  Jesus
he  went  to  him  by  night ;  he  was
much  like  some  men  are  in  this  our
day,  with  respect  to  their  private
feelings  for  the  li  Mormons  ;"  they
respect  the  "Mormons,"  they  can-
not help  tloing  so,  but  they  do  not
want  it  known;  for  the  Latter-day
Saints,  like  the  former-day  Saints,
are  not  popular;  in  fact,  we  are  con*
sidcred  by  many  as  they  were,  to
of  disreputable  character,  a  people
with  whom  it  would  not  be  consid-
ered proper  to  associate. This  was
the  character  that  the  Savior  bore
among  the  self-righteous  but  hypo-
critical religionists  of  His  day.  Vet
we  call  Him  the  Son  of  God  And
we  iind  Nicodemus,  a  prominent
man,  a  man  of  discernment  and
ability,  creeping  around  the  back
door,  not  wishing  it  to  be  known
that  he  had  called  upon  the  M  Mor-
mons11— oh,  no  ! — Jesus  of  Nazareth;
vet he  wished  to  find  out  some-
thing  respecting  Him,  for  he  believed
that  no  man  could  do  the  things
that  He  did  except  God  were  with
him. Jesus in explaining  the
Gospel  to  him,  told  him  that  he,  in
order  to  understand  His  teachings
a;id  His  works,  would  have  to  be
born airain. Nicodemus  could  not
appreciate  this  say i Jig,  he  knew  not
what  the  Savior  meant,  thinking
the saying referred  Xo  a  roan's
natural  birth. The Savior  then
told  him,  that  unless  a  man  was
born  of  the  water  and  of  the  Spirit,
he  could  not  enter  the  kingdom  of


PE EXECUTIONS  OF  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


373


God  ;  that  he  could  not  compre-
hend it  ;  that  he  could  not  even
sea  it  ; that  he could not  un-
derstand the relations!  dp  that
existed between God and  man
without  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
The  question  would  naturally  arise,
how  could  man  become  possessed  of
this heaven Iv  iri  ft  I There  was  a
young  n,anf  for  instance,  a  high-
minded, honorable young  man,
who  went  to  Jesus,  and  addressing
Him, said, Good Master,  what
good  tiling  can  I  do  to  inherit  eter-
nal life  ? Jesus  said.  Thou  kuowest
the  command  men  is,  *4  Do  not  kill
Do  not  steal,  Do  not  commit  adult-
ery,  Do not  b^ar  false  witness,
Defraud  not,  Honor  thy  father  and
mother,  and  love  God  with  all  thy
heart,  and  thy  neighbor  as  thyself"  I
And  the  young  man  said  that  these  j
things  he  had  done  from  his  youth
up, Jesus  then  told  him  to  go  and
sell  all  that  he  had  and  give  to  the
poor,  and. to  come  and  follow  Him:
promising  him  that  lie  should  have
treasures  in  heaven,  or  in  otherwords
he  should  have  eternal  life,  and
should  drink  of  the  streams  whereof
make  glad  the  city  of  our  God.
But the  young  man  went  away
sorrow  fid,  for  he  had  much  posses-
sions, 'i-.  \
In  regard  to  the  Holy  Ghost  of
which  we  have  spoken,  we  are  told  '
that  the  disciples  were  instructed  to
tarry  in  Jerusalem,  until  they  were  j
endowed  with  power  from  on  high.
They  did  so,  and  when  they  were  '
assembled together in one  place  '
with  one  accord, making prayer  i
and  supplication unto the  Lord,
the  spirit  of  God  descended  upon
them  us  a  mighty  rushing  wind  and
rested upon them. And  they
began  to  speak  in  tongues  as  the
Spirit  of  God  gave  them  utterance.
There were people there  from
Afferent  nations,  and  they  heard  J


them  speak  in  their  own  tongues
the  wonderful  works  of  God.  Some
who  were  present  said  they  were
drunk,  "These  men  are  drunk
with  new  wine,1'  said  they.  Why,
no,'1  slid  Peter,  u  it  is  only  the  third
hour  of  t lie  day" — that  h  about  nine
o'clock  in  the  morning.  People  do
not  generally  get  drunk  as  early  as
that.  What  did  this  all  mean?
Peter  said  unto  them*:-  u  This  is
that  which  was  spoken  of  by  the
Prophet  Joel,  and  it  shall  come  to
pass  in  the  last  days,  aaith  God,  I
will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all
flesh  and  your  sons  and  your
daughters  shall  prophesy,  and  your
young  men  shall  see  visions,  and
your  old  men  shall  dream  di earns  j
and  on  my  servants  and  on  my
handmaidens  I  will  pour  out  in
those  days  of  my  spirit;  and  they
shall  prophesy."  In  other  words,
it  shall  bring  them  into  relationship
with  God  ;  it  slml!  open  the  visions
ot  their  minds  ;  it  shall  inspire  them
with  the  spirit  of  revelation  j
they  shall  have  a  hope  that  enters
within  the  veil,  whither  Christ  our
forerunner  hath  gone  :  and  being
led  and  directed  under  the  inspira-
tion of  God,  they  shall  have  one
Lord,  one  faith,  and  one  baptism,
and  be  guided  in  the  ways  of  all
truth.  Well,  when  the  people
asked  what  they  were  to  do  to  be
saved,  they  were  not  told  as  the
Pharisees  would  tell  them,  or  as  the
Kssenes,  or  as  the  Sadducees,  or  any
of  the  other  parties  ;  but  they  were
told  to  re  fieri  t  and  be  baptized  every
one  of  them  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and
they  were  promised  that  they
should  receive  the  lioly  Ghost.  In
other  words,  thev  would  he  horn  of
water  and  of"  the  Spirit,  and  be  made
new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus.
What,  then,  would  the  Holy  Ghost
do  for  them,  and  wherein  was  th§


374


JOURNAL  <>!♦'  DISCOURSES


difference  and  the  distinction  be-
tween that  and  the  other  spirit —
that  is,  the  spirit  which  the  people
of  the  world  had  ;  for  they  had  a  con-
science accusing  <>r  excusing  them,
and  many  of  them  felt  a  desire  to
do  right.  But  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Glw>st  was  to  place  them  i* i  a  posi-
tion whereby  tliey  could  know  and
comprehend  for  themselves.  What
was  the  command  of  Jesus  to  His
disciples?  M  Go  ye  into  all  the  wen  Id
and preach the  Gospel  to  every

♦  creature.  He  that  believeth  ami  is
baptized  shall  be  saved,  and  he  that
believeth  not  shall  he  damned.  And
these  signs  shall  follow  those  that
believe."  What  signs?  Why,  the
sick  were  to  be  healed,  the  lame
were  to  be  made  to  walk,  the  blind
to  see,  and  the  deaf  to  hear1  and
the  poor  were  to  have  the  Gospel
preached  to  them.  Now,  what  did
Jesus  tell  His  disciples  the  Holy
Ghost  should  do  when  it  came  ?  He
promised — "It  shall  lead  you  into
all  truth  f"  What  shall  it  do !  Lead
you  into  all  truth — not  into  a  diver-
sity of  sentiments,  not  into  differ-

-ences  of  doctrine,  not  into  a  variety
of  ordinances,  but  you  shall  see
alike,  comprehend  alike  and  under-
stand alike,  "It  shall  lead  you  into
all  truth.11  What  else  shall  it  do?
It  shall  bring  things  past  to  your
remembrance,  so  that  you  will  be
able  to  comprehend  the  things  of

'God  as  they  have  existed  in  the
different  ages  on  the  earth  and  with

'the  Gods  in  the  eternal  worlds,  and
you  shall  see  eye  to  eye. And  the

.{Scriptures  say  that  when  the
Lord  shall  bring  again  Zion  her
w  atchmen  shall  see  eye  to  eye.  They
shall  see  alike,  they  shall  compre-
hend alike,  they  shall  be  under  the
same  influence.  What  else  shall  it
do  ?  It  shall  show  you  of  things  to
come.  You  shall  be  enabled  to  look
through  the  dark  vista  of  the  un-


born future,  to  draw  aside  the  veil
of  the  invisible  world,  and  com-
prehend the  things  of  God;  to
know  your  destiny  and  the  destiny
of  the  human  family,  and  the  events
that  will  transpire  in  coming  ages
and  times,  That  is  what  the  Holy
(ihost  will  do,  and  therein  is  the
difference  between  that  Spirit  and
the  tittle  portion  of  that  spirit  which
is  given  to  every  man  to  profit
withal.  In  other  words,  men  are  in-
ducted into  the  family  of  God  and
the  household  of  faith,  and  they
become  heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs
with  Jesus  Christ.  Did  the  disciples
promise  these  things  in  their  day?
Yes,  they  did,  Did  the  people  who
obeyed  the  Gospel  receive  them  ?
Yes,  they  did,  and  so  evident
was  it  in  many  instances  that  Simon
Magus,  who,  when  he  saw  that  the
disciples  by  laying  on  of  hands
conferred  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  the  people  spake  with  tongues
and  prophesied  under  its  influence,
offered  the  Apostles  money,
with  the  expectation  that  they
would  confer  it  upon  him  for  his
money,  so  that  he  might  pos-
sess this  great  power.  But  he  was
answered  immediately  :  *'  Thy
money  perish  with  thee,  because
thou  hast  thought  that  the  gift  of
God  may  be  purchased  with  money,"
These  men  in  that  day  ]>ossessed
a  hope  that  bloomed  with  immor-
tality and  eternal  life — a  hope
which  it  was  said  entered  within
the  veil  whither  Christ  our  fore-
runner hath  yoiie.  And  then  there
were  a  great  many  of  the  same  class
of  people  to  whom  Paul  alludes
when  he  says  :  Li  They  w  ere  stoned,
they  were  sawn  asunder,  were
tempted,  afflicted,  tormented,"  &c.
And,  says  Paul,  4i  For  they  that  say
such  things  declare  plainly  that  they
seek  a  country  *  *  *  Where-
fore God  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called


PERSECUTIONS  OF

their  God  :  for  he  hath  prepared
for  them  a  city."  They  have  obtained
a  hope  that  others  have  not  They
have  received  intelligence  which
others  tie  not  possess.  Now,  what
is  the  promise  that  is  made  to  the
world  to  day  when  the  Elders  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  preach  tin*
Gospel  to  them?  What  have  I
proclaimed  to  them  ?  What  have
hundreds  of  Elders  that  are  here  to-
day proclaimed  to  them  ?  They
have  told  them  to  repent  of  their
sins  and  be  baptized  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and
they  should  receive  the  Holy  Ghost
What  Holy  Ghost  1  The  same  as
men  had  in  former  times,  possessing
the  same  certainty,  the  same  intel-
ligence, the  same  knowledge  and
faith,  ami  the  same  relationship  to
God,  And  we  in  our  day  are  taught
as  they  were  in  their  day  to  add  to
our  faith  virtue,  to  virtue  brotherly
kindness,  to  brotherly  kindness
charity,  etc.,  that  if  these  things
dwell  in  us  and  abound  we  shall
neither  be  barren  nor  unfruitful  in
the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ — not  in  the  "  guess  so/'
not  in  the  opinions,  not  in  the
notions,  not  in  the  ideas,  not  in  the
theories  of  man,  but  in  the  know-
ledge of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus
Christ  This  is  the  position  which
the  Saints  in  these  times  are  called
to  occupy ;  this  is  the  thing  that
has  been  promised  to  the  Latter*
day  Saints  ;  this  is  the  principle
which  they  themselves  have  received,
and  you  Latter-day  Saints  are  wit-
nesses of  these  things  of  which  I
speak.  I  speak  of  things  that  I
know  ;  1  testify  of  things  that  I
have  seen  and  that  you  com  pre
hend,  and  it  is  by  that  very  principle
that  you  have  been  gathered
together  here  into  these  valleys  of
the  mountains.  Here  is  the  difference
between  uncertainty  and  doubt,  and


THE  SAINTS,  ETC.

i  truth,  certainty  and  intelligence.
The  Spirit  of  God  bears  witness  with
our  spirits— if  we  are  living  our
religion  ami  keeping  the  command-
ments of  (Jod — that  we  are  the  chil-
dren of  God,  as  it  did  to  the  former-
day  Saints,  and  there  is  no  guessing
and  no  uncertainty  about  the  mat*
ten  We  know  in  whom  we  have
believed  j  and  if  the  Latter-day
Saints  have  not  this  Spirit  it  is  be-
cause they  are  not  living  their  reli-
gion and  keeping  the  commandments
of  <iod.  Very  well,  this  being  the
difference,  what  next  ?  Why  we  are
toli  l  in  this  day  to  proclaim  the  ( Jospei
to  the  world  as  they  did  in  former
days.  What  has  been  told  to
the  Elders  of  Israel  in  these  days?
£Go  ye  into  all  the  world  ami  preach
the  Gospel  to  every  creature/1  Just
tlu*  same  as  it  was  in  former  days.
Ami  have  we  done  it,  and  are  we
doing  it?  Yes.  I  myself  have
traveled  hundreds  of  thousands
of  miles  to  proclaim  this  Gospel,
without  purse  or  scrip,  trusting
in  the  God  of  Israel  ;  and  I  would
rather  go  forfh  trusting  in  God  for
my  subsistence,  backed  up  by  the
Lord  God,  of  Hosts  and  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  and  under  the
promise  of  God,  than  under  the
promise  of  any  earthly  potentate
that  could  be  found  in  any  part  of
the  world.  Why]  Because  God  is
always  true  to  His  word  ami  sus-
tains  those  who  put  their  trust  in
Him.  And  hence  we  say  it  is  a  cer-
tainty. What  is  the  feeling  to-day
amongst  our  Elders  1  Why  here  are
hundreds  of  them  going  on  missions,
and  they  keep  going.  And  what  is
their  feeling?  I  receive  numerous
letters  something  like  the  following :
I  have  been  called  to  go  upon  a
mission.  I  esteem  it  an  honor  to
be  engaged  in  the  service  of  God,  •
and  to  be  a  messenger  of  salvation
to  my  fellow-men,  and  I  will  try  to


37G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


be  reiyftwitif

fulfilled

These  ilfflfsfBn
in ;  and  the  Elders  go  forth  in  the
name  of  Israel's  God  bearing  precious


in  every  particular
these  matters  ?  I


ong
in  regard  to
do  not  know


seeds,  the  seeds  of  eternal  life,  as^hat  that  is  any  part  of  our  busirtess
messen^ere  to  the  nations  of  the  '  '

earth,  the  legates  of  the  ,-kies,  com-
nu^k»iiad
prpttdnJ

world,  and  they  return  again  rejoic
ing,  bringing  their  sheaves  with  them.
Tins  is  oi:e  work  we  liave  to  do.


Our  business  Is  to  preach  the  Gos-
pel,  and  if  tliey  do  not  receive  it,
Lave^efv  ^aL^aii.
jkirtic  Jair-icaasfU.  mim
ciples  in  former  days  went  and
preached  the  Gospel,  and  the  people
would  not  receive  it — Jesus  told


Eiders  scarcely  iiiidefsfaiid  this  ma
ter  as  fully  as  they  might,  and  I  will
here  make  a  remark  in  relation  to
it. They  s-iy  that  people  pay  verv


wash  their  feet


Sometimes  I  think  thj^'ffMu3)  of  -^ih*  */tl^ijJt

it-  fas  a  "testimony  t>efo re  Him  in  regard


to  that  matter,  and  lie  would  ileal
with  such  people  Himself,  We  have
to  leave  those  thin  us  in  the  hands


little  attention  tp^tlji*^  api  f  som^jj  of  Qa^,  ■  fpiqthe  ^xfanf  b&  well  as


parts  ;  in  others  a


jy  an


baptized,  etc  Now,  tije  Elders  are
not  responsible  for  the  actions  of
other  men,  Ix  is  their  business  to
go  and  preach  the  Gospel
all  diligence  and  faithfi
be  earnest  and  emphatic,  and  to  seek
for  the  guidance  and  direction  of  the


ourselves  are  all k  ni  "t  lie  hands  of
God,  It  is  true  that  it  is  said  of  the
Twelve  Apostles  that  hereafter  they
shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones  judg-
tlic  t>j^l«  tribes  of  Israel,  but


s  also  true  that  John  the  Eeve-
la  tor  says,  4i  I  saw  a  great  white
throne,  and  him  that  sat  on  it,  from
whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven
fled  away  ;  and  there  was  found  no
'i1*g  or^j4dce  for  them.  And  I  saw  the  dead,
small  and  great,  stand  before  God  ;
and  the  books  were  opened  ;  and


Lord  in  the  proclamation  of  Ins
word  : but  they  have  nothing  to
do  with the  people  n
rejecting  their  message, If  they
receive  it,  it  is  for  their  benefit  ;  if

tbey  reject  it,  it  is  to  their  con-  another  book  was  opened,  which  is
dewnation.  But  the  Elder  is  ;  the  lwk  of  life  :  and  the  dead  were
not responsible whether tiie^^jiirigal  out  of  those  things  which


receive  it  or  ^


lirrba  fvdttlls


wtite*  M  rittan  in  the


according

his  .duties  s  he  &¥»iJiisM«^ch^j  to  kikm-  WMWaaJtria*j«iil^aiu
that  respect  as  if  thousands  were  to  that  the  Saints  shall  judge  the


receive  it.
receiving  it.


But,  thousands  are  world,  but  that  is  not  yet ;  our
and  we  are  doing  our  business  now  is  simply  to  preach  the
work  and  performing  on?  duties,  G^pel  -and  deliver  our  testimony,
and  sending  forth  the  Gpjpjf \J ;  to  t  g^tjfer  together  the  elect  from
And  then  when  wc  have  done  that,  *  among  the  nations,  and  having
what  else?  Why,  that  "is  all  we  ;  faith tully  performed  our  duty  to
can  do.  Preach  these  things  to  the  leave  the  events  pertaining  to  others
world  ;  deliver  the  testimony  that  in  the  hands  of  God.

re
rfltl

And  wno  is


God  has  given  to  us.  And  what
tft^FK  j^re  w&  <io  ^terse^Llt^  litem
because  they  do  not  believe


do?  T


J

i  u  hi  h.


hdt. Shalt  we


}wt  devolve  upon  i
^Zion  tin  to  our


*  uox  Am
