JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.
PRESIDENT BRIGHAM  YOUNG,
HIS  COUNSELORS,
AND THE TWELVE  APOSTLES.
ft 2 FORTH  [J  BT
D.  W.  EVANS,  fJEO.  F.  KIBBS,  AND  OTHERS.
ftlHPlirrrULLT  UlblfiTlbTMUl  UfTll'DAY  HAlNTA  IK  ALL  tui  w.m
VOL.  XIX.
LIVERPOOL :
PRIMTKD  AND  PUBLISHED  BY  WILLIAM  BUHUK,  4i,  ISLINGTON.
LONDON:
4TTM-DAY  HA  I  KTil*  HuOK D1MM\ 2U. HHUJf'l  U»OTBT  BALL'S  POND *ri*D. I  &L.  I M  -,J  TO  ■  -
187*.
ENTKHP.D  at  STATIONERY*  HALL.
V  R  E  V  AC  E .
The  Nineteenth  Volume  of  the  Journal  ok  Discourses  is  not  a  whit
khind  its  predecessors  in  the  simplicity  of  its  content*,  or  the  ad-
vanced character  of  the  truths  contained  therein.
It  is  impossible  to  give  monetary  value  to  the  past  volumes  of
this  publication,  and  the  best  evidence  that  they  are  appreciated,  is
to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  they  ar*  sought  alike  by  non-members
as  well  U  by  member*  of  the  Church,  and  in  contrast  with  many  works
of  greater  pretentions,  book  stalls  are  searche  J  in  vain  for  even  soli-
tary copies*.
This  volume  contains  the last  discourses  of  our  late  venerated
header,  President  B.  Young;  here,  with  those  delivered  by  his  uawl
ate*  of  the  Twelve,  they  are  enshrined  to  show  to  unborn  generations
the  grand  development  of  progressive  man  when  subject  to  the  teach-
ings of  the  Eternal  Spirit.
Years  shall  enhance  the  interest  and  importance  of  these  volumes
as  a  library  of  reference  and  repository  of  truth.
THE  PUBLISHER
INDEX
Date.  I'ajre.
Preface  lil.
Enjoyment  in  the  south... The  blessings  of  a  temple.-  Need  of
chastisement. .  .The  redemption  of  the  earth 'J  he  Christian
world  concerned  in  regard  to  the  Priestbfwid Th^sc-  who
persecute  wilt  be  visited*. .The  ten  virgins. „The  wise  will
understand  B.  Young* April  2#t  1877,  1
Revelation  gradual r„Hy rum  Smith's  experience... The  Lord  has

not  shut  down  the  gates  of  revelation  .  The  tliureh  organi-
zation not  pprieeTed  ar  >>iwr  .,The  establishment  of  Zion.,.
Building  Temples... Their  style  and  character  progressive,,.

Diligence  will  secure  the  blessing,  0*  Pratt. May 'JO,  8

Belief  and  knowledge,. . Personal  knowledge  indispensable..  Pos-
session of  the  Holy  Ghost  Decenary  to  the  knowledge  of  the
truth... How  to  obtain  the  Holy  Ghost  . .Ilia  office,.. The

enmity  of  the  world  toward*  tiie  Priesthood  an  evidence  of
it*  divine  authority,.. Always  was  and  always  will  be  so...
Conditions  upon  which  blessings  are  to  be  obtained,  or  lost.

Jos.  F.  Santa, April 2,  „  20

tj*int*  should  be  whole-bear  ted...  Seek  first  the  kingdom..  The

Utter-day  Wfk  a  revelation... J  ojtepk  Kmith  illiterate (J ur

iLfituicy  aceepL*  ur  rejects... Love  of  the  truth  piuvt-u  more
bv  example  t nan  preceiii \n  minni-lanl  grite  ration,

(Jhas.  C.  Rich. May 13, „  'J6

Prj*v4-r  n,*  the  dedication  of  the  Temple  nirr  nt  jl^an,,  CncheCe..

"  Ulali.  0.  Pratt  May  II,  „  30

Hem  arks  made  at  the  close  of  foregoing  dedicatory  prayer.

k  Young. May IS. „  33

Trying  to  be  SttiuU  .  .Treasure  of  the  everlasting  hillt... The  hill

Cu  mo  rah. .  .Obedience  to  true  principle  the  key  to  knowledge

...All  enjoyment  cornea  from  God...  Organization. -.Duties  of

officer*... Final  ssswsfliia-  B,  Young, June 17. m  3(i

The  work  of  the  Priesthood  the  [improvement  of  the  human

family.. .The  Gospel  more  than  morality,  it  includes  re-
demption... Difference  between  the  ideas  of  the  Saint*  and

the  world.  .  The  Prophets  in  regard  to  the  increase  of  mineral

wealth...  Teach  the  children-  B.  You  tig. May 27. t.  45

Immediate  revelation  ..Spiritual  gifts  necessary  in  the  Christian
Clittrch^.Apostacy  .  The  Hcstoration  of  the Gospel... A II

things  to  be  gathered  in  one., .Divine  authority.. -Marriage,..

Celestial  Mam .Baptism  for  the  dead.  July 11,  *l


Jl


Order  of  the  Friestbood,„Duties  of  the  <evera!  q  nor  urns... Dim"  ■
cities  and  their  settlements  .Duties  of  t  he  teachers,..  Disci-
pline  id  the  Church.  Jf  ftj^ june jj(  j|

Prayer  the  medium  for  blessing  Practical  morality  establishes
confidence.,, Thr  I'mnhut  Joseph  manifest  in  Brighsm ..  Ago
prevents  effort,  bui  when  behind  the  vail,  freedom  from  ob-
struction is  Our  opportunity.  O.Hyde. April 5, „  ft

Items  of  history  The  pioneers.., Talking  to  the  child  ren .  .Pence
in Utah...  God  a  personage  of  tabernacle.., The  foolish

f&shians.  Jt.  Young. July 24> 1t  Lin

Relief  Societies,.,  Talk  to  mothers... Improvement  societies.  .
Domestic  matters... Training  Child ran.,. Home  Production...
Silk  interest*.  B.  Young. July 19, „  66

Ood's  purposes  iinehangable,..The  two  powers,.. The  everlasting

Priesthood.. .Abraham and  Melchisedeck .  ..Organizing  stakes

of  Zmn  ..Temple  building ...  The  Latter-day  Saints  the

friends  of  the  world.  J,  Taylor. July 29t „  76

Increase,  of  the  stakes  of  £ton,.,Tfae  Saints  co-workers  with  find

...The  government  ami  kingdom  of  God.. .Our  inheritances
,Thc  poor  receive  the  word..  The  Gospel  incorporates

everything.  D.H.Wells. Aug.  IB, „  84

The  Lord's  Supper.. .A  word  to  mo theTS..,The sacrament  in  Sab-
bath schools ...  H  isu » ry  of  so  me  th  lag  a , . .  Yo  u  ng  men  to  pre  -
side  ...Hume  man u inch jr  s.  B.  Young. Aug. 19t £  91

Dilference  between  the  Saints  and  the  ancient  ApO*t3ea  and  dis-
ci pies  ►..The  quorums  of  the  Priesthood  will  continue  to  go
for  ward., .The  Saints  are  calm  ami  undisturbed. BL  Snow*

The  rock  of  new  (or  continued)  revelation,.. Incident  in  regard  to
P,  P.  Piatt../1  One  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism*1.. .The
work  of  the  Father  extends  throughout  th*  etenmics*.

Q.  Q.  Cannon. Sept. 16,  M  101

Actions  should  harmonize  with  professions.,,"  Mormon  ism**  a
system  of  power...  All  the  faithful  are  en  lit  led  to  revelation
...  Leading  men  but  as  instruments  in  the  hands  of  God

G.  Q.  Cannon. Sept. 33, „  1«7

The  Savior  among  the  Ne flutes..  .Printing  of  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon  The  Presidency  of  the  Church, ..The  aueiciil  Prusi

hood,.. The  Kirtland  Temple.  O.  Pratt. Oct, 5, t(  111

The  voice  of  Godt  the  voice  of  the  people  ..The  position  of  the
Twelve  . .Reading  from  Doctrine  and  Covenants

J,  Taylor. Oct. 6, „ 1 19

The  trusteeship  President  Young's  labors,. .The  lYicsflmod,  u,
position.  duties,  etc.  ../Kirtland  ami  Nauvoo  Temples...
•Saviors  upon  Mount  JCion.,,Emigrathu  of  the  poor  ,fBuild-

ing  of  the  labfernuctak..The  United  On  J  or.  J.  Taylor, Oct, 7,  12*

ConferenccB,,,OlfaniliLttion  of  the  Stakes  of  Zi on.  .Qualification
for  a  liUliop.  ..The  people  In  three  grand  divisions.

E.  Snow. Oct. 13, M  130

The  work  progressing. .  Prophecy  fulfilled.. .We  shall  all  ohev  the

law  of  death  W.  Woodraff, Oct. 13, M  VM

God  is  at  the  helm.  .Organization  according  to  the  revelations...
Historic  statements,,, Societies  eonnecied  witii  the  Church...

Temple  building  J.  Taylor, Oct. Mt „  137

The  ever  lasting  Gospel...  Temple  Building.. .The  High  Priests

and  S«vciitias...Tft  the  Bishops,..  To  the  siatera, J.Taylor, Oct. 21, tl  H;i


Sept. 9t tl  m


INDEX.


Gathering  the  result  of  revelrttion,,.Tehip'Ie  buildfn^  similar.


The  restoration  of  the  PrieM  hood  ...Ministering  for  th
.  .The  Goapel,  God-sustained,  J,  '


dead

Taylor. Nov. 14,  1877,  ISO


oung. April  22,  t.


Expectation*  deferred...  Oo  rev  elation.,..  Marriage,  how  j>erform

e iicourapo<l  arnnnfr  the  youth . . .  Love  control-

nhJe... Meant  to  he  tmiifr  the  dominion  of  ri  gbteoustiees,  and

to  be  far  time  and  etemfty.  C.  C,  Rich, Nov, I  I .  ]  t\\

J  he  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,,  , The  nwords  of  the  pant...  The  two
micks  .The  pnnniv  ,  i\w\  Hewing*  of  Joseph.-.The  saneti-

fii  >i  <  ftrrh...Thi?ro  is  a  spirit  in  man.  Q,  Pratt, Dec, 2  )Qh

The  United  Order.  Among  theNepbites... Not  incompatible  with
individual  responsibility  or  steward  ship...  The  Utter-day
-Saints  gather  for  training-  ..Home  manufacture  indiapen-

**ble"  E.  Snow. June 3, H  17*

Arrival  in  Salt  Lake  City  „The  first' principle»-+The  question  of
au  tho  ri  ty  .  Th  e  ordiu  aneea, . ,  Eduea  I  i  on  of  our  youth . .  +  Pi  u  ral

marriage,  etc,,,.1' Mormonism*;  immortal,  J,  F,  Smith*  Sept  30,  „  1*7
Leaving  Nauvoo,..No  change  accidental.  Divinity  marks  the

history  of  the  Church,..  Diligence  will  aid  in  securing  success

„.Tbe  Temple  in  Nauvoo  Q,  Q.  Cannon, July 21,  1867,  lf*8

King  Limni1*  enquiry,  from  the  Book  of  Mormon, ♦.Ammon  re-

plie».,.8eerahip  and  the  Urim  and  Tiiumiuiitt.f-The  brother

of  Jared<..Hyrum  Smith's  enquiry... What  is  a  generation...

The  immense  number  iff  records  to  be  revealed O,  Pratt, Dec* 9,  1877,  204
Living  according  to  the  light...  Tern  pie  work,,  .Good  counsel.,.
What  say  the  High  Priests  ami  Seventies  ? B,  Young.

Not  ashamed  of  the  GospcL.. Thirty  years  progress  in  the  moun-
tains...The  Gospel  unchangahlc. ..Joseph  insjiirer.1. ,  Presi-
dent Young's  work.. .Labors  in  St  George  Temple.

w.  Woodruff. f*epfc,  16, iT  22>

An  important  Conference..,  The  death  of  Joseph  and  the  death  of
Brigham...The  keys  of  the  apostle  ship...  Rev  elation  for  ihe
guidance  of  the  Church  corner  ihnmjh  the  head*

G,  Q.  Cannon, Oct, 8, „  23<>
The  Gospel  revealed  for  the  benefit  of  the  world.. ♦Witneag  of  the
Spirit...  Priest  hood  ...High  Priests  and  Seventies..  Energetic

missioiiarieii  Dutit  s  of  IYe*iilentH.  Bishops,  Elders*  Prints,
Teacher*  and  Diiacons... Relief  Societies,.. Tithing.. , P,  E.

Fund. „  Common  school;..  ,f,  Taylor. Oct. 21, ,(  237

BlensitiE  the  result  of  obedience  ro  law,,  t  lur  fegenry  in  the  flesh
...The  advantages  of  Union...  Ordpr  in  the  kingdom  of  Goc|>..

The  eternal  warfare  between  good  and  evil. C.  C,  ilich. Feb, 10,  1878,  tit
An  Age  of  visitation  and  revelation., .Revelation  the  law  of  gov-
ernment. ..The  nature  oi  death. ..Jesus  our  forerunner  and

exemplar..  The  three  witnesses., .  Personal  knowledge  a  hove

»ll.,fOrduiaDceaforthcdeiMi,  J,  P.  Smith.  April  n, „  •>:>*

There  is  a  GofL.XuutTiiLJithm  with  him  an  inherent  craving  of  the
human  heart. ..Man  in  hia  image... Male  and  female  created

he  them.  ..Spirit  and  Mesh ...  Mortal  and  immortal fi.  SOOW. March  3  °ort
MOd  is  light .,,  God  ou  r  Path  er. . ,  God  a  porno  mi  gc . . .  Tbe  Holy  G  host

.♦.Ihe  earth  as  part  of  ihe  uD^erse^.The  purpose  of  experi-
ence...The  resurrection  ..Jin  n  takes  from  each  of  the  crea-
tions... iSpjriuiiil  faculties.  0-  Pratt. 281

The  bleating*  realized  by  the  Saints... Men  die,  but  (heir  works

remain A  d.iv  of  infidelity... The  coming  glory  ofZion...
Temple  building  again.., Blessing  at  St,  George,

W.  Woodruff, April 0, „  i«i;,


Vlll


LSD


No  man  cm  direct  the  kingdom  of  God  ..The  Gospel  did  not
originate  with  Joseph  Smith  or  Brigham  Young. .  The  Saints
operating  with  God  and  the  angels.., The  grand  organization
of  the  Church... Other  institutions  of  Ziou.  J,  Taylor*

TcmpU^  ill  AQCieut  America. The  GoJ  of  mankind  nn  irupdiMibte

bod..  The  truth  in  regard  to  him..  . Man  in  his  itnag*...Pre-
existence... Why  infanta  dig., .The  redemption  by  Jesus...
Plurality  of  gods,,. The  word  of  the  Lord  is  truth. O.  Pratt.

Origin  of  man  and  attributes  of  Deity...  Philosophers  and  as  trouo<
mem  versitu  the  Scriptures.., Matt  pusses  the  power  of  itn*

profemflDt..  This  develop**!  by  induration. E.  Snow.

Parable  of  the  vineyard..  The  gradual  organization  of  the  Church
...Duties  of  officers..*  Union  in  all  matter  *  advantaged  i
inevitable... Political  and  religious  growth.  O.  Pratt

.Remarks  at  NephL  Bishop  Hardy  and  J,  Taylor.

United  Order  ..Tithing, „ Co- operative  labors,  L.  Snow.

A  marvelous  work... Angel  visitation.., The  Book  of  Mormon...
Evidence  calculated  to  excite  faith... Testimony  not  always
to  salvation,  0.  Pratt.

Faith... Fulfillment  of  Prophecy  ..Restoration  of  the  Gospel,..
Priesthood,  W.  Woodruff.

The  heavens  full  of  intelligence... God  has  revealed  portions  of
that  for  the  welfare  of  his  children  ..Reasoning  from  science
to  sacred  things...  All  divine  law  u  neb  an  gable. J.  Taylor.

Opposition  to  God  among  mankind,,. Religion  intolerance  a  conse-
que  nee  . .  In  fidelity  the  result  of  departure  from  revealed  order
The  United  Order.  D.  H,  Wells,

Hq  salvation  in  ignorance...  Rev  id  at  ion  of  calamity ... This  world,
not  a  bad  one,  suited  to  its  purpose., .  Unbelief  of  mankind
The  Saints  will  live,  C  C,  Rich-


April 8, 1878,  300


Oct.

i  ■

311

•1  JLQ.

2ot

1878*

April

7P

330

May

Ifi,

11

334

April

21,

ti

341

June

16,

350

June

:iu(

t  1

357

.J  una

16t

363

.1  uue

If

367

J  urn-

30,

1  *

;;7l

JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOCRsiK  BY  PRESIDENT  ORIGffAM  YOl

B«UVfcBKl>  IN  THK  NEW  Ta B  £  11  .V  AC  I.  E,  SaLT  hAKK  ClTY, StUtJAY  AlTKr*.

yoosr,  April  211  1877.


(Reported  by  Geo*  R  tjlhbsj


I'HK  SOUTH — TH
' — THE  REhEMPTI


CTK  VV|].L


SARD  TO  TF1F
i) — THE  TEN


m  OF  A  TEMPLE—
[K KAKTH — VHE  CI

: pit  r est uo*.nt  — jhi

VIRGIN  8 — THE  #11


WILL


ANh.


ij,  I  ftm  thin ilc fut  H  my  Heavenly
■"her  for  the  privilege  of  meeting

2J?  yo11  *sr,|*n  *nd  f|m  h'lppv  *•■»  **  v

ub°n  during  ihe  last  sr*  jnonths  as
***f  bf  the  labors  of  my  life.  Here
J*  tile  a*kT are  yon,  my  brethren

sinters,  ftafiat) -d  tril h  The  Indira  '  we  might  have  the

J'3**  hiive boffltoated daring  the

^me  length  of  tiineP  This  t*  n
£ ?*liOn  yt>U will have to nu^'y  y

Qr  jruqpm.|vvH  to  your  own  c^osci*
|,fv-*. lr  you  (jfivit  cicm  wi-'j  >  11

'H  be  hlr^.-d,  wnd  ymi  will  feel
*UuBwi ;  if  yrm  have  iriftod  your-

J  l^e*  to  iln  ihnf  which  in  wrong
^*rri«  yourselves  or  toward*  «nv


jnyed  for  tinny  ceutnries,  that  we
hnve  any  knowledge  of.  We  lmve
lieen  permit  ted  to  enjoy  privileges
for  the  jMM-*'*.siori  of  which  wo  have
been  slrrvh  g;  an  I  In  boring  for  many
jrenrs-  For  almost  half  a  century
wo  hare  been  ciertiiig  ourselves  that


terinjf  into  a  Temple  of  God,  there
to  officiate  and  receive  I  he  ordinances

of  him  holv  Fioij*h.%  both  for  uuraelvus

and  fur  oar  friends  that  ha™  *>Upi
witbentt  the  Gospel. Thia  privilege

nni)  blinking  wt?  have  not  et  Joyed
until  within  u  very  few  months  past.
The  feel  in  jf  experienced  bvr  those  who
h  tme participated in the  hfeat


**r  person  on  the  earth t  or  to  the  ftd


1  ill  the  'IVmph


tSr^*^8*  °^  God,  or  to  on  i  H<*a-  j  thing  which  cannot  be  des
• lather,  ynnr  consciences  will your  understanding  Those
yuu-  have  shared  with  ns


'ihed  to
sly  who
Temple

the

that
onr


!  am  aware  that  yo«  wlnh  to  I  ordinances  know  for  Ihems
flff*^ BotftetMltg  of  our  labors  in  the  '  sutisfaction  there  is  in  renl  15

h  hi ^  ^*!** *mvt* ie  ^  *Dt'ee^  co-work

miV^*5^ time, Hiii'ti  a  time  an  iki  "  Ijnni anrl  Savior; that we  tiear  a

^r  P«*pJo  on  the  enrvh  have  en*  1  humble  part  in  the  great  work  of  sal-
t>  .  .  Vol.  XIX,


2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


va  t  inn ;  that  we  have  th^  pri  vilege
of  receiving  and  obeying  the  truth ,
and  of  securing  to  ourselves  that
happiness  which  the  Gospel  alone
affords  ;  and  not  only  of  performing
these  ordinances  tor  ourselves,  but
of  doing  the  necessary  work  for  our
patents  and  fore)  at  hers  who  have
slept  without  the  Gc  spel,  that  they
may  partake  akso  of  the  waters  of
life,  and  be  judged  according  to  men
in  the  flesh.  This  is  a  privilege,  a
blessing,  which  no  one  can  sense  un-
less be  is  in  possession  of  it.  We
are  happy  to  know  by  our  faith  and
feelings  through  the  spirit  ot  reve-
lation within  us  that  our  labors
have  been  accepted  of  the  Lord.
We  have  enjoyed  ourselves  exceed-
ingly in  the  society  of  each  other;
the  aged,  the  middle-aged  and  the
youth  have  rejoiced  and  been  made
glad  in  this  glorious  work.

When  I  look  upon  the  youth,  our
young  brethren  and  sisters,  who  are
more  or  less  unacquainted  with  the
great  principles  of  life  and  salvation,
I  wish  that  they  could  enjoy  what  a
few  of  our  young  people  did  this
past  winter,  their  minds  would  he
detached  from  the  t rides  and  follies
of  this  weak  world,  and  they  would
be  placed  upon  more  sacred  things,
upon  the  principles  that  are  calcula-
ted to  exalt  them  and  ennoble  every
feeling  and  desire  of  the  heart.

The  Latter-day  SaiutH  present  a
strange  spectacle  to  those  that  enjoy
the  spirit  of  revelation*  To  see
thern  following  after  the  spirit  of
this  world  and  gratifying  the  lust  of
the  eye  and  of  the  mind,  like  the
rest  of  mankind  who  have  never
enjoyed  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel  of
life  and  salvation;  and  yet  not  so
very  strange  when  we  realize  the
power  of  the  enemy  and  the  thou-
sands of  snares  which  he  lays  for
the  feet  ot  the  unwary,  to  draw  the
people  astray  from the  things  of


God.  Still,  when  we  view  the  great
object  of  our  life,  our  being  here
upon  the  earth,  being  brought  here
expressly  to  receive  that  experience
by  winch  we  can  discover  between
right  and  wrong,  between  good  and
evil,  between  light  and  darkness,
and  obtain  that  experience  that  an-
gels have,  that  the  gods  have,  and
that  all  exalted  beings  have,  and
remember  that  we  are  put  in  pos-
session of  those  principles  that  make
us  wise  unto  salvation,  that  we  should
stoop  to  the  sinful  deeds  and  sinful
reflections  that  many  do,  is  marvelous
and  strange.  When  I  think  of  these
things  I  am  impressed  with  the  great
importance  of  this  life  and  of  exer-
cising ourselves  in  the  privileges  that
God  has  granted  to  us  to  prep  tro
our  hearts  through  obedience  to  the
Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  for  a  high
station,  for  a  high  exaltation  in
worlds  to  come,  such  as  we  cannot
receive  whilst  clothed  in  this  mor-
tal tabernacle.  But  still,  in  thia
life  we  can  receive  little  by  little,
and  more  and  more,  growing  in
grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  the
truth,  until  our  minds  are  able  to
comprehend  many  of  the  great  things
of  eternity;  and  thus  prepare  our
hearts,  oy  overcoming  sin  and  the
weaknesses  of  humanity,  fur  that
exaltation  already  awaiting  the  right-
eous.

Sometimes  I  am  so  exercised  that
1  chastise  the  people  very  severely ;
but  I  will  say  to  the  Latter-day
Saints  that  I  have  no  chastisement
for  any  unless  they  deserve  it,  and  if
I  myself  am  found  guilty  of  the  same
wrongs,  I  receive  to  myself  a  por-
tion of  the  rebuke  which  I  give  to
others.  But  my  feelings  are  very
acute;  what  I  see  and  hear  oft  times
causes  me  sorrow  and  wonder,  and
I  feel  to  exclaim,  "  O  Lord,  have
mercy  upon  us,  thy  people !  "  How
easy  it  is  for  us  to  forget  the  Lord


i

ENJOYMENT  IN  THE  SOUTH,  ETC,


3


who  atoned  for  us,  and  to  depart  I
from  his  ways,  giving  way  to  the
false  ii.fluenc  s  that  fire  continually
prompting  our  minds  to  lust  after
the  tilings  of  this  world  in  their
•corrupt  condition.  All  this  is  strange
to  the  mind  opened  to  see  and  uu-
derst  and  the  tilings  of  God  and  the
things  of  eternity  as  they  are.  If
we  possessed  that  power,  that  influ-
ence over  ourselves,  a  proper  portion
of  that  stability  that  belongs  to  the
heavens,  when  we  once  embraced  the
truth  there  would  be  no  necessity  for
our  being  chastened,  no  necessity  for
-our  being  called  upon  to  refrain  from
this  or  that  wrong;  bat  the  weak-
ness of  the  flesh  is  so  great  that  we
need  continually  the  influence  of  our
Father  through  our  Lord  and  Sa-
vior Jesus  Christ,  to  hold  us  to  the
truth,  in  order  that  we  may  not  fall
away  therefrom  and  finally  wander
into  the  darkness  of  the  world,  for-
saking God  and  the  faith  we  have
embraced.

It  a>t.  mishing  that  men  should
do  so  when  we  consider  things  as
they  are,  and  witness  the  continued
love  ami  kindness  of  our  Heavenly
Father,  in  again  speaking  from  the
heavens,  revealing  himself  and  his
everlasting  Gospel  to  thechildreu  of
men,  as  well  as  tfcfe  ordinances/laws,
rulrs  and  regulations  of  his  House
which  etfect  the  salvation  of  both  the
living  and  the  dead.

How  is  it  with  my  brethren  and
sisters  here  ?  Are  they  awake  to
the  things  of  God  ?  If  they  are  We
shall  have  no  need  of  c  Ihng  upon
them  from  day  to  day,  from  week
to  week.  Brethren,  will  you  put
forth  your  hands  and  rear  these
Temples,  these  buildings  wherein
we  can  enter  and  officiate  for  our-

I selves  and  our  progenitors,  prepara-
tory to  the  coming  of  the  Son  of
Man,  which  coming  draws  near  ?
Will  we  build  up  the  Ziou  of  God


before  entering  info  the  millennium

of  rest, when wicked!! ess will  be
taken  away  from  the  earth  ?  Then
the  Latter-day  Saints  will  be  able  to
go  forth  without  being  persecuted  by
their  enemies,  and  opposed  on  every
hand  by  the  alluring  spirits  that  are
constantly  tempting  them  away  from
the  things  of  G> >d  to  follow  alter  the
things  of  a  fallen  world. Then  the
Saints  will  enjoy  t privilege  of
building  their  Temples  unmolested,
redeem their friends, and  make
ready  fur  the  time  when  the  nations
shall  come  up  to  the  presence  of
God  the  Fit  her,  to  be  judged  ac-
cording to  the  deeds  done  in  the
flesh. There  are  a  few  of  the  bre-
thren and  sisters  who  understand
things  as  they  are,  and  who  are
ready  and willing  to  devote  their
time  and  their  means  for  the  salva-
tion of  the  human  family. If  there
are  any  hearts  or  spirits  in  this  city,
or  elsewhere,  that  are  fearfully  won-
dering whether  or  not  we  are  going
to be  destroyed,  or  whether  this
Church  will  endure  and  become  the
mighty  power  in  the  earth,  according
to  the  predictions  of  the  servants  of
God,  I  will  say  to  all  such  trembling
souls  You  need  entertain  no  such
fears. You  need  have  only  one  fearf
and  that  is  with  regard  to  yourselves,
lest  you  should  leave  the  light  that
the  Lord  has  imparted  to  you  and
wander  into  darkness,  returning  to
the  beggarly  elements  of  the  world,
lusting  again  atti  r  the  things  of  the
world  in  their  siulul  s^ate.  The  earth
is  the  Lord's  and  the  fullness  thereof ;
even  the  very  things  which  we  are
so  tempted  to  covet,  through  lustful
desires,  in  and  of  themselves  are
pure and holy,  for  they  are  the
Lord's ;  but  we  wish  to  possess  them
I  unrighteously  and  not  according  to
the  will  of  God- This  is  the  sin
1  which  is  upon man-  Everything
which we  see  and  which  pertains


4


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


to  this  little  earth,  belongs  to  the
L«>rd,  and  the  whole  of  it  will  be
given  to  his  Saints  and  they  will
enjoy  it  forever  and  ever.  Bat  at
present  the  earth  is  groaning  under
sin  in  consequence  of  the  wicked-
3ii ss  of  the  children  of  men,  and  it
is  longing  to  be  delivered,  as  are  the
Saints  that  have  slept,  whom  the
Apostle  John  saw  and  heard,  when
he  was  an  exile  on  the  Isle  of  Pat
mos.  When  will  the  earth  be  re-
deemed, when  will  Jesns  come  to
receive  the  Church  as  a  bride,  when
will  lie  come  to  reign  King  of  na.
tions  as  he  now  reigns  King  of  Saints,
when  will  he  banish  wickedness  from
the  earth,  and  when  will  the  Saints
have  power  to  overcome  sin  ?  When
we  learn  to  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in
our  hearts.  As  fast  as  we  learn  to
Conform  our  individual  wills  to  his
will,  overcoming  sin  within  ourselves,
will  we  have  power  to  subdue  sin  in
those  that  surround  us,  aftd  in  this
way  the  whole  earth  will  be  redeemed
from  wickedness.  The  curse  which
has  been  brought  upon  the  earth
through  the  Fall  will  be  removed
through  the  faith  and  virtues  of  the
Saints.  When  we  become  sanctified
in  the  truth,  and  our  faith,  through
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  be-
comes sufficiently  powerful  we  will
be  able  to  remove  the  thorns  and
thi sties  and  obnoxious  weeds  that
grow  immediately  around  us,  and  to
bless  and  sanctify  our  gardens  and  >
farms,  so  that  they  will  bring  forth
spontaneously  the  fruits  and  flowers,
the  cereals  and  vegetables  that  sus-
tain life  ;  and  upon  this  principle  as
righteousness  extends  will  the  whole
earth  eventually  be  redeemed  and
sanctified,  when  all  things  will  be  as
they  were  in  the  beginning,  when  the
Lord  finished  the  earth  and  pro-
nounced everything  to  be  "  very  !
good/'  This  is  the  nature  of  the
great  latter-day  work  in  which  we


are  engaged,  and  were  it  not  for  the
confident  assurance  that  we  have  of
successfully  accomplishing  it,  I  would
tremble,  and  fear  might  enter  ray
heart.

Why  is  the  whole  Christian  world
concerned  about  your  humble  ser-
vant ?  They  say  Brigham  Young
is  not  fit  to  live,  that  be  ought  not
to  be  allowed  to  remain  upon  the
earth.  Would  they  remove  him  if
they  had  the  power  to  ?  Yes,  many
who  call  themselves  Christians  would
join  in  tbe  act,  and  many  others
would  consent  to  his  death  !  Not  the
bighminded  and  honorable  of  the
earth,  and  those  who  serve  God  and
his  Christ ;  but  the  bigot,  the  hypo-
crite, the  wicked  and  the  ungodly
would.  Why  ?  Simply  because
they  represent  their  master,  the  devil,
who  is  carrving  on  a  warfare  with  the
heavens,  and  their  hearts  are  opposed
to  God  and  to  all  that  represent  him.
This  conflict  always  has  been,  and
will  be  until  the  winding  up  scene.
If  I  had  to  depend  upon  my  own
wisdom  and  power,  in  connection
with  that  of  my  fellow-laborers,  I
might  well  tremble  and  fear.  But  I
depend  not  upon  human  wisdom  or
human  power,  I  occupy  the  position
that  God  our  Heawnly  Father  has
placed  me  in,  and  while  I  exercise
myself  in  the  duties  that  he  has
committed  to  me,  seeking  to  build
up  his  kingdom  and  establish  right-
eousness upon  the  earth,  holding  the
dominion  for  him  and  for  the  family
of  Christ,  I  tremble  not,  I  fear  not,
neither  do  I  care  for  the  insults  of
the  world,  for  the  Lord  is  my  bul-
wark, my  shield  and  my  deliverer.
But  have  not  some  of  the  wicked
succeeded  in  removing  others  from
the  earth  ?  Yes,  they  killed  Joseph
and  Hyrum  Smith,  while  under  the
pledged  faith  of  the  State  of  Illinois;
and  at  Haun's  Mill,  Missouri,  they
massacred about  eighteen of  our


ENJOYMENT  IN  THE  SOUTH,  ETC


brethren  and  sisters,  innocent  men,
women  and  children,  without  the
first  cause  or  provocation;  and  fur-
thermore, the  perpetrators  of  these
and  other  murders  were  never
brought  to  justice  ;  in  fact,  the  press
of  the  nation  advocated  the  destruc-
tion of  "  Mormon  ism,"  and  on  the
death  of  the  leaders  of  our  Church,
all  the  consolation  that  public  opinion
afforded  their  bereaved  families,  as
well  as  the  members  of  the  Church,
over  which  they  presided,  was  that
that  would  put  an  end  to  *■  Mormon*
ism."  But  will  the  Lord  overlook
and  forget  such  crimes  ?  No,  for
the  blood  of  the  innocent  is  contin-
ually crying  unto  him  for  vengeance,
which  he  will  administer  in  his  own
due  time.  He  has  already  vt-xed  this
nation  and  given  the  people  time  to
pause  and  consider  their  conduct;
and  if  they  repent  not  by  turning
from  their  corruptions  and  wicked-

f  ness,  he  has  only  to  say  to  the  inno-
♦cent,  and  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
"  Wait  a  little,  wait  a  little,  and  their
<;up  will  be  full  to  overflowing/'  I
have  said  to  my  brethren  and  sisters,
and  I  say  it  now,  Go  to  Jackson
County,  and  to  Caldwell  County,
where  the  lives  of  Latter-day  Saints
have  been  taken  and  from  where
they  have  been  driven ;  go  to  the
region  of  Haun's Mill, where  so

*  many  were  massacred  because  they
bad  come  up  to  the  western  part  of
Missouri,  and  it  was  said  they  were
*  Mormons,"  and  you  will  find  that
we,  in  all  our  persecutions,  have  not
suffered  so  much  as  the  characters
who  executed  judgment  upon  the
*  innocent.  If  I  were  asked  to-day
if  we  as  a  people  had  suffered  per-
secution, i  would  say,  44  No,  nothing
worth  mentioning."  This  has  e?er
been  the  case  with  the  righteous,  and
it  ever  will  be,  For  when  their  lives
are  taken Sor  the  Gospels  sake,  they
go  to  the  Father,  to  the  paradise  of


rest,  where  they  are  free  from  the
influence  and  power  of  sinful  aud
wicked  men.  But  how  different  with
the  wicked  and  ungodly !  When
they  die  their  sufferings  which  cannot
be  described,  only  commence.  But
we  have  received  enough  to  under-
stand that  the  wicked  are  a  rod  in
the  hands  of  God  to  chasten  his  chil-
dren ?  It'  you  do  not,  it  is  time  that
you  had  learned  it,  for  it  is  even  so;
and  if  we  are  chastened,  it  is  for  a
purpose,  probably  to  bring  us  to  a
sense  of  our  duty,  that  we  may  know
the  hand-dealing  of  the  Lord  towards
us.  But  were  we  ever  destroyed?
No,  neither  will  God  permit  us  to
be,  so  long  as  we  are  desirous  of  being
his  servants,  and  of  doing  the  work
given  us  to  do.  Although  it  was
necessary  that  Jesus  should  suffer  on
the  cross  for  the  sins  of  the  world,
still  it  might  be  said  of  those  who  took
an  active  purr  in  the  deed,  as  well  as
those  who  consented  to  it  in  their
hearts,  "  Woe  unto  them  by  whom
this  offence  came."  Many  of  the
Prophets  have  sealed  their  testimony
with  their  blood,  that  their  testament
might  go  forth  with  force  and  not
return  void.  As  in  ancient  days,  so
in  modern  days.  When  Joseph
Smith  sealed  his  testimony  with  his
blood,  his  testament  from  that  mo-
ment wad  in  force  to  all  the  world;
and  woe  to  those  who  fight  against
it.  What  will  we  do  to  them  ?
Nothing  at  all,  but  preach  the  Gos-
pel. They  may  lie  about  us  as  they
please.  If  we  will  faithfully  mind
our  own  concerns,  live  our  religion,
do  good  to  all  men,  preach  the  Gospel
to  the  nations  of  the  earth,  gather
up  the  honest  in  heart,  build  up  and
establish  Zion  in  the  earth,  send  the
Gospel  to  the  House  of  Israel,  ai  d
live  and  serve  God  in  all  things,  all
will  be  well  with  us,  we  have  no  cause
for  lear  in  the  least.  When  the  Lord
deems  it  necessary  that  his  servants


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


should  seal  their  testimony  with  their

if

blood;  in  order  that  his  word  may  be
Strengthened  and  of  greater  force  in
the  eaith,  so  let  it  be  ;  they  are  re-
ceived into  the  arms  of  Jehovah,
they  rejoice  in  the  society  of  those
who  are  waiting  rafriently  until  the
tramp  shall  sound,  when  the  sleeping
nations  shall  awake  and  their  bodies
come  forth  to  be  reunited  jrith  their
spirits,  and  the  faithful  enter  into  a
fullness  of  his  glory.  With  them
all  his  well,  all  is  right.

But  do  we  live  our  religion  ?  The
only  tear  I  have  is  that  we  are  not  as
faithful  as  we  should  be.  We  give
way  to  passion,  we  yield  to  tempta-
tion ;  whereas,  we  ought  to  live  80
that  the  Lord  can  strengthen  the
position  of  his  people  and  multiply
the  righteous,  how  fast  and  to  what
decree  is  not  for  me  to  say.  But  if
the  Latter- day  Saints  were  as  right-
eous and  as  holy  as  we  are  capable  of
being  by  reducing  to  practice  the
doctrine  we  have  received,  I  am
sure  that  the  Lord  could  hasten  his
work,  and  he  would  cut  it  short  in
righteousness,  it  would  be  consum-
mated much  quicker  than  he  can  in
our  present  condition.  The  acts  and
condition  of  the  people  here  on  the
earth  must  be  considered,  the  same
is  held  in  remembrance  before  the
throne  of  God,  for  he  requires  of  his
people  to  act  with  him  in  all  things
pertaining  to  the  building  up  of  his
kingdom  upon  the  earth.  But  his
grace  is  always  ready,  his  Spirit  is
always  waiting,  and  the  light  that
Jesus  brought  into  the  world  is  al-
ways with  the  people,  teaching  thera
the  right  from  the  wrong,  He  is
the  light  of  the  world  that  lighteth
every  man  that  Cometh  into  the
world,  and  if  the  whisperings  of  his
Spirit  and  its  dictates  were  hearkened
to  and  obeyed,  all  men  everywhere
would  grow  in  the  truth,  much  faster
than  we  Latter-day  Saints  are  doing.


It  is  a  source  of  mortification  to
know  that  men  and  women  who  have
been  in  this  Church  from  twenty  to
forty  years  should  still  be  so  prone
to  the  weaknesses  of  the  flesh.  What
do  I  see  ?  If  I  do  not  witness  it
with  my  own  eyes,  I  hear  of  it
through  those  who  do — men,  ofttimes
of  long  standing  in  the  Church,  drink
a  little,  they  s^ear  a  little,  smoke  or
chew  a  little,  and  indulge  their  appe-
tites in  those  things  which  the  Lord
has  warned  us  against,  and  which  he
has  said  are  not  good  for  man.  They,
too,  can  spend  their  time  wandering
about  these  mountains  hunting  for
gold  and  silver,  they  can  mingle  and
associate  with  those  whose  lives  are
records  of  vice  and  immorality,  and
who  are  ready  to  oppose  God  and
Induce  the  character  of  his  servants.
Can  Saints  of  God,  Elders  in  Israel,
who  are  exercised  by  the  power  aud
spirit  of  their  holy  calling,  who  have
within  them  the  gift  of  eternal  life,
can  they  be  guilty  of  such  things  and
stand  approved  before  God  r  No,
they  cannot ;  and  I  say,  shame  upon
such  men,  they  are  a  disgrace  to
themselves,  and  their  actions  are  a
disgrace  to  the  name  of  Saint.  It
is  a  disgrace,  too,  to  the  sisters,  as
well  as  the  brethren,  who  thirst  after
the  vain  fashions  and  foolish  practices
of  the  world.  Cease  to  pattern  after
those  who  know  not  God.  How
would  such  conduct  compare  with
the  conversation  and  deportment  of
the  angels  whom  we  exoect  to  meet  ?
Would  they  want  to  adopt  the  prac-
tices and  fashions  of  the  wicked
world  ?  No,  they  have  higher  aims
and  holier  aspirations,  they  live  above
vanity;  so  should  the  Latter-day
Saints.  Our  hearts  should  be  pure,
entertaining  such  things  only  as  are
comely,  chaste  and  praiseworthy  be-
fore him.  This  is  the  course  of  life
thai  he  expects  of  us.

I  have  a  great  many  reflections,


ENJOYMENT  IN  THE  SOUTH,  ETC.


7


especially  when  alone,  1  converse  with
myself  upon  these  eternal  things,
things  which  the  frivolous,  the  vain,
and  those  who  are  engaged  only  with
the  things  of  this  world,  never  think
of.  With  regard  to  the  society  of
heaven,  their  conversation  and  deport-
ment, consider  the  magnitude  and
greatness  of  the  character  of  holy
beings,  contemplate  the  expanse  of
eternity  and  the  life  that  is  belure  us,
and  then  how  insign  Beaut  appears
this  world  as  it  now  is!  Still,  in
our  humanity,  iu  our  fallen  condition,
that  divine  influence  is  more  or  less
with  as,  and  it  we  would  preserve
ourselves  to  dwell  with  the  holy  ones
of  heaven  and  have  joy  in  our  being,
we  must  faithfully  adhere  to  and
practice  the  principles  of  eternal  life;
and  in  doing  so,  he  will  add  tor  our
comfort  and  enjoyment  all  tilings
necessary  pertaining  to  this  life.  .

Fear  not  with  regard  to  the  sue-
cess  of  this  Chuieh  ana  kingdom.
Rather  fear  you  should  not  he  counted
worthy  to  l5e  numbered  among  the
sane  titled  when  Jesus  comes  to  make
up  his  jewels;  rather  fear  lest  you
should  be  found  in  the  condition  ot
the  five  foolish  virgins  whose  lamps
had  gone  out  and  who  were  unpre-
pared to  meet  t  he  bridegroom  because
they  had  no  oil, lie  member,  Latter-
day  Saints,  there  were  live  wise  and
five  foolish,  an  equal  division,  and
yet  they  were  all  virgins. The  ap-
plication is  a  just  one  and  has  a  direct
bearing  on  ua,  as  Later-day  Saints*
The  wise  among  us  will  take  heed,
will  hearken  to  the  instructions  and
counsels  of  th*-  servants  ot  God,  will
pattern  after  Christ,  and  thirst  after
the  things  of God,  and  our  lamps
will  be  trimmed  and  burning,  ?md
we  will  he  prepared  to  meet  the  bride-
groom when  he  conies,  and  they  that
are  ready  will  enter  in  with  him  to
the  marriage  ;  and  whether  or  not
the  door  be  shut  upon  those  not  so


well  prepared  is  a  matter  that  belongs
so  ley  to  him,  and  lie  can  do  just  as
he  pleases  about  it. I  want  to  have
oil  in  my  vessel,  so  that  in  case  I
should,  in  consequence  of  the  weak*
ness  of  the  flesh,  slumber  a  little,
fin  arising  my  lamp  would  be  trim-
med ready  to  burn. This  is  doubt-
less your  desire. Then  live  for  it  ;
mingle  not your  voices  with  the
wicked,*  seek  not  after  the  delusive
things  of  this  world  in  their  present
state. But  is  not  the  Lord  going  to
give  the  earth  and  the  riches  thereof
to  his  Saints  r Yes,  that  is  the  pro-
mise, and  he  has  spoken  it  by  the
mouth  of  many  of his  Prophets.
But  when  will  this  inheritance  pass
into  the  hands  of  his  people?  When
we  shall  have  sanctified  the  Lord  in
our  hearts,  sanctified  our  bodies  and
spirits  in  the  truth,  and  we  become
pure  and  holy,  free  from  selfishness
and  from  every  sin ;  and  until  we
shull  have  readied  this  state  of  per-
fection, we  never  need  exptct  these
things  committed  to  our  can*,  for
he  will  not  do  it. When  the  judg-
ment is  given  to  the  Saints,  it  will
he becniso  of  their  righteousness,
because  they  will  judge  even  as  the
angels  and  as  the  Gods,  and  not  as
the  wicked  do  at  the  present  time,
who  care  not  for  God  nor  for  justice,
who  care  not  for  truth  nor  raeiey,
loVe  nor  kindness,  who  judge  ac-
1  cording  to  the  wickedness  of  their
hearts. I  am  very  thankful  that  it
is  not  our  province,  in  our  present
condition,  to  judge  the  world  \  if  it
I  were,  we would ruin  everything.
We  have  not  sufficient  wisdom,  oar
minds  are  not  filled  with  the  know-
ledge and  power  of  God  ;  the  spirit
needs  to  contend  with  the  flesh  a  lit-
tle more  until  it  shall  be  successful
in  subduing  its  passions,  until  the
uhole  soul  is  brought  into  perfect
harmony  with  the  mind  and  will  of
i  God. Aud  we  must  also  acquire  the


8


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


discretion  that  God  exercises  in  being
able  to  look  into  futurity,  and  to
ascertain  and  know  the  results  of  our
acts  away  in  the  future,  even  in  eter-
nity, before  we  will  be  capable  of
judging.

Let  us  live  po  that  we  shall  lu>
ready  for  any  dispensation  of  provi-
dence. It  is  said  He  will  come  as  a
thief  in  the  night.  We  had  better
be  on  the  watch-tower,  flatting  in
readiness  for  him,  than  to  be  putting
off  the  time,  for  peradrentute  we
might  put  it  off  until  it  is  too  late.

I  have  something  to  s?*y  to  the
Latier-dav  Saints  about  their  tern-
poral  a  Hairs,  how  we  should  live
temporally, taking proper  aire  of


that  which  is  committed  to  our
charge,  and  using  it  for  the  benefit
of  ourselves  and  others,  which  I  will
tell  you  on  some  future  occasion.

On  the  second  Saturday  and  Sun-
day  in  May,  the  12th  and  13th,  we
will  hold  a  two  days*  meeting  here,
or,  if  you  choose  to  call  it  bo,  a  Dis-
trict Conference  of  this  Stake  of
Zion,  to  which  you,  and  as  many  as
can  make  it  convenient  to  attend,  are

I  invited.  If  you  wiill  come  with
clean  hands  and  pure  hearts,  full  of
faith,  so  that  the  Lord  can  pour  out
his  spirit  upon  us,  we  will  have  a
time  of  rejoicing, God  bless  you.

i  Amen.


DISCOURSE  DELIVERED  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

At  a  Special  Conference,  at  Logan,  ox  Sunday  Mokninw,  May  20th,

1877.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Oibbs)

REVELATION  GRADUAL— HYRUM  SMITH'S  EXPERIENCE — THE  LORD  HAS
NOT  SHUT  DOWN  THE  GATES  OF  1 1 EV ELATION — THE  CHURCH  ORGA-
NIZATION NOT  PERFECTED  AT  ONCE-  THE  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  ZIuN  —
BUILDING TEMPLES — THEIR STVLE AND CHARACTER PROG  RESSlTl —

DILIGENCE  WILL  SECURE  THE  BLESSING.

r

I  will  read  a  few  items  from  scrip-  tain  the  more  part  of  the  things
ture  spoken  by  Mormon,  which  will  which  he  taught  the  peuple ;  and
be  found  on  the  4Stth  pag*1  of  the  these  things  have  I  written,  which
Book  of  Mormon,  European  edition — are  a  lesser  part  of  the  things  which

"And  now  there  cannot  be  writ-  he  taught  the  people;  and  I  have
ten  in  this  book,  even  a  hundredth  :  written  them  to  the  intent  that
part  of  the  things  which  Jesus  did  they  may  be  brought  again  unto
truly  teach  unto  the  people;  but  this  people,  from  the  Gentiles,  :*o
behold  the  phi  tea  of  Me  phi  do  con-  |  cording  to  the  words  which  Jesus


REVELATION  GRADUAL,  ETC


9


hath  spoken.  And  when  they  slmll
have  received  this,  which  is  expedient
that  they  should  have  first,  to  try
their  faith,  and  if  it  so  be  that  they
shall  believe  these  things,  then  shall
the  greater  things  be  manifest  unto
them.  And  if  it  so  be  that  they  will
not  believe  these  tiling,  then  shall
the  greater  things  be  withheld  from
them,  onto  their  condemnation.
Behold  I  were  about  to  write  them
all  which  were  engraved  upon  the
plates  of  Nephi,  but  the  Lord  for-
bid it,  saying,  1  will  try  the  faith
of  my  people;  therefore,  I,  Mormon,
do  write  the  things  which  have  been
commanded  me  of  the  Lord."

The  reason  why  I  have  read  these
words  is  to  show  to  the  people  more
fully,  or  to  impress  upon  their  minds
the  way  and  manner  in  which  the
Lord  deals  with  his  people.  It  is
within  his  power,  if  he  see  proper
to  do  so,  to  pour  out  upon  the  people
a  vast  amount  of  knowledge  all  at
-once,  that  their  minds  may  be  com*
pletely  surfeited  with  the  abundance
of  t lie  knowledge  communicated  to
them.  But  the  Lord  has  not  seen
proper  to  thus  deal  with  the  Latter-
day  Saints.  He  has  another  object
in  view  than  this.  He  intends  to
instruct  them  little  by  little,  here  a
little  when  it  is  needed,  and  there
a  little  when  it  is  needed;  giving
them  a  line  upon  this  subject  when
it  is  necessary,  and  there  a  tine
upon  another  subject,  leading  them
along,  step  by  step,  just  as  a  wise,
careful  parent  would  his  little  chil-
dren, until  they  become  instructed
in  every  principle  that  would  be  for
their  good.  It  is  not  because  the
Lord  is  not  willing  that  bis  intelli-
gent children  should  enjoy  this  greater
amount  of  knowledge  ;  it  is  not  be-
cause he  does  not  desire  the  human
family  to  placed  in  possession  of  all
the  wisdom  that  their  hearts  are
prepared  to  receive. He  is  willing,


on  his  part,  that  the  people  should
become  very  intelligent  in  regard  to
everything,  pertaining  to  their  fu-
ture welfare.  He  is  willing  that
they  should  know  more  concerning
himself,  his  attributes  and  their  own,
to  learn  concerning  the  glories  of
his  kingdom  and  the  mysteries
thereof  and  everything  that  would
be  essential  for  their  comfort  and
happiness  in  this  world.  This  the
Lord  is  willing  to  do  in  behalf  of
his  children.  But  he  knows  far
better  than  we  do,  what  the  people
are  prepared  to  receive,  and  what
they  arc  not  prepared  to  receive ;
and  we  can  see  this  illustrated  by
the  words  which  I  have  read.  Mor-
mon informs  us  that  he  was  about
to  write  all  Hie  tinners  which  Jesus
hi\d  taught,  but  the  Lord  expressly
forbade  it,  and  the  reason,  as  given
to  Mormon  for  not  permitting  this
was,  that,  he  intended  to  try  the  faith
of  his  people  in  the  latter-days,  and
of  w hum  he  said  that  if  they  would
believe  these  things  and  hearken,
then  should  the  greater  things  be
made  manifest  to  them  ;  but  it,  on
the  other  hand,  they  should  nut  lie-
lie  ve  these  few  things,  then  should
the  greater  things  he  withheld  from
them,  to  their  condemnation.

This  reminds  me  of  a  certain  say-
ing, given  in  1S^9,  betbre  the  rise
of  this  Church,  Hyrurn  Smith  had
left  his  home  in  Manchester,  N.  Y  ,
and  had  gone  down  to  Susquehanna,
Penn.,  about  a  hundred  miles,  to
visit  his  brother  Joseph,  the  Prophet,
who  was  then  in  the  act  of  trans-
lating the  Book  ot  Mormon.  When
Hyrurn  arrived  he  felt  very  anxious
to  know  about  his  calling  and  min-
istry— whether  he  could  not  go  forth
to  preach  these  glorious  things.  It
would  be  very  natural  for  a  person  to
feel  very  anxious  about  this,  for  the
things  contained  in  the  manuscript,
so  tar  as  he  had  become  acquainted


10


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.

■


with  them,  were  so  glorious,  that  he  [
wished  everybody  to  know  about
them.  As  will  be  found  on  page
98  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  the  Lord
told  Hyrnm  not  to  be  in  a  hurry.  In
other  words,  the  Lord  had  his  own
time  to  ordain  to  the  ministry,  his
own  time  to  send  forth  missionaries
among  the  people.  **  Dou't  you  be
in  a  hurry  in  this  matter.'*  But  said
the  Lord  to  him,  (M  will  tell  yon
what  you  may  do;  you  should  study
my  woid  which  has  goi^e  forth  among
the  children  of  men,  and  also  that
which  shall  come  forth,  even  that
which  is  now  being  translated."
"Seek  8rst  to  obtain  my  word,  then
eh  a  11  your  tongue  be  looked  ;  then,
if  you  desire,  you  shall  have  my
spirit,  which  shall  enable  you  to  con-
vince men  of  the  truth.**  Another
lesson  to  be  learned  from  this  is,  that
Hyrum,  instead  of  being  in  a  great
hurry  in  this  matter,  was  required
to  store  up  the  word  of  God  iu  his
mind,  to  be  thoroughly  acquainted
with  the  Jewish  record,  as  well  as
that  which  was  then  being  translated,
until  he  had  obtained  all  that  the
Lord  should  grant  to  the  children
of  men  in  the  generation  that  was
then  living — lB^U.  We  may  learn
that  the  Lord  did  intend  to  give  only
about  so  much  to  the  generation  then
living.  !

A  great  many  have  supposed  that
there  must  be  a  gieut  lack  on  t he
part  of  the  Latter-day  {Saints,  be-
cause spiritual  knowledge  is  not  all
the  time  being  poured  down  from
heaven,  like  a  flood  in  their  midst ;
some  become  doubtful  and  feel  to
murmur  and  complain  one  to  ano-
ther, carrying  the  idea  among  the
people  that  God  has  forsaken  Ziou,
that  God  has,  in  a  measure,  with-
drawn his  spirit  from  us:  saying,
u  Where  are  the  revelations  such  as
were  given  in  the  days  of  Juseph  t
The  Lord  then  poured  out  upon  us


of  hi.s  spirit  continually;  we  then
received  record after  record,  book
after  book,  etc/*  The  reason  is  clearly
defined  here;  the  Lord,  in  his  own
time,  will  fulfill  and  accomplish  his
purposes,  and  he  was  determined,
not  only  in  these  days,  but  he  had
the  same  determinations  some  fifteen
centuries  ago,  when  lie  talked  with
Mormon  the  Prophet,  that  a  people
who  should  live  on  the  earth  in  the
last  days,  should  have  just  about  so
much  information,  and  no  mure,  as
tar  as  sacred  records  and  books  are
concerned. Do  not  misunderstand
me  by  this  expression,  and  c irry  it
to  the  other  extreme,  and  say,  that
God  determines  to  give  about  so
much,  atid  then  shut  down  the  gate
and  give  no  revelation  at  all.  but
he  intended,  so  far as  the  great
principles  of  the  Goj>pel  are  concerned,
the  fundamental principles  of  sal-
vation, that we should  have  the
Bible  and the Book of  Mormon.
Then  He  determined,  still  further,
that there  should  be  a  sufficiency
pwn  from  year  to  year,  dm  mj  the
life-time  of  the  Prophet  Joseph,  to
know  how  to  properly  organize  the
Church. These  further  revelations
were  published  in  the  Doctrine  and
Covenants. These having  been
I  given  as  a  pattern,  for  the  com-
mencement of  the  organization,  the
Lord has  seen  proper  to  withhold,
I  tor the time being,  the  giving  of
additional  sacred  records,  that  the
Saints  might  show  their  faith. "  I
will  try  the  faith  of  my  people,  I
will  see  whether  they  will  be  obe-
dient to my commandments,  and
the  laws  which  1  have  revealed  to
them. If  they  will  be  faithful — if
they  will  practice  upon  that  which
I  have  given,  then  shall  the  greater
tilings be  made  man i (cut  to  them.
Uut  it  they  will  not  do  this,  they
shall  be  withheld  from them,  to
;  their  condemnation.11


REVELATION  GRADUAL,  ETC


11


There  will  be  a  point,  in  the  his-
tory of  this  people,  when  they  will
be  counted  worthy  to  receive  all
that  knowledge  and  intelligence
which  the  Lord  has  held  in  reserve
for  them,  from  before  the  founda-
tion of  the  world.  Such  is  the  glo-
rious destiny  of  this  people,  to  be
realized  in  due  time.  But  our  pre-
sent work  is  to  comply  with  that
which  God  has  already  given,  and
which  he  may  hereafter  give,  through
the  living  oracles  that  he  has  placed
within  our  midst.

Now  the  Lord  has  not  .shut  down
the  gate;  he  has  not  closed  up  the
spirit  of  inspiration,  as  all  these  peo-
ple are  witnesses.  What  man,  un-
less he  hud  been  tinder  the  spirit  of
inspiration,  and  the  wisdom  that
conies  down  from  heaven,  could
have  led  forth  this  people  from  the
midst  of  the  wicked,  and  established
them  here  in  this  mountain  desert,
and  created  the  wonders  we  now
behold  ?  No  man,  however  great
might  be  his  natural  wisdom  and
ability,  could  have  accomplished  a
work  of  this  nature,  unless  aided
by  direct  revelation.  The  Spirit  ot
the  living  God,  from  the  time  of  the
death  of  Joseph  to  the  present,  has
rested  upon  President  B.  Young,
urging  him  forward,  first  to  organize
the  people  and  lead  them  forth  from
the  midst  of  their  enemies,  and,  se-
cond, to  establish  them  here  in  these
mountains.  He  bad  not  the  experi-
ence, beforehand,  to  do  this;  he  had
never  lived  in  a  country  where  the
people  were  accustomed  to  irrigate
their  farms ;  he  had  never  lived  in  a
country  where  the  people  necessarily
were  compelled  to  live  compactly
together,  as  we  have  to  do  here.
But  he  had  been  accustomed  to  live
in  a  country  where  the  people  spread
abroad  wherever  they  took  a  notion
to;  consequently  it  was  just  as  new
to  him,  when  entering  these  valleys,


as  to  the  rest  of  us,  *And  nothing
hut  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  the
inspirations  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  could
have  enabled  him  to  do  what  he  has
done,  and  to  direct  all  this  people
throughout  this  Territory,  in  regard
to  their  settlements,  not  only  here,
but  wherever  the  Latter-day  Saints
have  been  located.  Consequently,
you  perceive  that  God  has  not  for-
saken us,  the  spirit  of  revelation  has
been  with  us.  But  then  it  has  not
been  wisdom  in  God,  that  all  this
revelation  should  be  written  and
published;  because  many  things  the
servants  of  God  are  inspired  to  do
under  one  set  of  circumstances,  would
not  be  required  of  them,  under  u  new
condition  of  circumstances;  hence,
such  revelations  would  not  become  a
standi  Tig  law  for  all  future  time.  For
instance,  in  order  to  form  new  set-
tlements, the  circumstances  are  very
different  from  what  they  are  after
you  have  enlarged  your  settlements
and  become  numerous  in  population,
and  other  duties  become  necessary.
Consequently  the  Lord  has  imparted
a  little  here,  and  a  little  there,  and
instructed  and  counselled  the  people,
through  his  servants,  what  should  be
done  in  the  incipient  stages,  or  in  the
forming  uf  settlements,  in  this  moun-
tain region.

In  the  midst  of  all  this  continu-
ous organization  that  has  been  going
on,  ever  since  the  rise  of  the  Church,
it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that
many  things  have  been  left  appa-
rently at  loose  ends,  for  the  time
being,  in  order  that  the  people
might  prove  themselves.  Men  have
been  sent,  year  after  year,  to  form
new  settlements,  and  to  do  this
kind  of  work,  and  that  kind,  with-
out being  specially  ordained  to  ac-
complish those  particular  duties.
What  for?  To  see  whether  they
would  manifest  that  the  Spirit,  of
the  living  God  was  with  tliem,  and


12


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


that  they  were  worthy  of  01  di na-
tion ;  and  if  st>,  then  afterwards  they
should  be  ordained  and  set  apart,
as  Bishops,  as  presidents  ot  Stakes,
et<\  But  one  may  inquire,  44  Why
not  perfect  these  organizations  at
once  "r"  Been  use  there  is  a  day  of
calling,  which  is  distinct  from  a
day  of  chuosing.  And  when  the
Lord  has  called  his  servants  and
appointed  them  to  perform  a  cer-
tain work,  it  they  manifest  a  wil-
lingness, on  their  part,  to  exercise
the  wisdom  that  comes  from  God,
in  the  performance  of  their  do  ties,
then  perhaps  the  day  ot  choosing
may  come,  and  they  be  set  apart
and  ordained,  according  to  the  law
contained  in  the  Book  of  Covenants*
It  means,  at  this  present  stage  of  the
work,  having  toiled  now  about  thirty
years  in  these  mountains,  that  the
Lord  is  about  to  44  right  tip"  the
people;  and  he  has  inspired  him  who
presides  over  us,  to  organize  us  more
fully.  Let  those  be  chosen  who  have
fulfilled  their  appointments  in  faith-
fulness; let  them  be  ordained,  and
have  their  counselors;  let  them  act
now  in  a  higher  sphere,  with  more
power,  because  they  have  proven
themselves  faithful  over  a  few  things,
therefore  let  them  be  made  rulers
■over  many  things.  This  is  after
the  order  of  heaven ;  this  is  after
the  order  of  that  judgment  that  will
be  more  fully  carried  out  in  the  great
day  of  the  Lord.  Things  will  pats
along  here  in  time,  as  a  pattern  of
things  in  regard  to  his  future  king-
dom. They  will  pass  along  fur  years,
until,  l»y  stud  by,  in  the  great  judg-
ment day,  these  persons  will  have
gained  an  experience  and  knowledge
that  will  quality  them  to  act  efficient  ly
in  the  duiies  and  callings  to  which
they  have  been  called;  and  they  will
act,  not  as  those  who  are  ignorant,
but  as  men  who  have  had  a  practical
experience,  year  alter  year,  having


used  their  stewardship  to  the  glory
of  God.

Brother  Erastus  Snow  spoke  to  us
very  plainly,  last  evening,  in  relation
to  all  the  officers,  from  the  com-
mencement of  the  Church  down  to
the  present  time.  When  we  have
dune  all  we  can  do,  towards  organiz-
ing as  far  as  possible,  according  to
the  written  law  of  God,  as  given  to
us,  in  our  weakness,  have  we  com-
pleted the  organization  ?  By  no
means.  The  organization  is  only
perfect  as  far  as  the  people  are  pre-
pared to  receive  it,  and  no  further.
To  say  thai  there  will  be  a  stated
time,  in  the  history  of  this  Church,
during  its  imperfections  and  weak-
ness, when  the  organization  will  be
perfect,  and  that  there  will  be  no  far-
ther extension  or  addition  to  the
organization,  would  be  a  mistake.
Organization  is  to  go  on,  step  after
step,  ftom  one  degree  to  another,  just
as  the  pen  pie  increase  and  grow  in
the  knowledge  of  the  principles  and
laws  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and
as  their  borders  shall  extend.  For
instance,  to  illustrate  my  ideas  more
fully  upon  this  point.  We  read,  in
the  Scriptures  of  truth,  concerning
the  latter-day  Ziou ;  we  read  that
Zion  is  to  become  a  great  people,  41  a
small  oue  to  become  a  .strong  nation."
We  also  read  that  out  of  Zion  shall
go  forth  the  Jaw,  We  also  read  that
Zion  is  to  become  so  glorious,  in
times  to  come,  that  the  nations  that
are  afar  will  Say  to  one  another,
44  Surely  Zion  is  the  City  of  our  God,
for  the  Lord  is  there;  his  puwer  is
there,  his  glory  is  there,"  etc-  Now
if  there  be  a  time,  in  the  history  of
the  latter-day  Zion,  that  the  power  of
God  will  be  made  manifest  in  their
midst,  so  as  to  stir  up  the  nations
afar  off,  causing  them  to  exclaim  that
Zion  is  truly  the  City  of  God  ;  her
laws  are  divine ;  let  us  become  sub-
ject to  her  laws  ;  do  you  suppose  that


RFVGLATION  GRADUAL,  ETC


13


we,  with  our  present  organization,
after  perfecting  it  as  much  as  we  can
expect  to,  could  be  ready  and  pre-
pared to  send  forth  laws  to  foreign
nations  for  their  government  ?  No.
There would then  be  persons  or-
dained  and set  apart  for  various
purposes,  not  to bestow  any  new
Priesthood,  for  it  is  all  included  in
the  everlasting  and  eternal  Priest-
hood, after  the  order  of  the  Son  of
God  ;  but  to  set  apart  persona  already
holding  the  Priesthood  in  the  great
organization  ;  to  Teceive  divine  laws;
or,  in  other  words,  to  regulate  the
nations,  according  to  the  laws  of
Zion;  that  they  may  understand  her
laws,  and  know  what  the  divine  gov-
ernment is,  by  which  they  are  to  be
governed  ;  in  other  words,  ministers
or  plenipotentiaries  are  to  be  sent
lorth  to  transact  business  among  all
nations  and  peoples  who  willingly
shall  become  subject  to  the  I ws  of
Zion. As  to  the  rebellious  nations,
there  will  be  none  left  alive Ah  it
is  written,  '  that  nation  or  kingdom
that  will  not  serve  thee  shall  perish/'
"Those nations shall be  utterly
wasted away consequently,  the
nations  left,  who  are  not  i orally  des-
troyed will  be  anxious  to  he  governed
by  the  laws  of  Zion. Hence  there
will  be  an  organization  before  the
winding-up  scene  that  will  control  the
nations  politically,  giving  them  the
privilege  of  remaining  in  their  own
land  if  they  choose  to  do  so,  but  sub-
ject to  the  laws  of  Zion.

I  will  not,  however,  confine  the
future  organizations  of  the  Church
of  God  to  ^he  political  matters  of  the
nations.  There  is  to  be  a  more  per-
fect organization  between  the  living
and  the  dead  of  all  former  dispen-
sations, which  organization  is  just
as  necessary  as  that  which  exists
among  the  lining,  on  this  side  of  the
grave.  This  organization  will  be
fully  completed,  at  a  certain  period,


pointed  to  by  the  Prophet  Dmi'd,
who  says,  that  he  saw  in  a  night  vision,
and  beheld  until  the  Ancient  of
Days  came  ;  and  he  describes  his
great  and  glorious  appear  mee  :  his
face  was  hke  a  Aiming  fire,  and  the
hair  of  his  head  was  white  as  wool  ;
his  chariots  were  like  unto  chariots
of  fire,  and  thousand  thousands
ministered  unto  him  and  ten  thou-
sand timed  ten  thousand  stood  before
him;  and  the  books  were  opened.
And  many  things  are  to  be  accom-
plished when  this  great  general  as-
sembly of  immortal  beings  come
from  heaven,  communicating  with
those  who  are  mortal  here  upon  the
earth.  In  other  words*  every  man  in
that  immortal  host,  among  those  that
shall  come  down  from  heaven,  and
every  man  among  the  mortal  host,
will  understand  his  place  and  calling
in  this  great,  grand  organ izitiou  of
the  Ancient  of  Days  j  and  you  will
find  no  unbroken  linkn  there.  The
Ancient  of  Days  is  the  father  of  all;
he  is  our  first  progenitor,  and  when
he  shtll  reveal  himself,  to  set  in
order  all  of  his  righteous  sons  and
daughters,  he  will  not  forget  those
who  have  already  passed  through
former  dispensations.  Every  dispen-
sation will  be  connecter!;  and  the
last  dispensation  of  the  fullness  of
times  will  have  given  to  them  the
keys  and  powers,  knowledge,  and
understanding,  and  revelations  to
know  how  to  weld  every  link,  in  or-
der that  the  entire  chain  may  be
completed  and  made  perfect.

Moreover  let  us  now  come  back  to
the  living.  We  are  commanded  to
build  Temples  ?  Why  ?  what  is  the
great  object  of  building  Temples  in
this  dispensation  ?  It  is  to  effect
the  accomplishment  of  the  very  work
1  have  hinted  at;  the  very  work  of
organization  that  must  be  completed,
by  the  time  the  Ancient  of  Days
shall  come;  the  very  work  that  must


U  JOURNAL  OF

be  introduced,  that  the  children  may
be  more  perfectly  connected  with  the
fathers  of  all  the  former  diapensa-
tions;  and  that  the  Saints  of  all
former  dispensations  may  understand  j
the  work  that  is  being  done  by  their
children  on  their  behalf,  so  that  when
the  heavens  shall  reveal  them,  they
will  find  things  ready  to  receive  them.
Before  that  time,  I  have  no  doubt,
the  generation  will  have  passed  away
that  were  living  in  1829 ;  bat  all
things  will  lie  added  to  those  revela-
tions that  the  Lord  gave  to  that
generation,  namely,  the  records  of
the  ancient  Nephites;  they  existed
in  great  numbers  and  are  of  great  ,
importance,  records  kept  by  their
Kings,  records  of  the  history  of  the
Nephites  for  over  a  thousand  years,
records  of  their  proceedings  and  of
the  things  that  God  had  revealed  to
them,  records  that  were  secret,  aivi
not  permitted  to  come  forth  in  the
days  of  weakness,  records  that  re-
vealed all  things  horn,  the  foundation
of  the  world  to  the  en-i  thereof,
records  that  were  kept  when  Jesus
administered  to  the  Nephites,  the
ninety-ninth  purt  of  which  was  not
written  by  Mormon,  all  of  which  are
to  rome  forth.  What  for?  To  trach
the  Latter-day  Saints  how  to  organize,
how  to  be  prepared  for  the  things  thaf
are  coming.  Then  we  will  know
something  about  what  is  termed  t lie
United  Order,  when  we  get  hold  of
these  records  of  the  experience  of  the
Nephites  for  165  years  in  the  Order  ;
the  experience  of  the  people  of  this
great  western  hemisphere,  from  the
northern  to  the  southern  extremity  j
they  will  have  left  some  records  of
their  acts  and  doings  that  cannot  fail
to  be  of  groat  worth  to  the  people  of
these  latter  times.

But  first,  says  the  Lord,  "I  will
try  my  people ;  I  will  perfect  them  j
I  will  teo  whether  they  will  be  obedi-
ent to  my  commandments;  I  will


DISCOURSES.

reveal  to  them  little  by  little  ;  I  will
o-ivc  them  line  upon  line;  I  will  im-
part a  little  light  upon  this  subject
and  upon  the  other  subject  :  and  if
my  poople  shall  enquire  of  me,  in
relation  to  these  things,  then  I  will
teach  them  still  more,  giving  them
another  line  and  another  precept,  I
will  nsiie  forth  another  command-
ment; hut  if  they  do  not  inquire  of
me,  and  their  hearts  be  found  full  of
covetoDsness,  and  they  feel  in  their
hearts  to  slight  these  things  which  I
have  eriven  to  them,  then  I  will  with-
hold the  greater  information  ;  I  will
not  let  them  know  the  law  which  I
gave  to  the  ancient  Nephites  ;  I  will
withhold  many  things  calculated  to
benefit  them,  until  they  learn  the
things  that  they  are  already  tanght.
But  when  they  become  obedient  stu-
dents, obedient  men  aud  women  of
God,  obedient  to  my  commandments,
hearkening  to  the  voice  of  mv  ser-
vants,  giving  heed  to  the  whisperings
of  my  spirit,  doing  away  with  cuvet-
onsness,  then  I  will  reveal  more;  I
will  introduce  more  and  more  of  the
principles  of  the  United  Order,  neces-
sHry  to  govern  the  people,  and  to
prepare  (hem  for  the  great  day  of  the
L  ml,  which  is  to  come.

In  the  beginning  of  the  dispensa-
tion it  is  necessary  that  there  should
be  chosen  vessels,  raised  up  un  pur-
pose to  bear  witness  of  the  things  of
God,  to  lay  the  foundation,  and  to
establish  the  Gospel  in  the  earth.
To  do  this,  it  ie  necessary  that  these
witnesses,  though  inexperienced,
>-houH  receive  revelations  and  admi-
nistration of  angels,  that  they  may
testify,  that  there  may  be  sufficient
evidence,  or  sufficient  number  of  wit-
nesses sent  forth,  that  the  Lord  may
be  justified,  in  the  great  day  of
judgment,  in  judging  the  people.
But  how  dangerous  it  is  for  people  to
see  heavenly  visions,  and  receive  the
ministration  of  angels  in  their  igno-


REVELATION  GRADUAL,  ETC


15


ranee.  How  dangerous  for  people  j
in  their  ignorance  to  obey  the  Go-pel !
Yet  shall  we  say  that  they  shall  not
obey  it,  because  they  are  very  igno-
rant 1  No.  Let  them  step  forth
with  all  their  hearts  and  obey  the
Gospel,  that  they  may  be  put  in  pos-
session of  the  Holv  Ghost :  then  if
they  will  seek  to  cultivate  their  minds,
cherishing  that  Spirit  in  their  hearts
and  developing  every  principle  of
righteousness,  and  doing  away  every
iniquitous  practice,  they  shall  receive
more  and  more  of  the  Holy  Spirit^  |
with  its  gifts.  So  in  regard  to
the.se  heavenly  manifestations.

In  the  year  1829  Oliver  Cowdery,
David  Whitmer  and  Martin  Harris
were  chosen  as  witnesses  to  behold
the  angel  of  Go  I ;  to  bell  old  the
plates  in  the  hands  of  the  angel  ;  to
g;ize  upon  the  ancient  engravings,
and  to  hear  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  at
the  same  time,  proclaiming  to  them,
that  the  plates  had  been  translated
correctly,  and  commanding  them  to
bear  record  of  the  same  to  all  peo-
ples, nations  and  tongues,  to  whom
the  work  should  be  sent.

Now  this  was  truly  a  groat  mani-
festation. But  who  was  ( Hi  ver  Cow-
dery  1  who  was  David  Whitmer  ?  who
was  Martin  Harris?  Poor,  weak,
frail  men  ;  two  of  them  quite  young,
one  of  middle  age.  They  had  but
very  little  experience  ;  they  knew
nothing  about  the  arrangement  of
the  organization  of  the  Priesthood,
as  we  now  know  ;  they  had  no  Teach-
ers  to  visit  them  from  week  to  week.
Yet  in  the  midst  of  all  this  igno-
rance, what  a  glorious  manifestation
they  received  from  heaven  !  They
lacked  experience;  they  had  not
been  prepared  as  Joseph  was.  He
was  prepared  by  a  series  of  years  of
experience,  in  beholding  visions  and
angels.

In  the  year  1823  the  angel  first
came  to  him,  telling  him  about  the


plates,  also  telling  him  that  he  would
return  one  year  afterwards,  when  he
would  give  him  further  instruction.
Why  tins  delay  ]  why  not  commit  to
his  charge  the  plates  at  once  ?  It
was  because  of  his  want  of  experi-
ence. It  is  true,  lie  had  previously
received  a  heavenly  vision  some  four
years  before,  in  which  he  had  seen
the  face  of  God,  the  Father.  But
he  lacked  all  other  qualifications ;  he
was  left  more  or  less  to  himself,  and
the  angel  was  determined  to  impart
to  him  experience!  year  after  year,
for  the  space  of  four  years ;  during
which,  whenever  Joseph  needed
chastisement  he  received  it  at  the
appointed  time  ;  his  failings  were
corrected  ;  he  was  shown  wherever
he  had  erred  ;  and  he  was  taught
what  to  do  :  he  was  instructed  little
by  little,  until  he  learned,  by  practice,
to  do  the  will  of  God.  Then  the
sacred  records  were  committed  to
him  ;  but  not  s  >  with  the  three  wit-
nesses referred  to,  and  hence  they
kept  not  the  holy  commandments  as
they  ought  to  have  done.  They  had
too  much  knowledge  for  their  lim-
ited experience.  You  recollect  what
the  Lord  has  said  upon  this  subject
— Where  much  is  given,  much  is
required  ;  and  where  but  little  is
given,  but  little  is  required.  Much
was  given  to  these  three  witnesses,
and  much  was  required  at  their
hands.  Hence  a  sin  that  they  might
commit  would  throw  them  into  ten-
fold more  darkness  than  any  man
who  had  never  seen  so  great  things.
This  accounts  for  their  apostacy,  not
for  their  denying  the  truth,  for  they
never  did  that;  they  held  fast  to
the  truth  ;  they  declared  that  the
Book  of  Mormon  was  true  and  never  •
denied  their  testimony.  It  is  not  a
matter  of  mere  faith  with  them;
they  knew  it.  But  how  great  is  the
darkness  in  them  that  sin  against  so
much  light  ! The  Lord  told  us,


1G


NAL  OF  DISCOUR


when  we  were  living  m  the  State  of
New  York,  to  go  to  tiro  Ohio  ;  there
to  build  a  Temple  to  the  name  of  the
Host  High.  And  there  the  Lord
condescended  to  bestow  upon  his
servants  and  people  a  great  endow-
ment, a  blessing  such  as  waft  not
known  among  the  children  of  men.
Ami  from  thence  they  should  go
the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  publish
these  tidings.  We  went  to'  the  Ohio :
and  after  we  had  been  sufficiently
taught  ami  instructed,  the  Lord  com-
manded us  through  Joseph,  to  build
a  Temple,  giving  the  pattern  thereof,
and  the  size  thereof,  the  size  of  the
inner  and  outer  courts,  the  size  of
the  severnl  rooms  and  apartments,
and  the  form  of  the  pulpits  ami
everything  pertaining  to  it,  was  given
by  tins  inspiration  of  the  Almighty
that  rested  upon  Joseph,  and  upon
those  associated  with  him.

"When  the  Temple  was  built,  the
Lord  did  not  see  proper  to  reveal  all
the  ordinances  of  the  Endowment^
such  as  we  now  understand*  He
revealed  little  bv  little.  No  rooms
were  prepared for  vn


HJlIfS


no

special  place  prepared  for  the  anoint-
ings, such  as  you  understand,  and
such  as  you  comprehend  $t  the  period
of  the  history  of  the  Church !
Neither  did  we  know  the  necessity
of  the  washings,  such  as  we  now
receive.  It  is  true,  our  hands  were
washed,  our  faces  and  our  feet  The
Prophet  Joseph  was  commanded  to
gird  himself  with  a  towel*  doing  this
in  the  Temple.  What  for  i  That
the  first  Elder  might  witness  to  our
Father  arid  God,  that  we  were  clean
from  the <'blood  of  that  wicked  gene-
ration, that  then  lived.  We  had
gone  ibrtli  according  to  our  best
ability,  to  publish  glad  tidings  of
great  joy,  for  thousands  of  miles,
upon  this  continent  After  this  we
were  called  in,  and  this  washing  of
hands  and  feet  was  to  testify  to  God


that  wre  were  elean  from  the  blood
of  this  generation.  The  holy  anoint*
ing  was  placed  upon  the  heads  of  his
servants,  but  not  the  full  develop
merit  of  /the  Endowments  in  the
anoint  ing.  Thesfc  administrations  in
the  Kirtlaud  Temple  were  revealed,
little  by  little,  corresponding  with
what  I  have  already  been  saying,
that  the  Lord  does  not  give  the  full-
ness at  once,  but  imparts  to  us  ac-
cording to  his  own  will  and  pleasure,
(treat  were  the  blessings  received.
We  were  commanded  to  seek  to  be-
hold the  face  of  the  Lord  ;  to  seek
after  revelation  ;  to  seek  after  the
spirit  of  prophecy,  and  the  gifts  of
the  Spirit  ;  and  many  testify  to  what
they  saw.  But  yet  they  were  inex-
perienced ;  they  had  not  proven
themselves  in  their  religion  long
enough.  They  obtained  blessings
greater  than  some  of  them  were  pre-
pared to  receive.  They  perhaps
might  have  been  faithful  if  they  had
exercised  the  agency  which  God
gave  them.  But  how  easily  are
mankind  toppled  first  this  way,  then
that  way,  and  are  lid  astray,  even
after  the  heavens  were  opened  and
chariots  and  horses  of  fire,  as  well
as  angels  were  seen :  still  many  of
t  b  ose  bre 1 1 1  re  n  apostatized.

Now  perhaps  some  of  you  may
say,  **  Withhold  these  tilings ;  do
not  send  angels  ;  do  not  bestow  the
gifts  of  prophecy,  *if  by  being  so
blessed  we  are  in  danger  of  aposta-
tizing from  our  religion/'  This  is
the  other  extreme ;  on  the  other
hand,  we  are  commanded  to  seek
the  face  of  the  Lord  always,  that
we  may  possess  our  souls  in  patience.
Again,  about  three  years  after  the
organization  of  the  Church,  the
Lord  gave  a  revelation  contained  in
the  Dt>ctrine  and  Covenants,  saying,
41  It  shall  come  to  pass  that  every
soul  that  comes  to  me,  obeys  my
commandments,  and  hearkens  to  my


id  calls  upon  my  name,  shall
see  my  face,  and  know  that  I  am."
He  has  ordained  that  in  his  holy
House,  in  a  Temple  built  to  his  name.


tin


t  hi


U  Ik?  mad


manifest  to  his  servants  and  people.
Ho  has  told  us  also  the  privileges  of
these  two  Priesthoods. The  piivi-

l  is  to


lew  of  the  lesser  Priestho
see  angels.  How  should  t
after  this  bl<


Of


9  ht*r

f -t*y  u

iere!^

ing,  and  acting  dishonestly,  full  of

tier  of  evils


covetousu'ess,  and  all  manner  01  eviis
cliu'rinir  about  us  because  of  our
traditions  1  Is  this  the  way  to  seek
for  so  great  blessings  1  It  is  by  irivintc
heed  to  the  instructions  and  laws
that  pertain  to  the  teacliing  of  this
lesser  Priesthood  ;  and  when  this  is
done,  we  may  claim  the  ministrations
of  holy  angels*

Again,  what  are  the  promises
made  to  the  high  Priesthood  of  the
order  of  the  Son  of  God  1  We  are
told,  in  the  revelation  given  on  the
2Jd  and  23d  davs  of  September,
1832,  that  without  the  ordinances
of  this  high  Priesthood  the  power
of  no: Illness  could  not  be  made
manifest  to  men  in  the  flesh.  For,
says  the  revelation,  **  Without  tins
Priesthood,  no  man  ran  behold  the
face  of  God  the  Father  and  live.11
Again,  says  the  revelation,  "This
Moses  plainly  taught  to  the  children
of  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  and
sought  diligently  to  sanctify  his  peo-
ple, that  they  might  behold  the
face  of  God,  But  they  hardened
their  hearts,  and  could  not  endure
his  presence/*

Here  then  we  perceive  that  one
blessing  of  this  high  Priesthood  is
to  behold  the  face!  of '.tad  the  Father
and  live.  And  this  blessing  is,  not
merely  fur  t ho  persons  holding  the
Priestl HMfd,  not  merely  for  those  who
have  been  ordained,  after  the  order
of  the  Son  of  God  :  but  every  one
that  keep*  "  my  commandments  and


obeys  my  voice/  etc.  This  \<  the
privilege  of  the  whole  Church  :  it
is  the  privilege  of  all  the  people  of
God.  to  sanctify  themselves,  to  be
obedient  to  his  laws,  and  to  behold
his  face,  not  only  the  face  of  Jesus,  -
but  of  God  the  Father,  and  still
live.  M x  . '  ~. r. ;  ,  [  ,f

What  means,  says  one.  that  pas-
sage in  the  Book  of  Moses,  where
th*j  L'>rd,  speaking  to  Mir  ^s,  >ays,
"Thou  canst  not  see  my  face:  for
there  shall  no  man  see  me  and  live,1*
etc.  This  very  passage  is  explained
bv  new  revelation.  The  Lord  at
that  time  became  angry  with  the
children  of  Israel,  and  he  decreed
that  no  man  of  that  whole  congre-
gation should  behold  his  face  at  that ;
time.  Hence  the  Lord  said  to
Moses,  **  Thou  shalt  not  behold  my
fa  *e  as  at  other  times/*  How  plain
that  littler  sentence  of  new  revela-
tion is,  showing  that  Moses  had,  alt  ^
other  times,  enjoyed  that  privilege,
and  that  it  was  the  j  rivilege  of  the
Children  of  Israel  to  become  sancti-
hed.  and  to  heboid  the  face  of  God;
but  at  that  time,  in  consequence  of
their  wickedness,  lie  in  his  anger,
forbade  them  that  privilege.  iSoon
alter,  he  marie  a  decree  that  all  that
congregation  should  be  left  without
this  privilege,  and  he  teok  his  pre-
sence away  from  them,  because  of
their  transgressions  and  rebellions,^
that,  had  not  the  Lord  withdrawn^
his  presence  from  them,  they  might
have  been  totally  destroyed.  The
Lord  desired  to  remember  his  cove-
nants with  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob;
for  he  promised  them  that  he  would
bring  up  their  seed  to  the  promised
land  ;  and  in  order  that  he  might
do  this  he  determined  not  to  go  up
in  their  midst ;  for  should  he  do  so,
he  might  break  forth  upon  then*,,
and  utterly  destroy  them.

Now  we  have  a  promise  given  to
us,  that  when  we  are  redeemed,  and

Vol  .  XIX.


IS


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


permitted  to  return  to  our  promised
land,  liis  presence  shall  go  witli  us.

We  have  a  promised  land,  as  well
as  Israel,  The  Lord  said  on  the
2d  of  January,  1831,  "  And  I  hold
forth  and  deign  to  give  unto  you
greater  riches,  even  a  land  of  pro-
mise, aland  flowing  with  milk  and
honey,  upon  which  there  shall  be
no  curse  when  the  Lord  comes  :

"  And  1  will  give  it  unto  you  for
the  land  of  your  inheritance,  if  you
will  seek  it  with  all  your  hearts  :

44  And  this  shall  he  my  covenant
with  you,  ye  shall  have  it  for  the
land  of  your  inheritance,  and  for
the  inheritance  of  your  children
forever,  while  the  earth  shall  stand,
and  ye  shall  possess  it  again  in
eternity,  no  more  to  pass  away."
Here,  then,  was  a  covenant  made,
that  the  Latter-day  Saints  should
have  for  their  particular  portion  a
promised  land.  We  were  com-
manded to  purchase  the  land  for
the  time  being ;  for  it  was  to  be  sig-
nal ly  our  land  of  promise,  and  our
children's  land  of  promise,  while  the
earth  shouU  stand,  and  then  they
should  have  it  to  all  eternity.

We  are  at  present  cast  out  of  that
land,  the  same  as  the  Israelites  were
in  the  land  of  Kgypt,  being  away
fmm  their  promised  land.  We  are
here  in  these  mountain  valleys.  It
is  a  goodly  land  which  the  Lord  has
pointed  out  for  us.  We  are  making
preparation  for  our  great  redemp-
tion to  go  back  to  the  promised  land,
the  same  as  the  Israelites  are  to
gather  back  to  their  promised  land.
And  a  further  promise  is  made  unto
us,  in  this  connection,  that  when
the  time  shall  come,  the  Lord  will
raise  up  a  man  like  unto  Moses  who
shall  deliver  this  people  out  of  bon-
dage, the  same  as  the  children  of
Israel,  their  fathers,  were  delivered,
And  he  tells  us  that  he  will  do  this
with  a  mighty  hand  and  an  out-


stretched arm.  And  he  also  says,
that  his  angels  shall  go  before  us,
and  also  his  presence.  Here  then
is  a  promise  made  to  tin1  Latter-day
Saints,  that  the  presence  of  the  Lord,
as  well  as  Ids  angels,  should  go  be-
fore their  camp-

1  mention  these  things  to  show
you  what  the  Lord  intends  to  be-
stow u|>on  you,  that  your  hearts
may  not  faint,  while  encountering
the  trials  of  reclaiming  the  desert
country  ;  that  you  in  the  mid>t  of
difficulties  and  tribulations  may  still
have  fait li  in  regard  to  t he  promises
of  the  future.

In  another  revelation  given  in  an
early  period  of  the  history  of  the
Church,  the  Lord  commanded  his
people  to  build  unto  him  a  Home,
promising  that  if  they  built  a  house
unto  his  name,  according  to  the  com-
mandment and  pattern  which  should
he  given,  and  providing  they  suf-
fered no  unclean  thing  to  enter  it,
so  that  it  should  not  be  defiled,  the
Lord  himself  would  appear  in  it  ;
his  presence  would  be  there ;  his
glory  would  be  there  j  and  all  that
should  go  into  that  House,  who  were
pure  in  heart,  should  see  him.  Here
then  you  perceive  that  there  are
certain  places  appointed,  and  certain
provisions  to  be  complied  with,  he-
fore  the  face  of  the  Lord  ran  be  seen.
He  has  said  that  his  people  are  al-
ways to  build  unto  his  name  a  house.
What  for?  That  his  name  might
be  there  ;  that  his  angels  might  he
there ;  that  his  presence  might  be
there;  and  that  there  the  fullness
of  the  holy  Priesthood  might  be
more  fully  revealed  j  and  that  there
all  the  ordinances  might  be  per-
formed, that  were  ordained  from
before  the  foundation  of  the  world.
This  is  the  object  of  Temples.  It

is  to  connect  the  children  to  the
fathers:  it  is  to  bring  about  an  or-
ganization between  the  living  and


REVELATION  GRADUAL,  ETC


the  dead.  It  is  seen  that  when  the
seventh  angel  shall  sou  in  I  his  trmn-
pet,  preparatory  to  the  coming  of
the  Son  of  Man ;  when  the  Saints
shall  receive  their  inheritances  and
be  made  equal  with  him,  they,  the
dead,  as  well  as  the  living,  receive  I
their  inheritances ;  that  will  be  a
perfect  organization*  When  Adam,
and  Enoch,  and  his  Zimu  and  all  the
righteous  men  before  the  flood,  and
a  l  the  holy  patriarchs  and  Prophets
of  the  eastern  and  western  Conti-
nents,  men  who  lived  on  the  earth
as  strangers  and  pilgrims,  but  who
through  the  eye  of  faith  were  per-
mitted  to  behold,  that  in  the  dis-
pensation of  the  fullness  of  times,
alt  things  would  be  gathered  in  one
that  were  in  Christ,  even  all  things
which  are  in  heaven  and  which  are
on  the  earth  :  1  say  that  when  all
these  receive  their  inheritances,  this
will  be  an  organization  that  takes
hold  of  eternity,  that  takes  hold  of
the  children  of  God  ill  all  ages,  that
unites  all  dispensations  in  one,  that
brings  all  the  kingdoms,  and  autho-
rities, and  powers,  of  all  other  dis-
pensations, and  unites  them  in  one  ;
and  upon  whom  knowledge  like  a
Hood  will  be  poured  out  even  upon
the  vast  congregations  cf  the  Church  •
of  the  First  Born,  the  living  and
the  dead,  for  the  dead  will  then  he
li  villi;.

Ought  not  these  things,  Latter-
day  Saints,  to  stimulate  every  indi-
vidual to  be  diligent  in  the  work
given  him  to  do,  lest  he  fall  out  by
the  way;  lest  his  cro^n  be  taken
from  him  and  placed  upon  the  head
of  another;  lest  the  talent  he  may
have  hidden  in  the  earth  be  taken
from  him  and  be  given  to  him  that
hath  mi -re  abundantly  {  How  dili-
gent we  should  be  !  How  faithful
in  the  performance  of  our  several
callings,  and  how  willing  to  hearken
to  the  counsels  and  instructions  of


those  placed  over  us?  By  and  by
we  will  have  Temples,  with  a  great
manv  things  contained  in  them  which
we  now  have  not ;  for  with  them,  as.
with  all  other  things,  the  Lord
begins  little  by  little  ;  he  does  not
reveal  everything  all  at  once.  He
gfcve  the  pattern  of  these  things  in
Kirtland,  Ohio,  as  the  beginning;
but  there  were  not  ropms  for  the
washings,  no  rooms  such  as  we  have
now.  and  mi  eh  as  were  prepared  in
the  Nauvoo  Temple;  and  in  other
respects,  there  was  some  thing  added
to  the  Nauvoo  Temple.  Why ;
Because  we  had  greater  experience,
and  were  prepared  for  greater  things.
There  was  no  font  in  the  basement
story  of  the  Kirtland  Temple,  for
baptismal  purposes  in  behalf  of  the
dead  ? Why  not ! Because  that

prit  eiple  was  nut  revealed But  in

the  Nauvoo  Temple  tjus  font  was
prepared,  which  was  something  in
advance  of  the  Kirtland  Temple.
We  have,  of  late,  constructed  a
Temple  at  St.  George.  Blessings
have  been  administered  in  that  Tem-
ple, that  were  totally  unknown  in
the  two  former  Temples,  namely,
endowments  for  the  dead.  Again,
by  and  by,  we  build  a  Temple  in
Jackson  County,  Missouri.  Will  it
be  built  according  to  the  pattern  of
our  present  Temples  ?  ]So,  There
will  he,  according  to  the  progress
of  this  people,  and  the  knowledge
they  receive,  and  the  greatness  of
the  work  that  is  before  them,  many
things,  pertaining  to  the  pattern,
that  will  then  be  given,  which  will
differ  materially,  or  will  be,  at  least,
in  addition  to  that  which  is  in  these
Temples  now  built  I  think  if  you
will  go  and  search  in  the  Church
Historian's  office,  you  will  find  a
plan  of  a  Temple,  that  is  to  be  built
in  Jackson  County,  which  will  be
very  different  from  the  little  Tem-
|  pies  we  now  build. By  and  by


•


20


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


there  will  be  a  Temple  built  at
Jerusalem,  Who  do  you  think  is
going  to  build  it  ?  You  may  think
that  it  will  be  tin:  unbelieving  Jews
who  rejected  the  Savior,  I  believe
that  that  which  is  contained  on  the
77th  page  of  the  Book  of  Mormon,
as  well  as  in  many  other  places,
in  that  saint;  book,  will  be  literally
fulfilled.  The  Temple  at  Jerusalem
will  undoubtedly  be  built,  by  thosy
who  believe  in  the  true  Messiah.
Its  const  ruction  will  be,  in  some
respects  different  from  the  Temples
now  being  built.  It  will  contain
the  throne  of  the  Lord,  upon  which
lie  will,  at  times,  personally  sit,  and


will  reign  over  the  house  of  Israel
forever--  It  may  also  contain  twelve
other  thrones,  on  winch  the  twelve
ancient  Aposiles  will  sit,  and  judge
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  It
will,  very  likely,  have  an  apartment,
with  a  tatJe,  on  which  lood  and
drink  will  he  prepared,  such  as  are
suitable  to  the  taste  and  happiness
of  immortal  resurrected  beings,  thus
fulfilling  the  words  of  Jesus—*4  Ye
that  have  followed  me  in  the  rege-
neration shall  eat  and  drink  at  my
table,  and  sit  upon  twelve  thrones,
judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel."
Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOSEPH  F.  SMITH,

i

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  at  St  George,  Sunday,  April  2,  1877V

- (Reported  by  Geo.  P.  Gibbs.)

BELIEF  AND  KNOWLEDGE— PERSONAL  KNOWLEDGE  INDISPENSABLE  —
POSSESSION  OF  THE  HOLY  GHOST  NECESSARY  TO  TUB  KNOWLEDGE
OF  THE  TRUTH — 110 W  TO  OBTAIN  THE  HOLY  GHOST— HIS  OFFICE —
THE  ENMITY  OF  I'lIE  WORLD  TOWARDS  THE  PKIESHOOD  AN  EVIDENCE
OF  ITS  DIVINE  AUTHORITY— ALWAYS  WAS  AND  ALWAYS  WILL  BE  SO
— CONDITIONS  UPON  WHICH  BLESSINGS  ARE  TO  EE  OBTAINED,  OR  LOST.


Daring  the  time  I  may  occupy,  I
desire  to  express  my  feelings  with
regard  to  ray  faith  in  the  Gospel,
and  the  great  latter-day  work  in
which  .we  are  all  more  or  less  en-
gaged, that  you  as  well  as  my  bre-
thren ra^y  know  how  I  stand  before
God  auti  man.

I  whs  born  in  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  but  not


under  the  sealing  covenant ;  that
principle  was  revealed  to  this  Church
subsSquent  to  my  bit  tb.  I  have  been
reared  in  the  midst  of  the  people
called  Latter-day  Saints,  receiving
most  of  ray  limited  education  i»
their  society,  and  that  during  my
childhood  under  the  guidance  of  ray
mother.  Since  the  age  of  1 5  years,
I  have  been  engaged  more  or  less  in


*


BELIEF  AND  KNOWLEDGE,  ETC.


21


the  ministry,  and  have  receive*!  in-
struction through  having  the  coun-
sels and  teadiintrs  of  the  servants  of
God,  as  you  all  have;  but  somo,
perhaps,  have  not  enjoyed  this  privi-
ledge  to  so  great  an  extent  as  others
who  have  been  less  abroad.  In  my
childhood  1  learned  to  believe  the
Gospel,  and  in  the  divine  mission
and  calling  of  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith,  in  the  visitation  of  the  angel
Moroni,  in  the  establishment  of  tin*
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth,  and
also  in  the  gathering  together  of  the
people  of  the  Lord,  and  many  Pirn*
pot  rant  things  connected  with  this
great  latter-day  work.

Oil  my  first  mission  I  began  to
learn  something  for  myself;  I  had
hithe  rto  believed  the  testimonies  of
the  servants  of  God  whom  I  had
beard  converse  and  preach,  as  well
as  the  instructions  1  received  from  a
most  kind  and  affectionate  mother,
as  also  what  I  could  comprehend
through  readirfg  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, the  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
and  the  Bible*  Bat  in  the  ministry,
where  I  labored  earnestly,  I  beg?m
to  comprehend  more  fully,  through
the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
what  I  had  read  and  been  taught,
and  so  they  became  in  my  mind
established  facts,  of  which  I  was* as
absolutely  certain  as  I  was  of  my
own  existence;  and  from  the  begin-
ning of  my  experience  as  an  Elder  in
the  Church  until  the  prtsent,  if
there  has  t  een  a  moment  in  my  lile
when  I  have  doubted  the  divinity
and  truthfulness  of  the.se  things,  it
has  escaped  my  notice,  and*  it  is
to-day  as  much  a  matier  of  fact  with
me,  as  it  is  that  I  live.

I  long  ago  learned  to  prize  the
principles  of  the  Gospel,  us  of  far
greater  impoitance  than  all  earthly
things  ;  they  are  of  more  value  tWtto
this  present  lile,  for  without  the
Gospel  it  is  valuless,  the  grand  ob-


ject and  purpose  of  life  being  attain-*
able  only through being  obedient
unto  the  Gospel.

A  saying  of  the  Savior  is  here
forced  upon  my  mind,  44  F  or  what
shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  shall  gain
rhe  whole  world  and  lo.se  his  own
soul  ?  or  what  shall  a  man  give  in
exchange  for  his  soul  tn  A  train*  UI
am  the  door,  by  me  if  any  man  enter
iu,  he  shall  be  saved/1  Int  only  upon
this  plan  can  he  be  saved,

By  the  principles  of  the  Gospel,
as  revealed  through  the  Prophet
Josoph  Smith,  we  are  privileged  to
secure  unto  ourselves  the  gift  of
eternal  life,  which  is  the  greatest  gift
of  Gud.  Without  these  principles
we  are  as  the  dumb  animal,  so  far  as
relates  to  the  knowledge  of  God,  for
our  fathers  were  unable  to  teach  us,
they  knew  no'  more  of  the  ways  uf
God,  or  the  plans  of  salvation,  than
the  children,  notwithstanding  their
boasted  enlightenment  and  their
possession  of  the  holy  Scrip tures.
They  were  not  acquainted  with  the
principles  of  life,  they  knew  not  the
law  of  the  Lard,  and  neither  did  we
until  we  received  and  obeyed  the
Gospel,  thereby  obtaining  heavenly
light  through  the  channel  of  the
Priesthood*  Before  this  we  were  as
they  were,  clinging  to  dead  forms,
puzzled  to  divine  the  meaning  of
many  thing*  which  under  the  light
of  inspiration  have  become  plain  and
easy  to  be  understood.  "And  this
is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know
thee  the  only  true  Go  I,  and  Jesus
Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent."

It  behooves  (he  Latter-day  Saints,
and  all  men,  to  make  themselves  ac-
quainted with  *:  the  only  true  God,
and  Jesus  whom  he  hath  sent."  But
Can  we  through  our  own  wisdom  find
out  God  ?  Can  we  by  our  unaided
ingenuity  and  learning  fathom  his
purposes  and  comprehend  his  will  ?
We  have,  1  think,  witnessed  examples


JOURNAL Of  DISCOURSES.


enough  of  such  efforts  on  the  part  of  :
the  intelligent  world,  to  convince  us  |
that  it  is  impossible. The  ways  itfld  J
wisdom  of  God  are  not  as  the  wayn
and  wisdom  of  man. How  then  can  j
we  know  4*  the  only  true  and  living  I
God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  he  has
sent  ?"  for  to  obtain  this  knowledge
would  be  to  obtain  the  ^cret  or  key
to  eternal  life. It  must  be  through
the  Holy  Ghost,  whose  office  is  to
reveal  the  things  of  the  Father  to
man,  and  to  bear  witness  in  our  hearts
of  Christ,  and  him  crucified  and  risen
from  the  dead. Thete  is  no  ofhet
way  or  means  of  attaining  to  this
knowledge. How  shall  we  obtain
the  Holy  Ghost? The  met  hud  or
manner  is  clearly  marked  out.  We
nrdt  told  to  have  fair h  in  God,  to
believe  thai  lie  is,  and  that  he  is  a
rewarder  of  all  who  diligently  seek
him;  to  repent  of  our  tins,  subdue
our  passions,  follies,  and  im proprie-
ties; to  be  virtuous,  honest,  and  up-
right in  all  our  dealings  one  with
another,  and  enter  into  covenant  with
God  that  we  will  Irom  thenceforth
abide  in  the  principles  of  truih,  and
observe  the  commandments  which  he
lias  given  us,  then  to  be  baptized  for
the  remissii  n  of  our  sins,  by  one
having authority;  and when  this
ordinance  of  the  Gospel  is  complied  j
with,  we  may  receive  the  gift  of  the
Holy  phost  by  the  laying  on  of  the
hands  of  those  clothed  with  the
authority  of  the  Priesthood.  Tims
the  Spirit  and  power  of  God—  the
Comforter,  may  be  in  us  as  a  well  of
water  springing  up  unto  everlasting
life. He  will  bear  record  of  the  i
Father,  testify  of  Jesus,  and  l*take
of  the  things  of  the  Father  and  revefil
them  unto  us,"  confirming  our  faith,
establishing  us  in  the  truth,  ^that  we
shall  be  no  longer  tossed  to  and  fro
by  every  wind  of  doctrine  j  but^hall
4t  knowyjof  the  doctrine"  whether  it
be  oW&ud  or  of  man.  •  This  is  the


course — it  is  simple,  reasonable,  and
consistent  Who  is  there  with  com-
mon abilities  that  can  fail  to  see,  or
Comprehend  it?  Indeed,  in  the
language  of  the  Scriptures,  it  is  so
plain,  that  "  the  wayfaring  ma*>,
though  a  foolt  Deed  not  err  therein/*
.Having  entered  into  t  Ids  covenant
berng  cleansed  Irom  sin,  and  endowed,
with  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  why
should  we  not  abide  Jn  fhe  trmh,
continuing  steadfast  before  God  and
tirm  in  ihe  great  »Vork  he  lias  esta-
blished on  the  earth  ?  We  should
never  cease  to  serve  Him,  nor  thwart
his  mercy  and  goodness  towards  us;
l*H  ever  live  so  that  the  Holy  Spirit
ryay  be  within  us  as  a  living  spring,
calculated  to  lead  us  to  perfection  in
righteousness,  virtue  and  integrity
before  God,  until  we  accomplish  our
earthly  mission,  perjorming  every/
duty  that  may  be  required  at  our
hands.

In  this  way  I  have  learned  the
Grispel  which  I  was  first  taught  to
believe,  which  belief  is  now  super*
seded by  knowledge. For  now  1
kltow  that  God  lives,  and  that  Jesus
Christ  was  sent  into  the  world  to
atone  for  the  original  sin,  and  also
fur  the  actual  transgressions  of  man-
kind, injfemuch  as  they  themselves
will  repent  of  their  sins  and  humble
themselves  before  Him  in  their  pur*
suit  of  the  gift  and  blessing  of  eter-
nal1 life. We  should  not  be  satisfied
with  the  testimony  alone of  our
brethren. It  is  well  and  good,  it  is
indeed  encouraging  and  cheering  to
the  hfcait  to  hear  the  testimonies  of
the  servants  of  God, — to  believe
that  God  has  raised  up  men  in  this
dispensation  and  made  them  witnesses
of  Him  and  his  Son  Jesus,  and  who
have  been  shown  the  mysteries  of
heavenly  things,  and  commanded  to
bear  record  of  what  they  saw  and
heard  ;  y*  s,  it  is  a  joy  to  the  soul
to  have  men  among  us  who  arc  io-


BELIEF  AND  KNOWLEDGE,  •ETC


2$


spired  by  ihe  Holy  Spirit  and  fall  of  Then  if  we  would  know  the  Lard
the  litfht  of"  truth" and  of  the  power  Jesus Christ, and his  servants,


of  God,  bearing  their  testimony  unio
ti-  t h  it  this  is  the  work  of  Ho  1,  that
Go!  lives,  thnt  Jesus  is  the  Christ —
the  Savior  of  the  world,  arid  that  he

h  is  k[ token  to  <he  inhabitants  of  the
e^rth  in  the  day  in  which  we  live,
hut  h  this  sufficient  to  satisfy  me  ?
Jio.  1 t  will  not  suffice  me  to  believe
that  you  know  the  nue  and  living
Go  1,  et/\  I  must  rt'e»'ive  this  know,
ledge  fiir  rnyseif  as  you  have  received
it.  Is  the  way  open  lo  me  to
comprehend  the  purpises  and  the
will  of  G<»d  conCfriiiris;  niy  salvation,
as  to  you  ?  Certainly  it  is.  It  is
iur  nil,  yea,  every  son  ami  daughter
of  Ad  mi  fo  learn  the  will  of  God,
to  receive  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit
$bf  him  arid  her.-elf,  and  nut  to  de-
pend alone  upon  the  tes! imonie>  o*
these  you  1  in  en  that  God  has  raised
up  lu  till  t ho  positions  they  occupy.
And  if  vve  should  pin  our  faith  to
them,  although  we  might  realize
consolation  and  even  joy  and  satis-
faction in  hearing  their  testimonies,
yet,  unless  we  receive  the  inspira-
tion of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  time  will


who  are  in  our  midst,  and  that
their  testimonies  are  true,  we  rhusfc
enj  >y  the  light  of  the  Spirit  of  tin
living  Goi  individually,  The  pos-
session  of  this  heavenly  knowledge
is  absolutely  necessary  to  keep  us  in
the  paths  of  life  and  truth,  for  with-
out it  we  cannot  distinguish  the  voice
of  the  true  shepherd,  which  U  .spirit-
ually discerned;  and  although  we
may  be  in  fellowship  with  the  Church,
fully  believing  the  counsels  of  oar
brethren  to  be  dictated  by  wisdom,
yet  without  something  more  than
mere  belief  or^ apposition  we  cannot
stand  ;  and  furthermore  under  such
circumstances  vve  cannot  c  insistently
claim  that  we  havepirt  or  lot  in  the
kingdom  -o/  God,  Fur  ;*s  it  is  writ-
ten, t4  An  actual  knowledge  to  any
person,  that  the  course  of  life  which
lie  pursues  is  according  to  V  e  will  of
God,  is  essentially  necessary  to  enable

him  to  have  that  eontidenee  in  God
without  which  no  person  can  obtain
eternal  life.  For  unless  a  person
does  kno»v  that  he  is  walking  accord-
ing to  i he  will  of  God,  it  would  be


undoubtedly  come  when*-  the  winds  |  an  insult  to  the  dignity  of  the  Creator

were  he  to  say  that  he  would  be  a
partaker  of  his  glory  when  he  should
be  done  with  the  things  of  this  life.
But  when  lie  has  this  knowledge,  and
most  assuredly  knows  that  lie  is  doing
the  will  of  God,  Ins  confidence  can
be  equally  strong  that  he  will  be  a


will  blow  a; i  i  the  storms  beat  upon
t he  house,  we  thus  may  build  and  it
wid  fed  I.  What  a  deplorable  condi-
tion vve  would  then  find  ourselves
f


in

Is  it  not  necessary  for  all  to  bo
Capable  of  judging  as  to  whether  tile

testimonies  of  these  men  are  of  God
or  man  ?  How  can  we  know  that
what,  they  testify  of,  is  true  t  how
cm  we  know  that  they  hear  witness
of  the  Almignty,  or  that  they  pos-
Fes«  ihe  holy  Priesthood  authorizing
them  to  minister  in  tiie  ordinances
of  t  he  Go-pel  t  I  answer,  only  by
nnd  through  t he  inspiration  of  that


partaker  of  the  glory  of  God.
Then  let  us  search  after  truth —
for  the  light  of  the  Sprit  winch
leadelb  inio  all  truth,  that  we  may
comprehend  the  Gospel,  t>e  able  to
sustain  the  hands  of  the  servants  of
G  xf  in  their  efforts  to  build  up  Ziou,
and  work  out  our o.vn  salvatim.

Tlt'H)tr[l


all  the  world  should  be
Jloly  Spirir  which  U  given  to  all  who  ^  s*ve4  but  oui\sc!v  a,  we  lining  ex-
diliijtmily  seek  and  obtain  it  according  eluded  horn  the  kiugdo  n,  wftat  will
to  the  promise,  !  it  protit  us  ? To  see  our  fello-v-ere*


24


JOL'BNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


fares  enter  into  salvation  find  be  ex-
aited  into  the  presence  of  God,  and
the  door  closed  against  us,  would
imh  eJ  be  pour  coTisoIation  or  com*


slackened  their  efforts,  nor  failed  to
use  nil  the  means  in  their  power,  nor
besi t  iled  to  n  sort  to  the  most  cruel,
foul  and  fiendish  acts  to  accomplish


fort.  But  if  we  would  enter  in,  we  I  their  nefarious  purpose.  This  st  no
mu->t  Jo  the  will  of  the  Father,  keep  j  cruel  enmity,  although  fur  Uie  fi  uo

being,  to  to-ne  osent  Milvint-il  or
lull  in  eh  ck  by  the  Almighty,
still  smoulders  and  rankles  iti
their  hearts,  awaiting  a  favorable
opportunity  to  burst  forth  as  ti*rcely


his  ommmdments,  possess  the  pi  ft
of  I  ho  Jloly  Ghost,  enjoy  the  te.>ti-
xnotiv  of  Jesus,  and  become  witnesses
o^  the  'inch  for  ourselves ;  we  thru
may  build  upon  a  foundation  more


lasting  than  the  solid  reck. That as  at any  time  during  the  life  of
when trials  come  and  temptations
Furgii  against  usT  as  they  will  do,  we
n^*y  stand  and  endure  to  the  end.
For  not  every  one  that  s  t till  Lord,


ic  Prophet  Joseph.  Tins  is  ouo
of  t  lie  Mron  treat  evidences  we  c:m
have  of  the  divine  mission  or  Pre-
sident lingi  am \ounu  BeeiiUS©


Lord,  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom,  |  of  the  iospira'i  >n  of  the  Almighty


but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  the  Ka*  and  poorer  of
ther,  etc.,  ;  or,  as  the  wise  man  onre
Said,  'Mlie  race  is  not  to  the  swift,
nor  the  battle  to  the  strong,  neither
yet  bread  to  the  wise,  nor  yet  riches
to  men  of  understanding,  nor  vet
favor  to  Ttien  of  skill."  Nevi  rtheless,
*' he  t h  it  endureth  to  the  end  shall
be  saved* 1 I  cannot  believe  lor  a


liii  i  whii-h  h  is  rested
up  m  hi 01  and  accompanied  his  ad-
01  illist rations,  he  lias  been  the  very
centre  of  the  target  Ht  which  all  tho
deadly  weapons  of  the  enemy  has
hi  en  aimed  ever  since  t he  death  of
the  Prophet  Joseph,  1  s  i y  this  is
one  of  the  strongest  evidences  we
can  have  of  this  fact,  aside  from  riio


moment  that  any  of  us  will  attain  to  j  testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which
the  gift  of  eternal life,  unless  we briu^eth knowledge. It  is  unmis-


siiall  qualify  our-cives  through  t he takable. The  hatred  of  the  kicked


truth,  in  the  manner  God  has  pre-
senile^, and in that  way  become


always  has  and  always  will  foilow
the Priesthood and the  Saints*


worthy  of  it. We  must  obtain  this  j  The devil  vwiU  not  ]o*e  sight  of

the  power  of  God  vested  in  man—
the  Holy  Priesthood,  lie  fears  i%
he  hates  it.,  and  will  never  cease  to
stir  up  the  hearts  ot  I  he  debased  and
eorrupl  in  anger  a-al  malice  towards
those  who  hold  this  power,  an  1  to
persecute  the  Saints,  until  he  is
bound  He  delights  in  apostaey  and
in  apostates,  and  uses  them  tor  his
purpose,  but  what  doe.*;  he  or  his
emissaries  cate  for  their  organizi-
tions  ?  Do  they  hate  them  ?  Is
the  world  moved  with  anger  or  malice
against  them  ? Mo. They  become

a  part  of  the  world,  fraternizr*  wifh
the  pe< > pie  ot  the  world  and  lose
their  distinction  or  i;lentit\\  £s  the
people  of  God  notwithstanding  their


litfht  by  revelation,  w.'  cannot  do  it
by  uur  ■ '  w  n  wis  ion  j*  God  will  giv*  us
know  led  o£  and  onderst  a  uding,  he
will  lead  us  in  the  path  of  truth
if  we  nut  Our  whole  trust  in  him
and  not  in  man,  lie  then  ean
ano  will  preserve  us,  and  all  the
powers  <»f  the  earth  combined  can-
not  destroy  us,  for  we  are  in  His
hands.  Here  are  our  fathers  and
leaders  that  have  passed  through
the  school  of  experience;  they  have
seen  what  t ho  enemies  of  this  king-
dom have  tned  to  do,  and  know  full
well  what  they  would  do  if  they  had
it  in  their  power.  It  has  ever  been
tho  desire  of  the  wicked  to  destroy
the  people  of  God, They  have  never


BELIEF  AND  KNOWLEDGE,  ETC.


25


claims  and  pretentions  to  being  be-
lievers in  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,
:m  l  the  Gospel  which  he  was  instru-
mental  in  restoring  to the  earth.

What  a  host  of  aposracics  there
have  been  since  the  organization  of
this Church  ! There have  been
Ritrdonites, Strang!  tes,  B»*nemites,
Wightites, Gladden  ites,  Cutlerites,
Morrisites,  Josephi'es,  :t ntl  the  duce
knows  what  ites  ? But  what  does
the  world  care  about  ihese?  Nothing.
AYh v  ? Because  they  have  forfeited
the Priesthood,  they  have  not  the
power,  nor  the  principles  of  flal  va-
tic, m  only  in  part.;  they  h  ive  deserted
the  cause,  have  struck  hands  alike
with  the  infidel  and  the  bigot,  «md
formed  an  allianc  *  with  themulignere
and persecutors  of  the  Saints,  and
therefore  they  fire  harmless  in  the
eyes  of  he  world  and  of  their  master
whom  they  have  blindly listed  to
serve. While  these  men  who  hold
t he  keys  of  the  Priesthood  of  the
Son  of  Gi»d,  who  have  lead  forth  the
Saints  out  of  bondage  and  oppression,
such  as  could  not  be  endured  in  the
States,  who  have  gathered  the  people
from  afar,  and  planted  them  in  happy
homes  and  peaceful  dwellings,  who
have  reared  cities,  towns  and  villages
wtll  organized,  well  governed  and
prosperous,  and  in fehort  wrought
miracles  in  I  In*  deserts,  smd  who  still
counsel  and  direct  the  Saints  in  the

pat  lis  ot  l:fe,  are  le-ld  up  to  t  he  ridi-

cule  and  contempt  of  the  world.
Their  peace,  good  names,  honor,
possessions  and  lives  as  eager  ly  and
per.-istemly  sought  after,  but  with
le>s  etlect,  by  the  blood-thirsty  hearts
and  crimson  hands  of  relentless  per-
6t  cufors  as  during  the  lifetime  of
Joseph  Smith  the  martyr,  when  the
Saints  were  driven  from  Ohio,  ex-
pelled from  Missouri,  or  banished
from  their  homes  in  Illinois.  Such
has  always  been  and  such  is  to-day
the  spirit  of  the  world  towards  us.


This  alone  is  sufficient  evidence  to
demonstrate  the  loyalty  of  this  people
to  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  their
possession  of  the  Gospt  l  which  is  the
power  of  God  unto  salvation.  Do
you  want  any  stronger  proof  of  this,
when  you  contemplate  the  sayings
of  the  Scriptures,  "  If  ye  were  of
the  world  the  world  would  love  his
ow:i  j  but  because  ye  are  not  of  the
world,  but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of"
the  world,  therefore  the  world  hateth
you.5*  (John  xv,  1H  )  "  And  ye
>h  ill be haled  of  ail men  hr  ?:iy

names  sake."  (Matt,  x,  22.  *  If
they  have  persecuted  me  they  will
also  persecu  e  yon/'  (John  xv,  20.)
li  In  the  world  ye  sh  ill  have  tribu-
lation." John  xvi,  SttJ*)  4 !  Blessed
art-i  ye  w -hen  men  shall  revile  you,
and  persecute  you,  and  say  all  man-
ner of  evil  against  you  falsely  tor
my  sake/'  (Matt,  v,  Hi)  uYeA
and  all  that  will  live  gndly  in  Christ
Jesus  .shall  suffer  persecution."  (2
Tim.,  3,  l'J.)  Therefore,  "Marvel
not  my  brethren  if  the  world  hale
you."  ([  John  iii,  13.)  "Yea  the
time  corneth  that  whoever  killeth
vou  will  think  that  he  doeth  God
service/,  (John  xvi,  2.)  This  was
the  nature  of  the  legacy  the  Savior
left  his  disciples  and  followers.  Is  it
strange  that  we  should  inherit  the
same?  Certainly  not,  if  we  are  the
disciples  and  followers  of  Christ,  for
the  same  warfare  continues  between
him  and  Belial,  and  will  until
Satan  is  bound  and  righteousness
triumphs  upon  the  earth.

It  is  a  convolution  therefore  to  know^
that,  notwithstanding  our  many  short-
comings, frailties*  and  imperfections,
the  Evil  one,  with  the  world  at.  his
back,  considers  us  of  sufficient  im-
portance to  oppose  and  persecute  us
with  shcIi  bitter  hatred  as  he  docs.
Yes,  I  say  it  is  encouraging  to  know,
that;  as  a  people  we  are  sufficiently
faithful  and  worthy  before  the  Lord,


26


JOTKNAL  n["  DISCOURSES


notwithstanding  our  opportunities  for  "
improvement  to  arouse  the  indijna-  ■
Hon  and  hatred  of  the  wicked,  and
to  entitle  ng  to  the  chastisement  of
God,  through  his  servants,  for  our
improprieties,  for  "whomsoever  the
Lard  loveth  he  chastetieth."  But
we  should  not  provoke  the  dis-
pleasure or  incur  the  chastisement
of  the  Almighty — presuming  upon
Ids  furhearancd  and  mercy  by  neg-
lecting to  per  fur  in  those  duties  and
responsibilities  so  justly  u quired  of
us — but  we  should  be  most  diligent,
putting  forth  every  energy  in  our
power  to  correct  our  ways,  and  thus
increase  our  faith  that  we  may  he-
Come  more  worthy  of  the  blessings
and  protection  of  iiod,  than  hitherto,
lie  irs  more  willing  to  bestow  bles-
sings upon  us  than  we  are  to  use
then*  properly  when  we  obtain  them,
thus  by  our  un worthiness  we  may
prevent  ourselves  often  from  receiv-
ing the  very  blessings  we  desire,  and


that  he  is  not  only  abundantly  able,
but  willing  and  ready  to  shower  upmi
us  it  we  were  Worthy,  for  he  cannot
consistently  hesto  v  44  pearls  noon
swiri'\"  No  blessing  or  yood  will  he
withheld  from  those  who  are  prepared
and  worthy  to  receive  and  make  a
wise  use  of  it The  kingdom  of

God  is  to  be  enj  iyed  by  the  Stints —
those  who  are  righteous,  not  those
who  are  wicked.  If  we  prove  un-
worthy1Zion  will  have  to  be  redeemed
by  our  chdlreu,  who  m  t  y  be  more
worthy,  win  I1  we  may  be  kept,  liko
(lie  ancient  children  of  Israel,  wan-
dering in  the  wildt-rness,  enduring
hardships,  ptrsecurion  and  tiinls,
until  we  shall  have  suffered  the
penal'y  nf  THndenfrd,  not  to  say  bro-
ken and unfulfilled  c-ivt-nants,

Mty  the  Lord  bless  us  all  that  we
may  prow  ourselves  faithful  arid  etli-

cieut  servants  Bitito  him,  is  my  prayer
in  the  name  of  Jesus,  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER CHARLES C.  RICH,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  £alt  Lake  City,  Saturday

Afternoon,  May  12,  1877*


(Reported  hj  Geo.  fi\  Gibbs.)


SAINTS  SHOULD  EE  WIIOLK-HEARTBD— SEEK  FIRST  THE  KINGDOM — TUB
LATTER-DAY  WORK  A  REVELATION— J  uSEPH  SMITH  ILLITERATE— OUR
AGENCY  ACCEPTS  OK  REJECTS— LOVE  OF  THE  TRUTH  PRuVED  MuKfi
BY  EXAMl'LB  THAN  PRECEFf — AN  IMPORTANT  GENERATION,


I  am  glad  to  enjoy  (he  opportu-
nity of  meeting  with  the  Ij-itter-day
Saints  in  this  Tabernacle  in  Cud-


ference,  under  circumstances  so  fVTo-
rable.  I  have  been  much  inteies^d
in  listening  to  the  instructions  we


SAINTS  SHOULD  BE  WHOLF-HEAltTRD,  ETC.


have  heard  this  day.  They  fire
words  uf  encouragement  to  the  faith-
ful, they  strengthen  the  weak,  they
enkindle  within  us  all  the  Hre  thut
burns  yet  not  consumes;  and  wh  are
stimulated  to  continue  in  the  good
fight  uf  faith  dt  spite  every  opposing
power.

We  embraced  the  principles  of
the  evci  t  i-t  iuij  Gospel  in  various
lands,  and  \\v  gathered  lu  re  for  the
expre.>a  purpose  of  learning  further
of  his  waysthit  we  im'-jIi*  wa  k  in
his  paths.  It  therefore  is  plain  and
easy  to  understand  the  great  obliga-
tion that  we  leive  placed  ourselves
under,  an  obligation  I  hat  Incomes
the  more  serious  antl  impoi  t ant  ns
we  count  l  he  \eais  uf  our  member-
ship  in  this  Church,  and  as  we
lave  had  opportunity.  To  b  come
efficient  lahorcis  in  the  kingdom,  is
that  we  learn  the  mind  and  will  i»f
God  concerning  us,  and  then  go
fori  li  and  do  it  to  the  v>  ry  best  of
our  abi  I  My  and  power.  Unless  we
seek  the  Lord  with  o<ir  whole  heart,
willing  to  sacrifice  a  I  for  hi  n  ami
his  cause,  we  cannot  be  "holly  ac-
*  cejHfd  of  him.

We  are  toll  by  revelation  that  all
hlMss  rigs  are  to  he  t 1  j  >yed  upon  the
,  principles  by  which  his  kingdom  c  m
9  be  built  up,  anil  upon  no  other.  It
would  be  in  vain  tor  us  to  imagine
that  *wtf  are  going  to  enjoy  the  bless-
ing of  the  celestial  world  by  a  I  opting
any  principles  we  may  choose^  or
that  may  be  suitable to  our  own
peculiar  ideas  and  fi  clings  Then
th-  ii  st  lesson  for  us  H)  learn  is  how
We  ean  best  become  ncq  tainted  with
the  wishes  of  our  V  iiner,  how  we
cart  i  est  use  our  time  and  our  talents

m

to  subserve  the  interests  or"  Ins  cau^e
here  upon  the  earth.  We  have
euteied  the  door  of  the  kingdom,

and I  hat is  about  all. Tr<e  actual

Work  vvfj  have  only  commenced,  and
who  cannot  see  that  it  is  of  the


greatest  importance  that  we  organize
ut >t  lves  that  ve  may  the  better
prosecute  our  lal)ors!  We  pray  that
the  will  of  God  may  he  done  on
earth  as  in  heaven.  What  dues  it
avail  us  if  we  do  not  seek  6rst  the
kingdom  of  God  and  all  its  right-
eousness? And  how  can  we  obey
this  divine  ii  junction  unless  we  seek
in  the  ritfht  and  proper  way  to  estab-
lish its  principles  in  our  hearts  and
lives,  giving  that  kinu  Join  and  its
government  a  foundation,  a  chance
to  develop  itself  into  the  proportions
it  event  u-dlv  will  do.

The  tendency  of  mankind  gene-
rally is  to  grality  a  craving  tot  this
world's  goods,  adopting  such  ways
as  will  best  secure  to  them  their
heart's  desire;  this  really  is  their
aim  and  oljVet  of  life.  When  we
n  fleet  that  we  live  in  this  important
age,  when  God  our  heavenly  Father
lias  again  spoken  to  the  children  of
men,  reve«  hilt  to  them  his  designs
and  purposes  and  the  only  way  to
tie  S4ved,  it  is  time  for  us  to  awake
to a se:  ae  of  duty and  prepare

ourselves  in  all  readiness,  for  he
Hoes  not  speak  in  vain;  all  must
be  fid  tilled  even  as  it  is  written,
whether  we  individually  take  part  in
it  or  not.

Tne  Lord  will  have  a  people
trained  in  the  school  of  experience
until  they  shall  be  prepared  to  re-
ceive him  when  he  tdml!  come  to
dwell  upon  the  earth  for  the  space
of  a  thousand  years.  This  we  un-
derstand; we  have  been  taught  it
by  divine  instruction,  and  it  is  for
us  to  be  willing  to  be  taught  and  to
be  used  in  accomplishing  the  pre-
paratory  work.  He  has  al^o  de-
clared by  the  voice  of  ids  servants
whom  he  has  raised  up,  and  by  bis
own  voice,  that  the  wicked  and
those  who  delight  in  abominations
he  will  overthrow  as  individuals
and  as  nations ; and  in  the  place


28


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


thereof  lie  will  have  a  ri^h terns
people  who  will  fear  and  obey  him

in  all  things.  This  his  been
preached  to  the  world  now  for  nearly
half  a  century,  an  1  we  are  Mill
declaring  it  We  know  hot  how
many  will  hearken  to  this  warning
voice,  but  w&  do  know  that  his'ory
in  forms  us  that  Noah  preached  one
hundred  and  twenty  years,  warning
the  people  of  threatened  judgments,
preaching  to  them  the  way  of  life,
with  but  very  little  success.  The
word  oi  t he  Lud  through  Noah  was
verified  and  hdiilled  even  as  he  had  I
dec  I  ii  red  it.

The  words  of  the  L  »rd  were  la-
mentably fulfilled  on  the  beads  of
his  chosen  seed,  because  they  r*  j+  cu*  1
the  s  i me  Gospel  message  which  was
sent  unti*  them,  Aral  the  L  «rd  has
said  that  in  the  last  days  his  word
should  be  verified  as  in  former  times.
True,  the  message  might  b  ■  lightly
esteemed,  and  they  that  b  ar  i r ,  as
well  as  those  that  receive  ir,  mav  be
stt  at  nought,  just  in  the  manner
that  his  word  and  people  always
have  been  t re  ded  by  the  world  of
mankind  generally.

This  Latter-day  work  has  been
commenced  hy  an  illiterate,  un-
learned boy  ;  but  like  the  leaven  that
was  put  into  the  measures  of  meal,
it  has  wotked  until  already  it  a'traet*
not  only  the  attention  of  men  ot
high  and  low  birth,  but  of  nations.
And  although  its  advocates  have,  as
a  gin  end  thing,  been  persons  of
humble  birth  and  of  limited  oduci-
lion,  where  has  appeared  the  man
that  has  succeeded  in  gainsaying
1hern,  and  proving  false  the  prmci
pies  they  teach?  That  individual
is  yet  to  be  found;  he  cannot  be
found  nor  never  will  be,  for  it  is  the
truth,  we  bear  the  new  and  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  wh  eh  is  i  neon  trover-
til  >le.  And  still,  with  all  this  before
the  world,  how  few  comparatively


henrken  to  and  obey  the  message  !
and  how  many  imperfections  we  find
existing  among  ml  We  need  care-
ful and  gradual  training,  to  be
taught,  a  lit  tie  now  and  again;  and
many  times  we  find  ourselves  almost
ready  to  relinquish  our  hold  on  eter-
nal life,  having  need  to  he  converted
agniii  tr>  the  truth;  And  yet  we  cull
ourselves  Litter-day  Saints.

Toe  question  that  oft  limes  ar-
rests mv  attention  is,  if  we  receive
not  the  'ruth  as  it  is  presented  to  us
here,  will  we  be  Killing  to  hereafter?
Some  people  imagine  that  when  we
piss  from  i his  stu^e  of  our  being-  we
shall  nil  be  in  a  condition  to  receive
truth  whether  we  reeeived  or  rejected
it  while  upon  this  earth*  It  is  by
reason  of  our  agency  that  we  reject
truth  and  accept  evil;  and  we  will
tin  I  when  we  l'o  hence  that  we  shall
stdl  be  p  ssfssed  of  the  same  agency;
and  if  we  were  not  willing  to  receive
the  truth  in  this  world,  what  assurnnce
have  we  that  our  agency  Will  not  lead
us  to  nject  truth  hereafter.  If  Lat-
ter-day Stints  cannot  endure  to  the
end,  if  thev  cmuot,  in  their  hearts
receive  as  well  ss  practice  all  of  the
principles  of  the  tlospel  as  they  are
made  knovn  to  them  hy  his  ser-
vants, it  is  lolly  in  the  extreme  for
us  to  allow  ourselves  to  believe  that
by  rejecting  certain  principles  here
we  wid  be  able  to  practice  them  in
the  world  to  come.

We  will  also  find  that  there  are
Certain  things  that  can  be  performed
in  this  world,  that  peradvenruie  can-
not be  attended  to  anywhere  else.
Baptism  byi  n  nersion  is  an  ordinance
essen-ial  to  salvati  n  ;  it  is  the  door
to  tile  kingdom  and  none  can  be
saved  without  it;  and  it  is  an  ordi-
nance that  strictly  lie  longs  to  this
life.  There  are  also  certain  ordinan-
ces essential  to  our  exaltation  in  our
Fither's  kingdom  that  can  be  per-
formed only  in  Temples,  except  in


SAINTS  SHOULD  BE  1

certain  peculiar  circa  instances  ;  and
m  order  that  we  should  derive  their
benefit  we  are  called  upon  to  erect
these  sacred  edifices.  These  are
ordinances  all-important  in  their  na-
ture that  belong  to  this  life,  they
must  be  attended  to  here,  that  we
.might  bp  prepared  to  enter  upon  the
duties  of  the  life  to  come.

There  is  one  matter  that  has  re-
ceived a  great  part  of  ray  attention
parti  ulatly  of  late,  that  is  *  he  con-
forming of  ray  will  to  the  will  of  God,
not  only  pertaining  to  things  spiritual
but  also  to  things  temporal  usMXiiahd
with  ray  e very-day  life.  And  it
appear.*  to  me  that  we  as  a  people
hare  now  readied  that  stage  of  the
latter-day  v-urk  when  this  same  ques-
tion  is  brought  right  home  to  the
minds  of  all  who  claim  membership
in  the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God.
There  is  one  thing  he  will  require  of
us,  that  is  to  prove  by  example  as
well  ms  precept  that  we  love  him  be-
yond  any  and  everything  eke;  he
will  require  that  we  establish  beyond
a  duubt  that  our  affections  and  hearts
are  liis,  and  that  to  do  his  bidding
anil  further  the  interests  of  his  cause
is  oar  greatest  and  fondest  iWre,

Thero  seems  to  be  throughout  the
world  a  great  love  for  wealth.  It  is
true  that  riches  oft-times  secure  ease,
comfort  and  enjoyment.  But  then
the-e  are  indulgences  that  belong
only  to  this  life;  as  no  man  brought
anything  into  the  world,  so  none  will
take  anything  away.  What  then
may  we  expect  to  enjoy  in  the  here-
after ?  Such  blessings  only  as  are
secured  unto  us  through  the  sealing
ordinances  of  the  holy  Priesthood
which  reach  behind  the  veil.  While
reflecting  on  this,  would  it  not  be
well  for  us,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  to
also  imagine,  if  we  can,  our  feelings
if  through  un worthiness  on  our  part
we  should  find  ourselves  in  the  next
world  disappointed, I  think  that


HOLE- HEARTED, ETC.  29

when  we  consider  these  thing?,  that
compared  with  our  eternal  happiness
everything  else  is  small  and  of  lit-
tle moment.

There  is  much  required  at  our
hands,  we  have  not  only  to  lab for
ourselves,  but  for  our  dead  friendsf
whom  we  shall  meet  sooner  or  later*
If  when  we  renew  our  acquaintance
with  them  we  cm  tell  them  thai  we
officiated  in  the  Temple  ordinance*
for  them,  it  will  afford  us  joy  ag
well  as  them  ;  but  if  when  we  shall
meetrthem  we  are  not  the  bearers  of
such  welcome  intelligence,  feelings
of  remorse  will  overtake  us  in  not
having  done  our  duty,  when  opportu-
nity was  afforded  us  to  do  so.  These
are  some  of  my  reflections  relative
to  some  of  our  present  and  imme-
diate duties,

I  am  pleased  to  say  that  wherever
I  go  I  perceive  a  willingness  on  the
part  of  the  people  to  build  Temples,
and  also  to  become  united  in  esta-
blishing ourselves  upon  such  a  basis
as  will  make  us  independent  of  the
snrrounding  world,  producing  and
manufacturing  everything  we  need
for  use  and  wear,  and  thus  become
self-sustaining ;  so  that  when  Baby-
lon shall  fall  we  may  sustain  no  loss.

There  has  never  been  a  generation
of  time  so  important  as  the  one  in
which  we  live.  Our  prospects  too
are  peculiarly  and  unusually  encour-
aging, for  the  (.iospel  we  preach  will
never  be  taken  away  from  the  earth,
and  as  long  as  we  prove  faithful  we
will  maintain  our  rights  which  God
has  given  us,  There  is  a  prospect
too  of  our  posterity  living  when
peace  for  the  space  nf  a  thousand
years  shall  be  on  this  earth,  when  the
Savior  and  holy  beings  will  visit  with
men  in  the  flesh,  and  then  his  glory
will  surround  the  habitation  of  the
Saintn.  I  know  of  no  previous  dis-
pensation that  had  Mieh  encouraging
and  glorious  prospects.


30


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


Then  lot  me  s<iy  *o  the  Litter-Hay  1
Saints,  let  as  practice  the  piimaplrs
of  our  holy  religion,  be  willing  to  he
directed  tod  used  fur  the  tjool  of  our
Fathers  cause,  in  whatever  ciptcity


we  may  lv»  placed,  and  be  servants
911  I  Siinta  of  0  od  in  very  deed.  And
thai  litis  in  iy  he  our  happy  lot  in  my
prayer  in  the  n  rue  of  Jesus,  Auieu.


i


PRAYER  BY  EM)Kll  ORSON1  PIIATT,

OS THE OCCASION" OP D  K2>It;  ITTN"  .* TH  G PeM?L3 ^ITii AT hoflW  CaCHB

Coonty,  Utah,  on  Friday,  at  12  m  o clock May  IS  1877

(Reported  faj  Geo.  F.  OMx )


0  God,  the  Eternal  Father,  id  the  1
name  of  thy  Sun  Jesus  Christ,  thy
people  and  thy  servairs  have  mel
together  upon  this  ground,  fur  th
purpose  of  dedicating  the  flame  unfo
the  Lord  our  God,  for  bail  Kng  a
hoiJse  to  thy  name,  even  a  Tempi*1,
wherein  thy  servants  and  thy  hand-
maidens may  receive  such  bledflinga  -is
thou  hast  ordained  to  he  hi ^ovvcl
upon  thy  people,  that  are  pure  in
heart.  We  desire,  t  ur  Fuller,  thai
we  may  do  this  w  irk  "  jib  holiness
of  heart,  that  we  may  have  the  Sp  rit
of  the  L  >rd  our  God  to  rest  upon  u«f
tli at  we  may  dedicate  and  consecrate
this  place  to  be  m*»6t  holy — a  scred
and  holy  place  unto  thee,  whereon
may  be  erecterl  S  Tern  pie  that  shall
be  acceptable  in  thy  sight*  By  virtue
and  authority  of  thy  holy  Priesthood,
we  do  dedicate  and  coiitiecrato  this
Temple  site,  and  its  immediate  sur-
rouudingH,  We  pray  that  it  m.iy  he
sanctified,  that  the  foundation  thereof
may  be  steadfast,  that  it  may  be  per-
manent, even  as  a  rock.  1

We  pray  that  thou  wilt  bless  those
who  shall  labor  thereon ;  those  that


stnll  make  the  necessity  excavation
for  the  basement  story  ;  fho>e  that
sh  ill  q  tarry  the  rock,  <  r htT  from
thequo'riert  of  the  moimtniog  dt  of
the  v\il'e\s;  thti^e  aJio  shall  he
eui/aLf  d  n  eiroTi  and  have  the  super-
iuteiide  (Vol  t  ]  m  ^  phe  ;  finite  that
shall  >h  <(>  ■  and  c  it  fie-  niek  and
prepare  ■  hem  to  le  placed  in  their
pr-ipT  pita  hoi:  Hit1  bud  Hug;  those
who  shall  he  i*iiLf 'tf  *  l  m  dm  fittg  the
stand,  i he  lime  and  the  clay;  and  iti

wot  kin^  ihf  ui'Htar;  and  all  th««t>
tiiat  sh  itl  he  enffagt  J  m  an\  way  on
I  he  etven  >n  of  the  building  whether
in  corrjnv  rt.Ml  preparing  the  timbers,
nt  q  i  nrying  r  «ck,  <r  in  whatever
wro  k  they  may  bj  engaged,  [>eronn-
ttig  io  the  b  Hiding  of  thin  Temple,
that  they  may  he  preserved  by  thy
power,  tint  ihy  proper  ion  may  he
over  them,  that  thy  holy  angels
may  be  with  them,  and  that  they
may  I  ihor  with  their  mights  upon
theediBee,  until  it  shall  be  finished,
until  it,  shall  be  prepared  fir  a  snll

further  dedicatioo;  that  it  may  be
built  according  to  the  instructions
and  inspiration  and  revelations  of  thy


PHAYEK  BY  ELDER  ORSON  FRATT


31


Holy  Spirit,  that  si  nil  rest  more
f>|Keiillv  upon  the  First  Presidency
of  thy  Chore! i  ;  that  1 1*.  *u  wilt  te-
veal  to  theni  the  put  tern  of  this
hurtling,  and  all  tlnn^s  appertain-
ing to  its  entire  construction,  that
ti  e  same  Tiniy  be  given  to  them  by
the  inspiration  of  thy  Spirit;  that
thou  wilt  raise  up  those  who  shall
lie  skilled  workmen  to  adorn  and
lieHiitity  the  various  apartments,
and  l«-aiifify  sind  adorn  the  pulpifs
thut  shall  be  made  for  the  various
orders  an  l  presidents  of  thy  holy
Priesthood,  and  for  all  the  work  t1  at
shall  l>e  placed  upon  this  holy  Tem-
ple; th^t  for  strength,  and  tor  gran-
deur, and  for  beauty,  it  may  be  a
house  which  thou  shalt  del hr  in.
¥  i\  O  L  ird,  we  know  that  thou  hast
promts  d  ro  place  thy  name  in  the
Hmiimo  that  thy  people  build  to  thee,
if  ibey  ahall  do  t  >e  vvork  with  boll*
lies>  nf  beirt.  But  thou,  U  L  >rd,
iKvi  !h\st  in  he i ven,  in  thy  c<  lestial
ftbpde,  and  thou  art  clot  lied  with
fjM^iiii  s-,  ulory  and  power,  hut  yer
tli on  dost  condescend  to  have  holy
phices  here  upon  the  earth,  where
thou  canst  more  fully  manifest
thyself  to  thy  servants  and  hand-
in  ddenH. We  therefore  pray  that

the hoii*p which thy people  shall

erect  upon  this  spot  may  be  a  holv
place,  where  the  inhabitants  of
L  gan,  of  WYIUville,  of  Uyrum,
and  of  all  the  towns  and  counties
routj  1  abonr,  that.  shall  assist  in  the
wuik  of  budding,  inny  lie  abun-
dantly blessed  therein;  that  it  may
be  a  place,  a  holy  place,  a  holy
sanctuary  to  them;  that  those  of  thy
people  who  .shall  seek  thee  iu  thy
house,  and  shall  offer  their  prayers
an  i  t  heir  supplications  to  tbee,  may
b-  heard  in  heaven,  thy  dwelling
place,  and  their  petitions  be  answered
to  them,  according  to  t he  righteous-
ness of  their  hearts.

We  pray  that  thy  blessing  may  be


!  upon  all  those  upon  whom  thou  bast
laid  this  duty  of  erecting  this  Tem-
ple, that  they  may  be  stirred  up  with
great  energy  and  much  faith,  to
devote  their  means,  and  their  ability
and  talents,  and  all  that  thou  hast
^iven  to  them,  to  perform  the  work
rh  u  thou  hast,  through  thy  servants,
required  at  their  hands;  that  they,
when  it  is  completed,  may  hive  a
phice  in  this  House;  that  they  may
receive  ordinances  therein;  that  it
may  be  a  house  wherein  they  caa
minister  for  themselves,  in  their
washings,  in  their  anointings,  in
their  endowments,  in  their  baptisms
for  their  dead,  in  their  confirmations,
and  in  their  sealing  ordinances ;  that
iu  all  of  these  things  thy  people  may
accomplish  the  work  which  is  required
of  them,  in  this  House;  and  that
records  thereof  may  he  kept,  and
that  there  may  be  a  place  in  thy
Utilise  for  the  holy  records  of  thy
Church — records  that  shall  be  ao
ceptable  in  thy  sight,  records  that
shall  be  most  holy,  and  stand  to  the
justification  of  thy  people  who  ad-
minister therein,  and  those  who
receive  ordinances  therein,  whether
for  themselves  or  their  dead  ;  that
out  of  all  these  books  thy  people
may  be  judged,  according  to  their
works,  according  to  that  which  they
do,  in  thy  name,  with  uprightness  of
heart,  , ;  ^  *

Now,  holy  Father,  we  ask  thee  to
bless  this  I\  mple  site,  this  land  on
which  this  Huuse  shall  be  erected.
Bless  the  elements  thereof,  that  the
same  may  be  sanctified  and  purified
and  made  holy.  Bless  the  waters
that  come  down  from  the  mountains,
whether  they  shall  be  conveyed  in
ditches,  or  aqueducts,  or  canals,  that
they  may  be  blessed  and  made  pure,
for  the  purposes  for  which  they  shall
be  used,  in  thy  holy  Temple,  We
pray  that  thou  wilt  not  only  bless  the
place  of  the  building,  but  all  its


32  JOURNAL  OF

go  rron  ndincfs  ;  TjIg^s  tlii  3  pi  a  tie  or
bench,  and  the  sheets  around,  and
the  si  incite  Irees  which  are  for  the
purpose  of  ornamenting,  that  thy  '
blessing  may  he  upon  them,  thai  they
may  grow  to  beautify  the  place  uf  this
sanctuary,  that  then*  may  be  a  place
where  thy  people  shall  delight  to
congregate  I  hem-elves,  and  wherein
they  shall  delight  to  enter  into  holy
communion  in  supplication  to  the
Jlo*t  High,  and  to  hold  holy  converse
one  with  another.

May  thy  blessing  h?  upon  all  those
of  thy  people  who  reside  in  this  '
county  ainl  the  surrounding  counties,
that  shall  do  this  work,  that  they
may  be  blessed  to  their  bis  kef  and
stores — blessed  in  their  orchards  and
garden*,  in  their  farms  and  fi  nits.
Wilt  tin j  i,  O  Lord,  restrain  the  c  dd-
ness  of  the  climate,  the  frosts  and
the  snows,  that  they  may  not  fall
npoa  the  earth  out  of  season,  that
the  earth  may  not  fail  to  yield  to  thy
people  rich  harvests,  that  they  may
reap  and  gather  in  great  abundance?
May  thy  blessings  be  upon  all  the
labors  of  their  hands,  and  grant  that
their  flocks  may  be  ureal  ly  increased
and  multiplied.  Wilt  thou  bless
their  labors  in  their  endeavors  to
beautify  their  habitations,  and  in
plan  ingout  shade  trees  to  make  this
a  delightful  place,  upon  this  lh\
footstool  ?

0  Lord,  bless  hitn  w!,om  thou  hast
inspired,  even  thy  servant,  President
Bribfharn  Young,  to  say  to  thy  people, ,
** Build  to  the  Lord  a  house  in  this
part  of  the  Territory,"  Bless  him,
O  Lord,  with  long  life;  bless  him  with
exceedingly  great  health  and  strength
of  body.  Remove  from  him  all  the
infirmities  of  old  age.  Grant,  (J
Lord,  that  he  may  live  to  see  this
House  erected,  fiuUhed  and  tet  in
order,  according  to  thy  righteous
will,  that  within  its  walls  he  may
rejoice  in  the  midst  of  his  brethren,


DISCOURSES.

and  not  only  Ike  to  soe  the  finishing
of  thin  Temple,  hat  to  behold  the
completion  of  tho  Te  n  pie  ro  be
erected  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  the
one  commenced  at  Muitr,  in  Smpete
County;  that  h>*  may  rejoice  and  be
made  glad  in  all  thy  goodness,  and
itt  beholding  the  beauty  of  the  works
of  t»ie  hands  of  ihy  people,  and  thy
blessings  t h  it  shall  be  in  their  midst.
Bless,  0  Lord,  It  is  fenerations  after
him,  that  they  may  rise  up  and  bo
mighty  men  in  the  earth  ;  that  they
may  be  clothed  with  t he  power  and
the  .spirit,  so  &<  undanlly  manifested
upon  their  reftptcted  father;  and  may
his  descendant**,  in  all  generations,
enjoy,  even  more  abundantly,  au pe-
ril ir  wisdom  and  knowledge  and  un-
nerstarniing  fro  n  the  heavens,  to
discern  in  their  >everal  callings  all
tl.ings  which  shall  tend  to  the  bless-
ing and  glory  and  futuie  ex.dtahon
and  pro^rvss  of  mankind  on  t fie
earth  ;  and  that  there  never  may  be
a  time  or  p*iiod,  in  all  the  genera-
tions of  this  world,  when  he  shall  not
be  represented  by  a  numerous  poste-
rity, who  s1' all 'enjoy  the  fullness  of
the  holy  Priesthood,  and  the  powers,
blegftinuB,  and  keys  thereof

Bless,  O  Lord,  his  Counselors  and
the  Council  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,
and  hi'  ss  all  who  preside,  not  only  in
this  Stake  of  Zmn,  when  it  shall  be
more  I  ally  set  in  order,  but  in  all  the
Stakes  of  Zion  throughout  these
mountain  regions.  Bless  this  whole
community,  that  they  may  be  pre-
pared to  enter  into  thy  House,  when
it  shall  be  completed,  with  clean
hands  and  pure  hearts.

May  blessings,  and  heavenly  mani-
festations, and  excellency  of  wisdom,
and  fullness  of  knowledge  be  the
portion  of  thy  Priesthood  and  of  thy
Saints,  throughout  all  their  dwelling
places,  but  more  especially  in  those
holy  places,  appointed  and  dedicated
unto  thy  great  name,  wherein  thoo


REMARKS  BY  PREST,  BRIGFIAM  YOUNG.  33

wilt  dwell  amon^  thy  people  forever-  ground,  by  thy  servants. All  of

mnf?f Hear,  O  Lord,  these  humble  which  we  humbly  do,  and  ask  for,  ia

petitions  *bf  thy  people,  and  raerci-  the  name  of  thy  beloved  San,  even

fully  accept  the  dedication  of  this  Jesus  Christ*  Amen.


REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,

MADB  AT  TUB  CLOSE  OF  THE  FOKKGOIXU  DEDICATORY  PRAYER.

(Reported  hy  Geo.  F.  Gihbs.)


Brethren,  if  you  will  give  me
your  attention,  I  will  say  a  few
words  to  you.  We  have  dedicated
this  spot  of  ground  opon  which  we
expect  to  erect  a  Temple,  in  whic'i
to  administer  the  ordinances  of  the
House  of  God.  Into  this  hou.se,
when  it  is  completed,  we  expect  to
enter  to  enjoy  the  bles>ings  of  the
priesthood,  and  receive  our  washings,
our  anointings,  oar  endowments,  and
oar  sealing;  and  the  brethren  will
be  so  iled  to  brethren  to  connect  the
links  and  make  perfect  the  chain
from  ourselves  to  Father  Adam.
This  is  the  object  of  the  Temple
which  we  are  about  to  commence
building  at  this  place,  We  require
the  brethren  and  the  sisters  to  go  to
with  their  might  and  erect  this
Temple;  and  from  the  architect  to
the  hoy  that  carries  the  drinking
water  to  the  men  that  work  on  the
building,  we  wisii  them  to  under-
stand that  wages  are  entirely  out  of
the  question.  We  are  going  to  build
this  House  for  out  selves,  and  we
shall  expect  the  brethren  and  sisters,
neighborhood  after  neighborhood,
ward  after  ward,  to  turn  out  their

No,  3*


proportion  of  men  to  come  here  and
labor  ms  they  eh  all  be  notified  by  the
proper  aat.horit.ies*

T  lis  may  be  called  a  temporal
work,  but,  it  pertains  to  the  salvation
of  ourselves  as  well  as  our  friends
who  have  pissed  behind  the  vail,
and  aid  J  to  the  generations  that  are
to  come  afrer  us.  We  can  carry  ting
Temple  forward  with  our  labor,
without  any  burden  to  oui selves  if
our  hearts  are  in  the  work,  mid  we
will  be  blessed  abundantly  in  doing
so.  We  will  be  better  off  in  our
temporal  aff  ors  when  it  is  completed
th-m  when  we  commenced,  or  than
we  would  be  if  we  did  not  build  it.

The  time  we  enjoy  is  the  Lord's,
but  we  have  the  permission  to  dictate
its  use  according  to  our  own  good
pleasure.  When  the  brethren  come
to  work  on  this  Temple  they  may
expect  to  be  blessed  of  the  Lord  in
proportion  to  their  faith.  We  feel
to  ask  the  brethrea  to  go  to  as  they
may  be  called  upon  by  those  who
shall  be  placed  to  take  charge  of  the
work,  and  complete  the  building  in
three  years  from  next  fall — I  think
it  can  be  done  within  that  time—

Vol.  XIX,


3*  JOURNAL  OF

that  we  may  come  up  aud  commence
to  give  endow  meats.  This  work  can
be  done  with  all  ease  in  that  time  if
we  are  disposed  to.

We  pray  fur  you  continually,  that
you  may  be  blessed.  I  feel  to  bless
you  according  to  the  power  and  keys
of  the  holy  priesthood  bestowed
upon  me,  and  my  brethren  with  me,
heart  and  hand,  and  all  the  Saints
feel  to  say  "  Amen,"  feel  to  bless
each  other,  feel  to  do  the  work  of
the  Lord,  and  dismiss  the  narrow,
contracted,  covetous  feelings  that  are
so  interwoven  with  the  feelings  of
our  natures. It  seems  hard  to  get


DISCOURSES.

rid  of  them,  but  we  must  overcome
them  and  unite  ourselves  together  in
the  holy  order  of  God,  that  we  may
be  Saints  of  the  Most  High,  with
our  interests,  our  faith  and  labors,
that  our  hopes  and  the  results  of  our
labors  may  be  concentrated  in  the
salvation  of  the  human  family.

Brethren  aud  Sisters,  try  to  realize
thess  things.  Awake  and  lay  these
things  to  heart.  Seek  to  the  Lord
to  know  his  mind  and  will,  and  when
you  ascertain  it  also  to  have  the  will
to  do  it

God  bless  you,  Amen.


REMARKS BY ELDER JOHN  TAYLOR,


On  the  Temple  Gkoufd.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F,  Gibbs.)


I  feel  to  rejoice  to  see  the  work  of
God  progressing  as  it  is  to-day,  and
to  witness  the  spirit  and  feeling  that
are  being  manifested  among  the
Saints  everywhere  throughout  the
Territory  for  the  advancement  of
His  Church  and  Kingdom  on  the
earth.  In  my  visit  south  to  attend
Conference,  I  felt  to  rejoice  exceed-
ingly iu  seeing  the  Temple  com-
pleted at  St.  George.  It  is  a  most
beautiful  building,  pure  and  white  as
the  driven  snow,  both  outside  and
in.  It  is  elegant  in  design,  and
there  is  a  manifest  propriety  and
adaptability  in  all  its  arrangements.
The  labor  and  finish  exhibit  talent
and  artistic  skill  of  the  highest


order,  and  it  is  chaste,  exquisite,
appropriate,  and  beautiful  in  all  its
appoint  menta

Approaching  from  the  north,  with
the  black  basaltic  lava  mountain
f row oing  on  the  background,  and
the  grim  red  sandstone  nearer  its
base,  relieved  indeed  by  the  beautiful
city  of  St  George,  with  its  shrub-
beries, its  gardens  and  orchards,  its
vines,  its  trees  and  flowers,  it  stands
as  a  chaste  memorial,  a  sweet
elysium,  a  haven  of  repose,  in  this
beautiful  oasis  of  the  desert ;  and  is
a  proud  and  lasting  monument  of  its
originator  and  designer,  the  fidelity
of  the  architect,  the  skill  of  the
mechanics,  and  the  faith,  self-denial,


REMARKS  BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR


35


liberality  and  devotion  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints.

When  I  visited  that  holy  Temple,
accompanied  by  ray  brethren  who
were  with  me,  we  experienced  a
sacred  thrill  of  j^y,  and  a  solemn,
reverential  sensation.  As  we  entered
its  sacred  portals,  we  felt  t h  it  we
were  standing  on  holy  ground,  and
experienced,  with  one  of  old,  ''Surely
this  is  the  House  of  God,  and  the
gate  of  heaven."  That  is  not  simply  1
a  metaphorical  expression,  but  a
reality,  for  it  is  in  that  Hou&e,  and
it  will  be  in  the  House  to  be  built
on  t his  ground,  that  the  most  sacred
ordinances  of  God  are  to  be  per-
formed, which  are  associated  with
the  interest  and  happiness  of  the  I
human  family,  living  and  dead.  I
felt  to  rejoice  in  my  heart  that  we
had  beeu  thus  far  successful  in  the
building  of  one  temple  to  the  name
of  our  Father  and  God.

On  our  return  trim  St.  George,
when  we  came  to  Manti,  in  Sin  pete
County,  we  found  a  place  dedicated
and  set  apart  like  this  ground  has
been.  A  train  I  felt  to  rejoice  to
witness  the  spirit  and  feeling  that
were  manifested  among  the  brethren
in  that  district  of  country  ;  every-
body seemed  desirous  to  commence
the  work  of  building  the  Temple.
When  I  heaid  of  the  one  to  be
erected  here  my  joy  was  still  greater,
and  I  am  indeed  very  hippy  for  the
privilege  of  meeting  with  you,  of
taking  part  in  this  dedication,  of
listening  to  the  prayer  ot  Brother
Pratt  and  the  remarks  of  President
Young,  all  of  which  were  dictated
by  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  all


of  which  have  their  meaning,  and
ought  to  influence  onr  hearts  and
minds,  and  lead  us  to  take  a  deep
and  abiding  interest  in  the  great  and
important  things  that  are  going  on
in  our  midst  and  around  about  us.
They  are  things  in  which  the  angels
and  gods  are  interested,  and  in  which
God  our  Father  is  interested,  and  all
the  ancient  prophets  and  holy  men
of  God  that  have  ever  lived ;  all  feel
j  interested  in  these  things  which  we
are  now  engaged  in,  and  all  stand
ready  to  approve  of  our  works.  If
we  go  to  work  with  all  our  hearts
and  with  all  our  souls,  we  can  accom-
plish it  within  the  time  the  Presi-
dent has  given  us.  Yes,  I  will
1  venture  to  say  we  can  do  it  in  two-
and-a-half  years,  instead  of  three-
and-a-half  years.  If  we  can  lay
aside  our  narrow,  contracted  ideas,
■  and  feel  that  we  are  servants  of  the
living  God,  that  we  are  operating
and  co-operating  with  Him  and  with
the  holy  Priesthood  behind  the  veil
for  the  accomplishment  of  this  object,
then  the  power  and  blessing  of
Almighty  God  will  be  upon  us  and
be  within  us,  and  we  will  feel  like
giants  refreshed  with  new  wine,  and
!  the  work  of  God  will  roll  on,  Zion
will  arise  and  shine,  and  the  glory  of
Gi;d  will  rest  upon  her.

I  say  **  Amen  "  to  the  prayer  of
Brother  Pratt,  and  to  the  remarks  of
President  Young,  and  I  say  God
bless  our  President  and  his  Coun-
selors, God  bless  the  Twelve,  aud  God
bless  the  Presidents  and  Bishops  and
every  good  man  that  fears  him  and
keeps  his  commandments.  Amen.


3G  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT B  HIGH  AM  YOUNG,
Delivered  at  a  Special  Conference  held  at  Farminoton,  fob  thb

PURPOSE  OF  ORGANIZING  A  STAKE  OF  ZiOS  Full  THE COUNTY  OF  DavIS,

on  Sunday  afternoon,  Juisk  17,  1877*
{Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Glbhs)


TRYING  TO  BE  SAINTS  —Tit EASURRS  OP  THE  EV KR LASTING  HILLS— THE
HILL  00MORAH— OBKIUENCE  Tu  TRUE  ITtlNCIFLE  THE  KEY  TO  KNOW-
LEDGE— ALL  ENJOYMENT  COMES  FROM  GOD — ORGANIZATION — DUi'iES
OF  OFFICERS— FINAL  RESULTS.


I  esteem  it  a  privilege  to  meet
with  tl Hi  Latter  day  Saints.  I  have
visited  Farniiugton  many  times,  and
I  can  say  that,  as  a  gen  oral  thing  in
attending  your  meetings,  I  have  felt
much  of  the  peace  and  blessings
that  flow  from  heaven  to  this  people.

I  have  no  doubt  that  the  majority
of  the  people  called  Latter-day
Saints  desire  really  to  be  Saints ;
were  it  not  for  this  I  might  feel
partially  discouraged.  The  people
who  are  honest,  who  are  seeking  to
know  and  to  understand  the  truth,
they  are  the  ones  who,  so  far  as
their  faith  and  good  works,  and
their  influence  and  ability  are  con-
cerned, sustain  the  kingdom  that
God  has  commenced  to  establish  on
the  earth.  When  we  consider  the
condition  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  see  how  many  there  are  who
seem  to  have  their  eyes  fixed  upon
the  things  of  this  world,  things  that
are  not  lasting,  but  that  perish  in
the  handling,  and  how  anxious  they
are  to  obtain  them,  how  do  you
think  I  feel  about  it?  We  see  many
of  the  Eiders  of  Israel  desirous  of


becoming  wealthy,  and  they  adopt
any  course  that  they  think  will
bring  them  riches,  which  to  me  is  as
unwise  as  anything  can  be — to  see
men  of  wisdom,  men  that  seem  to
have  an  understanding  of  the  world
and  of  the  things  of  God,  searching
after  minerals  throughout  these
mountains;  they  traverse  the  hills,
and  they  dig  here  and  there,  and
keep  digging  and  picking,  and  rolling
the  rocks  from  morning  till  night.
This  chain  of  mountains  has  been
followed  from  the  north  to  the  south,
.  and  its  various  spurs  have  been  pros-
I  peeled,  and  what  do  they  find?
Just  enough  to  allure  them,  and  to
finally  lead  them  from  the  faith,  and
at  last  to  make  them  miserable  and
poor.  Ask  the  brethren  why  they
do  this,  and  the  ready  reply  will  be,
**Is  it  not  my  privilege  to  find  a
gold  mine,  or  a  silver  mine,  as  well
as  others r!"  As  far  a>  1  am  con-
cerned I  would  say,  u  Yes,  certainly
;  it  is  your  privilege,  if  you  can  find
one."  But  do  you  know  how  to
find  such  a  mine  %  No,  you  do  not,
These  treasures  that  are  in  the  earth


are  carefully  watched,  they  can  be
removed  from  place  to  place  accord-
ing to  the  good  pleasure  of  Him
who  made  them  and  owns  them.
He  has  his  messengers  at  his  service,
and  it  is  just  as  easy  for  an  angel  to
remove  the  minerals  from  any  part
of  one  of  these  mountains  to  ano-
ther, as  it  is  for  you  ami  me  to  walk
up  au  l  down  this  hall.  This,  how-
ever, is  not  understood  by  the
Christian  world,  nor  by  us  as  A
people.  There  are  certain  circum-
stances that  a  number  of  my  bre-
thren and  sisters  have  heard  me
relate,  that  will  demonstrate  this  so
positively,  that  none  need  doubt
the  truth  of  what  I  say.

I  presume  there  are  some  present
who  have  heard  me  narrate  a  cir-
cumstance with  regard  to  the  dis-
covery of  a  gold  mine  in  Little
Cottonwood  Canon,  and  I  will  here
say  that  the  specimens  taken  from
it,  which  I  have  in  my  possession  to-
day, are  as  fine  specimens  of  gold
as  ever  were  found  on  this  continent.
A  man  whom  some  of  you  will
well  know,  brought  to  me  a  most
beautiful  nugget  r  told  hhn  to  let
w  mine  alone.

When  General  Conner  came  here,
he  did  considerable  prospecting ;
and  in  hunting  through  the  Cotton-
woods,  he  had  an  inkling  that  there
was  gold  there*  Porter,  as  we
gtMierally  call  him,  came  to  me  one
py,  saying,  "They  have  struck
within  four  inches  of  my  lode,  what
shall  I  do  V  He  was  earned  away
Hith  the  idea  that  he  must  do  some-
thing. I  therefore  told  him  10  go
with  the  other  brethren  interested,
ami  make  his  claim.  When  he  got
through  talking  I  said  to  him,
Porter,  you  ought  to  know  better;
you  have  seen  and  heard  things
which  I  have  not,  and  are  a  man  of
long  experience  in  this  Church.  1
want  to  tell  you  one  thing;  they


may  strike  within  four  inches  of
that  lode  as  many  times  as  they
have  a  mind  to,  and  they  will  not
find  it."  They  hunted  and  hunted,
hundreds  of  them  did  :  and  I  had
the  pleasure  of  laughing  at  him  a
little,  for  when  he  went  there  again,
he  could  not  find  it  himself*
(Laughter.)

Sometimes  I  take  the  liberty  of
talking  a  little  further  with  regard
to  such  things,  \Orin  P.  Rockwell
is  an  eye-witness  to  some  powers  of
removing  the  treasures  of  the  earth.
He  was  with  certain  parties  tha£
lived  near  by  where  the  plates  were
found  that  contain  the  records  of
the  Book  of  Mormon.  There  weri
a  great  many  treasures  hid  up  by
the  Nephites.  Porter  was  with
them  one  night  where  there  were
treasures,  and  they  could  find  them
easy  enough,  but  they  could  not
obtain  them*

1  will  tell  you  a  story  which  will
be  marvelous  to  most  of  you.  It
was  told  me  by  Porter,  whom  I
would  believe  just  as  quickly  as  any
man  that  lives.  When  he  tells  a
thing  he  understands,  he  will  tell  it
just  as  he  knows  it  ;  he  is  a  man
that  does  not  lie.  He  said  that  on
tliis  night,  when  they  were  engaged
hunting  tor  this  old  treasure,  they
dug  around  the  end  of  a  chest  for
some  twenty  inches.  The  chest
was  about  three  feet  square.  One
man  who  was  determined  to  have
t  Yv  eouteni ;  of  I  hut  dust,  took  his
pick  and  struck  into  the  lit  I  of  it,
and  split  through  into  the  chest*
The  blow  took  off  a  piece  of  the  lid,
which  a  certain  lady  kept  in  her
possession  until  she  died.  That
chest  of  money  went  into  the  bank.
Porter  describes  it  so  [making  a
rumbling  sound] ;  he  says  this  »
ust  as  true  as  the  heavens  are*  I
aave  heard  others  tell  the  same
story. I  relate  this  because  it  Si


38


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


marvelous  to  you.  But  to  those
who  understand  these  things,  it  is
not  marvelous.

You  hear  a  great  deal  said  about
finding  money.  There  is  no  diffi-
culty at  all  in  finding  money,  but
there  are  a  great  many  people  who
do  not  know  what  to  do  with  it
when  they  do  find  it.  This  is  the
great  defect  with  the  human  family.
I  could  relate  many  very  singular
circumstances.  I  lived  right  ri
the  country  where  the  plates  were
found  from  which  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon was  translated,  and  I  know  a
great  many  things  pertaining  to
that  country.  I  believe  I  will  take
the  liberty  to  tell  you  of  another
circumstance  that  will  be  as  marve-
lous as  anything  can  be.  This  is
an  incident  in  the  life  of  Oliver
Cowdery,  but  he  did  not  take  the
liberty  of  telling  such  things  in
meeting  as  I  take*  I  tell  these
tilings  to  you,  and  I  have  a  motive
for  doing  so.  I  want  to  carry  them
to  the  ears  of  my  brethren  and  sis-
ters, and  to  the  children  also,  that
they  may  grow  to  an  understanding
of  some  things  that  seem  to  be
entirely  hidden  from  the  human
family,  Oliver  Cowdery  went  with
the  Prophet  Joseph  when  he  deposi-
ted these  plates.  Joseph  did  not
translate  all  of  the  plates  ;  there
was  a  portion  of  them  sealed,  which
you  can  learn  from  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants.  When
Joseph  got  the  plates,  the  angel  in-
structed him  to  carry  them  back  to
the  hill  Cumorah,  which  he  did.
Oliver  says  that  when  Joseph  and
Oliver  went  there,  the  hill  opened,
and  they  walked  into  a  cave,  in
which  there  was  a  large  and  spacious
room.  He  says  he  did  not  think,
at  the  time,  whether  they  had  the
light  of  the  sun  or  artificial  light ;
but  that  it  was  just  as  light  as  day.
They  laid  the  plates  on  a  table ;  it


was  a  large  table  that  stood  in  the
room.  Under  this  table  there  was  a
yule  of  plates  as  much  as  two  feet
high,  and  there  were  altogether  in
this  morn  more  plates  than  probably
many  wagon  loads  ;  they  were  piled
up  in  the  corners  and  along  the
walls.  The  first  time  they  went
there  the  sword  of  Laban  hung  upon
the  wall  ;  but  when  they  went  again
it  had  been  taken  down  and  laid
upon  the  table  across  the  gold  plates;
it  was  unsheathed,  and  on  it  was
written  these  words  :  "This  sword
will  never  be  sheathed  assiin  until
the  kingdoms  of  this  world  become
the  kingdom  of  our  God  and  his
Christ/'  I  tell  you  this  as  coming
not  only  from  Oliver  Cowdery,  but
others  who  were  familiar  with  it,
and  who  understood  it  just  as  well
as  we  understand  coming  to  this
meeting,  enjoying  the  day,  and  by
and  by  we  separate  and  go  away,
forgetting  most  of  what  is  said,  but
remembering  some  things.  So  is  it
with  other  circumstances  in  life.  I
relate  this  to  you,  and  I  want  you  to
understand  it.  I  take  this  liberty
of  referring  to  those  things  so  that
they  will  not  be  forgotten  and  lost,
Carlos  Smith  was  a  young  man  of
as  much  veracity  as  any  young  man
we  had,  and  lie  was  a  witness  to
these  things.  Samuel  Smith  saw
some  things,  Hymm  saw  a  good
many  things,  but  Joseph  was  the
leader.

Now,  you  may  think  I  am  unwise
in  publicly  telling  these  tilings,
thinking  perhaps  I  should  preserve
them  in  my  own  breast  ;  but  nuch
is  not  my  mind.  I  would  like  the
people  called  Latter-day  Saints  to
understand  some  little  things  with
;  regard  to  the  workings  and  dealings
of  the  Lord  with  his  people  here
upon  the  earth.  I  could  relate  to
you  a  great  many  more,  all  of  winch
are  familiar  to  many  of  oar  brethren


and  sisters.  J

Now,  should  you  go  prospecting
for  gold  or  silver,  you  will  fbd  just
enough  to  allure  ynu  and  to  destroy
you.  But  it  might  be  said,  "Are
not  the  earth  and  the  treasures  the
property  of  the  Lord  who  created
them,  and  will  he  not,  according  to
the  promise,  give  them  to  his  faith*
ful  disciples  ?"  O  yes,  this  is  strictly
correct ;  but  you  mark  this — the
man  who  is  faithful  to  his  calling
and  to  this  holy  Priesthood,  never
goes  hunting '  for  gold  or  silver,
unless  he  is  sent.  Such  men  are
found  following  their  legitimate
pursuits,  working  in  their  fields,  in
their  workshops  and  gardens,  making
beautiful  their  habitations;  in  other
words,  engaged  building  up  and
assisting  to  establish  the  Zion  of
God  on  the  earth,  with  their  minds
centered  on  the  true  riches  and  not
upon  the  things  of  this  world.
People  do  not  know  it,  but  I  know
there  is  a  seal  set  upon  the  treas-
ures of  earth ;  men  are  allowed
to  go  so  far  and  no  farther,  I  have
known  places  where  there  ,  were
treasures  in  abundance  ;  but  could
men  get  them  ?  No.  You  can  read
in  the  Book  of  Mormon  of  the  an-
cient Nephites  holding  their  treas-
ures, and  of  their  becoming  slip-
pery; so  that  after  they  had  private-
ly hid  their  money,  on  going  to  the
place  again,  lo  and  behold  it  was
not  there,  but  was  somewhere  else,
but  they  knew  not  where  The
people  do  not  understand  this;  I
wish  they  did,  for  they  would  then
do  as  I  do,  pay  attention  fo  the  legi-
timate business  that  God  has  given
them  to  perform,  Do  I  run  after
mines  or  digging  holes  in  the
ground  ?  No,  not  at  all.  It  is  like
the  will-o'-the  wisp,  a  jack  o'- lantern.
Yuu  ask  our  business  men,  or  go
to  California,  and  enquire  there
whether  it  pays  to  hunt  for  gold.


I  will  venture  to  say  there  never
was  a  dollar  taken  from  the  moun-
tains ot  California,  neither  from
these  mountains  west,  nor  from  out
of  this  Territory,  but  what  cost
from  ten  to  one  hundred  dollars.
Do  you  believe  that  ?  It  is  said  a
great  deal  of  money  has  been  made
here  and  there.  Who  has  made  it  ?
Considerable  lead  has  been  taken
from  here,  and  a  little  silver ;  but
when  you  count  the  time  that  has
been  spent,  and  after  putting  a  fair
valuation  upon  it,  you  will  find
what  I  sav  to  be  a  fact,  to  say  no-
thing  of  the  live,  »„d  pn,pert/ th»t
are  lost  A  little  town  directly
west  of  here,  some  fifteen  months
ago,  contained  a  certain  number  of
men,  who  followed  mining.  We
calculated  their  time  at  the  rate  of
what  was  paid  for  common  labor;
and  then  we  ascertained' the  amount
realize!  from  the  treasure  taken  out
of  the  earth,  which  was  well  known ;
and  it  was  shown  that  they  spent
in  the  neighborhood  of  seven  hun-
dred dollars  a  day,  and  got  in  re-
turn about  thirty.  What  they  did
get  was  just  sufficient  to  allure
them.

The  Lord  has  permitted  our  ene-
mies to  come  among  us,  who  would
destroy  us  if  they  could.  They  are
only  allowed  to  allure  the  minds  of
the  foolish  and  those  who  lack
judgment  and  who  know  not  the
things  of  God,  But  when  we,  as
individuals  and  as  a  people,  learn
1  things  as  they  are,  we  will  find  this
fact — all  truth  is  worthy  and  worth
possessing,  while  all  untruth  is  not
worthy  nor  worth  running  after,  nor
working  for,  nor  spending  our  lives
for.  The  Gospel  of  life  and  salva-
tion which  God  has  revealed  to  ui,
incorporates  all  the  systems  there
are.  Every  true  principle  and  every
true  science,  and  every  truih  there
is,  are  incorporated  within  the  faith


10


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES


of  the  Latter-day  Sainta  Tliis  is
something  worth  possessing,  this  is
Worth  spending  our  time  fur;  but
the  religions  of  the  day,  inde-
pendent of  their  moral  worth,  are
nothing  but  a  myth,  a  shadow  ;  there
is  no  reality  in  them.  But  when  you
come  to  (he  philosophy  ol  die  religion
of  heaven,  you  have  facts  in  your
possession  t fiat  are  worth  having,
they  K*e  worthy  the  admiration  of
the  wise,  the  prudent,  the  noble,  the
great  and  those  Hint  seek  after  the
wisdom  tli at  comes  from  God,  and
the  Latter  Hay  Saints  are  in  posses-
eion  of  this  treasure!  What  are  we
doing  ?  If  we  were  the  people  of
God,  as  we  profess  to  be,  there
would  nut  be  a  dissenting  voice  in
all  Israel  in  obeying  the  Priesthno  I
It  was  observed  this  morning  by
brother  Cannon  with  regard  to
yielding  obedience,  that  we  were
call  d  upon  to  yield  obedience  be-
cause it  was  a  command  of  God,
and  uiir  faith  demands  obedience.
To  what  i  Why  ?  Wherefore  P
Obedience  to  every  principle  of  truth*
What  for  ?  So  tli  ;it  we  rnav  o+  dmie
possessor  of  all  truth.  Why  should
we  do  it  ?  Because  it  gives  us
health,  it  gives  us  wealth,  it  gives  us
knowledge,  it  gives  us  power,  ii
gives  us  beauty,  it  eives  us  excel*
Jency,  it  gives  us  treasures  on  the
earth  and  treasures  i it  heaven,  it
gives  us  a  knowledge  of  God  and
of  the  love  of  God,  ic  gives  us  fel-
lowship with  the  Saints  that  are
sanctified  and  glorified,  and  it  gives
us  all  things  that  will  promote
happiness  and  peace.  These  aie
the  reasons  why  we  do  it  Should
you  take  the  other  road,  what  do
you  get?  Nothing,  When  persons
turn  away  from  ihe  Gospel  of  the
Son  of  God,  what  do  they  turn  to  r
Nothing.  And  what  clo  they  turn
from  hereafter  ?  All  things  worth
possessing, everything that  men


and  the  G<h3s  can  possess  in  time
and  in  eternity.  Take  the  other
road,  and  you  get  a  shadow  for  the
time  being,  and  you  may  think  you
have  the  substance,  but  sooner  or
later  you  are  left  as  a  feather  Boat-
ing in  the  air,  or  worse  than  a  tdrip
upon  the  ocean*  wuhotit  compass
or  t udder,  deprived  of  the  light  of
the  sun,  the  moon  and  the  stars,
tossed  hither  and  thither  until  it
.sinks  to  ri>e  no  more.  In  order  to
yield  obedience  to  the  truth,  you
must  low1  the  tr  »th  and  have  the
fear  of  God  in  your  brails.  All
who  An  1  the  true  spirit  of  this  lat-
ter-day work  delight  in  the  truthf
they  delight  to  hear  the  truth,  arid
thev  delight  to  ob^y  the  truth;  it
is  their  delight  to  know  the  mind
and  will  of  God,  that  they  may
render  obedience  to  it  This  is  the
experience  of  every  faithful  man
and  woman  in  this  Cmuic  i,  J  jut
take  the  experience  of  the  apostates,
»nd  the  expeiience  of  those  who
have  risen  up  in  opposition  to  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  the  Gos-
jivl  hro  iLjht  forth  an  i  comaim-d  in
the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
rants  and  in  the  lio  -k  of  il  >nnon,
and  the  revelations  that  he  was  the
honored instrument in the  hands

of  God  o4  revealing  to  the  people;

those  that  ri.se  up  in  opposition  to
this,  who  are  they  and  u  hat  is
their  end  ? You  will  bear  one -fact

from  them: — "Brother  ,  have

you  enjoyed  yourself  since  resign-
ing *Mor:nonism  Y  Now  speak  the
t ruth.  Come,  tell  us  just  as  it  is.
Have  you  experienced  joy  and
happiness  since  having  the  king-
dom of  God  ? Come,  now,  don't

lie  !  " Brother  answers, k"  I

have  not  enjoyed  one  day's  peace
since  I  left  the  Church/'  This  is
the  declaration  of  the  apostates  to-
day, when  they  tell  the  truth  about
it. Ljok  at  iheir  countenances — is


TRYING  TO  EE  SAINTS,  ETC


11


there  happiness  depicted  there  ?  No,
it  is  sorrow  j  they  choose  error  in-
stead  of  truth,  they  love  darkness
rather than light, and the  end

thereof,  to  use  Scripture  language,
is  death. The  sorrow  thereof,  they
feel  every  day, fur  man's  spirit  i>
operated  upon  continually, We  are
as independent in our  orgMiiizn-
tion  as  the  Gods  are,  but  si  ill  we
are  creatures  ot  circumstances,  in-
fluenced by  the  spirits  and  by  the
powers  of eternity that  are  here
4u;d  round  about  us. We  are  here
and  are  operated  upon  by  them  iu
our orgartizttious. This is  (lie
place  where  every  man  commences
to  acquit*  the  germ  of  the  inde-
pendence that  is enjoyed in  the
heaven* Tlissa  influences,  in  com-
parison, are  like  the  cooling  breezes
from the mountains that  are  so
grateful  to  us,  that  revive  and  re-
fresh us,  that  give  u*  lite. But  on
the other  bund, here cornea  the
miasma  from  the  swamp,  bringing
disease and death, and  without
knowing we inhale  the  poisonous
air,  we  become  conscious  ot*  weak-
ness, we  feel  that  we  ate  taking
fever,  that  we  are  getting  siek — we
become  a  prey  to  the  enemy,  and
death  ensues. That  is  the  differ-
ence  between the two  influence
that  operate  continually  on  man-
kind. It  is  either  enjoyment  or
suffering. All  are  subject  to  these
elements  in  which  we  live.  Here
is  in 6  good  operating,  all  the  tunc
telling meu and women,  before
passing  the  ordeals  of  redemption,
that  they  must  repent,  that  then
the liuht  of  Christ,  wid be  up*n
then  from  time  to  time,  to  operate
upun  their  minds,  teaching  them —
you  are  doing  wrong,  you  are  say-
ing tbat  which is  not  right,  you
have  renounced  the  Book  of  Mor-
mun,  you  have  renounced  the  Doc-
trine and  Covenants,  you  have  re-


nounced Joseph,  your  en  down)  en  Is,
or  Celestial  Law.  When  they  ri>
veal  the  tt nth  of  their  hearts,  they
will  say,  as  Lyman  E.  Johnson
Si  id,  at  one  of  our  Qaornm  meet*
ii:ss,  after  he  had  apostarized  and
tried  to  put  Joseph  out  of  the  way,
Lyman  told  the  truth.  He  said*
t4  Brethren — I  will  cdl  you  kvthren
— I  w  II  tell  you  the  truth.  It  I
could  believe  *  Mormonism  * — it  is
no  matter  whether  it  is  true  or  not
—but  if  I  could  believe  *  Mormon-
ism*  as  I  did  when  1  traveled  with
you  and  preached,  if  I  possessed
the  world  I  would  give  it.  I  would
givft  anything,  I  would  suffer  my
right  hand  to  be  cut  uff,  if  I  could
believe  it  a^ain.  Then  I  was  full  of
joy  and  gladness.  My  dreams  were
pleasant*  When  I  awoke  in  the
morning  my  spirit  was  cheerful,  I
was  happy  by  day  and  by  night,  full
of  peace  and  joy  and  thanksgiving.
But  now  it  is  darkness,  pain,  sorrow,
misery  iu  the  extreme.  I  have  never
since  seen  a  happy  moment.."

Lyman  E.  Johnson  belonged  t<>  ;\ie
Quorum  of  the  Twelve  ;  he  was  the
tii. -st  man  called  when  the  Twelve
were  called;  his  name  was  first,
Brighain  Young's  second,  and  Hrl^er
U.  Kimball's  third.  The  testimony
that  he  gave  of  his  bitter  experience
in  the  testimony  that  every  apostate
would  give  if  they  would  tell  the
truth.  But  will  tiny  acknowledge
it  ?  No,  bec»u>e  they  do  not  want
to  tell  the  truth.

There  is  no  enjoyment,  no  happi-
ness, no  comfort,  therj  is  no  li^ht
to  my  path,  tor  me  there  is  no  real
pleasure  or  delight  only  in  the  ob-
servance of  truth  as  it  comes  from
God,  obeying  it  in  every  sense  of
the  word,  and  marching  forward  as  a
good  faithful  soldier  in  the  discharge
of  every  duty.  The  man  or  the
woman — perhaps  you  mny  think  it
presumptuous  in  me,  but  I  will  pro-


42  JOURNAL  OF

raise  yon  that  what  I  am  going  to
say  is  the  truth — who  has  embraced
what  is  called  "  Mormonism,"  but
which  is  nothing  more  or  less  than
the  Everlasting  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God,  who  when  counseled  by  men  of
God  holding  the  eternal  Priesthood
to  do  thus  and  so,  and  who  will  in-  |
dulge  in  a  spirit  that  will  prompt
him  to  say,  uGyes,  I  think  I  will
use  my  own  judgment-  I  think  I
have  discretion  as  well  as  you,  and
I  will  take  my  own  course,  I  can
attend  to  my  own  business  as  well  '
and  perhaps  a  little  better  than  any
one  else,  and  then  fore  I  don't  need
any  one  to  advise  me/*  I  say  the
man  or  the  woman  that  will  do  so,
thereby  taking  to  himself  or  to  her-
self strength  and  wisdom  to  counsel
themselves,  unless  they  repent,  turn
round  and  do  better,  they  will  go
into  darkness,  and  sooner  or  later
each  person  or  persons  will  apostatize
and  go  to  destruction*  Do  you  be-
lieve it  ?  It  is  just  as  true  as  the
sun  that  shines.  Is  it  hard  to  be-
lieve  ?  No,  it  is  the  easiest  thing
in  the  world  to  believe  the  truth.  It
is  a  great  deal  easier  to  believe  truth
than  error.  It  is  easier  to  defend
the  truth  than  to  defend  error,  It
is  necessary  that  the  religions  and
creeds  of  the  Christian  world  be  de-
fended by  the  most  able  and  learned
students,  in  order  to  make  them
popular  and  to  appear  as  true.  But
after  these  Christian  students  have
been  through  academies  and  colleges,
and  the  most  famed  seminaries  in  the
world,  and  after  they  have  studied
and  studied,  spending  a  life- time  in
the  acquisition  of  a  theological  edu-
cation, it  takes  but  one  of  our  buys,
with  the  aid  of  the  Bible  and  the
little  Catechism,  to  wind  them  up  as
you  would  an  old  clock.  This  lias
been  the  experience  of  many  of  our
boys,  and  when  they  started  out  from
their  homes  to  preach  the  Gospel,


DISCOURSES.

they  did  not  know  that  they  could
sav  anything  at  all  about  its  princi-
ples; but  when  they  have  come  in
contact  with  those  who  have  professed
much  an  I  who  have  undet taken  to
disprove  the  Gospel  as  taught  by  the
Latter-day  Saints,  their  minds  have
become  enlightened  and  passages  of
Scripture  have  come  to  them,  and
they  have  discomfited  their  oppo-
nents, so  that  they  have  had  nothing
to  say.  I  have  done  so  many  times
myself,  and  that  toowith  afe  v  words;
and  the  conversation  would  be  turned
to  something  else.  With  all  their
study  a  no!  learning,  and  with  all  the
philosophy  and  >cienee  there  is
brought  to  the  aid  of  talse  theories,
how  easy  it  is  to  believe  the  truth!
Itiamurh  easier  than  to  disbelieve
!  it.  Truth  commends  itself  to  every
'  honest  person,  it  matters  not  how
simply  it  is  told,  and  when  it  is  re-
ceived it  seems  as  though  we  hnd
been  acquainted  with  it  all  our  lives.
It  is  the  testimony  of  the  majority  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  that  when  they
first  heard  the  Gospel  preached,  as
contained  in  the  B  hie  and  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  although  entirely
new  to  them,  it  seemed  as  though
they  already  understood  it,  and  t!-at
they  must  have  been  tf  Mormons1'
from  the  beginning.

Well,  before  I  sit  down  I  will  pre-
sent to  the  congregation  the  names
of  three  of  our  brethren  whom  I  shall
recommend  to  form  the  presidency
of  this  3'ake  of  Zion,  which  will
comprise  Davis  County,  and  the  name
of  which  will  probably  bcFarmington
Stake  of  Zion.  (Here  Pres  Young
proposed  the  names  of  Wm.  R.  Smith
of  Gen t rev i Mo  as  President,  and
Christopher  Liyton  of  Kaysville
as  his  first  and  Anson  Call  of  Boun-
tiful as  his  second  Counselor).  I
know  some  of  yuu  wish  it  otherwise,
or  that  some  one  else  was  chosen  for
President ;  but  as  we  cannot  suit


TRYING  TO  BE  SAINTS*  ETC.


43


everybody's  desire  in  a  matter  of  this
kind,  we  have  to  centre  on  one,  and
I  h;tve  felt  to  suggest  the  name  of
brother  Smith.  (Each  name  was
put  separately,  and  each  vote  was
unanimous).

Before  presenting  the  names  of
brethren  to  compose  the  High  Coun-
cil, which  would  be  in  order  to  do,  I
propose  for  President  nf  the  High
Priests'  Quorum  the  name  of  Thomas
S.  Smith,  who  was  once  Bishop  of
this  place.  (Brother  Smith  was
unanimously  sustained  ;  and  brothers
Thomns  S/eele  and  Job  Welling  were
elected  as  his  Counselors,  without  a
single  dissenting  vote.  The  names  i
of  the  brethren  to  act  as  members
of  the  High  Council  were  also  pre-
sented and  sustained  in  a  similar
manner).

The  Wards  will  be  organized  here-
after ;  Bishops  will  be  placed  over
them,  with  their  two  Counselors,  nil
of  whom  will  be  ordained  High
Priests,  if  not  already  so  ordained, ;
and  t  hen  he  set  npart  to  act  in  their
several  offices.  They  then  will  form
a  court  ;  and  then  all  the  other  quo-
rums of  Priesthood  w  11  be  set  in
order.  For  what  ?  Paul  says,  " For
the  perfecting  of  the  Saints,  for  t ho
work  of  the  m  nistry,  for  the  edifying
of  the  body  of  Christ/1  But  whether
this  will  he  the  result  here  I  do  not
know.  All  I  know  is  that  it  should
be  so,  and  if  every  one  does  his  duty
and  lives  his  religion,  it  will  be  so.
(The  brethren  chosen  and  elected  to
till  the  several  offices  herein  named,
were  then  set  apait  to  act  therein.
The  President  then  continued — )

Just  a  few  words  to  the  Presidency
of  this  Stake  of  Zion.  It  is  now
their  duty  to  see  that  the  officers
within  their  jurisdiction  perform
their  several  duties,  it  is  sufficient
work  for  them  too  if  they  will  attend
to  it.  The  High  Council  I  hope  will
not  have  much  business  to  do* I  am


told  that  there  have  only  been  three
cases  during  the  last  twenty -three
years,  that  have  gone  for  trial  before
the  High  Council  from  Farmington,
That  is  doing  very  well.  To  the
now  acting-Bishops,  who  will  be
ordained  Bishops,  as  well  as  to  bro-
ther Hess,  who  I  believe  is  the  only
ordained  Bishop  in  the  county,  I  will
sav  that  you  will  now  be  required  to
look  after  your  several  Wards  more
assiduously  than  heretofore;  see  that
Teachers  are  diligent  in  the  perform-
ance of  their  duties,  and  that  all  diffi-
culties that  may  arise  atnong  the
brethren  of  the  Ward  be  settled,  if
possible,  by  the  Teachers ;  and  also
see  that  all  who  claim  membership  in
this  Church  observe  the  moral  law
of  our  religion.  We  shall  not  expect
to  hear  of  people  breaking  the  Sab-
bath, and  a  hundred  other  things  all
of  which  are  inconsistent  with  our
holy  callings,  and  opposed  to  the
accomplishment  of  the  work  that
the  Father  has  given  us  to  do.  Yoa
are  called  upon  now  to  make  your-
selves familiar  with  the  revelations
and  commandments  that  have  been
given  ns  of  the  Lord  for  our  perfec-
tion, for  our  sa  notification  preparatory
to  our  exaltation,  and  so  live  that  our
acts  and  conversations  may  conform
to  the  same.  We  expect  to  see  a
radical  change,  a  reformation,  in  the
midst  of  this  people,  so  that,  when  the
proper  authorities  shall  call  npon  yoa
to  do  thus  and  so,  every  one  may
bo  found  willing  and  ready  to  respond r
placing  himself,  with  all  he  com-
mands, for  the  up-hnilding  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  This  is  in  ac-
cordance with  a  revelation  given  to
this  Church  before  the  law  of  Tithing
was  revealed  ;  but  in  consequence
of  unbelief  and  imperfection  on  the
part  of  the  people  it  was  not  observed,
and  hence  a  law  more  adapted  to  their
condition  was  given,  namely,  that
of  Tithing. You  are  called  upon


44


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


bow  to  improve  your  ways,  to  seek
wtili  all  earnestness  for  an  increase  j
of  fnih  that  you  may  live  according
to  the  higher  law?,  which  is  your
privilege  to  do,  and  which  is  so  ne-
cessary for  ortr  peace  and  comfort  and
fur  the  good  order  of  p<  eiety  and  for
the  &alvHtion  of  the  Latter-dny  Sainta.
W  e  shall  look  lor  thtschnnge,  and  I
do  not  tli ink  we  shall  be  disappointed ;
if  at  all,  I  believe  it  will  prove  a
lifippy  disappointment  to  all  Israel,
b<  cause  of  the  threat  reformat iou  that
w til  be  efllcted  among  the  LiUer-
day  Saints

Brethren  and  listers,  we  feel  to
ble^tf  yun,  we  are  blessing  you  all  tin*
time,  and  God  is  blessing  yua.  See
how  lie  1 1 us,  tempered  Hie  elements;
bow  he  has  held  oar  enemies  in  check,
and  delivered  us  out  of  \\v\v  m -i>p
and  power ;  how  he  bus  prospered
us  when  we  have  confined  our  atten-
tion to  our  legi'imate  business;  anil
]  can  say  with  all  propriety  time  if
we  ha  I  strictly  followed  the  counsels
that  have  been  given  from  the  com-
mencement until  to-day,  instrad  of
being  in  such  poverty,  as  we  ate  iu
one  sense,  we  would  be  a  self-*su^r n iii-
iiiLT,  independent  people,  comnm  diny
ltd II  ions  jns'  as  easy  iis  we  now  com-
tnnnd  thousands.  But  how  unwise,
how  foolish  some  of  our  brethren  are!
I  am  ashamed  of  them,  and  their
condition  is  deplorable,  Lisiead  of
beautifying  their  homes  and  improv-
ing their  firms,  and  helping  to  re-
did m  the  corn  muni  ry  and  build  up
the  Zion  of  the  latter- d  ivs,  they  have
done — what  Y  Du{  holes  in  ilte
ground?  and,  I  do  nut  know  how
it  is  with  you,  but  go  to  Salt  Like
City,  a: jd  you  will  find  men  whose
experience  and  judgment  should  huve
taught  them  better  reaping  the  re-
sults of  their  folly — their  houses  and
lots  mortgaged,  their  farm,  also  many
are  in  this  condition,  and  most  of
them  will  lose  their  property.  They


wanted  a  little  more  money,  they
allowed  themselves  to  he  allured  and
they  lose  all.  1  myself  was  the
tnenfis  of  making  several  brethren  by
employing  them,  letting  H  em  have
business  to  attend  to  until  they  be-
came weahhy;  and  now  they  are  in
p.ivi  rty.  Whereas,  if  they  had  t.  ken
my  counsel  they  could  have  added  to
their  wealth  and  been  in  eood  com-
fortable ctrcnm&tHnces  to- day,  success
and  prosperity  would  Imve  n U ended
the  n,  peace  and  blessing  would  have
been  their  portbn,  and  they  in  turn
would  have  been  in  a  position  to  bless
others  of  their  brethren.  This  I  say,
with  all  confidence  and  assiirane. »  ;
but  no,  selfishness  and  covetonsness
blinded  them,  they  wanted  more  and
they  coveted  that  which  was  not  their
own  ;  and  if  they  have  not  already
S  'lisri I  ir,  I  c iti  tell  th-rn  that  weep-
ing, mourning  and  lamentation  will
overt. ke  them,  arid  this  they  bring
upon  themselves.

Let  us  take  the  c  mrse  p>inb A  out
and  we  will  avoid  trouble;  if  we  pay
attention  to  our  calling  we  will  be
blessed  abundantly,  b  >tli  temporally
and  spiritually;  and  when  it  shall  be
said  to  the  people,  Let  us  do  tins  or
that,  it-  will  he  done*  We  require
nothing  more  of  the  people  than  the
Lord  requires  of  us,  And  what  is
that?  It  is  this,  "Son,  give  me
thine  heart."  Let  us  truly  nni  in
reality  be  servants  of  God,  holding
on t'Ru Ives  with  all  we  have  subject  to
the  will  of  God,  to  be  ased,  it  neces-
sary, fortiie  building  up  ef  his  king-
dom on  the  earth.  This  is  what  tiie
Lord  requires,  this  is  what  the  Priest-
hood require,  and  is  the  course  I
endeavor  to  pursue.

I  s  iy  God  bless  you  ;  I  bless  you.
I  say  p  Hce  be  with  you.  Brethren,
one  and  all,  be  faithful,  be  diligent.
We  have  all  plenty  to  do;  it  remains
for  us  to  live  so  that  by  the  light,  of
the  Jdoly  Spirit,  we  can  sec  the  work


THE  WORK  OF  THE


PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.


45


before  us.  Do  not  let  oar  minds  run
after  gold  and  silver,  nor  upon  bouses
and  I;tiids;  what  the  Lord  gives  us
take  the  very  best  cnre  of,  putting
the  same  to  a  wise  and  proper  u^e,  or
our  hearts  cannot  be  for  the  king-
dom.

Never  have  I  seen  to  so  great  an
extent  that  willingness  to  labor  tor
tfiectfuse  of  righteousness,  aswns  wit-
nessed in  the  Temple,  at  St.  George,
last  winter.  The  Spirit  of  God  per-
vaded the  hearts  of  the  brethren  and
sisteis,  and  how  willing:  they  were  to
labor!  This  work  will  continue,  and
the  brethren  and  sisters  will  go  into
the  Temples  of  the  Lord,  to  officiate
for  those  who  have  died  without  the
Gospel  from  the  days  of  Father  Adam
to  the  winding-up  scene,  until  every
ooe  is  officiated  tor;  who  can  or  will
receive  the  Gospel  so  that  all  may


have  the  opportunity  and  privileges
of  lite  and  salvation.

Don't  you  think  we  have  a  work
to  perform  ?  Yes,  and  it  will  take  a
thousand  years  to  accomplish  it.  In
the  Temple  last  winter  the  brethren
and  sixers  enjoyed  themselves  the
In  fit  that  tney  ever  did  in  their  lives.
So  tbey  said.  And  our  children,
ju;st  old  enough  to  work,  how  hnppy
they  were!  They  would  exclaim,
*' I  never  knew  anything  about
4  Mormon  ism  '  before  ! "  If  you  were
in  the  Temples  of  God  wot  king  for
the  living  and  the  dead,  your  eyes  and
henrfs  would  not  be  after  the  fashions
of  the  world,  nur  the  wealth  of  the
world.  Yet  the  whole  of  this  world's
wealth  belongs  to  the  Lord,  and  he
can  give  to  whomsoever  he  pleases.
Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Ogden,  Sunday  Moenixo,  May  17,  1877.

(Reported  by  James  Tayfor,)


THE  WORK  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD  THE  IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  HUMAN
FAMILY  —  THE  GOSPEL  MURE  THAN  MO  R  A  LIT  f,  IT  INCLUDES  RE-
DEMPTION— DIFFERENCES  BETWEEN  THE  IDEAS  OF  THE  SAINTS  AND
THE  WORLD— THE  PROPHETS  IN  REGARD  TO  THE  INCREASE  OF
MINERAL  WEALTH — TEACH  THE  CHILDREN.


I  can  offer  a  few  of  the  reflections
of  my  own  mind  with  regard  to  the
discourse  of  brother  Geo,  Q.  Cannon.
I  will  take  his  text  : "  We  have


great  work  to  perform."  Nut  that
I  have  time  to  take  up  item  by


item,  and  txplain  and  give  you  cor-
rect views,  so  that  you  can  under-
stand all  things  pertaining  to  this
great  work;  but  i  will  give  a  few-
words,  hoping  that  you  are  prepared
to  receive  them  in  good  and  honest


40


JOURNAL  OF  DISCGUKSKS.


hearts,  and  digest  them  by  the  spirit
of  revelation,  and  understand  what
1  have  in  my  own  heart.

The  improvement  that  we  are  un-
dertaking is  not  a  small  labor.  It
is  not  the  work  of  a  day,  or  a  week,
or  a  month,  but  the  work  of  a  life-
time ;  and  when  we  end  our  career
here,  we  hope  to  leave  those  behind
us  on  the  earth,  of  our  own  poste-
rity, who  are  bet  ter  calculated  to  go
on  with  tins  work,  and  who  will  do
so  until  it  is  completed.  What  is
this  work?  The  improvement  of
the  condition  of  the  human  family.
This  work  must  continue  until  the
people  who  live  on  this  earth  are
prepared  to  receive  our  coming  Lord,
and  dwell  with  the  sanctified,  and
to  associate  with  angels  and  with
our  Savior,  preparatory  to  entering
into  the  presence  of  our  heavenly
Father.

Now  this  is  the  work  ;  and  how
are  we  to  perform  this  work  is  the
question  which  I  hope  you  will  be
able  to  understand.  I  wish  you
had  the  spirit  of  revelation,  I
would  delight  in  the  Latter-day
Saints  living  so  that  the  Spirit  of
God  would  be  within  them,  so  that
they  could  see  and  understand  and
judge  all  these  things  for  themselves,

I  will  commence  by  drawing  at-
tention to  the  philosophy  of  man
here  upon  the  earth.  We  see  our
selves  here  to-day.  Here  are  old,
grey-headed  men,  aged  ladies,  in-
fants in  their  mothers  arms,  and
persons  in  the  different  conditions
and  stages  of  life,  with  varied  looks,
feelings,  sympathies  and  passions.
We  see  this  variety  before  us  to-
day. But  we  ail  commenced  at  the
foot  of  the  hill  We  see  the  infant
in  its  mother's  arms.  What  is  this
infant  here  for  ?  What  is  the  design
in  the  creation  of  this  little  infant
child  ?  It  lies  here  in  its  mother's
arms  ;  it  would  not  resist,  in  the


least,  if  it  were  dropped  into  a
caldron  of  boiling  oil ;  if  it  were
thrown  into  fire  it  would  not  know
it  until  it  felt  the  flames  ;  it  might
be  laid  down  here,  and  the  wolf
might  come  and  lick  its  face,  and
it  would  not  know  but  that  its
mother  was  soothing  it  You  see
this  foundation,  the  starting  point,
the  germ  of  intelligence  embodied
in  tins  infant,  calculated  to  grow
and  expand  into  manhood,  then  to
the  capacity  of  an  angel,  and  so
onward  to  eternal  exaltation.  But
here  is  the  foundation.  Sent  to
school,  the  child  learns  to  read,  and
continues  to  improve  as  long  as  it
lives.  Is  this  the  end  of  the
knowledge  of  man  ?  No,  It  is  only
the  beginning.  It  is  the  first  stage
of  all  the  intelligence  that  the  philo-
snpher  in  his  reflections,  taking
the  starry  world  before  him,  and
looking  into  the  immensity  of  the
creations  of  God,  can  imagine.
Here  is  the  first  place  where  we
Irani,  this  is  the  foot  of  the  hill.

Now  the  object  is  to  improve  the
minds  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  until  \\v  learn  what  we  are
here  for,  and  become  one  before  the
Lord,  that  we  may  rejoice  together
ami  be  equal.  Not  to  make  all
poor.  No,  The  whole  world  is  be-
fore us.  The  earth  is  here,  and  the
fullness  thereof  is  here.  It  was
made  for  man  ;  and  one  man  was
not  made  to  trample  his  fellow-
man  under  his  feet,  and  enjoy  all
his  heart  desires,  while  the  thou-
sands suffer.  We  will  take  a  moral
view,  a  political  view,  and  we  see
the  inequality  that  exists  in  the
human  family.  We  take  the  inha-
bitants of  the  civilized  world,  and
how  many  laboring  men  are  there
in  proportion  to  the  inhabitants?
About  one  to  eveiy  five  that  are
producers,  and  the  supposition  is
that  ten  hours  work  by  the  one  to


THE  WORK  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.


47


three  persons  in  the  twenty-four
hours  "ill  support  the  live.  It  is
an  unequal  condition  of  mankind.
We  see  servants  that  labor  early
and  late,  and  that  have  not  the
opportunity  of  measuring  their
hours  ten  in  twenty-four  They
cannot  go  to  school,  nor  hardly  get
clothing  to  go  to  meeting  in  on  the
Sabbath.  1  have  seen  many  cases
of  this  kind  in  Europe,  when  the
young  lady  would  have  to  take  her
clothing  on  a  Saturday  night  and
wash  it,  in  order  that  she  might
go  to  meeting  on  the  Sunday  with
a  clean  dress  on.  Who  is  she  labor-
ing for]  For  those  who,  many
of  them,  are  living  in  luxury.  And,
to  serve  the  classes  that  are  living
on  them,  the  poor,  laboring  men


and


women  are


toiling,


working


their  lives  out  to  earn  that  which
will  keep  a  little  life  within  them.
Is  this  equality?  No!  What  is
going  to  be  done  ?  The  Latter-day
Saints  will  never  accomplish  their
mission  until  this  inequality  shall
cease  on  the  earth

We  say  bur,  very  little  about  poll*
ttca.  If  we  have  laws,  we  should
h  tve  good  1  iw8:  and  we  should  get
giM*d  men  to  adjudicate  those  It ws.
And  it  we  arts  at  varance  with  our
neighbor,  and  are  in  want  of  better
judgment  I  ban  we  have  to  settle
our  difficulties,  let  us  call  three  or
twelve  men,  Biid  have  it  to  them
to  decide  between  us  Adopt  this
coarse,  and  it  would  save  an  im-
mense amount  of  time,  and  set  the
lawyer  to  raising  his  own  potatoes
and  wheat,  instead  of  gulling  the
people.  The  nun- producer  must
live  on  the  products  of  those  who
labor.  There  is  no  other  way.  If
we  all  labor  a  few  hours  a  day,  we
could  then  spend  the  remainder  of
our  time  in  rest  and  the  improve-
ment of  our  minds.  This  would
give  an  opportunity  to  the  children


to  be  educated  in  the  learning  of
the  day,  and  to  possess  all  the  wis-
dom ot  man.

But  we  are  to  revolutionize  the
world.  Do  you  think  these  Litter*
day  Saints  can  do  it?  I  do  not
know.  It  is  the  work  of  the  Al-
mighty ;  and  if  he  sends  forth  h  a
Spirit  to  teach  the  people  true  prin-
ciples, we  have  a  right,  a  moral
right,  a  religious  right,  to  tell  the
truth  to  the  people  without  inter-
ruption ;  and  men  have  no  business
to  raise  their  anger  against  this  peo-
ple, when  we  are  merely  telling  the
truth  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,
and  instructing  them  how  they  can
better  their  condition.  •

But  we  have  something  mora
than  morality  alone  to  teach  the
people.  What  is  it  ?  It  is  how  to
redeem  the  human  family.  In
Adam — that  is,  if  we  believe  this
book  (i  he  Bible),  and  believe  the
history  that  Moses  gave  of  our  first
parents,  and  of  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth,  which  indeed  we  have
to  depend  upon,  for  we  are  not  in
pos-es-iua  of  any  o1  her  history  of
our  first  parents,  and  are  conse-
q  ienily  obliged  to  refer  to  this  his*
tory — if  we  believe  this,  I  can  say
that  as  in  At  lain  all  die,  even  so  in
Christ  all  are  made  alive.  If  we
can  believe  Moses  and  the  Apostles,
we  die  in  consequence  of  sin  in  the
conduct  of  our  Brst  parents,  in  eat-
ing that  which  they  were  forbidden
to  eat  ;  that  we  are  shut  out  and
cannot  see  and  understand  heavenly
beings.  We  cannot  see  their  faces.
We  cannot  hear  their  voices.  We
cannot  behold  their  glory.  We  are
shut  out  from  this.  The  vail  of
mortality  being  dropped  between
us  and  ihe  Creator,  something  has
to  be  done  so  that  we  may  return
and  behold  those  that  are  exalted.

There  is  a  difference  between  the
Latter-day  Saints  and  the  professed


48  JOURNAL  OF

Christian  world. Shrill  I  remark  on

this  difference?  We  teach  our
children  that  we  are  serving  a  God

who  hns  mi  ear  to  hear,  an  eye  to
sim1.  Hi?  has  a  month  to  speak,  a
hand to  handle* He  has  a  body.

ha-j  the  component  piHs  of
man.  He  moves  in  his  own  sphere*.
He  dwells  at  his  own  dwelling.
p!aje.  His  presence  Hiid  his  power
ti!l  immensity.  He  lias  filled  the
heavens  and  the  earth  with  his
works,  and  placed  man  heiv  upon
the  earth,  and  brought  frMth  in  the
latter  days  his  greatest  work.  It
is  the  greatest  work  for  th*>  salva-  :
tion  of  the  human  familv  that  has
been  revealed  to  man  since  the  (all
of  Adam,  I  hope  you  teach  this  in
the  Sunday  school,  that  we  are
serving  a  God  who  has  a  hody,
parts  and  pas-ions,  *nd  who  hag
feelings,  and  a  fellow* feeling.  Well,
you  startle  at  this.  You  have  a
fellow-feeling.  If  the  Christian
world  were  to  hear  me  declare  that
oar  Father  in  heaven  could  know
and  sympathize  with  this  mortality
by  experience,  and  has  a  telluw-
feelingT  and  deals  kindly  and  sym-
pathetically and  mercifully  with
those  who  are  fro  ward,  they  would
be  startled.  Yet  this  is  our  Father
We  believe  in  hiru*  Yis.  Ask
the  Christian  world,  Do  you  be-
lieve in  sach  a  God  ?  No,  they
eay.  What  kind  of  a  being  do  yon
believe  in  ?  Such  as  was  described
in  the  inscription  which  Paul  saw
written  on  the  altar  at  Athens,  14  To
the  unknown  God."  "  We  worship
that  unknown  God."  But  the  God
that  the  Latter-day  Saints  are  wor-
shiping, and  that  we  teach  our  child-
ren to  worship,  is  the  God  and  Father
of  our  L  >rd  Jestn  Christ  and  the
Father  of  our  spirits,  the  author  of
the  existence  of  our  bodies,  He  who
placed  them  here  upon  the  earth.
He  gave  existence  to  us  all.  He


DISCOURSES,

I  £ave  breath  and  beinsr  to  all.  And
yet  man  has  his  agency;  this  truth
wt*  must  never  We  sight  of.  We
must  tearh  our  children  that  Christ
'■a me  in  the  meridian  of  time;  that
he  suffered  and  died  for  the  original
|  sin  Adam  committed  in  the  Garden
of  K  ien,  and  taste!  death  for  every
man.  He  sufltitvd  for  every  man
upon  the  earth.

This  is  the  character  of  him  whom
we  receive  as  our  Savior.

We  want  you  to  believe  in  Him,
my  son,  my  daughter.  Believe  in
His  Father,  and  that  they  have
compassion  upon  us,  and  we  should
hearken  to  His  counsel  What  is
required  of  us  as  soon  as  we  come
to  the  years  of  accountability?  It
if  required  of  ns,  for  it  is  an  insti-
tution of  heaven,  the  origin  of  which
yon  and  I  cm  not  tell,  for  the  simple
,  reason  that  it  has  no  beginning;  it  is
from  eternity  to  eternity — it  is  re-
quired of  us  to  go  down  into  the
waters  of  baptism.  Here  is  a  foun-
tain or  element  rypical  of  the  purity
of  the  eternifies.  Go  down  into  the
waters,  and  there  he  baptized  for  the
remission  of  sins,  and  then  have
hands  laid  up^ti  u*  to  confirm  us
members  of  the  Church  of  Ji  sua
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints.  Then
receive  the  Spirit  of  truth,  or  the
Holy  Ghost,  Thm  nve  according*
to  every  word  that  proceeds  out  of
the  mouth  of  God,  through  those
men  whom  he  his  appointed  here
upon  the  earth,  until  ive  are  perfect.

If  we  go  and  preach  the  Gospel,
men  and  women  of  age,  youths  and
children  believe  our  testimony,
cooie  forward  and  desire  to  rect- ive
a  remission  of  their  sins  by  obeying
tlie  ordinances  of  the  house  ot  God,
that  are  placed  in  that  house  for  the
express  purpose  of  remitting  sina*
!  Then  they  commence  to  live  moral
lives,  as  become  th  those  who  have
embraced  the truth,  and  continue


THE  WORK  OF  THE

to  Jive  by  the  truth  until  they  are
prepared  to  enter  into  an  exaltation.
How  long  will  they  live  hire  ?  No
matter  it'  they  live  as  long  as  Me-
thuselah lived,  if  they  commence
that  moral  reform  required  in  their
lives.  Those  who  have  bee  i  in  the
habit  of  swearing,  swear  no  more.
Never  use  the  name  of  the  Deity
without  his  authority.  If  we  are  in
the  habit  uf  telling*  that  which  is  not
true,  learn  to  speak  the  truth.  If
we  speak  evil  of  our  neighbors,  cease  '
to  speak  evil.  Covet  not  that  which
is  not  our  own.  Keep  the  Ten
Commandments,  and  then  go  on  un-
til we  are  perfect,  loving  our  neighbor  |
more  than  we  love  ourselves,  im-
parting to  all  that  kind  fellow-feel-
ing, that  we  can  take  those  who  are
in  this  poor  and  stricken  conditio^
of  life,  and  raise  them,  that  they  may
come  up  and  possess  the  tin  its  of  the
earth,  and  enj  >y  nil  that  we  can  eij  >y

in raiment, food and  possessions.

Itaiac  our  own  horsee,  oar  own  food,

and  let  every  one  be  a  producer,  and
then  we  can  with  a  good  grace,  be
consumers.  Infringe  upon  no  one*
Instead  of  making  any  poorer,  make
all  wealthy.  •

A  few  words  upon  the  minerals
found  in  our  mountains.  We  have
had  a  great  many  men  examining
among  the  mountains,  and  through
the  plateaus  and  ranges  in  the  south.
The  whole  scientific  world,  a  few
years  ago,  would  have  pledged  their
reputation  that  there  was  not  any
mineral  in  the  sandstone  range  along
the  Rio  Vtrpen  River.  Now  they
are  finding  it  in  many  plnces.  A  great
many  have  told  me  that  there  was  no
mineral  there,  but,  it  is  now  found  in
various  parts  of  the  southern  portion
of  this  Territory.  Wlm't  can  I  say
about  it  ¥  The  Lord,  in  Isniah,
says,  "For  brass  I  wHI  bring  gold,
and  for  iron  I  will  bring  silver,  and
for  wood  brass  and  for  stones  iron*"

No*  4.


PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.  49

I  can  attribute  it  to  no  other  agency
than  the  power  of  God  diffusing  it
in  these  mountains.  I  will  refer  it
to  the  scientific  world.  You  m£y  as
well  take  a  piece  of  wood  and  say
that  it  shall  become  a  piece  of  sand-
stone, as  to  say  that  you  will  find
silver  in  sandstone.  Did  you  ever
know  sandstone  to  become  a  petri-
faction. It  is  hard  to  say  where  it
will  not  be  found,  now  that  it  is  found
in  the  barks  of  petrified  trees.  It
is  no  matter,  the  Lord  is  managing
all  this,  and  he  does  just  as  lie  pleases
with  regard  to  the  treasures  of  the
earth,  and  we  may  look  for  them,  bat
if  we  are  not  to  find  Them,  they  will
be  hid.  When  God  says  to  his  agents,
remove  this  gold,  this  silver,  this
copper,  it  wilt  be  done*  You  do  not
understand  this  philosophy,  but,  I
do.  And  my  philosophy  outreaehes
the  philosophy  of  men  that  study
books,  !  have  said  enough  with
regard  to  the  minerals  of  the  earth.

I  see  a  man  grow  up  from  the  in-
fant static  to  be  a  scholar,  and  by
and  by  lie  has  an  empire,  and  can
give  laws  to  the  people,  that  cau
equalize  tliem,  and  bring  them  to  a
state  of  happiness  and  excellency,
and  give  them  all  the  advantages
that  man  can  possess  upon  the
earth,  anil  make  every  man  happy
aod  comfortable.  This  is  the  work
that  we  have  upon  our  hands.  Teach
the  people  the  faith  uf  the  Gospel.
Teach  them  what  God  is,  and  what
His  work  is,  and  that  there  never  was
a  time  such  as  many  of  our  philoso-
phers speak  of,  who  drift  back  and
back,  and  come  to  this  theory  and  that
theory,  and  go  back,  and  back  to  the
time  when  we  were  all  reptiles.  When
was  there  a  time  when  there  wag
not  a  God  ?  But,  say  they,  there
must  have  been  a  time.  Then  you
declare  to  me,  do  you,  that  there  was
a  time  when  there  was  no  time.  And
this  is  the  philosophy  of  a  great

Vol  XIX,

I


50


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


many  of  the  scientiBc  in  this  day.
They  see  the  heavens  stretched  out,
but  they  comprehend  them  not
And  why  do  they  not  say,  if  there
was  a  time  when  there  was  no  time,
there  will  be  a  time  again  when  there
will  be  no  time*  What  a  condition  for
man  to  be  in!  Can  we  look  onward
and  upward  through  the  immensity
of  space,  and  behold  the  worlds  on
worlds  that  we  call  stars,  and  imagine
that  they  will  be  blotted  out  forever?
What  an  idea !  What  a  philosophy  !
Why,  it  ought  to  be  laughed  at  by
the  ignorant,  and  those  who  are  chil-
dren in  their  reflections.  A  time  when
there  was  no  God,  no  eternity  !  It
caniiot  be  possible,  and  the  philoso-
pher who  tries  to  establish  such  a
doctrine  cannot  possess  any  correct
ideas  of  his  own  being.  Will  there
ever  be  such  a  time  ?  No.  But
forever  onward  and  upward.  So  it  is
with  the  religion  we  have  embraced.

Teach  the  Sunday  School  children
with  regard  to  the  heavens,  with
regard  to  their  faith,  with  regard  to
their  mortal  lives,  and  reach  oat  to
that  higher  life,  far  above  this,  that
we  may,  if  we  will,  enjoy  upon  the
earth,  This  is  the  condition  of  man.
This  is  the  road  for  men  to  walk  in,
to  be  obedient  to  the  principles  of
eternal  truth,  those  immortal  prin-
ciples that  God  has  revealed  to  us.

With  regard  to  the  ordinances  of
God,  we  may  remark  that  we  yield
obedience  to  them  because  He  re-
quires it ;  and  every  iota  of  His
requirements  has  a  rational  philo-
sophy with  it. We  do  not  get  up


things  on  a  hypothesis.  That  philo-
sophy reaches  to  all  eternity,  and
is  the  philosophy  that  the  Latter*
day  Saints  believe  in.  Every  par-
ticle of  truth  that  every  person  has
received  is  a  gift  of  God*  We  re-
ceive these  truths,  and  go  on  from
glory  to  glory,  from  eternal  lives  to
eternal  lives,  gaining  a  knowledge
of  all  things,  and  becoming  Gods,
even  Sons  of  God.  These  are  the
celestial  ones.  These  are  they  whom
the  Lord  has  chosen  through  their
obedience.  They  have  not  spurned
the  truth,  when  they  have  heard
it.  These  are  they  that  have  not
spurned  the  Gospel,  but  have  ac-
knowledged Jesus  and  God  in  their
true  character ;  that  have  acknow-
ledged the  angels  in  their  true  char-
acter. These  are  they  that  work
for  the  salvation  of  the  human
family,

I  say  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
all  we  have  to  do  is  to  learn  of  God.
Let  the  liars  lie  on,  and  let  the
swearers  swear  on,  and  they  will
go  to  perdition.  All  we  have  to  do
is  to  go  onward  and  upward,  and
keep  the  commandments  of  our  Fa-
ther and  God;  and  He  will  con-
found our  enemies.  It  is  for  you
and  me  to  improve  our  children,  and
teach  them  to  bring  forth  the  ele-
ments here,  until  we  possess  all  things
that  are  on  the  earth,  and  then  pre-
pare to  possess  the  things  that  are  in
Heaven,  and  go  on  from  glory  to
glory,  until  we  are  crowned  with  God
the  Father.

May  the  Lord  blesg  you,  Amen.


■


ORDER  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC.


51


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  at  Farmington,  os  Sunday  Morning,  June  17,  1877.


(Reported  hj  Geo.  F.  Gihhs.)


ORDER  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD  —  DUTIES  OF  THE  SEVERAL  QUORUMS  —
DIFFICULTIES  AND  THEIR  SETTLEMENT — DUTIES  OF  THE  TEACHERS —
DISCIPLINE  IN  THE  CHURCH.


The  following  passage  is  found  in  >
the  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  page
266,  edition—

"Which  Priesthood  continueth  in
the  Church  ot  God  in  all  generations,
and  is  without  beginning  of  days  or
end  of  years.  And  the  Lord  con-
firmed a  Priesthood  also  upon  Aaron
and  his  seed  throughout  all  their
generations; — which  Priesthood  also
continueth  and  abideth  forever,  with
the  Priesthood  which  is  after  the
holiest  order  of  God.  And  this
greater  Priesthood  administereth  the
Gospel  and  holdeth  the  key  of  the
mysteries  of  the  kingdom,  even  the
key  of  the  knowledge  of  God  ;
Therefore  in  the  ordinances  thereof,
the  power  of  godliness  is  manifest  j
and  without  the  ordinances  thereof,
and  the  authority  of  the  Priesthood,
the  power  of  godliness  is  not  manifest
unto  men  in  the  flesh.  Fur  without
this  no  man  can  see  the  face  of  God,
wen  the  Father,  and  live."

There  are  some  ideas  associated
with  these  principles  which  I  will
briefly  refer  to.  We  have  assembled
here  to  more  perfectly  organize  the
Church  of  God  in  this  place;  to  es-
tablish a  Stake;  to  select,  appoint"
and  set  apar£  the  necessary  officers
there  for. Our  President  has  been


•  moved  upon  to  call  upon  the  Twelve
to  go  through  the  Territory  and  at-
tend to  these  matters,  in  accordance
with  a  revelation  which  makes  it
the  duty  of  the  Twelve  "  to  ordain
and  set  in  order  all  the  officers  of
the  Church ; "  to  see  that  the  Church
is  "righted  up"  in  all  its  varioug
departments,  and  in  the  organization  of
its  various  quorums;  where  it  ia
necessary  that  Stakes  should  be  or-
ganized organize  them;  and  to  see
that  all  the  quorums  and  officers  be
placed  in  their  proper  position  so
that  they  will  work  harmoniously
and  according  to  the  revelations
and  order  of  God,  The  growth  of
the  Church  and  the  changes  contin-
ually taking  place  render  it  neces-
sary that  this  work  to  which  we  have
been  called  be  attended  to.  It  is
very  desirable  and  necessary,  too,
that  every  man  should  understand
his  true  position  in  the  Church;
that  he  may  the  better  magnify  his
;  calling,  and  attend  to  every  duty
devolving  upon  hira.  In  the  orga-
nization of  a  Stake  of  Zion,  aa
revealed,  there  should  be  a  Pre-
sident with  two  Counselors,  to
preside  over  all  the  officers,  authori-
ties and  people  of  that  Stake,  Thera
should  also  be  a  High  Council  ecru


52


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


si  sting  of  Twelve  Councilors  presided
over  by  the  President  of  the  Stake
and  his  two  Counselors.  There
should  also  be  a  High  Priests'  Quo-
rum, with  a  President  and  two  Coun-
sellors to  preside  over  all  the  High
Priests  in  the  Stake.

The  Elders'  Quorum  should  be
composed  of  ninety- six  Elders,  pre-
sided over  by  a  President  and  two
Counselors,  and  when  more  than
ninety-six,  other  quorums  should  be
organized.

The  Priests'  Quorum  should  be
composed  of  forty-ei^ht,  presided
^Ar  over  by  a  Bishop.  The  Teacheh*'
Quorum  should  be  composed  of
twenty-four,  and  the  Deacons  of
twelve,  each  with  their  respective
Presidents  and  Counselors*  The
Bishop  necessarily  presides  over  the
whole  of  the  lesser  Priesthood  in
his  Ward,  and  they  ate  under  his
special  guidance  and  direction,  while
he  is  presided  over  by  the  Presidency
of  the  Stake,  and  the  Presidents  of
the  Stakes,  in  their  turn  are  presided
over  by  the  First  Presidency  and  the
Twelve;  thus  all  are  amenable  to
proper  authority  in  their  various  orga-
nizations and  there  is  no  schism  in  the
body.  All  Bishops  should  be  properly
ordained  with  their  Counselors,  in
order  to  be  qualified  to  act  efficiently
in  their  offices,  and  to  be  qualified  to
sit  as  common  judges  in  Israel

We  have  frequently  heard  that
*'  Order  is  heaven's  first  law,"  In
do  earthly  government  is  there  so
much  order  evinced  as  in  the  Cnureh
and  kingdom  of  God,  and  for  that
we  are  indebted  to  the  revelations
of  God,  The  office  of  the  Priesthood
is  really  to  rule  and  govern  in  that
government  which  is  recognised  as
the  Lord's,  whether  it  be  in  heaven
or  on  the  earth.  And  as  the  Lord
has  restored  the  everlasting  Gospel
and  the  keys  of  the  everlasting  Priest-
hood which  administers  in  time  and


eternity,  when  we  elect  officers  to  fill
positions  in  this  Church  we  choose
men  whose  authority  through  their
faithfulness  will  hold  good  not  only
on  this  earth,  hut  in  the  heavens,  and
not  only  now  but  hereafter.  And  when
these  things  are  carried  oat  to  their
fullest  extent,  then  will  "the  will  of
God  be  done  on  earth  is  in  heaven,"'
and  the  meek  will  re  juice  in  the  ad-
ministration of  his  rule,

If  I  had  time  I  might  refer  to  ac-
counts given  of  various  men  who
stood  at  the  head  of  the  Priesthood
in  the  different  agt*s  of  the  world,
showing  how  it  has  been  handed
down  from  one  to  ar  other,  agreeably
to  the  will  of  God,  for  the  accom-
plish men  t  of  his  purposes  and  the
benefit  of  the  human  family.  He
has  given  unto  us  a  very  good  and
perfect  organization  ;  quite  as  perfect
I  think,  and  I  am  prepared  to  say^.
as  any  organization  that  ever  existed
upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  And  it
is  indeed  reasonable  th;*t  such  aa
organization  should  now  exist,  for  we
are  living  in  what  is  called  the  dis-
pensation of  the  fullness  of  times;
and  it  embraces  all  other  dispensa-
tions that  ever  did  exist  on  the  earth.
It  embraces  also  all  the  powers  and
privileges,  rights,  keys  and  Priest-
hoods ever  known  to  man.

In  relation  to  organizations,  there
has  been  a  great  deal  of  carelesnesa
exhibited  in  many  instances;  we  have
failed  to  sense  the  importance  of  the
serious  responsibilities  that  attaches
itself  to  this  Priesthood,  this  dele-
gated power  of  heaven.  We  have
found  more  or  less  confusion  among
the  churches  wherever  we  have  gono;
and  hence  the  wisdom  manifested  by
the  President  in  requesting  a  more
perfect  organ ization  seems  the  more
to  be  appreciated,  because  of  the  ne-
cessity that  exists  for  improvement
Says  the  Lord,  "  Wi||out  the  ordi-
nances thereof,  and  the  authority  of


ORDER  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC*


53


the  Priesthood  ,  the  power  of  godliness
•is  not  manifest  unto  man  in  the  flesh  ;
for  without  this  no  man  can  see  the
face  of  God,  even  the  Father,  and
live." The  Lord  having  given  unto
as  this  divine  law  and  revealed  cer-
tain principles  unto  us,  he  expects  us
to  govern  ourselves  accordingly;  that
every  ordinance  in  connection  with
the  Priesthood  may  be  administered
properly  and  in  accordance  with  his
law. We  find  many  departures  how-
ever from  this  law. In  the  bishopric
v?e  find  many  irregularities. In  some
instances  we  have  found  that  a  Bishop
has  no  Counselors,  in  others  he  has
had  one  Counselor  perhaps,  and  some-
times we  have  found  the  Bishop  with
two  Counselors,  but  he  himself  not
ordained  to  the  office,  but  had  only
been  appointed,  and  in  some  instances
we  have  found  that  the  Counselors  ;
have  not  been  properly  authorized  and
qualified to act in their  calling.
Whereas  there  is  a  law  regulating  ;
these  things  which  we  hope  to  com-
ply with. Every  Bishop  should  be
first  ordained a  High  Priest,  and
then  set  apart  to  the  Bishopric  ly
the  proper  authority  ;  and  the  Bish-
op's Counselors, if  not  already  or-
dained to the High  Priesthood,
should  be,  and  then  set  apart  to  act
in  their  capacity,  as  first  and  second
Counselors  to  the  Bishop*  These
three  then form  a  quorum,  and  a
court  and  are  qualified  to  sit  in  judg-
ment upon  all  matters  that  may  come
before  the  Bishop,  as  a  common  judge
in  Israel  which  pertains  to  his  \Vard.
They  are  then  properly  authoriz  ed  to
act  in  this  capacity,  and  they  ought  to
be  upheld  and  sustained  in  the  posi-  <
tion  they  occupy,  and  in  ail  of  their
doings,  inasmuch  as  they  are  charac-
terized by  righteousness  and  sound
judgment,  and  as  the  Scriptures  say,
with  humilitj^nd  faith,  and  long-
suffering  and  wisdom,  and  according
to  the  principles  laid  dowu  in  the  book


of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  which
the  Spirit  of  God  would  dictate  to
men  occupying  such  a  position.

And  then  if  there  is  an  appeal
from  this  court  it  goes  to  the  High
Council  which  is  also  composed  of
High  Priests,  set  ap-irt  to  this  office,
by  the  First  Presidency  or  the  Twelve,
to  be  presided  over  by  the  Presidency
of  the  Stake,  For  the  lack  of  this
more  perfect  org -triization  all  kin  Is
of  confusion  has  prevailed  among  the
brethren  in  many  instances;  all  kinds
of  little  differences  are  taken  to  the
High  Council,  which  ought  to  be  taken
to  the  Bishop's  court  People  some-
times quarrel  about  little  things,
very  trivial  allitr*  that  do  not  re-
present more  than  ten  or  twenty
dollars  in  monetary  matters,  and
they  are  not  satisfied  unless  the  High
Council  try  such  cases.  And  what
is  the  result  ?  Instead  of  having
these  little  matters  settled  by  the
Teachers  or  Bishops  in  their  own
Wards,  they  occupy  the  time  of  the
fifteen  men  composing  the  Council,
besides  their  own  and  that  of  the
witnesses,  who  generally  number
from  five  to  fifteen.  But  these  men
work  for  nothing  and  board  them*
selves,  and  therefore  it  costs  the  dis-
putants nothing  for  the  adjudication
of  their  differences,  whereas  in  such
cases  the  High  Council  would  prefer
to  put  their  hands  in  their  pockets
and  pay  the  amount  in  dispute  rather
th?in  listen  to  their  nonsence.  And
it  would  seem  that  some  men  are  so
inconsiderate,  that  they  would  im-
pose upon  them,  because  they  are
willing  to  give  their  time.

Such  cases  should  not  come  before
the  High  Council ;  they  more  pro-
perly belong  to  the  lesser  Priesthood,
to  the  Priests  and  Teachers  and  to
the  Bishop's  court.

Sucb  men  do  Dot  realize  their  posi-
tion before  God  and  their  brethren.
If  men  have  differences  they  should


54


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


try  to  settle  them  amicably  among
themselves.  But  if  they  cannot  do
this,  let  them  take  the  first  steps  us
directed  in  the  Church  Covenants,  let
them  then  come  together  as  brethren
having  a  claim  upon  the  Spirit  and
power  of  God  which  would  attend
them  if  they  lived  their  religion,  and
then,  provided  the  Priests  and  Teach-
ers did  their  duty  and  were  filled  with
wisdom  and  the  spirit  of  their  office
and  calling,  ninety-nine  cases  out  of
every  hundred  might  be  satisfactorily
settled  without  either  troubling  the
Bishop's  court  or  the  High  Council.
Bat  because  these  duties  of  the  lesser
Priesthood  are  not  faithfully  per-
formed or  sufficiently  estimated,  they
are  not  carried  out  according  to  the
laws  laid  down  for  our  government
and  thus  many  of  these  differences
and  difficulties  exist  in  our  midst.

When  the  Church  is  organized  in
all  its  various  departments  with  the
President  at  the  head,  the  Twelve  in
their  place,  the  High  Priests,  Seven-
ties and  Elders  in  theirs,  together
w  ith  the  Bishops  and  lesser  Priest-
hood, the  local  aids  and  governments
each  acting  in  their  appointed  sphere
and  calling,  and  all  operated  upon
and  influenced  by  the  Holy  Spirit,
then  the  whole  becomes  as  the  body
of  a  man,  sound  and  complete  in  all
its  members,  and  everything  moves
harmoniously  and  pleasantly  along.
For  the  body,  we  are  tuld,  has  not  one
member  but  many :  "  And  the  eye
cannot  say  unto  the  hand,  I  have  no
need  of  thee  ;  nor  again  the  bead  to
the  feet,  I  have  no  need  of  you  f  but
every  man  in  his  place  acting  in  his
office  and  calling.  And  there  is  as
much  devolving  upon  the  Priests,
the  Teachers  and  Deacons  and  those
of  the  lesser  Priesthood  as  there  is
upon  any  other  members  of  the
Church.  When  they  do  not*  fulflll
their  duties,  what  is  the  result  ?
People  go  to  the  Twelve,  or  to  the


First  Presidency,  they  pass  the  more
immediate  authorities,  and  confusion
and  disorder  exist,  and  valuable  time
is  occupied  almost  needlessly,  and
those  who  will  work  may  work  until
they  are  broken  down  ready  to  cease
their  earthly  labors,  and  all  this  for
the  want  of  men's  knowing  their  du-
ties and  doing  them.

But  while  we  are  contending  over
little  things  what  becomes  of  us  p
We  are  losing  sight  uf  our  callings,
we  forget  that  this  kingdom  was
established  upon  the  earth  for  the
purpose  of  introducing  righteousness
and  the  laws  and  principles  of  truth,
the  laws  of  heaven  upun  the  earth,
and  of  blessing  mankind  and  of  sav-
ing the  living  and  the  de-id.  We
forget  what  we  are  here for,  and

I  what  the  kingdom  of  God  is  esta-
blished for,  It  is  not  for  you  or  for
me  or  anybody  else  alone ;  it  is  the
interests  of  the  world  and  the  salva-
tion of  mankind.  We  are  expected,
every  one  of  us,  to  perform  the  vari-
ous duties  and  responsibilities  devolv-
ing upon  us. If  we  neglect  them  are

j  we  not  guilty  before  God  ?  Whence
come  the  difficulties  that  we  have  in
our  midst  ?  Because  as  I  have  said
in  many  instances  the  Priesthood  do
not  perform  their  duties,  are  not  vigi-
lant and  faithful  The  Teachers
sometimes  come  to  visit  us  and
sometimes  they  do  not.  1  do  not  know
how  it  is  with  you,  but  they  rarely
visit  me,  When  they  do  come,  am
I  pleased  to  see  them  ?  Yes.  I  call
ray  family  together,  and  then  ad-
dressing the  Teachers  I  say  to  thnin;
"Brethren,  we  are  all  very  glad  to
see  you,  we  are  ready  to  listen  to
you  and  if  you  have  any  instructions
for  us  we  shall  be  happy  to  hear  you."
These  are  my  feelings  with  regard  to
men  who  act  as  Teachers.  And  are
they  prepared  to  teach  me  ?  Yes.
If  I  have  been  negligent  or  careless,
they  will  enquire  into  it;  and  the


ORDER  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ETC


55


same  with  the  members  of  my  fam-
ily. Or  are  there  ill  feelings  existing
among  any  of  the  members  of  the
household  ;  or  between  them  and  our
neighbors.  If  so*  they  should  find
out.  It  is  their  business  to  know
whether  I  and  my  family  are  living
our  religion  or  not ;  and  the  same
with  everybody  else's  family  in  the
Church.  But  how  is  it  now  ?  They
come  perhaps  once  in  three  months,
or  nine  months  as  the  case  may  be.
And  when  they  do  come  they  have  a
few  words  and  questions  which,  to
say  the  least,  are  very  formal.  Is
that  the  spirit  and  calling  of  a
Teacher  ?  No !  They  should  be
foil  of  the  light  and  revelation  of
God,  quick  to  discover  everything
and  know  everybody  and  their  stand-
ing in  their  jurisdiction.  And  they
would  too  if  tbey  performed  their
duties  and  were  faithful  to  the  welfare
of  the  people.  What  is  the  result  ?
The  wards  are  not  attended  to.  What
follows  ?  We  have  d nuking  io  our
midst*  Yes,  Elders  and  High  Priests
and  Seventies  are  tempted  to  drink
and  humiliate  themselves  before  God
and  the  people.  We  have  others
that  break  the  Sabbath,  and  others
that  swear  and  blaspheme  the  name
of  God.  We  have  others  that  lie
and  cheat.  And  who  pays  any  atten-
tion to  it  ?  Some  think  it  would  not
be  polite  to  attend  to  some  of  these
matters;  but  I  tell  you  God  will  take
hold  of  them  by  and  by,  and  they
will  know  whether  he  will  be  polite
or  not  If  a  man  does  wrong,  let
him  be  held  accountable  for  that
wrong,  no  matter  who  he  may  be.
If  he  cheat*,  bring  him  up;  if  he
liee,  let  him  lie  treated  as  a  liar;  if
he  breaks  the  Sabbath  bring  him  to
an  account  for  it ;  let  the  proper  offi-
cers of  the  Church  see  that  tbey  do
their  duty,  or  God  will  not  hold  them
guiltless.  Let  all  the  Elders,  the
Priests,  Teachers  and  Deacons  and


I  other  officers  thoroughly  and  faith-
i  fully  perform  their  duties,  and  then
we  will  see  whether  there  is  any  power
in  the  Priesthood  or  not;  then  we
will  know  whether  the  blessings  of
the  Lord  attend  the  ordinances  or
not;  then  we  will  know  that  God
rules  in  Israel,  and  that  the  honest
in  heart,  the  truthful  and  those  who
love  righteousness  are  in  reality  his
people,  and  that  they  will  maintain
the  right  and  purge  the  Church  from
evil  of  every  kind.  We  do  not  want
to  become  partakers  of  other  men's
sins;  the  First  Presidency  will  not,
neither  will  the  Twelve;  the  Bishops
should  not,  for  God  will  require  it  at
their  hands.

Hod  intends  to  build  up  a  Church
here  after  the  pattern  of  the  one  that
exists  in  heaven;  and  to  come  down
and  associate  himself  with  man  upon
the  earth.  Are  we  prepared  ?  No.
Shall  we  be  by  the  course  we  are
going  ?  Never,  while  the  world
stands.  Therefore  we  are  going  forth
and  wherever  we  find  things  disor-
ganize, we  organize  them,  and  then
call  upon  the  various  organizations
to  perform  their  duties  in  fidelity,
honesty  and  faithfulness,  that  every
man  may  be  felt  after  to  the  utmost
extremity  of  the  Territory,  that  it
may  be  known  what  thev  are  doing,
whether  they  are  for  God  and  th»
principles  of  truth  or  not.  We  do
not  want  any  more  "  Good  Lord  and
good  devil;"  the  line  will  be  drawn
and  we  will  know  who  is  for  the  king-
dom and  who  is  not  If  we  do  not
those  things  which  are  required  at
our  hands,  what  is  the  use  of  our
profession  ?  Why  should  men  who
do  not  want  to  do  right,  who  break
the  Sabbath,  who  steal,  defraud  and
impose  upon  their  neighbors,  why
should  they  court  the  fellowship  of
the  Saints  ?  Do  you  think  they
will  get  into  the  kingdom  of  God  ?
No, We  read  of  ten  virgins?,  live


56  JOURNAL  OF

of  whom  were  wise  and  6ve  were
foolish  ;  and  I  think  both  the  wise
and  the  foolish  ones  got  into  rather  a
bad  condition — they  went  to  sleep.
By  and  by,  at  midnipKt,  t  he  cry  was
hi  ard,  u  |5eho!d,  the  bridegroom
«-  cometh  ;  go  ye  out  to  meet  him,"
Then  tbey  all  awakened,  rubbed  their
eyes„a  little,  I  suppose,  looked  around
for  their  lamps,  some  of  which  con-
tained oil  and  sot  no  were  empty.
Those  who  had  no  oil  in  their  lamps
went  to  those  who  had,  requesting
them  to  give  them  of  their  oil,
for  their  lamps  bad  gone  out.
But  those  who  had  oil  had
none  to  spare,  and  the  foolish  were
told  to  go  to  those  who  sold  oil
and  buy.  When  the  bridegroom
Came  those  who  were  ready  went  in
with  hitn  to  the  marriage,  and  the
others  did  not,  and — that's  all.  We
might  as  well  look  at  these  things
squarely  and  see  how  we  stand,  and
what  our  position  is  before  the  Ljid.
*  Ik*  not  deceived.  God  is  not
mocked  ;  that  which  a  man  sows  he
will  reap;  if  we  sow  to  the  flesh,  we
shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption;
if  we  sow  to  the  spirit,  we  shall  n  ap
life  everlasting.'*

Why  should  men  who  do  not  want
to  do  right  stop  in  our  midst  ?  If  1
did  not  want  to  be  a  Latter-day  Saint,
I  would  say,  Gentlemen,  I  will  leave
you,  success  to  you/1  But  then  1  do
not  know  what  1  might  do  or  might
not  do  were  I  in  such  a  condition.
At  any  rate,  why  do  men  palm  them-
selves upon  the  community  as  Latter-
day  Saints,  when  they  are  not  ?  And
we  hear  of  them  grumbling  and
growling  about  the  Priesthood.  If
the  Priesthood  are  snch  rascals,  why
do  they  not  leave  them,  and  seek
more  congenial  society  ?

When  these  organizations  are  com-
pleted there  will  be  a  President  with
two  Counselors,  and  they  will  preside
over  all  other  Councils  in  the  Stake,


DISCOURSES,

And  it  will  be  expected  that  all  the
others  under  their  presidency  will
listen  to  their  counsels;  and  it  will
be  expected  that  they  will  listen  fo
the  instructions  of  President  Young
and  the  Twelve.  And  it  is  then
expected  that  the  Priests,  Teachers
and  Deacons  will  hearken  to  and  obey
the  counsel  of  t heir  Bishop;  and  it
will  be  expected  that  the  people  will
listen  to  the  voire  of  their  Priests  and

I  Teachers  and  those  whose  business
it  is  to  look  after  their  interest  and
welfare.  We  are  now  approaching
a  very  important  stage  in  the  history
of  this  latter-day  work  ;  we  may  try
to  dig  around  our  duties  and  respon-
sibilities, but  we  ha  v.-  to  meet  them.
We  have  got  to  walk  accord inir  to
(lie  laws  of  God,  or  anideby  the  result
for  not  doing  it.  God  expects  these
things  at  our  hands,  and  they  are
things  which  we  have  a  right  to  ex-
pect from  one  another;  it  is  expected

i  that  we  all  will  do  our  duty,  and  God
tbeFatherof  Jesus,  and  all  the  eter-
nal Priesihood  in  ihe  heavens  expect
the  Presidency,  the  Twelve,  the
Presidents  of  Stakes,  the  High
Priests,  High  Councils,  the  Seventies
and  Elders,  the  Bishops,  Priests,
Teachers  and  Deacons  and  all  the
Priesthood  and  all  the  people  to  be

|  governed  by  the  law  of  G'd,  and  to
help  faithfully  to  build  Zion  and
establish  the  kingdom  of  God  that
we  m  :y  be  one  in  all  things  temporal
and  spiritual;  t  liar  we  may  be  welded
and  united  together  on  eart  h  and  not
only  on  the  earth  but  in  the  heavens
also.  This  is  what  t he  whole  thing
points  to,  that  the  Priesthood  on  the
ear tli  should  operate  and  co-operate
with  the  Priesthood  of  heaven  in  the
accomplishment  of  the  purposes  of
God,  We  are  building  Temples  that
we  may  labor  therein  for  ourselves
and  also  become  saviors  on  Mount
Zion.  How  can  we  operate  with  tho
Priesthood  of  heaven  unless  we  are


PRAYER,  ETC,


57


governed  by  (tie  Priesthood  God  has
given  us  on  the  earth  ?  We  cannot
do  it ;  we  must  be  governed  by  the
laws  and  principles  he  has  revealed
for  our  guidance,'  and  for  our  salva-


tion. And  that  God  may  help  us  to
do  his  will  and  perform  the  work
given  us  to  do,  is  my  prayer,  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON"  HYDE,
Delivered  in  tee  Temple,  St.  George,  Afkjl  5?  1877.


(Reported  by  Geo.  I\  Gihbs.)


PRAYER  THE  MEDIUM  FOR  BLESSING  —  PRACTICAL  MORALITY  ESTA-
BLISHES CONFIDENCE — THE  PROPHET  JOSEPH  MANIFEST  IN  BRIG  HAM
— AGE  PREVENTS  EFFORT,  BUT  WHEN  BEHIND  THE  VAIL,  FREEDOM
FROM  OBSTRUCT  I  nN  IS  OUR  OPPORTUNITY,


I  have  not  language,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  to  express  the  feelings
and  emotion:*  of  my  In-art  un  i<nti-
iug  into  this  Temple  yesterday
morning  ;  I  could  not  describe  them
if  I  were  to  undertake  to  do  so,  and
consequently  1  will  sum  up  in  short
by  saying,  that  the  sentiments  of
my  heart  were,  Thank  God  for  such
a  place  in  which  to  worship  and  to
reverence  his  high  and  holy  name*

We  have  been  listening  this
morning  to  some  very  interesting  and
truthful  remarks,  and  I  have  felt
edified,  instructed,  and  comforted
in  my  feelings.  And  1  think,  if  we
all  remember  our  prayers  in  tfrte
season  thereof,  in  sincerity  and
truth,  that  our  light  would  shine
before  us  according  to  our  needs
and  wants.  It  is  too  often  the  case
that  this  important  duty  is  neglect-
ed. I  look  at  the  rivers  of  water,


I  trace  them  to  their  source,  and  I
find  that  many  times  the  phuvs
wheiv  thev  ori'dnatt?  are  small  and
ofttimes  hidden  from  the  popular
gaze.  But,  notwithstanding,  they
flow  down  and  the  waters  increase,
until  by  tributaries  the  main  chan-
nel becomes  a  might}'  river.  So  our
prayers  in  private  and  family  circle
are  senvt  and  retired  from  the  pub-
lic, but  they  keep  the  fire  burning
upon  the  altar  of  our  hearts.  Ana
it  is  not  often  that  persons  who
faithfully  attend  to  this  duty  walk
in  darkness,  it  is  seldom  that  they
apostatize  and  turn  away  from  the
faith,  especially  when  we  couple
our  solemn  prayers  with  a  short
sermon  or  lecture  of  comfort  and  of
peace  to  our  wives  and  children,
sanctifying  our  prayers  by  words  of
consolation,  and  then  we  have  a
little  heaven  on  earth. And  I  have


58


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES


noticed  that  those  who  do  this  can
generally  give  a  reason  for  the  hope
that  is  in  them.  Where  these
things  are  neglected,  however  small
they  may  appear  in  the  estimation
of  some,  there  is  :i  want  of  the  vital
principle  that  feeds  the  soul,  that
keeps  the  leaves  and  branches  green,
that  imparts  beauty  and  loveliness  to
all  nature.

I  have  thought  that  if  we  were  a
little  more  punctual  in  the  dis-
charge of  our  obligations  one  with
another  and  to  all  men,  it  would
be  the  means  of  opening  wider  the
door  of  light  and  truth  to  all
pursuing  that  course.  It  is  too  often
the  case  that  we  sometimes  con-
tract duties  and  make  promises  to
discharge  them,  when  our  present
condition  and  future  prospects  are
altogether  too  slim  to  jutsify  our  do-
ing so.  Yet  we  feel  wTe  must  go  in
debt  to  supply  our  immediate
wants.  And  when  the  time  comes
for  payment  to"  be  made,  it  is  not  at
all  an  infrequent  chapter  in  our
lives,  that  at  that  particular  time
we  were  not  so  well  prepared  to
meet  the  obligation  as  we  wen*  tin*
day  we  made  the  contract.  This  I
apprehend  is  a  barrier  to  our  suc-
cess and  our  prosperity.  And  I  feel
that  if  there  was  more  punctuality
manifested  by  us  in  paying  our  obli-
gations than  now  exists,  we  would
have  more  confidence  in  one  another
than  we  already  have.  I  do  not
recommend  any  person  to  take  his
neighbor  in  hand  and  say,  "Pay
me  that  which  thou  owest  me,"
So  far  as  my  memory  serves  me,  in
such  cases  as  when  persons  owed  me
who  failed  to  pay  me  according  to
promise,  and  I  believed  them  honest
and  upright  in  their  feelings,  seek-
ing not  to  take  advantage,  I  do  not
recollect  ever  having  crowded  such
persons,  or  putting  them  to  the
least  inconvenience. 1 think  it


is  good  and  honorable  on  the  part
of  the  creditor  to  establish  his  name
and  character  by  showing  mercy
and  easing  the  burden  of  those  who
may  be  indebted  to  him.  For  there
should  be  a  disposition  on  one  part-
to  avoid  contracting  debts,  and  a
disposition  on  tlm  other  to  be  as
lenient  as  circumstances  permit,  to
move  away  all  the  obstruction  we
can  from  the  path  of  each  other's
prosperity.  However  small  these
matters  may  seem,  they  are  im-
portant.

At  the  time  our  Prophet  and
Patriarch  were  killed,  or  at  least
soon  afterwards,  when  the  Twelve
returned  to  Nauvoo,  their  imme-
diate circumstances  were  not  alto-
gether agreeable  and  pleasant  or
profi table.  But  suffice  it  to  say  we
had  a  meeting,  a  Conference,  at
which  President  Young  was  the
centre  of  attraction.  On  bis  rising
to  speak,  and  as  soon  as  he  opened
his  mouth,  I  heard  the  voire  of
Joseph  through  him,  and  it  was  as
familiar  to  me  as  the  voice  of  my
wife,  the  voice  of  my  child,  or  the
voice  of  my  father.  And  not  only
the  voice  of  Joseph  did  1  distinctly
and  unmistakably  hear,  hut  I  saw
the  very  gestures  of  his  person,  the
very  features  of  his  countenance,
and  if  I  mistake  not,  the  very  sisse
of  his  person  appeared  on  the  stand.
And  it  went  through  me  with  the
thrill  of  conviction  that  Brigham
was  the  man  to  lead  this  people.
And  from  that  day  to  the  present
there  has  not  been  a  query  or  a
doubt  upon  my  mind  with  regard
to  the  divinity  of  his  appointment ;
I  know  that  he  way  the  man  selected
of  God  to  fill  the  position  he  now
holds.

I  have  found  in  my  experience  that
there  is  a  good  deal  in  a  man's  hav-
ing confidence  in  himself,  A  per-
son having  little  confidence  in  God


K


PRAYER,  Eta


59'


and  more  in  himself  is  not  good;
the  capital  stock  should  be  in  the
Lord  our  God,  and  the  smaller  portion
in  the  creature  operating.

When  the  Lord  created  man,  I
believe  he  placed  in  him  a  portion  of
himself,  that  ia  a  portion  $f  every
qualification  that  he  himself  pos-
ses: sed.  And  in  our  sphere  we  are
to  act  independently ;  but  under  and
by  ibe  power  of  those  principles  of
natural  inspiration.  There  is  a  good
deal  of  natural  inspiration  in  man  ;
and  when  that  is  touched  by  the
finder  of  the  Almighty,  it  makes  the
cup  a  delicious  one,  it  makes  the
mind  truly  enlightened.

Brethren  and  sisters,  I  have  all
confidence  in  the  Lord  our  God — I
sa3T  all  confidence,  perhaps  that
calls  for  a  little  qualification.  At
any  rate  I  believe  in  him,  and  that
he  is  just,  wise  and  merciful*  It  I
did  not  believe  he  was  merciful,  I
could  not  believe  my  own  eyes  while
looking  upon  this  vast  congregation
of  his  people,  assembled  in  this  iso-
lated place,  here  in  the  southern  por-
tion of  our  Territory,

I  tell  you  how  I  feel  in  relation  to
the  matters  that  have  been  spoken
of  here  to- day.  If  I  had  more
confidence  in  myself,  and  in  my
own  ability,  limited  though  it  may
be,  I  could  venture  farther  and  do
more,  and  perhaps  overcome  my
natural  timidity  and  become  a  more
efficient  agent  in  the  hands  of  our
Father  of  doing  good.  This  I  desire
with  all  my  heart.  I  can  say  that
wLat  little  I  possess  of  this  world's
goods  are  subject  to  the  orders  of  my
superiors  in  the  Priesthood,  myself
and  all  that  I  command  are  at  their
dictation  to  be  used  in  the  service
of  our  God  for  the  advancement  of
his  kingdom.  I  labored  with  my
hands  until  I  reached  my  seventieth
year,  when  I  had  to  cease  working;
and  for  the  last  two  years  I  have


not  been  able  to  do  anything,  not  even
to  cut  a  stick  of  wood  or  fetch  a
bucketful  of  water.  But  I  feel  thank-
ful that  my  health  is  as  good  as  it  is,
and  that  I  have  lived  to  see  this  day,
and  to  behold  this  elegant  structure-
reared  to  the  honor  of  our  God,  and
to  have  the  privilege  of  meeting  and
joining  with  so  many  of  my  brethren
and  sisters  to  worship  within  it»
walls.

Brethren,  I  rejoice  in  the  service
of  God,  and  I  want  to  continue  in
it ;  and  if  our  religion  had  no  more
consolation  than  it  now  affords,  it
would  be  ample  to inspire us  to
honor  it  and  to  live it. I  look;
around  rne  and  see  a  great  many
heads  as  white  and  many  whiter
than my own. I ofttimes  wish,
Oh,  that  I  were  again  active  and
able  to  work  manfully  and  energet-
ically in  the  cause  of  truth  !  But
no;  like  many  others  of  my  age,  1
am  subject  to  rheumatism  and  pains
in  my  limbs,  which  at times  dis-
able me; I bave  commenced  to
teel the infirmities of  increasing
age  and  yenrs;  and  so  many  of  ua
now,  after  these  many  years  of  toil,
bave  to  struggle  with the  going
down  sun  of  our  earthly  existence.
But we have the  consolation  of
knowing  that  our  mortal  body  will
not  always  impede  our  progress,  we
shall  not  forever  suffer  its  inconve-
niences; we  are  gladdened  in  the
hope  of either  laying  down  this
mortal  tabernacle  or  undergoing  that
welcome  change  which  will  free  us
from  all  afflictions  and  annoyance?.
And  we  hail  the  day  when  we  shall
|  be  free  from  sorrow  and  death,  to
forever  rejoice  in  the  joys  of  ever-
lasting lives. But  while  we  remain
let  us  struggle  on,  and  continue  the
good  fight  of  faith  until  vre  are  called
home. I  calculate,  the  Lord  being
my  helper,  to  do  the  very  best  I  can*
How  long  I  may  live  I  know  not,


60


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


peither  do  I  feel  much  anxiety,  fee!*
lug  as  I  do  that  I  a*n  in  the  hands
©f  my  Heaven  Iv  Father,  who  will  do
*ith  me  as  seemetb  him.  good.  But
yet  if  I  could  be  Spared  in  health,
I  would  like  to  see  the  adversary  '
bound,  to  trouble  and  harass  no
more  the  children  of  our  God.  I
would  like  to  live  to  Bee  myself
euhrely  redeemed  from  the  tradition


of  our  forefathers,  which  we  have
inherited  through  entailment,  aud
completely  baptized  in  the  element
of  life  everlasting.  These  are  my
heart's  desi res.  I  pray  that  God
may  continue  to  bless  us  and  help
us  to  walk  day  by  day  in  obedience
to  the  requirements  of  heaven.
A  me  n.


ADDRESS  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,


Dellv£kei>  to  the  Sunday  School  children,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,

Salt  Lake  City,  July  24,  1877.

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

IT  ESAU  J*?  HISTORY — TT™  ''TT^ftfr  fiflgE  f  *  T  fff '  ^  TO  THE  CHILDREN  —
PEACE  IN  UTAft— GOD  A  PERSONAGE  OF  TABERNACLE— THE  FOOLISH
FASHIONS,  »


If  I  can  have  qniefc  and  the  strict,
attention  of  the  congregation  I  think
all  can  hear  me.  The  children,  as
well  as  those  of  older  growth  and
manhood,  will  please  cease  their
talking  one  to  another,  cease  the  rub*
bing  of  feet  on  the  floor,  cease  to  make
noise.  I  have  a  few  words  for  the
children,  The  larger  portion  of  this
congregation  have  been  born  in  this
TerritorjT;  they  know  nothing  of  the
outside  world;  they  know  but  little
in  comparison  as  to  the  cause  of  their
birth  and  education  within  the  valleys
of  these  mountains.  A  short  recital
of  the  reasons,  why  these  children
before  me  were  born  here  instead  of
being  born  in  the  States,  I  can  give
to  you,  and  will  endeavor  to  do  ao  in
a  few  wordi.


In  1830,  forty-seven  years  ago  last
Mirch,  the  Book  of  Mormon  wag
printed  and  bound.  Joseph  Smith
had  received  revelation,  and  plates  on
which  were  engraved  characters  from
which  the  book  was  translated.
Before  the  b  njk  was  printed,  before
Joseph  had  the  privilege  of  testifying
to  the  truth  of  the  latter-day  work,
persecution  was  raised  against  him.
On  the  0th  day  of  April  of  the  same
year  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  was
organized.  Persecution  increased  aud
continued  to  increase.  He  left  the
State  of  New  York  and  went  to  the
State  of  Ohio.  The  Gospel  was
preached  there  and  many  received  it,
A  settlement  was  formed,  but  Joseph
had  not  the  privilege  of  staying  there
long  before  they  hunted  him  so  deter-


ITKMS  OF  HISTORY  ETC.


61


mined  ly  that  he  was  forced  to  leave
Kirtland  and  the  State  of  Ohio,  He
then  weut  to  Missouri.  In  the  year  j
1838,  in  the  month  of  March,  in  !
company  with  a  number  of  brethren,
myself  included,  Joseph  arrived  at
Far  West,  Caldwi  U  euunty,  Missouri,
We  had  not  the  privilege  of  staying
there  more  than  for  a  few  months
before  the  cry  was  raised  against.
Joseph  Smith,  that  he  was  guilty  of
high  treason.  This  aroused  the  peo-
ple and  the  government  of  the  State;
and  iu  October,  thirty-five  hundred  of
the  militia  of  the  State  of  Missouri
were  marched  against  a  few  of  us  in
Far  West.  They  succeeded  in  taking-
Joseph  and  Hyram  and  sixty-live
others  and  putting  them  in  prison.
When  Joseph  had  his  trial,  the  great
accusation  against  him  was  that  he
believed  in  the  fulfilment  of  prophe-
cy— the  prophecies  that  had  been
made  by  Prophets  of  old  and  contain-
ed  in  H<>1y  Writ*  When  Judge  King
asked  Joseph  if  he  b<  lieved  the
predictions  of  Daniel  the  Prophet,
that  in  the  la  iter- days  the  God  of
heaven  would  set  up  a  kingdom  which
should  succeed  and  finally  rule  and
bold  dominion  over  alt  other  kingdoms,
Joseph  replied  that  he  did  believe  this
scripture  as  well  as  the  rest.  This
was  considered  treason  !  Joseph's
lawyer  turned  to  Judge  King  and  said,
11  Judge,  I  think  vou  had  better  write
it  down  that  the  Bible  is  high  treason,"
and  this  was  all  they  found  against
him*  But  the  r:ob  continued  until
they  drove  the  Latter-day  Saints  out
of  the  State  of  Missouri.  We  were
told  if  we  remained  there  the  people
would  be  upon  us.  What  we  were
goilty  of  we  did  not  know,  only  that
we  believed  in  the  Bible  and  the
fulfilment  of  prophecy,  or,  in  other
words,  in  the  literal  reading  of  the  word
of  God,  They  succeeded,  atter  killing
many  of  the  Latter-day  Saints — men,
women,  and  children,  cruelly  mas*


sacring  them,  in  driving  us  out  of  the
State  to  the  State  of  Illinois,  where
the  people  received  us  with  open  arms,
especially  the  inhabitants  of  the  city
of  Qaincy ; -for  which  kindness  the
hearts  of  our people'  who  passed
through  these  scenes  have  ever  been
lifted  to  God,  petitioning  for  blessings
upon them. And  they  have  been
blessed.  '  We  lived  in  the  State  of
Illinois  a  few  years)  n^nd  heiv,  as
elsewhere,  persecution  overtook  ns.  .
It  came  from  Missouri,  eg ut easing  itself
upon  Joseph,  and  fastened  ft stdf  upon
others. We  lived  in  Illinois  from
1839  to  1SU,  by  which  time  they
J  again  succeeded  in  kindling  the  spirit
of  persecution  against  Joseph  and  the
Latter-day  Saints. Treason !  treason  !
treason !  they  cried,  calling  us  mur-
derers, thieves,  liars,  adulterers,  and
the  worst  people  on, the  earth.  And
this  was  done  by  the  priests,  those
pious  dispensers  of  the  Christian  re*
ligion  whose  chat  ify  w  a*  supposed  to  be
extended  to  all  men,  Christian  and
heathen  ;  they  were  joined  by  dumk-
ards,  gamblers,  thieves,  liars,  in  crying
against  the  Latter-day  Saints.  They
took  Joseph  And  Hyrutn,  and  as  a
guarantee  for  their  safety,  Governor
Thomas  Ford  pledged  t  he  faith  of  the
State  of  Illinois.  They  were  imprison-
ed, on  the  pretense  of  safe  keeping,
because  the  mob  was  so  enraged  and
violent, The  Governor  left  them  in
the  hands  of  the  mob,  who  entered
the  pr  ison  and  shot  them  dead. J ohn
Taylor,  who  is  present  with  us  to  day,
was  in  the  prison  too,  and  was  also
shot,  and  was  confined  to  his  bed  for
several  months  afterwards. After  the
mob  had  committed  these  murdera
they  came  upon  us  and  burned  our
houses  and  our  grain. When  the
brethren  would  go  out  t:>  put  out  the
fire,  the  mob  would  lie  couceaJed
under  fences,  and  in  the  darkness  of
the  night,  they  would  shoot  them*
At  last  they  succeeded  in  driving  nt


-62  JOURNAL  OF

from  the  State  of  Illinois.

Three  congressmen  came  in  the  Fall
of  18i;j,  and  had  a  Conference  with
the  Twelve  and  others  ;  they  were
desirous  that  we  should  leave  the
United  States.  We  told  thejn  we
would  do  so,  we  had  staid  long
enough  with  them ;  we  Agreed  to  leave
the  State  of  Illinois  in  consequence  of
that  religious  prejudice  against  us
that  we  could  not  stay  in  peace  any
longer.  These  men  s$id  the\  people
were  prejudiced  against  us.  SteJ*#nA.
Dduglassppne  of  the  three  had  been  ,
acquainted  with  us.  He  said  "  I  know
you,  I  knew  Joseph  Smith  ;  he  was  a
good  man,"  and  this  people  was  a
good  people ;  but  the  prejudices  of  the
priests  and  the  ungodly  arc  such  that,
said  he,  u  Gentlemen,  you  cannot  stay
here  and  live  in  poace."  We  agreed
to  leave.  We  completed  our  Temple
far  enough  to  give  endowments  to
many.  We  left  Nauvooin  February,
1846,  There  remained  behind  a  few
of  the  very  poor,  the  sick  and  the
aged,  who  suffered  again  from  the
violence  of  the  mob :  they  were  whipped
and  beaten,  and  had  their  houses
burned.  We  travelled  west,  stopping
in  places,  building  settlements,  where
we  left  the  poor  who  could  not  travel
any  further  with  the  company.  Ex-
actly thirty  years  to-day,  myself,  with
others,  came  out  of  what  we  named
Emigration  Canon  ;  we  crossed  the
Big  and  Little  mountains,  and  came
down  the  valley  about  three  quarters
of  a  mile  south  of  this.  We  loca-
ted, and  we  looked  about,  and  finally
we  came  and  camped  between  the
two  forks  of  City  Creek,  one  of
which  ran  south-west  and  the  other
west.  Here  we  planted  our  stand-
ard on  this  Temple  block  and  the
one  above  it;  here  we  pitched  ©ur
camps  and  determined  that  here  we
would  settle  and  stop.  Still  our
brethren  who  tarried  by  the  way
were  toiling  through  poverty  and


DISCOURSES.

distress.  At  one  time,  I  was  told,
they  would  have  perished  from  star-
vation, had  not  the  Lord  sent  quails
among  them.  These  birds  flew
against  their  wagons,  and  they  either
killed  or  stunned  themselves,  and'
the  brethren  and  sisters  gathered
them  up,  which  furnished  them  with
food  for  days,  until  they  made  their
way  in  the  wilderness.

Children,  we  are  the  pioneers  of
this  country,  with  one  exception,  west
of  the  Mississippi  river  ;  we  esta-
blished the  first  printing  press  in
every  State  from  here  to  the  Pacific
Ocean,  and  we  were  the  first  to  esta-
blish libraries,  and  the  first  to  esta-
blish good  schools;  we  were  the  first
to  plant  out  orchards  and  to  improve
the  desert  country,  muking  it  like
the  garden  of  El  en.

I  will  not  prolong  this  recital ;  but
will  ask  the  children  if  they  can
now  understand  why  they  were  born
here  in  this  far  off  land  ?  You  mi^hfc
just  at*  wi-11  have  been  burn  in  Mis-
souri or  Illinois,  if  your  parents  had
been  treated  as  they  should  have  been.
If  let  alone  to  enjoy  the  rights  and
liberties  in  common  with  our  fellow-
men,  we  would  Inve  beautified  the
land,  made  it  an  Eden  and  adorned  it
with  everything  desirable*  But  we
were  not  allowed  to  stay  there  to  pos-
sess the  homes  we  had  made;  and
consequently  we  are  here  and  this  has
been  your  birth  *  place.  And  now
that  we  are  here,  we  are  followed
by  a  set  of  men  who  are  reudy  to
re- enact  the  scenes  that  we  have
already  passed  through*  But  we  are
now  where  we  can  keep  and  preserve
ourselves  in  the  possession  of  onr
'  homes  and  property.  They  drove
us  to  the  fastnesses  of  the  Uocky
Mountains,  and  it  will  be  a  hard  mat-
ter to  dispossess  us  again ;  it  will
prove  a  job,  if  undertaken,  that  they
would  be  glad  to  let  out  before  they
get  fairly  into  it But  still  they  are


afW  us ;  and  when  you  hear  of  this
and  thnt  with  regard  to  myself,  being
goilty  of  tins  and  that  wrong;  I  would
have  you  look  at  those  who  make
these  accusations,  look* at  certain
characters  we  have  ami  have  had  in
our  midst  who  are  called  ministers
of  justice,  ministers  of  the  law  ;
they  are  bosom  companions  of  thieves,
liars  and  murderers;  Lut  the  honor-
able and  upright  they  hate  because

*  their  deeds  are  evil ;  and  they  believe
tbey  have  a  mission,  but  it  is  a  hard
,one  to  accomplish.  .

You  can  now  understand,  my  chil-
dren, why  you  were  bom  in  Utah,  and
jsot  in  either  Missouri  or  Illinois.  If
they  h  id  let  us  alone  we  would  luive
made  those  lands  an  Eden,  and  we
wdnld  have  molested  or  hurt  no  one.

'Fur  there  are  no  people  that  preserve
the  laws  of  our  government  as  well  as
the  Litter-day  Saints.

Now,  permit  me  to  cast  one  reflec-
tion before  closing  this  part  of  my
address. Yon  have  been  reading  of

,*tbe  gre.it  and  alarming  "  uprising  of

*  the  Mormons!"  what  aptwrible  time
they  arc  experiencing  in  Utah  !  etc.

Wonderful  !  Wonderful  !  You
have  seen  your  fathers,  who  are
farmers,  go  to  their  farms,  and  those
who  are  mechanics,  to  their  work-
ihtjps,  and  our  merchants  to  their
place  of  business,  without  molesting
any  person,  and  what  a  terrible  state
of  atf'urs  this  is.  You  have  read,
too,  in  our  late  papers  about  the  up-
rising of  the  railroad  strikers,  which
has  really  taken  pU*ee;  does  it  not
•eem  singular  to  you  why  these  char-
acters, who  are  so  afraid  of  trouble,
do  not  go  east  and  lend  their  aid  and
moral  influence  to  quell  the  riot  ?
You  can  understand  that  if  we  had
been  let  alone  we  would  have  done
justice  and  preserved  the  laws.  Who
pay  their  taxes  as  well  as  do  the
Latter-day  Saints  ?  No  people.  Who
honor  so  well  the  laws  of  our  govern-


ment ?  No  other  people.  This  is
the  speech  that  brother  George  Q.
Cannon  was  expected  to  have  made.
He  wanted  me  to  make  it  and  I  have
to  make  the  two  speeches  in  one.
j  Now,  a  few  words  of  counsel  to
;  the  children.  Do  you  feel,  children,
that  you  can  remain  patient  and
endure  my  talk  a  little  longer  ?  I
think  you  c^n.  A  few  words  of  coun-
!  sel  to  you,  to  ,you  that  understand
what  I  am  saying,  I  hope  you  will^b*
sefs«;wfaat  I*sjy  and  remem^et*  it,
and',  carry  it  out  in  y<Ai;jBve%  The
first  is  to  love  the  L^rd  you*,God  with
all  your  hearts.  And  the  next  is  to
honor  your  parents,  that  your  days
may  be  long  in  the  land  which  the
Lord  your  God  has  given  us.  Ob-
serve, children,  and  hearken.  Yon
are  taught  to  worship  the  Lord,  so
are  the  children  of  the  Christian
world.  They  bavetheirSundayschooISj
and  churches  and  meeting-houses,
and  their  ministers  and  teachers  who
instruct  the  children.  You  go  to
them  and  ask  them  if  they  kuow
anything  about  that  Holy  Being
whom  they  worship,  and  whom  they
call  God.  Not  that  the  comprehen-
sion of  children  is  equal  to  that  of
the  aged  philosopher,  but  still  you
have  some  understanding.  Children,
when  yon  ask  the  ministers  of  Chris-
tendom whom  they  worship,  tbey
will  tel!  you,  "Oh,  we  worship  God  !,p
Who  is  that  God  ?  Can  you  tell  us
where  he  lives?  The  answer  is,
"  No/'  Can  you  tell  us  anything
about  his  character  ?  He  is  a  per-
sonage without  a'iy  body  at  all  •  he
has  neither  body  nor  parts,  he  has  no
head,  he  has  no  ears,  he  has  no  eyes
to  see,  he  has  no  nose  to  smell,  no
mouth  to  speak,  no  arms  to  handl©
anything,  nor  a  body  to  which  these
arms  can  be  attached ;  he  has  no  legs,
he  therefore  ennnot  walk  j  and  finally
they  say,  to  sum  him  up  to  our  entire
satisfaction,  he  is  a  personage  without


C4


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


body,  parts  or  passions:

Now,  little  children,  can  vou  con-
c^ive  what  kind  of  a  beinp  this  is  ?
Yon  say,  u  It\s.;nothing' fct  all.*'  That
is  just  wh&t  it  n» ;  it  is  a  myth ;  it
is  no thili p*  to  look  at,  nothing
adore,  nothing  to  worship;  nothing'
to  admire,  nothing  to  appeal  to  for
help, Be  has  no  arm*?  to  either  ban-


believe  in  Jeans  Chris*,  the  Son  of
(xfid  and  the  Savior of  the  world, who
is  a  personage  of  Jtahernaeh\  Ho
was  to  all  appearance  like  other  men,
and  he  was  the  express  imajje  of  thu
Father.  If  he  were  here,  to-dav,  as
'  lip  Appeared  at  Jernsaletn,  he  would


no


ihrou|i

te^WOtl


u


'Oil  1 1)'


in  world  w)Mi


-11  f  1  1  >  ■'nil  V»»

Ration,

Id  suppose  bi

tT ir  1  % 1  1

Id


to


*;  .afftl  taJ^Mrirk^P^eiiildreti  to  worship.

*  * •  9d*s  cli  i  I  ri  reti  ,  re  me  m  her  t  h  i  s ,
We  teach  von  that  our  Father  in
heaven  is  a  personage  of  tabernacle,
just  ns  much  as  1  atn  who  stand  be-
fore you  lO-day,  and  he  hns  all  the
par  la  and  pulsions  of  a  perfefit  man,
and  his  body  is  composed  tfL  flesh
and  bones,  but  not  of  hloolf*  He,

i  therefore,  h;is  eyes  to  see,  and  his
ey.es  are  upon  alL  the  works  of  his
hai  d&i  '  bifc f.tas  eirtrs;  which  are  open

^  t*>  JSeaj^  th0gjj^££rs^g£  little  children,
iihd  heiWet  yoa,^iria  knows  you,
for  you  are  all  his  offspring  ;  and  his
knowledge  of  you  is  so  minute  that,
to  use  the  language  of  the  ancients,
not  a  hair  of  your  head  falls  to  the
ground  unnoticed.  This  is  the  kind
of  God  we  worship.  Children,  call
upon  him  in  your  childhood  and
youth,  for  from  such  as  you  lie  lias
fiaid  he  will  not  turn  away.  Ask  the
Fa' her  to  protect  you;  always  ask
him,  in  the  nnme  of  Jesus,  for  his
spit-it.  The  youth,  the  child,  those
who  are  partially  grown,  as  well  as
the  a^ed,  cease  not  to  call  upon  God
with  nil your  hearts.  Remember

I  this.  Obey  your  parents,  honor  them
and  seek  to  do  tKeni  good.  And
parents,  seek  to  honor  your  children  ;
bring  them  up  \n  the  nurture  and
admonition  of  the  Lord.  Teach  them
truth  andAut  error ;  teach  them  to
love  and^wre  God;  teach  them  to


the  rather  has  appoint!
in  liffllfanlted  jk>sitiop.  ,  If  is not  my
busiheSi-  nor  yftijri ,  tp  <ff|ptron  the
Father  whvJie&Mi^teil  this  Jesus
to  be  the/iSvlSr  w  the^  world.  If
you  d o f  itofiJPbofw  t till v  comprehei id
thfa>  the-jj^fe  will*  '*<nn.e
will.  Remember,,  too.  tfik*  great
principle  of  impnwemenWlp^
learn  !  learn  !  continue  t|6  learn,  &o
study  bv  observation  and  from  croou

V  h  hi.  fr*0itilJ% **** *  T

books?  !  Listen  txfcthe  itptructinn  <«t
your  parents,  and  of  your  bnjnh*eir
who  hold  the  holy  Priesthtiou,  ari^
they  will  tj^gh  jsete  the  ways  of  JSjfe|
pin  ess  ^rTrfPrffp^Tternal.  Ifany  of
you  are  so  unfortunate  as  to  havd
parents  who  wander  into  by  and  for-
bidden paths,  and  who  do  things  that
are  wrong,  follow  not  after  them,  but
honor  them  and  be  kind  to  i hem,
and  teach  them  by  example  the  bet-
ter way.  Study  the  Bible,  the  Rook
of  Mormon,  the  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants, read  the  sermons  that  are,
published  in  the  Deseret  News,  as
well  as  all  the  standard  works  of  the
Church.  Such  reading  will  afford
you  instruction  and  improvement;
but  novels  allure  the  mind  and* are
without  profit.

Little  girls/pennif  ine  to  yon,
Wont  you  be  m  kind  and  so  good
as  to  take  those  pins  or  the  india-
rubber  cords  out  of  the  back  of  the
skirts  of  your  dresses,  so  that  you
will  look  comely.  They  make  you
look  uncomely,  to  see  your  dresses


ITEMS  OF  HISTORY",  ETC.


65


drawn  around  you,  showing  your
form.  Mothers  ought  to  be  ashamed
of  teaching  their"  children  such
things.  Dress  your  children  and
yourselves  in  that  comely,  angelic
manner  that,  were  an  angel  to  visit
you,  you  would  not  feel  ashamed.
I  am  very  pleased  to  say  that  there
are  some  of  our  girls,  and  numbered
among  them  are  some  of  my  own,
whom  you  could  not  get  to  adopt
these  follies.  Ask  your  mothers,
then,  to  make  your  clothes  suitable
and  becoming ;  and  keep  your  hair
smooth  and  nice.  The  hair  is  given
to  the  female  for  adornment  ;  and
therefore  let  the  ladies,  young  and
old,  adorn  their  heads  with  "their
hah.  Mothers  should  study  and
children  should  study  to  preserve  the
skin  of  the  children  from  being
ruined  by  dirt,  and  the  heat  of  a
scorching  sun,  and  to  keep  them-
selves clean  and  pure  ■  but  children,
now  remember,  study  those  books
that  teach  you  the  way  of  life  and
salvation.

You  see  that  the  infant  and  the
children  die.  How  many  of  you
witness  the  infant  lying  in  its  little
coflin,  and  here  lie  the  child  and  the
youth  ;  they  pass  away  in  death.
And  again,  here  are  the  middle-
aged,  many  of  them  pass  away  into
eternity ;  the  old  people  must  die.
And  the  world  is  but  a  span.

Are  we  going  to  cease  to  exist]
No,  this  world  is  only  a  preparatory
place  to  gain  a  knowledge  of  God,
that  we  may  be  prepared  to  enter
into  a  higher  state  of  existence  and
glory,  and  grow  up  unto  Christ  our
living  head.  Learn  the  ways  of  the
Lord  in  your  youth,  and  continue


therein  all  the  days  of  your  life,  that
you  may  be  prepared  for  that  higher
state  of  glory  that  awaits  the  faithful
children  of  our  God.

I  have  said  enough  to  answer  my
own  feelings,  for  this  occasion,  and
perhaps  to  satisfy  you.  I  sav  to  all,
God  bless  you,  my  chilren,  my  Utile
!  ones.  I  love  you,  I  am  a  great  lover
;  of  children  and  innocence  and  purity,
and  I  am  a  hater  of  iniquity,  just
as  much  so  as  the  Lord,  and  perhaps
more  than  I  should  be.  I  do  not
know  this.  I  think  very  frequently,
in  looking  upon  the  actions  of  men,
that  I  do  not  have  compassion
enough  j  but  when  I  see  the  wolf
among  the  lambs  I  am  after  them,  '
to  see  that  they  do  not  destroy  the
lambs.  And  when  you  are  told  that
you  do  not  know  anything  about
"  Mormonism  "  you  may  know  it  is
I  wrong  ;  you  know  something  of  it
'  every  day.  I  would  have'  given
worlds  if  I  could  have  known  the
truth  in  my  childhood,  as  I  now  hear
it.  I  had  a  great  desire  to  know  it,
and  the  priests  were  after  me  from
the  time  I  was  eight  years  of  age.
I  was  infidel  to  their  creeds,  but  not
to  the  Bible,  not  to  <iod,  not  to  holi-
ness, but  to  the  creeds  of  the  chil-
dren of  nmu  I  was  infidel,  and  am
to  this  day.  I  say,  God  bless  you,
niy  children.  I  give  all  of  yon  an
invitation  to  attend  the  meetings  on
the  Sabbath  day,  to  hear  the  preach-
ing and  to  worship  God,  and  to  spend
the  Sabbath  day  prudently  in  the
love  and  fear  of  God.  Try  to  adopt
in  your  whole  lives  that  code  of  mo-
rals which  our  religion  teaches,  and
which  we  urge  upon  the  people.  God
bles.s  you.  Amen.


No.  5.


Yol.  XIX.


66


journal  ov  iwscouksjks


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Ogdex,  at  a  mertixg  of  the  Relief

Socihties  of  VVeber  County,  July  19,  1877.

(Reported  by  James  Taylor.)

RELIEF SOCIETIES  —  TALK TO MOTHERS  —  IMPROVEMENT SOCIETIES —


DOMESTIC  MATTERS — TRAINING  CHILDREN — HOME  PRODUCTION— SILK
INTERESTS,


[The  following  discourse  was  de-
livered by  President  Brighara
Young ;  it  was  not  revised  by  our
respected  President,  but  is  pre-
sented as  reported  by  brother
James  Taylor,  of  Ogden.]

I  expected  to  attend  a  meeting  of
the  Relief  Societies  of  this  Stake  of
Zion  to  hear  reports,  and  comments
from  the  Presidency,  the  Secreta-
ries, and  from  those  that  they  would
call  upon  to  speak.  I  learn  from
the  President  that  the  calculation
was  to  invite  the  brethren  to  come
here  and  talk  to  them,  instead  of
their  talking  to  us,  and  to  give
them  instructions,  point  out  their
duties,  and  direct  them  with  regard
to  their  future  course  of  life.  This
we  are  willing  to  do,  on  conditions.
Were  I  to  ask  you  if  you  are  wil-
ling to  comply  with  those  condi-
tions, I  have  no  doubt  but  what
you  would  at  once  answer  me  in
the  affirmative,  and  believe  that  you
would  carry  out  the  declaration  of
your  own  voices,  for  this  would  be
jour  mind.  The  question  is,  will
you  carry  out  our  instructions  p
We  leave  each  and  every  one  to
determine  that  bv  their  future  lives.


We  hope  that  the  people  will  hearken
and  by  their  acts  respond  to  gur  re-
quests.

The  people  called  Latter-day  Saints
say  that  they  wish  to  know  and  un-
derstand how  to  order  their  lives
before  Him  whem  we  serve  and
acknowledge  as  our  Father  and  our
God.  If  I  were  to  gi  ve  you  my  own
feelings  with  regard  to  instructions,
many  of  you  would  perhaps  con-
sider it  egotism  ;  still,  I  take  the
liberty  of  saying  to  these  my  sisters,
if  the  counsel  and  instruction  that
your  unworthy  servant  has  given  to
i  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  had
been  obeyed  and  carried  out,  I  have
taught  them  enough  to  have  saved
the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  to  have
made  every  one  of  them  to  be  Latter-
day  Saints.

We  are  professedly  Saints,  What
is  the  difference  between  a  Saint  of
God  and  an  angel  of  God  ?  One  is
clothed  upon  with  mortality,  the
other  has  passed  through  mortality
aud  has  received  the  celestial  glory
of  our  heavenly  Father,  and  is  free
from  the  contaminating  influences
of  sin  that  we  have  to  contend
with.  This  is  the  difference.  We
ask  the  question,  can  mortal  beings


UEULF  SOCIETIES,  1TC.


67


live  so  that  they  are  worthy  of  the
society  of  angels  ?  I  can  answer
the  question  for  myself — I  believe
that  they  can  ;  I  am  sure  that  they
can*  But  in  doing  this,  they  must
subdue  the  sin  that  is  within  them-
selves, correct  every  influence  that
arises  within  their  own  hearts  that
18  opposed  to  the  sanctifying  influ-
ences of  the  grace  of  God,  and  pu-
rify themselves  by  their  faith  and  by
their  conduct,  so  that  they  are
worthy,  Then  they  are  prepared
for  the  society  of  angels.  To  be
Saints  indeed,  requires  every  wrong
influence  that  is  within  them,  as
individuals,  to  be  subdued,  until
every  evil  desire  is  eradicated,  and
every  feeling  of  their  hearts  is  brought
into  entire  subjection  to  tho  will  of
Christ  Now  you  all  believe  thin
jofit  as  much  as  I  do.

The  first  thing  I  am  going  to  in-
troduce to  my  sisters  is  the  condition
of  this  community.  Since  I  have
come  into  this  place  I  understand
that  you  have  a  great  deal  of  sick,
ness  here.  "It  is  very  warm  wea-
ther," one  says,  "A  great  deal
of  sickness,"  says  another.  I  want
to  say  to  yon  that  warm  weather  is
very  healthy  weather.  And  I  can
aay  still  further,  with  regard  to  our
climate,  a  dry  climate  is  a  healthy
climate,  much  more  so  than  where
a  damp  miasma  arises  from  swamps
and  decayed  materials,  which  is  so
frequently  the  case  in  low  lands,
especially  in  the  Mississippi  Valley,
but  not  so  on  this  western  slope.
Now  I  want  you  to  understand  what
I  am  talking  to  you — this  weather
is  beautiful  weather  to  enjoy  health.

Now  I  rill  talk  to  you  mothers*
If  I  were  invited  to  your  houses  to
take  supper,  or  breakfast  to* morrow
morning,  if  yon  have  it  within  your
reach  you  will  have  a  platter  of  meat
cooked,  and  will  put  this  before  your
children. They  are  hungry,  and


require  something  to  satisfy  the
demands  of  nature.  Tou  place
this  before  them,  and,  if  they  choose,
in  our  country,  they  may  gorge
themselves  to  overflowing.  You
do  not  stop  to  ask  them  if  they
have  eaten  sufficient,  and  ask  them
now  to  desist,  and  eat  moderately.
You  will  let  your  children  eat  green
apples  and  berries  of  any  kind  ;  ait
down  and  eat  fat  meat,  if  they
choose  it  and  like  it;  and  fill  their
systems  with  swine's  flesh  which
is  more  susceptible  of  diseases  than
any  other  flesh  that  we  eat.  It  is
not  like  fish  or  fowL  It  is  suscep-
tible of  disease  of  every  kind,  and
will  impregnate  the  system  with  dis-
ease far  quicker  than  any  other  food
th-it  we  eat.  Now,  mothers,  it  is
well  for  you  to  think  of  these  things.
I  will  tell  you  how  you  can  enjoy
health.  You  let  your  children  have  a
little  milk  in  the  morning,  I  would
prefer  putting  it  over  the  tire  and
boiling  it,  and  put  one- third  water
in  it,  with  a  little  flour  and  a  particle
of  salt  to  make  it  palatable.  Give
them  a  little  bread  with  it — not  soft
bread,  teach  your  children  to  eafc
crust — hard  baked  bread,  that  the
Americans  would  call  stale,  but  the
English  would  not*  Teach  them
to  eat  this,  and  to  eat  sparingly.
Instead  of  drinking  unhealthy  water,
boil  such  water,  and  let  it  stand
until  it  is  cool.  If  the  children  are
in  the  least  troubled  with  summer
complaint,  and  are  weak  in  their
bowels,  make  a  weak  composition
tea,  sweeten  it  with  loaf  sugar,  and
put  a  little  nice  cream  in  it;  and  let
the  children  make  a  practice  of  drink-
ing composition  instead  of  cold
water.  Mothers,  keep  the  children
from  eating  meat ;  and  let  them  eat
vegetables  that  are  fully  matured,
not  unripe,  and  bread  that  is  well
baked,  not  soft  Do  not  put  your
loaf  into  the  oven  with  a  fire  hot


63


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


enough  to  burn  it  before  it  is  baked
through,  bat  with  a  slow  heaf,  and
let  it  remain  until"  it  is  perfectly
baked  ;  and  I  would  prefer,  for  my
own  eating,  each  and  every  loaf  to
be  no  'bicker  than  my  two  hands —
von  Ml  I  tow  thick  they  are — and  I
wouuld  want  the  crust  as  thick  as
my  hand,

Now  for  experience.  You  see  I
fiTii  creeping  up  into  years ;  and  I
have  been  from  my  boyhood  a  per*
Sim  of  observation.  1  have  many
mux  many  a  time  said  to  children
when  they  begged  for  the  soft
bread,  that  was  not  baked  thoroughly,
"  Look  here;  you  will  not  live
very  long;  you  will  probably  conic
to  a  premature  grave/'  I  have  no-
ticed invariably  the  child  that  selects
the  soft  bread  to  be  a  short  dived
person.  The  children  that  hunt
around  after  the  crust  and  eat  it,
I  have  noticed  endure,  live,  and
continue  to  live  on*  Have  you  ever
noticed  this  ?  I  have  quite  aged
sisters  here;  and  I  am  talking  to
many  that  have  children,  grand-
children and  great  -  grand  -  ch  ild  ren,
like  myself*  Have  you  ever  observed
this  ?  If  you  have  not  I  wish  you
would  commence  to  reflect  upon  it.

You  say  you  are  improving.  These
societies  are  for  the  improvement  of
our  maimers,  our  dress,  our  habits,
and  our  methods  of  living.  Now,
sisters,  will  you  take  notice,  and
instruct  those  who  are  not  here
to-day,  to  adopt  this  rule  —  stop
your  children  from  eating  meat,
and  especially  fat  meat;  let  them
have  con) position  to  drink,  instead
of  unhealthy  water;  let  them  eat  a
little  milk  porridge;  let  them  eat
sparingly  and  not  oppress  the  sto-
mach so  as  to  create  a  fever.  No
matter  whether  it  is  a  child  or  a
middle-aged  person,  whenever  the
stomach  is  over  loaded  and  charged
with more than is required  it


creates  a  fever;  this  fever  creates
sickness,  until  death  relieves  the
sufferer.  Now  the  people  do  not
think  of  this.  You  ought  to  have
thought  of  it.  I  have  taught  this
fur  years  and  years  to  the  people.
When  \ve  commence  to  shape  our
lives  jiceording  to  the  judgment
that  is  given  to  us,  and  we  exer-
rise  a  proper  portion  of  thought,
and  study  the  hiws  of  life,  to  kuuw
what  to  give,  and  how  to  guide  and
direct  our  children  and  ourselves,
we  shall  find  that  the  longevity  of
this  people  will  increase,  Ah  hough
it  is  a  fact  that  the  longevity  of  this
people  is  as  great  perhaps  as  that  of
any  other  peqple  at  the  present  time;
yet  we  shall  find  if  we  will  hearken
to  the  wisdom  our  Heavenly  Father
has  given  us,  this  will  increase;  and
we  shall  learn  at  once  that  we  are
enjoying  better  health,  we  shall  have
a  greater  amount  of  vitality,  and  a
stronger  development  of  ability,
and  by  temperance  and  moderation
lay  the  foundation  for  the  develop-
ment of  the  mind.  Now,  here  let
me  throw  in  a  side  remark.  I  do
not  mean  to  go  without  food  and
go  to  fasting.  This  is  the  other
extreme.  A  sufficient  amount  of
food  that  will  agree  with  the  sto-
mach is  healthy,  and  should  be
partaken  of.  Aged  or  middle  aged,
youth  or  children,  uever  should  go
without  food  until  their  stomachs
are  faint,  demanding  something  to
sustain  their  systems,  and  continue
to  undergo  this ;  for  this  lays  the
foundation  of  weakness,  and  this
weakness  will  tempt  disease.  But
keep  the  stomach  in  a  perfectly
healthy  condition.  Now  I  do  not
mean  fasting,  but  eating  moderately;
and  if  my  sisters  will  go  home  and
commence  to  adopt  this  rule,  yoa  will
find  that  you  begin  to  get  better,
your  children  and  neighbors  will  get
better. We  do  not  expect  all  to  be


ree  from  sickness. I  have  had  a 1
great  deal  of  sickness  in  my  life.  I
do  not  expect  to  be  free  from  the  ills,
the  weakness,  debility  and  disease
that  prey  upon  the  banian  family,
but  we  can  amend  our  wavs,  and
amend  our  life  by  being  prudent ;  and
I  wish  the  sisters  to  understand  this,
and  to  adopt  these  instructions;  and
if  yon  do  not  learn  before  the  month
of  July  is  gone  that  your  sickness
has  departed,  I  shall  be  very  much
disappointed. So much for  the
health  of  the people. Will  you
listen  ?  I
Here  are  mothers. Who  give  the
key  to  the  nations  of  the  earth  with
regard  to  their  feelings,  pride,  pre-
judices; their  religion,  habits  and
customs,  and, I may  say,  who,  in
a  great  degree,  govern,  thst  lay  the
foundation  for  the  ability that  is
exhibited among the nations  of
men  ? It is the mothers.  Who
have laid the  foundations  in  the
hearts  of  children  to  prepare  them
to  be  great  and  good  men  ? It  is
not  the  fathers — it  is  the  mothers.
It  is  like  the  saying  of  the  Savior
with  regard  to  the  poor.  Speaking
to  his  disciples,  he  says: "For  the
poor  always  ye  have  with  you,  but
me  ye  have  not  always." Now  the
children  are  always with  the  mo-
ther, and  the  mother  is  always  with
the  children,  but  the  father  they  have
not. He  is  in  the  field,  at  his  work  ;
and  the  mother  is  all  the  time  making
impressions  upon  the  minds  of  the
children. Permit  me  here  to  say,
mothers,  and  my  sisters,  ynu  who
are  young,  it  will  do  you  good  if  you
will  only  observe  it You  see,  hear
and  witness  a  good  deal  of  conten-
tion among  children — some  of  you
do,  if  not  all — and  I  will  give  you
a  few  words  with  regard  to  your
future  lives,  that  you  may  have  chil-
dren that  are  not  contentious,  not
quarrelsome. Always be  good-na-


tured yourselves,  is  the  first  step.
Never  allow  y ourselves to  become
out  of  temper  and  get  fretful.  Why,
mother says, "  this is a  very
mischievous  little  boy  or  little  girl."
What  do  you  see  ? That  amount
of  vitality  in  those  little  children
that  they  cannot  be  still. If  they
cannot  do  anything  else  they  will  tip
over  the  chaira,  cut  up  and  pull  away
at  anything  to  raise  a  row.  They
are  so  full  of  life  that  they  cannot
contain  themselves ; and they  are
something like ourselves — boys.
They  have  so  much  vitality  in  them
thA  their  bones  fairly  ache  with
strength.  They  have  such  an  amount
of  vitality — life,  strength  and  activity,
that  they  must dispose  of  them ;
and  the  young ones will  contend
with  each  other. Do  not  be  out  of
temper  your selves. Always  sym-
pathize with  them  and  soothe  them.
Be  mild  and  pleasant If  you  see
a  child  with  knives  and  forks,  playing
with  them,  it  might  put  out  its  eyes.
It  will  not  do  to  give  it  a  hammer
and  a  looking  glass. What  will  you
do  ? I  am  a  person  of  experience,
and  know  to  deal  with  children.  If
the  child  has  in  its  hand  that  which
it  should  not  have,  let  the  mother  or
the  father,  or  whoever  has  charge
of  the  child  or  has  the  right,  take
such  things  from  it,  and  put  them
away w litre they belong.  Now,
mother,  listen  to  tl lis— never  ask  a
child  to  give  up  that  which  it  .should
not  have. Step  up  kindly  and  put
the  article  where  it  belongs.  The
child  will  not  say  anything, A  little
circumstance  took  place  in  Salt  L^ka
City. I  had business  in  a  house
where  I  had  understood  there  had
been  considerable  trouble  occasion-
ally ;  and  the  mother  would  not  let
I  the  father  speak  to  the  children,  to
chastise  them. I  went  into  the  house
and  talked  to  the  man. The  lady
came  in  and  sat  down. I  pretty  soon


70  JOURNAL  OF

saw  a  little  girl,  about  two  years  old,
with  a  tip  thimble  in  her  mouth,
sucking  it.  I  weot  up  to  the  girl,
took  the  thimble  from  her  and  put
it  on  the  mantle  shelf.  Says  I  to  the
mother — "you  must  not  allow  the
child  to  have  this  thing  ;  if  it  should
go  into  the  stomach  it  will  decay."
The  man  looked  at  me  as  if  he  would
faint  away.  He  was  a  large  man,
but  I  suppose  he  never  attempted  to
say  such  a  thing  to  his  wife  in  his  life.
I  said  it;  and  the  mother  was  so
confounded  that  she  did  not  say  a
word  ;  and  it  would  not  have  done
her  any  good  if  she  had.  Now,  if
you  will  mind  this — You  bring  up
your  children  correctly,  and  teach
them  those  principles  and  habits
that  are  correct,  and  you  will  find
that  you  will  improve  very  mate-
rialy  in  your  families.  If  you  find
that  the  children  are  cruel,  do  not
contend  with  them,  soothe  them,
and  invite  those  who  through  acci-
dent have  injured  a  little  sister  to
pity  her.  "  You  have  accidentally
hurt  your  little  sister,  go  and  kiss
her,"  By  taking  this  course  you
will  have  good  children,  and  they
will  not  contend  with  each  other.  I
am  talking  to  you  of  that  which
I  know.  I  have  had  an  experience
in  these  matters.

I  will  relate  a  little  incident  that
occurred  in  my  own  family,  A
little  boy  about  three  and  a  half
years  old  was  very  ill.  His  mother
would  feed  him  bread  and  milk,  or
whatever  be  wished.  As  soon  as  he
ceuld  stand  by  her,  every  day  he
wanted  his  broad  and  milk.  Just
as  soon  as  he  had  got  what  he
wanted,  he  would  throw  up  his  hand,
and  away  went  the  basin  to  the
floor.  His  mother  did  not  know
what  to  do.  Said  I,  "If  you  will
do  just  as  I  tell  you,  I  will  tell  you
what  to  do.  The  next  time  you  sit
down  to  feed  this  little  boy,  when


DISCOURSES.

he  has  got  through  he  will  knoek
the  dish  out  of  your  hand."  Said
I,  "  lean  him  against  the  chair,  do
not  gay  one  word  to  him,  go  to  your
work,  pay  no  attention  to  him  what-
ever/' She  did  so.  The  little  fel-
low stood  there  looked  at  her,  watched
her;  then  he  would  look  at  the  basin
and  the  spoon,  watch  his  mother,
and  look  at  the  basin  and  spoon
again.  By  and  by  he  got  down  and
crept  along  the  floor  and  climbed
up  to  the  chair,  and  then  set  the
basin  on  the  table,  and  crept  until
he  got  the  spoon  and  put  it  on  the
I  table.  He  never  tried  to  knock  that
dish  out  of  her  band  again.  Now
she  might  have  whipped  him  and
injured  him,  as  a  great  many  others
would  have  done;  but  if  they  know
what  to  do,  they  can  correct  the  child
without  violence.

,  One  of  the  nicest  things  in  the
world  is  to  let  an  enemy  alone  en-
tirely,  and  it  mortifies  him  to
death.  If  your  neighbors  talk  about
you,  and  you  think  that  they  do
wrong  in  speaking  evil  of  you,  do
not  let  them  know  that  you  ever
heard  a  word,  and  conduct  yourselves
as  if  they  always  did  right,  and  it
will  mortify  them,  and  they  will
say, "  We'll not  try this  game

I  any  longer."  I  have  seen  men,  and
women  also,  that  are  never  happy
until  they  are  miserable,  and  never
easy  until  they  are  in  pain.

These  are  little  things;  but  is  not
the  world  made  up  of  little  things  f
The  wbole  earth  is  composed  of
these  small  atoms  of  sand.  Our
lives  are  made  up  of  little,  simple
circumstances  that  amount  to  a  great
deal  when  they  are  brought  together,
and  sum  up  the  whole  life  of  the  man
or  woman  ;  and  yet  in  our  passing
from  one  to  another  our  little  acti
and  incidents  seem  to  be  very  minute

'  or  simple,  but  we  find  that  they
amount  to  a  great  deal.


■


RELIEF  SOCIETIES,  ETC


71


Now,  sisters,  will  you  learn  these
things,  I  want  to  see  the  children
of  this  people  grow  as  they  should;
and  I  want  to  go  a  little  farther  with
regard  to  our  chilren.  Commence,
mothers,  just  as  quick  as  the  child
is  old  enough  to  understand,  which
is  quite  young.  They  observe  the
acts  and  doings  of  the  mother,  and
whoever  is  present.  From  these  acts
they  imbibe  their  first  impressions.
Now,  mothers,  do  you  want  your
children  to  be  Saints,  when  they  are
grown  up  ?  Do  you  want  your  sons
and  daughters  to  be  good  and  great,
and  their  lives  filled  up  with  useful-
ness ?  44  Certainly,  with  all  my
heart/*  Then  lay  that  foundation  for
their  future  life  by  teaching  each
little  child  what  it  should  do.  Teach
that  child  honesty,  uprightness  and
truthfulness.  Never  permit  a  false-
hood to  be  told,  nor  the  color  of  a
falsehood  without  correction.  Train
that  child  by  your  own  acts  and
words,  from  its  infancy,  so  it  mny
imbibe  the  principle  in  its  own
heart  to  be  perfectly  honest.  Teach
that  child  to  believe  in  God  our
Heavenly  Father,  Teach  it  to  be*
lieve,  to  have  confidence  in  Him.

"  Why,  he  is  the  author  of  your
lives.  Here  are  your  father  and
mother  with  regard  to  your  natural
body."  As  soon  as  they  can  under-
stand anything  at  all,  teach  them —
44  Yes,  my  little  child,  but  you  have
a  spirit  within  you.  Were  it  not
for  this  spirit,  you  would  not  have
life  in  you.  Here  are  the  father  and
mother  of  your  tabernacle ;  but  yon
have  a  spirit  in  you,  and  the  father
of  that  spirit  is  our  Heavenly  Father,
whom  we  serve  as  our  God.  You
must  have  implicit  confidence  in  this
Being.  You  must  depend  upon
Him  always.  If  you  are  in  danger
in  the  least,  you  must  believe  in
God,  and  ask  Him  to  rescue  you,  to
preserve  you ;  and  your  faith  must


be  in  the  name  of  Him  that  He  has
given,  whom  He  calls  His  only  be-
gotten son,  to  die  a  ransom  for  our
sins."  And  as  soon  as  they  can  un-
derstand, teach  them  with  regard
to  the  original  sin.  Teach  them  to
have  implicit  confidence  in  the  Fa-
ther through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;
and  every  time  they  need  wisdom,
to  ask  tor  wisdom,  and  ask  for
understanding;  and  every  time  they
are  in  trouble,  ask  our  Heavenly
Father  to  give  them  comfort,  and
they  will  feel  joyous  instead  of
grievous,  and  will  feel  a  buoyant
feeling,  instead  of  being  cast  down.
Teach  the  children  to  pray,  that
when  they  are  large  enough  to  go
into  the  field  with  their  father,  they
may  have  faith  that  if  they  are  in
danger  they  will  be  protected.  Teach
them  that  those  good  angels  that  are
ministering  spirits,  and  their  angels,
to  guard  and  defend  the  just  and
pure  watch  over  them  continually.
And  teach  them — 1  am  sorry  to  say
there  are  not  many  mothers  who  do
teach  it — that  they  may  grow  up
with  this  understanding,  that  our
Heavenly  Father  takes  cognizance
of  all  our  acts  and  doings,  and  of
us,  as  individuals,  and  that  His
eye  is  over  us,  and  there  is  not  so
much  as  a  hair  of  our  heads  fulls  to
the  ground  without  the  notice  of
our  Heavenly  Father.  Teach  them
these  things  and  they  will  grow  up
into  this  habit.  You  may  call  it
1  tradition,  but  it  is  an  excellent  one.
You  can  sow  the  seeds  of  infidelity
and  they  will  grow  there.  Teach
the  children  so  that  when  they  go
out  from  the  presence  of  their  fa*
ther  and  mother,  God  is  in  all  their
thoughts.  Can  you  come  to  this
understanding,  mothers  ?  If  I  were
talking  to  the  brethren,  I  should
say  no  man  in  this  Church  has  the
privilege  or  right  to  enter  into  busi-
ness, or go at anything  withoat


72


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


having  God  in  his  th oughts,  and
asking for  guidance  and  direction
in  all  his  ways, And  I  will  say  to
the  mothers  and  sisters,  now  give
your  children  this  correct  tradition
in  their  youth. As  I  was  talking
to  one  of  my  wives,  she  said,  "  Who
is  there  that  teaches  her  children
these  things  ?" I  turned  to  one  and
said,  "  There  is  one  of  my  wives ;
she  has  children  full  of  faith,  I)- cause
she  made  it  her  business  to  teach
them the  tradition to believe  in
God  the  Father,  to  call  upon  Him
continually;  and  God  was  in  their
thoughts  from  morning  until  even-
ing, all  the  time  they  were  awake*
Says  I,  "  There  is  the  woman ;  she
has  taught  her  children/* Now  I
know  that  mothers  can  teach  their
children ;  and  they  ought  to  teach
them,  and  this  is  my  duty  to  tell
you  what  to  do  in  this  case.  Re-
member to tradiiionate  your  chil-
dren in  the  nurture  and  admonition
of  the  Lord. Teach  thi  m  as  they
ou^ht  to  be  taught,  that  they  will  have
faith  from  their  youth  up,  and  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  to  direct  them,
that  they  may  never  lose  sight  of  this
faith  in  Christ,  and  our  Heavenly
Father;  and  when  thev  are  old  thev
will  not  depart  from  the  good  path,
I  am  lirm  in  the  faith,  and  verilv  be-
lieve,  that  if  mothers  will  bring  up
their  children  aright,  and  give  tlu*m
that  early  training  that  they  should
have, their  children  will  grow  up
and  never  tie  part  from  the  path  of
rectitude  and  truth.

The  mothers  are  the  moving  in-
struments in  the  hands  of  Provi
deuce  to  guide  tho  destinies  of  na-
tious.  Let  the  mot  tiers  of  any  na-
tions teach  their  children  not  to
make  war,  the  children  would  grow
■  up  and  never  enter  into  it.  Let
the  mothers  tench  their  children.
"  War ?  war  upon  your  enemies,  yes,
war  to  the  hilt!"  and  they  will  be


6 lied  with  this  spirit.  Consequently
you  see  at  once  what  I  wish  to  im-
press upon  your  mind  is,  that  the
mothers  are  the  machinery  that  give
zest  to  the  whole  man,  and  guide  the
destinies  and  lives  of  men  upon  the
earth.  Now,  then,  I  want  to  talk
upon  other  matters.  You  can  do
just  *is  you  please;  you  can  rule
i his  Stake  of  Zion.  Why,  here  arc
brother  Peery  and  his  two  Counselors,
they  cannot  move  one  step  unless  you
say  so.  Yon  do  not  understand
this,  do  you  t  Why,  all  the  men
in  this  Stake  of  Zion  can  go  to
some  other  country,  but  wluu  the
ladies  sav  thus  and  so,  all  the  men
have  to  come  to  the  standard,  "  But,
we  have  an  independence,  you  know  ;
and  I  would  not  like  to  pin  my  des-
tiny to  any  woman's  apron  string,"
But  you  see  the  force  of  this  educa-
tion, which  is  forced  upon  them  by
the  lead  lings  received  in  early  child-
hood,

Now  I  want  you  to  guide  and
direct  to  our  benefit, I  want  these
my  sisters  to  take  into  considera-
tion what  we  can  do  with  regard  to
sustaining ourselves. Say  you,
4 'Let  us  go  to  work  and  lay  the
foundation  of  it,' In  a  great  many
places  there  is  a  foundation  of  it
laid  out,  which  is  very  good.  Now,
I  want  you  to  go  to  work  and  say,
we  will  make  all  our  . head-dresses,
we  will  make  all  the  hats  that  the
men  need  to  wear ;  we  have  plenty
of  straw  and  materials,  we  will  do
this, "Now  you  have  an  object,
brother  Brigham." Yes,  I  have,
more  than  one  object  j  and  the  great
object  is  to  show  to  our  heavenly
Father  that  we  have  come  out  from
Babylon,  and  are  capable  of  taking
care  of  ourselves. When  we  come
to  finances,  I  want  the  people  to  be
rich,  instead  of  poor. The  course
we  are  now  taking  is  heggaring  the
people — running  into  debt  for  this


RELIEF  SOCIETIES,  ETC.


73


folly  and  that  folly,  and  everything
that  they  can  see.  Why,  let  the
merchant  come  and  bring  the  follies
of  Babvlon,  we  want  them  immedi-
ately.  "  Why,  yes,  we  can  make
all  the  straw  hats,  if  you  will  take
then}."  I  will  tell  you  what  else  1
want,  I  want  the  sisters  to  say  to
themselves,  and  then  to  their
daughters,  sisters  and  friends,  u  We
will  wear  that  which  we  will  make,
or  we  will  wear  nothing  ;  we  will
make  what  we  wear  on  our  heads ;
we  will  make  our  own  hats  and
bonnets."  Now  men,  will  you  pa-
tronize this?  "Yes."  Then  get
your  husbands  to  pay,  "  we  will  not
buy  one  of  the  hats  from  these  stores,
if  they  bring  them  by  the  car  load."
Well,  there  will  be  a  great  deal
saved  to  this  Stake  of  Zion;  pro-
bably more  than  twenty  thousand
dollars.  Then  say  to  your  husband,
"now,  go  and  build  a  tannery,
that  the  hides  that  come  oft*  our
beef  cattle,  can  be  made  into  leather/1
And  tli en,  say  to  your  husband,
"  I  want  you  to  understand  that  1
am  perfectly,  absolutely  opposed  to
your  course  of  life,  unless  you  make
some  leather/'  Then,  sisters,  go  to
work  and  make  up  this  leather.
The  labor  is  in  the  shade,  and  a
great  ileal  of  this  work  can  be  done
by  machinery  ;  but  it  can  be  done
by  hand.  We  have  one  sister  in
Salt  Lake  City,  who  started  twenty-
three  years  ago  boot  and  shoe
making  ;  she  has  made  herself  a
little  fortune ;  she  has  plenty  to
live  on  :  she  has  worked  with  her
own  hands  until  she  has  accumulated
property  enough  to  sustain  her.
My  young  sisters,  instead  of  sitting
continually  at  the  piano  and  getting
the  consumption,  take  hold  and
build  up  Zion,  The  first  thing  is  to
do  something  for  yourselves,  and
learn  to  labor ;  and  when  one  thing
is  done,  take  up  another  item,  anjd


continue  until  we  manufacture  every
thing  that  we  need  here.

I  will  say  to  those  who  are  raising
sheep,  do  not  send  your  wool  away.
Why,  it  will  be  said,  "a  fool  and
his  money  are  soon  parted."  Save
your  wool,  and  send  it  to  the  fac-
tory. If  we  want  a  little  cotton
cloth,  we  can  raise  it  in  the  south-
ern country ;  and  we  could  raise
some  here  as  well  as  in  some
other  places.  We  can  raise  about
two  gatherings.  In  the  best  of  the
States  they  will  gather  from  three
to  four.  We  can  raise  our  cotton
in  the  south,  and  save  our  wool
here.  (Jo  to  and  save  your  wheat-
Tell  the  people  of  this  Stake  of
Zion  not  to  sell  their  grain.  "W©
are  in  debt,"  says  one.  What  brought
Vi»u  in  il  bt  r  -  (  Hi,  I  wanted  a
thresher  and  a  mowing  machine."
Where  do  you  live  I  How  much
grass  have  you  to  cut  ?  "  One  hun-
dred and  fifty  acres/1  How  many
mowing  machines  have  you  got1
"Only  eight."  Buy  another,  and
another  machine,  and  clothing  from
the  stores  that  is  nothing  in  the
world  but  shoddy,  with  but  enough
of  wool  to  hold  it  together — buy
these,  and  buy  more  than  you  can
pay  for.  Go  into  debt,  and  pauper-
ize the  whole  community,  instead  6f
building  up  Zion.  I  want  you  to
stop.  When  we  are  in  a  position
to  build  up  ourselves,  we  are  build-
ing up  Zion.  Let  us  sustain  our-
selves.

Well,  I  may  say  there  are  a  hun-
dred ami  one  things  we  have  to  talk
about ;  and  as  the  sisters  will  give
no  reports,  we  will  tell  them  what
they  should  do.  Now,  recollect
what  I  have  said  to  you.  Go  to,
from  one  thing  to  another  to  make
for  ourselves  what  we  need.  Stop
this  buying,  so  that  we  can  have
something  on  hand.

Another  item. I  will  say  to  tht


Presidency  of  this  Stake  of  Zion,  if
you  could  take  one-fourth  the  time
of  the  men  who  are  idle  here  and
put  it  on  the  Temple,  and  take  the
other  three-fourths  and  go  to  the
Railroad  Companies  and  say,  u  Gen-
tlemen,  we  will  turn  you  out  a  hun-
dred hands  who  will  work  for  one  j
dollar  a  day,'1  we  would  have  the
railroads  in  our  hands,  and  have
every  dollar  that  they  spend  for
five  hundred  miles.  We  might
bring  every  dollar  in  here,  and  live  ;
within  fifty  cents  on  the  dollar,  and
save  the  other  fifty  cents.  How
long  would  it  take  the  men  to  go
down  to  the  bed  rock,  where  we
were  brought  up  ?  I  can  see  women
who.  when  they  were  twfenty  years
old,  six  yards  of  calico  was  all  they
asked  for  for  a  gown,  and  that  was
good  enough  to  wear  to  meeting  or
to  a  party  ;  good  enough  anywhere
If  my  mother  and  her  grandmother
got  one  silk  dress,  and  they  lived  to
a  hundred  years  old,  it  was  all  that
they  wanted,  I  think  my  grand-
mothers silk  dress  came  down  to
her  children.  She  put  her  silk
dress  on  when  I  went  to  see  her.  I
It  was,  I  think,  her  wedding  dress,
and  she  had  been  married  some
seventy  years.

Some  of  the  ladies  wear  a  silk
dress  and  say,  "  Husband,  I  want
another  silk  dress,  I  have  had  this
four  years."  Learn  to  be  prudent.
It  is  no  skill  to  get  money  ;  but,  it
is  a  skill  to  know  how  to  preserve
it  and  make  it  increase,  and  bring  to
you  an  abundance  to  build  up  Zion,
and  purchase  what  we  want

I  wish  to  Eay  a  few  words  to  my
sisters  in  regard  to  raising  silk,  I
wouM  like  to  talk  just  enough  to  have
you  do  something  in  this  direction.
This  is  a  matter  that  I  have  talked
upon  for  a  great  many  years,  Soon
alter  I  first  came  to  the  valley,  I  sat
on  a  load  of  hay  in  Salt  Luke  City,  1


and  said,  "  this  atmosphere  is  full  of
silk  and  all  good  things  ;  and  we  will
prove  it  to  be  one  of  the  best  places
for  raising  silk,"  We  have  proven
that  we  can  raise  it.  There  are  sis-
ters here  who  can  reel  it  and  make  it
to  to  cloth.  There  is  a  sister  before
ime  with  a  Bilk  dress  on  ;  she  raised
the  silk,  and  made  it  herself-  and  I
warrant  it  will  wear  four  times  as  long
as  any  yon  can  buy  in  the  stores.
(By  invitation  the  sister  arose  that
the  congregation  might  see  the  dress.)
I  want  to  encourage  you  in  this  in-
dustry. If  you  want  a  little  change,
you  can  very  easily  get  it  by  raising
silk*  Silk  that  we  raise  here,  when
it  is  reeled,  is  worth  from  $8  to  $14
a  pound.  It  is  always  a  cash  article,
and  6nds  a  ready  market  There  is
no  day  in  the  week  or  month  in  the
year  but  what  yon  can  find  a  market
for  silk,  and  get  the  money  for  it.
I  wish  the  sisters  would  think  of  thin.
A  few  pounds  of  silk  gives  you  a  lit-
tle money.  It  is  easily  raised ;  where
there  is  a  little  care  taken  you  can
preserve  the  eggs  so  thut  you  cau
raise  two  crops  of  cocoons  in  a  year.
There  is  no  trouble  to  preserve  them
in  onr  ice-houses,  until  the  first  am
disposed  of,  and  so  you  can  keep  the
crops  growing  along.  You  can  raise
more  money  than  the  farmers,  and
beat  them  in  the  production  of
wealth.  Take  a  woman  with  her
children,  and  they  will  make  twice
the  amount  of  money  by  raising  silk
that  the  man  can  make  with  the  farm.
If  you  will  try  it  you  will  say  it  is
true.

If  yon  have  not  the  mulberry
trees — I  have  proffered  for  years  to
give  the  trees  and  if  you  w^nt  a
thousand  you  are  welcome  to  tbem,
or  a  million,  I  am  ready  to  give
them  to  you.  Some  twenty  years
ago  I  sent  for  mulberry  seed.  I  have
raised  thousands  and  tens  of  thou-
sands of  trees,  and  tbey  are  in  this


RELIEF  SOCIETIES,  ETC


75


Territory,  I  have  a  large  cocoonery
that  I  built  twelve  or  fourteen  years
ago.  I  have  given  the  use  of  that
-a  building  about  20  x  110  feet,  and
I  have  given  the  use  of  the  mulberry
trees,  and  the  fruit  is  good,  A  great
many  people  are  fond  of  the  fruit ;  it
is  healthy  for  children*

When  you  feel  disposed  to  make  a
little  money,  go  into  the  raising  of
silk,  which  is  one  of  the  easiest
branehes  of  business  that  was  ever
followed.  There  is  no  other  work
the  women  can  do  that  will  yield  the
same  amount  of  profit.  This  is  a
matter  that  I  wish  you  to  hearken
to.  Will  you  bless  yourselves,  and
do  good  to  yourselves?  We  have
plenty  of  weavers  who  can  take  the
silk  and  know  how  to  manufacture
it  i  and  they  will  give  you  all  you
could  reasonably  ask  for  it.

Now  let  the  beauty  of  your  adorn-
ing be  the  work  of  your  hands.
Will  you  not,  Presidents,  ask  your
Societies  to  enter  into  this  agreement,
and  go  to  work  and  make  what  you
want  to  wear.  Then  we  will  appeal
to  the  brethren  and  say,  "  Come,  let
na  wear  the  head  dresses  that  our
wives  and  our  sisters  can  makej  and
it  would  be  very  healthy  for  the  men
if  they  would  wear  straw  hats  winter
and  summer.  We  would  not  see  so
many  bald  heads  as  we  now  see
around  here.  Straw  hats  are  per-
fectly healthy  to  wear.  I  have  worn
them  through  winter  ;  and  the  only
objection  I  have  to  them  is  that  they
area  little  too  tight  and  close.  Let
the  sisters  go  to  work  and  make  these
things.

Now,  sisters,  I  plead  with  you  to
stop  these  fashions.  They  are  non
sense.  Brother  Oarriugtoh  has  given
you  a  a  fine  detail  of  them,  They
are  miserable  looking.  I  dare  not
tell  you  how  they  look  to  met  and
how  the  vanity  looks  that  is  in  the
minds  of  the  people. How  long  is


it  since  my  family  said  to  me  of
hoops, "  They  are  so  nice  and  comely;
how  would  we  look  if  we  were  to
take  those  hoops  off?  why  we  should
look  like  the  town  pump.  Would
you  net  be  ashamed  of  us  ?"  I  am
ashamed.  I  am  ashamed  to  see  the
tight  clothes — to  see  the  shape  of  the
ladies.  How  long  is  it  since  the
sleeves  were  so  loose  that  you  go  into
a  store,  and  the  gentleman  says,
"  Are  you  not  going  to  buy  a  pair  of
aleeves  ?"  "  O,  if  I  buy  a  pair  of
sleeves  I  shall  have  to  have  a  new
dress."  *'  O,  I  will  give  you  a  dress."
Eighteen  yaids  in  the  sleeves,  and
three  yards  in  the  dress!  These
foolish  fashions,  what  good  do  they
do  ?  I  have  asked  t^y  sisters  what
they  would  think  if  a  lady  who  lives
in  heaven  should  pay  them  a  visit.
Would  she  come  with  these  large
sleeves  on — a  mutton  leg  sleeve,  with
dress  pulled  right  out  in  front  of  her?
Now,  it  is  pinned  back  here.  It  is
very  unwise.  It  is  nonsense  and
uncomely.  It  is  the  best  looking  of
anything  in  the  world  when  brother
Carrington  sees  his  wife  in  her  new
calico  dress."  You  look  just  as  yon
did  when  I  courted y  ou."  Now  there
is  another  fashion.  You  see  a  girl
with  her  hair  clipped  off  in  the  front
of  her  head  ;  she  looks  as  though  she
had  just  come  out  of  a  lunatic  asy-
lum.  The  hair  is  for  an  ornament*
You  can  love  a  woman  with  a  comely
dress  on  of  her  own  make,  just  at
well  as  though  she  had  on  a  dress
that  cost  five  thousand  pounds.

We  do  not  seem  to  realize  that  we
have  to  give  an  account  of  the  days
we  spend  in  folly,  and  that  we  will
be  found  wanting  if  we  spend  our
time  foolishly.  When  you  come  to
the  wheat  and  the  fine  Hour,  to  the
gold  and  the  silver  and  the  precious
stones,  the  Lord  owns  them.  But
what  have  we  ?  Our  time.  Spend
it  as  you  will* Time  is  given  to  you*


70


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES*


and  when  this  is  spent  to  the  best
possible  advantage  for  promoting
truth  upon  the  earth,  it  is  placed  to
your  account,  and  blessed  are  you  j
but  when  we  spend  our  time  in  idle-
ness and  folly  it  will  be  placed  against
us. Here  is  the  difference.

Now,  sisters,  take  hold ;  do  this
that  we  nfik  ^  ou  to  do. It  is  for  your


own  benefit,  and  health,  rind  life,  and
for  the  comfort  of  the  people,  and
the  building  np  of  Zion.  And  let
us  go  to,  and  establish  the  ZiOfl  of
God  upon  the  earth,  that  we  mny  he
prepared  io  enjoy  it,  which  1  most
earnestly  pray  for  every  day,  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER JOHX  TAYLOR,
Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  July  29,  1877.

(Reported  by  Rurtger  Clawson.)

god's  purposes  unchangable— thk  two  powers— the  everlasting
priesthood — abraham  and  mklchisedeck — organizing  stakes  of
zion— temple  building — the  latter-day  saints  the  fbi  ends  of
the  would,


In  relation  to  the  great  principles
of  eternal  life,  as  de  vol  pod  to  us  in
the  word  of  God,  and  through  the
various  revelations  that  he  continues
to  give  unto  us,  there  are  many  things
that  arc  of  great  importance  to  the
human  family.  In  regard  to  the
ideas,  theories  and  notions  of  men,
it  would  H*em  that  they,  in  former
ages,  have  been  of  very  little  avail  in
thwarting  or  overturning  the  pur-
poses of  the  Almighty,  nor  will  they
be  in  these  days  any  more  efficacious
then  they  have  been  in  the  days  that
have  past  and  gone.  Before  this
world  rolled  into  existence,  or  the


in  on  nng  stars samr  for


He


.0  iui  joy,

purposed,  in  his  own  mind,  to  ac-
complish certain  objects  that  he  had
designed  in  relation  to  the  world  in
which  Ave  live,  and  the  inhabitants


that  dwell  thereon.  He  has  never
swerved,  changed  or  altered  his  views
or  opinions  in  relation  to  this,  no
matter  what  our  feelings,  ideas  and
theories  may  be  concerning  these
matters.  In  the  organization  of  the
world  and  all  creation  as  it  now  exists
in  the  various  dispensations  of  hi  im-
providence that  have  been  inducted
in  the  different  ages,  in  the  manifest-
ation of  his  will  to  i  he  human  family,
he  has  had  one  design,  one  purpose,
and  one  set  of  ideas  to  accomplish
pertaining  to  the  whole  matter,  and
everything  he  intended  concerning
these  thin  us  will  all  be  accomplished,
whether  it  relates  to  the  early  history
of  man,  to  the  middle  ages,  or,  to  the
ages  in  which  wt*  live.  There  arc
eternal  principles  associated  with
God,  with  his  la*vs,  with  his  Priest-


gob's  purposes  uhchangable,


77


Lootl  that  are  as  unchanging  as  the
eternal  heavens ;  yea,  more  so,  for
the  heavens  may  pass  away,  but  the  j
Scriptures  say,  tk  His  word  shall  not
fall  to  the  ground."  There  is  some-
thing great  and  comprehensive  asso-
ciated with  the  plans  and  purposes  of
Jehovah in connection  with  the
human  family,  which  very  few  men
care  to  take  the  trouble  to  investigate
or  reflect  upon  ;  mid,  as  "No  man
can  know  the  things  of  God,  but  by
the  Spirit  of  God and  as  very  few
place  themselves  in  a  position  to
obtain  this  spirit,  the  result  necessa-
rily is,  that  there  is  a  large  amount
of  ignorance  in  relation  to  the  things
of God and consequently  a  huue
amount of  evil prevailing  every-
where m id  which has existed  in
every  age. I suppose,  associated
with  these  matters,  there  is  a  grand
overruling  destiny,  and  that  it  was
necessary  that  this  set of  things
should exist There have  always
been  two  grand  powers  iu  juxtapo-
sition, or rather  in opposition  to
each  other. There  was  in  the  hea-
vens a  conflict,  and  one* third  of  the
angels,  we  are  told,  were  cast  out
of  there. That  conflict  has  existed
here  upon  the  earth,  and  will  con-
tinue to  exist  for  a  length  of  time
yet  to  come,  until,  as  we  are  told,
Satan  shall  be  bound* The  conflict
is  between  right  and  wrong,  between
truth  and  error,  between  God  and
the spirit of darkness, and  the
powers  of  evil that are  opposed
to  Him;  and  these  prineiples  have
existed  in  the various  ages.  No
sooner  was  man placed upon  the
earth, than  Satan  commenced  his
work  and  bis  operations. God,  it
is  true,  created  the  world  ;  God,  it  is
ttue,  is  the  Father  and  Spirit  of  all
flesh ;  God,  it  is  true,  has  a  right  to
demand  obedience from his  chil-
dren, and  the observance  of  the
laws  he  has  given  unto  them;  but


that  right  has  been  contested  from
the  very  first- Satan  placed  a  de-
murrer in the way  immediately,
and  from  the  two  sous  of  Adam,
one  of  which  feared  God  and  the
other did not, the wicked  one
killed the  righteous,  who  himself
Appeared  to  be  master  of  the  field
under  the  guidance  and  direct  ion  of
Satan,  and  he  held  this  position  and
this  influence  for  a  length  of  lime
upon  the  earth,  until  Serb  was  intro-
duced to  represent  Abel,  to  represent
God,  and  also  to  represent  all  \he  prin-
ciples of  truth  and  righteousness ;  and
Satan  with  his  influence  and  those
that  yielded  to  him,  under  the  influ-
ence of  Cain  and  others  associated
with  them  that  had  wrought  wicked-
ness, bore  sway ;  and  iniquity  of  every
kind  prevailed,  they  fought  agahist
God  and  the  principles  of  truth  and
righteousness,  and  it  was  then  as  it
is  to-day,  and  as  it  was  in  the  day**
of  Jesud. Says  he  :  "  Straight  is
the  gate  and  narrow  is  the  way  that
leads  to  life,  and  few  there  be  that
find  it;  while  broad  is  the  gate  and
wide  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to  des-
truction, and  many  there  be  that  go
in  thereat." It  would  have  seemed,
at  some  time,  as  though  the  purposes
of  God  were  thwarted  iu  relation  to
the  organization  of  the  earth  and  the
salvation  and  exaltation  of  the  human
family,  and  it  was  necessary,  as  has
been  referred  to,  on  a  certain  occasion,
to  sweep  otf  the  inhabitants  of  the

i

earth  and  start  anew,  "  J^or  the
imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  the
hearts  of  the  people,  was  only  evil,
and  that  continually,"  and  they
were  raising  up  a  people  that  were
prepared  for  wrath  and  destruction,
having  power  to  propagate  their  own
species,  they  were  doing  it  and
teaching  them  the  laws  of  death
instead  of  the  laws  of  life.  God
in  hie  mercy  to  those  spirits  yet  un-
born, thought  proper  to  sweep  them


from  the  earth  and  then  commence
another  state  of  things  under  the
direction  of  Noah.  It  was  neces-
sary that  thesn  opposing  influences,
these  contending  powers,  should  be
in  existence  j  that  this  antagonism
should  prevail;  that  there  should  be
a  devil,  that  there  should  be  all
the  influences  associated  therewith.
There  was  a  degree  or  design  of
God  in  relation  to  the  human  family
from  the  commencement,  to  save  all
that  were  capable  of  it,  in  the  celes-
tial  glory*  All  that  were  not  capable
of  this,  in  a  terrestial  glory,  and  all
that  were  not  capable  of  receiving
that,  or  prepared  for  it,  in  a  telestial
glory.  It  was  necessary,  according
to  certain  unchangeable  and  eternal
Jaws,  that  existed  with  Christ  in
the  eternal  world,  that  man  pos-
sessing any  of  these  glories  should
be  prepared  to  receive  them,  or
they  could  not  inherit  them,  there-
fore, it  was  necessary  that  man  i
should  be  placed  in  a  state  of  trial
or  probation!  having  to  contend
with  evil  that  he  might,  through
the  power  of  God,  and  the  strength
lhat  he  would  give  to  him,  if  he
was  sought  unto,  that  he  might,
through  that  power,  overcome  and
inherit  a  celestial  glory,  and  dwell
with  God  in  his  celestial  kingdom.
For  this  purpose,  he  gave  the  Priest-
hood, which  is  spoken  of  as  being
after  the  order  of  Melchisedeck,
after  the  order  of  the  Son  of  God,
and  after  the  powers  of  endless
life  ;  which  is  the  power  that  exists
in  the  heavens,  and  the  wisdom  and
intelligence  that  dwell  with  the  Gods;
and  is  the  principle  by  which  the  Gods
in  the  heavens  and  men  who  are  un-
der its  influence  upon  the  earth  are
governed.  It  is  called  in  the  Scrip-
tures, the  "  everlasting  priesthood,
without  beginning  of  daya  or  end  of
years,"  and  that  those  who  have  it,
administer  not  only  in  this  world,  but


in  the  world  which  is  to  come ;  and
it  is  the  privilege  of  those  who  have
it,  to  come,  as  the  Scriptures  say,
"  to  the  general  assembly  and  Church
of  the  first  born,  which  are  writ-
ten in  heaven,  to  God  the  judge  of
all,  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men
made  perfect,  unto  Jesus  the  medi-
ator of  the  new  covenant,  and  to
the  blood  of  sprinkling  that  speaketh
better  things  than  that  of  Abtfl.*'
It  is  this  principle  spoken  of  in
the  Scriptures  that  brings  life  and
immortality  to  light,  that  enables
mankind,  when  living  according  to
its  laws,  to  overcome  the  powers
of  darkness,  to  combat  successfully
with  the  errors  of  the  world,  to  tri-
umph over  evil  of  every  kind,  to  sub-
due the  world,  the  flesh  and  the  devil,
through  the  aid,  guidance,  power  and
spirit  of  God ;  to  come  out  triumphant
and  obtain  an  inheritance  which  is
incorruptible  and  undefiled,  that
I  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  the
heavens  for  those  that  are  obedient
thereto,  and  live  according  to  its
requirements.  It  is  in  view  of  this,
and  of  the  strength  and  power  and
communication  with  God  that  the
Priesthood  is  imparted  to  man,  and
it  is  that  which,  according  to  the
Scriptures,  "  brings  life  and  immor-
tality to  light;"  and  men  in  the
possession  of  these  principles  know
and  understand  their  relationship
to  God,  unto  the  eternities  that
were  and  unto  the  eternities  that
are  to  come,  bringing  life  and  im-
mortality to  light;  it  chasteth
away  darkness,  confusion,  mystery
and  doubt  and  uncertainty;  it
draws  aside  the  veil  of  the  eternal
world,  enabling  men,  who  are  in
possession  of  it  to  comprehend  their
standing  and  relationship  to  God,
to  each  other,  to  the  past,  present
and  future,  and  to  all  intelligent
beings  that  ever  have  existed,  that
now  exist,  or  that  will  exist;  hence


god's  purposed  unghangable,  etc


79


this  principle  is  given  to  men  to
lead  them  in  the  paths  of  life,  to
instruct  and  prepare  them  for  that
celestial  glory  where  Gud  the  Fa-
ther dwells,  and  Jesus,  the  media-
tor of  the  new  covenant,  and  those
of  the  holy  Priesthood  who  have
lived  before  in  different  ages,  who
^xist  now  and  who  will  exist  through-
out the  eternities  that  are  to  come.
It  places  us  in  relationship  to  all
these  beings,  and  we  feel  that  we
are  one  with  God,  one  with  Jesus,
one  with  the  ancient  Apostles,  Pro*
phets  and  Patriarchs,  one  with  the
men  of  God  that  have  had  the
holy  Priesthood  in  the  different  ages
of  time,  and  expect  to  be  one  with
them  in  the  eternal  worlds.  We
,  should  also  be  one  in  accomplishing
the  purposes  of  God  pertaining  to
the  earth  whereon  we  live.  It  is
not  easy  for  men,  without  a  know-
ledge of  these  principles,  to  compre-
hend those  things  of  which  I  speak,
for  as  1  said  before,  and  so  say  the
Scriptures — *'No  man  knows  the
things  of  God,  but  by  the  Spirit  of
God ; "  and  the  Lord  has  revealed
onto  us,  through  very  simple
methods,  the  way  whereby  we
can  approach  unto  him.  Who  is
there  among  men,  with  all  their
wisdom  and  intelligence,  that  can
comprehend  God  ?  Who  under-
stands his  laws  and  his  doctrines  ?
Who  knows  anything  about  his
purposes  and  designs  ?  Why,  it  is
as  high  as  the  heavens,  it  is  deeper
than  hell,  it  is  as  wide  as  the  ex-
panse of  the  universe,  it  circum-
scribes alt  subjects,  and  compre-
hends all  intelligence.  Who  knows
it  ?  Nobody,  but  those  who  are
enlightened  by  the  spirit  of  revela-
tion that  proceeds  from  God.  How
did  men  in  former  times  obtain  a
knowledge  of  these  things  ?  By
obedience  to  the  laws  of  God,  by
submitting to his authority,  by


taking  up  their  cross  and  following
him,  and  by  searching  diligently  to
obtain  a  knowledge  of  his  laws.

We  read  a  little  about  Abraham,
as  given  to  us  in  his  history.  What
does  he  sav  about  himself  ?  "  L
Abraham,  having  been  a  follower  of
righteousness,  desiring  also  to  be
one  who  possessed  great  knowledge,
and  to  be  a  greater  follower  of  right-
eousness, and  to  possess  a  greater
knowledge,  and  to  be  a  father  of
many  nations,  a  prince  of  peace,  and
desiring  to  receive  instructions,  and
to  keep  the  commandments  of  God,
I  became  a  rightful  heir,  a  high  priest,
holding  the  right  belonging  to  the
fathers.  It  was  conferred  upon  me
from  the  fathers  from  the  beginning
of  time;  even  from  the  beginning  or
before  the  foundations  of  the  earth,
to  the  present  time ;  even  the  right
of  the  first-born,  or  the  first  man,  who
is  Adam,  or  first  father,  through  the
fathers  unto  me.  I  sought  for  mine
appointment  unto  the  Priesthood,
according  to  the  appointment  of  God
unto  the  fathers  concerning  the
seed/'

We  read  in  the  revelations  given
unto  us  by  Joseph  Smith,  that  he
was  ordained  by  Melcbisedeck,  and
the  BiUe  tells  us  that  he  was  blessed
of  Mfc'lchisederk  ;  and  Paul  in  ^ peak-
ing of  Abraham  and  Melchisedeck,
says ;  "  The  less  is  blessed  of  the
greater,"  and  that,  although  Abraham
was  a  great  man,  and  hud  great  in-
telligence, great  knowledge  and  many
comraunicatioDS  from  God,  that  MeU
chisedeck  was  yet  greater  than  he,
and  had  more  intelligence,  and  knew
more  of  God.  What  is  the  result  ?
Why,  the  Lord  gave  to  him  the  Urim
and  Thummim,  whereby  he  was  en-
abled to  inquire  of  the  law  of  God,
What  law  ?"  The  same  principles
that  existed  in  that  day  were  the
same  that  existed  in  the  days  when
Jesus  came  npon  the  earth.


SO


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Jesus  snvs.  that  i£  Abraham  saw
my  day,  and  was  glad."  The  Apostle
tells  us  thai  "  God  foresaw  that  lie
would  justify  the  heathen  through
faith,  and  preached  before  the  Gospel
unto  Abraham/'  Then  Abraham
bad  the  Gospel,  and  a  knowh?dge  of
the  laws  of  God,  Life  and  im-
mortality are  brought  to  liyhf  where
the  Gospel  exists,  and  he  had  it;
hence  it  brought  him  to  God,  and
the  Lord  revealed  himself  unto  him
and  told  him,  that  in  blessing,  he
would  biess  him,  and  in  multiplying,
be  would  multiply  him,  and  in  him
and  in  his  seed  all  the  families  of  the
earth  should  he  blessed.  There  was
something  very  lemarkahle  nb  >ut
these  things,  so oh  thing  that  shows  a
determination  on  his  part  to  do  the
will  of  God,  to  obey  his  laws  and
keep  his  commandments,  and  to  carry
out  his  purposes  and  designs,  go  far
as  he  wns  aule  to  do  it.  Anions
other  things  he  id  :  44  1  desire  to  U?
a  follower  of  righteousness,  and  to
have  more  righteousness.  Then  I
desire  that  1  may  he  a  prince  of  peace
and  a  father  of  nations/1  He  sought
tlrs  fit  the  hand  of  God,  and  God
promised  him  that  in  biin  and  in  his
seed  all  the  families  of  the  earth
should  be  blessed.  But  did  he  give
it  to  him?  He  did-  Did  he  fulfil
his  word  to  him?  He  did.  Who
were  Hoses  and  Aaron  ?  Moses  led
the  children  of  Israel,  under  the  guid-
ance and  direction  of  the  Almighty,
with  a  migbfy  hand  and  stretcbed-oot
arm,  and  delivered  them  from  the
hands  ot  the  Egyptians.  Who  were
they?  They  were  the  descendants
of  A  bra  hum.  Who  \-ere  the  old
Prophets  we  read  of  in  the  Bible
lit; re  ?  They  were  the  descendants
of  Abraham  ?  Who  was  Jesus  r  A
descendant  of  Abraham.  Who  were
the  Twelve  Apostles?  They  were
the  descendants  of  Abraham,  Who
were  the  Seventy that  existed  in


th  ose  davR  ?  Th?v  vrprr*  the  descend  -
ants  of  Abraham What  were  they

told  to  do?  To  damn  mankind?
No.  What  ?  To  go  an  i  preach  the
Gospel  to  all  the  world,  to  life  up  a
banner  of  life  and  silvation  to  the
nations,  and  c  II  upon  them  to  re-
pent. Who  were  the  Nephites  that
came  to  this  continent  ?  Lehi,  Lem-
■  uel,  Nephi,  etc.  Who  were  they  ?
They  were  descendants  of  Abraham.
Who  were  the  Twelve  Apostles  that
wm>  or i  this  continent?  They  were
descendants  of  Abraham*  What  was
|  their  mission  ?  It  was  to  preach  the
I  plad  tidings  of  (salvation  to  the  peo-
ple, which  they  did.  Wbo  was
Joseph  Smith?  We  are  toll  in  a
I  revelation  in  relation  to  him,  that
his  name  should  be  Joseph,  and  that
<  he  should  be  the  son  of  Joseph,  who
was  a  descendant  of  that  Joseph  who
went  into  Egypt.  God  saw  proper
to  reveal  uuto  him  the  ancient  re-
conls  of  the  people  that  lived  on
this  continent,  as  a  descendant  of
Abraham,  and  what  was  his  message
to  the  people  ?  <fcGu  ye  unto  all  the
:  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to
every  creature  ;  lie  that  belie  vet  h
and  is  baptized  shall  lie  saved,  and
he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damn-
ed," Has  this  message  been  com-
municated? It  has  to'  a  very  great
extent  There  are  around  me  and
before  me,  men  who  have  traveled
thousands  and  hundreds  of  thou-
sands of  mile?,  without  purse  or  scrip,
as  they  did  formerly,  trusting  to  the
help  of  the  Lord,  in  the  midst  of
contumely  and  reproach,  to  proclaim,
the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  a
fallen  world.  Have  they  done  it  I
They  have  so  far  as  it  was  in  their
power,  and  they  have  continued  to
J  do  it  up  to  the  present  day.  Will
they  accomplish  the  work  that  was
designed  of  the  Almighty?  They
will  Will  the  Zion  of  our  God  be
built  up  1 It  will,  and  I  prophesy


god's  purposes  unch  an  gable.


SI


it  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  Will
the  kingdom  of  God  roll  on  ?  It
will.  No  power  on  this  side  of  hell
or  in  hell  can  stop  it.  God  is  at  the
helm,  and  I  know  it,  and  his  work
will  roll  forth  and  con  tin  tie  to  roll
until  the  kingdoms  of  thin  world
shall  become  the  kingdom  of  our
God  and  bin  Christ,  and  he  will  reign
forever  and  forever.  The  Priesthood
in  this  day  are  assisted  by  the  Priest-
hood that  existed  in  former  days,  who
lived  and  operated  and  withdrew,  and
are  operating  with  Him.  These  are
things  that  many  people  reflect  very
little  upon,  but  they  are  nevertheless

Who  was  it  that  appeared  with
Jesus  when  he  was  transfigured  upon
the  Mount  with  Peter,  James,  and
John  ?  Moses  and  Elias,  Who
were  Moses  arid  Elias?  Prophets
who  had  existed  before,  and  still  con-
tinue to  exist,  and  to  administer  on
the  earth  as  well  as  in  the  heavens.
How  was  it  of  John  the  Baptist?  I
speak  of  these  things  particularly  for
the  information  of  those  who  may  be
present  who  are  not  acquainted  with
our  revelations,  and,  perhaps,  in  many
instances  not  much  acquainted  with
the  Bible,  But  John,  we  are  told,
when  on  the  I  tile  of  Patmos,  had
great,  important,  and  glorious  visions  j
presented  to  him.  There  was  a
glorious  personage  who  stood  before
him,  and  he  was  about  to  fall  down
and  worship  him.  But  says  he,  do
not  worship  me.  Why!  who  are
you  ?  I  am  one  of  thy  fellow  ser-
vants, the  Prophets  that  have  kept
the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,  and
the  word  of  God ;  worship  God,  says
he,  do  not  worship  me.  I  am  one  of
those  that,  perhaps,  wandered  about
in  sheepskins  and  goat  skins,  dwell-
ing in  deserts  and  dens  and  caves  of
the  earth,  of  whom  the  world  is  not
worthy ;  but  I  have  been  exalted,
and  glorified  as  you  now  see  me,  and

No,  6,


I  have  come  to  administer  to  you.
Who  was  it  that  administered  to
Joseph  Smith  ?  Moroni  and  Nephi,
men  who  had  lived  upon  this  conti-
nent. Who  from  the  other  conti-
nent ?  John  the  Baptist  for  one;
Peteit  James,  and  John  for  others;
Mouses  and  Eli  s  again  for  others,  who
revealed  certain  principles  tbat  God
designed  they  should  reveal,  and  im-
parted unto  him  the  powers  of  the
Priesthood  which  existed  in  the  hea-
vens, that  it  might  he  again  con-
ferred upon  men  on  the  earth,  and
fh^it  the  blessings  of  the  everlasting
Gospel  migdif.  he  again  restored

We  have  been  organizing  Stakes
of  Zion  fur  a  length  of  time,  and
placing  things  in  order  under  the
direction  of  President  Young  and
Council,  What  order  is  that  ?  The
order  given  by  the  revelations  of  God
for  the  truidance  of  his  people,  not  of
man  nor  by  men,  but  by  the  will  of
God  ;  a  pattern  of  things  in  the
heavenly  world.  That  is  the  thing
t hut  i*  now  being  introduced  here
among  the  Saints.  Why  are  we
Imildmg  Temples  here  ?  Because  it
is  part  of  our  mission,  Elias  was  to
come  to  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers
to  the  children,  and  the  hearts  of  the
children  to  the  fathers,  lest,  say  the
Scriptures,  I  come  and  smite  the
earth  with  a  curse.  In  this  is  the
wisdom  of  God  made  manifest,  and
the  power  of  God  displayed.  In  this
he  shows  as  he  has  represented  in  the
revelations  that  he  wuuld  show,  that
the  wisdom  of  God  was  greater  than
the  cunning  of  the  Devil,  for  those
that  Saltan  thought  he  had  destroyed*
that  were  cast  into  prison,  Jesus  went
and  delivered,  and  preached  unto
those  spirits  in  prison  who  sometime
were  disobedient  in  the  days  of  Noah.
Again,  in  relation  to  the  position  that
we  occupy  here  upon  the  earth.  We
are  gathered  to  Mount  Zion,  We
are spoken  of as being  saviors.

Vol.  XIX,


82


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


"  Saviors  shall  stand  upon  Mount
Zion,  and  the  kingdom  shall  be  the
Lord's,"  How  can  men  be  saviors
unless  they  save  somebody?  That
would  be  a  matter  of  impossibility  ;
hence  we  go  to  work  and  build  our
Temples.  Why  ?  That  we  may
carry  out  that  mission  that  Elias
came  about,  to  turn  the  hearts  of  the
fathers  to  the  children,  and  the  hearts
of  the  children  to  the  fathers;  that
our  fathers,  who  have  lived  without
the  Gospel,  and  without  the  light  of
truth  thereof,  that  we  may  administer
for  them  in  these  Temples,  and  be
baptised  for  them,  hb  the  Scriptures
say  :  "  If  the  dead  rise  not,  why  are
ye  baptised  for  the  dead?"  and
'*  Why,"  says  the  Apostle,  "stand  ye
in  jeopardy  every  hour  ?"  We  gu  to
work  then  and  build  Temples,  and  is
this  message  that  we  have  come  upon
a  message  of  terror,  trouble,  misery,
and  confusion  ?  No.  It  is  a  message
of  life  to  the  people.

God  told  his  disci  pies  to  go  to  the
ends  of  the  earth;  and,  says  he,  41 1
will  go  with  you,  and  mine  angels
shall  go  before  you,  and  my  spirit
shall  accompany  you."  Has  it  been
so  ?  It  has.  It  has.  Whence  comes
our  gathering  ?  Because  we  are  in-
troduced into  a  Gospel  of  gathering,
because  we  are  living  in  a  gathering
dispensation,  because  that  is  one  of
the  dispensations  that  existed  in
former  days,  and  has  been  restored
in  the  latter  days  wherever  this
Gospel  is  preached,  that  spirit  accom-
panies it.  You  cannot  prevent  it
Go  and  preach  to  the  people,  baptise
them,  lay  hasds  upon  them  for  the  re-
ception of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  first
thing  that  exists  among  the  people  is
the  feeling  to  go  to  Zion .  A  feeling  of
that  kind  universally  prevails.  Where
did  it  come  from  ?  It  comes  through
the  administering  of  Elijah  to  Joseph
Smith,  and  through  the  things  that
he  imparted  to  him,  and  is  one  of  the


dispensations  which  is  embodied  in
the  dispensation  of  the  fullness  of
times  ;  hence,  say  the  Scriptures,  "I
will  take  them,  one  of  a  city  and  two
of  a  family,  and  bring  them  to  Zion,"
What  do  you  with  them  there  ?  "I
will  give  them  pastors  after  my  own
heart,  and  shall  feed  them  with  know-
ledge and  understanding."  Our  mis-
sion is  not  a  mission  of  death,  it  is  a
mission  of  mercy  and  salvation.

As  has  teen  remarked,  whom  have
we  injured  1  Whose  Hie  or  liberties
have  we  interfered  with  ?  Are  we
the  enemies  of  mankind  because  we
tell  them  the  truth?  If  God  has
spoken,  and  has  certain  purposes  to
accomplish,  can  we  hinder  him?  No.
If  we  obey  his  will,  we  must  be  sub-
ject to  the  inconveniences  resulting
therefrom.  We  go  forth  in  the  name
of  Israel's  God,  trusting  in  him,
44  bearing  precious  seed,  and  returning
again  bringing  our  sheaves  with  us."
Well,  what  then  ?  Those  who  are
being  taught  and  instructed,  are  sent
out  again.  To  whom  %  Why,  as
saviors  to  their  own  people,  and  then
our  nut  ion,  as  elders  it)  Israel,  to  pro-
claim the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ
onto  the  nations,  and  gather  out  all
who  are  honest  and  willing  to  obey
the  truth.  What  then  ?  Then  they
return  again.  Then  go  to  work  and
build  Temples,  and  then  administer
in  them.  44 1  will  take  them,"  say
the  Scriptures,  "one  of  a  city  and
two  of  a  family,  and  bring  them  to
Zion,  and  they  shall  be  saviors  there;"
hence  we  have  representatives  here
from  among  the  different  nations  of
the  earth.  We  are  building  Temples.
What  for  i  For  ourselves  ?  Yes,  for
our  fathers,  mothers,  uncles,  aunts,
friends,  associates,  and  ancestry.  Yes,
for  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands
of  others.  That  is  what  we  are  doing.
We  have  built  one  Temple  down  at
St.  George;  we  are  building  another
here ;  we  are  building  another  in


GODS  PUliPuSKS  UXUHANGAHLK,  ETC


83


Sanpete,  and  another  in  Cache  Vallev.
Well  now  then  how  do  we  act  as
laviors? We  first  build  Temples;
we  then  go  in  and  administer  in  them,
and  do  for  others  what  they  cannot
do  for  themselves. We  become,  then,
saviors  in  that  respect  here  upon
Mount  Zion  ;  and  hence  the  nations
of  the  earth  have  their  representatives
here,  who  are  representing  those  dif-
ferent nations  in  the  Temples  of  the
Lord  of  Lords. Well,  what  next  ?
Huw  are  we  assisted  in  this  ? By  all
the  intelligences  that  have  lived  before
us. Could  we  have  stemmed  the
amount  ot  opposition  and  overcome
the  evils  with  which  we  have  been
surrounded  if  there  had  not  been  an
invisible  power  sustaining  us  ?  We
could  not But  all  the  Priesthood
that  have  existed  before,  with  God
and  Jesus  at  the  head,  are  on  our  side
and  assisting  us  ;  and  he  is  all  the
time crying, 16  Touch not  mine
anointed,  do  my  prophets  no  harm."
He  still  cries  the  same* They  are
operating  in  the  heavens  while  we
are  operating  on  the  earth ;  "  They
without  us  cannot  be  made  perfect,
and  we  without  them  cannot  be  made
perfect/' It  needs  a  grand  control-
ling power  associating  and  uniting
the  heavens  with  the  earth;  uniting
them  together  in  indissoluble  bonds
that  cannot  be  broken.  Uniting  them
together  in  one  grand  phalanx  for  the
accomplishment  of  the  purposes  of
God. When  Satan  thought  he  had
got  the  inhabitants  of  the  whole  world,
did  God  give  them  up  ? No!  No!!
When  Jesus  11  Was  put  to  death  in
the  flesh,  he  was  quickened  by  the
spirit,  by  which  he  went  and  preached
to  the  spirits  in  prison  that  were
sometime  disobedient  in  ihe  days  of
Noah/* When  men  have  been  de-
stroyed and  nations  led  into  iniquity
and  overcome,  are  all  going  to  be
lost  and  destroyed? No, God  has
introduced  a  plan  whereby  all  that
have  lived  upon  the  earth,  that  are


[  worthy  in  any  respect  or  honorable,
and  all  that  have  desired  to  do  right,
who  have  lived  without  the  Gospel,
shall  yet  have  the  privilege  of  it,  and
they  faball  be  baptised  for,  according
to  a  certain  order  that  God  has  indi-
cated in  relation  to  these  matters  to
his  Priesthood  here  upon  this  earth  ;
and  will  God  be  thwarted  ?  No.  He
will  accomplish  his  designs,  and  the
earth,  by  and  by,  will  be  purged  from
■iniquity; and  Zion  will  grow  and
increase  and  spread t  and  no  power
can  hinder  it,  for  God  is  at  the  helm,
and  he  will  guide  and  direct  all  things
accordi n g  to  the  co u  n sel  o f  h  i s  o  w n  will-
Are  we  the  enemies  of  mankind?
No. We  are  their  friends. No  meu
living  ever  exhibited  more  friendship
to  the  world  than  we  have. I  hare
travelled thousands  of miles,  and
hundreds  of  thousands,  as  President
Young  and  many  brethren  around  me
have, thousands  and  thousands  of
miles  without  purse  or  scrip,  without
hope  of  earthly  reward,  to  carry  forth
those  principles  that  we  knew  G  >d
had  revealed  for  the  salvation  of  the
human  family,  and  we  know  it  to-day,
I  know  these  things  are  true, I  kttov?
that  God  has  spoken. I  know  that
the  heavens  have  been  opened.  I
know  that  the  truth  of  Gud  has  beea
revealed,  and  I  bear  record  of  it  before
th  is  people,  before  God,  angels,  and
men. I  know  ot  what  I  speak,  and
therefore  testify  of  it  in  the  name  of
Israel's  God, I  call  upon  men  every*
where  to  repent  and  be  baptised  in
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  re*
mission  of  sins,  and  they  shall  receive
the  Holy  Ghost. I  call  upon  the
Latter-day  Saints  to  be  one,  and  to
be  united  in  temporal  and  spiritual
things,  to  seek  after  God  that  they
may  learn  of  Him  and  His  laws;  then
shall  your  light  shine  like  the  sun,
and  then  shall  Zion  rise  and  shine,
and  the  glory  of  God  rest  upon  her,
and  the  power  of  God  be  made  mam*
test  among  his  people.  Amen,


84


JOURNAL  OP  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  DANIEL  H.  WELLS,

Delivered  at  a  Special  Conference  hrld  at  Briuham  City,  ox  Satur-
day Afternoon,  Aro.  18,  1877.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  GibhsJ


INCREASE  OF  THE  STAKES  OF  ZION — THE  SAINTS  CO-WOtlKKRS  WITH
UOD — THE  GOVERNMENT  AND  KINGDOM  OF  GOD — OUR  INHERITANCES
—THE  POOR  RECEIVE  THE  WORD — THE  GOSPEL  INCORPORATES  EVERY-
THING- ' 5  '  r

I  discover  it  is  here,  as  it  is  in
other  places  through  the  Territory
which  we  have  visited,  that  there  is
ati  increase,  a  strengthening  of  the
Stakes  of  Zion.  The  prophecy  which
referri*  to  the  strengthening  of  the
stakes  And  the  lengthening  of  the
Cbrds  bf  Zion  is  continually  being
fulfilled  in  the  efforts  made  in  this
dttectibri  by  the  Latter-day  Saints,
Bi  the  world's  history  some  of  the
greAteSt' events  that  have  taken  place,
in  theft  infeeption  attracted  but  little
of  *th«J  nbtice  or  attention  of  the
cftitttrerf  of  men.  The  coming  of  our
litifti  arid  Savior  Jesus  Christ  was
lihbwn'tD  but  few  people  who  then
cmelllSJpdft  the  face  of  the  earth  ;  and
yfet'it'  tf&TS1  the  greatest  event  in  the
\iht6¥y  ttf  the  world.  The  coming
ftfrth^df  Joseph  Smith  and  the  Book
df  MSfrnibn,  and  the  organization  of
tffc  Cht»r*h  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-

Sy  B&intfl;1  attracted  but  little  of  the
tigfotitth  of  the  masses.  Of  course
iV**as  tJtfnsidered  of  the  greatest  im-
jtort»nW'byitkefew,  but  in  the  course
of  -finHS'  we*  shall  see  in  this  land  of
2ffefr*  tltf*  sfe*6mbling  of  millions.
MptliftJtea1!  ^metimes  hear  the  sound
rf^ltfti^'fifbtstept  approaching;  and


\  when  they  come  they  will  be  for
Zion,  for  God  and  His  kingdom,  and
they  will  sustain  and  uphold  the  holy
and  righteous  principles  of  eternal
fruth  which  have  been  revealed,  nxxd
the  institutions  of  Heaven  which  our
Father  has  established  in  this  day
and  age  of  the  world.  And  God's
purposes  will  be  accomplished  with
triumph,  for  victory  will  crown  the
eflbrts  of  the  Lord  and  his  people.

In  our  day  we  are  permitted  to
witness  the  occurring  of  some  of  the
greatest  events  that  have  ever  tran-
spired since  the  days  of  Adam  upon
the  earth.  The  ushering  in  of  this
great  and  glorious  work  of  the  last
days,  the  coming  forth  of  the  Gospel
to  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  the
assembling  of  the  people,  the  gather-
ing together  to  sustain  these  prin-
ciples, and  carry  out  the  work  of  the
Lord,  to  bring  to  pass  His  great  and
glorious  purposes  and  establish  His
kingdom  in  the  earth,  as  he  shall
lead  forth,  guide,  and  direct  from
time  to  time.  It  is  the  great  and
glorious  kingdom  of  our  God  that
shall  stand  for  ever.  In  these  things
we  are  co-workers  with  the  Lord  our
Father  in  Heaven,  so  far  as  we  will


INCREASE  OF  THE  STAKES,  ETC.


let  Him  work  with  us,  for  He  stands
at  the  helm,  He  guides  the  ship,
directing  the  affairs  of  the  whole
earth,  as  well  as  those  of  His  covenant
people.  It  has  come  forth  in  the  age
of  the  world  in  which  He  designed
it;  He  has  made  no  mistake  in  regard
to  tli  is  matter.  I  suppose  the  Lord
knew  and  understood  the  time  of
bringing  to  pass,  and  commencing  to
bring  to  pass  His  purposes  in  the
earth  in  regard  to  His  kingdom,  as
well  as,  and  no  doubt  a  little  better
than,  anybody  else,  and  He  also  knew
there  were  those  living  upon  the  earth
who  would  receive  it  when  He  should
reveal  it  unto  them.  All  these  events
have  their  times  aud  seasons.  I
expect  He  knew  also  that  in  the  days
of  Jesus  the  word  would  be  accepted
by  but  few — yea,  that  it  would  be
trampled  out  by  the  wicked  who
would  gain  the  ascendancy;  and  that
the  Priesthood  and  authority  thereof
would  be  received  back  again  to  the
leavens,  there  to  remain  until  the
times  oi  restitution  should  set  in,
which  times  it  is  our  happy  privilege
to  live  in.  This  is  the  commence-
ment of  the  restitution  ;  the  Gospel
has  come  again,  but  never  more  to  be
taken  from  the  earth.  It  is  now  to
be  sustained  and  upheld,  to  grow,  to
increase  and  multiply  and  become
mighty  and  powerful,  and  the  way
prep  i red  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  who  will  rule  from  the
rivers  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.

We  do  not  fully  realize,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  that  this  work  in  which
we  are  engaged  is  the  kingdom,  the
government  of  God  if  you  please,
handed  down  to  the  children  of  men,
with  all  its  officers.  A  people,  a
kingdom  surrounded  with  all  the
elements  necessary  for  the  advance-
ment aud  prosperity  of  the  people  of
the  kingdom  ;  the  government  being
established  here  in  the  earth,  men,
women,  and  children  under  the  gov-


8*

eruraent  of  Heaven  are  sustaining
and  upholding  and  carrying  it  -for-
ward, with  the  power  and  might  with
which  the  God  of  Heaven  endows
them ;  seeking  to  establish  the  prin-
ciples of  truth  and  virtue  upon  His
earth,  here  in  the  period  of  time  ip
which  it  was  to  come  forth- — the  set
time  to  favor  Israel.  A  stripling
came  forth  with  the  message ,from
Heaven,  leading  out,  guiding,  and
directing  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom
as  they  were  made  manifest  to  him
by  the  Lord  from  time  to  time,  until
it  has  grown  to  become  a  great  people.
It  has  gone  forth  and  continued  to
grow  until  we  find  it  as  it  is  this  d  iy
here  in  these  valleys  of  the  moan-
tains — with  a  people  dwelling  in  a
hundred  towns,  cities,  and  settlements.
Poor  people  ?  Yes,  in  the  majority
of  cases  ;  I  might  say  in  all  cases.
Poor  people,  laboring  people,  yfho
have  come  here,  a  good  many  of
them,  without  anything  excepting
their  hands  to  obtain  a  subsistence;
all  poor  alike,  very  little  difference,
to  find  an  inheritance,  I  do  not  aup-
pose  that  a  parallel  can  be  found
since  the  God  of  Heaven  gave  Israel
their  inheritance  in  the  land  of  Pales-
tine* We  see  many  people  who  have
received  inheritances  ;  poor  people
that  had  nothing  of  this  world's
goods  hive  received  inheritances  aud
been  blessed  in  a  temporal  point  of
view,  I  presume  and  believe  that
President  Brighum  Young  has  done
more  to  obtain  inheritances  for  the
people,  the  poor  among  men,  iu  the
last  thirty  years  than  all  the  emigrat-
ing and  philanthropic  societies  in  the
world,  putting  them  all  together,
existing  at  the  present  time*  I  do
not  think  it  has  been  equalled  since
the  dnys  of  Israel,  when  Palestine
was  divided  out  and  given  to  the  sons
of  Jacob.  If  it  has  I  have  no  know-
ledge of  it,  and  I  read  a  good  deal
It  is  said  "  in  that  day" — looking


85  JOUUNAL  UK

forward  to  the  day  in  which  we  live—  \
that  the  41  poor  among  men  should
rejoice  in  the  holy  one  of  Israel,"  Is
this  being  literally  fulfilled  ?  Yes,  it
is.  We  have  demonstrated  this  fact*
we  have  fulfilled  it  and  are  fulfilling  it
all  the  time.  It  is  one  of  the  signs
of  the  latter  times,  when  the  Gospel
is  preached  to  the  poor.  What  is  the
Gospel  to  the  poor  ?  It  is  the  power
of  God  unto  salvation.  Cannot  we
eee  the  power  of  God  demonstrated  to
the  salvation  of  the  poor  among  men,
that  lifts  them  out  of  the  poverty  in
which  they  have  been  brought  up,
and  places  them  in  a  land  where  they
can  get  inheritances  both  for  them-
selves and  their  posterity  T  Then
most  assuredly  this  Gospel  is  the  I
power  of  God  to  the  salvation  of  all
such  at  least.  It  has  proven  itself
the  power  of  God  to  this  whole  com-
munity, not  even  President  Young
himself  excepted.  We  came  here
stripped  of  everything,  as  the  poor
among  men  ;  we  can  now  lift  up  onr
hearts  and  rejoice  in  God  who  has
wrought  out  His  salvation,  temporal
as  well  as  spiritual.  We  were  brought
here  to  these  valleys  of  the  moun-
tain^ a  land  held  in  reserve  by  Him,
where  He  can  plant  the  feet  of  His
Saints  and  strengthen  Israel.  Has
be  done  it  ?  Witness  ye  this  day  !
Here  in  this  little  nook  and  corner,
a  place  passed  by,  by  the  traveller
who  journeys  over  the  great  high-
way, almost  unnoticed.  Yet  in  this
little  place  the  children  were  strung
along  the  sidewalk  greeting  our
coming,  from  the  railroad  depot  to
the  bridge,  a  distance  of  half  a  mile.
One  would  not  suppose  there  were  so
many  in  the  whole  country  round.
Here  we  behold  the  results  of  the
emigration  from  the  heavens,  as  well
as  that  from  the  various  nations  of
the  earth,  a  grand  assembling  of  the
Saints  of  the  Moat  High.  What  for?
Without  a  pur j iose  or  design  ?  No,


DISCOURSES.

not  by  any  means.  The  God  of
Heaven,  our  Father,  never  planted  a
single  individual  upon  the  earth
without  a  purpose  and  design.  Well
would  it  be  for  us  to  find  out  that
purpose  and  design  concerning  us,
and  then  truly  live  to  it  and  fulfil  itr
that  our  existence  upon  this  earth
might  be  accomplished,  that  oar
existence  here  might  not  be  a  failure,
that  we  might  return  to  our  Father
and  receive  that  welcome  plaudit,
"  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  ser-
vants."

He  has  given  ns  the  opportunity
of  filling  the  full  measure  of  our
creation  with  credit  to  ourselves  and
honor  to  His  name.  And  this  can  be
done  dimply  by  living  our  religion,
the  religion  of  Heaven,  He  is  in-
viting everybody  who  will  to  corns
and  partake  of  the  waters  of  life
freely,  without  money  and  without
price.  And  yet  it  will  cost  you  all
you  have;  but  then  there  is  one  thing
|  also  to  be  thought  of:  you  did  not
have  much  when  you  commenced*
Those  who  have  riches  are  the  last
to  receive  the  Gospel.  They  do  not
see  anything  to  rejoice  over  in  the
revealed  will  of  God  to  man  upon  the
earth.  If  they  do,  they  are  so  full  of
the  cares  and  love  of  the  world  that
the  good  seed  is  choked  by  the  weeds
that  grow  up  around  them,  so  that
they  cannot  attend  to  it,  and  place
for  the  word  is  not  found  in  their
hearts.

It  is  the  poor  who  receive  the  words
of  truth,  who  are  the  most  ready  to
do  the  will  of  God-  When  John  sent
•I  one  of  his  disciples  to  the  Savior  to
■  ask  Him  if  He  was  the  Son  of  Godr
eta,  He  said  tell  John— u  The  blind
receive  their  sight,  and  the  lame
walk,  the  lepers  are  cleansed  and  the
deaf  hear,  the  dead  are  raised  up  and
the  poor  have  the  Gospel  preached  to
them.'*  That  is  the  sign  be  gave  to-
John, It  seems  that  even  he  was  ia


some  little  doubt  concerning  the  f
divinity  of  Jesus'  mission.  The  |
Gospel  is  preached  to  the  poor;  it
is  also  preached  to  the  rich  so  far  rs
they  will  receive  it,  but  they  will
not  hear  it,  '*  O,  (say  they)  go  yoar
way,  we  do  not  want  anything  to  do
with  it  or  with  you."  This  is  what
they  say  to  the  Elder  who  bears  the
message  of  life  and  salvation  to  the
children  of  men.  It  is  among  the
poor  they  find  the  readiest  access.
And  such  are  the  ones  that  the  Lord
can  use  to  bring  to  pass  his  purposes;
they  are  the  ones  who  need  redemp-
tion, and  who  feel  that  they  need  it,
and  who  obtain  it.  Feeling  their
dependence  upon  Him,  they  ap-
preciate the  great  good,  the  blessing
that  God  is  pouring  out  upon  them
from  time  to  time  ;  tbey  realize  that
it  is  he  who  is  doing  this  work  for
them.  But  they  could  not  arrogate
to  themselves  this  honor,  inasmuch
as  they  know  that  they  are,  merely
instruments  in  our  Father's  hands
of  establishing  his  kingdom.  The
rich  it  they  attempted  to  perform
this  work  would  go  forth  in  their
own  power  ;  they  would  say  I  have
done  it  j  it  is  I  who  have  accomplish-
ed this  great  work."  They  would
not  acknowledge  God  in  all  things,
nor  give  the  honor  to  whom  it  really
belongs,  for  who  does  not  know  that
they  themselves  only  exist  by  God's
power  and  beneficence  ?  But  how  is
it  that  while  the  great  majority  feel
and  realize  these  things,  there  are
many  who  very  soon  arrogate  to
themselves  greatness  and  power,  and
think  that  they  have  accomplished
great  things,  and  that  the  Lord  can
scarcely  get  along  without  them;
I  wonder  sometimes  how  he  did  hap-
pen to  get  along  before  they  were
bora,  I  have  seen  a  great  many  of
this  chancier.  You  know  those  who
get  fat  quickly  are  very  apt  to  kick.
What  is  there  to  hinder  the  bles-


sings of  heaven  flowing  to  this  peo-
ple to  the  full  extent  of  their  hearts
desire  1  I  do  not  know  of  any  rea-
son, unless  we  are  not  prepared  and
worthy  to  receive  it,  and  make  a
wise  and  proper  use  of  it  when  it
does  come.  How  many  do  you  be-
lieve there  are  in  Israel  to-day  who,
if  the  wealth  of  the  world  were
turned  towards  them,  would  not
consign  it  to  the  hands  of  the  devil
about  as  fast  as  the  Lord  handed  it
to  them  ?  Do  you  know  that  I  be-
lieve there  are  a  good  many  ;  our
experience  teaches  us  there  are  a
good  many,  because  they  part  with
it  just  as  last  as  it  comes  to  them.
I  will  say  that  no  Latter-day  Saint
has  any  right  to  dispose  of  the  bles-
sings that  God  bestows  upon  him  ;
he  has  no  right  to  bestow  his  patron-
age upon  the  outside  world,  and
especially  upon  those  who  are  in  the
midst  of  Israel,  whose  interests  are
separate  and  apart  from  ours.  It
only  fosters  an  agency  in  our  midst
calculated  to  undermine  the  faith  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  ;  it  nourishes
a  viper  in  our  midst  ;  a  power  that
is  calculated  to  lead  astray  the  young
and  unthinking.  I  said  a  Latter-
day  Saint  had  no  right  to  dispose  of
the  blessings  that  God  bestows  upon
him ;  they  are  not  given  to  us  for
any  such  purpose.  What  are  they
given  us  for?  To  strengthen  the
2ion  of  God  upon  the  earth,  not  to
destroy  it ;  to  send  forth  the  Gospel
to  all  nations,  to  build  Temples  to
God's  holy  name,  wherein  those  who
are  faithful  may  receive  the  blessings
of  time  and  eternity  for  themselves
and  their  dead  ;  they  are  given  to
us  to  sustain  and  uphold  righteous
principles,  and  the  institutions  of
heaven ;  to  gather  the  poor  from
afar,  who  are  seeking  to  be  delivered
from  a  state  of  bondage,  to  come  up
and  participate  in  the  blessings  you
and I  enjoy  in  these  mountains-


88  JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


And  so  when  the  Lord  finds  out
tli  at  he  has  a  people  who  will  be
Unity  zealous  of  good  works,  who
will  make  a  good  use  of  the  wealth
of  the  world,  so  fast  and  so  soon
will  the  kingdom  be  delivered  to  the
Saints  in  greatness  ami  power.

It  cannot  be  given  any  sooner,
and  should  not  be  if  it  could.  Then
if  we  want  to' see  advancement  and
progress,  let  us  be  diligent  and  faith-
ful over  the  few  things  committed
to  our  trust,  using  them  for  God
and  for  his  kingdom,  and  not  dis-
tribute them  to  the  wicked,  nor  sift
our  ways  to  strangers,  nor  to  those
who  know  not  God,  and  who  give
no  heed  to  the  principles  of  truth
be  has  established  in  the  earth.  It
is  suicidal  in  the  highest  degree  for
the  Latter-day  Saints  to  take  such  a
course,  and  it  is  treasonable  against
the  Government  to  which  we  have
sworn  allegiance.  Inhere  is  a  war-
fare, but  who  institutes  Wi  The
Devil  ;  he  is  against  the  authority
of  the  holy  Priesthood,  seeking  to
trample  it  from  off  the  face  of  the
earth.  What  do  the  Latterdav
Saints  do?  Nothing,  only  stand  in
their  own  defence,  contending  inch
by  inch  for  the  right.  Toe  Adver-
sary is  found  all  the  day  long  seek-
ing to  overthrow  us,  his  agents  are
continually  making  their  insiduous
approaches  to  undermine  the  faith
of  the  Saints,  and  destroy  the  autho-
rity of  the  holy  Priesthood,  their
aim  and  object  being  to  drive  it
from  the  earth  as  they  did  anciently.
Then  for  the  Saints  to  give  aid  to
those  who  would  destroy  them,  by
giving  them  our  patronage,  even
the  means  that  God  has  placed  in
our  possession  !  Yes,  we  do  it  all
the  day  long,  we  are  doing  it  con-
tinually. The  people  here  in  I i rig-
ham  City  not  so  much  perhaps  as  in
other  places.  You  have  a  better
order  of  things  1  presume  ;  yet  it  is


done  more  or  less  everywhere.  Sup-
posing for  instance,  nations  at  war
with  each  other  should  find  any  of
their  citizens  giving  comfort  and  aid
to  the  enemy,  giving  munitions  for
war,  rendering  service  or  informa-
tion, or  betraying  any  trust  what-
ever, such  person  would  be  strung
up  for  treason.  This  is  the  law
among  the  nations  ;  and  why  should
it  be  counter!  anything  less  than
treason  for  those  who  have  sworn
allegiance  to  the  government  of
Heaven  to  be  found  giving  their
patronage  to  the  enemy.  I  tell  you
in  the  name  of  the  Lurd,  you  cannot
do  it  with  impunity  ;  such  acts  will
be  counted  against  you,  no  matter
who  you  are,  and  you  will  have  to
meet  it !  It  behooves  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  above  all  people  upon  the
face  of  the  earth,  to  stand  s  loulder
to  shoulder,  presenting  an  unbroken
phalanx  for  the  enemy  to  meet,  a
phalanx  that  they  cannot  penetrate
or  destroy.  It  is  our  duty  to  God
and  to  one  another  to  fortify  our
walls  of  defence.  How  ]  By  living
our  religion,  by  sustaining  through
our  faith,  integrity,  and  good  works
the  government  which  the  God  of
heaven  lias  so  kindly  bestowed  upon

us.  There  is  necessity  enough  for
this  government  to  be  established  in
the  earth.  There  was  no  rallying
point  in  all  the  earth  for  the  Saints,
until  the  Lord  revealed  the  truth.
But  now  there  is  a  rallying  point,
and  the  people  are  gathering  to  it.
What  fort  To  pull  it  down!  No  !
but  to  uphold  it,  to  keep  it  and  to
hold  it,  unfurling  its  banner  to  the
mountain  breezes,  and  in  the  strength
of  Israel's  God  to  stand  by  and  de-
fend it!  To  stand  by  and  sustain
each  other  in  all  good  works,  not  to
seek  to  pull  each  other  down  ;  but
to  put  down  sin  and  iniquity,  and
trample  it  out  of  our  midst,  sustain-
ing purity  and  upholding  and  main-


taming  righteousness,  and  God  and  1
his  kingdom  forever.  Let  the  wicked
howl  ;  heed  them  not  !  What  mut-
ters though  we  are  unpopular;  -Tesus
and  his  disciples  were  unpopular  in
their  day  ;  but  our  Savior  passed
the  ordeals.  Have  we  any  ordeals
to  pass?  Not  many.  We  have
more  or  k\ss  difficulties  to  encounter
it  is  true,  which  i*  all  right,  in  fact
it  is  the  only  way  we  can  be  tested.
If  we  "  fiy  the  track"  the  moment  a
difficulty  presents  itself,  what  good
are  we  ?  Where  is  our  integrity  ?
It  is  given  unto  m  to  overcome  every-
difficulty  and  continue  on  our  way
rejoicing,  having  our  hearts  tixed
like  a  flint  on  the  prize  before  us  j
yes,  no  matter  what  devil  stands  in
our  way  to  prevent  our  onward
march,  or  to  beckon  us  this  way  or
thai  way,  let  us  not  be  moved  either
by  fear  or  temptation,  but  exclaim
like  one  of  old,  "  As  for  me  and  my  ,
house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord  P
Let  us  all,  young  and  old,  make  our
resolves,  and  then  live  to  our  resolu-
tions, notwithstanding  the  induce-
ments and  allurements  the  evil  one  J
may  bring  to  bear  to  prevent  us
walking  in  the  strait  and  narrow
^vay.  .  h

The  Gospel  incorporates  everything
calculated  to  do  any  good  whatever,
anr]  it  Is  the  power  of  God  unto  sal-
vation both  here  and  hereafter;  and
you  will  not  find  any  real  pleasure  or
salvation  outside  of  it.  Now  remem-
ber that!  Both  the  old  and  the
young  can  find  suitable  and  satis-
factory enjoyments  with  in  the  purview
and  elements  of  the  Gospel.  Real
enjoyment  is  such  as  can  be  partici-
pated in  without  offending  the  Lord,
Tbeie  is  no  enjoyment  in  taking  a
course  calculated  to  injure  and  offend
Deify.  There  is  no  real  enjoyment
in  the  intoxicating  cup,  it  brings
misery  instead  of  joy.  And  so  are
all  these  things  that  are  used  to  their


abuse.  The  Gospel  teaches  us  better
things,  a  better  way  ;  and  still  it  fur-
nishes us  everything  necessary  for
our  pastime  and  for  our  encourage-
ment to  fro  forward  in  the  path  that
leads  to  honor  and  renown  in  time
and  eternity.

There  is  a  great,  work  to  be  done  !
The  Lord  has  designed  to  accomplish
a  mighty  work  through  the  instru-
mentality of  children  who  do  and
will  exist  upon  the  earth.  It  is
through  this  rn^ans  he  does  accom-
plish his  purposes;  he  always  has
and  I  expect  he  always  will.  The
redemption  of  oar  dead  friends,  of
our  progenitors  who  never  knew  the
Gospel  ;  the  resurrection  of  tha  dead
to  come  forth  clothed  in  im mortality
and  eternal  lives,  will  all  he  brought
about  through  the  Gospel,  What,
all  the  human  family  ?  Yes,  pretty
nearly  all.  It  is  a  great  under  taking  ;
the  Lord  is  susceptible  to  great  un-
dertakings. He  undertook  to  people
this  earth  with  spirits  that  were  be-
gotten in  heaven  and  who  dwelt  in
his  presence.  Consider  that  under-
taking for  a  moment,  and  perhaps  it
will  be  found  to  be  as  vast  as  our
oom  prehension  is  of  the  redemption
of  the  dead  and  the  accomplishment
of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  He
is  capable  of  great  enterprises  of  this
kind.  And  just  as  sure  aa  he  brought
forth  man  upon  this  earth,  organizing
it  1* ir  them  to  dwell  upon,  so  sure  will
he  bring  them  forth  again  in  the  re-
surrection, I  do  not  know  that  one
is  greater  than  the  other;  however
he  is  capable  of  accomplishing  alh  I
have  heard  people  talk  about  tha
utter  impossibility  of  bringing  about
the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  We
read  there  is  nothing  impossible  with
God.  I  am  quite  sure  of  it  in  this
respect.  We  see  how  natural,  how
easy  it  is  to  bring  forth  the  great  work
of  peopling  the  earth;  and  I  see  no
reason  why  the  other  bhould  not  be


90


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


just  as  easy  for  him  to  do  as  this  seems
to  us.  He  has  all  time  and  eternity
at  his  command ;  the  heavens  are  fuf]
of  days,  and  the  work  will  continue
onward  when  you  and  I  rest  and  sleep
in  the  dust.  There  is  something  to
be  done,  we  have  the  opportunity  and
blessed  privilege  of  laboring  in  the
cause  ;  and  it  is  well  for  us  if  we  do
it  while  the  day  lasts,  for  "behold
the  night  cometh  wherein  no  man
can  work."  Therefore  we  should  be  ;
dilligent  in  the  performance  of  our
duties,  divesting  ourselves  of  the
errors  and  trad  it  ions  we  have  imbibed,
and  which  are  in  opposition  to  truth
and  righteousness  accoiding  to  the
revelations  of  Jesus  made  known  to
us  in  this  our  day  and  generation.
We  should  control  ourselves;  our
passions  are  given  to  us  for  a  good
and  wise  purpose,  not  to  be  oar  mas-
ters, not  to  be  given  way  to,  allowing
ourselves  to  quarrel,  to  speak  harsh
and  unkind  words  and  to  mistreat
our  wives  and  children  as  some  do.
Our  passions  are  implanted  within  us
to  give  strength 'and  energy  of  char-  !
acter,  to  serve  a  good  and  wise  pur*
pose;  and  it  is  expected  that  we  hold
them  in  proper  subjection,  instead
of  allowing  them  to  master  us.  No


man  is  able  to  control  or  is  fit  to
govern,  even  a  family,  unless  be  can
govern  and  control  himself.

Let  ns  give  heed  to  the  reqn ire-
men  ts  of  heaven,  and  perform  them
regardless  of  the  consequences,  trust-
ing  in  God  who  will  sustain  even  to
the  death*  If  we  have  to  mr,  t  ob-
stacles, what  of  it  ?  "  Thongh  he
slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  hirnT"  let
this  be  the  word  in  the  heart  and
mind  of  every  man  and  woman  before
the  Lord.  Because  we  know  he  is
the  wise  giver  of  all  good  things,  the
wise  controller  of  all  events  who  does
all  things  well.  Let  us  put  our  trust
in  him,  and  go  forward  in  the  right-
eousness of  the  God  of  our  salvation,
iu  the  performance  of  the  work  al-
lotted to  ua  his  Saints  upon  the  earth.
If  we  do  this  and  endure  faithful  to
the  end,  great  will  be  our  rewurd  ;
and  great  is  our  reward  as  we  pass
alon It  brings  peace  of  mind  iu
the  assurance  that  we  are  doing  the
Lord's  will,  and  taking  that  course
which  is  pleasing  unto  him.
j  That  the  Lord  may  add  his  blessing
unto  us  white  we  sojourn  in  the  earth,
and  at  last  save  us  in  his  kingdom  is
my  prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


THE  LORD'S  SUITE  11,  ETC.  91


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  at  a  Special  Conference  held  in  Bkigham  City,  Box  Elder
County,  for  the  purpose  of  organ ixisq  a  Stake  of  Zion  in  said
County,  on  Sunday  Afternoon,  August  19,  1877.

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

-  -  ■  -

THE  LORD'S  SUPPER— A  WORD  TO  MOTHERS — THE  SACK  AM  KENT  IN  SAB-
BATH SCHOOLS — HISTORY  OF  SOME  THINGS — YOUNG  MEN  TO  PRESIDE
— HOMK  MANUFACTURES.


Previous  to  attending  to  the  busi-
ness to  be  presented  to  the  congre-
gation this  afternoon,  I  feel  to  exhort
the  Latter  -day  Saiuts  before  me
to  try  to  realize  the  sacred ness  of
the  ordinance  that  ia  now  being
administered  to  them,  which  was
introduced  by  our  Savior,  that  his
disciples  might  witness  to  the  Father
that  they  were  truly  his  followers.
On  the  last  time  that  our  Lord  met
with  his  disciples,  previous  to  his
being  betrayed,  he  administered  to
them  the  sacrament.  Instead  of
eating  as  at  other  times,  he  took  the
bread  and  blessed  and  brake  it  and
gave  to  his  disciples,  saying  to  them
that  he  should  require  of  them  to
meet  together  to  break  bread  iu  re-
membrance of  his  body,  that  would
suffer  for  them  and  for  the  sins  of  the
world.  So  when  he  had  blessed  and
broken  the  bread,  he  administered
the  same  to  them,  saying,  M  take, eat;
this  is  my  body "  When  his  dis-
ciples had  eaten,  be  then  took  the
cup  of  wine  and  gave  thanks,  and
gave  it  to  them,  saying,  "Drink  ye
all  of  it;  for  this  is  my  blood  of  the
New  Testament,  which  is  shed  for
many  for  the  remission  of  sins.1
He  came  here  to  redeem  fallen  man,
he  being  the  heir  of  the  family  that
receive  bodies  on  this  earth,  that  they,


through  obedience  to  his  requirement*
and  commandments  and  the  ordinan-
ces of  his  house;  may  be  sanctified
and  prepared  to  return  unto  the  pre-
sence of  the  Father  and  there  sit
down  with  Jesus,  where  he  will  ad-
minister to  them  again  in  fulfillment
of  his  saying  to  them,  "  I  will  not
drink,  henceforth  of  this  fruit  of  the
vine,  until  the  day  when  I  drink  it
anew,  with  you,  in  my  Father's  king-
dom."

I  would  exhort  my  brethren  and
sisters  to  receive  this  ordinance  every
Sabbath,  when  they  meet  together,
as  is  our  practice;  not  following  the
customs  of  others,  for  with  some
denominations  this  is  administered
once  a  month,  with  others  once  in
three  months,  with  others  never,  they
not  believing  in  outward  ordinances.
This  is  the  way  with  the  Christian
sects ;  they  teach  that  portion  of  the
Bible  which  seerneth  right  unto  them
and  add  such  doctrines,  views  and
opinions  as  suit  their  own  creeds.

We  are  in  the  habit  of  partaking
of  the  contents  of  the  cup  each  Sab-
bath when  we  meet  together,  and  I
do  pray  you  my  brethren  and  sis-
ters to  contemplate  this  ordinance
thoroughly,  and  seek  unto  the  Lord
with  all  your  hearts  that  you  may
obtain  tbe promised blessings  by


92  JOURNAL  OF

obedience  to  it  Teach  its  observ-
ance to  your  children  ;  impress  upon
them  its  necessity.  Its  observance
is  as  necessary  to  our  salvation  as
any  other  of  the  ordinances  and
commandments  that  have  been  in-
stituted in  order  that  the  people
may  be  sanctified,  that  Jesus  may
Uem  them  and  give  unto  them  his
spirit,  and  guide  and  direct  them
that  they  may  secure  unto  themselves
life  eternal.  Impress  the  sacred  n  ess
of  this  in  sport  ant  ordinance  upon  the
minds  of  your  children.  Many  of
you  who  are  aged,  have  witnessed  the
strength  and  power  of  tradition,  w he-
ther  it  be  correct  or  false.  The  power
of  tradition  upon  the  minds  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  is  most  po-
tent, I  might  say  it  is  almost  almigh-
ty. We  know  the  way  of  life,  we
have  the  keys  of  life  in  our  posses-
sion ;  and  if  we  do  not  take  pains
to  train  our  child  ten,  to  teach  an<l
instruct  them  concerning  these  re-
vealed truths,  the  condemnation  will
be  upon  us,  as  parents,  or  at  least
in  a  great  measure.  We  do  not  want
this  sin  to  rest  upon  us;  we  want  the
people,  each  and  every  one  to  under-
stand their  duty  and  then  discharge
that  duty  fearlessly,  without  favor  of
hope  of  earthly  reward,  having  in
view  the  doing  of  the  Father's  will
alone  and  the  receiving  of  the  heav-
enly reward.  I
Let  me  here  call  the  special  atten-
tion of  the  mothers  to  what  I  am
going  to  say:  If  you  mothers  will
live  your  religion,  then  in  the  love
and  lear  of  God  teach  your  children
constantly  and  thoroughly  in  the  way
of  life  and  salvation,  training  thein
up  in  the  way  they  should  go,  when
they  are  old  they  will  not  depart  from
it.  I  promise  you  this,  it  is  as  true
as  the  shining  sun,  it  is  an  eternal
truth.  In  this  duty  we  fail;  we  do
not  bring  up  our  children  in  the  way
they  should  go,  or  there  would  be  no


DISCOURSES.

turning  away,  wandering  here  and
there  from  the  society  of  the  Saints.
We  let  onr  children  do  too  much  as
they  have  a  mind  to;  if  they  want
this  or  that  their  wishes  must  be
gratified  ;  if  they  want  to  go  here  or
there,  the  mother,  in  very  many  in-
stances, is  too  ready  to  urge  upon  the
father  directly  or  indirectly,  the  ne-
cessity of  accommodating  the  young
mind  to  the  path  of  folly.

By  some  it  is  very  well  understood
that  in  the  days  of  ancient  Israel
while  in  the  land  of  Palestine  thev
were  not  blessed  so  profusely  as  we  are
with  the  crystal  streams  from  the
mountains,  They  were  in  the  habit
ot  drinking  a  great  deal  of  wine,  and
among  the  few  who  have  continued
to  inhabit  that  laud,  this  habit  I  be-
linve  has  been  kept  up  to  the  present
time.  It  is  a  wine  country.  But  the
Lord  has  *aid  to  us  it  mattereth  not
what  we  partake  of  when  we  admin-
ister the  cup  to  the  people,  inasmuch
as  we  do  it  with  au  eye  single  to  the
glory  of  Gud  ;  it  is  then  acceptable
to  him.  Consequently  we  use  water
as  though  it  were  wine;  for  we  are
commanded  to  drink  not  of  wine  for
this  sacred  purpose  except  it  be  made
by  our  own  hands.

In  some  of  our  wards  and  settle-
ments the  administering  of  tbe  sacra-
ment has  been  introduced  in  the
Sunday  schools.  Ir,  is  very  pleasing
and  gratifying  to  the  spiiit  that  I
possess,  for  tbe  parents  to  see  that
their  children  attend  Sunday  school
and  receive  the  proper  instruction
with  regard  to  their  faith.  After
the  Sunday  school  is  over,  let  the
parents  take  the  pains  to  bring  their
children  to  meeting.  This  would
be  very  pleasing  to  me.  An  idea
seems  to  have  gone  abroad  among  the
parents,  and  consequently  descends
to  the  children,  that  when  the  little
ones  have  been  to  Sunday  school,  the
remainder  of  tbe  day  is  for  them  to


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER,  ETC,


9£


enjoy  themselves  the  best  way  they
can.  No  more  duties,  no  more  oblU
gations  to  attend  meeting.  They
have  been  to  the  Sunday  school  and
the  mothers  and  probably  the  fathers
think  this  is  sufficient.  But  if  we  do
our  duty,  each  and  every  one  of  us,
and  as  communiies,  and  per  fur  m  the
duties  required  of  us,  wc  will  see  that
our  children  attended  all  the  preach-
ing meetings  and  meetings  for  in-
struction, which  it  is  proper  for  them
to  attend,  where  they,  as  well  as  the
parents  can  be  taught  pertaining  to
God  and  to  his  religion  on  the  earth,
for  the  salvation  of  the  human  family.
If  my  brethren  and  sisters  will  ac-
cept of  this  exhortation  and  try  to
carry  it  out  in  their  lives,  my  heart
will  say  to  them,  "  God  bless  you,
peace  be  with  you,  love  be  multiplied
upon  you."

We  will  now  attend  to  the  business
before  us  pertaining  to  the  organiza-
tion of  this  Stake  of  Zion  in  this
county  of  Box  Elder*  When  the
people  are  fully  organized  we  shall
expect  them  stiictly  to  attend  to  the
duties  devolving  upon  them.  Brother
Franklin  D.  Richards,  in  his  remarks
has  drawn  out  the  thread  of  the  or-
ganization of  the  Priesthood  and  the
duties  devolving  upon  the  Bishops
and  upon  the  Priests,  Teachers  and
Deacons  in  advancing  the  faith  of  the
Gospel  and  seeing  that  there  is  no
iniquity  among  the  people.  We  ex.
pect  this  will  be  carried  out,  There
are  many  things  wherein  the  people
will  need  instructing,  they  will  re-
ceive these  instructions  from  time
to  time,  adding  instruction  to  in-
struction with  regard  to  the  faith,
ordinances  and  commandments  of  the
house  of  God  ;  our  faith  in  the  reli-
gion we  possess  or  hope  to  possess,
and  in  the  faith  we  should  possess  in
the  name  of  our  Savior  and  through
him  in  the  Father.  And  we  expect
to  see  an  exhibition  thereof  that  will


be  brighter,  that  will  be  more  bean*
tiful,  more  permanent  and  lasting
throughout  all  the  organizations  of
the  Stakes  of  Zion,  than  we  have
heretofore  seen^  We  have  a  multi-
tude of  traditions  to  overcome,  and
when  this  people  called  Latter-day
Saints  will  be  tree  from  these  tradi-
tions, so  that  they  can  take  hold  of
the  Gospel  and  build  np  the  kingdom
according  to  the  pattern,  1  am  not
able  to  say  ;  but  I  hope  the  time  will
soon  come.  I  can  say  I  am  encour-
aged, I  think  there  is  au  improvement,
I  can  perceive  a  growth  in  the  know-
led  sfe  of  God  among  the  Latter-day
Saints,  And  yet  I  see  many  old
members  of  the  Church,  fathers  in
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God,  of
long  standing,  who  have  been  teachers
and  have  been  taught,  and  have  exer-
cised themselves  in  the  different  du-
ties of  the  Priesthood,  and  also  in
municipal  affairs  among  this  people,
to  direct,  to  counsel;  and  yet  they
seem  to  have  no  brightness  within
them  concerning  the  Priesthood  ;  no
knowledge  with  regard  to  the  dealings
of  God  with  his  children.  We  see
this;  but  still  on  the  whole  there
is  an  increase  of  faith,  of  knowledge,
of  wisdom,  of  understanding.  When
we  get  to  understand  all  knowledge,
all  wisdom,  that  it  is  necessary  for  us
to  understand  in  the  flesh,  we  will  be
like  clay  in  the  hands  of  the  potter,
willing  to  be  moulded  and  fashioned
according  to  the  will  of  him  who  has
called  ns  to  this  great  and  glorious
work,  of  purifying  ourselves  and  our
fellow-beings,  and  of  preparing  the
nations  of  the  earth  for  the  glory
that  awaits  them  through  obedi-
ence. Here  is  mystery,  here  are  the
hidden  mysteries  that  God  has  re-
served for  the  latter  times,  and  they
are  coming  forth ;  the  work  we  have
upon  ns  is  an  immense  one,  it  it
great,  powerful  and  di?ine;  it  is  an
almighty  work. And  with  regard


St  JulKN AL  UK

to  the  conduct  of  this  people — if  an
angel  should  come  here  and  speak
his  feelings  as  plainly  as  I  do,  I
think  he  would  say,  "  O,  Latter-day
Saints !  why  don't  you  see,  why  don't
you  open  your  eyes  and  behold  the
great  work  resting  upon  you  and
that  you  have  entered  into  ?  You
arc  blind,  you  are  stupid,  you  are  in
the  dark,  in  the  mist  and  fog,  wan-
dering to  and  fro  like  the  buat  upon
the  water  without  sail,  rudder  or  oar ;
and  you  know  not  whither  you  are
going.11  But  we  run  first  this  way,
and  then  that  way,  turning  here  and
turning  there,  strewing  our  ways  to
strangers  and  doing  that  which  we
should  not  do.  I  will  refer  to  a  little
incident  j
I  used  to  travel  this  road  running
through  here  several  times  during
the  season.  I  recollect,  not  many
years  ago,  there  was  a  little  gold  found
in  Montana.  The  inhabitants  of  Utah,
called  Latter-day  Saints,  took  every-
thing that  the  Lord  caused  the  earth
to  bring  forth  that  they  could  pack
in  their  wagons,  and  carried  it  away
to  those  who  would  not  even  speak
a  good  word  for  them.  Brother
Stainea  referred  to  and  related  facts
to  us  yesterday.  He  told  us  that
there  were  a  great  many  reople  in
these  mountains,  and  a  great  many
had  been  here,  who  had  become  ac-
quainted with  this  people,  whom  they
acknowledged  to  be  an  industrious
and  honest  people ;  that  some  had
said  to  him  they  would  rather  trust
themselves  with  the  people  of  Utah
than  any  other  community,  feeling
safer  with  them.  But  when  the  hue
and  cry  was  raised  that  the  t£  Mor-
mons" were  rising  againat  the  law,
and  against  the  rules  and  regulations
and  all  that  is  good  pertaining  to  the
society  of  this  great  republic  and  were
in  open  rebellion,  where  could  be
found  the  man  to  open  his  mouth  or
to  write  a  word  saying,  *'  This  is  false,  I


I  it  is  not  true."  Did  you  find  or  hear
of  any  such  men  ?  But  very  few,
and  they  will  be  blessed  for  so  doing.
Are  we  at  all  astonished  at  the  silence
of  the  great  majority  under  such
circumstauces  ?  No.  It  has  always
been  so;  it  is  so  now,  and  will  con-
tinue to  be  so;  for  there  is  no  union,
no  affiliation,  no  fellowship  between
Christ  and  Baal.  Baal  will  fight  the
Savior,  the  enemy  will  fight  against
the  law  of  God,  and  he  will  never  gi  ve
1  up  the  contest  until  he  is  taken  and
bound  and  cast  into  '*  the  bottomless
pit,"  And  these  honorable  men,
these  good  men  who  with  their  fa  ra-
il iee  have  received  the  blessings  from
the  hands  of  this  people  -  those  to
whom  we  have  given  our  substance,
our  flour  and  breadstuffs,  our  money
and  whatever  we  had,  were  there  any
ot  them  who  opened  their  mouths  in
;  justification  of  the  innocent,  the  pur©
and  good,  and  denounced  the  false-
hoods and  the  slanders  of  those  that
raised  the  cry  against  us  ?  If  there
were  any  I  do  not  know  it.  But  they
say  to  the  liars,  "  Lie  on  about  those
"  Mormons,/  we  like  to  hear  it"
Whilst  on  the  other  hand  these  Lat-
ter-day Saints  are  giving  everything
that  the  Lord  bestows  upon  them  just
as  fast  as  they  receive  it ;  not  resting
satisfied  until  they  hand  everything
over  to  the  laps  and  hands  of  our
enemies,  A  great  many  will  say,
I  u  But  we  are  not  your  enemies..  Why
then  do  you  not  speak  out  and  tell  the
truth  about  us  ?

Regarding  the  brethren  carrying
their  substance  north  to  Montana,  I
will  say  I  knew  a  man  who  under-
took to  head  off  all  this,  by  trying
to  organize  the  Elders  of  Israel  into
a  society  to  raise  an  influence  by
which  they  might  control  the  north-
ern market ;  but  no,  they  rebelled
against  it  But  what  I  was  going
to  mention,  go  into  the  northern
settlements,  and  you  would  see  the


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER,  ETC


95


wagons  by  hundreds  and  thousands
hauling  off  the  provisions  to  those
who  would  never  speak  a  word  in
our  favor Yes,  we  are  generous
enough  to  feed  them,  and  clothe
them,  and  give  them  money.  And
then,  when  the  enemy  would  raise
]  persecution  against  the  Latter-day
Saints,  they  can  sit  and  laugh  at  it
All  the  merchants  among  us  we
have  made  ridi. Do  you  know  of
any  that  brought  money  here  !  If
you  do,  you  know  more  than  I  do,
and  I  think  I  am  as  well  acquainted
with  them  as  any  one.  Who  brought
capital  here  and  spent  that  capital  %
They came here  poor,  and  made
their  capital,  but  they  never  lifted
their  voice  in  behalf  of  any  one;
but  they  laugh  and  sheer  around  the
corner  and  in  their  sleeve  when  they
see  the  storm  of  trouble  coming
upon  the  Latter-day  Saints. I  will
not  tell  their  doom,  they  will  find  it
out quick  enough  ;  a  good  many
have  found  it  already. Our  perse-
cutors too  who  die,  and  they  keep
dying, their  end  is  sorrow,  both
priests  and  people.

There  is  a  good  deal  of  money
spent ;  I  know  of  one  man  who
spent  many  thousands  of  dollars  try-
ing to  organize  the  Elders  in  such  a
manner  that  they  could  hold  the
control  of  the  market.  But  no.
Wild  as  the  deer  upon  the  moun-
tains, running  by  day  and  by  night,
oft-times  under  the  shades  of  night,
to  get  away  from  this  and  other
towns,  lugging  off  the  blessings  that
God  had  poured  into  their  laps*  We
have  counseled  the  people  to  save
their  grain.  Supposing  we  had  a
few  million  bushels  of  grain  on  hand,
would  it  do  us  any  hurt  ?  To  say
the  least,  we  certainly  might  as  well
have  kept  it,  for  we  got  nothing  for
it  j  we  did  not  even  pay  for  the
transportation  of  our  substance.
Will  famine  come  ? Yes!  Will


plagues  come  t  Yes  !  Will  distress
come  upon  the  nations?  Yes,  and
upon  this  nation,  and  that,  too,
before  a  great  while.  When  they
made  war  upon  us  some  eighteen
years  ago,  how  it  pleased  and  tickled
the  masses  who  thought  that  now
destruction  was  to  overtake  the
Latter-day  Saints.  I  told  many,
and  sent  word  to  Congress  saying,
that  it  would  prove  the  opening
wedsje  for  the  struggle  of  war  be-
twee n  the  North  and  South.  But
some  gentlemen  took  the  liberty  of
saying,  time  after  time,  "  No,  no,
that  cannot  be/'  Said  I,  "It  will
be  so,  and  I  tell  it  to  you  in  the
name  of  Israel's  God."  And  when
the  press  delight  in  publishing  such
falsehoods  abou t  the  Latter-day
Saints  as  they  have  done,  and  the
people  delight  to  read  them,  you  will
see  real  trouble  crop  out  in  and
among  themselves*  Is  there  power
enough  in  the  Federal  Government
to  put  down  mobocracy.  No  I  And
it  is  a  truth  that  they  whom  the
Lord  makes  weak  are  weak  indeed  ;
and  those  whom  the  Lord  makes
strong  are  strong  indeed.  Strength
was  given  to  the  North  in  the  last
struggle,  and  the  South  suffered  ex-
tremely. But  the  time  will  come
when  the  North  will  be  weaker  than
the  Sou tli  was,  and  they  will  have
no  power  to  muster  their  forces
against  th*  tide  of  folly  that  will
come  upon  them,  that  they  bring
upon  themselves,  and  they  them-
selves must  receive  the  results*

But  say  the  Latter-day  Saints,
*  How  are  we  living  f  If  you  were
to  hear  an  angel  talk  to  you,  and
tell  just  what  he  sees  and  under-
stands, you  would  say,  that  is  as
sharp  preaching  as  brother  Brig-
ham's  ;  his  words  are  sharper  than
brother  Brigham's.  And  they  wou  Id
be.  And  still  we  are  improving  a
little  j  but  oh  !  what  improvement


96


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


we  have  vet  to  make  in  order  to  I
acquire  such  victory  over  ourselves
as  to  bring  ourselves  into  perfect
subjection  to  the  law  of  Christ  Let
us  take  heed,  and  teach  our  children
by  precept  and  example  to  love  and
serve  the  Lord.  What  a  glorious
sight  was  presented  to  us  yesterday  '
on  our  arrival  at  your  depot,  to
witness  the  hosts  of  children  that
lined  the  side  walks,  You  have
here  in  this  little  city  the  buds,  the
beginning  of  a  nation.  Be  careful
my  brethren  and  my  sisters  how
you  conduct  yourselves.  See  that
you  bring  yourselves  in  subjection
to  the  law  of  Christ  and  then  teaeh
your  children  in  the  spirit  of  love
and  affection  the  way  of  life,  so  that
they  will  not  stray  away  from  you,
becoming  heady  and  high-minded,
wandering  after  the  foolish  fashions
of  the  world,  the  pleasures  of  the
wnild  ;  but  let  them  make  their
delight  in  that  which  is  virtuous  and
true,  for  this  is  more  pleasurable
than  all  the  vanities  of  the  world,
Keal  wisdom  is  real  pleasure  ;  real
wisdom,  prudence,  and  understand-
ing, is  real  comfort

(The  Presidency  of  the  Stake  were
then  unanimously  elected — namely,
Oliver  G.  Snow  as  President,  and
Elijah  A.  Box  and  Isaac  Smith  as
his  counselors,  who  also  received
thfir  ordinations.  Elder  William
Box  was  ordained  a  Patriarch,  The
names  of  the  members  of  the  High
Council  were  presented,  and  that  of
the  President  of  the  High  Priests1
Quorum,  together  with  the  names  of
the  Bishops  of  the  several  Wards,
all  of  which  were  unanimously  sus-
tained. The  President  then  con-
tinued :)

I  have  a  few  words  to  say  to  the
Latter-day  Saints  concerning  these
young  men  we  have  called  to  pre-
side over  the  people  of  this  Stake  of
Zion. They  are  young — they  have


not  the  experience  that  older  men
have  ;  but  if  they  do  not  possess
more  wisdom  than  a  good  many  of
our  old  experienced  men,  1  am  sorry.
There  are  a  good  many  that  do  not
profit  by  the  experience  they  have
got,  they  do  not  know  how  to  do  so.
I  want  to  tell  you  the  reason  why
we  have  made  the  selection  of  bro-
ther Oliver  G.  Snow  to  preside  here.
He  is  the  son  of  brother  Lorenzo
Snow,  who  has  hitherto  presided
here.  By  appointing  brother  ( Hiver
to  this  position,  I  think  he  will  be
under  his  father's  care,  and  where
he  can  get  the  wisdom  his  father
possesses.  And  I  will  say  to  the
credit  of  the  people  here,  they  have
done  well.  And  brother  Lorenzo
Snow,  who  has  had  charge  of  you,
has  set  the  best  example  for  the
literal  building  up  of  the  kingdom
of  God  of  any  of  our  presiding  El-
ders. There  is  one  man  in  the
Son tli  who  I  think  will  come  up  to
t  his  standard,  and  continue  on.  But
brother  Snow  has  led  the  people  and
gudided  them  and  counseled  them
in  the  way  that  they  should  go,
apparently  without  their  knowing
anything  about  it,  until  he  got  them
into  the  harness;  and  I  like  this
very  much.

Our  motive  is  to  make  every  man
and  woman  to  know  just  as  much  as
we  do ;  this  is  the  plan  of  the  Gos-
pel, and  this  is  what  i  would  like  to
do. I  would  like  all  the  Latter-day
Saints  to  come  up  to  this  standard,
and  know  as  much  as  I  do,  and  then
just  as  much  more  as  they  can  learn,
and  if  they  can  get  ahead  of  me,  all
right I  can  then  have  the  privi-
lege of  following  after  them.  If
they  keep  up  close  to  me,  so  that
they  will  understand  as  I  do  the
workings  of  the  Spirit,  they  will  do
a  good  deal  better  than  they  do  now.
But  the  beauty  and  excellency  of
the  wisdom  that  God  has  revealed


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER,  ETC


97


to  us  is  to  fill  everybody  with  wis-
dam,  bringing  them  up  to  the  highest
standard  of  knowledge  and  wisdom,
pari  tying  us  and  preparing  as  to  enter
into  the  highest  state  of  glory,  know-  j
ledge  and  power,  that  we  may  become  |
fit  associates  of  the  Goda  and  be  pre-
pared to  dwell  with  them*  This  I  say
is  the  beiutv  and  glory  of  the  great
knowledge  that  God  has  revealed  unto
the  Latter-day  Saints.  Yuumay  ask
in  what  particular  ?  In  every  par-
ticular. For  the  knowledge  men  pos-
sess of  every  science,  every  art,  every
study  there  is,  and  every  branch  of  i
mechanism  known  to  men,  they  are
indebted  to  the  Lord.  True  men  may
have  been  taught  it  by  his  lei  low  man
and  he  may  have  discovered  ranch
himself;  but  all  originated  with  God
our  Heavenly  Father,  through  his
agents  to  the  children  of  men.  The
faith  and  philosophy  of  our  religion
comprehends  all  things,  believes  all
things,  hopes  all  things,  and  I  wish  I
was  able  to  say  a  little  better  than  I
am,  endures  all  things.  But  we  must
endure  all  things  that  we  cannot  help,
enduring  patiently  until  we  are
counted  worthy  to  belree.

I  want  to  say  this  with  regard  to
brother  Oliver  6.  Snow  ;  virtually
we  leave  brother  Lorenzo  to  overlook
you.  Can  yon  nnderstaud  this  ?  If
you  cannot  ypa  cannot  see  as  I  do*  ,
Brother  Snow  has  exhibited  splendid
talent  in  what  he  has  done  towards
making  this  people  self-sustaining.  i
Shall  I  give  you  my  ideas  in  brief
with  regard  to  business  and  business
transactions.  Here  for  instance  is  a
business  man,  a  merchant,  comes  to
our  neighborhood,  with  a  stock  of
goods;  he  sells  them  at  from  two  to
ten  hundred  per  cent,  above  what
they  cost.  As  a  matter  of  course  he
soon  becomes  wealthy,  and  after  a
time  he  will  be  called  a  millionaire,
when  perhaps  he  was  not  worth  a

No.  7.


dollar  when  he  commenced  to  trade.
You  will  hear  many  say  of  such  a
person,  what  a  nice  man  he  is,  and
what  a  great  financier  he  is  !  My
feeling  of  such  a  man  is  he  is  a  great
cheat,  a  deceiver,  a  liar!  He  im-
poses on  the  people,  he  takes  that
which  does  not  belong  to  him,  and  is
a  living  monument  of  falsehood.
Such  a  man  is  not  a  financier !  The
financier  is  he  that  brings  the  lumber
from  the  Canyons  and  shapes  it  for
the  use  of  his  fellow  man,  employing
mechanics  and  laborers  to  produce
from  the  elements  and  the  crude
material  everything  necessary  fur  the
sustenance  and  comfort  of  man  ;  one
who  builds  tanneries  to  work  up  the
hides  instead  of  letting  them  rot  and
waste  or  be  sent  out  of  the  conn  try
to  be  made  into  leather  and  then
brought  baek  in  the  shape  of  boots
and  shoes;  and  that  can  take  the
wool,  the  furs  and  straw  and  convert
the  same  into  cloth,  into  hats  and
bonnets,  and  that  will  plant  out  mul-
berry trees  and  raise  the  silk,  and  thus
give  employment  to  men,  women  and
children,  as  yon  have  commenced  to
do  here,  bringing  the  elements  into
successful  use  for  the  benefit  of  man,
and  reclaiming  a  barren  wilderness,
converting  it  into  a  fruitful  field,
making  it  to  blossom  as  the  rose;
such  a  man  I  would  call  a  financier,
a  benefactor  of  his  fellow  man.  But
the  great  majority  of  men  who  have
amassed  great  wealth  have  done  it  at
the  expense  of  their  fellows,  on  the
principle  that  the  doctors,  the  lawyers
and  the  merchants  acquire  theirs.
Such  men  are  impositions  on  the
community,  and  they  ought  to  be
taken  and  put  to  some  honorable  la-
bor such  as  raising  potatoes,  raising
grain,  cattle  and  sheep,  and  perform-
ing other  useful  and  necessary  labors
for  the  good  of  mankind.  Amen.

Vol.  XIX,


J UU KS XL  O r  DI.NCOU  RSI  >


DISCOURSE  BV  KLDER  ERASTUS  SNOW,


Delivered  ik  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday,

September  9,  1877.


(Reported  by  Ihuhjer  Clawwn  )

DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  THE  SAINTS  AND  THE  ANCIENT  APOSTLES  AND
DISCI  PL  KS — Til  E  QUORUMS  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD  WILL  CONTINUE  TO
GO  FORWARD— THE  SAINTS  ARE  CALM  AND  UNDISTURBED,


While  Elder  Richards  was  address-
ing us,  a  certain  Scripture  presented
itself  somewhat  forcibly  to  my  mind,
that  I  will  call  attention  to,  as  an
illustration  of  the  difference  existing
between  us  at  the  present  time,  and
the  condition,  feelings  and  spirit  of
tbe  Apostles  and  disciples  of  Christ
at  the  time  of  His  crucifixion.

The  students  of  the  Bible  are  aware
how  the  feelings  and  faith  of  the  dis-
ciples anciently  centered  in  Christ,
with  the  expectation  that  he  was  at
that  time  to  restore  Israel  to  the
possession  of  their  promised  inherit*
ances,  and  establish  himself  upon  the
Throne  of  David  for  ever,  and  that
the  kingdom  which  he  came  to  esta-
blish, v»a*  not  only  to  be  spiritual  but
also  temporal  in  its  character.  And
notwithstanding  the  many  plain  say-
ings of  the  Savior,  pointing  at  his
death  and  his  resurrection,  and  the
work  He  came  to  perform  for  the
redemption  of  man,  there  seemed  to
be  a  veil  over  their  hearts  that  they
comprehended  it  only  in  part  When
He  was  taken  and  crucified,  that  veil
still  covered  their  minds.  Notwith-
standing that  on  the  morning  of  His
resurrection,  the  holy  women  reported
to  His  disciples  that  they  had  seen


Him  and  that  He  was  verily  risen,
they  could  not  seem  to  sense  it.
When  two  of  their  number  traveled
out  iuto  the  country  the  same  day,
Jesus  overtook  them,  and  they  knew
him  not,  and  they  related  to  Him
what  had  happened,  adding  that
they  had  expected  that  He  was  the
one  who  should  have  redeemed  Israel,
Then  He  began  to  expound  unto
them  the  Scriptures,  and  show  unto
them  that  it  was  necessary  for  Christ
thus  to  suffer,  to  fulfill  the  words  of
the  Prophets.  Yet  even  these  two,
after  hearing  Him  and  His  explana-
tion of  the  Scriptures,  returned  and
reported  to  the  rest  of  the  disciples
what  they  had  seen  and  heard,  and
even  these  could  not  dispel  the  doubts
from  the  hearts  of  the  disciples  or
take  off  the  veil  from  their  minds.
Still  they  hesitated  ;  still  the  vision
of  their  minds  was  not  fully  open  lo
comprehend  the  true  nature  and
character  of  His  mission  and  their
own  true  calling.  Finally,  after  a
day  or  two,  and  the  depth  of  their
grief  and  mourning  began  to  sub-
side a  little,  Peter  says  to  his  breth-
ren :  I  propose  to  go  a  fishing.  John
says,  I  go  with  you ;  and  so  one  after
another  they  who  had  followed  the


DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  TII13  SALVib,  KIV


occupation  of  fishermen  before  they
were  called  to  be  Apostles,  concluded
they  would  turn  again  to  their  fotmer
occupation  and  go  fishing.  They
tried  it,  but  the  Lord  did  not  bless
them  in  their  labors.  They  toiled  all
Bight,  but  the  fish  would  not  come,
and  they  caught  nothing.  In  the
morning  a  voice  called  to  them  from
the  sea  side,  saying,  "  Children  have
ye  any  meat,"  and  they  answered
Him,  "  none."  Now,  said  He,  "  cast
your  net  over  on  the  other  side  ot
the  ship."  They  cast  their  net  on
the  other  side  of  the  ship,  straight-
way, and  their  net  was  full  of  fish,
so  much  so  that  they  could  not  bring
it  into  the  ship,  and  they  were  under
the  necessity  of  rowing  to  shore  and
drawing  the  net  after  them.  But
about  this  time,  a  thought  penetrated
Peters  heart  that  this  was  very  much
like  the  many  deeds  uf  Jesus;  this
ike  one  of  Jesus'  miracles,  and
straightway  he  crtst  a  look  toward
the  shore  and  exclaimed  to  his  bre-
thren, »  Truly  it  is  the  Lord."  Then
his  faith  and  hope  revived,  and  such
joy  filled  his  bosom  that  the  impetu-
osity of  his  nature  led  him  to  leave
the  ship  ;  he  could  not  wait  its  pro-
gress to  the  shore  but  plunged  into
the  sen,  to  meet  his  Lord.  You  re-
member what  followed;  Jesus  knew
they  were  hungry,  and  had  break-
fast prepared  for  them  ;  he  didnot  wait
for  their  seine  of  fish  to  be  brought
ashore  and  cooked,  but  when  thev
arrived  he  Lad  it  cooked,  and  the  fish
ready,  and  he  invited  them  to  sit
down  to  breakfast  with  him.  No  one
durst  ask  him  who  he  was  for  by
this  time,  God  had  opened  their  eyes
and  they  knew  him.  You  remember
the  peaceful  yet  keen  rebuke  admin-
istered to  Peter  on  the  occasion,  be-
cause he  had  forsaken  the  injunctions
that  he  had  previously  received,  and
the  commandment  that  had  been
given  unto  him,  and  turned  hia  at-


tention again  to  Ins  fishing,  After
they  had  filled  themselves  with  the
fish  and  cakes,  Jesus  asked  him  :
"Simon  Peter,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest
thou  me  more  than  these  ?"  pointing
to  his  fish.  "  Yes,  Lord,  thou  know-
est  I  love  thee,"  "Then  feed  my
lambs/1  Again  the  Lord  says,  14  Si-
mon, son  of  Jona?,  lovest  thou  me  ?"
"Yes,  Lord,  thou  knowest  I  love  thee."
"  Then  feed  my  sheep."  Again,  the
third  time,  Jesus  asked,  "Simon
Peter,  lovest  thou  me  more  than
these?"  Peter  was  grieved  because
the  Lord  asked  the  same  question
with  renewed  earner tness  the  third
time,  as  it  he  doubted  his  assurance,
and  said,  "  Yes,  Lord,  thou  knowest
all  things,  thou  knowest  I  love
Thee,"  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  "Feed
my  sheep.  Now  you  have  tried  your
hand  at  fishing,  Peter,  and  you  see
that  when  the  Lord  was  not  with  yon,
you  caught  nothing.  I  called  you
from  your  fishing  in  the  beginning,
and  said  to  you  henceforth  to  leave
your  nets,  and  I  would  make  you
tishers  of  men."  This  reproof  suf-
ficed Peter  ttie  rest  of  his  life.  We
have  no  account  uf  his  ever  wishiug
to  go  fishing  again,  at  least  not  to
neglect  the  flock  of  Christ.

In  the  epistle  which  Peter  wrote
to  his  brethren  in  the  latter  end  of
his  life,  lie  refers  very  delicately  to
that  period  of  his  career,  when  as  he
says,  in  his  own  words,  "  We  buried
our  hope  with  Christ,  but  thanks  be
unto  God  that  it  is  renewed  again  by
the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  from  the
dead."  The  hope  they  had  cherished
st  emed  to  have  been  lost  when  they
buried  him,  but  it  was  renewed  again

!  unto  them  by  the  resurrection  of  the
Lord  from  the  dead,  and  by  his  min-
istrations among  them  during  a  period
of  forty  days  after  bis  resurrection,
showing  himself  repeatedly  and  giv-
ing them  instruction,  telling  them,  at

I  the  same  time,  "  not  until  I  have  de-


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES.


parted  from  you  will  the  Holy  Ghost
come  upon  you  and  enuow  you  with
power  from  on  high,  revealing  all
things  unto  you  which  the  Father
hath  prepared  ;  but  if  I  go  away  the
Comforterwill  come,  and  hewill  guide
you  into  all  truth  and  show  you  things
to  come.

It  is  interesting  to  reflect  upon
and  contemplate  the  influences  and
surroundings  of  the  early  disciples
and  the  manner  in  which  the  Father
erformed  his  works  in  their  midst
and  after  the  resurrection  of  the  Sa-
ior;  how  their  eyes  were  opened  to
and  comprehend  the  true  nature
nd  character  of  his  mission  upon  the
arth  ;  the  true  nature  of  his  king-
om,  and  the  work  which  he  was  sent
£q  perform,  in  which  they  were  his
rs  and  fellow  workers ;  called
rdained  to  the  holy  Apostleship,
is  witnesses  in  all  the  earth,
bear  witness  of  him  and  baptize
hose  who  believed  in  the  name  of
the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,
aching  them  to  observe  ail  things
hich  he  had  commanded  them,
seemed  wise  in  the  providences  of
^God  to  conceal  itf  measurably,  from
heir  minds  until  after  his  resurrec-
n  from  the  dead.  His  last  en-
e  into  Jerusalem,  when  he  rode
upon  the  foal  of  an  ass,  and  the  be-
lievers spread  their  garments  and
palm  branches  iu  his  pathway,  for
him  to  ride  upon  in  token  of  the
great  esteem  and  respect  they  cher-
ished for  him,  and  their  assurance
that  he  had  come  in  the  name  of  the
Lord,  to  establish  the  Throne  of
David  and  redeem  Israel  from  the
oppression  of  the  Gentiles  and  the
bondage  that  was  upon  their  necks
as  a  people ;  and  they  cried  u  Ho-
sannah,  blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in
the  name  of  the  Lord,"  while  some
of  the  over-righteous  ones  or  those
who  thought  they  were  making  too
much  ado  about  him  were  rather  in-


clined to  rebuke  them  and  asked
Jesus  to  rebuke  them  and  tell  them
to  be  quiet.  His  answer  was,  "  If
these  should  hold  their  peace  the  very
stones  will  cry  out,"  as  much  as  to
say,  it  is  the  Father  in  them  th*t  is
crying  It  was  the  promptings  and
inspiration  of  the  Almighty  that
were  moving  the  hearts  of  the  peo-
ple to  call  the  attention  of  all  Jadea
and  Jerusalem,  and  all  the  people
around  about,  that  their  eyes  might
nee  and  their  ears  might  hear  and
all  the  people  know  him  who  cometh
in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  riding  upon
the  foal  of  an  ass,  according  to  the
predictions  of  the  ancient  Prophets*
He  would  not  rebuke  them,  but  let
the  spirit  flow ;  let  their  mouths
utter  praise ;  let  them  show  their
respect;  let  them  show  their  respect,
and  do  honor  to  him  whom  the  Fa-
ther had  sent.  And  all  this  that
when  he  should  suffer,  and  the  cur-
tain should  drop,  and  he  should  be
executed,  the  Lord  should  cause  the
sun  to  be  darkened,  and  the  earth  to
quake,  and  the  vail  of  the  Temple  to
rend,  that  all  Israel  might  have  a
testimony  and  an  assurance  that  tha
Son  of  God  was  suffering.

Those  who  are  familiar  with  the
early  history  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
with  the  life,  career  and  death  of  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  with  the  scenes
that  surrounded  the  people  at  that
time,  and  the  mighty  strides  that  ha
seemed  to  take  in  the  last  years  of
his  life;  the  force  with  which  h©
seemed  to  push  forward  the  work
that  was  upon  him,  and  the  feeling
that  hurried  him  forward  to  confer
upon  the  Apostles  and  a  few  others
the  keys  of  the  Priesthood  and  the
Holy  Endowments,  which  God  had
revealed  unto  him,  aud  his  efforts
to  set  in  order  all  things  pertainiug
to  the  Priesthood;  also  his  commu-
nication on  the  powers  and  policy
of  the  Government  of  the  United


DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  THE  SAINTS,  ETC


101


tates,  and  the  purposes  of  God  1
concerning  them,  putting  his  name
before  the  people  as  a  candidate  for
the  Presidency  of  the  United  States,
and  the  recommendations  which  he
made  to  save  them  from  the  civil
war  that  has  since  overtaken  them,
the  results  of  the  shivery  question,
that  was  agitating  the  nation*  all
these  great  and  important  subjects
were  kept  prominently  before  the
people,  and  while  the  Elders  and
people  of  Israel  labored  diligently  to
carry  out  his  tench  logs  and  execute
his  plans  and  designs,  he  stepped  be-
hind the  vail  almost  as  suddenly  and
unexpectedly,  to  the  people,  as  did
Jesus  when  he  was  crucified.  1  re-
peat, it  was  aim  <st  as  sudden  and
unexpected  to  the  vast  body  of  this
people  as  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus  was
to  his  disciples,  who  were  looking  for  ,
him  to  be  placed  upon  the  t drone  of
his  father  David,  to  rule  and  reign
over  the  House  of  Israel.

The  Apostles  of  this  dispensation
did  not,  however,  leave  the  work  of
the  ministry  to  which  they  had  been
called,  and  go  a  fishing;  but  there
were  some  in  Israel  who  seemed  to
have  buried  their  hope  with  the  Pro-
phet Joseph,  And  it  has  been  said
of  some  that  they  died  with  him;
and  though  they  continued  to  live  !
years  after,  yet  their  faith  and  hope
seemed  to  have  died  wilh  him.  Not
so  with  President  Hrigham  Young,
and  the  Apostles  that  were  with  him.
They  were  mostly  abroad  ministering
in  their  calling,  but  two  or  three  of
them  were  at  home.  Among  the ;
latter  number  was  Elder  John  Tay-
lor, who  is  with  us  to-day,  as  yon
who  are  familiar  with  the  early  his-
tory  of  those  times  are  aware.  He
and  Elder  Willard  Richards  were  with
the  Prophet  Joseph  and  Hyrum,  in
person,  whtn  they  were  assassinated,
and  John  Taylor  received  four  balls.
The  rest  of  the  Twelve  were  abroad


attending  to  their  ministry,  holding
Conferences  in  various  parts  of  the
country,  nor  did  they  leave  those
labors  and  turn  again  to  their  former
occupations  as  did  Peter  and  his  bre-
thren. A profound sensation  was
produced  among  all  the  Latter-day
Saints  throughout  the world,  and
among  their  enemies,  many  of  whom
loudly  condemned  the  shocking  man-
ner in  which  their  death  was  accom-
plished. Time  will  not  permit,  nor
does  it  appear  to  me  a  suitable  time
to  dwell  upon  it ;  but  great  was  the
impression  produced  throughout  the
land. Deep was the sorrow  and
mourning,  and  the  query  arose  in  the
minds  of  many,  what  shall  be  the;
result  of  these  tilings  ? Especially  *
among  that  class  whose  hopes  seemed  '
to  have  been  buried  with  him,  whose*
faith  seemed  to  have  been  centred  f
in  him;  who  did  not  look  beyond/
him.  \n* '  *  -

Bat  the  response  of  the  Spirit  to
those  whose  faith  centred  in  God  was
this  :  The  Prophet  Joseph  has  or--
gun i zed  the  quorums,  1ms  .set  in
order  the  Priesthood,  and  conferred
the  keys  and  powers  thereof  upon
his  brethren,  and  said  to  the  Twelve
Apostles,  %i  Upon  your  shoulders  shall
rest  the  burden  of  this  kingdom,  to
bear  it  off  in  all  the  world.  The
Lord  is  going  to  let  me  rest."
11  is  words  were  before  the  people,
and  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  were
li  ving  and  walking  in  the  light  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  whose  faith  reached  be-
yond the  Prophet  Joseph,  and  looked
to  the  source  from  whence  he  received
his  power  and  influence.

We  have  often  heard  our  late  Pre-
sident, Brigham  Young,  who  was
Pi  evident  of  the  Twelve  Apostlea
by  seniority,  and  who  had  been
placed  there  by  the  voice  of  his  bre-
thren, to  preside  over  his  quorum,
which  had  also  been  confirmed  by  the
Lord,  fcuy  that  he  was  attending  a


102


JOURNAL  OV  DISCOURSE*


Conference  in  Peter  sboro,  Xew  Hamp-
shire, when  lie  heard  of  the  Prophet's
death.  The  query  arose  in  his  mind:
Where  now  rusts  those  keys  of  the
holy  Priesthood  which  the  Prophet
Joseph  received  and  revealed  unto
us  Y  Where  now  an  this  side  of  the
vail  are  those  keys  deposited  ?  The
answer  came  to  him  by  the  Holy
Spirit  resting  upon  him  with  a  power
and  influence  and  peaceful  assurance
which  caused  him  to  bring  his  hand
to  his  thigh  with  the  utterance, 11  They
are  here.  They  are  here !"  The
voice  of  his  brethren  responded,  and
the  echo  reverberated  not  only  among
the  Apostles,  but,  among  the  Seven-
ties, the  High  Priests,  the  Elder's,
Bishops,  Teachers,  Deacons,  and  all
the  people.  They  are  here,  with
brother  Brigham,  with  his  brethren
the  Apostles,  who  have  been  called
and  charged  by  the  Prophet  Joseph
with  the  duties  and  responsibilities
of  bearing  off  this  kingdom  and
building  it  up,  and  setting  in  order
and  regulating  the  affairs  thereof  in
all  the  world.  This  revelation  of  the
Spirit  to  our  beloved  President,  Brig-
bam  Young,  on  that  occasion,  and
which  also  rested  upon  his  brethren,
and  was  diffused  among  all  the  peo-
ple and  responded  to  with  such  uni-
versal voice,  sentiment  and  feelings,
was  not  a  fresh  call,  a  new  revelation,
but  it  was  bringing  to  their  minds
one  previously  given,  refreshing  their
minds  and  understanding  in  the  word
of  the  Lord  that  had  been  spoken
nnto  them  through  the  Prophet  Jo-
seph himself,  making  more  fully  and
clearly  than  ever,  those  words  that
had  been  previously  spoken  to  them,
the  charge  that  he  gave  to  them  to
bear  off  the  work  which  now  rested
upon  their  shoulders.  From  that
day  until  the  present  time  has  this
revelation  been  clear  and  prominent
before  the  people,  and  in  their  hearts,
j|tid  in  the  mouth  of  President  Brig-


ham  Young.  How  often  has  he  said,
w  Joseph  is  still  my  leader;  he  is  still
my  President ;  he  still  bears  the  keys
before  me.  I  am  still  following  after
him  to  carry  out  his  counsel,  to  ac-
complish the  work  of  which  he  laid
the  foundation,  under  God.  I  am
still  as  he  appointed,  an  Apostle  to
bear  off  this  kingdom,  to  bear  witness
of  the  work  which  God  by  him  did
accomplish,  and  to  carry  it  forward
by  the  power  of  God  and  the  help  of
my  brethren  and  fellow  laborers,  and
I  am  still  an  Apostle  and  President
of  the  Twelve  Apostles/

But  the  Lord  stgni&es  to  me  that
these  Quorums  of  the  Priesthood
shall  go  forward  in  their  respective
spheres  of  labor,  and  as  one  passes
beyond  the  vail,  following  his  file
leader,  the  next  Apostle  will  follow
after,  treading,  as  it  were,  in  his
footsteps,  to  bear  off  this  kingdom.
The  work  is  of  (iod  and  not  of  man.
and  no  number  of  martyrdoms  or
death,  and  no  amount  of  persecution
nor  slaying  of  the  Lord's  anointed,
can  put  a  stop  to  it.  How  often  we
have  heard  it  proclaimed  that  the
keys  of  the  Apostleship,  which  had
been  committed  to  men  on  the  earth,
together  with  all  the  keys  of  the
Holy  Endowments,  and  every  bles-
sing which  the  Lord  has  provided
and  promised  to  men  in  the  flesh,  are
placed  within  our  reach  through  the
keys  of  this  Priesthood,  and  that  this
Apostleship  will  continue  upon  the
earth  until  it  has  accomplished  that
which  the  Lord  has  ordained  and
appointed,  and  until  Israel  shall  be
gathered,  and  the  people  be  prepared
for  his  second  coming,  and  that,  if
one  passes  beyond  the  vail,  another
follows  in  his  footsteps,  and  it'  perse-
cution rage,  and  many  witnesses  of
the  Lord  are  slain,  stil!  he  will  pre-
serve witnesses  upon  the  earth,  with
the  keys  of  that  ministry  and  Apos-
tleship to  bear  off  the  kingdom  tri-


\


DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


103


umphantly,  and  fulfill  and  accom-
plish all  that  the  Lord  has  predicted*
These  utterances  have  often  been
made  in  our  hearing,  within  the  last
thirty-three  years,  since  the  death  of
the  Prophet  Joseph,  and  have  become
household  words  with  those  who  have
been  alive  to  their  calling  and  duties,
and  whose  eyes  and  ears  have  been
open  to  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord
and  remember  it.  How  calm  and
peaceful  the  spirit  and  feelings  of
Israel  on  this  memorable  occasion,
when  our  beloved  President,  who  has
led  the  van  for  the  last  thirty-three
years,  quietly  gathered  up  his  feet
and  was  gathered  to  his  fathers.
Ho  w  d liferent  was  the  spirit  and
feelings  of  Israel  on  this  occasion
from  the  other  occasion  I  have  re-
ferred to,  and  from  the  Apostles  and
disciples  of  Jesus  when  He  departed  !
It  shows  to  our  minds  the  education
of  the  peg  pie,  and  their  advancement
in  understanding  and  faith.  It  shows
the  stability  of  our  institutions  and
their  power  over  the  feelings  and
hearts  of  the  people.  In  every  de-
partment of  the  Priesthood,  in  every
branch  of  the  Church,  through  all
the  Stakes  of  Zion,  and  in  every  de-
partment ot  our  labor,  there  seems
scarcely  a  ripple  upon  the  smooth
surface  of  the  waters*

Last  Sabbath,  when  a  vast  con-
gregation of  the  people  came  from
the  east,  west,  north  and  south,  and
from  this  city  and  its  suburbs,  to  pay
their  last  respects  to  the  honored
dead,  the  quiet,  the  order,  the  silent
and** discreet  feeling  of  resignation
and  peace  thn t  prevailed,  should  be  a
lesson  to  the  Saints  and  a  testimony
to  the  vvorld  of  the  purity  of  faith
that  we  have  embraced,  and  the  in-
fluence that  had  been  exerted  upon
the  hearts  of  the  people  by  our  de-
parted leader,  and  bis  brethren  who
have  been  laboring  with  him.  We
find  no  confasion,  no  running  to  and


fro,  nobody  dropping  their  tools  or
neglecting  their  labors,  and  nobody
wishing  to  go  a  fishing.  When  we
had  finished  the  last  sad  rites,  and
completed  what  duties  we  owed  to
t lie  honored  dead,  we  found  every
one,  on  Monday  morning,  resuming
his  duties;  business  assume!  its
wonted  course  in  every  department
of  our  public  as  well  as  our  private
labors.  The  Saints  everywhere,  as
well  as  our  Eiders  abroad,  move  for-
ward in  the  discharge  of  their  duties
with  calmness  and  serenity,  with
assurance  that  Brighasn  is  still  our
leader.  Joseph  is  still  our  Prophet,
and  Brigham  is  leader  as  much  as  he
was  in  life,  but  not  on  this  side  of
the  vail — he  has  gone  into  another
sphere,  to  engage  in  the  labors  of  the
Gospel  with  Joseph,  Ely  r  urn,  and  all
the  holy  ones  that  have  gone  before
in  this  dispensation,  to  assist  them  in
rollintr  on  the  work  of  this  dispensa-
tion among  the  dead,  and  prepare  the
way  for  the  final  consummation  of
all  things  spoken  of  by  the  Propheti,
while  his  brethren  on  this  side  the
vail  tread  softly  and  diligently  after
him,  as  it  were  iu  his  footsteps,  to
move  on  the  canse  of  Israel,  and
send  the  Gospel  to  the  ends  of  the
earth.  What  a  commentary  on  the
stability  of  the  institutions  of  Zion  !
The  power  of  that  faith  that  we  have
received,  the  strength  of  that  union,
and  the  perfection  of  that  organiza-
tion which  Cod  has  established  among
as,  which  gives  us  the  re- assurance
that  instead  of  the  cause  of  Zion
weakening,  it  will  gain  additional
power  and  strength  ;  and  the  Priest-
hood that  remain  on  this  ^ide,  hav-
ing lost  a  tower  of  strength  in  him
who  has  gone,  must  exert  themselves
and  their  fa i til,  and  renew  their
strength  in  the  Lord,  and  magnify
their  calling,  that  the  work  of  tht
Lord  be  not  hindered.  To  at  this
may  be  the  feelings  and  determine-


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


tion  of  every  one  of  the  Apostles,
Seventies,  High  Priests,  Elders,
Bishops,  and  Presidents  in  Ziou,  and
all  the  people,  that  we  may  strive
more  diligently  to  magnify  our  call-
ing, until  we  meet  again  those  who
have  gone  behind  the  vail,  where
already  there  seems  tu  be  almost  a
majority  of  tire  early  Apostles  and
first  Elders  of  the  Church,  preaching:
the  Gospel  and  preparing  the  hearts
of  those  that  receive  it,  while  we
who  remain  continue  our  labors  iu  \


building  ihe  Temples  of  the  Lord,
and  entering  therein  and  officiating  in
the  baptisms,  endowments,  and  ordi-
nances, and  sealing  blessings  upon
our  dcad>  that  the  promises  of  God
may  be  fulfilled  which  he  has  made,
namely,  that  in  this  dispensation  of
the  fullness  of  times  lie  would  gather
in  one  all  things  that  are  in  Christ
Jesus,  which  are  on  the  earth  and
which  are  in  heaven,  which  may  God
grant  and  help  us  to  accomplish,
l  through  Jesus,  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER GEO. Q,  CANNON,


Delivered  is  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept,  16,  187?

(Reported  h\j  Rxtdger  Clawmu  )


THE  ROCK  OF  NEW  (u|;  CONTINUED)  REVELATION — INCIDENT  IN  REGARD
TO  P.  P.  PR  ATT— u  ONE  LORD,  ONE  FAITH,  ONE  BAPTISM" — THE  WORK
OF  THE  FATHER  EXTENDS  THROUGHOUT  THE  ETERNITIES.


Those  who  hare  listened  to  the  dis-
course of  Elder  Woodruff  and  to  the
testimonies  which  he  has  borne  con-
cerning this  work,  must  have  been
interested  in  his  recital,  in  his  ex-
planations and  in  the  doctrines  which
he  has  advanced,  and  which  have
special  interest  for  the  Latter-day
Saints.  If  it  were  not  for  the  new
revelations  received  from  the  Al-
mighty, this  people  called  Latter-day
Saints  would  not  be  in  existence.  If
it  were  not  that  the  Lord  has  re-
vealed in  great  plainness  his  mind
and  will  onto  his  people,  they  would
not  be  an  organizat  ion,  neither  would


his  EMers  have  gone  forth  hearing
[testimony  of  the  truths  of  the  ever-
lasting Gospel,  The  rock  upon  which
this  Church  is  built,  and  the  loun-
j  dation  stone  thereof,  is  new  revela-
tion  from  God  to  men,  and  that
revelation  being  of  divine  origin  it
must  uf  necessity  agree  with  the
J  revelations  which  have  already  been
given ;  hence,  as  he  has  said,  the
doctrines  taught  by  the  Prophet  Jo-
seph Smith,  and  the  organization
of  t he  Church  as  ho  was  directed
to  accomplish  it,  was  all  in  perfect
bar  uny  with  the  truths  contained
iu  this  book  (the  Bible) • It  can


THE  ROCK,  ETC.


105


cot  be  otherwise  and  be  what  it  pro-
fesses to  be.  It  made  no  difference
to  Joseph  Smith  whether  he  read
and  was  familiar  with  everj  doctrine
taught  by  the  Apostles;  he  was  on-
der  no  necessity  of  framing  his  teach-
ings therewith  that  there  should  be
no  difference  between  that  which  he
taught,  and  that  which  had  been
taught,  because  the  same  spirit  that
revealed  to  the  ancient  Apostles  and
Prophets,  and  inspired  them  to  teach
the  people,  and  leave  on  record  their
predictions  and  doctrines,  taught
him  also  and  enabled  hi  in  to  teach
exactly  the  same  truths.

I  remember  hearing  related  bro-
ther Parley  R Pratt's  first  inter-
view with  the  Saints  at  Fayette,
Seneca  Comity,  where  the  Church
was  organized. Those  of  you  who
remember  brother  Parlev  know  his
familiarity  with  the  Scripture?,  es-
pecially with  the prophecies.  On
that  occasion  he  was  called  upon  to
speak;  the  Prophet  Joseph  was  not
present  at the  time. He  brought
forth  from  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel and other  pro-
phets, abundant proofs  concerning
the  work  which  the  Lord had  es-
tablished through  his  servant  Jo-
seph,  a  great  many  of  the  Litter-
day  Sai'ts  were  surprise  1  that  there
were  ao  many  evidences  existing  in
the  Bible  concerning  thuj  work.  Hie
Church  had  then  been  organized  some
tive  month-,  hut  the  member*  had
never  heard  from  any  of  the  Elders
these  proofs and evidences  which
existed  in  the  Bible. And,  if  I  re-
member correctly,  he  told  me  that
Oliver  Cowdery  and the  Prophet
Joseph himself  were surprised  at
the  great  amount  of  evidence  there
was  in  the  Bible  concerning  these
things. The  Prophet Joseph  was
inspired  of  God  to  teach  the  doctrines
of  life  and  salvation,  and  he  did  so
without  reference  to  what  the  ancient


prophets  had  said.  I  have  heard
President  Young  make  the  same  re-
marks. He  said  that  he  never  con-
sulted the  Book  of  Covenants,  he
never  consulted  the  Bible  or  Book
of  Mormon  to  see  whether  the  doc-
trices  and  counsels  which  lie  was
inspired  to  give,  corresponded  with
these  books  or  not.  It  was  a  matter
that  gave  him  no  particular  concern,
from  the  fact  that  be  endeavored
always  to  be  led  by  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord,  to  speak  in  accordance  there-
with; hence  these  men  have  had
very  little  care  resting  upon  their
minds  as  to  whether  their  doctrines
and  counsels  were  in  harmony  with
the  doctrines  and  counsels  of  those
who  preceded  them.  It  was  for  them
to  seek  to  know  the  mind  and  will
of  the  Lord  and  comprehend  his
Spirit  as  it  rested  upon  them,  to
speak  in  accordance  therewith  ;  and
the  doctrine  that  has  been  taught
under  the  inspiration  of  that  spirit
will  he  found  to  be  in  perfect  hai-
mony  with  the  doctrines  which  have
been  taught  by  men  inspired  of  God
in  ancient  days,

There  are  no  two  modes  of  bap-
tism, there  are  no  two  methods  of
organizing  the  Church  of  Christ;
there  ar^  no  two  paths  leading  into
the  kingdom  of  God  our  heavenly
Father;  there  are  no  two  forms  of
doctrine,  "  There  is  one  Lord,"  as
the  Apostle  Paul  says,  "  one  faith
and  one  baptism."  There  is  one
form  of  doctrine,  and  when  we  all
meet,  (those  of  us  who  shall  be  so
fortunate  as  to  be  redeemed  and
sanctified  in  the  presence  of  our
Father  and  the  Limb,)  we  shall
find  that  our  doctrines  will  precisely
agree;  our  obedience  wilt  be  of  a
similar  character,  we  shall  all  discover
that  the  doctrines  that  we  have  re-
ceive !  and  bowed  in  submission  to
are  precisely  the  same  doctrines,
whether  we  were  baptized  into  Christ


JOURNAL  OF  DISOOURSKK.


in  America,  in  Asia,  in  Africa  or  any
other  part  of  the  earth,  and  it  will
be  found  when  we  all  come  together,
(that  is  the  family  of  our  heavenly  1
Father,)  that  we  have  all  received
the  same  faith,  the  same  doctrines,  |
and have  partaken of the  same
Spirit  and  the  same  gifts,  the  Spirit
having  rested  dawn  m  on all  alike
according  to his  or  her  faith.  If
it  were  not so  heaven  would  be
full  of  clashing  sectaries;  it  would
be  full  of  confusion,  strife  and  di-
vision and every  kind of  conten-
tion; because  the  same  spirit  that
characterizes men here, and  that
creates  division  and  contention  among
t  fie  in  here,  if  they  could  reach  hea-
ven in  the  possession  of  it,  as  some
claim they do,  would turn  hea-
ven itself  into  a  pandemonium,  and
make  it  no  better  than  this  earth  so
far  as  confusion  is  concerned.  This
is  not  the  Gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus;
this  is  not  the  path  that  he  marked
out; He  marked  out.  a  plain  path
and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
must,  if  they  ever  come  into  the
presence  of  the  Lamb,  walk  in  that
path  to  the  end,  or  they  never  can
reach  there. And  the  millions  of  the
dead,  to  whom  allusion  has  been  made
by  brother  Woodruff,  they  also  shall
hear  of  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation*
And  the  unnumbered  millions  who
have  died  without  ever  having  heard
the  name  of  the  Son  of  God,  and
without  ever  having  known  anything
concerning the redemption  which
he wrought out for them  ;  they
who  died  in  ignorance  of  the  law
will  not,  of  course,  be  judged  by  or
held  accountable  t  >  the  law,  having
never known it. This would  be
contrary  to  the  justice,  the  eternal
justice  of  our  Father  in  Heaven,  to
hold  any  man  or  being  accountable
for  the law  which they  violated
without  their  first  having  been  made
acquainted  with  it,  hence,  if  they


die  in  their  ignorance  they  will  be
judged  according  to  the  light  they
received. But will they  forever,,
through  the  endless  ages  of  eternity,
remain  in  ibis  ignorance?  Certainly
not. The  work  of  our  Father  is  not
confined  to  this  earthly  existence,  it
extends  throughout the  eternities :
it  extends  from  eternity  to  eternity  ;
it  is  without  beginning  and  without
end  ;  it  is  as  indestrnctable  and  en-
,  during  as  he  himself. But  all  of  the
sons  of  our  Father  who  ever  dwelt
upon  the  earth,  and  his  daughters
also,  will  hear  at  the  proper  time  and
under  the  proper  circumstances  the
glad  tidings  of  salvation,  the  name
of  our  Redeemer  and  the  plan  by
which  they can  be  redeemed  and
be  exalted  into  his  presence.  There
are  several  plain  allusions  to  these
doctrines  in  the  Scriptures.  Peter
talks  about  them  very  plainly.  The
Savior  himself  allrded  to  the  same
idea  when  he  spoke  to  the  thief  on
the  cross,  when  he  said  to  him —
"  This  day  shall  thou  be  with  me
in  Paradise;**  when it  is  a  well-
kuown  fact  that  he  did  not  ascend  to
his  Father  in  Heaven. But  while
his  body  lay  in  the  earth  his  spirit
I  went  elsewhere,  and  was  absent  f  rom
that  body. The  Apostle  Paul  alsa
I  aUudes  to  it  in  the  15th  chapter  of
I  his  Epistle  to  the  Coriuthiana,  and
our  minds  have  been  set  at  rest  by
those  glorious  revelations  and  doc-
trines, because  they  explain  to  us
the  goodness,  mercy  and  justice  of
our  Father  in  Heaven,  aud  enable
us,  who have  received  these  doc*
trines  and  believe  in  them,  to  glo-
rify Him  as  we  could  not  if  we  be-
lieved these unnumbered  millions
'that  I  have  alluded to  were  con-
demned to  endless  perdition,  without
ever  having  a  chance  to  be  redeemed
therefrom. It  has  always  been  a
mystery  to  me,  since  I  have  been  old
enough to  comprehend the  truth,


ACTIONS,  LI  1 1


107


bow  it  is  that  men,  with  the  ideas
which  they  entertain  concerning  the
Gospel,  can  reconcile  their  belief
with  the  fact  that  our  Father  is  a
God  of  truth,  a  God  of  mercy,
and  a  God  of  perfect  justice.  I  do
not  wonder  at  men  becoming  skep-
tical in  view  of  the  ideas  which  pre-
vail in  the  so-called  Christian  world.
A  man  mast,  in  some  instances,
throw  away  his  feelings  and  reason,
and  surrender  his  judgment,  and
accept  the  theories  which  prevail
upon  this  sul  jcct,  without  reasoning
and  without  questioning,  in  order  i
to  flow  along  with  the  orthodox
stream.  This  is  the  only  way  in
which  many  do,  to  go  along  with-
out difficulty*  But  if  the  Gospel
was  taught  in  its  plainness  and  in
its  fullness,  and  if  men  and  women
understood  the  Gospel  as  it  is,  there
would  be  nothing  that  would  be  in
contradiction  to  those  truths  to  which
I  have  alluded;  but  all  would  be
harmonious  therewith,  and  every-
thing would  tend  to  increase  the
faith, strengthen the love,  and


heighten  the  feeling  of  admiration
in  the  breast  of  the  human  being
in  con  tern  plat  iog  the  character  of  our
F  it  her  in  the  light  of  the  plan  which
lie  has  revealed  for  our  salvation
from  the  power  of  sin.  And  this  is
what  the  Gospel  (or  as  men  ohoose
to  call  it  in  these  days  "Mormon ism")
has  done  for  us.  It  is  this  that  has
enlightened  this  people;  it  is  this
that  has  gathered  them  from  the
nations  of  the  earth,  and  h;*s  enabled
them  to  submit  to  the  privations  and
persecutions  that  they  have  had  to
contend  with,  and  it  is  this  that  will
carry  them  forward,  until  they  are
brought  hack  into  the  presence  t>f
our  Father  in  Heaven.

I  pray  that  the  blessings  of  the
Lord  may  rest  upon  the  people,  and
that  the  revelations  of  the  Lard  Je-
sus may  he  in  their  hearts,  and  in
their  souls,  to  guide  them  in  that
path  th-st  will  bring  them  back  iuto
the  presence  of  our  Fattier,  which
I  ask  iu  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.
Amen.


DISCOURSE BY  ELDER GEO. Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  *J:>,  1877.

(Reported  by  R%d<jtr  Clawson.)

ACTIONS  SHOULD  HARMONIZE  WITH  PROFESSIONS  —  "  MORHONISM"  A
SYSTEM  OF  POWER — ALL  THE  FAITHFUL  ARE  ENTITLED  TO  REVELA-
TION— LEADING  MEN  HUT  AS  INSTRUMENTS  IN  THE  HANDS  OF  GOD.

I  have  listened  with  a  ^reat  deal  and  the  instructions  which  they
of  pleasure  to  the  remarks  which  have  given  unto  us  upon  the  princi-
haw  been  made  by  our  brethren,-  pies  of  the  Gospel The  interesting


■


108


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


remarks  of  brother  Brigham  Young
must  have  appealed  very  strong]}'
unto  all  of  us,  and  impressed  us  with
their  truth.  First,  he  has  said  if
our  professions  are  greater  than  t  hose
of  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  if  we
testily  that  we  have  received  truths
in  advance,  and  authority  greater
than  that  possessed  by  others,  our
lives  should  correspond  with  our
professions,  or  we  can  never  justly
expect  that  we  will  receive  any
greater  reward  than  they  ;  and  this
is  a  truth  that  should  be  taken  home
to  the  hearts  of  all  the  people  who
are  called  Latter-day  Saints.  The
Lord  requires  of  us  that  our  acts,
and  that  our  desires,  ami  that  all
our  labors  shall  be  in  harmony  with
our  professions,  and  that  when  we
testify  that  we  know  that  God  lives,
and  that  he  tats  restored  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  to  the  earth,  in  its
primitive  simplicity,  purity,  and
power,  with  the  authority  to  a-!  mini-
ster in  the  ordinances  thereof  for
the  salvation  of  the  children  of
men, — that  making  thfese  professions
and  bearing  these  testimonies,  we
should  exhibit  in  our  lives  the  fruits
of  the  glorious  doctrines  and  truths
that  we  profess  to  have  received.
In  no  other  way  can  we  truly  bear
testimony  to  the  veracity  of  these
things.  u  A  tree  is  known  by  its
fruits  ;  a  good  stream  does  not  send
forth  bitter  waters;  men  do  not
gather  grapes  of  thorns  and  figs  of
thistles."  And  so  with  us  and  the
rest  of  mankind.  When  we  profess
to  have  received  the  truth,  we  should
exhibit  the  fruits  of  that  truth  in
our  lives.  When  we  profess  to  have
received  the  everlasting  Gospel  and
the  Spirit  of  God,  we  should  rejoice
in  the  gifts  of  that  Spirit.  We  s|  .'<  ml  I
Kve  so  as  to  enjoy  them,  and  in
times  of  trial,  of  difficulty,  of  per-
plexity, and  of  affliction,  we  should
exhibit  a  self-control  and  power  and


strength  that  might  be  expected
from  a  people  situated  as  we  are,  and
having  the  blessings  that  we  enjoy.
Do  the  Latter-day  Saints  exhibit
these  fruits  as  they  should  ?  In
some  res  >ects  tliev  are  to  be  seen,
and  in  others  they  are  not  so  fruitful
as  they  should  be.  There  is  an
abundance  of  room  for  improvement
on  our  part.  There  is  room  for  an
increase  of  exertion  and  an  exhibi-
tion of  greater  faith,  as  a  people,
than  we  have  ever  yet  exhibited.
The  Lord  is  ready,  according  to  our
own  testimonies,  to  pour  out  upon
us  every  blessing  that  we  need.  Are
we  sick  %  Are  any  of  our  house-
holds sick  ;  W  hat  is  the  privilege
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  according  to
our  doctrines,  according  to  the  teach-
ings  of  these  books  (the  Bible  and
the  Book  of  Mormon),  and  accord-


ing to  our  own  belief?  It  is  our
privilege  to  exercise  faith  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  have  the
sick,  where  not  appointed  unto  death,
restored  to  life.  This  is  the  privi-
lege of  the  Latter  day  Saints,  the
privilege  of  every  faithful  man  and
woman  in  the  Church  of  Christ
upon  all  the  face  of  the  earth.  If
there  be  a  misfortune  impending  that
is  fraught  with  difficulty,  or  disaster,
or  trouble  of  any  kind,  what  is  the
privilege  of  those  who  are  the  ser-
vants and  hand-maidens  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ  1  It  is  the  privilege,
and  has  been  the  privilege  iu  all
ages  of  the  world,  according  to  the
records  that  have  come  down  to  us,
for  those  wdio  live  godly  in  Christ
Jesus  to  have  revelation  concerning
those  events,  that  they  may  be  pre-
pared for  them,  and  not  be  taken
unawares.  I  would  not  give  much
for  a  religion  that  did  not  prepare
me  for  events  of  that  character ;  I
would  not  think  it  the  religion  of
Jesus  Christ.  I  would  not  give
much  for  a  church,  to  me  it  would


ACTIONS,  ETC,  109


have  no  attractions,  in  which  God
did  not  manifest  his  power,  in  which
there  were  no  evidences  received  of
God's  power  and  of  God's  ability  to
deliver  in  the  hour  of  trial  and  diffi-
eulty.  It  is  this  which  makes  tin*
Church  of  Christ,  it  is  this  which
makes  what  men  call  t£  Monnunism,"
so  attractive  to  me.  It  is  because  it
is  a  system  of  power  ;  it  is  because
there  are  gifts  connected  with  it  ;  it
is  because  I  was  told  when  a  child
that  if  I  would  be  baptized  for  the
remissions  of  my  sins  and  repent  of
them,  I  should  receive  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost  It  is  because  there
are  in  this  Church  Prophets  and
Apostles,  the  gifts  of  revelation,  of
healhfg,  and  discerning  of  spirits,
and  all  the  other  gifts,  that  were
ever  enjoyed  by  the  ancient  people
of  God,  It  is  these  gifts  that  make
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  a  power
in  the  earth,  and  that  makes  the
teach ings  and  doctrin es  o f  t  h is  C h  urel i
so  attractive  to  all  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  who  believe  truthfully  and
sincerely  the  doctrines  contained  in
the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  It
supplies  the  want  that  is  felt  by
every  honest  heart,  a  yearning  after
a  knowledge  of  God,  a  yearning  after
the  things  of  God,  and  a  yearning
after  that  certainty  that  dispels  all
darkness  and  unbelief,  and  is  a  rock,
which  is  like  the  rock  of  ages,  upon
which  the  foundation  being  built,
the  building  is  forever  without  fear
of  being  shaken  or  overturned,  when
the  storms  and  tempests  shall  beat
upon  it

This  is  the  secret  of  the  union  that
has  always  characterized  this  Church
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  yet  we  do  not
live  up  to  our  privileges.  What  is
the  privilege  of  the  Latter  -  day
Sainls?  Are  the  privileges  of  this
<  Jospel  confined  to  a  few  individuals  ?
Revelations  have  been  given  to  our
departed  President — President  Brig-


ham  Youns—  but  were  the  -ifts,
powers  and  qualifications  of  this
Gospel  confined  to  his  person  alone?
Were  they  confined  to  his  Counsel-
ors ?  Are  they  confined  to  the
Twelve?  Are  they  confined  to  the
Bishops  or  to  any  other  class  in  this
Church  ]  Certainly  not.  They  are
like  the  air  we  breathe  ;  they  are
like  the  light  that  enlightens  our
understandings  and  gives  light  to  our
intellects.  They  are  free  to  all  who
will  live  so  as  to  receive  them.
There  is  none  so  old,  none  so  learned,
none  so  high,  neither  is  their  any  so
low,  nor  so  young,  nor  so  illiterate,
unto  whom  these  are  denied.  They
are  the  free  gift  of  God  to  all  His
children  ;  to  all  who  keep  His  com-
mandments. They  shall  receive
these  gifts,  and  enjoy  them  if  they
will  live  so  as  to  have  them  in  their
hearts,  so  that  the  Holy  Spirit  will
bestow  them  upon  them,  and  it  is
this  also  that  causes  this  Church  and
this  Gospel  to  lie  so  delight  full,  there*
is  an  equality  about  it.  It  is  not,
as  I  have  said,  confined  to  a  few.  but
it  is  extended  to  all  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth,  who  will  place  them-
selves in  a  position  to  receive  it.
"  Repent  and  be  baptized  every  one*
of  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ
for  the  remission  of  sius,  and  ye  shall
receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
for  this  promise  is  unto  you  and  to
your  children  and  to  all  that  are  afar
off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our
God  shall  call."  Even  alh  Whom
does  he  call  \  Go  preach  this  gospel
to  every  creature,  therefore  every
creature  is  called,  at  all  times  and  in
all  generations  througout  the  earth.
None  are  excluded  fron  its  glorious
benefits.  It  is  therefore  the  privi-
lege of  every  member  of  this  Church
to  enjoy  revelation  for  himself  or
herself,  to  know  the  mind  and  will
of  the  Father,  to  know  concerning
the  doctrine  whether  it  be  of  the


1 1  J


Lord  or  whether  it  be  of  man,  and  I
would  not  give  much  for  a  people  or
an  individual  who  is  destitute  of
this  knowledge.  Sooner  or  later
unless  they  repent  and  feel  after  it,
they  will  stand  in  slippery  places,
and  when  the  floods  come  and  the
tempests  beat  upon  them,  they  are
in  danger  of  falling  away  and  becom-
ing castaways  from  the  Church  of
Christ ;  but  the  man  who  receives
his  knowledge  from  the  Father,  and
the  woman  who  can  come  to  the
Father  in  the  name  of  Jesus  and  ask
and  receive  for  herself  a  testimony,
concerning  this  work,  and  concerning
the  government  of  God,  in  times  of
trial  and  difieulty,  they  are  safe,  be-
cause they  know  where  their  strength
is  and  unto  whom  they  can  apply  for
light  and  guidance  in  the  hours  of
temptation,  trial  and  difficulty.  They
know  then  the  voice  of  the  true
Shepherd.

My  brethren  and  sisters  let  me
address  myself  more  directly  to  you
upon  this  point.  We  have  been
bereft  of  our  President  We  have
been  bereft  of  the  man  who  has  stood
at  our  head  and  guided  us  for  thirty-
three  years,  and  we  have  learned  to
look  upon  Mm  as  the  mouth-piece  of
our  Father  to  us,  but  we  ought,
also,  to  have  learned,  as  I  have  no
doubt  the  majority  of  this  people
have  learned,  that  he  was  but  an
instrument  in  the  hands  of  God  to
accomplish  the  work  entrusted  to
him,  ami  that  lie  being  gone,  the
Lord  will  raise  up  and  strengthen
those  who  remain,  and  give  them
the  power  necessary  to  accomplish
bis  work  and  carry  it  forward  in  the

w

earth;  and  if  they  fall  too,  as  they
likely  will,  the  column  of  humanity,
the  column  of  the  Priesthood  will
Still  press  forward,  until  nil  that  the
Lord  lias  appointed  to  his  people,  he
will  accomplish  on  the  earth,  and
Ziou  will  be  established  aud  fully  re-
deemed according  to  all  the  words


of  the  Prophet?.  And  further,  it  will
cause  us  to  draw  nearer  onto  the  Fat  her
and  live  so  that  we  shall  receive
revelation  from  him  for  ourselves,
that  the  knowledge  of  the  Spirit
shall  be  in  our  hearts,  that  the  voice
of  the  true  Shepherd  will  be  known
to  our  e;irs,  that  when  we  hear  it  we
will  know  it,  that  we  cannot  be
deceived  or  led  astray.  This  is  the
privilege  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  the  man  and  woman  in  this
Church  who  does  not  live  so  as  to
enjoy  this  privilege  comes  short  of
being  what  he  should  be.  It  is  these
blessings  that  compensate  for  the
falsehoods,  for  the  contumely  and  for
tlit?  persecution  to  which  the  Latter*
day  Saints  are  subjected*  If  it  were
nut  for  these  gifts  and  blessings  our
1  case  would  not  be  a  very  enviable
one  ;  but  in  possession  of  these  bless-
ings, and  knowing  for  ourselves  the
truth,  and  understanding  the  will  of
our  Father  in  heaven  and  rejoicing  in
the  blessings  of  peace,  quietude,  union
ami  love,  such  as  cannot  be  obtained
elsewhere,  with  those  other  gifts  to
which  I  have  allnded — having  these
in  our  possession  we  can  look  calmly
upon  the  efforts  of  the  wicked.  We
can,  without  being  afflicted  in  our
souls,  receive  the  persecution  which
they  may  seem  lit  to  heap  upon  us  ;
to  have  oar  names  cast  out  as  evil,  to
be  accused  of  all  manner  of  wickedness
and  crime.  We  can  submit  to  these
things  cheerfully,  knowiug  that  the
day  will  come  when  these  lies  shall
be  swept  away  ;  when  the  will  of  the
Father  and  the  glorious  light  of  truth
will  shine  npon  us,  and  we  shall  be
vindicated  in  the  sight  of  the  inha-
bitantfl  of  the  earth,  in  the  sight  of
heaven  and  angels*  This  being  our
condition,  we  can  rejoice  under  these
circumstances,  and  look  forth  to  the
time  when  we  shall  receive  the  happi-
ness and  reward  alluded  to.  Bre-
thren and  sisters,  live  so  that  each  of
you  can  go  to  the  Father  and  ask  and


THK  SAVIOR  AMoN<;

receive  from  him  the  blessing  that
you  need.  He  has  said,  "Cursed  is
he  that  potteth  his  trust,  in  man,  or
mrketh  flesh  his  arm,"  Do  not
build  upon  man.  Do  not  lean  upon
Lira,  but  lean  upon  our  Father  in
heaven.  Seek  unto  him ;  implore
his  blessing;  ask  for  light  and
strength  from  him ;  humble  your-
selves before  him,  and  confess  your


THE N  KPilLTES, ETg.  Ill

sins  ;  be  of  a  broken  heart  and  con-
trite spirit,  and  he  will  visit  you
with  his  Spirit,  and  bestow  upon  you
gifts  such  as  you  have  never  yet
received.

That  you  may  do  this,  and  that
we  all  may  do  it,  that  we  may  be
eventually  saved  and  exalted  in  the
kingdom  of  our  Father,  is  my  prayer,
in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  at  thb  New  Tabernacle.  Salt  Lake  City,  Friday,

Octobek  5,  1877,

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gihbs.)

THE  SAVIOR  AMONG  THE  NE P H ITES— PRINTING  0*  THE  BOOK
OF  MORMON— THE  PRESIDENCY  OF  THE  CHURCH— THE  ANCI-
ENT  PRIESTHOOD- THE KIRTLAXD  TEMPLE.


I  will  read  a  few  words  of  our  Lord
and  Savior,  at  the  time  of  his  Inst
personal  appeal  ance  among  the  Ne-
pbites,  or  rather,  the  last  account  of
His  appearance  in  their  midst,  so  far
as  the  Book  of  Mormon  has  given
the  history.

"Write  the  things  which  ye  have
seen  and  heard,  save  it  be  those  ,
which  are  forbidden.  Write  the
works  of  this  people  which  shall  be
even  as  hath  been  written,  of  that
which  has  been ;  for  behold,  out  of
the  books  which  have  been  written,
and  which  shall  be  written,  shall  this
people  be  judged  ;  for  by  them  shall
their  works  be  known  unto  men.  And
behold  all  things  are  written  by  the
Father;  therefore,  out  of  the  books
which  shall  be  written  shall  tbe  world


be  judged.  And  know  ye  that  ye
shall  be  judges  of  the  people,  ac-
cording to  the  judgment  which  I
shall  give  unto  yon,  which  shall  be
just;  therefore,  what  manner  of  men
had  ye  ought  to  be?  Verily  I  say
uuU>  you,  even  as  I  am."

These  words  of  our  Lord  and  Sa-
vior, to  the  ancient  Israelites  of  the
American  Continent,  are  written,
not  only  for  the  bt-nefit  of  the  de-
scendants of  the  Israelites,  who  in-
habit  the  Continent,  but  also  lor  the
benefit  of  all  people,  that  all  might
know  something  in  relation  to  the
authority  that  God  bestowed  upon
His  servants  in  ancient  times.  The
Priesthood  is  not  a  delegated  autho-
rity from  heaven  to  be  merely  exer-
cised in  this  life;  it  is  a  divine  au-


1 1  2  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


thority  in  tended  to  he  exercised  in
the  next  lite,  as  well  as  this  :  its  ex-
ercise here  is  only  the  begiunig.

Before  dwelling  upon  this  subject,
I  wish  to  say  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
that  I  have  been  permitted  by  the
counsel  of  the  servants  of  God,  to
perform  another  but  very  fchort  mis-
sion abroad,  having  left  Salt  Like
City  cm  the  18th  July,  and  returned
again-  after  nbout  two  months  and
nine  days1  absence,  traveling  during
this  period  of  time,  about  thirteen
thousand  miles,  by  land  and  ocean.
I  feel  very  glad,  and  rejoice,  that  I
have  had  this  opportunity  of  going
out  once  more  among  mankind
abroad.  Although  my  mission  was
not  specially  a  preaching  mission,
to  declare  to  the  people  l he  things
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  yet  I  en-
deavored, so  far  ad  opportunity  per-
mitted to  bear  my  humble  testimony
among  the  people.

My  mission,  as  if*  well  known,  was
to  go  to  England,  for  the  purpose  of
printing  the  Book  of  Mormon,  and
the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  I
according  to  the  phonotype  system
of  Pitman.  I  will  here  state,  that
Pitman's  system  of  phonetics  has
been  changed  and  re-changed,  in
England,  so  many  times,  that  it  has
finally  and  almost  entirely  dropped
out  of  use  in  that  country.  Pitman
still  continues  to  publish  a  periodical
in  which  he  gives  his  present  forms
of  type  or  characters,  and  present
forms  of  spelling,  but  his  paper  is
more  particularly  advocating  the
system  of  short- hand  writing,  or
phonography,  which  is?  quite  popu-
lar in  England.  By  making  inquiry,
I  found  that  one  of  the  brothers,
Ben}.  Pitman,  in  consequence  of  the
numerous  alterations  that  were  being
made,  was  disgusted,  and  came  to
America  to  see  if  he  could  establish
a  lystem  upon  a  little  different  prin-
ciple. A  certain  wealthy  gantleman


in  our  country  became  interested  in
the  enterprise,  and  he,  by  will,  ad-
vanced money  to  publish  an  exten-
sive dictionary  upou  the  phonetic
principle*  A  little  different  alphabet
was  adopted  in  our  country  from  that
which  was  used  in  England.  After
examining  these  different  systems,  I
concluded  that,  in  some  very  few
respects,  they  were  all  in  error.
Those  errors  consisted  mostly  in  the
mode  of  spelling.  Some  have  adopted
one  standard,  and  some  another;  and
having  examined  the  different  systems
closely  and  carefully,  I  finally  con-
cluded to  accept  the  American  pho-
netic alphabet,  with  the  exception  of
two  or  three  characters,  and  also  to
spell  according  to  the  American  pho-
netic dictionary, with  some  slight

alterations.

I  made  arrangements  with  a  house
in  London  to  furnish  the  phonotype,
nnd  most  of  it  had  arrived  in  Liver-
pool, just  as  I  was  called  home.

These  preliminary  preparations  for
printing  were  made  just  as  fast  as
possible  before  learning  the  s  id  news
of  the  death  of  our  beloved  Presi-
dent, which  we  received  some  seven
hours  after  he  breathed  his  last.  A
few  hours  later  we  received  another
telegram  from  /the  Council  of  the
Twelve  Apostle^  instructing  brother
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  myself  to  ar-
range matters  in  Great  Britain,  per-
taining to  the  European  mission,  and
come  home  immediately.  We  have
complied  with  the  request

We  feel,  with  all  our  hearts,  to
mourn  with  the  Latter-day  Saints,
in  the  loss  of  so  great  and  good  a
man,  as  the  President,  who  has  led
us,  with  marked  success,  for  one-
third  of  a  century.  He  was  the  in-
strument, in  the  hands^  of  God,  of
bringing  the  people  forth,  some  1,400
miles  from  the  great  Mississippi
River,  over  wild,  barren,  and  track-
less plains,  and  locating  us  here,  in.


THE  SAVIOR  AMONG

the  great  American  desert.  He  has
been  the  instrument,  in  the  hands  of
God,  of  giving  counsel  and  instruc  '
tion  for  the  numerous  towns,  cities
and  villages,  through  our  mountain
region  ;  he  has  been  foremost  in  the
encouragement  ot  home  manuf  ictnres,  1
and  borne  industries,  introducing  at  j
bis  own  expense,  much  machinery
into  the  T^rrit-Tv,  so  as  to  make  the
L  itter  day  Saints,  as  far  as  possible,
a  self-sustaining  people;  lie  has
labored  diligently  during  the  last
years  of  bis  life,  to  bring  about  a
great  or  degree  of  union  amou<_r  the
Latter-day  Saints,  in  regard  to  tem-
poral things,  And  near  the  close  of
his  useful  life,  hi1  was  wrought  upon
by  t  he  spirit  of  God,  and  more  espe-  !
ci filly  on  his  last  mission  at  St  George,
to  give  counsel  to  the  Twelve  Apos-
ties,  to  go  into  all  parts  of  the  Tirri-
tory  and  mute  fully  organize  the  peo-
ple according  to  the  revelations  and
commandments  find  institutions  of
heaven,  as  given  by  revelation,  through
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  Having
accomplished  so  great  a  work,  in
lending  forth  the  people  of  God,  in  I
locating  them  here  in  these  moun-
tains, so  far  from  what  is  termed
civilization,  and  having  redeemed
the  desert,  established  academies
and  school-houses,  Tabernacles  and  i
Temples,  home  manufactures  and
home  industries,  aud  finally  having
organized  the  Saints  into  Stakes,
appointing  Bishops,  and  having  them
ordained,  in  all  parts  of  our  Territory,
having  fulfilled  and  completed  the
work,  the  Lord  has  taken  him  home
to  himself.  j

We  heard  this  forenoon,  respecting
the  Prophet  Elijah;  the  Lord  had  a
great  work  for  him  to  perform;  he
lived  to  accomplish  it,  and  he  knew  '
then  that  the  time  had  come  for  htm
to  depart  and  leave  the  children  of
IsraeL  He  was  taken  up  to  heaven.
The  Prophet  Brigham,  too,  had  his

No.  8.


THE NEPHITES,  ETC.

work  to  perform  ;  he  lived  to  do  it,
and  he  has  passed  uway  in  peace,  be-
loved by  his  people.

This  is  the  second  time  in  the  his-
tory of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ
of  Litter-day  Saints,  when  the  Twelve
have  stepped  forward  as  the  proper
authorities,  to  bear  otF  this  kingdom,  ■
and  to  presiile  over  the  Church,
Joseph  was  in  our  midst  but  a  few
year's-  The  Lord  culled  him  to  lay
the  foundation  of  this  work ;  he  gave
him  revelations  before  the  rise  of  the
Church.  He  ordained  him  and
Oliver  Cowdery  to  the  Apostleship,
giving  (hern  the  authority,  uud  power,
and  otliee,  and  Priesthood,  to  perioral
the  things  necessary  in  the  future
organisation  of  the  Church,  giving
line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,
from  time  to  time,  to  instruct  the  va-
rious Councils  of  the  Church  in  re-
gard to  their  several  duties*  He
having  performed  the  work,  God  re-
quired at.  his  hands,  was  taken  away ;
the  Lord  saw  proper  to  remove  hitn
from  our  midst.  The  authority  then
de  vol  veil  upon  the  Twelve,  and  upon
the  Priesthood  of  the  Twelve,  Ano-
ther First  Presidency  was  appointed
about  three  years  and  sis  mouths
after  the  martyrdom  of  Joseph.
During  that  time  the  Lord  was  with
the  Twelve,  in  every  duty,  and  a  great
wotk  was  accomplished,  during  that
period,  by  them.  The  greater  part
of  the  Temple  iu  Nauvoo  was  built
by  the  Twelve,  after  the  death  of  the
Prophet*  Endow  me  nts  were  given
in  that  Temple,  by  the  Twelve,  while
presiding  over  the  Church.  Settlings
and  blessings  in  behalf  of  the  living
and  the  dead,  were  performed  in  that
Ten  j  pie.  All  the  ordinances  neces-
sary on  that  occasion  w^re  admin-
istered, under  the  Presidency  and
jurisdiction  of  the  Twelve.  And
not  only  this,  but  the  Lord  enabled
them  to  lead  the  people  forth,  through
an  unexplored  country,  to  select  a

Vol.  XIX.


114  JOURNAL  OK

location  for  them.  Having  done  Uuf,
they  returned  in  the  latter  part  of
the  year  IS ±7,  to  the  camps  located
on  the  Missouri  river,

I  mention  these  things  to  show
you,  t bat  the  Twelve  were  not  idle
after  the  death  of  Joseph >  but  took
the  lead,  hi  id  organized  the  camps
of  Israel,  and  preside -d  over  all  the
authorities  in  the  midst  of  these
camps.

In  those  days,  some  persons,  ig-
norant of  the  authority  of  an  Apostle,
questioned  the  right  of  the  Twelve
to  preside,  but  I  would  ask,  what  au-
thority  ever  existed  in  the  Church
that  the  Twelve  do  not  hold  ?  1
would  further  enquire,  had  the  First
Presidency  any  office  that  the  Twelve
had  not  ?  If  they  have,  where  did
they  get  it  ?  Do  you  know  r
Another  First  Presidency  of  the
Church  were  organized,  three  years  1
and  a  half,  after  the  death  of  Joseph.
If  they  held  any  higher  authority,
then  they  must  have  received  it  by
direct  communication  from  the  hea-
vens. But  it  is  known  that  they  re-
ceived it  by  the  voice  of  the  Council
of  the  Twelve,  with  all  the  authorities
of  the  kingdom  of  God  to  hack  them
up.  We  have  been  taught,  ever  since
the  Twelve  were  chosen,  ihat  they
held  all  the  power  of  the  Melchisedee
Priesthood,  all  the  power  of  the
Apostleship  that  could  be  conferred
upon  mortal  man,  Hence,  when
Hyrum  Smith  was  taken  out  of  the
First  Presidency  and  appointed  to
another  calling,  not  to  another  office
in  the  Apostleship,  was  it  not  the
province  of  the  Twelve  to  Bet  him
apart  ?  It  was,  because  they  held
that  authority,  that  Pries thood,  that
Apostleship,  that  gave  him  the  right
to  do  this.  By  what  revelation  you
may  ask  ?  I  answer,  by  a  certain
revelation  contained  in  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  where  it
says,  that  the  Twelve  shall  ordain  in


DISCOURSES,

all  large  Branches  of  the  Church,
evangelical  ministers.  When  this
was  first  given,  the  word  "  evan-
gelical" w  is  not  there.  But  Joseph
was  wrought  upon  by  the  Spirit  to
I  erase  the  word  patriarchs  and  sub-
stitute the  words  "  evangelic  d  min-
isters/* Hence  the  Twelve  have  so
ordained  patriarchs,  as  11  y rum  Smith.
But  inquires  one,  should  the  Twelve
ordain  Prophets,  Seers  and  Re  vela-
tors  ?  Yes.  Were  they  not  ap-
pointed in  the  Kin  land  Temple,  in
the  year  1836,  after  its  dedication  by
the  voice  of  Joseph,  and  the  First
Presidency,  and  the  united  voice  of
the  Church  to  the  Prophets,  Seers
and  Uevvlaturs  to  the  people  ?  Yes.
Then  they  could  ordain  such;  or  in
other  words  they  could  set  apart
such  to  these  duties.  They  could
set  apart  Patriarchs,  to  such  an  office
as  brother  Hyrum  Smith  held,  when
he  was  taken  oat  of  the  First  Presi-
dency and  placed  in  the  Patriarch  ial
office*

Then,  again,  there  is  another  re-
velation given  concerning  the  Priest-
hood, which  you  can  read  in  the
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  After  hav-
ing mentioned  the  various  offices  and
callings,  the  Lord  required  it  as  a
duty  enjoined  upon  the  Twelve,
tlw>ugh  the  First  Presidency  was  then
alive,  to  organize  all  the  officers  in
Zion.  What !  the  Twelve,  a  travel-
ing High  Council  ;  the  Twelve,  who
hold  the  keys  of  all  nations,  to  the
Gentiles  first,  and  then  to  the  Jews,
to  be  at  home  attending  to  such  work  ?
Yes. The  Twelve had  duties  to

i  perform,  both  abroad  and  at  home.
Having  fulfilled  important  duties
abroad,  they  were  not  relieved  from
the  duties  specified  in  the  command-
ment, to  act  at  home,  and  they  have
been,  from  that  time  to  this,  in  the
midst  of  the  people  of  God,  at  home,
at  the  gathering  places,

| In the  revelation  given  on  the


TiiK  SAVJuU  AVuMi  TUB  NKl'IJIi'EiS,  ETC.


ns


19th  day  of  January,  IS 41,  Brigham  it  is  just  as  I  believed  it  would  be,
Young  was  called by name,  and


appointed  the  President  of  the  Twelve,
and  also,  in  another  reVelation,  given
not  far  from  the  same  time,  he  was
required  to  remain  at  home.  Instead
of  being  a  traveling  Councillor,  to
be  sent  abroad  among  the  nations,  his
services  were  required  at  home,  which
was  also  the  case  with  several  of  the
Apostles,  and  especially  since  the
death  ot  Joseph.

There  is  another  subject,  while
dwelling  on  the  Priesthood,  which  I
wish  to  speak  of ;  I  refer  to  the  Coun-
sellors that  may  be  left,  when  the
President,  the  First  President  of  the
Church  islakeu  away  from  our  midst
We  are  informed  that  the  Counsellors
that  existed  in  the  day  of  Joseph
could  not  act  as  Counsellors  to  Joseph
after  lie  was  taken  away ;  to  be  Coun-
sellors to  him  would  be  impossible,
unless  they  themselves  should  go  the
other  side  of  the  veil  Hence  when
the  President  was  taken  away  their
duties  as  Counsellors  to  the  Prophet,
the  First  President,  ceased.  Just  the
same  with  a  Bishop's  Council  under
the  same  circumstances.  Suppo-ing^
the  Bishop  were  to  die,  his  two  Coun-
sellors could  not  legitimately  step
forward  claiming  to  be  Bishops  them-
selves; and  furthermore  their  duties
as  Counsellors  to  the  deceased  Bishop
would  at  his  death  cease.  And  so  it
would  be  if  the  Bishop,  instead  of
dying,  were  called  to  some  other
location  or  should  be  cat  off  the
Church.  So  it  was  considered,  in  the
days  of  the  loss  of  our  Prophet  and
Seer,  Joseph  Smith.  The  two  Coun-
sellers  that  then  existed  had  the  pri-
vilege, if  they  chose  to  do  so,  of  being
associated  with  the  Council  of  the
Twelve  to  assist  us  in  the  work  of
beariug  off  the  kingdom  ;  not  as
members  of  the  Twelve,  but  acting
with  and  assisting  them.  The  same
order  lias  again  been  carried  out ;  and


when  I  was  in  Liverpool,  aftet  learn-
ing  of  the  death  of  President  Young.
The  question  came  up  there,  and  I
took  the  liberty  of  instructing1  the
Saints  making  the  inquiiies.  I  told
them,  that  when  the  First  Presidency
Jeft,  the  Twelve  would  lead  forth  the
Church,  until  such  times  as  the  Spirit
of  God,  and  the  desires  of  the  people,
universally,  should  be  to  select  and
set  apart  and  sustain  by  their  prayers
and  fatth,  a  First  Presidency  again.
Furthermore,  it  was  published  in  the
papers,  particularly  in  America,  and
also  in  England,  and  there  seem e  I  to
be  a  great  anxiety  on  the  part  of  our
enemies,  to  know  who  was  going  to
lead  the  Church.  They  seemed  to
have  far  more  anxiety  than  you  upon
this  subject.  For  the  Saints  gennallj
have  been  instructed  on  this  matter,
and  have,  in  a  measure  understood
it.  We  knew  that  President  Brig-
ham  Young,  and  his  two  Counsellors,
receive  d  no  new  office,  by  being  taken
from  the  Quorum  of  the  Twelve,  and
appointed  to  other  duties.  The  same
as  brother  Joseph  F.  Smith  has  been
appointed  and  set  apart  not  to  a  new
office,  but  to  go  to  Great  Britain  find
preside  over  the  European  Mission.
That  did  not  devolve  upon  brother
Richards,  nor  brother  Rich,  nor  any
other  member  of  the  Twelve}  he
alone  can  perform  this  duty.  It  is
not  a  new  office,  but  merely  a  new
duty  required  ot  him.  So  in  relation
to  the  First  Presidency,  They  carry
no  new  office,  but  new  duties  are
required  at  their  hands,  when  they  are
chosen  by  the  Priesthood  and  set
apart,  not  ordained  to  a  new  office,
but  set  apart  to  preside.

I  wish  also  to  speak  a  few  words,
in  regard  to  the  ancient  Priesthood.
1  tind,  from  the  Book  of  Mormon,
concerning  the  ancient  Twelve — the
twelve  Nephites  of  this  land;  that
Jesus  cbxsu  them,  and  called  them


116


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


by  name,  and  set  them  apart  and
ordained  them.  Prior  to  this  time,
before  his  death,  he  chose  twelve  in
the  hmd  of  Jerusalem.  These  offi-
cers, the  Twelve  on  the  Eastern,  and
the  Twelve  on  the  Western  continent,
did  t.ot  lose  their  office  by  death;  but
as  was  dearly  stated  by  brother  Snow
this  morning,  and  as  is  plainly  set
forth  in  the  revelation,  they  retained
their  oil  ice.  Fur  instance,  we  will
tn k e  the  Book  of  Mormon;  and  in
the  vision  and  prophecy  of  Nephi,
given  almost  COO  years  before  Christ,
the  Lord  showed  to  that  Prophet,
that  there  would  be  Twelve  Apostles
in  some  five  or  six  hundred  years  after
his  day.  And  instead  of  the  Lord
pointing  out  what  should  be  the  duties
ot  these  Apostles,  while  here  in  this
temporal  existence,  lie  pointed  out
the  more  important  duties  that  would
devolve  upon  them  in  the  next  state.
The  simple  duties  of  this  life  were
nothing  eo  tn  pared  to  those  of  the
world  to  come.  Hence  the  angel
said  to  Nephi  that  these  Tweve  Apos-
tles should  judge  the  twelve  tribes
of  Israel.  What  a  great  work !
Then  he  showed  him  the  twelve  Ne-
phite  disciples,  all  descendants  of
Nephi  and  bis  brethren.  Said  he,
these  twelve  disciples  of  the  Lamb
shall  be  judged  by  the  Twelve  Apos-
tles that  shall  be  chosen  in  the  laud
of  Jerusalem.  Here  then  was  another
and  most  important  duty  assigned  to
that  particular  Council  of  Apostles,
after  this  mortal  life.  First,  it  is  said,
they  shall  judge  the  whole  House  of
Israel  ;  secondly,  they  shall  judge
**  the  twelve  ministers  of  thy  seed,"
Also  from  the  language  of  the  text
I  have  read,  we  learn  that  the  Twelve
Nephite  Apostles  had  a  know  lege  of
some  other,  future  duties  to  lie  per-
formed in  the  world  to  come.  "  Know
ye,  that  you  shall  be  judges  of  this
people.  What  manner  of  men  ought
ye  to  be. Verily  I  say  unto  you,


even  as  I  am."  In  other  words,  If
you  are  to  be  judges  of  all  this  people,
to  whom  yotl  are  administering;  if
you  are  to  sit  in  judgment  in  the
great  and  coming  day,  and  if  the
words  which  are  written  in  the  books
which  you  keep,  and  which  are  also
written  by  the  Father,  are  to  be  the
records  out  of  which  the  people  are
to  be  judged,  sure  enough,  you  should
hi'  as  pure  and  holy  as  Jesus  himself.
We  are  told  too  that  it  should  not  de-
pend upon  their  weak  judgment,  but
they  should  judge  according  to  the
judgment  which  the  Lord  their  God
should  give  unto  them.  In  other
words,  afrcr  they  leave  this  present
life,  and  the  time  comes  for  them  to
sit  in  council  in  the  midst  of  the  Xe-
phites,  that  instead  of  judging  ac?-
COrdllJg  to  human  wisdom  and  im-
perfect knowledge,  that  Gud  would
give  them  the  spirit  of  judgment,  or
the  spirit  of  inspiration  more  abund-
antly than  what  they  were  in  posses-
sion of  in  this  life;  and  in  order  that
they  may  lie  entitled  to  judge  all
people,  they  were  required  to  be  pure
and  holy.

Let  me  say  a  few  words  in  regard
to  another  revelation  that  the  Lord
gave  in  the  year  1830,  0*1  this  same
subject.  He  says,  "The  decree  has
gone  forth  from  the  Father  that
mine  Apostles,  they  who  were  with
me  in  my  ministry  in  the  land  of
J erusalem,  shall,  at  the  time  of  my
coming,  sit  upon  twelve  thrones,
clothed  in  glory,  even  as  I  am,  to
judge  the  whole  House  of  Israel,
they  that  have  loved  me  and  kept
my  commandments,  and  none  else.**
Again,  we  will  appeal  to  the  New
Testament,  "  You  that  have  followed
me  in  the  regeneration,  when  the  Soa
of  Man  comes  in  his  glory,  you  also
shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones, and  shall
judge  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel ;  and
shall  eat  and  drink  at  my  table."

Here,  then,  we  have  a  number  o£


THE  SAVIOR  AMONG  THE  NEPHITES,  ETC.


117


evidences  and  witnesses  from  the
Book  of  Mormon,  from  the  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  and  from  the  New
Testament,  concerning  the  future
duties  of  the  servants  of  God,  in  the
world  to  come.  In  relation  to  the
Twelve  Jewish  Apostles,  have  they
a  First  Presidency  independent  of  the
Twelve,  a  separate  body  ?  They
have  not.  Why  were  there  twelve
Apostles  chosen  instead  of  nine,  or
thirteen,  or  any  other  number  ?  Why
th:i  t  pa  r  t  ie  u  1  ar  n  u  m  he  r  ?  Beca  u  se
it  so  happened  in  the  economy  of  the
Most  Hi^h,  that  a  certain  servant  of
God  had  power  to  prevail  with  him,
and  by  four  wives  he  had  power  to
beget  twelve  sons,  and  the  Lord  or-
dained that  through  them  the  twelve
tribes  should  spriny  up  in  the  earth,
and  he  would  have  regard  for  them.
He  intended  tha".  (hey  should  not  only
be  organized  as  tribes  in  this  life,
but  also  in  the  world  to  come*  And
in  order  that  all  may  have  judges,
twelve  were  chosen  to  perform  the
work,  instead  of  any  other  number.
Had  these  Twelve  Apostles,  in  an*
<nent  days,  that  had  no  separate  First
Presidency,  so  far  as  we  have  any
record,  power  to  preside  over  the
Church  ?  They  had.  If  they  had
no  power  there  was  none  upon  the
earth.

Agbin,  these  twelve  men  among
the  Nephites,  that  were  to  sit  in
judgment,  had  a  great  many  succes-
sors, probably  sixty  or  seventy  in
iiu  mi  her.  Had  these  successors  all
equal  power  on  this  ear  Hi  ?  I  think
they  had,  so  far  as  apostleship,  or
discipleship  was  concerned,  they  held
equal  power  with  those  who  precede  I
them.  But  in  the  next  world,  can
these  sixty  or  seventy  successors  stand
in  the  position  of  the  first  chosen  r
No.  So  it  is  in  regard  to  the  latter-
day  Apostles.  In  this  Church  we
have  had  ordained  to  the  Council  of
the  Twelve  Apostles,  twenty-eight


persons.  Six  of  the  original  Twelve
Apostles  apostatized,  and  three  of
their  successors  apostatized,  making
nine  apostates  that  once  had  hands
laid  upon  them,  ordaining  them  to
the  Apostleship.  These  apostates
are  mostly  dead.  We  cannot  suppose
that  they  can  hold  an  office  in  eter-'
nity  which  they  have  forfeited.  We
are  told  to  the  contrary  in  the  Doc*
trine  and  Covenants  ;  the  Lord  say-
ing, through  a  revelation  given  to
the  Prophet  Joseph  in  Missouri,  that
bis  servants  John  E.  Page,  Wilfbrd
Woodruff  and  Willard  Richards
should  take  the  place  of  those  who
had  apostatized.  And  Oliver  Cow-
dery,  although  never  one  of  the
Twelve,  had  his  place  filled  up;  and
the  keys  and  the  glories  and  the  pro-
mises conferred  upon  and  made  to
Oliver  Cowdery  were  taken  from
him  and  bestowed  upon  brother  Hy-
rurn  Smith,  liut  there  are  nineteen
Apostles  that  have  nor  npostatized.
Out  of  this  ti umber  there  are  seven
dead  and  twelve  living.  If  the  Lord,
in  the  world  to  come,  should  follow
the  examples  given  in  regard  to  the
former  Twelve,  suppose  these  nine-
teen should  remain  faithful  and  ob-
tain their  crowns,  yet  there  would  be
only  twelve,  I  think,  that  would  be
placed  in  certain  positions,  the  same
as  the  Twelve  at  Jerusalem,  and  the
ancient  Twelve  on  this  American
land.  This  is  something,  however,
not  revealed,  not  made  manifest  to
any  of  us  in  the  hitter  days,  what  the
future  of  the  Twelve  wilt  be,  as  it  is
in  regard  to  the  ancient  ones  who
have  gone.

In  the  year  1829,  the  Lord  told
David  Whitmer  and  Oliver  CowUery
to  search  out  the  Twelve,  and  pointed
nut  how  they  should  be  known,  etc.
In  the  same  revelation  he  s; teaks  of
their  duties,  and  also  informs-  them
how  great  was  the  trust  and  blessing
conferred  upeu  them,  if  they  prove


1 1 8


JOURNAL  UF  DISCOURSES


faithful  in  all  things  ;  that  the  bles-
sing upon  them  was  above  all-  How
far  this  extended  I  do  not  know ;  that
is  all  which  is  rexealed,  so  far  as  I
kii'»vv,  in  all  of  the  revelations  of
God,  in  regard  to  the  future  of  the
•Twelve  Apostles  in  the  last  days.

Now  we  hope  these  nineteen  Apos-
tles will  be  faithful.  Thomas  B.
M  u>h,  the  oldest  of  the  original
Twelve,  chosen  in  1838,  and  who
stood  at  the  head,  apostatized,  and
left  the  Church.  David  W.  Patten
was  the  next  in  age,  and  the  Lorci
tonk  him  to  himself,  as  we  are  in-
formed in  the  revel  ition  given  on  the
19th  of  January,  18U.  The  Lord
says :  "  My  servant  David  W.  Patten,
who  is  with  me  at  this  time,"  The
Lord  accepted  of  him.  He  died  in
the  faith — a  martyr  in  Missouri.  "I
have  taken  bim  to  myself/*  Yet,
says  the  Lord,  u  another  may  be  ap-
pointed to  the  same  calling;"  and
further  says  that  44  my  servant  Lyman
Wight  is  appointed  to  succeed  him,"
Did  that  give  Lyman  Wight  power
to  preside  over  the  Twelve  Apostles  ?
No.  David  W.  Patten  died  in  the
faith,  and  so  far  as  we  know  holds
the  keys  of  the  Presidency  of  the
Twelve,  in  the  world  to  come.  But
there  may  be  changes  in  that  world.
The  original  Twelve,  first  chosen,
were  all  made  equal,  by  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith.  And  he  said  to  them
in  t  he  basement  of  the  Temple  as
they  were  to  be  sent  as  a  Council  on
their  first  mission,  that  the  oldest
should  preside  in  the  first  Conference,
in  the  following  Conferences,  the  next
in  seniority,  and  so  on,  until  all  had
taken  their  turns  in  presiding.  And
you  shall  be  equal,  showing  respect
to  the  oldest.  They  were  arranged
according  to  their  ages,  while  all  t  heir
successors  were  arranged,  according
to  the  date  of  their  respective  ordi-
nations.

I  have  given  you  some  of  these


items  in  relation  to  the  Priesthood,  in-
relation  to  the  Twelve  at  Jerusalem,
and the  Twelve  Nephite  disciples,
and  tin*  Twelve  of  these  hitter  times  ;.
and  now  let  me  say  in  repaid  to  the
various  authorities  and  Councils  of
the  Priest  hood,  there  has  not  been  a
time  since  the  rise  of  this  Church,
when  the  people  have  been  so  com-
pletely and  fully  organized  as  at  the
present  time. Go  where  we  will,
through  all  these  mountain  valleys,,
and  wherever  we  see  a  family,  or
wherever  wo  can  find  a  small  Branch
of  the  Church,  if  you  make  inquiry  r
you  will  find  it  ia  included  in  a  regu-
lar Stake  of  Zion ; it  belongs  to-
some  Stake,  and  you  will  find,  too,
that  they  are  looked  after,  if  the  offi-
cers are  doing  their  duties,  for  they
are  considered  a  part  and  portion  of
the  great  family  of  God, I  feel  to
congratulate  the  Latter-day  Saints^
on  this  occasion,  in  regard  to  the
perfect  organization,  as  it  were,  that
exists  in  all  our  mountain  region,  and
hope  that  every  man  will  strive  to
learn  his  doty,  and  faithfully  and
honorably  perform  the  same.

I  wish  to  state  still  further  in  re-
gard to  the  Priesthood,  while  upon
the  subject,  that  in  the  Kirtland
Temple  when  the  authorities  were
I  presented  before  the  people,  they
!  were  called  upon  to  vote  by  quorums*
Not  that  ir  occurred  always  in  that
manner.  That  was  the  way  Joseph
ordained  in  the  Temple;  each  Coun-
cil voting  separately,  by  standing
upon  their  feet  in  order  that  their
votes  might  be  better  known  than
i  they  could  be  by  keepiug  their  seats.
After  one  Quorum  bad  voted  for  the
highest  authority  of  the  Church,
then  another  Quorum  or  Council
would  be  called  upon  to  give  their
vote,  and  so  on,  until  all  had  voted
for  the  different  authorities,  and  then
it  was  presented  to  all  the  Church,,
male  and  female- Why  ? It  is  be*


THIS  VOICE  OF  GOD,  ETC.


119


cause  God  ordained,  on  the  6th day irf
April,  1830,  as  yon  cnn  read  in  the
Doctrine and Covenants, that  all
things  in  this  Church  should  he  done
by  common  consent. This  is  the
reason  lor  the  voting. Ah  hough  the
Lord  may  jsrive  a  revelation  upon  the  1
subjr-ct,  although  he  mi^ht  say,  Let  I
my  servant  H\rum Smith he  P?u
triareh;  or  Let  my  servant  Brigham
Young  he  President  of  the  Twelve  I
Apostles  j  notwithstanding  the  Lord  .
n>ay  give  this  by  revelation,  yet  he
himself  was  anxinus  to  Crirry  our
the  principle  he  had  revealed  a  long
time  before  that;  namely,  that  sill
this  I  have  named  mnv  be  brought
before  the  General  Conference  to  be
sanctioned  and  approved,  or  not  to  i
be  sanctioned. What !  the  people
have  a  right  to  reject  those  whom  the
Lord  names  ? Yes,  they  have  this
right,  he  gave  it  to  them, "  Let
them  be  approved  of  or  not  approved
of;  "  showing  that  he  had  respect  to
the people themselves, that  they


should  vo'e'and  give  their  general
voice  to  pith  r  sustain  or  not  to  sus-
tain. I  do  not  know  why,  only  in
the  latter  days  the  kingdom  is  in  a
little  different  circumstances  upon  the
face  of  the  earth,  than  it  has  been  in
during  any  former  dispensation.  We
are  living  in  a  free  Republican  Gov*
ernment,  wherein  the  people  vote,
and  the  L  >rd  established  this  great
American  Government  and  gave  the
Constitution,  and  he  wished  t ho  peo-
ple to  have  a  voice  in  the  officers
named ;  he  wished  the  people  to  ex*
ercise  their  agency  ;  you  may  call  it
a  df  mocratic  principle.  Notwith-
standing He  himself  may  point  out
the  persons,  and  cull  I  hem  by  name,
yet  you  may  approve  of  them  or  dis-
approve of  them  at  rny  General  Con-
ference* v

Perhaps  I  have  said  enough  ;  there
is  a  great  held  open  when  Priesthood
is  spoken  of  May  the  Lord  bless
yon.  Amen,


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,

DELIVERED  AT  THE  $EMT  ANNUAL  CnNFFEENCE,  H ELD  TN"  THE New  TaBER

nacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Saturday  Afternoon.  Oct,  6,  1877.


(Reported  hj  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)


THE  VOICE  OF  GOD,  THE  VOICE  OF  THK  PEOPLE — THE  POSITION  OF  THE

TWELVE—  R I  LADINGS  FROM  DOCTRINE  AND  COVEN  A  NTS,

I  am  very  happy  to  find  ho  great  j  vox  dei,"  or,  "The  voice  of  the  peo-
an  unanimity  ot  feeling  in  the  voting,  |  pie  is  the  voice  of  God."  Although
as  has  been  manifested  at  this  Con-  *  the  voice  of  the  people  is  very  im-
ference.  There  is  a  very  common  portant,  we  do  nut  believe  in  that
axiom  in  the  world,  "vox  pjpuli,  |  action  separate  and  alone. It  was


120


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


usual  among  ancient  Israel  for  the  I  by  that  wisdom  and  intelligence


Lord  to  speak,  presenting  his  laws,
ordinances,  and  eommandments  to
the  people,  then  they  were  presented
to  the  people,  and  then  all  the  peo-
ple said  '*  Amen."  Then  it  was  the
voice  of  God  and  the  voice  of  the
people  ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  voice
of  the  people  assenting  to  the  voice
of  God.


tli at  flows  from  above,  for  without
the  aid,  guidance,  and  direction  of
the  Almighty,  we  can  do  nothing
acceptably  to  him,

I  have  said  very  little,  very  little
indeed,  since  the  death  of  our  es-
teemed President,  Brigham  Young,
1  have  had  various  reasons  for  that.
One  is,  niv  heart  has  felt  sorrowful


In  relation  to  the  duties  devolving  ami  pained,  for  we  have  lost  a  man


upon  the  Twelve,  in  consequence  of
the  changes  that  have  recently  taken
place,  I  can  say,  in  behalf  of  myself
and  niv  brethren,  that  their  full

if  #

weight  and  responsibility  are  felt  by
us. Unless  we  had  the  sanction  of

the  people  we  Would  he  unwilling

to  assume  them,  ami,  were  it  not
that  these  things  are  plainly  laid
down  in  the  law  of  God,  we  would
not  have  accepted  the  situation  that
we  find  ourselves  placed  in  to-day.
We  feel  now  that  unless  God  is
With  us  we  can  accomplish  nothing
that  ran  in  an v wise  be  for  the  wel-


who  stood  prominent  in  Israel  for
the  last  thirty-three  years,  yes,  for
upwards  of  forty  or  forty-five  years,
lie  is  taken  away,  and  all  Israel  felt
to  mourn  the  event.  This  is  one
reason  why  I  have  been  so  silent.
Another  is,  a  great  many  questions
have  had  to  be  decided,  arrange-
ments made  and  investigations  had,
in  regard  to  the  proper  course  to
pursue  pertah ling  to  these  very  im-
portant matters.  Still  another  rea-
son is,  I  did  not  wish  to  put  myself
forward,  nor  have  I,  a-  the  Twelve
here  can  hear  me  witness,  [The


fare  of  Ziou,  or  the  building  up  of  Twelve  unanimously  gave  their  as-


his  kingdom  on  the  earth.  Those
are  my  feelings,  and  those  are  the
feelings  of  my  brethren.  It  is  not
with  us  as  viewed  by  the  world
generally,  that  there  is  some  thin
so  verv  honorable  in  office,  for  w<
have  learned  that  in  order  that  any


•  i

Ft


sent]  I  have  not  had  any  more
hand  in  these  affairs  than  any  of  the
members  of  my  Quorum  ;  but  I  am
happy  to  say  that  in  all  matters
upon  which  we  have  deliberated,  we
have  been  of  one  heart  mid  one  mind.
When broth  era Pratt  and  Smith


office  in  the  government  of  the  I  returned  from  England,  as  you  will
Church  and  kingdom  might  be  made  have  learned  from  their  published
honorable,  the  office  itself  must  be  j  letter,  their  sentiments  were  pre-
honored,  and  that,  too,  by  faithfully
complying  with  the  laws  of  God


loverniinj  it.  Then  it  is  a  hi^h
ion  or  conferred  upon  man  from  the
Lord,  and  the  Twelve  so  appreciate
it.  Whilst  they  thank  you  for  the
confidence  which  you  have  mani-
fested in  then),  at  the  same  time
they  feel  to  rely  upon  God,  and  to
ask  that  you  will  remember  them
before  the  throne  of  our  heavenly
Father  in  your  prayers  and  daily
supplications,  that  we  may  be  guided


cisely  the  same  as  ours,  ^and  also  the
Counselors  of  President  Young,
whom  we  esteem  and  honor  in  their
place,  are  also  united  with  us.  We
are  glad  to  have  tit  em  with  us,  as
our  friends  and  associates,  and  Coun-
selors to  the  Twelve.  I  pray  that
the  blessing  of  God  may  rest  upon
them,  and  lead  them  in  the  paths  of
life,  and  that  thev  with  the  Twelve
may  unite  together  as  a  grand  pha-
lanx, not  in  our  own  individual  in-
terests, but  in  the  interests  of  the


THE  VOICE  OF  GOD,  ETC,


121


Church  ami  kingdom  of  God,  and
the  building  up  of  Ids  Zion  on  the
earth  ;  for  the  Priesthood  is  not  in-
stituted  for  the  purpose  of  personal
aggrandizement  or  persona!  honor,
but  it  is  for  the  accomplishment  of
certain  purposes  of  which  the  Lord
is  the  Author  and  Designer,  and  in
which  the  dead,  the  living,  and  the
unboru  are  interested.  We  ought,
brethren,  all  of  us,  to  feel  and  act  as
though  we  were  the  servants  of  the
living  God,  feeling  in  our  hearts  an
honest  desire  to  do  his  will  and  esta-
blish his  purples  on  the  earth.  It
we  can  be  united  in  our  faith,  our
acts  and  labors,  as  we  have  been  in
our  voting,  as  manifested  at  this
Conference,  the  heavens  will  smile
upon  us,  the  angels  of  God  will
manifest  themselves  tons,  the  power
of  God  will  be  in  our  midst,  ami
Zion  will  arise  ami  shine,  ami  the
glory  of  God  rest  upon  her.

[By  request,  Elder  Geo.  Q.  Cannon
read  from  the  Doctrine  and  Cove?
nants  the  following  extract  from  a
e o n u  i  in  n  ie at  ion  en  titled,  A  P rayer
and  Prophecies,  written  by  Joseph*
the  Seer,  while  in  Libertv  Jail,  Clav
County,  Missouri,  Marcii  $0f  183  ',
commencing  at  the  34th  paragraph  :

"  Behold,  there  are  many  called,
but  few  are  chosen.  And  why  are
they  not  chosen  %

**  Because  their  hearts  are  set  so
much  upon  the  tilings  of  this  world,
and  aspire  to  the  honors  of  men,  that
they  do  not  learn  this  one  lesson —

"That  the  rights  of  t  lit-  Priesthood
are  inseparably  eoimeeteu1  with  the
pouvr.s  of  heaven,  and  that  tin*
powers  of  heaven  cannot  be  controled
m»r  handled  only  upon  the  principles
of  righteousness.

"That  that  may  he  conferred  upon
us,  ii  is  true;  hut  when  we  under-
take to  cover  our  sins,  or  to  gratify
our  pride,  our  vain  ambition,  or  to


exercise  control,  or  dominion,  or
compulsion,  upon  the  souls  of  the
children  of  men,  in  any  degree  of
unrighteousness,  behold,  the  heavens
withdraw  themselves,  the  Spirit  of
the  Lord  is  grieved  ;  and  when  it  is
withdrawn,  Amen  to  the  Priesthood,
or  the  authority  of  that  man.  Be-
hold !  ere  lie  is  aware,  he  is  left
unto  himself,  to  kirk  against  the
pricks,  to  persecute  the  Saints,  and
to  fight  against  God,"  etc.  See
page  .  M",  new  edition.]

I  wanted  to  have  this  excellent
instruction  read  over  in  your  hearing,
for  it  was  tine  and  profitable  at  the
time  it  was  written,  and  it  is  so  to-
day. If  we  possess  the  Spirit  that
flows  from  God,  and  that  dwells  in
his  bosom,  we  shall  possess  the  spirit
of  kindness  and  love  and  affection,
that  will  eventually  bind  us  in  the
bonds  of  etereal  union.  It  becomes
us,  as  servants  ami  handmaidens  of
Uod«  to  seek  after  these  things,  that
we  may  be  full  of  light  and  life,  and
the  power  and  intelligence  of  God,
and  feel  that  we  are  indeed  children
of  the  .Most  Ili-h.  that  he  is  our
Father,  and  that,  with  the  ancient
Prophets  and  Apostles,  and  the  Gods
of  the  eternal  worlds,  we  will  unite
in  accomplishing  the  work  God  de-
signed from  the  commencement  off
the  world.  Xo  man  or  set  of  men
need  think  that  the  work  will  stop,
for  Hod  has  decreed  that  it  shall  go
onward,  and  no  power  this  ,-ide  of
hell  can  stop  its  progress.  The

Lord  is  with  us,  the  great  Jehovah
is  our  shield  and  our  buckler  ;  the
Lord  is  our  Judge,  the  Lord  is  our
King,  the  Lord  is  our  Ruler,  and  he
shall  rule  over  us.

.May  God  help  us  to  be  faithful  in
the  observance  of  his  laws,  that  we
may  secure  to  ourselves  eternal  lives
in  his  kingdom,  is  my  prayer  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,


Dkllvekrd  at  the  Semi-Axkital  Conference  held  in  the  New  Taber-
nacle, Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,  Oct,  7.  1877.

(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbs.)

THE  TRUSTEESHIP — PRESIDENT  YOUNGfS  LABORS — THE  PRIESTHOOD,  ITS
POSITION,  M'TIIX  K'Vi  \ — KTRTLAND  AND  NAUVOO  TEMPLES — SAVIORS
ITPON  MOUNT  ZION — EMIGRATION  OF  THE  POOR— El  ILDING  OF  THE
TAEERNACUS— THE  UNITED  ORDER*


There  are  one  or  two  items  I  wish
to  present  before  ynu  in  relation  to
the  Trusteeship.  I  have  been  ap-
pointed to  that  office,  and  I  feel  that
I  need  some  assistance  in  re  sard  to
the  duties  devolving  upon  me  in
that  capacity,  I  am  desirous  to
have  the  matter  laid  before  this
Conference.  One  thing  I  refer  to  is
t he  auditing  of  the  accounts  of  t  he
Trustee -in-Trust  I  therefore  bee  to
present  three  names,  as  an  auditing
committee,  for  the  sanction  of  this
Conference — n  amely ,  Wilford  Woo  d-
ruff,  Erastus  Snow,  and  Joseph  F.
Smith.  [On  motion,  they  were  una-
nimously sustained.]

There  is  another  subject  that  I
wish  to  present,  one  which  pertains
more  particularly  to  my  brethren  of
the  Twelve.  1  suppose  that  most
of  you  know  that  they  have  traveled
and  labored  for  a  very  lon-r  period,
some  of  them  for  forty  years  and
upward?,  without  purse  or  scrip,
while  almost  everybody  else  has
been  paid  for  his  services.  It  does
seem  proper  to  me  that  they  should
be  placed,  at  least,  on  an  equal  foot-
ing with  other  people,  particularly
as  their  labors  necessarily  increase.


In  consequence  of  our  present  orga-
nizations, necessitating  their  fre-
quent visits  to  our  quarterly  Con-
ferences, in  addition  to  other  duties
accumulating  upon  them,  reudering
it  impossible  for  them  to  pay  any
attention  to  their  own  private  affairs.
II y  proposition,  and  1  know  it  will
meet  with  the  hearty  response  of
the  brethren  generally,  that  they
have  a  reasonable  recompense  for
th  eir  services,  and  that  the  Trustee-
in-Trust  be  authorized  to  arrange
this  matter.  I  would  wish  these
same  remarks  to  apply  also  to  the
Counselors  of  the  Twelve.  [The
motion  was  put  and  unanimously
sustained.]

As  has  been  remarked,  the  condi-
tion we  occupy  to-day  is  a  very  im-
portant one.  There  hns  been  a
change  of  Presidency,  and  necessa-
rily a  change  of  administration.  In
the  providence  of  God  our  heavenly
Father,  he  has  seen  fit  to  take  from
us  our  beloved  President  Brigbam
Young,  who  has  so  long  labored  in
our  midst.  It  is  one  of  those  occa*
siorjs(hatcaa.>e  reflect  inn  and  thought,
casting  a  degtee  of  gloom  among  this
whole  people. We  have  felt  sorry  to


Tlii;  TRUSTEES  HIP,  ETC*


123-


lose  Ins  counsel,  to  be  deprived  of  that
wisdom  and  intelligence  that  have
characterized  him  in  all  of  his  ad-
ministrations. For  they  have  been
of  such  a  nature  as  not  only  to  inter-
est the  Latter-day  Saints,  but  his
name  has  become  famous  throughout
the  world,  Brigham  Young  needs
no  factitious  aid  to  perpetuate  his
memory;  his  labors  have  boon  ex-
hibited during  the  last  fortv-five
years  in  his  preaching,  in  his  writ-
ing, in  his  counsels,  in  the  wisdom
and  intelligence  he  has  displayed,  in
our  exodus  from  Nauvoo;  in  the
building  of  cities  throughout  the
length  and  breadth  of  this  Territory,
in  his  opposition  10  vice  and  his  pro-
tection of  virtue,  purity  and  right.
These  tilings  are  well  known  and
understood  by  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  also  by  thousands  and  millions
of  others.  But,  as  with  his  prede-
cessor, Joseph  Smith,  who  had  to
leave,  while  we  are  called  upon  to
mourn  a  President  dead,  angels  an-
nounce a  President  born  in  the  eter-
nal worlds ;  he  has  only  pone  to
move  in  another  state  of  existence
But  then  in  speaking  of  these  things
we  would  not  eulogise  only  the  man,
for  Brigham  Young,  although  so
great  a  man  could  have  done  no
thing  towards  developing  the  pur-
poses of  God  unless  aided  and  sus-
tained by  him.  Joseph  Smith  could
have  done  nothing,  neither,  as  1  have
already  said,  can  the  Twelve  Apos-
tles accomplish  anything  unless  they
receive  the  same  divine  support.  The
work  we  ate  engaged  in  emanated
from  God,  and  what  did  Joseph  Smith
know  about  it  until  God  revealed  it  ?
Nothing,  What  did  President  Young,
or  the  Twelve,  or  anybody  else,  know
about  it  before  the  heavenly  messen-
gers, even  God  himself,  came  to
break  the  long,  long  silence  uf  ages,
revealing  through  his  Sun,  Jesus
Christ,  and  the  holy  angel  a,  the  ever-


lasting Gospel  ?  Nothing  at  all.
We  were  all  alike  ignorant  until
heaven  revealed  it.  Then  in  the  ad-
ministration of  these  things  the  hea-
vens are  interested.  Thesp  my  bre-
thren before  me,  this  Priesthood  that
assembled  yesterday  in  their  various
quorums,  all  of  them  have  assisted
in  this  work,  all  have  more  or  less
been  preaching  and  laboring  in  the
interest  of  Zion,  in  the  building  up
of  this  the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the
earth.  So  that  it  is  not  by  any  means
an  individual  affair,  as  many  totally
ignorant  of  it  suppose  and  say  it  is;
it  is  not  in  the  wisdom  of  this  man
or  the  intelligence  of  the  other,  but
it  is  the  wisdom  and  guidance  of
God,  and  by  his  sustaining  hand,
that  this  whole  people  are  led  for-
ward, and  that  this  kingdom  has
an  existence  opon  the  earth,  For
my  part,  I  would  say  to-day  as
Moses  did  on  a  certain  occasion,
when  God  said  he  would  not  go  np
with  the  children  of  Israel  because
tbey  were  rebellious  people,  14  If
thy  presence  go  not  with  us,  carry
us  not  up  hence  ;  "  or,  in  other  words,
I  want  nothing  to  do  with  so  great
an  undertaking  as  the  leading  forth
of  this  people  without  the  Lord's
assistance,  I  would  say  to-day,  if
God  be  not  witli  us,  if  we  are  not
sustained  by  the  almighty  power  of
Jehovah,  il  his  guiding  and  protect-
ing hand  be  not  over  us,  I  want
norhing  to  do  with  it.  But  he  is
with  us,  and  we  know  it.  The  feel-
ing that  was  manifested  here  yester-
day, is  most  creditable  to  Israel,
it  is  approved  of  by  the  Gods  in  the
eternal  worlds;  and  if  we  carry  out
in  our  practice  and  daily  lives  that
union  which  we  manifested  in  our
voting,  the  Lord  God  will  continue  to
pour  upon  u^  his  blessing  until  we
shall  be  united  in  all  things,  temporal
and  spiritual,  which  unify  we  have
got  to come to. When this  is


124


JOURNAL QV  DISCOURSES


achieved,  Zion  will  arise  and  shine,
and  then  the  glory  of  our  God  will
rest  upon  her,  then  his  power  will  be
made  manifest  in  our  midst.

Yon  hoard  this  morning  a  good  deal
s-ucl,  and  that,  very  correctly  too,  in
relation  to  Priesthood  and  the  orgnn-
ization  thereof,  and  the  position  we
occupy  in  relation  to  these  matters.
You  voted  yesterday  that  the  Twelve
should  bo  Prophets,  Seers,  and  Reve-
latory. This  may  seem  strange  to
some  who  do  not  comprehend  these
principles,  but  not  to  those  who  do.
The  same  vote  was  proposed  by  Joseph
Smith  and  voted  for  in  the  Temple
in  Knt land,  so  long  ago  as  that;
consequently  there  is  nothing  new
in  t hia.  And,  as  you  heard  this
morning,  this  is  embraced  in  the
Apostleship,  which  has  been  given
by  the  Almighty,  and  which  em-
braces all  the  keys,  powers  and  autho-
rities ever  conferred  upon  man.  I
do  not  wish  to  enter  into  the  details
of  this  matler;  you  will  find  them
in  the  Book  uf  Doctrine  find  Cove-
nants, very  clearly  poit rayed,  and  I
refer  you  there  for  the  evidences  on
these  points.

You  heard  too  that  although  the
Priesthood  held  certain  powers  and
privileges,  the  manifestations  and
powers  thereof  were  only  conferred
according  to  the  exigencies  of  the
case  anil  the  necessities  and  require-
ments thereof.  God  has  conferred
upon  us  these  blessings,  but  here  are
certain  manifestations  and  powers
that  must  come  directly  from  him,
and  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Twelve  to
hunt  up,  search  after,  pray  for  and
obtain  them;  and  it  is  also  the  duty
ot  theee  Presidents  of  Stakes,  Bish-
ops, High  Priests,  Seventies,  and
all  men  holding  prominent  positions,
to  seek  after  and  comprehend  God,
whom  to  know  is  life  everlasting.  We
need,  all  ot  us,  to  humble  ourselves
before  the  Almighty,  for  we  are  be-  j


fore  him,  and  all  creation  is,  and  hell
and  destruction  are  also  without  a
covering  before  him.  As  mortal  and
immortal  beings,  as  men  holding
the  holy  Priesthood  that  the  Lord
has  conferred  upon  us  for  the  esta-
blishment nf  his  kingdom,  the  build-
ing up  of  his  Zion,  the  redemption
of  the  living  and  the  dead,  it  is  of
the  utmost  importance  that  we  stand
forth,  every  one  of  os,  and  magnify
our  several  callings;  for  with  all  our
weakness,  with  all  our  infirmities,
God  has  given  unto  us  great  treasures,
which  we  hold  in  these  earthen  ves-
sels. \\1

As  has  been  referred  to,  the  Pre-
sident was  operated  upon  to  organize
the  Church  throughout  the  Territory
more  completely ;  the  Twelve  were
called  upon  to  visit  every  part  of
the  Territory  and  organize  it,  which
they  have  done.  There  ate  now
twenty  different  Stakes  fully  organ-
ized with  their  Presidents  and  Coun-
selors, with  their  High  Councils,
with  Bishops  and  their  Counselors,
who  operate  as  common  judges  in
I>raeh  and  with  High  Priests,  Seven-
ties, Elders,  and  the  lesser  Priest-
hood, that  they  may  administer  in
all  things  in  their  several  Stakes
under  the  direction  of  the  Twelve*
As  was  remarked  this  morning,  the
Church  never  since  the  day  of  its
organizai  ion  was  so  perfectly  organ-
ized as  it  is  to-day.  What  has  this
been  done  for  ?  Is  it  to  place  some
men  in  positions  of  honor  or  emolu-
ment ?  No,  but  it  is  to  organize  the
Church  and  Kingdom  of  God  accord-
ing to  the  pattern  that  exists  in  the
heavens,  that  we  may  be  prepared  to
comply  in  all  things  with  the  ordinan-
ces of  God,  for,  as  we  are  told  *•  In
the  ordinances,  the  power  of  godliness
is  manifest,  and  without  the  ordinan-
ces thereof,  ami  the  authority  of  the
Priesthood,  the  power  of  godliness
is  not  manifest  unto  men  in  the  flesh  ;


THE  TRUSTEESHIP,  ETr.


123


for  without  this  no  man  can  see  the
face  of  God,  even  the  Father,  and
live."

It  is  expected  that  tbes*  Presidents
of  Stakes  be  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost
and  the  power  of  Gud,  that  they  feel
and  realize  that  they  are  the  servants
of  Jehovah,  engaged  in  his  work,  and
that  he  will  require  at  their  Imuds  an
account  of  their  stewardships.  Ir
is  necessary  also  that  the  Hi^h  Coun-
cils and  the  Bishops  act  in  the  same
way,  together  with  the  High  Priests,
Seventies,  Eiders,  and  all  those  of
the  Aaronic  Priesthood,  and  that  all
operate  together  in  the  fear  of  God,
for  his  eye  is  over  you,  and  he  expects
you  to  work  righteousness  and  purge
the  Church  from  iniquity,  and  teach
the  people  correct  principles  and  lead
them  in  the  puths  of  life*  This  is
what  God  requires  at  your  hands.

Hence,  while  we  are  looking  at
these  things  and  are  engaged  in
these  organizations,  there  are  other
things  necessarily  connected  there-
with. There  has  been  a  feeling  work-
ing gradually  upon  the  minds  of
the  Saints  that  many  could  not
comprehend,  nor  tell  where  it  came
from,  and  that  is  to  build  Temples
President  Young,  the  Twelve  and
the  people  generally  have  felt  drawn
out  in  their  feelings  with  an  almost
unaccountable  desire  for  the  accom-
plishment of  this  object;  and  why?
Can  yon  tell  me  the  reason  ?  It  is
very  difficult  sometimes  to  explain
some  of  these  matters  to  the  human
mind.  You  heard  this  morning  about
Moses  appearing  in  the  Temple  at
Kirtland,  committing  to  Joseph  Smith
the  Keys  of  the  Gathering  Dispensa-
tion, over  which  Moses  presided  an-
ciently, nnd  over  which  be  presides
to* day.  Unless  those  keys  had  been
restored  and  you  had  partaken  of  that
influence  and  spirit,  would  you  have
been  here  to-day  ?  No,  you  would
not. When  the  Gospel  went  forth


among  the  people,  after  the  appear-
ing of  Moses  in  the  Temple,  and
the  committing  of  the  K  ys  of  the
Gathering,  when  you  Latter-day
Saints  received  the  Gospel  of  bap-
tism for  remission  of  sins  and  the
laying  on  of  hands  for  the  reception
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  you  also  received
the  spirit  of  the  gathering.  You
Llders  before  me  to-day  might  have
preached  until  your  tongues  had
cleared  to  the  roof  of  your  mouth,
but  if  the  Spirit  of  God  had  not  ac-
companied your  administration  in
this  regard,  you  could  have  accom-
plished nothing  of  any  worth.  At
the  time  this  messenger  came,  there
appeared  another,  even  Elijah,  whose
missiou  was  to  turn  the  heart  of  the
fathers  to  the  children,  and  the  heart
of  the  children  to  their  fathers,  lest
(says  ths  Lord)  I  come  and  smite  the
earth  with  a  curse.  He  committed
these  keys.  But  before  they  were
committed,  what  was  done  in  the
Temple?  Did  we  baptize  for  the
dead  there  ?  No,  we  did  not.  Why  ?
Because  the  keys  were  not  given*
When  they  were  given  and  afterwards
when  the  Temple  was  built  in  Xauvoo,
then  that  spirit  accompanied  it,  and
we  began  to  feel  after  our  fathers
behind  the  vail,  and  they  likewise
began  to  feel  after  their  children.
Brother  Woodruff,  who  has  been  min-
istering in  the  St.  George  Temple,
could  relate  to  you  if  he  had  the  time,
many  things  of  great  importance,,
associated  with  these  matters.  Suf-
fice it  to  say  that  the  purposes  of
God  pertaining  to  the  human  family,,
which  he  had  in  his  mind  before  this
world  rolled  into  existence,  or  the
morning  stars  sang  together  for  joyr
all  have  to  be  accomplished  in  the
salvation  of  the  living  and  in  the
redemption  of  the  dead.  These  thing*
you  are  acquainted  with  :  it  is  nob
necessary  for  me  to  talk  much  upon
these  subjects. But  I  merely  wish


1


<ilK.YAL


to  refer  to  ihe  spirit  ant]  influence  and
power  that  have  operated  upon  the
Saints,  and  which  are  operating  upon
them  throughout  the  length  and
breadth of this  Territory.  That

rir

comes  from  the  Priesthood  which
existed  before ;  it  comes  because
the  keys  of  that  Priesthood  have
again  been  restored  to  man.  What
is  the  result  ?  Why,  a  desire  to
build  Temples.  What  for?  That
we  may  administer  therein  in  those
ordinances  in  which  they  and  we
are  so  greatly  interested.  Yon  heard
through  brother  Woodruff  how  many
more  administrations  there  had  been
for  the  dead  than  fur  the  living,
This  is  because  Elijah  has  been  here
and  has  delivered  the  keys  that  turn
the  hearts  of  the  children  to  the  fa-
thers, and  we  are  beginning  to  feel
after  them.  Hence  we  are  building
a  Temple  here,  otic  in  Sanpete,  ano-
ther in  Cache  Valley,  and  we  have
one  already  huilt  in  St.  George,  all
of  whbh  I  think  will  be  qnite  credi-
table buildings,  which  tlu>  L  rd  and
holy  angels  will  accpt.  Do  we  de-
vote our  labor  and  our  means  ?  Yes,
we  do;  and  it  is  this  spirit  which  rests
upon  us  that  is  prompting  us  to  do  it,
and  it  will  not  let  us  rest  until  these
things  are  done.  Why  ?  Because
the  keys  of  the  Priesthood  have
brought  us  in  connection  with  the
Priest  hood  in  the  heavens,  of  which
we  are  a  part,  belonging  to  the  Church
of  the  First  Born,  whose  names  are
written  in  heaven.  They  are  inter-
ested in  their  children*  whose  child-
ren are  our  fathers.  We  have  been
called  together  fur  the  purpose,
among  other  things,  of  operating
with  thern  in  this  work;  for  they
without  us  are  not  made  perfect,  as
the  Scripture  tells  us.  Therefore  it
is  necessary  that  we  should  be  here,
building  Temples  and  ministering
therein,  that  their  seed  and  posterity
may  be  hunted  up  and  looked  after.


We  without  them  cannot  be  made
perfect,  for  we  need  the  help  and  as-
sistance and  the  power  of  God  to  sus-
tain  and  guide  and  direct  us  iu  our
labors  and  administrations.

This  is  the  thing  Prest.  Young
has  been  engaged  in  with  all  his
might,  mind  and  strength  ;  this  is
the  thing  my  brethren  cf  the  Twelve
have  been  engaged  in,  and  what  we
are  engaged  in  to-day.  This  is  the
thing  that  all  Israel  ought  to  be  en-
gaged in,  for  we  are  living  only  for
a  short  time  here,  and  by  and  by  we
shall  pass  away,  as  our  President  has
done;  but  it  will  only  be  to  associate
with  another  Priesthood,  or  the  same,
if  you  please,  in  (he  eternal  worlds,
f  r  the  one  is  combined  and  united
with  the  other.  The  Priesthood  that
has  lived  before,  and  that  which  lives
now  are  eternal,  and  administer  in
time  and  in  eternity  ;  and  the  prin-
ciples which  God  has  revealed  to  us
draw  aside  the  curtains  of  the  eternal
worlds,  giving  us  a  glimpse  within
the  vail,  where  Christ,  our  Forerunner,
has  gone.  We  are  gathered  together,
"  one  of  a  city  and  two  of  a  family,"
as  the  Prophet  said  they  should  be.
And  he  says,  *P  will  bring  yon  to
Zi«*n."  What  will  he  do  with  them
when  he  has  brought  thern  there  ?
"I  will  give  them  pastors  after  my
own  heart,  which  shall  feed  them
with  knowledge  and  understanding,"
Again,  "Saviors  shall  conic  up  on
M  unt  Zion,  to  judge  the  Mount  of
Esau;  and  the  kingdom  shall  be
the  Lord's,'1  Some  talk  about  em-
pires and  kingdoms  being  built  up  by
man.  This  is  the  Lord's  kingdom
and  not  man's.  The  Lord  is  our  God,
he  is  our  king  and  our  lawgiver,  and
he  shall  rule  over  us  ;  and  we  will
seek  for  and  obtain  his  help  and
power.

Saviors  shall  come  up  on  Mount
Zion,  say  the  Scriptures,  What  is
a  Savior  ? One  who  saves  another.


THE  TRUSTEESHIP,  K T<  \


is  it  not  ? How  could  any  man  save
people  if  he  knew  not  how?  and  how
could  be  know  except  the  Lord  teach
him  ? The  world  often  finds  fault
with  us. There  are  do  greater  bene-
factors to  the world in  existence
than  the  Latter* day  Saints  are.  There
are  no  persons  who  have  done  more
for  the  Ijenetit  of  mankind,  accord-
ing to  their  number,  than  this  people
have. President Young, who  is
dead,  and  a  number  of  others  who
Lave  passed  away,  as  well  as  the
ve  and  thousands  of  others  who
Still  tarry,  have  traveled  the  length
and  breadth  of  the  earth,  without
purse  or  scrip,  to  preach  the  glad
tidings  of  salvation which  heaven
revealed  to  them. Do  you  6nd
anybody  else  that  has  done  it,  or
that is doing it,  outside  of  this
Church  ? No,  such  a  thing  is  un-
heard of. We  have  gone  forth,  as
the  Scriptures  say,  bearing  precious
seed,  and  have  returned  again  re-
joicing, bringing  our  sheaves  with
us. Is  this  anything  to  hurt  any-
body ? Does  it  interfere  in  the  least
with  the  rights  of  any  ? No.  Are
there  any  in  this  city,  who  are  not  of
us,  that  can  show  that  their  religious
rights,  privileges,  or  principles  have
been interfered with  or  infringed
upon  by  the  Latter-day  Saints,  or  by
the  authorities  of  this  Church  ?  No,
not  one. If  I  knew  of  any  that  were
in  any  way  being  interfered  with,  I
would  be  the  first  to  protect  them.
These  are  our  feelings  towards  the  j
world,  and  to  those  who say  all
manner  of  evil  agaiust  us.

We  have  expended  millions  upon
millons  in  gathering  the  poor  to  this  >
land,  by  what  is  known  as  the  Per-
petual Emigration  Fund,  We  may
ask  why  did  this  people  in  these
valleys  expend  such  large  sums  r
Was  it  because  they  were  sending
for  relatives  and  friends?  No,  but
because  they  were  of  the  family  of  |


Christ,  the  sons  and  daughters  of
G^d,  and  desire  J  to  come  to  Zion.
\\  e  have  Sent  as  much  as  live  hun-
dred teams  at  a  time  to  help  oot  the
poor.  You  have  done  it,  and  many
j  of  you  have  either  sent  your  sons  or
:  gone  yourselves,  and  you  h?ive  parried
provisions  for  them  as  well  as  bring-
ing  them  here,  I  do  not  think  there
,  is  very  n?uch  harm  in  that.  And
what  then?  When  these  same  men
who  had  received  the  message  of
truth  in  far  off  lands,  and  who  had
been  gathered  here,  had  been  further
instructed,  we  have  sent  them  back
again  to  the  nations  from  whence
they  came,  to  proclaim  to  their
kindred  and  friends,  to  their  tongue
and  nation,  what  God  had  done  for
them*  After  fulfilling  their  missions
they  return  again.  What  to  do?
To  slumber  and  &U:ep  away  their
time  ?  No,  but  to  continue  their
work  in  reclaiming  the  waste  places,
and  to  build  Temples  in  the  interest
of  humanity,  as  the  friends  of  God
and  of  the  world.

There  are,  to-day  ,  engaged  working
on  our  Temple,  one  hundred  and
fifty  men.  What  for  ?  That  a  place
may  be  found  that  will  be  acceptable
to  God,  and  in  which  we  may  admi-
nister, in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  for
our  dead  as  well  as  for  our  living.
We  do  not  want  to  do  this  grudg-
ingly, but  with  willing  hearts,  desiring
to  operate,  with  the  Priesthood  be-
hind the  vail,  in  building  up  and
establish  ing  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  this  earth.  These  men,  after
preaching  and  returning  ajain,  can
then  go  into  these  Tern  pis  and
minister  in  them  as  representatives  of
the  nations  from  whence  they  came,
and  in  the  interest  of  thesis  nations
we  are  operating.  Will  God  be
pleased  with  this  work  r  Yes.  if  we
continue  faithful  in  well  doing.  There
are  not  less,  I  presume,  than  ->U0
men  at  work  ou  the  Temples  now


128


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


being  erected  in  this  Territory,  find  1
probably  more  than  that  Thta
seems  foolisli  to  the  outside  world  ;
but  wc  know  in  whom  we  have  be-
lieved, and  we  know  the  work  in
which  we  are  engaged — and  who  is  j
injured  by  it?  None*

Some  of  our  brethren  feel  some-
times that  these  things  draw  heavily
upon  them,  Of  course  they  do ;
and  God  expects  to  try  us,  to  see
what  wo  are  made  of,  and  see  whe-
ther the  right  ring  of  metal  is  in  us
or  not,  mid  whether  we  are  prepared
to  stand  up  to  the  rack  find  walk  !
forth  in  the  name  of  Israel's  God.  Is
it  the  desire  to  oppress  anybody  ?  ]
No,  never,  nothing  of  that  kind.
In  speaking  on  this,  I  would  say  to
the  Presidents  of  Stakes,  and  to  the
Bishops,  see  that  there  is  no  oppres-
sion of  any  kind,  or  anything  ap-
proaching arbitrary  measures,  or
any  body  interfered  wirh  ;  let  every-
thing be  done  righteously,  properly,
and  voluntarily.  Instead  of  opres-
sing  the  poor,  feed  them.  Instead  of
taking  from  the  linked,  clothe  them.
Be  mercilul  ro  the  widow  and  the
fatherless  and  the  orphan,  and  all
who  may  be  in  distress  ;  dry  up  their
tears,  and  pour  balm  into  their
wounds,  and  be  full  of  compassion,
and  kindness,  and  the  love  of  God,
and  let  it  bubble  and  flow  from  you
like  a  river  of  life.  These  are  the
feelings  that  ought  to  exist  among
the  Saints;  nothing  like  oppression
or  wrong  of  any  kind  should  find
place  in  our  hearts.

Let  me  pass  from  this  to  another
thing  which  was  touched  upon  this
morning,  which  is,  but  which  I
really  wish  was  not,  true.  Many  of
these  my  brethren  have  sent  out
their  teams,  ami  have  subscribed
their  means  to  send  for  the  poor,
bringing  them  to  these  valleys.
According  to  the  provisions  of  the
Perpetual Emigration  Fund,  the


penplc  who  are  thus  assisted  are  ex-
ported to  repay  the  means  advanced
to  them  when  they  have  earned  it*
so  that  others  may  be  helped  with
the  same  mnnev.  and  thus  that  tht*

r

fund  in  its  operations,  a<  was  desired,
may  be  perpetual.  I  am  told  that
there  is  upwards  of  a  million  dollars
of  indebtedness  to  this  fund  to-day*
This  is  a  sad  reflection  upon  the
gratitude  of  men  thus  assisted.  I
am  afraid  the  heavens  will  not  smile
upon  si  11 1  j  proceedings,  ami  that  God
will  not  sanction  it.  It  is  time  we
waked  up  and  attended  to  these  ob-
ligations and  duties,  and  felt  that
there  was  somebody  else  in  the  world
besides  our  own  selves;  and  if  we
have  been  assisted  that  we  will  be
at  least  honest  enough  to  meet  that
amount,  and  others  who  need  its  as-
sistance may  find  it  through  the  pro-
per channel.

We  are  engaged  in  this  place  in
building  a  Tabernacle,  in  which  we
can  meet  during  t  he  Wiutei  season*
We  do  not  call  upm  you  outside
brethren  to  assist  us  in  this  under-
taking, because  it  is  local  and  belongs
to  this  Stake.  This  is  a  matter  that
was  designed  by  President  Young
before  his  death  ;  and  we  have  been
desirous,  as  brother  Cannon  said  this
morning,  to  carry  out  the  views  of
our  venerated  President,  as  far  as
we  can.  We  have  commenced  to
build  this  house,  we  want  to  put  it
up  without  delay.  In  this,  as  in
everv  other  matter,  we  do  not  wish
anybody  to  contribute  his  means  or
labor  towards  it,  unless  he  feels  free
to  do  it  ;  for  there  are  plenty  that
will  do  it  willingly,  and  it  will  be
built  j  and  we  shall  have  a  nice,
comfortable  place  to  worship  in
t  hrough  the  Winter,  and  it  will  serve
the  Priesthood  for  all  necessary  pur-
poses, as  well  as  the  public.  The
building  will  be  1 16  x  64  feet  inside,
with  gallery  all  around It  will  be


a  little  larger  than  was  at  first  con-
templated ;  and  we  have  also  de-
parted a  little  from  the  original  in-
tention respecting  the  kind  of  build-
ing material.  Instead  of  adobie,  we
have  concluded  to  use  rock.  I  now
invite  the  people  of  this  Stake  and
the  masons  especially  to  come  for-
ward and  exer*  their  energies,  and  let
us  do  the  work.  It  will  he  done  by
voluntary  donations  and  by  utilizing
la  bur  tithing.  Some  people  may  say,
Why  do  it  by  voluntary  donations  ?
Why  not  nse  the  tithing  for  all  such
purposes  ?  I*  not,  that  sufficient?
Yes,  if  all  of  yon  strictly  ptid  ir.
but  then  you  do  tint  all  do  this,  and
consequently  we  have  to  resort  to
other  means.  But,  ;;s  I  have  before
said,  iu  this  aud  everything  else,  we
do  not  wish  to  press  the  people,  nor
place  any  in  unpleasant  positions  ;
but  as  we  sometimes  sine,  it's  "all
frre  grace  and  all  free  will/'

I  wish  to  make  a  few  remarks  in
relatioTi  to  what  we  term  the  United
Order,  We  are  united  to-day  with
God,  and  wi<h  the  holy  Priesthood
that  existed  before  us,  with  Jesus
the  Mediator  of  the  New  Covenant,
and  with  the  ancient  Prophets  and
Apostles  and  men  of  God,  in  building
up  the  Zton  of  God  upon  the  earth.
They,  in  their  different  spheres  and
callings,  are  operating  with  us,  and
we  with  them,  and  the  whole  thing
is  a  grand  Co-operati  ve  Society  ;  and
everything  we  do  here  should  be  with
the  view  of  uniting  our  earthly  inter-
ests, that  we  may  be  one  in  things
temporal  and  one  in  things  spiritual,
one  on  the  earth  and  one  with  those
in  the  heavens,  helping  with  our
suited  efforts  to  roll  on  the  King-
dom of  God  according  to  his  purposes,
and  not  according  to  our  erratic  no-


tions. In  speaking  of  these  things
I  would  address  a  few  words  to  our
sisters  of  the  Relief  and  of  the  Mu-
tual Improvement  Societies.  You
are  performing  a  jjood  work  in  Zion.
I  an i  pleased  with  the  paper  yon
publish,  and  have  been  very  much  in-
teres  ted  in  the  reports  you  have  made,
in  witnessing  the  energy  and  zeal  yoa
display  in  endeavoring  to  introduce
home- manufactu red  goods  and  arti-
cles of  diBlrent  kind3,  in  looking
after  the  poor  and  necessitous,  and
in  trying  to  elevate  the  community
ere ne rally.  To  our  Yotmp  Men's  Hu-
mid Improve  merit  Societies  I  say,
God  bless  you,  and  all  who  are  oper-
at:  ti £  in  the  interest  of  Zion  forever.

Now  let  me  say  to  parents,  let  ns
see  that  our  youth  are  properly  cared
for  and  taught,  and  that  honesty,
truthfulness,  virtue  and  good  morals
are  inculcated,  that  they  may  grow  in
the  faith  of  the  ft. pel  and  in  the
learnt"  God,  t  be  useful  in  their  day,
to  carry  on  the  great  work  in  which
we  are  engaged.  We  already  perceive
a  great  improvement  among  our
young  men  in  their  administrations ;
they  are  stepping  forth,  manifesting
an  excellent  spirit,  and  many  of  them
promise  to  become  mighty  men  in
Israel,  who  will  roll  forth  the  work
when  we  get  through.  I  will  say
to  the  Presidents  of  Stakes,  encou-
rage and  foster  these  institutions ;
and  to  all  the  people  I  would  suy,
love  God  and  fear  him  and  keep  his
commandments*  Be  honest  with
yourselves,  honest  before  God.  Be
virtuous,  be  truthful  and  full  of  in-
treglty,  and  fear  the  Lord  your  God
in  your  hearts,  and  his  blessing  will
be  with  you,  and  his  Spirit  will  at-
tend you,  and  your  generations  after
;  oii.  worlds  without  end.  Amen*


No.  9.


Vol.  XIX.


J  A


JUl  li.V\L Of  IflACuVUHt.S


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  EKASTUS  SNOW,

Delivered  at  the  Quarterly  Conference  of  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion,
in  the  Provo  Meeting  house.  Saturday,  Oct.  13,  1877*

(From  the  Territorial  inquirer.)

CONFERENCES —  ORGANIZATION OP THE STAKES  OF  ZION — QUALIFICA-
TlUNS  FUR  A  BISHOP— THE  PKoPLE  IN  THREE  GRAND  DIVISIONS.


The  Lord  in  his  revelation  to  the
Prophet  Joseph,  forty-seven  years
ago,  required  the  Elders  to  meet
together  in  Conference  once  in  three
months,  or  from  time  to  time  as
appointed,  for  the  purpose  of  tran-
sacting necessary  business  connected
with  the  work,  and  for  giving  and
receiving  instructions,  in  relation
to  the  duties  of  the  Priesthood.
This  commandment  lias  been  pub-
lished in  the  book  of  Doctrine  ami
Covenants,  and  is  a  standing  revela-
tion which  has  not  been  generally
observed.  We  have  had  General
Conferences  of  all  the  people —
Priesthood  and  laymen  — twice  a
year  since  our  settlement  in  these
valleys,  which  only  a  small  portion
of  the  people  and  a  few  of  the  gene-
ral authorities  of  the  Church  have
been  able  to  attend.  We  have  had
occasional  Conferences  in  some  places
in  the  Territory,  and  in  various
places  abroad.  It  is  time  now  that
Stakes  of  Zion  are  organized,  to
hold  our  Conferences  with  more
regularity  and  in  their  order,  for  the
Saints  to  come  together  to  be  in-
structed, that  reports  may  be  heard
from  the  various  Wards,  and  the
Elders  enter  into  counsel  and  learn
their  duties.  The  last  summer's
labors  of  our  late  President,  Bngham

i


Young,  and  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,
were  mainly  devoted  to  this  work —
organizing  the  Stakes  and  the  Priest-
hood therein,  and  arranging  a  sys-
tem of  reports  with  a  view  of  hold-
ing the  people  to  closer  responsibili-
ties, to  awaken  them  to  a  better  un-
derstanding and  appreciation  of  their
obligations.  At  the  same  time  this
rendering  an  account  of  stewardship
in  the  various  districts.  Wards  and
Stakes  of  Zion,  is  calculated  to  en-
courage those  who  are  doing  right,
and  reprove  such,  it'  there  be  any,
as  do  evil.  You  may  be  sure  that  if
these  arrangements  are  carried  outt
and  good  counsel  is  given  to  the  peo-
ple, they  cannot  fail  to  produce  good
results.  Those  who  love  the  truth
and  hate  iniquity,  and  who  keep
their  covenants  with  God  unbroken,
are  not  afraid  of  their  works  being
made  manifest  before  the  people.  If
they  live  in  the  faithful  discharge  of
their  duties,  they  have  nothing  to
fear  from  this  system  of  rendering
reports  of  their  stewardship.  Presi-
dents of  Stakes,  Bishops,  Counselors,
Priests,  Teachers,  Deacons,  and  Pre-
sidents of  Quorums,  who  are  doing
well  and  performing  their  duties,
need  not  shrink  from  giving  reports
of  their  actions,  lives,  and  general
conduct It  is  pleasing  to  me,  and


to  every  right-minded  man  and  wo-
man, to  hear  these  reports*  They
are  not  uninteresting  nor  dry  to
those  who  have  the  welfare  of  Israel
at  heart,  and  are  watchful  of  the  pro-
gress made  among  us.  We  have
been  instructed  by  the  revelations
of  God  to  keep  records  of  our  orga-
nizations and  councils,  of  everything
brought  he  fore  the  Priest  hood  in
their  respective  Quorums,  of  the
attendance  of  members,  who  are
speakers,  what  they  say,  and  all
things  pertaining  to  the  business
and  general  welfare  of  the  Quorums.
Our  various  organizations  should
keep  clerks,  whuse  duty  it  should  he
to  record  the  acts  of  its  members,
whether  or  not  those  members  are
living  up  to  their  requirements,  and
whether,  instead  of  attending  their
meetings,  they  are  engaged  in  fish-
ing, hunting,  freighting,  gold-seek-
ing, or  anything  else  that  is  con-
trary to  what  is  expected  from  them
as  laborers  in  the  Church  and  king-
dom of  God.  It  is  the  duty  of  the
Teachers  to  report  to  their  Bishops
the  relative  standing  of  those  under
their  supervision  —  whether  their
bouses  are  houses  of  order — whether
the  wife  is  good  to  the  husband,  and
the  husband  is  good  to  his  wile —
whether  the  children  are  obedient
to  their  parents,  and  whether  the
parents  are  training  their  children
in  the  way  they  should  walk, — if
there  is  strife  where  there  should  be
peace,  if  there  are  jealousy  and  dis-
cord where  love  and  unity  should
exist, — whether  the  mother  poisons
the  mind  of  her  daughetr  instead  of
teaching  her  correct  principles  ;  in
short— whether  the  house  is  what  it
should  he— a  house  of  God.

A  Bishop  should  necessarily  bo  a
man  ot  sound  judgment,  full  of  the
Holy  Ghost  and  capable  of  adjusting
matters  in  a  manner  that  will  work
the  least  injury  possible  and  fur  the


accomplishment  of  the  greatest  good.
There  are  matters  of  a  delicate  nature
which  sometimes  arise  in  families,
and  which  should  be  properly  under-
stood by  the  Bishop  and  his  Counsel
before  heralding  them  abroad*  U
n light  not  be  necessary  to  publish
them  among  the  people  to  the  de-
triment and  injury  of  the  parties
interested,  but  be  considered  id  a
proper  spirit  and  not  reported  in  a
general  sense,  to  the  ward*  At  the
same  time,  nothing  that  may  have
a  bearing  on  the  union  and  fellowship
of  the  Saints,  should  escape  the  no-
lice  of  the  teachers;  and  no  Bishop
should  ever  betray  the  confidence  and
trust  imposed  in  him  through  a  know-
ledge of  these  tender  and  delicate
matters,  but  manifest  that  fatherly
love,  tenderness  and  anxiety  that
parents  feel  for  their  offspring,

I  Sunday  School  Teachers  also  unghfc
not  to  exercise  any  undue  severity

I  and  harshness  toward  those  under
their  care,  but  should  be  actuated  by
feelings  of  tenderness  and  love*  Ev-
ery presiding  officer  of  a  quorum
should  do  likewise,  and  every  mother
in  her  house  should  govern  her  chil-
dren in  gentleness,  and  filial  love  and
kindness  should  be  a  part  of  their
nature.

The  Holy  Spirit  will  impress  us
with  these  matters,  and  on  the  other
hand,  the  powers  of  evil  will  endeavor
to  influence  us  to  act  contrary  to  those
impressions,  to  give  way  to  anger,
jealousy  and  envy.  This  is  warfare
— it  is  with  ourselves,  whether  we
conquer  or  yield  to  our  evil  passions.
In  our  family  circles,  in  our  daily
associations  with  our  wives,  and  chil-
dren, Iriends  and  neighbors,  we
should  be  actuated  and  governed  by
feelings  of  tenderness  and  love,  We
should  strive  to  become  perfect  in
every  great  and  good  work  and  be
examples  worthy  of  imitation  in  our
!  home  and  before  our  neighbors.  Wa


132


JOUKNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


can  never  be  truly  great  until  we  be-
come truly  good.

If  we  would  have  a  good  people  to
associate  and  labor  with,  or  to  pre-
side over;  if  our  Wards,  towns,
divisions,  sub-divisions  and  families
must  be  in  order  we  must  not  neglect
any  duty  or  leave  any  place  uncared
for.  We  cannot  so  neglect  our  res-
ponsibilities without  feeling  the  effects
afterwaids.  If  a  wound  afflicts  the
body  a  scar  is  left  as  the  effect  uf  that
wound.  If  we  allow  evil  to  dwell  in
the  midst  of  the  community  it  will
manifest  itself  in  the  fruits  thereof
in  after  years.  In  the  words  of  the
Apostle  Paul,  u  Whatsoever  man
goweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  No
farmer  expeci  s  to  raise  wheat  when
he  sows  oats,  nor  can  a  man  gather
tigs  from  thorn  trees  that  he  may
plant  ;  neither  can  we  expect  to  enjoy
the  fruits  of  love  unless  we  have  sown
the  seeds  of  love  in  our  hearts  and  in
thu  hearts  of  otlnrs.  Every  careful
and  reflecting  mind  will  appreciate
the  Apustle  Paul's  word**.

Have  we  not  seen  children  flee
Irom  their  parents  ?  and  why  ?  Be-
cause they  have  not  sown  in  the  hearts
of  their  children  the  seeds  of  love,
respect  and  good  will,  but  have  them-
selves given  way  to  evil  passions,
and,  by  such  a  course  have  driven
au-fiy  their  offspring.  On  the  other
hand,  you  may  see  men  and  women
who,  by  their  kindness,  gentleness
and  love,  have  drawn  Towards  them
not  only  their  offering  but  the  off-
spring of  others.  Like  cleaves  to
like.  Those,  therefore,  who  lead  the
Saints  must  be  men  who  have  with-
in them  these  same  feelings.  Can
the  wicked  lead  them  ?  .No  !  Jesus
says,  "  My  she,  p  know  my  voice  and
a  stranger  they  will  not  follow."

The  object  of  our  Conferences,
Priesthood  meetings  and  reports,  is,
not  only  to  ascertain  how  we  stand
according  to  statistics,  but  that  we


may  be  able  to  learn  what  our  indi-
vidual condition  is  as  members  of  the
Church,  to  see  ourselves  in  a  glass,
as  it  were,  and  find  out  wherein  we
need  improving;  and  that  men  who
have  t  he  charge  and  general  oversight
of  the  people  may  see  at  a  glance
the  condition  of  the  people  in  the
different  Wards,  They  may  by  this
means  form  correct  ideas  of  the  feel*
tugs,  faith  and  works  of  the  Saints,
how  far  the  law^s  of  God  are  observed,
and  whether  the  members  are  keep-
ing their  covenants,  attending  to
home  duties,  paying  their  tithes  and
are  engaged  in  all  the  1  and  able  works
required  at  their  hands,  so  that  if  the
Lord  commands  any  service  at  our
hands,  there  will  be  a  unity  of  pur-
pose and  a  concert  of  action,  on  the
part  of  thu  people,  in  carrying  it
out.-

The  people  in  this  Territory  arc
classed  into  three  grand  divisions
for  the  purpose  of  Temple  building.
There  are  a  certain  number  of  stakes
grouped  together  to  build  a  Temple
i ti  Mauti,  another  to  build  a  Tempi©
in  Logan,  and  others  of  the  more
central  stakes  to  build  one  in  Salt
Lake  City,  The  presiding  officers
of  these  Stakes  and  the  various  quo-
rums will  vie  with  each  other  in  the
accomplishment  of  this  work,  that
the  people  may  officiate  in  the  ordi-
nances of  the  house  of  God  for  them-
selves and  their  dead.

These  things  being  necessary  for
working  out  the  Lord's  purposes,  and
for  the  general  welfare  of  Israel,
have  another  good  effect  in  the  ex-
perience they  give  to  us.  They  are
valuable  in  the  training  of  the  peo-
ple and  give  an  increase  of  power
that  will  prove  of  benefit  to  the
Saints  in  years  to  come.  That  ex-
perience and  increase  of  power  we
shall  find  necessary  in  our  future
warfare  against  evil.  There  is  and
j  always  will  be,  until  the  Savior  ap-


pears  again,  a  great  battle  fought  be-  '
tween  the  Priesthood  and  the  powers
of  darkness.  The  wicked  do  not
comprehend  this.  They  witness  va-
rious manifestations  of  unseen  powers
operating  in  the  human  family,  but
•whether  they  are  good  and  truthful
or  vile  and  deceptive  they  are  unable
to  comprehend  satisfactorily,  because
they  have  not  applied  to  the  fountain
of  light,  truth  and  knowledge.  The
Saints,  on  the  other  hand,  can  com-
prehend these  manifestations  .  tticl
judge  this  wicked  world  by  the  light
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  si i all  see
the  manifestations  of  the  powers  of  j
darkness  in  an  increased  degree  in  the
future,  deceiving  the  children  of  men.
Ho  far  as  this  generation  is  concerned
it  has  been  since  the  Prophet  Joseph
came  forth  and  declared  his  lac  lief  in
revelations,  visions  and  angels  that
the  powers  of  darkness  have  operated
by  external  and  supernatural  mani-
festations, and  as  the  power  of  God
increased  with  the  people  and  ex-
tended throughout  the  earth  and  was
felt  by  other  nations  besides  this,
the  Evil  One  manifested  his  power
Jimong  men  to  a  greater  extent.
When  the  Prophet  Joseph  appeared,
announcing  his  belief  in  these  things,
"there  was  a  general  unbelief  among
religious  seers  in  regard  to  t hem-
Professed  Christians  disci  aimed  any
belief  in  manifestations  from  heaven,
had  no  faith  in  visions  or  angels,  and
considered  the  claims  of  any  man  to
be  absurd  who  professed  to  have
communication  with  the  unseen  world.
Those  who  had  faith  in  visions  and
dreams  where  looked  upon  as  su-
perstitious beings.  Joseph's  profes-
sions were  viewed  as  inconsistent
with  the  spirit  and  enlightenment
of  the  age.  But  how  great  is  the
change  !  We  find  men  and  women
seeking  communication  with  the  un-
seen world,  with  spirits  of  departed
friends,  and  receiving  spiritual  mac-


iTestafions  in  varions  form*  In  the
days  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  there
were  only  a  few  who  entertained
any  faith  in  such  manifestations,  but
now  they  are  numbered  by  millions.
What  has  all  this  effected  ?  Has  it
produced  any  more  unity  in  the  world
than  existed  before  ?  Is  there  an
increase  of  happiness  or  aught  that
is  praiseworthy  ?  The  effect,  it,  has
produced  is  evident  to  the  reflecting
mind.  Infidelity  has  increased  as  the
puwers  of  darkness  have  spread  their
influence  over  the  minds  of  men,

I  do  not  expect  many  of  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  to  be  able  to  fully  con-
template the  subject,  not  having
mmgied  with  the  world  since  these
great  changes  have  occurred,  but
there  are  some  who  possess  a  general
knowledge  of  such  things  by  seeing,
hearing  and  reading-  The  testimony
of  the  Elders  is  that  the  world  is
almost  universally  infidel  —  priests
and  people.  Religion  is  used  as  a
cloak  with  the  great  majority  of
professing  Christians,  There  appears
to  prevail  an  almost  general  disbelief
In  Je.sas  and  his  Apostles.  The  Bible
is  counted  unworthy  of  credence  or
attention,  and  religion  is  deemed  a
farce,  This  general  tendency  to  in-
fidelity is  also  the  result  of  men's
efforts  to  put  down  Mormnnism.
The  world  rejected  the  power  tit  God
made  man i lest  by  the  visitation  of
holy  angels,  but  when  the  devil  mani-
fested his  power  through  the  visi-
tation of  evil  spirits,  assuming  all
sorts  of  fantastic  shupes,  the  people
eagerly  rau  after  them  aiid  became
blind,  bewildered  and  stupetied.
Such  persons  would  rather  "  believe
a  He  and  be  damned;  "  they  willingly
follow  after  the  "strong  delusions'*
that  the  Apostle  Paul  referred  to.
These  powers  ot  darkness  will  con-
tinue to  come  upon  them  and  spread
over  the  earth,  as  we  advance  ia
truth  and  righteousness.


134


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


We  that  have  this  warfare  to  meet,
should  keep  ourselves  prepared  for
any  and  every  attack  of  the  evil  one.
It  becomes  us  (o  draw  ourselves  to-
gether in  the  bonds  of  unity,  to  cling
to  each  other,  oar  covenants  and  our
God. We  are  called  upon  not  only  j


to  uphold  and  sustain  the  Priesthood
over  us  but  each  other.  If  wo  do
this,  and  pet  form  the  duties  we  owe
one  another,  we  shall  perform  the
duties  we  owe  to  the  Priesthood  and
to  God. God  bless  you.  Amen.


i


SYNOPSIS OF  A
DISCOURSE BY ELDER WILFORD  WOODRUFF,

Delivered  in  the  Provo  Meeting  House,  Oct.  13,  1877,

(From  the  Territorial  Etiguirer.)

THE  WORK  PROGRESSING — PROPHECY  FULFILLED — WE  SHALL  ALL  OBEY

THE  LAW  OF  DEATH.


It  was  with  pleasure  I  listened
this  morning  to  the  remarks  of  bro-
ther Snow,  and  wish  that  all  the
people  in  this  Stake  had  heard  them.
We  have  had  a  great  deal  of  preach-
ing, and  need  a  great  deal,  and  I
don't  know  that  a  people  ever  lived
who  had  more.  i

We  are  in  the  valleys  of  the
mountains  for  a  special  purpose — to
establish  righteousness  and  live  in
accordance  with  the  principles  of
truth.  There  never  was  a  generation
of  people  who  had  so  much  to  per-
form as  the  Latter-day  Saints  have.
This  work  is  progressing,  and  it  will
continue  to  advance.  I  have  seen
the  time  when  you  could  get  the
whole  Church  into  this  room— when
there  were  a  few  High  Priests,  no
Apostles  or  Seventies,  and  only  a  few
Elders.  I  am  as  thoroughly  satisfied


now  as  I  ever  was  in  my  life,  that
this  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  I  am  as
firm  a  believer  in  God,  in  the  reve-
lations of  God,  in  the  Books  of  Mor-
mon and  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  as
I  ever  was.  I  have  read  the  prophe-
cies of  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and
other  inspired  writers,  and  have  seen
some  of  them  fulfilled,  and  expect
to  see  others  have  their  literal  ful-
fillment God  worked  with  the
children  of  men  through  revelation,
and  he  will  continue  to  do  so  in  this
generation.  With  him  there  is  no
change ;  his  ways  are  one  eternal
round,

The  Lord  lias  directed  and  guided
this  work  from  the  beginning.  The
prophecies  relating  to  the  present
dispensation — to  Zion  being  estab-
lished in  the  tops  of  tin*  mountains —
to  the  building  of  cities  and  Temples


THE  WORK  PROGRESSING,  ETC,


135


— are  being  fulfilled.  We  have  no- 1
thing  to  do  but  build  up  the  king-
dom of  God,  anil  the  more  light  and
understanding  we  get,  the  less  our
hearts  will  cling  to  outside  things.
While  we  are  engaged  in  this  work,
we  can  realize  that  holy  angels  are
watching  us.  The  Lord  told  us,
forty-sevm  years  ago,  what  would
take  place,  and  we  are  now  fulfilling
that  which  he  spoke  of.  Brothers
Joseph  and  Brigham  are  gone  into
the  spirit  world,  but  there  are  a  few
of  us  left  to  continue  the  work  laid
out  by  the  Almighty.  We  have
preached  to  the  world,  organized  the
Priesthood  and  the  Saints,  and
angels  have  borne  record  ot  this,  and
it  is  recorded  in  heaven— our  toil,
our  preaching,  and  our  testimony.
We  have  filled  these  once  desert
places  with  Saints  of  the  living  God,
Hid  many  thousands  are  here  who
never  saw  the  world.  We  have  to
build  Temples — one  is  almost  coin-
pie  ted  and  is  dedicated  ;  we  have
laid  the  foundations  of  others,  and
the  work,  like  a  panorama,  is  be  ton*
us.  This  labor  is  not  to  be  per-
formed by  other  hands,  God  looks
to  us  to  build  these  Temples,  and  to
bring  about  the  redemption  of  the
earth.  He  holds  us  responsible  for
this  work;  wc  have  to  preach  to
the  house  of  Israel — to  the  Laman-
ites — to  gather  together  the  honest
in  heart  from  all  parts  of  the  earth.
We  are  chosen  to  perform  this  great
a  id  important  work — we,  a  small
handful  of  people  compared  with  the
millions  nt  human  beings  on  the
earth.  The  Lord  does  not  expect
any  other  people  but  the  Latter-day
Saints  to  do  this  work  ;  there  is  no-
body else  preparing.

One  after  another  of  our  brethren
have  left  us  and  gone  to  labor  on  the
other  side  of  the  vil.  President
Brigham  Young,  brother  George  A.
Smith,  and  others  before  them,  have


I  all  gone,  and  the  few  that  an4  left  of
the  Twelve  will  also  go  by  and  by  ;
but  while  here,  it  is  our  duty  to
labor  on  the  foundation  they  have
laid.  President  Young  labored  hard
and  fait  hful  during  the  last  few  years
of  his  life  in  organizing  and  building
up  Zion.  We  have  to  continue  the
work  they  were  engaged  in,  and
when  our  time  comes  to  take  our
departure  for  that  life  behind  the
veil,  none  of  us  will  regret  having
devoted  our  time,  talents,  and  labor
for  the  accomplishment  of  this  great
object.  The  riches  of  the  world  will
appear  as  the  dust  under  our  feet
compared  with  the  eternal  re  wan!
before  us.

This  kingdom  will  never  be  given
into  the  hands  of  another  people.
We  may  pass  away,  but  our  sons  and
daughters  will  have  the  labor  on
their  shoulders  of  building  up  the
kingdom.

Many  of  you  may  have  read,  years
before  it  was  fulfilled,  the  revelation
and  prophecy  of  the  Prophet  Joseph
in  regard  to  the  trouble,  anarchy,
and  war  that  should  befall  this  na-
tion. Wise*  men  said  its  fulfillment
was  a  matter  of  impossibility — that
the  government  was  too  sound  and
too  well  established  for  such  a  cala-
mity to  occur,  but  the  fulfillment
came.  When  the  Lord  undertakes
to  perform  a  work,  he  is  certain  to
carry  it  out.  I  t  would  not  take  the
i  Lord  twenty- four  hours  to  cause
war,  anarchy,  confusion,  and  judg-
ments to  come  upon  the  nation.  He
is  withholding  these  calamities  until
his  purposes  are  accomplished.

The  set  time  has  come,  and  the
world  is  preparing  itself  for  these
things.  The  Church  and  kingdom  of
God  must  adorn  itself,  and  prepare
for  the  coming  of  the  Great  Bride-
groom.  Every  key  relating  to  this
dispensation  was  given  to  the  Pro-
phet Joseph,  and  they  remain  with


no


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  Priesthood  to-day.  We  have?  no  ;
right  to  walk  in  die  dark.  The
burden  is  now  resting  upon  us,  and,
holding  the  Priesthood,  our  aim
should  be  the  building  up  of  the
king* loin  of  God.  We  hold  the
Priesthood  for  that  purpose,  and  we
have  no  business  to  use  it  for  any-
thing else  but  to  officiate  in  the
ordinances  of  the  house  of  God.

Sooner  or  later  we  shall  have  to
obey  the  law  of  death*  As  St  is
written,  "  In  Adam  all  died,  so  in
Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive/'  We
shall  have  to  pass  through  the  ordeal
— there  is  no  escape  from  it  We
have,  consequently*  no  time  to  throw
away.  It  may  be  asked,  "  How
much  longer  will  it  be  before  the
winding  up  scene  takes  place  *  it
is  not  for  me  to  say.  How  much
longer  have  the  Elders  to  suffer
violence  at  the  hands  of  the  wicked?
It  appears  to  me  that  the  world  is
about  ripe  for  the  judgments  of  the
Lord,  and  that  the  testimony  will
soon  be  sealed.  He  is  already  work-
ing with  the  Lamanites,  and  he  will
accomplish  a  great  deal  in  a  little
time.

Some  people  entertain  the  idea
that  because  wheat  is  plentiful  and  I
selling  at  exceedingly  low  figures,  I
the  probability  of  a  famine  is  more
remote  than  ever;  but  the  Lord
makes  no  mistakes  about  what  is
going  to  transpire.  He  has  decreed
the  visitation  of  judgments,  and  they
are  certain  tu  take  place.  President


Young  has  for  years  repeatedly  im-
pressed upon  the  brethren  the  neces-
sity of  preparing  for  a  period  of
famine  by  storing  their  wheat,  and,
before  his  death,  was  impressed  to
speak  to  the  sisters  and  urge  them
to  look  after  that  matter.  Let  us
be  united  in  our  labors,  and  in  all
the  brandies  of  industry  that  males
or  females  may  be  engaged  in.  The
raising  of  silk  may  be  rendered  an
important  item  in  the  industry  of
this  Territory,  It  is  a  business  that
our  wives  and  children  can  engage
in,  and  there  is  nothing  to  hinder
the  people  from  becoming  rich  from
this  branch  of  industry  alone.  There
is  an  improvement  in  the  United
Order,  or  Co-operation.  The  Saints
Iflfe  preparing  themselves  for  that
event  when  Jesus  shall  come  as  a
thief  in  the  night.  For  our  own
sakes  let  us  do  the  best  we  possibly
can.  We  must  observe  and  keep
the  laws  of  (Joil,  in  order  to  inherit
the  rewards  promised.  Let  us  not
set  our  hearts  on  the  riches  and
vanities  *>f  this  earth.  It  is  very
convenient,  it  is  true,  to  have  the
comforts  of  life  around  us,  but  we
shall  be  better  without  them,  if  by
hoarding  up  the  riches  of  the  world
we  forget  the  things  of  God.

1  pray  God  to  bless  you  and  our
sons  and  daughters,  that  their  minds
may  be  led  and  prepared  for  the
work  they  will  be  called  upon  to
perforin.


GOD  18  AT  THE  HELM,  ETC


137


DISCorUSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR.


Delivered  in  thk  Provo  Meeting  Housr,  Sunday  Morning,  Oct.  14,  1S77


(From  the  Territorial  En*iniftr.)


GOD  IS  AT  THE  HELM— ORGANIZATION  ACCORDING  TO  THE  REVELATIONS
— HISTORIC  STATEMENTS— SOCIETIES  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  CHURCH
— TEMPLE  BUILDING.


It  is  the  first  time  that  I  have  been
permitted  to  meet  with  you  sidcl*  the
death  of  our  beloved  President  and
Prophet.  We  all  feel  sari  and  sor-
rowful on  account  of  our  bereave-
ment.  He  had  been  our  guide,  di-
rector, Prophet,  Seer  and  Revelator
for  the  hist  thirty-three  years,  and
his  departure  caused  feelings  of
gloom  and  sorrow  throughout  all  the
Territory.  We  all  felt  to  appreciate
our  President  and  mourn  his  loss,
and  we  still  have  sumo  feelings  of
sorrow  lingering  about  us;  yet,  at
the  s'imu  time,  we  cannot  ignore  the
fact  that  there  are  certain  duties  and
responsibilities  resting  upon  us  that
eall  into  operation  our  beat  energies,
thoughts,  reflections  and  actions.
And  wlule  we  mourn  his  loss  we  are
impressed  with  t  lie  responsibilities
that  rest  upon  us  as  individuals,  in
connection  with  the  wot k  of  tied, and
are  led  to  reflect  upon  the  changing
vicissitudes  of  human  life  and  the
various  events  that  have  transpired
among  us.

There  is  a  satisfaction  in  the  reflec-
tion that  God  is  at  the  helm  and
guides,  controls  and  dictates  n cord-
ing to  his  own  plans  and  designs,
and  that  the  Priesthood  is  not  con-
fined to  this  earth  alone,  but  that,


after  having  performed  our  various
duties  here  and  passed  away,  we
shall  be  called  upon  to  operate  for
the  same  grand  purpose  in  another
sphere.  The  Priesthood  we  have
receive  I  on  the  earth  is  everlasting,
it  administers  in  time  rmd  eternity,
and  to  that  Priesthood  are  Mfa  in-
debted for  the  revelations  of  God's
will  to  man;  for  with  the  introduc-
tion of  the  Priesthood  to  men  on  the
earth  came  the  development  of  the
principles  of  truth  and,  by  that
means,  light,  knowledge  and  intelli-
gence were  communicated  to  this  peo-
ple. We  cannot  do  anything  of  our-
selves,  unless  aided  by  the  spirit  of
the  Lord,  We  are  in  communion
with  not  only  the  Prophets  and
Aoostles  who  lived  anciently,  but
with  brother  Joseph,  brother  Brig-
ham,  brother  Heber  C.  Kimball,  bro-
ther Geo.  A  Smith  and  others  who
held  the  holy  Priesthood  and  have
pasted  away,  and  aie  operating  with
them  in  behalf  of  fallen  humanity,
in  behalf  of  the  people  who  live  now
on  the  earth  and  the  myriads  of  dead
who  have  left  us.  We  art*  engaged
13  a  work  that  nothing  but  the  com-
bined act' on  of  the  Priesthood  on  the
earth  and  in  the  heavens  can  bring
about. It  is  not  in  the  power  ale


138  ■  JOURNAL  OF

of  anyone  man,  whether  it  be  brother
Brigham,  brother  Joseph  or  any  thnt
exist,  to  accomplish  the  redemp-
tion of  the  human  family,  unless
aided  by  the  Almighty.  We  are  not
only  working  in  our  own  interests,
but  in  the  interests  of  mankind,  and
we  should  seek  that  light,  intelligence
and  knowledge  nece*s*ry  in  the  cur-
rying out  of  the  designs  of  Jehovah,
and  associate  ourselves  with  that
grand  combination  and  union  be-
tween heaven  and  earth  for  the  uc-  !
complishment  of  His  purposes.

We  have  lately  been  organizing
ourselves  according  to  the  revelations  |
of  the  Almighty.  Our  organization
is  not  entirely  perfect,  but  we  shall  !
continue  to  approach  nearer  to  that  1
condition  until  every  man  is  placed
in  his  right  position  and  we  are  pro-
perly organized,  whereby  all  matters
connected  with  the  work  of  God  can
be  placed  in  their  proper  workiug
order,  all  of  which  will  be  accom-  ,
plished  if  we  follow  the  directions  of
our  late  venerated  President  By  1
continuing  in  this  good  work  we  shall
go  on  from  intelligence  to  intelligence,
and  from  knowledge  to  knowledge,
until  we  shall  see  as  wo  are  seen  and
know  as  we  are  known.  These  or-
ganizations of  Stakes  and  Wards  are
not  made  for  the  purpose  of  putting
men  in  positions,  neither  are  posi-
tions in  the  Priesthood  given  to  men
to  enable  them  to  strut  about  and  lord
it  over  their  fellows,  but  in  all  their
administrations,  men  should  have  the
fear  of  God,  understand  His  mind  and
renhze  their  responsibility  to  Him  for
their  acts  and  doings.  Men  holding
the  Priesthood  should  not  he  gov-
erned  by  personal  ambition,  but  feel
full  of  the  love  of  God,  the  Holy
Ghost,  light,  revelation,  mercy,  kind-
ness and  long*  suffering  toward  all
with  whom  they  are  associated.
These  are  the  kind  of  feelings  that
ought  to  be  expressed  and  manifested


DISCOURSES.

by  nil  those  holding  the  Priesthood,
W e  are  not  to  act  as  lords  over  God's
heritage,  but  ought  to  act  in  the  fear
of  the  Almighty,  aided  by  the  Holy
Spirit,  in  seeking  to  carry  out  the
virions  duties  devolving  upon  us,  for
little  or  iiiignificant  as  these  things
appear  to  as,  they  are  of  the  greatest
importance.  God  understands  hetter
the  wants  of  the  people  than  we  do,
for  lie  has  had  experience  that  we
hove  not  yet  acquired.  In  all  his
operations  He  is  governed  by  love,  and
he  desires  to  see  those  who  hold  his
authority  here  on  the  earth  exercise
it  for  the  welfare  of  the  human  fam-
ily, and  to  act  as  he  would,  with  the
same  parental  solicitude.  For  this
purpose  He  has  delegated  his  autho-
rity to  man,  as  described  in  the  Scrip-
tures, "  first,  Apostles,  secondarily
Prophets,**  etc„  that  the  Saints  might
bo  perfected,  "  until  we  all  come  to
the  unity  of  the  faith/'  This  was
said  iu  former  times  for  the  organ-
ization of  the  former-day  Saints,  and
is  applicable  to  the  case  of  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  Through  these  or-
dinances come  the  blessings  of  the
Gospel,  and  without  them  the  power
of  God  cannot  be  made  manifest  to
man  in  the  flesh.  Now  there  is  mure
in  this  than  is  apparent  to  the  super-
ficial observer.

We  have  and  have  had  various
organizations  of  the  holy  Priesthood.
We  have  had  a  First  Presidency,  and
sometimes  we  have  not.  It  was
sometime  before  a  First  Presidency
was  organized  in  the  early  days  of
the  Church,  and  then  it  was  quite
a  number  of  years  before  the  Twelve
Apostles  and  the  several  quorums
now  in  existence  were  organized.
The  Lord  has  been  developing  us  in
th  ese  matters,  and  there  is  a  beauty
and  a  harmony  in  the  organization
f  the  Church  that  cannot  be  found

any  other  community  in  the  world.
Before  the  Prophet  Joseph  departed,


he  said,  on  one  occasion,  turning  to  I
the  Twelve,  **  I  roll  the  burden  of  j
this  kingdom  on  to  you,"  and,  on
another  occasion,  he  said  their  place
was  next  to  that  of  the  First  Presi-
dency, and  he  wished  them  to  take
their  place  that  he  might  attend  to  ;
otlipr  duties,  such  as  translating,  etc.
At  the  time  he  was  taken  away  he
was  in  the  bloom  of  life  and  the  vigor
of  health,  and  although  his  depar-
tnre  was  sudden  and  unexpected  our
organisation  rendered  it  no  difficult
matter  to  decide  who  should  assume
the  leadership  of  the  Church.  There
wag  no  difficulty  in  the  matter;  it
was  understood  that  the  duty  rested
on  the  Twelve.  Why  ?  The  reve-
lation stated  that  the  Twelve  were  to
hold  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  in
connection  with  the  First  Presidency , '
which  were  handed  down  under  va-
rious circumstances.  You  will  find
in  the  history  of  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith,  that  this  matter  is  made
perfectly  plain.  He  said  there  was
do  authority  or  power  of  presidency
over  the  Twelve  except  the  First
Presidency,  and  where  he  was  not
there  was  no  presidency  over  the
Twelve.  Hence  President  Brigham
Young  said,  when  the  Prophet  Jo-
seph was  taken  away,  u  Thank  God
the  keys  of  the  kingdom  are  not
taken  from  us,"  and  being  head  of
the  Twelve,  he  assumed  his  position
and  so  acted  on  the  authority  he  held
a  id  According  to  the  rules  laid  down.
Thus  there  was  no  scattering,  con-
fusion or  difficulty  that  might  other-
wise have  existed  if  the  organization
of  the  Church  had  not  been  perfect.
When  President  Young  was  taken
away  the  same  condition  of  things
were  presented  again,  the  circum-
stances being  similar.  There  is  no
contention,  strife  or  difficulty,  be
cause  we  all  understand  the  principles
that  God  has  ordained  for  the  govern-
ment of  his  people* The Twelve  |


[  have  not  assumed  the  Presidency  of
j  the  Church  to  suit  themselves,  but
as  a  duty  which  they  could  not  ig-
nore. Men  of  the  world  cried  out
'*  The  Mormons  are  all  scattered
now,"  but  they  don't  know  anything*
about  the  character  and  mission  of
this  Church.  I  don't  think  we  have
been  much  scattered.  Our  hist
|  General  Conference  in  Salt  Lake  City
proved  how  much  scattered  we  were.
Our  voting  on  that  occasion  showed
a  cementing — a  uniting  together  of
the  people,  that  could  not  be  equalled
by  any  other  people  on  the  earth.  Ifc
may  be  asked  why  we  voted  at  Con-
ference in  the  manner  we  did.  Be-
cause it  was  the  way  that  God  or-
dained. Under  the  inspiration  of
the  Almighty,  Joseph  Smith-  organ-
ized this  state  of  things  at  a  General
Assembly  held  in  Kirtlandf  when  the
people  were  called  upon  to  vote,  and
they  did  so  in  the  same  manner  that
we  did  at  our  last  General  Cunfe-
i  re  nee.  You  will  recollect  that  about
the  19kh  of  January,  1841,  a  reve-
lation was  given  defining  the  various
positions  of  men  called  to  act  in  the
Priesthood.  First,  the  Lord  gave  to
the  Church  Hyrurn  Smith  to  be  Pa-
triarch, then  Joseph  Smith,  Jun  ,  to
be  Prophet,  Seer  and  R  relator  to  the
people,  and  Sidney  Rtgdon  and  Wil-
liam Law  for  his  Counselors,  Brig-
ham  Young  as  President  of  the
Twelve,  which  Twelve  he  called  by
name — then  the  High  Priests,  Sev-
enties and  Elders — then  again  the
Bishops  and  lessor  Priesthood.  Now,
says  he,  at  t he  next  General  Confer-
ence present  this  organization  to  the
C  inference  for  its  acceptance  or  re-
jection. At  the  next  Conference  the
various  quorums  were  presented  in
that  torm  and  the  people  voted  ns
quorums  and  with  uplifted  hands.
Some  of  these  men  that  the  Lord
had  named,  however,  were  rejected :
One  man  named  Hicks,  and  another


140


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Bishop  Ripley,  John  E.  Page,  one
of  the  quorum  of  the  Twelve,  was
also  rej octet],  but  after  a  hearing  wag
afterwards  restored.  The  Prophet
Joseph  told  the  people  to  vote  in
that  man i) or,  the  majority  of  the
several  quorums  would  form  a  quo-
rum  or  authority  that  would  be  de-
cisive. This  manner  of  voting-  was
observed  at  Far  West  also  ;  and  even
after  Joseph's  death  this  same  rule  I
was  observed,  though  not  with  the  ;
same  unanimity  as  at  our  General  Con-
ference. There  is  no  log-rolling —
no  bee  king  for  office,  but  our  idea  is
that  the  voice  of  God  should  dictate
and  then  the  voice  of  the  people.  ,
He  respects  our  rights,  as  he  did  the
rights  of  the  people  thousands  of
years  ago,  when  the  congregations
of  ancient  Israel  stood  up  and  said
Amen  to  the  voice  of  God  through
his  Prophets.  There  is  no  com  pul-
sion— no  forcing  the  human  mind —
no  driving  ;  but  every  one  should
have  a  full,  frank,  free  and  unfet-
tered opportunity  of  expressing  his
wish  for  or  agamst,  but  we  always
ought  to  consent  to  that  which  is
rijjht.  I  never  saw  more  unanimity
on  the  part  of  the  people  than  was  dig-
played  at  the  General  Conference
two  weeks  ago ;  there  could  not  pos-
fl  hly  te  more.  The  Twelve  stand
as  they  did  after  the  Prophet  Joseph
was  taken  a  way,  I  and  others  of  the
Twelve,  now  living,  were  with  them.
]Now  a  secotid  time  it  devolves  upon
the  Twelve  to  take  the  presidency
of  the  Church. Will  there  be  anv-

mi

thing  else  ?  1  cannot  say  ;  there  may
be,  when  the  Lord  deems  it  neces-
aary.  We  should  feel  as  Jesus  did
when  he  exclaimed,  u  Lord,  not  my
will,  but  thine  be  done/'  It  devolves
upon  the  Twelve  to  attend  to  the  du-
ties  the  Lord  has  placed  upon  them,
bat  they  need  the  faith  and  conti-
nence of  the  Saints  and  the  suste-
nance of  the  Almighty,  for  they  will


not  be  able  to  do  anything  of  them-
selves.

I  would  like  to  have  been  at  the
High  Priests'  meeting  held  here  last
evening,  but  could  not  attend  in
consequence  of  ill-health.  There  is
a  quorum  of  Hi^h  Priests  in  this
Stake,  and  it  is  proper  that  they
should  fully  understand  the  duties
of  their  office  and  calling,  which  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants
plainly  states.  It  is  an  ordinance,  as
therein  shown,  that  has  been  instiuted
for  the  purpose  of  qualifying  men
for  Presidents  of  the  different  Stakes
scattered  abroad.  Miny  circumstan-
ces have  occurred  since  the  com-
mencement, of  our  recent  organiza-
tions which  show  how  linle  prepared
the  High  Priests  were  to  take  upon
themselves  the  duties  of  their  office,
in  presiding  over  Stakes,  Wards,  etc.
We  have  had  to  take  hundreds  from
the  Quorums  of  Seventies  and  Elders
and  ordain  them  High  Priests  and
make  Bishops,  Bishops'  Counselors,
Presidents  of  Stakes  and  High  Coun-
cilors of  them.  Now  it  seems:  to
mu  that  if  the  High  Pries fs  hnd  un-
derstood and  performed  their  duties,
we  should  not  have  been  in  the  posi-
we  were  and  compelled  to  go  out-
side of  these  quorums  to  find  men
suitable  for  presiding.  I  dtaw  their
attention  to  this  matter;  and  you
Presidents  of  High  Priests  should
instruct  your  quorums  on  the  prin-
ciples of  Presidency,  that  when
called  upon  they  can  be  used  in  posi-
tions of  that  character.  Let  us  not
be  negligent  in  time  to  come,  I
say,  get  your  people  together,  instruct
them  in  the  duties  of  their  calling,
have  them  seek  after  light,  know-
ledge and  intelligence  as  to  the
requirements  of  their  exalted  posi-
tions, that  when  we  want  qua li tied
and  capable  men  we  may  know
where  to  find  them.  Now,  then,  is
it  wrong  to  take  others? If  one,


GOD  IS  AT  THE  HELM,  ETC,


who  by  the  Priesthood  be  holds  has

if

a  priority  of  claim  in  a  case  of  this
kind,  ts  otherwise  unqualified,  we
must  select  the  wisest  and  the  best,
whether  he  be  a  Seventy  or  an  Elder,
to  fill  such  position  and  to  admin-
ister correctly  in  the  things  of  God.

Now  let  113  go  on  to  the  Seventies-
There  are  large  numbers  of  them,
and  there  has  been  a  great  desire  to
push  men  into  quorums,  without  re-
gard sometimes  to  their  worth  and
fitness.  Now  what  is  their  duty?
Why,  to  go  abroad  and  preach  the
Gospel  to  all  nations.  How  many
do  this?  Very  tew.  Well,  say
scene,  we  go  when  called  upon  That
is  all  true ;  the  Seventies  have,  as
a  rule,  been  on  hand  to  go  forth
and  preach  ;  but  I  am  speaking  more
particularly,  of  the  nature  of  the
Priesthood  they  hold  and  the  duties
which  devolve  upon  them.  They
should  be  always  ready,  a  kind  of
minute  men  under  the  immediate
direction  of  the  Twelve,  to  go  forth
as  the  messengers  of  life  and  salva-
tion to  nil  nations  on  the  earth.  Are
you  Seventies  preparing  yum  selves
tor  this  ?  Are  you  prepared  to  stand
forth  as  men  of  God,  clothed  upon
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to
go  into  the  world  to  warn  the  people,
calling  them  to  repentance?  A  great
deal  has  been  accomplished  for  the
salvation  of  the  human  fimily,  but
we  are  only  starting  in.  We  have
sent  a  few  here  and  there,  and  al-
though we  think  we  have  doue  a  gre?it
work,  there  is  but  a  small  handful
of  people  to  show  for  it.  There  will
be  great,  and  wonderful  changes  on
the  earth  ;  war,  bloodshed  and  de-
solation will  stalk  through  the  land,
and  we  have  got  to  pursue  our
work  and  seek  after  the  light  of  reve-
lation to  guide  us.  We  talk  about
r.nd  wonder  who  the  biggest  man  is
— the  Seventy  or  the  High  Priest  ?
Let  us  seek  to  know  who  of  us  is


living  nearer  to  God  and  acting  in
such  a  manner  as  to  call  down  upon
us  the  power  of  God,  and  angels  will
administer  to  us.  We  cannot  tell
which  member  of  the  body  is  most
useful  to  us,  which  we  can  best  af-
ford to  spare — the  leg  or  the  arm,
the  rye  or  the  nose.  All  are  neces-
sary to  render  the  body  perfect,

Moses  appeared  to  the  Prophet
Joseph  to  confer  upon  hiru  the  keys
for  the  gathering  together  of  th*
dispensations  and  the  house  of  Israel
from  all  portions  of  the  earth.  We
have  got  to  preach  to  the  Limanites,
to  the  house  of  Judah  and  by  and
bye  the  ten  tribes.  We  must  bo
prepared  for  these  things  at  id  realize
the  importance  of  this  duty  and  tho
responsibilities  resting  upon  us  as
God's  holy  Pries' hood.  Now,  Elders,
you  ought  to  be  diligent  in  observing
the  laws  and  keeping  the  command-
ments of  God.  These  are  the  lead-
ing features  of  the  Melchizs  lek
Priesthood,  including  the  Patriarchs.
In  England  we  ordained  a  few  Pa-
triarehs,  and  I  remember  that  the
people  on  occasions  used  to  get  to*
gether  and  have  a  fcast,  and  then
the  Patriarch  would  bless  them.
This  is  the  way  some  of  the  ancient
Patriarchs  did.  The  people  ought
to  be  liberal  with  them,  but  men
holding  the  Priesthood  should  be
governed  by  higher  and  more  exulted
feelings  than  that  of  using  their  call-
ings for  the  purpose  of  merchan-
dizing. The  Eiders  should  stand  in
i  their  positions  as  men  of  God.  We
are  really  to-day  a  kingdom  of  Priests,
and  ought  to  wield  a  powerful  influ-
ence for  good  in  the  earth,  W©
should  get  our  spirits  right  and  act
in  righteousness.

I  The  Presidents  of  Stakes  have
important  positions;  they  preside
over  all  the  interests  ef  the  Church,

I  where  they  are  placed,  and  they
should  feel  like  acting  for  God,  and


rut  f;NAJ,  w  (Usc'ii;  j;sj^


1  .

they  «nd  their  counsel  shuuld  have
continually  with  them  the  light  of
revelation,  be  fall  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  quick  to  disscern.  There  is  no
officer  in  the  Church,  who  acts  with
a  single  eye  to  the  glory  of  God  but
what  will  have  wisdom  given  him
according  to  his  capacity.  The  P re-
sident of  the  Stake  presides  over  the
High  Council,  a  set  of  men  appoin-
ted and  ordained  to  adjudicate  all
matters  in  dispute  that  may  come
before  them,  and  they  should  act  in
all  meekness,  humility  and  wisdom,
seeking  intelligence  from  the  Foun-
dation of  Light,  so  that  they  can  act
in  righteousness  and  give  righteous  '
judgment.  Then  the  Bishop  is  a
common  judge  in  Israel,  acting  in
the  iuteiests  of  the  people;  his  duty
is  to  put  down  evil  and  root  out  ini-
quity. What  is  the  duty  of  the
Priests?  Only  to  hold  office  ¥  No ;  !
it  is  to  visit  the  members  of  the
various  Wards,  and  to  see  that  there
are  no  hard  feelings,  troubles  or  diffi-
culty among  the  people,  to  antici-
pate the  occurrence  of  anything  of
that  sort,  put  things  right  and  see
that  the  ordinances  of  the  Church
are  carried  out.  Then  the  Teachers,
who  are  helps  to  the  Priests,  whose
duty  it  is  to  go  among  t  he  people  and
talk  to  them  on  their  duties — not  like
so  many  parrots,  but  full  of  the  spirit
of  God,  And  where  there  may  be  dif-
ficulties to  settle,  and  it  is  not  within
the  power  of  the  Teachers  to  satis-
factorily adjust  them,  report  them  to
the  Bishop,  who  sits  as  a  common
judge  in  Israel,  and  to  adjudicate  all
such  matters.  If  thy  brother  offend
thee,  go  and  say  to  him,  4fc  Brother,
you  have  done  so  and  so,"  and  if  be
will  not  listen  to  yoa  nor  ask  forgive-
ness for  the  offense  he  has  given  you,
tiike  another  man  with  you — one
whom  you  think  has  influence  with
him,  and  one  whom  you  think  he
will  listen  to — and  let  him  talk,  and


if  the  offending  person  will  not  lis-
ten to  him,  report  him,  to  be  dealt
with  according  to  the  order  of  the
Church,  and  if  he  continues  obdurate
and  stubborn,  then  he  does  nut  belong
to  us.  Let  us  always  feel  like  ope-
rating together  for  the  good  of  each
other  and  for  the  kingdom  we  art
identified  with.

We  have  other  societies, — the
Young  Men's  and  Young  Ladies*
M  □  t  ual  I  in  pro  Yemen  t  Associations
and  the  Female  Relief  Societies,  A
great  deal  of  crrdit  is  due  to  our  sisters,
God  has  provided  them  as  helpmates
to  their  husbands,  and  it  is  the  duty
of  the  latter  to  cherish  and  protect
those  whom  God  has  given  unto
them,  and  show  them  hov  to  make
themselves  happy, —  teach  them —
our  wives  and  daughters — the  pure
principles  of  the  Gospel,  that  the
daughters  of  Zion  may  be  lovely
and  shine  as  the  light  and  glory  of
the  nge  in  which  we  live.  Sisters,
put  away  from  you  the  vanities  and
frivol  ties  of  the  world,  administer
to  the  poor  and  the  afflicted.  The
sisters  know  how  to  sympathize  with
and  administer  to  those  who  are
poor,  afflicted  and  downcast ;  and  let
the  brethren  help  them  in  their  kind-
ly ministrations.  The  young  men
should  be  encouraged  in  the  work
they  are  engaged  in,  and  their  Mu-
tual Improvement  Associations  ought
to  be  nourished  and  their  iuterests
promoted.  TheLjrd  has  encouraged
these  things  from  the  commence-
ment. The  first  sister's  relief  society
instituted  in  the  Church  was  pre*
sided  over  by  sister  Emma  Smith;
sister  Whitney  tTas  her  Counselor,
and  sister  Eliza  Snow  was  the  Sec-
retary.

The  spirit  of  Temple  -  building
seems  to  have  taken  possession  of
the  people.  One  Temple  has  already
been  built,  and  it  is  designed  to
build  three  more. We  are  prompted


Tilt;  EVERLASTING  'GOSPEL,  ETC


113


by  holy  influences  to  embark  in  this
labor.  The  Lord  said  he  would
send  his  servant  Elijah  to  turn  the
hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  children,
and  the  hearts  of  the  children  to
their  fathers,  and  this  matter  of
Temple-building  is  in  fulfillment  of
his  word.  We  are  seeking  not  only
to  administer  for  the  living,  but  for
the  dead.  There  are  many  queries
come  up  in  relation  to  the  manner
in  which  the  various  works  we  are
now  engaged  in  shall  be  accom-
plished. Shall  we  pay  our  Tithing]  !
Yes,  Shall  we  sustain  the  building
of  Temples?  Yes.  And  anything
outside  of  this  ]  Yes,  we  should  do
the  best  we  can  to  build  up  the
kingdom  of  our  God,  A  case  came
up  recently  in  Cache  Valley,  where  a
leading  man  wanted  to  know  if  he
could  not  have  the  Tithing  for  put-
ting up  the  Temple  in  that  Stake.
Now,  if  this  privilege  is  given  to
them  in  Cache  County,  they  will
want  it  in  Sanpete,  and  if  they  have


the  privilege  there,  they  will  want
it  in  other  places  where  Temples
are  being  erected,  and  what  next  ]
What  are  we  going  to  do  to  meet
all  the  expenses,  and  they  are  vari-
ous, which  occur  in  the  carrying  on
of  the  work?  By  and  bye  the
Tithing  may  be  sufficient  to  meet  all
requirements.  We  do  not  wish  Co
oppress  and  crush  the  poor  and
faithful  of  God's  people, — we  would
rather  say,  "Break  every  yoke,  and
let  the  oppressed  go  tree  !"  There
i*  no  tiling  contributed  for  the  work
of  God  but  what  should  be  accounted
for.  We  intend  to  tell  you  all
what  becomes  of  your  Tithes  and
offerings.  Through  these  ordinances
come  the  blessings  of  God.  Bro-
therly love  should  prevail  among  all
the  people  of  God,  and  we  should  be
more  united  in  our  temporal  and
spiritual  matters,  and  thereby  claim
the  promised  blessings.

May  God  bless  you  and  lead  you
in  the  paths  of  right.  Amen,


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,
Delivered  at  the  Quarterly  Coxfkrencb,  heuj  in  Uudks,  0<t.  l'L  1877,


(From  the  Off  den  Junction,)


THE  EVERLASTING  GOSPEL— TEMPLE  BUILDING— THE  HIGH  PIUKSTS  AND

! SEVENTIES — TO  THE  BISHOPS — TO  THE  SISTEK&


[This  report  is  from  long-hand
Botes,  and  though  not  verbatim,  is  as
nearly  so  as  possible. — Ed.]

I  am  happy  to  meet  my  brethren
and  sisters  at  this  Conference.  Since
I  was  last  here,  we  have  had  to


mourn  the  loss  of  our  veneiated
President,  Brig]  nun  Young,  It  has
cast  a  gloom  over  the  Saints  through-
out the  Territory,  and  all  feel  sorrow-
ful. He  led  Israel  for  a  long  time —
the  past  33  years,  andjn  leaving  us


HA


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


we  have  felt  his  loss.  Hi-  demise
\f*M  among  the  events  necessarily
associated  with  human  affairs  fur
the  Lord  manages  such  things  by
his  own  will.  1  remember  when
Joseph  was  taken,  but  his  death  was
not  like  that  of  Brigham  Young,  but
by  the  hands  of  a  ruthless  mob,  It
was  a  in^ter  ofjgreat  importance  to

t  wit  1 1  tliH


irYt-


^MieW  flip  Lord^veaf^d  Jhe  Gospel
linto  Joseph  Smith,  ana  unfolded
His  purposes  and  designs  to  \he
earth  when  He  gave  us  a  know-
ledge of  the  laws,  ordinances  of  the
Go^pekand  doctrines,  it  was  not  for
the  object  of  elevating  him  as  a  man,
but  "  was  done  in  the  interest  of
society  and  the  world  in  which  we
live — in  the  interest  of  the  living
and  the  dead,  according  to  the  <le-
crees  of  Jehovah  before  the  world
was  rolled  into  existence,  or  the  |
morning  stars  sang  together  in  joy.
In  the  last  da^s  He  saw  it  was  pro-
per to  restore  the  new  and  everlasting
w\ — nfew  to  the  world  because
I  TflRtions.  friH^s,  weakneMb^.
etc.,  but  everlasting  because  it  ex-
isted with  God,  with  Him  before  the
world  was,  and  will  continue  when
change  shall  succeed  change/  and
when  all  things  are  made  new  the
things  of  God  will  endure  on  and  on
forever.  So  it  is  an  everlasting  Gos-
pel, though  new  to  the  world.  It  was
introduced  in  the  interest  of  human-
ity :  our  fathers,  the  Prophets  and
men  of  God  who  once  administered
on  the  earth  and  are  now  admin ;JTer-
in  the  heavens,  had  a  hai  4  in
introducing  this  work.  To-day  they
feel  interested  in  rolling  forth  the
work  and  purposes  of  God  assigned
to  them  before  the  foundation  of  the
world.  It  is  to  them,  to  God,  to
Jesus,  that  we  are  iiidubted  for  the
light,  life  and  intelligence  commu-
nicated, and  we  shall  look  to  them


throughout  all  time  fur  infractions
to  sustain  and  direct  us.  We  talk
about  the  organize  ion  of  iheChutcti
being  better  attended  to  lately  than
formerly;  but  from  whom  did  we
recei  ve  it  ?  What  did  we  know  about
the  Apostles  till  God  revealed  it?
Nothing.  We  talk  about  the  Patri-
archs, the  First  Presidency ;  who
knew  of  them  tU|  God  revealed  it  ?
Nii/One  ?  The  fflgfc  PrfStre^  Seven-
ties, Elders— who  knew  about  them
or  their  calling,  duties  and  labors  till
God  repealed  it  ?  No  one.  It  is
the  case  with  the  Bishops,  Counselors,
Hi^h  Councilors,  t  h6  Lester  Priest-
In  jo.  I,  aud  wi£h  all  the  organizations
and  Quorums  ;  the  light  was  all  from
God.  jfrud  not  from  man.  It  came
throtfffh  fcvelationa  from  God  to
JosepKSmith,  the  Prophet  of  God  ;
hence  we  3  re  littiahted  to  the  Lotd  for
all  these  things,  for  nil  the  knowledge
we  have  in  relation  to  those  princi-
ples. Who  taught  the  gathering
principle  and  why  are  we  here  to-day?
Under  what  influence  did  we  come  ?
Many  latter-day*  tSiints  themselves
liurdlv  rcftbze  it.  We  re&tUdAflflfo
history  of  the  Church  that  at  a  cer-
tain time  there  was  a  revelation  given
in  the  Temple  which  was  built  at
Kirtland,  Ohio;  when  ,  Joseph  Smith
and  Oli  ver  Cowdery  were  seated  in  it,
several  important  personages  appeared
rmd  gave  certain  keys,  powiru  and
piivileges;  among  them  was  Moses,
who  represented  what  if*  termed  the
Gathering  Dispensation,  which  was
to  gather  Israel  from  the  four  quar-
ters of  the  earth  ;  you  will  find  it  in
the  edition  of  the  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants, and  I  refer  you  to  that,  where
it  is  positively  stated.  Why  did  we
gather?  Because  the  keys  of  this
dispensation  were  given  to  Joseph
Smith,  and  conferred  by  hirn  on  the
Twelve,  the  Seventies  and  others,  and
they  received  this  as  a  part  of  their
ministry,  their  endowments,  if  yon


THE  EVERLASTII

please,  and  when  they  called  upon
the  people  to  repent  and  be  baptized,
and  thry  did  so,  they  received  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  among  other  things
received  was  this  principle  of  gather-
ing, and  I  defy  all  Israel  to  have  so
gathered  without  these  keys  and  been
brought  together  as  they  are  to-day.
But  we  had  no  trouble  in  gathering
because  we  had  the  keys,  I  have 1
seen  the  time  when  the  people  were
almost  willing  to  sell  themselves  in
order  to  get  here,  and  you  know  this
to  be  true  ;  it  is  all  from  God.

Our  Temple  building  is  of  the  same
nature;  we  are  living  in  the  dispen-
sation of  the  fulness  of  times,  em-  j
bracing  all  the  powers,  principles,
doctrines  and  covenants  since  the
world  was,  and  among  the  rest  is
Temple  building.  The  speaker  here
read  from  the  Djctrine  and  Cove-
nants, concluding  with,  41  Before  the
great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord
shall  come,  I  will  turn  the  hearts  of
the  children  to  the  fathers,  and  of
the  fathers  to  the  children,  etc,  lest
I  come  and  smite  the  children  with  a
curse,"  Did  Elijah  hold  these  keys,"
He  did.  Bid  he  give  them  to  Joseph?
He  did.  You  will  find  it  in  the  same
revelation  as  that  quoted  ;  a  feeling
of  that  kind  sprang  up  in  the  breasts
of  the  Litter  day  Saints,  till  we  hardly
know  sometimes  why  we  do  so,  but
we  do.  We  built  our  first  Temple
in  Kirtland,  then  one  at  Nauvoo,  and
laid  the  foundation  for  one  at  Far
West,  Missouri ;  we  have  also  built
one  here  at  St  George;  it  is  a  beau-
tiful building,  and  we  are  performing
the  ordinances  there  for  the  living
and  the  dead.  Do  any  of  us  regret
the  part  we  have  taken  in  it  ?  I
think  not.  Then  we  have  been  doing
work  on  another  in  Salt  Lake,  ano-
ther in  Sanpete,  and  another  in  Cache
Valley,  all  of  which  will  be  magnifi-
cent buildings  when  completed ;  not
less  than  500  men  are  at  work  on


G  GOSPEL,  ETC.  145

them.  It  looks  odd  to  some  people
who  don't  know  what  it  means,  but
we  know  because  God  revealed  it  to
us  ;  we  are  always  on  hand.

The  year  past,  1876,  feelings  were
stirred  up  in  the  mind  of  the  Presi-
dent, and  he  called  on  the  Twelve,
the  High  Priests,  the  Seventies  and
Elders  to  subscribe  to  build  the  Tem-
ple at  Salt  L*ke.  Did  they  do  it  ?
Yes,  You,  here,  did  your  share  and
gave  means  freely,  as  thousands  did
throughout  the  Territory.  Why  did
he  feel  like  this  ?  Because  the  spirit
of  God  prompted  him.  Why  did
the  Seventies,  Priests,  Teachers,  etc.,
respond  so  promptly  ?  Because  the
spirit  of  God  rested  on  them  and  all
hands  wanted  to  help  build  the  Tem-
ples to  the  name  of  God,  that  we
might  administer  the  ordinances  ne-
cessary to  be  performed  for  the  living
and  the  dead.  If  we  turned  oul-
Temples  over  to  the  world  to-day,
they  would  not  know  what  to  do  with
them  ;  they  could  not  administer  in
the  ordinances,  and  we  should  not
know  if  God  had  not  taught  us ;  but
the  Gospel  brings  us  light  and  places
us  in  communion  with  the  heavens
through  time  and  eternity ;  they  tell
us  to  build  Temples  and  then  instruct
us  how  to  administer  in  them  for  the
living  and  the  dead — that  men  who
are  placed  here  are  for  a  certain  work,
and  they  are  helping  ua  to  do  our
work  and  are  operating  with  the  Gods
in  the  heavens  in  onr  behalf,  and  we
for  them — they  without  us  are  not
made  perfect,  nor  are  we  perfect
without  them.  It  requires  union —
nnion  cemented  by  indissoluble  ties  ;
it  unites  us  to  each  other  and  to
them,  and  enables  ns  to  act  intelli-
gently, and  when  we  get  through
with  our  affairs,  to  assist  others  in
the  accomplishment  of  theirs  in  the
interest  of  God  aud  humanity.  This
is  not  our  work,  nothing  that  ws
have  done;  God  has  done  it,  He

Vol.  XIX.


14G


JOURNAL  OF  LUSCUUKSKS.


wants  us  to  help  Him  and  He  will
help  as.  We  can  do  nothing  in  and
of  ourselves,  for  we  are  weak  and
frail  and  need  the  guidance  and  reve-
lation of  God  to  uphold  us.

We  have  had  a  Conference  here
to-day,  and  yon  ate  mure  perfectly
organized  than  before.  The  Lord
some  time  ago  wrought  on  t lie  mind
of  President  Young  to  have  a  more
complete  organization  in  the  Church,
and  the  Twelve  were  culled  on  to
visit  the  settlements  and  explain  the
order  of  the  Priesthood,  etc. ;  bj  or*
gnnize  the  Stakes  with  all  the  officers
— President  and  Counsel,  the  High
Council  and  Priests  under  the  Presi-
dent and  the  Counsel  over  the  Stake
— Bishops,  Elders,  the  Lesser  Priest*
hood,  and  all  those  called  local  autho-
rities iu  their  several  places,  and
have  everything  in  order,  the  Twelve
went  through  the  Territory,  and  as-
sisted by  the  Presidency,  the  work
w*»s  accomplished,  and  has  been  for
bo  me  time.  The  quorums  before  you
to-dav  are  the  result  of  their  work.
Whut  did  he  know  of  this  only  as
God  revealed  it  ?  Nothing.  Did
Brigham  Young  or  Joseph  Smith
know  it  ?  No,  only  as  God  revealed
it  But  the  necessary  information
has  been  given,  and  to-dny  the  Church
ia  more  perfectly  organized  than  ever
before,  perhaps  with  the  exception
of  the  general  assembly  at  Kirtland,
but  in  some  things  now  we  are  more
stable  and  complete  than  they  were
even  then.  It  is  proper  at  the  pre-
sent time  to  refer  to  sunh  things  for
instruction,  though  brother  Richards
is  well  posted  in  respect  to  these
matters,  and  has  taught  you  much
in  relation  to  them.

In  Kirtland,  Ohio,  we  had  many
things  revealed  through  the  Prophet
Joseph  ;  we  had  the  First  Presidency
over  the  High  Council,  and  another
in  Missouri.  Joseph  Smith  and  bis
Counsel  presided  over  that  in  Kirt-


land;  hence  some  things  at  times
to  k  pluce  that  were  peculiar  u>  -  >me
people;  when  they  were  at  a  loss  to
find  out  anything  pertaining  to  the
principles  and  doctrines,  the  Presi*
dency  inquired  of  the  Lord,  and
would  get  the  desired  infer ma  tie  nil*
Now,  I  would  make  a  remark  in
regard  to  these  things  here.  All
the  High  Councils  and  all  those
holding  the  Priesthood,  the  Presi*
dents  and  all  the  Hisliops  and  their
Counsel,  and  all  holding  positions  in
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God  that
are  faithful,  honest,  diligent  and
upright,  if  they  seek  unto  God  they
will  have  wisdom  imparted  to  them
under  all  ci  re  it  rn  stances  and  on  all
neeitsions,  as  to  what  course  they
should  pursue,  and  it  is  the  order  of
God  that  hli  should  have  His  Spirit
in  proportion  to  their  integrity  and
faith  ;  and  if  one  does  not  have  it  is
because  he  is  not  diligent  in  seeking
after  such  things.  As  brother  Joseph
F.  said  this  morning  he  could  have
revelation  for  himself,  though  not  to
regulate  the  Church;  it  would  be
the  privilege  of  the  President  of  the
Twelve  to  regulate  all  things  In  rela-
tion to  Zion  ;  but  the  other  principle
extends  to  all  grades  and  all  ir*en  in
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God,
each  in  his  place,  if  he  lives  his
religion  and  is  faithful  and  prepared
to  receive  the  truths  fro  in  God  so
that  he  can  instruct  the  children  of
men.  There  appears  at  times  to  be
a  discrepancy  among  all  of  us,  for
we  are  all  weak  and  intirm  ;  and
God  made  it  so  on  purpose,  ' that
man  might  not  glory  in  himself  but
in  the  God  of  Israel. bash  n  I

I  will  say  something  in  relation  to
High  Priests,  and  what  their  place
is  in  the  Church.  They  came  con-
spicuously before  us  in  the  late  orga-
nizations. The  speaker  again  read
from  the  Doctrine  and  Coveuants,

"  And,  again,  I  give  unto  you  John

.01  .off


THE  EVERLASTING  GOSPEL  ETC.


147


C  Smith/'  etc.  What  are  they  or*
ganized  for  ?  The  purpose  is  set
forth  in  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants.
They  are  a  sort  of  normal  school  to
prepare  the  people  to  preside ;  they
have  hardly  fulfilled  this;  perhaps  if
they  had  been  more  active,  and  be-
come acquainted  with  principles  for
which  they  are  organized,  we  should
not  have  to  ofdaiti  eo  many  High
Priests  from  the  Elders'  Quorum  to
make  Presidents  offtakes,  Bishops,
High  Conneils,  etc. ;  but  as  it  was
we  had  to  pick  np  the  material  where
we  could,  and  I  hope  we  will  have
better  material  nest  time.

I  hear  a  great  deal  said  about
which  is  the  "  biggest"  man.  The
"  biggest"  man  makes  no  difference
whatever.  I  ihiuk  that  the  man  who
can  be  most  like  a  little  child  will  be
the  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  God.
Greatness  does  riot  consist  of  talking
of  things,  but  in  doing  them.  We
are  now  just  beginning  to  move;
Zion  is  stretching  forth  "And  length-
ening out  her  cords :  we  want  no
more  baby's  play,  but  let  ns  have
wisdom,  tight,  revelation,  and  let  the
power  of  the  Priesthood  of  God  burn
in  the  hearts  of  Ihe  people  to  waken
them  to  a  knowledge  of  truth  ;  then
when  other  Stakes  are  to  be  orga-
nized we  can  apply  to  this  normal
school  and  get  men  prepared.  We
have  got  a  great  number  of  Seventies,
and  the  question  has  often  arisen,
Which  is  the  biggest,  they  or  the
lligh  Priests?  ,  I  say  I  don't  think
it  makes  much  difference  as  to  which
is  the  greater  or  smaller.  I  think
tile  body  of  Christ  was  not  one  mem-
ber, but  composed  of  many  parts.
How  which  member  of  your  body
would  you  like  to  be  without  ?  An
arm  or  a  leg?  No,  you  want  both.
Sddoes  the  Church.  But  which  is
the  most  useful  ?  If  yod  can  tell  me
which  of  those  members  is  most
nfieful  to  you,  I  will  let  you  know


!


which  is  the  most  useful  to  the
Church,  the  Hight  Priests  or  Seven-
ties. We  ought  to  magnify  the
Priesthood  we  hold,  and  be  satisfied
with  the  positions  we  hold.  We
have  sent  a  number  of  Elders  on
missions,  whose  duty  it  is  to  preach
to  the  people  of  the  earth.  They  go
when  they  are  called,  but  it  is  often
hard  work  ;  they  make  a  great  many
excuses — they  have  debts  to  settle,
families  to  support,  etc.  In  meeting
they  will  tfdk  about  who  is  the  "  big-
gest,"  and  when  they  are  gone  for  a
while  they  get  home  sick  and  want
to  return ;  they  say  "  there  is  no
place  like  home.3'  They  meet  diffi-
culties among  the  people,  who  d  m't
believe  much  that  is  told  them.  Did
they  ever  ?  Not  much.  We  don't
expect  to  gather  all,  we  will  take
one  of  a  city  and  t  wo  of  a  family,  and
bring  them  to  Zion ;  and  if  our  El-
ders abroad  would  be  more  particular,
and  real  is  3  that  they  are  messengers
of  the  Lord — exhibit  more  of  the
Apostolic  power,  and  have  the  light
of  the  Sprit  of  God,  they  would
realize  that  they  are  sent  to  teach,
not  to  be  taught;  they  would  rnear
surably  control  circumstances,  not  be
controled  by  them  altogether.  Here
are  the  Lainanites  to  attend  to;
when  we  are  through  with  them,  then
the  Jews,  then  the  Ten  Tribes,  and
then  the  earth  is  to  be  redeemed  and
the  power  of  God  prevail,  and  we
must  take  a  part,  for  we  are  not  Iter
to  look  so  mnch  after  our  own  affdr
to  build  up  Zion. The  Elders


as


ought  to  reflect  and  say,  M  What  can
I  do  to  help  on  the  work?  God  in-
spire my  heart  and  mind  and  soul,
that  I  may  help  to  build  up  the
kingdom  of  God."  That  is  the  way
to  feeL  Then  to  the  High  Councils
of  Stakes  and  to  the  Presidents  of
Stakes  I  would  say,  you  ought  to  feel
that  you  are  servants  of  the  living
God,  that  the  eye  of  the  great  Jeho-


148  JOURNAL  OF

vah  is  over  you,  and  be  working  in
tbe  interest  of  the  Gospel  We  are
not  here  to  build  up  ourselves,  but
to  build  up  Zion  and  the  kingdom  of
God  on  the  earth,  that  we  may
magnify  oar  calling  and  honor  our
God.  As  brother  Joseph  F,  said,  we
should  not  allow  ourselves  to  be
bartered  or  sold,  but  work  for  the
interests  of  Israel

The  Bishops  of  the  various  Wards
have  their  place ;  it  is  their  duty  to
attend  to  the  interests  of  their  Wards,
to  look  after  the  temporal  affairs
principally,  not  for  their  own  benefit,
but  that  of  the  people.  They  should
set  patterns  of  all  that  is  good  and
praiseworthy ;  their  duty  is  to  do
justice  and  adjudicate  in  all  matters
pertaining  to  a  Bishop's  court,  as  a
common  court  in  Israel,  and  they
•u^ht  to  judge  in  all  righteousness,
fidelity,  and  truth.  The  Priests
ought  to  be  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  should  be  full  of  intelligence  to
act  as  watchmen  over  the  people,
trying  to  stop  ill  feelings,  evil  actions,
eto.  The  Teachers  ought  to  assist
them,  and  visit  from  house  to  house,
and  see  that  no  iniquity  prevails.
The  Deacons  should  assist  the  Bish-
ops in  temporal  affairs,  and  be  faithful
in  their  calling,

Let  us  act  together  as  a  family  in
the  interest  of  the  Church  and  king^
dom  of  God,  for  thereby  come  the
blessings  promised.  We  are  now
•peratiug  for  these  things,  and  these
organizations  are  for  that  purpose.
The  Deacon  who  honors  his  calling
is  more  honorable  than  the  Apostle
who  does  not.  Can  we  find  Itigh  !
Priests,  Seventies,  and  Eiders  who
don't  pray  ?  Yes,  I  am  afraid  so.
And  farther,  in  relation  to  the  Teach-
ers, I  will  tell  you  my  rule*  When
they  come  to  me,  I  call  in  my  family
and  ask  them  to  instruct  ua  and  im-
part such  information  as  is  their
duty. That  is  the  way  I  feel  to*


DISCOURSES.

wards  the  men  who  come  in  that
capacity.  They  have  a  perfect  right
to  do  it,  it  is  their  duty,  and  thej
are  always  at  liberty  to  visit  mj
household.

We  all  have  a  great  Priesthood  if
we  magnify  it,  and  there  is  no  little
Priesthood,  In  relation  to  the  young
men,  I  would  say  that  in  their  associ-
ations a  good  spirit  is  growing — they
are  waking  up.  The  Young  Men's
Mutual  Improvement  Associations
and  other  organizations  of  our  young
men  are  very  praiseworthy.  Young
men,  the  burden  of  the  kingdom  will
yet  roll  on  your  shoulders,  and  you
must  prepare  for  it.  If  you  will  go
to  God  and  ask  for  wisdom,  he  will
give  it  to  you.  Get  the  best  books,
the  Book  of  Horizon,  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  and  read  our  own  publi-
cations, you  will  find  such  intelli-
gence as  you  never  dreamed  of  Ask
God  for  faith.  Get  all  the  sciences,
arts,  and  useful  learning  you  can
from  schools;  get  nothing  false,  but
the  things  pertaining  to  earth  and
the  elements,  and  how  to  use  them;
when  you  meet  let  it  be  in  the  fear
of  God,  and  he  will  bless  you.

A  word  to  the  sisters*  They  have
their  associations  and  societies — all
of  which  are  good  and  praiseworthy.
They  form  a  part  of  us,  for  the  man
is  not  without  the  woman,  nor  the
woman  without  the  man.  It  takes  a
man  and  a  woman  to  make  a  man;
without  woman,  man  is  not  perfect;
God  so  ordained  it.  We  are  aiming
at  celestial  glory,  and  when  we  reach
that  exaltation,  will  we  have  our
wives  ?  Yes.  The  women  have  to
manage  household  affairs ;  they  must
rear  the  children  properly,  and  culti-
vate those  principles  which  exalt  and
beautify,  that  all  may  move  on  plea-
santly and  harmoniously.  In  the
Relief  Societies  they  discharge  their
duties  better  than  we  could,  because
of  their tender  sympathies  and


gentler  natures.  Joseph  Smith  orga-
niied  a  Relief  Society  in  Nauvoo  as
far  back  as  that ;  Emma  was  presi-
dent, sisters  Whitney  and  Cleaveland
were  her  counselors,  and  Eliza  R.
Snow  secretary,  who  has  visited  yon
often,  and  whom  you  well  know.
They  allowed  the  society  to  sleep  for
&  while,  but  they  are  now  waking  up.
What  should  they  teach  ?  I  can't
go  into  details,  but  they  should  teach
dress,  speak  and  act  aright,  diffuse
correct  principles,  and  let  us  have
sisters  growing  up  fit  to  associate
with  the  angels  of  God.  I  want  you
to  make  home  a  heaven  for  your
husbands,  that  when  they  come  there
they  will  feel  happy,  cheerful,  and
<jom Portable  in  their  households.  Do
away  with  evil  speaking — let  love,
kindness,  and  friendly  feelings  pre-
Tail  j  and  if  the  sisters  want  th*  bre-
thren to  give  them  a  few  bushels  of
wheat  to  take  care  of,  let  them  have
it,  it  is  not  much,  and  we  may  some
day  be  glad  we  did  so*  I  have  read
of  an  extravagant  man,  whose  wife
proposed  that  he  give  her  so  much —
ten  or  twenty  dollars  to  keep  house
with,  and  instead  of  spending  it  she


saved  it  in  the  Bible.  Finally  a
financial  crash  came,  and  he  went  to
his  wife  for  consolation.  She  told
him  to  read  the  Bible  for  comfort,
and  when  he  opened  the  leaves  the
money  dropped  out.  What  does
this  mean  ?  he  said.  His  wife  said,
you  were  careless,  and  I  took  care  of
the  money  you  gave  me  ;  and  this
money  saved  him  from  ruin.  There-
fore let  the  sisters  take  care  of  the
wheat.

The  speaker  here  referred  to  the
question  of  using  the  Tithing  for
Temple  building,  saying  if  it  were
all  paid  in  that  was  owing,  we  need
ask  nothing  farther,  but  such  was
not  the  case.  He  then  referred  to
the  Perpetual  Emigration  Fund,
saying  there  was  over  $1,000,000
due  it  from  those  who  had  been
emigrated,  and  he  hoped  it  would  be
paid  without  further  delay-  At  pre*
sent  no  radical  changes  would  be
made  in  the  matter  of  Temple  build-
ing. May  God  help  Israel  and  pre-
pare us  for  an  inheritance  in  his
kingdom,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


150


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


•iff
iftl
iioh


168  T


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR, « 0  IT

DELIVERED  IX  THE  FOURTEENTH WaKD  ASSEMRLY ROOMS, SlM>AY A FTSR*

noon,  Nov,  14,  1877- h  Jud  ^IhtJub  ohii  05a


{Reported  by  Geo.  F*  Gibte.)

GATHERING  THE  RESULT  OF  REVELATION — TEMPLE  BUILDING  SIMILAR —
THE  RESTORATION  uF  THE  PRIESTHOOD—- MINISTERING  FUR  THE  DEAD
— THE  GOSPEL,  GOD-SUSTALNED, iBtlJ  emoo  V  Jllj  iisxiw  Juril  abaixfeufl


There  is  something  novel  as  wel
as  interesting  in  the  contemplation
of  the  subject  that  has  been  referred
to  by  brother  Folsoru.  The  ideas
entertained  by  the  Latter-day  Saints
are  different  from  those  believed  in
by  any  other  people  upon  the  face  of
the  earth ;  and  there  is  a  feeling  and
spii  ii  resting  upon  the  Saints  that  is
not  known  nor  experienced  among
any  other  people*  The  way  we  have
been  led  is  very  peculiar  and  differs
entirely  from  anything  else  that
exists  anywhere  in  the  world*  Oar
gathering  together,  the  kind  of  Gos-
pel that  is  preached,  the  disposition
and  feeling  to  build  Temples,  a  strong
impression  that  seems  to  rest  upon
all  the  people,  is  something  in  it.se If
very  remarkable.

Now  in  relation  to  our  gathering,
who  is  there  anywhere  else  in  the
world  that  feel  ns  the  Latter -da*
Saints  do  ?  Yon  do  not  find  it  any.
where,  and  nothing  but  the  Spirit
of  God  operating  upon  the  minds  of
the  people  could  have  induced  them
to  gather  together  as  they  have  done.
This  spirit  was  imparted,  as  the
Holy  Ghost  is,  by  the  laying  on
of  hands,  through  the  medium  of
the  Priesthood.  And  this  peculiar-
ity seemed  all  the  more  striking  at


first,  for  as  soon  as  the  principle  of
the  gathering  was  first  preached,
the  people  needed  no  convincing-
argu merit,  for  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
had  revealed  it  to  them,  and  they
knew  it  was  true.  And  it  mattered
not  where  people  hoard  it,  or  in
what  language  it  was  preached,  they
immediately  had  a  strong,  fervent
desire  to  gather  to  Zion,  to  assem-
ble with  the  Saints  and  worship  with
them.  And  however  foolish  many  of
us  have  acted  since  that  time,  yet
these  were  the  feelings  that  welled  up
in  our  bosoms;  and  they  came  be-
cause of  certain  principles  having
been  developed  through  Joseph
Smith.  You  that  are  acquainted
with  the  history  of  Joseph  Smith
well  know  that  in  the  Temple  in
Kirtland,  among  other  visions,  mani-
festations and  administrations  he
received  was  one  in  which  the  Pro-
phet Moses  appeared  to  him,  who
committed  to  him  the  keys  of  the
gathering  dispensation.  It  was  he
who  led  the  exodus  of  Israel  in
former  times,  and  like  all  other
men  who  have  held  the  holy  Priest-
hood and  have  been  faithful  in  the
discharge  of  their  duties,  he  not  only
administered  in  time  but  continues
to  minister  in  eternity. And  hold-


GATHERING,  ETC.


151


ing  the  keys  of  this  Priesthood,  he
was  the  proper  person  to  confer
them  upon  the  Prophet  Joseph  ;  and
on  doing  so,  he  tola  Joseph,  that  he
had  bestowed  uoon  him  *'  the  kt*ys
of  the  gathering  of  Israel  from  the
four  parrs  of  the  earth  and  the  lead-
ing of  the  Ten  Tribes  from  the  land
of  the  north.11  And  this  was  in
fulfilment  of  a  significant  scripture
which  says,  "  That  in  the  dispensa-
tion of  the  fullness  of  times  he
mitfht  gather  together  in  one  all
things  in  Christ,  both  which  are  in
heaven  and  which  are  on  earth  ;  even
in  him."

Hence,  after  men  had  been  bap-
tized for  remission  of  sins,  and  had
hands  laid  upon  their  heads  for  the
reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost  by  those
holding  this  Priesthood  and  autho-
rity, uf  which  this  was  one  of  the
.principles,  they  began  immediately
to  have  the  Heeling  to  gather  to
Zion.  This  has  been  spoken  of  by
ancient  men  of  God  as  one  of  the
erents  ot  the  Utter  days*  One  of
the  Prophets  retelling  to  it  says,
44 1  will  take  you  one  of  a  city,  and
two  of  a  family,  and  I  will  bring
you  to  Zion.  And  I  will  give  you
pasrors  according  to  mine  heart,
which  shall  feed  you  with  knowledge
and  understanding*"  It  wad  through
this  principle  and  this  ordination,
with  the  spirit  attending  it,  first  con-
ferred upon  Joseph  Smith,  and  after-
wards upon  the  believers  of  the  Gos-
pel  by  obedience  thereunto,  through
the  administration  of  baptism  ami
ot  the  laying  on  of  hands  by  the  El-
ders, that,  brought  the  people  together
as  they  aru  to-day.  Wherever  this
Gos^eJ  has  bet^n  preached,  believed
and  obe\ed,  this  desire  to  leave
the  lands  of  their  nativity,  to  gather
with  the  Saints,  has  been  strongly
manifested ;  and  so  strong  has  it
been,  that  1  have  had  men  otter  to
bind  themselves  to  my  service  tor


quite  a  length  of  time,  or  willing  to
do  anything  required  of  them,  pro-
vided they  could  lie  assisted  to  the
gathering  place  of  the  Saints,  And
it  was  to  meet  this  universal  want
that  the  Perpetual  Emigrating  Fund
was  gotten  up,  which  has  been  the
means  of  bunging  out  to  this  coun-
try thousands  of  people,  the  majority
of  whom,  perhaps,  by  their  own  ex-
ertions, never  could  have  accumulated
the  necessary  amount  of  means  to
have  brought  themselves  here;  and
as  each  one  was  required,  after  being
assisted,  to  refund  the  amount  re-
ceiver! for  this  purpose,  others  could
realize  its  benefits  in  like  manner,
and  thus  the  fund  became  perpetual*
Temple  building  is  another  char-
acteristic associated  with  this  Gos-
pel that  is  in  itself  peculiar  We
are  here,  as  Jesus  was,  not  to  do
our  own  will,  hut  the  will  of  Him
who  sent  us;  and,  as  he  was,  so  we
are  expected  to  do  and  perform  such
things  as  may  be  required  of  us  by
the  Almighty.  This  is  really  the
position  we  occupy  as  Latter  -  day
Saints,  if  we  could  fully  compre-
hend the  situation.  There  are  cer-
tain powers  and  privileges,  rights,
immunities  and  blessings  connected
with  this  Gospel  that  do  not  exist
anywhere  else,  and  this  is  one  of
them.  We  arts  told  that  the  Gospel
brings  life  and  immortality  to  light,
and  without  it  there  is  no  correct
knowledge  of  life  and  immortality.
We  did  not  understand  either  our
own  position,  nor  the  position  of
the  world  ;  we  Could  not  compre-
hend anything  of  God,  or  the  laws
of  God,  or  the  laws  ut  life,  until  we
became  acquainted  with  the  Gos|>eI.
Kvery  good  anil  every  perfect  gift
proceeds  Irom  God,  in  whom  there
ih  no  variableness  or  shadow  of  turn-
ing. And  the  world  generally  are
ignorant  of  God,  Why  ?  Because
we  u:e  told  that  no  man  knows  the


152  JOURNAL  OF

things  of  God  but  by  the  Spirit  of
God.  And  if  they  cannot  obtain  a
knowledge  of  God  only  by  the  Spirit
of  God,  unless  they  receive  that
Spirit  they  must  remain  ignorant  of
these  priuciples.  And  it  matters  not
what  the  learning,  what  the  intelli-
gence, what  the  research,  the  philo-
sophy, or  religion  of  man  may  be,
the  tilings  of  God  cannot  be  compre-
hended, except  through  and  by  the
Spirit  and  revelations  of  God.  And
this  can  only  be  obtained  through
obedience  to  the  principles  which
God  has  and  shall  ordain,  sanction
and  acknowledge.  And  hence,  in
these  last  times,  he  first  communi-
cated a  knowledge  of  himself  to
Joseph  Smith*  long  ago,  when  he  was
quite  young.  Who  in  that  day  knew
anything  about  God?  Who  had
had  any  revelations  from  Him,  or
who  knew  anything  in  relation  to  the
principles  of  life  and  salvation  ?  If
there  were  any  persons  I  never
heard  of  them,  nor  lead  of  them,
nor  never  met  them.  But  when  the
Lord  manifested  himself  to  Joseph
Smith,  presenting  to  him  his  Son
who  was  there  also,  saying,  "  This
is  my  beloved  Son,  hear  ye  him  ;  "
be  then  knew  that  God  lived  ;  and
he  was  not  dependent  upon  anybody
else  for  that  knowledge*  He  saw
him  and  heard  his  voice,  and  he
knew  lor  himself  that  there  whs  a
God,  and  of  this  he  testified,  seal-
ing his  testimony  with  his  blood.
The  evidence  of  the  existence  of
God  that  he  received,  none  but  God
could  impart.  Well,  what  was  the
result  ?  He  told  him  how  others
might  obtain  the  same  knowlege  of
him  and  of  his  lawn  ;  and  he  made
him  acquainted  with  a  medium
through  which  he  could  obtain  a
knowledge  of  these  things,  And
bow  did  he  do  it  ?  By  commu-
nicating unto  him  a  knowledge  of
the  everlasting  Priesthood,  and  send-


DISCOURSES,

ing  that  Priesthood  to  reveal  unto
him  the  laws  and  the  ordinances
thereof.  Hence,  as  early  as  Sep-
tember 21at,  1823,  an  angel  said
to  Joseph  Smith,  "  Behold,  I  trill
reveal  unto  you  the  Priesthood/*
He  was  informed  there  had  to  be  a
certain  ordinance  attended  to,  viz.,
baptism.  And  as  John  the  Baptist
had  held  the  keys  of  that  Priest-
hood, in  generations  gone  and  past,
he  was  sent  to  confer  upon  him  and
upon  Oliver  Cowdery  what  is  known
as  the  Aaronic  Priesthood,  which
authorized  them  to  baptize  each  other
for  the  remission  of  sins. And  this

i  heavenly  messenger  did  come  and
did  so  ordain  them,  on  May  1-Hh,
18^9,  saying — "  Upon  you,  my  fel-
low servants,  in  the  name  of  Mes-

l  siah,  I  confer  the  Priesthood  of
Aaron,  which  holds  the  keys  of  the
ministering  of  angels,  and  of  the
Gospel  of  repentance,  and  of  bap-
tism for  t lie  remission  of  sins;  and

!  this  shall  never  again  be  taker,  from
the  earth,  until  the  sons  of  Levi  do

I  offer  again  an  offering  unto  the  Lord
in  righteousness/'  (D  C.,  page  100  )
And  what  next? It  was  necessarv

if

then  that  other  institutions  shuuld
be  introduced  and  other  principles
developed ;  and  consequently  the
Apostles  Peter,  James  and  John
appeared,  bringing,  and  conferring
on  their  heads  the  Melchisedek
Priesthood,  which  holds  the  keys  of
the  mysteries  and  revelations  of  God,
and  by  which  they  could  lay  their
hands  upon  men  for  the  reception  of
the  Holy  Ghost.  And  when  they
received  this  gift,  it  "  brought  things
past  to  their  remembrance,  led  them
into  all  truth  and  showed  them  things
to  come ;  "  it  opened  up  communica-
tion between  the  heavens  and  the
earth,  whereby  others,  as  well  as
Joseph  Smith,  could  know  that  God
lived,  and  obtain  for  themselves
through  the  administration  of  the


GATHERING,  ETC


153


ordinances,  a  knowledge  of  their  [
acceptance  with  him,  and  of  their
relationship  to  him,  and  also  obtain
a  knowledge  of  heavenly  as  well  as
earthly  things.  So  that  Brst,  Joseph
Smith  having  received  this  know-
ledge that  God  lived,  and  others
through  the  medium  that  God  or-
dained were  accorded  the  same  pri-
vilege. Thus  there  was  opened  up  a
communication  with  the  heavens  ;
not  only  with  Joseph  Smith  and
Oliver  Cowdery,  and  those  imme-
diately associated  with  them,  but
with  those  also  who  received  the  Gos-
pel ;  and  as  the  Scriptures  say,  44  But
as  many  as  received  him,  to  them
gave  lie  power  to  become  the  sons
of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe
in  his  name  ;  which  were  born,  not
of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  flesh,
nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."
And  they  received  that  Spirit  where-
by they  were  able  to  comprehend
the  principles  of  truth;11  and  as
the  Apostle  John  says,  4t  But  ye
have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,
and  ye  know  all  things.  But  the
anointing  which  ye  have  received
of  him  abideth  in  you,  and  ye  need
not  that  any  man  teach  you:  but,
as  the  same  anointing  teacheth  you
of  all  things,  and  is  truth  and  is  no
lie,  and  even  as  it  hath  taught  you,
ye  shall  abide  in  him."  How  did
they  receive  this  anointing  ?  By
repenting  of  their  sins,  by  being
baptized  by  one  having  the  autho-
rity of  God  for  the  remission  of
buis,  »nd  by  having  hands  laid  upon
their  heads  for  the  reception  ot  the
Holy  Ghost,  They  received  this
spirit  precisely  in  this  manner,  aud
hence  they  had  this  knowledge  for
themselves;  which  knowledge  all
Latter- day  Saints  have  who  are
living  their  religion,  walking  hum-
bly and  obediently  before  God,
Heiic*',  this  is  a  pirt  of  what  we
term  the  Gospel;  it  is  part  of  what


we  call  the  principles  of  life,  or  the
laws  of  life,  for  it  leads  to  life,  it
leads  to  God,  it  leads  to  a  knowledge
of  the  laws  of  God,  and  a  know-
ledge of  the  principles  of  truth,
and  to  an  acquaintance  with  those
principles  which  are  calculated  to
exalt  and  ennuble  mankind  both  in
time  and  through  all  eternity*  There
is  nothing  new  in  it,  and  yet  there
is.  It  is  called  the  new  and  ever-
lasting  Gospel.  Singular,  that  an
everlasting  thing  should  be  new.
But  it  is  a  principle  that  has  existed
with  God,  or  with  the  Gnils,  if  you
please,  in  the  eternities,  and  it  has
been  communicated  from  time  to
time  to  the  children  of  men.  And
although  wc  have  a  great  amount  of
intelligence,  learning  and  science,
and  everything  else  considered  wor-
thy among  men,  yet  we  have  nothing
in  all  of  this  that  gives  a  knowledge
of  the  laws  of  life.  It  needs  a  de-
velopment from  God  to  unravel  these
things,  and  mike  us  acquainted  with
our  true  position.  Hence  although
it  is  new  to  us,  it  is  nevertheless  an
everlasting  principle.  We  are  mortal
and  immortal  beings,  we  have  to  do
with  time  and  also  with  eternity.
And  as  the  things  of  the  future  aie
hidden  from  men  and  can  only  be
known  through  the  medium  ot  the
Gospel,  this  means  was  made  use  of
by  the  Almighty  for  the  introduction
of  the  principles  of  truth  and  the
placing  of  mankind  in  the  position
to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  him  and
his  laws.  Having  been  put  in  this
position,  we,  every  one  of  us,  men
and  women  who  are  living  our  reli-
gion, preserving  ourselves  in  the
purity  of  the  Gospel  and  acting
honorably  and  honestly  before  God
and  man,  have  a  right  to  know  and
understand  for  ourselves  the  princi.
pies  of  truth  which  we  have  em-
braced, I  well  remember  a  remark
that  Joseph  Smith  male  to  me  up-


JOUHNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


wards  of  forty  years  ago*  Said  Ire,
'*  Elder  Taylor,  yon  bavi?  been  bap-
tized, yon  have  bud  hands  laid  upon
your  head  for  the  reception  at  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  you  have  been  or-
daincd  to  the  holy  Priesthood.  Now,
it  you  will  continue  to  follow  the
leadings  of  that  spirit,  it  will  always
lead  yoii  right,  Sometimes  it  might
be  contrary  to  your  judgment  ;  never
mind  that,  follow  its  dictates  ;  and
if  you  be  truu  to  its  whisperings  it
will  in  time  become  in  you  a  principle
of  revelation,  so  t lint  you  will  know
all  things/'  That  agrees  precisely
with  some  of  the  remarks  of  John  in
the  parage  I  have  qtn ited  to  you.
"  Yes,  haw.  an  miction  irorn  t lie  Holy
One,  aud  ye  know  all  things,  and
Tired  not  that  any  man  teach  you ;
but  the  h)>me  anointing  teacheth  you
all  things."  Now,  that  which  John
taught  was  the  everlasting  Gospel,
and  that  which  Jo>eph  Smith  taught
was  the  everlasting  Gospel.  That
which  John  taught  has  been  forgot-
ten long  ago  by  the  people,  they  are
not  in  possfssion  of  Jt  and  conse-
quently they  cannot  comprehend  it,
And  hence  when  Joseph  Smith  re-
vealed it,  he  preached  the  new  and
everlasting  Gospel  ;  new  to  the  gene-
ration that  lives,  and  everlasting  be-

d<  cause  it  has  existed  in  all  ages  and
times  when  God  has  revealed  himself
to  the  human  family*

But  to  return  tu  this  singular
thing  of  Temple  building,  which
I  will  refer  to  again,  Why  do  we
want  to  build  these  Temples  ?
Some  of  us  hardly  know  ;  but  we  do
want  to  build  it. What  a  most  singu-

* lar  thing  !  Just  consider  the  amount
of  labor  that  has  already  been  per-
formed throughout  this Territory,  S
Surely  the  people  have  some  motive  1
in  view. The  mechanic  or  the  labor-  i
er  does  not  go  to  work  unless  he  gets

2i  ■  ft  recompense  of  some  kind.  When
men  devote  themselves  to  any  kind


of  labor,  whether  mental,  physical,
mechanical  or  scientific,  they  have
some  particular  object  in  viow.  So
it  is  also  in  relation  to  these  matters.
I  have  already  referred  to  it  ;  but
many  of  us  can  hardly  realiz-;  why  it
is  that  we  are  engaged  in  these  tilings.

I  will  go  back  again  and  refer  to
another manifestation. We  find,
among  others  that  appeared  to  Joseph
Smith  was  Elijah  the  Prophet  ;  and
what  did  he  come  for? His  special
mission  was  to  u  turn  t lie  hearts  of
the  fathers  to  the  children,  and  the
hearts  ot  the  children  to  I  he  fathers."
And  the  same  scripture  informs  us  of
his  coming  u  before  that  great  and
terrible  day  of  the  Lord/' What  is
meant  by  this,  say  the  world  ?  It
means  that  we  are  the  offspring  of
God  ;  it  means,  as  the  scriptures  say,
that  God  is  the  Father  of  the  spirits
ot  all  fl^sli  j  it  means  that  we  have  to
do  with  eternity  as  well  as  time  ;  it
moans  that  we  have  to  do  with  thiugs
past,  with  things  present  and  with
things  to  come;  it  means  that  being
the  children  of  our  Heavenly  Father,
we  are  or  ought  to  be  under  his  gov-
ernment, yielding  obedience  to  him,
and  that  we  ought  to  operate  with
him  in  exi ending  mercy  and  love  and
salvation  to  the  living  and  the  dead,
according  to  certain  laws  unknown  to
men  generally  ;  but  kno  wn  unto  God
and  now  revealed  again  by  him  for
the  salvation  of  our  race. It  mearis
that  God  is  the  Father  of  the  human
familv  and  is  interested  in  the  whole
ot  his  progeny,  these  that  now  exist
and  those  who  have  passed  away.
It  means  that  there  are  certain  laws
in  the  heavens  that  all  men  have  to
do  witli  that  must  be  complied  with,
if  not  in  time  in  eternity. It  means
that  all  men  who  ha%*e  lived  and  died
without  a  knowledge  of  the  Gospel,
shall  be  placed  on  the  same  plane  as
ourselves  through  the  plan he  haa
L pruvided,  giviug  all  of  his  children,


-


an  equal  I  our  doctrine  be  true  they  think  it:
of  the  I  wntitd  be  cruel  I  bat  this  state  of
■  ;•  - .  >h, ,uM  cxi>r.  Why,  G<  d  is
more  merciful  than  man  i*<,  be  pos-
sesses more  sympathies  with  human
nature  than  man  does  or  ever  did,
one  with  another.  The  Lord  has
been  feeling  after  the  welfare tif -man-
kind all  the  flay  Ion?,  from  the  first
cum  men  cement  of  the  world  to  th»
present  time- But  there  are  certain


whether  living  or  dead,
chance  to  a  vail  themsel
means  of  salvation  ;  and  that  we  are
to  operate  in  their  behalf,  working
out  certain  ordinances  for  them  which
they  are  now  incapable  of  doing  for
themselves.  It  means  that  as  God
feels  interested  in  the  welfare  of  all
his  f'amilv,  men  in  the  flesh  who  are
in  possession  of  his  spirit  and  the
light  of  eternity,  having  come  to  a

knowledge  of  him  am!  his  eternal  ]  eternal  lawa  among  the  Gods  in  the
laws,  should  co-operate  with  him  in
the  accomplishment  of  this  object
And  it  means  loo  that  if  he  bus  con-


ferred the  Gospel  and  the  power
thereof  and  the  Aaronic  and  Melchise-
dek  Priesthood*,  sending  his  messen-
gers from  the  heavens  for  this  purpose,
that  it  is  not  for  a  phantom,  it  is  not
for  a  plaything  to  be  trifled  with  at
pleasure ;  but,  it  is  thut  we  should
operate  with  God  and  with  tin  Priest-
hood who  lived  before  us,  in  the
accomplishment  of  the  tilings  of  Gud
on  the  earth.  That  is  what  it  means.


eternal  worlds  which  render  if  neces-
sary that  mankind  shall  l?o  through
certain  ordeals  and  observe  certain
ordinances  and  be  governed  by  certain
laws  before  they  can  be  exalted  in
the  kingdom  of  God.  '  And  as  Satan


has  been  operating  in  opposition  to
the  Lord*s  designs,  and1  having  so  far
succeeded  in  drawing  men  after  him,
it  became  necessary  that  these  ordi-
nances that  God  has  instituted  should
be  introduced  and  that  man  should
be  governed  by  them.  Hence  it  was
necessary  that  a  Redeemer  hhotild  be


And  hence,  says  he,  when  Elias  comes  ,  provided,  which  was  perfectly  under-
lie will  "  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fat  hers  !  stood  by  one  of  the  Prophets  who
to  the  children,"  etc.  It  is  not  for  j  said  "  Deliver  him  from  going  down
mankind  to  come  and  live  and  exist  to  the  pit:  I  have  found  a  ransom/*
a  little  while  to  be  blotted  out  and  Who  wns  he  ?  When  Jesus  appear-
nothing  more  of  them  ;  but  it  is  that ed,  says  John,  "  Behold  the  Limb  of


God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the
world/' He  was  the  ransom.

What  about  the  others,  they  who
have  died  without  a  knowledge  of  the
Gospel  ?  They  are  amply  providea
for.  The  Lord  bus  shown  us  that  we
must  build  Temples  in  which  to
officiate  for  them. We  have  eom-


they  should  be  enlightened  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  that  they  should  sym-
pathize with  and  have  regard  for  all
he  human  family  living  and  dead,
eling  desirous  to  promote  their
happiness  and  welfare,  as  he  himself
does.  How  often  when  abroad  preach-;
ing  this  Gospel  have  I  heard  men
sny,  and  you  have  heard  the  same
sentiment  expressed,  "If  this  is  true

what  has  become  o!  our  fathers?  are  manifesting  themselves  by  dreams
they  to*  be  lost  forever?"  And  then  -  and  visions,  and  in  various' ways  to
yon  know  they  have  certain  peculiar  '  those  most  interested  in  their  welfare,
ideas  about  heli  and  damnation,  the  '  And  hating  inaugurated  this  state  of
lake  of  tire  and  brimstone  into  which  things  for  our  guidance  that  we  have
a  certain  portion  of  the  human, family  to-day,  with  Presideifts,  Apostles,
are  to  be*  cast  to  be  forever  burning  J  Presidents  of  Stakes,  High  Councils,
and  never  to  be  consumed. And  if  \  High Priests, Seventies,  Bishops,


mebced  to  do  so,  and  our  tat  hers  have
already  commenced  to  feel  after  us:


156  JOURNAL  OF

Elders,  Priests,  Teachers  and  Deacons
and  the  various  organizations  of  the
Church  ;  it  is  for  us  each  one  to
operate  in  our  sphere  under  the  direc-
tion of  the  Almighty  ;  and  feel  not
only  for  ourselves,  but  for  others,  as
Abraham  did,  and  as  Isaac  and  Jacob
did,  we  should  have  a  desire  to  bless
our  posterity  after  us ;  and  God  has
shown  us  how  to  do  it,  and  has  be-
stowed bis  Patriarchal  authority  with
power  to  bless.  He  has  appointed  this
through  the  Priesthood  and  sealing
ordinances.  That  which  is  joined
together  no  man  can  put  asunder,
and  what  is  bound  on  earth  ia  bound
also  in  heaven  ;  and  u\so  a  ureal
nrmy  other  things  of  a  similar  nature
in  i elation  to  ourselves.  The  moment
a  man  gets  enlightened  by  the  Spirit
of  God  and  begins  to  comprehend
himself,  he  begins  to  feel  for  the
welfare  of  others,  w  I  have  a  wife,
what  shall  I  do  tu  save  her  fcr  I  have  1
children,  what  can  I  do  for  them  ?"
And  by  and  by  his  comprhension
expands,  and  he  commences  at  once
to  reiich  after  his  father,  and  bis
grandfather,  and  friends  and  relatives,
who  have  passed  away ;  and  his  feel-
ings if  they  were  expressed  would  be,
What  can  I  do  for  them  to  help  them  ?
Yes,  he  hns  revealed  to  us  that  we
c  in  render  valuable  aid  to  our  dead
friends  and  ancestors,  and,  as  I  have
gaid,  the  Lord  has  shown  us  that  in
order  for  them  to  receive  the  benefit
of  our  services^  Temples  mast  be ;
built,  and  they  must  be  dedic?ited  to
God  and  accepted  of  him  ;  and
through  the  medium  of  those  sacred
structures  and  the  ordinances  per*
formed  therein,  there  is  to  be  a  unit-
ing and  welding  together  of  all
principles  and  peoples,  and  without
them  this  great  work  cannot  be  done*
Brother  Folsom,  who  has  just
been  speaking  to  you  of  his  recent
labors  m  the  Manti  IV m pie,  says  he
never  felt  better  in  his  life  than  when


DISCOURSES.

engaged  there.  What  is  the  reason?
He  has  been  engaged  in  the  sen- ice
of  God  j  and  there  is  no  happiness
among  men  to  be  compared  with  the
joy  a*id  satisfaction  that  the  Gospel
imparts  ;  it  lifts  us  up  from  the  sub-
lunary things  of  time  and  son  we,
and  we  feel  that  we  are  gods,  even
the  sons  of  God,  and  that  he  is  our
Father ;  and  we  know  that  we  have
a  hope  tliat  blooms  with  immor-
tality and  eternal  lives,  and  we  feel
that  we  are  in  the  hands  of  Cod,
and  that  he  will  guide  and  direct  us
and  sustain  us  and  hear  us  off  tri-
umphant under  all  cm  :u  instances  ;
and  we  feel  joyous  and  happy  in  the
contemplation  of  these  things.  And
then.it  is  necessary  that  the  Lord
should  have  introduced  this  Gospel,
or  shall  I  say  he  never  could  have
saved  the  human  family  that  have
gone  1  Yes,  I  will  say  that ;  be*
cause  there  are  certain  laws  in  rela-
tion to  these  things  which  must  be
obeyed;  the  Lord  himself  is  gov-
erned by  them,  and  we  must  be
governed  by  them.  And  hence  when
Elijah  came  and  laid  his  hands  upon
Joseph  Smith,  conferring  upon  him
that  Gospel  which  was  to  turn  the
hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  children,
he  received  it,  and  the  spirit  of  it
we  have  received  ;  and  that  is  why
we  want  to  build  Temples,  And  in
this  regard  we  are  associated  with
those  in  the  heavens  in  carrying  out
the  plan  that  was  contemplated  and
designed  by  the  gods  before  the
world  was,  in  relation  to  the  forma-
tion of  the  earth,  and  in  relation  to
peopling  it,  and  then  with  regard
to  its  redemption  and  the  salvation
of  its  inhabitants  and  everything
pertaining  to  it,  until  it  shall  be
celestialized  and  celestial  beings
inhabit  it.  And  we  are  operating,
or  should  do  so,  and  we  will  when
we  know  ourselves,  operate  with  the
hoi}'  angels  and  with  the  holy  Priest-


GATHERING,  ETC*


157


hood,  that  has  existed  before,  doing
our  part  on  the  earth  while  they  are
performing  theirs  in  the  heavens.
Gould  we  do  anything  unless  God
helped  us  1  No,  we  could  not.  You
might  preach  until  the  tongue
cleaved  to  the  roof  of  your  mouth,
urging  the  people  to  build  Temples,
but  u  11  leal  the  spirit  of  Elijah  rested
upon  them  they  never  would  do  it.
And  sometimes  people  think  now
that  it  interferes  with  the  dollars
and  dimes  and  their  monetary  calcu-
]  at  ions  ;  but  what  of  that  1  God
is  interested  in  these  things,  and  he
does  not  care  much  about  the  dol-
lars, for  the  gold  and  the  silver,
and  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills
are  his,  the  earth  in  its  fullness  be-
longs to  him ;  the  heavens  are  his
tli rone  and  the  earth  his  footstool,
and  he  manages  and  directs  accord-
ing to  the  counsel  of  his  own  will

*  *

And  as  we  send  our  ministers  to  the
nations  of  the  earth  to  perform
certain  missions  designed  by  the  j
Priesthood  on  the  earth ;  so  does
God  in  the  eternal  heavens  employ
those  of  his  servants  around  him
in  the  accomplishment  of  the  same
grand  object.

Do  you  think  that  this  Gospel
would  have  stood  the  opposition  it
has  met  with,  and  that  this  people
•ould  have  lived  under  the  calumny
and  reproach,  the  vituperation,  ha-
tred and  persecution  that  has  been
raised  against  them  by  men,  unless
God  had  been  with  us?  No;  we
should  have  been  scattered  like  the
chaff  before  the  wind,  long,  long
ago.  But  God  has  sustained  us,
and  has  said  to  all  men  and  will
continue  to  say,  Thus  far  fhalt  thou
go  and  no  farther,  and  here  shall
thy  power  be  stayed.  Our  strength
is  in  God,  and  not  in  man.  Many
and  many  a  time  have  I  seen  the
wrath  of  man  turned  away,  when
it  was  thought]  its  power  would


crush  us,  and  that  too  by  one  prin-
ciple. What  was  that  ?  Jesus,
when  in  the  flesh,  taught  his  dis-
ciples how  to  pray ;  and  the  Lord
has  also  instructed  us  how  to  pray.
And  we  have  the  consolation  of
knowing  that  our  prayers  have
availed  with  him,  for  we  have  seen
our  enemies  foiled,  frustrated,  dis-
comfited and  scattered,  who  sought
our  destruction,  and  their  plans
utterly  fail,  and  that  too  when  to
all  human  appearances  we  were  going
to  be  submerged  and  overwhelmed
by  their  fury*  And  so  long  as  we
continue  to  fear  Him,  observe  his
laws  and  keep  his  commandments,  -
all  their  plans  will  fail  from  this
time  henceforth  and  forever  [the
congregation  said,  Amen],  for  God
is  on  our  side,  and  He  will  uphold
us  and  never  forsake  us.

To  return  again  to  the  subject  of
Temple  building.  I  may  talk  about
it  from  now  until  to-morrow,  and
j  then  not  get  a  quarter  through,  for
there  are  so  many  things  connected
with  it.  But  we  feel  now  that  we
want  to  build  Temples  that  we  may
administer  in  them.  Brother  Wood-
ruff has  been  operating  a  long  time
in  the  Temple  at  St.  George  ;  and
you  have  perhaps  heard  him  testify
of  visits  that  he  has  had  from  the
spirit  world,  the  spirits  of  men  who
once  lived  oil  the  earth,  desiring
him  to  officiate  for  them  in  tha
Temple  ordinances.  This  feeling  is
planted  in  the  hearts  of  the  people  ;
and  the  Priesthood  in  the  heavens
are  watching  over  us  ;  they  are  min-
istering spirits  sent  forth  to  minister
to  those  who  shall  be  heirs  of  sal-
vation, says  the  Apostle ;  and  if  we
were  not  the  recipients  of  their
ministrations  and  watchful  care,  we
should  be  in  a  poor  condition.  They
are  operating  in  the  heavens,  and
we  are  on  the  earth  ;  they  without
us  cannot  be  made  perfect,  neither


J  a


journal  uy  inscuv


we  without  them ;  it  requires  the
combined  and  united  efforts  of  both
parties,  directed  by  God  Himself  to
cousufmuate  the  work  we  are  .en-
:d  in.


1  will  lit1  re  show  vou  the  differ-
euce  between  the  operation  of  men  ;
and  those  of  the  Lord,  in  regard  to
the  human  family. Men  make  war
one  upon  another, they  kill  and
destroy  and  make  wash*.  This  work  (
of  killing  and  destruction  is  even  ,
now  going  on  among  me  Russians
and  Turks. And  it only  a  short  ]
timfi  since  the  Germans  and  French  j
were  doing  the  same  thing  ;  and  it  i
almost  seems  like  the  recollect ions  j
of  yesterday,  when  our  own  uation  ,
were,  imbrueing  tlieiifj flaftq^  in  each  ,
Qtbffl  s  1  uc  w )  d ,  wheji  tli  e cri  < 1  s  of  \
widows  and  orphans,  of  bereave!
fathers  and  mothers,  brothers  and
ststeys  were  heard  throughout  our
laud,  and  when  want  and  misery,
pain  and  sorrow  were  depicted  on
the  faces,  of  so  3J3ffl¥;  flgwuse  of
man's  inhumanity  to  his  fellow  man.
What do the Scriptures say  j
44  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by
man  shrdl  his  blood  be  shed-*'  What
right  has  any  man  to  interfere  with
the  life  of  another  niaijj t  \ *  fta
Now  I  will  go  back  tp  s]xf > \Vj  yffj^t J
how  the  Lord  operates. He  de-
stroyed a  whole  world  at  one  time
save  a  few,  whom  he  preserved  for  ,
his  own  special  pqrpo.se. And  why  ?
lie  had  more  than  one  reason  lor
doing  so. This  antediluvian  people
were  not  only  very  wicked  them-  i
selves  but  having  the  power  to
propagate  their  species,  they  trans-'
mitted  their  unrighteous  natures
and  desires  to  their  children,  aud
brought  them  up  to  indulge  in  their

spirits


tliat


practices.  f  And  the
welt  hi  the  eternal
worlds  knew  this,  and  they  knew
very  well  that  to  be  born  of  such
{Rentage  would  entail  upon  them-


selves an  infinite  amount  of  trouble,
misery  and  sin.  And  supposing
ourselves  to  be  of  the  number  of
unborn  spirits,  would  it  not  lie  fair
tp  presume  that  we  would  appeal  to
the  Lord,  crying,  ''Father,  do  you
not  behold  the  condition  of  this
people,  how  corrupt  and  wicked
they  are  ?,!  Yes.  "  Is  it  then  just
that  we  who  are  now  pure  should
take  of  such  bodies  and  thus  subject
ourselves  to  most  bitter  experiences
before  we  can  be  redeemed,  accord-
ing to  the  plan  of  salvation  "No,"
the  Father  would  say,  "it  is  not  in
keeping  with  my  justice/'  "Well,
what  will  you  do  in  the  matter;
man  has  his  free  agency  and  cannot
be  coerced,  and  while  he  lives  he
has  the  power  of  perpetuating  hia
species  ? '  I  will  lirst  send  them
my  word,  offering  them  deliverance
from  sin,  and  warning  them  of  my
justic^,  winch  shall  certainly  over-
take them  if  they  reject  it,  and  I
will  destroy  them  from  oif  the  face
of  the  earth,  thu*  preventing  their
increase,  and  I  will  raise  up  another
seed,"  Well,  they  did  reject  the
preaching  of  Noah,  the  servant  of
Gr>tlt  who  was  sent  to  them,  and
consequently  the  Lord  caused  th«
rains  of  heaven  to  descend  inces-
santly for  forty  days  and  nights,
which  Hooded  the  land,  and  there
being  no  means  of  escape,  save  for
the  eight  souls  who  were  obedient
to  the  message,  all  the  others  were
drowned.  Bat,  says  the  caviller,
is  it  right  that  a  just  (iod  should
sweep  off  so  many  people  1  Is  that
in  accordance  with  mercy  ?  Yes,  it
was  just  to  those  *  spirits  that  had
not  received  their  bodies,  and  it  Was
just  and  merciful  too  to  those  people
gui  1 1  y  of  1 1  j  iniquity.  AVI ly  !  Be-
cause  by  taking  away  their  earthly
existence  he  prevented  them  from
entailing  their  sins  upon  their  pos-
terity and  degenerating  tjiein,  and


GATHERING,  ETC


159


also  prevented  them  from  commit-
ting further  acts  of  wickedness.
And  was  it  just  to  send  them  to  hell,-
to  be  eternally  burning  up  in  fixe,
never  to  be  consumed  I  We  do  not  i
know  anything  about  that  part  of  it,
that  is  sectarianism,  and  is  no  part
of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  Suf-
fice it  to  say,  they  were  put  into
prison  and  the  doors  were  so  secure-
ly locked  that  they  could  not  he  un-
fastened until  the  right  time  had
arrived.  The  Prophets  understood
this,  and  spoke  of  it.  *l«f  ehl  ilmhm
VVhat  next 't  God  still  felt  after
them ;  and  he  said,  in  speaking  of
the  Savior,  that  he  was  to  oome.  And
what  to  do  1  uTo  bind  up  thebro-
ken -hearted ,  to  proclaim  liberty  to
the  captives,  and  the  opening  of  the
prison  to  them  that  are  bound  ;  to
proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the
Lord."  This  was  the  nature  of  his
mission  to  the  earth.  And  what  do
the  Scriptures  tell  us  he  did  i  "  Be-
in  j:  put  to  death  in  the  Hesh,  but
quickened  by  the  Spirit ;  by  which
also  he  went  and  preached  unto  live
spirits  in  prison,  which  sometime
were  disobedient  when  once  the
longmiftering  of  God  waited  in  the
days  of  Noah/1  Were  they  re-
deemed ?  Ye*,  if  Jesus  preached
the  Gospel  to  them,  and  which  he
most  assuredly  did.  If  a  man  kill
another,  does  he  know  how  to  re-
deem him  afterwards  J  No,  he  does
not ;  therefore  men  have  no  right  to
assume  the  prerogatives  of  God,  and
hence  the  Scriptures  say  that  uno
murderer  hath  eternal  life  abi ding
in  him."  You  may  get  the  priest  or
priests  to  pray  for  him  and  pack  him
off  to  heaven  the  moment  he  breathes
his  last  here ;  but  such  prayers  avail
not ;  he  will  never  get  there,  but
will  go  to  the  place  appointed  unto
him.  Here  then  is  the  difference
between  the  dealings  of  God  with
man,  and  the  dealings  of  man  one


with  another,  bnf£  vffut  01  n.:r  «r/h
We  are  moved  upon  to  build  Tem-
ples. There  is  one  now  building  in
Logan,  Cache  Valley.  I  wa*  up  there
two  w  eeks  ago,  and  was  much  grati-
fied to  find  the  i  work  being  pushed
forward  so  energetically  and  so
spiritedly.  Since  the  early  part  of
June,  I  think  upwards  of  $$0,000
has  been  expended  by  the  people  of
that  and  two  other  Stakes  in  making
the  necessary  arrangements  for  the
building  of  this  Temple*  We  find
the  same  spirit  existing  among  them
as  we  found  in  St  George,  and  in
Sanpete,  and  here,  and,  in  fact,  as
we  rind  everywhere  among  the  Lat-
tern  lay  Saints  ;  and  1  am  much
gratified  to  see  the  people  thus
moved  and  acted  upon.  Jn  the  Mil-
lennium, a  duration  of  one  thousand
years,  we  shall  be  actively  engaged
administering  for  the  dead,  and  as-
sisting Got  I  to  fix  up  accounts  with
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.

Before  closing  I  wish  to  add  a  few
words  in  regard  to  matters  associated
with  our  position  here,  which  is  a  very
important  one  before  angels  and  the
people.  We  stand  in  an  important
position  in  this  respect,  we  are  the
86ns  and  daughters  of  Go. I  ;  if  we
obey  his  laws  and  keep  his  command-
ments, proving  ourselves  valiant  and
true  to  his  cause,  we  shall  be  heirs,
"heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  of
Jesus  Christ ;  and  if  we  sutfVr  with
him  we  shall  also  reisjn  with  him,
that  all  may  be  glorified  together  in
the  eternal  worlds."  Now,  then,  if
we  can  perform  a  work  of  this  kind,
and  secure  the  approbation  of  God,
and  the  co-operation  of  the  holy
Priesthood,  then  we  will  be  doing
something  that  will  not  oidy  be  ac-
ceptable to  Him  and  to  the  holy
angels,  but  to  our  name,  and  fame,
our  honor  and  happiness  and  glory,
and  to  the  increase  of  our  dominion
there  will  be  no  end. i>ut  if  we


160


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


give  way  to  folly  and  to  vanity,  to
covetousness  and  pride  or  to  evil,  to
wickedness  or  corruption  of  any
kind,  the  hand  of  God  will  be  over
»s,  our  candlestick  will  be  removed
out  of  its  place,  the  light  within  us
will  take  its  departure,  and  darkness
will  take  its  place ;  and  oh,  how  great
will  be  that  darkness  !  How  often
have  I  seen  men  whom  I  have  known
in  this  Church,  and  whom  I  have
respected  as  honorable,  make  ship-
wreck of  their  faith,  lose  the  Spirit
of  God  and  go  into  darkness.  When
they  turn  aside,  after  having  received
certain  light  and  intelligence,  can
you  lead  them  back  ?  No,  you  can-
not They  have  no  desire  for  it,  and
you  cannot  implant  that  desire  with-
in them.  What  does  Paul  say  ]  "For
it  is  impossible  for  those  who  were
once  enlightened,  and  have  tasted
of  the  heavenly  gift,  and  were  made
partakers  of  the  Hdy  Ghost,  and
have  tasted  the  good  word  of  God,
and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,
if  they  shall  fail  away,  to  renew  them
again  unto  repentance,  seeing  they
crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of
God."  We  do  not  want  to  be  in
that  fearful  condition.  Let  us  be
careful,  then,  what  we  do  and  what
we  say,  and  how  we  act  and  live.
Let  us  treat  one  another  in  a  right
and  proper  manner,  not  seek  to  op-
press and  defravd,  or  rob  one  another
of  property,  or  of  honor,  or  of  char-


acter, or  anything  else  ;  but  let  us
all  copy  after  the  Son  of  God,  walk-
ing in  all  humility  and  meekness,
feeling  rather  to  suffer  wrong  than
do  wrong,  and  ever  b#  desirous  to
promote  each  other's  happiness  and
welfare.  Do  not  let  us  be  censorious,
or  oppressive,  or  tyrannical,  or  ex-
acting ;  but  cultivate  the  spirit  of
kindness  and  charity,  and  seek  con-
tinually for  the  Spirit  of  God  to  lead
and  direct  us.  Every  morning  that
we  arise,  dedicate  ourselves  to  God,
and  ask  Ids  blessing  upon  us  through
the  day,  that  we  may  be  preserved
from  evil,  folly  and  vanity.  Let  us
be  governed  and  influenced  by  the
counsels  we  receive  from  our  Bishops
and  presiding  authorities  ;  and  let
us  pray  for  them,  that  they  may  be
kept  pure  and  holy  ;  and  fail  not  to
supplicate  the  Father  in  behalf  of
tht  Twelve,  for  we  are  poor,  weak
creatures,  and  need  the  faith  and
prayers  of  the  Saints,  and  the  help
and  favor  of  the  Almighty,  and  we
ask  an  interest  in  your  prayers,  that
we  may  be  led  in  the  paths  of  life  ;
for  none  of  us  can  do  anything  un-
less God  be  with  us.

Brethren  and  sisters,  God  bless
you,  and  lead  you  in  the  paths  of
life,  that  you  may  be  prepared  for
an  inheritance  in  the  celestial  king-
dom of  God,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


EXPECTATIONS  DEFERRED,  ETC


161


DISCOUESE BY ELDER CHARLES C.  RICH,


DELIVERED  AT  A  CONFERENCE  HELD  IN PARIS,  £DAHO. Nov. 11,  1877.


(Reported  by  James  ff.  Hart.)


EXPECTATIONS  DEFERRED  —  ON  REVELATION  —  MARRIAGE,  HOW  PER-
FORMED— SHOULD  BE  ENCOURAGKD  AMONG  THE  YOUTH — LOVB  CON-
TRULABLE — MEANT  TO  BEUNDER  THE  DOMINION  OF  RIO  HTKO  USNI88
— AND  TO  BE  FOR  TIME  aSH)  ETERNITY,


ceired  the  Gospel  I  did  not  expect
forty- seven  years  to  pass  away  before
the  prophecies  would  be  fulfilled  con-
cerning the  second  coming  oC  the
Savior,  and  the  end  of  the  world.  I
expected  the  Savior  would  come  and
reign  upon  the  earth,  before  this  time,
as  the  King  of  Kings  and  Lord  of
Lords.  In  the  revelations  given  to
the  Prophet  Joseph,  Jesus  said  it
would  be  but  a  short  time  before  he
would  come  and  take  the  Kingdom.
We  are  not  accustomed  to  hear  the
Lord  speak,  and  when  he  spoke  of
a  short  time,  we  understood  it  ac-
cording to  our  use  of  the  language*
Forty- seven  years  may  appear  a
long  time  with  us,  but  a  thousand
years  is  not  a  long  time  with  the
Lord,  A  few  moments  with  Him
is  a  long  time  with  us*  It  takes  a
long  time  according  to  oar  reckon-
ing to  do  the  work  the  Lord  has  de-
creed concerning  the  children  of
men  in  this  last  dispensation.  It
is  .no  small  matter  to  preach  to  all
nations  and  kingdoms  of  the  earth ;
this  has  to  be  dona;  all  people
most  be  warned  of  the  judgment*
of  the  Lord  that  are  coming  upon
the  earth,  The  sound  of  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  must  go  forth  to  all

Vol.  XIX.


Brethren  and  sisters:— I  have  a
remarks  to  make  to  the  Saints
this  afternoon,  and  I  trust  I  shall
have  your  prayers  and  attention.
I  feel  my  weakness  and  that  I  am
unable  to  benefit  the  Saints  without
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  And  the
same  applies  to  all  who  stand  before
the  Saints,  to  minister  in  word  and
doctrine*  We  are  taught  by  the  reve-
lations given  us  through  the  Prophet
Joseph,  that  we  should  not  undertake
to  teach  without  the  spirit,  and  I  feel
that  I  need  its  influence  and  power,
that  I  may  speak  such  things  that
wilt  be  pleasing  to  the  Lord.  If  I
have  any  pride  it  is  in  being  ai>  El-
der in  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  having  the  privilege  of  present-
ing the  principles  of  life  and  salva-
tion to  the  people,  and  in  preaching
the  fulness  of  the  Gospel  that  has
been  vestored  to  us  in  the  last  days.
Many  seek  after  the  honors  of  the
world,  none  of  which  are  worthy
to  be  compared  with  the  honor  of
serving  God,  in  proclaiming  His
Gospel  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth.  I  have  had  the  honor  of
being  in  this  Church  for  many  years.
It  has  been  organised  upwards  of
forty-seven  years.  When  I  first  re*
Mo.  11.


1(12  •  JOURNAL  OF

nations. It  is  a  great  work  for  us
to  perform  individually  and  collec-
lively, to preach the Gospel  of
Jesus  Christ  to  all  nations,  and  to
prepare  for  his  coming. Some  may
think  it  a  small  work  to  prepare  for
his  coming. I  do  not  think  so.  1
find  mysslf  far  from  being  prepared.
Are  we  worthy  to  be  received  and
dwell  where  our  Savior  dwells  ?  No
one  can  dwell  with  him  bnt  those
who  overcome  and  endore  to  the  end.
It  should  give  us  more  energy  and
more  determination  to  overcome  our
eiiis  when  we  find  everything  depends
on  our  perseverance  to  the  end.  We
should  be  energetic  in  doing  the  will
of  God, We  find  we  have  many
things  to  learn,  and  we  learn  daily
by  our  experience  something  we  did
not  know  before,  and  thus  we  I  eel
our  ^dependence  upou  the  Lord  fur
wisdom  to  lead  and  guide  us  into
all  truth. It  is  important  .we  put
oor  trust  in  God* We  may  have
imagined  that  we were  sate  from
clanger  and  would  stand,  but  difficul-
ties crowd  upon  us  which  we  had
never  considered,  and  we  are  tempted
and  tried  to  prove  whether  we  are
willing  to  stand  the  trials  or  not  It
is  with  us  like  the  parable  of  the
sower;  some  seed  feH  on  stony  ground,
some  fell  among  thorns  and  so  per-
ished. So  it  is  in  the  hearts  of
many  who  join  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ. Some  seed  has  fallen  on
good  ground,  and  has  brought  forth
fruit The  Lord  has  said  He  seeks
those  who  worship  Him  in  spirit
and  in  truth. He  is  no  respecter
of  persons. He  has  no  favorites —
only  on  the  principle  of  righteous-
ness* We  are  all  His  children,  one
as  well  as  another* His  sun  shines
on  the  just  and  the  unjust,  and  He
causes  the  earth  to  bring  forth  fruit
for  the  benefit  of  all. He  is  im-
partial in  His  character,  and  those  I
who  love  Him  and  keep  His  com*


mandments  are  accepted  of  Him,
It'  you  will  not  accept  His  kind*
ness,  if  you  will  not  receive  Mis
blessings,  He  is  not  to  bin  me,  Tfu^y
are  offered  free  to  all  without  mo-
ney and  without  price.  When  Jesus
came  into  the  world  and  died  for  the
sin  of  the  world,  he  blotted  out  ori-
ginal sin.  He  did  not  die  for  us  only,
but  for  every  creature.  These  are
some  of  the  characteristics  of  our
Lord  and  Savior.  We  do  not  re-
ceive His  counsels  as  we  should.
We  are  called  upon  to  be  perfect  like
unto  Him,  and  to  walk  in  His  foot-
steps. To  be  perfect  and  godlike,
we  must  do  as  He  did  while  upon  the
earth,  for  He  said,  UI  came  not  to  t
do  my  will  but  the  will  ot  rny  Fa-
ther who  sent  me."

I  want  to  say  a  few  words  on  an-
other important  sulject  We  are  a
people  who  profess  to  believe  in  re-
velations. I  have  thought  many
times  that  this  principle  was  very
little  understood.  If  I  can  have
the  spirit  to  sustain  me  I  will  in-
struct the  Saints  this  afternoon  in
this  principle.  What  is  the  spirit
of  which  we  »re  speaking  ?  It  is
neither  more  nor  less  than  the  Holy
Spirit  1  don't  know  of  two  kinds
of  Holy  Spirit  It  is  the  spirit  of
promise,  the  same  that  imparts  reve-
lation from  heaven.  I  have  many
times  heard  persons  deliver  revela-
tions, in  which  I  had  no  faith  what-
ever. It  is  difficult  to  be  deceived,
if  we  know  the  proper  channel
through  which  they  are  to  be  re*
ceived.  We,  as  the  Church  of  Je-
sus Christ,  cannot  live  without  reve-
lation. If  we  had  no  revelations
in  thia  Church,  we  would  not  be
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  It  is
important  when  we  need  revelations,
that  we  understand  what  channel
they  should  come  through,  Wi
read  iu  the  early  history  of  this
Church  that  Oliver  Cowdery,  who


was  the  second  Apostle  in  this  I
Church,  was  instructed  on  this  sub-
ject, and  it  is  written  for  our  learn-
ing. The  Lord  told  Oliver  that  Jo*
seph  was  the  man  to  receive  re  re-
lations for  the  Church;  he  might
receive  revelations  for  himself,  but
those  to  the  Church  must  come
through  Joseph  Smith,  or  the  leader.
If  we  .need  revelations  for  our  guid-
ance, what  channel  should  they  come
through  ?  You  have  just  voted  to
sustain  the  Twelve  Apostles  as
Prophets,  Seer?,  and  Revel  a  tors.
Brother  John  Taylor  is  the  Presi-
dent of  tfcmt  Quorum,  therefore  when
revelations  are  needed  for  the  gov-
ernment of  this  Church,  they  will
come  through  President  John  Tay-
lor, as  long  as  he  lives,  because  tie
holds  the  keys  of  the  Apostleshxp,
He  does  not  hold  any  keys  or
powers  that  he  did  not  hold  when
President  Brighani  Young  was  alive,
or  any  other  keys  than  are  held
by  his  brethren  of  the  Twelve;  but
the  Lord  will  speak  to  us  through
the  head  of  his  Church,  through
him  who  holds  the  Presidency.  We
should  all  understand  these  princi-
ples that  we  may  not  be  deceived,
and  if  revelations  are  given  from
any  other  source  professing  to  guide
the  Church,  we  may  know  tbey  are
not  from  God.  AH  of  us  have  the
privilege  of  receiving  revelations.
For  the  Church  ?  By  no  means;
We  cannot  receive  all  that  are  neces-
sary for  the  performance  of  our  du-
ties. We  have  here  a  Stake  of  Zion,
and  a  presidency  of  this  Stake.  Can
anybody  receive  revelations  for  the
government  of  this  Stake  ?  Cer-
tainly not.  If  any  person  other
than  the  Presidency  should  profess
to  receive  revelations  lor  its  govern-
ment, would  yon  consider  them  gen-
nine  revelations  ?  If  so,  you  would
be  mistaken.  We  are  entitled  to  the
Holy  Spirit  to  help  us  in  the  dis-


[  charge  of  our  duties  and  to  teech  ns
all  that  is  necessary  for  our  guidance.
The  Bishop  is  entitled  to  the  spirit
of  revelation  to  teach  him  his  duties,
and  when  guided  by  that  spirit,  he
will  never  come  in  collision  with  those
who  preside  over  him.

Some  years  ago,  when  I  was  pre-
siding in  California,  evening  meet-
ings were  established.  I  think  it
was  about  the  time  of  the  reforma-
tion. On  one*  occasion  I  had  been
away  for  a  short  time,  and  on  my
return  I  found  a  large  crowd  on  t  he
water's  edge,  some  of  whom  were
being  baptized.  1  think  brother
Hopkins  was  there,  and  I  ask<jd  hirn,
subsequently,  what  induced  the  peo-
ple to  turn  out  so  suddenly ;  he
replied  that  some  sister  had  re-
ceived a  revelation  the  night  before,  .
commanding  them  to  be  baptized.
I  told  him  that  if  any  revelation
had  been  given  on  that  subject,  I
should  have  known  it.  We  should
seek  to  be  governed  by  these  princi-
ples, and  leirn  to  discern  the  spirits,
and  discriminate  between  that  which
is  from  God  and  that  which  is  from
beneath.  If  we  seek  unto  the  Lord
he  will  give  us  wisdom  to  lead  us
into  all  truth*  It  is  a  serious  thing
to  say  the  Lord  has  spoken  through
us  if  he  has  not  To  say  thus  saith
the  Lord,  when  the  Lord  has  not  spo-
ken, would  subject  us  to  his  wiath
and  displeasure.  It  is  a  fearful  thing
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living
God.  If  we  receive  revelations  we
should  be  sure  they  are  not  leading  ■
us  outside  of  our  duties,  but  tend  to
our  instruction  and  improvement,
and  lead  us  to  perform  those  duties
devolving  upon  us.

There  is  another  matter  important
to  the  Saints,  of  which  I  would  like
|  to  speak  this  afternoon ;  it  is  the
subject  pertaining  to  marriage.  It
I  was  the  first  great  commandment
I  given  to  our  parents  in  the  Garden


IGi  JOURNAL  OF

of  Edem  The  Lord  said  :  "  Be
fruitful  and  multiply  and  replenish
the  eaitb."  This  principle,  like
the  principle  of  revelation,  should
be  properly  understood  and  rightly
and  legally  administered.  Some
persons  rush  into  marriage  hastily
and  inconsiderately,  with  no  other
consideration  than  that  they  call  love,
which  fn  queutly  brings  misery  and
unhappiness.  We  have  to  tell  thern
what  is  wiong  in  relation  to  this
principle.  It  would  be  unwise  and
unpleasant  for  an  Elder  in  Israel  to
perform  a  marriage  cetemony  that
could  not  be  acknowledged  in  hea-
ven. Since  the  endowment  house
has  been  closed  in  Salt  Liike  City,
those  wishing  to  be  married  accord-
ing to  the  laws  of  heaven  have  had
to  travel  down  to  St.  George,  where
they  can  be  ^ealed  together  for  time
and  all  eternity  ;  for  a  Temple  is  the
proper  place  in  which  to  perform
then  sncred  ordinances.  We  learn
from  our  pitst  history  and  experience
that  there  hive  been  deviations  from
this  role  from  time  to  time,  accord-
ing to  the  circumstances  of  the  peo-
ple, and  the  attention  of  the  Twelve
has  been  called  to  the  subject,  and  it
baa  been  taken  under  ndvisement
We  learn  that  alihuu^h  a  Temple
Stood  in  Kirtlund,  wtill  the  Prophet
Joseph  gave  endowments  aud  per-
formed marriages  in  Nauvoo  before
the  Nauvoo  Temple  was  built.  The
same  was  done  in  Salt  Lake  City
for  many  years,  and  those  endow-
ments and  marriages  were  legally
administered  ;  and  the  way  may  be
opened  by  which  these  ordi nances
can  be  performed  among  uaj  with-
out having  to  travel  to  St  George
for  that  purpose.  This  no  doubt
will  be  gratifying  to  the  Saints,
particularly  to  the  young.  There
ate  ordinances  that  can  only  be  ad-
ministered in  a  Temple,  hence  the
importance  of  completing  the  Tern-


DISCOURSES,

pie  so  that  these  ordinances  may  be
administered  for  the  living  and  for
the  dead.  In  relation  to  this  devia-
tion from  this  rule  pertaining  to  seal-
ings  and  endowments,  we  understand
that  the  Priesthood  is  greater  than,
the  Temple,  and  that  which  is  sealed
on  earth  by  those  holding  the  keys,
is  sealed  in  heaven.  Many  cannot
go  to  St  George  to  receive  their
marriages  and  endowments,  and
should  the  way  be  opened  by  which
they  may  be  performed  without  go.
ing  there,  it  will  be  appreciated,  for
all  who  understand  the  Gospel  and
the  sacred  ordinances  pertaining
thereto,  would  prefer  to  be  married
in  the  proper  manner.  I  don't  know
how  far  these  privileges  may  extend,
whether  they  will  extend  to  plural
marriages  ur  not;  it  will  be  as  the
Lord  wills  ;  should  it  be  the  case
that  we  obtain  these  privileges,  it  will
l>e  no  cause  for  .slackening  our  labors
on  the  Temple.  Our  dead  friends
are  waiting  for  their  baptisms  and
other  ordinances,  which  can  only  b%
administered  in  a  Temple.  I  cannot
say  any  more  on  this  subject  until
arrangements  are  more  fully  per-
fected. .  t

There  is  no  blessing  that  our  hea-
venly Father  is  not  ready  to  bestow
upon  us  on  condition  that  we  observe
the  laws  and  ordinances  established
for  the  salvation  of  his  Saints.  We
are  brought  together  from  time  to
time  that  we  may  be  instructed  and
learn  our  duties.  There  are  manj
things  to  talk  about,  we  have  to  se-
lect a  few  and  pass  by  the  rest.  The
principle  of  marriage  is  one  of  great
importance ;  our  young  men  and
maidens  are  called  upon  to  become
united  and  to  learn  to  live  together
and  accomplish  all  the  Lord  has  com-
manded.

One  of  the  Bishops  remarked  yes-
terday that  the  people  liked  co-oper-
ation very  much  when  they  obtained


EXPECTATIONS  DEFERRED,  ETC


165


big  dividends,  which  principle  is  very
good  if  it  is  right  As  Latter-day
Saints  we  have  to  deal  with  the  Lord  ;
he  knows  oar  hearts  and  comprehends
oor  thoughts,  and  we  cannot  cover  up
the  secrets  of  hearts  From  him.  What
we  do  that  is  right  will  he  approved  ;
that  which  we  do  that  is  wrong  will  |
be  disapproved.  If  we  are  willing
and  obedient  we  shall  find  very  little
trouble  in  co-operation.  We  have
embraced  it  in  a  small  way,  and  we
are  expected  to  handle  it  honestly  ;
lind  if  we  do  not  handle  it  honestly,
it  would  be  better  if  we  never  em-
braced it  at  all.  We  should  seek  to
the  Lord  for  knowledge  and  wisdom
that  we  may  deal  with  each  other
righteously,  that  we  may  establish
confidence  in  each  other  that  cannot
be  shaken.  The  Loid  wishes  to  in-
troduce and  perfect  among  his  Saints
the  principles  of  union.  He  intends  ,
to  lift  his  people  up,  and  to  makei
them  wealthy.  When  his  will  is
done  among  the  Saints  there  will  be
no  poor  among1  them.  When  this
time  cornea  all  will  form  one  king-
dom and  serve  one  (Jod.  We  are  all
entitled  to  his  blessings  and  all  should
be  devoted  to  his  service.

It  is  not  his  will  that  one  should
be  lifted  up  and  another  put  down,
one  be  made  rich  and  another  poor.
We  have  to  keep  this  principle  in
view  in  our  co-operative  labors  and
be  one,  or  we  are  not  the  Lord's.  It
is  the  purpose  of  the  Lord  to  build
up  the  poor,  and  these  principles  are
revealed  for  its  accomplishment.  If
twenty  or  thirty  persons  engage  in
business  and  we  make  them more  j
wealthy,  and  others  poor,  what  dif- 1
fete  nee  is  there  between  us  and  the
gentile  world  ? If  we  do  as  is  done
fn  the  world,  wherein  are  we  better
than  they  ? If  we  carry  ont  the  j
principle  of  co-operation  with  unsel-
fishness of  spirit  and  singleness  of
heart,  it  will  build  us  up,  and  the  poor


also.  We  do  not  want  to  take  one
man's  means  and  give  to  another;
that  ia  not  the  principle  intended  ;
but  by  uniting  oar  means  we  can  es-
tablish a  store,  a  tannery  or  other
business  that  will  be  profitable.  If
we  do  not  so  co-operate,  others  may
come  in  who  have  no  in  teres'  in  our
prosperity,  who  will  tra^e  and  traffic,
and  when  they  become  wealthy  would
leave  us  and  spend  their  means  else-
where. This  has  been  our  experience
in  years  past  with  tht»se  who  have
come  among  us  with  their  merchan-
dize. We  can  prevent  this  in  the
future  by  our  co- operative  institu-
tions. It  is  riijht  and  proper  that
we  should  combine  for  self  defense
against  this  world,  and  so  protect  our
general  interests.

I  cannot  say  much  in  favor  of
stores  although  it  is  necessary  that
we  have  such  institutions.  The  grand
obiect  brfore  us  is  to  make  what  we
need,  and  dispense  with  outside  im-
portations, as  much  as  possible.  We
must  not  be  content  to  buy  aud  sell
what  we  get  abroad,  we  want  to  esta-
blish a  factory,  and  make  our  own
clothing.  We  don't  wjnt  our  wool
to  go  abroad  to  he  manufactured  for
us;  but  we  must  make  the  necessary
preparations  to  make  it  up  ourselves.
We  find  occasionally  among  us  0110
who  wnttts  to  strike  out  in  business
on  the  gentile  principle,  and  a  few
an:  always  ready  to  feed  and  encou-
rage an  institution  of  that  kind  ;  but
we  must  learn  better  and  do  better,
»nd  show  by  our  faith  and  works  that
we  will  not  sustain  such  institutions,
but  that  we  will  serve  the  Lurd,  and
sustain  our  brethren,  and  discard
everything  that  is  set.  up  in  opposi*
tion  to  the  institutions  of  Zion.
When  the  Stints  are  governed  bj
these  principles,  then  you  will  find
a  people  who  are  williug  to  devote
their  energies  and  means  to  establish
and  advance  our  home  institutions.


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


I  will  say  ft  few  words  on  the  sub*
ject  of  counsel.  We  are  a  people
who  profess  Jo  be  governed  by  coun-
sel It  never  hurts  any  one  to  oliey
the  counsels  of  the  servants  of  God,
but  we  should  never  ask  counsel  un-
less we  intend  to  receive  it;  yon
should  never  ask  counsel  when  your
mind  is  made  up  concerning  the  thing
you  $sk.  The  most  important  coun-
sels are  given  us  from  the  pulpit  or
stand,  and  it  would  be  well  with  us
if  we  obey  them,  King  Saul  in-
quired of  the  Lord  through  his  Pro-
phet concerning  Israel.  They  had
already  determined  to  go  to  battle.
The  Prophet  Samuel  told  them  to  1
fro;  they  did  so  and  got  whipped.
We  should  understand  Hint  there  is
safety  in  counsel,  hut  we  should  seek
for  it  in  the  proper  manner,  and  from
the  proper  source.  We  should  go
for  counsel  where  we  have  the  right
to  go.  When  you  need  counsel  you
should  go  to  your  Bishop  or  Presi-
dent, and  he  will  give  you  good  coun-
sel if  he  has  any  to  give.  If  the
Bishop  does  not  understand  the  mat-
ter and  cannot  give  counsel  under-
stand ingly  let  him  tell  the  appliciiut
that  he  don't  know  how  to  counsel  in
this  matter ;  for  we  shall  be  held  ac-
countable for  our  acts  and  counsels,
and  for  everything  we  do  or  say.  If
any  persons  want  to  know  anything
you  do  not  know,  tell  them  to  go  to
same  one  who  does  know,  so  that
they  may  not  take  a  leap  in  the  dark.
If  I  were  counseled  to  leave  Bear
Lake  Valley  I  would  leave.  It  is
right  for  me  to  be  governed  by
Counsel,  and  if  it  is  right  lor  me  it  is
right  for  you  also,  for  this  principle
wifl  apply  to  us  all.  Some  have  left
Bear  Lake  Valley  without  asking
counsel;  I  do  not  condemn  them;
let  them  do  as  they  please;  if  they
want  counsel  of  me  I  will  give  it  if
I  hjive  any  to  give,  if  they  do  not,  I  j
wish  them  well ;  hut  I  am  mistaken


if  they  do  not  find  more  or  less  diffi-
culty where  they  go,  but  that  is  their
affair  ;  they  are  gone,  and  may  they
prosper,

I  liHve  a  few  words  to  the  sisters,
Ladies'  meeting  was  announced  for
Thursday  next;  t ho  general  report
given  at  this  Conference  cot icerning
the  Ladies'  Relief  Societies,  ist  t hat
they  are  a  groat  help  to  the  Bishops,
One  of  the  Bishops  staled  that  they
rendered  assistance  in  substantial
means  in  helping  to  build  a  meet-
ing-house. I  am  glad  to  learn  of
their  efforts  in  lading  up  grain.  It
is  gratifying  to  see  this  disposition
manifested  among  the  sisters.  If  all
the  sisters  advocate  the  laying  up  of
grain  it  won  Id  not  be  graceful  for
them  to  s;iy  to  their  husbands,  let  us
have  a  few  hushels  to  trade  out  at  the
store.  When  in  Salt  Lake  some  time
ago,  a  lady  came  round  and  wanted  to
sell  some  notions;  she  said  she  had
just  sold  a  sister  twenty  five  yards  of
lace,  only  one  dollar  per  yard.  When
I  see  such  things  among  the  Stints!
think  it  a  little  extravagant ;  it  needs
a  great  amount  of  means  to  support
a  wife  who  indulges  in  many  such
purchases.  Some  people  have  extra-
ordinary not  ions  concerning  marriage;
they  think  they  must  have  everything
to  start  with;  they  don't  want  to
marry  unless  they  can  have  a  carriage,
horses,  and  servants,  and  many  things
besides ;  these  are  extravagant  no-
tions, I  have  heard  it  taught  by  the
Presidency  that  young  people  should
marry,  and  to  commence  they  should
have  a  straw  bed  ;  they  should  have
at  least  a  bed  tick,  aud  fill  it  with
straw,  and  commence  any  way,  I
remember  hearing  that  my  great
grandfather  and  his  wife,  when  they
started  in  married  life  had  but  one  or
two  blankets  to  start  with.  They
took  up  some  land,  both  went  to
work  with  a  will,  and  they  were  suc-
cessful, and  before  they  died  they  had


EXPECTATIONS  J

become  wealthy.  They  owned  two
large  farms,  good  rock  houses  and
property  worth  sixty  thousand  dollars,
all  accumulated  by  their  htbor,i d dust ry
find  economy,  Many  persons  marry
those  possessing  fortunes  and  soon
become  (K>or  ;  they  are  almost  sure  1
to  run  through  their  property  ;  they
did  not  earn  it,  and  they  don't  know
how  to  use  it.  Concerning  marriage,
it  must  be  an  important  matter  for
find  to  teach  and  command  obedience
to  it.  What  constitutes  its  import*
ance  ?  In  the  Hrs'  place  a  man  can-
not  have  an  exaltation  without  a
wife.  It  was  some  years  before  I
learned  the  fact  that  1  could  not  do
much  good  without  a  wife  and  with-
out posterity.  I  therefore  concluded
to  marry.  And  you  ladies  cannot
wear  a  celestial  crown  without  a  hus-
band ;  if  you  happen  to  get  a  has-
bnnd  who  is  not  entitled  to  a  crown,
what  are  you  going  to  do?  If  I
were  a  lady  I  should  be  careful  whom
I  married  :  1  should  want  to  be  pretty
gore  that  the  man  tried  to  live  his
religion  as  revealed  to  us.  Young
folks  generally  marry  because  they
love,  sometimes  because  they  are  i
pretty.  It  is  said  that  beauty  is
41  only  akin  deep,1'  and  I  believe  it  in
so,  it  will  short ty  fade  away.  We
should  be  reasonable  on  this  sul  ject,
as  well  as  on  others  ;  but  when  a  per-
son  is  love  struck,  there  is  no  leason
in  them.  We  should  never  be  struck
very  bad.  We  should  love  so  that  we
could  thtow  him  off  at  any  time  it  he
does  not  do  right.  Where  is  the  man
who  understands  the  principles  of  the
Gospel  who  does  not  want  to  lay  a
foflndation  lor  a  kingdom  ?  Some
yonng  people,  and  some  older  ones,
appear  to  have  but  little  judgment
of  marriage.  When  we  marry  it
should  be  for  time  and  eternity.
I  nave  thought  many  times  that  if  a
man  or  woman  could  get  the  Lord  to
tell  them  who  to  marry  they  would


>EFERRED,  ETC, *  167

do  well,  if  not,  I  would  do  the  best  I
could.  Father  Abraham  married
Sarah  and  Hager  many  years  ago,
and  gre*t  nations  have  sprung  out  of
t fiis  marriage.  If  we  do  as  well  as
lie  did  we  shall  be  blessed  as  he  was
blessed,  I  want  to  impress  this  upon
the  minds  of  the  young  and  old,  that
we  should  labor  to  accomplish  all  the
eood  we  oan  in  this  worid.  We  have
encountered  many  things  and  have
learned  many  things.  We  have
learned  thajr  there  is  an  immense
amount  otl  Lettish  n  ess  in  this  world,
and  that  it  is  a  very  bad  thing,  and
we  should  get  rid  of  it  as  soon  as  pos-
sible. We  should  be  as  willing  that
others  should  enjoy  the  blessings  of
the  Lord  m  ourselves.  We  should  be
as  willing  to  bless  other  people  as  we
ure  to  I je  blessed  ourselves  I  want
you*  my  brethren  and  sisters,  to  think
of  these  things  And  treasure  them  up
in  your  hearts.  Whatever  the  Spirit
will  alluW'ftie  tn^«ay  to  yoo  I  *f ill  say
to  the  beat  of  my  ability.  iWben
Jesus  came  to  the  Nephiteshif  found
them  unprepajed  to  receive  his  words,
and  he  said  to  them,  "I  will  come
again  to-morrow  ;  you  are  not  pre-
pared to  receive  my  words."  He
came  to  them  several  times;  and
they  became  prepared,  finally,  to  hear
and  learn,  that  which  they  were  not  pre-
pared to  learn  before*  If  we  are
uot  prepared  to  receive  the  word  of
the  Lord  to-day,  we  may  possibly  be
prepared  to-morrow.

1  am  glad  to  meet  yon,  my  bmth-
ren,  tp  heboid  the  inanities  tation  of
goud  feeling  and  witness  your  wil-
lingness to  build  up  55ion,  and  esta-
blish righteousness  on  the  earth*
And  may  yota  continue  faithful,  that
you  may  be  happy  and  prosperous
and  realise  all  the  promises.  It  is
promised  that  the  Saints  shall  be  the
richest  of  all  people,  and  to  realize
|  this  prom^e,  wfc  must  bo  guided  by
those  placed  to  lead  us. This  is  th*


ICS


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


principle  of  safety  and  success.  Any
other  course  will  produce  sorrow.
That  God  will  bless  the  Saints  in  this


Stake  of  Zion  and  all  his  people,  is
my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus
|  Chris L  Amen,


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  in  the  Fourteenth  Wakd  Assembly  Rooms,  on  Sunday

Afternoon,  Dec.  2,  1877.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F,  Gibhs.)

THE  OUTPOUR!  uK  THE  SPIRIT  — -  THK  RECORDS  OF  THE  PAST — TMK
TWO  STICKS — THE  PROMISES  AND  BLESSINGS  OF  JOSEPH — THE  SANCTI-
FIED EARTH — THERE  IS  A  SPIRIT  IN  MAN.


I  will  call  the  attention  of  the
congregation  to  a  passage  in  the
prophecy  of  Joel,  second  chapter,
commencing  with  the  2bth  verse  :

44  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  after-
ward, that  I  will  pour  out  my  spirit
upon  all  flesh  ;  and  your  sons  and
your  daughters  shall  prophecy,  ynur
old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  and
your  young  men  shall  see  visions  ;

"And  also  upon  the  servants  and
upon  the  handmaids  in  those  days
will  I  pour  out  my  spirit.

"And  I  will  show  wonders  in  the
heavens  and  in  the  earth, — blood,
and  tire,  and  pillars  of  smoke.

"And  the  sun  shall  be  turned
into  darkness,  and  the  moon  into
blood,  before  the  great  and  terrible
day  of  the  Lord  come/'

These  words*  were  spoken  by  the
inspired  man  long  before  the  first
coming  of  our  Savior  ;  they  refer  to
the  future  condition  of  the  world,  a  j


state  of  things  that  has  never  been
known  to  have  existed  upon  our
earth  since  the  Prophet  lived  here.
All  flesh  should  be  under  the  influ-
ence of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  not
only  all  human  flesh,  but  also  the
animal  creation,  and  all  tilings  living.
The  effect  of  the  outpouring  of  this
Holy  Spirit  upon  mankind  will  be
to  cause  the  young  people  to  pro-
phecy, making  revelators  of  them,
and  the  older  ones  to  dream  dreams.
This  prophecy  was  quoted  by  the
Apostle  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pente-
cost, when  under  the  influence  of
the  same  Spirit.  It  was  not  referred
tot  however,  with  the  intention  of
declaring  its  fulfillment  at  that  time,
but  merely  to  inform  the  unbelieving
Jews  that  it  was  the  same  Spirit
which  Joel  spoke  of.  It  will  be
remembered  that  on  the  morning  of
the  day  of  Pentecost,  about  121)
disciples  had  received  this  Spirit.


THE  OUTPOURING  OF  THE  SPIRIT,  ETC.


169


On  that  occasion,  while  assembled
in  the  Temple,  it  operated  so  power-
fully upon  them,  that  the  illiterate
and  unlearned  were  enabled  to  speak
in  different  languages,  and  that  it
manifested  itself  in  the  form  of
cloven  tongues,  like  fire  in  appear-
ance. The  people  who  witnessed
these  operations  marveled  and  won-
dered exceedingly.  But  some  were
inclined  to  evil,  and  accused  these
men  of  God  of  drunkenness.  It
was  then  that  the  Apostle  Peter,  in
order  to  correct  any  false  impression
upon  the  minds  of  the  congregation,
arose,  and  alter  denying  the  accusa-
tion of  these  evil-disposed  persons,
said,  lfc  This  is  that  which  was  spoken
by  the  Pro]) he t  Joel,"  quoting  the
prophecy  nearly  word  for  word.

Some  have  supposed  that  the  pro-
phecy was  then  fulfilled  It  is  very
evident  to  every  one  who  will  reflect
for  a  few  moments,  that  such  was  not
the  case,  but  that  the  Spirit  which
rested  upon  those  one  hundred  and
twenty  was  the  same  Spirit  that
should,  in  the  last  days,  be  poured
out  upon  all  flesh.  It  is  still  fur-
ther evident  that  it  was  not  then
fulfilled,  a#i  appears  from  the  follow-
ing :  u  I  will  show  wonders  in  the
heavens  and  in  the  earth — blood,
and  fire,  and  pillars  of  smoke.  The
sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness,
and  the  moon  into  blood,"  etc,  hav-
ing reference  to  His  second  coming,
when  these  great  events  should  take
place.  It  is  generally  believed,  by
the  various  Christian  churches,  that
there  are  to  l>e  no  more  revelations,
or  visions,  or  dreams,  given  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  and  this  belief  has
been  entertained  for  generations  by
millions  of  people  terming  them-
selves Christians.  But  when  this
prophecy  is  really  fulfilled,  all  men
and  women  upon  t  he  earth  will  be-  !
<soine  revelators,  receiving  from  the
heavens  information  and  knowledge


by  the  power  of  that  Spirit  poured
out  upon  them.  I  think  our  present
Bible  will  then  be  greatly  enlarged,
should  their  revelations  be  written.

Before  all  flesh  receive  the  Spirit
of  God,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  to
appear  upon  the  earth.  The  work
is  to  be  commenced,  and  his  Spirit
poured  out  upon  a  few,  preparatory
to  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Alan,
that  there  may  be  Prophets  and
revelators  again  on  the  earth,  and
the  true  Church  of  God  attain  exist
aujong  men,  as  anciently.  The
time  having  fully  arrived,  in  this
the  19th  century,  for  the  prophecies
to  be  fulfilled,  in  regard  to  the  set-
ting up  of  the  latter-day  kingdom,
the  Lord  and  his  angel,  as  predicted
in  the  14th  chapter  of  John's  Reve-
lations, revealed  the  original  plates
from  which  the  Book  of  Mormon
was  translated  by  inspiration  and
the  aid  of  the  Urim  and  Thu minim,
is  found  to  contain  the  fullness  of
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  as
revealed  in  ancient  times  to  the
Israelites  of  this  western  hemis-
phere, the  forefathers  of  our  Indian
race.  They  understood  the  Gospel
and  also  the  law  of  Moses,  the  lat-
ter of  which  they  had  kept  for  near-
ly GUi*  years  before  Christ.  After
Mis  crucifixion  and  resurrection
from  the  dead,  they  were  favored
with  His  personal  ministry;  the
Gospel  was  taught  them  in  great
plainness,  and  twelve  men  were
chosen  on  this  continent,  and  com-
missioned to  go  forth  and  preach
the  fullness  of  the  Gospel  to  all  the
inhabitants  of  the  land.  These
Twelve  men,  like  the  Apostles  of
the  eastern  hemisphere,  preached
faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and
baptism  by  immersion  in  water  for
the  remission  of  sins,  and  the  laying
on  of  bauds  for  the  reception  of  the
Holy  Ghost;  and  upon  those  who
believed  and  obeyed,  the  Spirit  of


170


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


the  Lord  was  poured  out  to  a  very  day  work,  which  will  never  end,  un-
great  extent. They  had visions, til  ;dl  flesh,  that  will  not  bedestioy-


arnl  dreams,  and  revelations,  and
great  manifestations  of  the  power
of  God,  and  the  people  generally  of
loth  North  and  Smith  America
were  eon  verted  and  were  taught  and
instruetod  in  the  things  of  God.
Yet  this  did  not  include  a]]  flesh,
and  therefore  did-  not  fulfil  the
prophecy  of  doe].

The  Lord  has  brought  to  lid  it


e,d  from  the  face  of  the  earth  by  the
judgments  spoken  of,  will  be  made
partakers  of  this  same  Spirit,  and  it
will  have  the  same  eifeet  promised.

You  may  ask,  Why  it  has  not
been  the  case  since  the  first  century
of  the  Christian  era?  Why  it  has
not  been  fulfilled  among  the  various
Christian  denominations  of  our
globe  ?  Why  they  have  not  receiv-
these  ancient  records,  containing  j  ed  dreams,  and  visions,  and  revela-
the  fullness  of  the  Gospel  which  he  tions  by  the  power  of  the  Holy
lias  command  ed  to  be  preached  and  Ghost  1  it  may  be  a  mystery  to
publishe  d  to  every  nation  and  in  some,  why  so  loi  g  a  period  should
every  tongue  upon  the  face  of  the  i  have  elapsed  among  the  people  of
earth,  that  all  of  his  numerous  *
children  may  have  the  opportunity
to  hear,  and,  through  obedience  to
its  requirements,  may  receive  the
Holy  Ghost,  the  Comforter,  which
should  reveal  to  them  the  mind  and
will  of  God  concerning  them,  and
lead  them  in  the  path  of  truth.  This
command  strictly  specifies  that  this
Gospel  is  to  be  preached  to  all  the
world,  but  first  to  the  Gentile  na-
tions, and  when  they  are  fully  warn-
ed, and  their  times  are  fulfilled,
then  t lie  Lord  will  declare  the  law
and  the  testimony  sealed,  *o  far  as
preaching  any  more  to  them  is  con-
cerned; ami  he  will  once  more  com-
mission Ins  servants  to  no  to  the
Jews,  the  House  of  Israel,  whom  the
Lord  will  prepare,  through  his  own
power  and  wisdom,  to  receive  the
message,  and  not  reject  it  as  they
anciently  did.  Scores  of  thousands,
among  the  different  nations,  have
already  received  the  ministry  of  the
Gospel,  revealed  by  the  angel,  and
they  have  been  filled  with  the  Holy
Ghost,  according  to  the  promise
made  to  every  soul  who  will  believe
and  repent  of  his  sins;  and  they
have  measurably  become  rev  el  :i  tors
and  prophets. This,  therefore,  is


th*  beginning  of  the  great  latter-


the  different  nations,  (luring  which
they  have  had  no  revelations,  no
visions,  no  prophecies,  no  voice  of
God.  The  reason  of  this,  as  reveal*
ed  by  the  Lord,  is  because  the  peo-
ple, did  turn  away  from  the  ancient
Gospel  :  they  did,  as  had  been  pre-
dicted they  would  do,  change  the
ordinances  and  break  the  everlasting
©oven ants  ;  they  did  apostatize  from
the  truth  so  that  the  authority  of
the  Apostlofthip  ceased  among  them  ;
the  authority  to  baptize  no  longer
existed,  the  authority  to  lay  on
hands  that  they  might  receive  the
Holy  Ghost  no  longer  existed,  and
they  were  no  longer  able  to  minis-
ter authoritatively  in  the  name  of
the  Lord  in  any  of  the  ordinances
of  the  Church.  There  were  many
good  moral  people  that  lived.  But
where  was  to  be  found  the  Church
organized  according  to  the  New  Tes-
tament pattern,  with  Apostles,  liv-
ing Apostles  receiving  revelation
from  heaven,  and  ]>ossessing  the
power  that  those  anciently  possess-
ed? You  could  find  churches  in
abundance,  which  were  called  Chris-
tian churches — thus  denominated  by
themselves,  some  called  by  certain
names  and  some  by  others;  all  of
them  believing  in  separate,  distinct


THE  OUTPOURING  OF  THE  SPIRIT,  ETC


171


doctrines  which  characterized  them ;
one  believing  one  principle  of  the
Gospel,  and  another  believing  some
other  ;  one  believing  in  one  mode
of  baptism,  another  in  some  other  ;
one  receiving  part  of  the  Gospel,
and  another  claiming  some  other
part.  This  was  the  condition  of  the
Christian  nations  when  the  Lord
sent  his  angel  to  reveal  the  fulness
of  the  Gospel  to  Joseph  Smith,  a
mere  boy,  who  was  raised  up  special-
ly by  the  hands  of  God  to  bring  to
light  another  record,  agreeing  with
the  one  which  already  existed,  call-
ed the  New  Testament  ;  not  another
Gospel,  hut  the  same  gospel  taught
to  another  branch  of  the  house  of
Israel,  Our  Heave nlv  Father  is  not
a  respeetor  of  persons;  l.e  respects
one  branch  of  the  house  of  Israel
just  as  much  as  another ;  and  inas-
much as  lie  did  by  his  own  power,
according  to  their  own  records,
bring  a  remnant  of  the  tribe  of  Jo-
seph out  of  the  land  of  Jerusalem
to  this  continent,  he  had  as  much
regard  for  them  as  he  had  for  the
Jews,  and  as  he  had  for  the  ten
tribes  who  were  taken  away  from
the  land  of  Palestine  some  720  years
before  Christ,  They  were  led  away
to  the  north  country,  but  where,  we
do  not  exactly  know,  He  had  equal
respect  to  all  these  branches  of  the
seed  of  Israel;  and  as  all  had  a
knowledge  before  their  dispersion
about  the  coming  of  the  future  Mes-
siah, it  would  be  perfectly  reason-
able that  when  he  should  come  to
suffer  and  be  crucified  for  the  sins  of
the  world,  the  Jews,  only  a  portion
of  Israel,  should  not  be  the  onlv
portion  who  should  be  favored  and
blessed  with  his  personal  ministry ;
it  is  perfectly  reasonable  that  he
should  go  to  the  ten  tribes,  and  also
come  to  this  great  continent,  where
a  part  of  one  tribe  existed,  and  min-
ister to  them. You  know  Jesus


himself  says,  +u  I  am  not  sent  but
utfto  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of
Israel"  Not  merely  to  the  Jews,
fur  they  were  only  a  part  of  them,
he  had  others  dispersed  in  various
countries,  and  upon  the  islands  of
the  seas?  and  inasmuch  as  they  all
had  a  knowledge  of  the  com  ins  of
Christ,  and  that  he  would  offer  the
great  last  sacrifice,  thereby  doing
away  with  the  rite  of  sacrifice  which
they  had  for  so  many  generations
held  sacred,  it  would  seem  consist-
ent that  he  should  inform  them  in
whatever  land  they  might  havt
been,  that  the  true  Messiah  had  come
and  offered  himself,  and  therefore
they  should  no  longer  offer  up  beasts
and  birds  as  sacrifices,  but  forever
afterwards  believe  in  Him.  It  is
also  just  as  reasonable,  that  a
branch  of  Israel,  existing  thousands
of  miles  from  Palestine,  having  the
personal  ministry  of  Christ,  would
keep  a  record  of  his  teachings,  just
as  much  as  thev  did  in  the  land  of
Jerusalem  ;  and  that  Ins  teachings
would  he  just  as  sacred,  when  writ-
ten, as  the  New*  Testament  is.  And
it  is  again  just  as  reasonable  that
they  should  receive  the  same  gospel
and  the  same  spirit,  and  that  the
same  effects  should  be  produced
among  them,  as  among  these  at  Jeru-
salem. Jesus  informs  us  too  in  St,
John's  Gospel,  tliar  lie  had  other
sheep  besides  those  at  Jerusalem.
The  passage  reads  :  "Other  sheep  I
have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold
them  also  1  must  bring,  and  they
shall  hear  my  voice  ;  and  there  shall
be  one  fold  and  one  shepherd."  He
did  not  go  to  the  Gentiles,  as  they
were  not  the  "other  sheep"  referred
to  :  thev  were  never  denominated  in
any  of  the  Scriptural  writings  as  the
sheep  of  Israel,  they  were  always
called  by  their  own  name.  But  the
sheep  that  Jesus  speaks  of  were
those  he  meant  to  visit ;  "  they  shall


172  JOURNAL  OF

hear  my  voice" — that  is,  he  would
minister  to  them,  and  they  would
see  Him  and  they  would  hear  His
voice.  And  the  instruction  that  he
gave,  they  were  commanded  to
write,  with  a  view  of  its  coming  j
forth  in  the  latter-days,  preparatory
to  the  time  when  "the  earth  shall  be
filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the
glory  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters
cover  the  sea  ;  not  merely  the  know-
ledge of  God  contained  in  the  Jew-
ish record,  but  the  knowledge  of
fJod  contained  in  all  the  records*
The  Book  of  Mormon  informs  us  \
that  the  ten  tribes  in  the  north
country  will  have  a  record  as  well  as
the  Jews,  a  Bible  of  their  own,  if
you  please*  indeed  Jesus  after  hav-  ;
iug  instructed  the  remnant  of  Jo-
seph upon  this  land  and  revealed  to
them  His  gospel,  said  to  them,
"  But  now  1  go  unto  the  Father,  and  j
also  to  show  myself  unto  the  lost
'  tribes  of  Israel,  for  they  are  not  lost
uuto  the  Father,  for  He  knoweth  \
whither  He  hath  taken  them/  And
it  was  predicted  concerning  them  by
one  of  the  ancient  American  pro-
phets, who  lived  in  those  days,  that
when  God  should  bring  these  ten
tribes  from  the  north  country,  they
would  bring  their  records  with
them.  And  it  should  come  to  pass
that  they  should  have  the  records  of
the  Nephites,  and  the  Nep  lutes
should  have  the  records  of  the  Jews,
.and  the  Jews  and  the  Nephites

should  l-i a ve  the  records  of  the  lost
tribes  of  the  house  of  Israel,  and  the
lost  tribes  of  Israel  should  have  the  j
record*  of  the  Ncphktsand  the  Jews,
"  It  shall  come  to  pass  that  I  will  |
gather  my  people  together,  and  I  will
also  gather  my  word  in  one,"  Not
only  the  people  are  to  be  gathered  1
from  the distant portions of  our
globe,  but  their  records,  or  bibles,
will  also  be  united  in  one.

In  the  good  old  book  believed  in


DISCOURSES.

by  the  world  of  Christianity,  we
have  a  prophecy  which  may  be  found
in  the  37th  chapter  of  Ezekiel,  con-
cerning the  uniting  together  of  two
of  the  records.  I  will  read  the
prophecy,  »  The  word  of  the  Lord
came  again  unto  me,  saying  :

"  Moreover,  thou  Son  of  Man,  take
thee  one  stick,  and  write  upon  it,  For
Judah,  and  for  the  children  of  Israel,
his  companions;  then  take  another
stick,  and  write  upon  it.  For  Joseph,
the  stick  of  Ephraim,  and  for  all  the
house  of  Israel  his  companions.

"And  join  them  one  to  another
into  one  stick,  and  they  shall  become
one  in  thine  hand.

"And  when  the  children  of  thy
people  shall  speak  unto  thee,  saying,
Wilt  thou  not  show  us  what  thou
meanest  by  these  ?

*l  S»v  unto  them,  Thus  saith  the
Lord  God  ;  Behold,  I  will  take  the
stick  of  Joseph,  which  is  in  the  hand
of  Ephraim,  and  the  tribes  of  Israel
his  fellows,  and  will  put  them  with
him,  even  with  the  stick  of  Judah,
and  make  them  one  stick,  and  they
shall  be  one  in  mine  hand.

u  And  the  sticks  wherein  thou
writest  shall  be  in  thine  hand  before
thine  eyes.'*

Why  was  he  commanded  to  do
this  simple  thing,  for  surely  it  would
be  considered  simple  in  our  day  for  a
man  to  lake  two  sticks,  writing  upon
one  for  Judah,  and  upon  another  one
for  Joseph,  and  then  joining  the  two
j  stick*  together,  and  holding  them  up
in  his  hands  to  become  one  ?  If  we
were  to  undertake  to  preach  in  this
way  the  people  would  think  we  were
insane,  But  it  was  a  familiar  way
by  which  the  Lord  intended  to  in-
struct hi*  people,  and  the  interpret*,
tiun  is  this :  These  two  sticks  were  to
i  represent  what  the  Lord  would  do*
Sa)s  he,  lt  When  the  children  of  thj
people  shall  speak  unlo  thee  saying,
Wilt  thou  not  show  us  what  thou


THE  OUTPOURING  OF  THE  SPIRIT,  ETC,


173


meanest  by  these  two  sticks,  that
they  become  one  in  thine  hand,  Thus
saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold  I,  (not
Ezekiel)  will  take  the  stick  of  Jo-
seph, etc."  And  what  will  you  do
with  it  ?  I  will  put  it  with  the  stick
written  upon  for  Judah,  and  will
make  them  one  in  mine  band.  And
the  sticks  whereon  thou  writest  shall
be  in  thine  hand  before  thine  eyes;"
one  being  a  representation  of  the
other.  Bat  when  will  it  take  place  ?
Bead  the  next  verse.

"  And  say  unto  them,  thus  saith
the  Lord,  Behold,  I  will  take  the
children  of  Israel  from  among  the
heathen,  whither  they  be  gone,  and
will  bring  them  into  their  own  land  :

"  And  I  will  make  them  one  nation
in  the  land  upon  the  mountains  of
Israel ;  and  one  king  shall  be  king  to
all,  and  they  shall  no  more  be  t  wo
nations,  neither  shall  they  be  divided
into  two  kingdoms  any  more  at'  all  :

*'  Neither  shall  they  defile  them-
selves any  more  with  their  idols,  nor
with  any  of  their  transgressions :  but
I  will  save  them  oat  of  their  dwell-
ing places,  wherein  they  have  sinned,
and  will  cleanse  them :  so  shall  they
be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  their
God."

Has  this  been  fulfilled  ?  Has  He
done  this  for  the  House  of  Israel,
scattered  among  the  heathen,  bring*
ing  them  back  and  making  them  one
nation  in  the  land  and  upon  the
mountains,  with  one  king  to  reign
over  them  all  ?  Has  there  ever  been
a  period  since  the  twelve  tribes  lived,
some  two  thousand  five  hnndred
years  ago,  that  the  Honae  of  Judah
lias  been  made  one  ?  It  is  very  well
known  that  such  things  have  not  yet
taken  place.  But  the  prophecy  will
be  fulfilled,  and  that  too  in  our  day.
The  Lord  will  gather  the  ten  tribes
from  the  north,  and  the  House  of  Ju-
dah from  the  four  quarters  of  the
earth  whither  they  be  gone,  and  will


gather  them  on  every  side,  and  bring
them  into  their  own  land,  making  of
them  one  nation  under  one  king
never  more  to  be  divided,  neither,
says  the  Lord,  shall  they  any  m^re
defile  themselves  with  their  detesta-
ble things,  etc.  "  And  they  shall
dwell  in  the  land  that,  I  have  given
unto  my  servant  .T.ioob,  wherein  your
fathers  have  dwelt,  etc,"  It  is  not  a
spiritual  thing,  it  is  natural,  and  will
tako  place  even  as  it  is  written.  How
will  He  accomplish  this  work?  In
the  very  way  He  has  pointed  out  in
this  chapter?  He  will  take  the
s  ick,  or  records,  of  Joseph  written
upon  for  Joseph,  and  join  it  with  that
of  the  Jews,  written  upon  by  the
Jewish  nation;  and  when  they  be-
come one  in  His  hand,  then  He  will
bring*  Israe  l  fro-n  the  four  quartern  of
the  earth  and  fulfill  all  that  has  been

id  concerning  them.

Here  (holding  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon in  his  hand)  we  present  a  record
of  this  American  continent,  a  history
of  a  branch  of  the  tribe  of  Joseph,
for  nearly  600  years  bef  ore  Christ,
and  until  420  years  after  Christ,  a
history  of  the  Lord's  dealings  with
them  from  the  time  they  left  Jerusa-
lem until  one  of  their  principal  na-
tions fell  in  battle,  because  of  their
apostacy;  and  the  descendants  of
the  remaining  remnant  are  this  de-
generated people  we  call  Indians,
who  still  exist.  Their  record  ha*
been  brought  to  light ;  the  Lord  hag
done  it,  not  Joseph  Smith.  He  ha*
already  united  the  record  and  testi-
monies of  Joseph  with  those  of  Ju-
dah that  we  may  have  additional  evi-
dence that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  that  we
may  have  the  testimony  of  two  great
nations — the  Jewish  nation  and  the
nation  of  Joseph  that  dwelt  on  thii
land,  and  which  afterwards  became  ft
"multitude  of  nations/'  according  to
the  blessing  pronounced  by  the
ancient  patriarch  Jacob,  when  bles»


Iphraim  and
Mauasseh.  Ht  re  we  find  on  this  con-
tinent a  multitude  of  nations*  and
when  we  curne  to  examine  the  lan-
guage they  all  speak,  we  find  that  it
evidently  hpiang  from  the  same
source,  Antiquarians  who  have
searched  diligently  into  this  matter*
all  testily  to  t his  one  fact — that  their
language  evidently  sprang  from  the
same  source.  It  is  also  stated  by
them  they  must  have  lived  fur  many
generations  on  this  continent  in  or-
der to  have  become  so  diversified  in
their  several  tongues.  You  know
where  people  have  no  written  lan-
guage, as  we  have,  that  it  will  be
come  corrupted,  and  as  they  sepa-
rate from  each  other,  as  the  In-
dian race  has  done,  it  will  corrupt
itself  more  and  more.  W^ien  you
come  to  trace  the  languages  spo-
ken by  the  aborigines  of  our
country,  you  will  find  that  they
have  the  same  origin  ;  also  that  this
"multitude  of  nations"  are  the  de-
scend ante  of  Joseph,  in  fulfillment  of
the  promise  God  made  him  through
his  father  Jacob,  Patriarchs  used  to
bless  their  children  in  ancient  days
and  tell  them  what  would  come  to
pass  in  the  latter  days,  Jacob  so
blessed  his  twelve  sons  ;  and  when
he  came  to  Joseph  he  pronounced  a
peculiar  blessing  upon  his  head.  It
reads — "Joseph  is  a  fruitful  bough,
even  a  fruitful  bough  by  a  well,
whose  branches  run  over  the  wall ;  **
signifying  that  a  portion  of  his  seed
would  not  always  stay  with  the  main
body  of  his  people,  but  would  branch
off,  "run  over  the  wall,"  depart  out
of  the  laud  of  Jerusalem.  "The
ble,>sings  of  thy  father  have  prevail-
ed above  the  blessings  of  my  progeni-
tors unto  the  utmost  bounds  of  the
everlasting  hills ;  they  shall  be  on  the
head  of  Joseph,  and  on  the  crown  of
the  head  of  him,  that  was  separate
from  his  brethren," Jacob's  progen-


itors were  Abraham  and  Isaac,
What  blessings  were  given  to  them  ?
Palestine.  But  says  the  Patriarch,  I
have  a  greater  blessing,  it  has  pre-
vailed above  that  of  my  progenitors.
Ho  w  much  above  thtiirs  ?  Unto  the
utmost  bounds  of  the  everlasting
hills.  Said  be,  I  will  give  tins  to
you,  Joseph;  or,  t(  they  shall  be  on
the  head  of  Joseph,  and  on  the  crown
of  the  head  of  him  that  was  separate
from  his  brethren*"  How  marvelous
are  the  dealings  of  God  with  man  in
bringing  to  pass  the  prophetic  utter-
ances of  his  servants!  There  was
another  blessing  pronounced  upon
his  head  by  Muses,  before  he  was
taken  out  lrom  the  midst  of  Israel,
which  was  very  distinct  from  thereat
of  the  tribes.  It  read* — "And  ot
Joseph  he  said,  Blessed  of  the  Lord
be  his  land,  fur  the  precious  things  of
heaven.  And  for  the  precious  things
of  the  earth  and  fulness  thereof/'
As  much  as  to  say,  his  hind  shall  be
very  choice.  Instead  of  l>eing  blessed
with  lands  side  by  siile  with  the  rest
of  the  tribes,  he  was  to  be  a  fruitful
bough  by  a  well,  whose  branches  run
over  the  wall,  unto  the  utmost  bound
of  the  everlasting  hills,  and  there  he
should  be  blessed  with  ali  kinds  of
climate ;  the  temperate  and  the  tor-
rid zone  ;  the  blessings  of  the  earth
and  fulness  thereof,  so  far  as  the  tern*
perate  zones  are  concerned  ;  then  the
blessings  of  the  earth,  so  far  as  the
torrid  zone  is  concerned.

Here  then  we  perceive  with  all
these  predictions  and  prophecies  that
the  Lord  in  his  providences  lias  so
wrought  among  the  Israelites  as  to
fulfill  these  promises  to  the  very  let-
Jer.  They  should  not  be  blessed  with
the  blessings  of  the  earth  only,  but
"  Blessed  of  the  Lord  be  his  laud,  for
the  precious  things  of  heaven,"
What  would  you  consider  the  preci-
ous things  of  heaven  ?  I  ihonld  say
that the revelations given  from


heaven  to  his  descendants  would  be  {
as  precious  as  anything  that  could  be
bestowed upon them. Why  then
should  it be  thought  unreasonable
that  these  prophecies  in  relation  to
the  descendants  of  Joseph  should  be
fulfilled,  that  the  Lird  should  brin^
forth  these  preetous  things  in  the  lat-
ter days,  under  the  name  of  the  re-
cord of Joseph,  in order that  it
might  go  forth  as  testimony  in  con
Beet  ion  with  the  Jewish  record,  first  1
to  tlie  Gentiles,  and  then  to  the  house
of  Israel,  that  the  way  might  be  pre*
pared,  that  the  kingdom  that  was  to
be  set  up  in  the  last  days  miifht  in-
crease upon  the  earth,  in  fulfillment
of  the  prophecies  of  Daniel,  even  un-
til the  Kingdom  and  the  greatness  of
the Kingdom under the  whole
heavens  should  be  given  to  the  Saints
of  the  Must  High. If  God  intends
to  set  up  a  Kingdom  represented  in
the  Book  of  Daniel  by  a  44  stone  cut
out  of  the  mountains  without  hands,"
and  that  Kingdom  is  to  extend  until
it  becomes,  as  he  saw  it  in  vision,  as
S  great  mountain  tilling  the  whole
earth,  it  will  no  doubt  be  out  a  pre-
paratory *\ork  for  the  stcond  advent
of  his  Son,  so  that  when  He  comes
iti  all  H  a glory,  in  the  clouds  of
heaven,  accompanied  by  the  proph-
ets, and  apostles,  and  re  vela  tors,  and
the  rest  of  the  Saints  to  reign  on  the
■earth,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that
the  King  torn  to  be  set  up  would
have  prophets,  and  revelators,  and
inspired  men, old men  dreaming
dreams,  and  young  men  seeing  vis-
ions. And  in  this  way,  when  Jesus
descends  with  his  resurrected  Saints
finding  a  Kingdom  prepared  for  him
composed of those  who  have  the
Spirit  of  God  in  their  hearts,  be  will
commence  his reign — his  universal
reign  upon  the  earth,  over  all  the
Saints  living. Then  will  be  fulfilled
that  part  of  ttie  prophecy  of  Daniel,
"And  the  Kingdom  and  dominion,"


not  only  the  Kingdom,  but  the  do-
minion, also,  "And  the  greatness  of
the  Kingdom  under  the  whole  heav-
ens shall  be  given  to  the  people  of
the  Saints  of  the  Most  Hi«h,  whose
Kingdom  is  an  everlasting  Kingdom,
and  all  dominion*  shall  serve  and
obey  Him,"  That  is,  all  people  then
living  will  be  under  this  one  King  of
Kings,  he  will  reign  :n  the  tnfdat  of
his  people,  the  resurrected  Saint*,
and  the  Saints  then  living.  And  all
tli_jsh  will  have  the  Spirit  of  God
poured  out  upon  them,

I  said  "all"  fl-sh  including  the
flesh  of  the  animal  as  well  as  human.
This  has  been  clearly  spoken  of  in
the  prophecies.  That  is,  in  those
days  wnen  u  the  earth  shall  be  lull  of
the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the
waters  cover  the  sea,"  then  the  44  lion
shall  eat  straw  like  tho  ox."  His
nature  will  he  so  susceptible  to  the
Spirit  of  God  that  it  wil!  be  entirely
changed,  instead  of  his  preying  up-
on other  animals  and  devouring  their
flesh,  he  will  feast  upon  the  vegetable
kingdom,  just  as  he  did  in  the  morn-
ing of  creation.  When  the  earth
was  first  made,  all  things  were  pro-
nounced very  good  ;  it  issued  fort ii
from  t  he  hand  of  the  Creator  in  a
very  perfect  condition,  but  when  man
fid  I,  a  change  came  over,  not  ouly
man,  but  also  the  animal  creation,
and  the  vegetable  kingdom  came  un-
der the  curse,  and  tho  power  of
Satan  was  exercised  upon  tlie  earth,
enmity  was  introduced  between  man
and  the  animals.  But  tlie  time  will
come,  when  the  Spirit  of  God  will
be  poured  out  upon  all  flesh  and
''Tile  wolf  shall  lie  down  with  the
lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall  lie  down
with  the  kid;  and  the  calf  and  the
young  lion  and  the  fading  together  ;
and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them,11
etc.  That  will  change  the  fall  of
creation  or  at  least,  the  living  por-
tion of  it. The  curse  then  will  Le


176


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


removed.  It -will  be  like  the  garden
of  Eden,  and  Jesus  will  \ie  here,  nnd
be  will  teach  his  people  fulfilling
what  is  written  in  the  saored  Scrip
tores  about  hiw  reign  of  a  thonsnnd
years.  The  Saints  theri  willl  he  re*
su riveted ,  and  they  will  also  be  tile


twelve  tribes  of  Israel."  Then  the
twelve  tribes  will  came  back,  and
twelve  men  si  t  ting  on  twelve  throne*,
the  land  of  Palestine,  will  reign


in


over  them.  The  Twelve  disciples
raised  up  in  this  land,  1800  years
ago,  are  to  have  their  thrones;  who,


ii habitants  of  this  globe. They  are  j  after  being  judged  themselves  hy  the


singing  about  it  in  heaven,  while
their  bodies  ai?e  sleeping  in  the  grave.
R  md  the  5th  chapter  of  John's  Rev-
elations, that  will  give  yoa  an  idea
what  theSatnfsof  heaven  anticipate.


Twelve  at  Jerusalem,  will  sit  upon
their  thrones  and  will  judge  the
remnant  of  the  tribe  of  Joseph,  And
they  will  have  that  work  to  do  in  the
eternal  worlds. The  Priesthood  is


The  words  of  the  new  song. -whin  not  given  for  a  few  years  and  then  to
John  heard  them  stag,  were:  44  Thcp  cease;  bat  nil  the  servants  of  God
art  worthy  to  take  the  book,  and  til  who  have  minisiered  here  below  by
open  the  seals  thereof;  for  thou  waft  ;  authority  of  the  Priesthood  will  con-
slain,  and  hast  redeemed  ns  to.  God  I  tinoe  their  work  among  immortal


by  thy  blood  out  of  every  kindred,
and  tongue  and  people  and  nation.
And  hast  made  us  tfrtto  00 r  0
kings  and  priests  ;  and  we  shall  rei
on  the  earth  !  "  How  plain  !
shall  reign  on  the  earth  !  *'  They
hop,-  for  it  ;  they  ein^  about  it ;  tht*y
expect  it,  just  as  much  as  we  hope  to


beings,  and  among  those  living  who
will  not  have  been  changed  to  the
immortal  state.  Some  think  that
when  Jesus  oomea  all  that  are  then
living  upon  tin-  mirth  will  be  changed.
There  is  no  Scripture  to  this  effect.
But  there  is  a  Scripture  that  says,
the  Saints  living  will  all  be  "changed


go  with  them, and  mingle  with  them  }1n  a  mwnent,  th  the  twinkling  of  an
and  just  as  much  ©s  we  have  faith eye,  at  the  last  trump/' When  the

first  trump  sounds,  at  the  coming  of
the  Savior,  they  will  not  be  changed,
but  they  will  be  caught  up^  but  whea
the  graves  of  the  Saints  are  opened
and  they  come  forth  as  immortal  be-
ings they  will  be  quickened,  not  made
immortal,  renewed  in  a  measure,  and
they  will  be  taken  up  with  those  who
will  ascend  out  of  their  graves  to
meet  Jesus,  and  descend  with  him.
And  the  immortal  ones  will  multiply
and  spread  forth  so  that  the  many
been  made  kings  and  priests  untofpt*  j  places  depopulated  in  consequence  of
God.  And  Jesus  and  the  Twelve
Apost'es  will  be  in  our  midst  And
we  have  an  account  of  their  thrones.
**  And  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Verily,


that  we  will,  when  we  lay  our  bodies
down  in  thtf  grcive,  go  to  our  forip#r
abode  where  we  once  were,  to  (be
roan>ions  prepared,  and  that  we  will
jon  with  the  heavenly  hosts.  We
will  not  forget  the  earth  ;  it  is  <pr
native  abode  ;  but.  instead  of  forget-
ting it,  we  will  join  with  them  in
their  new  song,  and  with  them  we
will  lovk  forward  with  joyful  antici-
pation to  the  day  when  we  shall  te-
turn  to  reign  on  the  earth,  having


the  great  judgment  that  will  precede
his  coming,  will  become  inhabited  by
their  numerous  children  during  the
millennium,  filling  up  the  different


I  say  unto  yoa,  that  ye  which  have  parts  of  the  earth. So  that  when


followed  me,  in  the  regeneration
when  the  Son  of  Man  shall  sit  in  the
throne  of  his  glory,  ye  also  shall  sit


the  thousand  yesrs  are  ended^
and  Satan  is  again  loosed,  he
will  find  a  large  number  who  have


upon  twelve  thrones,  judging  the  !  not  been  tempted  by  him,  and  he  will


■r


THE  OUTFOVBING  OF  THE  SPIRIT,  ETC.

1


177


use  his  (.".inning  among  them,  and
will  succeed  in  leading  more -or  less
astray.  He  will  gather  op  his  nu-
merous hosts  from  the  four  quarters
of  the  earth,  and  will  encompass  the
camp  of  the  Saints.  The  Saints  will
then  gather  from  abroad,  as  they  now
do,  and  they  will  have  to  pitch  their
tents  while  doing  so;  and  Satan's
army  will  also  compass  the  beloved
citv  to  destroy  the  people  of  God  j
but  fire  will  come  down  from  Go  t
out  of  heaven,  and  will  devour  them.
And  the  beloved  city  and  the  right-
eous will  be  taken  to  heaven ;  and
after  tbo  thousand  years  are  ended
the  earth  will  pass  away.  This  earth
that  will  be  sanctified  and  purified
and  blessed  with  the  presence  of  Je-
sus, aud  upon  which  the  immortal
and  resurrected  Sainta  will  live  and
reign  as  kings  and  priests  ;  this  enrth
because  of  the  fall  and  the  curse  that
came  upon  it,  will  have  to  undergo  a
greater  change,  the  same  as  our  bo-
dies, and  will  pass  away.  There  will
be  no  place  found  for  it,  as  au  organ-
ized world :  it  will  exist  in  mi  ele-
mentary condition,  all  of  its  elements
scattered  through  space,  until  the
Lord  sees  proper  to  gather  them  to-
gether by  his  power,  and  fortes  an
immortal  earth,  an  earth  free  from
the  curse,  free  from  the  effects  of
the  fall,  restored  as  it  was  iu  the
beginning.  This  then  will  be  the
new  earth  and  the  new  heaven,  where-
on the  righteous  only  will  dwell.  The  i
beloved  city  will  descend  upon  this
eternal  earth,  and  it  wilt  then  become  |
one  of  the  heavenly  m an sions,.w here-
on the  Saints  that  are  prepared  will
reign  forever  and  ever.  J

This  is  our  eternal  home  then  ;  we
are  not  to  look  for  a  heaven  —


M  Beyond  the  boundt*  of  time  and  space,
Where  human  mind  can  never  trace."

We  are  are  not  to  go  further  than
our  thoughts  can  carry  us,  to  some
remote  unknown  place,  concerning

No,  12.


which  there  has  been  no  revelation
given.  ,But  we  will  return  to  our
earth,  fcnd  then  will  be  fulfilled  that
part  of  the  vision  where  John  says,
"And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of
hfMven  spying;  Behold  the  Tabernacle
#of  Gad  is  with  man,  and  he  will  dwell
with  them,  and  they  shall  be  his  peo-
ple, arfti  God  himself  shall  be  with
t  horn,  and  he,  their  God,

u  And  God  shall  wine  a  way  all
tears  from  their  eyes,  and  there  shall
be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor
crying,  neither  shall  there  be  any
more  pnin  ;  fur  the  former  things  fire
passed  away.11

Why  y  Because  all  its  inhabitants
then  will  be  immortal,  and  the  *arth
itself  will  be  celestial,  consequently
there  will  be  no  more  funerals/'nor
any  Tbause  for  mourning :  *l  Behold  I
make  all  things  new,"  said  he  that
s  it  npnn  the  throne.

I  That  will  be  the  historv  of  tin's
mtlo  creation  of  ours;  it  is  only  one
oat  np  the  immensity  of  creations
that  God  has  made,  all  of  which  have
their  limes  of  redemption,  having  to
pass  tii rough  similar  changes  as  those
wliicWl  have  alluded  to;  and  the
people  inhabiting  them  have  to  learn
by  a  set  tool  of  experience  ;  they  have
their  joys  and  sorrows  as  well  as  we,
because  they,  like  us,  could  not  ac-
quire the  necessary  experience  in  any
other  way  to  fit  them  for  the  society
of  'the  heavenly  hosts,

When;  accordi ug  to  the  prophecy
of  Joelj  God  bestows  visions  and
revelations  up^n  his  sons  and  daugh-
ters, and  dreams,  by  the  same  Spirit,
upon  the  old  men,  they  will  acquire
more  knowledge  in  a  very  short  time,
than  could  be  learned  by  studying
the  best  of  books  that  are  possessed
by  the  colleges  and  institution  tf
learning  all  over  the  world.  We
have  to  study  for  years  in  order  to
learn  one  branch,  mathAmattp*  for

Vol.  XIX.


178  JOURNAL  OF

instance,  viz :  geometry,  conic  sec*
tions,  calculus*,  etc.  *

It  takes  years  of  study  to  acq  a  ire
a  knowledge  of  them,  and  about  the
time  we  have  partially  mastered
them,  we  are  old  men,  ready  to  pass
away  from  this  sfate  of  existence. %
But  when  the  time  shall  come  that
the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  stial!  be
poured  out  upon  all  flesh,  in  a  very
few  moments  of  time  the  Lord  coulc
unlock  the  mysteries  and  treasures
of  the  earth,  so  that  we  could  under-
stand not  only  the  geographical  sur-
face of  the  eartht  but  be  able,  by  the
power  of  vision,  to  behold  every  par-
ticle of  it  inside  as  well  as  outside,
and  also  the  law  that  governs  its
elementary  portions,  Dearly  all  of
which  it*  now  closed  from  our  mortal
vision.  We  can  only  go  about  so  far
with  our  natural  sight ;  but  there  is
a  faculty  in  every  man  and  woman
which  is  now  sleeping  in  a  dormant  j
state ;  and  as  soon  as  it  is  touched
by  the  spirit  of  the  Lord,  we  shall  be
enabled  to  see  a  new  world  of  things
as  it  wert-,  mysteries  will  be  opened
up  and  we  will  perceive  naturally  as
if  they  were  written,  and  in  this  way
we  shall  be  able  to  learn  very  rapidly
indeed. If  we  want  a  knowledge  of


mscouiis&s.

this  world  or  of  ourselves,  when  our
spirits  were  bom,  or  if  we  desire  to
know  things  that  took  place  before
the  foundations  of  the  world  were
laid  or  the  neucleus  was  formed,  when
the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy,  if
we  desired  to  know  these  things  it
would  only  be  necessary  for  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord  to  touch  the  vision  of
our  minds  and  light  up  our  under-
standing and  we  could  gaze  upon
things  past  for  thousands  of  genera-
tions of  worlcfs  before  the  earth  was
made,  and  we  could  see  the  succession
of  worlds  that  have  been  and  were
in  existence  long  before  this  earth
was  formed,  we  could  see  tku;  otdeals
through  which  they  had  parsed,  see
them  brought  into  existence  and
passing  through  their  several  changes
and  finally  become  gloritied  celestial
m  maions  iu  the  presence  of  God.
By  this  same  spirit  spoken  of  by  Joel,
i  we  could  look  forward  inio  the  dis-
;  tant  future  and  behold  new  worlds
formed  an  j  redeemed,  and  not  only
this,  but  see  and  understand  the  laws
by  which  they  were  made,  and  the
object  and  end  of  all  these  creations,
I  being  touched  by  the  finger  of  the
Almighty  and  lighted  up  by  the  Holy
Ghost  Amen.


DISCOURSE 15  V ELDER EEASTUS  SNOW,


Delivered  at  Piuvo,  on  Sunday  Aftjgkxoon,  June  3,  1877.


[Reported  by  Geo,  F,  Gtbba,)


THE  UNITED  ORDER — AMONG  THE  NKPIIITKS — NOT  INCOMPATIBLE  WITH
INDIVIDUAL  RESPONSIBILITY  OR  STEWARDSHIP — THIS  LATTER-DAY
SAINTS  GATHER  FOR  TRAINING — IIuME  MANUFACTURE  INDISPENSABLE.


The  house  is  so  crowded  that  in
order  for  all  to  hear  it  will  be  ad vis-
able  that  each  one  keep  as  quiet  as
possible.

Id  my  remarks  yesterday  forenoon
I  alluded  briefly  to  the  subject  of  the
United  Order,  as  1  understood  it  In
the  minds  and  feelings  of  some  the
United  Order  is  a  sensitive  tupic:
bat  this  is  chiefly  for  the  want  of
a  proper  understanding  of  the  revela-
tions of  God,  and  the  obligations  of
the  Gospel  which  we  have  embraced,
for  the  want  of  understanding  what
the  Lord  has  purposed  to  accomplish
throngh  this  Order,  In  one  of  the
revelations  contained  in  the  Book  of
Covenants  is  to  be  found  these  words  :
**  Except  ye  are  one  in  your  temporal
affairs,  how  Cin  ye  he  one  in  obtain-
ing heavenly  tilings?11  This  one-
ness referred  to  is  variously  under-
stood, otttimes  construed  according  to
the  peculiar  views  and  notions  ot
men  and  women,  who  do  not  take  the
broad,  comprehensive  view,  as  the
Lord  does,  and  in  tended  we  should
do,  and  who  do  not  comprehend  the
revelations  and  the  manner  in  which
the  Lord  purposes  to  deal  with  his
people,

Under  the  operations  of  the  Uni-
ted Order  the  ancieut  Nephites  were


said  to  he  the  best  and  most  prosper-
ous people  on  the  earth  ;  it  was  said  of
them,  as  of  no  other  people  we  read
of,  that  there  were  neither  rich  nor
poor  among  them;  that  they  dwelt
in  peace  and  righteousness,  and  every
man  dealt  honestly  with  his  neigh-
bur.  The  fact  that  every  man  dealt
honestly  with  his  neighbor,  necessa-
rily implies  individual  responsibility
and  stewardship.  The  Book  of  Mor-
mon tells  us  farther  that  after  a
peiiod  of  one  bundled  and  sixty-five
years  living  in  this  state,  there  began
again  to  be  disunion,  and  they  began
to  cense  to  have  everything  in  com-
mon;  a  certain  class  began  to  wear
jewelry  and  costly  raiment;  class  dis-
tinctions began  to  spring  up,  some
exal Ling  themselves  over  their  fellows,
and  they  commenced  to  build  up  so-
cieties and  associations  and  classes
which  were  graded  by  their  wealth.
And  thus  they  grew  from  bad  to
worse,  until  the  judgment  of  God
fell  upon  them  to  their  utter  destruc-
tion. Those  who  are  inspired  by  the
Holy  Spirit  to  comprehend  the  deal-
ings ol  God  with  his  people,  both
ancient  and  modern,  may  be  able  to
look  forward  to  the  future  and  behold
a  prosperous  and  happy  people  that
shall  be  one  in  temporal  things,  and


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


1SG

rich  in 'the  enjoyment  of  heavenly!
things,  and  among  whom  there  will
be  no  poor  or  rich,  having  all  things
,  co/nmon,  eo  far  as  property  is  con-
cerned, when  no  one  will  say  u  this  is
inine,  ami  I  have  a  right  to  do  just
as  I  please  with  it,"  ■
And  yet  to  my  mind  this  state  of
things  will  not  necessarily  be  incom-
patible with  individual  responsibility
and  stewardship.  It  will  merely  imply
that  advanced  condition  of  the  peo-
ple, that  will  enable  them  to  seek
each  other's  welfare,  and  build  each
other  up  instead  of  pulling  each  other
down,  in  order  that  they  may  rise
upon  the  ruins  of  their  fellows.  And
that  which  they  possess,  or  are  stew-
ards over,  will  be  held  in  trust,  from
the  Lord,  accounted  for  to  Him,  and
to  His  servants  who  shall  be  over
them  in  the  Lord,  This  state  of
things  will  be  such  as  Brother  Can-
non referred  to  this  morning;  when
thtrj  will  be  no  temptation  placed
before  the  people  to  take  advantage
of  their  neighbor,  boca use  there  will
be  nothing  to  be  gained  by  it  ;  there
there  will  be  no  temptation  to  steal
or  plunder,  for  if  they  need  anything
for  their  personal  comfort,  it  could  be
supplied  them  with  all  good  feeling;
ami  he  that  would  take  stealthily
that  which  would  be  given  to  him
freely  and  abundantly,  would  be  a
consummate  fool,  or  grossly  wicked.
This  state  of  things  also  pre-supposes
a  disposition  on  the  part  of  all  to  do
ther  duty  ;  to  be  saints  in  very  deed,
"to  be  industrious,  to  be  frugal,  using
their  gifts  and  talents  for  the  com-  !
mon  welfate,  to  be  ready  to  serve
where  they  are  best  fitted  to  serve  j
in  a  word,  to  be  the  servants  and
handmaidens  uf  the  Lord,  instead  of
nerving  themselves  and  having  a  will
of  their  own  contrary  to  the  will  of
heaven,  and  determined  to  follow  that
if  they  have  to  go  to  hell  for  doing
it We  are,  some  of  as,  at  times  apt


to  think  that  this  state  of  feeling  ig
necessary  to  constitute  us  good  demo-
crats ;  in  other  words,  unless  we  have
this  kind  of  feeling  of  " doing  as  we
damn  please" — you  will  please  par-
don the  expression — we  are  not  men,
that  this  is  the  only  way  we  can  give
expression  to  our  manhood.  To  me
this  is  worse  than  folly  :  it  is  igno-
rance of  the  true  spirit  of  manhood.
A  Saint  will  say,  M  I  have  no  will  of
my  own,  except  to  do  the  will  of  my
Heavenly  Father  who  has  created
me.  True,  lie  has  given  mean  agency
and  this  will,  but  he  has  given  it  to
me  to  see  what  I  will  do  with  it,  how
I  will  use  it  ;  and  I  have  been  in-
structed from  heaven  sufficiently  to
know  and  understand  that  it  is  lor
my  best  interest  to  allow  this  will  to
be  subservient  to  the  will  of  my
Father;  it  is  best  for  me  so  to  live
and  so  to  seek  his  face  and  favor,  that
I  may  know  and  learn  what  his  will
is  concerning  me,  and  that  I  may  be
ready  to  do  it,  holJing  my  will  in
subjection  to  his,  "  Well,  then,  how
can  you  be  an  independent  man  ?
Surely  you  cannot  be  an  independent
man  unless  you  resist  everybody's  will
but  your  own.1'  If  good  and  evil  is
placed  before  us,  does  net  the  person
who  chooses  the  good  and  refuses  the
evil  exhibit  his  agency  and  manhood  as
much  as  the  man  who  chooses  the
evil  and  refuses  the  good  ?  or  is  the
independence  of  manhood  all  on  (he
side  of  the  evil-doer  ?  I  leave  you  to
answer  this  question  in  your  own
mind.  To  me,  I  think  the  angels  and
saints  and  all  good  people  have  ex-
ercised their  agency  by  choosing  the
good  and  refusing  the  evil;  and  in
j  doing  so  they  not  only  exhibit  their
independence  and  manhood  as  mucbf
but  show  a  much  higher  and  greater
nobility  of  character  and  disposition;,
and  I  leave  the  future  to  determine
who  are  wise  in  the  choice  of  their
freedom  and  independence.


Joshua said to ancient Israel :
**  Choose  ye  this  day  whom  ye  will
serve ;  if  the  Lord  be  Godt  serve  him  ;  i
it  Baal,  serve  him* But  as  for  me
an  1  my  house,  we  will  serve  the
Lord." I  think  what  we  need  to
learn  are  the  true  principles  that  shall
lead  us  to  peace,  to  wealth  and  hap-
piness in  this  world,  and  glory  and  •
exaltation  in  the  world  to  come.  And
that  if  we  cati  learn  these  principles,  j
and  receive  them  in  good  and  honest
hear! s,  and  teach  them  as  our  faith,
and  practice  them  in  our  lives,  we
shall  show  onr  manhood,  our  inde-
pendence and  our  agency  as  creditably
before  the  angel*  and  the  Gods,  as
any  wicked  man  can,  in  refusing  the  |
good  and  cleaving  to  the  evil,  exhibit
his  before  the  devil  and  his  angels.

Now  the  Latter- day  Saints  are
gathering  from  all  nations  and  J
tongues,  with  divers  customs  and  |
habits  and  traditions,  and  we  have
brought  them  with  us,  unfortunately
we  could  not  leave  ourselves  behind,
while  we  gathered  to  Zion.  Having
brought  ourselves  along  we  hove  the
labor  of  separating  the  follies  of
Babylon,  the  traditions  of  the  fathers  .
and  every  foolish  way,  learning  some-  ■
thing  better  as  fast  as  we  can ;  and
this  is  the  duty  that  is  upon  us,
Many  sermons  would  be  necessary  to  >
teach  us  this  lesson  ;  we  shall  need
the  lesson  often  repeated  before  we
can  learn  these  principles  and  prac-
tice them  thoroughly  ;  we  shall  need
a  great  deal  of  self-control,  and  a
great  deal  of  effort  on  the  part  of  the
brethren  to  help  us,  and  by  mutually
assembling  together,  by  doing  busi-
ness together,  by  learning  correct
principles  and  then  living  them.  One
thing  is  certain,  that  if  God  accom-
plishes with  the  Latter-day  Saints
what  the  prophets  have  foretold,  and
establishes  his  Zion,  and  he  makes
them  a  holy  nation,  a  kingdom  ot
priests,  a  peculiar  people  to  himself,  as


he  has  promised,  it  will  not  be  by  our
clinging  lo  Babylon  and  to  her  fool-
ish ways,  and  imitating  the  evil  and
foolish  things  of  the  world.  But  what
we  have  proved  and  know  to  he  good,
hold  fast  to  it ;  but  lay  aside  that
which  tends  to  evil.  We  must  he-
come  a  people  within  and  of  ourselves,
sooner  or  later,  and  learn  to  be  self-
reliant  and  self-sustaining ;  this  we
cannot  do  as  individuals  nor  as  an  in-
dividual community,  but  by  combi-
ning our  energies  as  a  whole,  we  may
eventually  arrive  at  this.  To  accom-
plish it  requires  a  united  effort,  con.
certed  action  and  perseverance,  along
pull  and  a  pull  altogether.  Disunion
and  pulling  against  each  other  will
only  retard  it;  we  reed  never  think
we  can  truly  enrich  ourselves  by  plun-
dering each  other  by  carrying  on
merchandising,  and  importing  the
products  of  the  labor  of  other  men
while  our  own  brethren  at  home  are
idle,  hungry,  naked  and  destitute.
Merchants  and  middlemen  are  neces-
sary evils,  their  legitimate  sphere  ia
interchanging  commodities  between
the  producing  classes*  The  Lord  has
taught  ns  that  by  and  by  he  will
waste  away  the  wicked  and  ungodly,
or  they  will  devour  and  destroy  each
other,  when  the  righteous  shall  be
gathered  out  through  the  preaching
of  the  Gospel.  And  He  designs  his
people  to  prepare  while  there  is  time,
and  while  he  gives  them  bread  to  sus-
tain themselves.  But  if  that  time
should  come  suddenly  upon  us  in  our
present  condition,  who  would  be  pre-
pared for  it  *i  If  the  news  was  to
reach  us  that  Babylon  was  really  go-
ing down,  that  a  general  war  had
overtaken  her,  causing  distress  of  na-
tions, and  the  closing  up  of  her  manu-
factories, nnd  the  struggle  between
capital  and  labor  were  again  renewed,
causing  domestic  and  nation  1  trouble,
and  as  a  consequence  we  found  our  for-
eign supplies  cut  off,  how  many  woul  1


182  JOURNAL  OF

begin  to  pray  that  Babylon  might  be  !
spared  a  lirtle  longer?  The  sisters
would  begin  to  qasI  their  eyes  around
io  see  where  they  were  to  get  theii
pan?*  and  kettles,  their  stoves  and
articles  of  domestic  use  ;  the  farmers
would  think  it  very  hnrd  that  mowers  J
and  reJipero,  plows  and  harrows  could
no  more  be  fuund  on  the  market;  and
the  mechanic  would  find  too  that  his
business  was  affected  for  the  want  of
tools ;  and  how  the  ladies  would  feel
when  they  found  that  their  hate  and
bonnets  and  fine  apparel  were  no  long-
er to  he  purchased.  The  real  value
of  Provo  Factory  would  then  be  ap-
preciated, and  it  would  not  be  con-
sidered transcending  to  say,  that  it
was  worth  more  to  the  county  than  all
the  merchants  in  Utah,  It  is  true,  it
does  not  nett  as  large  dividends  to
the  stockholders,  as  thest;  merchants
get  who  enrich  themselves  by  encou-
raging the  vanity  and  foolishness  of
the  people.  The  Provo  Factory  takes
the  raw  material  produced  at  home,
and  converts  it  into  the  useful  articles
of  clothing  for  the  people,  and  that
mainly  by  the  labor  of  your  own  citi-
zens. The  same  might  be  said  cor-
respondingly of  every  other  branch
of  home  industry.  They  ought  to
be  encouraged  by  the  masses  of  the
people  j  they  ought  to  be  multiplied
and  increased  among  us  by  our  united
eff  rts,  for  they  produce  our  wealth.
What  is  wealth?  Does  it  consist  of
gold  and  silver  ?  No,  Let  this
Territory  be  filled  with  gold,  and  war
prevail  outside  and  all  intercourse  be
cut  off,  what  would  we  do  with  it?
It  would  be  a  medium  of  exchange,
and  as  such  would  facilitate  home
trade;  but  nothing  further.  There
is  no  real  wealth  in  metallic  or  paper
currency,  in  d rafts,  letters  of  credit,
or  any  other  representative  of  value.
At  best  they  are  only  the  representa-
tives of  wealth,  though  convenient
in  carrying  on  our  trade. But  the


DISCOURSES.

real  wealth  mny  be  summed  up  in  a
few  words,  to  be  the  corcifoita  of  life;
that  is  to  say  what  is  needed  for  us
arid  our  families  and  those  depending
upon  us.  How  are  these  obtained  ?
We  might  say  money,  when  we  have
the  money  to  exchange  for  them,
and  when  these  commodities  are  to
be  bought.  But  where  do  they  come
from  ?  They  are  not  in  the  market
unless  somebody  has  produced  them;
if  in  the  shape  of  food*  some  farmer
has  raised  it  j  if  clothing,  some
manufactory  has  produced  it;  if  boots
mid  shoes,  somebody  did  the  work.
It  is  the  labor  of*  men's  hands  with
the  aid  of  machinery  that  produced
these  articles;  if  not  by  the  labor  of
our  community,  by  that  of  some
other  ;  and  if  we  are  dependent  upon
other  people  then  are  we  their  aer-
!  vants  and  they  our  masters.  The
Southern  States  in  thv  late  civil  war
were  whipped  by  the  Northern  States,
why  ?  There  may  be  some  general
reasons,  but  you  may  say,  speak*
ing  on  natuntl  principles  they  were
not  sufficiently  self-sustaining-  They
relied  mainly  upon  their  cotton,  and
a  few  other  products  of  the  earth,
mainly  iruits  of  their  close  labor;
they  had  few  manufacturing  establish-
ments. They  sent  the  raw  material  to
other  Slates  and  countries,  and  these
worked  it  up,  sending  back  to  them
the  manufactured  articles.  No  na-
tion under  heaven  can  long  thrive,
and  continue  this  state  of  things.
Just  as  soon  as  their  trade  was  inter-
fered with,  their  domestic  institutions
broken  into,  and  the  country  block-
'  aded,  preventing  the  export  of  their
raw  material,  and  the  import  of
manufactured  goods,  they  were
brought  to  the  ver^e  of  ruin.

This  subject  of  home- manufacture
has  become  somewhat  hackneyed.
When  will  we  cease  to  talk  about  it  ?
When  the  necessity  ceases  to  exist,
when  we  will  have  learned  to  apply


THE  UNITED  ORDER,  ETC.


183


these  principles  in  our  daily  lives  and
conduct.  The  greatest  lack  among
ns  is  the  means  to  employ  our  idle
hands.  We  shoo  Id  be  able  to  afford
every  man,  woman  and  chilrl  in  our
community  profitable  employment ;
were  we  able  to  do  this,  we  would  by
wisely  and  prudently  directing  that
labor  become  a  thriftier,  wealthier
and  happier  people,  of  whom  it
might  be  said,  there  were  no  poor
among  us.  Comparatively  speaking,
we  c  m  any  now  there  no  ahjfect
poverty  among  ns,  yet  we  are  far
from  enjoying  that  which  is  our
privilege  to  enjoy,  and  that  which
we  have  comes  from  abroad  and  we
are  striving  for  money  to  pay  for  it.
Crops  are  mortgaged  or  sold  to  our
creditors  in  advance  for  articles  of
foreign  manufacture-  I  was  told
that  Sanpete  County  owed  for  sew-
ing machines  alone  from  forty  to
fifty  thousand  dollars;  and  I  was
told  by  brother  Thatcher  of  Cache
Valley,  that  forty  thousand  dollars
would  not  clear  the  indebtedness
for  sewing  machines.  The  irrepres-
sible sewing  machine  agents  have
ravaged  our  country,  imposing  them
selves  upon  every  simpleton  in  the
land,  forcing  their  goods  upon  them.
Tens  ot  thousands  of  dollars  are  lying
idle  in  the  houses  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  to  day  in  this  article  alone  ;
almost  every  house  you  enter  you
can  find  a  seeing  machine  noiseless
and  idle,  but  very  seldom  you  hear  it
running;  and  all  of  which  were  pur-
chased at  enormous  figures,  and  now
the  patent  rights  having  expired,
they  can  be  bought  for  less  than  half
the  prices  paid  for  them.  And  in  this
way  many  of  our  agricultural  ma-
chines are  obtained  ;  we  should  be
properly  classified  in  onr  labor,  so
that  our  investments  in  agricultural
and  other  machinery  could  be  kept
in  constant  use  in  the  season  thereof,
and  then  well  taken  care  of,  as  pro-


perty ought  to  be,  instead  of  allowing
them  to  be  exposed  to  the  storms  of
winter,  as  many  are,  and  get  out  of
repair*  Some  have  thought  we  need
but  few  factories  to-day  ;  I  may  be
mistaken,  but  I  am  under  the  impres-
sion that  every  factory  in  the  Terri-
tory, except  yours,  before  the  last
wool  was  brought  into  market,  had
to  stop  running  for  want  of  material.
The  wool  that  should  have  supplied
them  was  shipped  out  of  the  coun-
try, gone  abroad  to  affjrd  other
hands  employment,  and  the  goods
brought  back  made  up  ready  for
wear,  to  sell  to  you.  You  not  only
buy  back  again  your  own  product,
but  you  buy  the  labor  of  foreign
manufacturers,  and  pay  the  trans*
portation  both  ways,  all  the  exp3nses
of  the  merchants  or  middlemen  who
handle  the  wool,  and  sell  you  the
clothes,  while  your  own  wives  and
children  are  idle  at  home,  and  your
own  factories  standing  still  for  waat
of  wool.  Is  this  the  way  to  get  rich  ?
The  same  may  be  said  with  regard  to
the  manufacture  of  leather.  Our
hides  and  skins  either  rot  upon  the
fences,  or  are  gathered  up  and  sold
mostly  to  men  who  ship  them  toother
countries  to  be  tanned  and  worked
up  into  harness  and  boots  and  shoes,
which  are  brought  back  for  you  to
wear ;  so  that  you  are  buying  back
your  own  hides  and  skins,  in  the
shape  of  these  manufactured  articles,
and  paying  the  cost  of  the  trans-
portation and  the  profits  of  the  mid*
die-men,  besides  employing  strangers,
while  our  own  bone  and  sinew  too
often  are  engaged  either  digging  m
hole  in  the  ground  or  lounge  around
the  street  corners  tor  something  to
turn  up.

During  the  last  sixteen  years  I  have
been  engaged  laboring  and  counsel-
ing and  trying  to  assist  my  brethren
in  Southern  Utah  to  become  self-
sustaining,  ami  as  much  as  they  cm


to  develop  the  resources  of  the  coun-
try. We  have  began  a  great  variety
of  associations  which  ,  are  incorrectly
called  co-operativaaanstitutions,  but
in  reality  they  areStly  combinations
of  capital. I  h*4£ sought  tor  the
last  six  or  eight  years  to  start  co-
operative institutions;  that  is  to  say
associations  <>f  Ulxjrers,  workmen's
and  workwomen's  associations,  asso-
ciations to  derive  benefits  from  a
corn bined  effort,  and  by  the  unity  of
labor  accumulate  material  manufac-
turing them  into  useful  articles  for
the  common  goon,  and  then  to  in-
duce those  who  begin  to  gather  to-
gether  a  little  surplus  of  capital,  to
encourage  these  labor  associations,  by
letting  them  have  a  little  means  to
help  them  to  start. But  the  great
difficulty  I  have  had  to  fight  against
has  been  the  ignorance  of  the  labor-


economy,  have  accumulated  a  little
means,  and  that  such  men  are  not
willing  to  put  their  money  at  the
mercy  of  laborers  who  have  not  sense
enough  to  take  care  of  it,  or  to  pre-
serve intact  the  capital  invested,  let
alone  increasing  it.  This,  1  say,  is
one  of  the  great  difficulties  we  have
met  with  throughout  this  country,  in
attempting  to  start  home  industries.
Everybody  is  willing  that  somebody
else  should  furnish  the  moans  and
assume  th«  responsibility;  in  other
words,  "  if  you  have  anything  to  give
us,  we  are  willing  to  take  it."  If  we
work  we  must  have  from  three  to
five  dollars  per  day,  whether  you  make
anything  out  of  ihe  business  or  not  ;
we  wnuM  not  want  to  work  for  any
less,  and  when  we  have  got  it  in-
stead of  buying  articles  of  home
production,  we  will  buy  those  int-


ers, their  inability  to  make  their  labor  j  ported  from  foreign  countries."  Do


pay  for  itself,  and  their  unwillingness
to  be  put  to  the  test.  They  prefer
some  one  to  raise  the  capita!  to  be
invested  in  the  enterprises,  and  em-
ploy them  and  pay  them  big  wages;
and  if  we  have  not  the  money  neces-
sary, they  would  have  us  borrow  it
at  big  interest,  and  establish  shoe-
shops,  and  woolen*facfories  and  other
various  branches  of  indus  ry,  fitted
up  with  the  latest  improved  machin-
ery, and  they  will  say,  u  Lei  us
work  by  the  day  or  piece,  and  be
paid  our  wages  every  Saturday  night ;
and  then  let  us  have  a  store  to  spend
our  money  at,  that  we  might  do  as
our  fathers  used  to  do  in  the  old
countries  we  came  from/'  This  is
the  spirit  of  the  working  classes  of
the  old  world,  and  I  said  before,  un-
fortunately we  brought  ourselves  with
us  when  we  emigrated  to  the  new
world.  They  do  not  seem  to  know
that  our  capitalists  are  generally  men
who  have  lived  .closely,  have  walked
instead  of  rode,  and  through  the  dint
of  perseverance  and  the  study  of


all  the  people  feel  and  act  like  this?
O,  no;  but  I  think  neatly  alt  of  us
have  indulged  more  or  less  in  that
folly.  There  are  not  many  of  us
that  say  by  our  acts  "we  desire  to
do  away  with  the  antagonism  be-
tween capital  and  labor."  There
are  not  many  capitalists  in  our  com-
munity; if  we  counted  out  a  dozen,
that  would  be  about  all  We  are  so
evenly  balanced,  that  it  might  even
be  said  of  us  now,  that  we  have
neither  rich  nor  poor  among  us.
Tbe  Utile  capital  we  have,  compared
with  the  many  who  think  them-
selves poor,  would  be  a  mere  break-
fast spell  if  turned  loose  among  a
greedy  horde;  I  include  myself  of
course.  When  I  say,  greedy  horde,
1  mean  we  are  ignorant  of  the  laws
of  life  and  true  liberty,  that  which  is
needed  among  us  for  our  own  good.
We  should  look  and  see  how  we  can
make  ourselves  usefjl  in  producing
something,  and  not  waste  our  time
either  in  digging  holes  in  the  ground
in  the  hopes  of  finding  something,


*


THE  UNITED  ORDER,  ETC.  /


185


or  laying  in  our  nest  with  mouth
wide  open  like  young  robins,  for
something  to  be  dropped  in.  This
is  not  the  way  to  become  a  self-sus-
tnining,  wealthy  and  happy  people.
Will  we  form  oar  associations  and  es-
tablish home  industries  ?  Will  we
tan  the  hides  that  come  off  our  cattle
and  our  sheep,  and  goats  and  other
animals,  making  them  into  leather,
and  then  work  it  up  into  boots  and
shoes  and  harness  and  so  forth  ;  or
will  we  suffer  them  to  be  shipped  out
of  the  country  for  others  to  do  it  for
os?  Will  the  sisters  ask  their  hus-
bands and  fathers  to  plant  out  mul-
berry trees  along  the  water  ditches,
where  the  willows  Jire  now  growing,
so  that  you  may  secure  food  for  the
silk-worm  ?  A  little  while  ngo  we
bad  lots  of  worms,  but  nothing  to
feed  them.  Let  the  sisters  raise  the
worms,  and  commence  their  little
associations  for  feeding  them,  that
you  may  have  silk  to  manufacture
your  ribbons  and  dresses.  This
climate  is  adapted  to  the  silk-worm,
the  growth  of  the  mulberry,  and
the  feeding  of  the  worms,  and  the
manufacture  of  the  silk.  Let  us
then  have  silk  manufactures,  let#  us
all  say,  we  will  bless  this  enterprise
with  our  faith  :  and  lot  the  men  en-
courage the  sisters  by  planting  the
trees  for  them  and  affording  them
every  facility  within  their  power.
You  may  say,  tliis  is  a  hard  way
of  getting  silk.  I  assure  the  Latter
day  Saints,  that  it  will  he  harder  by
and  by  when  Babylon  goes  down.
We  had  better  improve  the  time
and  use  the  elements  now  within
our  reach.  Let  us  multiply  our
factories,  and  work  up  our  wool  at
home,  and  cease  employing  spinners
and  weavers  at  distant  parts  of  the
world,  while  our  own  people  are
hunting  for  something  to  do,  and
crying  "hard  time?,"  or  wasting
their  time  hunting  for  minerals*  I


and  in  fact  throughout  the  Terri-
tory, is  sacrificedftSt  Jthe  shrine  of


will  venture  to  say  that  nine-tenths
of  the  property  under  mortgage  and
to  be  sacrificed  in  Salt  Lake  City,

'oud

this  wild-cat  speculation.  One  of
the  best  shares  in  ;tfa£$>ank  is  a  plow
share,  and  the  be^&ptfculation  we
can  go  into,  is  to  raistorom  the  ele-
ments around  us  th<?r things  neces-
sary to  supply  our  daily  wants.  Ev-
erything produced  at  home,  furnishes
employment  for  idle  hands,  and
stimulates  the  production  of  some
other  articles.  Let  home  manufac-
ture, and  the  production  of  raw
material  from  the  elements,  be  our
watchword,  that  employment  may
be  furnished  our  souk  and  daughters,
and  those  who  shall  come  unto  ua
from  distant  lands.  Let  us  too  es-
tablish reasonable  and  consistent
fashions  within  ourselves,  and  cease
patronizing  the  fashions  of  the
wicked  world.

Now,  referring  to  what  we  call
the  United  Order,  what  is  it  1  I  will
tell  you.  It  is  to  live  at  home  and
sustain  ourselves.  It  is  not  to  hunt
after  capital  as  we  would  a  fat  goose
to  eat  it  up,  and  when  eaten  Jko  hunt
another  the  next  day,  for  fat  geese
are  not  so  plentiful  <  hir  true  policy
is,  learn  how  to  produce  and  be  sure
to  produce  a  little  more  than  we
consume  ;  and  if  we  only  produce
five  cents  a  day  in  something  more
than  we  consumes  we  will  soon  be
rich.  But  if  we  all  consume  five
cents  a  day  more  than  we  produce,
how  long  before  we  shall  all  be  poor  I
We  are  poor  already  when  we  com-
mence that  system.  It  is  a  great
lesson  to  impress  upon  the  minds  of
this  great  people,  gathered  from  all
nations  and  tongues,  to  induce  tliem
to  live  at  home  and  support  them-
selves, to  depend  upon  their  labor
for  their  subsistence,  instead  of
hunting  for  somebody  to  devour.


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


Many  of  the  people  may  say,  I  do
not  want  to  be  eaten  up  by  the  rich,
I  can  tell  you  there  is  a  heap  of  us
for  the  rich  to  eat  up,  and  there  are
not  many  rich  to  do  it. My  opinion
is  the  scare  is  the  other  way,  for,  as
I  have  said,  the  few  rich  anions  us
are  only  a  breakfast  spell  How
long;  do  you  think  it  would  take  if
we  were  all  producers,  and  convert-
ing the  raw  materials  into  useful
articles,  to  become  a  self-sustaining
people  1 And  then  if  we  heard  of
Babylon's  downfall,  Ave  would  not
of  necessity  lift  up  our  hands  and
cry,  44  O  Lord  spare  her  a  little  lon-
ger, we  are  not  ready  for  her  to  go
down,  we  should  sutler  from  the
want  of  boots  and  shoes,  and  for
our  cloth inLr,  and  our  machinery,
and  so  forth/' The  United  Order
is  designed  to  help  us  to  be  self-re-
liant and  to  teach  us  to  understand
what  it  costs  to  produce  that  which
we  consume, ( hie  of  the  chief  ob-
stacles in  the  way  of  our  progress
towards  becoming  a  self-sustaining
people  is the  lack  of  this  under-
standing among  the  people.  They
cling  to  the  habits  and  customs  of
Babylon that they  have  learned
abroad— the  laborer  wishing  to  eat
up  the  capitalist,  and  the  capitalist
constant]  v  guarded  for  fear  he  should
be  drawn  into  close  quarters,  and


then  to  succumb  to  the  demands
of  operatives.  This  is  the  way  of
the  world,  and  tlte  warfare  that  is
going  on  all  the  time  ;  and  why  1
Because  they  comprehend  not  how
to  promote  their  mutual  interests;
covetousness  of  capital  on  one  hand,
and  covet Liousnoss  of  labor  on  the
other,  each  trying  to  enrich  itself
at  the  expense  of  the  other.  Most
of  the  Saints,  when  tlmy  embraced
the  Gospel,  partook  of  its  true  spirit,
opening  their  hearts  ami  hands,  and
those  who  had  it  to  spare,  used  their
means  to  gather  up  the  poor ;  and
when  they  landed  among  us  were
generally  on  a  common  level  And
hence  the  necessity  of  our  labor,
and  through  our  labor  accumulate
capital  instead  of  needless  expendi-

j  tures,  exhausting  the  results  of  our
labors  and  getting  us  into  debt.
Learn  to  live  within  our  means

!  that  there  may  be  a  little  increase,
that  we  may  have  something  where-
with to  purchase  improved  machi-
nery, and  extend  our  industries  un-
til Ave  shall  be  able  to  supply  our
every  need.  And  that  we  may  learn
these  lessons,  and  profit  by  them
for  the  mutual  benefit  of  the  Saints,
and  t  he  advancement  of  the  Zion  of
our  God,  I  pray  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOSEPH  F.  SMITH,


Delivered  tx  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Sept.  30,  1877*


'Reported  by  Geo,  F.  Gibbs,)


ARRIVAL  IN  SALT  LAKE  CITY— THE  FIRST  PRINCIPL1  S — THE  (jrESTION
OF  AUTHORITY —  THK  ORDINANCES  —  EDUCATION  OF  OUR  YOUTH —
PLURAL  MARRIAGE,  ETC. — "MORMONISM"  IMMORTAL.


I  fear  I  shall  not  be  able  to  make
niysel  f  heard  by  this  vast  congrega-
tion I  have  not  been  accustomed
lately  to  address  so  many  people;  but
om  the  contrary,  a  very  few  in  a  place
at  a  time,  H  is  difficult  for  me  to
speak  so  that  all  may  hear  me  dis-
tinctly,  in  this  immense  house.  Be-
sides, I  havt  not  been  in  very  good
health  of  late,  having  bad  an  attack
of  siokneas  since  my  return  home,
which  has  drawn  heavily  upoa  my
strength.

I  am  thankful  that  I  have  been
privileged  to  meet  with  you  to- day,
under  so  favorable  circumstances  as
those  which  surround  os ;  although
in  common  with  the  Latter-day
Saints,  1  cannot  but  regret  the  c mse
of  my  presence  among  you.  I  left
my  home  and  friends  here,  but  a  few
months  ago,  for  Europe,  expecting  to
fill  a  mission  there  of  two  years  and
perhaps  much  longer.  But  soon  af-
ter hearing  of  the  death  of  our  de-
parted President,  Brigham  Young,
Brother  Orson  Pratt  and  I  received  a
cablegram  from  our  Brethren,  the
Twelve,  inviting  us  to  return  home*
As  soon t  theielore,  as  circumstances
permitted,  we  were  on  our  way  hith-


er, making  the  journey  from  England
to  this  city  in  about  fifteen  days.  We
had  rather  a  rough  passage  across  the
Atlantic,  having  experienced  equi*
noctial  gales  and  heavy  seas  for  the
first  few  days,  which  made  it  very
disagreeable;  the  remainder  of  the
voyage,  however,  was  comparatively
pleasant,  and  the  trip  from  New  York
here  very  much  so  indeed.

For  the  past  few  months  I  have
been  engaged  preaching  the  Gospel
in  England,  as  opportunities  present-
ed fur  me  to  do  so.  I  did  not  travel
very  extensively,  as  my  limited  time
and  other  circumstances  did  not  war-
rant it.

I  was  pleased,  in  July  last,  to  meet
in  Liverpool Brother  Orson  Pratt,,
who  came  to  England  to  publish  the
Book  of  Mormon  and  the  Doctrine
and  Covenants  in  phonetics,  or  pho
notype. He  whs  diligently  engaged
prosecuting  this  work  at  the  time  the
sad  news  of  the  death  of  the  Presi-
dent reached  us. Arrangements  had
been  so  far  completed  that  the  type
was  mostly  obtained  and  delivered  at
our  office,  and  prep*i rations  were  near-
ly made  for the  commencement  of
this  work. But  as  Brother  Pratt  is


188


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


here,  I  will  leave  his  mission  and  la-
bors tor  him  to  narrate  himsalf.

I  can  say,  in  all  consciousness  that
during  the  time  I  have  been  absent
from  home,  I  hate  felt  as  strong  a  de-
aire  in  my  heart  as  lever  did,  for  the
advancement  of  the  kingdom  of  Godf  ]
and  the  spread  of  the  Gospel  among
those  who  sit  in  darkness.  And  I
feel  that  I  have  done  the  l>est  I  could  j
under  the  circumstances  to  carry  out
mv  desires.

As  misstonai  iea  we  have  labored
unceasingly  through  England,  Scot-
land and  Wales  during  the  p*st  sum-
mer, availing  ourselves  of  every  op-
portunity ot  holding  meetings  in  the
streets,  on  the  squares,  and  in  what-
ever places  we  could  procure  fur  the
purpose;  the  Elders  going  around
iiom  house  to  house  to  notify  t  lie
people  and  invite  them  to  air  end.
The  brethren  have  labored  diligenily  "
and  unceasingly  the  past  summer,
endeavoring  in  this  way  to  spread  the
'Gospel.  In  many  places  very  encou-
raging success  has  crowned  their  la-
bors; in  many  instances  congrega-
tions, numbering  from  one  to  three
thousand  persons,  have  assembled  in
the  public  parks,  and  upon  the  com-
mons, to  listen  to  the  Elders  preach-
ing. It  is  true,  that  so  fur  we  have
M'tn  but  little  immediate  fruits  of  this
labor  ;  but  we  feel  that  the  seed  is  :
being  sown,  that  it  will  fall  in  more
or  less  good  soil,  and  in  due  season  it
will  bring  forth  fruit  meet  for  re-
pentance.

The  European  mission  to-day  if  I  !
am  to  speak  my  feelings  plainly  upon
the  matter,  is  in  a  very  low  condition
—that  is,  speaking  ol  Great  Britain.
Whereas, on the Continent and  I
throughout  Scandinavia,  the  work  is  '
flourishing. In  some  places  in  Ger-
many, which  have  been  impenetrable
heretofore,  the  Gospel  is  now  preach-
ed. There have been  recently  a
number  of  baptisms  in  and  adjacent


to  Berlin  ;  and  we  feel  encouraged  in
our  labors  in  that  country,  knowing
that  efforts  have  been  made  so  h  ng
and  so  persistently  to  open  up  the
Gospel  to  that  nation,  without  ac-
complishing anything.

The  ohject  of  sending  Elders  forth
to  the  nations  of  the  earth  is  to
preach  the  Gospel,  that  the  world
may  know  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Christ
Jesns,  and  through  obedience  thereto
bo  gathered  to  the  people  of  God,  and
be  saved  in  His  kingdom.  We  are
thankful  that  we  are  engaged  in  the
great  latter  day  work,  that  God  our
heavenly  Father  is  at  the  head,  and
has  decreed  to  carry  it  forth  to  a  suc-
cessful consummation.  Tii  ere  fore,  so
long  as  we  put  our  trust  in  Him,  do-
ing the  best  we  can  to  accomplish
His  purposes,  we  may  rest  content
that  sill  will  be  well.

I  have  been  a  member  of  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day
Saints  from  my  childhood  ;  nnd  ever
since  I  began  10  investigate  for  my-
self, I  have  been  satisfied  with  my  re-
ligion ;  I  have  been  perfectly  confi-
dent that  I  was  engaged  in  a  right-
eous cause,  having  had  every  assu-
rance that  it  is  the  work  of  God  and
not  of  man ;  and  that  it  is  the
business  of  the  Almighty  to  sustain
it;  choosing  and  using  the  instruments
best  suited  to  accomplish  Hia  pur-
poses that  were  at  His  command.  I
believe  He  has  ever  done  so,  and  will
continue  to  do  so  until  He  completes
His  undertaking.  As  Latter-day
Saints  we  have  every  reason  to  rejoice
in  the  Gospel,  and  in  the  testimony
we  have  received  concerning  its  truth.
I  repeat,  we  have  reason  to  rejoice
and  to  be  exceeding  glad,  for  we
possess  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  the
spirit  of  prophecy,  which  the  world
know  nothing  about,  nor  can  they
without  obedience  to  the  Gospel.

Jesus  thoroughly  understood  this
matter,  and  fully  explained  it  when


ARRIVAL  IN  SALT  LAKE  CITY,  ETC,


189


he  said,  "  Except  a  man  be  born
again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of
God."  On  first  reflection,  it  would
seem  that  anything  so  clear,  reason-
able and  tangible  could  be  easily
made  plain  to  the  understanding  of
all  men.  Hence  the  feeling  that  has
prompted  many  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  to  believe,  after  their  minds
have  been  enlightened  by  the  Spirit
of  God — everything  being  made  so
plain  and  clear  to  them — that  they
had  only  to  tell  their  friends  and
kindred  what  they  had  learned  and
they  would  gladly  receive  it.  Bat  how
disappointed,  after  they  had  present-
ed to  them  the  truths  of  heaven  in
simplicity  and  plainness,  to  hear
thpm  say  "We  cannot  see  it!"  or
"  We  do  not  believe  it !  "  or  perhaps
bitterly  oppose  it,  which  is  by  fur  the
most  common  practice  of  the  world.
They  cannot  understand  it.  Why  ?
Because,  as  Jesus  has  said,  no  man
can  see  the  kingdom  except  he  is  born
again.  You  may  preach  the  Gospel
to  the  people,  but  unless  they  humble
themselves  as  little  children  before
the  Lard,  acknowledging  their  de-
pendence upon  him  for  light  and  wis-
dom, they  cannot  see  or  sense  it,
although  you  may  preach  to  them  in
as  great  plainness  as  it  is  possible  for
the  truth  to  be  conveyed  from  one
person  to  another.  And  should  any
believe  your  testimony  it  would  only
be  belief*  They  would  not  see  as  you
see — nor  comprehend  it  as  you  do —
until  they  yield  obedience  to  the  re-  i
quirementsof  the  Gospel,  and  through
the  remission  of  their  sins  receive  the
Holy  Ghost,  Then  they,  too,  can  see
as  yon  do,  for  they  have  the  same
spirit ;  then  will  they  love  the  truth
as  you  do,  and  may  wonder  why  they
could  not  comprehend  it  before,  or
why  it  is  that  there  can  be  anybody
with  common  intelligence  that  cannot
understand  truth  so  plain  and  forcible,
I  have  been  preaching  for  a  few


months  past  to  the  world,  and  perhaps
it  would  not  be  amiss  to  dwell  for  a
few  moments  upon  some  of  the  prin-
ciples of  the  Gospel,  as  though  I
were  talking  to  strangers,  notwith-
standing I  feel  I  am  in  the  presence
of  the  Latter-day  Saints.

About  the  first  question  an  honest
inquirer  would  ask  would  be:  What
is  your  religious  belief  ?  or,  What
are  the  principles  of  the  Gospel  as
you  understand  them  ?  I  do  not  pro-
pose to  tell  you  all  about  the  Gospel  in
one  discourse,  but  I  may  tell  you  a
few  of  my  tuoughts  upon  some  of  ita
principles,  wliich  are  essential  not
only  for  the  Latter-day  Saints  ta
know,  but  for  all  the  children  of  men,
in  order  to  be  saved  in  the  kingdom
of  God.

First,  then,  it  is  necessary  to  have
faith  in  God,  4k  faith  being  the  tirsfc
|  principle  in  revealed  religion,  and  the
foundation  of  all  righteousness."

Faith  in  God  is  believe  that  he
isf  and  hi  that  he  is  the  only  supreme
governor  and  independent  boing,  ta
whom  all  fullness  and  perfection  imd
every  good  gift  and  principle  dwells
independently,"  and  in  whom  the
faith  of  all  other  rational  beings  must
centre  for  life  and  salvation  ;  and  fur-
ther, that  he  is  the  great  Creator  of
all  things,  that  he  is  omnipotent,
omniscient,  and  by  his  works  and  the
power  of  his  Spirit  omnipresent.

Not  only  is  it  necessary  to  have
faith  in  God,  but  also  in  Jesus  Christ,
his  Son,  the  Savior  of  mankind  and
the  Mediator  of  the  New  Covenant;
and  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  bc^rs
record  of  the  Father  and  the  S  *n,
"the  same  in  all  ages  and  forever,"
Having  this  faith,  it  becomes  ne-
cessary to  repent.  Repent  of  what  ?
Of  every  sin  of  which  we  may  have
been  guilty.  How  shall  we  repent
of  these  sins  ?  Does  repentance  con-
sist of  sorrow  for  wrong  doing?  Yes  j
but  is  this  all  ?  By  no  means.  True


190  JUlKN.u.  Ul

repentance  only  is  acceptable  to  God,
nothing  short  of  it  will  answer  the
purpose.  Then  what  is  true  repent-
ance ?  True  repentance  ia  not  only
sorrow  for  sins,  and  humble  penitence
an«l  contrition  before  God,  bat  it  in-
volves the  necessity  of  turning  awny
from  them,  a  discontinuance  of  all
evil  practices  and  deeds,  a  thorough
reformation  of  life,  a  vital  change
from  evil  to  good,  from  vice  to  virtue,
from  darkness  to  light.  Not  only  so,
but  to  make  restitution,  so  far  as  it
possible,  for  all  the  wrongs  we  have
done,  to  pay  our  debts,  and  restore  to
God  and  man  their  right* — that
which  is  due  to  them  from  us*  This
is  true  repentance,  and  the  exercise
of  the  will  and  all  the  powers  of
body  and  mind  is  demanded,  to  com-
plete this  glorious  work  of  repent-
ance; then  God  will  accept  it.

Having  i bus  repented,  the  next
thing  requisite  is  baptism,  which  is
an  essential  principle  of  the  Gospel
— no  man  can  enter  into  the  gospel
covenant,  without  it.  It  is  the  door
of  the  Church  of  Christ,  we  cannot
jjet  in  there  in  any  other  way,  for
Christ -hath  said  it.  4  Sprinkling,"
or  "  ponring,"  is  not  baptism.  Bap*
tistn  means  immersion  in  water,  and
is  to  he  administered  by  one  having
authority,  in  the  name  of  the  Father,
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  Baptism  without  divine
authority  is  not  valid.  It  is  a  sym-
bol of  the  burial  and  resurrection  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  must  be  done  in
the  likeness  thereof,  by  one  commis-
sioned of  God,  in  the  manner  pre-
scribed, otherwise  it  is  illegal  and
will  not  be  accepted  by  him,  nor  will
it  effect  a  remission  of  sins,  the  ob-
ject for  which  it  is  designed,  but
whosoever  hath  faith,  truly  repents
and  is  "buried  with  Christ  in  bap-
tism," by  one  having  divine  author-
ity* shall  receive  a  remission  of  sins,
-and  is  entitled  to  the  gift  of  the  Holy


Ghost  by  the  laying  on  of  hands.
Only  those  who  are  commissioned  of
Jesus  Christ,  have  authority  or  pow-
er to  bestow  this  gift.  The  office  of
the  Holy  Ghost  is  to  b*  ar  repord  of
Christ,  or  to  testify  of  him,  and  con-
firm tht;  believer  in  the  truth,  by
bri aping  to  1: is  recollection  things
that  have  p-issed,  and  showing  or  re-
vealing to  the  mind  things  present
and  to  come.  u  But  the  Comforter^
which  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  the
Father  will  send  in  ray  name,  he
shall  teach  you  all  things  and  briog
all  things  to  your  remembrance
whatsoever  I  have  said  unto  you."
u  He  will  guide  you  into  all  truth."
Thus,  without  the  aid  of  the  Holy
Ghost  no  man  can  know  the  will  of
God,  or  that  Jesus  is*  the  Christ —
the  Redeemer  of  the  world — or  that
the  course  he  pursues,  the  works  he
performs,  or  his  faith,  are  acceptable
to  God,  and  such  as  will  secure  to
him  the  tjift  of  eternal  life,  the  great
est  of  all  gifts.

"  But,"  says  an  oljector,  u  have  we
not  the  Bible,  and  are  not  the  Holy
Scriptures  able  to  make  us  wise  unto
salvation  ?  "  Yes,  provided  we  obey
them*  "  All  Scripture  is  given  by
inspiration  of  Gud,  and  is  profitable
for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correc-
tion, for  insiructi  >u  in  righteousness;
that  the  mun  of  God  may  be  perfect,
thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good
works/'  The  4t  good  works  "  are  the
great  desideratum.  The  Bible  itself
is  but  the  dead  letter,  it  is  the  spirit
that  giveth  life.  The  way  to  obtain
the  Spirit  is  that  which  is  here  mark-
ed out  so  plainly  in  the  Scriptures.
There  is  no  other.  Obedience,  there-
.  fore,  to  these  principles  is  absolutely
necessary,  in  otder  to  obtain  the  sal-
vation and  exaltation  brought  to
light  through  the  Gospel.

As  to  the  question  of  authority,
nearly  everything  depends  upon  it.
!  No  ordinance  can  be  performed  to


AKKIVAL  IN  HALT  LAKE  fITYs  ET< \


191


the  acceptance  of  God  without  divine  I
authority.  No  matter  how  fer-
vent  I  j  men  may  believe,  or  pray,
unless  they  are  endowed  with  di-
vine authority  they  can  only  act  in
their  own  name,  and  not  legally
nor  acceptably  in  tlin  name  of  Je-
gas  Oh  fist,  in  whoso  name  all  these
things  must  he  done.  Some  sup-
pose this  authority  may  he  derived
from  the  Bible,  but  nothing  could
be  more  absurd-  The  Bible  is  but  a
book  containing  the  writings  of  in-
spired men,  M  profitable  for  doc-  ,
trine,  for  reproof,  for  correction  and
instruction  in  righteousness ;  *'  as
such  we  hold  it  is  sacred  ;  but  the
Spirir,  power  and  authority  by
which  it  is  written  cannot  be  found
wi'hin  its  lids,  nor  derived  from  it.
"  For  prophecy  came  not  in  old  time
by  the  will  of  man:  but  holy  men
of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved  i
by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  *If  by  reading
and  believing  the  Bible  this  autho-
rity amid  be  obtained,  all  who  read
and  believed  would  have  it — one
equally  with  another,  I  have  read
the  Bible,  and  I  have  as  good  rea-
son tor  believing  it  ad  any  other
mm,  and  do  btlieve  it  with  all  my
beiirt  ;  but  this  does  not  give  me
authority  to  teach  men  in  the  name
of  the  Lord,  nor  to  officiate  in  the
sacred  ordinances  of  the  Gospel.
Were  the  Scriptures  i he  only  source
of  knowledge,  we  would  be  without
knowledge  for  ourselves,  and  would
have  to  rest  our  hopes  of  salvation
upon  a  simple  belief  in  the  teati-  !
monies  and  sayings  of  others.  This
will  not  do  (or  me;  I  must  know  for
myself,  and  if  I  act  as  a  teacher  of
these  things,  I  must  be  clothed  with
the  same  light,  knowledge  and  autho-,
rily  those  were  who  acted  in  a  similar
calling  anciently.  Else  how  could  I
declare  the  truth  and  bear  testimony
as  they  did  ?  What  right  would  I
have  to  say  "  thus  saitb  the  Lord/'


I  and  call  upon  man  to  repent  and  be
baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  ?
or,  that  "This  Jeso*  hath  God  raised
up  (from  the  dead)  whereof  we  all
(rhu  Apostles)  are  witnesses."  And,
:  therefore,  let.  all  men  "  know  assur-
edly that  God  hath  made  that  same
Jesus/'  who  was  crucified,  u  both
Lord  and  Christ  ?"  No  man,  with-
out the  Holy  Ghost  as  enjoyed  by
the  ancient  Apostles,  can  know  these
things  therefore  cannot  declare  them
by  authority,  nor  teach  and  prepare
mankind  for  the  salvation  of  God.
God  Almighty  is  the  only  source  from
whence  l his  knowledge,  power  and
authority  can  be  obtained,  and  that
through  the  operations  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  The  Set  lptures  mav  serve
us  a  guide  to  lead  us  to  God,  and
hence  to  the  possession  of  all  things
necessary  to  life  and  salvation,  but
thes  cm  do  no  more.

Having  pro  tired  by  this  example,
and  done  the  works  commanded  by
both  Christ  and  his  Apples,  :*ncient
and  modern,  I  am  happy  of  the  pri-
vilege to  declare  to  the  inhabitants
i  of  the  earth  tint  I  have  received  this
testimony  and  witness  for  myself.  I
do  know  that  these  things  are  true.
Jean*  my  Redeemer  lives,  and  God
hath  made  him  both  Lord  and
Christ.  To  know  and  to  worship  the
true  God,  in  the  name  of  Jesus — in
spirit  and  in  truth — is  the  duly  of
m*n.  To  aid  and  qualify  him  for  this
service  is  the  duty  and  office  of  the
Holy  Ghost  Man  may  fail  through
faltering  and  unfaithfulness,  but  the
Spirit  of  God  will  never  fail,  nor
abandon  the  faithful  disciple,  I
can  s?ty  hs  one  who  has  tried  (he
experiment — for  it  may  be  called  an
I  experiment  to  the  beginner — that
all  who  will  takrt  the  course  and  ac-
cept, the  doctrine  thus  marked  out
will,  through  faith  fatness,  become
acquainted  with  the  truth,  and  shall
know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be


192


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


of  God  or  of  mnn,  and  w«ll  rejoice
in  it  as  all  good,  faithful  Latter- day
Saints  do.

Here  is  an  ordinance  which  we
are  now  administering,  the  Sacra-
ment of  the  Lord's  Sapper;  it  is  a
principle  of  t lie  ^Gospel,  one  as  hwps-
sary  to  be  observed  oy  all  believe,
as  any  oilier  ordinance  of  ihr  GftHp^l.
What  is  the  object  of  it  ?  Itfi*  that
we  may  k*ep  in  mind  continually
the  Son  of  Go4  who  has  redeemed  us,
from  eternal  death,  and  brought  us
to  life  again  through  the  power  of  the
Gospel.  Before  the  coming  of  Cnrist
to  the  earth,  this  was  borne  in  mind
by  tlic  inhabitant*  of  the  earth  to
wham  the  Gospel  was  preached,  by
an  ther  ordinance,  which  involved
the  sacrifice  ot  ant  mat  life,  an  ordi-
nance which  %vas  a  type  of  the  great,
sacrifice  that  should  take  place  in
the  meridiem  of  lime.  Hence,  Adam,
alter  he  was  cast  out  ol  rhe  (Jnrden,
was  c  unrnanded  to  offer  sacrifices  to
God  ;  by  this  act  he,  and  all  who
participated  in  the  offering  of  saeri*
tices,  were  reminded  of  the  Savior
who  nhould  come  to  redeem  them
Irom  dfeat.h  which,  were  it  not  for
the  atonement  wrought  out  by  him,
would  forever  exclude  them  from
dwelling  in  the  presence  ot  God
again.  But  in  his  coming  and  death,
this  commandment  was  fulfilled  ;  and
he  instituted  the  Supper  and  com-
tnanded  his  followers  to  partake  of
this  in  all  time  to  come,  in  order  that
they  may  remember  him,  bearing  in
mind  that  he  had  redeemed  them,
aUo  that  they  had  covenanted  to  keep
his  commandments  and  to  walk  with
him  in  the  regeneration.  Hence  it
is  necessary  to  partake  of  the  sacra-
ment, as  a  witness  to  him  that  we
do  remember  him,  are  willing  to
keep  the  commandments  he  has  given
138,  that  we  may  have  his  spirit  to  be
with  us  always — even  to  the  end,  and
also  that  we  may  continue  in  the  for-


giveness of  our  sins,  y
In  various  dispensations  there  are
various  differences  in  regarC^  to  cer?
tain  requirements of  the Gospel/  f
For  instance,  in  the  day  of  Noah,
when he  preached the,  GosperLio
the  antediluvian  world,  he  was  given
a  special  commandment,  to  build  an
ark,  that,  in  cise  the  people  would
reject  him  and  the  message  sent  unLo
them,  I  hat  himself  and  all  who  be^
lievrd  on  him  might  be  sa>ed  from
the  destruction  that  awaited  them.
In  this  dispensation  there  is  a  prin-
ciple or  commandment  peculiar  to  it.
What  is  that  ? It  is  the  gathering
the people  unto one  place.  The
gathering  of  this  people  is  as  neces-
sary to  be  observed  by  believers,  as
faith,  lepentance,  baptism,  or  any
other  ordi nance. It  is  an  essential
part  of  the  Guy  pel  of  this  dispensa-  .
t  ion,  as  m.uch  so,  as  the  necessity  of  1
building  an  ark  by  Noah,  for  his  ]
deliverance,  was  a  part  of  the  Gospel  .
of  his  dispensation. Then  the  world  f
was  destroyed  by  a  flood,  now  it  is  \
to  be  destroyed  by  war,  pestilence,
famine, earthquakes, storms,  and
tempests,  the  sea  rolling  beyond  it*
bounds,  malarious  vapors,  vermin,
disease,  and  by  fire  and  the  lightnings
of  God*s  wrath  poured  out  for  des-
truction upon  Babylon, The  cry  of
the  angel  unto  the  righteous  of  this
dispensation  is,  "  Come  out  of  her
O  my  people,  that  ye  partake  not  of
her  sins,  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  [
her  plagues We  believe  also  in  the
principle  of  direct  revelation  from
God  to  man* This  is  a  part  of  the
Gospel,  but  it  is  not  peculiar  to  this  i
dispensation. It  is  common  in  nil  :
ages  and  dispensations  of  the  Gospt  h
The  Gospel  cannot  be  administered,
tior  the  Church  of  God  continue  to
exist  without  it. Christ  is  the  head  j
of  his  Church  and  not  man,  and  the
connection  can  only  be  maintained
upon  the  principle of  direct  and  i


ARRIVAL  IN  SALT  LAKE  CITY,  ETC


193


continuous  revelation.  It  is  not  a
heritor j  principle,  it  cannot  be
handed  down  from  father  to  son,  or
from  generation  to  generation*  bat
is  a  living  vital  principle  to  be  en*
joyed  on  certain  conditions  only,
namely — through  absolute  faith  in
G'kI  and  obedienc*  to  his  laws  and
commandments.  The  moment  this
principle  is  cut  off,  that  moment  the
Gh arch  is  adrift,  being  severed  from
its  ever-living  head.  In  this  con-
dition it  cannot  c  mtinue,  bat  most
cease 'to  be  the  Church  of  God,  and
like  the  ship  at  sea,  without  captain,
compass  or  rudder,  is  afloat  at  the
mercv  of  the  a'orms  and  the  waves,
of  ever  contending  human  passions,
and  worldly  interests,  pride  and  folly,
finally  to  be  wrecked  upon  the  strand
of  priestcraft  and  superstition.  The
religious  world  is  in  this  condition
to-day,  ripening  for  the  great  destruc-  \
tion  which  awaits  them,  but  there  is
an  ark  prepared  for  such  as  are  wor-
thy of  eternal  life,  in  the  gathering
of  the  Saints  to  the  chambers  of  the
Almighty,  where  they  shall  be  pre-
served until  the  indignation  of  God
is  passed.

Marriage,  is  also  a  principle  or
ordinance  of  the  Gospel,  most  vital
to  the  happiness  of  mankind,  how*
ever  unimportant  it  may  seem,  or
lightly  regarded  by  many.  There
is  no  superfluous  or  unnecessary
principle  in  the  plan  of  life,  but
there  is  no  principle  of  greater  im-
portance or  more  essential  to  the
happiness  of  man — not  only  here,
bet  especially  hereafter,  than  that
ot  marriage.  Yet  all  are  necessary.
What  good  would  it  be  to  one  to
be  baptized  and  receive  not  the
Holy  Ghost  ?  And  suppose  he  went
■  little  further  and  received  tho
Holy  Ghost,  thereby  obtaining  the
testimony  of  Jesus,  and  then  atop,
ped  at  that,  what  good  would  it  do
him  ? None  whatever,  but  would  '

No.  13.


add  to  his  condemnation,  for  it
would  be  as  burying  his  talent  in
the  earth, ,  To  secure  the  fulness  of
the  blessings,  we  must  receive  the
fulness  of  the  Gospel.  Yet  men  will
be  judged  and  rewarded  according
to  their  works,  44 To  him  that
knoweth  to  do  good  and  doeth  it  not,
to  him  it  is  sin."  Those  who  receiv*
a  part  of  the  Gospel  with  light  and
knowledge  to  comprehtni  other
principles,  and  yet  do  not  obey
th  em  will  come  under  this  law,  hence
condemnation  will  be  added  onto
!  such,  and  that  which  they  did  receive
may  be  taken  from  them  and  added
to  them  who  **re  more  worthy.
|  Obedience  is  a  requirement  of  hea-
ven, and  is  therefore  a  principle  of
the  Gospel,  Are  all  required  to  be
obedient  ?  Yes,  all.  What  against
their  will  ?  O,  no,  not  by  any
means.  There  is  no  power  given  to
man,  nor  means  lawful  to  be  used
to  compel  men  to  obey  the  will  of
Gud,  against  ther  wish,  except  per-
|  suasion  and  good  advice,  but  there
is  a  penalty  attached  to  disobedience,
which  all  must  suffer  who  will  not
obey  the  obvious  truths  or  laws  of
heaven.  I  believe  in  the  sentiment
of  the  poet :

14  Know  this,  that  every  soul  in  free,
To  choose  his  life  ana  what  he'll  be  ;
For  this  eternal  truth  is  given,
That  God  will  force  no  man  to  heaven.

He'll  call,  persuade,  direct  aright,
Bless  him  with  wisdom,  love  and  light-
In  namele&s  ways  to  be  good  and  kind,
But  never  force  the  human  mind."

Is  it  a  difficult  task  to  obey  the
Gospel  ?  No.  It  is  an  easy  matter
to  those  who  possess  the  spirit  of  it.
j  Most  of  this  congregation  can  tes-
tify that  the  Go«  pel  u  yoke  is  easy
and  the  harden  is  light, *  Those
who  hive  embraced  it  will  be  judged
according  to  their  works  t herein,
whether  they  be  good  or  evil.  To
'  such  as  are  untrue  to  their  covenants,

Vol.  XIX.


194


■JOURNAL  UF  lHJSUOUKSEs.


it  may  be  said  by  and  by,  "  depart
from  me ! "  Id  vain  will  they  plead
their  former  good  works,  and  faith.
Why  ? Because  the  race  is  not  to

w

the  swift  nor  the  battle  alwavs  to

-a

the  strong,  hut  to  him  that  endures
faithful  to  the  end,  We  must  save
ourselves  from  this  untoward  genera-
tion. It  is  a  continual  labor,  but  the
strength  of  the  righteous  will  be  suf-
ficient for  their  day.  Jeeus  said,  tk  in
my  Father's  house  there  are  many
mansions.  There  is  a  glory,  or  man-
sion ,  of  which  the  s»n  is  typical,
another  of  which  the  moon  is  typical,
and  still  another  like  unto  the  stars,
and  in  this  letter  the  condition  of  its
occupants  will  differ  as  the  stars  diSer
in  appearance.  Every  man  will  re-
ceive according  to  his  works  and
knowledge.  **  These  are  they  who
are  ot  Paul  and  A  polios,  some  of
one  and  some  of  another,  some  of
Christ,  some  of  John,  of  Moses,
Elias,  Isaiah  and  Enoch,  but  receive
not  the  Gospel  nor  the  testimony  of
Jesus-"  Thus  impartial  justice  will
be  meted  out  unto  all,  and  none  will
be  lost  but  the  sons  of  perdition.

Let  us  treat  with  candor  the  reli-
gious sentiments  of  all  men,  no
matter  if  they  differ  from  ours,  or
appear  to  us  absurd  and  foolish.
Those  who  hold  them  may  be  as
sincere  as  we  are  in  their  convic-
tions. It  is  well  to  prove  all  things,
so  far  as  we  can,  and  be  sure  to  hold
fast  to  that  which  is  good,  no  mat-
ter where  we  find  it*  Ridicule  is
not  likely  to  convince  a  man  of  his
error,  or  if  it  does,  it  may  destroy
bia  respect  and  love  for  its  author,
and  if  be  has  truth,  hit  victim  will
most  likely  spurn  it.

I  desire  to  say  that  my  faith  in
this  work  ia  as  firm  or  firmer  than
ever.  My  heart  is  in  it,  and  I  know
truly  it  is  the  kingdom  of  God.
These  thing!  of  which  I  have  been
so  imperfectly  speaking,  I  know  to


be  the  truth, — Bible  truth,  Gospel
truth,  and  are  essential  to  the  sal-
vation of  mankind.  I  am  not  de-
ceived in  this  but  know  whereof  I
speak,  lly  religion  teaches  me  to
do  good,  to  be  at  peace  with  my
neigh bora,  at  least  not  to  infringe
upon  their  rights  nor  trespass  upon
their  property,  and  even  to  et  dure
wrongs  from  t  lie  in  rather  than  do
them  wrong,  or  even  demand  from
the  trespasser  what  I  might  deem
full  justice.  It  teaches  rne  to  trust
in  the  jus  lice  of  the  Almighty,  and
to  rest  ruy  cause  in  his  band**.  It
enjoins  honesty,  sobriety  and  in-
dustry. It  forbids  pro  faulty,  lying,
adultery,  deceitful ness,  and  vile  cun-
ning.

It  gives  true  enlightenment  to
the  mind  and  exalts  the  low  and
debased  who  will  hearken  and  obey
it.  The  observance  of  the  Gospel
will  make  good  men  of  bad  ones,
and  better  men  of  good  ones.  It
will  make  good  citizens,  good  fa-
thers, husbands,  wives  and  children,
good  neighbors,  a  good  people,  an
enlightened,  pure  and  high  minded
community,  a  blessed  state  and  a
prosperous  nation.  Obedience  to
the  Gospel  will  save  the  world  from
sin,  abolish  war,  strife  and  litigation,
and  usher  in  the  millennial  reign.
It  will  restore  the  earth  to  its  right-
ful owner,  and  prepare  it  fur  the  in-
heritance of  the  just.  These  are  all
principles  of  that  same  Gospel  of
Christ,  and  the  effects  which  will
flow  from  their  acceptance  and  adop-
tion by  mankind.  Jesus  taught
them,  and  on  one  occasion  the  people
took  up  stones  and  were  about  to
atone  him  for  it  When  he  said,
"  Many  good  works  have  I  shewed
you  from  my  Father,  for  which  of
those  works  do  ye  stone  me  IF  He
had  done  many  good  works,  taught
them  many  good  things,  and  for  this
they  were  about  to  stone  him*  The


AKUIVAL  IN  SALT  LAKL  CilY,  KiU


K  3


Latter-day  Saints  could  with  pro-
priety address  themselves  in  like
manner  to  the  world,  but  more  espe-
cially to  our  own  nation.  We  hnre
done  many  good  things,  have  tried
to;[do  no  harm,  have  buffered  the
spoil  at  ion  of  our  goods  without  re*
taliation,  have  been  driven  from
place  to  place.  Our  Prophets  arid
leaders  have  been  slain,  and  you  still
persecute  us,  nnd  are  not  satisfied,
For  which  of  the  good  works  we
have  done  do  ye  the&e  things  ?  I
know  they  wjll  say,  M  for  your  good
works  we  do  not  hate  or  persecute
you,  but  for  your  blasphemy,  and  be-
cause you  say  you  are  the  people  of
God/*  This  was  about  what  the
Jews  said  to  Jesus,  but  it  did  not
change  the  fact  that  he  had  told
them  the  truth,  or  that  he  had  done
the  many  good  works  among  them
which  he  did,  nor  that  it  was  for
these  they  hated  and  crucified  him.
What  did  the  Savior  or  his  disci-
ples do  to  injure  mankind  I  No-
thing. But  much  to  benefit  them  ;
yet  they  were  hated,  persecuted,
hunted  and  destroyed.  What  have
the  Latter- rlay  Saints  done  to  in-
jure anybody  I  absolutely  nothing,
but  a  great  deal  to  benefit  human-
ity. I  am  at  the  defiance  of  the
world  to  prove  to  the  contrary.
We  have  gathered  our  people  by
thousands  out  of  poverty  and  dis-
tress from  many  nations  to  these
ralleys  where  they  are  now  enjoy-
ing good  homes,  the  sweets  of  lib-
erty and  plenty.  Aside  from  reli-
gion, that  is  an  inestimable  bless-
ing  to  them.  But  we  have  also
taught  them  good  principles  and
doctrines,  and  they  are  happy,
honest,  industrious  and  prosperous.

We  have  labored  diligently  to
Advance  in  the  scale  of  intelligence.
Our  schools  compare  favorably  with
any  in  our  broad  land  ;  our  children
are  as  intelligent,  and  we  are  the


pioneers  of  true  and  enlightened
civilization  in  the  Western  States
and  Territories.  Through  our  in-
dustry and  enterprise,  cities,  towns
and  villages  have  sprung  up  in  the
wilderness,  and  the  deserts  and
waste  places  have  been  made  fruits
ful  and  to  blossom  as  the  rose.  Can
there  be  any  wrong  in  all  this?
"But,**  says  one,  "it  is  not  for  this
you  are  persecuted,  it  is  for  your
religion/'  What,  then,  in  the
name  of  reason,  is  there  in  our  reli-
gion that  we  should  be  perscuted
for  it  ?  Is  it  because  we  believe  in
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  %  The  Chris-
tian world  also  profess  belief  in
him,  and  we  believe  in  him  as
much  as  they  do  and  a  little  more.
Is  it  because  we  believe  it  is  neces-
sary to  repent  of  sin  ]  Certainly  we
have  a  right  to  do  this  Is  it  be-
cause we  baptize  for  the  remission
of  sin  %  Christ  commanded  it,  and
laid  it  down  as  the  law.  Then  what
can  it  be  that  so  distinguishes  us
from  the  people  of  the  world,  antd
that  moves  their  hatred  toward  us  ?
Is  it  revelation  from  God  to  man  i
Peril aps  so,

Some  forty  years  ago,  the  great
cry  against  Joseph  Smith  was  **  He
believes  in  revelation  and  this
was  considered  a  crime.  But  very
soon  after,  others  who  were  not
"Mormons"  commenced  to  have
"revelations,'*  and  seemingly  the
stream  has  so  enlarged  that  to-day
the  world  is  full  of  "revelation/*
So  our  belief  in  revelation  is  not
now  considered  so  much  of  a  crime
as  formerly,  and  therefore  it  can  be
no  longer  the  object  of  persecution,
for  we  would  have  as  good  a  right
to  persecute  them,  as  they  would
to  persecute  us  on  that  score.  We
do  not  believe  in  these  "revela-
tions'1 of  the  world,  no  more  than
they  do  in  ours.  We  believe  theim
to  be  bogus,  but  we  are  quite  wf  -


196


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


ling  that  others  should  enjoy  their
opinions.  We  believe  that  while
they  have  rejected  the  true  light,
they  are  found  willing  and  ready
to  be  thus  deceived,  by  false  and
delusive  spirits,  just  as  the  Prophets
have  foretold  would  be  the  case.
(See  1  Tim.,  4th  chap,,  1st  verse,
and  2  Tim.  iii,  1).  The  revelations
given  through  Joseph  Smith  are  full
of  light,  knowledge  and  wisdom,
because  they  emanated  from  God-
What  has  Spiritualism  done  for  the
world  ?  Can  it  boast  of  bringing
life  and  immortality  to  light  r  1
have  yet  to  learn  that  a  single  prin-
ciple has  been  developed  from  this
source  that  will  save  mankind,  or
exalt  them  to  the  presence  and  glory
of  God.  Yet  they  have  a  right  to
their  convictions,  and  we  grant  it
cordially. We  have  tha  same  right.

But  says  one,  u  You  have  dodged
the  main  question  ;  it  is  polygamy
that  causes  all  the  trouble  f

This  is  the  mind  of  our  eflemies
generally,  yet  nothing  can  be  more
fallacious ;  those  who  assert  this
only  expose  their  ignorance.  The
fact  is  that  since  the  announcement
and  practice  of  that  principle  by  this
people,  their  persecutions  have  been
comparatively  trivial  and  harmless
to  what  they  were,  before  it  was
even  known  to  the  in  selves.

But  the  plural  marriage  of  the
"  Mormons'*  now  seems  to  form  one
of  the  strongest  pretexts  for  the
bitterness  of  our  enemies,  and  the
thoughtless  readily  fall  into  the
ranks  of  the  maligners  of  this  prin-
ciple. Did  they  ever  stop  to  reflect
as  to  what  harm  this  principle  and
practice  has  done  ?  Let  me  ask  the
ladies  in  this  vast  audience,  Have
any  of  you,  or  do  you  know  of  any
woman  who  has  been  compelled  to
practice  polygamy  among  this  peo
pie  ?  Or  who  has  been  compelled
even  to  marry  at  all  1 I  think  not.


Mas  plural  marriage  deprived  any
woman  of  a  home,  of  husband  or
children  ?  Has  it  promoted  immo-
rality or  vice  ?  No,  it  has  not.  Has
it  sown  the  seeds  of  corruj  tion  and
death  among  the  people?  On  the  con-
trary it  has  promoted  healt  hy,  robust
and  vigorous  increase,  and  the  laws
of  life  and  health.  Can  the  Elders
of  this  Church  be  accused  of  going
to  the  Gentiles  for  their  wives  and
daughters?  No,  for  we  think  we
have  better  ones  at  home,  we  have
not  the  least  occasion  to  go  abroad*
So  fir  as  relates  to  this  matter  we
are  independent  of  the  world.  We
fete  willing  to  let  them  and  theirs
alojie,  and  mind  our  own  business,
while  we  respectfully  request  them
also  to  attend  to  their  own  affairs.

The  real  facts  are,  the  Latter-day
Saints  have  embraced  the  unpopular
doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ,  have  re-
ceived the  keys  of  the  Holy  Priest-
hood— heaven's  delegated  authority
to  man,  and  are  not  ashamed  of  the
gospel,  knowing  it  to  be  the  power
of  God  unto  salvation.  Hence  the
Devil  is  enraged,  and  although  they
will  not  believe  it,  this  professedly
pious,  hypocritical  world  are  moved
with  hatred  towards,  the  work  and
the  people  of  God,  instigated  by  the
spirit  of  him  whose  servants  they
are.  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know
them/'

They  predict  our  downfall,  but
they  will  not  live  to  see  their  pre-
dictions fulfilled.  The  wicked  may
rage  and  imagine  they  can  success-
fully measure  arms  with  the  Al-
mighty, but  he  will  hold  them  in
derision  and  laugh  when  their  fear
cometh,  while  the  kingdom  of  God
will  continue  to  progress  until  his
purposes  are  consummated  as  has
been  decreed*

It  is  vain  for  the  world  to  hope
that  "  Mormonism  **  will  die  with
President  Brigham  Young,  Whea


ARRIVAL  IN  SALT


LAKE  CITY,  ETC


197


the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  was  as-  [
sassinated  the  press  and  pulpit  uni-
versally joined  in  predicting  the  end
of  "  Mormonism."  But  instead  of
their  being  any  truth  in  their  pro-
dictions,  "The  blood  of  the  martyrs
■was  the  seed  of  the  church  ; "  for
the  church  irrew  as  fast  a.s  it  had
ever  done  before,  ami  it  took  deeper
and  firmer  root.  Men  were  no  long-
er dependent  upon  the  Prophet,  the
man  of  God  to  guide  til  em  ;  they
began  to  stand  upon  their  Own
foundation,  to  seek  more  earnestly
after  God  themselves,  and  to  know
for  themselves,  and  not  to  be  de-
pendent upon  the  voice  of  man.
Hence  they  grew  in  faith  and  in  po  v-
er,  the  truth  sinking  deeper  into  the
hearts  of  the  people  who  remained
true  to  the  Lord,  and  they  a  compa-
rative handful,  have  succeeded  in
building  up  the  church  as  it  exists
to-day  in  these  valleys*  Are  we  now
going  to  be  scattered  to  the  four
winds  because  one  or  two  distin-
guished men  should  pass  away  t  No,  1
the  seed  has  fallen  into  good  ground,
and  it  will  germinate  and  mature  ;
the  priesthood  itself  is  still  with  us,
the  authority  is  here,  and  in  obedi-
ence to  the  command  of  God,  we
will  continue  to  go  forth  and  organ-
ize and  establish  the  kingdom,
never  more  to  be  thrown  down  or
given  to  another  people,  until  all  is
consummated  and  finished.  This  is
the  work  of  God,  and  not  of  man.
Man  is  incompetent  to  direct  and
manage  it  He  will  not  suffer  man
to  arrogate  to  himself  the  honor  of  j
doing  it  The  honor  belongs  to  him
and  he  will  take  it  to  himself

This  is  my  faith  in  the  Gospel  It
Jills  my  soul  with  joy  and  gratitude


to  God  my  heavenly  Father,  and  I

desire  to  increase  in  the  truth,  to  be-
come better,  more  faithful  and  dili-
gent in  overcoming  every  weakness,
that  I  may  be  worthy  to  stand  in
the  position  I  occupy  in  the  church
I  of  the  living  God  This  is  the  way
we  should  all  feel  ;  and  w*  should,
above  all  other  considerations,  be
determined  to  cleave  to  the  gospel,
building  our  faith  upon  the  rock,  not
upon  the  arm  of  flesh.  Let  us
humble  ourselves  before  God,  seek
unto  him  continually  with  prayerful
hearts,  be  diligent  in  the  observance
of  our  covenants,  and  he  will  bear
us  off  triumphant  over  every  op-
posing foe  and  every  power  that  un-
dertakes to  measure  arms  with  him
and  his  cause.  This  is  my  testimony,
and  this  is  my  exhortation  to  the
Latter-day  Saints.  I  pray  G od  to
bless  his  people,  and  to  bless  his  ser-
vant brother  Taylor,  who  stands  at
the  head  of  the  Quorum  of  the
Twelve  Apostles,  who  now  preside
over  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
Latter-day  Saints  in  all  the  earth.
May  the  Lord  bless  him,  prolong  his
life  and  give  him  power  and  wisdom
to  stand  in  his  place  and  calling  and
to  magnify  the  priesthood  conferred
upon  him ;  may  his  brethren  stand
with  him  in  one  solid  phalanx,  uni-
I  ted  a*  one  man,  even  as  God  the
Father  and  Jesus  and  the  heavenly
hosts  are  one,  and  I  tell  you  the
whole  people  will  be  united  and  re-
joice in  the  truth.  That  God  may
bless  the  faithful  every  where  and  en-
able them  to  keep  sacred  the  cove-
nants they  have  made  with  him,  is
my  earnest  prayer,  in  the  name  of
Jesus.  Amen.


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER GEO. Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the  Bowery,  Salt  Lake  City,  July  21 ,  1867.

(Reported  by  David  W\  Evans.)

LEAVING  NAUVOO — NO  CHANGE  ACCIDENTAL-— DIVINITY  MARKS  THE
HISTORY  OF  THE  CHURCH — DILIGENCE  WILL  AID  IN  SECURING  SUC-
CESS—THE  TEMPLE  JN  NAUVOO.


It  has  been  very  interesting  to  me,  I
And  no  doubt  it  has  to  all  who  have
been  present,  to  listen  to  the  remarks
of  our  brethren  tins  morning,  in  re-
lation io  the  principles  of  the  Gospel
as  taught  by  us,  and  their  experience
in  this  work. While  Brother  Law-
rence was  speaking  in  relation  to  our
position  in  Naavon,  my  rcmd  revert-
ed to  the  time  when  we  left  there,
and  to  the  reluctance  displayed  by
many  of  our  people  to  cross  the
river  and take  their  journey  west-
ward. It  required  a  great  amount  of
faith  on  the  part  of  the  people,  to
venture  into  an  unexplored  uud  des*
ert  country  to  attempt  again  to  build
up  homes,  and  to  perform  the  labors
etij"inrd  upon  ns  by  G<  d,  our  Heav-
enly Father, There  was  a  cry  of  ex-
ultation went  up  throughout  all  that
Country  when  ive  were  broken  up,
fill]  the  hope  was  indulged  in  by  nil
prhn  were  mimical  to  us,  that  the  so-
lution of  the  Mormon  problem  had
been  at  rived  at,  and  that  the  subject
of  Mormon  ism  might  henceforth  be
dismi'-Kt'ri  from  every  mind. We  had
gone  forth  into  the  wilderness,  and  it
wis  not  at  all  likely  that  we  would
ever  trouble  civilizntion  again.  It
Wis  n  iturally  supposed,  by  those  who


knew  but  little  of  us,  that  we  must
be  quite  as  bad  as  we  had  been  re-
presented to  be  ;  and  if  we  were,  of
course  we  had  nobody  to  steal  from
in  the  wilderness  but  ourselves  ;  no-
body to  aggress  and prey  upon  bat
ourselves,  and  these  being  our  char-
acteristics,  as  they believed,  they
very  naturally  came  to  the  conclu-
sion that  we  would  quarrel  one  with
another,  and  the  result  would  be  our
extermination  through  our  own  quar-
rels, or  that  we  should  fall  an  easy
prey  to  the  Indians. How  these  an-
ticipations have  been realised,  the
lapse  of  twenty.one  years  has  proved-
For  a  number  of  years  after  leaving
|  Nauvoo  we  were  not  deemed  particu-
larly worthy  of  notice. Men's  minds
were  attnic*ed  in  other  directions,
and  our  ooe rations  here,  be*ng  so  far
removed frurn all  communication
with  them,  were  almost  overlooked.
But  time  has  wrought  great  changes,
not  only  with  us  and  in  our  position,
but  also  in  the  position  at  id  feelings
i  of  the  world  by  which  we  are  sur-
rounded. Instead  oF  being  regarded
as  a  people  scarcely  worthy  of  notice,
we  now,  through  the  blessings  of  our
I  Heavenly Father,  inhabit  a  large
I  Territory,  and  if  we  arc  alluded  to  at


LEAVING  NAUVOO,  ETC.


199


all  by  the  world,  it  is  in  a  national
capacity.  Have  these  changes  been
accidental  and  unlocked  for  ?  Did
no  one  anticipate  such  results  as  we
now  behold  being  wrought  out?  Or
were  they  anticipated  years  and  years
ago  by  those  most  familiar  with  the
genius  and  organization  of  the  king-
dom of  God  ?  Those  who  are  not
familiar  with  our  early  history  have
but  to  read  the  utterances  of  those
who  were  engaged  in  the  founding  of
this  work,  to  become  convinced  that
they  weie  anticipated  long  ago  by
those  who  contemplated  the  future
growth  and  development  of  the
kingdom  of  God.  There  is  no  fea-
ture connected  with  our  eiremn stan-
ces to-day  that  has  not  been  familiar
for  years  to  the  minds  of  those  who
h^ve  contemplated  the  future  of  this
work.  When  the  church  was  organ-
ized, and  a  small  house  would  bold
all  its  members,  predictions  were  in-
dulged in  that  the  circumstances  of
to-day  but  partially  fulfil,  and  years
will  yet  have  to  elapse  before  they
are  completely  fulfilled.  Our  Heaven-
ly Father  poured  out  his  spirit  upon
bis  servants  in  the  beginning,  which
enabled  them  to  comprehend  the
work  he  had  established  on  the  earth,
and  through  the  spirit  ot  prophecy
nnd  revelation  they  could  plainly  see
the  great  results  which  would  be
wrought  out  through  the  fai|j|f uiness
of  the  people  of  God,  Can  we  now
sec  the  limit  of  this  work  ?  Is  the
h orison  of  our  vision  bou tided  by
those  things  actually  transpiring
around  us,  or  do  we  snll  sttetch.fo^
ward  to  a  future,  for  this  p  op  »  ,  tdb
glut  ions  for  description  ?  I  do  not
suppose  there  is  one  here  who  has
ever  thought  on  tins  great  subject
and  attempted  to  grasp  the  circum-
stances by  which  we  arc  surrounded,
that  has  not  sire  robed  forward  in  de-
lightful anticipation  of  the  glorious
lutuie  that  awaits  the  people  of  God,


if  they  are  only  faithful  to  the  truth
that  he  lias  committed  unto  them.
Would  to  God  that  all  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  earth  could  see  and  com-
prehend these  things!  Would  to
God  that  they  would  divest  them-
selves of  their  prejudices  and  pre-
conceived ideas,  and  that  they  would
cdmly  look  truth  in  the  face  and  re-
flect upon  the  work  that  God,  our
Heavenly  Father,  is  performing  in
the  midst  of  the  nations  of  the  earth  !
If  they  would  do  this,  they  might
avoid  a  great  many  difficulties  into
which  they  will  otherwise  be  inevi-
tably involved.  It  is  no  more,  nor  no
less,  true  to-day,  than  it  w*s  thirty-
seven  years  ago,  that  God  has
stretched  forth  his  hand  to  accom-
plish a  great  and  a  mighty  work,
that  shall  stand  for  ever,  and  shall
not  be  given  into  the  hands  of  an-
other people ;  but  it  will  goon  in-
creasing and  spreading  abroad,  until
it  has  accomplished  that  for  which  it
was  destined  by  our  Almighty
Father,  I  .say  it  is  as  true  now  as  it
was  then,  and  no  more  true  to-day
than  then,  and  they  who  pay  heed  to
it  then  have  never  had  cause  to  regret
doing  so  ;  and  they  who  give  heed
to  it  to-day  will  never  have  cause  to
regret  it  in  the  future,  To  up  who
are  familiar  with  this  work,  and  un*
derstand  the  operations  of  the  spirit,
and  can  see  the  design  of  God,  our
Heavenly  Father,  it  seems  strange
that  mankind  shot^^be  so  indiffer-
ent to  so  gre^^flBbrk  as  this  in
which  we  ajjpP^a^ed,  Yet  it  is  so.
You  wouhrunagine  that  men  going
forth  with  the  proclamation  that  the
elders  bear  won  Id  receive  everywhere
that  attention  that  the  importance  of
their  proclamation  demands,  at  least
until  men  were  satistied  in  their  own
minds  of  the  truth  or  falsity  of  the
message  they  bear.  But  this  is  not
the  case.  No  man  ever  calmly  sat
down  witli  a  prayerful  heart  to  ex-


200


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES-


amine  the  claims  of  this  work,  popu-
larly termed  Alormonism,  who  did
not  rise  from  the  investigation  con-
vinced that  there  wag  a  power,  an  in-
fluence and  a  spirit  accompanying
this  work,  (hat  he  had  never  met
with  before.  Are  they  who  investi-
gate the  ones  who  fi^ht  against  this
work,  mid  persecute*  and  slay  the  ser-
vants of  God  ?  No;  they  who  do
this  ;ire  the  ignorant,  who  have  never
investigated,  or,  having  investigated
and  embraced  it,  have  after wards
apostatizeil,  and  have  thus  become
two-fold  more  the  children  of  hell,
through  rejecting  the  truth,  God
our  Heavenly  Father  lias  commenced
a  great  and  mighty  work,  and  has
given  the  strongest  kind  of  evideueo
in  favor  of  it,  if  the  inhabii ants  of
the  earl  1 1  would  only  receive  it;  hut
their  condemnation  will  consist  in
their  rejection  of  this  work  and  the
evidence  of  its  truth  which  is  spread
before  i hem.  The  whole  history  of
this  people,  from  the  commencement
until  i lie  present  time,  affords  abund-
ant evidence  of  the  divinity  of  t lie
work  in  which  we  are  engaged.
When  our  elders  go  forth  into  the
world  men  cry  aloud  for  miracles,  for
some  supernatural  manifestation  of
power,  that  will  convince  them  that
we  are  the  people  we  profess  to  he.
Jesus  said,  "  A  wicked  and  an  adul-
terous general  ion  seek  a  sign,  but  no
sign  shall  he  given  them  save  the  sign
of  the  prophet.  Jonah."  But  God,  our
Heavenly  Fattier,  has  nevertheless
left  his  handwriting,  as  it  were,  to  be
seen  by  all  the  nations  of  the  earth
on  the  work  that  he  Las  established.
Divinity  is  marked  in  ever  feature  of
this  great  work  ;  in  every  step  of  its
progress,  from  its  commencement
until  the  present  time,  \e  see  divinity
exhibited,  and  the  power  uf  God
manifested  in  its  preservation,  growth
and  development.  What  is  it  that
brings  this  people  from  the  nations  of


the  earth,  binds  them  together,  and
makes  a  unit  of  the  people  of  the  va-
rious nationalities  here  assembled  to*
gether  ?  Is  it  the  power  ot  man?
Is  it  delusion  ?  or,  Is  it  a  manifesta-
tion of  the  restoration  of  rhat  power
bestowed  upon  men  in  ancient  days,
and  which  has  been  so  long  with-
drawn frnrn  the  earth  ?  Why  is  it
that  we  love  one  another?  Is  it  as
(he  Apostle  John  t-aid,  "We  know
that  nc  have  passed  from  death  unto
life,  because  we  love  the  brethren  ?  "
We  love  une  another  because  we  have
bow*  d  in  obedience  to  the  truth
which  God  has  revealed,  and  through
the  reception  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of
promise  we  have  the  love  of  God  in
our  liea its.  If  mankind  loved  the
I  ruth  and  would  examine  these
things,  they  won  Id  see  something  de-
sirable about  this  work,  and  they
would  be  prompted  to  investigate.
But  the  difficulty  now  is,  as  it  has
been  in  every  age  when  God  has  at-
tempted to  establish  his  work  upon
the  earth — men  in  general  are  blind-
ed by  the  traditions  of  their  lathers.
This,  and  the  love  of  ease,  and  popu-
larity, and  other  worluly  objects  that
surround  them,  prevent  men  from
seeing  the  work  of  God  in  its  true
light,  and  blinds  them  to  their  high-
est interests.  They  cannot  see  how
they  are  going  to  receive  any  benefit
from  this  work.  That  which  is  ma-
terial is  riiiht  before  them,  and  they
can  understand  the  material  advan-
tages areruing  to  them  through  not
obeying  this  work  ;  but  the  advan-
tages and  blessings  that  would  result
from  obedience  are  hidden  from
their  sight,  being  discernible  only
by  the  light  of  the  Spirit  of  God.
Yet  there  is  this  peculiar  feature
about  the  work  of  God  to-day,  more
especially  than  at  any  other  time
since  the  days  of  Enoch,  that  thev
who  embrace  it  not  only  receive  l  he
Spirit  of  God,  with  its  gifts,  but  they


also  receive  blessings  of  a  temporal
nature,  winch  they  would  never  re-
ceive outside  of  it*  Those  who  have
joined  the  Church,  as  a  mass,  have
been  bencBtted  temporally,  though
at  the  time  of  rendering  obedience,
they  probably  could  not  see  how
advantages  of  this  nature  could  re-
sult. They  could  see  that  their
names  would  be  emt  out  as  evil,  that
they  would  be  hated  of  nil  men,
persecuted  and  probably  driven  from
pi  ;ce  to  place,  but  how  they  would
be  blt-ssed  temporally  they  cunld  not
sec\  But  God,  i jar  Heavenly  Father,
has  held  in  reserve  until  these  days
great  a! id  glorious  blessings  for  his
people,  who  are  faithful  to  the  truth.
He  has  reserved  for  his  Saints  the  ;
kingdom  and  the  greatness  of  the
kingdom  under  the  whole  heavens*
Not  something  beyond  the  bounds
ot  time  and  t*pace,  not  some  tiling
that  we  will  inherit  in  eternity
alone;  but  be  has  also  temporal  ad-
vantages  to  bestow  upon  his  people
here.  A  great  many  people  imagine
that  we  hold  these  out  as  induce*
ments  to  get  peuple  to  join  the
Church  ;  but  they  who  join  the
Church  for  the  love  of  the.se  things,
and  with  a  desire  to  obtain  them,
are  invariably  disappointed.  If  peo-
ple join  the  Church  of  God  with
any  of  her  motive  than  to  embrace
the  truth  and  to  be  associated  with
the  people  of  God,  nnd  to  receive
the  spirit  of  the  Gospel,  they  are  i
invariably  disappointed ;  but  when
they  come  in  for  the  love  of  the
truth,  willing  to  take  upon  them  |
the  cross  of  Chiist,  and  endure  all
the  persecutions  incident  to  the  life  j
of  a  Saint,  submit,  to  the  contumely
aud  privation  that  in  the  providence
of  God  they  may  be  called  to  en-
dare,  God  thug  tests  their  faith,
and  if  they  continue  faithful  he
will  bestow  upon  them  every  bless-
ing promised  to  the  most  faithful.


The  work  in  which  we  are  engaged
differs  in  some  respects  from  the
work  in  which  the  Apostles  were
engaged  in  the  days  of  Jesus  Christ.
Many  things  operated  against  them
that  we  have  not  to  contend  with.
They  had  to  scatter  out  and  preach
the  Gospel  in  various  places;  they
could  not  gather  together  with  the
same  facility  that  we  can.  But
God,  our  Heavenly  Father,  reserved
this — the  land  of  promise — for  the
especial  purpose  of  building  up  his
kingdom  in  the  latter  days.  As
the  '*  Book  of  Mormon"  informs  us,
it  has  been  hid  Irom  the  eyes  uf  the
generations  of  men  for  this  purpose.
If  it  had  not  been  thus  hidden  the
nations  of  the  earth  would  have
overrun  the  land  until  there  would
have  been  no  foothold  found  for  the
establishment  of  the  kingdom  of
Gf>d  upon  it,  But  the  Lord  con-
cealed it,  from  the  dsiys  of  the  flood,
from  the  eyes  of  men,  excepting  those
whom  lie  led  hither;  as  we  are  in-
formed by  the  **  Eook  of  Mormon"
that  no  nation  after  the  flo  d,  knew
anything  about  this  land  ;  although  1
believe  it  is  said  in  the  Norwegian
Antiquarian  researches,  that  this  land
was  visited  by  the  Icelanders  in  the
eleventh  century.  But  there  is
nothing  authentic  in  this,  But  be
that  as  it  may,  this  land  wan  kept
secret  until  Columbus  was  moved
upon  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  to  go  lorrh
and  penetrate  the  western  ocean.
Then  the  land  was  settled  and  a
government  was  formed  under  the
protecting  ae^ia  of  liberty,  and  a
place  was  found  for  the  establishment
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  to  which
the  Saints  from  every  nation  under
Heaven  comd  gather  together.
He  uce  we  are  surrounded  by  many
more  favorable  circumstances  than
they  who  preceded  us  in  the  work  of
God  in  the  days  of  Jesus  and  the
Apostles. They  did  not  possess  the


202


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


the  privilege  of  all  to  possess,  It
is  tliis  that  binds  us  together,  and
gives  the  Priesthood  influence  over
the  Saints  of  God. My  brethren
and  Bisters,  it  is  only  by  faithful ness
that  we  can  retain  this  knowledge.
A  man  may  be  an  Apostle  and  may
have  had  the  administration  of  holy
angels,  and  the  heavens  opened  to
in  anticipations  no  [  his  view,  and  behold  the  things  of
other  people  have  ever  been  able  to  ;  eternity,  but  if  he  is  not  faithful
indulge  in,  unless  it  be  the  people himself,  pursuing  a  right  and  proper


advantages  that  we  enjoy  ;  hut  we
have  them,  and  our  Heavenly  Father
intends  that  we  shatl  possess  them,
and  that  we  shall  build  up  his  king-
dom on  the  earth,  establish  right-
eousness and  bring  about  that  im-
provement alluded  to  by  brother
Jesse  N.  Smith,  in  hia  remarks.  Our
circumstances,  then,  being  different,
we  can  indulge  in  anticipations  no


of  Enoch  and  the  Nephites,  to  whom
Jesus  appeared  on  this  Continent,

Those  who  investigate  the  Gospel
with  a  desire  to  keep  the  connnand-


course.  before  God,  he  cannot  retain
his  standing  in  this  Church  and  keep
that  knowledge  God  has  given  him
undimnied  by  error;  but  errors  will


ments  of  God,  as  I  have  remarked,  |  creep  into  bis  heart  and  false  spirits


rise  from  its  investigation  with  con-
victions of  its  truth  ,  for  an  honest
man  c\n  not  go  to  the  Lord  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  ask  Him
respecting  (his  Gospel  without  re-
ceiving a  knowledge  tor  himself  that
it  is  true* In  my  preaching  to  the
world,  I  have  many times  dared
them  to  this  test,  that  if  they  would
go  in  hor.esty  before  the  Lord  and
ask  Him  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ
to  show  to  thera  the  truth  of  this
Gospel,  I  would  pledge  myself  that
the  Lord  would  show  them  and  they
would become  convinced that  the
principles  we  taught  were  indeed  the
principles  of  life  and  salvation.  No
person  ever  investigated  this  Gospel
with  that  spirit  without  being  con-
vinced  of  its truth, because  our
Heavenly  Father  bestows  upon  every
one  who  embraces  it  with  the  right
soirit  a  knowledge of  the  truth.
What  a  glorious  privilege  it  is  to
have  this  knowledge  bestowed  upon
us. This  testimony  emboldens  us  10
declare  to  the inhabitants  qf  the
earth,  no  mutter  to  what  nalion  we
may  be  sent,  that  if  they  will  em-
brace the  truth,  as  it  is  taught  by
the  Elders  of  this  Church,  they  shall
know  for  themselves  that  this  is  the


take  possession  of  him,  imd  sooner
or  later  he  will  become  alienated  from
the  work  of  God, We  should  every
one  be  careful  on  these  points.  This
is  the  work  of  God,  and  there  is  a
well-established  principle  upon  which
we  can  remain  connected  with  it,
and  that  is  by  being  true  and  faith-
fill  to  the  principles  which  God  our
Heavenly  Father  has  revealed.  We
cannot  grieve  the  Spirit  of  G<d  with
impunity; we cannot indulge  in
frivolity  nor in anything that  is
wrong  without  driving that  spirit
from  us  with  its  holy  and  sweet  in-
fluence. We  should  seek,  therefore,
as individuals, whether  Apostles,
High  Prieats,  Seventies,  High  Coun-
cillors, Elders, Priests,  Teachers,
Deacons  or  members  of  the  Church,
to  have  the  spirit  of  oar  holy  religion
continually  resting  upon  us.  How
cm  we  retain  this  ? Can  we  retain
it  by  being  negligent  and  indifferent
to its claims  ? Do  men  gather
earthly  riches  around  the  in  by  being
negligent? We  all  know  tha  ,  as
a  rule,  the  man  who  is  the  most
diligent  in  business  is  he  who  gains
the  greatest  amount  of  prulit  for  his
labor;  we  are  proving this  every
day  in  earthly  business,  and  if  De-


work  of  God. This  testimony  it  is  !  cessary  in  earthly business, it  is


LEAVING  NAUVOO,  ETC*


203


equally  so  in  the  things  of  the  king-
dom of  God.  The  men  and  women
who  most  diligently  keep  the  com-
mandments of  God,  offer  up  prayers
in  sincerity,  not  with  their  lips,  but
with  their  hearts,  making  it  a  rale
to  live  near  the  Lord,  are  they  who
retain  the  light  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ;
and  they  are  they  who,  when  persecu-
tion or  affliction  comes,  feel  that
God  is  near  to  them  ;  and  that  when
they  pray  He  is  not  afar  off,  but  He
hears  their  prayers  and  pours  conso-
lation, peace,  and  every  good  yift
upon  them,  and  they  can  rejoice  from
morning  to  night  among  the  chang-
ing vicissitudes  to  which  we  are
exposed  in  this  mortal  life.  My
brethren  and  sisters,  we  are  com-
manded not  to  give  the  whole  of
our  attention  to  the  accumulation  of
earthly  things;  we  are  commanded
also  to  lay  up  treasures  in  heaven.
We  are  required  to  build  op  Zion
on  the  enrth ;  then  let  us  take  a
course  that  will  ensure  to  us  the
blessing  and  favor  of  God  our  Hea-
venly Father,  that  our  prayers  and
thanksgiving  'nay  be  acceptable  be-
fore Him.  We  should  do  this,  es-
pecially when  we  reflect  upon  the
nature  of  the  work  in  which  we  are
engaged,  and  the  nature  of  the  oppo-
sition with  which  we  have  to  con-
tend. We  have  the  whole  world  to
contend  with  to  a  certain  extent,  or
rather,  we  have  to  defend  ourselves
aga  nst  the  whole  world  ;  they  are
combatting  us.  Tiere  are  probably
thousands  of  honest  men  and  wo-
men in  the  world  who  manifest  no
disposition  to  proiecute  cr  oppose
us  j  hut  this  is  not  the  case  with  the
majority.  There  is  a  spirit  of  op-
position to  this  work  gone  abroad
in  the  world  ;  and,  as  in  the  begin-
ning, we  had  a  township  to  meet
and  contend  with,  afterwards  ft
County  and  counties,  then  a  State,
and  ultimately  we  had  a  nation,  so


to  speak,  in  arms  against  us ;  so  in
the  future  we  will  have  the  whole
world  to  contend  with.  Not  only
this  nation,  but  every  nation  on  the
face  of  the  earth  will  manifest  greater
or  less  opposition  to  us  as  a  people,
and  we  will  have  a  thousand  things
to  contend  with.  Whv?  Because
Satan  has  influence  over  the  hearts
of  the  children  of  men ;  he  has
power  with  them,  and  so  long  as
there  is  a  foot  of  this  earth  upon
which  he  can  maintain  foothold,  so
long  m?iy  we  expect  warfare,  and
And  difficulties  to  contend  with,  and
it  will  only  be  by  the  power  of  God
manifested  in  oar  behalf  that  we  will
overcome.  This  warfare  will  not  be
a  contest  with  cannons,  rifles,  or
earthly  weapons  of  war,  so  much  as
a  moral  warfare.  We  are  engaged
in  a  great  moral  warfare;  it  is  by
the  exercise  of  mnnd  force  that  we
are  going  to  achieve  the  viclories
that  God  our  heavenly  Father  has
promised  us.  We  may  be  threat-
ened, as  we  have  been,  with  weapons
Of  wart  and  it  will  doubtless  be
necessary,  so  long  as  we  have  an
existence  on  the  earth,  to  be  pre-
pared for  every  contingency.  This
will  no  doubt  be  necessary,  bat  the
day  is  probably  far  distant  when  we
will  have  to  t boulder  weapons  and
engage  in  actual  warfare.  I  look
for  a  moral  contest,  a  moral  triumph,
and  moral  victories,  gained  by  the
force  of  truth,  and  the  exercise  of
those  Godlike  qualities  with  which
we  have  been  end  >wed  by  our  hea-
venly Father,  And  when  the  great
victory  is  achieved,  there  will  he  no
blood  to  mourn  over,  no  sorrow  to
be  indulged  in,  and  nothing  to  pre-
vent us  from  building  the  Temples-
of  God,  as  was  the  case  with  David,
because  he  waa  a  man  of  blood.  I
anticipate  that  we  will  lie  free  from
this,  and  that  we,  like  Solomon,  can
go  forward  and  build  the  Tern  pits  of


*


3G1


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


God  according  to  His  command-
jaunts*  While  brother  Henry  W.
Lawrence  was  talking  about  the
Temple  in  Nauvoo,  I  felt  to  echo
the  sentiment  I  have  heard  expressed
by  President  Young  respecting  that
Temple,  I  am  glad  it  is  destroyed;
I  nm  glad  that  it  was  burned  and
purified  by  tire  from  ihe  pollution
our  enemies  inflicted  upon  it,  and  I
am  pin!  there  is  nothing  of  it  left ;
and  I  would  prefer  that  this  Temple


in  course  of  erech'on  hare,  should
never  l>e  completed,  and  that  we
should  never  build  another,  than  to
»ee  those  holy  places  built  by  Gou's
command^  pass  into  the  hands  of
our  enemies  and  lie  d<  filed  by  them.

May  God  bleys  you,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  and  enable  ua  to  he
faithful  and  true  in  keeping  His
commandments,  is  my  prayer  for
Christ's  sake.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  Twelfth  Wakd  Mekting  House,  ox  Sunday

Afternoon,  Dec.  9,  1877*


(Reported  by  Geo.  l\  Gibbs.)

KING  LIMHI'S  ENQUIRE,  FROM  THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON — AMMON  REPLIES
— SEEKKHIP  AND  THE  URIM  AND  THUMMIM — THE  BROTHER  OF  .TARED
— HYKUM  SMITH'S  ENQUIRY — WHAT  IS  A  GENERATION — THE  IMMENSE
NUMBER  OF  RECORDS  TO  BE  REVEALED.


Since  coming  to  this  stand  I  have
been  reminded  of  a  certain  passage
contained  ?n  the  u  Book  of  MortMon"
(commencing  on  page  161,)  which
1  will  read.

"Now,  as  soon  as  Ammon  had
read  the  record,  the  king  inquired
of  him  to  know  if  he  could  inter-
pret languages,  and  Ammon  told
him  that  he  could  not.  And  the
king  saifl  unto  him,  being  grieved
for  the  affliction  a  of  my  people,  I
caused  that  forty  and  three  of  my


people  should  take  a  journey  into
the  wilderness,  that  thereby  they
might  find  the  land  of  Zarahernla,
that  we  might  appeal  unto  our  bre-
thren to  deliver  us  out  of  bondage;
and  they  were  lost  in  the  wilderness
many  days,  yet  they  were  diligent,
and  found  not  the  land  of  Zarahernla,
bat  returned  to  this  land,  having
traaveled  in  a  land  of  many  water,-*;
having  discovered  a  land  which  was
.covered  with  the  bones  of  men,  and
of  beasts,  etc.,  and  was  also  covered


■


KING  LIMHl'S  ENQUIRY,  ETC


205>


with  ruins  of  buildings  of  every  kind;
having  discovered  a  land  which  had
been  inhabited  with  a  people  who  were  (
an  numerous  as  the  hosts  of  Israel,
And  for  a  testimony  that  the  things
that  they  have  said  are  true,  they
have  brought  twenty- four  pUtes,
which  are  filled  with  engravings,
and  they  are  of  pure  gold.  And,
behold,  also,  they  have  brought  breast
plates,  which  nre  large,  and  they  are
of  brass  and  of  copper,  and  are  per-
fectly s  sund ,  And  again,  they  have
brought  8 words,  the  hilts  thereof
have  perished,  and  the  blades  thereof
wc  re  cankered  with  rust ;  and  there
is  no  one  in  the  land  that  is  able  to
interpret  the  language,  or  the  engrav-
ings that  are  on  the  plates.  There-
fore I  said  unto  thee,  canst  thou
translate  ?  And  I  say  unto  thee
again,  k  no  west  thou  of  any  one
that  can  translate  ?  Ft  I  am  de-
sirous that  these  records  should  be
translated  into  our  language  j  for,
perhaps,  they  will  give  us  a  know-
ledge of  the  remnant  of  the  people,  i
who  have  been  destroyed,  from
whence  these  records  came  ;  or,  per-
haps, they  will  give  us  a  knowledge
of  this  very  people  who  have  been
destroyed  ;  and  I  am  desirous  to
know  the  cause  of  their  destruction.

"  Now  Amnion  said  unto  him,  I
can  assuredly  tell  thee,  0  king,  of
a  man  that  can  translate  the  records;
for  he  has  wherewith  he  can  look
and  translate  all  records  that  are  of
ancient  date;  and  it  is  a  gift  from
God.  And  the  things  are  called
interpreters  and  no  man  can  look  in
them,  except  he  be  commanded,
lest  he  should  look  for  that  he  ought
not,  and  he  should  perish.  And
whosoever  is  commanded  to  look  in
them,  the  same  is  called  seer.  And
behold,  the  king  of  the  people  who
is  in  the  land  of  Zarahemla,  is  the
man  who  is  commanded  to  do  these
tilings,  and  who  has  the  high  gift


from  God.  And  the  king  said  that
a  Seer  is  greater  than  a  Prophet.
And  Ammon  said  that  a  Seer  is  a
Revel  a  tor  and  a  Prophet  also ;  and
a  gift  which  is  greater  can  no  man
have,  except  he  should  possess  the
power  of  God,  which  no  man  can  ;
yet  a  man  may  have  great  power
given  him  from  God.  But  a  Seer
cun  know  of  things  which  huve
passed,  and  also  of  thiugs  which
are  to  come,  and  by  them  shall  all
things  be  revealed,  or,  rather,  ahull
secret  things  be  made  manifest,  and
hidden  tilings  shall  come  to  light,
and  things  which  are  not  known
shall  be  made  known  by  them  ;  and
also  thin  its  shul!  be  made  known  by
them  which  otherwise  could  not  be
known.  Thus  God  has  provided  a
means  that  man,  through  faith,
might  work  mighty  miracles  ;  there-
fore he  hecometh  of  great  benefit  to
his  felloW'heitigs.

"And  now,  when  Ammon  had
made  an  end  of  speaking  these
words,  the  king  rejoiced  exceedingly,
and  gave  thanks  to  God,  saying,
dou bless  a  great  mystery  is  con-
tained within  these  plates,  and  these
interpreters  are  doubtless  prepared
for  unfolding  all  such  mysteries  to
the  children  of  men.  O  bow  marvel-
lous are  the  works  of  the  Lord,  and
how  long  doth  he  suffer  with  his  peo-
ple; yea,  and  how  blind  and  im-
penetrable are  the  understandings
of  the  children  of  men,  for  they  will
not  seek  wisdom,  neither  do  they  de-
sire that  she  should  rule  over  them.
Yea,  they  are  as  a  wild  flock  which
fleeth  from  the  shepherds,  and  scat-
ter eth,  and  are  driven,  and  aro  de-
voured by  the  beasts  of  the  forest."

The  instructions  that  are  imparted
here,  which  I  have  jast  read,  are
of  importance  to  the  children  of
men.  We  are  here  taught  about  %
very  great,  and  precious,  and  high
gift  that  comes  from  God — the  gift


206


JUUKNAL  OV  DISCO  U  US


of  being  a  Seer,  a  Hevelator,  a  Pro-
phet, and  inspired  man.  Not  only
to  receive  revelation  from  God,  but
to  interpret  revelations  given  to
other  Prophets  who  lived  in  times
before,  bringing  to  light  knowledge,
and  intelligence,  and  wisdom,  and
the  dealings  of  God  with  the  hu-
man family,  among  more  ancient
people.  This  gift  is  more  fully  ex-
plained in  the  u  Book  of  Mormon"
than  in  the  Jewish  record.  We  have
in  the  Jewish  record,  the  Bible,  some
information  in  relation  to  the  instru-
ment here  called  interpreter,  but
which  is  called  in  that  record  by
another  name,  namely,  Uriin  and
Thummim,

It  was  a  gift  that  was  exercised  in
the  days  of  Moses,  among  the  house
of  Israel :  it  was  a  gift  specially
given  to  Aaron,  the  brother  of
Muses,  who  was  appointed  the  chief
priest  over  all  the  tribes  of  Israel
The  L>rd  saw  proper  to  give  him
instructions  in  relation  to  the  du-
ties of  his  office  and  calling,  how
he  should  be  clad — what  kind  of
priestly  garments  he  should  wear,
what  lie  should  perform  in  admin-
istering certain  ordinances  and  how
he  should  perform  them ;  and  also
gave  unto  him  some  instruction  in
regard  to  the  breast- pi  ate,  that  was
called  the  breast-plate  of  judgment.
The  reason  of  this  was,  that  Aapon
was  appointed  to  be  a  judge  among
the  children  of  Israel,  occupying  a
similar  place  among  that  people  that
the  President  of  the  Bishopric  oc-
cupies in  the  Churcb.  But  be  was
blessed  above  those  who  have  been
ordained  to  the  same  calling  in  this
dispensation,  for  he  was  in  posses-
sion of  the  Uritij  and  Thummin,
and  by  virtue  of  this  instrument
be  could  inquire  of  the  Lord  in
relation  to  every  case  that  sbonld
be  brought  before  him  for  adjudica-
tion* The  judgment  of  man  is  na-


turally very  weak  and  imperfect,  and
inasmuch  as  Aaron  was  required  to
judge  the  people  of  God,  it  waaof  the
utmost  importance  that  all  his  deci-
sions should  be  given  in  righteous-
ness, that  there  should  be  no  imper-
fections connected  with  tbem,  and  for
that  reason  the  Lord  gave  express
instructions  to  Aaron,  through  his
biother  Moses,  to  have  a  breast  plate-
In  this  breast. plate  were  twelve
stones,  representing  the  Twelve
Tribes  of  Israel,  and  in  the  centre
of  these  rows  ot  stones  the  Urirn  aud
Thummim  was  placed,  and  when  he
was  required  to  render  judgment
apon  any  matter,  he  inquired  of  the
Lord  through  it,  and  was  enabled  to
give  decisions  according  to  the  word
of  the  Lord*

We  have  other  accounts  given  in
the  Bible  concerning  the  exercise  of
this  same  gift.  David  was  blessed
with  this  gift,  and  when  Saul  was
pursuing  him  from  plnce  to  place,
seeking  his  life,  he  would  inquire  of
the  Lord,  by  means  of  a  similar
instrument,  and  receive  revelations.
The  nature  of  bis  inquiries  was —
Would  Saul  go  to  such  a  ci  ty  seeking
hirn  ?  Would  the  people  of  such  a
city  deliver  him  into  bis  hands  ?  and
t  he  Lord  would  answer  him,  and  he  of
course  would  govern  himself  accord-
ingly. This  gift  seem*  to  have  been  of
frequent  occurence  among  the  Israel*
itea  in  their  several  generations,  down
to  a  few  centuries  before  the  coming  of
Christ  Then  it  seems  that  Israel
so  far  transgressed  the  law  of  heaven,
and  so  f  ar  strayed  from  the  Lord  that
the  Urim  and  Thummim  was  taken
from  their  midst,  as  yoti  will  find
mentioned  by  one  of  the  Prophets  in
the  Jewish  Bible  ;  it  was  taken  from
them,  and  they  were  to  abide  many
davs  without  this  instrument,  also
without  a  king  and  without  sacrifices,
and  eventually  the  ordinances  of.  God
were  to  be  taken  from  them.  In


KING  LIMHl's

other  words,  they  were  to  be  left  !
without  revelators,  without  prophets,
without  aii  inspired king to  rule
over  them,  all  of  which  has  been
fulfilled  for  many  centuries  in  the
dispersion of the descendants  of
Jacob  from  their  land  of  promise,
among the nations  whithersoever
they  are  driven,  without  having  any
king;  they  do  not  offer  sacrifices  as
anciently  ;  they  have  no  priest  with  j
the breast-plate  of  judgment,  and
Urim  and  Thummim  to  inquire  of
the  Lord,

It  seems  that  the  Lord  manifested
himself  to  the  people  of  this  great
western  continent  in  a  similar  man-
ner. Here  he  raised  up  Prophets,
and  here  they  were  in  possession  of
an  instrument,  although  not  called
strict  ly  by  the  same  name,  yet  an
instrument  evidently  designed  by
the  Almighty  as  a  medium  of  com-
munication to  his  people.  King
Musiah,  who  lived  some  time  after
the  Israelites  came  to  the  American
continent  j  some  few  centuries  before
the  tirst  coming  of  Christ,  he  had
this  great  gift.  Amnion,  a  servant  ;
of  God,  who  explained  this  gift  to
King  Li m hi,  tells*  us  the  nature  of
the  gift.  He  informs  us  thatMosiah
had  wherewith  he  Could  look  and
interpret  writing  and  engraving  of
ancient  date.  It  seems  that  forty*
three  of  the  people  of  King  Li m hi
had  been  sent  from  the  kingdom
where  they  resided,  which  was  flown
at,  or  near  Equidor,  in  South  Ame-
.pica,  to  search  the  land  which  they
had  left  some  two  or  three  genera-
tions before;  and  they  lost  their
way  in  the  wilderness,  and  failed  to
find  Zarahemla,  the  land  they  were
seeking,  which  was  in  the  northern
part  of  South  America.  They  passed
by  the  land  through  a  wilderness
country,  and  it  appears  that  they
went  into  North  America.  They
found  all  the  land  which  they  ex-


ENQUIRY,  ETC.  20T

plored  covered  with  ruins  of  buildings
and  cities,  and  they  found  the  bone  3
of  men  and  animals*  and  among
other  things  they  founl  twenty- four
plates  which  were  of  pure  gold,  on
which  were  engravings,  which  they
brought,  among  other  things,  to
King  Limhi.  He  at  that  time  was
a  righteous  man,  as  well  as  most  of
his  people,  and  they  were  exceedingly
anxious  to  kuow  the  interpretation*
of  the  engravings,  believing  that
they  would  give  some  account  of  the
people  who  had  occupied  the  country
where  they  were  found.  They
wanted  to  know  what  had  become  of
so  great  a  people,  for  evidently  it
appeared  to  them  they  had  been
very  numerous.  And  it  was  for  this
purpose  that  Amman  was  questioned.
Amnion  was  a  man  who  had  been
sunt  up  in  the  mean  time  from  the
northern  portions  of  South  America
called  Z  irahemla,  and  lie  informed
King  Limhi  that  the  King  of  Z  ira-
hemla had  this  high  gilt  Irom  God,
that  he  was  a  seer,  and  could,  by
using  the  interpreters,  interpret  an-
cient languages.  Hence  the  re-
joicing of  the  king,  because  there
was  a  man  who  could  give  them  the
information  they  were  so  anxious  to
find  out.

Afterwards  we  have  a  history  in
the  "  Book  of  Mormon,"  of  the
people  of  Kiug  Limhi  having  been
driven  out  by  some  of  the  wicked
portions  of  the  people.  He  came
to  the  land  of  Zarahemla,  taking,
with  his  colony,  these  twenty- four
plates,  and  asking  King  Mosiah  to
translate  them  into  the  N*phito
language.  He  did  so  j  and  they  g  ive
an  account  of  a  people — who  came
from  the  tower  of  Babel,  at  the  time
of  the  confusion  of  tongues;  that
they  landed  upon  this  north  country,
called  North  America,  and  dwelt  here
some  sixteen  or  seventeen  centuries,
and  they  were  part  of  the  time  a


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


rig  lit  eons  people,  and  a  part  of  the
time  wicked.  And  many  Prophets
existed  among  the  ancient  colony,
and  they  kept  their  records,  some
upnn  metal  Ire  plates  and  others  upon
other  materials.  'Bbere  was  a  Prophet
at  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  this
first  colony  whose  name  was  Ether.
He  wrote  an  abridgment  of  the
Jaredites,  also  an  account  of  their
coming  to  this  fond  fnmi  the  Tower
of  Babel ;  he  wrote  also  concerning
the  creation  of  the  world,  and  the
doings  of  the  Lord  from  the  begin-
ning down  to  the  building  of  the
great  tower,  this  short  account  was
given  on  these  twenty* four  plates.
And  there  is  also  given  in  the'1  Book
of  Mormon/'  by  Moroni,  the  man
who  hid  up  the  plates  trom  which  the
book  was  translated,  a  very  .short
sketch  of  the  history  of  this  first
colony  that  came  from  t he  tower,
under  the  name  of  the  u  Book  of
Ether/1  And  in  this  Book  of  Ether
we  find  that  they  had  some  thirty
kings  from  the  time  they  left  En  lei,
ard  that  they  were  fin  filly  destioyed
because  ot  great  wickedness,  to  fulfil
a  prophecy  -and  decree  which  the
Lord  made  when  he  was  bringing
them  forth  to  this  land.  The  de-
cree was  that  if  they  or  their  descen-
dants should  fall  into  wickedness
and  become  folly  rij>ened  in  iniquity,
that  the  Lord  would  utterly  destroy
them,  and  bring  forth  another  people
to  possess  the  land  in  their  steud#
Accordingly  these  twenty-four  plates
mentions  their  tfver throw,  bow  they
were  destroyed ;  also  some  mention
is  made  of  their  most  eminent  Pro-
phets, and  much  instruction  is  given
in  regard  to  the  coming  to  this  land
of  this  first  colony,  bow  they  wete
brought  here  by  the  Lord  from  the
lower,  and  how,  in  passing  through
the  valley  called  Nimrod,  the  Lord
himself  went  before  their  camp  in
a  cloud,  teaching  them  and  instruct-


ing, and  leading  them,  the  same  as
he  afterwards  led  the  children  of
Israel.  And  he  brought  them  to
great  waters,  where  thry  were  com-
manded of  him  to  build  vessels,
which  they  did,  eight  in  number,  by
which,  under  t^e  particular  carp  of
the  Almighty,  they  were  brought
across  the  great*  Pacific,  as  we  now
term  it,  taking  them  thtee  hundred
and  forty. four  days,  and  finally  they
lauded  upon  the  western  coast  of
North  America,  as  near  as  we  can
determine  from  this  honk,  in  Mexico,
south  of  the  Gulf  of  California.  And
that  when  the  brother  of  Jared  was
coming  to  this  land  the  Lord  gave
him  some  very  remarkable  visions,
and,  among  other  things  he  gave  him
the  Urim  and  Thurnmim,  prepared
two  crystal  stones  in  two  rims  of  a
bow,  and  sanctified  them,  and  showed
to  the  brother  of  Jared  ninny  marvel-
lous things,  some  of  which  I  will
read,  lor  the  instruction  of  those  who
have  not,  perhaps,  given  their  at  ten*
tion  to  these  matters,

I  will  read  first  how  the  Lord
lighted  up  the  ei^bt  vessels  in  which
the  colony  from  the  tower  came.

14  Howbeit,  ye  cannot  cross  thi*
great  deep,  save  I  prepare  you  against
the  waves  of  the  sea,  and  the  winds
which  have  gone  forth,  and  the  floods
which  shall  come*  Therefore,  what
will  ye  that  I  shall  prepare  for  yuu
that  ye  may  have  light  when  ye  are
swallowed  up  in  the  depths  of  the


r\tt

sea  r


Their  barges  were  so  constructed
that  they  could  dive  under  the  waves
and  be  brought  up  again,  and  tbiift
they  were  drivpn  by  the  force  of  the
winds  for  days.

"  And  it  came  to  pass  that  the
brother  of  Jared,  (now  the  number
of  the  vessels  which  had  been  pre*
prepared  was  eight,)  went  forth  unto
the  mount  which  they  called  the
mount  Sbelim,  because  of  its  ex-


ceeding  height,  and  did  moulteu  out
of  a  rock  sixteen  small  stones  ;  and
they  were  white  and  clear,  even  a3
transparent  glass;  and  lie  did  convey
them  in  his  hands  up  on  the  top  of
the  mount,  and  cried  again  unto  the
Lord  saying,  0  Lord  thou  luist  said
that  we  roust  be  encompassed  about
by  the  floods.  Now  behold,  O  Lord,
and  do  not  be  angry  with  thy  servant
because  of  his  weakness  before  rltee  ;
for  we  know  that  thou  art  holy  and
dwellest  in  the  htavens;  and  that  we
are  unworthy  before  thee  ;  because
of  the  fall,  our  n^iTuie  has  hecoms
ev  I  cmurn;a  ly  ;  injveriholess,  O  Lord
thou  bast  given  us  a  commandment
that  wo  muei  ca  11  upon  the*,  that
from  t  h^t*  we  may  receive  according1
to  our  desires*  Behold,  U  Lord,
thou  hast  smitten  us  becaose  of  our
iniquity,  uud  lutst  driven  us  forth,
and  (or  these  many  years  we  have
been  iii  the  wilderness;  nevertheless
thou  husc  been  merciful  unto  us.  0
Lord,  look  upon  me  in  pity,  and  turn
away  thine  an^er  from  tins  t lay  peo-
ple, and  sutler  not  that  they  shall
go  forth  across  the  raging  deep  in
darkness,  but  behold  these  things
which  I  have  moulten  out  of  the
rock.  And  I  know,  0  Lord,  that
thou  hast  all  power,  and  can  do  what-
soever thou  witt  for  the  benefit  of
man  ;  therefore  touch  these  stupes,
O  Lord,  with  thy  finger,  and  prepare
theui  that  they  may  shine  forth  in
darkness;  and  they  shall  shine  forth
unto  us  in  the  vessels  which  we  have
prepared,  that  wo  may  have  light
while  we  shall  cross  the  sea*  Behold,
0  Lord,  thou  canst  do  this.  We  know
that  thou  art  able  to  show  forth  great
power,  which  looks  small  to  the  un-
derstanding of  man."

io u  can  see  from  the  very  lan-
guage itself,  what  great  confidence
this  man  of  God  hud  in  relation  to
the  doings  of  the  Lord,  It  was  not
a  thing  that  looked  impossible  to

No.  14.


him  for  the  Lord  to  touch  these  six-
teen stones,  two  of  which  were  to
be  placed  in  each  vessel,  one  at
each  end.  He  knew  the  Lord  could
touch  them,  and  that  it  was  possible
for  him  to  cause  them  to  shine  forth
in  theee  vessels,  giving  them  light
while  thev  crossed  the  ocean.

"And  it  came  to  pass  that  when
the  bi other  of  Jared  had  said  these
words,  behold,  the  L  <rd  stretched
forth  his  hand  and  touched  the
stones,  one  by  one,  with  his  linger  ;
and  the  vail  was  taken  from  off  the
eyes  of  the  brother  of  J  a  red,  and
lie  saw  the  finger  of  the  Lord  ;  and
it  was  as  the  finger  of  a  man,  like
unto  flesh  and  blood  ;  and  the  bro-
ther of  flared  fell  down  before  the
Lord,  for  he  was  struck  with  fear.
And  the  Lord  saw  that  the  brother
of  J  ft  red  had  fallen  to  the  earth ;
and  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  arise,
why  hast,  thou  fallen  ?  And  he  said
unto  the  Lord  I  saw  the  tinger  of
the  liOfd,  hi  id  I  feared  lest  he  should
smite  me;  for  I  knew  not  t hat  (he
Lord  had  flesh  and  blood.  And  the
Lord  said  unto  him,  because  of  thy
faith  thou  hast  seen  that  I  shall  take
upon  me  flesh  and  blood  "

It  most  have  been  the  spirit  of
our  great  Redeemer  whose  finger
lie  then  saw,  thousands  of  years
before  he  came  and  took  a  body  of
flesh  and  bones.

"  And  never  has  man  come  be-
fore me  with  such  exceeding  faith
as  thon  hast ;  for  were  it  not  so,
ye  could  not  have  seen  my  finger.
Suwest  tliou  more  than  this  ?  And
he  answered,  nay  Lord,  shew  thy»
self  uu to  me.  And  the  Lord  said
unto  him,  belie  vest  thou  the  words
which  I  shall  speak  ?  And  he  an-
swered, yea,  Lord,  I  know  that  thon
speakest  the  truth,  for  thou  art  a
God  of  truth,  aad  canst  not  lie.
And  when  he  had  ,^nid  these  words,
behold  the Lord showed  himself


210


JOURNAL  UK  DISCOURSES.


unto  him,  and  said  because  thou
knowest  these  things,  ye  are  re*
deemed  from  the  fall ;  therefore  ye
fire  brought  back  into  my  presence;
therefore  I  shew  myself  unto  you,"

You  know  that  one  of  the  penal-
ties of  the  fall  was,  than  man  should
be  shut  out  from  the  presence  of
God,  by  this  mortal  tabernacle ;  but
this  man,  because  of  his  knowledge
and  the  great  faith  he  had  obtained,
had  the  vail  removed  and  was  re-
stored back  a^ain  to  the  presence  of
God,  as  man  was  before  the  fall.

"  Behold,  I  am  he  who  was  pre-
pared from  the  foundation  of  the
world  to  redeem  my  people."

The  L«jrd  had  the  plan  already
laid  before  this  world  was  made,  or
brought  into  existence.  And  it  was
all  understood  in  the  councils  of
eternity  about  the  Lord's  emning  in
the  meridian  of  time  to  take  upon
himself  flesh  and  blood.  It  was
understood  that  he  should  suffer
death,  and  be  as  a  Lamb  slain  from
before  the  foundation  of  the  world,
in  the  mind  of  God,

"  Behold,  I  am  Jesus  Christ.  I
am  the  Father  and  the  Son.  In  me
shall  nil  mankind  have  light,  ana
that  eternally,  even  they  who  shall
believe  on  my  name  ;  and  they  shall
become  my  sons  and  my  daughters.
And  never  have  I  showed  myself
unto  man  whom  I  have  created,  for
never  has  man  believed  in  me  as  thou
hast.  Seest  thou  that  ye  are  crea-
ted after  mine  own  image  ?  Yea,
even  all  men  were  created  in  the
beginning,  after  mine  own  image.
Behold,  this  body,  which  ye  now
behold,  is  the  body  of  my  spirit,"
(not  a  body  of  flesh  and  bones,  but
the  shape,  the  stature  and  form  of
the  body  of  his  spirit,  a  pure  and
immortal  body,)  "  and  man  have  I
created  after  the  body  of  my  spirit ;
1  and  even  as  I  appear  unto  thee  to  be


I  in  the  spirit,  will  I  appear  unto  my
people  in  the  flesh.

"And  now,  as  I,  Moroni,  said  I
cosld  not  make  a  full  account  of  these
things  which  are  written,  therefore
it  suffice! Ii  me  to  say,  that  Jesus
showed  himself  unto  this  man  in  the
spirit,  even  afUr  the  manner  and  in
the  same  likeness  of  the  same  body,
even  as  he  showed  himself  unto  the
Nephites."

The  Nephites  were  Israelites  to
whom  Jesus  appeared  after  his  resur-
rection.

"And  he  ministered  unto  him,
even  us  he  ministered  unto  the  Ne-
phites ;  and  all  this,  tliat  this  man
might  know  that  he  was  God,  be-
cause of  the  m*tny  great  works  which
the  Lord  had  showed  unto  him  ;  and
because  of  the  knowledge  of  this
man,  he  couid  not  be  kept  from  be-
holding within  the  vail;  and  he  saw
the  finger  of  Jesus,  which,  when  he
saw  he  fell  with  fear;  for  he  knew  it
was  the  linger  of  the  Lord  ;  and  he
bad  faith  no  longer,  tor  he  knew  ;
nothing  doubting;  wherefore,  having
this  perfect  km >w ledge  of  God,  he
could  not  lie  kppt  from  within  the
vail  ;  therefere  he  saw  Jesus,  and  he
did  minister  unto  him.  And  it  came
to  pass  that  the  Lord  said  unto  the
;  brother  of  Jared,  behold,  thou  shall
not  suffer  these  things  which  ye  have
seen  and  heard,  to  go  forth  unto  the
world,  until  the  time  oometh  that
I  shall  glorify  my  name  in  the  flesh  ;
wherefore  ye  shall  treasure  up  the
things  which  ye  have  seen  and  heard,
and  shew  it  to  no  man/'

It  seems  that  the  Lord  did  not
wish  to  show  these  things  to  others,
when  the  people  had  not  sufficient
faith.  These  things  were  too  great
and  glorious  for  them  at  that  early
period  of  the  world,  to  be  made
acquainted  with,  But  at  a  certain
time,  when  S  name  should  be
glorified  in  the  flesh,  and  after  he


should  rise  from  the  dead,  then  he
would  permit  these  things  to  come
forth,  which  he  did  among  the  ancient
Israelites  on  this  continent;  they
were  then  translated  into  tbeNephite
language  and  brought  to  light  But
the  Lord  gaid  unto  the  brother  of
Jared:  "And  behold,  when  ye  shall
come  onto  me  ye  shall  write  them
and  shall  seal  them  up  that  no  man
can  interpret  them  ;  for  yc  shall  write
them  in  a  language  that  they  cannot
be  read.  And  behold,  these  two
stones  will  I  give  unto  thee,  and  ye
shall  seal  them  up  also,  with  the
things  which  ye  shall  write.  For
behold,  the  language  which  ye  shall
write,  I  have  confounded,  wherefore
I  will  cause  in  my  own  due  time  that
these  stones  shall  magnify  to  the  eyes
of  men,  these  things  which  ye  shall
write.  And  when  the  Lord  had  said
these  words,  he  showed  unto  the
brother  of  Jared  all  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth  which  had  been,  and
also  all  that  would  be;  and  he  with-
held them  not  from  his  sight,  even
unto  the  ends  of  the  earth."  What
a  great  git t  it  is  to  know  and  see  by
the  enlightenment  of  the  Spirit,  by
t  is  ion,  things  that  have  taken  place
from  the  beginning  of  this  world  j
to  see,  for  instance,  all  the  inhabi.
tants  of  the  earth  that  had  been
prior  to  the  day  that  the  Lord  gave1
this  vision ;  and  then  all  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  earth  that  should  be,
even  to  the  end  of  the  world.  For
he  had  said  unto  him,  in  times  be-
fore, that  if  he  would  believe  in
him,  that  lie  could  show  unto  him
all  things — it  should  be  shown  onto
him  j  therefore  the  Lord  could  not
withhold  anything  from  him,  for  he
knew  that  the  Lord  could  show  him
all  things.  And  the  Lord  said  unto
him,  write  these  things  and  seal
them  up,  and  I  will  show  them  in
my  own  due  time  unto  the  children
of  men.


And  it  came  to  pass  that  the  Lord
commanded  him  that  he  should  seal
up  the  two  stones  which  he  had  re-
ceived and  show  them  not,  until
the  Lord  should  show  them  unto  the
children  of  men.  And  the  Lord
commanded  the  brother  of  Jared  to
go  down  out  of  the  mount  from  the
presence  of  the  Lord,  and  write  the
things  which  he  had  seen;  and  they
were  forbidden  to  come  unto  the
children  of  men,  until  after  that  he
should  be  lifted  up  upon  the  cross ;
and  for  this  cause  did  King  Mosiah
keep  them/'

1  told  you  that  Mosiah  was  a
righteous  man,  and  a  revelator  as
well  as  a  king,  who  dwelt  on  this
American  continent  some  few  cen-
turies before  Christ,  and  when  he  ii-
terpreted  the  history  of  the  people,
lie  did  not  interpret  these  things
that  the  brother  of  Jared  saw  in  this
great  vision;  the. Lord  would  not
permit  him  to  do  so*

"That  they  should  not  come  unto
the  world  until  after  Christ  should
show  himself  unto  his  people.  And
after  Christ  truly  had  shown  himself
unto  his  people,  he  commanded  that
they  should  be  made  manifest."

They  were  translated  after  Christ
first  appeared  to  the  Nephites,  and
probably  sent  abroad  among  the
Nephite  nation.  The  Prophet  Mo-
roni says,  "  And  now,  after  that  they
have  all  dwindled  in  unbelief,  and
there  is  none,  save  it  be  the  Laman-
ites,  and  they  have  rejected  the  Gos-
pel of  Christ;  therefore  I  am  com-
manded that  1  should  hide  them  up
again  in  the  earth.  Behold,  I  bare
written  upon  the  plates  the  very
things  which  the  brother  of  Jared


saw.


A  great  many,  in  reading  this
record  carelessly,  would  wonder  why
it  was  that  a  part  of  these  plates
should  be  sealed,  and  why  Joseph
Smith  should  not  be  permitted  to


as


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


break  the  Heal,  it  was  because,  id
this  great  revelation,  the  sealed  por-
tion of  the  plates  from  which  the
Book  of  Mormon  was  taker,  con-
tained tins  great  vision,  given  to  the
brother  of  Jared.  Joseph  was  not
permitted  to  translate  it,  neither  to
bteak  the  seal  of  the  book  ;  it  is  to
be  reserved  to  come  forth  in  due  time.

The  Prophet  Moroni  further  says,
44  And  there  never  was  greater  things
made  manifest,  than  that  which  was
made  manifest  unto  the  brother  of
Jared;  wherefore  the  Lord  hath
commanded  me  to  write  them,  and  I
have  written  them.  And  he  com-
manded me  that  I  should  seal  them
up;  and  he  also  hath  commanded
me  that  I  should  seal  up  the  inter-
pretation thereof;  wherefore  I  have
sealed  up  the  interpreters,  according
to  the  commandment  of  the  Lord.
For  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  they
shall  not  go  forth  unto  the  Gentiles
until  the  day  that  they  shall  repent
of  their  iniquity  and  become  clean
before  the  Lord ;  and  in  that  day
that  they  shall  exercise  faith  in  me,
saith  the  Lord,  even  as  the  brother
of  Jared  did,  that  they  may  become
sanctified  in  me,  then  will  I  manifest
unto  them  the  thing  the  which  the
brother  of  Jared  saw,  even  to  the
unfolding  unto  them  all  my  revela-
tions, saith  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of
God,  the  Father  of  the  heavens  and
ot  the  earth,  and  all  things  that  in
them  are*  And  he  that  will  con-
tend against  the  word  of  the  Lord,
let  him  be  accursed;  for  unto  them
will  I  show  no  greater  things,  saith
Jeans  Christ,  for  I  am  he  who  speak-
eth  ;  and  at  my  commaud  the  hea-
vens are  opened  and  are  shut ;  and
at  ray  word  the  earth  shall  shake ;
and  at  my  command  the  inhabitants
thereof  sl\erfl  pass  away,  even  so  as
by  fire;  and  he  that  believeth  not
my  words,  believeth  not  my  dis
ciples ;  and  if  it  so  be  that  I  do  not


speak,  judge  ye;  for  ye  sh;ill  know
that  it  is  I  that  speakelh  at  the  last

44  Bur  he  that  believeth  these  word*
which  I  have  spoken,  him  will  I  visit
with  the  manifestations  of  my  Spirit,
a:.d  he  shall  know  and  bear  record.'*

Now,  I  want  to  appeal  to  the
Latter-day  Saints  who  occupy  this
room,  whether  this  promise  has  bee  a
fulfilled  to  yon,  or  not  ?  1  will  read
it  again,  "  But  he  that  believeth
these  words  which  I  have  spokrnt
him  will  I  visit  with  the  manifesta-
tions of  my  Spirit,  and  he  shall  know
and  hear  record/1  It  do^s  not  s*yf
he  shall  merely  have  an  opinion  and
bear  record,  but  he  shall  know  »nd
hear  record.  Do  yon  know  that  this
hook  (the  Book  of  Mormon)  is  true,
Latter-day  Saints?  Do  you  kiow
tli at  what  I  have  been  reading  are  the
words  of  the  Lord  ?  If  you  have
helieved  these  tilings  with  all  of  your
hearts,  and  complied  with  the  com-
mands of  the  Most  High,  manifesting
your  faith  by  your  woik^  then  you
have  been  put  in  possession  of  this
knowledge,  and  you  know,  by  the
Spirit  which  he  has  poured  out  fr--m
heaven  upon  you,  that  they  are  true,
and  in  force  to  all  the  world,  and  this
Spirit  gives  you  a  knowledge  concern-
ing all  truth.  You  are  not  like  those
who  have  no  revelation  of  whom  the
ancient  Apostle  speak ■,  who  were
"Ever  learning,  and  never  able  to
come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth
but  you  are  of  those,  if  you  keep  the
commandments  of  God,' who  are  not
only  learning  from  the  word  ot  God,
but  have  a  knowledge  of  all  revealed
truth  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  the
Comforter,  which  is  a  revelator,  an
unction  to  all  those  who  receive  it;
and  they  are  able  to  bear  record  of  the
thing*  which  they  formerly  believed
to  be  true.  The  Lord  has  thus  raised
up  a  great  cloud  of  witnesses  in  coa-
nectlon  with  scores  of  thousands  of


KING  LIMHl'S  ENQUIRY,  ETC*


213


xfthers  to  bear  record  of  the  truth,  in
this  last  dispensation  of  the  fullness
of  times*  *'  For,  because  of  my  Spirit,
he  shall  know  that  these  things  are
true ;  for  it  persuadeth  men  to  do
good  ;  and  whatsoever  thihg  persuad-
*eth  men  to  do  good,  is  of  me;  for
good  cometh  of  none,  save  it  be  of  me.
1  am  the  same  that  leadetli  uum  to
all  good  ;  he  that  will  not  believe  my
words,  will  not  belie vo  me  that  I  am  ;
and  he  that  will  pot  believe  me,  will
not  believe  the  Father  who  sent  me.
For  behold,  I  am  the  Father,  I  am
the  light,  ?ind  the  life,  and  the  truth
of  tho  world.  Come  unto  me,  0  ye
Gentiles;  and  I  will  show  unto  you
the  greater  things,  the  knowledge
which  is  hid  up  because  of  unbelief.
Come  unto  me,  0  ye  house  of  Israel,
and  it  shall  be  made  manifest  unto
you  how  great  things  the  Father
bath  laid  up  for  you,  from  the  found-
ation of  the  world;  and  it  hath  not
oome  unto  you,  because  of  unbelief
Behold,  when  ye  shall  rend  that  veil
of  unbelief  which  doth  cause  you  to
remain  in  jour  awful  state  of  wicked-
ness and  hardness  of  heart,  an  I  blind-
ness of  mind,  then  shall  the  great  and
marvellous  things  which  have  been
hid  up  from  the  foundation  of  the
world  ;  yea,  when  ye  shall  call  upon
the  Father  in  my  name,  with  a  broken
heart  and  a  contrite  spirit,  then  shall
je  know  that  the  Father  hath  remem-
bered the  covenant  which  he  made
unto  your  fathers,  0  house  of  Israel ;
and  then  shall  my  revelations  which
I  have  caused  to  be  written  by  my
servant  John,  be  unfolded  in  the  eyes
of  alt  the  people.  Remember,  when
ye  aee  these  things,  ye  shall  know
that  the  time  is  at  hand  that  they
shall  be  made  manifest  in  very  deed ;
therefore,  when  ye  shall  receive  this
record,  we  may  know  that  the  work
of  the  Father  has  commenced  upoji
all  the  face  of  the  land.  Therefore,
repent,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth,  and


come  unto  me,  and  believe  in  my
Gospel,  and  be  baptized  in  my  name;
for  he  that  believeth,  and  is  baptized,
shall  be  saved;  but  he  that  believeth
not,  shftll  be  damned ;  and  signs
shall  follow  them  that  believe  in  my
name.  And  blessed  is  he  that  is
found  faithful  unto  my  name  at  the  "
last  day,  for  he  shall  be  lifted  up  to
dwell  in  the  kingdom  prepared  for
him  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.
And  behold,  it  is  I  that  hath  spoken
it.  Amen."

I  have  read  these  things  because
I  am  full?  aware  that  there  are  in  the
Church  of  Litter  day  Saints  many
persons  who  are  very  c  ireless  about
reading  the  "  Book  of  Mormon/'  It
is  one  of  the  greatest  treasures,  so
far  as  books  are  concerned,  that  has
b*en  given  to  mankind  for  almost
1,800  years.  It  con  tains  the  things
of  God  in  great  plainness,  £o  easy
of  comprehension  that  the  child  who
reads  can  understand  it.  And  yet,
how  many  there  are  of  the  Latter-
day  Sa'nts  who  sutF**r  this  book  to
remain  upon  their  shelves,  week  after
week,  without  ever  reading  a  page
of  these  precious  things,  I  have
also  read  these  things  for  the  benefit
of  strangers  who  may  be  present  ou
this  occasion.  It  is  not  to  be  ex-
pected that  they  will  read  it,  for  they
do  not  believe  it  is  a  divine  record  ;
they  do  not  believe  that  God  has  spo-
ken, or  that  Joseph  Smith  was  raiifd
up  to  bring  it  forth  to  the  children
of  men,  by  the  power  of  the  Urim
and  Thummirn.  It  is  not  expected,
therefore,  that  they  will  read  a  work
that  they  have  no  frith  in.  They  do
not  want  to  have  faith  in  it,  they  do
not  consider  it  a  matter  of  sufficient
importance  even  to  enquire  of  the
Lord  whether  it  is  true  or  not.  And
yet,  sometimes  they  may  have,  for
a  few  moments,  a  feeling  in  their
hearts  that  they  would  like  to  ku  >ir
what  is  contained  in  the  "Book  cf


2H


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


Mormon  ;"  hence,  I  have  read  this  i
that:  you  may  have  an  idea  what  is
contained  in  tit  is  book,  on  which  the
Latter-day  Saints  found  their  faith,
as  well  as  on  the  Bible.

You  will  perceive,  Latter-day  Saints,
how  this  Urim  and  Thummin  was  !
•  formed  in  the  first  place. It  was  not
something  that  existed  on  the  earth
in  a  natural  state,  it  was  something
made  by  the  Lord. He  is  a  good
mechanic, he  understands  how  to
make  things. He  made  the  heavens
and  the  earth,  he  made  many  worlds
that  we  see  roll  as  it  were,  upon  their
wings  in  the  midst  of  space.  He
made  the  garments  that  first  clothed
Adam  and  Eve;  and  he  made  a  very
beautiful  garden,  and  planted  it  with
a  variety  of  trees,  and  caused  them
to  bear  fruit,  and  that  they  should
have  seed  within  themselves.  He
understands  how  to  do  such  things  ;
he  is  not  like  many  of  us,  who,  after
attempting  to  do  certain  things,  fail
for  the  lick  of  knowledge;  but  when
he  undertakes  to  do  a  thing,  he  does
it  in  the  best  manner  possible,  and
what  be  makes  is  made  perfect  And
if  afterwards  his  handiwork  becomes
imperfect,  it  is  because  of  the  corse
that  comes  upon  the  earth  in  conse-
quence of  sin. He  made  the  Urim
and  Thummim,  and  we  have  an  ac-
count of  his  making  it  in  the  words
which  I  have  been  reading.  Two
crystal  stones  that  he  gave  unto  the
brother  of  Jared  were  made  by  him.
When  ye  shall  write  these  things,
ye  shall  seal  them  up,  alio  the  in-
terpreters, until  the  Lord  shall  see
fit,  in  bis  owa  due  time,  to  reveal
them  to  the  children  of  men.

Perhaps  some  of  you  may  ask
when  this  great  revelation,  that  was
given  to  the  brother  of  Jared,  will
be  revealed.  I  wish  1  could  answer
the  question  ;  I  cannot  answer  as  to
the  year,  for  I  do  not  know.  I  may,
however, answer you in  general


terms. If  you  will turn  to  the
tc  Doctrine  and  Covenants,"  you  will
there  find  a  revelation,  given  in  the
year  1820,  to  Hyrum  Smith,  who
went  down  from  Manchester,  Ontario
County,  N.  Y.,  to  Susquehanna  Coun-
ty, Pennsylvania,  to  visit  his  brother,
Joseph,  who  was  then  engaged  in  the
work  of  translating  the  '  Book  of
Mormon," When Hyrum  arrived
in  the  presence  of  his  brother,  he  felt
anxious  to  know  what  the  Lord  had
for  him  to  do,  or  if  it  would  not  be
well  for  him  to  commence  to  preach,
bearing  testimony  to  the  manuscripts
of  the  l'  Book  of  Mormon,"  etc.  He
finally  desired  that  his  brother  should
inquire  of  the  Lord,  through  the
Urim  and  Thummim,  what  he  wished
him  to  do. The  Lord  gave  a  revela-
tion, telling  him  he  was  not  to  preach
his  word  at  that  time,  that  the  time
had  not  come. He  had  not  received
the  ordination  authorizing  him  to
preach,  neither  had  the  Church  been
organized  on  the  earth. The  Lord
told  him,  however,  of  oerfain  things
he  should  do. He  said,  "  Study  my
word  which  hath  gone  forth  among
the  children  of  men,  and  also  study
my  word  which  shall  come  fortk
among  the  children  of  men,  or  that
which  is  now  translating,  yea,  until
you  have  obtained  all  which  I  shall
grant  to  the  children  of  men  in  this
generation,  and  then  shall  all  things
be added thereunto." After  the
generation living in 1829,  some
forty-eight  years  ago,  is  all  accom-
plished, then  we  may  look  for  the
j  revelation  which  the  brother  of  Jared
obtained  upou  the  mount,  then  we
may  look  for  the  things  he  saw  when?
the  Lord  showed  him  all  the  children
of  men  that  had  ever  been  upon  the
earth  from  the  beginning  of  creation
down  to  his  day,  and  also  that  would
come  upon  the  earth  down  to  the  end
of  time. In showing him  these
things,  I  do  not  think  he  merely  gave


KING  LJMHI'S  ENQUIRY,  ETC,


him  this  to  satisfy  his  curiosity,  for
no  man,  we  are  told,  had  ever  before
witnessed  such  great  things,  and  the
Lord  could  not  withhold  them  from
him,  because  of  Iris  great  f  dtb.  I
do  not  believe,  either,  that  this  ereat
man  would  have  sought  the  Lord
seeking  to  aatisfy  CMrtosifcy;  hut  I
told  you,  and  I  do  believe,  that  He
revealed  to  him  many  of  his  great
and  marvellous  purposes  in  relation
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  in  rela-
tion to  his  future  dealings  with  the
nations  of  the  earth,  in  relation  to
the  rise  of  his  kingdom  iu  the  latter
days,  as  now  taking  place*  I  huve
no  doubt  he  saw  every  particular  as
they  have  occurred,  since  1830  to
the  present  time.  He  u\w  our  history
and  our  travels  and  our  persecutions  ;
and  he  also  saw  the  atate  of  darkness
that  the  world  would  be  in  before
the  Lord  would  set  up  this  Church
npon  the  earth  again,  and  the  per*
seen t ions  that  would  come  up  on  tbe
former-day  Saints,  and  how  the
Church  would  fall  away  aud  the
Priesthood  be  taken  away  from
amoiiff  men;  all  these  things  were
in  an  it  rated  to  him,  and  he  was  com-
manded  to  write  them.  And  if  we
had  these  things  now  which  he  wrote,
I  have  not  the  least  doubt  we  could
read  the  future  history  of  this  Church,
just  the  same  as  we  can  its  prist  his-
tory ;  we  could  understand  all  the
particulars  until  the  wicked  shall  be
destroyed  from  the  earth,  and  we
could  see  our  future  travels  and  our
future  tribulations  and  persecutions,
and  also  our  blessings  that  shall  come
upon  us  after  the  days  of  tribalations
are  ended;  we  could  behold  the  glory
of  God  that  would  rest  upon  Zion,
and  the  resurrection  of  the  righteous
dead,  and  the  coming  of  the  Church
of  the  First  Born  in  the  clouds  of
heaven,  in  connection  with  Jesus,
and  the  coming  of  the  ancient  day
Zion. AH  these  things,  1  have  no


doubt,  ware  revealed  to  this  man  of
God,  and  were  commanded  to  be
written,  and  will  come  forth  when
the  generation  has  fully  past  away
that  were  living  in  the  year  1829 —
forty -eight  years  ago.

As  regards  the  numter  of  years
by  which  a  generation  shall  be  mea-
sured, we  have  no  special  definite,
period  given  to  na  by  revelation  ;  the
Lord  speaks  in  terms  that  are  gese-
ral  in  relation  to  generations.  Among
the Nephites, immediately  after
Christ's  appearance  to  thern,  a  gene-
ration  was  a  hundred  years,  and  in
the  fourth  generation  they  were  de-
stroyed, as  a  nation  ;  except  some
few  who  went  over  to  the  Lamanites.
We  find  generations  numbering  from
father  to  son,  and  from  son  to  grand-
son, etc  ,  and  when  we  come  to  ave-
rage generations,  according  to  ths
statistics  of  fiations,  we  find  them
to  be  about  thirty  years  to  a  genera-
tion ;  but  when  the  Lord  speaks  in
general  terms,  and  says,  This  gene-
ration shall  not  pass  away,  until  a
House  shall  be  built  to  his  name,  as
ia  given  in  this  *'  Book  of  Covenants,"
and  n  cloud  should  rest  upon  it;  ia
that  case  I  do  not  thick  he  is  limited
to  any  definite  period,  but  suffice  it
to  say  that  the  people  living  in  1832,
when  ths  revelation  was  given,  will
not  all  pass  away ;  there  will  ba  some
living  when  the  House  spoken  of
will  be  reared,  on  which  the  glory  of
God will  rest. Already  forty-five
years  have  passed  away  since  that
revelation  was  giv^n,  concerning  ths
building  of  that  House. And  whoa
hs  says  to  Hyrnm  Smith,  "Study
my  word,  etc.,  until  you  have  obtained
all  which  I  sli all  grant  unto  the  chil-
dren  of  men  in  this  generation,1'  I
do  not  know  how  long  that  genera-
tion was  intended,  in  tbe  mind  of
God,  to  be,  and  I  do  not  think  there
ia  any  person  in  the  Church  that  does
know,  unless  the  Lord  has  revealed


216


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


it  to  him. But  we  have  every  reason  [
to  believe  that  the  time  is  not  far
distant,  and  that  there  are  some  living
among  the  young  now  upon  tht  earth,
that  will  live  to  behold  great  numbers
of  revelations  given,  and  will  behold
other  books  come  forth  and  other  re-
cords ttanslaied by  the  Urirn  and
Thummim, that hart  e  instrument
tbaf  Joseph  Smith  used  in  the  trans^
lation  of  the  "  Bunk  of  Mar  ion,"
which  will  ngain  Come  forth  and  be
revealed  to  the  seer  and  Tovela'or
-  that  God  wdl  nns*4  up  by  which  tbe>c
ancient  records  vvill  be  brought  to
light. Then  these  great  things  will
be  known,  then  we  shall  rejoice  in  the
greater  fulness  of  knowledge  and
understanding,  according  to  the  pro-
mise ;  and  when  we  rend  that  veil  of
unbebcf,  spoken  of  in  the  14  Book  of
Mormon,"  aad  when  it  is  taken  away
from  our  midst,  and  we  exercise  fail h
in  God,  even  as  the  ancient  man  of
God,  the  brother  of  Jsred,  did,  then
will  the  Lord  reveal  to  this  people
what  was  shown  to  this  man.  And
if  it  were  important  for  him,  in  the
early  ages,  to  understand  tht1  great
things  of  the  latter-days,  how  mach
more  important  it  is  for  us  who  are
living,  as  it  were,  just  preceding  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  ;  and  if
ancient  men  of  God  were  privileged
and  blessed  in understanding  the
thiugs of the future,  how  much
greater  blessing  it  will  be  to  os,  in-
asmuch as  these  things  are  at  our
doors,  I
1  believe  I  will  make  a  few  moxe
remarks in relation tu  this  same
revelation  that  is  to  be  given.  In
the  second  book  of  Nephi,  the  11th
chap,,  we  have  some  account  of  what
the  Lord  is  going  to  do,  referring  to
the  things  which  the  brother  of  Jared
aaw. The  prophecy  I  am  about  to
read  whs  delivered  nearly  six  cento*  j
ries  before  Christ,  by  a  man  whose
came  was  Nephi,  whom  the  Lord


brought  out  from  Jerusalem,  in  con-
nection with  his  fathers  family  and
some  others,  landing  them  on  the
western  coast  of  South  America
where  they  formed  a  colony.  Before
begot  here,  he  had  a  great  revelation,
and  also  after  coming  here,  1  will
commence  at  the  17th  paragraph  of
t he  vision  be  had,

uAud  it  bli'dl  come  to  pass,  tint
the  Lord  God  shall  bring"  forth  unto
you  the  words  of  a  book,  and  they
1  shall  be  the  words  of  them  that  have
slumbered."

He  wits  prophecy ing  of  the  last
days,  of  the  time  when  the  Book  of
Mormon  should  be  brought  foith  to
the  inhabitants  of  tbo  earth.

u  And  behold  the  book  shall  he
sealed:  and  in  the  book  shall  be  a
revelation  from  God,  from  the  begin-
ning of  the  world  to  the  ending
thereof."  This  is  the  part  that  is
sealed.  u  Wherefore,  because  of  the
things  which  are  sealed  up,  the  t  Idng.s
which  are  sealed  shall  not  be  deli-
vered in  the  day  of  the  wickedness
and  abomination  of  the  people.1*  That
I  agrees  with  what  1  was  telling  you
about  the  generation  that  is  passing
away.  The  people  who  are  wicket  I
shall  he  swept  away  from  the  earth,
and  those  who  remain  that  are  righte-
ous will  have  this  great  revelation
unsealed  to  them.  "Wherefore  th«
book  shall  be  kept  from  them,"  The
Lord  did  not  suffer  these  plates  to
go  among  th*  wicked,  for  he  well
knew  that  they  would  have  destroyed
them  for  the  ?>ake  of  the  gold  upon
which  they  were  written.  "But  the
book  shall  be  delivered  ur.to  a  man,
and  he  shall  deliver  the  words  of  the
book,  which  are  thd  words  of  those
who  have  slumbered  in  the  dust;
and  he  khall  deliver  these  words
unto  another;  but  the  words  which
are  sraled  he  shall  not  deliver,  nei-
ther shall  he  deliver  the  book."  I
wish to  state  here  for  tha  informa-


KING  LIMHl*S  ENQUIRY,  ETC.


217


tion  of  those  who  do  not  understand,
that  before  Joseph  Smith  translated
the  p»it  that  way  unsealed,  he  copied
anrne  of  the  words  and  sent  them  by
Martin  Han  is  to  the  city  of  New
York  to  have  them  exhibited  to  the
learned,  to  see  if  they  con  Id  read
them,  "For  the  book  shall  be  sealed
by  the  power  of  God,  and  ihe  revela-
tion which  wag  sealed  shall  be  kept
in  the  book  until  the  own  due  time
of  the  Lord  they  may  come  forth  ;
for  behold,  they  reveal  all  things
from  the  foundation  o(  the  world
unto  the  end  thereof/'  We  will  get
some  knowltdir"  of  the  purposes  of
God,  not  only  in  relation  to  the  bis
thousand  years  past,  but  tor  the
thousand  years  to  come,  after  the
revelation  ia  tjiven  showing  forth  the
purposes  and  designs  of  the  great
iLehuvah  in  relation  to  this  creation.
44  And  the  day  cometh  that  the  words
of  the  book  which  was  sealed  shall
be  read  upon  the  bouse  tops;  and
ihey  slndl  he  read  by  the  power  of
Christ;  and  all  things  thai!  be  re-
vealed to  the  children  of  men  which
ever'  have  hern  among  the  children
of  men,  and  which  ever  will  be,  even
unto  the  end  of  the  earth.  Where-
fore, at  that  day,  when  the  hook
shall  be  delivered  unto  the  man  of
whom  I  have  spoken,  the  book  shall
be  hid  from  Ihe  eyes  of  The  world,
that  the  eyes  of  none  shall  behold  it,
save  it  be  that  three  witnessed  shall
tehold  it,  by  the  power  of  God,
besides  him  to  whom  the  book  filial  1
be  delivered  ;  and  they  shall  testily
to  the  truth  of  the  book  and  the
tilings  therein-  And  there  is  none
other  which  shall  view  it,  save  it  be
a  few,  according  to  the  will  of  God,
to  bear  testimony  of  bin  word  unto
the  children  of  men  ;  for  the  Lord
hath  said,  that  the  words  of"  t lie
faithful  should  speak  as  if  it  were
from  the  dead.  Wherefore,  the
Lord  God  will  proceed  to  bring  forth


the  words  of  the  book ;  and  in  the
mouth  of  aa  many  witnesses  aa  aeem-
eth  him  pood  will  he  establish  his
word ;  and  wo  unto  him  that  reject-
ed! the  word  of  God,'1

That  gives  us  a  little  more  light
upon  the  same  subject*  When  that
is  bronsfht  forih,  I  expect  that  the
same  Uiim  and  Thuinmim  which
the  Lord  gave  to  Joseph  Smith  will
come  forth  with  these  plates,  and
they  will  be  translated,  but  by  whom
I  know  not.  Who  will  be  the
favored  Seer  and  Revehitor  that  will
be  raise1 1  up  among  this  people  to
bring  this  revelation  to  light,  ;s  not
revealed  to  rue.  And  not  only  this
revelation,  but  those  twenty-four
plates  of  gold  which  contain  the
doings  of  the  old  JWedite  nation  that
inhabited  this  North  American  con-
tinent; at  present  we  have  only  an
abridgment,  not  a  hundredth  part  of
their  history.  These  plates  of  gold
will  come  forth,  as  well  as  many
other  records  kept  by  the  first  nation
— the  Juredites,  that  came  here;  and
I  have  no  doubt  that  the  Lord  will
trive  the  Urini  and  Tim  in  mini  to
translate  them*  And  not  oulv  these,
but  thrs  L  )rd  intends,  in  this  dispen-
sation in  which  you  and  1  live,  to
overwhelm  the  whole  earth  with  a
flood  of  knowledge  in  regard  to  him-
self, in  regard  to  his  purposes  and
design and  in  regard  to  the  future
glories  and  blessings  that  are  or-
dained for  the  Latter-day  Saints,  in
regard  to  the  preparation  of  the  earth
for  the  thousand  years  of  righteous-
ness to  come*  Hence  these  plates,
these  threat  numbers  of  plates,  that
were  kept  by  the  kings  of  the  Neph-
ites  and  by  many  Prophets  before  and
after  Christ,  as  well  as  those  sealed
records  of  which  I  have  been  speak-
ing, will  all  come  to  light ;  we  then
will  have  revelations  of  heavenly  and
earthW  things,  and  the  designs  and
put  puses  of  God, We  will  have,


218


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


perhaps,  the  most  complete  history

of  this  continent  that  there  is  in  ex-
istence of  any  other  nation  or  king-
dom on  the  earth.  Moreover,  we
have  abundance  of  promises  that
God  hns  made  to  us,  in  this  book
c  died  ihe  Doctrine  find  Covenants,
given  through  the  Prophet  Joseph,
concerning  other  records  besides
those  I  have  named,  that  were  kept
by  ihe  Jareriites  and  the  Nephites,  a
record  for  instance  hick  so  far  as
the  days  of  Enoch,  Yon  might  say,
they  did  not  know  how  to  write  in
those  days.  But  the  Bible  indicates
that  they  did  know,  and  speak  about
the  book  of  the  generations  of  Adam
even  before  the  flood.  Further-
more, we  have  an  account  that  t  hree
years  prior  to  the  death  of  Adam,
he  called  together  the  righteous  of
his  posterity,  he  called  also  the
High  Priests  of  that  day,  into  a
certain  valley,  called  Adam  Ondi-
Ahman,  which  is  located  about  fifty
miles  north  of  Jackson  County,  or
what  is  now  called  Davis  County,
Missouri,  Here  assembled  the
righteous  of  his  posterity  for  eight
generations,  and  he  pronounced
upon  them  his  last  blessing,  as  the
grand  patriarch  of  the  whole.  And
he  jttood  up,  notwithstanding  lie
was  bowed  down  with  age,  before
the  vast  body  that  were  gathered
on  that  occasion,  and  prophesied  of
all  things  of  importance  that  should
transpire  among  his  seed,  and  the
nations  that  should  spring  from
him,  down  to  the  very  end  of  time.
These  things,  it  says,  were  written
in  the  book  of  Enoch,  and  are  to  be
testified  of  in  due  time.  When  we
get  that,  1  think  we  shall  know  a
great  deal  about  the  ante-diluvians,
of  whom  at  present  we  know  so
little.

Then  there  is  still  another  record
to  come  forth.  John  the  Baptist  is
said  by  the  highest  authority  to  be


one  of  the  greatest  Prophets  ever
born  ot  a  woman  ;  but  we  have  very
little  written  in  the  Jewish  record
concerning  him.  We  have  a  revela-
tion in  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants
concerning  the  record  of  John,  that
great  Prophet.  And  we  are  pro-
mised that  if  we  were  faithful  as  a
people,  the  fullness  of  the  record  of
John  shall  hereafter  be  revealed  to
us.  When  we  get  this,  I  think  we
shall  have  still  more  knowledge  in
regard  to  doctrine  and  principle,
and  things  that  are  great  and  mar-
velous, of  which  we  know  very  little,
if  anything  about.  This  is  not  all.
The  Lord  ha*  told  us  that  he  would
bring  forth  those  brass  plates  that
Lehi  and  the  families  that  came  with
him  from  Jerusalem,  some  six  hun-
dred years  before  Christ,  brought
with  them,  which  contain  the  history
of  the  creation,  and  the  writings  of
inspired  men  down  to  the  days  of
Jeremiah  ;  they  came  out  in  Jere-
miah's day.  We  are  informed  in
the  "Book  of  Mormon"  that  they
contained  many  prophecies  very  great
and  extensive  in  their  nature.  And
when  these  plates,  now  hidden  in
the  hill  Cumorah,  are  brought  to
light  we  shall  have  the  history  of
the  Old  Testament  much  mure  fully,
with  the  addition  of  a  great  many
prophecies  that  are  not  now  con-
tained in  that  record.  The  prophe-
cies of  Joseph  in  Egypt  were  very
great,  and  we  are  told  in  the  "Book
of  Mormon"  that  there  were  a  great
many  given  to  him.  When  we  have
all  those,  also  the  prophecies  of
Neum,  a  great  Prophet  who  propl  ie«
cied  concerning  Christ ;  also  those
of  Zenos  and  Zenoek,  and  others  of
which  only  bare  reference  is  given ;
and  then  again  when  the  ten  tribe*
of  Israel  come  from  the  north  coun-
try, they  will  bring  with  them  their
records  which  they  have  kept  since
|  seven  hundred  and  twenty  years


before  Christ,  which  will  contain  an
account  of  the  hand  dealing  of  God
among  that  lost  people,  which  doubt-
less will  be  exceedingly  interesting
as  well  as  instructive.

Shall  we  stop  here  ?  No,  the
time  will  come  when  this  people  will
become  more  fully  revelators,  and
Prophets,  and  Seers  themselves,  and
the  earth  will  be  filled  with  the
knowledge  of  God,  and  even  out
of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  suck-
lings will  the  Spirit  of  God  reveal
things  that  have  been  kept  secret
from  the  foundation  of  the  world  ;
they  will  utter  forth  the  things  of
God,  helping  to  fill  the  earth  with
the  knowledge  of  God,  as  the  wa-
ters cover  the  great  deep.

We  might  now  stop  and  say  no
more  about  the  bibles  that  are  yet
to  come.  From  what  little  I  have
said,  the  strangers  present  may  be-
;in  to  believe  the  truth  of  that
icripture  which  says,  "  And  there
are  also  many  other  things  which
Jesus  did,  the  which,  if  they  should
be  written  every  one,  I  suppose  that
even  the  world  itself  could  not  con-
tain the  book  that  should  be  writ-
ten/' The  Lord  has  not,  because
of  unbelief  and  wickedness  of  the
people,  permitted  these  things  to
come  forth  to  be  trampled  untler
the  feet,  as  swine  would  trample


jewels  under  their  feet.  But  as
soon  as  the  righteousness  of  the
people  shall  warrant,  he  will  reveal
these  hidden  treasures  of  knowledge,
and  they  will  understand  and  com-
prehend the  great  tilings  of  God  ;
and  not  only  will  records  be  brought
forth,  but  the  minds  of  men,  and
minds  of  women,  and  minds  of  chil-
1  dren,  and  the  minds  of  all  the  peo-
ple who  believe,  will  be  like  a  foun-
tain of  light  and  intelligence,  and
they  will  be  able  to  comprehend  all
records  and  books  inspired  from  on
high.

Sometimes,  when  I  reflect  upon
these  things  in  the  spirit,  it  seems
as  thou <ih  i  can  scarcely  wait  for  the
present  generation  to  pass  away,
without  seeing  the  Latter-day  Saints
in  pos.-t -<sion  of  these  great,  things.
They  will  surely  come !  Rest  as-
sured, Latter-day  Saints,  that  these
things  will  be  fulfilled,  yea,  every
jot  and  tittle  ;  and  every  record  that
God  has  commanded  to  be  kept
among  the  ancient  seers  and  reve-
lators,  will  be  brought  to  light  in
this  last  dispensation,  and  none  need
think  that  the  Lord  is  trifling  with
us,  for  these  things  will  be  made
manifest.

May  God  bless  you  is  my  prayer,
in  the  name  of  Jesus*  Anie*i.


220


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUitSES.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,


Delivered  at  Richfield,  Sevier  County,  Utah,  on  Spsday  Aftkrnoon,

Apkil  22,  1877.


(Reported  hy  Geo.  F.  Gilbs.)


LIVING  ArcoKDING  TO THE LIGHT — TEMPLE WORK — GOOD  COUNSK5

WHAT  SAY  THE  HIGH  PKIESTS  AND  SEVENTIES,


I  am  very  much  gratified  in  the
opportunity  of  appearing  in  this
ho  tine  again.  I  am  disposed  to  say
a  tew  words  to  you.  I  have  not
time  to  instruct  you  in  all  things,
nor  to  Bay  all  I  wish  to  say.  Do
just  as  well  as  you  kno-v  how  in  ail
things,  never  permitting  yourself  to
commit  an  act  unless  the  Spirit  of
Gud  within  you  justfies  you  in  doing
it  And  if  you  live  every  day  of
your  lives  according  to  the  best  light
and  understanding  you  possess,  glo-
rifying God,  our  Heavenly  Father,
just  as  far  as  your  knowledge  extends,
I  will  promise  you  eternal  life  in  the
kingdom  of  God.  This  is  saying  a
great  deal,  it  is  a  very  important
discourse  embodied  in  a  few  words.
The  grand  difficulty  with  the  people
is  they  do  not  do  quite  as  well  as  I  hey
know  how  ;  it  is  that  which  hinders
us  from  accomplishing  the  work
given  us  to  do.

Now  let  me  say  to  you,  my  breth-
ren and  sistora,  if  you  live  according
to  the  light  within  you,  you  will  be
of  one  heart  and  one  mind  ;  your
interests  and  labors  will  be  one,  and
you  will  take  hold  with  all  the  po.ver
God  has  given  you  to  consummate
this  great  and  glorious  work  com*


mitted  to  our  charge.  When  we
become  one  we  shall  have  a  heaven
here  upon  the  earth.  Do  you  think
that  in  t he  family  of  heaven  dwelling
in  the  presence  of  God  there  is  any
jarring,  bickerings,  contentious,  fault-
finding, or  distrust  in  the  Priesthood  ?
No.  It  is  true  we  are  in  a  world  of
darkness,  and  we  have  a  great  many
weaknesses,  temptations  and  annoy-
ances all  tending  to  lend  us  astray.
But  if  we  do  mi  well  as  we  know  how,
we  shall  accomplish  the  work.

1  have  been  spending  the  winter
in  St.  George.  Our  Temple  there
is  finished,  which  is  the  tirst  com-
pleted Temple  built  to  the  name  of
thr*  Most  High,  in  which  the  ordi-
nances for  the  living  and  the  dead
can  be  performed,  since  the  one
built  by  Solomon  in  the  land  of
Jerusalem,  that  we  have  any  know-
ledge of.  The  Nephites  may  h*ive
built  Tern  plus,  and  in  all  probability
they  did,  but  we-  have  no  account
of  them.  We  enjoy  privileges  that
no  other  people  enjoy,  or  have  en-
joyed. In  the  days  of  Solomon,  in
the  Temple  that  he  built  m  the  land
of  Jerusalem,  there  was  confusion
and  bickering  and  strife,  even  to
murder,  and  the  very  man  that  they


LIVING  ACCORDING  TO  THE  LIGHT,  ETC


±21


looked  to  to  give  them  the  keys  of
life  and  solvation,  they  killed  because
he  refused  to  administer  the  ordi-
nance* to  them  when  they  requested
it;  and  whether  they  got  any  of  them
or  not,  this  history  does  noL  suy  any-
thing about.

We  enjoy  the  privilege  of  entering
into  a  Temple,  built  to  the  name  of
God,  and  receiving  the  ordinances
of  his  House,  with  all  the  kaya  and
blessings  preparatory  of  entering  into
the  *'  lives;"  we  also  enjoy  the  privi-
lege of  administering  for  our  fathers
and  mothers,  our  grandfathers  and
grand  mothers,  for  those  who  have  slept
without  the  Gospel

You  chii  understand  why  it  is  that
the  press  of  our  nation  is  so  ready  to
cry  out  against  the  u  Mormons  why
it  is  that  these  poor  Latter-day  Saints
are  not  considered  tit  to  live,  why  they
ought  not  to  enjoy  the  common  bles-
sings of  citizenship,  and  why  the
wicked  would,  if  they  could,  deprive
this  whole  people  of  their  right*  and
privileges,  and  destroy  their  leaders
from  off  the  earth  ?  it  is  evidence
to  all  Latter-day  Saints,  if  they  have
hearts  to  understand,  that  God  is
wilh  this  people,  and  that  the  Evil
One  is  using  the  sarne  means  now,  as
he  always  has  dune,  to  oppose  Him.
We  ought  to  be  thankful  that  we  are
worthy  to  receive  these  persecutions.
And  I  can  promise  you,  that  if  we
exercise  patience  and  faith,  and  attend
faithfully  and  diligently  to  the  work
given  us  to  do  of  the  Father,  that
they  will  work  out  for  us  a  more  ex-
cellent degree  of  glory  and  exaltation.
Consequently  it  becomes  us  to  be
patient,  trusting  in  God  and  the  pro-
mises he  has  made  unto  us.

I  was  about  to  say  to  you,  that  our
labors  during  the  time  I  have  spent
in  St.  George,  are  perfectly  satisfac-
tory to  me;  and  I  believe  we  have
all  the  evidence  we  can  ask  for,  thai
the  Lord  is  satisfied. And  now  that


wo  have  auceeded  so  well  in  building
one  Temple,  we  feel  encouraged  to
<  continue  our  labors  in  the  same  direc-
tion until  we  shall  have  built  and
finished  others*  We  want  to  com-
mence another  one  in  your  region  of
country,  at  Manti ;  aiH  wc  intend  to
lay  out  the  ground  when  we  reach
there  on  our  way  to  the  city.  We
have,  traveling  with  us,  in  our  com-
pany, Elder  Parry,  the  man  who  had
charge  of  the  rock- work  of  the  St*
George  Temple  ;  he  is  on  his  way  to
Manti,  to  work  on  the  Temple  to  lie
built  at  that  place.  We  expect  to  say
to  the  Latter-day  Saiute,  R*ar  tfap.se
walls  forthwith,  and  complete  this
building,  that  you  may  enjuy  the  bles-
sings therein  promised.

Brethren  and  sistars,  live  your  holy
religion  that  the  spirit  of  truth,  of
virtue  and  of  holiness  may  burn  with-
in you,  that  your  only  desire  may  be
to  do  the  will  of  the  Father  in  the
literal  building  up  of  this  his  kingdom
on  the  earth.  Say  your  prayers,  and
increase  your  faith  in  the  Lard  and
in  his  promises  made  to  the  faithful.
Bring  up  your  children  in  the  love
and  fear  of  the  Lord  ;  study  their
dispositions  and  their  temperaments,
and  deal  with  them  accordingly  never
allowing  yourself  to  correct  them  in
the  heat  of  passion  ;  teach  them  to
love  you  rather  than  to  fear  yon,  and
h.'t  it  be  your  constant  care  that  the
children  that  God  has  so  kindly  given
you  are  taught  in  their  early  youth
the  importance  of  the  oracles  of  God,
and  the  beauty  of  the  principles  of  our
holy  religion,  that  when  they  grow  to
the  years  of  man  and  womanhood
they  may  always  cherish  ji  tender
regard  for  them  and  never  forsake  the
truth,  I  do  not  wish  you  to  lay  the
stress  and  importance  upon  outward
ceremonies  that  many  do.  There  ar©
those  belonging  to  what  is  called  the
Mother  Church  who  say  give  thefa
the  care  and  training  of  children  at


ZiZ  JuUKN.U.  ui

from  three  to  seven  years  old,  and  |
they  could  so  ground  them  in  their
faith,  that  they  for  ever  afterwards,
weuld  remain  good  Catholics  The
secret  of  th*ir  great  success  is  no
doabt  in  their  strict  observance  of
outward  ordinances  and  ceremonies.
Bat  while  they  go  to  one  extreme  in
the  observance  of  ceremony,  making
bigots  of  their  children,  (for  one  of
the  earliest  recollections  of  the  child,
who  is  reared  in  Catholicism,  is  the
use  of  the  sign  of  the  cross)  many
of  the  Latter* day  Saints  go  to  the
other,  failing  entirely  to  impress  the
minds  of  their  children  with  that
degree  of  reverence  and  sacredness
that  belongs  to  the  ordinances  of
our  Church.  Parents,  teach  your
children  hy  precept  and  example,
the  importance  of  addressing  the
throne  of  grace  ;  teach  them  how  to
live,  how  to  draw  from  the  elements
the  necessaries  of  life,  and  teach
them  the  laws  of  life  that  they  miy
know  how  to  preserve  themselves
in  health  and  be  able  to  minister  to
others.  And  when  instructing  them
in  the  principles  of  the  Gospel,  teach
them  I  bat  they  are  true,  truth  sent
down  from  heaven  for  our  salvation,
and  that  the  Gospel  incorporates
every  truth  whether  in  heaven,  in
earth,  or  in  hell  j  and  teach  them  too
that  we  hold  the  keys  of  eternal  life,
and  that  they  must  obey  and  observe
the  ordinances  and  laws  pertaining
to  this  holy  Priesthood,  which  God
has  revealed  and  restored  for  the  ex-
altation of  the  children  of  men.

If  I  were  to  ask  the  High  Priesti
of  this  district,  Do  you  pray  in  jour
families  before  going  to  work,  or
before  sit  around  the  breakfast  table  ?


Do  yoa  kneel  down  in  humility  and
meekness,  with  the  faith  that  the
Father  requires  at  your  hands  to  ask
him  in  the  name  of  jesus,  to  bless
and  preserve  and  give  you  grace  ac-
cording to  your  day  ;  and  do  you  do
this  before  retiring  to  bed  ?  Seven-
ties, do  you  call  upon  the  Lord  morn-
ing and  evening  ?  The  Lord  says,
I  will  be  sought  unto  by  my  people
tor  the  blessings  that  they  need.  And
instead  of  our  classing  prayer  among
the  duties  devolving  upon  us  as  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  we  should  live  ao  aa
to  deem  it  one  of  the  greatest  privi-
leges accorded  to  usj  for  were  it  not
for  the  efficacy  of  prayer  what  would
have  become  of  us  both  as  a  people
and  as  individuals  ?

I  do  not  feel  disposed  to  preach  a
lengthy  sermon  to  you,  but  we  feel
in  our  hearts  to  say,  God  blase  yon,
peace  be  to  you,  I  do  not  expect
to  come  to  see  you  as  often  as  I  have
done,  my  health  will  not  permit  of
it.  My  voice  is  go^d,  I  feel  as
though  I  could  make  myself  heard
a  mile  off,  but  my  system  is  almost
worn  out;  jet  I  expect  to  work  right
in  the  harness  until  I  am  called  for
to  go  hence.  I  am  so  thankful  we
have  completed  our  Temple,  it  is  the
greatest  blessing  th-at  could  be  be-
stowed upon  us,  I  know  of  nothing
that  could  equal  it  But  we  are  not
satisfied  with  this  one,  we  must  hurrj
the  building  of  an  ther  one,  and  thus
another  one  and  so  on,  and  perform
the  great  work  therein  that  is  re-
paired at  our  hands.  Let  us  live  so
that  we  may  be  worthy  to  be  owned
of  the  Lord,  and  to  be  received  into
the  fulness  with  him.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  WILFORD  WOODRUFF,


Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Aftkknoon, September  16,  1877*


(Reported  by  Geo,  F.  Gibbs.)


NOT  ASHAMED  OF  THK  GOSPKL  —  THIRTY  YEAKS  PROGRESS  IN  THE
MOU  NTA I N  S — TH  E  IH  >SPEL  UN C II ANG  ABLK — J  OS  KPH  I  N  SPI R  EI) — -PRESI-
DENT YOUNG'S  WORK — WORK  OF  THE  TWELVE  —  LABORS  IN  ST.
GEORGE  TEMPLE— GATHERING  OF  THE  SPIRITS  OF  THE  DEAD.


It  is  with  much  pleasure  and  sa-
tisfaction I  again  stand  before  the
Saints  of  God  in  this  Tabernacle,
A  year  nearly  b^s  passed  since  I  eu^
joyed  this  privilege,  my  labors  hav-
ing been  directed  elsewhere.  What-
ever I  may  say  to  you  depends  en-
tirely upon  the  dictation  of  the  Holy
SpniL  And  I  may  say  that  we  all
seed  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty
to  dictate  us,  whether  we  preach  or
listen,  and  not  only  in  our  public
gatherings  but  in  all  of  our  labors
connected  with  the  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  yes,  just  as  much
as  the  Saints  of  God  did  in  every
past  age  and  dispensation.

I  can  truly  say  as  the  Apostle  Paul
■aid,  "  For  1  am  not  ashamed  of  the
Gospel  of  Christ ;  for  it  is  the  power
of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one
that  believeth."  I  am  not  ashamed
of  what  the  world  is  pleased  to  en II
"Mormonism j"  I  am  not  ashamed
of  any  revelation  that  God  has  given
unto  the  Latter-day  Saints,  through
the  mouth  of  modern  Prophets;  I
am  not  ashamed  to  acknowledge  my-
■elf  a  firm  believer  in  the  literal  ful-
filment of  the  Bible,  as  well  as  every


communication  of  God  to  man,  al-
though I  am  well  aware  that  the
Scriptures  have  been  more  or  less
spiritualized  by  the  whole  Christian
world,  especially  during  the  last
hundred  years.  I  believe  that  holy
men  of  old  wrote  and  spoke  as  they
were  moved  upon  by  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  that  they  meant  what  they  said
and  said  what  they  meant,  and  that
the  Apostle  Paul  spoke  truly  when
he  said,  uthat  no  prophecy  of  the
Scripture  is  of  any  private  interpre-
tation." The  Lord  has  taught  us  in
a  modern  revelation  contained  in
this  book,  the  44  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants," that  it  matters  not  whether
he  speaks  from  heaven  by  his  own
voice,  or  by  the  ministration  of  an-
gels, or  by  the  mouth  of  his  servants
when  they  are  moved  upon  by  the
Holy  Ghost,  it  is  all  the  same  the
mind  and  will  of  God  ;  and  although
the  heavens  and  the  earth  pass  away,
my  words  would  not  fall  unfulfilled.

I  desire  more  particularly  to  ad-
dress myself,  this  afternoon,  to  the
Latter-da^  Saints;  and  at  the  same
time  if  any  of  the  strangers  present
can  receive  any  benefit  from  my  re-


221


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


marks,  I  shall,  be  glad  of  it

Our  position,  to-day,  before  the
heavens  and  the  earth  and  before
each  other,  reminds*  me  of  day*  that,
are  past  and  gone.  Oa  the  1:0th  of
July,  18t7t  I  brought  our  late  Presi-
dent Young  in  my  carriage  through
Emigration  Canyon  into  this  val-
ley, which  was  thfi  first  time  be  set
foot  upon  this  huaL  The  question
has  been  often  asked  by  strangers
who  visit  our  city,  why  did  Brig-
ham  Yoiintr  pick  upon  this  spot  to
build  m  city  ?  Because  it  was  shown
him  before  he  came  here.  But
when  we  came  to  this  country,  what
did  we  6ua  here?  A  barren  desert,
an  barren  as  the  Desert  of  Sahara  ;
and  the  only  signs  of  life  were  a  few
black  crickets.  M>me  cavote  wolves,
and  a  few  poor  wandering  Indians.
To-day  we  may  travel  from  Paris  in
the  north  of  our  Territory  to  St
George  in  the  south,  a  distance  of
some  out)  miles,  and  see  on  ^every
Land towns  and village*,  rj^lfee us,


and  orchards,  fields  ai^'^fcjopf  j  we


behold  a


I


itj


and


happy,  building  their  own  dwelling-
houses*,  meel  ing-honses,  school-houses,
tabernacles  anil  Temples,  and  im>
provements  and  enterprises  are  dm.
stantly  going  on.  And  all  this
within  so  short  a  time.  What  does
this  mean  ?  What  does  it  bespeak
to  the  strangers  who  visit  our  Terri-
tory, and  in  tact  to  the  whole  world,
and  t)  heavenly  as  welt  as  mortal
beings  ?  It  is  evidence  that  God
has  set  his  hand  to  fulfil  the  predic-
tion contained  in  the  Bible,  that  he
has  commenced  the  work  of  uniting
the  record  or  stick  of  Joseph  with
that  of  Judah;  that  the  set  time
has  come  tor  him  to  favor  Zion.
And  how  have  these  things  come
to  pass  and  whflt  was  the  origin
of  this  peculiar  system  that  presents
itself  now  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth }  which  found  a  resting-place  in


♦he  wilds  of  this  tfrsolate,  uninhabited
I  md,  and  which  lias  already  produced
such  marvellous  results?  [■  w;is
per  formed  in  a  very  singular  manner^
io  begin  with.  As  the  Lord  ever  has
done  in  attempting  to  establish  his
rule  and  govern  men  t  ou  the  earth,
he  chose  the  weak  things  of  the
earth,  and  theni  he  will  use  to  con-
found the  wisdom  of  the  wise.  Pie
manifested  hiitiself  to  n  boy  in  his
teens,  and  a  I. so  sent  an  angel  *o
him  on  several  occasions,  in  fulfil-
ment of  the  re  vein  i  ion  to  John  the
Revel  a  tor,  and  of  the  inspired  words
of  many  other  Piophets  and  Apostles
who  have  spoken  concerning  the
marvellous  work  and  wonder  of  the
latter-days.  But  says  the  world,
14  We  do  not,  believe  that."  We  un-
derstand thai  perfectly  well ;  we  do

not  expect  you  to  receive  the  Gospel
of  the  Son  of  God  with  the  same
read  mens  thar  von  believe  the  false-
hoods  and  misrepresentations  that
are  constantly  made  ai  ont  it.  The
world  ever  has  opposed  it,  and  we
expect  to  meet  all  manner  of  opposi-
tion until  the  tiii^l  triumph  of  right
over  wrong,  of  truth  over  error.  We
might  commence  with  far  her  Adam
and  trace  it  down  to  the  present  time,
and  we  would  find  that  the  same
spirit  of  opposition  and  of  persecu-
tion followed  the  people  of  God  in
every  age,  as  exist  a  to  day  h  gainst
us,  as  a  people.  And  so  natural  is
it  for  the  devil  to  oppose  every  move
that  the  Lord  makes  towards  re-
claiming and  redeeming  the  earth,
that  men  are  often  found  to  de-
nounce the  *'  Mormon*"  and  their
religion  when  they  know  nothing
either  of  us  or  our  tenets  The  Sa-,
vior  of  tiie  world  himself  was  de-
nounced as  a  deceiver,  as  an  im  poster  £
why?  Because  those  who  raised
this  cry  against  him  knew  him  not,
and  those  who  re- echoed  it  took  not
the  trouble  to  ascertain  whether  it


NOT  ASHAMED  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


225


was  true  or  false*  And  it  has  been
precisely  in  the  same  way  that  the
names  of  Joseph  Smith  and  Brig-
ham  Toun^  have  been  had  for  evil
by  the  masses  of  this  enlightened
age.  The  Savior  said  of  those  that
rejected  him,  that  he  was  hated  by
them  because  he  tea  titled  of  their
works,  which  were  evil.  And  so
verily  it  mifirhi  be  said  of  thorn*  who
decry  against  the  men  \\\u\  in  this
respect  have  not  been  more  favored
than  their  Master.  Through  them
light  has  dawned  upon  the  world,
and  because  men  choose  dnrkne^a
rather  than  light,  their  deeds  being
evil,  they  find  their  opposite  in
"  Mormom'sni,"  and  in  all  those  who
faithfully  adhere  to  it  and  advocate

Through  this  boy,  inexperienced
and  unlearned  ad  he  whs,  the  L  >rd
organized  this  Church  on  the  6th
day  of  April,  IS  0,  with  only  six
members;  and  it  can  be  sud  of  him
as  of  no  other  man  in  Christendom,
that  he  was  the  instrument  in  the
hands  of  God  of  presenting  to  the
world  a  system  of  religion,  aChur:h
organization  complete  with  all  the
keys  and  powers  of  the  Holy  Priest-
hood, and  that  through  him  has
been  imparted  to  the  religious  world
more  light  and  knowledge  than  all
the  prof  I  ssors  of  religion  combined,
with  all  their  boasted  intelligence
and  learning.  And  when  be  pub-
lished to  the  world  this  new  yet  old
doctrine,  even  the  everlasting  Gus-
jwl,  it  was  (bund  to  agree  precisely
with  that  taught  by  the  Savior,  and
the  Church  organization  was  after
the  same  pattern  as  the  one  insti-
tuted by  Him,  although  the  Gospel
had  not  been  preached  since  it  was
driven  away  from  the  earth  by  the
iron  band  of  persecution.  One  of
the  peculiar  features  in  the  faith  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  is  that  we  be-
lieve there  is  but  one  Gospel,  that

No.  15,


there  never  has  been  nor  never  will  be
any  other,  and  that  that  Gospel  never
changes  from  one  generation  to  ano-
ther, and  that  it  consists  of  the  sim-
ple principles  taught  by  the  Savior
and  o  mtained  in  the  Sew  Testament,
which  principles  never  deviate  one
from  another.  The  first  was  faith
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  the  se-
cond was  baptism  in  water  by  im-
mersion for  the  remission  of  sins,
and  then  the  laying  on  of  hands  for
the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost  j
and  this  was  the  kind  of  doctrine
taught  hy  Christ  and  his  Apostles,
;t  nd  this  was  the  floe  trine  that  »L-
si'ph  Smith  preached.  In  doing  so
he  stood  alone  ml  t  he  world,  and  ha
had  to  meet  the  traditions  of  eighteen
hundred  years,  traditions  which  had
been  handed  down  from  generation
to  generation,  which  were  entirely
opposed  to  the  doctrine  which  the
Lord  hud  revealed  to  him,  and  wh^ch
he  was  commanded  to  preach.  Yon
an  I  I  jtfern  taught  from  our  youth
that  there  was  no  such  thing  as  new
revelation,  it  was  all  done  away  j
and  tliis  same  tradition  is  beipg  im-
bibed by  the  youth  of  Christendom
to  the  present  time.  Abk  the  min-
isters, the  men  to  whom  people  look
as  their  spiritual  guides,  why  they  da
not  enjoy  t  he  gifts  and  graces  and  the
light  of  revelation  from  heaven,  and
wrist  is  the  universal  reply  ?  It  is
in  substance,  '*  Oh,  these  things  are
alt  done  away,  they  are  no  longer
needed  ;  it  was  necessary  that  they
should  exist  in  the  dark  ages  of  the
world  but  not  in  thtse  days  of  the
blaze  of  Gospel  light"  Whenever
God  had  s  Church  upon  the  eartb-
these  gifts  were  enjoyed  by  the  peo-
ple. The  sick  were  healed  uf  tbeir
sickness,  the  lame  were  made  to  walk,
the  blind  to  see,  the  dumb  to  speak,
etc,  through  the  administrations
ot  those  among  them  who  held  the
Priesthood,  which  authorises  men

Vol.  XIX ,


226  - JOURNAL  UF

to  ict  in  the  name  of  the  Lord ;  and
without  it  no  man  ever  did  or  ever
c»n  officiate  in  the  ordinances  of  the
Horn**  of  God. And  I  can  r  ot  Ik
lievr  that  there  is  an  honest- hearted
ni&Q anywhere  who  possesses  any
portion  of  the  spirit  of  the  Lord,  and
who  Ijhm  any  faith  in  the  revelation*
of  God,  who  can  he] i eve  that  men,
whether  of  kigh  or  humble  birr
learned  or  on  learned,  would  be  di-
Tinely  called  to  minister  in  the  things
of  God,  unless  they  were  endowed
from  on  high  with  the  same  power
that  the  ancient  Apostles  possessed.

Well,  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith
lived  fourteen  year  a  after  he  had
organized  the  Church  ;  and  during
that  time  t he  work  spread  over  the
United  States,  and  to  some  of  the
foreign  nations  ami  islands  of  the
sea.  And  when  lie  had  done  this,  he
bad  a  mission  the  other  side  of  the
Tail,  as  well  as  this.  Here  n^ain  we
widely  differ  from  other  religious
denominations.  Ah  I  before  intimate  1,
the  world  of  mankind  do  not  compre-
hend u  Mor  monism  tlie  people  are
as  ignorant  of  the  Gospel  to-day  hs
Nicodemus  was  when  he  inquired  of
the  Savior  what  he  should  do  to  be
saved.  And  I  will  here  say  that  the
answer  which  Jesus  made  him  in  that
early  day  is  strictly  applicable  to  all
who  are  now  seeking  the  same  infor-
mation. 41  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto
thee,  except  a  man  be  burn  again,  he
cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God/*
And  no  man  from  Father  Adam  to
the  present  time  ever  understood  the
principled  of  the  Gospel,  unless  he
received  the  testimony  of  Jesus
through  obedience  thereto.

We  are  living  in  the  dispensation
which  Daniel  saw  in  prophetic  vision,
when  the  kingdom  of  God  was  to
be  established  upon  the  earth,  whose
dominion  is  to  have  no  end,  and
when  the  greatness  of  the  kingdom
is  to  be  given  to  the  Saints  of  the


Most  HiLfh,  to  possess  it  for  ever  and
ever.  Who  nr**  ihe  Saints  of  God,
i  may  n>k  : Everv  In  nest  soul  who

m  mi

on  hearing  the  Gospel  preached,  re-
ceives  it  And  obeys  it,  and  uses  his
energies  to  consummate  its  establish-
ment upon  f  lie  eiir  h.

The  Prophet  Joseph  was  moved
;  upon  by  divine  inspiration  in  tin*
establishment  of  this  Church,  And
|  before  his  death  he  called  the  Twelve
Apostles  together,  whom  he  had
called  to  the  ministry  by  revelation,
intimating  that  he  was  going  to
leave  them,  that  lie  would  shortly
be  called  home  to  rest  And  he
talked  with  them  and  instructed
them  for  weeks  and  months  in  tin*
ordinances  aud  laws  of  the  Go*]iel ;
and  he  sealed  ui*mi  their  heads  all
the  Priesthood,  keys  and  powers
that  had  been  com! erred  upon  him
by  the  angels  of  God.  And  then,
in  addressing  them  I  e  said,  "  Breth-
ren, no  matter  what  becomes  of  me,
or  what  my  late  may  be,  you  ha\e
got  to  round  up  your  shoulders  and
bear  of  this  kingdom;  the  lind  of
heaven  requires  it  at  your  bauds.  I
have  desire  1,"  said  he,  "to  see  the
Temple  complete  J,  but  I  shall  not
be  spared  to  see  it,  but  you  will."
Although  he  spoke  so  plainly  to  us,
intimating  that  his  end  drew  near,
we  could  no  more  get  it  into  our
hearts  that  he  was  going  to  be  mar-
tyred, any  more  than  the  Apostles
could  comprehend  the  meaning  of
the  Savior  when  he  told  them  he
was  going  away,  and  that  if  he  did
not  leave  them,  the  Com  orter  could
not  come.  When  the  Messiah  was
crucified  his  followers  felt  sorrowful
and  disappointed,  because  they  ex-
pected him  to  release  them  and
their  nation  from  the  Romish  yoke.
And  so  helpless  did  they  feel  them-
selves when  denied  his  society,  that
even  Peter,  the  first  among  the
Apostles,  proposed  that  they  return


Nol"  AS  HAM  Kit  U. IUK  IhiSrhL,  h'R.


to  their  nets,  that  instead  of  pur-
suing the  high  ealling  of  "  fishery
of  men,"  that  they  again  become
common  fishermen.  They  compre-
hended not  the  words  of  the  Savior
to  them.  But  after  his  death,  he
appeared  to  them,  and  they  began
to  understand  then  what  he  had
previously  told  them.  We  did  not
understand  either  what  Joseph
meant  when  he  told  us  he  was  going
to  be  taken  away.  But  so  it  was,
and  when  it  came,  we  knew  too  u  ell
his  meaning,  for  sorrow  and  gloom
rested  upon  all  Israel,  The  question
may  be  asked,  Why  was  this  net  es-
sary  ?  There  may  be  more  than  one
reason;  one,  however,  id,  the  dis-
pensation already  ushered  in  is  the
dispensation  of  the  fullness  of  times  •
and  like  preceding  ones,  the  men
who  have  been  called  upon  to  open
them  up,  had  to  seal  their  testimony
w  ith  their  blood,  Joseph  had  to  do
the  same.  But  those  who  took  his
life,  and  those  who  assented  to  it,
will  have  to  pay  the  bill.  He  held
the  keys  of  the  Priesthood,  and  bad
a  work  to  perform  in  the  spirit  world,
as  Jesus  had.  When  he  was  put  to
death,  and  while  his  body  lay  in
the  tomb,  lie  went  to  the  spirit
world  to  introduce  the  Gospel  to  the
spirits  there,  that  they  might  have
the  opportunity  of  either  receiving
or  rejecting  it,  and  be  judged  ac
cording  to  men  in  the  Heslh  And
it  will  be  the  privilege  of  every  sun
and  daughter  of  Adam,  sometime
of  their  life,  either  in  the  body  or
in  the  spirit,  to  hear  the  glad
tidings  of  great  joy  proclaimed  to
them,  for  God  is  just  and  is  no
respeetor  of  persons.  Joseph,  then,
standing  at  the  head  of  this  dispen-
sation holds  the  keys  of  the  Priest-
hood pertaining  to  this  time,  and  it
^vas  a  duty  that  the  God  of  heaven
required  of  him  to  open  up  the
Gospel  to  those  in  the  spirit  world


who  had  not  received  it  And
there  is  no  greater  duty  resting
upon  the  Latter-day  Saints  to-day
than  that  of  building  Temples,  and
officiating  therein  for  the  dead  as
well  as  the  living.  Said  Paul,  in
support  of  this  doctrine,  -4  Else
what  shall  they  do  which  are  bap-
tized for  the  dead,  if  the  dead  rise
not  at  all  ?  Why  are  they  then
baptized  for  the  dead  f  There  is
no  doubt  or  obscurity  in  the  minds
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  respecting
this  principle,  it  has  been  made
plain  unto  our  understanding  by
the  light  of  revelation.  The  Ad-
versary, well  knowing  the  nature
and  importance  of  the  mission  of
this  Prophet  of  God,  put  it  into  the
hearts  of  wicked  men  to  kill  him,
and  in  taking  his  life  they  thought
they  were  putting  an  end  to  i4  Aior-
mouisin."  They  reasoned  from
their  human  standpoint,  for  such
might  have  been  the  case  if  this
work  were  the  creation  of  man.  But
the  hind  of  God  was  over  him  and
the  work  that  he  established,  and
it  is  his  work  and  he  directs  it  and
those  who  want  to  find  fault  with
it,  or  any  part  of  it,  should  enter
complaint  against  God,  fur  he  is  its
Author  ;  we  are  merely  the  instru-
ments in  his  hands  in  carrying  it  oil
After  the  martyrdom  of  our  be-
loved Prophet,  the  Twelve  Apostles
stepped  forward,  in  the  magnitude
of  their  calling,  and  assumed  the
Presidency  of  the  Church,  and,  as
a  Quorum,  they  led  it,  with  Pre-
sident Young  as  President  of  that
Quorum,  for  several  years  before
there  was  an  organization  of  the
First  Presidency ;  and  w  hen  this
organization  was  effected,  with  Brig-
ham  Young  as  President  of  the
Church,  lie  continued  to  preside  for
the  space  of  thirty-three  years,  un-
til the  time  of  his  death,  notwith-
standing the  combined  efforts  of  the


Adversary  and  wicked  men  to  de-
stroy him  from  off  the  earth,  His
works  are  before  you ;  they  are  be-
fore the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and
all  men.  The  entire  Territory  bears
marks  of  his  genius  and  enterprise;
and  the  Lord  certainly  crowned
his  labors  with  success,  as  he  has
blessed  the  labors  of  his  brethren
wlio  have  not  spared  their  hands
or  their  hearts  in  assisting  him.
And  instead  of  the  work  of  the
latter -day  stopping,  or  its  progress
being  retarded  in  consequence  of
the  death  of  our  beloved  President,
it  will  move  forward  with  accelerated
speed,  until  Zion  arises  in  beauty,
and  power,  and  dominion,  in  fulfil-
merit  of  the  inspired  words  of>  Pro-
phets and  Seers  who  have  spoken,
and  who,  while  wrapt  in  heavenly
vision,  saw  our  day.

It  cannot  he  a  verv  creat  while
before  many  of  us  will  follow  him.
I  have  traveled  with  him  for  some
forty -four  years  of  my  life,  and
during  those  years  I  have  never
known  him  to  waver  or  Hindi  in
toe  performance  of  his  duties.  He
has  performed  an  honorable  mission
to  earth,  and  while  his  body  sleeps
bis  spirit  lives,  and  he  continues
his  labors,  strengthening  the  hands
of  Joseph,  and  Hyrum,  and  Jede-
diah,  and  Heber,  and  George  A.,
and  all  those  who  have  been  true
and  faithful  to  God  and  to  man
while  upon  the  earth,  who  are  now
engaged  in  the  same  great  cause  of
redemption  and  salvation.  Although
President  Young  has  finished  his
earthly  career  and  mission  to  this
earth,  the  work  has  only  commenced.
Tiie  Gospel  must  be  thoroughly  and
faithfully  preached  to  every  nation
under  heaven,  and  the  Lord  holds
us  responsible,  for  verily  the  trust
lias  been  imposed  upon  us,  and  it
behooves  us  to  see  to  it.  I  have
traveled  more  or  less  for  the  last


forty  years,  without  purse  or  scrip,
and  1  have  been  sustained  by  the
hand  of  the  Lord,  and  so  have  my
brethren.  Our  Elders  who  are  called
constantly  from  the  plow  and  the
workshops  to  go  forth  into  the  world
and  preach  tin*  tiospel,  traveling
from  place  to  place  on  foot,  without
purse  or  scrip,  and  although  they  are
not  trained  in  colleges  or  seminaries
of  learning,  yet  they  are  sustained
and  enabled  to  cope  with  the  learned
and  wise,  and  the  honest  in  heart
receive  their  testimonv«  which  is
accompanied  by  the  Spirit  of  God,
and  the  Holy  tihost.

Before  I  close,  I  want  to  say  one
thing  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  a  Inch
is  resting  upon  my  mind.  President
Young  having  now  passed  away,  his
labors  with  us  have  ceased  for  the
present.  He,  with  his  brethren,
built  and  completed  one  Temple,,
also  laid  the  foundation  for  one  at
Mauti  and  one  at  Logan,  and  besides
a  great  deal  of  work  has  been  done
on  the  one  in  this  city.  He  left  this
unfinished  work  for  us  to  carry  on  to
completion;  and  it  is  our  duty  to
rise  up  and  build  these  Temples.  I
look  upon  this  portion  of  our  min-
istry as  a  mission  of  as  much  import-
ance as  preaching  to  the  living  ;  the
dead  will  hear  the  voice  of  the  ser-
vants of  God  in  the  spirit-world,
and  they  cannot  come  forth  in  the
morn  in"  of  the  resurrection,  unless
certain  ordinances  are  performed,
for  and  in  their  behalf,  in  Temples
built  to  the  name  of  God  It  takes
just  as  much  to  save  a  dead  man  as
a  living  man.  For  the  last  eighteen
hundred  years,  the  people  that  have
lived  and  passed  away  never  heard
the  voice  of  an  inspired  man,  never
h**ard  a  Gospel  sermon,  until  they
entered  the  spirit-world.  Somebody
has  got  to  redeem  them,  by  per-
forming such  ordinances  for  them
in  the  flesh  as  they  cannot  attend


NOT  ASHAMED  OF  THE  GOSFEL,  ETC.


to  themselves  in  the  spirit,  and
in  order  that  this  work  may  be
done*  we  must  have  Temples  in
which  to  do  it ;  and  what  I  wish  to
say  to  you,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
is  that  the  God  of  heaven  requires
us  to  rise  up  and  build  them,  that
the  work  of  redemption  may  be
hastened.  Our  re  wan  I  will  meet  us
when  we  go  behind  the  vail.

t£  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die
in  the  Lord  from  henceforth  :  Yea,
saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  may  rest
from  their  labors  ;  and  their  works
do  follow  them/'

We  have  labored  in  the  St,  George
Temple  since  January,  and  we  have
done  all  we  could  there  ;  and  the
Lord  has  stirred  up  our  minds,  and
many  things  have  been  revealed  to
us  concerning  the  dead,  President
Young  has  said  to  us,  and  it  is  verily
•o,  if  the  dead  could  they  would  speak
in  language  loud  as  ten  thousand
thunders,  ealling  upon  the  servants
of  God  to  rise  up  and  build  Tem-
ples, magnify  their  calling  and  re-
deem their  dead.  This  doubtless
sounds  strange  to  those  present  who
believe  not  the  faith  and  doctrine  of
the  Latter-day  Saints ;  but  when
we  get  to  the  spirit- wo  rid  we  will
find  out  that  all  that  God  has  revealed
is  true.  We  will  find,  too,  that
everything  there  is  reality,  and  that
God  has  a  body,  parts  and  passions,
and  the  erroneous  ideas  that  exist
now  with  regard  to  him  will  have
passed  away,  1  feel  to  say  little  else
to  the  Latter-day  Saints  wherever
and  whenever  I  have  the  opportu-
nity of  speaking  to  them,  than  to
call  upon  them  to  build  these  Tem-
ples now  under  way,  to  hurry  them
up  to  completion.  The  dead  will
be  after  you,  they  will  seek  after
you  as  they  have  after  us  in  St .  George,
They  called  upon  us,  knowing  that
we  held  the  keys  and  power  to  re-
deem them.


I  will  here  say,  before  closing,
that  two  weeks  before  I  left  3k
George,  the  spirits  of  the  dead  gath-
ered around  me,  wan  tin  if  to  know
why  we  did  not  redeem  them.  Said
they,  41  You  have  had  the  use  of
the  Endowment  House  for  a  num-
ber of  years,  and  yet  nothing  has
ever  been  done  for  us.  We  laid
the  foundation  of  the  government
you  now  enjoy,  and  we  never  apos-
tatized from  it,  but  we  remained
true  to  it  and  were  faithful  to  God,"
These  were  the  signers  of  the  De-
claration of  Independence,  and  they
waited  on  me  for  two  days  and  two
nights.  I  thought  it  very  singular,
that  notwithstanding  so  much  work
had  been  done,  and  yet  nothing
had  been  done  for  them.  The
thought  never  entered  my  heart,
from  the  fact,  I  suppose,  that  here-
tofore our  minds  were  reaching  after
our  more  immediate  friends  and
relatives.  I  straightway  went  into
the  baptismal  font  and  called  ujk>u
brother  MeCallister  to  baptize  me
for  the  signers  of  tile  Declaration
of  Independence,  and  fifty  other
eminent  men,  making  one  hundred
in  all,  including  John  Wesley,  Col-
umbus, and  others  ;  I  theu  baptized
him  for  every  President  of  the  Uni-
ted States,  except  three ;  and  wlien
their  c;  ; -••  is  just,  somebody  will
do  the  work  for  them.

I  have  felt  to  rejoice  exceedingly
in  this  work  of  redeeming  the  dead.
I  do  not  wonder  at  President  Young
saying  he  felt  moved  upon  to  call
upon  the  Latter-day  Saints  to  hurry
up  the  building  of  these  Temples.
He  felt  the  importance  of  the  work;
but  now  he  has  gone,  it  rests  with
us  to  continue  it,  and  God  will  bless
our  labors  and  we  will  have  joy
therein.  This  is  a  preparation  rie$
cessary  for  tlie  second  advent  of  the
Savior  ;  and  when  we  shall  have
built  the  Temples  now  contemplated,


230


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


we  will  then  begin  to  see  the  neces
sity  of  building  others,  for  in  pro-
portion to  the  diligence  of  our  labors
in  this  direction,  will  we  comprehend
the  extent  of  the  work  to  be  done,
and  the  present  i*  only  a  beginning.
When  the  Savior  conies,  a  thousand
years  will  be  devoted  to  this  work
of  redemption  ;  and  Temples  will
appear  all  over  this  land  of  Joseph,
— North  and  South  America — and
also  in  Europe  and  elsewhere  ;  and


all  the  descendants  of  Shem,  Ham,
and  Japheth  who  received  not  the
Gospel  in  the  flesh,  must  be  offi-
ciated for  in  the  Temples  of  God,
before  the  Savior  can  present  the
kingdom  to  the  Father,  saying,  44  It
is  finished/'

May  God  continue  to  bless  us,
and  guide  and  direct  our  labors,  is
my  prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELD  UK GKO. Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Morning,  (Xtobkr  8,  1877.


(Reported  hy  Geo,  F.  Gibbs.)


AN  IMPORTANT  CONFERENCE— THK  DEATH  OF  JOSEPH  AND  THE  DEATH
OF  BRIGHAM — THE  KEYS  OF  THE  AFOSTLESH IP— REVELATION  FOR.
THE  GUIDANCE  OF  THE  CHURCH  COMES  THROUGH  THE  HEAD — AS  TO
THE  FIRST  PRESIDENCY.


( >ur  Conference  ii  t  most  important
one,  one  that  doubtless  will  be  long
remembered  by  those  who  have  par-
ticipated  in its dtlibt  rations  and
actions. It  is  not  often  that  we,  as  a
people,  have  been  called  upon  to  pass
through  such  circumstances  as  those
which  liavr  surrormded  us  for  the  past
four  or  five  weeks. Twice  in  our
history,  during  the  paat  forty-seven
and  a  half  years,  hare  we  been  called
to  mourn  (he  loss  of  him  who  lias  h>*\
the  cause  of  th«  Holy  Priesthood
opon  the  earth* At  both  times  the


hJovr  has  fallen,  it  may  be  said,  unex-
pectedly npon  us;  it  was  particularly
so  at  the  martyrdom  of  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith,  for  lie  had  passed
through  so  many  dificulties,  and  had
so  many  narrow  escapes,  and  so  many
deliverances  from  perils  of  th«  most
menacing  character,  that  the  Latter*
day  Saints  had  heen  led  to  regnrd
him  as  almost  invulnerahle,  and  that
his  life  would  be  spared  to  a  good  old
age,  if  not  to  the  winding  up  scene.
His  martyrdom,  then,  fell  as  a  very
unexpected  blow  upon  the  people.  It


AN  IMPORTANT  CONFERENCE,  ETC


a  dreadful  shock,  for  which  a
great  bulk  of  t he  Latter-day  Saints
were  unprepared,  It  is  true  that
mnny  were  warned,  especially  those
who  were  abroad  among  the  nations
pr*m»hing  j  they  had  dreams  and
manifestations  of  the  Spirit  concern-
i 1 1 jjf  the  terrible  cil-t  iity.  Bu!:  those
at  home  were  scarce  ly  prepared,  Evi-
dences came  s<i  quickly,  one  after
another,  that  there  was  scarcely  an
idf»a  among  the  people  that  hii  arreet,
or  his  deli  vering  himself  up  as  lie  did,
would  terminate  in  such  a  catastrophe.
The  Church  itself  was  so  unprepared,
by  any  pre*  ous  experience,  for  the
steps  that  were  necessary  to  carry  on
the  work  that  the  Lord  had  establish-
ed, and  of  which  he  had  been  the
instrument

I  well  remember  the  feelings  that
were  experienced  upm  that  occasion  ;
how  men's  minds  wondered,  and  the
■urmises  that  were  indulged  in  ;  the
guesses,  the  anticipations,  some  think-
rn^  one  man  would  be  chosen,  and
ot hers  that  some  one  else  would  be.
Many  of  the  people  were  at  an  entire
lo$8  to  know  who  would  take  charge
ot  the  Church  affairs,  And  while
they  were  not  satisfied  with  Sidney
Rigdon,  nor  his  preaching,  nor  his
propositions  ;  a  great  many  were  un-
decided in  their  minds  as  to  who
would  be  the  leader,  or  who  would
have  the  right  to  stand  at  the  head,
When  the  Twelve  returned  and  their
voices  were  heard  in  t  he  midst  of  the
people;  when  President  Young  stood
before  the  congiegation  arid  ap^e  to
the  people,  doubt  and  uncertainty  and
every  kindred  feeling  vanished,  and
every  one  who  had  a  sufficient  portion
of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  recognized
in  him  th man  whom  the  L  >rd  hud

i

chosen  to  lead  and  guide  Ids  people,
instead  of  the  martyred  Prophet,

For  the  first  time  in  the  history  of
the  Church,  the  Twelve  Apostles
btepped  forward  an-1  took  the  charge


of  affaire,  by  the  authority  of  the
Apostleship,  and  the  authority  which
they  had  received  from  the  Prophet
Joseph.  And  for  a  little  rising  of
three  years  they  led  and  guided  the
Church,  until  the  Lord  inspired  his
servant  Brigham,  to  wrganize  a  First
Presidency  of  the  Church,  This  ex-
perience has  been  most  valuable  to  us
under  our  present  circumstances.  Men
have  looked  back  to  the  past  ;  they
have  remembered  what  was  done  at
the  period  to  which  I  refer,  and  doubt
uncertainty  and  hesitation  have  not
existed  to  any  extent  ;  in  fact,  have
not  existed  at  all  in  the  minds  of
those  of  long  experience  in  the  Church.
The  Twelve  Apostles  have  the  au-
thority to  lead  and  guide,  to  manage
and  direct  the  affairs  of  the  Church,
beiutr  the  Quorum  standing  next  to
the  First  Presidency.  Naturally  it
falls  to  them  to  step  forward  once
more  »nd  assume  the  direction  and
control,  to  dictate  and  counsel  and  to
regulate,  so  far  as  may  be  necessary,
every  thisg  connected  with  the  organ-
ization of  the  people,  and  the  proclam-
ation of  the  Gospel  among  the  nations
of  the  earth*

Although  the  blow  has  been  a  heavy
one,  and  has  fallen  unexpectedly  upon
us,  it  see  mod  to  me,  during  the  past
summer,  in  watching  President  Young,
in  listening  to  him,  iu  associating
with  him,  that  he  had  obtained  a  new
lease  of  life.  He  had  not  been  able
to  speak  for  year*  in  public  assem-
blies with  the  ease  to  himself  that  he
had  done  since  the  last  winter  It
seemed  that  he  had  overcome  his
weakness,  a  weakness  of  the  stomach
f  rom  which  lie  suffered  when  he  spoke
to  large  congregations,  and  his  bodi-
ly health  appeared  to  be  as  perfect  as
it  could  be  for  a  man  of  hisagu  ;  this
being  the  case,  it  was  a  very  unex-
pec  ted  thing  tor  him  to  pass  off  so
suddenly.  But  in  looking  back  at
the  circumstances  that  surrounded


132


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSE*.


him  and  that  surrounded  the  Church,
and  the  labors  that  were  so  essential
for  him  to  perform,  we  can  now
understand  whj  it  was  that  lie  was
so  greatly  strengthened,  that  ho  hnd
such  vigor  not  only  in  speaking,  but  1
in  performing-  the  labors  of"  traveling
and  visiting  the  various  settlements,
that  he  enjoved. 1  do  not  believe
myself  that,  Pros! dent  Young  could
have  felt  as  happy,  as  I  know  he  dues
feel,  had  he  left  the  Church  in  the
condition  it  was  in  when  he  com-
menced his  labors  last  spring, I  am
convinced  that  it  has  added  greatly
to  his  satisfaction; it  has  been  h
fitting  consummation  to  the  labors  of
his  long  life  that  he  should  he  spired
to  organize  the  Church  throughout,
these  valleys  in  the  manner  in  which
it  no  v  is  organized. It  was  remark-
ed by  brother  Pratt,  in  his  discourse,
that  at  no  time  since  the  first  organ-
ization of the Church have  the
Latter-day  Saint*  been  so  well  organ-
ized ;  everything  set  in order  so
completely  as  we  now  see  them.  This
is  his  experience  and  his  testimony  ;
and  you  know  he  has  been  familiar
with  the  Church  from  nearly  the  first
%  of  its  organization to  the  presem
time. And  I  believe  this  would  be
the  testimony  of  every  man  of  years
belonging  to  the  Church. And  I  am
thankful  this day that  President
Young  was  spared  to  accomplish  this
work,  that  the  Lord  gave  him  the
bodily  vigor  and  the  mental  capacity
^sufficient  to  enable  him  to  close  up  the
labors  of  his  earthly  career  in  so  fit-
ting a  manner.

#  H«  has  marked  out  the  path  for
the  Twelve  to  pursue.  And  1  was  a
number  of  times  impressed  during  the
summer  that  the  spirit  he  possessed
in  relation  to  these  matters  impelled
him  to  hurry  them  up,  and  have
everything  attended  to  quickly;  al-
most a  feeling  of  restlessness  was
manifested  by  him  (which  was  so  con-


trary  to  his  usual  calmness  of  manner),
to  have  the  work  of  organization
completed.  I  have  been  reminded  a
number  of  times  of  the  same  spirit
that  rested  upon  tin-  Prophet  Jose  ph  ;
he  seemingly  ould  not  rest,  he  was
constantly  stir  ring  up  and  urging  the
Twelve  to  step  forward  an  i  assume
the  responsibility  that  lay  npon  thorn,
and  to  impart  to  t  he  people  i  he  know.
U>d:>e  that  theLn-d  had  given  to  him,
and  to  befit ow  upon  the  servants  of
God  the  keys  and  the  authority  of
the  holy  Priesthood  in  its  fulness*
And  President  Young  manifested  the
an  me  spirit.  He  lived  to  receive
Eider  Taylor  and  the  brethren  of  the
Twelve  who  accompanied  him  after
their  return  from  organizing  the  last,
of  the4' Stakes  of  Zion,  and  to  confer
with  them.  In  a  few  hours  atterwarda
lie  took  his  exit.

At  no  time  probably  in  the  his-
tory of  the  Church  have  the  Saints
been  so  calm  and  so  serene,  mani-
festing so  little  concern  in  relation
to  the  way  not  iters  should  go,  and
the  at! airs  of  the  Church  be  con-
ducted,  as  they  have  on  tins  occa-
sion. It  hnB  seemed  as  though  the
Lord  has  prepare d  the  people  tor
these  things  He  has  poured  out
upon  us  the  spirit  of  union  that  has
not  been  enjoyed,  probably,  to  SO
great  an  extent  at  any  time  in  our
history.  There  are  great  labors
assigned  to  all  of  us  in  every  depart-
ment of  the  Priesthood.  It  we  take
np  the  work  and  carry  it.  fur  wind  in
the  spirit  with  which  it  has  been
committed  to  us  by  him,  now  that
he  has  gone  from  our  midst,  the
Lord  will  continue  to  be  with  us,  and
to  bless  us  as  he  did  him.  For  He
was  with  hi tii  all  his  life  ;  He  was
with  him  in  counseling  the  people;
He  was  with  him  in  prophecy ing
to  the  people,  and  in  teaching  them
and  directing  them  in  their  tempo  ial
as  well  as  their  spiritual  labors.  And


AN  IMPORTANT  CONFERENCE,  ETC.


235


the  Lord  crowned  his  life  with  sue-
cess,  and  his  labors  with  blessing;
and  they  who  sustained  him  ftnd
obeyed  his  counsel  have  been  pros*
pered  in  every  instance ;  and  when
they  received  I  he  counsel  in  a  proper
spirit,  and  carried  it  out  as  'it  was
given  to  them,  they  and  the  Church
prospered  u nder  his  presidency  and
administration;  and  it  has  gone
forth  in  power  and  majesty,  mid  in
«  ich  a  way  as  to  brin*r  conviction  to
the  hearts  of  thousands  of  people  that
there  is  n  power  connected  with  this
system  called  4t  Mormoiiisui,*'  iwt
comprehensible  to  any  who  do  not
view  ir  by  the  Spirit  of  Go;i  I  feel
that  we,  as  a  people,  should  take
hold  of  this  work  ;  that  we,  as  Apos-
tles, that  we,  as  Seventies,  and  as
High  Priests,  as  Elders-,  a.n  Pries' s,
Teachrrs  and  Deacons,  should  take
hold  of  this  work  in  earnestness  and
in  zeal,  and  carry  it  tor  ward  as  our
Prophet  arid  tile  leader  did  during
his  lifetime;  that  we  should  take  it
up  where  he  laid  it  down,  and  carry
it  on  until  the  end  is  readied,  and
the  f II i i  consummation  of  all  tilings
is  accomplished  ;  seeking  to  have  t he
spirit  that  animated  him,  and  to
follow  him  as  he  followed  Joseph,
as  he  honored  Joseph,  as  tie  revered
Joseph,  as  he  upheld  Joseph,  as  lie
maintained  Joseph,  touching  doctrine
and  counsel,  so  rhat  it  appears  to  me
if  we  are  animated  by  the  Spirit  of
God  we  will  honor  him  and  follow  in
his  footsteps,  as  he  followed  Joseph,
and  as  Joseph  followed  Christ,  When
we  do  tins,  and  take  hold  of  this
work  with  the  earnestness  and  zeal
winch  should  characterize  our  actions,
the  Spirit  and  power  of  God  will
rest  upon  us,  and  he  will  heir  us  off
as  he  has  borne  them  off  who  pre-
ceded us;  he  will  not  desert  us,  nor
leave  us  in  any  position  where  we
will  be  destitute  of  help.

i  listened  with  a  great  deal  of


pleasore  to  that  portion  of  brother
Pratt's  discourse  which  I  heard,  in
relation  to  the  Aposfleship  and  the
authority  of  the  Apostleship,  and  the
right  of  the  Priesthood  to  rule  and
to  govern.  There  have  been  a  great
many  ideas  afloat  in  the  minds  of
men  concerning  this  woik,  and  I
suppose  I  have  been  interrogated  I
might  say  thousands  of  times — at
any  rate  I  have  been  interrogated
upon  this  point  more  than  any  other
namely.  Who  will  succeed  President
Young  in  case  he  dies  ?  The  Latter-
day  Saints  who  have  had  experience
in  this  matter  have  not  had  occasion
to  ask  this  question  j  but  many  in-
experienced Saints  had  it  in  their
hems,  wondering  what  shape  affairs
would  take  in  case  anything  were  to
happen to the  President of  the

Church,

Every  man  who  is  ordained  to
the  fullness  of  Apostleship,  has  the
power  and  the  authority  to  lead  and
guide  the  people  of  God  whenever  he
is  called  upon  to  it,  and  the  responsi-
bility rests  upon  him.  But  there  is  a
difference,  as  was  explained  by  bro-
ther Pratt,  that  arises  in  some  in*
stances  from  seniority  in  age,  in
other  instances  from  seniority  in
ordination.  And  while  it  is  the
right  of  all  the  Twelve  Apostles  to
receive  revelation,  and  for  each  one
to  be  a  Prophet,  to  be  a  Seer,  to  be  a
Revelator,  and  to  hold  the  keys  in
the  fullness,  it  is  only  the  right  of
one  man  at  a  time  to  exercise  that  }
power  in  relation  to  the  whole  people,
and  to  give  revelation  and  counsel,
and  direct  the  affairs  of  the  Church
— of  course,  always  acting  in  con-
junction with  his  fellow-servants.
And  while  we  say  that  the  Twelve
Apostles  have  the  right  to  govern,
that  the  Twelve  have  the  authority,
that  the  Twelve  Apostles  are  the
men  who  preside — when  we  feay  thist
we  do  not  mean  that  every  one  of


234


JOURNAL  UF  DISCOURSES,


the  Twelve  is  going  to  give  revela-  1
tion  to  this  great  people,  that  every  J
one  of  the  Twelve  has  the  right  to
counsel  and  dictate  arid  re^uhite  the
affairs  of  the  Church  as  emergencies
mav  arise,  independent  of  the  rest.
The  Church  is  not  governed  like
Zion's  Co-operative  Institution,  hy  a
Board  of  directors;  this  is  not  God's
design. It  is  governed  hy  men  who
hold the keys  of  ihe  Apostlesfeip,
who  have  the  right  and  authority.
Any  one  of  th«m,  should  an  emer-
gency arise,  can  act  as  President  of
the  Chm ch,  with  all  the  powers,
with  nil  the  authority,  with  all  the
keys, and  with every  endowment
necessary  to  obtain  revelation  from
God, and  to  lead  and  guide  this
people  in  the  path  that  leads  to  the
celestial  glory  ;  -but  there  is  only
one  man  at  a  time  who  can  hold  the
keys, who can dictate, who  can
puide,  who  can  give  revelation  to
t  he  Church. The  rest  must  acquiesce
in  his  action,  the  rest  must  be  gov-
erned by  his  con  rise  la,  the  rest  must
receive  his  doctrines. It  was  so
with  Joseph. Others  held  the  Apos-
tleship — Oliver  received  the  Apos-
tleship  at  the  same  time  that  Joseph
did, but Joseph held the  keys,
although  Oliver  held  precisaly  the
same  authority. There was  only
one  who  could  exercise  it  in  its  full-
ness and  power  a  mo  up  the  people.
So  al*o  ai  Joseph's  death,  there  was
only  one  man  who could  exercise
that  authority  and  hold  these  keys,
and  that  man  was  President  Brigham
Young,  the  President  of  the  Quotum
of  the  Twelve  whom  God  bad  singled
out,  who  by  extraordinary  providence
had  been  brought  to  the  front,  al-
though many  were  ahead  of  him
according  to  ordination  at  one  time
and  another.

Now  that  he  lias  gone,  one  man
only  can  hold  this  power  and  autho-
rity tu  which  I  refer,  and  that  man


is  he  whom  yon  sustained  yesterday  r
as  President  of  the  Quorum  of  tht
Twelve,  as  one  of  the  Twelve  Apos-
tles and  of  the  Presidency,  John
Taylor  by  name. When  revelation
conies  to  this  people,  it  is  he  who
has  the  right  to  give  it.  When  coun-
sel comes  to  this  people,  aa  a  people,
it  is  he  who  has  the  right  to  impart
it  ;  and  whiln  tho  Twelve  are  asso-
ciated with  him,  one  in  power,  one  in
authority,  they  must  respect  him  as
their  President,  they  must  look  to
him  as  the  man  through  whom  the
voice  of  God  will  come  to  them,  and
to  this  entire  people. By  extraordi-
nary providence  he  has  been  brought
to  the  front. Men  have  wondered
at  it,  why  it  was  so. It  is  easy  of
explanation. There  was  a  time  when
three  living  Apostles, three  Apos-
tles who  now  live,  whose  names  were  »/
placed -above  his  in  the  Quorum  of
the  Twelve, But  when  this  matter
was  reflected  upon,  President  Young
was  moved  upon  to  place  him  ahead
of  one,  and  afterwards  ahead  of  two
othars,  until  by  the  unanimous  voice
of  the  Apostles  he  was  acknowledged
the  Senior  Apostle,  holding  t  he  oldest
ordination without  interruption  of
any  man  among  the  Apustlt-s.  Not
that  he  sought  it  ;  not  that  he  en-
deavored to  obtain  it  ;  not  that  he
begged  for  his  place,  for  it  is  due  to
;  him  to  say  to  this  congregation  to-
f  day,  that  no  man  has  been  more
modest  iu  urging  his  claim  or  set-
ting forth  his  right  than  he.  But
President  Young  was  led  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  as  we  do  verily  be-
lieve, to  place  him  in  hia  right  por-
tion ;  and  two  years  ago  last  June,
iu  Sanpete,  he  declared  iu  a  public
:  congregation  that  John  Taylor  stood
next  to  him;  and  that  when  he  was
absent  it  was  his  right  to  preside
over  the  Council. We  little  thought
then,  at  that  time,  that  there  would
be  a  necessity  so  soon  arise  when  he


AN  IMPORTANT  CONFERENCE,  ETC


115


would  be  required  to  exercise  that
power,  that  authority  and  rig  lit.
Most  of  the  people  could  very  readily
imagine  that  President  Youny  would
have  outlived  President  Taylor,  but
the  Lord  has  ordered  otherwise.

In  relation  to  ordination,  a  great
many  people  have  imagined  that  it
was  necessary  to  ordain  a  man  to
succeed  another,  that  it  would  im-
part a  particular  efficacy  or  endow
him  with  some  additional  power.
Ordination  is  always  good  and  ac-
ceptable; blessings  and  getting  apart
are  always  desirable  to  those  who  '
have  to  go  forth  to  prepare  them  for
God's  service;  but  it  is  not  necessary
that  an  Apostle  should  be  ordained
to  stand  at  the  head  of  the  people.
When  the  exigency  arises,  he  has
already  got  the  fulness  of  authority,  .
and  the  power  of  it.  I  whs  told  of
a  dream  that  a  person  had  shortly
after  the  death  of  the  Prophet,  A
person  dreamed  that  a  certain  man
had  been  set  apart  by  the  President,
and  the  keys  had  been  given  him;
and  that  President  Younj*  came  and
said  that  he  bad  given  to  this  per-
son tha  keys.  Now,  that  of  itself,
to  a  person  understanding  the  prin-
ciple, would  carry  its  own  contra-
diction with  it.  The  man  dreamed
of  was  already  an  Apostle,  holding
and  exercising  the  keys  of  the
Apostleship  ;  ant]  therefore  it  would
not  be  necessary  for  President  Young
to  con  far  again  upon  him  the  keys.
If  every  man  of  the  Twelve  but  one
were  slain,  the  one  remaining  would
have  the  right  to  organize  a  First
Presidency  of  the  Chutch,  to  choose  1
Twelve  Apostles,  and  to  organize  the
Church  in  its  fulness  and  power,  and
to  preside  over  it  And  his  acta
would  be  accepted  of  the  Lord,  and
binding  upon  tiie  people.  This  is  the
authority  of  the  A  post  It  ship.  If
every  Apostle  anciently  had  been
slain  but  John  the  Revelator,  as  they


all  were,  and  there  had  been  faith
smd  men  enough  left,  he  would  hav»
hud  the  rsglit  to  ordain  other  Apoa-
Hes,  and  set  in  order  the  entim
Clinrch,  and  carry  forward  the  work
as  the  L'jrd  sin  mid  dictate  it.  So-
in  our  day.  As  I  have  stated,  it  is-
not  necessary  for  a  man  who  had  re-
ceived thin  power  and  these  keys  to
be  ordained  and  set  apart  to  act;  he
c:in  act  in  any  position.  President
Young,  when  he  chose  brotherGeorge
A.  Smith  to  be  Ins  First  Counselor,  in
t  he  place  of  He  her  C.  Kimball,  did
not  h j  hi*  hands  upon  his  head  to-
con  fer  upon  him  any  additional  power
or  authority  for  the  position,  because-
brother  George  A.  held  the  Apostle-
ship in  its  fulness,  and  by  virtue  of
that  Priesthood  he  could  act  in  that
or  in  any  other  position  in  the  Church.
He  chose  other  assistant  Counselors  ;
he  did  nut  set  them  apart,  there  was
no  necessity  fur  it,  as  they  already
held  the  Apostleship.  And  if  be
had,  lie  cout»l  only  have  blessed  them  ;
he  could  not  bestow  upon  them  any
more  than  they  already  had,  because
they  had  all  that  he  himself  had,  that
is  whm  he  chose  them  from  the  sama
Quorum,  He  did  choose  several  of
Lis  assistant  Counselors  from  tbo  *
Quorum  of  the  Twelve;  he  did  not
put  his  hands  np  n  them  to  set  them
apart,  nor  to  give  them  the  authority
and  power  to  act  as  his  Counselors;
they  already  held  it.

It  is  well  for  the  Latter-dr\y  Saints
to  understand  the  principles  of  the
Holy  Priesthood,  and  the  power
thereof,  that  it  may  be  known  by
you  where  t^e  authority  rests,  who
has  the  right  to  teach  and  guide
and  counsel  in  the  affairs  nf  the
kingdom  of  God.  The  Lord  has
revealed  it  in  plainness,  so  that  a
way-faring  man,  though  a  fool  need
not  err  therein.  Was  it  necessary
that  Elder  Taj  lor  should  be  set  apart
to  preside  over  this  people?  was  it


230


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


ueceasary  that  the  Twelve  Apostles
should  be  set  apart  to  preside  over
this  people  ?  No  it  was  not,  for
they  already  possessed  the  power,  au-
thority and  ordination.  Wag  it  neces-
sary for  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  to
set  apart  Brigham  or  Heber  or  Wil-
lard,  or  any  of  the  real  of  the  Twelve
Apostles  ?  No,  for  the  same  reason,
they  had  received  the  fulness  of  the
Holy  Priesthood,  I  he  full  endowment
and  the  keys,  and  the  authority,  and
the  fulness  of  the  Apostlesbip;  there-
fore it  was  not  necessary.  It  might
have  been  done;  there  would  have
been  no  wrong  in  doing  it;  there
would  be  no  impropriety  in  blessing
a  man;  there  would  be  no  impro-
pritty  in  a  man  like  Joseph  or  Brig-
ham,  favored  of  God  with  the  power
to  move  tlie  he* Ten 6  to  bring  down
bless  iugi  upon  the  children  of  men;
1  *ay,  there  would  be  no  improprieJy
in  such  men  laying  their  hands  upon
any  man  and  blessing  him  ;  the  Lord
would  bless  him,  if  he  were  thus
blessed.  But  I  am  now  speaking  of
the  authority  and  power  of  the  Holy
Priesthood,  The  blessing  of  such
men  or  by  such  men,  would  not  be-
stow upon  him  any  additional  autho-
rity or  any  more  keys,  presuming  that
he  already  had  received  the  fulness
of  the  ApostUship.  Some  may  fetl
that  the  Lord  should  raise  up  a  mau
by  special  manifestations  of  power  to
preside  over  his  Church — they  hav-
ing an  expectation  of  that  kind.
Whenever  the  Lord  does  it  will  be
because  of  there  being  a  necessity
for  it,  and  whenever  there  is  a  ne-
cessity lor  it,  it  will  not  be  made  plain
tii rough  one  of  the  Twelve  aside  from
the  President,  it  will  not  be  made  plain
through  a  Seventy,  it  will  not  be
made  plain  through  a  High  Priest,
through  an  Elder,  through  a  Patri-
arch j  it  will  come  as  all  revelations
from  the  Lurd  come,  to  be  binding
upon  this  people,  through  the  voice


I

i


of  him  whom  the  Lord  chooses  to  be
his  voice,  sanctioned  by  the  Twelve
Apostles,  Hear  it,  0  Israel !  and
remember  it  Have  I  the  right  to
say  who  shall  preside  over  this  peo-
ple ?  No.  Although  au  Apostle,
holding  the  keys  with  my  brethren
and  being  side  by  side  with  them,
having  equal  authority  with  thtm.
Why  ?  because  I  am  not  chosen  by
the  Lord  to  be  his  mouthpiece  to
the  Latter  day  Saints;  what  J  mean
by  this,  to  givt  them  revelation.
It  is  my  right  to  instruct  and  teach,
to  tabor  and  to  counsel;  but  it  is  not
my  right  to  organize  a  First  Presi-
dency for  this  Church,  neither  is  it
the  right  of  any  other  man,  ex-
cepting him  whom  the  Lord  has
chosen  the  President  of  the  Twelve,
with  that  Quorum  standing  as  the
First  Presidency.  A  day  or  two
ago,  a  man  came  here  and  notified
the  President  of  the  Twelve  that
he  was  to  be  the  successor  to  Brie-

1_  O
lam.  Ihe  most  charitable  con-
struction you  can  put  upon  such
speeches  is  that  the  man  is  crazy.
Whenever  the  Voice  of  the  Lord
comes  upon  such  a  subject,  it  will
coma  with  the  powi-r  and  demon-
stration of  tlie  Holy  Ghost  and  with
much  assurance,  and  every  Latter-
day  Saint  on  the  earth  will  receive
it,  because  the  Spirit  of  God  will
bear  testimony  to  our  spirits  that  it
is  from  Him,  so  that  we  cannot  be
deceived.  It  is  our  privilege  to  so
live  that  we  know  the  voice  of  the
true  shepherd,  and  can  not  be  de-
ceived by  those  who  profess  to  have
revelation  aud  have  authority,  when
they  have  it  not  And  every  mau
and  woman  in  this  Church  should
so  live  that  when  they  hear  the  true
voice,  they  will  know  itaa  they  would
know  the  voice  of  their  nearest  friend,
and  not  be  deceived  or  led  astray.
Well  but,  says  one,  Why  cannot  you
organize  a  First  Presidency  now,  if


the  Twelve  have  this  authority  ?  Do
yon  want  to  know  the  reason,  bre-
thren and  sisters,  why  we  do  not
take  such  a  step?  I  suipect  you
would  like  to  know  why  a  man  and
his  two  Counselors  are  not  singled
oni\  called  and  set  apart  by  the  voico
of  the  people  at  this  Conference,  as
the  First  Presidency  of  th*  Church  ?
The  reason  is  simply  this*  the  L  >rd
has  not  revealed  it  to  ui;  he  has  not
commanded  us  to  do  this,  and  until
he  does  require  this  at  our  heads,  we
shall  not  do  it.  For  the  present,  it
seems  to  be  the  mind  and  will  of  God,
as  manifested  to  ns,  that  the  Twelve
should  preside  over  the  Church.
And  until  he  does  reveal  unto  his
servants  that  it  is  right  and  proper
that  a  First  Presidency  should  be
organized  again,  we  shall  wait,  we
shall  do  nothing*  of  that  kind.  When
the  voice  of  God  comes,  when  it


shall  be  the  counsel  ef  our  Heavenly
Father  that  a  First  Presidency  shall
be  again  organized,  the  Quorum
of  the  Twelve  will  be  organized  in
its  fullness  as  before.  Therefore
you  can  wait,  as  well  as  we,  for  the
voice  of  the  Lord  ;  and  when  it
does  come,  whenever  it  will  be,  you
will  see  the  Church  take  iction  iu
this  matter;  but  until  then,  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  you  will  be  gov-
erned by  the  authority  that  already
exists.  If  three  men  have  the  right
to  govern,  certainly  twelve  men,  all
possessing  the  same  keys,  have  that
right  and  that  authority.  Then  let
ms  wait  the  good  pleasure  of  the
Lord,  and  cease  surmises,  and  cease
indulging  in  vain  and  foolish  ideas
upon  these  subjects.

I  pray  God  to  bless  yoo,  and  pour
out  his  Spirit  upon  us  all,  in  the
name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHtf  TAYLOR,

Delivered  is  the  Ogdbx  Tabernacle,  on  Sunday  Afternoon,

Ol-tobkb  21,  1877-


{Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Oibhs  J


THE  GOSPEL  REVEALED  FOR  THE  BENEFIT  OF  THE  WORLD — WITNESS  OF
THK  SPIRIT  —  PRIESTHOOD,  —  HIGH  PRIESTS  AND  SEVENTIES — ENER-
GETIC MISSIONARIES  —  DUTIES  OF  PRESIDENTS,  BISHOPS,  ELDERS,
PRIESTS,  TEACHERS  AND  DEACONS — RELIEF  SOCIETIES— TITHING— P,  E.
FUND — COMMON  SCHOOLS.


I  am  happy  to  meet  with  the  I  had  to  suffer  the  loss  of  onr  venera-
brethren  and  sisters  at  this  Confe-  ted  and  beloved  President  Brigham
rence. Since  I  was  hat  here  we  have  Young,  which  cast  a  gloom  over  the


2.  o


feelings  of  the  Saints  throughout  the
Territory,  and  made  uh  m  1 1  feel  sorry.
His  demise,  with  that  of  otheis,
however,  is  amoiur  the  evidences  that
are  necessarily  atmciaied  with  human
affairs,  and  is  something  over  which
we  have  no  control,  lor  t he  Lord
manages  such  things  iiccording  to
the  counsel  of  his  own  will.

1  remember  the  time  very  well
when  Joseph  Smith  whs  htken  from
u«,  not  however  in  the  manner  that
President  Young  was  bur  by  n  ruth-
less mob,  meeting  hi*  death  at  the
hands  of  assassins.  But  I  hese  things
are  matters,  although  of  pre  nr.  im-
portance to  us,  yet  relatively  they
have  not  a  very  great  deal  t**do  wiih
the  building  up  uf  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth,  and
with  His  work  in  which  we  are  all
engaged.

When  the  Lord  revealed  the  #  vrr-

lasiing  Ooape]  to  Joseph  Smith,  he

unfolded  unto  him  his  put  -poaw-s  :md
designs  in  relation  to  the  eanh
whereon  we  live,  and  gave  nolo  him
a  knowledge  of  Inn  1m w  uml  the  ordi-
nances  ot  the  Go>pe!  vtiul  the  doctrine
thereof.  It  was  nut  lor  t lie  object
dimply  of  elevating  Lim  ns  a  man,
but  it  «aa  done  lor  the  interest  of
society,  in  the  interest  of  the  world,
and  in  the  interest  ol  the  living  mid
the  dead,  according  to  the  decries
and  designs  of  Jehovah  which  he
formed  before  the  world  ntlltd  into
existence,  or  the  morning  siars  sang
together  for  joy.  The  Lord  h  d  his
designs  in  relation  to  the  earth  and
the  inhabitants  rheieof,  and  in  these
last  days  ha  saw  proper  toieveal  and
restore,  through  Ins  servant  Joteph
Smith,  what  we  term  the  new  and
everlasting  Gospel ;  new  to  tbe  world
at  present,  because  of  i  heir  traditions,
their  follies  and  weaknesses,  and  their
creeds,  opinions  and  notiun*,  but
everlasting  because  it  existed  with
God,  and  because  it  existed  with  him


before  the  world  was,  and  will  con-
tinue when  change  shall  have  suc-
ceeded change  upon  this  earth,  and
when  the  earth  shall  have  been  re-
deemed and  all  thing*  made  new,
and  while  life  aud  thought  and  being
list,  and  immortality  endures.  There-
fore, although  the  Gospel  is  new  to
the  world,  it  is  everlasting.  And  it
was  introduced,  as  1  have  stated,  iu
the  interests  of  humanity — our  fa*
thers,  the  ancient  Prophets  and  Apos-
tles, and  men  of  God  who  have  lived
in  the  various  ago  of  the  world,  who
have  administered  in  the  holy  Priest-
hood while  they  lived  upon  the  earth,
and  who  ure  now  administering  in
the  havens,  and  who  had  a  hand  in
the  introduction  of  this  work,  toge-
ther with  God  our  heavenly  Father,
jiud  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  New
Covenant ;  and  to-day  they  feel  in-
terested in  the  rolling  forth  of  this
wotk,  and  in  the  accomplishment  of
these  purposes  which  God  designed
before  the  foundation  of  the  world.
And  it  te  to  God  and  his  Son,  and  to
these  men,  that  we  are  indebted  for
the  light  and  the  intelligence  that
has  been  communicated  to  us,  and
to  them  we  shall  be  indebted  through
all  time  for  the  same  kind  of  know-
ledge and  intelligence  to  sustain  and
direct  us*

We  talk  sometimes  about  the  or-
ganization of  our  Church,  and  about
a  First  Presidency,  and  about  Apoi-
i  left,  and  Patriaichs,  and  High
Priests,  and  Seventies,  and  Elders,
etc.  ;  but  who  knew  anything  about
any  uf  these  offices,  their  rights  and
privileges,  etc,  until  God  revealed
it  ?  Nobody.  And  this  is  not  only
so  with  regard  to  the  several  offices
of  the  Melchizedek  or  higher  Priest*
hood,  but  it  is  also  the  case  with
those  of  the  Aaronic  or  lesser  Priest-
hood. These  are  things  that  were
not  originated  by  man,  they  oame
to  ua  through  revelation  from  God,


THE  GUSPEL  REVEALED,  ETC.


23»


and  hence  we  ire  indebted  to  the
Lord  for  them,  and  aluo  for  all  the
knowledge  we  possess  in  t elation  to
them. Who taught  us  anything
about  t he  Gathering  and  why  are
we  I j ere  to-day  ? What  brought  us
here,  and  under  what  influence  did
we  come,  and  by  what  principle  were
we  united  as  we  find  ourselves  at  the
present  time  ? You  who  are  familiar
with  the  history  of  the  Churrh  know
that  there  was  a  Temple  built  in
Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  that  while  the
Pmphet  Joseph  &mith  and  Oliver
Cowdery  were  seated  in  their  proper
places  iti  that  Temple,  there  were
several important personages  ap-
peared to  them,  and  gave  unto  them
several  keys,  powers  and  privilege?,
and  that  among  these  heavenly  beings
was  Moses,  who  represented  what  is
termed  the  Gathering  dispensation.
His  mi  si  ion  to  earth  was  to  restore
the  keys  of  the  Gathering  dispensa-
tion, wbich  should  gather  Israel  from
the  four  quarters  of  the  earth,  and
also  restore  the  ten  tribes. You  who
have not  read this  for  yourselves,
you  will  find  it  in  the  new  edition  of
the  Doctrine  and  Covenants;  I  refer
you  to  it  and  recommend  you  ^to
read  it. Moses  conferred  these  keys
of  authority  upon  the  prophet  Jo-
seph Smith,  and  he  afterwards  con-
ferred them upon the  Twelve
Apostles  and  others,  who  when  they
were  ordained  received  them  as  part
of  their  ministry  and  priesthood,  to
prepare  them  for  the  work  that  was
to  be  done. And  when  these  elders
went  forth in the performance  of
their  duties,  calling  upon  the  people
among  whom  they  traveled  lo  re-
pent and  be  baptized  in  the  name  of
Jesus  Christ for  the  remission  of
their  sins,  promising  believers  that
they  should  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,
in  obedience  to  the  gospel  require-
ments, they  laid  their  hands  upon
their  heads  confirming  them  mem-


bers of  the  church  and  also  confer-
,  red  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  they  receiv-
ed it;  and  among  other  things  they
received  was  the  principles  of  the
Gathering.  And  it  was  universally
the  case,  and  they  hardly  knew  why
it  was,  that  among  their  first  desires
after  th  eir  confirmation,  was  a  wish
to  gather  to  Zion  ;  and  no  one  that
remains  faithful  to  the  cause  ever  re-
mained satisfied  until  he  did  gather
with  the  saints.  I  would  defy  the
world  and  all  the  Elders  of  Israel  to
have  gathered  this  people  together,
as  we  now  are,  unless  these  keys  of
the  Gathering  had  been  restored  to
earth,  and  iht*  people  had  received
the  spirit  of  it  through  the  proper
channel.  But  as  is  was,  there  was
"no  trouble  at  all,  so  far  as  their  wil-
lingness was  concerned.  I  have  seen
many  of  them  after  baptism  almost
ready  to  sell  themselves  in  order  to
have  the  chance  of  coming  to  Zion.
And  yon  elders,  who  are  my  hearers
to-da*,  have  witnessed  the  same,  and
many  of  you  were  doubtless  num.
bered  among  those  of  whom  1  speak,
who  were  so  extiemely  anxious  to
gat  Iter.

We  are  living  hi  what  ancient
men  of  God  have  beer*  pleaded  to
terra  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness
of  times,  which  embraces  all  previous
dispensations  and  ad  the  priesthood
that  has  ever  be! ore  existed  on  the
earth.  And  among  other  means  that
God  will  make  use  of  to  accomplish
his  purposes  is  that  of  Temples;  and
the  spirit  of  Temple  building  comes
in  the  very  same  way,  as  that  of
gathering  together,  and  this  accounts
for  our  desire  to  assist  iu  electing
Temples.  The  Lord,  through  the
prophet  Ma  lack  i,  in  referring  to  this
feature  of  the  great  Latter- day  work
says  u  Behold,  I  will  send,  you  Elijah
the  prophet  before  the  coming  of  the
great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord.
And  he  shall  turn  the  heart  of  the


'240  JOURNAL  OF

fathers  to  the  children,  s(nd  the  heart
of  the  children  to  the  fathers,  lest  I
come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a1
curse,"  Did  Elijah  hold  these  par
tmular  ki-y«  of  the  priesthood  ?  He
did.  And  did  he  confer  them  upon
Joseph  Smith  ?  Yes,  he  did.
An  account  of  this  too  will  be
found  in  the  refetence  I  have  already
yiven  yoo.  Did  the  Letter- day
Saints  generally  manifest  any  particu-
lar desire  to  build  Temples  beforMthe
prophet  Elijah  cAme  ?  No;  butter
since  this  desire  and  feeling  ha? av-
iated in  the  minds  of  Hie  Latter-day*
Saints.  It  might  appear  very  fooliih
to  other  people,  but  to  us  it  is  both
consistent  and  necessary*  The  first
Teijwlc  we  builr  was  in  Kirtland,
^hio ;  the  next  was  in  Nhuvqo,  Illi-
nois, and  a  foundation  of  a  thin)  was
laid  in  Far  West,  Missouri.  Since
our  coming  to  Utah,  we  have  built
one  Temple  ,in  St,  George  and  a
beautiful  building  it  is;  and  in  that
Temple  are  now  performed  ordinan-
ces for  the  living  and  the  dead.  And
let  me  f^k,  il  any  present  in  this
large  assembly  to* day  regret  in  the
least  having  contributed  to  it.  I  do
not  think  for  a  moment  that  there  is
a  man  or  wotnau  that  does.  We
have  already  expended  a  lartre
amount  of  means  on  the  Temple  now
being  constructed  in  Salt  Lake
City  ;  and  still  we  have*  commenced
two  other  such  brtildings,  one  in
Mint!  and  the  other  in  Logan,  all  of
which  will  he  magnificent  buildings
when  completed  ;  I  suppose  there  are
Bot  less  than  five  hundred  men  em
ployed  on  these  buildings,  in  this
Territory.  It  looks  odd  and  simple,
the  world  does  not  know  what  it
means ;  but  we  know,  for  God  lias
revealed  it  to  us;  and  he  has  not  only
revealed  it,  but  he  has  put  it  here
(pointing  to  the  heart),  and  we  can-
not  get  rid  of  it.

In  the  year  1876,  President  Young

% ,  •  -  i ■


DISCOURSES.

was  strongly  impressed  with  (his
feel t«K| .and  he  requested  the  Twelve
to  call  upon  the  High  Priests  ami
Seventies,  $hd  the  Elders  to  subscribe
town  ids  carrying  forward  the  Tem-
ple in  this  city.  Was  the  0*11  re-
sponded to  ¥  Yes  ;  the  various
quorums  throughout  the  length  and
breadth  of t the  Territory  willingly
contributed  and  n  verv  material  ad-
vance  has  been  made  in  the  construe-
Hon  of  that  building.  Why  did
President  Young  feel  so?  Because
the  spirit  of  God  rested  upon  hin|*
prompting  him  to  move  in  this  di-
rect ion.  Why  did  the  brethren  of
these  several  quorums  so  readily  re-
spond to  t+ie  call  ?  Because  the  same
spirit  tested  upon  them  ;  and  hence
we  find  that  tlje  Fiist  Presidency,  that
Twelve,  and/^he  Saints  gene/ai  ly^
are  all  interjefljed  in  tin*  movgmBflt,
•vinchi&r  the  wune  desire  to  uceom-
plisli  this  work  of  Temple  building,
as  the  Saints  of  foreign  lands  do  to
gather  to  Ziuti.  What  object  have
we  in  view  itifdoiug  this  ?  That  we
may  administer  the  ordinances  which
the  Lord  has  revealed  unto  us,  and
which,  according  to  his  command,
must  be  done  in  Temples  built  to  his
nanif.  If  we  were  to  turn  over  to-
day the>e  buildings  to  the  religious
world,  they  *voula  know  no  more
how  to  use  tjiem  legitimately,  than
a  baby-wguld  know  what  to  do  with
algebra;  neither  would  we  had  not
the  Lord  taught  us  by  revelation
ft  i  Mil  heaveD.  The  Gospel  brings
life  and  immortality  to  light;  U
places  us  in  communion  with  the
leavens,  the  Priesthood  there  and
the  Priesthood  here  working  har-
moniously J  oget  her,  we  being  taught
of  tbem^are  enabled  to  accomplish
what  the  Lord  requires  of  us.

We,  as  intelligent  beings,  made
in  the  imajfe  of  our  Creator,  are
placed  here  upon  the  earth  to  ac-
complish a  certain  work,  that  we


I


may  operate  with  the  Gods  in  the
eternal  worlds,  through  the  light
of  revelation  that  God  has  given
unto  us,  nnd  that  he  will  continue
to  give  us,  nntil  all  things  designed
by  hi  in  pcr^ainin^  to  this  earth  and
its  inhabitants  shah  he  accomplished.
In  other  words,  they  are  helping*
03  to  do  our  work,  by  communicating
to  us  principles  we  require  to  know,
and  also  by  operating  in  our  behalf,
while  we  are  operating  fur  then, and
their  children,  who  are  our  fathers.
As  the  Scriptures  say,  "that  they
with<  nt  us  should  not  be  made  per-
fect/* it,  is  requiring  n  union  ol  tin*
heavens  and  the  earth,  funning  a
grand  cooperative  society,  if  you
please,  connected  together  by  indis-
soluble lies  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  the  light  of  revelation  and
the  power  of  God.  Thus  we  are  united
to  each  other  and  to  them,  and  are
able  to  act  intelligently,  doing  works
that  will  be  approved  in  heaven
which  are  connected  with  the  in-
terests ot  God  and  the  interests  of
humatiity.

It  is  not  our  work,  it  is  not  any-
thing we  Imv  dune,  but  it  is  God
that  has  done  the  whole  of  it,  he
having  called  upon  u*  to  help  him
a  little  in  our  weak  way  j  and  inas-
much as  we  wek  continually  to  do
his  will,  he  will  help  us,  for  in  and
of  ourselves  we  can  do  nothing,  no
not  any  of  us,  for  wes  are  all  poor,
weak,  erring  human  beings, constant-
ly needing  his  sustenance,  aid  and

guidance.

The  various  quorum*  of  the
Priesthood,  which  have  been  pre-
sent ed  to  you  this  afternoon,  give  a
more  perfect  representation  of  your
Stake  than  has  beea  given  before.
And  I  am  pleased  to  way  that  this
extended  organization  of  the  Priest-
hood exibts  among  all  the  Stakes —
some  twenty  in  all — throughout  the
Territory, It  may  be  proper  on  the

He.  16*


present  occasion  to  refer  to  some
things  connected  with  the  organiza-
tion of  our  Church  for  our  informa-
tion ;  although  I  presume  a  good
deal  of  similar  instruction  has  al-
ready been  given  you  by  brother
Richards,  who  is  very  conversant  in
such  matters  Yet  it  is  very  desira-
ble that  the  Sdnis  generally,  as  well
as  the  Twelve  and  leading  Elders,
should  become  familiar  with  these
tilings  and  have  a  cor  rue  t  under-
standing of  them;  and  it  will  do  no
harm  to  again  talk  on  some  of  them.

In  Kutl-jud,  Ohio,  a  great  many
things  wen*  revealed  thruugh  the
PropheL  Ti  ere  was  then  a  First
Presidency  that  presided  over  tbe
High  Council,  in  K  rtland;  and
that  Hitrb  Council  and  another  which
was  in  Missouri,  were  the  only  High
Councils  in  existence  As  I  have
said,  tlie  Hi^h  Council  in  Kirtiand
was  presided  over  by  Joseph  Smith
and  his  Counselors  ;  and  hence  there
went  some  things  associated  with  this
that  were  qiite  peculiar  in  them-
selves. It  ts  siated  that  when  they
were  at  a  loss  to  find  out  anything
pertaining  to  any  principles  that
mi glit  come  before  them  in  their  coun-
cils, that  the  presidency  were  to  in-
quire of  the  Lnrd  and  get  revelation
on  those  subjects  that  were  difficult
for  them  to  comprehend,  And  I
would  make  a  remark  here  in  rela-
tion hi  these  things,  that  all  High
Councils,  and  all  Presidents  of
Stakes  and  Bishops,  and  in  fact  all
men  bulling  the  Priesthood,  who
;jre  humble  and  faithful  and  diligent
and  honest  and  true  to  the  principles
of  our  religion,  if  they  seek  unto  God
with  that  tailh  that  he  requires  of  us,
he  will  give  them  wisdom  under  all
circumstances  and  on  all  occasions,
and  the  Holy  Spirit  will  never  fail
to  indicate  the  path  they  should
pursue.  This  is  the  order  of  God  in
relation  to  these  matte  re  that  #very

VoL  EI


24 12


JOCKNAl,  UK  IHSCul  KSE*


man  holding  any  position  in  the
Chinch,  through  Ins  faithfulness,
shall  have  his  Spirit  comnirwsurate
to  the  duties  devolving  upon  them,
to  enable  theni  to  magnify  their
calling  to  I  he  acceptance  of  God
and  their  brethren.  And  if  such
men  do  not  enjoy  this  blessing,  this
divine  assistance,  it  is  because  they
do  not  "  live  godly  in  Christ,"  be-
cause they  do  not  seek  unto  him  in
humility  and  lowliness  of  heart,
making  it  their  daily  smdy  to  ob-
serve the  laws  of  God  and  the  rights
of  their  lellow.meri.  It  is  true,  we
til  of  us  have  certain  infirmities
and  foibles,  and  as  you  heard  this
morning,  God  has  placed  lh$m  upon
us  I  hat  man  should  not  glory  in  him-
self, but  that  he  might  depend  upon
and  glory  in  the  God  of  Israel;  but
it  is  our  duty  to  overcome  them,  and
ltarn  to  subject  our  will  to  that  of  our
Heavenly  Father,  and  continue  on  in
the  way  to  perfection.

There  is  a  matter  that  has  of  late
become  a  subject  of  a  good  deal  of
conversation,  and  it  occurs  to  my
mind  to  re'er  to  it,  namely  that  of
the  High  Priesthood,  or  the  place
and  calling  of  a  High  Priest  In
the  revelation  on  this  subject  I  find
these  words :  44  And  again,  1  give
onto  you  Don  C,  Smith,  to  be  a
President  over  the  Quorum  of  High
Priests,  which  ordination  is  insti-
tuted for  the  purpose  of  qualifying
those  who  shall  be  appointed  stand-
ing presidents  or  servants  over  the
different  Stakes  scattered  abroad."
What  are  they  organized  for  ?  It  is
instituted  for  the  purpose  of  quali-
fying those  who  shall  be  appointed
standing  presidents  over  the  different
Stakes  scattered  abroad.  A  sort
of  a  normal  school,  if  you  please,  to
prepare  men  to  preside,  to  be  fathers
of  the  people.  Hajre  they  fulfilled
this  F  Hardly ;  perhaps  many  of
them  hare  mot  thought  about  it;


but  if  they  had  reflected  more  upon
these  things,  and  humbled  them-
selves before  God,  and  met  together

1  often  to  talk  over  the  principles  of
the  Gospel,  manifesting  an  eaper
desire  to  become  acquainted  with
doctrine,  and  using  due  diligence
in  seeking  for  wisdom  from  the  best
of  books  and  every  availible  source,
I  do  not  think  we  should  have  taken
no  rnat.y  men  from  among  the  Seven-
ties and  Eiders  to  make  of  them
Presidents  and  Bishops  and  Coun-
cilor*, as  we  have  been  obliged  to  do,
lint  instead  of  the  High  Priests  pur-
suing this  course,  m  ny  of  them
have  indulged  in  much  unnecessary
talk  about  which  was  the  biggest,  a
HiLfh  Priest  or  a  Seventy*  I  can  an-
swer that  question  for  you,  my  bre-
thren: li  you  will  take  a  little  child
among  you,  and  on  comparing  your-
selves with  it,  can  th.d  the  one  most
like  unto  it— the  one  who  is  the  most

|  honest,  truthful  an  J  child- like,  such
a  man  should  be  classed  among  the
L'teatest  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  It
is  not  talking  about  these  things  that
qualifies  men  for  positions,  but  doing
them.

We  are  only  just  starting  in  on
!  the  t>  real  work  before  us. Zion  is
bound  to  spread  and  grow  ;  her  cords
!  will  be  lengthened  and her  stakes
will  be  strengthened;  but  we  must
|  be  energetic  and  alire  to  the  duties
;  devolving  upon  us,  always  keeping
iti mind  the  object  to  be  accom-
plished, and in  order  to  facilitate
things  and  to  meet  the  mind  and
will  of  God,  and  that  his  work  may
be  cut  short  in  righteousness,  we
|  must  operate  together. And  not,
what  ? 14  Lullaby  baby  on  the  tree
j  top,  when  the  wind  blows  the  cradle
will  rock/ We  have  bad  enough  of
that;  let  us  now  begin  mote  earnestly
to  seek  after  the  wisdom  and  power
of  God  and  the  light  of  revelation,
so  that  the  love  of  God  may  bum


THK  i;u-l*EL  RKVEALMIj,  i/ir.


1*  fc  ;


in  the  hearts  of  the  people,  and
awaken  them  up  to  an  understanding
of  the  principles  of  eternal  troth.
This  is  what  we  want.  And  if  they
do  this,  magnifying  their  calling,
then  when  other  Stakes  are  to  be
organized  ai  d  other  changes  made,
all  we  will  have  to  do  will  be  to  go
to  the  High  Priests  for  such  persons
to  fill  such  offices  that  rightly  belong
to  the  High  Priesthood-  And  the
question  that  has  agitated  the  minds
of  the  Seventies  and  High  Priests
will  no  longer  trouble  them,  for  all
will  then  more  clearly  perceive  that
Church  or  body  of  Christ  is  as  the
body  of  man,  composed  not  of  one
member t  but  many,  For  instance,
there  is  the  head,  there  are  the  eyes,
there  is  the  nose,  the  mouth,  there
are  the  ears,  the  arms  and  hands,  the
legs  and  feet,  all  of  which  are  mem-
bers of  the  human  body  ;  which  of
these  would  you  like  to  be  without  ?
Supposing  you  had  to  part  with  one
of  your  legs,  or  one  of  your  arms,
you  would  of  course  want  to  retain
the  most  useful  of  the  two  ;  bat  if
you  will  tell  me  which  of  the  two  is
the  most  useful  to  the  human  body,
then  i  will  tell  you  which  is  the  most
useful  to  the  body  of  Christ,  the
High  Priests  or  the  Seventies.  I  do
not  think,  however,  we  need  discuss
this  question  ;  but  rather  let  us  mag-
nify the  Priesthood  we  hold,  seeking
to  acquire  a  proper  fitness  for  the
positions  we  occupy.

Nowf  I  will  tell  you  something
I  have  noticed  lately.  We  call  upon
*  Seventies,  and  sometimes  upon  High
Priests  to  perform  missions  abroad,
bat  how  is  it  with  them  ?  They
generally  go,  but  it  is  often  a  hard
squeak.  One  man  has  a  roof  to  put
on  a  house,  another  is  perhaps  build-
ing a  new  house,  or  his  business  is  in
such  a  flourishing  condition  as  to
need  his  personal  superintendence  j
another  has  perhaps  "  bought  fire


yoke  of  oxen,"  and  he  must  needs
41  go  to  prove  them ;  and  another  has
perhaps  "  married  a  wife,  and  there-
fore" would  like  to  be  excused.  And
still  such  men  generally  have  quite
an  opinion  of  themselves,  and  they
ate  ofttim^s  anxious  to  know  which
is  the  biggest,  they  or  somebody
else.  And  when  such  men  do  go
upon  missions,  they  are  of  very  little
aocount,  they  are  ready  to  find  ex-
cases  not  to  go,  and  just  as  ready  to
find  excuses  to  return,  and  are  soon
reconciled  to  the  fact  that  fct  there
is  no  place  like  home,"  and  that
44  Jordan  is  a  hard  road  to  travel:"
they  have  all  kinds  of  difficulties  to
encounter,  meeting  with  Hons  in
their  way,  etc.  Did  you  ever  remem-
ber the  time  when  the  Elders  felt  a
desire  to  preach  the  Gospel,  and  men
were  ready  with  open  arms  to  receive
those  who  proclaimed  it  ?  1  believe
the  Scripture  to  be  true  to-day  which
tays,  UI  will  take  you  one  of  a  city
and  two  of  a  family,  and  I  will  bring
you  to  Zion."  We  profess  to  be
Apostles  of  the  Lord  bearing  his
Gospel  message  to  the  nations  of
the  earth;  thtn  let  us  exhibit  a  lit-
tle more  of  the  apostolic  power  and
zeal  when  wt*  go  out  among  our  fel-
low-men,  realizing  that  we  have  got
the  light  and  life  and  power  of  God
with  us;  and  that  we  are  sent  to  teach
and  not  to  be  taught  of  men,  to  con-
trol circumstances,  in  a  great  mea-
sure, by  the  power  uf  the  Priesthood,
instead  of  allowing  ourselves  to  bo
controlled  so  much.  We  have  not
got  through  with  the  work,  we  have
only  just  commenced  it.  Here  are
our  fallen  brethren,  the  Lam  an  i  tea.
What  an  extensive  work  opens  up
among  them,  which  must  yet  be  done,
but  which  will  not  fairly  commence
until  we  approximate  to  the  consum-
mation of  our  mission  to  the  Gentile
world.  And  when  we  shall  have
introduced  more  fully  the  Gospel,


244


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


and  developed  the  purposes  of  the
Almighty  to  this  Branch  of  Israel,
the  Jews  will  be  ready  to  receive
tho  servants  of  God  and  the  Gospel,
which  will  then  he  proclaimed  to
them.  And  when  we  get  through
with  Israel,  there  will  rem?* in  the
ten  tribes  to  hp  les'ored,  (lie  earth
to  be  redeemed  and  the  kingdom  of
God  to  be  established  thereon  ;  nil
of  wh  ch  must  be  done  in  order  Mint
the  Scriptures  may  be  fulfilled,  and
the  designs  of  God  con  sum  mated.
Our  work  is  mapped  out.  before  us,
it  is  all  designed  and  planned  by  him
who  rules  above,  and  it  is  lime  that
every  Elder  in  Israel  fully  understood
this  fact  that  the  Latter- day  Saints
have  got  to  tike  a  part  in  all  this
work,  and  that  we  are  not  hero  to  1
attend  to  our  own  personal  affairs
merely,  but^  we  are  called  to  look
after  the  interests  of  God,  to  build
up  his  Zion  and  establish  hi*  king-
dom on  this  his  earth,  I

There  is  another  class  of  men —
the  Elders  of  Israel — that  play  a
most  important  part.  Tlicy  are
very  numerous,  and  it  is  time  Mint
they  commenced  to  feel  after  Gi  d,
and  to  think  and  reason  and  reflect  :
"  What  can  I  do  to  help  to  build  up
the  kingdom  of  God  temporally  and
spiritually,  Q  God,  inspire  my  heart
with  light  and  revelation,  that  I  may
magnify  my  calling,  honor  biv  posi-
tion,, teach  the  principles  of  right-
eousness, aud  help  to  build  up  thy
kingdom  on  the  earth/1  This  is  the
way  they  should  feel.

And  I  might  refer  to  Ptesidents
of  Stakes  and  to  our  High  Coun-
cils; how  ought  they  to  feel  ?  That
we  are  the  servants  of  the  living  God;
that  the  eye  of  the  great  Jehovah  is
over  us,  and  that  we  are  operating  in
the  interests  of  Zion  and  for  her  wel-
fare in  all  things  pertaining  to  time
and  eternity.  If  they  do  not  do  I
Mi  is,  God  will  be  after  them,  and  |


they  will  feel  his  hand  upon  them.
For  as  I  have  said,  we  are  not  her©
to  build  up  ourselves,  hut  to  build
up  Zion  and  establish  the  principle*
of  righteousness  upon  the  earth.
That  is  our  railing,  that  is  what  the
Priesthood  is  conferred  upon  us  fort
and  it  beh*  ovt  s  us  to  magnify  it  and
honor  our  God,  Be  govt  rued  bj
integrity  and  truthfulness,  and  never
allow  yourselves  to  he  bartered  or
sold  in  the  interests  of  anybody,  t  ufc
operate  for  Israel,  doing  justice  be-
fore God  and  the  angels  and  all  good
men.

And  then  we  have  our  Bishops;
they  have  their  place  in  our  midst,
t>  at  ten  I  to  the  interests  of  their
several  Wards,  to  look  more  particu-
larly after  the  temporal  afftirs  of  the
people,  and  act  and  counsel  them  as
fathers  for  their  good  ;  and  no*  in
their  o*n  interests,  but  fur  the  good
and  benefit  of  the  whole  Aud  thori,
in  the  capacity  of  High  Priests,  to
take  charge  of  meeting*,  and  instruct
and  counsel  those  of  their  wards,
always  setting  a  pattern  in  all  that
is  upright,  good  and  noble,  saying
to  the  people,  Follow  me,  as  I  follow
Christ.  And  a«  common  judges  ia
Israel,  they  should  he  jealous  of  the
people's  rights,  adjudicating  all  mut-
ters that  may  come  before  them  ia
nil  righteousness.

Then  we  come  to  our  Priests,  and
what  are  they  to  do  I  1  (in  not
think  I  need  tell  you,  for  J  have
heard  brother  Richards  tell  you.
They  should  visit  from  bouse  to
house,  and  see  that  there  are  na
hard  feelings  existing  in  those  house-
holds, or  between  the  inabitants  of
different  households ;  and  such  inert
ought  to  be  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
standing  as  watchmen  over  the  Hock
committed  to  their  care,  trying  to
put  things  right,  and  to  keep  them
right.  The  Teachers  should  be  their
assistants,  whose  duty  it  is  to*see


that  there  is  no  iniquity  of  any
kind,  and  that  righteousness  and
truth  prevail  among  the  people.
Ami  then,  the  Deacons  should  be
active  in  their  place  and  calling,
stain  ling  side  by  side  with  the  Bish-
ops, assisting  them  in  all  their  tem-
poral duties,  operating  together  as
one  family.  And  then  everything
will  move  on  harmoniously  and
pleasantly,  for  through  these  ordi-
nances come  the  blessings,  we  are
told  in  the  revelation  ;  and  without
them  the  power  of  godliness  is  not
manifested  to  men  in  the  flesh..  God
placed  in  the  Church,  Apostles,  Pro-
phets, etc.,  for  the  perfecting  of  the
Saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,
for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of
Christ ;  that  we  may  all  grow  toge-
ther to  a  perfect  man,  to  the  full
measure  of  the  stature  of  Christ.
This  Priesthood  and  our  Church
organization  are  introduced  for  this
purpose,  not  to  make  big  men  of
some,  and  little  men  of  others  j  for
I  tell  you,  I  would  rather  see  a  Dea-
con magnify  his  calling,  than  an
Apostle  who  treats  his  indifferently.
We  must  seek  to  magnify  our  offices,
and  not  expect  our  offices  to  magni-
fy us.

I  will  here  refer  to  the  young
people.  I  find  a  very  good  spirit
growing  up  through  the  Territory,
associated  with  the  Young  Men's
*nd  Young  Women's  Improvement
Societies.  It  is  very  gratify ing,  and
we  trust  that  the  youth  of  Ziou  will
continue  to  search  after  God  and  a
knowledge  of  his  ways,  for  I  want
to  say  to  you  young  men,  that  by
and  by  the  burden  of  thus  work  will
fall  on  your  shoulders,  and  it  is
pleasing  to  God  and  all  good  men,
that  you  should  prepare  yourselves
for  the  labor  ami  responsibility  to
which  you  are  fast  approaching.
And  I  wish  to  say  to  you  further,
that  if  you  will  go  before  the  Lord


j  in  all  humility,  and  ask  him  for
|  wisdom  and  intelligence,  your  pray
ers  will  be  heard.  You  are  com-
manded to  .search  after  wisdom  from
the  best  of  books,  and  also  through
faith  ;  and  I  will  promise  you  that
diligent  study  of  our  own  works  will
place  you  in  possession  of  a  fund  of
knowledge  that  you  never  dreamed
of.  And  then  devote  your  leisure
time  to  the  acquisition  of  such  useful
knowledge  as  can  be  obtained
through  the  schools,  and  from  works
on  the  sciences  ;  but  do  not  be  led
by  their  nonsense,  and  scepticism,
and  false  theories.  And  in  doing
this,  seek  earnestly  for  the  Spirit  of
God  to  aid  you,  to  enlighten  your
mind,  that  you  may  the  better  com-
prehend truth,  and  be  able  to  dis-
card error.  And  when  you  meet
together,  let  your  hearts  be  set  on
the  worship  of  God,  and  you  will
grow  up  in  his  fear,  and  your  de-
light will  be  in  doing  good  and
laboring  in  the  interest  of  his  cause
on  the  earth.

Now  a  few  words  to  the  sisters.
They  have  their  Relief  Societies  and
Retrenchment  Societies,  and  their
Mutual  Improvement  Societies,  all
of  which  are  very  laudable  and
praiseworthy.  You  heard  quoted
this  morning  that  the  man  was  not
without  the  woman,  nor  the  woman
without  the  man,  in  the  Lord.  Or
in  other  words,  it  takes  a  woman
and  a  man  to  make  a  man.  Did
you  ever  think  about  that,  that
without  a  union  of  the  sexes  we  are
not  perfect  f  God  lias  so  ordained
it.  And  therefore  do  we  expect  to
have  our  wives  in  the  future  state?
Ye%  And  do  wives  expect  to  have
their  husbands  ?  Yes.  Are  we
engaged  in  building  up  the  kingdom
of  God  f  Yes,  What  have  we  to
do  I  Why,  our  sisters  have  to  learn
to  manage  their  household  affairs  in
a  proper  manner,  and  to  train  their


JUL  UN  A  L  OF  DISCOURSES


daughters  in  such  a  manner  as  will
prepare  them  to  become  mothers  in
Israel,  competent  to  attend  to  the
various  duties  and  responsibilities
which  must  sooner  or  later  devolve
upon  them  in  the  household,  and
also  cultivate  their  nobler  qualities,
calculated  to  elevate  and  exalt  wo-
man in  the  estimation  of  God  and
man  ;  and  not  only  your  daughters,
but  sons  also  ;  begin  early  to  teach
them  meekness,  kindness  and  gen-
tleness, and  withhold  not  from  them
such  training  as  will  give  them  an
acquaintance  with  the  common
branches  of  education,  and,  if  possi-
ble, afford  them  a  knowledge  of
science,  aiul  of  music,  and  everything
that  will  have  a  tendency  to  lead
their  minds  to  find  enjoyment  in
the  development  of  the  mind,  but
be  sure  and  have  for  your  base,  or
foundation,  the  early  cultivation  of
the  virtues,  and  a  due  regard  to
their  superiors,  as  well  as  reverence
for  God  and  sacred  things.  And
w  hat  next  ?  Teach  others  who  lack
the  opportunity  that  your  children
may  possess.  Sisters,  you  are  emi-
nently constituted  for  this  work.
God  has  given  you  both  the  desire
and  ability  to  do  it ;  you  can  enter
into  the  sympathies  of  others,  and
you  can  better  appreciate  their  feel-
ings than  we  men  can,  and  you  are
altogether  more  competent  to  mini-
ster in  such  affairs-  Hence  the  Pro-
phet Joseph  Smith,  in  his  day,  orga-
nized a  Female  Relief  Society  ;  some
of  you  sisters  now  before  me  I  re-
member seeing  present  on  that  occa-
sion* Sister  Emma  Smith  was  Pre-
sident of  that  Society,  sister  Whit-
ney, now  of  Salt  Lake  City,  was  one
of  her  Counselors,  sister  Cleveland
was  the  other  Counselor,  and  sister
Eliza  Snow  was  Secretary.  This
movement,  under  the  auspices  of  the
Kelief  Societies,  was  allowed  to  sleep
for  a  while,  but  it  has  again  began


to  awaken,  ami  great  good  is  being
accomplished.  And  what  do  we
want  to  teach  our  good  sisters  ?  I
do  not  propose  to  go  into  details,
but  will  merely  say  they  should  be
things  most  elevating  and  useful
Teach  them  to  cook  aright,  to  dress
aright,  and  to  speak  aright ;  also  to
govern  their  feelings  and  tongues,
and  unfold  unto  them  the  principles
of  the  Gospel  Let  the  elderly
ladies  teach  the  younger  ones,  lead-*
ing  them  on  in  the  paths  of  life,  that
we  may  have  sisters  growing  up,
whose  goodness  and  praiseworthy
principles  will  make  them  fit  to
associate  with  the  angels  of  God
And  if  you  persevere  in  this  good
work,  God  will  bless  you  and  your
efforts.  Let  male  and  female  oper-
ate together  in  the  one  great  com-
mon cause.  Sisters,  let  it  be  your
dailv  study  to  make  your  homes
comfortable,  more  and  more  pleasant
and  agreeable,  in  fact,  a  little  heaven
on  earth.  And  brethren,  let  us
treat  our  wives  properly,  and  pre-
pare proper  phices  for  them ;  be
kind  to  them,  and  feel  to  bless  them
all  the  day  long-  Do  away  with
unkind  or  harsh  words,  ami  do  not
allow  hard  feelings  to  exist  in  your
hearts,  or  find  place  in  your  habita-
tions. Love  one  another,  and  by
each  trying  to  enhance  the  welfare
of  the  other,  that  element  will
characterize  the  family  circle,  and
your  children  will  partake  of  the
same  feeling,  and  they  in  turn  will
imitate  your  good  example,  and
perpetuate  the  things  they  learn  at
home.

There  is  another  subject  I  wish
to  refer  to,  which  was  introduced
this  morning  by  brother  Joseph  F.
Smith.  He  said,  in  speaking  on
Tithing,  that  if  all  of  the  brethren
would  pay  their  Tithing,  there  would
be  no  need  to  call  for  donations,  I
am  precisely  of  the  same  opinion.


THE  GOSPEL  REVEALED,  ETC*


247


But  then  all  of  you  have  not  done
this,  neither  do  you  do  it  "  But
are  you  in  hopes  that  something  of
that  kind  will  be  accomplished  f9
Yes,  of  course  we  are.  \V\dI.  how
is  it  now  with  our  Temple  affairs,
there  has  been  a  change  made  in
relation  to  these  matters!  The
High  Priests  and  Seventies  were
called  upon  to  contribute  in  this
direction,  and  they  did  it,  and  did
well,  which  is  praiseworthy.  If  I
remember  correctly,  the  whole
amount  subscribed  during  the  year
was  some  sixty- three  thousand  dol-
lars, and  this  act  not  only  facilitated
the  building  of  the  Temple,  but  also
rendered  employment  to  a  great
many  of  our  brethren.  Now,  Pre-  i
sident  Young,  before  he  left  us,
said  that  after  the  Stakes  of  Zion
were  organized,  these  subscriptions
should  be  made  through  the  Bishops,
instead  of  through  the  Presidents  of
these  several  Quorums.  Borne  would  I
be  reaily  to  suggest  that  we  do  away
with  that,  and  use  the  Tithing  in-
stead, I  am,  as  I  have  said,  in
hopes  that  we  will  be  able  to  do
that  by  and  by,  but  I  do  not  think
you  can  to-day.  We  wish  to  take  ,
a  steady,  even  course,  and  advance
in  improvements  gradually,  as  our
way  shall  open.  I  will  show  you
what  effect  these  sudden  change©
has.  We  talk  about  the  Seventies,
and  the  High  Priest  and  Elders,
and  what  they  have  done.  But  it  is
not  generally  known  that  the  result
of  that  sudden  change  was  tlmt
Bishop  Hunter  had  to  furnish  sup-
plies for  30  or  60  men  out  of  the
Tithing  Office.  And  our  experience
convinces  us  that  any  sudden  changes
in  relation  to  these  matters,  might
prove  disastrous,  causing  perhaps  the
stoppage  of  some  of  ofir  works.

I  tiud  there  is  Considerable  means
owing  by  the  Church,  and  I  will  speak
a  little  about  that,  believing  as  I  do


that  in  making  such  things  public,
that  all  may  have  an  understanding
of  our  position.  There  were  some
propositions  made  to  the  Twelve,'
when  they  were  in  Cache  Valley,
lately,  the  auhstance  of  which  was
in  the  form  of  a  request  th*t  the
Tithinsr  of  that  Temple  District,
comprising  three  Stakes,  be  used  on
the  Temple  now  building.  This,
doubtless,  seemed  very  desirable  to
them,  but  some  of  us  thought,  and
so  expressed  ourselves,  that  if  this
request  were  granted,  then  the  people
of  the  other  two  Temple  districts
would,  of  course,  want  the  same
fa vor  extended  to  them,  which  could
not  well  be  denied.  And  if  this  were
done,  how  could  we  meet  all  the  other
expenses?  Perhaps  some  of  you
wise  men  can  tell  me;  the  brethren
of  Cache  Valley  could  not.  There
are  thousands  of  dolhtrs  owing  in
different  directions,  which  I  am  con-
stantly called  upon  to  meet,  and  if
our  resources  were  stopped,  we  could
not  carry  out  certain  public  labors
required  of  us,  and  should  be  unable
to  pay  our  debts.  Bat,  with  the
hearty  and  continued  co-operation  of
ray  brethrn,  I  am  in  hopes  that  we
will  so  work  things  before  very  long,
that  we  shall  be  able  to  eise  op  in
gome  of  these  mat  (era,  am  have
things  move  along  a  little  more
agreeable.  We  do  not  wish  anybody
to  feel  oppressed  or  crowded,  buv
on  the  other  hand,  we  want  to  (eel  as
we  sing  sometime.* — ^\\e  are  the
five- born  sons  of  Zion,*1  etc.;  and
that  it  is  "All  free  gnce  and  free
will."  I  mention  these  things  to
show  you  til nt  there  are  responsibil-
ities that  many  of  the  people  little
dream  of,

Bro.  Jn&eph  mentioned  one  thing
this  morning  to  which  1  think  I
should  have  demurred  a  little,  and
I  think  you  will  when  I  tell  you.  In
speaking  about  the  poor  people,  that


JOURNAL  OF  DISGOUIISKS


they  seemed  to  pet  along  very  well,
etc.,  and  that  it  was  necessary  some-
times fnr  the  Lord  to  humble  the  rich,  j
etc.,  which  things  are  s[>okcn  of  in
the "  Doctrine and Covenants.*'  ,
But  what  of  some  of  (he  others — ,
those  who  cannot  be  said  to  be  either
rich  or  poor  r I  want  to  refer  to  nn
item. There  is  owm^  to  1  lie  Per-
pet  nil  Emigrating  Fund  Company,
up  ■ aids  of  a  million  of  dollars;  the
nature  of  this  indebtedness  you  aie
acquainted  with. Certa'n  brethren
have  been  assisted  here  and  von  have
joined  in  tendering  that  assistance.
They  hsive  since  come  in  possession
of  ineuis and  property  of  various
kinds,  but  they  have  nut  settled  for
their  emigration  indented  nesn*  And
this  debt  hag  increased  to  this  enor-
mous sum,  and  it  hangs  in  ibis  posi-
tion to-day. Is  this  right? Is  it
just  ? I  am  inclined  to  think,  with
the  president  of  the  company,  that
if  we  only  have  the  patience,  the
thing  will  be  completely  hung  by  and
by,  it  is  only  a  question  of  time.  Bat
then  this  state  of  things  I  look  upon
as  an  outrage  to  the  coin ni unity,  and
a  greater  outrage  to  the  good  atid
worthy  poor  who  are  ungathered,  who
are  crying  for  assistance, And  the
Church  has  listened  to  these  cries,
and  has  advanced  a  large  amount  of
means,  at  one  time  and  another,  to
do what thestf once- poor  people
ahould  have  done,  but  have  not  done.
Now  I  would  ask,  shall  these  things
continue  ? I  hope  not;  1  trust  that
those  who  are  indebted  to  this  Fund
will  have  more  "  bowels  of  com  pas*
sion." How  anxious  you  were,  when
in  foreign  lands,  to  get  to  Zion ;  and
you  felt  when  assistance  reached  you,
that  one  of  the  first  tilings  you  would
do,  would  be  to  extend  the  same  to
others. Let  us  be  reminded  of  these
obligations,  and  see  that  they  are
paid.

There  is  another  subject  I  want  to


speak  on,  that  is  our  school  opera-
tions. You  have  elected  me  Super-
intendent of  Common  Schools,  and
I  feel  a  good  deal  of  interest  in  the
welfare  of  Common Schools,  and
also  in  all  of  our  institutions  of  learn-
ing, when*  good  education  c:ui  be
had, for  I lipid interested in  our
youth,  Hiid  I  take  this  opportunity
to  speak  to  the  whole  county  in  rela-
tion this  matter, I  can  perceive
quite  an  interest  in  educational  mat.
ters,  manifesting  itself  in  our  breth-
ren who  preside  here  ;  and  I  am  much
gratified in it. I hope  that  this
whole  county  will  go  at  this  matter
in  all  good  faith,  and  where  you  hick
good school -houses  put  them  up;
and  when  you  have  already  the  school-
house,  but  lack  the  furniture,  *<et  it
and  try  to  m;ike  the  school  -  house
comfortable for  the  children ;  and
then  good teachers  who are  good
Latter-day  Sum  La, Shall  we  have
them,  or  shidl  we  employ  teachers
i  hat  will  turn  the  infant  minds  of  our
children  away from the  principles
of  the  Gas  pel, and per  Imps  lead
them  to  darkness  and  death  V  Some
say,  "  You  ought  to  b«  very  gener-
ous, quite  hh  liberal  and  generous  as
others/' I  think  so, J3ut  if  some
of  these  liberal  people,  who  talk  so
much  about  liberality,  would  show
a  little  more  of  it,  we  would  appre-
ciate it  a  little  better, I  would  like
to  know  if  a  Methodist  would  send
his  children  to  a  li>man  Catholic
School,  or  vice  vn<sa  ? I  think  not.
I  Jo  either  send their  children  to
41  Mormon"  schools,  or  employ  4t  Mor-
mon1* teachers  ? 1  think  not*  Do
we  object  to  it? No,  we  do  not;
we  accord  to  all  classes  their  rights,
and  we  claim  rights  equal  with  them.
Well,  shall  we,  after  goiug  to  the
ends  of  the  earth  to  gather  people
to  Ziorj,  in  order  that  they  may  learn
I  more  perfectly  of  His  ways  and  walk
'  in  His  paths,  shall  we  then  allow  our


BLESSING  THE  RESULT  OF  OBEDIENCE,  ETC.


children  to  be  at  the  mercy  of  those
who  would  lend  them  down  to  death
again  ?  God  forbid  !  Let  our
teachers  be  men  of  God,  men  of
honor  and  integrity,  and  let  us  afford
our  children  such  learning  as  will
pUee  our  com  inanity  in  the  front
nuka  in  educational  as  well  as  reli-
gious matters.  Bat  would  we  inter-
fere with  other  religious  denomina-
tions ?  No.  Prevent  them  from
bending  their  children  where  and  to
whom  they  please  ?  No.  Or  from
shipping  where  they  please  ?  No.
I  would  not  put  a  hair  in  their  way,
nor  interfere  with  them  in  any  pos-
sible wiiy ;  they  c*m  take  their  course,
and  we  want  the  same  privilege.

With  regard  to  some  of  these  other
things  winch  I  have  referred  to,  I


would  say:  We  wish  to  continue
on  as  we  have  done,  and  aa  soon  as
we  can  see  our  way  out,  we  will  make
things  more  agreeable. Tbeae  are

my  feelings;  but  in  the  meantime,
there  will  be  no  radical  change*.
We  started  in  with  the  intention  of
carrying  out  the  views  of  President
Young,  and  we  purpose  to  do  it;  but
should  we,  by  and  by  see  a  better
way,  one  that  suits  us  better,  that
would  be  more  pleasant  all  around,
we  will  then  adopt  it.  In  the  mean-
time, we  will  stick  to  the  rod  of  iron,
and  humble  ourselves  before  God,
seeking  to  do  His  will  in  all  things;
and  by  and  by,  when  we  shall  have
done  our  wotk  on  earth,  will  obtain
nn  inheritance  in  the  celestial  king-
dom of  our  Father.  Amen


DISCOURSE BY ELDER CHARLES C.  RICH,

Delivered  at  the  Quarterly  Confkrbncb  held  jjf  Paris,  Bear  Lake

County,  Idaho,  Fkb.  10,  1878*


(Reported  by  James  If.  Hart.)

BLESSING  THE  RESULT  OF  OBEDIENCE  TO  LAW — OUR  AGENCY  IN  THK
FLESH— THE  ADVANTAGES  UF  UNION — ORDER  IN  THE  KINGDOM  OP
CUD— THE  ETEKNAL  \V  All  FA  RE  BETWEEN  GOOD  AND  EVIL.


Brethren  and  sisters,  I  am  pleased
to  have  the  opportunity  of  meeting
with  you  in  Conference.  I  have
enjoyed  myself  very  much  while
listening  to  the  reports  of  the  Bish-j
ops,  and  also  to  those  who  have
addressed  us. We  have  had  some


excellent  instructions  during  the
Conference,  1  am  glad  to  meet  so
many  of  the  Saints,  I  will  say,
however,  that  I  feel  of  myself  very
weak,  and  I  desire  the  prayers  of
the  Saints,  that  I  may  be  able  to
instruct  you. 1  desire  to  speak  to


250


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


your  edification,  but  that  depends
upon  tht1  Holy  Spirit,  without  which
no  one  can  instruct  and  edify  the
Sain  Us.  I  trust  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  will  he  with  us  this  afternoon,
that  I  mar,  perad venture,  he  a
means  of  blessing  and  building  you
up  in  the  principles  of  the  Gospel.
I  will  read,  for  your  instruction,
from  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  and  will  give  you  some
keys  by  which  you  may  unlock  th«
treasures  of  the  Gospel  Page  424,
new  edition  :  u  Mine  house  is  a
house  of  order,  and  not  of  confu-
sion/' etc.  Page  421  :  "All  bles-
sings are  predicated  on  law/'  etc.  I
have  read  these  passages  because  to
me  they  are  important,  and  they
are  important  to  you  also.  We
learn  from  the  revelations  we  have
just  read,  that  it  was  ordained  be-
fore the  foundation  of  the  world
how  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel
were  tu  be  obtained,  and  why  some
people  could  not  attain  to  certain
blessings.  We  are  told  they  could
not  obtain  these  blessings  because
they  did  not  abide  by  the  law.  As
Latter-day  Saints,  it  is  important
that  we  understand  the  principles
of  salvation,  that  we  may  be  enabled
to  comprehend  and  obtain  all  the
keys,  principles,  and  blessings  per-
taining thereto.  It  was  a  long  time
after  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  had
received  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of
God,  and  after  Hyrum  and  others
had  received  many  blessings,  that
the  Lord  gave  Joseph  a  revelation,
to  show  him  and  others  how  they
could  ask  for  and  receive  certain
blessings.  We  read  in  the  revela-
tions of  St  John,  that  the  Saints
are  to  receive  a  white  stone,  "  and
in  the  stone  a  new  name,  which  no
man  knoweth  save  him  that  receiv-
eth  it1'  Joseph  tells  us  that  this
new  name  is  a  key-word,  which  can
only  be  obtained  through  the  en-


dowments. This  is  one  of  the  key*
and  blessings  that  will  be  bestowed
upon  the  Saints  in  these  last  days,
for  which  we  should  be  very  thank-
ful, *

In  the  first  instructions  we  re-
ceived from  the  Elders,  we  were
told  we  must  repent  of  our  sins  and
he  baptized,  in  order  to  receive  the
Holy  Spirit,  and  that  we  had  no
claims  ujion  the  Lord  for  his  Spirit,
until  we  had  complied  with  the  re-
quirements made  of  us.  I  remem-
ber very  well  my  feelings  upon  this
subject  before  I  obeyed  the  Gospel,
I  studied  carefully,  anxiously,  and
prayerfully,  that  1  might  know  if  it
were  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ,
I  did  not  want  to  run  any  risk  in
the  matter,  an  1  remain  in  uncer-
tainty. I  was  willing  to  do  any-
thing that  would  give  me  a  know-
ledge of  the  truth.  I  was  willing  to
receive  it  through  the  ministration
of  an  angel,  through  direct  revelar-
tion,  or  by  any  other  way,  but  I  did
not  want  to  be  deceived.  Every
time  I  reflected  carefully  upon  the
subject,  I  came  to  this  point — the
conditions  upon  which  the  promises
have  been  made  are,  repentance,
baptism,  and  imposition  of  hands.
The  spirit  would  then  whisper,  you
have  not  been  baptized,  you  have
not  obeyed  the  Gospel  ;  but  when  I
had  complied  with  the  law,  then  I
had  a  perfect  claim  to  the  blessings
and  the  promises,  and  did  receive
them,  and  obtained  a  perfect  know*
ledge  of  the  truth,  and  could  then
bear  a  testimony  of  it  to  all  the
world.  I  mention  these  things  to
show  you  the  principles  we  have  to
act  upon  in  order  to  obtain  the
blessings  of  salvation  and  eternal
life.  And  I  can  testify  that  the
Lord  has  fulfilled  his  prom i sets,  and
has  jxmred  out  his  Spirit  upon  the
people,  through  baptism  and  tl>e
laying  on  of  hands. So  that


BLESSING  THE  RESULT  OF  OBEDIENCE,  ETC,  t


the  keys  given  for  our  introduction
into  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ,
are  as  effectual  in  this  our  day  as
they  were  in  the  days  of  the  former
Apostles.  Some  might  say,  Why
would  not  some  other  ordinance  do
as  well  ]  Simply  because  these  were
the  principles  ordained  fur  that  pur-
pose before  the  world  was.  It  is
not  a  new  feature  in  the  Gospel,
something  started  a  lew  years  ago.
From  what  I  have  read,  we  find
they  are  eternal  principles ;  that
they  existed  and  were  ordained  for
our  salvation  before  the  foundation
of  the  world,  and  cannot  be  changed.
We  must  comply  with  the  principles
of  the  eternal  law,  in  order  to  ob-
tain eternal  blessings*  I  want  to
impress  these  principles  upon  your
minds,  for  there  is  no  u  think  so"
and  £*  guess  so"  about  these  things,
for  the  Lord  himself  lias  decreed
them,  and  I  bear  record  that  they
are  true.  I  hope  these  principles
will  make  a  lasting  impression  upon
your  minds,  that  you  may  devote
yourselves  more  fully  to  the  service
of  the  Lord,  and  faithfully  obey  all
the  commandments  which  he  has
given  us,  and  may  give  us  hereafter.
There  is  another  principle  to  w hich
I  will  call  your  attention  ;  that  is,
the  pre-exist e nee  of  spirits.  Before
we  came  into  this  world  we  hail  an
existence  with  the  Father  in  the
heavens.  We  are  eternal  beings.
How  do  you  know  that  1  one  might
say*  We  know  it  by  the  revelations
of  Jesus  Christ,  which  bring  life  and
immortality  to  light.  It  was  reveal
ed  to  Abraham  and  many  of  the
ancient  Prophets,  and  it  has  been
revealed  unto  us  in  these  the  last
days.  We  are  told  that  before  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  had  an  exist-
ence in  the  flesh,  they  had  an  exist-
ence in  the  spirit  world  ;  and  that  it
was  necessary  to  come  into  this  w  orld
and  be  clothed  with  mortality.  And


why  was  it  necessary  1  Because  we
could  not  attain  to  an  exaltation

,  without  coming  here.  Many  people
think  this  is  a  world  of  sorrows,  and
a  very  horrid  world  to  live  in.  So
it  may  seem  to  some  people,  but  I
think  that  it  is  a  glorious  world,  for
it  is  here  we  are  enabled  to  obtain
our  blessings  and  endowments.  We
come  into  this  world  weak  and  frail
mortals  We  have  an  agency  given
us,  with  an  opportunity  of  doing
good  and  evil.  We  are  invited  to
obey  the  Gospel,  winch  embraces
principles  that  will  endow  the  will-
ing and  obedient  with  exaltation
and  eternal  life.  But  our  agency  is>
not  taken  from  us.  We  have  placed
before  us  light  and  darkness,  the-
bitter  and  the  sweet,  exaltation  and
degradation,  life  and  death,  and  we
have  reason  and  intelligence  given
us,  by  which  to  judge  and  choose  for
ourselves.  By  choosing  the  good
and  obeying  the  principles  of  truths
we  are  entitled  to  the  spirit  of  revel-
ation, and  by  that  spirit  only  can  we
know  God  the  eternal  Father,  and
his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  Is  it  not  im-
portant that  we  should  know  God  ?
Surely  it  is  ;  for  to  know  God,  and
his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  is  eternal  life.
So  notwithstanding  \re  have  our
trials  and  sufferings  here,  we  have
joys  and  happiness  likewise,  and  we
learn  to  discern  and  appreciate  the
difference  between  good  and  evil.
An  opportunity  is  also  afforded  us
in  this  world  to  increase  in  faith  and
wisdom,  and  in all that  leads  to

!  exaltation  and  eternal  life.  And  we
are  told  that  all  the  intelligence  we
gain  in  this  world  will  rise  up  with
us  in  the  resurrection.  Now,  who
is  there  among  the  Saints  that  does
not  want  to  learn  something  con-
cerning the  principles  of  life  and
salvation?  We  should,  above  all
people,  be  diligent  in  seeking  to
know  the  principles  of  truth,  that


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


we  may  obtain  eternal  life,  We  can
use  the  keys  ami  principles  tliat  we
have  received  to  obtain  tins  know-
ledge, and  what  is  there  pertaining
to  the  Gospel  that  we  cannot  learn
if  we  are  faithful  ?  If  we  do  not
know  all  that  is  necessary  for  our
advancement,  it  is  our  privilege  to
go  to  some  person  who  does  know*
And  when  wt>  understand  how  to
use  the  keys  and  principles  our-
selves, we  can  then  teach  others,  for
all  who  have  received  the  Gospel
are  expected  to  practice  its  princi-
ples in  their  lives,  and  to  devote
their  energies  and  lives  to  the  esta-
blishment of  truth  and  righteous-
ness upon  the  earth.  Are  we  doing
this?  Are  we  doing  our  duty  as
faints  of  God  I  Or  are  we  passing
away  our  time  idly  and  indifferently]
If  so,  v  e  are  doing  ourselves  an  in-
jury, and  we  thus  deprive  ourselves
of  the  blessings  promised  to  the
faithful.

There  is  another  great  principle
often  brought  before  us,  that  may
be  considered  a  very  common  prin-
ciple. It  is  the  principle  of  Union.
We  arc  told  by  the  Savior  that  we
must,  he  united,  or  we  are  not  his,
Dues  this  concern  ns  as  Latter* day
Saints  ?  I  think  it  does,  but  some
<io  not  seem  ill  any  way  concerned
about  it,  notwithstanding  the  word
of  the  Lord,  that  otherwise  we  fc*  are
none  of  his.'*  How  can  we  be  united
fo  as  to  be  acceptable  to  God  ?  We
have  to  be  u ruled,  not  merely  in
doctrinal  matters,  but  in  everv  other
way.  So  tar  as  doctrine  is  Cuueei  ned,
we  are  pretty  well  united,  but  not  so
in  our  temporal  affairs.  But  we  may
Ltcome  united  in  onr  temporal  affairs,
if  we  are  williug  to  learu  some  prac-
tical lessons  that  have  been  taught
us,  and  uniting  in  their  execution  j  by
♦entering  into  them  with  all  our  heart
und  our  means,  we  may  then  be
united in temporal matters  also.


There  is  but  one  way  to  be  united,
according  to  the  will  of  God,  and
that  is  by  being  dictated  in  our  af-
fnirt  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.
When  we  were  baptized  we  received
the  spirit  of  the  Gospel,  and  by  that
spirit  we  obtained  a  knowledge  of
its  truth.  And  the  same  spirit  we
then  received,  if  it  continues  with
us,  will  lead  us  into  all  truth  and
reveal  to  us  thiugn  to  come.  We
have  need  of  revelation  at  every
step  after  we  are  baptized,  tor  when
we  take  a  t^p  it  ought  to  be  a  right
step,  and  the  only  right  at*p  wo
can  hike  will  be  one  that  is  in  ac-
cordance with  the  principles  of  truth,
as  dictated  by  those  authorized  to
teach  and  instruct  the  Saints.  This
is  the  only  principle  on  which  we  can
be  united,  and  when  this  principle
fully  is  curried  out,  then  perfect  union
will  exist  among  the  Saints.

I  temember  once  being  sick,  but
I  scarcely  realized  that  1  was  sick,
for  my  mind  wiis  bright  and  active,
l»  uring  t tie  night  the  Spirit  rested
upon  me,  and  the  principles  of  the
Millennium  were  opened  up  to  me.
It  seemed  to  me  that,  all  was  hap-
piness and  union.  Now  what  will
it  require  to  bring  abjut  the  Millen-
nium ?  In  the  that  place  every  man
will  have  to  learn  Ins  duty,  and  do
it,  E^eh  one  must  study  his  neigh-
bor's interest  as  well  as  his  own.
No  one  will  do  that  which  would
conflict  with  hia  brother's  interest,
and  no  man  would  wilfully  infringe
upon  his  neighbor's  rights  and  pri-
vileges. Now  if  all  had  learned  their
duty  and  were  doing  it  faithfully,  it
would  bring  about  a  reign  of  peace
and  righteousness,  and  knowledge
would  cover  the  earth.  If  these
principles  were  understood  aud  car*
ricd  out,  we  should  have  no  reason
to  tiud  fault  with  each  other.  Are
we  seeking  after  these  things  ?  I
tmst  we  are,  and  I  feel  rejoiced  at


BLESSING  THE  RESULT  OF  OBEDIENCE,  ETC.


2«1


the  progress  we  are  making  as  a  peo-  I
pie,  although  we  come  far  short  of
that  we  should  attain  unto.  We
mn4  have  oar  minds  fixed  on  this
subject,  and  be  determined  to  re-
ceive these  truths?,  and  live  for  them.
This  should  be  our  first  and  last
thought  everv  dav,  and  wo  should
not  be  contented  till  we  rmdiz  1  onr
desires  in  righteousness.  Some  per-
sons think  that  a  few  prayers  offered
to  the  Lord  will  be  all-sufficient  in
securing  their  salvation.  It  is  very
good  to  pray,  but  something  is  re-
quired besides  praying  ;  for  example,
we  most  be  baptized,  for  that  ordi-
nance has  been  instituted  for  the  re-
mission of  sins.  We  need  endow-
ments and  ordinations,  and  they  can
only  be  administered  by  those  hold-
ing the  Priesthood,  for  without  these
gilts  we  could  not  obtain  a  celestial
crown.  We  bestow  the  Priesthood  '
on  many  young  men,  to  bring  them
up  ami  qualify  them  fur  future  use-
fulness. We  want  our  washings  and
anointings,  and  how  can  we  receive
them  without  someone  to  administer
them  to  usr  And  no  one  could  give
them  without  divine  authority.
The  same  words  might  lie  used,  and
the  same  ordinances  ad  ministered
in  the  same  way  precisely,  but  they
would  be  of  no  avail  whatever,  with-
out the  priestly  authority.  Our  hap-
tisms,  confirmations,  ordinations  and
endowments  can  only  be  administered
by  those  who  are  ordained  and  set
apart  to  administer  them.  The  law
must  be  complied  with  concerning
these  things  or  the  ordinances  are
void  and  ot  no  effect.  Temples  have
to  be  built  in  which  some  of  these
ordinances  must,  be  performed.  Who
is  to  dictate  concerning  their  con-
struction and  management  ?  The
Lord  himself  controls  these  things,
and  authorizes  whom  he  will.

Some  ini^ht  ask,  Why  Hot  bap-
tize for  the  dead,  and  give  endow-


ments in  this  meeting  house  ?  Just
simply  because  the  Lord  has  not  so
ordered  it.  The  way  and  manner
in  which  these  ordinances  hsve  to
lie  performed  hav£  bet  n  determined
in  the  eternal  world,  and  unless  yon
comply  with  the  requirements  and1
obey  the  la^v,  you  cannot  obtain
the  keys,  and  without,  the  keys  you
cannot  pass  by  the  angels  and  tha
Gods  in  the  eternal  worlds.  For
era pn pie,  yon  cannot  attain  to  an
exaltation  without  a  wife,  or  wives;
and  you  ladies  cannot  he  exalted
without  a  husband.  "For  man  is
not  without  the  woman  nor  the  *>o-
•  an  without  the  man  in  the  Lord/*
So  said  the  Apostle  Paul.  What,
then,  will  be  the  situation  of  those
who  remain  single,  and  do  not  attain
to  an  exaltation  ?  We  learn  from
the  re  velar  ions  that  they  will  be  an-
!  gels.  Some  people  think  that  an-
!  gels  are  the  most  exalted  and  glo-
rious beings  iu  the  eternal  world ;
but  this  is  a  mistake.  If  it  will
,  satisfy  any  of  you  to  receive  that
glory  it  will  not  sati*fy  me.  Now
we  understand  that  in  order  to  ob-
tain an  exaltation  we  must  have  a
wife,  and  we  have  to  comply  with
the  celestial  law,  so  as  to  have  her
in  the  eternal  world.  In  the  firafc
place,  we  must  receive  her  from  Hie
man  whom  God  has  authorised  and
appointed  to  se-d  tor  time  and  eter-
nity, otherwise  we  have  no  claim  on  her
in  the  eternal  world.  Peihaps  soma
do  not  care  much  about  r he  other
world.  Such  persons  remind  me  of
a  man  I  knew  in  California,  who  be-
came acquainted  with  and  courted  a
lady  whose  husband  was  dead.  He
was  told  that  the  lady  was  st  aled  to
>  another  man  for  eternity  ;  he  replied
he  did  not  care,  all  he  wanted  was  to
marry  her  for  this  life,  he  d  d  not
cure  about  the  ot.>er  world.  Such
a  man  will  not  attain  to  an  txalta-
1  tion, Some  persons  may  be  satis-


JUl  UN  A  . >t> -.  jL'i.m,.-,.


fied  without  a  complete  exaltation.
I  do  not  feel  so,  [  feel  my  nn*
worthiness  and  my  inability  to  speak
as  I  would  like,  and  if  I  did  nut
know  it  was  my  duty,  I  would  shrink
from  this  undertaking;  but  I  feel  it
my  duty  to  declare  faithfully  the
Counsels  of  God,  to  instruct  the  Smuts
if j  their  duties,  and  tell  tliem  how
they  can  obtain  salvation.  When  I
have  done  this  I  have  done  my  duty.
Every  man  and  woman  can  obtain
and  enjov  the  spirit  of  revelation,  so
hh  to  guide  them  in  the  path  of  duty,
and  if  we  are  nil  guided  by  the  same
spirit,  and  m  11  our  actions  are  dictated
by  its  influences,  we  shall  then  enjoy
happiness  and  peace.

We  have  co-operative  institutions
established  among  us,  and  if  they
are  conducted  properly  they  will  be
a  blessing  to  us*  How  shall  we
carry  on  onr  co-operative  institu
(ions  so  as  to  be  approver!  of  hea-
ven r3  They  must  be  dictated  by  the
spirit  of  revelation,  for  unless  they
are  dictated  and  controlled  by  that
spirit  they  are  in  danger  of  being
overthrown.  If  we  build  up  insti-
tutions nn  any  other  foundation  they
will  be  overthrown  sooner  or  later.
If  we  establish  our  institutions  ac-
cording to  the  principles  of  revela-
tion, they  will  be  approved  by  the
Almighty,  and  they  will  be  preserved
when  he  overthrows  the  kingdoms
of  this  world,  Who  would  not  like
to  see  the  co-operative  institutions
growing  up  among  us,  buik  upon  a
firm  foundation  ?  We  should  look
well  to  the  foundation  on  which  we
build,  fur  unless  we  act  upon  correct
principles  we  c  in  not  expect  to  pros-
per.  The  building  that  is  reared
properly  will  stand  the  winds  and
storms  and  will  be  firm  and  solid.
Time  will  tell  whether  we  build  by
the  spirit  of  revelation  or  otherwise.
You  may  be  assured  that  if  we  do
not  our  building  will  be  overthrown.


We  are  dependent  on  the  Almighty
for  the  breath  of  life,  for  the  bread
we  eat,  and  for  every  ble&sing  we
enjoy.  We  need  not  feel  in  any  way
troubled  when  we  see  a  man  lifted
up  in  his  feelings,  and  act  as  though
he  was  some  great  person.  We  are
all  of  us,  mere  worms  of  the  dust,
and  at  best  are  poor  dependent  crea-
tures; but  some  men  appear  to  grow
larger  and  larger  in  their  own  imagi-
nation, and  when  we  see  a  man  as-
cending higher  and  higher  in  his  own
conceit,  it  is  not  always  wi;?e  to  pull
him  down  suddenly,  but  give  him  a
lift,  and  when  he  gets  so  high  that
his  head  swims,  we  can  then  help
him  gently  down.  We  must  learn
to  be  humble,  meek  and  lowly,  or  we
cannot  enjoy  the  spirit  of  the  Lord.

There  is  another  thing  I  wish  to
mention,  and  that  is  the  manner  in
which  we  ishould  treat  each  oLber,
The  principle  was  advanced  an-
ciently, **  Do  unto  others  as  you
would  have  others  do  unto  you,"
This  principle  is  as  binding  upon  us,
as  it  was  upon  the  people  in  former
days,  and  we  need  as  much  urging
to  observe  it  as  they  did.  How
would  we  do  with  the  Lord  if  he  were
here  ?  We  have  his  word  for  it,
that  forasmuch  as  ye  do  it  unto  one
of  the  least  of  these  my  disciples  ye
do  it  unto  me.  If  we  see  a  brother
mistreated,  we  do  not  like  it,  and  we
feel  to  take  his  part.  If  we  do  not
like  to  see  a  brother  mistreated,  we
should  be  the  more  careful  not  to
mistreat  each  other,  for  it  is  displeas*
iug  to  the  Lurd.  What  can  we  pay
concerning  these  things  ?  We  can
say  *i  straight  is  the  gate  and  narrow
is  the  way  that  leadeth  to  the  lives,
and  few  there  be  that  find  it,"  Do
we  all  want  to  find  it  ?  I  do.  And
you  do,  then  let  us  seek  diligently
that  we  may  find  the  right  way —
the  way  God  has  pointed  out  He
has  made  it  plain  before  us,  and  has


KLL'SSING  THE  RESULT  UK  OBEDIENCE,  ETC


255


rule  of  action,  it  would  have  been
better  for  you  if  ycu  bad  never
heard  them.

We  have  been  taught  that  we
have  a  great  work to perform  in
working  out  our  salvation,  in  pro-
moting that  of  our  families,  and  se-
curing  the  salvation of  our  dead
friends. We  cannot  leave  any  of
these  things  undone  and  feel  justi-
titjd  before  God,  and  before  our  dead
friends  when  we  meet  them  in  the
other  world,  and  if  we  do  not  feel
justified  we  shrill  not  feel  very  happy.
An  opportunity  is  now  offered  by
brother  (Jammings,  by  which  some
of  us  may obtain  our  geneologies,
and  we  should  improve  it  as  much
-as  possible. 1  feel  happy  in  being
:ible to  send  to  the  Stares  whera
many  of  my  ancestors  have  lived  and
died,  so  as  to  get  the  names  of  many
of  rny  dead  friends,  that  I  may  do  a
work  for  them  that they had  no
opportunity  of  doing  fur  themselves.
We  have  the  privilege  of  being  bap-
tized for  our  dead,  and  performing
other  ordinances  for  them,  and  thus
became  saviors  on  Mount  Zion.  There
is  a  great  lab^r  to  be  performed  by
more  truth  than  we  do  ? We  hear every  faithful  Saint. There  is  no


told  us  the  manner  in  which  he  is
willing  to  bestow  his  blessings  upon
us.  And  if  we  do  not  obtain  them
it  will  not  be  his  fault.  What  would
be  the  condition  of  society  if  these
principles  were  fully  curried  oMt  ?
We  would  find  a  brother  and  a
friend  in  every  place  where  God  is
known.  No  one  would  have  Any
disposition  to  wrong  his  neighbor.
No  one  would  seek  to  injure  his
brother  or  sister.  Would  it  not  be
good  to  live  in  such  society  ?  In-
stead of  men  striving  to  take  ad-
vantage of  their  fellow  men,  and
seeking  to  aggrandize  and  build  up
themselves  at  the  expense  of  others,
they  w nil  hi  seek  to  bui  ld  up  mil
enrich  others  as  well  as  themselves,
and  instead  of  hungering  and  thirst-
ing after  the  perishable  tilings  of  this
life,  they  would  hunger  and  thirst
after  righteousness.

We  read  in  the  "Book  of  Mor-
mon*' that  Jesns  told  the  Nephites  to
re r urn  home,  for  they  were  not  pre-
pared to  receive  his  words.  They
went  home  and  they  did  prepare
their  hearts  for  tire  reception  of  the
truth. Why do we not  receive


a  great  many  teachings  and  coot*
sels  from  the  servants  of  God.  And
why  do  we  not  receive  more  ?  Per-
ad venture  we  are  not  prepared  to
receive  it.  Why  does  not  the  Al-
mighty bestow  on  us  more  light,
truth, intelligence  and  other  bles-

able  to  bestow  ?  It  is
ate  not  prepared  to  re-
We  have  more  offered
now  than  a  great  many  can  receive
because  their  hearts  are  unprepared,
they  are  tided  with  the  spirit  of  the
world,  t hey  have  lost  sight  of  the


sings  he  is
because  we
ceive  them.


time  to  waste  in  foolishness.  There
is  too  much  time  wasted  in  frivolity
and  nonsense.  It  is  important  that
we  make  good  use  of  the  time  allotted
us  in  this  probation,  for  we  under-
stand that  we  shall  be  judged  accord-
ing to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body.
We  have  placed  before  us  good  and
evil — th;it  which  tends  to  exalt  and
dignify,  and  that  which  tends  to  cor*
rupt  and  degrade.  And  we  are  ex-
pected to  overcome  evil,  and  not
allow  the  evil  to  overcome  us.  For
example,  we  find  too  often  persons


principles  of  salvation,  and  do  not  who  can  be  overcome  with  whiskey,
comprehend  them.  Yon  may  have  and  by  that  means  they  d  est  ray  their
heard  these  things  preached  many  usefulness  in  the  Church  of  Jesus
times  before,  but  if  you  have  not  Christ ;  they  have  been  tried  in  this
received  them  and  made  them  your  »  matter,  and  have  made  a  failure,  I


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES


would  say  to  such,  do  not  receive  nor
pai  t  nke  of  that  which  leads  to  des-
truction. Hundreds  nnd  thousands
have  been  overcome  by  this  evil,  nnd
are  now  suffering  the  consrqnenees  of
their  tolly.  We  should  be  prepared
to  resist  everv  evil,  if  we  do  not  we
shall  bring  trouble  upon  ourselves.
It  will  irot  be  because  we  do  not  un-
derstand llwe  lawsol  God,  but  because
wo  do  not  observe  them. I  Irnstmv

il

brethren  will  remember  these  things,
anil  that  they  will  make  a  lasting
impression  on  your  minds.  I  want
yon  to  remember  that  you  fire  eternal
beings,  that  God  is  eternal,  and  4  hat
the  principles  he  has  revealed  to  us
are  eternal — that  \ou  have  an  op-
portunity of  receiving  them,  mid
that  you  must  give  an  account  of  all
yuur  actions,  :tnd  will  be  rewarded
according  to  the  principles  of  righte-
outness,

We  have  learned  that  there  is  a
warfare  between  good  and  evil,  and
we  are  free  to  choose  the  one  or  the
.other.  We  have  learned  what  is
required  of  us,  and  what  our  privi-
leges are  as  Saints  of  God  ;  and  it
we  do  not  .receive  and  obey  the  prin-
ciples of  tru*h,  and  secure  I  lie  bles-
sings uf  salvation  for  ourselves,  and
fot  our  dead,  we  8 ban  know  it  when
we  get,  into  the  eternal  world;  we
shall  know  that  we  have  failed  To
comply  with  the  condition  on  which
they  are  promised.  Don't  you  think
we  shall  be  sorry  when  we  discover
what  we  have  loqt  ?  I  think  we
shall.  And  how  long  shall  we  be
sorry?  Can  we  think  of  any  time
in  future  ages  when  we  will  r  ot  be
sorry  if  we  lose  this  opportunity  of
obtaining  salvation  ?  When  we  have
sorrowed  for  thousands  of  years,  we
shall  still  be  sorry  if  we  neglect  this
great  salvation  ;  we  shall  forever
eoi row  if  we  do  not  improve  our  op-
portunities and  lay  buld  of  eternal
life. I  want  you  to  think  of  these


things,  for  now  is  the  lime  to  avo:;l
the  trouble  that  might  come  it  pun
osT  and  to  secure  our  fut  u re  happiness
and  exaltation,  by  carrying  out  tha
princ  pies  revealed  for  our  salvation.

The  Lord  has  greatly  blessed  us,
and  we  have  treat  reason  to  thank
him  for  our  homes  in  these  moun-
tains. We  have  beeu  led  by  hira  in
all  our  travels,  and  he  has  blessed  us
in  all  our  labors.  We  have  reason
to  thank  him  more  abundantly  for
the  fullness  of  the  Gospel,  and  for
the  promise  of  eternal  life.  We  are
(old  by  him  that  it  is  bis  business  to
provide  for  his  Saints.  Now  the
better  Saints  we  are,  the  better  the
L  >rd  will  provide  for  us.  He  has
told  ns  through  his  Prophet,  that  his
S  lints  shall  he  the  richest  of  nil
people.  Bat  here  comes  the  ques-
tion, are  we  his  Saints  #f  It  should
be  remembered  that  we  must  be  ouet
or  we  are  none  of  his  ;  and  to  become
one,  we  must  allow  the  Lord  to  dic-
tate all  our  actions  and  lead  us  in  his
way.  If  we  have  our  o  •  v n  way  we
kImII  do  as  the  world  does.  The
Lord  wants  to  build  up  a  people  like
the  people  of  Euopb,  who  had  no
poor  among  them.  If  it  was  neces-
sary that  fcocfl  a  com!  it  ion  of  society
should  exisr  then,  is  it  less  so  now  ?
The  nations  of  the  earth,  and  the
large  cities  of  the  United  States,  am
crowded  with  the  poor  and  indigent,
thousands  and  millions  among  them
sutler  for  want  of  hreai  ;  how  thar.k-
ful  we  ought  to  be  for  our  condition
in  these  mountains,  where  we  enjoj
peace  and  plenty,  and  if  not  very
rich  we  are  not  very  poor*  It  i.i
written  that  against  none  is  th\*
Lord  displeased,  but  against  thi*«
who  do  not  acknowledge  his  hand  m
all  things.  And  those  who  feel
themselves  poor,  should  acknowledge
in  it  the  hand  of  the  Almighty  and
be  comforted,  for  poverty  is  a  most
excellent  thing  ;  'tis  the  poor  in  this


BLESSING  THE  RESULT  OF  OBEDIENCE,  ETC


257


world's  goods,  but  the  rich  in  faith,
who  are  the  heirs  of  the  kingdom.
Poverty  has  been  one  of  the  greatest
blessings  that  could  be  conferred
upon  as*  If  we  had  been  rich  we
might  have  gone  In  the  devil  long
ago.  But  being  poor  we  had  to  hold
on  to  the  kingdom  of  Godt  or  nothing.
Many  men,  when  they  get  wealthy,
apostatize,  because  they  love  their
money  more  than  the  Almighty.
When  we  love  the  Almighty  more
than  we  love  money,  or  anything  else,
then  perhaps  he  will  entrust  us  with
riches,  but  may  the  Lord  keep  ns
from  becoming  rich,  if  riches  would
tempt  us  to  forsake,  the  truth,  and
hinder  us  from  serving  him  and
keeping  his  commandments.  Poverty
is  a  great  blessing,  if  in  our  poverty
we  learn  to  serve  God.  And  riches
are  also  a  great  blessing  if  we  make
a  good  use  of  them.  When  the  time
comes  that  the  Saints  can  be  in-
trusted with  riches,  the  Lord  will
give  them  all  they  need,  I  or  they
all  belong  to  the  Almighty.  I  am
blessed  with  a  Rich  name,  but  I  have
been  through  poverty  myself,  and  I
know  how  it  feels*  I  trust  I  have
gained  some  good  by  my  experience-
Have  I  anything  to  complain  of.
Certainly  not.  I  have  no  fault  to
find  with  the  providences  of  God,
who  doeth  all  things  well.

Soon  after  my  return  from  a  mis*
sion  to  England,  I  was  called  to
Bear  Lake  Valley  to  superintend
the  settlement  of  the  Saints  in  this
country.  I  felt  that  it  was  right
that  I  should  come  here,  not  be-
cause I  rould  live  better  here  than
any  other  place,  but  because  this
was  my  place  and  field  of  labor.
And  there  is  one  good  thing  we
should  all  learn,  that  is,  always  to
be  contented  where  the  Lord  has
placed  us.  But  I  want  to  be  in  a
better  country  says  one.  Well,  I
think  you  will  get  into  a  better

Mm.  1 T.


country  bye  and  by,  but  I  would
recommend  yon  not  to  be  in  too  great
a  hurry.  I  don't  want  to  dictate
the  people  too  much,  but  I  am
willing  to  counsel  yoa  for  your  good,
if  you  are  willing  to  take  my  counsel,
all  right,  you  will  lie  blessed  in  your
obedience.  I  would  like  to  pour  out
blessings  upon  the  Saints.  There
are  mnny  things  that  occur  to  -tty
mind  that  I  cannot  say  to  you,  but
that  which  the  spirit  dictates  that  I
will  communicate.  I  have  nothing
in  my  heart  but  the  best  of  feelings
towards  the  Saints

Some  people  think  I  am  a  poor
firnucier!  Perhaps  I  am.  There
are  some  persons  who  arc  such  good
financiers  that  they  take  all  the
wool  and  part  of  the  hide  with  it.
Now  I  would  not  like  to  financier
in  that  way.  And  if  I  do'nfe  fleece
any  one,  and  take  an  advantage
of  those  with  whom  I  deal,  I  shall
have  nothing  to  regret,  and  phall
enjoy  a  clear  conscience ;  but  if  I  do
these  things  it  will  have  a  bad  effect
in  this  world  and  worse  in  the  next.
Perhaps  t^ose  who  financier  so  closely
to  the  injary  of  their  neighbors  will
not  feel  so  well  about  it  in  the  next
world.  If  they  have  deceived  and
taken  advantage  of  us  in  our  neces-
sities, they  will  not  feel  so  well  about
it,  if  they  should  meet  us  in  the  other
world.  I  could  tell  a  story.  I  think
I  will  do  so.  I  could  mention  names.
You  understand  that  when  a  man
dies  and  leaves  this  world,  he  don't
take  his  family  with  him,  but  they
are  left  to  the  care  and  protection
of  others.  A  certain  good  man  died
and  left  a  large  family.  A  near
relative  took  charge  of  the  family
and  removed  them  to  a  certain  town,
built  a  grist  mill,  from  which  the
family  was  supplied  with  the  neces-
sary bread*  He  built  the  first  mill
in  that  town,  and  it  was  a  blessing
to  the  people  as  well  as  to  the  family

Vol."  XIX.


JulKNAL  OV  DISCOURSES.


of  our  deceased  brother.  By  and  by
a  few  persons  concluded  to  build
another  mill,  and  in  order  to  get  the
grinding  they  resolved  to  build  ano-
ther mill.  The  consequence  was  the
first  mill  failed  to  supply  food  for
the  widows  and  lather  less  children.
These  brethren  expect  to  go  into  the
eternal  world.  Will  the  head  of  this
family  be  there?  He  certainly  will.
And  bow  will  these  brethren  feel
when  tbey  meet  him  ?  1  don't  think
they  will  feel  very  happy.

The  effect  prod  need  by  I  heir  finan-
ciering was  that  ol  taking  the  bread
from  the  fatherless  children.  Will
they  feel  as  well  as  though  they  had
Dot  dune  it  ?  I  think  not.  1  was
always  sorry  when  I  thought  of  these
circumstances  and  their  effects.  These
things  will  have  to  be  met  somewhere.
The  God  we  prut  ess  to  serve  lives
and  takes  notice  ot  our  actions,  and
if  we  do  wrong  we  shall  have  to  meet


it  sooner  or  later.  Then  let  us  do  to
others  as  we  would  have  others  do
unto  us.  But  do  not  suffer  trans-
gressors to  deprive  you  of  any  bles-
sing, but  rather  suffer  wrong  than
do  wrong.  Deal  righteously  with
each  other,  and  so  establish  confi-
dence by  your  good  works.  Do  not
take  any  right  or  privilege  from  any
man  or  woman.  Not  from  a  Gen-
tile ?  No!  take  no  right  from  any
man.  T  would  not  like  to  infringe
upon  any  man's  rights.  If  we  do
the  Lord  will  hold  us  accountable  in
the  day  of  judgment.  He  causes
the  sun  to  rise  upon  the  evil  and  the
good,  and  seudetb  rain  upon  the  just
and  on  the  unjust.  And  as  the  Lord
dealeth  will  all  the  children  of  men,
so  should  we  deal  with  each  other,
1  have  detained  yon  longer  than  I
expected.  My  prayer  is  that  the
Lord  will  bless  you,  in  the  uaino
of  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.


FUNERAL  SERVICES
PREACHED BY ELDER JOSEPH F.  SMITH,

Over  the  remains  of  Emma,  daughter  of  Elder  Daniel  H.  and
Emeline  Wells,  on  Thursday  Mousing-,  April  11,  1878.


(JB^epoded  by  Geo.  F.  Gihbs.)

AN  AGE  OF  VISITATION  AND  REVELATION — REVELATION  THE  LAW  OF
GOVERNMENT — THE  NATURE  OF  DEATH — JESUS  OUR  FORERUNNER
AND  EXEMPLAR  —  THE  THREE  WITNESSES  - —  PERSONAL  KNOWLEDGE
ABOVE  ALL — ORDINANCES  FOR  THE  DEAD.

While  sitting  listening  to  the  sing-  i  would  read  part  of  a  revelation  given
ing,  it  occurred  tome  that,  in  making  i  to  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
a  few  remarks  on  this  occasion,  I Latter-day  Saints  on the  37th  of


December,  Is 32,  believing  that  we
may  derive  some  confort  and  en-
couragement, as  well  as  enlighten-
ment by  doing  so.

He  then  read  sect  ion  Ixxxviii,
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  new  edi-
tion, from  the  3rd  to  the  32nd  verse
inclusive.

These  are  the  words  of  God  unto
us,  words  that  were  not  spoken  in
some  remote  period  of  the  world,
and  handed  down  to  us  by  the  tra-
ditions uf  our  fathers,  but  they  are
the  words  of  the  Almighty  spoken
directly  to  our  brethren  chosen  by
God  to  be  his  mouth  piece  and  re  ve-
la tors  to  the  people  of  this  time*
They  are,  therefore,  words  of  truth,
and  ot  eternal  life,  words  upon  which
we  may  rely  with  the  utmost  confi-
dence, without  doubt  or  misgiving,
or  fear  of  yielding  to  the  caprice  of
vain  philosophy,  for  they  are  not  the
words  of  man,  but  of  God,

It  is  well  for  us  to  realize,  if  we
possibly  can — and  we  can  if  we  en-
joy a  sufficient  portion  of  the  Spirit
of  God — that  we  are  living  in  an  age
in  which  the  Father  in  heaven  has
deigned  to  visit  his  children,  making
himself  known  by  declaring  his  law
and  his  word,  by  his  own  mouth  and
by  kis  own  presence,  If  we  could
always  realize  this,  it  appears  to  me
tbat  we  would  place  greater  reliance
upon  the  words  of  eternal  life  which
have  come  unto  us ;  we  would  thereby
be  induced  to  live  so  near  to  the
Lord,  and  he  so  faithful  in  the  dis-
charge of  our  duties,  as  the  covenant
people  of  God,  that  our  hearts  would
barn  with  grateful  joy,  we  would  be
inclined  to  that  which  is  pleasing
and  acceptable  unto  the  Lord,  all  the
day  long,  and  ^e  would  eschew  even
the  appearance  of  evil.  In  all  the
varied  scenes  of  life,  we  would  never
forget  him,  disobey  his  will,  nor
neglect  a  duty  ;  but  we  would  abide
in  the  covenant  of  the  Gospel,  in  the


!


love  of  God  and  ofour  ftllow-creatures,
doing  the  works  of  righteousness,  not
omitting  to  improve  an  opportunity
to  do  good.  It  is  necessary  for  us  to
understand  these  things  and  bear  them
in  mind,  in  order  to  abide  the  law
which  has  been  eriven  nnto  us,  a
portion  of  which  I  have  read  to  you ;
and  which  is  necessary  for  us  to  obey,
in  order  to  be  found  keeping  the  celes-
tial 1  aw,  and  in  order  to  be  quickened
by  that  glory,  tbat  our  souls,  which
are  our  bodies  and  spirits,  may  be
redeemed  and  restored  to  life  and  im-
mortality, to  possess  crowns  of  glory
and  exaltation,  winch  are  to  be  had
only  in  the  celestial  kingdom  ;  in
other  words,  that  we  may  be  quick
ened  by  the  celestial  glory  and  receive
a  fullness  thereof,  according  to  thii
revelation*

God  has  given  laws  to  govern  all
his  worki,  and  especially  has  he  given
laws  to  govern  his  people,  who  are
his  sons  and  daughters.  have
come  to  sojuurn  in  the  flesh,  to  obtaii
tabernacles  for  our  immortal  spirits  ;
or  in  other  words,  we  have  come  tor
the  purpose  of  accomplishing  a  work
like  that  which  was  accomplished  by
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  object
of  our  earthly  existence  is  that  we
may  have  a  fullness  of  joy,  and  that
we  may  become  the  sons  and  daughter*
of  God,  in  tlte  fullest  sense  of  the
word,  being  heirs  of  God  and  joint
heirs  with  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  kings
and  priests  unto  Uud,  to  inherit  glory,
dominion,  exaltation,  thrones,  and
every  power  and  attribute  developed
and  possessed  by  our  heavenly  Father.
This  is  the  object  of  our  being  on
this  earth.  In  order  to  attain  unto
this  exalted  position,  it  is  necessary
that  we  go  through  this  mortal  ex.
peri e nee,  or  probation,  by  which  wa
may  prove  ourselves  worthy,  through
the  aid  of  our  elder  brother,  Jesug
Th«  spirit  without  the  body  is  n0j
perfect,  it  is  not  capacitated,  with#mt


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOPRSFA


the  body,  to  possess  a  fullness  of  the
glory  ot  God,  and,  therefore,  it  can
not/without  the  body,  fulfil  its  desti-
ny. We  are  fore-ordained  to  become
conformed  to  the  likeness  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ ;  and  in  or  ler  that  we
mav  become  like  unto  hi  in,  we  must
folluw  in  his  footsteps,  e^en  ant i ]  we
sanctify  ourselves  by  the  law  of  truth
and  righteousness  This  is  the  law
of  the  celestial  kingdom  ;  and  when
we  die,  its  power  will  bring  us  forth
in  the  morning  of  the  first  resurrec-
tion, clothed  with  glory,  immortality,
and  eternal  lives.  Unless  we  do  keep
the  law  that  God  has  given  unto  us
in  the  flesh,  which  we  have  the  privi-
lege of  receiving  and  understanding,
we  cannot  be  quickened  by  its  glory,
neither  can  we  receive  the  fullness
thereof  and  the  exaltation  of  the
celestial  kingdom*

**  There  is  a  law.  irrevocably  de-
creed in  heaver:  before  the  foundations
of  the  world,  upon  which  all  blessings
are  predicated ;  and  when  we  obtain
any  blessing  from  God,  it  is  by  obedi-
ence to  that  law  upon  which  it  is
predicated."

We  must,  therefore,  learn  the  Jaws
of  heaven,  which  are  the  laws  of  the
Gospel  live  and  obey  ihem  with  a!l
our  hearts,  and  in  faith  abide  in
them,  perfecting  ourselves  thereby,
in  order  to  receive  the  fulness  of  the
glory  of  that  kingdom,

I  make  these  remarks,  not  to  the
departed,  but  to  the  living — to  you
as  well  as  myself,  who  still  tarry  in
the  flesh,  to  battle  with  the  weak-
nesses and  infirmities  of  human  na-
ture, who  have  yet  to  learn  by  ex-
perience, that  we  may  be  instructed
in  the  things  necessary  to  know,  in
order  that  our  course  here  may  secure
unto  us  the  greatest  reward  in  the
presence  of  our  Father  and  God, "

We  have  not  met  here  to  brood
over  our  sorrows  in  this  our  tern-
porary  lots — in  thua  being  deprived,


perhaps  only  for  a  little  while,  of
the  society  and  companionship  of  a
daughter,  a  sister,  a  friend ;  for
tears  are  partially  dried  and  sorrow
is  greatly  ameliorated  in  the  fact  that
our  loss  is  her  gain.  She  has  been
released  from  a  world  of  sorrow,
anguish  and  pain,  and  rests  from
her  earthly  labors.  Blessed  is  her
condition,  for  she  has  performed  her
mission  to  earth,  she  has  made  her
name  honorable  amidst  the  honest
and  true  of  God's  people,  she  has
fought  the  good  fight,  and  has  now
taken  her  departure,  gone  to  her
old  home  from  whence  she  came*
What  has  she  lost  ?  Simply  the
society  of  her  eaithly  friends,  but
not  to  the  extent  that  we  miss  her;
for  I  believe  the  greater  can  al-
ways comprehend  the  lesser,  but  the
lesser  can  only  comprehend  the
greater  as  it  may  be  revealed  by
glimpses  from  time  to  time  by  the
Holy  Spirit,  While  we  are  in  mor-
tality we  are  clogged,  and  we  see
as  through  a  glass  darkly,  we  gee
only  in  part,  and  it  is  difficult  for
us  to  comprehend  the  smallest  things
with  which  we  are  associated.  But
wheu  we  pot  on  immortality,  our
condition  will  be  very  different,  we
ascend  into  an  enlarged  sphere;  al-
though we  shall  not  become  perfect
immediately  after  our  departure  from
the  body,  for  the  spirit  without  the
body  is  not  perfect,  and  the  body
without  the  spirit  is  dead.  The  dis-
embodied spirit  during  the  interval
of  the  death  of  the  body  a  id  its
resurrection  from  the  grave  is 'not
perfect,  hence  it  is  not  prepared  to
enter  into  the  exaltation  of  the  celes-
tial kingdom ;  but  it  has  tbe  privi-
lege of  soaring  in  tbe  midst  ot  im-
mortal beings,  and  of  enjoying,  to
a  certain  extent,  the  presence  of  Godf
not  the  fiilness  of  His  glory,  not  the
fulness  of  the  reward  which  we  are
seeking  and  which  we  are  destined


AN  AGE  OF  VISITATION,  ETC


2GI


to  receive  if  found  faithful  to  the  law
of  the  celestial  kingdom,  hot  only  in
part.  The  righteous  spirit  that  de-
parts  from  this  earth  is  assigned  its
place  in  the  Paradise  of  God ;  it  has  ,
its  privileges  and  honors  which  arc  |
in  point  of  excellency,  far  above  and
beyond  human  comprehension ;  and
in  this  sphere  of  action,  enjoying
this  partial  reward  for  its  righteous
conduct  on  the  earth,  it  continues
its  labors,  and  in  this  respect  is
very  different  from  the  state  of  the
body  trom  which  it  is  released.  For  j
while  the  body  sleeps  and  decays,
the  spirit  receives  a  new  birth ;  to  it  ,
the  portals  of  life  are  opened  ;  it  is
born  again  into  the  presence  of  God.
The  spirit  of  our  beloved  sister  in
taking  its  departure  from  this  world
is  born  again  into  the  spirit  world,
returning  there  from  the  mission  it
bad  been  performing  in  this  state  of
probation,  having  been  absent  a  few
years  from  Father,  Mother,  kind-
red, friends,  neighbors,  and  from  all
that  was  dear;  it  has  returned  nearer
to  the  home  -  circle,  to  old  associa-
tions  and  scenes,  much  in  the  same
way  as  a  man  who  comes  home  from  ,
&  foreign  mission,  to  join  again  his  !
family  and  friends  and  enjoy  the
pleasures  and  comforts  of  home.
Th  is  is  the  condition  of  her  whose
remains  now  lie  before  us,  or  of  erery
one  who  has  been  faithful  to  virtue
and  purity,  while  travel; ng  here  be-
low; but  more  especially  of  those
who  while  here  had  the  privilege  of
obeying  the  Gospel,  and  who  lived
true  and  faithful  to  its  covenants.
They  instead  of  continuing  here
among  the  things  of  time,  sur-
rounded as  we  are  with  the  weak-
nesses of  a  fallen  world,  and  subject
to  earthly  cares  and  sorrows,  are  freed
from  them  to  enter  a  state  of  joy,
glory  and  exaltation ;  not  a  fulness  ,
of  either,  but  to  await  the  morning
of  the  resurrection  of  the  just,  to


come  forth  from  the  grave  to  redeem
the  body,  and  be  reunited  with  it,
and  thus  become  a  living  soul,  an
immortal  being  never  more  to  die.
Having  accomplished  its  work,  hav-
ing gone  through  its  earthly  proba-
tion, and  having  fulfilled  its  mission
here  below,  it  is  then  prepared  for
the  knowledge  and  glory  and  exalta-
tion of  the  celestial  kingdom.  This
Jesus  did  ;  and  he  is  our  fore-run-
ner, he  is  our  exemplar-  The  path
which  he  marked  out  we  have  got  to
walk  in,  if  we  ever  expect  to  dwell,
and  be  crowned  with  him  in  his
kingdom.  We  must  obey  and  put
our  trust  in  him,  knowing  that  he
is  the  Savior  of  the  world.

It  is  not  a  difficult  thing  for  me
to  believe  this;  I  read  the  Bible  in
which  I  find  narrations  of  many  of
his  doings,  sayings,  precepts,  and
examples.  And  I  do  not  believe
that  any  upright,  honest  man  or
woman,  possessing  common  intel-
ligence, can  read  the  Gospels  of  the
New  Testament  and  the  testimo-
nies therein  given  of  the  Savior,
without  intuitively  feeling  that  he
was  what  ne  professed  to  be.  For
every  upright,  honest  person  is  pos-
sessed, more  or  less,  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  and  this  holy  messenger  in
the  hearts  of  men  bears  record  of
the  word  of  God;  and  when  all
such  read  these  inspired  writings,
with  honesty  of  heart  and  meekness
ot  spirit,  divested  of  prejudices  and
the  false  conceptions  arising  from
traditions  and  erroneous  training,
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  bears  witness
in  unmistakable  language  that  burns
with  conviction,  therefore,  I  believe
that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  the  Savior,
the  only  begotten  of  the  Father;  and
this  too  through  reading  the  Bible.
But  do  we  depend  upon  the  Bible
for  *this  conviction  nnd  kaow ledge  ?
No,  thank  the  Lord  we  do  not.  What
else  have  we  to  impart  this  know-


202


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES,


ledge  and  confirm  this  testimony  ?
We  have  the  u  Book  of  Mormon,"
the  "stick  of  Ephraim,"  which  has
come  to  us  hy  the  gift  and  power
of  God,  which  also  testifies  of  him,
and  which  reveals  an account  of


cross,  was  laid  in  the  tomb,  burst
the  bands  of  death  and  came  forth
out  of  the  grave.  That  he  was  the
same  who  came  to  the  Nephitei
upon  this  continent  ;  who,  when
about  to  t^ke  his  departure  from


bis  mission to  and  dealings  with them,  declared that  he  was  going


the  inhabitants  of  this  continent,
after  his  resurrection  from  the  dead,
when  he  came  to  this  land  to  visit
his  "  other  sheep,"  to  unite  them


to  visit  the  ten  tribes  whom  the
Father  had  led  away,  having  the
same  purpose  in  view  that  he  had  in
visiting  the  Nephites. Here,  then


in  the  one  fold,  that  they  might  also is  another  testimony  of  this  divine


be  his  sheep  and  he  their  great
shepherd.  Besides  the  conviction
that  the  Book  itself  carries  with  it,
we  have  the  collateral  testimony  of
him  who  translated  it,  who  sealed
his  testimony  with  his  blood;  also
that  of  other  witnesses,  who  testify
to  the  whole  world  that  they  taw
the  plates  and  the  engravings  there-
on, from  whtch  the  Book  was  trans-
lated, these  plates  were  shown  them
by  an  angel  of  God,  who  declared  that
the  Book  had  been  translated  cor-
rectly by  the  gift  and  power  of  God  ;
and  in  obedience  to  divine  command
these  witnesses  bear  record  of  what
they  saw  and  heard.

Here,  then,  are  two  witnesses —
the  "  Bible"  and  the  "Book  of
Mormon,"  both  bearing  record  of  the
same  truth,  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,
that  he  died  and  lives  again,  having
burst  the  bands  of  deaih  and  tri-
umphed over  the  grave.  This  latter
additional  evidence  the  Latter*  day
Saints  have  of  this  fact,  over  and
abt  ve  that  possessed  by  the  Christian
world  who  do  not  believe  in  the
11 B  iok  of  Mormon/'

But  is  this  all  ?  No,  We  have
here  another  book,  the  "  Doctrine
and  Coven i+nts,"  which  contains  re-
velations from  God  through  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  who  lived
cotempotary  with  ourselves.  They
are  Christ's  words,  declaring  that
lie  was  the  tame  that  came  to  the
Jews,  that  was  lifted  up  on  the


truth  ;  hence  we  have  three  wit-
n esses.  In  the  mouth  of  two  or
three  witnesses,  we  are  told,  all
things  shall  be  established ;  and  by
the  testimony  of  two  or  three  wit-
nesses shall  we  stand,  or  be  con-
demned,

But  would  this  satisfy  me  ?  it
might,  if  I  could  obtain  no  further
light  or  knowledge.  But  when
greater  light  comes,  and  I  have  the
privilege  to  make  myself  possessor
of  it,  I  could  not  remain  satisfied
with  the  lesser.  We  could  never
be  satisfied  nor  happy  hereafter,
unless  we  receive  a  fulness  of  the
light  and  blessings  prepared  for  the
righteous.  This,  in  part,  will  con-
stitute the  misery,  sorrow  and  an-
guish of  the  condemned — those  who
reject  the  truth  when  it  is  offered  to
them,  for  their  eyes  will  be  opened  to
behold,  iu  part,  the  greater  light,  ex-
altation and  joy  which  they  might
have  attained  unto,  hut  which  is  irre-
trievably lost,  to  them,  because  of
their  disobedience  and  wrong  doings.
Then  I  say  we  cannot  be  satisfied
with  anything  short  of  a  complete
salvation  in  the  kingdom  of  God ;
our  joy  cannot  be  foil  unless  we  ob-
tain a  fullness  of  knowledge.  Hence,
I  am  not  satisfied  with  the  Bible,
the  u  Book  of  Mormon,"  nor  the
"  Doctrine  and  Covenants."  All  these
three  are  not  sufficient  for  me,  for  the
reason  that  greater  privileges  have
been  revealed  to  man,  and  they  are


#


AN  AGE  OF  VISITATION,  ETC


263


within  the  reach  of  all  that  live
upon  the  earth.  T  here  for  e,  I  Co  till
not  rest  satisfied  with  myself  until
I  had  fully  availed  myself  of  my
privileges.

It  is  tjiveti  to  us  to  know  these
things  for  o  arse  Ives.  God  has  said
he  will  show  these  things  unto  us;
and  for  this  purpose  the  Holy  Ghost
has  been  imparted  to  all  who  are
entitled  to  it  through  submission,
which  bears  record  of  the  Father
and  the  Son,  and  also  takes  of  the
things  of  God  and  shows  them  unto
man.  Convictions  that  we  may
previously  have  had  respecting  the
truth  the  Holy  Ghost  confirms,  giv-
ing us  a  positive  assurance  of  their
correctness,  and  through  it  we  obtain
a  personal  knowledge,  not  as  one  that
has  been  told,  but  as  one  that  has
seen,  felt,  heard,  and  that  knows  for
himself.

Then,  in  standing  before  you,  my
brethren  and  sister?,  as  a  humble
instrument  in  the  hands  of  God,  I
testify,  not  by  virtue  of  the  know-
ledge I  may  have  derived  from
books,  but  by  ihe  revelations  of  God
to  rne,  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ.  I
know  that  my  Redeemer  lives ;  I
know  that  although  the  worms  may
destroy  this  body,  that  I  shall  in
my  flesh  see  God,  find  I  shall  be-
hold him  for  myself  and  not  for
another.  This  light  lias  come  to  me,
and  is  in  my  heart  and  mind,  and
of  it  I  testify,  and  through  and  by
it  I  testify,  and  I  know  whereof  1
speak.  God  has  called  me,  in  con*
nee t ion  with  my  brethren,  to  this
mission,  and  this  is  our  testimony
to  the  whole  uorld.  I  therefore
say,  there  is  no  dt^ath  here,  instead
of  death  it  is  life  to  the  departed.
That  which  we  call  death  is  merely
the  slumber  and  rest  of  this  mortal
clay,  and  that  only  for  a  little  sea-
son, while  the  spirit,  the  life,  has
gone to  enjoy  again  the  presence


and  society  of  those  from  whence
it  came,  and  to  whom  it  is  joy  agaio
to  return.  And  this  will  be  the
condition  of  the  righteous  until  the
morning  of  the  resurrection,  when

i  the  spirit  will  have  power  to  call
forth  the  lifeless  frame  to  be  united
again,  and  they  both  become  a  liv-
ing soul,  an  immortal  beinsr,  filled
with  the  light  and  power  of  God,

j  I  am  a  witness  of  these  things.  Am
I  alone  ?  No ;  there  are  tens  of
thousands  to-day  that  can  bear  this
testimony.  They,  too,  know  it  for
themselves;  G^ul  has  shown  it  to
them,  they  have  received  the  Holy
Ghost,  which  ha&  born  witness  of
these  things  in  their  hearts,  and
they  likewise  are  not  dependent  upon

;  hooks,  nor  upon  the  words  of  another,
for  they  have  received  a  knowledge
from  God  themselves,  and  know  as
he  knows,  and  see  as  he  sees  in  re-
lation to  these  plain  and  precious
things.

What  reason  have  we  to  mourn  ?

j  None,  except  that  we  are  deprived
for  a  few  days  of  the  society  of  one
whom  we  love.  And  if  we  prove
faithful  while  in  the  flesh  we  will
soon  follow,  and  be  glad  that  we  had
the  privilege  of  passing  through
mortality,  and  that  we  lived  in  a  day
in  which  the  fullness  of  the  Ever-
lasting Gospel  was  preached,  through

|  which  we  will  be  exalted,  for  there
is  no  exaltation  bat  through  obedience
to  law.  Every  blessing,  privilege,
glory,  or  exaltation  is  obtained  only
through  obedience  to  tin;  law  upon
which  the  same  is  promised.  If  we
will  abide  the  law,  we  shall  receive
the  reward  ;  but  we  can  rec  nve  it  on
no  other  ground. Thou  let  us  rejoice

!  in  the  truth,  in  the  restoration  of  the
Priesthood — that  power  delegated  to
man,  by  virtue  of  which  the  Lord
sanctions  in  the  heavens  what  man
does  upon  the  earth.  The  Lord  htf
taught  us  the  ordinances  of  the  Gjs-


2C4


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


pel  by  which  we  may  perfect  our
exaltation  in  his  kingdom. We  are
not  living  as  the  heathen,  without
law ;  that  which  is  necessary  for  our
exaltation  has  been  revealed.  Our
duty,  therefore,  is  to  obey  the  laws,
then  we  shall  receive  our  reward,  no
matter  whether  we  are  cut  down  in
childhood,  in  manhood  or  old  age ;
it  is  all  the  same,  so  long  as  we  are
living  up  to  the  light  we  possess,  we
shall  not  be  shorn  of  any  blessing,
cor  deprived  of  any  privilege  j  for
there  is  a  time  after  this  mortal  life,
and  there  is  a  way  provided  by  which
we  may  fulfil  the  measure  of  our
creation  at  id  destiny,  and  accomplish
the  whole  great  work  that  we  have
been  sent  to  do,  although it  tuny
reach  far  into  the  future  before  we
fully  accomplish  it. Jesus  had  not
finished  his  work  when  his  body  was
slain,  neither  did  he  finish  it  after
his  resurrection  from  the  dead,  al-
though he  had  accomplished  the  pur-
pose for  which  he  then  came  to  the
earth,  he  had  not  fulfilled  all  his  wot  k.
And  when  will  he? Not  until  he
has  redeemed  and  saved  every  son
and  daughter  of  our  father  Adam
that  has  or  ever  will  be  born  upon
this  earth  to  the  end  of  time,  except
the  sons  of  perdition. That  is  his
mission. We  will  not  finish  our  work
until  we  hare  saved  ourselves,  and
then  not  until  we  shall  have  saved
all  depending  upon  us  ;  for  we  are
to  become  saviors  upon  Mount  Zion,
as  well  as  Christ We  are  called  to
this  mission. The  dead  aie  not  per-
fect without  us,  neither  are  we  with-
out them, We  have  a  mission  to
perform  tor  and  in  their  behalf;  we
have  a  certain  work  to  do  in  order  to
liberate  those  who,  because  of  their
ignorance  and  the  unfavorable  cir-
cumstances in  which  they  were  placed
while  here,  are  unprepared  for  eternal
life;  we  have  to  open  the  door  for
them,  by  performing  ordinances  which


they  cannot  perform  for  themselves,
and  which  are  essential  to  their  re-
lease from  the  "  prison-house,"  to
come  forth  and  live  according  to  God
in  the  spirit,  and  be  judged  according
to  man  in  the  flesh.

The  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  has
said  that  this  is  one  of  the  most  im-
portant duties  that  devolves  upon
the  Latter-day  Saints,  And  why  ?
Because  this  is  the  dispensation  of
the  fullness  of  times,  which  will  usher
in  the  millennial  reign,  and  in  which
all  things  spoken  by  the  mouth  of
holy  Prophets, since  the  world  began,
must  be  fulfilled,  and  all  things
united,  both  which  are  in  heaven  and
in  the  earth.  We  have  got  that
work  to  do,  or  at  least  all  we  can  of
i  t,  having  the  balance  to  our  children,
in  whose  hearts  we  should  instil  the
importance  of  this  work,  rearing
them  in  the  love  of  the  truth  and
in  the  knowledge  of  these  principles,
so  that  when  we  pass  away,  having
done  all  we  can  do,  they  will  then
take  up  the  labor  and  continue  it  un-
til it  is  consummated.

Mny  the  Lord  bless  this  bereaved
familv  and  comfort  them  in  their  de-
privation.  Those  who  die  in  the
Lord  shall  not  taste  of  death.  When
Adam  partook  of  the  for  bidden  fruit
he  was  cast  out  from  the  presence  of
God  into  outer  darkness  ;  that  is,  he
was  shut  out  from  the  presence  of  his
glory  and  the  privilege  of  his  society,
which  was  spiritual  death.  This  was
the  first  deafh  ;  this  indeed  was  death  ;
for  he  wis  shut  out  from  the  presence
of  God,  and  ever  since  Adam's  poste-
rity have  been  suffering  the  penalty
of  this  spiritual  death,  which  is  ban-
ishment from  his  presence  and  the
society  of  holy  beings,  This  first
death  will  also  be  the  second  death.
Now  we  look  upon  the  mortal  remains
of  our  departed  sister ;  her  immortal
part  has  gone.  Where  ?  Into  oulei
darkness  r — banished  from  the  pre-


AN  AGE  OF  VISITATION,  ETC,


2Sf>


sence  of  God  ?  TTo,  bot  born  again
into  his  presence,  restored,  or  born
from  death  to  life,  to  immortality
and  to  joy  in  his  presence.  This  is
not  death,  then;  and  this  is  true  in
relation  to  all  Saints  who  die  in  the
Lord  and  the  covenant  of  the  Gospel.
They  return  from  the  midst  of  death
to  life,  where  death  has  no  poirer.
There  is  no  death  except  to  those
who  die  in  sin,  without  the  sure  and
steadfast  hope  of  the  resurrection  of
the  just.  There  is  no  death  where
we  continue  in  the  knowledge  of  the
truth  and  in  hope  of  a  glorious  re-
surrection. Life  and  immortality
are  brought  to  light  through  the
Gospel,  hence  there  is  no  death  here;
here  is  peaceful  slumber,  a  quiet  rest
for  a  little  season,  and  then  she  will
come  forth  again  to  enjoy  this  ta ber-
ime I e.  If  there  is  anything  lacking
in  regard  to  oidinances  pertaining
10  the  House  of  the  Lord,  which
may  have  been  omitted  or  not
reached,  those  requirements  can  be
attended  to  for  her,  Here  are  her
lather  and  mother,  her  brothers  and
sisters ;  they  know  the  course  to  pur.
Hue,  they  know  the  ordinances  neces-
sary to  be performed  in  order  to


secure  every  benefit  and  blessing
that  it  was  possible  for  her  to  have
received  in  the  flesh.  These  ordi-
nances have  been  revealed  unto  us
for  this  very  purpose,  that  we  might
be  born  into  the  light  from  the  hi  Hat
of  this  darkness — from  death  into
life.

We  live  then,  we  do  not  die,  we  do
not  anticipate  death ;  but  we  antici-
pate life,  immortality,  glory,  exalta-
tion, and  to  be  quickened  by  the  glory
of  the  celestial  kingdom,  an  i  receive
of  the  same,  eveu  a  fullness.  Tiiis
is  our  destiny  :  this  is  the  exalted
position  to  which  we  may  attain,  and
there  is  no  power  that  can  deprive  or
rob  us  of  it,  if  we  prove  faithful  and
true  to  the  covenant  of  the  Gospel.

That  the  Lord  may  bless,  comfort
and  solace  the  family  of  his  servant,
who  are  called  to  lament  this  moment-
ary loss,  that  in  the  midst  of  their
affliction,  while  their  sorrow  finds  no
relief  in  tears,  they  may  bow  obe-
dient to  Heaven's  will,  and  in  grati-
tude and  thanksgiving,  praise  Him
11  from  whom  all  blessings  flow*"
And  that  the  Lord  may  help  us  to  be
faithful,  is  my  prayer,  in  the  name
of  Jesus.  Amen.


260


JOURNAL  OF  IHSUUrUSKS.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER EKASTUS  SNOW,


Delivered  in  the  Mkktikg  House,  Beaver  C  ity,  Beaver  County,  Utah,

OX SUNDAY MORXJNG, MaRC'H  3, 1878.  ,n },  ©J4


( Report fd  by  Jodah  Rwjtrsim.)


THERE  IS  A  UOD— t  oMMl  NION  WITH  HIM  AN  INHKRKNT  ORAVINU  OF
THIS  HUMAN  HEART — MAN  IN  HIS  I  MAO  K — MALE  AND  FEMALE  CREA-
TED HE  THEM — SPIRIT  AND  KLESH — MORTAL  AND  IMMORTAL.


4i  And  God  said,  let  us  make  man
in  our  own  ima^,  after  our  likeness,
and  let  them  have  dominion  over  the
lish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of
the  air,  and  over  the  cattle,  and
over  all  the  earth,  and  over  every
creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon
the  earth.

"So  God  created  man  in  his  own
image,  in  the  image  of  God  created
he  him  ;  male  ami  female  created
he  them.  And  God  blessed  them,
and  God  said  unto  them,  be  ye  fruit-
ful and  multiply  and  replenish  the
earth,  and  subdue  it,  and  have  domi-
nion over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and
over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over
every  living  thing  that  nioveth  upon
the  earth." — Gen.  iii,  26 — 28.

In  (Jen.  \\  1,  2,  we  read,  "This
is  the  book  of  the  generations  of
Adam  :  In  the  day  that  God  created
man,  in  the  likeness  of  God  made
lie  him,  male  and  female  created  he
them,  and  blessed  them  and  called
their  name  Adam  in  the  day  when
they  were  created."

All  mankind  feel  instinctively  that
there  is  a  God.  I  admit  that  many
people  try  to  reason  themselves  out
nf  the  idea  and  into  a  state  of  infi-
delity, or  into  atheism,  but  it  is  very


hard  for  them  to  do  it,  or  to  satisfy
themselves  that  they  arc  correct
when  they  think  they  have  done  it.
And  the  universal  feeling  that  may
be  set  down  to  be  common  to  all
nations  and  people  bearing  the  hu-
man form,  is  that  there  is  a, God;
and  there  is  a  yearning  after  him,
and  a  desire  to  worship  him,  how-
ever difficult  it  may  be  to  satisfy
themselves  of  the  manner  in  which
they  may  worship  him  acceptably.

On  one  occasion  our  Lord  and
Savior  said  to  the  people  among
whom  he  ministered,  "  Ye  worship
ye  know  not  what,  but  we  (speaking
of  himself  and  his  disciples  and  fol-
lowers) know  whom  we  worship,  and
we  speak  the  things  we  have  heard
of  him,  and  we  know  what  we  speak,
and  yet  you  receive  not  our  testi-
mony."

The  Jews  were  in  possession  of
many  laws  and  regulations  given  to
their  fathers,  and  they  were  taught
the  true  and  the  living  God,  but
darkness  covered  their  minds,  and
many  of  them  walked  in  darkness  at
noonday,  and  enjoyed  not  the  true
light,  as  it  was  in  Christ,  pertaining
to  themselves  and  to  their  heavenly
Father.


Heathen nations, as  they  are
termed  by  Christians,  have*  less  defi-
nite ideas  of  their  Creator,  though
all  of  them  entertain  the  common
notion  of  the  Deity,  and  seek  to
worship  him,  though  it  may  he  in  a
crude way,  and very  undefined.
Sometimes  they  are  accused  of  wor-
shipping the  work  of  their  own  hands
— images  made  of  wood,  of  stone,
iron  and  brass,  and  various  other
materials,  and  other  nations,  tribes
and  tongues  are  accused  of  worship-
ping animals  of  various  kinds.  They
have  their  sacred  elephants,  croco-
diles, or  other  beasts  of  the  earth,
whom  they  learn  either  to  love  or
fear  and  worship,  either  as  "  friend"
or  "  foe." Yet  when  we  become
acquainted  with  these  nations  and
find  out  their  in  wan  1  faith,  we  find
that  none  of  them  look  upon  these
as  anything  but  representations  of
Deity.  They  do  not  see  Deity  before
them,  they  do  not  walk,  and  talk,
and  converse,  and  eat,  drink,  and
sleep  with  the  being  whom  they  have
in  their  minds  as  God,  but  thev  set
up  before  them  something  they  can
see,  to  represent  him,  and  as  soon  as
they  begin  and  rear  up  before  them
some  representation  of  Deity — one
representative  they  consider  to  be
about  equal  to  another,  and  if  it  is
the  work  of  men's  hands,  it  is  some-
thing that  corresponds  to  their  ideas
of  a  Deity,  and  whether  it  be  in  his
exact  likeness  or  not  they  know  not
— not  having  formed  a  personal  ac-
quaintance with  him,  nor  having  any
likeness  of  him,  from  which  they  can
pattern  after — one  image  answers  as
well  as  another,  or  one  representation
as  well  as  another.  But  all  these  are
but  representations  of  Deity.  And
no  nation  has  been  found  upon  the
earth,  tribe  or  tongue,  but  what  have
some  mode  of  worship,  or  some  faith
in  the  Deity,  and  feel  the  need  of
honoring  a  superior  Being.  |


f This  craving  of  the  human  heart  is
universal  ;  and  education  does  not
remove  it It  is  not  confined  to
barbarous  tribes  and  less  cultivated
people. All  nations  may  have  their
sceptics,  and  in  many  enlightened
nations  of  modern  times,  there  is  an
evident  tendency  to  infidelity  ;  yet
those  who  seriously  entertain  doubts
of  the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Being,
are  generally  those  who  have  a  smat-
tering of  learning  and  have  become
mad  in  this  particular.  The  thorough
scientist  is  forced  to  recognize  the
existence  of  the  Great  Supreme,
They  cannot  get  around  it,  or  arrive
at  any  other  conclusion,  than  that
the  great  wheel  of  nature  is  moved
by  an  over-ruling  hand,  and  the
regularity  and  uniformity  that
found  in  all  her  laws,  are  traceable
to  that  Supreme  Being,  and  unac-
countable upon  any  other  principle.
It  is  almost  impossible  for  them  to
arrive  at  any  other  conclusion,  and
where,  in  the  history  of  the  world,  is
it  chronicled  of  any  great  astronomer
that  he  was  an  infidel  \  any  one  that
has  the  mind,  and  whose  researches
have  enabled  him  to  stretch  out  and
begin  to  comprehend  and  fathom  the
greatness  of  the  works  of  creation,
that  has  not  in  the  most  humble  and
reverential  manner  acknowledged
God  I Those  who  deny  him  as  I
said  before,  are  those  that  have  a
partial  education  ;  and  a  little  learn-
ing is  intoxicating  to  the  brain.
As  the  great  English  poet  says  :

A  little  learning  is  a  dangerous  thing  !
Drink  deep,  mr taste  not  the  Pierian  spring";
Those  shallow  drafts  intoxicate  the  brain,
And  drinking  largely  sobers  us  again.

It  is  those  that  gain  a  little  know-
Iedgf\  and  begin  their  researches  in
various  branches  of  science,  but  do
not  fathom  them,  who  are  bewildered
in  their  imaginations,  and  they  tend
to  infidelity.


268  •  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


There  is  a  theory  in  the  human  j
mind — I  will  say  with  a  certain
school  of  modern  philosophers — to
satisfy  themselves  and  justify  their
infidelity;  t he.*  h<»nt  and  tendency
of  their  inclinations  is  that  way.
But  it  is  probabfe  that  the  crude,
undefined  C'evices  and  erroneous  no*
tions  and  ideas  of  modern  Chris-

  I

tianity  touching  the  Deity  leads  to
this  infidelity,  as  much  as  anything
else. The  advocates  of  Christianity  I
are  in  a  great measure to  blame.
When  we  begin  to  scan  the  teach-  -
ings  and  enquire  into  the  views  of
the  leadinu  divines  of  modern  times,
and  examine  their  articles  of  faith
and  their  discipline,  the  teachings
of  different  Christian  denominations  ,
on  the  subject  of  the  Deity,  we  do
not  wonder  that  the  reflecting,  care-
ful  thinker,  should  repudiate  their
crude  notions,  '

The  old  Catholic  Church,  who  e*ll
themselves  the  Holy  Mother  Church,
the  English  Church  and  the  Lutheran
Church,  the  two  most  extensive
branches  of  dissenters  from  the  Ca*  ■
tholic  Church,  and  the  most  of  the
lesser  Protestant  denominations,  all
-declare  to  their  followers  that  God  is
a  spirit,  without  body,  parts  and  pas-
sions. Some  leave  off  the  word  pas-
sions, but  they  all  say  he  is  without
body,  or  parts;  and  when  they  at-
tempt to  locate  him,  they  locate  hirn
nowhere,  His  centre  is  everywhere!
his  circumference  is  nowhere.  His  j
form  may  be  best  described  in  the  !
quaint  language  of  Parley  P.  Pratt,
"  A  footless  stacking  without  a  leg,"
sitting  upon  the  top  of  a  topless
throne,  tar  beyond  the  bounds  of
time  and  space ;  that  heavenly  un-
known place  that  some  crazy  poet
sung  about.  And  we  are  asked  to
believe  in,  render  obedience  to  and
worship  this  being.  The  c. ireful
thinker  says,  u  I  cannot ;  it  is  im-
possible for  me  to  believe  in  a  being  j


that  has  neither  body,  parts  nor
passions,  and  that  is  located  no-
where; I  cannot  conceive  of  him/'
The  elaborate  thinker  says,  **  I  can-
not conceive  of  any  such  being,  nor
can  anybody  else  conceive  of  him.
It  is  not  within  the  sphere  and
range  of  our  comprehension/'  It
is  simply  nothing  at  ail  ;  and  in
the  exercise  of  his  reasoning  facul-
ties, he  chooses  to  disbelieve  in
their  dogmas,  and  is  net  down  by
them  as  an  intidel.  Yet  the  true
philosopher  is  not  an  infidel.  He
is  only  infidel  to  those  vague  ideas
and  theories  that  are  in  themselves
monstrosities.  Yet  in  the  absence
of  true  religious  teaching,  and  being
i aught  by  the  Christian  world  that
the  Scriptures  do  not  mean  what
they  say,  and  must  be  taken  in  some
mysterious  sense,  they  come  to  the
conclusion  that  (hey  do  not  know
anything  about  the  tru^  character  of
the  Deity,  and  it  is  not  their  province
to  teach  him,  only  as  they  learn  to
know  him  in  scanning  his  works.
Hut  in  scanning  his  works  we  learn
that  he  is  a  Being  of  order  an  1  law,
aud  that  all  things  are  governed  by
law.  Whether  the  minutest  atoms
that  ate  examined  under  powerful
glasses  in  the  molecular  world,  that
aie  scrutinized  by  the  aid  of  the
microscope,  or  whether  we  study  the
works  of  God  in  the  vast  unnumbered
worlds  that  are  rolling  in  the  midst
of  the  power  of  God,  we  find  the
same  order.  "All  things  are  gov-
erned by  law.11

If  we  study  physiology  or  anato-
my, we  are  led  to  exclaim  with  the
Psalmist  of  old,  "  I  am  fearfully  and
wonderfully  made/  and  see  a  beau-
tiful harmony  in  all  the  parts,  and
a  most  exquisite  design.  This  is
proven  by  an  examination  of  the
various  parts  of  the  human  form.
And  every  organ  adapted  to  ita
special  use,  and  for  its  special  pur-


THERE  iS  A  GOD,  ETC.


269


pose,  and  combining  awholo,  a  grand
union  —  a  little  kingdom  composed
of  many  kingdoms,  united  and
constituting  the  grand  whole,  the
being  we  call  man,  but  which  in  the
language  of  these  Script  ores  whs
called  AHam — male  and  female  crea-
ted he  them,  and  called  their  name
Adam,  which  in  the  original,  in
which  these  Script u res  were  written
by  Moses,  signifies  "  the  first  man.11
There  was  no  effort  at  distinguishing
between  the  one  half  and  the  other,
and  calling*  one  man  and  the  other
woman.  This  was  an  after  distinc-
tion, bat  the  explanation  of  it  is —
one  man,  one  being,  and  he  caller)
their  name  Adam.  But  he  created
them  male  and  female,  for  they  were
one,  and  he  says  not  unto  the  woman
muliiply,  and  to  the  man  multiply,
but  he  says  unto  them,  multiply  and
reproduce  your  species,  and  replenish
the  earth.  He  speaks  unto  them
as  belonging  together,  as  constituting
one  being,  and  as  organized  in  his
image  and  after  his  likeness.  And
the  Apostle  Paul,  treating  upon  this
subject  in  the  same  way,  says  that
man*  was  created  in  the  likeness  of
God,  and  after  the  express  image  of
his  person.  John,  the  Apostle,  in
writing  the  history  of  Jesus,  speaks
in  the  same  way  ;  that  Jesus  was  in
the  likeness  of  his  Father,  and  ex-
press image  of  his  person.  And  if
the  revelations  that  God  has  made
of  himself  to  man,  agree  and  har-
monize upon  this  theory  ,  and  if  man-
kind would  be  more  believing,  and
accept  the  simple,  plain,  clear  defini-
tion of  Deity,  and  description  of
himself  which  he  has  given  us,  instead
of  hunting  for  some  great  mystery,
and  seeking  to  find  out  God  where
he  is  not  and  as  he  is  not,  we  all
might  understand  him.  There  is  no
great  myatery  about  it;  no  more
mystery  about  it  than  there  is  about
ourselves,  and  our  own  relationship


to  our  father  and  mother,  and  the
relationship  of  our  own  children  to
us,  That  which  we  see  before  our
eyes,  and  which  we  are  experiencing
from  time  to  time,  day  to  day,  and
year  to  year,  is  an  exemplification  of
Deity,

"  What,"  says  one,  u  do  you  mean
we  should  understand  that  Deity
consists  of  man  and  woman  ?"  Most
certainly  I  do.  If  I  believe  anything
that  God  has  ever  said  about  himself,
and  anything  pertaining  to  the  crea-
tion and  organization  of  man  upon
the  earth,  I  must  believe  that  Deity
consists  of  man  and  woman.  Now
this  is  simplifying  it  down  to  our
understanding,  and  the  great  Chris-
tian world  will  be  ready  to  open  their
mouths  and  cry,  *4  Blasphemy  !  S*c-
riledgeP*  Open  wide  their  eyes  and
wide  their  mouths  in  the  utmost
astonishment.  What !  God  a  ram
and  woman  ?  The  Shakers  say  he
was,  and  Ann  Lee  says,  "  Christ
came  in  the  form  of  a  man  in  the
first  place,  and  now  comes  in  the
form  of  a  woman,"  and  she  was  that
form.

Then  these  Christians — they  siy
he  has  no  form,  neither  body,  part*
nor  passions.  One  party  says  he  i*
a  man,  and  the  other  says  be  is  a
woman,  I  say  he  is  both.  How
do  you  know  ?  I  only  repeat  what
he  says  of  himself ;  that  he  created
man  in  the  image  of  God,  male  and
female  created  he  them,  and  he
called  their  name  Adam,  which  sig-
nifies in  Hebrew,  the  first  man.  So
that  the  beings  we  call  Adam  and
Eve  were  the  first  man  placed  here
on  this  enrth,  and  their  name  waa
Adam,  and  they  were  the  express
image  of  God.  Now,  if  anybody  is
disposed  to  say  that  the  woman  is  in
the  likeness  ot  God  and  that  the  man
was  not,  and  if  viee  versa,  I  say  yon
are  both  wrong,  or  alse  God  has  not
told  us  the  truth.


1  sometimes  illustrate  this  matter
by  taking  up  a  pair  of  shears,  if  I
have  one,  but  then  you  all  know
they  are  composed  of  two  halves,
but  they  are  necessarily  parte,  one
of  another,  and  to  perform  their  work
for  each  other,  as  designed,  they  be-
long together,  and  neither  one  of
them  is  fitted  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  their  works  alone.  And  for
this  reason  says  St.  Paul,  "the  man
is  not  without  the  woman,  nor  the
woman  without  the  man  in  the  Lord/1
In  other  words,  there  can  be  no  God
except  he  is  composed  of  the  man
and  woman  united,  and  there  ts  not
in  all  the  eternities  that  exist,  nor
ever  will  be,  a  God  in  any  other  way,
I  have  another  description  :  There
never  was  a  God,  and  there  never  will
be  in  nil  ctern i tie?,  except  they  are
ltl»de  of  the.se  two  component  parts;
a  man  and  a  woman;  the  male  and
the  female*  Some  of  those  who
are  disposed  to  cavil  will  say,  how
will  you  explain  the  idea  of  a  plu-
rality in  the  female  department  ?
Here  opens  a  subject  involving  phi-
losophy  and  the  philosophical  pro-
pagation of  our  species,  and  it  in-
volves the  great  principles  of  vir-
tue, and  the  laws  that  govern,  or
slmuld  govern  through  all  eternity
the  commerce  of  the  sexes;  and  the
more  they  are  scanned  in  the  light
of  true  philosophy  and  revelation,
ih<?  more  it  will  be  proven  that  the
superior  wisdom  of  Jehovah  baa  or-
dained that  in  the  higher  type  of
ihe  Godhead,  they  are  not  limited
in  their  union  of  the  sexes;  I  refer
to  the  female  principle.  On  the
other  hand  nil  the  laws  governing
the  commerce  of  the  sexes,  and  the
results  flowing  from  them  in  the
procreation  of  our  species,  show
that  the  violation  of  the  laws  that
God  lias  ordained  to  govern  and
control  the  commerce  of  the  sexes,
pro  luces  di seise,1  death  and  deteri-


oration of  the  human  family;  dete-
riorates the  vital  power  and  physical
strength  and  longevity,  and  tends
to  weaken,  lessen  and  destroy  the
human  race,  instead  of  building  ap,
and  sustaining  and  strengthening;
while  on  the  other  hand,  the  strictly
confining  ot  a  woman  to  one  husband,
tends  to  all  that  is  lovely,  to  family
organization  and  government,  and
the  classification  of  human  beings  in
groups,  in  families  and  kingdoms,
tends  to  increase  the  vital  powers,
endurance  and  lung  life;  and  in  c^ery
sense  accomplishes  the  great  object
of  creation.

There  is  a  theory  put  forth  by
Mr.  Darwin,  and  others,  that  is  the
school  of  modern  philosophers,  which
is  termed  in  late  years,  the  theory
of  Evolution,  that  man  in  our  pre-
seut  state  upon  the  earth,  is  but  the
sequence  and  outgrowth  of  steady
advancement  from  the  lowest  order
of  creation,  till  the  present  type  of
man,  and  that  we  have  advanced
step  by  step  fiom  the  lowest  order
of  creation  till  at  last  man  has  heen
formed  upon  the  earth  in  our  present
sphere  of  action  ;  iu  short,  that  our
great-grandfathers  were  apes  and
monkeys.  And  how  much  satisfac-
tion these  philosophers  have  in  the
contemplation  of  their  grandfather
monkeys,  we  are  left  to  conjecture;
but  such  are  the  theories  put  forth
by  some  of  our  modern  philosophers.
But  we  find  nothing  on  the  earth,  or
it i  the  earth,  nor  under  the  earth,  that
indicates  that  any  of  tkeae  monkeys
or  apes,  or  any  other  orders  of  crea-
tion below  man  have  ever  accom-
plished any  great  exploits.  So  far
as  the  history  of  this  earth  is  known,

#  e

whether  written  or  unwritten,  «r
whether  written  in  volumes  of  books,
whether  engraven  upon  metallic
plates,  or  whether  found  impressed
in  rocks,  neither  geologists,  nor  any
other  scientists  have  ever  been  able


I'HfcKfc  is  A  GOD,  ETC


371


to  show  ns  any  great  exploits  of  any
of  these  inferior  crudes  of  being;  to
indicate  thai  there  was  any  such
vitality  in  them,  as  to  develop  in
their  tut  ore  process,  the  present  or-
der of  beings  we  call  man.  But  if
there  is  any  iroth  in  the  history  given
pa  by  ifjees  this  being  we  call  man,
is  only  God  in  embryo.  And  Moses
tells  u$  thwt  the  Creator  conversed
witf»  this  mtin  whom  he  called  Adam,
consisting'  of  male  md  female.  He
conversed  w| tb  them,  showed  himself
to  them.  Bp  fee  with  them  at  different
times,  pave  them  ins* ructions,  gave
tbetn  his  Jaw,  visited  them  repeat,
edly  in  their  new  home*  in  the  place
»e  call  the  Garden  of  Eden,  the  £*r-
den  that  ihe  Lord  planted  for  man —
ea tt ward  in  j£deo.  And  aftvr  he  was
driven  out  from  the  face  of  his  Crea
tor,  from  the  Garden,  and  the  rail
Was  drawn  between  htm  and  his  Crea-
tor, jet  from  time  to  time  God  was
wont  to  draw  aside  that  vail  and  show
himself,  and  we  not  only  find  that
Adam  and  Eve  had  frequent  inter-
course with  their  Creator  and  talked
with  him  persona) I j  as  we  talk  with
our  children  and  they  with  os;  but
we  tiud  many  of  Adam's  descendant*
obtained  Jike  privileges  of  seeing
their  Creator,  and  speaking  with  birn,
receiving  instructions  from  him,
Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  it
was  said  walked  with  God,  and  en*
joyed  ibis  privilege  for  three  boo.
dred  years.  From  lime  to  time  the
vail  was  drawn  aside,  and  whenever
be  desired,  and  it  mi  expedient  to
receive  instructions  and  counsels
from  his  Father  nnd  Crettor  he  en-
Joyed  this  privilege,  and  the  F-ttber
Came  and  showed  himself  to  him  and
•poke  with  him.  The  tame  may  be
•aid  of  Noah  and  of  Abraham,  who
conversed  with  him,  and  the  Scrip-
tores  tell  as,  furthermore,  thai  A  bra*
ham  kilted  the  fatted  calf,  and  pre-
pared savory  meat  for  a  meaJ,  and  set


before  him  and  he  ate  with  him.

Our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ
was  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  the
Script  area  tell  us;  and  she  bare
record  of  it,  and  there  were  many
witnesses  of  this  fact,  and  the  re-
cord tenches  us  that  he  w»s  begoiteu
by  the  power  of  God,  and  not  of
man,  and  that  she  had  no  intercourse
witJi  mortal  man  in  the  flesh  until
after  she  e*t*e  birth  to  the  Savior,
who  is  called  the  Son  of  God.  I  will
*1*o  say  that  Adam  was  called  the
Son  of  God.

Matthew,  in  giving  the  genealogy
of  Jesua  Christ,  traces  it  luick  from


the  fathers,
D.i  v  id  i  j  A I
to  Noah,  are  I
lie yets leu  i


11  he


.1*


;r  of


Ami  not  by  mor
the  New  Testa ii


sent  I ■  j


Lord  to  I
should  hi


make  ki


tft  her  was  designed  t*
mind,  her  heart  and
tliis  tfrpjit  work  uuto  w}
had  chosen  her  And


of  thee  shall


of  the  htu
d  partaken  c


.uleij  the  f>


all  other  m

f  t*kh  wTll 111  Wit


uTOt  liar*1


Jiff


272


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  fruits  of  the  earth,  their  systems
become  infected  by  it,  and  the  blood
formed  in  their  veins,  and  composed
of  the  elements  of  the  earth,  which
they  partook,  and  these  contain  the
seeds  of  dissolution  and  decay.  And
this  blood,  circulating  in  their  veins,
which  was  made  up  of  the  fruits  of
the  earth — those  things  of  which
they  partook — that  formed  their  |
flesh,  and  made  the  deposits  that
constituted  their  muscle,  and  their
bones,  arteries  and  nerves,  and  every
part  of  the  body,  became  mortal  and
this  circulating  fluid  in  their  sys-
tems produced  friction  which  ulti-
mately wore  out  the  machinery  of
their  organism,  and  brought  it  to
decay, that  it  became  no  longer
tenable  for  their  spirits  to  inhabit,
and  death  ensued  ;  and  this  was  the
decree  of  the  Father,  "  In  the  dav
you  partake  of  this  fnlit,  you  shall
die," But  tins  death  was  the  death
of  the  mortal,  and  not  the  immor-
tal. The  dissolution  of  the  mortal
tabernacle, which was  the  outer
covering  ot  their  spirit. As  I  said,
man  was  created,  male  and  female,
and  two  principles  are  blended  in
one  ;  and  the  man  is  not  without
the  woman  nor  the  woman  without
the  man  in  the  Lord  ;  and  there  is
no  Lord,  there  is  no  God  in  which
the  two  principles  are  not  blended,
nor  can  be  ;  and  we  may  never  hope
to  attain  unto  the  eternal  power  and
the  Godhead  upon  any  other  prin-
ciple. Not  only  io,  but  this  God-
bead  composing  two  parts,  male  and
female,  is  also  composed  of  two  ele-
ments, spiritual  and  temporal.  Or
in  other  words,  two  organisms  ;  the
one  capable  of  dwelling  within  the
other. The  spirit  dwelling  within
*  the  outer  tabernacle,  answering  to
the  spirit  what  our  clothing  answrers
to  this  body,  as  a  covering  and
shield  and  protection. The  spirit
is  also  an  element. It  is  not  an  im-


material nothing  as  some  imagine.
We  read  about  material  and  imma-
terial things,  and  such  terms  are
used  by  men  for  the  want  of  more1
suitable  language  to  correctly  repre-
sent ideas  ;  but  in  truth  there  is  no
such  thing  as  immaterial  substance.
Though  we  are  told  that  God  i.s  an
immaterial  substance,  and  you  read
the  philosophic  descriptions  of  the
Deity  by  some  of  these  learned
divines,  and  it  is  all  simmered  down
to  an  immateriality  or  nothing  at
all.  But  there  is  no  such  thing  as
immaterial  substance  in  the  strict
sense  of  the  word ;  and  immate-
riality when  rigidly  defined  is  another
definition  for  nothing  at  all  But
we  use  these  terapr  only  compara-
tively to  compare  one  thing  with
another,  and  we  say  that  one  thing
is  material  because  we  can  touch  it
with  these  hands,  and  we  can  handle
it  with  these  mortal  bodies,  we  can
see  it  with  these  mortal  eyes,  and  it
is  visible  to  the  sight,  touch  and  so
on,  and  hence  we  call  it  material  ;
and  what  is  not  visible  to  these  na-
tural eyes,  and  what  these  coarse
hands  cannot  feel,  we  call  that  im-
material or  intangible ;  but  these
are  only  comparative  terms.

If  the  vail  were  drawn  aside,  and
We  could  see  the  spirits  of  those  that
once  have  lived  here  in  the  flceh,
and  that  have  passed  behind  the
vail,  or  have  been  separated  from
their  tabernacles,  and  now  exist  in
the  spirit  world,  if  the  vail  was
drawn  aside  and  we  could  see  them,
if  this  second  sight,  this  spiritual
sight  was  enjoyed  by  us,  that
could  look  through  the  eyes  of  our
spirits  instead  of  through  the  eyes,
of  our  earthly  tabernacles,  and  could
see  these  spirits  and  converse  with
them,  we  should  find  we  could  talk
with  them,  and  we  would  not  talk
through  the  organs  of  speech  either.
We  could  talk  through  other  organs-


This  tabernacle  may  be  upon  the  I
couch,  the  eyes  elosed,  and  all  the
sensibilities  of  the  tabernacle  sus~  j
pended  for  the  time  being,  and  yet
the  organism  of  life  may  be  kept  up
by  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  and
the  motion  of  the  heart,  the  ma-
chinery of  our  organism  may  be  kept  i
in  motion,  and  for  the  time  bring,
kent  from  decay  and  dissolution,
while  the  spirit  is  conversing  with
spirits.  This  some  call  a  trance.
In  the  scriptures,  and  other  places  it
is  called  a  vision.  It  is  simply  the
spirit  within  us  enjoying  a  higher
privilege  of  conversing  with  spirits,
seeing  spiritual  things  and  convers-
ing with  spirits  or  immortal  beings  ;
but  they  neither  converse  through
these  organs  of  speech,  nor  see
through  these  natural  eyes,  but  they
see  through  the  eyes  of  their  spirit,
and  converse  with  the  organs  of
speech  that  belong  to  the  spirit,  and
if  the  spirits  of  men  did  not  possess
the  faculties  and  power  of  commu-
nication, and  conversing  ami  carry-
ing on  conversation  with  each  other
before  they  came  into  this  tabernacle
they  never  would  speak  in  this  taber-
nacle. This  is  only  an  art ;  this  art
of  speech — this  power  of  sight —
of  hearing.  Speech  is  not  some-
thing peculiar  to  the  tabernacle  and
belonging  to  this  tabernacle.  It
belongs  to  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit
teaches  the  tabernacle ;  and  the
spirit  makes  use  of  the  tabernacle.
When  once  it  finds  itself  embodied
in  this  tabernacle,  it  begins  to  use
the  fingers  and  hands  of  the  taber-
nacle, and  makes  these  its  servants.
The  moment  it  is  separated  this
tabernacle  lies  senseless.  It  has
mouth  and  teeth  and  tongue  and
organs  of  speech,  but  it  cannot  use
them*  It  has  eyes,  but  it  cannot
dee.  It  has  ears  but  it  cannot  hear,
and  it  has  no  power  of  using  these
onjans.  It  cannot  set  itself  in  mo- 1
Xo.  18.


tion,  it  cannot  keep  itself  in  motion;
it  is  the  spirit  that  does  all  this.
And  when  the  spirit  is  separated
from  the  tabernacle  it  still  retains
the  power  of  seeing,  hearing,  feeling,
tastiuar,  smelling  and  conversing ;
but  the  tabernacle  loses  all  these
power*,  the  moment  the  spirit  takes
its  departure.

Now  what  is  this  spirit?  Is  it
an  immaterial  substance  ?  No  1  As
I  said  before,  that  is  only  another
definition  of  nothing  at  all  It  is
a  being  precisely  as  we  are  seen
here  to-day  ;  and  if  you  nsk«  <c  How
does  brother  Snow's  spirit  look  when
it  i*  disembodied  V ?  Why,  you  just
look  at  me  now,  and  you  can  answer
the  question.  How  does  the  spirit
of  my  wife  look  ?  Why,  just  look
at  her  and  see.  And  if  we  were
both  disembodied  at  the  same  in-
:  stant,  we  should  scarcely  know  that
we  were  changed  any  more  than  we
would  if  we  both  started  out  of  the
door  at  the  same  instant  and  found
ourselves  outside,  looking  at  each
other,  and  do  not  see  very  much
difference  between  us  than  what
there  was  when  we  were  both  inside
the  house.  Whether  inside  or  out
of  it,  we  are  the  same  beings.  Con-
versing together  ?  Yes.  looking  at
each  other  ?  Yes.  The  same  fea-
tures exactly.  Our  tabernacles  are
formed  for  our  spirits,  yes,  expressly
tor  our  spirits.  But  why  were  they
not  all  made  alike?  Why  were
they  not  all  made  just  six  feet  high?
and  why  were  they  not  all,  in  every
respect,  all  the  same  length  ;  limb&p
likeness,  the  same ;  the  same  length
of  an  arm  1  You  may  just  as  well
ask  the  tailor,  **  Why  do  you  make
different  sized  coats  and  pants  ?"
'  And  say  to  the  milliner  also,  41  Why
do  you  make  different  sizes  of  dresses
and  other  garments  Tf  And  their
answer  is,  because  I  have  so  many
[  different  persons  to  fit,  and  I  make

▼oL  XIX.


£7 :


JOURNAL  OF  OiSCOCKSES.


-the  garment  to  fit  the  person.
And  that  is  the  answer  concerning
the  tabernacles*  They  are  made  to
fit  the  spirits.  I  say,  therefore,  that
God  not  only  includes  within  himself
the  male  and  female  principle,  the
same  a*  man  does,  but  it  also  in-
cludes the  two  elements  which  Ave
call  spirit  and  tabernacle,  and  these
are  only  comparative  terms,  to  illus-
trate in  a  crude  way  the  idea  of  the
two  principles,  the  spirit  being  of
finer  material,  possessing  greater
intelligence,  more  fully  developed,
and  organized  for  greater  and  more
is  works*


Now  touching  the  doctrine  of
mortality  and  immortality.  Savs
one,  "  Wliat  is  mortal  and  what  is
immortal  1'*  These  are  only  com-
parative terms,  again  ;  the  same
as  we  use  temporal  and  eternal
Time  means  temporal — short  lived.
Immortal  means  that  which  reaches
forward  into  eternity  ?  And  what
is  eternity?  Why  it  is  another
term  which  we  use— a  comparative
term  to  measure  time,  and  wi  say
time  and  eternity.  And  then  the
scriptures  use  other  terms,  eternities,
and  from  eternity  to  eternity ;  while
these  are  only  so  many  definitions,
or  divisions  of  duration.  But  the
scriptures  tell  us  that  time  only  is
measured  to  man,  that  is  to  say,
time  as  a  term  is  used  in  reference  to
the  short  period  belonging  to  mor-
tality, while  eternity  is  used  in  the
measure  of  the  time  of  the  Gods,
from  one  period  to  another,  and  the
vastuess  of  eternity  none  can  com-
prehend It  is  illustrated  by
Abraham,  by  the  figure  of  a  ri*g.
He  marks  a  round  ring  to  give  an
illustration  of  his  views  of  eternity.
You  may  start  anywhere  on  that
ring  and  undertake  to  find  the  end,
and  you  cannot,  for  it  has  none.
You  may  have  a  starting  point  any
place  on  the  ring,  but  you  cannot


have  any  stopping  place,  and  so  the
Scriptures  in  another  place,  more
expressly  use  the  term,  that  the
course  of  God  is  an  eternal  round,
and  therefore  it  is  called  eternity.
But  this  course  of  God  being  "  one
eternal  round,"  is  marvelous  in  our
eyes,  and  who  can  comprehend  it  t
But  we  see,  yes,  we  see  right  before
us  to-day,  Ins  image,  man — male  and
female.

The  first  pair  placed  here  was  on
a  farm  lie  had  prepared  for  them  ;
an  earth  hr  had  organized  for  them,
and  where  he  gave  them  dominion
as  gods  over  it,  as  rulers  over  the
eaith  and  all  things  therein.  Lu-
cifer, who  fell  from  heaven,  when
these  evil  spirits  we  read  of  rebelled
against  God  the  Father,  ami  his  an-
gels that  itdlwith  him,  sut  about  the
opposition  of  this  earth  and  to  wrest
the  dominion  from  Adam,  and  he
has  been  trying  it  ever  since,  from
the  beginning  till  the  present,  to
wrest  the  dominion  of  this  earth
from  Adam  and  his  posterity,  and
the  only  means  by  which  he  expects
or  hopes  to  accomplish  it  is,  in  short,
to  take  possession  of  the  tabernacles
of  Adam,  which  means  a  man  and
his  wife — male  and  female,  whom
he  called  Adam,  and  rule  the  earth,
and  make  the  earth  and  the  fullness
thereof  Ids  servants.  He  has  sought
to  do  this,  but  he  will  not  accom-
plish that  evil  design,  for  the  Father
has  provided  a  way  of  thwarting
him*  The  Savior  will  displace  him.
The  name  of  Jesus  has  power  over
all  these  evil  spirits,  Lucifer  and  all
the  hosts  of  hell  who  are  cast  down
to  the  earth,  and  have  set  up  their
abode  in  the  tabernacles  of  men,
and  in  many  instances  they  have
succeeded.  They  do  not  altogether
get  possession  of  the  tabernacles  of
men,  only  in  isolated  cases.  There
are  cases  in  which  it  seems  that
these  spirits  so  far  control  the  taber-


THERE  IS  A  GOD,  ETC.


275


nacles  of  men  as  to  find  the  natural
spirit  that  owns  these  tabernacles
and  suspend  the  operations  of  their
functions,  and  usurp  the  control  of
the  functions  of  the  body,  and  make
these  organs  of  speech  speak  the
language  of  devils,  and  make  these
tabernacles  perform  the  wicked  works
of  the  evil  one;  while  the  spirit  that
owns,  and  should  control  this  taber-
nacle, is  hound,  as  it  were,  hand  and
foot  :  and  where  these  powers  and
functions  are  thus  suspended  in
these  isolated  cases,  we  call  them
maniacs,  because  their  natural  powers
are  suspended,  and  they  are  under
the  dominion  of  devils.  But  others,
and  this  embraces  all  of  us,  are
more  or  less  influenced  by  evil  spirits,
that  prompt  and  lead  to  passions,
and  the  lusts  of  the  flesh;  and  to
do  many  tilings  in  violation  of  the
true  laws  of  life  and  health,  and  of
-peace  and  glory  and  exaltation,  and
'these  evils  to  which  we  aye  prompted
through  the  influence  of  these  spirits
are  designed,  little  by  little,  to
bring  us  into  bondage,  to  sin  and
death,  and  to  him  who  has  the  power
of  death,  which  is  the  devil

Now  the  term  devil  we  use  also  as
a  term  representing  a  power  that  is
at  the  head  of  the  rebellion  against
God  our  Father.  A  power  that
stands  at  the  head  of  that  organizes  1
rebellion,  A  power  that  governs
all  evil  spirits.  He  is  called  in  the
Scriptures  that  old  Serpent,  the
devil,  and  Satan,  and  Lucifer,  and
a  variety  of  names.  These  are  ap-
plied to  him,  and  all  representing
the  chief  power  over  that  organized
rebellion,  that  governs  and  controls
these  evil  spirits,  and  that  power
holds  the  power  of  death  over  mor-
tality, and  over  man  in  the  flesh.
And  why  and  how  do  they  obtain
that  power  i  I  have  said  by  influ-
encing the  parents  in  the  first  place,
and  then  by  influencing  their  poste-


rity  after  them,  and  *  violating  the
laws  of  their  being,  and  thereby
subjecting  themselves  to  dissolution
and  death. The  form  of  this  or-
ganism does  not  necessarily  imply
dissolution  and  death. It  is  only
the  materials  that  enter  into  it  that
implies  this,  and  that  brings  it  about.
The  seeds  of  dissolution  and  decay
are  planted  here,  as  I  said,  throngh
the  influence  of  this  evil  one  leading
us  to  violate  the  laws  of  our  being,
and  which  brings  death  in  its  train.
The  Father,  in  his  economy,  has  fore-
seen this,  and  has  provided  a  way  of
e-cape,  provided  a  deliverance.  He
km  provided  the  resurrection,  a  pe-
riod when  the  spirits  which  are  un-
clothed in  death  when  the  natural
death  comes,  and  which  is  the  sepa-
ration of  the  spirit  from  the  taber-
nacle, when  this  natural  death  cornea
which  unclothes  this  spirit  and  leaves
it  in  its  native  state  unclothed,  he
has  appointed  a  time  when  it  shall  be
clothed  upon  the  second  time,  and
then  in  immortality,  with  tabernacles
incorruptible,  undefiled,  that  fadeth
not  away. And  this  is  the  second
clothing;  this  is  immortal.  This
incorruptible  is  free  from  the  coarser
elements  that  enter  into  these  mortal
tabernacles,  and  free  from  these  seeds
of  dissolution  and  decay,  and  those
things  that  wear  out,  and  destroy
this  tabernacle,  that  perish  with  their
using. Herein  then  is  life. We  eat
and  drink  and  live,  and  yet  that
very  eating  and  drinking  destroys
□s. We  partake  of  the  fruits  and
elements  of  the  earth,  and  that  build
up these mortal  tabernacles,  and
when  they  have  been  built  up  to  a
certain  stage,  the  very  process  by
which  we  build  thetn  up  destroys
them  again,  and  they  perish  with  the
using. They  are  worn  oat  in  the
objects  for  which  they  are  created.
Just  like  our  clothing,  boots,  and
shoes,  antf  bats,  do  they  perish  with


276


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


their  using* Not  so  with  the  immor- 1  he  was  living  ;  go  and  tell  his  disci-


tal;  the  spirit  i«  clothed  upon  with
the  immortal  tabernacle. Is  it  like
the  mortal  ? Yes  ;  ami  yet  unlike,
like  so  far  as  the  form  is  concerned  ;
the  form  and  organism  constituted
to  the  spirit,  and  to  the  labor  which
has  to  be  performed  throughout  eter-
nity ;  but  not  com  rosed  of  perishable
materials. That  immortal  taberna-
cle, that  incoiruptible,  will  have  no
blood  circulating  iu  its  veins.  That
is  free  from  the  gross  elements  of
this  earth,  from  the  fruits  of  this  |
earth,  from  the  grains  nnd  vegetables
of  this  earth.

We  have  a  sample  of  this  immor-
tal in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ-  He
was  raised  from  the  dead  after  he
had  lain  in  the  tomb  for  three  days.
We  are  told  in  the  Scriptures  that
he  was  quickened  by  the  power  of  the
Father,  who  raUed  him  from  the
dead;  and  he  looked  as  he  did  when
he  perished,  his  features  were  the
same.  He  showed  himself  to  his
disciples  after  Ins  resurrection,  on
numerous  occasious.  First,  he  showed
himself  to  Mary,  near  the  tomb
where  he  was  raised.  When  Mary
came  to  the  tomb  at  early  dawn,  she
saw  two  angels  by  the  tomb,  and
they  said  unto  her,  "  whom  seek
ye  ?"  (of  course  they  knew  whom
she  sought,  but  they  spoke  to  draw
her  out,)  and  she,  supposing  them
to  be  the  guard s,  in  the  grey
dawn  of  the  morning  looked  in  the
door  of  the  tomb,  and  saw  he  was
gone.  There  was  the  winding  sheet,
and  the  napkin  that  bad  been  about
his  head  neatly  folded  and  laid  down,


pies  that  lie  is  risen15  and  as  she  turned
to  go  away  Jesus  was  by  her.  She
met  him,  saw  that  he  looked  just  as
he  did  when  he  died,  and  she  recog-
nized him  instantly. And  as  she
made  the  motion  towards  him,  as  if
she  would  seize  him  by  his  feet  and
worship  him;  says  he,  u  Touch  me
not,  I  have  not  yet  ascended  to  my
Father,  I  have  just  risen,  I  must  go
and  report  myself  to  my  Father,  and
then  I  will  come  and  visit  you,  but
you  cannot  touch  me  yet. But  go
and  tell  my  disciples  I  go  before
them  into  Galilee,  as  I  promised
them,  and  I  will,  go  to  my  Father."
After  a  little  he  showed  himself  to
bp  disciples. He  appeared  to  two
of  them  the  same  afternoon,  ns  they
were  journeying  out  of  the  village,
a  few  miles  out  of  the  city,  talking
and  conversing  with  them  by  tha
way  side,  and  discovered  himself  to
them  in  the  act  of  breaking  bread*
Then  he  departed  from  them.  The
next  time  he  appeared  unto  eleven
of  the  disciples  as  they  were  gathered
together  in  a  room,  and  instructed
them, But  Thomas  called  Didymua
was  not  present,  and  when  these  told
him  that  they  had  seen  the  Lord  he
could  not  believe  it,  he  says, "  I
must  not  only  see  him  myself  before
I  bilieve,  but  I  must  feel  the  prints
of  his  wounds,  where  the  nails  were
driven  through  his  hands  and  feet,
thrust  my  hands  in  his  side,  and  feel
the  hole  that  was  made  by  the  spear
when  the  soldiers  thrust  it  into  bi»
side,  and  drew  out  his  heart's  blood*
Unless  I  can  do  this  I  will  not  be-


but  no  Jesus  was  there,  and  in  her  |  lieve." So  the  next  time  the  discU


disappointment  and  grief,  she  turned
to  go  away,  and  saw  two  men  which
were  supposed  to  be  the  guards,  and
said,  "  If  vou  have  borne  him  hence,
tell  me  I  pray  you  where  you  have
lain  him,"  They  replied,  uJesuB
has  risen  ;  as  he  said  unto  you  when


pies  were  together,  and  Thomas  was
with  them,  Jesus  came  into  their
midst  and  showed  himself  to  them
again,  and  the  first  thing  he  said
wag,  M  Thomas,  come  here,  stick
your  fingers  in  the  holes  in  my  hands,
thrust  your  hands  into  my  side,  feeL


ibe  wound  as  it  was  made  by  the
•pear  in  my  side,  feel  the  print  of
the  nails  in  my  hands  and  feet,  and
doubt  not  but  be  believing."  Not  a
word  had  been  said,  bat  Jesus  heard
his  words,  aod  knew  the  thoughts  of
his  heart,  and  it  took  him  unexpect-
edly. Now  come,  come  said  he,
41  Now  apply  the  test  yon  demand.
Feel  the  print  of  the  nails  in  my
hands  and  feet,  and  thrust  your
hands  into  my  side,  and  doubt  not
hat  be  believing."  Thomas  saw  that
the  thoughts  of  his  heart  were  known
and  heard,  and  the  words  of  his
mouth  were  known  and  read,  and  be
at  once  exclaimed,  "  Lord !  It  is
enough.  Well,  says  Jesus,  "Tho-
mas, you  beliove  now  that  yon  have
seen,  but  blessed  are  those  who  shall
believe  aod  have  not  seen.

I  know  there  is  a  great  many  think
that  they  must  show  their  great
strength  of  mind  by  doing  as  Th  cm  as
did,  and  swear  that  they  won't  believe
anything  till  they  see  it;  but  Jesus
says,  "  Thomas,  you  believe  now  you
have  seen,  but  blessed  are  those  who
believe  and  have  not  seen,"

Now,  the  first  tinif*  Jesus  appeared
to  his  disciples  they  thought  it  was
a  spirit  that  had  appeared  to  them,
and  to  show  them  that  ho  had  his
tabernacle  with  him,  he  says,  Bring
me  something  to  eat,  and  I  will  prove
to  you  that  there  is  something  more
than  spirit  in  me,  "What  have  yon
to  eat  ?"  And  they  answered,  "  we
have  got  some  fish  here  and  some
honey/'  **  Bring  me  some  fish  and
honey  comb."  And  he  took  some  of
the  fish  and  some  honey  and  eat  it
before  them.  Now,  says  he,  u  be
believing  ;  the  spirit  has  not  flesh
and  bones  as  ye  see  me  have."

Here  was  an  immortal  being  raised
from  the  dead*  la  what  did  that
tabernacle  differ  from  the  mortal
tabernacle  ?  Waa  there  a  chaog*?
wrought  upon  it? Had  it  the  same


eyes  in  its  tockets,  same  tongue  in
its  head,  same  bands  and  feet,  with
the  same  holes  made  by  driving  the
nails  through  them,  the  same  hole
made  in  its  side  by  the  spear  that
was  run  into  it?  Says  he,  "spirit
has  not  flesh  and  bones  as  you  see
rae  have,"  and  he  used  the  si  ne
teeth,  the  same  organs,  and  eat  be-
fore them,  and  showed  them  that
there  was  his  tabernacle.  Then
wherein  did  he  differ  from  the  mortal
tabernacle  ?  I  answer,  the  blood  was
spilled,  and  that  the  purpose  of  the
Father  might  be  accomplished,  he
caused  the  soldiers  to  run  the  spear
into  his  vitals  that  they  might  draw
out  the  last  drop  of  his  heart's  blood.
And  when  he  whs  raised  from  the
dead  he  was  quickened  by  the  spirit,
by  the  spirit  and  power  of  the  Father,
and  the  life  that  was  in  him  was  not
the  life  infused  by  the  circulation  of
the  blood,  it  was  not  that  that  kept
the  machinery  of  this  organism  in
motion,  it  was  the  element  called
spirit.  And  this  is  the  essential
difference  between  the  mortal  and
immortal.

As  I  said,  a  union  of  two  princi-
ples— the  refined  element  that  is
organized  into  spirit,  and  the  gusset
element  we  call  tabernacle,  organized
as  an  outer  clothing,  the  two  united
and  blended  together,  and  the  two
principles,  male  arid  female,  united.
And  for  what  purpose  ?  Why,  we
see  bore,  for  the  purpose  of  pro-
creation;  for  the  purpose  of  endless
increase,  and  the  building  up,  and
enlarging,  and  extending  the  king-
doms and  dominions  of  eternity.
Else  why  are  all  these  vast  creations,
the  shining  orbs,  that  indicate  to
feeble  man  on  this  lower  earth  the
existence  of  these  glorified  worlds !
Why  all  this?  if  there  were  not  the
works  of  the  Gods  of  eternity  going
on,  and  that  continually?  And  the
need  and  extent?  thereof,  none  oan


tell;  aud  to  use  the  language  of
Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  said
he,  M  If  the  particles  of  this  earth
were  numbered,  aud  millions  of  earths
like  this,  it  would  scarcely  be  a  be-
ginning to  the  number  of  thy  crea-
tions, and  thy  hand  is  over  them  all."
And  this  is  the  object  we  worship.
And,  notwithstanding  the  Apostle
Paul  says,  u  There  are  Lords  many
and  Gods  many,  yet"  said  he,  u  unto
ns  there  is  but  one  God,  even  the
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ/'
and  that  is  enough  for  us.  And  we
may  say  to  every  child,  though  there
are  fathers  many  and  mothers  many,
but  to  you  there  is  but  one,  and  that
is  enough,  that  is  enough  for  you.
Honor  your  father  and  your  mother,
and  let  your  father  and  mother  honor
their  father  and  mother,  and  this  is
the  chain  of  the  Priesthood,  and
power  let  down  from  the  eternities  to
man  on  the  earth.  And  may  God
enable  us  to  grow  in  this  chain,  and
climb  higher  and  higher,  onward
and  upward,  and  work  ourselves  up
to  the  eternal  power  and  godhead.
I  repeat  to  you  what  the  Apostle
Paul  said  to  the  Epbesians,  in  his
epistle  to  them  ;  says  he,  u  Brethren,
let  tbe  same  mind  be  in  you  that  was
in  Christ  Jesus,  who,  when  he  found
himself  in  the  form  of  God,  thought
it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  him."
But,  says  the  narrow-minded  bigot
sectarian,  What  blasphemy  !  for  man,
in  the  form  of  God,  to  aspire  to  be
equal  with  him  !  That  ii  preeicely
tbe  exhortation  of  St  Paul  to  his
former-day  Saints,  Shall  we  con-
tinue in  the  estimation  of  Jesus  for
applying  the  same  truth  to  us,  or
using  the  same  exhortation  that
Paul  did  to  his  brethren?  And  St.
Paul  understood  what  he  declared,
and  be  wished  to  instil  this  same
faith  and  feeling  in  numbers  of  bis
brethren,  and  cherish  the  same  feel-
ing, hope  and  aspiration,  and  labor


and  aspire  to  rise  up  and  become  one
with  God,  because,  says  he, "  You  are
his  image,  and  you  are  his."  Why  ?
We  may  aspire  to  betqnal  with  him,
and  that  is  not  robbery.  \es,  Jesus,
who  found  himself  in  the  form  of
God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be-
come? equal  with  him.  How  can
that  be  ?  I  ask  if  any  son  robs  his
father  if  he  grows  up  to  beC3me  equal
with  him ;  attains  to  all  the  per-
fections of  his  father ;  attains  to  all
knowledge,  all  wisdom,  all  under-
standing, all  power,  and  performs  as
great  works  as  his  father  performed?
Did  he  rob  his  father  of  anything?
Has  his  father  lost  anything  because
the  son  has  attained  to  the  same
greatness,  glory  and  perfection  ?  No  !
The  Scriptures  tells  us  that  God,  in
bestowing  blessings,  loses  nothing.
In  giving  it  does  not  impoverish  him,
and  in  withholding  it  does  not  enrich
him.  He  can  impart  light,  truth,
knowledge,  power,  wisdom,  under-
standing, ability,  lift  up  and  exalt  bis
creatures,  and  make  them  like  unto
himself,  and  instead  of  losing  anything
he  is  greatly  enriching  himself.  He
is  enlarging  and  extending  his  domin-
ions, he  is  multiplying  his  kingdoms,
and  his  offsprings,  over  which  he  is
extending  his  benign  influence,  and
blessings,  and  glory,  and  honor,  for
ever  and  ever.  Then,  says  the  Apostle
Paul,  Why  your  narrow-mindedness,
Let  the  same  mind  be  in  yon  that
was  in  Christ,  who,  finding  himself  in
the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  rob-
bery to  become  equal  with  him,  grow-
ing up  unto  Christ,  our  living  head,
and  that  is  the  object  of  t  he  organiza-
tion of  the  Priesthood  on  the  earth,
andtheclassification,  and  organization
of  tbe  Church  of  Christ  upon  the
earth.  It  is  not  to  exclude  and  send
down  to  damnation,  to  hell,  everybody
that  does  not  subscribe  to  our  ideas
and  beliefs  in  an  instant,  nor  in  a  day,
week,  month,  nor  a  year,  nor  in  this*


short  life  time ;  but  it  is  to  gather  out
men  and  women,  and  locate  and
organize  them,  and  classify  them
together,  and  instruct  them,  and  lead
them  on  and  insp  re  them  with  faith,
and  build  thern  up,  and  teach  them
the  laws  of  lift  and  health,  and  lift
them  up  that  they  may  exercise  faith,
and  lay  hold  upon  the  promises  of
God  and  climb  op  upon  this  chain
that  is  laid  down  from  the  Gods  of
eternity  to  their  children  on  earth.
Climbing  by  this  chain  till  they  are
built  up  in  Christ,  our  living  head,
and  become  one  with  Christ  Jesus,
for,  says  the  Apostle  P.iul,  We  are
heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with
Jeans  Christ.  .

Now,  again,  tha&iame  Paul  says,
in  the  same  epistle  lo  the  Knhesiatis,
that  Christ  set  iu  his  Church  first
Apostles,  secondly  Prophets,  and
thirdly  Evangelists,  Pastors,  and
Teachers,  and  gifts  and  healkgs.
All  these  hath  he  placed  in  his  Church
for  the  perfecting  of  the  Saints,  and
for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  and  for
the  perfecting  of  his  people,  that  they
may  grow  up  unto  Christ,  our  living


head,  and  all  the  parts  being  fitly
joined  together  may  become  perfect
in  him.  Here  are  the  objects  of  this
organization  of  thi.s  Priesthood,  and
the  ordinances  thereof,  and  the  power
of  godliness,  that  is  made  manifest
unto  man  in  the  flesh,  and  through  it
to  urge  them  on,  faster,  further  and
farther,  until  they  shall  attain  to  this
fullness  of  eternal  power  and  the
Godhead.  And  that  we  may  not  lose
sight  of  this  high  calling  of  God  in
Christ  Jesus,  which  has  come  down
unto  us,  and  that  we  may  not  turn
back  to  the  beggarly  element  rhe
world,  but  cast  away  the  luat*  of  the
flesh,  and  the  pride  of  life,  nvA  rill  the
vanities  and  follies  of  thia  mortal  state,
and  learn  to  appreciate  our  true  posi-
tion, and  our  high  and  holy  calling,
and  labor  to  perfect  ourselves  through
the  Gospel,  and  in  obedience  to  his
ordinances,  tiil  we  shall  become  heirs
of  trod  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ,
rising  up  to  the  eternal  power  and
Godhead  and  the  perfection  that  is  in
him,  is  my  prayer,  through  Jean  a
Christ  our  Lord,  Amen.


A


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  at  the  Focutfknth  Ward  .Ask  em  lily  Rhomb,  Salt  Lake  C  ity,

StfMUY  AFTKR!»OOX. ,  1873.


d[ by  Geo,


F.  Gibbs.)


GOD  1H  LIGHT  —  COD  UUK  FATHER  —  UQD  A  PERSONAGE — THE  HOLY
GHOST— TIIK  EARTH  AS  PART  OF  THE  UNIVERSE  —  THE  PURPOSE  OF
RPERIENCE— THE  RESURRECTION — ZION  TAKEN  F^pM  EACH  OF  THE
CREATIONS — SPJ RITUAL  FACULTIES.


These  words  are  found  .in  the  Mh
Terse  of  the  1st  Epistle  of  John:  "God
is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at
all."

Inasmuch  as  God  is  represented  to
he  a  being  full  of  truth,  full  of  know-
lediit*  and  intelligence,  having  sd-
minhiy/ power,  we  would  naturally
suppose  that  he  was  also  a  God  of
light,  thnt  is  lull  of  the  principle  of
light;  and  that  there  is  nuthin^  foo
deep  for  him  to  understand, -or  too
great  for  his  understanding  to  compre-
hend or  reach.""  H*ijjeiyg  full  of  light,
there  am  be  no  darkness  in  hi  in.
P  Indeed,  he  is  spoken  of  by  James  as
.  *The  "  Father  of  lights/* In  other


words,  his  offspring,  his  children,  his
sons  and  daughters,  pwpake  of  a
portion  of  that  light  wht^ijd^veiU  in

the  Father  ;  the  sanie  as  our  "-children.


con  d  it  ion  in  Wtjff  I '  ey  fin  e  pi  need ,

to  fill  the  obieofc^oi  theft*  en .:a'mii.

The  Lor(Fdoei  not  intru.st  r\  fii!
ness  of  light  to  any  of  his-  creatures
in  this  world,  riot  even  his  owr  sons
and  daughters  have  this  privilege,
while  in  this  mortal  state  of  existence.
It  seems  to  be  in  accordance  with  the
great  purpose  of  Jehovah,  to  place  his
own  children  here  in  this  creation  and
impart  to  them  a  very  small  degree
of  light  nnd  t rutin  They  are  required
to  improve  upon  this  degree  of  light,
adding  thereunto  un  ietstandinjr,
knowledge  nnd  truth.  Some,  in  re-
flecting upon  this  subject,  might  ask
the  questions,  "If  the  Lord  is  an
almighty  being,  possessing  all  power,
and  is  full  of  intelligence,  knowledge
and  truth,  and  if  we  are  his  children,
why  did  he  not  impart  unto  us  the


bum  unhf  us,  partake,  in  some  tt^J  |o]lness  of  this  light  in  the  beginning
ppaets,  of  the  light  und  inteljpagncc d|  our  existence  in  this  world  ]  why
which  dwells  in  their  paren
crei^tures  that  we  are  acquai
that  have  life,  and  be
to  move  upon  the  enH

of  light,  j|

and  thgt  light  <
meted  out
decree  of


snould  he  give  us  little  by  little  i  why
ajewe  not  born  with  an  understands
^Wet^ing  of  all  things  past,  all  things  prfi
sgrcti sent,  and  all  things  to  come  ?"  To
ifiniTtij' my  mind  these  questions  sire  easily
answered. The  Lord  designed,  in
placing  his  children  here  upon  this
creation,  that  they  should  not  only


i


attain  to  great  knowledge,  and  under-
standing, and  wisdom,  but  that  they
should  show  themselves  approved  in
every  sphere  in  which  they  might  be
placed.  Where  little  is  given,  but
little  will  be  required.  And  having
determined  in  his  own  purpose  and
mind  that  they  should  be  agents  to
themselves,  he  designed  to  try  them
in  their  agency,  with  a  small  degree
of  light  and  truth  at  first,  to  see  how
they  would  act  in  relation  to  the
degree  of  intelligence  given  ;  in  other
words,  to  see  whether  they  would
make  a  good  use  of  the  same,  ext;r-
SHHbeir  agency  in  doing  that
which  is  right,  cleaving  to  that  which
■^^^^■and  resisting  evil  of  every
kind.  And  then  having  been  found
worthy  lie  would  impart  a  greater
degree  of  light,  and  impart  to  them
greater  knowledge  concerning  him-
self, and  his  purposes,  and  his  ways,
and  the  works  ot  his  hands.  If  we
were  created  with  a  fullness  of  know-
ledge, it  would  be  very  difficult  for
us  to  conceive  bow  it  could  be  possi-
ble, to  use  this  agency  properly  before
the  Lord.  It  is  true  we  would  be
placed  in  possession  of  a  vast  amount
of  information  concerning  the  past
present  and  future,  but  being  agents
to  ourselves  we  might,  penvi venture,
U3G  this  knowledge  in  a  manner  to  do
great  injury.  Therefore  the  Lord
determined  that  we  should  only  be
intrusted  with  h  little  information, and
■with  an  agency  to  use  it  according  to
his  mind  and  will.

We  arc  the  sons  and  daughters  of
God,  just  as  much  so  as  the  children,
present  this  afternoon,  are  the  sons
and  daughters  of  their  parents,  and  in
the  same  light,  that  we  are  the  child-
ren of  our  earthly  parents,  so  are  the
children  of  men  the  offspring  of  the
Al mighty.  He  is  our  Father  in  the
full  sense  of  the  word,  and  we  were
begotten  by  him,  and  born  to  him,
not  in this probation,  but  in  the


world  prior  to  the  existence  of  this
one — in  our  former  or  first  estate.
There  we  were  born,  there  we  were
begotten,  there  we  received  a  spirit-
ual existence  in  the  image  of  God,
we  were  then  without  flesh,  without
bones,  without  the  organization  we
now  aro  in  possession  of,  When  I
speak  of  a  spiritual  existence,  do  not
misunderstand  me,  I  do  not  mean
the  kind  of  existence  spoken  of  in
the  writings  of  many  theologians  in
which  the  spirits  of  men  are  repre-
sented as  occupying  no  space,  and  as
having  no  relation  to  duration  or
time.  Such  an  existence  is  incon-
ceivable; it  is  absurd  in  its  very
n at  13 re,  to  suppose  ttmt  there  can  be
any  existence,  either  in  an  immortal
form,  or  in  the  present  form  of  body
and  spirit,  as  persons  occupying  no
space;  it  is  one  <ft  the  greatest  ab-
surdities ever  invented  by  intelligent
beings.  Yet  this  is  incorporated  in  *
the  articles  of  faith  of  some  of  the
Christian  societies  and  especially  in
their  theological  writings.  They  try
to  make  spiritual  existence  as  myste-
rious as  they  possibly  can,  and  often
dtchire  our  Father  and  God  to  be  a
person,  and  yet,  according  to  their
articles  of  faith,  he  is  said  to  be  with-
out body,  parts  or  passions,  as  though
we  could  comprehend  the  existence
ot  something  without  a  body  or  parts.

Some  of  you,  my  hearers,  may  be
surprised,  especially  the  rising  gen-
eration  growing  up  in  these  valleys,
when  I  tell  you  that  there  are  mil-
lions of  Christians  (so  called),  who
believe  that  God  Occupies  no  space,
that  is,  as  a  body,  and  yet  is  a  per-
son. You  read  the  39  Articles  of
the  Church  of  England,  it  you  doubt
what  I  say,  and  you  will  there  find
it  just  so;  also  the  Articles  of  the
Methodists,  which  are  more  or  less
copied  from  those  of  the  Church  of
England,  In  the  Methodist  disci-
pline it  reads:  We  believe  in  one


282


JOUKNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


God,  consisting  of  three  persons,
without  body,  without  parts,  with-
out passions.

In  reading  these  things  when  a
boy,  and  not  having  reflected  much,
I  thought,  of  course,  it  was  one  ot
the  mysteries  which  we  were  not
permitted  to  understand.  I  did  not
then  perceive  the  absurdity  of  the
idea,  incorporated  as  one  of  the
articles  of  faith  of  a  great  and  nu-
merous religious  body.  But  after  I
grew  up  to  manhood,  and  reflected
upon  these  things,  and  began  to  try  to
grasp  in  my  mind  and  comprehend,
in  some  measure,  a  being  consisting
of  two  other  beings  beside  himself,
and  yet  having  no  body,  I  could
not  do  it.  It  was  a  contradiction  in
my  mind,  something  that  did  not
look  consistent ;  and  especially  when
they,  in  order  to  make  the  thing  so
plain,  in  their  estimation,  that  no-
body m  i^ti t  misunderstand  them,
declare  that  he  has  no  parts.  Con-
sequently he  does  not  occupy  any
portion  of  finite  or  infinite  sp*ice.
However  minutely  we  may  divide  a
cubic  inch  of  space,  though  sepa-
rated into  millions  of  parts,  yet
every  one  of  these  minute  portions
are  parts  of  the  cubic  inch ;  and
when  you  speak  about  that  which
has  no  parts,  then  you  come  to  the
representation  of  nothing;  then  you
come  to  the  modern  Christian  (iod,
represented  in their  discipline,


as


and  in  their  articles  of  faith.  I
have  oft  times  wondered  how  it  is,
that  there  are  so  many  who  believe
in  these  absurd  ideas;  men  of  in-
telligence, men  that  would  scorn  to
believe  such  principles  connected
with  natural  philosophy,  nod  with
the  sciences  of  the  day,  yet  so  mis-
taken in  their  minds,  and  so  infatu-
ated by  false  religions,  as  to  cpnceive
of  the  existence  of  a  being  that  has
no  parts.

New  let  me  say  something  about


that  being,  the  subject  of  our  text,
H  God  is  light, and  in  him  is  no
darkness  at  all." Does  he  exist  as
a  person  ? Yes. Has  he  a  Son
cdled  his  Only  Begotten  ?  Yes.  Did
his  Son  have  a  body  ? Yes.  We
have,  this  afternoon  heen  celebrat-
ing the  Lord's  Supper,  and  com-
memorating his  broken  body,  that
was  crucified  for  us. Had  he  parts  ?
Yes,  and  those  parts  occupied  space
just  the  fame  as  all  the  children  of
men  ? Yes. AVas  he  about  the
common  height  of  men  ?  Yes.  Had
he  dimensions  ? Yes,  a  body  and
parts. And  yet  we  are  really  told
that  God  consists  of  three  persons
without  body  or  parts. Is  Jesus
one  of  these  three  persons  ?  They
will  tell  vou  so,  and  that  thes^  three
have  one  body. How  did  the  Jews
crucify  him  when  he  had  nothing
to  crucify  ? Please  do  not  blnme
me  for  speaking  of  these  absurdities.
But  what  says  the  Scriptures  in  regard
to  these  matters. Paul,  in  speaking
of  Jesus,  says,  he  was  "  the  bright-
ness of  his  (Father's)  glory,  and  the
express  image  of  his  person."  The
martyr  Stephen,  in  his  last  dying
testimony  said,  "  Behold,  I  see  the
heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  Man
standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God."
How  many  persons  did  Stephen  see  ?
Two;  and  the  Son  was  standing  on
the  right  hand  of  the  Father.  Then
we  have  testimony  to  show  that  the
Father  has  a  right  hand,  and  it  would,
therefore,  be  fair  to  infer  that  he  has
a  left  hand  also. But  let  me  refer
you  back  to  a  very  early  period  just
before,  and  immediately  after  man
first  appeared  on  our  earth ;  among
other  things  that  are  said  of  him,
you  will  dnd  these  words:  "And
God  said,  Let  us  make  man  in  our
image,  after  our  likeness/' And  then
it  says,  4tSo  God  created  man  in  his
own  image,  in  the  image  of  God
created  he  him." Hence,  whenever


we  have  had  any  account  given  us  of
heavenly  beings  appearing  to  man
on  the  earth,  they  have  always  come
in  the  form  of  man.  For  instance,
the  Lord  and  two  other  heavenly
personages  appeared  to  Abraham,
who  besought  them  to  tarry  until
something  could  be  prepared  for
them  to  eat;  and  we  are  told  that
'*  a  calf,  tender  and  good,"  was  killed
and  dressed,  and  cakes  also  were
prepared,  which,  together  with  butter
and  milk,  constituted  the  meal,  and
that  they  did  eat  Can  you  conceive
of  a  more  ridiculous  idea  than  for  a
person  without  body  or  parts  to  sit
down  to  a  meal  and  eat  ?  You  may
say,  these  were  angels  ;  but  you  will
find  by  reading  the  whole  of  this
chapter  that  I  have  quoted  from,
namely :  the  8th  of  Genesis,  that
after  the  repast,  they  proceeded  on
their  way  towards  Sodom,  accom-
panied by  Abraham,  and  that  two
of  the  persons  went  ahead  leaving
the  Lord  himself  in  conversation
with  Abraham,  both  of  them  in  the
same  human  form.

Again,  we  are  informed  that  sev-
enty of  the  Elders  of  Israel,  at  a
certain  time,  went  up  into  Mount
Sinai,  where  "  they  saw  the  God  of
Israel ;  "  and  they  describe  his  per-
son, and  also  the  appearance  of  the
ground  upon  which  he  stood.  Jacob
also  tells  us  that  he  saw  God  face  to
face ;  and  we  have  many  declara-
tions made  by  many  of  the  ancient
Prophets  to  the  effect  that  they  saw
him.  Isniah  speaks  of  having  seen
him,  and  says  that  his  train  filled
the  Temple;  he  was  accompanied
by  a  numerous  host  of  heavenly
beings.

In  all  of  the  references,  the  Lord
appears  as  a  man,  they  saw  him  as
a  man,  and  those  who  saw  him  de-
scribe him  as  a  man,  as  having  a  head,
eyes,  ears,  mouth,  etc.,  in  common
with  the  human  family,  his  children.


The  difference,  however,  between
man  and  God  doea,  not  consist  so
much  in  the  personal  form,  as  :n  the
vast,  immeasurable  amount  of  know-
ledge and  information  in  possession
of  the  Father,  while  we,  his  offspring,
have  but  little,  a  very  limited  amount,
comparatively  the  same  as  our  little
children  :  they  have  power  to  move
their  limbs,  and  that  information
apparently  is  all  that  they  hive;
their  minds  are  much  limited,  in-
deed, nnd  they  have  to  learn  by  ac-
tual experience.  They  nt  first  learn
something  that  concerns  them  ;  they
have  to  learn  the  nature  of  iheir
sight,  and  that  is  not  correct  at  first,
but  by  experience  they  learn  to  com-
pare things,  and  also  find  the  dis-
tances of  things.  For  instance,  a
little  child  taken  to  the  door  and
seeing  the  moon  shining  in  the  hea-
vens, puts  forth  its  little  hand  to
reach  that  luminary  ;  it  does  not  know
the  distance  of  objects,  until  it  learns
by  experience*  And  hence  it  seems
we  have  been  placed  in  the  first  con-
ditions of  knowledge,  and  we  have  to
cultivate  this  knowledge  hy  degrees
— from  one  degree  to  another,  until
we  arrive  to  manhood  and  woman-
hood ;  and  some  continue  tq,  cultivate
knowledge  and  information  until  they
become  old  and  gray* headed.  But
some  learn  much  faster  than  others,
from  either  natural  advantages,  or
those  of  method.  But  there  is  a  cer-
tain school  far  superior  to  any  schools
established  among  men.  It  is  this.
The  Lord  has  taught  us  that  if  we,
his  children,  will  only  repent  of  our
sins — when  I  speak  of  repentance,  I
mean  a  reformation,  a  putting  away
of  sin ;  when  we  do  this  with  all  our
hearts,  and  are  immersed  in  water
fur  remission  of  our  sins,  we  have
the  promise  that  the  Holy  Ghost  shall
be  given  to  us.  This  is  a  blessing
that  the  natural  man  is  not  acquainted
with  ;  but  when  he  becomes  a  spiritual


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


man,  so  far  as  learning  is  concerned,
he  conies  in  possession  of  a  power  he
never  knew  before  to  any  great  ex-
tent ;  in  other  words,  he  is  baptised
with  the  Holy  Ghost, What  does
this do  for  the  education  of  the
-children  of  men  ? Far  more  than
our  academies do, Gur  children
have,  by  hard  study,  year  after  year,
to  acquire  their  learning  in  these
human institutions; hard  thinking
is  necessary,  reasoning,  gaining  little
by  little,  and  it  frequently  requires
many  years  ot  close  application  to
fcecome what  is  termed  a  learned
man — a  man  that  understands  the
sciences,  that  has  worked  his  way
through  the  various  departments  of
mathematics,  and  perhaps  geology,
and  mineralogy,  and  all  the  sciences,
such  as  ;jre  ubually  taught  in  univer-
sities. But  the  man  tilled  with  the
Holy  Ghost  has  got  the  advantage
of  students  who  graduate  at  our  uni-
ve  titles. Why  ? Beeause  be  can
learn  more  in  ten  minutes,  in  regard
to  many  things,  than  another,  not  so
favored,  can  in  all  his  life.  Indeed,
he  can  learn  some  things  by  the
operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which
do  natural  man  or  woman  could  learn,
however  gifted  they  may  be.  You
imy  inquire  where  they  could  learn
these  things  ? I  answer,  by  the
revelations  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which
brings  to  light  many  things  that
are  past,  and  shows  things  that  are
in  the  future* The  Lord  is  just  as
able  to  show  one  of  his  pupils,  who
vill  take  the  necessary  steps  to  be
taught,  what  will  take  place  a  year,
-or  ten  years,  or  a  hundred,  or  a
thousand  or  more  years  hence,  as
the  principals  in  our  universities  are
to  teach  persons  concerning  things
present God  is  not  confined  to  the
present,  or  to  things  immediately
-concerning  his  pupils,  or  those  who
may  enter  into  the  university  he  has
^prepared,  but  he  opens  the  past  and


future  to  the  minds  of  men,  just  as
Jesus  promised  his  disciples,  when
he  was  about  to  leave  them.  <;  How-
beit  when  he,  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  is
come,  he  will  guide  you  into  all  truth  ;
and  he  wilt  show  you  things  to
come."

Supposing  then  that  the  children
oi  God,  who  are  counted  worthy  to
be  in  possession  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
should  corn  ply  with  all  his  command-
ments, and  become  revel  a  tors,  and
supposing  they  should  inquire  about
the  condition  and  formation  of  the
earth,  when  the  Lord  rolled  it  into
existence,  also  about  the  changes  that
have  come  upon  it,  how  easy  it  would
be  for  the  Lord  to  show  them,  in  a
moment,  almost  in  the  twinkling  of
an  eye,  all  about  it,  giving  the  whole
history  of  its  condition,  before  and
when  it  was  first  formed,  Geologists
may  study,  year  after  year,  all  the
best  works  they  can  obtain,  concern-
ing the  geological  phenomena  of  our
globe ;  they  may  speculate  and  say,
the  earth  is  several  millions  of  years
old,  founding  their  speculations  upon
geological  appearances ;  they  may
say,  that  it  must  have  passed  through
successive  changes  for  millions  of
years.  But  after  all,  what  do  they
really  know  ?  They  may  have  a
very  imperfect  idea  in  relation  to  the
surface  of  the  earth  ;  but  they  do  not
know  anything  about  the  depths,
underneath  this  superficial  stratum —
the  great  interior;  they  have  only  a
faint  idea  of  certain  very  limited
localities — a  few  surface  scratches,
and  almost  infinitessimal  in  thickness.
From  these  uncertain  data  they  have
drawn  their  conclusions  concerning
the  age  of  the  earth.

Supposing  persons,  under  the  in-
fluence of  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,
should  behold  how  many  of  these
changes  have  been  brought  about,
and  how  great  revolutions  have  taken
!  place,  since  the  earth  was  last  organ-


GOD  IS  LIGHT,  ETC


285


ized  out  of  pre-existent  and  eternal
materials;  supposing  they  should
behold  the  solid  enrth  gradually
emerging  from  its  watery  envelope,
and  hecoming  one  land,  the  waters
gathered  together  into  one  place —
no t  into  two  places,  not  into  differ-
ent oceans,  seas  and  lakes,  but  into
one  place,  leaving  the  dry  land  in
one  place.  Supposing  they  should
still  further  see  by  the  power  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  this  dry  land,  after  a
few  thousand  years,  separate  into
great  oontinents,  not  by  long  grad-
ual phenomena,  in  the  nature  of
geological  periods,  but  by  the  im-
mediate power  of  the  great  Creator;
supposing  again,  that  the  ocean
should  change  from  its  location,  and
land,  in  many  places,  should  be
brought  to  light.  Supposing  again,
tbat  they  should  behold  in  vision,
mountains  sink,  forming  deep  val-
leys, and  valleys  rise  up,  forming
high  mountains.  Supposing  again,
that  they  were  to  see  many  parts
of  these  continents  sink,  and  lakes
appear  in  the  sunken  portions;  and
supposing  too,  they  were  to  behold
great  and  important  changes,  at  dif-
f err nt  times,  wrought  upon  the  dry
land,  and  upon  the  parts  called  oc^an,
changing  places  by  degrees.

Now,  a  geologist  would  say  that
all  these  things,  and  all  these  revo-
lutions were  brought  about  by  grad-
ual and  slow  changes  j  whereas  the
man  of  God,  being  taught  by  the
Holy  Ghost,  would  say  that  these
things  were  accomplished  in  a  com-
paratively short  period  of  time.
Which  of  the  two  would  be  most
correct,  the  man  who  speculates  from
the  little  he  can  find  out  from  the
surface  examination  of  our  little
globe,  or  the  man  who,  by  the  power
of  the  living  God,  penetrates  in
vision,  into  tho  depths  of  the  earth,
and  also  beholds  those  various  revo-
lutions which  have  taken  place  upon


the  surface  of  thp  earth  ?

Then  again,  when  it  comes  to
astronomical  phenomena,  we  are
taught  that  there  are  very  slow  cli-
matic changes  taking  place,  which
occupy  very  long  periods,  during
which,  the  northern  and  sour  hero
hemispheres  of  our  globe,  are  alter-
nately affected  with  extremes  of  heat
nnd  cold.  It  is  true,  there  are  causes
of  an  astronomical  character,  which,
if  permitted  to  act  through  immense
periods,  would  necessarily  produce
alternate  extremes  of  temperature  in
the  two  polar  hemispheres.  It  is
also  true,  that  differences  of  tem-
perature in  the  two  hemispheres,,
would  necessarily  diminish  the  polar
ice  in  one,  and  increase  it  in  the
other;  thus  there  would  necessarily
result  a  continued  change  of  t*ea
level — a  change  in  the  earth's  center
of  gravity — a  rising  of  the  ocean  in
the  colder  hemisphere,  a  correspond-
ing retirement  of  the  ocean  in  the-
warmer,  giving  rise  to  glacial  and
inter-glacial  periods  of  great  length.

But  all  these  great  phenomena
could  also  be  brought  about,  in  a
few  thousand  years,  by  simply  and
alternately  changing  the  angle  be-
tween the  planes  of  the  earth's  orbit
and  the  equator.  He  who  formed
the  universe  holds  the  regulating
key  in  his  own  hand.  By  his  al*
mighty  power  it  was  oiganized;  by
his  law  it  is  governed  ;  by  his  good
will  and  pleasure  it  passes  through
great  chauges;  by  his  decree  it  will
pass  away  and  be  renewed.  Which
gives  the  most  information,  that
which  comes  from  God,  direct  by
the  power  of  his  Spirit — revelation
from  heaven, — or  that  which  comes
from  mere  speculation,  based  upon
some  uncertain  data,  that  may  bo
correct,  and  that  may  not  be  correct  ?
I  would  say,  give  me  the  privilege
of  being  taught  from  on  high,  give
me  the  privilege  of  being  taught  bjr


JUL  KNAL  UJ  DlSCuUKM^.


that  being  who  knows  and  compre-
hends everything  pertaining  to  this
cieation,  and  knows  the  ehangesthat
it  has  undergone,  and  how  long  the
ear tli  has  continued  in  its  present
condition,  or  nearly  in  its  present
condition.

We  infer  from  this  good  book,
called King  James'  translation  of
the  Bible,  that  a  few  thousand  years
a^o the  earth  was  formed*  And
many  hare  supposed  that  it  was  then
formed  out  of  nothing.  I  need  hardly
say  to  this  congregation,  that  no  such
nonsense  can  be  found  in  the  Scrip-
tures ;  but  in  the  creeds  of  men,  may
be  found  this  idea  set  forth,  that  God
created all things from  nothing.
Now,  how  do  the  founders  of  these
creeds,  as  well  as  those  who  believe
hi  them,  know  that  he  did  such  a
thing  ? Have  they  any  revelation,
from  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  to
the  end  of  the  revelations  of  St.  John,
which  states  or  intimates  that  the
Lord  niiide  the  earth  out  of  nothing?
Not  one. This  is  the  addition  of
man  ;  this  is  a  tradition  formed  by
uninspired  articles  of  faith  and  dis-
cipline to  govern  people  in  their
religious  ideas ;  whereas  the  word
of  God  says  nothing  of  the  kind.
The  materials  out  of  which  this  earth
was  formed,  are  just  as  eternal  as
the  materials  of  the  glorious  per-
sonage of  the  Lord  himself  Now,
he  consists  of  a  body  and  parts,  and
not  only  of  parts  but  passions.  He
has  the  passion  of  love,  so  much  so
that  he  is  called  a  God  of  love :
hence  this  nonsense  about  God  hav-
ing no  parts  nor  passions  is  among
the  inventions  of  human  wisdom.
This being, when  he  formed  the
earth,  did  not  form  it  out  of  some-
thing that  had  no  existence,  but  he
formed  it  out  of  materials  that  had
an  existence  from  all  eternity :  they
never  had  a  beginning,  neither  will
■one  particle  of  substance  now  in


existence  ever  have  an  end.  There
are  just  as  many  particles  now  as
there  were  at  any  previous  period  of
duration,  and  will  be  while  eternity
lasts.  Substance  had  no  beginning  ;
to  say  that  laws  bad  no  beginning
would  be  another  thing;  some  laws
might  have  been  eternal, while  others
might  have  had  a  lawgiver.  But  the
earrh  was  formed  out  of  eternal  ma-
terials, and  it  was  made  to  be  inhab-
ited and  God  peopled  it  with  crea-
tures of  his  own  formation.

There  have  been  many  people  in
tli  is  world  so  limited  in  their  infor-
mation and  knowledge,  in  conse-
quence of  tradition  and  false  creeds,
and  catechisms,  that  they  really  be-
lieve that  our  earth  is  the  only  crea-
tion that  exists  on  which  inhabitants
dwell,  that  the  stars  were  made  to
shine  for  the  benefit  of  our  earth,
that  the  sun  and  moon  were  made
especially  for  us,  and  that  the  earth
is  the  great  central  standard,  and
that  all  things  were  made  for  its
benefit.  Bot  I  am  happy  to  say,
that  these  ideas  are  fast  getting  out
of  date,  and  that  people  are  begia-
ning  to  learn  that  God  is  not  so  lim-
ited in  his  power  as  to  confine  himself
to  a  creation  so  little  and  insignifi-
cant as  that  of  our  earth.  There  is
an  infinitude  of  space,  boundless  in
every  direction.  In  other  words,
when  I  say  boundless,  I  mean  that  it
is  impossible  for  us  to  limit  any
bounds  to  that  space*  Has  this  space
materials  existing  in  it  ?  Yes*  (So
far  as  our  telescopes  are  able  to  pene-
trate, and  some  of  them  go  very  far
indeed.)  You  take  Lord  Boss9  six
foot  reflector,  and  point  it  towards
yonder  heavens,  and  you  find  new
systems,  new  universes,  as  it  were,
revealed.  What  are  these  worlds?
They  are  mighty  globes.  To  say
they  are  like  our  globe  would  not  be
correct;  for  if  they  were  only  little
specks  like  our  little  earth,  they


could  not  be  seeu.  But  they  are
mighty  suns,  like  our  sun  in  yonder
firmament.  Our  sun  is  over  twelve
hundred  thousand  times  larger  than
our  earth  ;  and  those  distant  bodies
thii t  are  seen — some  of  them  by  the
naked  eye,  and  others  by  the  aid  of
powerful  glasses,  are  worlds  of  great
magnitude,  For  what  purposes  were
all  these  mighty  worlds  framed  ?
What  object  had  the  Lord  in  view
in  their  creation  ?  Was  it  to  satisfy
a  few  individuals  that  should  dwell
upon  this  little  earth  that  the  Lord
made  them  to  tw inkle  in  yonder
heavens,  to  shine  by  night?  Was
that  the  main  object  that  he  had  in
view?  No;  he  had  a  greater  and
more  glorious  object  than  that.  He
has  created  worlds  without  number,
that  is  they  cannot  be  numbered  by
us  ;  millions  on  millions  have  been
discovered  by  the  aid  of  glasses,  but
those  are  only  a  beginning  of  the  im-
mensity of  the  worlds  in  existence;
and  he  has  made  them  to  be  inhabit-
ed by  his  own  offspring,  or  own  child-
ren, his  own  sons  and  daughters,  in-
telligent  beings  designed  to  be
brought  up  and  eventually  to  be
made  like  him.  You  know  ourchild-
ran  become  like  their  parents  in
many  respects  j  and  you  know,  too,
that  it  is  the  hope  of  all  parents  that
their  children,  if  they  live,  and  are
properly  educated  and  trained,  will
grow  up  to  be  good  men  and  women,
and  that  they  will  possess  the  same
intelligence,  if  not  more,  than  their
parents.  And  we  also  see  other  kinds
of  beings  brought  forth  in  the  like*
ness  of  their  parents;  the  lion  begets
a  lion,  not  a  lamb;  and  so  with  every
apecits  of  beings  that  exist,  each  be-
gets his  own  likeness.  And  why  not
we,  the  masterpiece  of  the  creations
of  our  Father,  grow  up  unto  all  that
fullness  of  eternal  knowledge  and
truth  which  he  himself  possesses.  If
he  is  full  of  light,  and  in  him  there


Eg  no  darkness  at  all,  why  not  his
children,  if  they  be  educated  and
taught  properly,  and  prove  them-
selves acceptable  and  worthy  before
him,  be  brought  up,  in  due  time,  and
be  made  like  him,  on  the  same  prin*
ciple  that  all  other  things  beget  their
like.  It  is  true,  we  are  now  fallen
beings,  we  bare  departed  from  our
r  ather,  we  have  transgressed  his  holy
laws,  we  have  been  throw  a  into  un-
happy circumstances,  in  consequence
of  the  transgression  of  our  first  pa-
rents, in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  and
hence,  darkness  reigns  over  this  little
creation,  and  has  taken  possession  of
mankind  ;  but  as  they  were  immortal
when  placed  in  the  garden,  and
death  had  no  power  over  them,  so
must  their  offspring  (if  they  were

!  permitted to  have  any)  have  been

i  immortal  and  not  subject  to  death.
Bat  by  the  fall,  death  came;  by  gin
and  transgression  men  became  sub-
ject to  dtiath,  and  consequently  this
world  ot  ours  became  a  fallen  world.
Our  first  parents  were  in  the  imme-
diate presence  of  God,  their  Father ;
they  could  behold  him  and  converse
with  him  face  to  face,  before  the
transgression.  But  how  changed
everything  became !  they  were  not

!  only  cast  out  of  the  gar-fen,  but  out
of  the  presence  of  their  Creator  and
God;  cast  out  from  the  presence  of
celestial  beings — -cast  out  into  a  world
of  durkness,  there  to  learn  by  sad
experience  many  lessons,  which  we,
perhaps,  never  could  have  learned,
had  we  still  continued  to  dwell  in  our
former  condition.

Now  this,  no  doubt,  has  been  done
in  wisdom.  When  we  occupied  our
first  estate,  duelling  in  the  presence
of  the  Father,  before  this  world  was
created,  we  were  without  bodies  of
flesh  and  bones,  but  possessing  parts
and  passions  then  as  much  aa  wa  do
now;  we  were  there  as  intelligent

I  spirits,  in  our  present  form  and  shape,


f


288


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


bat  nl though  we  had  no  bodies  of
flesh  and  bones,  that  spirit wil  sub-
stance  of which  our  spirits  were
formed  had  a  form,  and  that  form  *vas
after  the  likeness  and  image  of  God,
the  Father. But  if  we  had  continued
to  dwell  there  for  innnmherable  mil-
lions of  years,  we  never  could  have
learned,  in  th  it  state  of  existence,
many  things  Thar,  we  are  being  taught
in  this  fallen  world. We  might  have
seen  other  worlds  formed:  we  might
have  had  some  idea,  perhaps,  of  their
condition and  of  their  misery  and
wretchedness,  and  we  might  have  had
some  idea  of  the  a  A  ful  calamities  that
happened  to  tho  bodies  of  other  fallen
creations;  but  then  there  are  many
things  that  intelligent  beings  cannot
learn  without  experiencing  the  same.
For  instance,  we  can  learn  a  great
many  things  oj  omt  reflective  powers,
without  the  ahl  of  natural  senses;  we
might,  by  reason  alone,  iind  out  some
obtruse  problems  of  mathematics ;  we
might,  by  reason,  too,  comprehend
more  or  lens  of  the  revolutions  and
mechanism  of  our  celestial  system  ;
we  might,  by a  pure process  of
reason,  find  rait  all  the  principles  of
geometry,  and  the  different  ial  and  in-
legral  calculus  and  many  other  prin-
ciples of  mathematics. But  there
are  some  things  we  might  never  find
out  by  the  process  of  reason.  For
instance ;  suppose  we  were  created
in the  celestiil  world without  a
knowledge  of  that  which  we  term
pain,  could  we  learn  to  sense  it  by
seeing  others  suffer  ? No,  no  more
than  a  person  born  in  a  dungeon  and
kept  there  until  be  reached  the  years
of  manhood,  without  the  least  gleam
of  light,  could,  while  in  that  con-
dition, be  instructed  about  the  princi-
ple of  light. Why  could  he  not  be
instructed  ? Because  it  is  something
he  never  has  experienced. You  tell
him  that light produces  beautiful
color?,  such  as  red,  blue,  green,  etc.,


what  would  he  know  about  these  col-
ors ?  Nothing  at  all  ;  hid  experience
has  not  been  cahed  to  grasp  them  ;
such  a  thing  as  a  ray  of  li^ht  never
penetrated  his  dungeon.  Bat  when
he  is  permitted  to  experience  the  na-
ture of  light,  when  he  sees  the  vari-
ous colors,  he  then  learns  something
which  he  never  could  reason  out.  So
with  regard  to  ourselves.  We,  in  oar
first  state  of  existence,  never  having
seen  misery  among  any  of  the  im-
mortal beings,  and  never  experienc-
ing it  in  our  spiritual  personages,
how  could  we  know  anything  about
it?  I  do  not  think  we  could  possi-
bly comprehend  the  nature  of  it.  Wo
could  nut  reason  out  the  difference
hi'Ueen  happiness  and  misery.
Why  Y  For  the  want  of  experience.
It  was  for  this  reason  that  God  the
Father  caused  the  tree  bearing  for-
bidden fruit  to  be  placed  in  the  gar-
den. Tins  tree  was  not  placed  be-
yond Adam's  reach,  but  it  was
found  iu  a  conspicuous  place — in
the  midst  of  the  garden,  so  that
man,  by  his  agency,  ini^iit  bring
upon  himself  his  own  misery  y
and  by  that  means  ho  would  be
able  to  distinguish  between  happi-
ness ant]  misery.  The  Lord  prepared
everything,  and  he  made  special  refer-
ence to  t  he  tree  of  knowledge  of  good
and  evil,  forbidding  Adam  to  eat  of  itt
saying  that  in  the  day  he  eat  the  fruit
of  that  tree  he  should  surely  die*
But  then,  what  did  Adam  know  about
death  ?  Such  a  penalty  could  not  be
understood  by  him;  the  ooly  way
possible  for  him  to  conceive  of.it  was
through  vision,  and  the  probability  is
he  did  not  know  anything  about  it*
But  he  was  his  own  ageut,  and  he
exercised  that  agency  by  putting  fortk
his  hand  and  partaking  of  the  fruit:
both  he  and  his  wife  eat  the  fruit,  and
thus  transgressed  the  h\w  of  God,
Then  the  earth  became  fallen,  and  all
the  inhabitants  thereof  have  inherited


UOD  IS  LIGHT,  Kir.


289


the  effects  of  the  fall,  through  these
two  fallen  beings.  Death  is  not
something  we  bring  upon  ourselves,
but  we  are  sure  to  die  because  our
first  parents  rendered  themselves
mortal;  before  tint  thev  were  irn-
mortal.  They  made  themselves
mortal  by  partaking  of  the  forbidden
fruit,  transgressing  the  law  of  heaven
and  wo  nre  the  inheritor^  of  tlien*?
calamities  and  these  pi*n*dtie.<*4  thu
same  n&  children  aie  susceptible  ot
pa  rent  til  diseases,  and  frequently  in-
herit, for  many  generations,  evils
tha(  their  forefathers  were  in  posses-
sion oh  We  learri  q»iite  mm  experience
here  :  we  It-am  wh:it  it  is  ro  bo
miserable,  we  learn  what  it  is  to  be
unhappy,  and  we  c=m  now  contras'
misery  with  happiness  ;  and  we  can
say  in  our  lit*-*»rts,  it  I  could  only  get
rid  of  sickness,  and  pain,  and  sorrow,
the  effects  of  t!  is  death,  bow  I  could
appreciate  it!  We  often  give  expres-
sion to  sue'"  feelings,  when wo  are

deeply  afflicted.  The  Lord  intends
to  free  ns,  if  wb  keep  bill  eommand-
ments,  after  hairing  suffered  sufficient-
ly lonjf  through  this  state  of  sickness
and  feebleness,  this  stare  of  suffering
and  sorrow,  which  we  have  endured
for  so  many  years*  He  intends  to
bring  us  forth  triumphant  over  the
grave,  bring;  up  our  bodies  from  the
tomb,  restoring  our  spirits  to  im-
mortal bodies,  as  Adam  was  in  the
Garden  of  Eden,  and  make  us  im-
mortal and  eternal  in  our  nuture.
Then  we  shall  know,  by  experience,
how  to  appreciate  as  well  as  distinguish
between  happiness  and  misery,  and
be  as  the  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil.
Is  this  lesson  necessary  ?  Yes,  sup-
pose the  Lord  were  to  appoint  to  you
a  kingdom  ;  suppose  he  were  to  say
to  you,  u  Sun,  yonder  are  materials
which  yon  may  organize  by  my  power
into  a  world  ;  and  you  may  place
upon  it  your  own  offspring,  as  I  did
my  offspring  upon  the  world  upon
No.  ID.


which  you  dwelt/'  What  kind  of
person  would  you  be  if  you  had  no
experience  ?  What  ?  Go  and  create
a  world,  and  then  people  that  world
with  your  own  offspring,  and  not
know  the  difference  between  good  and
evil,  between  sickness  arid  health,
between  pain  and  happiness,  having
no  knowledge  of  these  by  experience.
I  think  that  such  a  one  would  not  be
Hr  to  l>e  entrusted  wii!i"a  w»>rld  that
was  to  undergo  and  piss  through  the
same  ordeals  that  our  creation  is  now
experiencing,

As  Latter-day  ^>'UwN^  we  look  for-
ward t,»  the  future  with  a  great  oVhV
of  pie  i sing  satisfacion,  when  we  shall
come  forth  from  tin*  grave,  and  our
vile  bodies  be  changed  and  fashioned
after  His  most  glorious  body;  and
this  is  what  the  Scriptures  set  forth
and  testify  of.  Her  tee,  when  the
materials  of  our  body  shall  come
together  again  to  be  reorganized,  our
bodies  will  be  a  little  different  ro  what

i

thev  are  now.  Blood  will  not  then
flow  in  the  arteries  and  veins  of  the
immortal  mule  and  female  *  for  blood
leads  to  deaih — leads  to  change;  but
instead  of  blood  will  flow  the  pure
Spirit  of  the  living  God,  This  is
referred  to  in  the  37th  chapter  of  the
prophecy  of  Ezekiel,  as  follows  :

14  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon
me  and  carried  me  oul  in  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord,  and  set  me  down  in  the
midst  of  the  valley  which  was  full  of
hones  and  caused  me  to  pass  by  them
round  about;  and,  behold,  there  were
very  many  in  the  np»n  valley  ;  and,
lo,  they  were  very  dry.  And  he  said
unto  me,  Son  of  man,  cau  these  bones
live  ?  And  I  answered,  0  Lord  God,
thou  k  no  west  Again  he  said  onto
me,  prophesy  upon  these  bones,  and
say  unto  them,  O  ye  dry  bone*,  hear
the  word  ot  the  Lord.  Thus  saith
the  Lord  God  unto  these  bones;  Be-
hold, I  will  cause  breath  to  enter  into
you,  and  ye  shall  live.

Vol  XIX.


.MiLMiNAL  UF  IHSCOI'KSKS


u  And  I  will  lay  sinews  upon  you,
and  will  bring  up  flesh  upon  you,  and
cover  you  with  skin,  and  put  brent h
in  you,  find  ye  shall  live;  and  ye  shall
know  that  I  am  the  Lord*

"  So  I  prophesied  as  I  was  com-
manded ;  and  as  1  prophesied,  there
was  a  voice,  and  behold  a  shaking,
aLd  the  bones  came  together,  bone
to  his  bone.  t

fct  And  when  I  beheld,  lo,  the  sin-
ews and  the  flesh  came  up  upon  them,
and  the  skin  covered  them  above:
and  there  was  no  breath  in  them.

"  Then  snid  he  unto  me.  Prophesy
unto  the  wind,  prophesy,  son  of  man,
and  uny  unto  the  wind,  Thus  saith
the  Lord  God  :  come  from  the  lout
winds,  0  breath,  and  or  eat  he  upon
these  slain,  that  they  may  live.

"  So  I  prophesied  as  he  command-
ed me,  and  the  breath  came  into
them,  and  they  lived,  arid  stood  up
upon  their  feet,  an  exceeding  great
army/'  That  was  n  vision  of  the
resurrection.  The  interpretation  is
given  in  the  following  verse.  The
child  rem  of  Israel  at  that  time  disbe-
lieved more  or  le*s  in  the  resurrection,
which  was  taught  by  their  Prophets;
aud  they  began  to  s?ty  in  their  hearts,
"Our  bones  are  dried,  and  our  hope
is  lost :  we  are  cut  off  tor  our  parts,"

"Therefore,  (says  the  Lord)  pro-
phesy and  say  uutu  them,  Thus  saith
the  Lord  God  :  Beh  ld,  O  ray  people,
I  will  open  your  graves,  and  cause  you
to  come  up  out  of  your  graves,  aud
briag  you  into  the  land  of  Israel."
When  the  Lord  brings  uji  the  chil-
dren of  Israel  out  of  theeir  graves,
he  will  do  it  just  as  Ezekiel  saw  it  in
vision,  The  materials  that  farm  the
bones  will  come  together:  first,  the
anatomy  or  framework,  the  most  part
of  the  system ;  then  the  flesh,  after-
wards the  skin,  and  then  the  Spirit
of  the  living  God  will  enter  into
them,  and  they  will  live  as  immortal
beings,  no  more  to  be  subject  to


death  And  when  they  leave,  instead
of  going  away  off  to  a  heaven  incon-
ceivable, such  as  we  find  in  the  arti-
cles and  creeds  of  men — a  u  heaven
beyond  the  bounds  of  time  and  space,"
a  place  supposed  to  be  beyond  infinity,
they  will  actually  ccme  here  and  lie
brought  to  the  land  of  Israel,  as  im-
mortal  beings,  male  and  female.  They
will  have  kings  and  priests  among
them,  and  they  will  reign  on  the
earth.  AtA  if  you  want  to  know
how  long,  you  can  leatn  it  ftom  the
revelation  which  John  had.  He  says,
t4  a  thousand  years"  Bur  that  44  the
rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  again  unt  il
the  thousand  Years  were  finished/*
After  the  thousand  years  here  refer*
red  to,  this  earth  will  die;  it  will  pass
through  a  change  similnr  to  that  of
our  bodies;  it  will  pass  away,  as  an
organized  world,  hut  not  a  particle,
however,  will  be  destroyed  or  anni-
hilated ;  it  will  all  exist,  and  when  it
in  resurrected  again,  it  will  he  a  new
earth.  Then  those  immortal  beings
who  come  up  out  of  their  graves,  at
the  beginning  of  the  thousand  years,
will  again  descend  from  heaven  upon
the  new  earth  ;  and  the  earth  will  be
eternal ;  and  the  beings  that  inhabit
it  will  be  eternal.  And  the  earth  will
at  that  time  have  no  more  need  of
the  light  of  a  luminary  like  our  sun,
or  any  artificial  light,  for  it  will  be  a
globe  of  light  ;  for  when  God  makes
this  e^rth  immortal,  he  will  make  it
glorious  like  the  inhabitants  that  will
be  permitted  to  live  upon  it.  They
will  become  immortal,  and  be  crowned
with  crowns  of  glory,  and  light  will
radiate  from  their  personages  and
countenances;  so  will  the  earth  ra-
diate its  light,  and  shine  forth  in
celestial  splendor,  I  will  not  s*y  as
the  splendor  of  our  sun,  for  it  is  not
a  celestial  body.  Although  the  light
of  the  mn  is  very  glorious,  it  will  not
begin  to  compare  with  that  of  this
earth,  when  it  becomes  celestial  and


eternal  and  is  lightened  by  the  pre-
sence of  God  the  Father*  It  is
doubtful  whether  the  children  of
mortality  on  other  worlds,  will  ever
behold  the  lijjht  of  this  earth,  after
it  is  made  eternal,  unless  they  hap-
pen to  catch  a  glimpse  of  it  by  vision.
God  dwells  in  a  world  of  light  too
glorious  for  mortal  eyes  to  behold,
unless  aided  by  the  Spirit  of  the  liv-
ing- God*

Let  me  say  a  few  words  on  the? el
different  worlds  of  which  I  have
spoken.  They  are  stretched  out  in
the  immensity  of  space,  are  infinite
in  every  direction,  and  they  are  in-
habited. I  doubt  very  much,  whe-
ther any  of  these  worlds  are  celestial.
I  do  not  think  we  could  behold  them,
unless  by  vision,  if  they  were  celes-
tial. They  are  worlds  in  various
.stages  i if  progression,  some  more
glorious  than  others,  inhabited  by
beings  prepared  to  dwell  upon  them,
beings  who  are  the  sons  and  daugh-
ters of  God,  or  the  sons  and  daughters
of  his  children.  If  God  is  our  Pa-
ther,  and  we  become  like  him,  we  may
have  our  attributes  greatly  enlarged,
sufficiently  to  prepare  us  to  occupy  a
greater  sphere  of  existence,  to  become
rulers  and  creators  under  the  corn-
maud  of  God,  being  one  with  hitnt
as  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  one,
to  carry  out  bin  law  and  eternal  pur-
poses. Not  only  are  present  worlds
existing,  but  worlds  without  number
have  existed  from  all  ages  of  eternity,
in  their  various  stages  of  progress
from  the  infinite  duration  of  the  past,
and  are  peopled  by  the  children  af
God — his  own  *  ftaprmg,  or  the  ofl-
spring  of  those  who  have  become
Gods.  Besides,  these  worlds  will  ex-
ist for  ever,  and  there  still  remains  no
end,  as  it  were,  to  the  materials  which
will  yet  be  organized  into  worlds,  for
the  materials  are  infinite  in  quantity  j
they  cannot  be  exhausted.  And  do
these  worlds  communicate  one  with


another? Why  not; is  the  Lord
limited  in  the  process  of  communica-
te find  that  man,  poor,  weak,  fallen
man,  is  now  able  to  communicate
from  one  end  of  the  world,  on  which
we  live,  to  the  other  ;  and  why  not
immortal  beings  communicate  from
world  to  world! If  they  were  lim-
ited, then  they  would  partake  more
of  the  nature  of  mortality-  But
they  are  not  limited  in  their  commu-
nications. There  is  a  faculty  in  man-
kind which,  when  lighted  up  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  can  not  only  pierce  in
vision  through  millions  of  miles  of
space,  but  can  also  hear  through
millions  of  miles  of  space.  Indeed,
the  progress  of  man,  in  this  the
nineteenth  century,  shows  to  us,  in
a  very  forcible  manner,  what  may  be
hereafter  in  our  more  perfect  state.
What  a  wonderful  thing  it  was  to
th<*  whole  world,  a  few  years  since,
to  communicate  their  th oughts,  by
the  means  of  electric  wires,  "sending
them  from  city  to  city,  from  state  to
state,  and  then  across  the  great
ocean  to  foreign  countries,  and  that
too  almost  momentarily  ! If  people
had  been  told  some  fifty  years  ago
that  such  wonderful  developments
would  take  place,  in  so  short  a  time,
they  would  have  laughed  at  and  even
derided  the  idea;  but  now  it  is  an
accomplished  fact. Who,  some  two
years  ago,  would  have  supposed  that
the  senses  of  the  ear  could  have  been
awakened by  sounds  transmitted
some  hundreds  of  miles  distant?
And  yet  this  isnowdoue  bv  the  aid
of  the  telephone  j  and  although  the
discovery  is  yet  only  in  its  infancy,
the  human  voice  is  heard  distinctly,
and  readily  recognized  at  that  dis-
tance. *  ;J

Now,  supposing  we  were  immortal
beings  and  we  stood  upon  one  celes-
tial world,  away  in  a  distant  part  of
space,  and  others  dwelling  upon
another  celestial  world  innumerable


2<)%  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


miles  distant  from  us,  there  may  be
a  process  by  which  we  could  commit?
iricate  one  to  another,  and  ideas  be
exchanged,  from  world  to  world,
without  adopting  the  slow  progress
of  communication  by  light  or  elec-
tricity* Well,  says  one,  fc*  I  thought
that  light  was  transmitted  more
rapidly  than  anything  that  wo  could
roneeivp  of."  Light  proceeds  from
one  luminary  to  another,  at  the  rate
of  l'tJi;,000  miles  per  second.  Can
any  tiling  be  swifter  than  this?  Do
you  suppose  the  Lord  wouid  reveal
all  his  resources  to  us  ?  I  think  not;
I  believe  than  when  the  children  of
men  become  immortal  and  eternal
their  privileges  will  be  enlarged ;
and  those  powers  of  nature,  and
laws  of  which  we  have  such  a  lim-
ited understanding,  will  become
greatly  multiplied  and  enlarged.
There  may  be  a  process  of  commu-
nication bv  means  of  celestial,  hea-
venly  light,  that  will  far  outstrip  the
natural  light  which  proceeds  from
yonder  luminaries  in  our  heavens.


redeemed  were  permitted  to  dwell,
whom  he  saw  and  heard,  singing  the


songs


of  Moses  and  the  Lamb.  What
a  happy  state  and  condition,  not
only  to  study  these  things  pertaining
to  this  little  world  we  inhabit,  but
to  extend  our  researches  to  our
neighboring  worlds,  learning  the
laws,  institutions,  and  governments
of  the  peoples  that  inhabit  them,
also  their  history,  and  everything
pertaining  to  them,  and  then  ex-
tend our  researches  still  further.
Let  me  here  quote  from  one  of  the
revelations  given  anciently  to  Enoch,
and  revealed  anew,  in  these  latter
da3rs  to  Joseph  Smith.  Enoch,  we
learn,  was  favored  with  a  great  and
glorious  vision  ;  he  saw  the  different
worlds,  and  saw  the  Lord  and  other
glorious  personages,  who  were  weep-
ing over  the  fallen  sons  and  daugh-
ters  of  this  world.  This  astonished
Enoch  ;  he  was  astonished  beyond
measure,  to  think  that  there  should
be  so  many  worlds  in  existence,  and
all  p:i*sin<r  through  certain  changes


It  may  be  that  this  natural  light  and  degrees  of  changes,  and  yet.  the


travels  very  slowly,  compared  with
the  light  that  proceeds  fort  It  from
celestial  worlds,  wherever  they  may
be  situated.  Then  again,  if  immor-
tal beings  on  celestial  worlds  can
hear,  and  see,  and  communicate  wit  h
each  other,  would  it  not  be  just  as


Lord  should  weep  over  the  fallen
sons  and  daughters  of  this  little
planet.  So  he  inquired  about  it.  ask-
ing how  it  was  that  the  heavens  wept
and  shed  forth  their  tears  like  rain
upon  the  mountains  ;  saying,  Thon
art  holy  from  all  eternity  to  all  eter-


pleasant  as  though  they  were  asso-  nity  ;  and  were  it  possible  for  man


ciated  together  in  the  same  room  S
W  hat  difference  can  it  make,  seeing
that  distance  is  no  impediment  to
them?  This  is  the  destiny  of  these
worlds  that  twinkle  in  the  firmament
of  heaven  ;  they  will  finally  arrive
at  that  state  of  perfected  existence,
unless  they  forfeit  their  privileges
through  transgression  ;  all  that  do
not  forfeit  these  privileges  will  be
exalted  to  them:  and  they  will  be
sanctified  ;  they  will  be  full  of  light,
like  unto  the  sea.  of  glass,  that  John
the  lievelotor  saw,  upon  which  the


to  number  the  particles  of  this  earth
and  a  million  of  earths  like  it,  it
would  not  be  a  beginning  to  the
number  of  thy  creations,  and  yet
thou  art  there  and  thv  bosom  is
there,  how  is  it  that  thou  canst  weep !
It  was  marvelous  to  him,  why  the
Lord  should  weep  over  so  small  a
creation,  when  there  were  so  many
others.  The  Lord  then  told  him
concerning  the  wickedness  of  the
people  who  existed  before  the  Hood ;
he  told  him  of  their  abominations
and  sinful  practices. And  then  he


goi>  is  liuht,  i:rc\


further  tells  him,  that  his  eyes  could
pierce  all  the  creations  which  he  had
made,  si  10 wing  how  powerful  are
the  eyes  of  the  great  Jehovah,  that
lie  can  behold  all  these  creations;
however  numerous,  and  can  behold
all  that  transpires  upon  them.

There  is  one  thing  connected  with
this  same  revelation,  to  which  I  wish
al&o  to  call  your  attention  ;  it  is  in
regard  to  the  fallen  condition  of
many  of  these  creatures,  Notwith-
standing  the  unnumlrered  worlds
winch  have  been  created,  out  of  each
tme  of  these  creations  the  Lord  had
taken  Ziou  (in  other  words  a  people
called  ZUm)  to  his  own  bosom.
What  does  this  signify?  Are  we
not  to  understand  that  all  these
creations  were  fallen  worlds.  Why
did  he  not  take  them  all  ?  Because
they  were  not  all  worthy,  because
beiiiir  fallen,  thev  did  not  keen  his
commandments,  because  they  did
not  exercise  their  agency  to  worship
God  ;  for  that  reason  he  did  not  take
them  all  to  himself.  He  did  in  it
qualify  them  and  make  them  our  in
him,  as  Jesus  is  one  with  the  Father;
he  did  not  make  them  like  him  in
all  respects,  to  go  forth  and  make
new  creations  and  people  them,  I
mention  these  things  to  show  that
we  have,  in  the  revelations  that  God
has  given,  many  indications,  that
there  are  worlds  beside  our  own  that
are  fallen;  also  that  we  may  see  that
the  Lord  has  one  grand  method,  for
the  salvation  of  the  righteous  of  all
worlds — that  Zion  is  selected  and
taken  from  all  of  thein.  And  rea-
soning from  analogy,  may  we  not,
with  propriety  believe,  that  these
fallen  creations,  after  fulfilling  their
temporal  destiny,  will  be  changed,
and  become  the  celestial  abodes  of
their  respective  Zions  1  Let  us,  for
a  moment,  consider  the  planets  of
our  solar  system,  namely,  Mercury,
Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  I  nt


nus  and  Neptune — the  great  primary
planets  of  our  system  ;  are  these
made  for  1  •  o thin g  1  No*  W ha t  has
the  Lord  said  to  us,  Latter-day  Saints,
concerning  these  planets  J  He  says,
all  these  are  kingdoms,  to  which  he
h;is  given  laws.  And  lie  likens
these  worlds,  or  kingdoms,  unto  a
man  having  a  field,  and  he  sent  forth
his  servants  to  dig  in  this  field.  To
tin*  Hrst  In'  s;iid,  ,%<o*  and  labor  in
the  field,  and  in  the  first  hour,  1
will  rome  unto  you,  aud  ye  shall  be-
hold tin*  joy  of  my  countenance.
And  he  said  unto  the  second,  go  ye
alsi *  into  rh-  Held,  and  in  the  second
hour  I  will  visit  you  with  the  joy  of
my  countenance :  and  unto  the  third
and  so  on  unto  the  twelfth,  And
the  lord  of  the  field  went  unto  the
first  in  the  first  hour  ;  and  tarried
with  him  all  that  hour,  and  he  was
made  irlad  with  the  light  of  the  conn
tenniH-i*  of  his  Lord  :  and  then  he
withdrew  from  the  first,  that  he
might  visit  the  second  also,  and  so
on  unto  the  twelfth,1'  This  with-
drawing from  one,  to  go  to  another
is  something  which  I  will  explain.
Why  was  it  necessary,  that  there
should  be  a  withdrawal  of  the  pre-
sence of  the  Lord  in  visiting  the
different  worlds]  I  think  it  was
necessary,  so  far  as  mortality  is  con-
cerned, and  indicates  that  the  in-
habitants of  these  different  planets
are  fallen,  as  we  are.  It  does  not  say
so,  in  so  many  words,  but  1  can  see
that  they  must  be  fallen,  and  for
that  reason  the  Lord  withdraws*  his
presence  from  them,  and  visits  them
in  their  hour,  aud  time,  and  season,
and  then  withdraws  from  them,  leav-
ing them  to  ponder  in  their  he irts
the  -commandments  given  them.  If
they  were  immortal  beings  and  celes-
tial in  their  nature,  the  Lord  would
not  act  with  them  thus,  for  then  they
would  always  be  in  his  presence,
whether  they  arelbeings  of  one  world


JULKNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


or  another,  or  whether  the  worlds
upon  which  they  dwell  are  as  nume-
rous as  the  sand*  upon  the  sea  shun*;
when  they  become  celestial  the  veil
that  obscures  the  view  of  mortals  is
removed,  and  it  makes  no  difference
whether  a  world  be  one  million,  a
hundred  million,  or  a  million  million
of  miles  distant  from  another,  if  the
veil  is  taken  away,  they  are  still  in
each  other's  presence.

There  is  a  spiritual  faculty  of  str-
ing, different  from  that  of  the  natu-
ral sight,  a  power  of  discerning
through  space,  by  which  celestial
beings  can  see  innumerable  mil  linns
of  miles  in  distance,  just  :us  easy  as
mortals  can  see  ten  feet  with  their
natural  vision.  To  be  in  the  pre-
sence of  God,  then,  is  simply  to  have
th*  veil  withdrawn,  which  will  be
done  when  we  prove  ourselves  wor-
thy of  celestial  glory.  If  tin*  worlds
of  which  I  have  spoken,  pertaining
to  the  planetary  system,  were  celes-
tial worlds,  occupied  by  celestial  in-
habitants, they  would  all  the  time
he  in  the  presence  of  their  Father  ,
and  there  could  be  no  withdrawing
from  the  first,  to  visit  the  second,
etc.,  according  to  the  revelation  from


which  I  have  quoted. His  method
of  conveying  intelligence  is  far  more
rapid  that  that  of  Light  Light*
how  slow! Only  185,000  miles  in
a  second. It  would  take  three  and
a  half  yeans  at  that  rate  for  light  to
come  from  one  of  the  nearest  fixed
stars.  A  long  time  to  wait,  especially
if  yon  were  in  a  hurry  to  get  an  an
swer  to  any  message  you  may  send  ;
you  would  have  to  wait  three  and  a
half  years  for  the  message  to  go,
and  probably  for  the  same  time,  for
the  returning  answer. Now,  the
Lord  has  powers  beyond  thone  with
which  we  are  acquainted. He  has
almighty  powers. He  has  only  in-
trusted us  his  children  of  mortality
with  a  knowledge  of  some  of  the
more  gross  principles  and  laws  of
this  fallen  creation,  and  when  we,
through  hard  study,  search  out  tlm
relation  of  one  law  to  another,  we
think  we  are  learned  men  ;  but  I
think  when  we  learn  in  that  great
university  the  sciences  of  which  the
Lord  our  God  is  the  great  Teacher,
we  shall  learn  more  rapidly  and  com-
prehend more  easily  the  things  of
his  kingdom,  than  we  now  do  the
things  of  time.  Amen.


THE  BLESSINGS  R£ALI/K1>  BY  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  WILPORD  WOODRUFF,
Delivered  at  the  Annual  Conference,  Saturday  Morning,  April  6,  1878,

(Reported  by  Geo.  F7.  Gihbs.)


THE  RLKSSINfiN  RKALIZED  BY  THE  SAINTS— MEN  THE,  HUT  THKIK  WORKS
1 1 K  M  A  IN  —  A  I J  A  Y  V  V  f  N  F ID  KU T  Y — THE  <  ( > M I NG  GL<  >  R  Y  OF  ZIOX-  -
TKMPLE  BUILDING  AGAIN — BESSING  AT  ST.  GEORGE,


The  very  fact  that  we  have  a  peo-
ple, that  we  have  a  Zion,  that  we
have  a  kingdom,  that  we  have  a
Church  and  a  Priesthood  which  is
connected  with  the  heavens,  and
which  has  powerto  move  the  heavens,
and  that  we  know  that  the  heavens
are  communicating  with  us,  directing
the  performance  of  this  great  latter-
day  work  in  which  the  Latter-day
Saints  are  engaged,  this  very  fact
alone  should  till  our  hearts  with
humility  before  the  Lord  our  God,
and  it  should  continually  remnd  us
in  our  reflections  and  feelings  of  the
responsibility  we  are  under  both  to
Him  and  to  one  another,  and  also  of
our  dependence  upon  him  fur  all  the
blessings  we  enjoy  of  a  spiritual  as
well  as  a  temporal  nature.

The  prayer  offered  up  by  brother
Pratt  filled  mv  mind  with  reflections
of  the  past.  Almost  half  a  century
has  expired  since  the  Prophet  of  God
organized  this  Church  upon  the  earth  ;
but  lie  and  most  of  the  men  who
labored  prominently  with  him,  in
laying  the  foundation  of  this  Church,
are  not  with  us  to-day,  their  voices
are  hushed  in  death,  they  have
finished  their  earthly  work,  havinir
labored  a  series  of  vcars,  and  are
now  the  other  side  of  the  vail.  There


are  but  two  of  the  first  Quorum  of
the  Twelve  with  us  in  the  ticsh,  and
only  two  of  the  semnd  Quorum.  And
this  speaks  in  haul  and  forcible
language,  at  least  it  does  to  me,  that
what  we  have  to  do  in  the  interest
of  the  great  cause  of  salvation,  we
should  perform  it  faithfully  and  dili-
gently, making  the  very  best  use  of
the  few  remaining  days  we  have  yet
to  labor  in  the  flesh.

While  1  refer  to  the  absence  of
our  brethren  whose  works  remain
and  whose  memories  are  cherished,
I  am  fully  conscious  this  morning
that  we  who  are  left  are  not  laboring
alone,  nor  particularly  for  our  own
benefit,  in  a  temporal  point  of  view ;
but  I  realize*  that  we  are  called  and
ordained  of  God  to  labor  with  him
and  the  heavenly  hosts,  in  the  accom-
plishment of  his  purpose*,  the  bring-
ing forth  and  establishingjof  his  Zion
and  Kingdom  in  the  earth,  and  all
that  has  been  designed  to  be  consunv
mated  in  this  the  dispensation  of  the
fullness  of  times.  I  also  sense  that
when  I  and  my  brethren  who  still
remain  shall  pass  away,  we  shall  go
as  others  have  done — we  shall  not
take  this  world  or  any  part  of  it  with
us.  When  »luseph  Smith  died,
Nauvoo  remained,  lie  did  not  take  it


JOl.'KNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


with  him  ;  when  President  Brigham
Young  died,  Salt  Lake  City  still

remained,  and  when  we  join  them

we  shall  leave  behind  us  the  thing*

of  time,  even  as  Jesus  did  himself
who  was  tin*  founder  of  the  earth.
This  truth  itself  should  incite  the
Latter-day  Saint's  to  reflection,  it
should  indelibly  impress  upon  our
memories,  the  fact  t  hat  we  are  work-
ing fur  something  far  greater,  in  real
worth,  than  do]l;u>  and  cents,  houses
and  lands,  and  this  worlds  goods.
We  have  been  gathered  here  in  mir
present  condition  by  the  command-
ment and  by  tin*  inspiration  of  the
Lord,  to  continue  the  work  that
others  commenced,  and  like  them  we
must  improve  the  time  in  doing  what
is  required  of  us,  working  fa  it  h  fully
for  God  and  his  Kingdom  while  the
day  lasts*

1  know,  you  know,  and  all  Israel
knows  who  have  received  the  fullness
of  the  everlasting  Gospel  in  this  last
dispensation  of  God  to  man,  that
this  is  the  work  of  God  and  not  of
man  ;  we  understand  this  perfectly.
This  Church  ami  Kingdom  has  been
organized  by  the  administration  of
angels  from  God.  The  organisation
of  this  Church  has  been  governed
and  controlled  by  revelation  and
upon  no  other  principle,  and  what
has  already  been  accomplished  since
our  existence,  as  a  church,  reveals
the  handiwork  of  God,  lor  no  man
could  have  done  what  has  been  done
unless  God  were  with  him,  I  rejoice
to  have  the  privilege  of  meeting  with
so  many  of  my  brethren  and  sisters,
and  that  1  have  the  privilege  of  bear-
ing testimony  to  tin*  divinity  of  this
latter-day  work,  aud  of  the  principles
of  salvation  revealed  from  God  to
man.  The  scene  I  behold  this  morn-
ing, and  that  which  I  behold  in
traveling  through  the  extent  of  this
Territory,  speaks  to  me  in  very  loud
language  that  it  is  in  fulfilment  of


the  designs  of  God,  and  the  revela-
tions of  Jesus  Christ,  which  are
recorded  not  only  in  the  Bible,  or  on
the  stick  of  Judah,  but  also  in  the
Book  of  Mormon,  or  stick  of  Joseph
in  the  hands  of  Ephraim,  as  well  as

in  the  New  Testament,  and  tlm><-

revelation*  of  modern  date  as  those
of  ancient  time,  have  been  sealed
with  the  blood  of  him  who  brought
them  forth,  and  this  testimony
therefore  is  in  force  to  all  the  world.
The  Lord  is  not  trifling  with  this
generation,  neither  is  he  trifling  with
the  Saints  or  with  the  world  of  man-
kind. During  the  last  IS  years  the
Gospel  has  been  preached  to  this
generation,  and  this  work  will  con-
tinue preaching  to  the  Gentiles,  until
the  Lord  directs  otherwise.  The
harvest  is  ripe,  and  he,  the  Lord,
said,  through  the  Prophet  Joseph,
he  that  would  thrust  in  the  sickle
and  reap  was  called  of  God,  And
some  have  continued  to  labor  faith-
fully almost  from  the  organization  of
this  Church  to  the  present  time —
almost  half  a  century.  I  think  it  a
great  blessing  and  privilege  to  stand
in  the  midst  of  t  he  people  of  God  in
this  age  of  the  world  to  preach  the
Gospel  of  Jesus,  and  to  labor  to
build  up  Zion,  in  obedience  to  his
commandments,  and  to  carry  out  his
purposes  in  the  day  and  age  in  which
1  live.  We,  as  a  whole  people,  should
certainly  exercise  our  faith  in  God
and  in  the  revelations,  more  especi-
ally those  that  immediately  refer  to
our  present  condition  ;  no  matter
where  they  are  found,  in  any  of  the
records  of  divine  truth.  The  Lord
has  said  unto  us,  through  Joseph
Smith,  that  it  matters  not  whether
he  speaks  unto  the  children  of  men
by  his  own  voice  or  by  the  ministra-
tions of  angels,  or  whether  by  the
voice  of  las  servants,  that  it  is  all  the
same,  it  is  his  word,  his  mind  and
his  will  to  thoM-  to  whomsoever  it


THE  BLESSINGS  REALIZIX)  BY  THE  SAINTS,  ETC.  £!'7


mmes ;  and  that  although  the  hea-
vens and  the  earth  pass  away,  not
oue  jot  or  tittle  of  his  word  shall  re-
main unfulfilled.

I  am  a  believer  in  this  revelation
and  also  in  the  records  which  are  left
turns  to  pursue,  the  inspired  words
of  ancient  as  well  as  modern  Prophets;
and  I  also  believe  that  they  will
have  their  fulfilment  in  the  due  time
of  the  Lord,  and  that  no  power  on
earth  can  prevent  it.  Ami  I  do  not
believe  there  has  been  a  revelation
uiven  from  God  to  man,  from  the
davs  of  father  Adam  to  this  hour,
but  what  has  had  its  fulfilment,  or
will  have,  as  fast  as  time  will  admit ;
and  wt*  are  every  day  of  our  liven
making  history,  and  we  are  also  fid-
riling  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  and  |
many  other  ancient  men  of  God,  who
wore  permitted  in  vision  to  see  our
day.

I  know  we  live  in  a  day  of  intideli-
tv  :  I  kno-v  that  darkness  covers  the
earth  anil  gross  darkness  the  minds
of  the  people  ;  I  know  that  the  Lord
is  angry  with  the  wicked,  and  with-
holding his  Spirit  from  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  earth  ;  I  know  that  light
has  t  ome  into  the  world,  ami  that
men  love  darkness  rather  than  light,
because  their  deeds  are  evil  But  as
u  servant  of  the  living  God  I  will  say
that,  notwithstanding  all  the  unbe-
lief of  this  wicked  generation — the
Christian,  the  Jewish  and  the  pagan
world,  together  with  the  combined
efforts  of  the  devil  and  wicked  men,
the  fulfilment  of  the  purposes  of  God
in  their  times  and  seasons  cannot  be
tru-t rated.  These  volumes  of  revela-
tion are  written  on  the  pages  of
divine  truth  as  in  letters  of  fire,  and
they  will  have  their  fulfilment  whether
men  believe  or  disbelieve,  for  thev
are  the  words  of  God.

It  is  a  great  work,  an  almighty
work  ;  it  is  a  work  different  from
that  of  any  dispensation  which  God


has  given  to  man.  When  I  look
upon  these  Latter-day  Saints  I  can-
not help  contemplating  our  calling
and  the  labor  required  at  our  hands,
i  and,  when  I  am  reminded  of  the
j  account  that  we  have  all  got  to  give
before  the  judgment  seat  of  God  for
the  use  we  make  of  our  own  time
and  talents,  and  the  gifts  of  God  and
the  holy  Priesthood,  and  the  work
of  our  God  which  has  been  commit-
ted to  us,  I  fed  to  ask*  What  manner
of  men  ou^ht  we  to  be.  Our  souls
should  be  opt.'U  to  the  building  up  of
tins  Kingdom  of  God,  and  we  should
continue  with  increased  diligence  to
rear  towards  heaven  these  Temples
of  our  God,  the  foundation  of  which
wr  have  laid  and  commenced  to  build
upon,  so  that  all  Israel  who  dwell
here  may  enter  into  them  and  attend
to  the  ordinances  of  the  house  of
God.  And  I  again  say  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  this  work  the  God  of
Israel  requires  at  your  hands.  This
requirement  is  not  confined  to  the
Twelve,  the  President  of  Stakes  and
the  Bishops,  but  it  is  binding  upon
every  man  who  lias  entered  into
covenant  vi  ith  the  Lord  our  1  Jod.
and  I  trust  that  one  and  all  will
willingly  share  this  responsibility^
and  not  for  a  moment  permit  this
work  to  drag  or  appear  laborious  to
perform.

I  thank  the  Lord  inv  God  that

mv  ears  have  been  saluted  with  the

sound  of  the  Gospel,  and  that  I  have
had  the  privilege  of  reading  the  reve-
lations of  (  Jod  to  us.  and  I  know  that,
its  an  individual,  1  am  held  responsi-
ble for  my  duty  to  Him.  We  have  a
harvest  to  reap  both  sides  of  the  vail
Wt*  have  already  done  considerable
work  on  this  side,  by  way  of  preach-
ing the  Gospel  to  the  nations  of  the
earth,  as  commanded  to  do  hy  God.
Well  do  I  remember  the  early  expe-
rience of  the  first  Klders  of  the
Church,  how  we  traveled  afoot  for


2jS


JOURNAL  UF  U1KUOUK8ES.


sands  of  mih*s,  without  purse  or
scrip,  with  valise  in  hand,  and  many
times  having  to  beg  our  bread,  from
door  to  door,  in  order  to  impart  to
the  people  a  knowledge  of  the  Gos-
pel. Onr  garments  are  clear  from
the  blood  of  thin  generation,  and
the  testimony  of  these  Elders  will
yet  rise  in  judgment  against  this
generation  to  condemn  them.  Not-
withstanding the  unbelief  of  the
Christian  world,  and  notwithstanding
the  warfare  that  may  be  waged
against  God  and  his  Christ,  Zion
will  be  redeemed  and  his  kingdom
will  be  established  neve*1  more  to  be
thrown  down.  He  holds  the  nations
in  his  own  hands,  and  he  also  has
his  Saints  in  his  holy  keeping,  and
he  will  continue  to  guide  and  direct
and  sustain  his  people,  until  they
consummate  all  unto  which  they  have
l?em  ordained.

Look  at  these  valleys!  When  we
came  here  in  18t7,  they  were  bar-
ren and  desolate,  without  the  least
sign  or  mark  of  civilization.  To-
day our  Territory  is  filled  with  vil-
lages, towns  arid  orchards,  and  (he
land  is  brought  under  a  good  state
of  cultivation,  inhabited  by  a  civil-
ized race.  Who  are  they  ?  Sons
and  daughters  of  the  Lord  Almigh*
ty  j  they  are  a  people  that  have  been,
as  corn  sifted  in  a  sieve,  among  the
Gentile  nations,  and  called  out  by
the  proclamation  of  the  everla*ting
Gospel.  The  Lord  chose  a  boy  from
the  humble  walks  of  life,  and  endowed
him  with  intelligence  and  power  to
commence  this  great  work,  and  also
to  .send  forth  others  throughout  this
and  to  other  nations  bearing  the  mes-
sage of  life,  and  this  people  opened
their  hearts  to  receive  it,  and  were
baptized  in  water  for  remission  of
sins,  and  received  the  lading  on  of
hands  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost.  They  have  been  born  of  the
Spirit,  and  they  have  seen  the  king-


dom of  God,  and  they  have  received
ordination  in  order  to  enter  into  it.
And  when  they  enter  into  it,  they
have  the  spirit  of  it,  and  this  makes
the  difference  between  the  Latter-day
Saints  and  the  former-day  Saints.
No  man  can  see  the  kingdom  of  God
unless  he  is  born  of  the  Spirit  ;  and
this  is  wherein  these  Latter-day
Saints  have  faith  in  God,  and  ob-
serve the  signs  of  the  times,  and
trust  in  him  by  this  principle.  Their
prayers  have  ascended  in  the  ears
of  the  Lord  of  Sabbaoth,  asking
for  things  which  they  stood  in  need
of;  and  he  has  answered  our  prayers
and  lie  has  continued  to  sustain  us
■  until  the  present  time.  I  ask,  my
brethren  and  sisters,  will  the  Lord
withhold  now  his  hand,  will  he  now
close  the  heavens,  withdrawing  the
power  by  whieh  we  have  been  up-
held ?  No,  he  will  not;  his  hand
will  continue  over  us  if  we  be  true  to
him  and  the  laws  he  has  given  unto
He  has  decreed  before  the  foun-


us.


datiou  of  this  world,  before  the  fall
of  man,  that  in  the  dispensation  of
the  fulness  of  times,  he  would  gather
unto  himself  all  things,  both  things
which  are  in  heaven  and  things  on  the
earth.  1  le  is  doing  it,  although  the
world  generally  does  not  know  it.

Now,  brethren  and  sisters,  1  do
not  wish  myself  to  occupy  all  your
time  this  morning,  but  1  want  to
say  to  you  that  our  position,  our
calling,  our  religion  embrace  the
noble  work  of  God,  both  temporal
and  spiritual,  which  rests  upon  hi.
We  have  to  go  forth  with  our  hands
and  build  up  Zioiu  Zion  wi41  be
built  up ;  Zion  will  be  redeemed,
and  she  will  arise  and  shine  and
put  on  her  beautiful  garments;  she
will  break  from  off  her  neck  her
yoke,  and  she  will  be  clothed  with
the  glory  of  our  God.  Zion  has
been  M)Id  for  naught;  she  will  be
redeemed  without money;  she  wil


THE  BLESSINGS  KKA.LIZKD  BY  THE  SAINTS,  ETC,


299


arise  in  her  beauty  and  glory,  as  the
Prophets  of  God  have  seen  her ;  she
will  extend  her  borders  and  strength-
en her  slakes,  and  the  God  of  heaven
will  comfort  her,  inasmuch  as  we  will
unite  together  to  curry  out  his  pur-
poses.

I  see  nothing  to  tempt  me  or  you
to  turn  aside  from  the  work  given
us  to  do.  The  Prophets  have  pre-
dicted that  every  weapon  that  is
formed  against  Zion  shall  he  broken,
and  this  is  in  accordance  with  the
revelations  of  God  to  us.  He  will
continue  this  work  and  direct  its
onward  course,  but  he  expects  us  to
continue  to  reclaim  the  waste  places,
and  to  continue  to  build  Temples  and
also  to  impart  of  our  substance.
And  I  wish  all  Israel  to  understand
that  when  we  impart  of  our  sub-
stance to  build  Temples  that  we  do
not  do  it  to  benefit  the  Lord  at  all,
he  had  his  endowments  a  long  time
before  we  were  born,  and  also  passed
through  his  probation,  We  are  his
children,  he  wishes  to  exalt  us  back
to  his  presence,  and  he  knows  very
well  we  are  obliged  to  walk  in  the
same  path  and  receive  the  same  ordi-
nances in  order  to  inherit  the  same
glory  that  surrounds  him.  And  when
we  erect  Temples  in  which  to  per-
form ordinances  for  the  living  and
the  dead,  we  do  it  to  beneBt  our  own
blessed  selves.  I  want  salvation,  I
wish  to  inherit  eternal  life,  I  wish  to
get  back  to  the  presence  of  God  from
whence  I  came,  when  I  have  finished
my  probation  in  the  flesh.  And  I
believe  that  I  desire  nothing  in  this
respect  but  what  you  also  wish.  Then
I  know  that  it  requires  my  diligence
and  my  constant  labor  and  study,  the
little  time  I  hate  to  spend  in  the
flesh,  to  do  all  1  can  to  build  up  Zion
and  to  establish  the  Church  and  the
kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth.
If  we  «o  o„.y  obtain  eter„al  live,
we  shall  attain  to  the  greatest  of


God's  gifts  to  man.  Our  Savior,
our  Heavenly  Father,  the  angel  Ga-
briel, Peter,  James  and  John,  Joseph
Smith  and  Brigham  Youn?,  are  not
coming  back  to  build  our  Temples
for  us,  they  are  not  corning  to  settle
new  country  and  open  up  new  roads,
plant  out  our  trees,  build  up  and
beautify  this  land,  this  is  our  part  of
the  work,  and  we  have  got  it  to  do,
working  while  we  live,  and  when  we
go  away  we  shall  move  on  exactly  as
others  have  done,  leaving  our  houses,
our  gardens,  our  flocks  nnd  herds,
and  all  our  earthly  interests  behind
ps.  And  when  we  go  to  the  spirit
world  rmd  our  eyes  are  opened  on
eternal  lives,  we  shall  all  marvel  at
the  way  in  which  our  lives  have
been  spent.  There  is  a  veil  over
all  the  earth,  it  is  ordained  of  God
that  it  should  be  so,  and  the  fact  of
it  being  so  will  prove  all  of  his
children  whether  we  will  aUde  in
his  covenant  even  unto  death  or  not.
And  those  who  are  not  willing  to
abide  in  their  covenant  unto  the  end
for  the  building  up  of  the  kingdom
of  God,  are  not  worthy  of  a  place
with  God  and  with  the  Savior  and
those  who  have  sealed  their  testimony
with  their  blood.

I  pray  the  Lord  to  bless  you  and
all  those  who  may  attend  this  Con-
ference, and  also  the  brethren  who
may  address  you ;  and  trust  that  our
prayers  may  continually  ascend  into
tho  ears  of  the  Lord  on  behalf  of
Zion  and  her  speedy  redemption.

I  will  say  before  closing,  that  I
have  just  returned  from  St.  George*
where  I  have  been  laboriug  in  the
Temple-  The  work  of  God  continues
there;  as  a  general  thing  we  have  as
much  labor  as  the  Temple  is  capable
of  sustaining.  The  spirit  of  the
work  does  not  lag.  Ard  I  can  safely
add  that  just  as  quick  as  the  people
get  the  Temple  done  at  this  place,
the  way  will  be  opened  before  them,


300


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


they  will  feel  the  responsibility  -  of
attending  to  the  work  so  essentially
necessary  to  be  done  on  behalf  of
those  who  have  lived  and  passed
away  without  having  had  the  privi-
lege of  receiving  the  blessings  of  the
■Gospel  ;  find  as;  their  time  and  atten-
tion will  be  occupied  in  this  direction
will  they  perceive  the  importance  as
well  as  tire  magnitude  of  tin'  wurk.
"There  are  many  lo-day  who  fltatid  in
need  of  this  assistance,  and  as  I  have
often  said,  so  say  I  again  to  tins
body  of  Latter-day  Saints,  that  this
labor  devolves  upon  us,  and  God
requires  it  at  our  hands. The  Pro-


phet Joseph  may  I  urn  the  keys  in
the  spirit  world,  and  he  and  those
engnged  with  him  may  preach  to
the  spirits  in  prison,  bur.  they  can
not  baptize  them  nor  confirm  them,
nor  administer  offices  of  the  endow-
!  mentp.  Some  person  or  persons
dwelling  in  the  flesh  must  attend
to  this  part  of  the  wm  k  for  them  ;  for
it  takes  just  as  much  to  s ive  a  dead
man  who  never  received  the  Gospel
as  a  li vini;  man.  And  all  those  who
have  passed  away  without  the  Gospel
have  the  right  to  expect  somebody
in  the  flesh  to  perform  this  work  for
•them,  Amen*


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR,


b&ltvbbbd  at  the  conference,  salt  lake  clty,  sunday  afternoon

Apkil  8th,  1878.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F,  Olbhs.)


No  MAN  CAN  1HRKCT  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD— THE  GOSPEL  DID  NOT  ORI-
GINATE WITH  JOSEPH  SMITH  OR  BRIGHAM  YOUNG. — THE  SAINTS  OPE-
RATING WITH  COD  AND  THE  ANGELS— THE  GRAND  ORGANIZATION  OF
THE  CHURCH — OTHER  INSTITUTIONS  OF  ZION.


1  shall  feel  very  much  obliged,
while  I  attempt  to  address  you  :  if
jou  will  keep  as  quiet  as  possible;
because  it  is  quite  a  labor  to  speik
to  so  large  a  congregation,  and  un-
less quiet  and  order  is  preserved,  it
is  impossible  for  all  the  people  to
hear.

I  have  been  very  much  interested
and  edified  in  listening  to  the  remarks
made  by  the  brethren  since  we  have
assembled  together  in  this  Confer-


ence. And  I  have  been  very  much
pleased  in  witnessing  the  union  and.
general  feeling  of  interest  manifested
among  the  people  to  attend  these
meetings. It  is  evidence  to  me  that
the  people  feel  interested  in  these
great  and  eternal  principles  developed
through  oar  holy  religion,  and  that
they  have  a  desire  to  yield  obedience
to  the  law  of  God  and  to  keep  his
commandment!). And  in  that  alone
is oar Rifety, our  happiness,  our


NO  MAX  C  AN  DIRECT  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  ETC.


301


posterit)',  and  our  exaltation,  aa  a
people;  for  we  derive  every  blessihg
we  enjoy,  whether  of  a  temporal  or
of  a  spiritual  nature  from  our  heaven-
ly Father;  and  without  him  we  can
do  or  perform  no  good  work,  for  in
him  M  we  live  and  move  and  have  our
being-/'  and  from  him,  and  through
him  we  leeeivc  all  blessing*  pertain-
ing to  this  lifo.  and  we  shall  hen  after,
if  we  possess  eternal  lives,  inherit
them  and  obtain  them  through  the
goodness,  mercy  and  long-suffering  of
God  our  Eternal  Father,  through  the
merits  and  redemption  of  Jesus  Christ
our  Savior.

It  is  not  in  man  to  direct,  to  man-
age and  control  affairs  of  the  Kingom
of  God.  No  man  ever  did  possess
that  power,  nor  will  he,  unaided  by
the  power  of  the  Almighty,  All  na-
tions and  all  peoples  are  more  or  less
under  his  direct  ion  and  control,
although  many  of  them  do  not  know
it.  He  raises  up  one  nation,  «nd  puts
down  another,  he  debases  the  proud
and  exults  the  humble  at  his  pleasure,
and  he  pursue?*  that  course  among  all
th<*  peoples  and  nations  of  the  earth,
as  seemeth  best  unto  him  ;  and  nil
nations  and  all  peoples  are  his  offspi  ing
and  he  is  the  God  and  Father  of  the
spirits  of  all  flesh,  and  feels  an  interest
in  the  welfare  of  all  the  human  fami-
ly. He  has  been  in  the  nges  that  are
past,  and  he  is  in  the  present  aye
doing  all  that  he  can  to  promote  the
happiness  and  well-being  of  the  human
family.  This  does  not  always  appear
to  men  of  superficial  minds,  the  deal*
ings  of  God  with  man  are  not  always
comprehended.  But  he  nevertheless
does  control  the  destinies  of  all  peo-
ples ;  and  if  in  many  instances  it  does
not  seem  for  their  present  benefit,  yet
as  mankind  are  eternal  beings,  having
to  do  with  eternity  as  well  as  time,
when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  he
developed  and  the  actions  of  gods
shall  be  made  known  and  fully  com-


prehended in  the  future  destinies  of
the  races  of  men,  it  will  be  foun  j
that  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  has
done  right.

The  Tjord  has  in  these  last  days,
for  his  own  special  purpose,  and  also
in  (he  interest  of  humanity,  revealed
himself  from  the  heavens,  made  man-
ifest hi*  will  to  man,  sent  his  holy
angels  to  communicate  and  reveal
unto  us  his  children  certain  principles
as  they  exist  in  the  bosom  of  God,
and  he  has  pointed  out  the  way
whereby  we  may  secure  our  happiness
and  an  eternal  exaltation  in  the  celes-
tial Kingdom  of  God.  He  has  been
pleased  to  restore  ayain  the  everlasting
Gospel  in  all  its  fullness,  with  all  its
riches,  and  blessings,  and  power,  and
glory.  He  has  organized  his  Church
and  Kingdom  upon  the  earth  ;  he  has
chosen  men  as  lie  did  in  former  times
to  be  the  bearers  of  his  message  of
life  and  salvation  to  the  nations  of  (he
earth.  Ho  lias,  through  these  instru-
ments, instructed  us,  and  gathered
u.s  together,  as  we  are  found  here  to-
day, from  the  different  nations  where
the  Gospel  reached  us.  He  has  brought
us  here  according  to  certain  eternal
principles  which  he  had  in  his  mind
before  the  world  was,  and  according
to  certain  councils  that  existed  in  the
heavens  among  the  gods,  who  have
been  operating  upon  and  with  the  hu-
man family  from  the  commencement
to  the  present,  and  will  until  the  wind-
ing up  scene.

The  work  that  we  are  engaged  in
is  not  the  work  of  man,  it  did  nufc
originate  with  man,  it  was  not  found
out  by  him.  It  is  the  work  that  has
been  prophesied  of  by  ail  the  holy
prophets  that  have  lived  on  this  con-
tinent, on  the  continent  of  Asia,  and
in  the  various  portions  of  the  earth.
As  the  Apostle  Paul  describes  it,  it  is
44  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of
times*  spoken  of  by  all  the  holy  pro-
phets since  the  woild  was."  And


any  thing  that  we  may  have  received
-any  light,  smy  intelligence,  any
knowledge  of  the  things  of  God,  have
emanated  and  proceeded  from  him.
He  saw  and  comprehended  the  fitting
time  for  this  work  to  commence;  he
prepared  the  way  by  once  more  open-
ing the  heaven*,  by  revealing  himself
and  his  S;>n  Jesus,  and  by  afterwards
sending  holy  angels  to  communicate
his  will  and  his  purposes  and  designs
to  the  human  family.  It  therefore
did  not  originate  with  us,  nor  with
any  sect  or  party  or  people,  for  no*
body,  not  even  Joseph  Smith,  or
Uriuhain  Young,  or  any  of  the
Twelve  Apostles  knew  anything  about
the  great  principles  that  were  stored
up  in  the  mind  of  God.  It  was  the
mind  and  will  and  revelations  of  God,
made  known  to  the  human  family,  in
the  first  place  to  Joseph  Smith,  and
through  him  toothers.  And  wl  en
thu  Elders  of  this  Church  went  forth
to  the  nations  of  the  earth,  as  bear
era  of  the  gospel  message,  if  they
hud  gone  uputi  their  own  responsibil-
ity they  could  have  accomplished
nothing.  But  having  been  chosen
and  set  apart  of  the  Lord,  they  went
forth  as  his  messengers,  without
pu rse  or  scri p,  t rust  1  n g  i n  H i m .  And
he  opened  up  their  way  and  prepared
their  path,  as  he  said  beforehand  that
Ire  would,  "Behold,"  said  he,  "I
send  you  forth  to  the  nations  of  the
earth,  and  my  Spirit  shall  go  with
you,  and  my  angels  shall  prepare  the
way  for  you.*1  I  send  you  forth  not
to  be  taught,  but  to  teach,  not  to  be
instructed  by  the  world  of  mankind
or  the  intelligence  of  the  world,  but
by  the  wisdom  and  intelligence  and
power  and  spirit  which  1  shall  give
you,  axvi  it  is  through  and  by  this  in-
fluence that  we  have  been  gathered
together.  And  why  are  we  gathered  ?
These  Elders  could  not  have  gather-
ed you  unless  God  had  been  with
the  in;  they  ould  not  have  influenced


you  to  come  here  unless  tiie  Spirit
and  power  of  their  mission  had  been
with  them.  But  the  Lord  said  in
former  years  through  his  prophets,
"I  will  take  you  one  of  a  city,  and
two  of  a  family,  and  I  will  bring  you
to  Zion,  And  I  will  give  you  pastors
according  to  mine  heart,  which  shall
feed  you  with  knowledge  and  under-
standing/ And  through  the  opera-
tion and  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  the
living  God,  manifested  through  the
priesthood,  God  s  ministers  on  the
earth,  you  have  been  brought  togeth-
er as  you  are  to-day.  But  why  should
we  be  thus  gathered  together  ?  That
theie  may  be  a  l>o  ly  of  people  found
to  whom  God  can  communicate  his
will,  that  there  might  be  a  people
who  should  be  prepared  to  listen  to
the  word  and  will  and  voice  of  God:
that  there  might  be  a  people  gather-
ed together  from  the  different  nations
who,  tinder  the  influence  of  that
spirit  should  become  saviors  upon
Mount  Zion;  that  they  might,  under
the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty,  and
through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Priest-
hood which  they  should  receive,  go
forth  to  those  nations  and  proclaim
to  the  people  the  principles  of  life,
that  they  might  indeed  become  the
saviors  of  men.  And  if  we  could
fully  comprehend  our  position,  we
should  see  things  very  differently
from  what  we  now  do.  If  we  could
comprehend  our  relationship  to  God,
to  each  other,  to  his  church  upon  the
earth,  and  also  the  greatness  and  mag-
nitude  of  the  w^rk  in  which  we  are
engaged,  and  the  responsibility  that
devolve*  upon  us  as  Elders  in.  Israel,
as  Saints  of  the  Most  High  God,  we
should  see  things  in  a  very  different
light  from  what  we  now  do.  We  are
not  here,  as  they  say  in  the  Church
of  England,  to  '*  follow  the  devices
and  desires  of  our  own  hearts  ;  *  we
are  not  here  to  pursue  our  own  in
dividual  interests  and  emoluments,


NO  MAN  I  "AN  DIKKtT  If  IK  K I  NUDUM  UF  UUD,  ETC.  3^3

we  are  not  here  merely  to  attend  to  and  authority  which  was  given  him

our  own  secular  affairs,  but  to  learn  for  that  purpose,  that  he  might  be

the  laws  of  life,  and  then  teach  Che  the  legitimate  representative  of  God

people  the  way  of  salvation. There  upm  the  earth. He  also  taught

whs  an  old saying  among  ancient  him how  to  organize  his  Church,

Israel  :  "  Hear,  O  Israel,  the  Lord  and  put  him  in  communication  with

our  God  is  one  Lord,  and  thou  shalt  many  of  the  ancient  Prophets  who

worship  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  have  long  since  passed  away,  who

thy  heart,  with  ail  thy  mind,  with  all  also  communicated with him,  and

thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  strength,  revealed  unto  him  further  the  plan

and  him  only  shalt thou  worship/1  and  design  of  the  Almighty  in  rela*

And  Jesus,  in  after  time,  added  n  tion  to  this  earth,  and  the  salvation

little  more  to  this:  "Thou  shalt.  love  of  all  who  would  listen  to  the  prin-

thy  neighbor as  thyself/' God  is  ci pies  of  truth.

one,  and  they  who  dwell  with  hi  n  Tne  nations  of  the  earth  have
are  one.  Those  who  will  inherit  the  their  representatives,  their  ministers,
celestial  kingdom  will  be  one  when  their  plenipotentiaries,  empowered
they  get  there  ;  and  we,  as  a  t  eople,  and  sent  forth  by  the  recognized
ought  to  be  one — one  in  faith,  one  authority  of  the  several  nations,
in  principle,  one  in  practice,  one  in  He  was  the  representative  of  God,
out  interests,  one  in  our  associations  his  credentials  came  Irorn  God,  and
with  each  other  and  in  our  families,  his  mission  extended  nut  to  one  na-
otie  with  God,  one  with  the  holy  tion  only-,  but  to  all  nations  ;  and  ho
angels, one  in  time, and  one  in  eternity,  was  authorized  to  establish  and  or-
To  bring  about  a  union  of  this  ganizs  what  was  termed  the  Church
kind,  the  principle  of  baptism  has  and  Kingdom  of  God  upon  the
been  introduced  thai  we  all  might  earth.  And  every  step  that  he  took,
be  baptized  into  one  baptism,  by  every  principle  that  he  inculcated,
the  laying  on  of  hands,  and  through  and  every  doctrine  that  he  taught,
the  various  orders  of  his  Priesthood,  came  from  God  by  the  revelations
we  all  partake  ot  the  same  spirit;  of  God  to  him,  and  through  him  to
and  being  brought  into  union  and  the  people.  He  selected  others  by
communion  with  God,  that  we  all  revelation — Apostles,  High  Priests,
might  feel  after  God,  that  the  tens  I  Seventies,  Bishops,  Elders,  Priests,
of  thousands,  and  hundreds  of  thou-  Teachers  and  Deacons,  also  Ht^h
sands  might  be  brought  into  con-  Councils,  and  Bishops'  Councils,
neetion  with  the  Almighty,  whose  and  Patriarchs,  and  all  the  various
prayers  could  ascend  into  tie  ears  authorities  and  organizations  ot  tins
of  the  Lord  of  Sabbaoth.  And  Church.  Joseph  Smith  neither  knew
for  the  accomplishment  of  this  pur*  |  how  to  select  men,  whom  to  select,
pose,  he  selected  Joseph  Smith  to  nor  what  their  offices  should  be  until
be  the  first  Apnstle  in  his  Church  :  it  was  communicated  by  the  L  »rd.
he  was  called  "not  by  the  will  of  And  yet  we  tind  tint  these  principles
man,"  nor  by  the  power  of  man,  revealed  to  him,  agree  with  those  that
nor  by  the  intelligence  of  man,  bnt  existed  in  former  ages  whenever  God
by  God  who  revealed  himself  unto  |  had  a  Church  or  people  on  the  e:irth.
this  young  man,  as  also  the  Savior,  And  hence  the  ushering  in  of  the
committing  unto  him  a  mission  to  Gospel  simply  means  the  revelation
perform  to  the  inhabitants  of  this  of  the  will  of  God  to  man;  it  aim-
earth. He  was  endowed  with  power  ply  means  the  placing  of  mankind  in


Optnmnnicatinn  with  the  Lord  that
he  may  not  be  governed  by  his  own
follies  or  tint  ions  or  theories,  tut  by
the  will  and  word  of  Gc  i  And  the
i  samples  that  you  beard  referred  to
here,  of  our  Stakes,  with  their  Pre-
sidencies, together  with  the  Bishops
and  their  Council,  etc,,  is  a  part  ol
the  system  of  heaven,  as  it  exists  in
the  eternal  worlds;  and  the  Priest-
hood that  we  hold  is  the  everlasting
Priesthood,  and  it  ud minister?1  in  time,
and  it  will  administer  in  eternity;
and  a  knowledge  of  the  works  that
we  are  now  engaged  in,  in  regard  to
the  building  of  TVmpKs  and  admin-
istering therein,  all  came  from  (IuJ,
and  ure  a  part  of  tho  eternal  system.
Who  knew  about  them  until  God  re-
vealed it  ?  Nobody.  Who  knows
how  to  administer  acceptably  in  these

Temple  without  revelation  ?  No-
body but  tho-e  to  whom  it  has  been
commun  cated,  it  came  from  God.
And  our^preuching  to  the  living  and
our  administering  for  the  dead  are  all
of  tliein  parts  and  parcels  of  the  same
concern,  The  fact  is,  we  air  in  a
state  of  probation;  we  have  enlisted
under  the  banner  of  the  Almighty;
we  have  dedicated  ourselves  to  him
for  time  and  for  eternity,  and  he  ex*
pi  ets  it  a!  our  hands  that  we  1x3
true  to  the  trust  conferred  upon  us,
that  we  be  faithful  to  our  obligations
and  fulfil  them,  that  we  honor  our
God,  that  we  magnify  our  callings
and  Pries^iood,  and  that  we  stand
forth  among  the  people  and  before
the  nations,  as  the  representatives
ot  God  upon  the  earth.  We  have
a  similar  view  to  that  of  the  Apostle
Paul,  who  said  when  addressing
himself  to  the  Corinthians:  1  Ye
are  not  your  own,  lor  ye  are  bouuht
with  a  price;  therefore  glorify  God
in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit,
which  are  God's."  We  have  en-
listed in  a  work,  have  engaged  in  a
warfare  that will  last while  time


shall  be,  and  if  we  live  nur  religion
and  keep  his  com  maud  merits,  the-
principles  that  we  are  in  possession
of  will  bear  us  off  triumphant  over
death,  hell  and  the  gtave,  and  hntd
its  among  the  just,  among  the  celes*
Hal  host  that  dwell  with  our  Father
in  heaven.  *  We  really  havr  no  time
to  attend  to  those  trivial  affairs,  that
some  people  peem  to  think  outrht  to
occupy  so  much  of  our  tifne,  I  wi-.li
now,  while  we  are  together  to  taik
Upon  some  general  principles  aeso-
ciafed  with  the  Priesthood  which  has
been  couferred  upon  us.

It  was  aaid  of  ancient  Israel,  if
(hey  had  kept  the  command  meats,,
that  he  would  have  made  out  of
them  a  kingdom  of  Priests.  We
are  literally  a  kingdom  of  Priests
to-drty.  Our  business  is  not  to  fol-
low oat1  own  will,  our  own  desires
and  plans,  but.  t>  seek  to  know  and
to  do  the  will  of  God,  to  carry  out
these  principles  which  he  has  revealed*
and  in  tins  is  our  happiness  and  ex-
altation in  time,  and  will  be  through-
out the  eternities  that  are  to  come.

Wo  ou^ht  to  be  operating  wiih
God,  arid  with  the  holy  angels  ;  we
ought  to  be  feeling  after  ihem,  wo
ought  to  be  operating  with  the  an-
cient Priesthood  Unit  have  I'V*  1
before — the  Patriarchs,  the  Prop  he  If,
the  Ape  sties,  a^d  all  those  men  uf
God  who  have  lived  and  died  in  the
faith  who  act  *a it h  God  our  heaven; v
Father,  and  with  Jesus  the  Mediator
of  the  new  covenant.  We  ought  to
be  operating  with  them  in  establishing
righteousness  throughout  the  earth,
iLor  nominally,  but  really ;  we  ought  to
be  laboring  in  conjunction  with  thriL
in  saving  the  living,  not  to  make  it  a
haidship  and  a  trouble  and  a  toil ;
something  that  we  can  hardly  endure
to  go  through  j  but  on  the  contrary,
feeling  it  an  honor  to  be  associated
with  the  interests  of  God  and  bearers
of  the  message  of  life  and  solvation,


NO  MAN  CAN  DIRECT  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  ETC,


305


and  also  seeking  for  wisdom,  and  in-
telligence, and  power,  and  revelation
from  God  to  carry  oat  his  will  and
designs,  and  to  accomplish  his  par

posn*  upon  the  earth,  ;  r

WiH  his  purposes  be  accomplish-
ed ?  They  will  Will  rhe  Gospel
grow,  spread  and  increase?  I  tell
yon,  in  the  name  of  Israel's  God,  it
will.  Will  the  rime  come  when  every
fictitious  thing  vill  he  renewed,  when
light  and  truth  shall  prevail,  and
when  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  will
became  the  kingdoms  of  oar  God  and
his  Christ?  I  tell  vou  it  will,  and
God  will  hasten  it  in  bis  time.  And
thin  priest1  mod  and  this  people  are  fu
be  the  instruments,  in  the  hands  of
God,  in  connection  with  the  priest-
hood who  have  gone  before,  who  are
now  operating  in  their  sphere,  as  we
are  in  our  s.  Tbe  Lord  hath  so  or-
dained, says  the  Apostle,  "  that  they,
(referring  to  the  d  *ad)  without  m
should  not  be  made  perfect;"  neither
can  we  without  them  be  made  perfect.
There  needs  to  be  a  welding  and  uni-
ting together,  that  in  all  of  our  doings
as  God's  servants  and  represent atives,
we  may  be  influenced  and  direct  el
from  above,  being  united  with  the
Gods  in  heaven  we  may  become  one
in  all  things  upon  the  earth,  and  af-
terwards one  in  the  heavens.  And
says  the  Lord,  "  If  ye  are  not  one,  ye
are  not  mine.'*  Everything  that
tends  to  divide  the  people,  as  you
heard  this  morning,  proceeds  from
beneath,  and  th  ose  that  are  engaged
in  it  are  the  emisaries  of  the  devil ;
for  as  he  is  the  fit  her  of  lies,  so  he  is
the  father  of  division,  strife  and  dis~
cord.  But  union,  peaca,  love,  bar-
many,  fellowship,  brotherhood  and
everything  honor  able,  noble  and  ex-
alting, proceeds  from  God  ;  these  are
the  principles  that  we  ought  to  seek
after  and  to  diifteminate  as  far  as  we
can  cvey  where  and  among  all  peoples.
And  theti  when  we  hate  done  that
No.  20.


work,  tumour  attention  to  the  build-
ing of  temples  and  minister  in  them
for  the  dead,  that  we  may  operate
with  the  fathers  in  the  interest  of
their  posterity,  helping  them  to  per-
form that  for  their  posterity  which
they  were  not  abl  *  to  do.

And  in  regard  to  the  world,  what
ouafht  our  let-lings  to  he  towards
them  ?  A  feeling  of  generosity ,  a
feeling  of  kindness,  a  fading  of  sym-
p*'by,  with  onr  hearts  full  of  charity,
I  ^tig-suffering  and  benevolence,  as
God  our  Father  has,  for  he  makes
his  sun  to  rise  on  th^  evil  ns  well  as-
the  good  ;  he  sends  his  rain  on  the
unjust  as  well  as  the  just.  And
while  we  abjure  tbe  evils,  the  cor-
ruptions, the  fraud  and  iniquity,  tha
b*s  'iviousn^ss  and  the  lyings  and
a  bom  i  nations  thnt  exist  in  the  world,
whenever  we  see  an  honorable  prin-
ciple, a^tesiiv  to  do  right,  whenever
we  see  an  opening  to  promote  the
happiness  of  any  of  these  people,  or
to  reclaim  the  wanderer,  it  is  out
duty  to  do  it,  as  saviors  on  Mouur
Zion  t > Jpj||fe^i^ilt. i ^

Will  they  have  trouble?  Yes,
'WIH  there  be  tribulation?  Yes,
W  ill  nation  be  arrayed  agaiust  na*
tion  ?  Yes.  Will  thrones  be  cast
down  and  empires  destroyed  ?  Yea.
Will  there  be  war,  and  carnage,  and
bloodshed  ?  Yes.  But  these  things
are  with  the  people  arid  with  God.
H  is  not  for  us  ;  we  have  a  mission
to  perform,  and  that  is  to  preach
the  Gospel  and  introduce  coirect
principles,  to  unfold  the  laws  of  God
as  men  are  prepared  to  receive  them,
to  build  up  his  Zion  upon  the  earth,
and  to  prepare  a  people  for  the  time
when  the  bursting  heavens  will  rave  d
the  Son  of  God,  14  and  when  every
creature  on  the  earth  and  ander  the
earth  will  be  heard  to  say,  blessing
and  glory,  and  honor,  and  pmver,
and  might,  and  majesty,  and  domi-
nion be  ascribed  to  him  that  sits
1  Vol.  XIX.


306


JOURNAL  OF  DISCuUKSKS


upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb
forever."

Will  this  people  grow  and  increase?
Yes,  And  the  time  will  come — it  is
not  now,  we  are  not  prepared  for  it
— when calamity and  trouble  and

tf

bloodshed,  confusion  and  strife  will
spread  anion g  all  the  nations  of  the
earth.  The  time  will  come,  and  is
not  far  distant,  when  those  who  will
not  take  up  the  sword  to  fight  apainst
their  neighbors,  will  have  to  flee  to
Zion  for  safety.  That  was  true  some
time  ago,  and  it  is  nearer  its  fulfil*
ment  b}f  a  great  many  years  than  a*
the  time  it  whs  first  uttered.

What  ore  we  here  for  ?  To  build
up  or  aggrandize  ourselves  ?  No,
but  to  build  up  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth,  and
to  spread  the  light  of  truth  among
the  nations*  That  is  our  duty,  and
also  to  pray  for  the  revelations  of
Uod,  that  the  Spirit  aud  power  of
God  may  rest  upon  us,  that  we  may
comprehend  correct  principles  and
understand  the  laws  of  life,  to  guide
and  guard  and  protect  the  ship  Zion
from  among  th#  rocks  and  shoals
and  troubles  that  will  sooner  or  later
overcome  this  nation,  and  other  na-
tions, and  prepare  ourselves  for  the
events  that  are  to  come-  We  ought
to  be  men  of  honor,  of  honesty,  ot
integrity,  having  our  eyes  single  to
the  glory  of  God,  That  ia  the  duty
of  these  Apostles,  and  not  to  act  witia
a  view  for  their  own  Aggrandizement,
and  for  the  obtainment  of  filthy
lucre,  or  anything  else  pertaining  to
tkis  world.  We  brought  nothing
into  this  world,  we  can  take  nothing
-eut  It  is  for  us  to  operate  for  God,
and  in  the  interests  of  his  Church
and  kingdom.

And  what  of  these  other  brethren,
the  High  Priests?  They  have  a
mission  to  perform,  and  that  is  to
make  themselves  acquainted  with  the
laws,  doctrines,  ordinances  and  gov-


ernment of  the  Church  of  God  upon
the  earth,  that  they  may  be  pre-
pared, when  called  upon,  to  fulfil  the
duties  and  responsibilities  devolving
upon  them.  I  will  here  read  part  of
a  revelation  which  indicates  the  na-
ture of  the^e  duties.  '*  And  again  I
give  unto  you,  Don  C.  Smith,  to  be
a  President  over  a  Quorum  of  High
Priests,  which  ordinance  is  instituted
for  the  purpose  of  qualifying  those
who  shall  be  appointed  standing  Pre-
sidents over  the  different  stakes
scattered  abroad,"  Hear  it,  O  ye
High  Priests !  This  is  the  prominent
duty  devolving  upon  you.  The
position  yoo  occupy  is  a  sort  of  a
normal  school,  if  you  please,  to  pre-
pare those  who  are  in  it  and  are
taught  in  it,  that  when  t^ey  shall  be
called  to  hold  official  places  in  the
various  stakes  of  Zion,  they  may  be
prepared  to  magnify  them.  How
was  it  when  we  were  engaged  orga-
nizing these  stakes,  were  these  bre-
thren prepared  ?  No,  many  of  them
were  not  by  any  means.  One  MM
engaged  on  his  farm,  another  was
tied  up  in  his  merchandising,  ano-
ther had  bought  five  yoke  of  oxen
and  had  to  prove  them,  and  another
had  married  a  wife  and  he  could  not
come.  And  we,  therefore,  had  to  go
outside  of  the  High  Priests,  whose
legitimate  business  it  was  to  occupy
these  positions,  and  call  other  men
and  ordain  them  High  Priests,  and
set  them  apart  to  preside  in  these
stakes,  as  Presidents  and  Bishops
and  Councilors,  having  to  take  them
from  among  the  Seventies'  and  El-
der s  Quorums,  because  the  High
Priests  wer«  not  prepared  to  magnify
Lhair  legitimate  calling;  whereas,  if
they  had  been  doing  their  duty,  living
their  religion,  and  meeting  together
in  prayer,  and  examining  the  dao-
triue  ot  Christ,  instead  of  being  ena
gaged  almost  exclusively  in  many  of
these  other  matters,  they  would  bar


Nu  MAN  CAN  DIKECT  THE  KLXGUUM  UF  GOD,  ETC.


been  prepared  to  step  forward  and
magnify  their  calling.  There  are
many  other  stakes  to  be  organized.
Prepare  yourselves,  yon  High  Priests,
for  the  duties  and  responsibilities
that  may  devolve  upon  you,  that  the
Church  of  God  may  be  strengthened
in  all  its  parts,  and  erery  man  in  hit
place,  all  prepared  to  magnify  their
calling.

Then,  again,  there  are  seventies  ;
I  think  there  are  some  seventy-
six  quorums  of  seventies*  Does  their
duty  consist  merely  in  making  their
own  plans  and  calculations,  such  as
to  go  on  a  farm  and  lire  there  all  their
life  time,  attending  to  their  own  in-
dividual affairs,  or  pursue  any  other
avocation  without  considering  the
obligations  they  are  under  by  virtue
of  their  Priesthood,  and  calling  ?  f
tell  you  nay.  We  have  something
else  to  do.  I  read  in  the  revelation
touching  this  matter,  when  the  sev-
enties were  ordained,  <c  they  were
to  ordain  more  seventies  until  there
should  be  seven  times  seventy,  if  the
labor  in  the  vineyard  required  it."
They  were  to  do  this  if  the  labor  in
the  vineyard  required  it"  In  whose
vineyard  ?  Tlieir  orchards  and
farms  ?  I  do  not  read  it  so.  Does
this  refer  to  their  merchandizing  ?
It  does  not  so  read.  In  looking  after
their  own  affairs  or  emoluments  ?
That  is  not  what  I  read  ;  but  for  the
labor  of  the  vineyard.  Whose  vine-
yard, then  ?  The  vineyard  of  the
Lord.  But  it  seems  that  a  great
many  of  the  Seventies  have  no  more
idea  of  going  into  the  vineyard  of
the  Lord,  than  if  they  held  no  such
Priesthood  or  calling;  they  do  not
Bsera  to  comprehend  their  duties,  nor
their  responsibilities.  Hear  it,  0  ye
Seventies !  you  are  called  and  set
apart  by  the  Priesthood,  to  act
under  the  direction  of  the  Twelve,
to  go  forth  as  His  messengers  to  the
nations  of  the  earth. Do  you  believe


30  7

it  ?  This  is  your  calling.  Prepare
yourselves  for  it.  I  do  not  want
Elders  coming  to  me,  as  some  have
been  "doing,  after  having  been  called
upon  missions  saying,  I  pray  thee
have  me  excused.  And  I  call  upon
the  first  President  of  the  Seventies
to  instruct  the  various  Presidents  of
Seventies,  and  they  in  tum  the  mem-
bers of  their  several  quorums,  in  re-
gard to  their  duties ;  and  to  ^ive
themselves  so  that  the  spirit  of  the
living  God  may  rest  down  upon  them,
that  they  may  indeed  be  qualified  to
teach  their  brethren  what  their  duties
are,  that  they  may  prepare  themselves
to  magnify  them.  Instead,  therefore,
of  every  one  seeking  his  own  indi-
vidual gain  from  his  own  quarter,  let
every  man  feel  that  he  is  a  servant
of  the  living  God,  a  messenger  to  the
nations  of  the  earth,  and  that  when
the  Lord  calls  upon  him,  through  the
proper  authority,  to  do  a  certain  work,
he  must  obey,  and  that  readily  and
willingly  !  These  are  the  duties  and
responsibilities  that  devolve  upo»
you,  my  brethren  of  the  Seventies.

And  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Elders
also  to  magnify  their  callings ;  to
feel  after  God  and  to  seek  instruction
from  Him,  and  to  magnify  their
calling  and  Priesthood  at  home  or
abroad,  being  governed  by  the  Holy
Priesthood,  in  regard  to  their  duties,
that  they  may  be  acceptable  to  the
Lord,  and  magnify  their  callings  with
all  diligence  and  fidelity,  and  then  it
is  the  duty  of  the  Presidents  of  Stakes
to  look  after  the  interest  and  welfare
of  their  own  people  under  their  Pre-
sidency, not  in  a  formal  manner,  but  as
interested  in  their  welfare,  having  a
lively  desire  to  benefit  aud  bnild
them  up,  both  spiritually  and  tempo-
rally, and  perfect  them  in  righteous-
ness, purging  out  when  necessary  the
ungodly,  lifting  up  and  exalting  the
poor,  and  blessing  and  benefiting
everybody  according  to  the  principles


30*


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


of  righteousness  and  truth,  guarding
their  virtue  and  their  houor,  and  see
that  men  are  honorable,  that  they
regard  their  word  of  more  value  than
their  bond,  that  all  people  may  rely
on  them  ;  men  who,  in  the  language
of  the  Prophet,  will  swerve  to  their
owu  hurt  and  change  not,  and  who
will  do  that  which  is  right  and  equi-
table before  God, It  is  their  duty,
and  the  duty  of  the  Bishops  and  also
that  of  the  High  Priests  and  Seven-
ties  and  Elders  operating  with  them,
to  louk  af:er  the  poor  and  see  that
they  ara  provided  for. Do  not  let
us  h»v«  anybody  crying  for  bread,
or  suffering  for  the  want  of  employ-
ment Let  us  furnish  employment
for  all,  tiiv^de  up  our  farms  and  plan
and  devise  liberally  that  all  who  need
work,  and  want  to  be  employed,  may
Bud  labor, And  I  now  call  upon  the
Presidents  of Stakes  throughout
Zion  to  give  this  matter  their  serious
and  earnest  attention, We  have
land  in  abundance,  water  in  abund-
ance, and  means  in  abundance  ;  let
ui  utilise  them  for  the  common  weal.
Talk  about  financiering!  Financier
for  the  poor,  for  the  working  man,
who  requires  labor  and  is  willing  to
do  it,  and  act  in  the  interest  of  the
community,  for  the  welfare  of  Zion,
and  in  the  building  up  of  the  king-
dom of  God  upon  the  earth,  This
is  your  calling;  it  is  not  to  build  up
yourselves,  but  to  build  up  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  God ;  and  gee  that
there  is  no  cause  for  complaining  in
all  your  villages  and  cities  and  neigh*
bur  hoods, Let  us  take  hold  together
for  the  accomplishment  uf  thia  o-  jeet,
and  pia)  God  to  give  us  wisdom  to
carry  it  out,  and  he  will  pour  upon
us  blessings  that  there  will  not  be
room  enough  to  con  tain.

Again,  we  have  what  is  called  a
Perpetual  Emigration  Fund,  I  wish
to  draw  the  attention,  not  only  of  the
Presidents  of  Stakes  but  ot  the


Bishops  of  the  various  wards,  and  of
the  whole  people,  to  the  responsibili-
ties that  devolve  upon  us  in  relation
to  this  matter.  We  seeun  to  be
dwindling  down  in  some  of  these
matters,  and  I  am  sorry  to  say  that
there  is  a  preat  lack  of  that  integrity
and  interest  that  we  would  like  to  see
manifested  among  onr  brethren.
There  are  those  here  whn  have  as*
slated  with  their  means  to  the  amount
of  upwards  of  a  million  dollars,
which  is  unpaid  by  those  who  re-
ceived the  benefit  ot  it.  It  was  the
calculation  that  this  means  should  be
used  to  bring  those  of  our  brethren
to  this  land,  who  needed  and  w^re
worthy  of  this  assistance,  and  when
you  who  were  thus  assisted  were  in
distant  lands  praying  and  wishing
to  be  gathered  to  Zion,  this  help
came  to  you  and  you  were  brought
here;  and  instead  of  paying  thia
your  honest  debt,  you  go  to  work  and
build  up  yourselves,  without  meeting
your  obligations,  what  is  the  result  ?
Tbcse  of  your  brethren  who  still  re*
main,  who  are  just  as  worthy  as  yoa
to  be  gathered  to  Zion,  are  left  to  cry
for  assistance,  I  am  daily  in  receipt
of  letters  from  diflerent  parts  of  the
earth,  asking  to  be  thus  assisted
pleading:  "we  want  to  gather  with
the  Saints,  can't  you  help  us  ?"  Yes,
we  can  if  you  who  owe  the  Fund  will
pay  your  honest  debts,  we  can  then
meet  all  these  requirements.  And  I
call  upon  the  Presidents  of  StakeiJ
and  upon  the  Bishops  to  look  after
these  things,  and  see  that  these  obli-
gations are  met,  that  the  poor  from
abroad  may  not  cry  in  vaiti;  but  that
we  may  help  them,  and  then  they
return  the  amount  advanced  to  then
to  assist  others,  and  thus  keep  the
work  rolling  in  the  same  direction.
And  if  this  duty  is  not  performed,
how  can  we  expect  the  bltssing  of
God  to  rest  upon  us  ?

We  are  engaged  quite  extensively


NO  MAN  CAN  DIRECT  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  ETC*


309


in  the  erection  of  Temples*  We  are
building  one  here,  and  also  one  in
Cache  Valley,  and  another  in  San-
pete, and  if  we  had  time,  and  it  was
considered  advisable,  we  could  read  the
report  read  setting  forth  the  receipts
and  disbursements  of  these  places;
and  I  presume  we  shall,  before  the
Conference  adjourns,  Suffice  it  to
say,  with  all  our  backwardness  in
seme  other  things,  there  are  a  great
many  of  the  Latter  -  day  Saints  who
are  doing  all  they  can  in  every  lauda-
ble enterprise.  I  presume  at  the
present  time  there  is  not  less  than
500  men  engaged  in  rearing  the  walls
of  these  Tern  pi  eg.  And  men  an
taking  hold  of  it  with  energy,  doing
all  they  oan  in  many  instances,  but
not  in  all  by  a  great  deal.

Then  in  regard  to  our  Tithing  ope-
rations, Bishop  Hunter  informs  me
that  many  of  the  people  are  very
negligent  in  regard  to  this  matter.
Now,  I  would  say  in  behalf  of  the
people,  that  perhaps  there  may  be  a
partial  excuse  for  some  of  these
things.  We  have  had  a  very  strin-
gent time  for  a  number  of  years  past,
a  financial  crisis  hag  prevailed  in  the
eastern  States  for  some  years  now,
and  almost  every  paper  reports  the
failure  of  mercantile  and  business
institutions — at  the  failure  of  one
firm  after  another;  and  we  have  been
subject,  more  or  less,  to  these  de-
pressions. The  fact  also  must  be
considered  that  great  exertions  have
been  made  in  the  building  of  the
St,  George  Temple,  and  also  the  three
Temples  now  under  way,  which  have
already  exhausted  considerable  means
Ihrnished  chiefly  by  the  peopie  resid-
ing in  those  Temple  districts.  I  must
give  the  people  credit  for  their  zeal
and  energy  in  this  direction,  which
we  must  all  acknowledge  is  very  com-
mendable and  praiseworthy.  And,
perhaps,  in  the  performance  of  this
labor  many  have  done  the  best  they


could,  and  possibly  circumstances
have  so  overruled  that  they  find
themselves  hardly  able  to  meet  their
Tithing,  for  as  a  rule  it  is  those  who
take  delight  in  observing  the  law  of
Tithing  that  subscribe  to  these  other
calls*  We  do  not  wish  to  crowd  or
press  upon  the  people;  bat  rather
let  ns  take  things  easily  and  delibe-
rately, seeking  always  to  break  off
the  yoke  of  him  that  is  bound,  letting
the  oppressor  go  free.  And  let  our
sympathies  be  extended  towards  the
widow  and  the  orphan  :  and  while
we  are  building  Temples,  paying  our
Tithes  and  offerings,  and  doing  the
best  we  can  before  God  and  man,  we
will  let  that  go  for  the  present,  and
when  we  get  into  more  favorable
circumstances  we  will  do  better.  At
any  rate,  we  will  keep  doing  with  a
long  pull  and  a  strong  pull,  and  a  pull
altogether,  as  one  in  the  interests  of
all  Israel.  But  we  must  not  forget
our  duties  to  the  Lord,

I  would  say  in  this  connection  that
there  are  three  of  the  Twelve  ap-
pointed to  superintend  the  erection
of  the*e  edifices  in  these  outside
districts,  and  then  there  are  those
residing  here  attending  to  home
affairs.  And  we  are  seeking  to  act
in  concert  and  do  the  very  best  wa
can.  Some  people  have  an  idea  that
these  Temples  ought  to  be  built  from
the  proceeds  of  the  Tithing  ;  I  do  not
object  to  it  in  the  least,  providing
you  will  only  pay  your  Tithing.  Bat
we  cannot  build  Temples  with  some*
tiling  that  exists  only  in  name.  Yon
deal  honestly  with  the  Lord,  handing
over  in  due  season  that  which  belonga
to  his  storehouse,  and  then  we  will
show  you  whether  we  can  not  build
Temples,  as  well  as  do  everything
else  that  may  be  required  with  it.  In
the  mean  time,  we  have  £pt  to  do  the
best  we  can  in  these  matters ;  and  as
we  are  personally  interested  in  thesa
things,  as  well  as  our  brethren,  the


310


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


departed  detd  who  have  gone  before  1
ns,  and  who  depend  upon  this  being
done,  we  feel  a  ttroig  desire  to  carry
oo t  these  projects ;  and  this  feeling,
I  mm  happy  to  say,  exists  through
oat  all  Israel,

We  want  also  to  be  alive  in  the
cause  of  education,  We  are  com-
manded of  the  Lord  to  obtain  know-
ledge, both  by  study  and  by  faith,
seeking  it  out  of  the  beat  books.
Aid  it  becomes  as  to  teach  our  chil-
dren, and  afford  them  instruction  in
every  branch  of  education  calculated
to  promote  their  welfare,  leaving
those  false  acquirements  which  tend
to  infidelity,  ind  to  lead  away  the
mind  and  affection  from  the  things
of  God,  We  want  to  compile  the
intelligence  and  literacy  of  this  peo-
ple in  book-form,  as  well  as  in  teach-
ing and  preaching;  adopting  all  the
good  and  useful  book*  we  can  obtain  ;
and  what  we  need  and  cannot  obtain,
make  them.  And  instead  of  doing
as  many  of  the  world  do,  take  the
works  of  God,  to  try  to  prove  that
there  is  no  God ;  we  want  to  prove
by  God's  works  that  he  does  exist,
that  he  lives  and  rules  and  holds  us,
as  it  were,  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand.
For  it  is  very  unfair  for  man  to  take
the  works  of  God  to  try  to  prove  that
there  is  no  God.  Bat  then  it  is  only
the  fool  that  has  said  in  his  heart,
there  is  no  God.  I  would  like  to
talk  upon  this  subject  if  time  would
permit.

I  am  pleased  to  see  the  exertions
made  by  the  young  men's  and  young
women's  mutual  improvement  asso-
ciations, to  benefit  and  bless  the
rising  generation  of  our  people.  -And
I  am  also  pleased  to  witness  the  de-
gree of  intelligence  and  studiousness
manifested  by  our  young  people;  it  is
creditable  and  praiseworthy.  We
want  to  lead  them  on  and  encourage
them  in  the  study  of  correct  princi-
ples, so  that  when  the  responsibility


of  bearing  off  the  Church  and  King-
dom of  God  shall  pass  fr^m  us  10
them,  they  may  be  prepared  for  it,
and  carry  on  the  work  to  a  glorious
and  triumphant  consummation.  And
that  we  may  stand  in  regard  to  edu-
cation and  literacy,  the  sciences,  the
arts  and  intelligence  of  every  kindr
as  high  above  the  nations  of  the
earth,  as  we  do  to-day  in  regard  to
religious  matters.

And  before  closing  I  would  refer
briefly  to  the  ladies'  relief  society.
We  are  told  that,  "  the  man  is  not
without  the  woman,  nor  the  woman
« ithout  the  man  in  the  Lord."  She
is  spoken  of  as  a  helpmeet  to  her
husband,  I  remember  the  organiza-
tion of  the  first  Belief  Society  in
Nauvoo,  by  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith ;  to-day  we  find  them  spread-
ing all  ever  the  land,  and  the  benefits
of  their  labors  are  widely  realized.
Our  sisters  are  doing  a  noble  and
commendable  work  in  writing  and
publishing,  in  visiting  the  sick  and
needy,  and  ministering  to  their  wants,
and  showing  kindness  and  benevo-
lence towards  the  Buffering  and  dis-
tressed, and  also  advocating  princi-
ples that  are  honorable  aad  praise-
worthy before  God  and  man,  calculated
to  elevate  and  bless  their  sex.  And
I  say  to  the  sisters,  God  bless  you  in
your  labors  of  love,  and  in  your  en-
terprise, continue  to  press  forward  im
your  good  work,  and  the  Lord  will
bless  you  and  your  posterity  after
you  ;  for  you  are  mothers  in  Israel
who  are  raising  up  kings  and  priests
unto  the  Moat  High  God.  .  See  that
your  children  are  taught  aright,  and
that  they  grow  up  in  virtue  and  pu-
|  rity  before  the  Lord,  Teach  them
good  principles,  never  mind  so  much
about  the  fashions;  but  let  economy,,
industry,  charity,  kindness  and  virtoe
be  early  impressed  upon  their  minds,
and  try  to  love  your  sons  and  daugh-
ters, and  to  lead  them  in  the  piths  of  life.


1  should  like  to  speak  ef  our  Sun-
day Schools  and  other  institutions,
but  time  will  not  permit. I  have


talked  long  enough,  God  bless  you,
in  the  name  of  Jesua*  Amm.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,
Delivered  in  thk  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Oct,  7,  1867.


(Rejwrted  by  Darid  IV.  Evam.)


TKMPLES  IN'  ANCIKNT  AMERICA — THE  GOT>  OF  MANKIND  AN  IMPOSSIBLE
KUD — THE  TRUTH  IN  RKGARD  TO  HIM — MAN  IN  HIS  IMAGE— PR*
EXISTENCE — WHY  INFANTS  DIE — THE  REDEMPTION  BY  JESUS — PLURA-
LITY OF  GODS— THE  WORD  OF  THE  LORD  IS  TRUTH.


Never  having  had  the  opportunity
of  speaking  to  so  large  a  congrega-
tion as  the  present,  or  at  least  in  so
lar^e  a  house  as  the  one  in  which
we  are  now  assembled,  I  do  not  know
whether  I  shall  be  able  to  adapt  my
voice  so  as  to  make  the  congregation
hear  me.  I  know  the  object  of  corning
to  meeting  and  preaching  is  to  hear
and  to  be  edified  and  instructed  more
perfectly  in  the  in  the  things  pertain-
ing to  God  and  to  godliness,  and  in
our  duties  before  the  Lord.  When
I  look  upon  this  large  tabernacle,
w  hich  has  been  erected  here  in  these
high  regions  of  our  globe,  I  am  for-
cibly reminded  of  the  sayings  of  two
of  the  ancient  prophets,  Isaiah  and
Micah,  both  of  whom  have  spoken  of
an  event  that  was  to  take  place  in
the  latter  days.  I  will  quote  their
savings,  for  the  language  of  both  is
almost  identical.  '"It  shall  com*  to
pass  in  the  latter  days  that  the  moun-
tain of  the  House  of  the  Lord  shall
be  established  in  the  tops  of  the


mountains."  I  have  often  wondered
when  I  have  read  this  portion  of
Scripture,  what  was  meant  by  the
meant  by  the  mountain  of  the  house
of  the  Lord  being  erected,  or  estab-
lished, in  the  tops  of  the  mountains.
The  mountain  of  the  house  of  the
Lord  is  something,  it  seems,  that  God
himself  would  establish  in  the  moun-
tains. When  I  entered  this  Territory
in  August  last,  on  my  return  from
my  last  mission,  I  beheld  from  the
mouth  of  Parleys  Canon  the  top  of
this  building  very  prominent.  It
seem e* I  to  rear  itself  up  above  the
surrounding  buildings,  and  it  was
easily  to  be  seen.  It  looked  very
much  like  an  artificial  mountain
erected  here,  or  like  some  of  those
mounds  that  we  see  down  on  the
Missouri  River,  that  were  made  by
the  ancient  inhabitants  of  our  coun-
try, only  it  is  much  larger  and  higher
than  some  of  them.  Whether  this
is  really  what  the  prophet  in  ancient
days  meant,  it  is  not  for  me  to  say.


v  1 2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


I  only  say  tliat  the  shape  of  this
buildings  reminds  me,  or  suggests  to
me  what  was  prophesied  anciently;
but  whether  or  not  it  is  the  fulfilment
of  that  prophecy  1  do  not  know.

I  will  take  this  opportunity  to
ezpress  my  gratitude  and  feelings  of
thanksgiving  to  the  Almighty,  that
ho  has  enabled  this  people  to  erect
unto  him  so  large  a  building  in  whieh
they  can  assemble  to  worship  his
great  and  holy  name.  The  Lord,  in
ancient  days,  when  lie  constructed
temples  and  tabernacles,  did  honor
them  by  hid  presence.  No  doubt  on
some  occasions  his  presence  was
made  more  manifest  than  on  others.
Oftentimes  we  read  that  the  power
and  the  glory  of  God,  as  manifested
in  his  tabernacles  and  temples  were
so  conspicuous  that  the  people  could
behold  them  with  their  natural  eves,
I  do  not  say  that  this  was  the  case
under  all  circumstances,  and  in  all
houses  that  were  built  unto  the  name
of  the  Lord.  Many  temples  and
houses  were  built  on  the  American
continent  by  the  remnant  of  the
House  of  Israel,  to  whom  this  land
was  given.  It  is  not  recorded  whether
the  Lord  manifested  himself  in  all
these  houses  or  not;  but  it  is  recorded
that  at  the  temple  which  was  built
in  the  land  Bountiful,  in  the  northern
part  of  South  America,  the  Son  of
God,  himself,  did  show  forth  his
power  and  his  glory  to  a  certain  con-
gregation assembled  in  and  around
about  the  temple*  Jesus,  after  his
resurrect io 1 1  from  the  dead,  was  sent
by  his  Father  from  the  heavens  to
the  American  continent,  to  a  congre-
gation of  two  thousand  and  five  hun-
dred souls,  men,  women  and  children,
who  where  assembled  together  for
the  purpose  of  worshipping  God  the
Father  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Con-
sequently God  did  respect  this  temple
built  on  the  American  continent,  as
well  as  the  great  temple  built  by


Solomon  in  the  days  of  old.  When
Solomon  had  built  the  temple,  he
spread  forth  his  hands  to  the  heavens,
and  ] grayed  to  the  Father,  in  the  pre-
sence  of  the  congregation  of  Israel
that  was  assembled,  and  the  spirit  of
the  Lord  was  poured  out  in  such  a
wonderful  manner  that  the  people,
through  their  faith,  beheld  the  power
and  the  glory  of  God  as  they  were
manifested  in  that  temple.  By  this
the  people  knew  that  God  respected
his  own  house.  So  it  was  in  the
days  of  Moses.  AY  hen  they  journeyed
in  the  wilderness,  God  commanded
the  Children  of  Israel  to  build  a
tabernacle.  He  gave  them  a  pattern
thereof.  In  that  tabernacle  the  Lord
showed  forth  his  power  among  Israel.
It  became  visible  not  only  on  the  in-
side, but  on  the  outside  the  glory  of
(  tod  was  made  manifest  and  rested
upon  it.  By  this  the  Children  of  Is-
rael knew  that  God  was  near  unto
them.  They  not  only  believed,  U::
the  testimony  manifested  before  their
eyes  gave  them  a  knowledge  that
God  was  in  the  midst  of  their  camp;
although  through  their  wickedness,
unbelief,  and  darkness  of  mind  God
withdrew  his  immediate  presence
from  the  midst  of  the  congregation,
anrl  Moses  only  was  permitted  to  see
the  Lord  and  talk  to  him  face  to
face,  yet  the  display  of  God's  power
and  glory  was  so  great  that  the  Chil-
dren of  Israel  knew  that  God  was
near  them.

The  question  may  arise.  Will  there
be  a  time  again  when  the  glory  of
the  Lord  will  l)e  manifestly  visible  to
and  hi«  voice  heard  by  his  people  ?
I  answer,  yes.  God  has  promised
this  in  the*  last  days.  There  is  no
doubt,  as  was  said  yesterday  by
Brother  Kimball,  that  heavenly  mes-
sengers hover  around  the  congrega-
tion of  the  Saints  here  assembled',
I  have  no  doubt  of  this  in  my  own
mind,  thought  I  have  not  seen  them


TEMPLES  IN  ANCIENT  AMERICA,  ETC,


SI  3


and  you  may  not  have  seen  them;  yet
that  God  who  has  seen  your  labors
and  diligence  in  building  a  house  to
his  name,  has  no  doubt  sent  heavenly
messengers  to  hover  around  us,  to
l>lu ft'  oil1  the  powers  of  darkness,  that
seek  to  darken  the  minds  of  the  peo-
ple, and  to  close  their  hearts  against
understanding.  The  time  will  come
when  the  faith  of  this  people,  the
pure  in  heart,  will  be  sufficiently
great  that  when  they  build  a  house  to
the -name  of  the  Lord,  and  do  not
suffer  any  unclean  thing  to  enter
therein,  that  the  Lord  will  come  and
grace  it  by  his  presence,  as  well  as  by
the  presence  of  his  angels.  That  will
be  the  time  when  the  pure  in  heart,
who  enter  into  the  house  of  God,
will  ho  hold  his  face.  0!  what  a  grand,
glorious,  happy  privilege  that  will  be
to  the  sous  and  daughters  of  the  Most
High,  to  behold  the  face  of  him  who
created  them,  the  Father  of  their
spirits,  who  created  them  before  the
foundation  of  the  world.  How  great
and  glorious  a  privilege  for  the  sons
and  daughters  of  God  who  are  now
shut  out  from  his  presence!  For  this
cause  the  people  of  God  are  com-
manded at  all  times  to  build  a  house
to  his  name,  that  he  may  reveal  those
ordinances  devise*  1  by  him  for  the
salvation  of  the  children  before  the
world  were  laid,

[  know  there  are  some  people  who
do  not  believe  God  has  a  face  like
unto  man,  or  in  other  words  that  we
are  in  his  image  and  likeness.  There
has  been  a  great  variety  of  views
among  the  inhabitants  of  our  globe
in  regard  to  the  being  or  beings  whom
they  have  worshipped  and  called  God,
Some  have  believed  that  he  was  an
immaterial  being.  Some  have  he>
Key*  I  that  be  had  no  properties,  per-
fection or  qualities  in  common  with
any  other  substance  in  nature;  that
he  Wits  entirely  separated  from  all
materia]  nature. This  seems  to  be


the  view  of  the  great  mass  of  the
Christian  world  at  the  present  day.
Some  two  hundred  millions  oiP  the
inhabitants  of  our  globe  consider
that  God  is  something  altogether  in-
definable, incomprehensible,  a  persm,
and  yet  has  no  parts;  consisting  of
three  persons,  Father,  Son  and  Holy
Ghost,  and  yet  no  part  of  these  per-
sons. That  is  a  horrible  idea  in  my
mind,  Mv  mind  is  so  constructed
that,  with  all  my  reading  and  medi-
|  tation,  I  never  could  conceive  of  a
being  of  that  description,  and  yet  it
is  incorporated  in  the  articles  of  the
Church  of  Fa i gland,  also  in  the  Me-
thodist discipline,  and  is  in  accor-
dance with  the  views  of  inmost  all
the  Christian  world  at  the  present
day.  "God  consists,1'  say  they  in
their  creeds,  of  three  persons  without
body  parts  or  passions/1  I  do  not
wish  to  dwell  upon  this  long;  it  is
so  inconsistent,  so  very  absurd,  so
contrary  to  all  intelligence,  reason
and  revelation  that  I  am  willing  to
throw  it  by  without  contemplating
it  for  any  length  of  time*  1  merely
mention  it  to  call  to  your  mind  the
inconsistencies  of  the  religious  world
who  pro! ess  Christianity.  One  of
these  persons,  called  the  Son,  with-
out body  and  without  part*,  was  ac-
tually crucified,  died  and  was  buried
in  ii  tomb,  aud  the  third  day  he  rose
again,  and  with  his  body  ascended
into  heaven,  when  he  did  not  possess
a  body.  If  anybody  can  believe  such
nonsense,  they  are  perfectly  welcome
to  it,  only  keep  it  away  from  me,  I
want  nothing  to  do  with  it,  1  never
expect  to  worship  such  a  being  here
on  earth  or  throughout  all  the  future
ages  of  eternity.  1  have  no  reverence
whatever  for  such  a  being,  for  1  do
not  believe  that  such  a  one  ever  exi-
sted only  in  the  hallucinations  of  dis-
ordered minds.

Perhaps the  strangers  who  are
present,  if  any  there  be,  may  be  led


■


3H  JOURNAL  OF

to  inquire  what  kind  of  a  being  do
the  Latter-day  Saints  worship?  Let
me  reply  according  to  my  understand-
ing* I  believe  that  God — I  mean
God  the  Father  is  a  material  personal
being;  that  he  has  a  body  and  a  spi-
rit united  together;  that  his  spirit
within  his  body  is  material;  that  he
is  a  personage  just  as  much  as  every
man  in  this  congregation  is  a  person-
age; and  let  me  go  still  further  and
bay  that  he  is  a  personage  of  flesh
and  of  bones.  Perhaps  that  may
shock  the  ideas  of  some  of  the  out-
siders and  they  may  think  that  to
get  over  their  immaterial  god,  with-
out  body  or  parts,  we  have  gone  to
the  other  extreme.  Well,  whether
it  is  to  the  other  extreme  or  not,  I
wish  to  state  to  you  my  views,  and
I  think  they  correspond  with  the
views  of  the  of  the  servants  of  God.

God  is  a  being,  then,  who  has  a
tabernacle  of  flesh  and  bones  in  which
his  spirit  dwells;  and  this  flesh,  bones
and  spirit  are  material.  Strangers
may  be  anxious  to  know  something
more  about  this  personal  being  whom
we  call  God  the  Father*  We  are
told  that  in  the  beginning  man  was
created  in  the  image  of  God,  and  we
are  also  told  the  Jesus  the  iSon  of
God,  was  the  express  image  of  His
Father.  The  doctrine  that  man,  in
his  form  and  shape  is  in  the  linage
of  God,  may  be  or  may  seem  some-
thing new  and  strange  to  those  who
are  not  acquainted  with  the  principles
in  this  church.  But  why  should  not
men  resemble  ( iod  is  the  question,
seeing  that  we  are  his  offspring f
Would  you  expect  that  sons  and
daughters  of  this  world  would  be  like
a  horse  or  like  the  fowls  of  the  air  or
the  Hsh  of  the  seal  Or  would  you
expect  them  to  resemble  their  par-
ents, and  be  in  their  image  and  like-
ness? Do  we  not  see  in  the  animal
creation— of  which  the  human  spe-
cies is  said  to  be  a  part — a  likeness


DISCOURSES,

between  the  parent  and  the  offspring
certainly  we  do.  If  then  this  law  pre-
vails among  all  animated  beings  here
on  the  earth,  why  should  we  imagine
God  to  be  entirely  distinct  and  diffe-
rent from  his  own  sons  and  daugh-
ters? Why  not  believe  that  there  is
a  resemblance  between  them  and  him.
When  we  look  at  our  fellow  man  we
behold  him  erect  in  the  form  of  God.
To  be  sure  there  may  be  many  de-
formities among  men  and  women,
produced  in  many  instances,  perhaps,
by  wickedness,  disease  and  by  acci-
dent: but  in  the  general  outline  there
is  resemblance  among  all  the  human
species,  and  there  should  be  in  as
much  as  their  Father  and  God  is  in-
deed their  Father,  as  any  in  this  con-
gregation are  the  literal  fathers  of
their  children.  We,  who  compose
this  congregation,  are  all  one  family,
and  only  a  very  small  portion  of  the
family  of  our  Father  and  God,  But
when  did  he  be<'et  us?  I  answer  be-
fore  this  world  was  made;  not  our
flesh  and  bones,  but  that  being  cal-
led man  that  was  created  in  the
image  and  likeness  of  God  and  who
dwells  in  his  mortal  tabernacle,  That
being  is  the  offspring  of  God;  we  were
all  begotten  by  him  before  this  world
was  made.  We  then  dwelt  in  his
presence  and  could  behold  his  face  as
sons  and  fathers  here  on  earth  can
behold  each  other.  We  then  par-
took, in  a  measure,  of  his  glory,  and
were  acquainted  with  the  glory  and
power  of  his  kingdom.  We  were
present  with  him  in  the  grand  and
magnificent  work  of  creation,  and  we
saw  and  rejoiced  in  his  handiwork.
We  sang  praises  in  the  presence  of
our  Father  and  God;  before  we  had
tabernacles  of  flesh  and  bones.  We
then  assembled  ourselves  together
as  we  do  here  on  th*  earth ;  we  then
accompanied  our  Father  and  God  and
his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  on  the  grain  I
and  glorious  mission  of  the  formation


TEMPLES  EN  ANCIENT  AMERICA,  ETC,


315


of  the  world  we  now  inhabit  Did
we  know  anything  about  the  object
for  which  this  world  was  created?
Yes,  we  knew  that  it  was  created
expressly  for  us,  and  we  sang  and
rejoiced  over  it  as  much  as  the  people
of  God  now  rejoice,  when  they  erect
a  temple  or  tabernacle  to  his  name.
When  you  erect  a  tabernacle  to  the
Most  High,  you  expect  to  enter  at
times,  and  be  feasted  with  the  words
of  eternal  life,  and  to  partake  of  the
blessings  of  God  So  it  was  in  regard
to  the  creation  of  this  world.  We
were  there  and  I  think  all  this  gene-
ration among  all  nations,  kindreds,
tongues  and  people  wire  present
on  that  occasion.  Shall  I  limit  it  to
this  generation?  No;  I  believe  all
the  sons  and  daughters  of  God  who
had  proved  themselves  faithful  were
assembled  on  that  occasion.  J  do
not  include  in  this  number  the  one-
third  part  of  the  family  that  fell,  but
the  two-thirds  who  kept  the  law  of
of  their  first  estate  who  were  really
and  truly  accounted  the  sons  and
daughters  of  God,  the  thousands  and
millions  who  inhabit  this  globe  be-
sides the  generations  of  the  past  and
all  future  generations.  Think  of  this
and  try  to  conceive  in  your  heart  the
magnitude  of  the  great  army  of  the
sons  and  daughters  of  God  assembled
at  the  time  the  foundations  of  this
world  were  laid.

The  Lord  put  a  very  curious  ques-
tion to  the  old  patriarch,  Job,  on  a
certain  occasion.  Job  had  been
praising  up  the  works  of  G'«l,  and  sn
for  as  his  narrow  mind  would  pen  nit
him,  he  tried  to  magnify  the  great-
ness of  his  power;  but,  by  putting  a
few  questions  to  Job  the  Lord  showed
to  him  that  his  wisdom  and  know-
ledge were  but  foolishness  in  the  sight
of  his  creator.  Said  the  Lord,** Where
were  you,  Job,  when  I  laid  the  foun-
dation of  the  earth,  and  the  corner
stones  thereof? Where  were  you,


Job,  when  the  morning  stars  sang
together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God
shouted  for  joy]"  I  do  not  know
that  Job  understood  the  pre-existence
of  man,  it  might  not  have  been  reve-
aled to  him;  at  any  rate  lie  left  the
Lord  to  answer  the  question  on  the
subject,  knowing  that  lie  would  give
information  on  the  matter  that  he,
Job,  could  not  give.  If  Job  had
been  a  sectarian,  how  easily  he  could
havt  answered  this  question  !  44  Why,
Lord/'  Job  could  have  said,  tc  I  did
not  exist  then,  and  why  do  you  ask
me  such  a  question  T  But  Job  very
well  understood  that  there  must  be
something  in  the  pre-existence  of
man,  or  the  Lord  would  never  have
put  such  a  question  to  him.  The
very  question  itself  implied  the  pre-
existence  of  Job  at  the  time  the
foundations  of  the  earth  were  laid,
and  it  also  implied  a  knowledge  on
the  part  of  all  the  sous  of  God  of
the  objects  of  the  creations  of  this
world  ;  for  if  they  had  had  no  such
knowledge,  why  should  they  have
joined  together  in  singing  the  songs
of  heaven  on  account  of  it?  Well,
then,  we  have  come  to  the  point,
namely,  that  we  did  exist  in  the
image  and  likeness  of  God  before
the  foundations  of  the  world  were
laid,  and  this  is  what  is  meant  when
the  Lord  says  to  his  only  begotten
Son  on  the  sixth  day  of  oreatioa,
"Let  us  make  man  in  our  image
and  in  our  likeness,  and  give  him
dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,
over  the  fowls  of  the  air,  the  beasts
of  the  earth,  and  over  all  the  earth
to  subdue  it,"  and  so  forth.  So  God
creattd  man  male  and  female.  He
did  not  tell  us  all  the  particulars  of
the  creation — that  we  were  born
male  and  female  in  the  spirit  world,
and  so  on,  but  yet  there  are  many
sayings  which  indicate  that  such
was  the  fact.  For  instance,  in  the
books  of  Moses  ami  in  the  book*  of


3iO


JOUKNAL 0¥  DISCOURSES.


the  New  Testament  we  read  that
God  is  the  Father  of  till  our  spirits,
that  we  were  begotten  sons  and
daughters  unto  lu>d.  The  vision
given  iu  lH->2  to  our  Prophet,  Jo-
seph Smith,  shows  this  matter  more
clearly.  Llesides  stowing  the  vast
number  nt  worlds  that  the  Lord  had
created,  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  in  that
vision,  declares  that  all  the  inhabi-
tants of  nil  these  worlds  were  begot-
ten mm  in  and  daughters  unto  God*
The  Book  of  u  Mormon"  hears  tes-
timony to  the  same  great  doctrine,
Yuu  who  are  familiar  with  that  book
will  recollect  reading  in  the  book  of
Ether  how  that  the  brother  of  Jared
fell  to  the  earth  with  fear  when  he
saw  tin;  finger  of  the  Lord,  after  the
veil  fell  from  his  natural  eyes*  And
the  Lord  spoke  to  him,  saying,
*k  Why  bast,  thou  fallen  ?"  Then
the  brother  of  dared  answered,  "I
saw  the  finger  of  the  Lord,  and  I
knew  not  that  the  Lord  bad  tlesli
and  bones,"  It  did  resemble  flesh
aud  bone,  but  ho?  doubtless,  thought
it  was  so  in  reality,  whereas  it  was
the  body  of  his  Spirit.  Then  said
the  Lord,  "  I  am  he  who  was  pre-
pared frum  the  foundation  of  the
world  to  redeem  my  people ;  I  ana
Jesus  Christ;  I  am  the  Father  and
the  Son,  and  the  body  which  thou
now  beholdest  is  the  body  of  my
•pirit.  Seesfc  thon  uot  that  thou  art
created  after  the  body  of  my  spirit,
and  all  men,"  says  Jesus  to  the
brother  of  Jared,  <(  have  I  created
In  the  beginning  after  the  image  of


Tin


13,


the  body  of  ray  spirit/'
believe,  is  the  only  passage  in  the
Book  of  "  Moraacn"  that  directly
teaches  tke  pre-existeuce  of  man.

Well,  that  body — the  body  of  the
Lord — that  the  brother  of  Jared
saw,  wan  a  personal  body*  It  had
fingers,  a  face,  eyes,  arms,  bandi,
and  all  the  various  parts  which  the
human  body  has,  so  much  so  that


he  thought  it  was  really  flesh  and
bones,  until  he  was  corrected  and
found  that  it  was  the  spirit  of  Je-
sus, that  same  spirit,  says  Jesus,
which,  in  the meridian  of  time,
should  come  and  take  a  body,  and
die  for  the  ains  of  the  world.  These
beings,  whoT  in  the  beginning,  were
created  after  the  image  of  the  spirit
of  Jesus,  had  a  probation  ;  they  had
law  ;  they  had  intelligence. It  was
called  their  tirst  estate. They  were
agents  there  just  as  much  as  you
and  I  are  here. They  could  obey
the  law  that  was  given  to  them,  or
they  could  disobey  that  law. I  have
already  alluded  to  a  third  part  of  the
great  family,  who  did  not  keep  their
first  estate. What  became  of  them  ?
They  were  thrust  down,  and  thus
came  the  devil  and  his  angels-  Jude
says  they  were  reserved  in  chains  of
darkness,  until  the  judgment  at  the
great  day. That  was  their  doom ;
their  transgression^  were  so  great —
binning against God the  Father,
whom  they  could  behold,  and  against
the  person  of  his  Son,  whom  they
conld  also  see — disobeying  the  most
sacred  of  a! I  laws seeking  to  de-
throne the  Almighty,  and  to  take  the
power  from  that  Being  who  had  be-
gotten them,  into  their  own  hands.
For  this  they  were thrust  down,
and  were  called  Perdition,  nnd  the
heavens  wept  over  them. I  do  not
know  how  faithful  the  remainder  of
the  spirits  were  ;  that  is  not  for  rae
to  say. I  do  not  know  whether  they
transgressed  any  of  the  laws  of  God,
or  not  in  their  tirst  estate, if  they
did,  one  thing  I  do  know,  and  that
is,  that  they  understand  about  Je-
sus and  bis  atonement ;  for  he  was  as
a  Lamb  slain  from  before  the  founda-
tion of  the  world,  and  inasmuch  as  he
suffered  in  spirit  as  well  as  in  body,
I  do  not  know  but  hia  sufferings  in
spirit  would  redeem  them  in  their
first  estate  as  well  as  us  who  sin  here


TEMPLES  IN  ANCIENT  AMERICA,  ETC.


in  the  body,  I  do  not  pretend  to  say
that  such  was  the  case.  Suffice  to
say,  that  the  plan  of  redemption  was
kflown  by  them,  and  suffice  it  to  say
again,  that-  they  were  faithful  enough
to  re tii in  tlirir  position  in  their  first
estate,  a'ad  to  have  the  privilege  of
corniuing  forth  in  this  world,  and
taking  upon  themselves  tabernacles,
or  bodies,  and  having  a  seoond  estate.
We  also  rt  d  that  all  who  come  into
this  world  were  innocent.  That
shows  tha  they  never  had  sinned,  or
if  they  had,  that  they  had  been  for-
given and  made  innocent  Which
way  it  waa  I  do  not  know.  If  they
had  sinned  and  were  all  made  innocent
through  the  blood  of  the  atonement,
and  through  the  sufferings  of  Jesus
in  the  spirit,  as  well  as  in  the  flesh,
that  wuiitd  prepare  them  to  corne
into  this  .world  without  having  any
a  tain  upon  them.  But  if  they  never
transgressed  the  law,  never  went
beyond  its  bounds,  or  limits,  they
would  be  sanctified,  purified,  per-
fee  tod,  saved  and  be  innocent  by
keeping  the  law.  But  let  us  come
down  a  little  further.  When  we
came  forth  into  this  world,  and  took
upon  ourselves  bodies  of  flesh,  they
were  fallen  bodies  —  subject  to  pain,
sickness,  sorrow,  mourning,  trials,
and  finally  death,  or  dissolution.
This  death  that  came  npon  the  bo-
dies of  the  children  of  men,  was
brought  to  pass  by  the  transgres-
sion of  one  man  and  woman,  that
is,  by  our  first  parents;  as  it  is
written,  "By  the  transgression  of
one  sin  entered  the  world,  and  death
by  sin.1*  It  matters  not  whether  it
is  the  little  infant  that  dandles  on  the
knee  that  has  never  ginned,  or  the
youth,  the  middle- aged  or  the  old,
all  have  to  feel  this  great  penalty  that
has  been  inflicted  upon  all  the  poste-
rity of  Adam  by  reason  of  bis  trans-
gression.

Now,  there  is  a  question  that  has


often  teen  asked  of  me  by  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  and  by  those  outside
of  this  Church— "Why  is  it  that
infants,  who  have  never  sinned,  should
die  ?  Why  should  they  be  suhject
to  death  because  their  father  some  six
thousand  years  ago  sinned  and  trans-
gressed ?"  I  answer  this  by  asking
yon  a  question,  Why  is  it  that  chil-
dren, oftentimes  to  the  third,  fourth
and  fifth  generation,  suffer  from  lin-
gering diseases  here  in  this  life,  be-
cause their  forefathers  wen*  licentious,
and  broke  the  laws  of  life  and  hap-
piness ?  Why,  it  is  hereditary,  is  it
not  ?  Is  it  jnat  that  they  should
suffer,  because  their  parents  or  some
of  their  progenitors  have  sinned?
Xo,  it  is  hereditary.  Whv,  then,
may  not  all  the  inhabitants  of  the
world,  whether  in  their  infancy  or
nof,  inherit  death  as  well  us  these
children  who  suffer  through  disease*
entailed  upon  them  by  their  fore-
fathers ?  Not  as  a  matter  of  justice
particularly,  but  something  that
comes  upon  them  in  consequence
of  the  fall  of  man.  It  ra  handed
down  among  them.  Now,  that
would  be  a  very  unpleasant  condi-
tion  if  they  were  always  tu  remain
in  that  state.  They  are  plunged
into  slavery,  as  it  were,  by  one  man;
hence  the  Redeemer  steps  forth  and
rescues  them  from  that  slavery.
When  I  say  rescues  them,  I  do  not
say  that  he  does  it  at  onee,  before
they  have  had  a  chance  to  know  the
difference  between  good  and  evil,
between  the  bitter  and  ihe  sweet,  to
contrast  between  happiness  and  mis-
ery. It  is  wisdom  that  they  should
suffer,  even  should  it  be  from  here-
ditary disease,  that  they  may  gain
experience.  But  I  will  tell  you  what
he  rescues  them  from,  by  his  atoning
blood.  Ho  breaks  the  bauds  of  death
and  roscues  them  from  tin*  power  of
the  grave,  which,  but  for  that,  would
have  held  the  infant  as  well  as  tha


iniddle-agpd  in  their  power  eternally.
There  is  such  a  thing  aa  a  father,
through  his  foolishness,  plunging
not  only  himself  but  all  his  children
into  a  slavery  from  which  he  cannot  j
redeem  himself  or  them,  bo  far  as
their  bodies  are  concerned;  but  with
Adam's  children  this  was  the  ease
with  both  their  bodies  and  spirits,
for  the  Book  of  "  Mormon"  says  that
all  mankind,  through  Adam's  trans-
gression, became  subject  not  only  to
a  temporal  death — the  separation
of  the  body  and  spiiit,  but  also  to  a  j
spiritual  death,  eternal  in  its  nature.
If  there  were  no  atonement — no
sufferings  and  death  of  our  Re-
deemer—  no  iyfinite  atonement  to!
rescue  men  from  the  grave,  their
spirits,  in  consequence  of  the  sla-
very entailed  upon  them  by  their
first  parents,  could  not  Lave  been
rescued  from  eternal  death.  Conld
they  have  delivered  themselves  ?
No*  They  were  in  captivity — sla-  i
very  —  and  their  master,  the  devil,
was  there  to  bind  them  in  that
slavery.  Could  they  torn  the  key
of  the  prison  doors  and  run  back
again  ?  No  !  Could  they  say  to  the
grave.  Yield  up  my  body  and  let  me
go  again  into  tbe  presence  of  my
Father  and  God  ?  No ;  there  were
potent  enemies  who  had  endless
power  over  them  had  it  not  been
for  the  atonement.  ,
We  are  taught  in  the  revelations
of  God  that  Jesus  suffered  the  pain
of  all  men.  You  will  find  it  in  the
teachings  of  Jacob,  the  brother  of!
Neplu,  in  the  Second  Book  of  Ne-
pbi.  <#  He  saffered  the  pains  of  all
men,  women  and  children,  says
Jacob.  What  was  this  great,  suffer*
ing  for?  That  the  resurrection
might  come  unto  all  men,  women
and  children  ;  that  Jesus  might
have  power  to  say  to  the  grave  *  re-
store those  captives  you  have  taken,
behold hare  redeemed  all  whose


bodies  slumber  in  the  grave.  I  have
power  to  bring  them  forth  by  virtue
of  the  atonement  I  have  made/'

Could  man  have  redeemed  him-
self? Could  one  man  have  shed
his  blood  for  another,  and  said  to
the  grave  give  up  your  dead  >  No.
Why  not  ?  Because  all  were  fallen  ;
all  were  under  the  dominion  and
power  <*f  Satan.  All  were  spiritu-
ally dead  —  dead  to  things  pertain-
ing to  righteousness.  It  was  uni-
versal eternal  death.  A  being
greater  than  man  was  required  to
redeem  him,  hence  Jacob  says,  in
the  passage  to  which  I  have  al-
al ready  referred,  in  relation  to  the
;  atonement,  w  that  it  most  be  infi-
nite." Wherein  was  the  Son  of
God  infinite  ?  In  the  first  place,
he  was  begotten  different  from  you
and  me.  We  were  begotten  by  a
mortal  father,  but  Jesus  was  begot-
ten by  an  Immortal  Being,  his  Fa-
ther and  God.  If  then  his  body
was  begotten  by  that  Being,  do  you
I  not  see  that  his  body  in  that  respect
differed  from  ours  ?  It  is  true  that
he  inherited  the  same  as  we  do  so
far  as  bis  mother  was  concerned,
but  on  the  part  of  the  Father  he
was  superior.  Hence,  being  be-
;  gotten  by  an  Infinite  Being,  he
could  do  that  which  no  other  man
could  do — redeem  from  spiritual
'  death  and  the  captivity  of  Satan.
Hence  it  is  said  that  u  through  Je-
sus came  life  and  light  into  the
world."  If  it  had  not  been  for  Je-
sus, darkness  would  have  reigned
eternally  over  this  creation.

Talk  about  works  of  righteousness
redeeming  us  without  the  atonement !
Why  the  thing  is  preposterous  in  the
highest  degree.  Why  ?  Because
we  were  spiritually  dead,  and  can  a
person  who  is  dead  work  righteous-
ness ?  Caa  a  person  who  is  dead
to  everything  good,  holy,  upright
and  Godlike,  who  is  in  captivity  te


TEMPLES  IN  ANCIENT  AMERICA,  ETC.


319


Satan,  work  righteousness  ?  Could
a  feast  of  salvation  be  prepared  for
him  in  that  dead  state,  unless  there
was  some  redemption  or  atonement
ma  le  to  bring  life  to  the  world  to
impart  to  tht*  human  family  ?  Light
and  life  have  come  upon  all  men.
Jesus  is  that  light  and  life;  He  is
the  light  and  life  of  all  things  ;  and
by  reason  of  that  light  and  life  which
he  has  purchased  for  us  by  his  own
blood,  you  and  I  have  the  privilege
of  working  righteousness,  which  we
never  would  have  had  without  the
atonement  We  could  not  have
done  anything  acceptable  in  the  sight
of  God,  without  his  atoning  blood.
That  ia  the  very  foundation  of  the
redemption  of  tbe  children  of  men;
without  it,  this  would  have  been  a  lost
and  fallen  creation,  and  not  one  could
have  been  saved.

But  let  m  pass  on  a  little  further,
You  recollect  in  the  former  part  of
my  remarks,  I  was  speaking  about
the  personality  of  God*  Now  let  us
come  along  to  the  plan  of  redemp-
tion, and  see  how  it  is  that  we  are
exalted  and  brought  back  into  the
presence  of  God,  and  become  as  it
were,  gods,  then  we  can  form  some
idea  concerning  our  Father  and  God.
We  are  instructed,  and  we  believe,
that  all  of  us  who  believe  iti  Jesus
Christ,  in  his  sufferings  and  death,
and  receive  the  benefit  of  his  atone-
ment, will,  if  we  remain  faithful,  be
exalted  into  the  pretence  of  that  being
who  is  our  Father,  and  that  we  will
be  made  like  unto  him, and  be  crowned
with  glory,  and  shall  have  the  privi-
lege of  sitting  down  with  the  Son
upo&  his  throne,  as  he  has  overcome,
and  has  sat  down  with  his  Father
upon  his  throne,  and  that  we  will  be-
come one  with  him,  as  he  ia  one  with
the  Father,  We  believe  we  will  be
perfected,  purified  and  cleansed  in
him,  and  made  not  only  the  sons  of
God,  but  grow  up  unto  him  in  all


things,  that  we  may  become  Gods
like  unto  onr  Father  who  begat  us.

This  is  consistent  with  analogy.
Amalogy  shows  that  sons  here  upon
the  earth,  grow  up  and  become  like
their  parents.  Why  then  should  we
set  a  barrier  between  the  sons  of  God,
who  are  redeemed  through  the  atone-
ment, and  their  restoration  to  the
mansions  where  they  formerly  dwelt  ?
Why  should  we  erect  obstacle?,  and
set  a  barrier  so  that  we  cm  not  be-
come like  him  ?  Analogy  would  say
at  once  that  when  he  appears  we  shall
be  like  him,  for  we  shall  see  him  as
he  is.  Analogy  would  say  that  when
he  shall  redeem  our  bodies  from  the
grave,  that  he  will  fashion  them  after
his  own  glorious  body,  and  clothe
them  with  power  and  glory,  even  as
He  is  clothed  with  glory  and  power,
in  the  presence  of  his  Father  and  our
Father  and  God.

Eut  say «  one,  if  yon  adopt  that
sentiment,  theu  your  people  believe
in  a  plurality  of  gods,  and  we  have
all  been  taught  in  the  Christian  world
that  there  is  but  one  personal  God,  or
rather  three  persons  in  the  Trinity —
the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.
Well,  these  three  are  called  one,  are
thpy  not  ?  Yes,  they  are  called  one.
Jesus  prays  that  all  his  disciples  may
be  made  one,  as  he  and  the  Father
are  one.  If  ever  that  prayer  is  an-
swered, then,  in  one  sense  of  the
word,  there  would  only  be  one  God,
but,  in  another  sense  of  the  word,
there  would  not  only  be  three,  but  a
great  many  personal  beings  called
gods.  Let  us  for  a  few  moments
refer  to  that  glorious  saying  in  the
revelations  of  St  John.  In  the
visions  of  eternity  that  were  shown
to  John,  ho  beheld  things  that  were
to  take  place  in  future  generations.
Among  other  things  that  were  shown
to  him,  were  the  one  hundred  and
forty- four  thousand,  standing  on
Mount  Ziun,  who  had  been  redeemed


i


320


JOURNAL  OF  IttS  COURSES.


from  arnnnor  men;

Let  ns  look  at  the  inscription  that
John  s*i\'<  was  written  on  their  fore*
heads.  That  will  tell  tis  that  the  name
of  their  Father  was  written  there.
What  was  his  name  ?  God,  trans-
lated into  the  English  language.
Ah  man  in  the  pure  language.  The
Father's  mine  John  saw  inscribed
on  the  foreheads  of  the  hundred  and
forty-foar  thousand  who  were  sh*fl>
incr  the  n^w  son^  he  fore  the  Lotst
"What  would  vou  think  if  you  were
to  have  the  future  opened  to  yoa  as
Jolm  had,  and  could  see  those  men
with  t  he  word  God,  inscribed  in  bright
anc  ahiniug  characters  upon  each  of
their  foreheads  ?  Would  you  think
that  God  was  rooking  fnn  of  them
by  putting  -such  an  inscription  there?
Wnuld  yon  supp--w*  M>e  inscription
was  a  mere  form  without  any  mean-
ing? No:  every  man  permitted  to
aee  them  things,  would  at  once  say,
**  they  are  gods  having  beep  redeem-
er!, and  made  like  their  Father/5
This  is  what  we  believe.  Then,
when  we  come  to  personality,  we  not
only  believe  in  our  personal  Father,
in  His  Son  Jeans  Christ,  and  in  the
Holy  Ghost,  as  personages,  hot  we
■In  l relieve  that  in  the  eternity  of
eternities  in  the  heaven  of  heavens
there  will  be  innumerable  millions
of  person*  who  will  occupy-  that  ex-
alted station  —  each  one  being  a  per-
sonal god,  as  much  ?o  as  the  God  of
this-  creation — the  Father of  our

spi  t  i  ts  is* L  'itK'  a  i^  JV^  l  i

If  time  permitted ?  we  might  bring
up  the  revelations  of  heaven,  given  in
these  days  as  well  as  anciently,  in
regard  to  the  representations  wfiich
God  has  iriveo  of  Himself,  not  only


Who  were  thev  ?  Hhat  he  dwells  in tabernacles  ar.rt

temples,  and  so  forth,  I  do  not
know,  but  that  in  my  teachings  in
years  past,  when  teaching  upon  the?*e
two  distinct  subjects,  I  may  have
left  an  impression  upon  the  minds  of
the  people  that  I  never  intended  to
convey  in  reference  to  the  qualities,
perfections,  glories  and  attributes  <jf
these  personages,  for  attributes  ai-
!  ways  do  pertain  to  substances,  you
can  not  separate  one  from  the  other.
J  Attribute  e*ua  not  exist  without  sub-
staJiCe ;  everywhere  it  whows  its
hearing  and  relation  to  substance  and
person,  and  if  in  any  of  my  preach-
ing; or  teachings  I  have  ever  conveyed
the  impression  that  attributes  could
exikt  separate  and  apart  from  sub-
stances I  never  intended  to  do  so.  I
do  not  know  that  I  have  ever  declared
any  such  in  my  writings.  I  have
said  that  God  is  love,  and  that  he  is
truth  beean!*e  the  revelations  sny  so.
I  have  said  that  he  oftentimes  repre-
sents himself  by  hia  attributes.  7 The
same  as  when  he  says  I  tm  in  you  ;
but  he  does  not  mean  that  his  person,
his  flesh  and  bones  are  in  us.  When
Jesus  stivs  I  am  in  the  F;:*h*:-r,  he?
(iocs  not  mean  that  his  person  is  in
the  Father*  What  does  he  mean  ?
He  means  that  the  same  attributes
that/ dwell  in  his  own  person  also
dwell  in  the  person  of  the  oHior,  1
think  I  have  heard  this  doctrine
taught  from  the  commencement,  by
the  authorities  of  this  Church,  ;:lJ
I  think  it  is  taught,  more  or  less,  now,
almost  every  Sabbath  day.  We  are
exhorted  to  develop  and  perfect  those
attributes  of  God  that  dwell  within
us  in  embryo,  that  we  may  more  as  d
more  approximate  to  that  high  staeo


represent ini*  himself  by  his  person,  of  perfection  t^at  exists  in  the  Father
but  also  by  his  attributes* But  this  and  the  Son.


is  a  subject  upon  which  we  do  not
fe*l  to  dvrell  at  this  time.  Suffice  it
to  say,  that  God  has  said  that  he  is
light  and  truth  ;  that  he  if?  a  spirit :


'  Attributes  belong,  in  all  cases,  in  this
and  all  other  worlds,  to  personages  and
substances,  and  without  personages
and  substances,  they  cannot  exist.


TEMPLES  IN  ANCIENT  AMERICA,  ETC.


321


In  the  "  Kingdom  of  God,"  pub-
lished in  October,  18 18,  I  have  set
forth  the  personality  ot  the  Father
and  theS  m, and  thegloriousattributes
that  perbiin  to  each.  And  again  in
many  of  my  writing^  to  which  I
might  refer,  and  cmild  pcrlmps  give
the  page,  I  have  t  night  the  same
thinu,  hik!  my  views  to-day  concern-
ing this  matter  are  just  the  sm\e  ns
they  were  then,  and  then  the  same  as
they  are  now  ;  only  I  think,  by
searching  more  fully,  I  hsiue  progress-
ed and  obtained  some  further  light
and  in  format  ton  more  than  I  had
twenty  or  twenty- five  years  ago.  I
do  not  know,  that,  in  my  remarks
this  morning,  concerning  the  atonc-
ruent,  and  the  personalities  and  glori-
ous attribute*  of  Go  1,  I  have  varied
in  my  views  from  those  of  the  rest  of
the  authorities  of  the  Church.  If  I
have  I  hope  they  will  CJrrcCfc  me  and
tell  me  wherein  I  am  wrong,  for  it  is
my  desire,  and  ever  has  bepn,  to  go
in  accordance  with  the  revelations  of
heaven,  to  nbide  in  the  word  of  God,
and  to  have  t  ifit  word  abide  in  me.

We  are  taught  that  the  words  of  j
truth  have  power, The  word  of  God
we  are  commanded  to  live  by.  In  one
of  the  re  velar  ions  we  are  taught  and  j


commanded  that  we  shall  live  by
every  word  that  proceeds  from  the
mouth  of  God,  for  savs  the  revelation
u  the  word  of  God  is  truth,  and  what-
soever is  truth  is  light,  and  whatsoever
is  light  is  spiril,  even  the  spirit  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  the  spirit  gives  light
to  every  man  that  comes  into  the
world,  and  the  spirit  directs  every
man  through  the  wnrkl  who  will
hearken  to  it;  and  he  tha*  liearkene
to  the  voice  of  the  spirit  cornea  to
God.  even  the  Father,  and  he  teaches
him  of  the  covenant  which  he  hat
renewed  uud  confirmed  upon  von  for
your  snkes,  and  not  tor  \  uu  .sakea
only,  bat  for  the  sake  of  the  whole
world."  ll&J  •>

Now,  I  want  to  abide  in  t!mt  If
the  word  of  the  Lord  is  truth,  and
whatever  is  truth  is  light,  and  what-
ever is  light  is  spirit,  I  want  to
embrace  it,  and  hold  fast  to  it.  Again,
he  says,  when  giving  a  revelation  to
the  servants  of  God  :  *;  T!mt  which
you  hear  is  the  voice  of  one  crying  in
the  wjlderue&a?  In  the  wilderness
because  you  cannot  see  hira.  My
voice  because  my  voice  is  spirit,  and
my  spirit  is  truth,  and  truth  abides
forever  and  has  no  end,'1  I  desire  to
abide  in  it  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen,


No.  21.


Vol.  XIX.


JOURNAL  Of  DISCOURSE*.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER EKASTUS  SNOW.

Dmuvkkkd  at  the  Fourteenth  Waki>  Assembly  Rooms,  Sunday

Aktkknogn,  Jan  20,  1878,


(Reported  hj  (lea*  F.  Gib  bp,)


ORIGIN  OF  MAN  AND  ATTRIBUTES  OF  DEITY  —  PHILOSOPHERS  AND
ASTUuNOMERS  Versus  THE  SCRIPTURES — MAN  POSSESSES  THE  POWER
OF  IMPROVEMENT— THIS  I) hVELUPED  RV  INSPIRATJuN,


11  And  God  said,  let  us  make  man
in  our  image  after  our  likeness  ;  and
let  them  have  <  lorn  in  ion  over  the
fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of
the  air,  and  over  the  cattle,  and  over
all  the  earth,  and  over  every  creep-
ing thing  that  creepeth  upon  the
earth,

44  So  God  created  man  in  his  own
image,  in  the  image  of  God  created
he  him  ;  male  and  female  created  he
them.

"  And  God  blessed  them,  and  God
said  unto  thein,  be  fruitful  and
multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth,
and  subdue  it ;  and  have  dominion
over  the  fish  of  t  he  sea,  and  over  the
fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  every  liv-
ing tiling  that  moveth  upon  the
earth." Gen.  i,  26,  27,  28.

iA  This  is  the  hook  of  the  genera
tions  of  Adam, In  the  day  that  God
created  man,  in  the  likeness  of  God
made  lie  him.'1 — Gen.  v,  I,

<(  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,
by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed  :  for
in  the  image  of  God  made  he  man."
— Gen.  ix,  6,

Those  who  believe  in  the  Christian
religion,  and  in  the  divinity  of  the  j


mission  of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus
Christ,  be  lieve  also  the  words  of  the
Apostle  Paul,  speaking  of  him  in
this  wise  :  That  he  was  in  the  like-
ness of  his  Father,  and  the  express
image  of  his  person.  And  the  ac
counts  we  have  of  Jesus  represent
him  as  being  physically  and  in  all
essential  parts,  in  the  likeness  of
man.  That  l  e  ate  and  drank,  and
partook  of  the  elements  that  enter
into  the  composition  of  onr  earthly
tabernacle,  that  he  was  subjected
to  pain  and  to  the  infirmities  of
our  flesh,  and  that  he  suffered  all
things  that  we  are  subject  to  in  the
flesh;  that  this  mortality  was  sub-
ject to  pains  and  penalties  of  death
in  him,  as  well  as  in  mankind  gene-
rally. In  this  particular  his  divine
origin  did  not  exempt  his  mortal
tabernacle  from  the  laws  that  gov-
ern ourflesh,  only  in  that,  the  Spirit
from  on  High  was  given  him  with-
out measure,  and  he  had  strength
to  withstand  every  form  of  tempta-
tion, and  was  able  to  obey  the  law
pertaining  to  his  existence  here
without  committing  sin.  Otherwise
there  was,  so  far  as  his  person  and


outward  appearance  was  concerned,
no  essential  difference  between  him
and  Adam's  race  generally.  ■
There  are  a  great  variety  of  ideas
and  notions  prevalent  in  the  world
at  the  present  time*  pertaining  to
the  origin  of  man,  and  attributes
of  the  Deitv* There  seems  to  be  an
instinct  in  man  everywhere  among
all  nations  and  peoples  to  worship
a  superior  being. In  this  particular  i
Christian  nations  are  not  an  excep-
tion. True,  in  heathen  countries,  a
variety  of  images,  representations
of  Deity  are  set  up  for  the  people  to
worship,  or  to  pay  some  deference
unto  them,  as  unto  Deity. But  the
thinking  portion  of  all  these  nations
who  encourage  these  various  repre-
sentations of  Deity,  do  not  for  a
moment  admit  that  these  gods,  a*
they  are  sometimes  called,  made  by  '
man's  hand,  of  wood  and  stone,  or
other  material ?  are  really  gods,  or
that  they  are  worshipped  as  god s  :
but  only  the  embodiment  of  the
idea  of  a  Deity,  a  representation  of  I
a  superior  being. And  the  fact  of
this  prevailing  sentiment  of  man-
kind and  the  universal  necessity  of
doing  homage  to  a  superior,  how- '
ever  crude  and  indefinite  this  idea
is,  and  however  varied  in  the  minds  f
of  men  in  the  different  nations  of;
the  earth,  yet,  taken  as  a  whole,  it
is  the  impress  of  Deity  upon  ail
that  bear  his  form  in  the  earth,
recojniizinu'  him  as  Deity;  as  a  Su-
perior  Being. With  many  Chris-  \
tian  s#cts  of  our  time,  ami  for  gene-
rations past,  the  idea  of  Deity  has
seemed  to  be  very  undefined. —  j
Mitay  philosophers  and  divines  have
attempt ed  to  describe  Deity.  We
have  *  it  set  forth  in  many  Chris-  |
tian  catechisms  and  articles  of  faith.
God  was  a  being  without  body,  parts
or  passions. This,  for  many  gene- 1
ration?  has"  been  taught  by  the  Es
kablished  Church  of  England,  and


bv  most  of  the  Protestant  sects,
both  in  Europe  and  America ;  Deity
i*  described  by  them  as  "a  spiritual
immaterial  substance."  This  word
substance  is  used  in  connection  with
the  word  "immaterial."  A  spirit
immaterial,  and  yet  a  substance  1
1  have  never  yet  found  a  philosopher
that  was  able  to  describe  a  substance
that  was  not  material.  The  idea  of
a  Deity  that  cannot  be  located  any-
where, that  has  no  form  or  substance,
or  materiality,  and  described  as  a
spirit !  It  is  the  best  definition,  to
my  mind,  of  nothing  at  all,  like
the  quaint  familiar  phrase,  "  a  foot-
less stocking,  without  a  leg."

If  we  believe  there  is  any  truth
in  the  writings  of  Moses,  the  Patri-
archs, Prophets  and  Apostles,  and
the  teachings  of  Jesus,  if  we  would
indeed  be  consistent  Christians  and
receive  the  writings  of  the  fathers,
and  believe  what  was  said  unto  them,
we  must  believe  that  man  is  made
in  the  image  of  <Jod,  and  conse-
quently that  we  are  of  the  same  spe-
cies as  the  gods*  However  child  like
and  feeble  we  are  in  this  condition
of  mortality,  we  are  nevertheless
descended  from  the  gods,  made  in
their  image  and  after  their  likeness.

And  when  Luke,  in  giving  us
t lie  geneniugy  of  Jtsus  Christ,  traces
his  lineage  back  through  his  mother
to  David,  who  whs  th<»  son  of  Jesse,
and  so  on,  he  tr-.c^s  hi*  descent  until
he  reaches  Abraham,  who  was  the  mm
of  Terab,  and  so  on  to  Noah,  who  waa
the  son  of  Noah,  who  was  the  son  of
Lamech  ;  and  when  he  reaches  Adam,
the  first  of  our  race,  he  says  of  him,
ik  which  was  the  aon  of  Uo<L"  Oh,
says  one,  we  are  told  th  it  Adam  waa
created,  not  horn.  This  is  something
I  am  not  disposed  to  dwell  upon
much  at  this  tin  e.  You  can  think
of  this  aa  you  please,  whether  he  waa
created  or  born,  or  whether  a  man,
because  he  is  born,  is  not  created.  I


C2  t


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


do  not  understand  the  term  creation
as  rimming  something  suddenly  made
out  of  nothing. I  believe  man  thai
is  born  is  as  moch  created  as  the
thiny  which  is  made  in  a  mould  and
turned  out  to  dry,  which  we  call  an
adohie. It matters  not  whether  it
tnkt  s  a  few  minutes  to  make  it,  or  a
longer  pL-iiod — it  is  created  or  made.
Ai  d  the  lerni  create  I  understand  to
be  synonymous with tr.e verb  to
mfikr,  find  what  is  made  is  created,
Hnd  what  is  organized  is  formed.
And  when it  is  written that  God
formed  man  in  his  own  iinagw  and
likened  it  does  not  describe  the  time
or  miuiriM', hut  simply  the  fact  of
having  tii?i l J e  or  created  man  in  his
own  image.

It  hag  been  ofttimes  er pressed  by
the  religious  teachers  of  the  Christian
world,  that  find  treated  all  tilings
in  six  days,  Hnd  on  the  seventh  day
he  rested.  We  read  in  this  first  chap-
ter of  Genesis,  that  in  six  days  the
Lord  created  the  heavens  and  the
earth.  N<>*  modern  scientists  attempt
to  confute  this  history  given  by  Muses,
by  demonstrating  that  the  earth  has
been  formed  through  the  operation
of  a  long  process  of  natural  laws,
and  tint  it  never  could  be  brought
into  its  present  condition  in  six  days.
Of  course,  t In *se  who  reason  thus  as-
sume that  the  days  here  spoken  of
weru  pen» ids  of  the  same  duration  as
the  days  c->ur:ted  out  to  as  by  the  re-
volution of  the  earth  on  its  axis,
every  h  *ie  it  turns  upon  its  axis  and
mark*  t:ie  day  and  night.  But  I
rnu.t  be  allowed  to  call  attention  to
thin  one  fact,  that  in  the  beginning
of  this  iiisrorv  Moses  tells  us  that
when  God  first  organised  or  created
the  elements  of  this  earth,  that  it
w:is  without  form  and  void;  that  is
to  sny  it  was  without  its  present
form,  and  that  darkness  was  upon
the  fane  of  the  abyss.  Then  how
were  the  d:iya  reckoned  ? Until  our


earth  assumed  its  position  among
the  planets,  and  began  to  perform
its  revolutions,  and  the  earth  was
so  far  completed  as  to  assume  its
position  among  the  heavenly  orbs,
and  perform  its  revolutions  as  nowf
present  modi  s  of  reckoning  time
Could  not  be  appointed  to  ronn — either
oar  days  or  months  or  our  years,  all
of  which  are  determined  by  the  revo-
lutions of  the  earth  upon  its  axis,
and  the  moon  around  the  earth,  and
the  earth  in  its  orbit  around  the  sun.
But  what  is  the  rule  or  measure  of
time  by  which  God  reckons  his  labor
and  wurk  ?  Is  it  the  time  measured
to  the  in  habitants  of  Mars  or  the
little  planet  Mercury  that  describes
its  revolution  around  our  sun  in  less
than  three  months,  and  coasts  out
four  of  its  years  while  we  upon  ihe
earth  are  counting  one  ?  Or  is  it
after  the  time  appointed  for  a  more
distant  orb  of  our  system,  that  is  I  "JO
or  more  of  our  years,  in  performing
their  revolutions  around  the  sun,  thus
cjutiting  out  its  single  year?  Or
were  the  days  reckoned  after  the
great  cycle  of  the  multitudes  of  j^ys-
tetns  moving  in  space  around  the
commun  center.

Philosophers  and  astronomers  have
not  lived  long  enough  upon  this  earth,
or  kept  a  record  of  the  heavenly  bodies
long  enough  to  make  any  calculation
of  the  length  of  this  period.  There
is,  however,  one  saying  of  Apostle
Peter  which  reads — **Be  not  ignorant
of  this  one  thing,  that  one  day  is  with
the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years,  and  %
thousand  years  as  one  day."  But
whether  that  has  any  reference  to
the  days  thnt  Moses  speaks  of,  in
which  the  Lord  was  engaged  in  the
formation  of  this  earth,  we  are  not
told.  But  be  the  periods  longer  or
shorter,  which  the  Lord  called  six
periods,  or  days,  in  which  he  did
his  work,  is  of  very  little  importance
to  us Nor  is  it  worth  our  time  to


ORIGIN  OF  MAX,  ETC-

p


327


question  or  contend  with  geologists
or  modern  scientists  as  to  the  dura-
tion of  these  periods.  It  is  a  fact
that  the  earth  exists,  and  that  it  has

its  sphere  in  which  it  moves,  and  that
it  is  appointed  for  the  abode  of  man,
an  \  that  we  are  here,  and  the  fathers
have  told  us  we  have  descended  from
the  G  ,ds.  And  that  when  God  said
to  his  associates,  let  us  make  man
in  our  image,  after  our  likeness,  he
was  not  atone.  And  as  Paul  said,
u  there  be  gods  many  and  lords
many/'  but  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,
there  is  given  onto  as  one  God,  even
the  Father  of  our  Lord  Josus  Christ.
And  it  matters  not  how  many  more,
nor  where  they  are  located,  nor  what
might  be  tlu*  extent  of  their  power  and
dominion.  We  cannot  comprehend
it,  we  are  mere  infants,  comparatively
ape-iking,  our  ideas  just  beginning  to
learn  how  to  shoot;  we  are  striving
to  grasp  the  little  within  our  reach,
and  we  find  we  can  but  grasp  a  little;
and  it  is  in  vain  to  attempt  to  look
back  to  the  beginning,  if  there  is  any,
or  to  look  forward  to  the  end,  it  there
is  an  end.  But  we  are  taught  that
the  works  of  God  are  one  eternal
round,  and  there  ia  neither  beginning
nor  end.

We  may  jocosely  ask  ourselves
the  question,  Which  was  tirst  the  goose
or  the  egg?  And  again,  D^es  the
pumpkin  produce  the  need,  or  does
the  seed  produce  the  pumpkin  ?  You
oan  answer  the  question  just  as  you
please,  either  in  the  affirmative  or
negative,  and  either  or  both  would
be,  in  one  sense,  correct.  Bat  say
yon,  "  That  is  not  enough  for  o?,
we  want  to  know  where  and  ^ow  the
first  pumpkin  was  produced."  That
is  something  we  cmuot  tell,  nor  any
other  mortal  being;  you  might  just
as  well  ask,  when  the  last  pumpkin
will  be  produced.  It  is  something
that  is  absolutely  incomprehensible,
because  their  is  neither  beginning  nor


eud,  it  is  beyond  the  reach  of  human
ken-,*'  But  we  accept  the  effect;  we
are  here^  the  creation  is  a  reality.
We  see  a  variety  of  solid  rocks,  and
ask,  How  nre  they  formed  1  Geolo?
girts  undertake  to  tell  ns,  and  rhey
refer  us  to  the  Book  of  Nature.  But
they  are  like  other  school-children  ;
they  make  a  great  many  mistakes  in
reading. What  they  read  cor^cijy
f<  (.  nT(.,.r  .  y hat  they  read  inc  -r^etly
is  incorrect. ** It  is  as  it  is,  aui  it
can't  be  any  fcisser." And  it  i.s  Ully
tor  geologists,  or  any  other  clasiuf
scientist**,  to  assume  that  they  kruw
it  all,  or  that  they  have  re  id  fhe  B  >cf<
of  Nature  from  beginning  to  en  I,  and
comprehend  it  through  and  through.

Mr.  Darwin,  and  a  kindred  school
of  modern  philosopher,  would  tain
try  to  impress  upon  us  their  the  »ry  of
evolutions,  anil  would  have  us  believe
we  are  descendants  from,  ami  only  a
little  in  advance  of  our  ancester,  the
monkey  ;  and  that  others  inferior
grades  of  animals  are  aspiring  to
become  monkeys;  they  fail  todera  fi-
st rate  their  theories,  simply  because
they  are  not  demonstrateable.

We  see  an  endless  variety  in  the
creations  before  na,  variety  in  every
species  of  animal  life,  an. I  m  evrry
species  of  the  vegetable  kingdom,  and
the  same  may  be  said  of  the  heavenly
bodies. And  so  far  as  man  is  con-
cerned, though  evidently  of  a  common
origin,  yet  the  variety  is  aljiiust.  as
great  as  the  number  of  individuals;
and  though  the  general  features  of  the
face  are  substantially  riie  same,  \efc
that  variety  ia  ho  great  that  no  isvcj
can  be  found  exactly  in  every  respect
alike. No  mother  that  has  produced
from  her  womb  twins,  however  near
th -y  may  approach  each  other,  nag
ever  tit  a  loss  to  discern  some  difference
by  which  one  could  be  dislinu inshed
from  the  other. Nor  even  in  the
vegetable  kingdom  can  we  ft  id  this
law  of  endless  variety  violate  I,  nor


JUUKNAL I>ISUU UUSE8.


yet  in  the  animal  kingdom.  Where
jdo  joa  find  any  sprcies  except  r^nn
inlawed  with  tbexaptcity  of , subdu-
ing the  earth,  and  controlling  the
elements  upon  it  ? Moses  tells  us
that  God  ftaid  unto  man,  lifive  thou
dominion  over  the  earth  and  subdue
it,fmd  exercise  dominion  over  all  the
lesser  species  of  animal life,  and
over  the fruits and herbs  which
shall ft*  given  to  you for  meat."
Has  any*  0* her  branch  of  the  animal
kingdom  done  this? When  man
is  first  ushered  into  being*,  he  seems
more  helpless  lhau  the  calf  or  the
goa^,  but  in  his  progress  and  develop-
ment he  exhibits  the  p-iwer  of  the
Gads; he#seizes  the  elements,  and
commands  them  into  form  and  shape
to  suit  his  convenience,  and  to  serve
his  purposes;  tftt.ritily  does  his  supe-
rior intelligence  riause  the  king  of
beasts,  a^d  all  branches  of  the  animal
kingdorri,  to  crouch  beneath  him,  hut
•very  element  found  to  exist  is  at  bis
service;  bjrrfeason  of  this  divinity  in
him,  in  its  exercise  and  development,
he  chains  the  lightning,  and  makes  it
his  servant  to  flash  his  though ta  or
mandates  over  the  earth;  he  touches
the steam  and  makes  it  a  motive
power  to  waft  him  over  land  and  sea.
He  makes  all  the  dements  within
his  reacli  subserve  his  piirpos^s,  and
he  invents  the  means  by  which  lie
controls  and  handles  them.  I  use  the
word  "  in  vent"  because  it  suits  the
pride  and  vanity  of  a  man  a  little
better  ; but  the  more  appropriHte
term,  I  should  say  i«f  i  'tpiration,  for
»o  great  truth  was  ever  revealed  to
man  that  was  not  an  inspiration.
And when Watt's, watching  the
trembling  of  the  tea  kettle  lid,  caused
by  the  power  of  steam,  conceived  the
idea  of  utilizing  that  power,  was  it
in veu (ion  or inspiration  ?  When
Newton,  on  seeing  the  -apple  fall
from  the  treer  by  questioning  in  his
mind  why  it  bhuuld  fall  downwards,


why  not  fly  upwards,  or  to  the  left
or  right,  his  mind  was  being  led  on  from
t  Ids  simple  observation  to  the  com  pre-
hension ot  one  truth  after  another
until  he  was  able  to  sfive  to  the  world
i  lie  laws  of  gravitarinti  ;  and  from
that  to  searching  out  the  laws  gov-
erning the  planets,  SO  that  astrono-
mers to-day  can  make;  mathematical
calculations  of  the  future  movements
of  the  heavenly  bodies,  with  much
eater  accuracy than the  mi  peri n-

tendenfcof  the  Utah  Southern  Railroad
can  calculate  the  speed  of  his  train.
Was  this  inspiration  or  was  ia  in-
vention ?

When  the  fathers  that  labored  to
brir.g  forth  and  deve?ope  truth,  whe-
ther .scientific  or  religious  —  for  I
hold  all  truth  to  ho  both  scientific
and  religious ;  in  other  words,  true
religion  embraces  ail  truth,  for  it
emanates  from  God,  who  is  the  foun-
tain Ik  ad  of  all  truth,  or  in  other
words,  who  is  in  pussession  of  all
truth  that  is  possible  for  us  to  reach
at  least.  And  for  me  to  say  that  he
has  got  to  the  end,  I  would  no  more
attempt  to  say  it,  than  to  say  that
von  or  I  have  £ot  to  the  end*  It  is
not  for  me,  in  my  imagination  and
fully,  to  place  any  bounds  to  or  drive
u  pin  to  lariet  the  gods  to.

But  we  see  that  this  being  called
man,  said  to  have  been  formed  iu
th  e  i  in  aye  of  God,  that  he  possesses
the  power  of  improvement,  of  ad-
vancement, ad  libitum,  and  who  shall
set  the  bounds  to  the  advance  moot
and  improvement  of  man  any  more
than  the  gods  of  eternity?  The
Apostle  Paul,^Ai  his  letter  to  ,the
PhdlipiAjH*,  sa^f,  u  Lvt  this  mind  be
in  you,  «wfiich  was  also  in  Christ
Jisusf  who,  being  in  the  Jurm  of
God,  thought  it* not  robber v  to  bo
equal  with  God."  4i  Oh  blasphemy  !'*
the  narrow-coot  nicted  bigot  will  cry,
blasphemy  !  Paul,  you  naughty
fellow,  yuu  had  better  take  that  back-


What,  to  exhort  jour  brethren to  ,  c^iraot  do  it,  nobody  ever  did,  and
cultivate  the  same  mind  and  feeling,  nobody  ever  will,  simply  because  there
and  desire  and  ambition,  as  were  in  I  is  no  end. And  if  yon  want  to  know-
Christ  Jesus,  who,  wiipn he  found  j  which  pumpkin  produced  thn  first
himself  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  seed,  and  which  seed  produced  the
it not robbery to be  equal  with  I  first  pumpkin,  we  say  that  neither
God! What  an  idea! Does  not  j  you  nor  anybody  else  can  tell,  they
every  father  expect  his  son  to  grow  cannot  point  to  the  time  when  there
up  and  become  his  equal  ?  and  does  |  was  either  one  or  the  other.  But
not  every  son  liorn  aspire  to  become  there  was  a  time  when  we  began  to
like  his  father  ? And  the  child  looks  exist,  wag  there  not  ? Yes,  Our
in  the  face  ot  the  mother,  as  the  spirit? Yes. Oar  earthly  form?
dearest  creature  it  knows  anything  Yes* Will  there  lie  a  time  when  our
about,  regarding  her  perhaps  as  per-  our  bodies  will  cease? Oh,  Yes;
feet;  her  word  is  law,  it  knows  nu  that  is  tiotuetbing  of  daily  occurence,
other. u  Let  this  mind  he  in  you,  mankind  coming  arid  igoing. And  su
which was  also in Christ  Jesus/  with  all  the  creations  of  our  hand?.
Ami  as  he  thought  it  not  robbery  to  This  house,  in  which  we  meet,  when
be  equal  with  God,  when  he found  was  this  created  ? Oh,  about  15  or
himself  in  the  form  of  God,  don't  20  years  ayo. Still  the  philosopher
you  think  differently. Why  ?  Shall  will  tell  you  that,  the  trees  from  which
wo  not  rob  him  ? Oh  no,  we  could  the  lumber  was  sawn,  must  have  been
not  do  it. Giving  does  not  impo-  hundreds  of  years  old- Oh,  to  tell
verish  him,  Withholding  does not  me  that  this  houso  was  made  only  15
enrich  him, He  is  able  to  impart  or  StO  years  stijo,  I  know  better;  my
that  which  he  possesses,  if  we  are  knowledge  of  timber  teaches  me  fcl  at
capable  of  receiving,  and  as  fast  as  the  very  trees  from  which  the  lumber
\ve  are  ready  to  receive,  he  is  abuu-  war  made,  were  several  hundred  years
dantly  able  to  impart; he  is not  old. And  the  geologist  will  take  you
impoverished,  while  we  are  enriched;  \  to  the  hills  or  along  the  beach  and
while  we  bavo  waxed  greatly,  he  has  point  out  to  you  the  evidences  in  nat-
grown  no  less* And this  he  has  lire  of  the  long  periods  that  must  have
ordained for  those whom he has  elapsed  since  the  formation  of  tha
formed  in  his  image  and  likeness,  sedimentary  rocks,  to  say  nothing
But,  .says  the world, 41  These  are  about  the  primary  rocks. Aud  they
things wo cannot comprehend/'  will  tell  yju  that  the  period  allu.ied
Very  true,  we  cumut  see  the  end  of  to  in  Moses  ,iu  the  history  of  Adam,  and
it;  but  we  can  aee  a  little  of  it,  if  tot  becreai  ion  is  scarcely  a  cypher  com-
we  cannot  comprehend the whole,  pared  with  the  period  in  which  these
We  may  stand  and  look upon  the  elements  of  the  earth  have  been  com-
chuiri,  revolving  and  end^ss,  and  as  iug  into  shape. What  is  all  that  to
it  turns  we  may  count  the  links,  but  do  with the  great  grand  principle,
we  cannot  Hud  the  end  of  it,  neither  We  will  say  that  the  component  parts
can  we  tell  the  beginning. But  we  of  every  implement  formed  by  the
see  the  links,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  ingenuity  and  labor  of  man  are  far
very  little  importance  to  us  whelher  older  than  the  implement  itself,  A
we  know  or  not  how  many  links  com-  lady  who  makes  a  pound-cake,  does  it
pose  the  c\ain,  as  loug  us  we  see  that  perhaps  in  a  few  hours;  but  the  man
the  eternal  is  one  eternal  round. Wh  that  has  not  seen  it  made,  and  who
need  not  to  try  to  tirid  the  end,  we  knows  not  the  cource  from  whence  it


32*


JOURNAL i^F  DISCOURSES.


came,  sees  a  raisin  in  the  cake.  Oh,
(says  he)  madam,  how  old  is  this
cake  ?" 11 1  made  it  yesterday,"  is
the  reply. "Oh,  bnt  madam,  this
raisin  grew  on  some  vine  surely,  and
my  knowledge  and  experience  teaches
me  tlmt  vines  Ho  not  grow  in  a  day.'1
But  ihe  lady  insists  that  she  made  the
cake  yesterday,  saying  "If  you  wish
to  know  how  I  compounded  it,  step
into  my  kitchen  and  v«u  will  readly
le:irn  ail  about  it/' By  and  by  we
may  be  permittee!  to  step  into  the
Lord's  kitchen  or  laboratory,  there
perhaps  commence  to  take  lessons  in
mete  matters,  as  we  now  ma)*  by  step-
ping into  the  iron- masters  shop,  there
to  learn  how  he  takes  I  lit*  d ifferent
classes  of  ore,  and by  putting  them
through  a  certain  process  they  are
formed  into  pig  or  railroad  iron.  He
speaks,  he  directs,  and  out  comes  his
iimter;;tl  at his  command, We  go
into  his  shop  and  learn  how  this  is
done;  wu  have  not  got  far  enough  yet
to  know  how ihese  materials  were
brought  tagelher,  how  they  werecun-
pounded. But  it  is  enough  for  u<  to
know  that  il  has  been  June,  and  rhaf
somebody  has  done  it :  and  we  might
as  well  say  the  railroad  iron  had  no
creator,  nobody  to  design  it,  or  com-
mand the  elements  to  go  together,  as
to  en?  there  is  no  God,  because  we
have  not  the  privilege  of  going  right
gtraigiit into  his  laboratory  to  find
ont  h v  he  commanded  the  elements
together. We  go  down  to  the  sea
coast  of  old  Salem  or  Boston  ;  we  see
ships  htai  t  out  to  sea  properly  officered
ajd  manned,  under  sail  or  steam,  or
both. In  the  course  of  a  month,  the
same  vessels  return  to  port  ;  and  by
and  bye  they  make  another  voyage,  in
about  the  same  time. We  bee  other
ships  start  out,  and  it  is  a  much  lon-
ger or  shorter  time  before  they  re-
torn. We  know  not  where  they  have
been  or  the  several  orbits  in  which
they  have  been  moving,  but  we  know


that  they  return. And  although  we
may  not  know  whither  they  have
been,  or  whence  they  came,  the  time
they  have  made,  etc,  the  crew  that
manned  them,  and  the  captain  that
steered  them,  and  the.  power  behind
them,  all  that  commands  them,  know
all  about  it. And  yet  our  own  obser-
vations should  teach  us  that  ihere
w as  somebody  that  directed  them,
their  movements  were  not  the  work
of  change,  but  of  design;  that  others
perform  their  work  and souk  body
lias  purposed  it. And  although  we
may ftut be able  to  measure  the
distance  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  nor
comprehend  the  extend  of  their  revo-
lutions, we  see  and  know  enough  to
convince  us  t  hat  they  are  all  regulat  ed
by  and  subject  to  law  ;  so  that  their
laws  aie  mj  well  understood  as  frail
mortal  man,  that  even  the  number  of
them  can  be  counted,  and  their  mov-
ement understood,  and  their  times  and
peril  ids  calculated.

Now,  won  Id  not  a  man  \>e  as  sense-
less to  say,  there  is  DO  God,  as  to  say,
there  is  no  .shipmaster  that  jruidts  the
course  of  t  he  vessel,  and  no  shipowner
that  controls  them.  Their  p< -rinds
are  appointed  by  him  who  lists  to
direct  them.  So  with  man.  As  the
Apostle  Paul  has  said  :  u  He  giveth
to  all  life,  and  breath,  and  all  things."

And  hath  made  of  one  blood  all
nations  of*  men  for  to  dwell  on  all  the
face  of  the  earth,  and  hath  determined
the  times  before  appointed,  and  the
bounds  of  their  habitation.

What  is^the  fountain  from  which
we  drink  knowledge,  is  it  from  books!
I  say  yes,  if  we  have  within  us  the
inspiration  that  enables  us  to  cull  the
good  from  the  bad,  l he  truth  from  the
error,  storing  up  that  which  is  worth
retaining,  and  casting  away  the  dross.
For  we  find  that  books  are  oftimes  a
labyrinth  of  folly  and  human  weak-
ness;  for  men  write  as  they  talk,  and
they  talk  as  they  think. And  when


ORIGIN  OF  MAX,  ETC


32»


they  th»nk  wrong,  they  tilk  wrong
and  write  wrong:.  What  13  the
Ftandard  of  troth  ?  Oar  Father  and
w  ithout  him  there  is  no  sore  standard
for  us.  Though  there  are  many  of
our  own  species  before  us,  that  are
advanein*r,  that  are  climbing  onward
ami  upward  in  the  scale  of  intelligence
a  id  power,  and  we  are  striving  to
follow  after  and  learn  of  them,  vet
the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty  is  the
t>uly  true  source  of  knowledge  As
Job  says,  "But  there  is  a  spirit  in
man ;  and  the  inspiration  of  t  he  Al-
mighty giveth  them  understanding. "
It  is  the  candle  of  Hie  Lord,  and  his
spirit  lights  it.  Proud;  haughty,  self-
Conceited  men,  do,  often  ignore  this
source  of  knowledge,  and  when  they
are  recipients  of  his  grace  mid  inspi-
ration, 1  heir  hearts  are  too  proud  to
acknowledge  it.  And  if  any  have
been  inspirt'd  a  little  ahead  ot  them,
or-  have  been  favored  with  one  idea
in  advance  of  their  own,  they,  in
their  pride  and  bigotry,  rise  up  and
resist  u.  Thus  it  whs  when  Galileo,
who.se  mind  had  been  susceptible  to
the  inspirations  of  the  Almighty,  re-
pealed to  the  world  that  the  earth
moved  upon  its  axis.  "  Blasphemy  !M
they  cried ;  and  the  power  of  the
Romish  Church  was  brought  to  crush
the  boy.  And  so  it  has  ever  been
iff  hen  pn  >p  het,  seer,  t  e  ve  I  a  t  o  r,  ph  i  1  oso-
pher,  or  sage  has  given  utterance  !o
inspiration  beyond  his  fellows;  oppo-
sition was  rife  against  him.  "We
cannot  stand  this  innovation  !  Away
with!  Kill  him,  we  c.-m't  endure  it  !f*
Tins  is  why  the  seed  of  Abraham
killed  the  ancient  prophet*,  and  *hy
they  persecuted  Jesus:  and  it  is  also
the  self- name  reason  why  the  prophet
Joseph  Smith  was  martyred  ;  lie  went


'  a  little  beyond  his  fellows  in  his
theory  of  God,  and  eternity  and  im-
mortality and  godliness,  and  his
theory  of  human  associations  and
morals.  He  was  a  little  in  advance
of  the  men  of  his  time,  and  therefore
they  could  not  endure  it.  "  Let  him
be  slain,  and  let  .hie  people  go  to  the
wall !  What  is  the  matter  ?  "  O,  they
marry  their  wives!  they  father  their
children,  they  honor  and  care  for
them,  instead  of  casting  them  into
the  mire  and  filth  of  the  streets  to
perish  !  The  women  they  marry  they
take  truly  to  their  bosoms,  and  lovej
honor  ami  cherish,  and  sustain  and
bless  them,  instead  of  secretly  stealing
around,  more  like  low,  crouch ing
brutes  then  men,  to  seduce  the  fair
daughters  of  E^e;  and  when  they
have  giatiHed  their  lust,  cast  them
off  ana  their  offspring,  to  be  forever
looked  upon  with  reproach,  0,  yon
Latter*day  Saints,  we  cau't  endure
you!  you  will  not,  descend  ton  level
vviilj  us  we  congressmen  are  after  you,
we  will  teach  you  morals!  No  matter
how  many  mistresses  you  may  have,
we  do  not  enter  any  corn plai nt  against
that  phase  of  it,  the  bills  we  have
introduced  are  not  intended  to  prevent
your  having  and  keeping  as  many
courtesans  as  you  may  choose  to,  but
it  is  to  prohibit  your  marrying  them!"

Brethren  and  sisters,  I  will  not
detain  yo  1  longer.  God  bless  yon.
Let  us  be  men  a? id  wom<  u,  true  to
ourselves,  true  to  our  God,  true  to  the
holy  religion  we  have  received,  and
by  and  by,  those  who  now  seorn,  re-
vile, abuse,  belie,  defame,  and  seek
to  trample  us  in  the  dust,  will  honor
out  memory  and  bless  our  children.

That  heaven  may  protect  us  is  my
prayer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


330


JOUKNAL  or  UJSCOCRSKS


DISCOURSE BY KhDKR ORSON  PliATT,


Delivered  at  the  Annual  Coa  fur&nck,  Salt  Lake  Cur,  Sunday

Morning,  April  7,  1878.


(Reported  by  Geo,  F.  ftibhs.)


rARAI'LE  OF  THE  VINEYARD  — THE  GRADUAL  ORGANIZATION  OF  THE
CHURCH — DUTIES  OF  OFFICERS — UNION  IN  ALL  MATTERS  ADVANTA-
GEOUS AND  INEVITABLE — POLITICAL  AND  RELIGIOUS  GROWTH.


I  will  rail  the  attention  of  this  large


embly  to  the  latter  part,  of  a  very
important  and  extensive  parable,  re-
corded in  the  Book  of  Mormon.

The  speaker  rend  fro  in  the  Book  of
Mormon,  commencing  at  the  128th
page.

I  have  read  these  words  of  the  an-
cient prophet,  to  whom  it  seemed
good  unto  the  Lord  to  reveal  his  par-  j
poses  and  designs  in  regard  to  the  in-
habitants of  this  earth,  by  means  of
the  trees  of  the  vineyard,  culling  the
house  of  Israel,  the  literal  descendants
of  Israel,  the  natural  ttees  of  his  vine-
yard ;  and  the  other  nations,  whom
we  term  Gentiles,  as  the  wild  brunch-
es of  the  wild  olive  tree.

I  have  read  only  a  small  portion  of
the  Utter  part  of  this  extensive  pa-  !
rafale,  that  part  which  more  partic-
ularly relates  to  the  great  work  which
we,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  are  now  pet-
funning  in  the  earth.

Forty-ei^ht  years  ago,  yesterday,
after  this  Book  had  been  printed
making  known  this  great  parable  to
the  people,  the  Church  arose,  consist-
ing of  only  six  individuals.  From
that  lime  until  the  present,  as  the
Church  tins  grown  and  extended  its
borders,  the  Lord through  his  ser-


vants, has  been  organizing  his  Priest-
hood. We  speak  of  the  Church  being
organized  on  the  (Mi  day  uf  April,
1830,  and  ot  it  consisting  then  of  only
six  members* No  one  could  expect
that  with  that  very  sniall  number
there  could  l>e  a  very  perfect  organi-
zation. But  so  fat  as  there  were  in-
dividuals introduced  into  the  Church,
on  the  day  of  its  organization,  the
Lord  pave  a  revelation  concerning
their  duty* And  alter  the  Church
bad  extented  forth  its  borders,  and  a
few  hundred  individuals  were  gather-
el  unto  it,  in  the  year  thai  it  was  or-
ganized, a  still  further  orgtnizatiun
took  place  j  and  it  was  but  a  few  years
until  the  Church  stood  forth  in  a
more  perfect  organization  then  it  had
on  the  day  of  its  foundation.  Twelve
men  were  called  to  be  Apostles  accord-
ing to  a  certain  prediction  <*iven  some
ten  mouths  before  the  or^ainz-itiou  of
t  he  Church.  About  this  same  period  uf
time  the  lirs-  seventy  elder*  wure  cho-
slvs,  which  perfected  the  organisation
still  more. And  also  in  those  early
days  the  High  Prieshood,  sitter  the
order  of  Mi'lcnisedec,  was  made  mani-
fest mure  fully  and  men  were  ordain-
ed to  that  order  of  priesthood-  In
those  early  days  also  tire  Lesser  Priest


PARABLE  OF  THE  VINEYARD,  ETC.


J  O  i


hood,  or  the  priesthood  after  the  order
of  Aaron  was  made  manifest  more
perfectly  in  the  eyes  of  the  people,
bishops  were  culled  and  their  duties
defined,  requiring  them  to  manage,  in
conjunction  with  the  higher  authori-
ties, the  temporal  concerns  of  the
Church,  This  organ  iz  ttiun  continued
to  increase  mid  grow,  and  become
more  and  more  perfect,  untill  finally,
temples  were  boilt  to  the  name  of  the
Lord,  when  the  dutieaof  these  various
councils  of  priesthood  were,  in  a
greater  degree,  made  manifest  before
the  people.  The  teachings  were  many
that  were  imparted  in  those  days,  and
a  union  began  to  exist  among  the
Saints  of  God,  such  as  had  not  b^en
known  among  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  for  many  long  generations.

After  the  completion  of  the
Temple  at,  Kirtland,  and  this
more  perfect  organization  had  been
established,  the  Saints  of  God  began
to  increase  and  multiply  to  that  extent
that  the  Lord  saw  proper  to  place
them  in  a  cunntry  and  land  by  them-
selves,  where  they  could  have  a  chance
to  enlarge  their  borders,  to  lengthen
the  cords  of  their  habitation,  to  break
forth  on  the  left  and  on  the  right,  and
where  there  might  be  a  majority  in
the  land,  and  where  they  might  have
the  privilege  of  serving  the  Lord  their
God,  according  to  tht r  dictate*  of  their
conscience.

Thos  you  see  our  Heavenly  Father
has  been  at  work  among  this  people,
and  with  this  people,  fur  almost  one
half  of  a  century,  bringing  together,
gathering  the  branches  of  the  wild
olive  tree  from  the  distant  nations  of
the  earth  and  grafting  them  in  and
making  them,  as  it  were,  one  body,
ou  this  great  western  hemisphere*

You  may  ask,  what  great  purpose
the  Lord  has  in  thus  organizing  his
people,  year  after  year,  The  answer
is,  to  accomplish  a  very  important
oijeet,  namely  to  make  thtrm  like


f


nnto  one  body,  that  there  may  be  a
most  perfect  union  ffom  the  highest
officer  in  the  Church  down  to  the
lowest  member;  that  there  may  be
no  disunion,  no  divisfbp  of  feeling  or
sentiment  in  regard  to  doctrine  or  or-
dinances or  in  any  of  the  principles
pertaining  to  the  Gospel  of  the  Son
of  God  ;  and  that  ther^  may  be  no  di-
vision in  our  political  ideas  and  senti-
ments, but  that  a  perfect  oneness  may
exist  in  the  heart  of  every  male  and
female,  from  the  gray  headed  ol<3  man
down  to  the  little  child,  that  one  feeU
in;*  and  one  spirit  may  pervade  the
whole  body,  that  they  may  be  cquaf
and  bring  forth  the  natural  fruit  again.
That  is  the  object;  that  is  the  reason
why  you  behold  the  organization  such
as  now  exists  throughout  all  these
mountain  regions.  W  hen  has  the
Church,  from  its  commencement  ex-
hibited what  we  now  behold  in  all
parts  of  our  land — stakes  of  Zion
having  jurisdiction  over  every  branch
in  the  Church  in  these  mountains,
and  over  every  family  and  every  indi-
vidual. And  every  one  of  these  sta-
kes has  its  presiding  officer  with  hia
two  councilors;  and  is  also  composed
of  numbers  of  wards  over  which  bi-
shops, with  their  counselors  are  ap*
pointed  to  preside.

What  is  the  duty  of  the  presiding
officers  of  these  stakes  ?  To  see  that
all  things  under  their  watcheare  are
conducted  according  to  the  order  of
God,  to  look  to  the  spiritual  concerns
first,  that  pertain  to  their  stake,  and
to  see  that  the  high  priests,  the
seventies,  the  elders,  the  priests,  the
teachers,  and  the  deacons  are  all  doing
their  respective  duties,  according  to
the  requirements  of  the  Most  High  ;
and  then  they  act  us  the  presiding  au-
thority and  power  over  the  bishops  that
may  be  in  the  several  wards  of  their
stakes,  seeing  also  that  they  are  in
the  performance  of  their  duty,  in  re-
lation to  temporal  matters.  And  then


«


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


all  the  o?her  authorities  under  these
presiding  officers  of  stakes  ate  to  see
that  those,  under  their  immediate
watch -care,  are  performing  their
duties,  according  to  the*  laws  of  heaven
which  have  been  revealed  fur  our  guid-
ance*

When  all  things  arein  proper  work-
ing order,  and  when  every  bishop  is
li vine  his  religion,  and  has  the  spirit
of  his  bishopric  resting  upon  him,
and  he  fully  under  stands  the  nature  of
hie  rloiies,  everything  in  regard  to
temporal  atf'iirs  will  move  like  clock-
werk,  a ntl  there  will  lie  no  running
down,  as  it  wire,  of  the  clock,  no
deranging  of  the  machinery,  but  every
part  will  fulfil  that  which  is  required
of  it  in  relation  to  its  particular  call-
ing, and  all  these  various  quorums  of
priesbood  will  stiive  to  Mir  up  the
people  to  a  oneness  in  regard  to  spiri-
tual things ;  thus  we  keep  spiritual
and  temporal  things  running  parallel
to  each  other,  connected  more  or  less
together.  So  that  the  whole  church
becomes  like  unto  one  body,  they  be-
come equal,  *4  And  the  root,  and  the
top  thereof  is  equal,"  Indicating,
when  these  thing  are  caried  out  strict-
ly, that  the  branches  will  not  have
power  to  overrun  and  grow  beyond
the  strength  of  the  rout;  neither
would  tibe  roots  have  power  to  out-
grow t  he  branches.  The  husbandmen
trimmed  up  the  trees  of  the  vine-
yard, and  they  pruned  them;  or
in  other  words,  the  servants  of  the
Lord  teach  the  people,  and  instruct
them,  so  that  they  may  become  one
in  all  tilings.  What  !  become  one  in
our  views  in  regard  to  politics  ?  Why
cot?  One  may  say,  If  you  undertake
to  carry  out  such  views  of  union  in
regard  to  political  affairs,  you  will  fill
vote  t lie  same  ticket  ;  thete  will  be
no  division  nor  disunion  throughout
all  the  Church  organization,  and
would  not  such  a  state  of  things  be
antagonistic to the  genius  of  our


American  government  ?  Wherein,  T
would  auk,  would  it  be  contrary  ?  Is
there  any  principle  connected  with
our  government  that  would  forbid  us,
ns  a  people,  becoming  so  united  ?
Dors  the  constitution  of  our  country
in  any  one  particular  prohibit  Ameri-
can citizens  from  uniting  and  casting1
a  solid  vote  in  favor  of  any  eligible
candidate  who  may  be  regularly
nominated,  say  for  the  position  of
President  of  the  United  States!  1
know  of  uo  such  restriction;  there  is
none.

Supposing,  then,  that  all  the  states
of  tliis  union  at  the  next  general
election,  should,  without  one  dissent-
ing voice,  conclude  in  their  own  minds
to  vote  for  one  and  the  same  individ-
ual, making  him  our  president,  what
part  or  portion  of  the  Constitution  of
our  country  would  be  violated  by
such  a  united  effort  f  None  whatever  ;
because  it  is  the  privilege  of  the  pe  pie
to  unite  or  divide  as  they  may  choose,
there  being  no  compulsion  one  way  or
the  other.

Whic'i  is  calculated  to  produce  the
greatest  good,  union  throughout  all
the  states,  concentrated  not  only  upon
the  president,  but  upon  t  he  governors,
and  all  of  onr  political  officers,  or
disunion  and  party  strife.  Everybody
would  certainly  agree  with  me  in
saying  that  union  in  such  matters
would  be  the  best  calculated  to  pro-
mote the  interest  and  comm  m  good
of  our  government  and  people;  that,
to  be  without  a  single  dissenting
voice  in  our  election  aff*ira  from
Maine  to  Texas,  from  the  Atlantic  to
the  Pacific,  all  concentrating  them-
selves upon  the  officers  they  want,
and  then  vote  for  them  unanimously
would  be  carrying  out  the  form  of
the  American  government  in  its  per-
fection. But  our  fathers,  who  framed
that  Great  instrument  of  nationality
— -that  instrument  by  which  all  classes
of  people  are  protected  in  their  rights


PARABLE  OF  THE  VINEYARD,  ETC


333*


— provider!  for  disunion,  if  the  people
should  feel  disposed  to  introduce  it.
Showing  that  they  were  permitted  to
dissent  and  vote  fur  as  many  candi-
dates as  they  may  choose  \o  nomi- !
iiafe*  t  1

But  in  the  Church  of  the  living
God,  according  to  the  onenfcs  reqn i  1 1 1  \
bv  the  Lord  of  herwen,  we  should  act

m

unitedly  in  nil  things.  Some  may
have  an  i  lea  that  if  we  are  only  uni-
ted about  some  of  the  spiritual  things
of  the  kingdom  that  is  all  the  union  j
needed  among  n&  I  do  not  know  of
any  tine  principle, or  subject,  connected
with  the  building  up  and  advancement
of  the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the
earth,  upon  which  we  have  a  right  to
be  disunited.  The  law  of  God  is  of
such  a  nature,  when  complied  with
strictly,  as  to  unite  us  not  only  in  the  '
first  principles  of  the  Gospel — f  iith,
repentance  and  baptism,  and  confir-
mation, and  upon doctrineand spiritual
things  generally,  but  aUn  in  regard
to  the  cultivation  of  the  earth,  the
raising  of  flocks  and  herds,  manufac-
turing, and  all  kinds  of  mechanical
business,  and  also  with  regard  to  our
political  affairs  and  everything  with
which  we  have  to  do  here  in  this
temporal  probation.  There  are  some
great  political  parties  very  much
united,  and  how  diligently  they  strive
to  make  themselves  still  more  united.
The  Republican  and  Democratic  part-
ies vie  with  each  other  in  their  efforts
to  elicit  the  sympathy  of  a  majority
of  the  people,  in  order  to  become  the
dominant  party.  Hence  the  great
number  of  political  agents,  that  go
forth  throughout  the  country  stnmp
speech ing,  as  well  as  other  means
that  are  resorted  to  for  this  purpose.
Is  there  anything  in  the  Constitution
of  our  country  prohibiting  them  from
striving  to  bring  about  disunion  ?  No,
not  in  the  least.  Neither  is  there
anything  written  that  would  forbid
the  Methodists, the  Baptists,  the


Presbyterians,  or  any  other  religious
society  throughout  the  confines  of
this  great  republic,  from  striving
with  all  their  alight  to  vote  with  one
heart  and  one  mind,  both  in  regard  to
their  political  and  their  church  affairs.

That  is  what  we  are  striving  to  do.
We  are  laboring  in  faith  and  with
much  assurance,  that  the  day  will
d-iwn  upou  Iisael,  when  this  people
will  attain  to  a  perfect  oneness,  so
:unch  so  that  not  a  dissenting  voica
will  be  heard  or  raised,  in  regard  to
things  religious  or  secular,  from  one
end  of  the  Territory  to  the  other.

This  nnion  exis's  in  the  eternal
worlds.  If  you  should  dwell  there  for
the  period  of  ten  mil!  ions  of  ages,  yoa
would  see  no  dissension  among  those
who  dwell  in  yonder  celestial  worlds*
If  the  aff  tirs  of  a  celestial  world  were
divided  into  different  departments,
calling  one  politic.*!  and  another  reli-
gious, and  so  on,  you  would  find  tha
whole  body,  both  religious  and  poli-
cal,  vote  for  the  same  ticket,  if  I  may
be  allowed  the  expression  ;  they  would
he  agreed,  of  one  heart  and  one  mind.
This  oneness  among  the  people  uf
(jod  must  be  at  tainei  in  ibis  world,  in
order  t  hat  His  purposes  may  be  broug  hfc
about,  respecting  man  and  the  earth
on  which  lie  lives

How  much  reason  have  we  to  re-
juice  that  our  lathers,  a  little  over  a
century  ago,  begau  to  consider  tha
importaneeof  being  free  ani  untrarneH-
ed  in  regard  to  their  religious  ideas
and  opinions;  and  that  by  having
their  techn^s  so  deeply  impressed
upon  their  minds,  they  were  enabled
to  get  out  that  great  instrument  of
liberty  which  guarantees  to  this  great
nation  to-day  civil,  political  and  reli-
gious rights.

Our  enemies  would  try  to  frighten
us,  by  representing  before  the  Congress
of  the  United  States  there  is  a  union
among  those  Latter  day  Saints,  and
j  that  all  vote  one  way; Supposing  v%©


■ill


admit  this  to  be  true,  ought  not  Con-
gress to  rejoice  exceedingly  to  think
that  there  is  one  portion  of  the  people
under  the  fl>*g  of  this  great  and  glo-
rioosjteBiihlie,  that  have  strength  of
niindTsinhri.ent  to  bo  united  on  poli-
ties. I  presume  the  Republican  party
of  our  government,  that  lias  some
hundreds  of  thousands  united  with
them,  rejoice  exeedingly  to  think  that
they  have  as  much  union  among  them
as  they  have;  and  it  is  their  constant
labor  and  study  to  use  and  devise
every  means  in  their  power  to  main-
tain and,  if  possible,  increase  this
union.  Ami  so  we  intend  to  use
every  lawful  (not  unlawful)  means  in
oar  power  to  keep  the  people  united
upon  one  platform,  religiously  and
politically,  and  also  in  every  other  po-
sition in  which  we  may  be  placed.

Remember  the  parable  I  have  read
in  your  hearings  which  was  printed  in
the  Book  of  Mormon t  before  we  had
on  existence  ns  a  Church*  The  ser-
vants 1  u  bored  in  the  vineyard  with
their  mights.  What  for  V  To  prune
up  the  tree?,  to  graft  them  into  their


proper  place,  that  (hey  may  bring
forth  th0t  fruit  which  was  most  pre-
HousjP  the  Lord  from  the  beginning
and  nie  fruit ,  become  like  unto  one
body,  a  And  the  roots  and  the  top
there  1  Were  equal  And  the  blessings


of  the  ?J8»t  High  began  to  bo  made
manifest  toon  the  fruits  of  the  vine-


t  won

yard,  and  %faey  began  to  grow  and
extend  then^elves,  their  branches
spreading  upon  the  face  of  the  whole
earth.  What  v^ill  be  the  final  result
of  all  this?  I  will  answer  in  the
words  of  Diniel  the  prophet:  "  I  be-
held until  the  kingdom,  and  the
greatness  of  the  kingdom  under  the
whole  heaven  was  given  unto  the
Saints  of  the  Moat  High  "  And  what
became  of  the  o  her  kingdoms,  em-
pires, republics  and  govern  menta,
generally  instituted  by  men  r  I  will
again  answer  you  in  the  words  of  the
same  prophet :  41  They  became  like
the  chaff"  of  the  summer  threshing
floors,  and  the  wind  carried  them
away,  that  no  place  was  found  for
them."  Amen.


R E  M  ARKS

Made  at  a  Meeting  held  in  Nephi,  on  Wednesday  Evening,

May  15,  1878.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Gibbe  j


BIS  HOP  L.  W.  H  AHDY.

Brethren  Mid  sisters,  I  am  pleased
4o  meet  with  you,  and  to  see  so  many
present. I  am  requested  to  occupy


ten  minute*  time,  which  I  propow  to
devote  to  the  subject  of  Tithing.

Tithing  is  a  la  v  of  God  which
are  required  to  obey,  and  it  is  bi


ing  upon  all  the  Latter-day  Saints,
the  poor  as  well  as  the  rich.  In
some  place*  the  widow,  who  depends
upon  the  Church  for  support,  pays
one-tenth  of  her  income  as  Tithing.
Ami  this  course  I  would  recommand
to  all  in  similar  circumstances,  for  it
is  only  in  compliance  with  the  law
that  we  can  expect  to  obtain  the
blessings  promised*  Ami  the  poor
woman  herself  is  not  the  only  one
that  is  blessed  by  taking  this  course,
but  her  children,  if  she  has  any,  are
taught  a  lesson  that  will  not  be  for-
gotten, and  they  will  always  have
pleasure  in  its  contemplation,  as
long,  at  least,  as  they  are  worthy  the
name  of  Latter-day  Saint,  say  no-
thing of  the  influence  for  good  which
she*  wields  anions  those  of  more
favorable  circu instances.  It  is  not
the  amount  that  we  pay,  but  it  is
the  honest  Tithing,  paid  willingly
ami  in  the  faith  and  spirit  of  the
Gospel,  that  the  Lord  requires,  no
matter  how  small  it  may  he  :  and
then,  on  the  other  hand,  it  matters
not  how  large.  The  Savior,  when  on
a  certain  occasion  he  sat  near  the
treasury,  looking  at  the  people  how
they  cast  in  money — and  we  are
told  that  many  that  were  rich  cast
in  much,  but,  notwithstanding,  the
poor  widow  who  came  along  and
threw  in  her  two  mites,  which  only
make  a  farthing,  contributed,  he  said,
more  than  they  all.  u  For  all  they
did  cast  in  of  their  abundance  :  but
she  of  her  want  did  cast  in  all  she
had,  even  all  her  living/'  The  Lord
acknowledges  the  honesty  of  the
heart  by  providing  for  and  blessing
ns  with  the  necessaries  and  comforts
of  life  ;  and  he  will  continue  to  do
bo,  as  long  as  we  fear  and  obey  him
with  all  our  might,  mind  and
strength.  He  wilt  not  fail  in  the
fulfilment  of  his  promises,  inasmuch
as  we  are  found  worthy  before  him.
It  is  not  only  our  duty  to  pay  our


Tithing,  but  our  offerings  too,  that
our  poor  may  be  fed  and  clothed,
and  their  hearts  made  glad.  It  is
just  as  binding  upon  us  to  look  after
our  poor,  as  it  is  to  he  baptized  for
the  remission  of  sins.  How  do  you
think,  brethren,  the  Lord  would  re-
gard us  if  the  cries  of  the  widow  and
the  orphan,  the  aged,  and  the  halt
and  the  blind,  were  to  ascend  into
his  ears,  while  we  heed  them  not  ?
[  tell  you  he  would  not  own  us  as
his  people,  neither  could  he  pour
out  his  blessings  upon  us.  Then
pay  your  Tithes  and  your  offerings,
and  be  blessed  Attend  your  fast
meetings,  and  bring  in  your  offerings
in  the  time  thereof,  that  the  poor
may  rejoice  and  feel  that  they  are
not  neglected.  Why,  if  every  man
and  vtoman  fulfilled  his  and  her  duty
in  tliis  respect,  your  offerings  would
be  piled  up  so  high  that  there  would
not  be  poor  enough  to  eat  t  hem,  and
you  would  he  sending  up  tn  Bishop
Hunter  asking  him  to  send  you  some
pour  people  to  eat  them  up*  We
are  a  blessed  people,  we  enjoy  peace
and  plenty,  while  millions  of  our
fellow  beings  to-day  know  not  what
it  isjjo  enjoy  either.  But  supposing
«e  all  were  prompt  and  faithful  in
] paying  our  Tithes  and  offerings,
■  aqw  do  you  think  it  would  be  with
us  ?  Why,  He  would  be  mindful  of
his  promise  to  fulfil  it ;  He  would
u  open  to  you  the  windows  of  heaven,
and  pour  you  out  a  blessing,  that
there  would  not  be  room  enough  to
receive  it/1  And  further,  he  says
to  those  who  comply  with  this  law,
u  I  will  rebuke  the  devourer  for  your
sakas,  and  he  shall  not  destroy  the
fruits  of  your  ground,"  etc.  Then
pay  your  Tithes  and  your  offerings,
that  the  blessings  of  God  may  be
upon  us  and  our  land,  and  upon  our
orchard f,  and  that  the  hearts  of  the
poor  may  be  made  to  rejoice,  and
that  Temples  may  be  reared  to  his


836


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


holy  name,  and  the  work  of  the
Fattier  may  go  on  to  its  consumma-
tion, I  doubt,  my  brethren,  whe-
ther  a  man  can  save  himself,  much
less  prove  a  savior  to  his  dead,  who
neglects  to  Tit  lie  himself.  Weil,  I
sec  that  my  time  has  expired.  God
bless  vou.  Allien,


J ELDKil  ERAS  I  CS  SNOW,

I  propose  to  continue  the  subject
that  has  been  alluded  to.

In  a  very' early  period  of  the  his-
tory of  this  Church,  when  in  its  in-
fancy. tin1  Lord  said  unto  us  in  a
revelation  which  is  contained  in  the
PoHrine  and  Covenants,  u  He  that
is  Tithed  shall  not  be  burned,"  In
several  of  the  revelations  the  subject
of  Tithing  is  referred  ti>  in  a  general
way  ;  but  the  .special  revelation  on
that  subject  was  -riven  at  Far  West,
Missouri,  in  July.  1  s:^s,  in  answer
to  the  question,  44  O  Lord,  shew
unto  thv  servants  how  much  thou
requirest  of  the  properties  of  thy
people  for  Tithing."  And  by  this
revelation  we  learned  that  we  were
required  to  consecrate  all  of  our
surplus  property  for  the  purjwjses
mentioned  therein,  and  after  doing
that,  to  pay  annually  one-tenth  of

>  our  increase.  This  means  increase
from  every  source.  For  instance,  if
a  man  depend  only  upon  the  labor
of  his  own  hands,  than  one-tenth  of
his  earnings  would  be  his  lawful
Tithing,  But  if  in  addition  to  this
he  possess  teams  or  employ  other
labor,  t lie n  the  increase  of  such  labor
should  also  be  Tithed.  Again,  if  he
should  be  engaged  opening  up  farms,
building  or  making  other  improve-
ment:', thus  accumulating  a  surplus

*  around  him,  one-tenth  of  the  increase
of  such  property  would  be  due,  as
Tithing,  as  well  as  a  tenth  of  Ida
labor  combined.  Then  again,  should
part  of  his  surplus  property  be  in
jTich  a  condition  as  to  enable  him


to  invest  it  in  anv  branch  of  busi-
ness,  one-tenth  of  the  profits  arisi:i^
therefrom  is  due  Tithing;  of
should  he  have  money  loaned  out  on
interest,  on  every  dollar  so  accumu-
lated the  sum  of  ten  cents  belongs
to  the  Lord,  in  accordance  to  his
law  rejrulatim;  the  Tithing  of  his
peufiV  :  and  so  on,  this  hiw  strictly
applying  to  our  income  tlerived  from
every  source. /  ^  i  :i 1  ;

It  is  not,  as  some  verily  suppose,
the  Tithing  of  what  you  utay  have
left  after  deduct  ing  all  of  your  ex-
penses;  or  in  other  words,  after
spending  all  you  can.  There  are
some  calling  themselves  Latter-day
Sa  i  n  ts  who  try  to  a p  \  tease  their  oon-
sciciKV  in  the  belief  that  Tithing
means  the  tenth  of  what  may  be  left
after  deducting  all  expenses,  winch
would  amount,  to  this:  "  What  we
cannot  spend  we  will  give  a  tenth  of
that  as  our  Tithing."  How  much,
my  brethren  and  sisters,  do  you
think  the  Lord  would  <^et  if  all  of
us  felt  and  acted  so  t  This  is  not
the  law  of  Tithing  ;  all  who  aim  to
comply  with  it  after  this  manner
deviate  from  its  true  reading.  \\  "a
are  required  to  pay  the  tenth  of  our
increase,  or  interest,  or  income,  which
i>  our  Tit  hing,  and  wh  ich  is  necessary
for  the  general  welfare  in  building
Temples,  sustaining  the  Priesthood,
administering  to  the  poor,  etc.,
while  we  retain  the  nine-tenths  for
the  sustenance  of  ourselves  and  fami-
lies, etc,  3"

Brother  Hardy  expressed  himself
doubtful  whether  men  who  ignored
this  law  of  Tithing  could  save  them-
selves, much  less  save  their  dead.  E
will  here  say,  that  when  this  law  of
Tithing  was  revealed,  in  1818,  tho
Lord  said,  u  This  shall  be  a  standing
law  unto  them  forever/  and  "shall
Ik*  an  ensample  unto  all  the  Stakes
of  Ziom"  And  we  are  also  told  that
all  who  observe  not  this  law  should


lot  be  found  worthy  to  abide  among
the  people  of  God,  And  t ho  Lord
farther  says,  u  If  my  people  observe
not  this  law,  to  keep  it  holy,  and  by
this  law  sanctify  the  land  of  Zion  of
unto  me,  that  my  .statutes  and  toy
judgments  might  iio  kep*  therein,
that  it  may  be  mast  holy,  behold;
verily,  I  say  unto  you,  ir,  sb*H  not  be
a  hind  ofZion  unto  von"  This  was
the  word  of  tin*  LonJ  to  his  people  at
1 1 iTi t  earlv  dav%  and  it  has  never
changed,  bat  is  in  force  to  this  day
and  will  remain  so  forever.  Unless
certain  conditions  are  complied  with,
thi<4  chosen  hind  cannot  be  u  hind  of
Z  on  us.

After  tl.ix  luv  was  given  onto  os
we  were  driven  from  Missouri,  and
wu  built  a  Temple  at  Nauvoo.  And
when  that  Temple  was  sn  far  coru-
plett»d  that  a  haptisraal  tout  could  bo
established  in  the  basement,  and  the
Latter-day  Saints  began  to  have  ac-
cess to  the  same,  the  Prophet  ,To^'p!i
instructed  the  brethren  in  charge,  to
the  effect  that  none  should  be  allowed
to  participate  in  the  privileges  of  the
House  of  God  excepting  those  who
shall  produce  a  certificate  from  the
Gen  end  Cnurch  Recorder,  certifying
^o  the  fact  that  they  had  paid  up  their
tithing.  How  many  of  these  old
Saints  have  yet  preserved  amongtheir
old  papers  certificates  of  this  charac-
ter, issued  by  Brother  Wm*  Clayton.
And  should  any  have  hud  access  to  the
privileges  of  the  House  of  the  Lord
either  on  behalf  uf  themselves  or  t  heir
dead,  without  having  complied  with
this  la*,  thos  securing  onto  themsel-
ves, in  a  legal  and  proper  way,  the
right  of  the  Temple,  they  would  be
like  thieves  and  rubbers  that  enter  not
into  the  sheepfuld  by  the  door,  but
climb  up  50  me  other  *vay.  And  the
time  will  cO'ne  when  such  persons
will  lie  treated  as  thieves  and  robbers
— bound  hand  and  foot  and  cast  out
again.  This  is  the  testimony  I  wish
No.  22.


to  add  to  the  remarks  of  Brother


That  we  may  be  more  diligent
and  faithful  in  the  observance  of  the
laws  of  God  than  in  the  past;  and
that  through  faith  and  good  wotks  we
may  l)e  able  to  see  as  God  Fees  us,
and  be  L .-i tier-day  Saints  indeed  and
of  a  truth,  is  my  prayer.  And  by
thus  placing  ourselves  in  a  condition
to  receive,  we  will  see  if  be  does  not
fulfil  h is  promise,  by  opening  the  win-
dows of  heaven  and  pouring  out  a
blessing  such  as  we  can  hardly  con-
tain. Amen,


V  c  J  *HN  TAYLOR,

I  am  pleased  to  have  the  opportu-
nity uf  meeting  with  the  brethren  in
this  [lace.  As  we  are  only  making
a  pissing  visit,  being  on  our  way  to
Smpeie,  we  have  not  time  to  make
very  long  spec  hea.  I  have  been  in-
terested in  the  remarks  which  have
been  made,  and  1  presume  you  have
been  aiso

In  regard  to  our  religion  and  our
feelings  about  tilhing,  and  in  fact
eveiy tiling  else,  we  need  to  act  con.
scienticusly  before  God,  and  as  hon-
est men,  without  any  equivocation  of
any  kind,  In  regard  to  our  doctrine  and
the  principles  we  believe  in  ;  in  regard
to  our  deal  and  intercourse  with  nil
men  every  where ;  in  regard  to  our  as*
sociations  with  our  families  and  with
one  another,  we  ought  to  really  be
what  we  profess  to  be — L\  tier-day  a
Saints.  And  not  only  have  the  pro-
fession, but  seek  to  posses  the  prin-
ciples that  all  good  Litter  days  Saints
ought  to  be  in  posession  of,  and  which
are  our  privilege  to  possess.  It  is
qni?e  possible  that  we  may  deceive
une  another;  but  it  is  not  always  that
we  succeed  in  doing  that.  We  often
try,  but  we  make  a  poor  out  at  ir,  for
people  generally  are  not  so  much  de-
ceived as  we  may  think.  It  \s  true
they  may  not  Say  anything,  bat  a*  the

Vol.  XIX.


Jul  WSaL  ufr  I'MUL  ksks.


snmo  time  they  keep  up  a  loud  think-
ing about  it*  Bat  if  we  do  manage
to  deceive  each  other  we  cannot  de-
ceive God,  And  what  is  the  use  of
making  fi  profession  of  anything  un-
I  Lisa  we  carry  it  out.  Why  are  we
here?  Because  we  embraced  the
Gospel,  and  because  we  believed  this
was  I  he  land  of  Zion.  Why  do  we
attend  to  Temple  ordinances  ?  Be-
en use  we  believe  they  are  ordained
of  God,  and  are  mce^SKiy  for  our
Welfare  and  tha  welfare  of  our  proge-
nitor*. Why  do  we  build  temples?
Is  it  m  appear  liberal  towards  these
institutions,  in  the  ey^s  of  our  breth-
ren ?  It  should  nr.t  be.  But  it  should
be  became  we  believe  it  to  he  a  duty
devolving  upon  us,  and  because,  hs
Bltlers  in  Israel,  ilu-  L  ml  expects  ua
to  do  it,  because  it  is  n  part  of  the  plan
of  salvation  ordained  of  God  for  the
living  and  the  dead  ;  find  because  it  is
expected  to  carry  out  his  purposes  in
regard  to  the  world  in  which  we  live,
and  that  we  should  operate  and  co-
operate with  the  Priesthood  behind
the  veil,  in  all  sincerity  and  honesty
before  God  in  all  that  we  do  to  this
end,  for  as  one  of  old  said,  in  corn  tem-
pi at  ing  these  things,  Hell  and  de-
struction is  without  a  covering  before
thee/1  and  how  much  more  so  are  the
hearts  of  the  children  of  men.  And
how  pie  sing  it  is  to  operate  with  our
Heavenly  Father  in  all  sincerity  ;
how  pleasing  it  is  to  feel  that  God  is
our  Father,  and  that  we  are  his  child-
ren, that  we  are  his  covenant  people,
and  that  we  are  engaged  doing  his
work,  We  should  be  honest  with
ourselves,  honest  with  our  families,
honest  with  each  other  and  honest
with  our  God,  and  in  all  the  various
relations  ot  life.

The  subject  of  tithing  has  been  re-
ferred to.  We  profess  to  believe  in
it,  and  therefore  we  should  carry  it
out.  If  we  do  not  believe  in  it,  let
us  be  frank  enough  to  say  so,  and


quit, We  profess  to  have  faith  in
God,  and  that  it  is  our  duty  to  call
upon  him  morning  and  evening*  It
1  did  not  believe  that  the  Lord  would
hear  me,  I  would  not  tumble  [ovarii*
about  calling  upmi  him. But  I  do
believe  that  the  Lord  says  :  M  Ask,
and  it  shall  be  given  you  ;  seek,  and
ye  shall  find;  knock,  and  it  shall  be
opened  unto  you  :  for  every  one  that
fiskcth  receiveth;  and  he  that seeketh
findeth ;  and  to  him  that  knocketh  it
shall  be  opentd. Or  what  man  is
there  of  you,  who  it  his  son  ask  bread,
will  he  give  him  a  stone? Or  if  he
ask  a  fish,  will  he  give  him  a  serpent  ?
etc/* Jesus tried  to  impress  this
principle  upon  the  people  in  his  day  ;
but  it  is  difficult  for  us  at  iiiues  to
realize  it. And  again  he  instances
the  widow nnd  the unjust  judge,
showing  that  by  continual  prayer,  im-
portuning the  Fattier,  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  in  faith  that  he  will  hear  us,
our  prayers  will  not  be  in  vain.  We
should  feel  that  God  is  our  Father
and  that  we  are  his  children,  an  i  that
lie  has  promised  to  listen  to  our  prayer,
and  that  we  are  called  upon  to  be
obedient  to  his  will  and  to  cany  out^
his  designs. And  then  we  ought,  in
order  that  our  prayers  may  be  effectual
perform  the  various  duties  devolving
upon  us,  such  as  have  betn  referred  to,
and  we  should  be  honest  and  honor-
able in  our  dealing  one  with  another.
If  we  try  to  defraud  our  brother,  how
cau  we  expect  God  to  bless  us  in  that,
for  he  is  a  child  of  our  Heavenly
Father  just  as  much  as  we  are.  And
being  his  child  he  feel  interested  in
his  welfare,  and  if  we  try  to  take  ad-
vantage to  the  injury  of  the  Lord's
child,  do  you  think  he would  be
pleased  with  us  ? Formally,  accord-
ing to  the  Mosaic  law,  if  a  man  stole
anything  he  would  make  him  restore
it  four  fold. That  was  a  law  of  car-
nal commandments  and  ordinances,
j  And  we  are  living  under  a  more  ele-


vated  law,  and  occupying  a  higher
position  than  the  Children  of  Israel
did.  We  want  to  be  jast  and  gener-
ous to  each  other,  u  Thf>u  shalt  love
the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,
and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy
mind,  and  with  all  thy  strength.  This
we  are  told  is  the  first  commandment
And  the  second  is  like  unto  it,
namely,  "Thou  shalt  love  thy  neigh-
bor ns  thyself*  "  Do  we  do  this  ?  If
we  did,  then  how  pleasantly  we  could
come  before  the  Lord.  Yet,  if  we
were  living  our  religion,  possessing
the  light  and  intelligence  of  Godf  we
would  do  so.  But,  to  go  a  little
further,  quitting  from  the  injunction
of  Paul  :  *4  Bt?  kindly  nffectioned  one
to  another  with  brotherly  love;  in
honor  preferring  one  another."  Could
you  go  that,  do  you  think  ?  There
would  first  have  to  be  a  little  change
among  some  of  us.  Yet  those  were
the  principles  taught  by  some  of  the
former-day  Apostlrs,  and  it  is  just;  ay
true  to  day  as  it  was  then.  There  is
something  very  pleasing  in  these
things  j  and  if  we  could  only  carry
them  nut  how  pleasant  it  would  be  ;
we  would  have  confidence  in  every
man.  We  king  sometimes  something
like  tin*  and  we  sin^  it  quite  glibly
too  :  "When  every  man,  in  every
place  shall  meet  a  brother  and  a
friend/'  Do  you  ever  remember  hear-
ing folks  sing  that  ?  If  we  were  one  and
all,  so  united  us  to  inspire  that  confi-
dence in  all  our  acts  and  doings,  so
far  :is  we  were  concerned  in  our  im-
mediate vicinity,  every  man  would
meet  a  brother  and  a  friend ;  and  the
same  would  also  be  said  of  our  sisters.
These  are  the  kind  of  feelings  the
Gospel  ought  to  inspire  in  our  hearts:
Jove  tor  one  another,  a  feeling  of  inter-
est in  one  another'?  welfare  and  so
fulfil  the  law  of  Christ— the  law  of
the  Gospel

And  then  men  should  feel  right  to-
wards their  wives  and  treat  them  in


kindness  and  with  regard,  not  allow-
ing our  love  to  wear  out.  We  might
have  been  a  little  foolish  in  our
younger  days,  when  doing  our  court-
ing, paying  to  much  attention  to  the
object  of  our  affection,  whereas,  by
and  by,  we  pay  too  little  attention.
We  should  so  live  that  our  love  for
ench  other  can  increase  all  the  time
and  not  diminish,  and  have  chanty
in  our  bosoms  so  that  we  may  bear
with  one  another's  infirmities,  feeling
that  we  aie  the  children  of  God, seek-
ing to  carry  out  his  word  and  will
and  law.  And  then  treat  everybody
right.  What,  the  Gentiles?  Yes,
certainly  ;  it  would  be  a  pity  if  we
could  not  afford  to  treat  everybody
honorably  and  right.  These  u  damned
Gentiles/'  as  yon  are  sometimes
pleaded  to  call  them,  are  the  children
of  our  Heaveuly  Father.  What  was
the  Gospel  introduced  into  the  world
for?  What  was  the  promise  made
to  Abraham  ?  "In  thy  seed  shall  all
the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed,5*
not  cursed.  What  was  the  mission
that  Jesus  gave  to  his  disciples?  "Go
ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the
Gospel  to  every  creature."  What,  to
the  Gentiles?  Yes;  were  not  you
among  that  class  when  the  Gospel
reached  yon?  Yes,  you  were,  and  if  the
nlders  had  not  gone  out  to  preach  the
Gospel  yon  would  not  have  been  here?
Well,  shall  we  treat  men  aright  here.
Certainly  j  but  that  is  not  to  say  you
shall  be  governed  by  any  of  their
meanness  or  corruption.  God  sends
us  to  teach,  not  to  be  taught  or  to  be  in-
fluenced by  anything  improper  or
impure;  he  sends  us  to  elevate  the
standard  of  truth  and"  to  act  the  part
of  a  friend  to  all  men,  but  not  to  be
partakers  of  their  sins,  or  mix  up  with
them  in  their  vice  and  contention* ;
but  preserve  our  bodita  and  spirits
pure  together,  that  we  may  be  the
children  of  God  without  rebuke  in  tke
midst  of  a  corrupt  and  perverse  geae*


340


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ration.  What  would  I  do  with  the
hungry  ?  I  would  feed  them.  What
if  they  were  not  good  people?  Yea,
you  and  1  ran  well  a  fiord  to  treat
everybody  ritjht.  God  makes  his
sun  to  shine  on  the  evil  hs  well  as  the
good ,  and  he  sends  his  rain  on  the
just  arid  the  unjust,  But  do  not  de-
scend to  their  evils  and  wickedness
and  corruptions,  nor  te  the  evils  and
nicked  news  of  those  who  call  them-
selves Latter  day  Saints,  who  are
not,  who  do  not  keep  the  command-
ments of  God,

I  am  a  believer  in  the  things  the
brethren  have  been  speaking  about,
they  are  matter  of  fact  principles.
There  ar*  some  Christian  people  in
this  world  who,  if  a  man  were  poor
or  hungry,  would  say,  let  us  pray  for
him.  1  would  suggest  a  Utile  diffe-
rent regiment  tor  a  person  iu  this
Condition  :  rather  take  him  a  bag  of
flour  and  a  little  beef  or  pork,  and  a
little  sugar  and  butter.  A  few  such
comforts  will  do  him  more  good  than
your  prayers.  And  1  would  be
ashamed  to  ask  the  Lord  to  do  some-
thing that  1  would  not  do  myself.
Then  go  to  w*ork  and  help  the  poor
yourselves  first,  and  do  all  you  can  for
them,  and  then  call  upon  God  to  do
the  balance,  So  with  the  building  of
our  Temples  and  everything  else.
Never  mind  so  much  about  the
prayers ;  prayers  are  all  very  well  in
their  place.  Theie  is  an  old  saying
which  is  not  without  meaning;  it  is
"  Yankee  doodle,  doit"  Let  us  do
something  and  feel  that  we  are  men
among  men,  and  that  we  are  prepared
to  fill  the  various  responsibilities  de-
volving upon  us,  and  then  things  will
move  along  right  enough.  We  get
excited  so  me  times  and  want  to  do
everything  in  a  rush.  Why  the  world
was  not  built  in  a  day,  ntit  her  does  win-
ter change  into  summer  in  a  day,  it  takes
time- When  it  begins  to  get  a


warm  in  the  spring  yon  begin  to  plow,
and  when  you  cast  in  the  seed  you
do  not  expect  to  reap  on  to-morrow  ;
but  you  wait,  and  by  and  by  the  grain
begins  to  sdioot,  and  every  things  looks
beautiful  and  green,  and  when  it  com-
mences to  head  oat,  you  begin  to  talk
about  the  harvest.  There  is,  however,
an  overwhelming  power,  which  is  the
power  ot  God,  at  the  buck  of  itf.
which  gives  life  <«nd  vitality  lo  all
nature;  find  it  moves  gradually  and
slowly,  but  surely.  We  want  to  grow
in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  and
love  of  God  in  the  same  way.

We  have  commenced  to  built  up
the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  like  the
grain  of  mustard  seed,  which  is  the
smallest  of  all  seeds,  it  will  grow  and
extend  until  the  whole  earth  shall  be
full  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  the
kingdoms  of  this  world  become  the
kingdoms  of  our  God  and  his  Christ
and  he  will  reign  forever.

We  will  try  to  be  united,  and  purify
ourselves  and  purify  our  families,  mid
purge  out  iniquity  from  our  house*
holds.  We  will  try  to  have  a  con-
science void  of  ofltmce  towards  God
and  man.  We  will  try  to  magnify
that  priesthood  God  has  conferred
upon  us.  And  we  will  go  on  from  truth
to  truth  ;  from  intelligence  to  intelli-
gence, and  from  wisdom  to  wisdom
until  we  see  as  we  are  seen  and  know
:is  we  are  known.  We  will  operate
together,  and  with  all  Israel  and  with
the  gods  in  the  eternal  worlds,  and
with  the  patriarchs,  prophets  and
apostles,  and  all  the  holy  men  of  God
who  have  lived  before  us,  in  assisting
to  bring  to  p*ss  all  the  designs  of  God
of  which  the  prophets  have  spoken,
aud  in  building  up  the  Zion  of  God,
in  redeeming  the  earth  and  establish-
ing the  kiagdom  of  God  theron.

May  God  bless  you  and  lead  you
in  the  paths  of  life,  in  the  name  of
Jesus.  Amen.


UNITED  ORDER,  ETC.


341


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  LORENZO  SNOW,

Delivered  ix  the  Tabernacle,  Ogden  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

April  21,  1878.


(Reported  by  James  Taylor .)


C  NIT  ED  ORDER — TITHING — CO-OPERATIVE  LABORS  IN  BRIGHAH  CITY.


I  will  read,  this  afternoon,  a  few  !
Terses  of  the  revelation  commencing
on  page  31  r>  of  the  new  edition  of
the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants  :

t£  L  Verily  I  say  unto  you  who  have
assembled  together,  that  you  may  learn
my  will  concerning  the  redemption  of  mine
afflicted  people.

'  2.  Behold,  I  say  unto  yout  were  it  not
for  the  transgressions  of  my  peop!et  speak-
ing concerning  flu*  church  and  not  indivi-
duals, they  might  have  been  redeemed
even  now.

"3.  But  behold,  rhey  have  not  learned
to  be  obedient  to  the  things  which  I  re-
quired at  their  hands,  but  are  full  of  all
manner  of  evil,  and  do  not  impart  of  their
substance,  as  beemneth  Saints,  to  the  pour
and  afflicted  among'  them*

*'4,  And  are  nut  united  according  to
the  union  required  by  the  law  of  the  celes-
tial kingdom.

14  5.  And  Zion  cannot  be  budt  up  unless
it  is  by  the  principles  of  the  la*-  of  ihe
celestial  kingdom,  otherwise  I  caunot  re-
ceive  her  unto  myself,

**6.  And  my  people  must  needs  be
chastened  until  they  learn  obedience,  if  it
must  needs  be,  by  the  things  which  they
suffer."

I  wish  to  remind  my  brethren
and  sisters,  in  the  tirst  place,  that
we  are  dependent  for  our  informa-
tion and  intelligence  upon  the  Spirit
of  Clod,  which  may  be  in  us,  if  pro-  I
perly  cultivated,  a  spirit  of  inspira-
tion, of  revelation,  to  make  manifest


clearly  to  our  understanding  the
mind4 and  will  of  (Jod,  teaching  our
duties  and  obligations,  and  what  is
required  at  our  hands.  And,  on
occasions  of  this  kind,  when  we  are
assembled  tone  titer  to  learn  the  will
of  God,  it  is  of  importance  that  we
exercise  faith,  and  have  the  spirit  of
prayer,  that  the  Lord  will  cause
something  to  be  said  that  will  in-
struct,  and  give  us  such  information
and  knowledge  as  will  be  of  use  and
service  in  our  daily  walk  and  under
the  circumstances  that  surround  us.

We  need  assistance.  We  are
liable  to  do  that  which  will  lead  us
into  trouble  and  darkness,  and  those
things  which  will  not  tend  to  our
good,  but  with  the  assistance  of  that
comforter  which  the  Lord  has  pro-
mised his  Saints,  if  we  are  care  fid
to  listen  to  its  whisperings,  and
understand  the  nature  of  its  lan-
guage, we  may  avoid  much  trouble
and  serious  difficulty.

We  are  told  in  these  verses  which
I  have  read*  that  the  Saints  in  for-
mer days  were  driven  from  the  land
of  their  possessions  because  they
lacked  that  union  which  was  neces-
sary for  their  safety  and  salvation,
and  to  preserve  them  upon  this  land
which  the  Lord  designed  to  give


U2


JUUKNAL  OF  DISCO UKSLS


them  for  an  inheritance.  They  were
not  united  according  to  the  union
which  was  required  by  the  celestial
law.  And  we  are  told  here  that
Zion  cannot  be  built  up  upon  any
other  principle  or  foundation.  This
is  the  subject  that  concerns  every
Latter-day  Saint,  and  is  well  worthy
of  deep  reflection,  and  we  should
seek  the  spirit  of  inspiration,  that
we  may  understand  it  properly,  and
how  it  may,  perhaps,  effect  us  in
our  present  situation.

There  are  principles  which  are
revealed  for  the  good  of  the  people
of  God,  and  cltarly  manifest  in  the
revelations  which  have  been  given;
but  in  consequence  of  not  being
more  persevering  and  industrious,
we  neglect  to  receive  the  advantages
which  they  are  designed  to  conier,
and  we  think,  perhaps,  that  it  is  not
necessary  to  exert  ourselves  to  find
out  what  God  requires  at  our  hands,
or  in  other  words,  to  search  out  the
principles  which  God  has  revealed,
upon  which  we  can  receive  very  im-
portant blessings.  There  are  re-
vealed, plainly  and  clearly,  princi-
ples which  are  calculated  to  exalt
the  Latter-day  Saints,  and  preserve
them  from  much  trouble  and  vexa-
tion, yet,  through  lack  of  perseve-
rance on  our  part  to  learn  and  con-
form to  them,  we  fail  to  receive  the
blessings  that  are  connected  with
Obedience  to  them.  These  principles
of  union,  which  the  Latter-day  Saints
in  former  times  ignored,  and  in  con-
sequence of  disobedience  to  them,
were  driven  from  Missouri,  are  called
by  different  names — United  Order,
Order  of  Enoch,  the  principles  of
Union  of  the  Celestial  Law,  etc.
When  we  search  the  revelations  of
God  in  regard  to  them,  we  see  that
wherever  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God  has  been  revealed  in  its  fulness,
the  principles  of  the  United  Order
Ave  re  made  manifest,  and  required


i


to  be  observed.  The  system  of
union,  or  the  Order  of  Enoch,  which
God  has  taken  so  much  pains  to
reveal  and  make  manifest,  lias  been,
and  is,  for  the  purpose  of  uniting
the  Latter-day  Saints,  the  people  of
God,  and  preparing  them  for  exalta-
tion in  his  celestial  kingdom,  and
also  for  the  purpose  of  preparing
them  here  on  this  earth  to  live  toge-
ther as  brethren,  that  they  may  be-
come one  in  all  matters  that  pertain
to  their  worldly  affairs,  as  well  as
their  spiritual  interests,  that  they
may  become  one — one  in  their  efforts,
one  in  their  interests — so  that  there
shall  be  no  poor  found  in  the  midst
of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  and  no
monied  aristocracy  in  the  midst  of
the  people  of  God,  but  that  there
should  be  a  union,  an  equality.  Be-
fore this  Church  was  organized,  in
April,  1830,  there  were  given  reve-
lations touching  the  Cnited  Order;
and  from  the  day  the  first  revelation
was  given  in  regard  to  these  princi-
ples, there  have  been  given  a  great
number  of  revelations  making  the
principle  of  the  United  Order  very
plain  to  the  understanding  of  those
who  wish  to  comprehend  them*
The  principles  and  system  have  been
pointed  out  in  various  revelations
very  distinctly,  so  that  the  Saints
might  not  err.  The  Lord  has  shown
us  that  he  considered  this  order  no
small  matter,  but  a  subject  of  vast
importance ;  so  much  so,  in  fact,
that4ie  has  pronounced  severe  pen-
alties on  those  who  disobey  its  prin-
ciples, and  promised  most  important
blessings  to  those  who  receive  it
and  conform  to  its  recprirements.
Doc.  and  Gov.,  page  327,  276,  256,
2G+.

The  Latter-day  Saints,  no  doubt,
have  made  very  great  improvement,
and  advanced  considerably  beyond
the  point  the  Saints  reached  when
they  were  in  Missouri,  and  were


UNITED  ORDEKj  ETC,


chastened  in  consequence  of  their
i tnt  having  conformed  to  the  princi-
ples of  union,  as  required  ;  but  when
we  see  these  sacred  principles  dis-
regarded, to  a  certain  extent,  so
much  as  they  are,  we  wonder  why
it  is  so,  and  how  it  is  that  they  are
so  much  neglected,  so  much  ignored
— principles  of  such  vast  importance
to  our  exaltation  and  glory,  and  for
our  safety,  and  on  account  of  dis-
obedience to  which  the  Lord  could
not  sustain  and  defend  his  people
in  the  State  of  Missouri,  but  suffered
them  to  be  overcome  and  expelled
by  their  enemies.

The  Lord,  when  he  counseled  that
Jackson  County  should  be  purchased
by  the  Saints,  was  very  strict  in
regard  to  the  manner  in  which  tliev
should  observe  the  principles  of
union  ;  and  he  called  one  of  his
servants,  and  told  him  that  he  would
make  him  an  example  in  regard  to
what  would  be  required  of  those
who  should  go  up  to  the  land  of
Missouri  to  receive  their  inheritance.
That  was  Martin  Harris.  (Doc,  &
Cov  .  see.  ;>8,  page  2<>3,  verses  :\5
and  36.)  The  Lord  said:  "It  is
wisdom  in  me  that  my  servant
Martin  Harris  should  be  an  example
unto  tin-  Church,  in  laying  his  monies
before  the  Bishop  of  the  Church,
And  also,  this  is  a  law  unto  every
man  that  cometh  unto  this  land  to
receive  an  inheritance  ;  and  he  shall
do  with  his  monies  according  as  the
law  directs/'

Now,  here  is  one  of  the  tirst  prin-
ciples of  the  United  Order,  and  it
was  made  and  ordained  a  law  by
every  person,  and  every  one  was
required  to  observe  it,  who  should
be  privileged  to  go  to  the  land  of
Missouri  to  receive  an  inheritance.
But  this,  1  think,  will  apply,  not
only  to  those  who  should  go  to  the
land  of  Missouri,  but  to  the  people
of  God  in  every  land.  Wherever


there  is  a  people  of  God,  the  princi-
ples of  the  United  Order  are  appli-
cable, if  they  would  receive  ami
obey  them.  Some  have  thought
that  the  United  Order  was  to  be
kept  only  by  the  people  who  should
go  up  to  the  land  of  Missouri.  Now
this,  I  believe,  is  incorrect.  It
would  seem  very  singular  that  the
Latter-day  Saints,  when  tliey  receive
the  Gospel,  should  not  have  the
privilege  of  uniting  themselves,  ac-
cording to  the  principles  of  the  celes-
tial law,  and  that  Jackson  County
should  be  the  ouly  place  where  this
law  might  be  observed.  I  shall  not
have  time  to  pursue  this  subject  so
particularly  as  1  would  wish,  I  will
simply  refer  to  some  revelations  in
regard  to  the  matter.

In  Kirtland,  Ohio,  there  was  a
United  Order  established  under  the
direct  influence  and  instructions  of
Joseph  Smith.  He  received  revela-
tions from  the  Lord  in  regard  to
this  subject.  And  there  was  not
only  a  United  Order  established  in
Kirtland,  but  there  was  also  a  Uni-
ted command  of  God  to  bo  esta-
blished in  a  locality  about  fifteen  or
twenty  miles  from  Kirtland,  in  a
town  called  Thompson.  And  the
Lord  gave  his  servant,  Edward  Part-
ridge, the  first  Bishop  of  this  Church,
revelations  and  important  instruc-
tions in  reference  to  organizing  a
Branch  of  the  Church  into  the  Uni-
ted Order  in  that  township.  And
Edward  Partridge  needed  these  in-
structions,  because  it  might  well  be
understood  that  he,  of  himself,  would
not  he  able  to  understand  the  mind
and  will  of  God  touching  what  was
rpq utred  according  to  the  principles
of  the  celestial  law.  Therefore,  the
Lord  told  him  it  was  necessary  that
he  should  receive  instructions  in
these  principles.  And  he  gave  him
instructions,  and  told  him  that  it
was  necessary  that  the  people  should


:44


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


be  organized  there  according  to  his
law,  otherwise  they  should  be  cut
off.  And  he  told  him,  furthermore,
that  it  was  their  privilege  to  be
organized  according  to  the  celestial
law,  that  they  might  he  united  upon
thope  principles?.  And  also,  in  this
revelation,  he  told  Edward  Part-
ridge that  he  should  have  the  privi-
lege of  organizing,  for  this  was  an
example  unto  him,  in  all  other  places,
in  all  other  churches.  So  it  was
not  confined  to  any  particular  loca-
lity, to  Kirthmd,  nor  to  Thompson,
nor  to  Jackson  County  ;  but  in  that
revelation  it  was  told  the  Bishop
that  this  should  I  e  an  example  unto
him  in  organizing  in  all  Churches.
So  that  wherever  Edward  Partridge
should  find  a  Church,  he  would  have
the  privilege  of  organizing  them  ac-
cording to  the  United  Order,  the
Celestial  Law,  or  the  ( >rder  uf  Knoch.

Now,  we  might  a&k  ourselves,  would
it  be  bupposable  that  there  could  be
any  transgression  or  that  we  would
offend  God  iu  ascertaining  what  the
United  Order  is,  and  then  conforming
ourselves  to  its  require  men  ts,  as  near
as  possible  ?

In  the  days  of  the  Prophet  Ezra,
the  Jewish  nation,  for  many  years,
had  been  in  captivity,  and  in  trans-
gression, and  been  permitted  *o  be
dest  roved,  and  driven  from  th^ir  loca-
tions  by  their  enemies*.  Well,  Ezra,
on  a  Certain  occasion,  saw  proper  to
bring  them  together  and  build  Jeru-
salem that  had  been  thrown  down,
The  Lord  aided  him  iu  this  work;
and  after  they  ha  !  been  successful  iu
building  the  walls,  they  commenced
reading  the  laws  and  revolutions  oi
God;  and  they  found  that  the  people
were  in  great  transgression,  and  in
disobedience  to  a  very  important  and
sacred  law,  and  that  was  in  regard  to
their  inter- marriages  with  aliens.
They  discovered  that  there  had  been
a  law  given  in  the  days  of  Moses,


that  they  should  not  give  their  daugh-
ters to  ti  e  sons  of  aliens,  neither
should  they  take  the  d?iughters  of
aliens  to  their son*. Well,  when
Ezra  made  this  discovery,  and  found
that  the  people  had  been  inter- marry-
ing1 to  qniie  an  extent,  he  was  in
consternation.  Ilesd  down,  plucked
the  hair  from  his  head,  and  his  heard
from  his  face,  and  rent  his  garments;
and  railed  nn  >n  his  God  to  forjjiv*?
the  people.  Well.finally,  the  prophets,
and  chief  men  were  called  together
and  had  a  consultation  ;  and  then  tho
people  were  called  together,  and  they
had  a  very  previous  time  in  making
the  thing  right  wherein  they  had
transgressed  this  holy  law;  and  how-
ever unpleasant tin*  requirements
were  in  regard  to  making  this  right,
it  was  considered  absolutely  import*
ant  to  have  the  ble^io^s  of  liod,  and
be  approved  of  him. Now,  I  do  not
say,  when  we  come  back  again  to  our
subject,  the  piinciples  of  the  United
Order,  that  this  might  be  our  position
with  reference  to  our  obedience  to  it.
Hut I  would  say  this*,  however,  that
if  these principles  of  the  United
Order  were  so  important  in  former
days,  and  the  Lnrd  by  some  thirteen
revelations  or  more,  has  made  them
manifest  to  his  Saints,  and  the  resul's
of  disobedience  were  such  as  we  see,
why  should  we  not  consider  thera  of
some  import  anon  at  the  present  time?
And  would  the  Lord  find  fault  with
the  people,  if  the  Latter-day  Saints
would  strive  with  all  their  hearts  to
conform  to  them  r And  would  we
not  feel  ourselves  better  prepared  to
l^o  ha-  k  jmd  build  up  Jack&on  County,
the  Centre  Stake  of  Zioti  ?  Would
we  expect  to  j:o  back  unless  we  com-
plied with  the  law  in  all  things,  and
in  consequence  of  disobedience  to
which,  the  people  were  expelled  from
that  country  ?

It  is  argued  by  some  that  when
the  principle  of  tithing  came  in,  it


UNITED  ORDER,  ETC.


3:5


snpersed  the  principles  of  the  United
Order.  The  law  of  Moses  was  given
to  he  a  school  master,  to  bring  the
people  to  a  knowledge  of  the  Son  of
God,  and  induce  them  to  obey  the
principles  of  the  fulness  of  the  Gos-
pel, The  higher  law  was  given  to
the  children  of  Israel  when  thev  were
first  delivered  from  Egyptian  bondage,
but  in  consequence  of  their  disobedi-
ence, the  Gospel  iti  its  fulness  was
withdrawn,  and  the  law  of  carnal
c ommandment*  was  added.  Now,  do
you  imagine  that  there  would  lu*vo
been  any  wrong  if  the  people  wanted
to  find  the  principles  of  the  higher
law  anrl  obey  them  as  n«*ar  as  circum-
stances would  admit?  Do  you  sup-
pose it  would  have  been  wrong  to
search  out  the  fulness  of  the  Gospel,
while  living  under  the  Mosaic  law  ?
But,  in  the  Book  of  Mormon  we  find
tins  point  more  fully  ill  nst  rated.  We  j
find  that  the  inhabitants  of  this  conti-
nent had  a  knowledge  of  the  fulness
of  the  everlasting  Gospel  and  were
baptized  for  the  remission  of  sin*,
man  j  generations  before  Jesus  came
into  the  world,  We  find  that  Alma
was  baptized  in  the  waters  of  Mormon,
and  some  four  hundred  and  fifty
other  individuals.  Alma,  bv  his
energy  and  perseverance,  had  discov-
ered the  fulness  of  the  Gospel  and
obtained  revel  at  if  his  from  the  Lord,
and  the  privilege  of  observing  the
Gospel  in  all  its  fulness  awl  blessings,

a  you  think  the  Lord  was  angry
with  them  ?  They  were  under  th**
Mosaic  law,  and  yet  considered  it  a
blessing  to  observe  the  higher  law.

Now  I  will  any  in  regard  to  the
matter  of  tithing,  I  think  that  law
was  given  to  the  Latter- day  Saints,
one  object  being  to  prepare  them  for,
and  conduct  them  to,  the  United
Order,  that  they  might  not  fail  into
the  same  error  as  the  people  who  were
driven  from  the*  State  of  Missouri,
but  gradually  be  inducted  in*o  these


higher  principles.  There  is  nothing
more  elevating  to  ourselves  and  pleas-
ing to  God  than  those  things  that
pertain  to  the  accomplishment  of  a

brotherhood.  Wise  men,  for  centuries,
have  sought  to  bring  tin's  ahout,  but
without  success.  They  had  not  the
ability,  the  wisdom,  the  intelligence,
nor  the  authority,  to  bring  the  people
up  to  that  standard,  that  they  could
become  a  united  brotherhood.  All
their  efforts  were  ineffectual.  But
the  Lord  will  be  successful ;  and  he
will  prepare  the  Litterday  Saints
that  these  principles  will  be  in  their
hearts  when  they  go  back  to  Jackson
County.  Remember,  while  the  Gos-
pel in  iift  fulness  was  observed  by
Alma  and  his  brethren,  and  by  many
thousands  in  different  ages  nf  the
world,  they  lived  tinder  the  Mosaic
Law,  and  cannot  the  Latter-day  Saints
under  the  law  of  tithing,  observe  the
fulness  of  the  gospel  ?  It  we  allow
that  we  are  under  the  principle  of  the
law  of  tithing,  is  there  any  harm  in
our  complying  with  the  principles  of
the  United  Order?

I  am  aware  that  it  is  unpleasant  in
the  ears  of  some  individuals,  to  hear
about  the  principles  of  the  United
but  take  the  Latter-day  Saints,  gene-
rally speaking,  throughout  the  vari-
ous settlements  of  this  Territory,
their  hearts  aeem  to  be  drawn  out
in  reference  to  this  principle  When
President  Young  first  came  info  these
mountain  valleys,  he  was  impressed
with  the  importance  of  this  principle,
and  he  took  the  first  steps  for  the  ac-
complishment of  this  union.  There
are  hundreds  and  thousands  of  indi-
viduals that  came  into  these  valleys
at  that  time,  who  comformed  to  the
first  principles  of  this  union.  There
are  many  of  us  that  consecrated  nil
that  we  possessed,  and  this  is  the  first
step  in  regard  to  the  United  Order.
It  is  very  possible  that  there  may
have  been  some  neglect  in  carrying


J  CRIMINAL  UF  DISCGUUSES.


forward  this  principle,  ns ,  perhaps
we  might  have  done.  This  J  would
not  sny  particularly,  bat  there  may
have  been  fault  in  us,  in  thig  matter
in  not  carrying  out  what  we  commen-
ced. In  things  (hat  pertain  to
celt  st  glory  there  can  be  no
foiced  operations.  We  must  do  ac-
corting  as  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
operates  upon  our  understandings  and
feelings*  We  cannot  be  crowded  into
mutters,  however  great  might  be  the
blessing  attending  such  procedure.
We  cmnot  be  lorecd  into  living  a
celestial  law  ;  we  must  do  this  our-
selves,  of  our  own  free  will.  And
whatever  we  do  in  regard  to  the  prin-
ciple^ of  the  United  Order,  we  must
do  it  because  wo  desire  to  doit.  Some
of  us  are  practising  in  the  spirit  of  the
United  Order,  doing  more  than  the
law  of  tithing  requires*  We  are  not
Confined  to  the  law  of  tithing.  We
have  advanced  to  that  point  that  wc
feel  to  soar  above  this  law.  Now,
we  have  thousands  and  tens  of  thou-
sands, and  1  might  say  millions  of
dollars,  that  have  been  appropriated
by  the  Latter- day  Saints  in  various
directions*  We  have  appropriated
tens  of  thousands  of  dollars  for  the
gathering  of  the  poor  and  the  build-
ing of  tabernacles,  and  for  many  other
things  that  might  be  mentioned.
Whe  u  we  do  this,  we  act  up  to  one  of
the  principles  that  pertain  to  this
United  Order.

The  Lord,  in  Kir! land,  established
&  United  Order,  lie  called  certain
individuals,  and  united  them  by  reve-
lation, and  told  them  how  to  proceed;
and  every  man  who  would  subscribe
fully  to  the  United  Order  will  proceed
in  the  same  manner.  He  told  those
people  and  the  Church  afar  off,  to
listen  and  hearken  to  what  he  required
of  men  in  this  Order,  and  of  every
man  who  belonged  to  the  church  of
the  living  God — that  all  that  they  re-
ceived above  what  was  necessary  for


the  support  of  their  families,  was  to
be  put  in  the  Lord's  storehouse,  for
the  benefit  of  the  whole  Church.  This
is  what,  is  required  of  every  man  in
his  stewardship.  And  this  is  a  law
that,  is  required  to  be  observed  by
every  man  who  belongs  to  the  church
of  the  living  God.  [Book  Don.  and
Gov.,  p.  234*]  Now,  this  if  one  of  the
the  main  teat  urea  of  the  United
Order.  We  are  not  going  tu  stop
here,  in  these  valleys  of  the  mount-
ains. Many  of  us  expect  to  go  forth
and  build  up  the  centre  stake  ofZion;
but  before  we  are  called,  we  must
understand  these  things,  and  conform
to  them  more  practically  than  many
of  us  do  at  the  present  time.

Wt'  are  told  in  one  of  these  revela-
tions that  it  is  necessary  that  we
should  be  equal.  It  we  are  not  eq  sal
ill  temporal  things,  we  cannot  be
equal  in  spiritual  tilings.  Men  on
whom  God  has  bestowed  hn an cee ring,
ability  ar^  the  men  that  are  wante  i
it  this  time — that  God  wants,  and
whom  he  would  wish  to  call  io  step
forth  in  the  accomplishment  of  this
grea:  union.  Now  we  call  men  at  our
conferences  and  send  them  forth  to
preach  the  gospel  to  the  nations  of
the  earth.  They  go  forth  in  the
strength  and  power  of  God,  depending
upon  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  assist  in  the
accomplishment  of  the  w  rk.  In  re^
gard  to  the  building  up  the  kingdom
I  of  God  here  nt  home,  persons  who
have  the  ability  arc  the  ones  who
should  step  forward  hi  things  that
would  lead  the?  Latter-day  Saints  to
this  union.  It  w<hik1  be  of  more  value
to  them  than  all  the  things  of  earth.
The  blessings  ot  God  upon  them  in
Liiiie  and  eternity  would  well  repay
them  to  step  forth  and  labor  for  the
Ziou  of  God.  We  are  told  that  too
priesthood  is  not  called  to  work  for
money,  but  to  establish  Zion.  What
a  lovely  thing  it  would  be  if  there
was  a  Zion  now,  as  in  the  days  of


l


UNITED  ORDER,  ETC.


Enoch  !  that  there  would  be  peace  in
oar  midst  and  no  necessity  for  a  man
to  contend  and  tread  upon  the  toes
of  another  to  attain  a  better  position,
and advance  himself  ahead  of  his
neighbor. And  there  should  be  no
unjust  competition  in  matter*  that  be-
long to  the  Latter-day  Saints.  That
which  creates  division  among  ua  per-
taining to our temporal  interests
should  not  be. The  Lord  considered
this  union  a  matter  of  importance,
and  he  uses  strong  expressions  in  re-  ;
ference  to  it. Speaking  iu  regard  to  '
those  who  should  disobey  the  princip-
les of  the  United  Order  after  receiving
it,  the  Lord  says,  u  I  have  decreed  in
my  heart  that  any  man  among  you
that  shall break the  covenant  by
which  you  are  bound,  he  shall  be
trodden  down  by  whomsoever  I  will,"
[p.  337.] And  he  says,  in  regard  to
some  parties  who  turned  away  from  ,
this  principle,  "  I  have  cursed  them  !
with  a  sore  and  grievous  curse.1'  He
says  in  another  revelation,  showing  the
sacred ness  of  this  order,  u  Therefore
a commandment  unto  you,  and  he
who  breaketh  it  shall  lose  his  stand-
ing in  the  church,  and  be  turned  over
to  the  buffeting  of  Satan  "  [p.  258.]
These  are  severe  penalties,  but  it  is
in  consequence  of  his  desire  to  prepare  1
a  people  for  celestial  glory.  Now,
shall  we  say  that  these  matters  do  1
not  pertain  to  us,  and  that  we  shall
leave  them  until  we  go  back  to  Jack-
Bon Coumty  ? I have  sometimes
thought  that  if  the  Latter-day  Saints
did  not  open  their  eyes  and  attend  to
these  tilings  very  strictly,  we  should
hardly  escape  these  afflictions,  but  be
persecuted  as  were  our  brethren  in
Missouri. After  the  instructions  we
have  received  during  the  last  forty
years,  shall  we  say  that  we  cannot  con-
form to  these  principles  ? Shall  we
say  that  we  shall  ignore  there  glonons
principles  that  pertain  to  this  exalted
brotkerhood  ?


Now,  we  are  trying  to  do  some
thing  in  Brigham  City  in  the  direc
tion  to  this  order;  but  there  seems  to
he  the  greatest  difficulty  with  our-
selves, when  we  come  to  these  tempo-
ral affairs. Our  old  ideas  of  things
have  a  wonderful  influence  over  us,
that  it  seen, s  a  difficult  matter  to
break  the  crust,  and  conform  wholly
to  the  requirements  of  the  United
Order. We  have  arrived  at  certain
points  of  union  in  our  city;  but  I  do
not  wish  to  speak  about  our  affairs
there  in  any  spirit  of  boasting,  for
when  I  consider  the  sacredness  of
those  principles,  and  the  importance*
of  them,  I  feel  my  insufficiency  and
un worthiness. To  engage in  this*
labor  seems  to  be  a  jjreafc  and  sacred
undertaking, President  Young  used
to  aay,  "  Why,  up  there  in  Brigham
City  Brother  Snow  has  led  the  people
along,  and  got  them  into  the  United
Order  without  their  knowing  it."  But
I  can  see  many  things  that  we  are
very  short  of  accomplishing.  We
have  not  entered  into  the  fulness  of
the  principles  of  the  United  Order,
but  we  talk  about  them,  and  many  of
us  try  to  conform  to  them,  and  get
the  spirit  of  them  in  our  hearts,  Now
we number about  three  thousand
souls,  and  we  have  moved  along  so
far  as  this — I  presume  it  is  a  little
further  than  you  haveinOgden — therft
is  but  one  store  in our  city  where
imported  goods  are  bought,  and  this
belongs  to  the  people. Now  that  is
consider  towards  a  union  in  a  people
of  three  thousand,  to  be agreed  to
do  their  trading  in  one  place — that
there  should  be  one  mercantile  estab-
lishment. Now,  you  have  more  than
one 'store  in  Ogden. Then,  we  have
united  a  little  further; we  have  but
one  tannery  in  our  city  of  a  popula-
tion of  three  thousand. We  have
|  but  one  shoemakers'  establishment —
an  association  of  shoemakers,  consist-
ing of  about  thirty  persons. There  if


348


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.

I  ■


no  competition  in  tins  business,  I  sup-
pose you  have  more  than  one  in
Ogden  ;  but  you  are  a  greater  people
than  we  tie,  several  times  over.  They
all  purchase  their  boots  and  r-hoes  at
tliis  industrial  department,  and  thus
the  men  engaged  in  this  business  are
sustained  by  the  people,  according
to  their  covenants;  and  there  are  nv
otber  shoemakers  ia  that  locality.
Well,  we  have  united  together  on  an-
other point,  that  is,  in  a  woolen  fact-
ory and  sheepherd.  We  met  with  a
loss  of  some  fifty  thousand  dollars  in
the  burning  of  our  factory,  and  the
destruction  of  oar  crops  by  the  grass-
hoppers. There  are  no  rich  people
in  Brigharn  City,  but  the  people,
through  their  union,  hare  erected  an-
other building,  much  better  than  the
one  destroyed.  We  expect  to  have
the  factory  in  operation  about  the  first
of  July.  This  &liows  some  proof  of
the  advancement  of  the  people.  This
-achievement  is  not  in  consequence  of
tlit*  pen  pie  there  having  money  ;  but
this  work— this  amazing  work,  as  1
consider  it — h»s  been  accomplished
in  consequence  of  the  advancement
that  the  people  have  made  in  this
union.  Well  we  have  but  one  black-
smith shop  in  that  city  ;  some  twelve
or  fifteen  work  in  this  establishment,
and  the  people  sustain  them  in  their
operations*  Those  engaged  in  the
various  branches  of  labor  feel  conti-
nent that  t)  e  people  will  patronize
them,  and  carry  out  what  they  have
agreed  in  this  particular,  and  they  do
not  trouble  themselves  about  ativ
other  employment,  or  business.  There
is  but  one  furniture  shop  in  Brigharn
City,  and  the  people  sustain  those
engaged  in  that  business*  I  suppose
you  have  more  than  one.  There  is
but  one  tin  shop,  and  it  is  patronized
by  all  the  people  of  Brightim  City.
There  is  but  one  lumbering  depart-
ment there,  and  the  people  sustain
the  parties  who  are  employed  in  that


business.  Some  eighty  or  one  bund-
red  persons  are  engaged  during  the
lumbering  season.  The  mills  are
owned  bv  the  people,  and  there  is  no
competition.  There  is  but  one  mil
linery  shop  in  that  city*  and  it  is
sustained  by  the  people.  You  have
more  than  one  here;  perhaps  yon
ought  to  have.  There  is  but  one
tailors  shop  in  Brigharn  City,  and
the  people  employed  in  that  business
are  patronized  by  the  whole  people.
I  might  mention  a  great  many  other
businesses,  but  will  leave  that  subject
now.

Now,  fnr  t lie  people  in  Ogden  and
the  people  in  other  settlement*,  it
would  be  a  good  thing  to  unite  toge-
ther to  supply  themselves  with  their
clothing,  food,  furniture,  building
materials,  ami  with  everything  that
pertains  lo  their  comfort  and  conve-
nience, without  being  under  the
necessity  of  em  ploying,  or  using,  those
things  that  are  imported.  You  have
a  great  many  wide-awake,  financeer-
ing  men  in  Ogden,  very  intelligent
men,  who  are  full  of  wisdom  and  stir,
and  have  the  principles  of  the  Gospel
in  them.  You  are  ahead  of  the  peo-
ple of  Brigharn  City  in  this  respect,
but  we  are  ahead  of  you  in  some
other  respects.  In  proportion  as  a
m*u  possesses  a  knowledge  over  his
brethren,  we  should  be  more  anxious
to  accomplish  good  for  Zion  ;  and  he
should  he  the  one  to  set  a  proper
example  for  the  union  of  the  people.
I  believe  if  the  Latter-day  Saints
would  go  forward  and  establish  the
United  ( >rder  in  their  midst  more
than  tliey  do,  the  Lord  would  more
abundantly  sustain  aud  bless  us,  and
provide  remedies  against  the  evils  to
which  we  are  exposed—  persecution
and  difficulties  from  outside,  that  we
will  not  talk  about  to-day.

The  sisters  here  in  Ogden  are  ac-
complishing considerable  in  regard  to
the  United  Order, They  are  uniting


UNITED  ORDER,  ETC.


349


themselves  together  to  do  a  great
work*  I  do  not  know  but  what  they,
in  eonnection  with  others,  will  be,
more  or  less,  the  salvation  of  Zion;
and  it  is  a  good  thing  for  them  to
persevere,  arid  for  some  ot  the  breth-
ren to  follow  their  good  example  in
this  respect

A  great  deal  might  be  said  in  re-
gard to  t he  principles  of  the  United
Order,  that  I  do  not  feel  to  talk  about
this  afternoon,  but  I  do  feel  to  urge
on  those  brethren  who  have  the
means  and  are  in  circumstances,  to
search  oat  the  mind  and  will  of  God
in  regard  to  these  matters,  and  let  us
try  to  build  up  Zion.  Zion  is  the
pure  in  heart.  Zion  cannot  lie  built
up  except  on  the  principles  of  union
required  by  the  celestial  law.  It  is
high  time  for  us  to  enter  into  these
things.  It  is  more  pleasant  and
agreeable  for  the  Latter-day  Saints
to  enter  into  this  work  and  build  up
Zion,  than  to  build  up  ourselves  and
have  this  great  competition  which  is
destroying  us.  Now  let  things  go  on
in  our  midst  in  our  Gentile  fashion,
and  you  would  see  an  aristocracy
growing  amongst  ua,  whose  language
to  the  poor  would  be,  *  we  do  not
require  your  company  ;  we  are  going
to  have  things  very  fine  ;  we  are
quite  busy  now,  please  call  some  other
time,"  You  would  have  classes  estab-
lished here,  some  very  poor  and  some
very  rich.  Now,  the  Lord  is  not
going  to  have  anything  of  that  kind.
There  bos  to  be  an  equality  ;  and  we
have  to  observe  these  principles  that
are  designed  to  give  every  one  th#
privilege  of  gathering  around  him  the
comforts  and  conveniences  of  life.
The  Lord,  in  his  economy  in  spiritual
things,  has  fixed  that  every  man,
according  to  his  perseverance  and
faithfulness,  will  receive  exaltation
and  glory  in  the  eternal  worlds — a
fulness  of  the  Priesthood,  and  a  ful-
uess  of  the  glory  of  God. This  is  tbe


economy  of  God's  system  by  which
men  and  women  can  be  exalted  spirit-
ually. The  same  with  regard  to
temporal  affairs.  We  should  establish
the  principles  of  tbe  United  Order*
that,  give  every  man  a  chance  to
receive  these  temporal  blessings,  I
do  not  say  that  it  would  be  proper  to
give  a  man  just  baptized  the  fulness
of  the  Priesthood  at  once.  Neither
would  it  be  right  to  sive  a  main  who
lias  just  come  from  tbe  old  country
the  home  and  possessions  of  him  who
has  been  here  and  labored  and  toiled
for  years  to  accumulate  them.  It
would  not  be  ti^ht  for  the  possessor
to  step  out  of  his  house,  and  let  the
one  who  has  never  labored  and  toiled
go  in  and  take  his  place;  but  this
man  who  bus  got  the  blessings  of
God  around  him,  should  be  willing
to  sacrifice  a  portion  of  his  surplus
means  to  establish  some  industry,
that  this  poor  man  can  work  and
obtain  a  good  remuneration  for  his
la  bur,  that  h*fc  can  see  comfort  and
convenience  before  him.  by  perse ver-
]  ing  as  he  has  done  who  has  been  thus,
l  blessed  This  is  the  spirit  and  aim
of  the  United  Order,  and  that  w§
should  endeavor  to  establish.  We
should  employ  our  surplus  means  in
a  manner  that  the  poor  can  have
employment  and  tee  before  them  a
competence  and  the  conveniences  of
life,  so  that  they  may  not  be  depend*
ent  upon  their  neighbors.  Where  is
tbe  man  who  wants  to  be  dependent
upon  his  neighbors  or  the  Tithing1
Office  ?  No  !  He  is  a  man,  and  is  the
image  of  God,  and  wants  to  gather
the  mean*  around  him,  by  his  own,
individual  exertions.  Blessed  of  God,
are  we,  who  have  surplus  means,  and
we  should  ha  williag  to  employ  those
means  whereby  such  individuals  may
have,  as  before  mentioned.  The
Uuited  Order  is  not  tfre>\di  Commu-
nism. It  i*  not  required  of  those
who  possess  the  means  of  living  i>


JUL  K iN  A  L  U r ±  ' l;*tAJ U  libisfe*


expi-nd  those  means  among  those  who
know  nothing  about  taking  care  of
and  preserving  them,  But  let  no
man  be  oppressed  and  placed  In  cir-
cumstances where  he  cannot  reach
forth  and  help  himself.

Well,  I  wanted  to  say  a  frw  tilings
by  way  of  suggestion  to  the  brethren.
May  God  bless  his  people  in  Ogden,


Take  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cov-
enants, trace  the  subject  of  the  United
Order,  and  you  will  find  it  explained
fully.  And  there  need  not  be  any
difficulty  in  regard  to  what  is  required
at  our  hands.

May  we  so  live  as  to  be  worthy  of
a  standing  in  the  presence  of  God.
Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  Tabeknai  lk,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Aftbrnooh,

June  16,  1878,


(Reported  by  Geo.  F,  Oibbs)


A  MARVELOUS  WORK — ANGEL  VISITATION — THE  BOOK  OF  MORMON —
KYI  DUNCE  CALCULATED  TO  EXCITE  FAITH — TESTIMONY  NOT  ALWAYS
TO  SALVATION.


A  very  .strange  thing  has  happen-
ed in  our  day— a  work  that  is  con-
sidered by  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  by  all  people,  to  be  a  marvelous
work  and  a  wonder  ;  something  al-
most entirely  unexpected  by  the
great  mass  of  the  human  family,
something  which  our  fathers  were
not  looking  for  has  happened  in  the
land.  What  is  it  ?  God  has  sent
an  angel  from  heaven.  What,  an
angel  in  the  latter-days  oome  from
heaven  !  Yes.  What  a  strange
thing  !  How  different  from  the  tra-
ditions of  our  fathers,  for  seventeen
centuries  past !  Tell  people  of  this
generation  that  God  has  sent  a  holy
angel  communicating  his  will  to
man,  and  they  will  be  ready  to
laugh you  to  scorn. They  have


formed  an  i<lea  in  their  own  hearts
that  angels  were  no  more  to  minister
to  the  hum: m  family.  No  messages
from  heaven  to  be  sent  by  them  ;
no  voice  of  the  Lord  to  be  heard
again  speaking  to  man  on  the  earth;
no  more  revelations  to  be  given  ;
no  more  Prophets  to  be  raised  up,
and  no  more  Seers  and  Kevelators
to  make  known  and  proclaim  the
will  of  heaven  to  the  people.  Such
were  the  traditions  of  our  fathers  j
such  were  the  traditions  of  some  two
or  three  hundred  millions  of  people,
calling  themselves  Christians.  Speak
to  them  about  more  of  the  word  of
God  to  be  given  to  the  human  fa-
mily, the  uaivertal  idea  and  excla-
mation of  the  nations  of  Chris  tea-
dom  would  be,  "  the  canon  of  Scrip-


UNITED  OKI) EE,  kTC.


3  1


ture  is  full/'  Who  told  them  this  ]
From  what  source  did  they  get  t  heir
information*  Did  the  Lord  ever
reveal  this  to  them,  or  is  it  a  crea-
tion of  their  own  imagination  1  Did
you  ever  hear  a  single  individual,
even  the  most  learned  and  wisest  of
them,  prove  this  assertion  by  the
divine  writings?  Did  you  ever
hear  of  any  lay  member,  minister  or
priest,  having  substantiated  these
ideas  and  traditions  in  accordance
wuh  Scripture  and  reason  1  Never,
never.  And  the  simple  reason  why*
is,  because  they  have  no  proof  or
evidence  to  sustain  their  position.
There  is  not  a  man  living,  however
learned  he  may  be,  however  familiar
with  the  Scriptures  of  divine  truth
he  may  be,  that  can  bring  one  idea,
by  way  of  proof,  to  support  these
traditions.  And  yet,  how  general
and  universal  these  things  have  been
circulated  anioag  the  nations,  and
imbibed  by  the  human  family  as
though  they  were  real  truths  !

When  the  Latter-day  Saints  came
forth  forty-eight  years  ago,  testify-
ing that  God  had  sent  an  an  ire!  from
heaven,  how  unexpected,  how  strange
to  this  generation !  Say  they,  **  The
Lord  onc^  had  a  religion  on  the
earth,  and  angels  were  included  as
part  and  portion  of  the  blessings
connected  with  it  ;  but  now  we  do
not  need  them."  Why  ?  "  Because
we  are  so  enlightened*  We  have
studied  the  Scriptures  and  become
so  effectually  acquainted  with  them,
and  also  with  science  and  everything
^else,  that  we  do  not  need  further
instruction  from  the  Almighty  ;  we
do  not  need  Prophets  in  our  day  to
foretell  the  future  ;  we  do  not  need
Revelators  to  come  forth  and  mani-
fest to  us  the  word  of  (jod.  Why,
we  are  m  enlightened  !  The  blaze
of  Gospel  light  is  •hining  forth  so
brilliantly,  we  can  get  along  with
human  learning  without  any  revela-


tion from  the  heavens/'  Have  I
not  expressed  before  this  congrega-
tion, the  real  ideas  of  the  two  or
three  hundred  millions  of  Christen-
dom, so  called,  that  live  in  the
various  civilize* I  nations  I

Now  let  us  go  back  to  the  real
principles  of  the  Gospel  to  find  out
whether  they  countenance  and  em-
brace the  visitation  of  angels.  His-
tory  informs  us,  that  before  the  flood
angels  conversed  with  men,  as  one
man  w  ould  with  another.  And  we
find  that  Abraham  and  Enoch  con-
versed with  God;  and  through  faith
Enoch  was  translated  from  mortality
to  immortality.  At  the  time  of  the
deluge,  we  learn  there  was  one  man
upon  the  earth  that  received  new
revelation  from  heaven,  and  that  he
and  seven  others  who  believed  on
his  word,  «  ere  the  only  ones  worthy
to  be  spared  from  the  terrible  judg-
ment which,  for  the  time  being,  put
an  end  to  wickedness  upon  the  earth.
A  fievelator  was  spared — the  only
man  anionic  them  who  could  com-
mu ue -with  the  heavens,  and  receive
information  from  on  high.

After  the  days  of  the  flood,  we
learn  that  the  Lord  made  to  Abra-
ham, Isaac  and  Jacob,  great  and
most  precious  promises  —  promises
concerning  things  of  eternity  and
thing*  of  the  earth.  These  men  were
called  and  esteemed  the  u  friends  of
God  f  they  were  perfect  in  their
day,  and  they  were  Revelators,  to
whom  angels  came  and  ministered
the  words  of  eternal  life.  They
were  the  only  ones  who  received
instruction  from  heaven  by  new
revelation,  and  who  were  counted
worthy  in  that  day  to  enjoy  the
divine  approbation,  and  to  be  called
his  friends.

So  likewise  we  may  come  down
to  the  days  of  Moses,  and  the  child-
ren of  Israel  who  were  in  Egypt.
Did  the  Lord  bless  them  ? He  did.


352  JOURNAL  OF

In  what  way  ?  By  speaking  himself,  1
and  also  by  sending  angels  to  ad-
minister in  their  midst ;  by  com-
municating revelation  by  day  and
by  night  while  the  children  of  Israel
sojourned  in  the  wilderness ;  by
revelation  they  were  taught  in  nil
the  on li nances,  and  by  revelation
they  journeyed  ;  and  when  the  Lord
commanded  them  to  pitch  their  tents,
they  remained  in  such  a  place  until
another  revelation  was  given.  Angels
communicated  the  things  of  God  to
that  people,  after  they  were  brought
to  the  Promised  Laud,  and  from
generation  to  generation  the  Lord
sent  forth  his  angels  to  minister
among  his  people.  Propli&t  after
Prophet  was  raised  up  in  their  re-
spective generations  to  declare  the
word  of  the  Lord  in  the  midst  of
all  Israel  ;  and  such  men  were  re-
garded as  the  mouthpieces  of  God.
And  so  it  was  continued  until  a  fe  v
centuries  before  Christ  Then  came
a  day  of  darkness  ;  then  came  a
time  when,  because  oi  the  wicked-
ness of  the  people,  no  angels  were
sent,  no  Re  vela  tors  or  Prophets
were  raised  up  in  the  midst  of  the
people.  The  consequences  were,  the
people  were  left  to  themselves  with-
out the  guidance  of  new  revelation,
and  instead  of  budding  up  and  esta-
blishing the  kingdom  of  God,  they
cheated  man-made  systems,  dividing
eff  into  sects  and  parties,  such  as
Pharisees,  Saddueees,  Essences,  etc.,
numbering  a  great  many  different
denominations.  And  they  estranged
themselves  so  far  from  the  ways  of
God,  and  became  so  wicked,  and
Satan  had  so  much  control  over
them,  that  when  Christ  came  preach-
ing to  them  the  everlasting  Gospel
in  all  its  simplicity  and  plainness,
he  found  them  in  such  a  condition
as  to  love  darkness  rather  than  light,
and  they  were  fully  prepared  to  im-
brue their  hands  in  the  blood  of  the


DISCOURSES.

Savior  of  the  world.

AVe  find  that  after  Christ  had
established  his  Church,  that  angels
continued  to  minister  :  and  one  of
the  Apostles,  on  a  certain  occasion
exhorted  the  former-day  Saints  to
Be  careful  to  entertain  strangers ;
for  in  so  doing  some  had  entertain,
angels  unawares.  And  we  find  that,,
during  the  first  century  of  the  Christ-
ian era,  angels  frequently  appeared  ;
and  revelations  were  also  given  by
the  gift  ami  po'.verofthe  Holy  Ghost
which  rested  upon  the  Apostles,  for
the  guidance  of  the  Church.  Paul
also  testifies  of  angels  in  thiswise:
*'  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits,
sent  forth  to  minister  fur  them  who
shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  f  Show-
ing ,  to  us  clearly  and  plainly  that
these  celestial  inhabitants  of  heaven,
— these  pure  sanctified  beings  that
dwell  in  the  presence  of  God  were
sent  forth  as  authorized  ministers  of
God  to  those  who  should  be  heirs  of
;  salvation  here  upon  the  earth.  But
by  and  by,  after  the  first  century  of
the  Christian  era,  the  heavens  be-
came as  i.rass  over  their  heads  again.
The  voice  of  inspiration  was  heard
no  more,  neither  did  the  voice  of
angels  salute  the  ears  af  mortals.
No  visions  among  the  people,  the
vail  of  darkness  that  Imng  over  them,
in  consequence  of  the  Lord's  with-
drawing his  ministering  agency  from
the  earth,  so  befogged  their  minds,
that  they  could  no  longer  gaze  upon
the  glorious  future.

This  state  of  apostaey  co turned,
until  about  the  last  half  century  of  the
Christian  era,  and  it  prevailed  more
or  less  among  all  people.  And  the
priests,  to  whom  the  people  looked
for  spiritual  light  and  instruction,
have  persisted  one  and  all  in  teaching
the  people,  from  generation  to  gene-
ration, that  the  Bible  was  full,  that
the  canon  of  scripture  was  closed,  and
that  it  was  no  more  necessary  for


A  MARVELOUS  WORK,  ETC.


3j3


angels  to  communicate  with  man,  nor  I  angel  spoken  of Jia*flnwn  from  heaven
that  the  miraculous  and  graces,  to  earth,  parting  it,sunder<  the  Vail  of
that  once  adorned the  Church,  should  ;  superstition, ignores*  and  doulA,


be  continued. The  people


and  brinsj-ingwitii  him  fn


of-grt?nt  jo^


down  to  this  belief  without  any  evi-  |  tia!  abode,  gladiidirt
deneo  or  testimony  nf  its  truthfulness
and  it  became  a  widespread  and  po-
pular tradition  :  aftd  the  bhil^Wi
even  down  tn  ouMlay,  have  inin*ri-
ted  J,he$e 1  notions  and  traditions  of
their  fathers  without  once  question-
inir  them  ;  thevare  horn  In  the  ehihU

nn,  its  it  were,  and  they  are  edueau  :  inspired  men  has  b*ed  heard  :  an<I


duly  authorizing  niffO  oji  the  earth  to
preach  the  sanie  to  all  peoples  of
every  nation.  Thi*  Gospel  commit*
tvfl  by  the  ;aejel  h^  been  preached
atnoi!^  many  i^;ioo.-  wherever  they
would  receive  Hie  liearerw  of  this
1 1<  *av  eid  v  meteifert *  tl ; t*f&  w*i'e  of


ed  and  trained  in  this  belief,  and
hence  it  hn£  become  deeply  rooted,
and  most  difficult  inr  1 5 tt-uj  to  rid
themselves  of.  «*J«ii\r
But  again  the  htnyl  long >ilence
has  bebA  broken,  again  the  voice  of
ante's  has  saluted  the  ears  of  mor-
tal man,  and  that  too  in  fulfilment


this  missionary  labor  has  been  faith-
fully prosrf'utel  dnimijsr  almost:

liUlf'of  a  eerMHyl  *>iA'vl  ihe  Oa«peI
will  be  prcnfctuM* -Aifi*ll  <#VerVfTflfti


n


I  fa

ill  l 1 1 rt \  I.*

■  I  C  i

uf  hearing  this  glorious  angelic  mes-

sage,  no!  Tit  m  m)  vi


of  a  i


s


I  bv  John  the


it


lint;'


flMorife*;  M  thin  ts^your


Revfdator.  while  under  banishment
upon  the  of  Palmos.  While
then*  suffering  for  the  gospel's  sake,
the  Lord  showed  unto  him  ■  v  vision,
things  that  should  take  place  upon
the  earth.  And  among  other  things
Siatrpassed  before  fiim,  he  saw  that,
after  a  length  of  time  the  darkiietfs
that  would  necessarily  follow  the  re-
jection of  die  Ur^nel  bv  hnHi  Je  v
and  Gentile,  and  that  must  come
upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,
would  be  gradually  dispulled  by  a
heavenly  communication  from  Uod
to  mam  And  from  'he  11th  chapter
of  Revelations  we  learn  the  manner
in  which  this  message  should  come
from  the  courts  of  heaven.  John


>  va  it ;
thv  vhe


testimony  ;  yobf  my  'fbftfrmi  ^an^el

ban  nume^^MH  tw^do*
voe  s^y  "  that  lu*  his

eVerhistiii'tf  (^Hpel,  h'^t  Bo-MiOt

ltl»0«v  ii. Wh^ti  eWdenCr1  ha#e  you

tO lf'\Ve US, tllrl  1


XT


nvav  Unow  for

M

ourselves  J t U  it  '*n  ungel  hnn  really
come  bearing  rhus  nie^igeifVi  I  will
ted  you  how  you  may  proi'fe  it,  ho^
every  Sri^r  aurt


ffnirgl-iftriQlF  ''^Adatitt
now  liviiiL?  infiy  fcrtoiv  whether  th^re

H^u*e,  cfdled  rhe


bus  been  »

everlasting  (iv>s[u>]?  ^er>l  from  he:  vf*tt
to  the  ituN^bimn^ ■  *f  th^i^rt  ii '.t>y  a
holy  angel.  On  the  will  of  v our
Father  in  beavwi  ;*^riaH  upon  his
li^rne,  ht\  \  inqnimwf  him,  K*yiitg'iQ
yoilr  heart.-!:  O  lj;>rd,  lia^e  thou  tn-
spea-ks  of  the  event  in  this*  wi*e.  ^aeed  sent  forth  fhmi  the  Iwivena
i%Aul  !  aiiother  anyel  fly  in  the  thine  sngid;  accord i tie'  to  the  [wedic-
midst  of  heaven,  having  the  evet*''  Uor\  by  thy : 'nsrva^t  Johr*,  '^beiirgiivg
lasting  ^-oripel  to  preach  unto  tfiefrt  t ^tn'ma^r -on -  the  eaiihr  rhe  evathi»ti*igr
that  dwell  nn  the  earth,  and  to  every  j  (ioft^el  ?  A^'i  hh<i  rhoo cnnTmUnirled
ion.  and  kindred,  and  tongue  awl 1  it  jo  be-  preached  to  every'  jS^ofde,


ae.  Saying  \"'it(j  a  h>ud  v^itx1;
Fearliod  and  inve  iriorv  t« »  hini  :  for
the  hour  of,  his  judgment  is  coo^^
etc* Strange  as  it  mav  seem,  tlris
No.  23.


» at  ion  una  tonsra**  nnrit^r  tJie  w4h4e  J  '
hefiVens  ^  If  y^ii  d»V  ihi«  rn  all  t\  lA
fntnjWfjI'^f  hi  hi  I  lull  pupp^^«yoii  iwoJ

may  all  know  for  yourselves.  4 *  Wh^t!

Vol.  XIX.


Ji  H  K  N  A  I .  <H


MSVi  U"KNfc>,


dees  the  Lerd  give  us  knowledge  in
our  day  by  seeking  unto  him  in
prayer  ?"  Why  not  ?  [  >id  he  not
anciently,  in  every  dispensation  from
the  beginning  down  to  the  closing  up
of  the  first  century  of  the  Christian
era,  impart  a  knowledge  concerning
the  trath  ?  He  did  ;  and  that  same
God  that  pave  a  knowledge  to  his
people  anciently,  will  give  a  know-
ledge fo  ynu,  provided  you  will  com-
ply wilh  his  wilh  "But/1  you  may
say,  "  in  order  that  we  may  put  such
a  question  to  the  Lord,  we  would
like  to  hare  some  testimony,  sufficient
at  least  to  encourape  us  in  making
this  inquiry."  I  do  not  know  how
much  yon  want.  So  far  as  external
evidence  is  concerned,  he  gave  abun-
dance of  it  bet  ore  this  Church  arose
The  Lord  did  not  suffer  the  Book  of
Mormon  to  be  sent  forth  to  the
nations  to  be  published  to  all  people,
until  he  gave  a  testimony  to  certain
individual  witnesses.  How  many?
Four  persons  at  least — the  translator
of  the  book,  Joseph  Smith,  and  three
other  persons,  Martin  Harris,  Oliver
Cowdcry,  and  David  Wbitmer.  They
kuaw  of  a  surety,  and  have  given
their  testimony  in  the  beginning  of
this  record.  Here,  then,  are  four
witnesses*  What  does  Jesus  say?
"That  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three
witnesses  every  word  shall  be  esta-
blished," lie  saw  proper,  however,
to  give  four,  *A  But,*'  inquires  one,
"  may  not  these  four  witnesses  have
bee:i  mistaken  ?*  Let  us  examine
into  the  nature  of  their  testimony,  to
see  if  there  is  any  possibility  of  their
being  mistaken,  Joseph  Smith,  one
of  these  witnesses,  testifies  that  the
angel  came  down  from  heaven,  and
■  that  his  countenance  was  like  light-
fiing,  and  the  glory  of  God  shone
round  about  him*  And  the  angel
told  him  to  go  to  a  certain  hill,  not
far  from  his  father's  house,  iu  the
tows  of  Manchester,  Ontario  (  ouuty,


I  in  the  State  of  New  York,  where  he
should  find  these  ancient  records —
plates  of  gold,  containing  the  ever-
lasting Gospel,  which  was  anciently
preached  among  the  inhabitants  of
this  continent. He  obeyed  ;  he  went

i  and  found  the  records  in  thu  very
place  which  had  been  shown  hi  in  in
vision  by  the  angel.  Was  there  any
possibility  of  Joseph's  having  been
deceived?  We  say,  No;  the  cir-
cumstances were  such  as  to  preclude
the  possibility  of  any  such  deception.
The  angel  also  told  him  that  with
these  plates  there  was  an  instrument-
called  the  Urirn  and  Thummim,  which
would  enable  him  to  translate  the
records  into  our  language-  Joseph
accomplished  the  work  of  translation
between  the  years  1827  and  1830,
through  the  use  of  this  instrument,
which  had  been  hidden  up  with  the
plates.  Could  he  be  deceived,  when
he  got  the  plates  before  him,  intently
looking  upon  the  peculiar  characters
enslaved  upon  them,  and  also  upou
that  most  singular  instrument,  the
Urim  and  Thumaum  ?  Every  ma*
of  common  sense,  possessing  the  least
degree  of  judgment,  will  at  once  say
that  it  was  not  possible,  under  these
circumstances,  for  him  to  be  deceived;
that  the  testimony  given  is  true,  and
the  message  divine,  or  else  he  was  a
bold  impostor,  a  man  that  came  forth
purposely  to  deceive  the  people.

Now  in  regard  to  the  other  three
witnesses.  They  testify  that  in  the
year  1829,  after  ihe  plates  had  been
translated,  that  an  angel  of  God
appeared  unto  them,  clothed  in  light
and  glory,  and  holding  these  plates

i  in  his  hands,  turned  them  over  leaf
after  Itaf,  showing  them  the  char-
acters engraved  t hereon.  And  they
also  say  that  while  they  stood  gazing
upon  this  heavenly  being,  clothed  in
his  glory,  in  the  act  of  showing  them
these  gold  plates,  they  heard  a  voice
out  of  the  heavens  proclaiming  to


them  that  the  plates  had  been  tran-  I
slated  correctly,  by  the  gift  and
power  of  God.  And  what  they  saw
and  beard  they  bear  testimony  to,  1
which  is  addressed  to  all  peoples  of
every  Tuition  to  whom  this  record  —
the  Book  of  Mormon — should  go.
Let  me  ask,  Was  there  any  possibility
of  their  being  deceived  ?  If  there
was,  then  we  might  say  all  men  of  j
ancient  times  who  professed  to  have
seen  angels  were  deceived  themselves.
Bat  I  do  not  see  that  anything  could  j
be  more  positive.  The  promise  had
been  given  that  there  should  be  three
witnesses  raised  np  to  bear  testimony
of  the  truth  of  these  records,  which
purport  to  be  a  history  of  the  abori-
gines, or  the  ancient  Israelites,  that
inhabited  this  country.  The  Lord
did  send  the  angel;  they  saw  him
come  down  from  heaven;  they  saw
the  light  and  glory  that  radiated
from  his  countenance;  they  heard
the  words  of  his  mouth  ;  they  **aw
the  plates  in  the  hands  of  this  hea-
venly personage,  and  they  could  dis-
tinguish the  characters  engraven
thereon ;  and  they  also  beard  the
voice  of  the  Lord  commanding  them
to  bear  testimony  to  all  peoples  of
what  they  had  seen  and  heard.  They
could  not  have  been  deceived,  it  was
utterly  impossible.

Tli en  here  are  four  witnesses,  all
bearing  testimony  to  the  divinity  of
this  work. And,  as  I  have  already
quoted  to  you,  the  Savior  has  said,
tbat  every  word  shall  be  established
by  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  wit-
nesses. The  Lord,  therefore,  did
not  raise  up  this  Church,  lie  did  not
commence  the  organization  thereof ,
until  he  had  given  sufficient  evidence  '
to  a  sufficient  number  of  witnesses  to  I
commence  the  establishment  of  this
work.

Again,  Joseph  Smith  was  com-
manded of  the  Lord  to  show  these
plates  to  eight  other  persona  who,


besides  the  three  referred to,  also
became  witnesses  to  this  work.  And
their  published testimony  is,  that
they saw the plates  and  handled
them,  and  they  saw the  peculiar
writing  thereon,  which  they  say  had
the  appearance  of  curious  and  ancient
workmanship. And  notwithstanding
some  of  these  witnesses  have  fallen
by  the  wayside,  having  been  over-
come by  the  power  of  the  Adversary,
rendering  themselves  unworthy  of
the fellowship of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  not  a  single  one  of  them  has
ever  been  known  to  deny  the  testi-
mony which  they  hsve  borne  con-
cerning this  marvelous  occurrence*
Here,  thwi,  are  twelve  witnesses,  Is
not  this  external  evidence  sufficient
to  satisfy  every  inquiring  soul  whose
heart is  honest belore  the Lord  ?
But  I  will  refer  you  to  still  more*
When  this  work  was  first  published,
the  Lord  called  upon  these  men  to
forth  among  the  people,  proclaim-
ing the  Gospel  which  they  them-
selves had  received*  promising  that
all  who  would  yield  obedience  thereto
should  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  which
should  confiim,  to  the  entire  satis-
I action  of  the  believer,  the  testimony
of  these  Elders. And  when  this
Holy  Spirit  descended  upon  such
people,  they  knew  for  themselves  that
these  men  were  servants  of  the  living
God,  atid  that  the  power  that  rested
upon them  was indeed the  Holy
Ghost,  of  which  they  had  read  in
ihe  Sctiptures. How  did  they  know
tli  is  ? BecauM*  it  manifested  diven
gifts. It  enabled  tbem  to  lay  their
hands  upon  the  sick,  rebuking  in  the
name  of  Jesus  the  disease,  and  the
sick  were  restored  to  health.  You
may  say  imagination  had  something
to  do  with  this  ; the  sick  imagined
themselves  better,  and  consequently
th*y  got  better. But  let  me  testify
that  little  infant  children,  not  capa-
ble of  exercising  the  powers  of  imft*


mrRNAL  OF  DISCOUR


gination,  have  been  healed  in  the
same  manner,  and  by  tfie  same  power,
which  was  the  power  of  Almighty
God  manifested  through  his  servants.
And  these  first  El  lei  s  of  Hie  Church
were  thus  enabled  to  convert  to  a
knowledge  of  oofr  ftii  h,  multitudes  of
people  who,  like  themselves,  could
bear  testimony  to  the  divinity  and
truthfulness  of  this  la  tier-day  work,
having  received  the  convincing  u*&u-
•lancet  of  this  Comforter,  which  beam
record  of  the  tiling  of  the  Father,
And  in  this  manner  this  whote  com-
tnunity  have  received  the  knowledge
they  testify  of,  and  heflcd  we  beeftme,
to  ntea  Biblical  term,  a  fit  eat  cloud
of  witnesses,  whose  test i nun y  *fs*in
foree  tu  'lie  wholf*  world,  w  fret  her
they  receive  it  or  reject  if,

I  have  now  laid  before  you  evi*
denee  sufficient  to  excife  the  prin-
ciple of  faith  in  your  hentta,  provided
yon  have  a 'genuine  desire  to  know
of  the  doctrine  we  teach,  as  to  whe-
ther it  be  of  God  or  man.  You
have  the  testimony  of  twelve  men  to
be^in  with, 'beside*  the  testimony  of
scores  of  thousands  of  men  and  wo-
men that  have  received  the  Holy
Ghost  through  obedience  to  the  re-
quirements of  the  Gospel,  whose
knowledge  of  this  hitter -day  work
enables  them  also  to  testify  to  the
truth  of  it. And  the  testimony  of
this  people  speaks  a*  with  the  voice
of  thunder  to  all  nations  and  tongues,
to  the  effect  that  God  bus  spoken
from  the  etern  d  worlds,  and  that  he
has  sent  bis  angels  *&*in  to  earth  to
commit  to  man  fhe  everlasting;  Gos-
pel, rr  so  remarkable  a  testimony
of  twelve  men,  together  with  the
united  testimony  of  a  community  so
large  as  we  are,1  is  not  sufficient  to
create  feith  m  your  hearts  that  God
has  incBra^romlnJnra  gVeataual
marvelous  ana  Orangey  wore'  and  a
wtmdafnHi  oflrVlay.  then  ,T-imt  Would
awaken  up  the  people  to  a  sense  of


the  furt  ?  There  can  be  no  exnse
for  those  who  hear  ;md  reject  'he
testimony  and  teaching  of  the  Kluers
of  this  Church,  for  the  crv  has  ht  en
raised  these  manv  yearn,  and  it  can-
not  hut  have  a  striking  effect  noon
all  h  mi  est*  bear  ted  people,  hecau>e  of
its  singularity  and  fairness,  for  the
promise  is,  if  you  have  sufficient  faith
to  cdl  upon  God  and  *>k  him,  von
yourselves  may  obtain  a  test  i  wtmyf
and  vou  can  receive  (hat  which  su-
pereedes  faith  or  belief — you  fintt
know  of  a  surety  that  he  has  indeed
visited  the  erfrtb  again  in  HUM  'he
last  days  by  his  angels,  and  that
Joseph  Smith  was  and  is  a  Pr;ip<tet
of  the  living  God,  and  that  the  doc-
trines we  teach  are  not  of  man  hiu  of
God;  aud  they  will  prove  the  sivor
of  life  to  those  who  obey,  and  of  death
to  those  who  reject  th^m.

Therefore  as  I  said  i:i  the  t  itu-
menc$mcnt  of  my  remarks,  :i  matvel-
lous  thing  has  occurcd  in  the  latl 1 !  a
wonderful  work  has  made  its  nppt*.ir-
ance !  The  heavens  ii"  longer  keep
silent  !  Prophets  again  are  hr  trd
among  the  people!  The  inspirit  toil
and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  tests
upon  th«  servants  of  God,  and  his
power  is  made  manifest  ataoug  Hie
I  various  nations  again,  as  in  ol  lea
time,  in  healing  the  sick,  causing  the
lame  to  walk,  the  blind  to  see,  and
the  deaf  to  hear,  and  in  pouring  out
,  his  Spirit  upon  the  children  of  inenf
j  as  he  did  in  former  dispensations  of
the  world  !

Is  not  this,  then,  sufficient  lo  ft  :ke
|  up  the  honest-in-hearr  ^^iot  g  Hie
people  ?  If  it  is  not,  then  I  know
nothing  that  is  likely  to  do  it.  Will
it  be  by  the  fulfilment  of  the  Pro-
pbets,  that  have  been  spoken  ol  by
the  former  speakers?  when  the  h;ind
of  judgement  shall  be  laid  upofj  the
n&nbns,  and  '  the  fierceness  of  his
wikih  he  m&df*^anif&rtfJ,^M  ing
away  the  disobedient  and  the


and  the  earth  becomes  depopulated
of  all  except iug  the  righteous  ?  This
will  be  a  testimony  they  cannot  resist
But  such  testimony  will  not  always

unto  salvation,  It  will  be  the
tes  imony  of  judgment  that  will  over-
whelm them,  in  a  time,  too,  they
tit  ink  not  of;  a  time  when  they  will
In  crying:  all  U  peaej  and  safely — h> !
sudden  destruction  is  at  their  doors;
and  thas  the  Scrip  rural  paying  will
be  literally  fulfilled,  14  As  the  clays  of
N-.vjh  were,  so  shall  also  the  coming
of  t  lis  Son  of  Man  be/'  etc.  When
that  unfortunate,  bat  disobedient  and


wicked  people,  the  An te-dil avians,
were  sinking  in  the  waters,  they
could  then  say,  u  I  know  that  Noah
if  a  Prophet,  and  that  the  message
he  has  declared  in  oar  ears  for  these
manv  Years  is  divine.1'  But  alas!
it  was  too  late;  they  rejected  :be
message,  paying  heedless  regard  to
it  as  well  as  to  him  who  preached
the  Gospel  to  them ;  they  would  uot
call  opon  God  in  all  honesty  of  heart,
but  they  considered  Noah  deceived  ;
they  obeyed  not,  and  were  destroyed
by  the  mighty  flood.  Amen*


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  WILFORD  WOODRUFF,


L>..uyerrd  is  the  Tabersaule,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday,  June  30,  1873,


{Reported  by  Geo.  F.  Oibhs.)


F\m! W^ULHLMENT OF PROPHECY — RESTORATION OF THE  GOSPEL

PRIESTHOOD,


There  is  a  principle  that  I  feel
disposed  to  say  a  few  words  on,  in
connection  with  what  brother  Kich
has  been  saying,  and  that  is  the
pri  nciple  of  faith;

[The  speaker  then  read  the  1 1th
chapter  of  H  ebre  w  s.  ]  I

I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  read-
ing this  catalogue  of  blessings  which
ancient  men  of  God  obtained  through
the  principle  of  faith  ;  which  prin-
ciple is  as  much  needed  to-day  by
the  people  of  this  generation,  as  by
any  people  at  any  age  of  the  world,
Wc  might  continue  the  chapter  of
results  and  operations  of  the  prin-


ciple of  faith  to  the  presept  day.
For  by  faith  Joseph  Smith  received
the  ministration  of  God  out  of  hea-
ven. By  faith  he  received  the  re-
cords of  Nephi,  and  translated  thein
through  the  Urim  and  TUummim
into  our  o\rn  language,  and  which
have  since  been  translated  into  many
different  languages.  By  faith  he
made  the  foundation  of  this  Church
and  kingdom,  just  as  much  as  Noah,
by  faith,  built  the  ark,  and  received
the  fulness  thereof.  By  faith  he
prophesied,  leaving  a  record,  a  testa-
ment  which  has  been  given  through
his  mouth  to  the  inhabitants  of  the


#1  I


earth,  and  whieh  contains  the  reve-
lations of  God  yet  to  be  fulfilled
The  testator  is  dead,  but  his  testa-
ment is  in  force  to  all  the  world.  By
faith  the  Elders  of  this  Church  left
their  homes  and  families,  and  went,
when  called  upon,  to  foreign  nations
wihuut  money  and  wit! tout  learning
or  experience,  to  preach  the  Gospel
of  the  kingdom  without  price  to  this
generation,  and  warning  the  inha-
bitants of  the  earth  of  the  judgments

of  God  which  await  the  world,  and
which  must  overtake  the  wicked.
Faith  is  necessary  on  the  part  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  say  nothing  about
the  outside  world,  in  order  to  read
and  believe  the  records  of  divine
truth  which  have  come  unto  us  ;
and  it  requires  faith  on  the  part  of
the  Christian  world  to  really  believe
this  record,  the  Bible— to  believe
that  the  Lord,  through  his  servants,
really  means  what  he  says,  and  says
what  he  means.  It  requires  faith
on  the  part  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
to  perform  their  duties  acceptably
before  God,  for  we,  in  this  dispensa-
tion, must  walk  by  faith  and  not  by
light,  just  as  much  as  the  people  of
God  in  any  previous  dispensation.
And  this  principle  we  should  exer-
cise and  live  by.  Some  of  the  reve-
lations which  God  has  given  unto
us  point  to  the  future  condition  of
the  world,  and  foretell  what  must
shortly  befall  the  world  of  mankind.
These  predictions  were  uttered  by
holy  men  as  they  were  moved  upon
by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  although
the  men  themselves  haye  passed
away,  not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  their
words  will  fail  in  their  fulfillment.
Notwithstanding  all  the  unbelief  and
infidelity  of  the  modern  world,  there
is  not  a  man  living  that  can  place  his
finger  upon  the  first  revelation  of
God  to  man,  from  the  days  of  father
Adam  to  the  present  time,  but  what
has  hail  or  is  having  its  fulfilment


as  fast  as  time  ami  opportunity
admit  of.  God  lives.  These  reve-
lations which  have  been  given
through  men  who  were  inspired  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  will  have  their  fill
fi  In  rent,  even  if  the  results  should
effect  tlie  destruction  of  the  genera
tion  now  living.  When  Jesus
brought  the  Gospel  to  his  father'*
house — the  Jews,  they  rejected  him
and  the  words  of  life  he  taught
them.  He  found  them  intently
looking  forward  to  the  coming  of
their  Shiloh  in  the  person  of  a  king,
a  ruler  who  should  possess  great
power,  even  power  sufficient  U  >  deliver
them  from  the  Romish  yoke.  They
never  once  dreamed  that  he  would
appear  in  their  midst  as  the  babe  of
Bethlehem,  who  should  be  born  in  a
stable,  and  cradled  in  a  manger,  a
man  who  should  know  sorrow,  aud
who  should  be  acquainted  with  grief,
and  who  should  choose  as  his  dis
ciples  illiterate  fishermen  of  low  de-
gree. And  although  he  was  their
Savior  King  who  would  have  re
deemed  them,  and  delivered  them,
and  given  unto  them  the  Gospel  of
peace  and  of  liberty,  yet  they  in
their  vanity  and  pride  despised  him,
and  persecuted  him,  and  at  last  shed
his  blood.  But  was  there  a  word
ever  uttered  by  him  concerning  their
Temple  or  nation  but  what  met  with
its  fulfilment  to  the  very  letter  i
The  history  of  the  Jews,  which
chronicles  the  days  of  their  glory  and
power,  when  they  held  the  I  "rim  and
Thummim,  the  ephod,  the  Priest-
hood, and  when  they  offered  sacri
fice,  taken  in  connection  with  the
prediction  of  Jesus  foretelling  their
downfall  and  dispersion,  is  of  itself
sufficient  to  teach  every  infidel  mind
that  there  is  truth  in  the  revelations
of  God  to  man.  The  Jews  have  been
trampled  under  the  feet  of  the  Gen-
tiles for  the  last  1,800  years,  fulfil-
ling, too,  what  Moses  said  of  them  ;


FAITH,  fcTC


and  they  have  been  overthrown  as  a
nation,  and  led  captive  unto  other
nations,  and  are  held  in  scorn  by  the
Gentiles  even  to  the  present  hour.
And  you  may  begin  at  the  begin-
ning, taking,  for  instance,  those  great
cities  that  figured  anciently  in
their  splendor  and  magniBcence,
and  which  were  built  to  defy
all  time,  such  as  Nineveh,  Thebes,
Tyre  and  Sid  on,  Memphis  and  Baby-
lon, Where  are  they,  and  what  become
of  them?  They  are  gone,  their  history
buried  as  if  .it  were,  in  oblivion,  and
that  too  in  fulfill  meut  of  prophesy.
Yes,  the  words  of  some  poor  honest
prophet  or  apostle  raised  op  to  de-
clare the  Gospel  to  the  inhabitants
thereof,  but  whom  they  despised  and
rejected,  have  met  with  their  fulfil-
ment, and  the  disobedient  and  wicked
have  passed  away  to  be  judged  ac-
cording to  the  deeds  done  in  the
body.  And  yoo  may  trace  the  his.
tory  of  the  world  from  father  Adam
to  the  present  time,  and  I  can  defy
any  man  to  point  to  a  single  predic-
tion, uttered  by  inspired  men  raised
up  of  God,  but  what  has  or  will  come
to  pass  in  its  time  and  season.  And
if  the  Gentiles  to-day  would  read
these  revelations  of  God,  and  exercise
faith  in  them,  they  would  no  longer
wonder  when  they  come  among  us,
to  see  these  valleys,  for  600  miles,
tilled  with  cities  and  towns,  gardens
and  orchard*,  temples  and  taber-
nacles, :md  with  comfortable  dwell
ings.  Bur  the  fact  is,  unbelief  has
overwhelmed  the  Christian  world,
and  man  ha*  spiritualized  the  Scrip-
tures until  there  if  no  faith  iu  him,
and  lie  has  no  faith  in  God,  nor  in  the
litenl  fulfilment  of  his  revelations  to
man,  That  is  what  ails  the  world
lo-day.  The  predictions  of  the  Bible
never  would  have  been  fulfilled,  had
not  the  Lord,  in  these  last  days  raised
up  a  prophet  as  an  instrument  in  his
bauds  to  :igain  establish  his  Gospel


on  the  earth,  and  gather  together  the
house  of  Israel  to  the  vallevs  of  these
everlasting  hills,  accord  ingr  to  his  de-
cree to  old  father  Jacob ;  and  his  seed
have  yet  to  make  this  western  desert
to  blossom  as  the  rose,  bringing  forth
H  the  fir  tree,  the  pine  tree,  and  the
box  together,  to  beautify  the  place  of
my  sanctuary/'  The  whole  history
|  of  this  people  has  been  foretold  by
i  the  prophet  Isaiah,  thoas  inds  of  years
ago;  and  it  has  been  a  steady  growth
from  the  commencement  to  thepresent
And  will  the  Lord  stop  here?  No;
whether  men  believe  or  not,  this  Ziou
so  often  spoken  of  in  holy  writ,  has
got  to  arise  and  put  on  her  beautiful
garments;  these  mountain  vales  have
got  to  be  tilled  with  the  saints  of  God
and  temples  reared  to  his  holy  name,
j  pre  paratory  to  the  time  when  *•  th<;
|  Gentiles  shall  come  thy  light,  and
kincrs  to  the brightness  of  thy  rising'1
And  this  time  will  come  when  the
nationsare  tally  warned  by  the  preach-
ing of  the  servant  of  God,  aud  his
judgments  commence  to  he  poured
out  upon  the  world,  in  fulfilment  of
of  the  revelations  of  St.  John,  Faith
than  is  what  the  unbelieving  world
needs  to  exercise  in  God  and  in  his
revelations  to  man ;  but  as  I  have
said,  whether  we  do  it  or  not,  our  un-
belief will  never  turn  the  hand  of  God
to  the  right  or  the  left,

God  has  restored  again  his  Gospel.
He  has  raised  up  men  and  com*
manded  them  to  go  forth  and  preach
it  to  the  world,  aud  they  have  been
engaged  doing  ho  now  tor  nearly  half
a  century,  eversince  the  organizition
of  this  Charch.  It  was  organized  by
revelation,  with  prophets,  apostles,
pa  Airs,  teachers,  helps  and  govern-
ment, and  the  principles  of  it  were
taught  by  revelation,  the  same  a*
Jesus  and  the  Apostles  taught  them
there  is  no  change  whatever,  Tbe
Lord  never  revealed  but  one(iospel
the  inhabitants  of  the  e  trth,  in  any


JOURNAL  OF  IHSCWKSES.


age  of  the  worlds,  nor  never  will ;  the
Gospel  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,
and  forever,  and  the  principles  thereof
»re  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  he-
lieving  that  he  is,  and  that  he  belired
and  died  as  t\  ransom  for  the  sins  of
the  world  ;  find  baptism  for  the  re-
liiis&ioh  of  tK-iug  immersed  and

but  jqd  \nyvfiU>\\  bj  one  having mith  or-
Hy\  uf  Cud,  tflat  you  may  Else  in  new*
.  iicsk  of  \kl\*t  in  fulfilment  uf  the  teti'i*
niony  of  J[esus,  and  then  receive  U*o
^oly  (fhpst  by  the  laying  on  of  hand;;
Cotilituoiig  tL,e believers  ineoshers  of
bis  Chut  oh. And  when  you  an*  bom
,pf  the  water  and  the  Spirit,  you  can
enter  into  the-?  Kingdom  of  God,  and
b:?ine  born  of  the  Spirit,  yon  can  seo
the  Kingdom  of  God, A  nd  such  I  se-
ll" vers,  when  they  receive  the  Holy
Ghost  receive  the  inspiration  aftd  re-
jyWiun  and  light  of  it. Our  'eyes
and  ears  may  be  deceived  by'  the
.  funning  and  machination*  of  iriau;
but,  tN^  Holy  Ghost  never  deceives
anybody. ll  bears  record  of  tin;
Father  and  i  lit*  Son,  mid  it  bears  re-
cord in  the  Gospel  to  those  who  pos-
sess it.  The  Lord  never  hud  a  church
1  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  from  its  first
organization  until  to- day,  unless  that
church  was  organized  by  reflation,
[with  prqphets  and  apnsMfa,  pastors,
.teachers,  helps  nnd  governments  en-
dowed with  the  Holy  Priesthood  —
that  power  delegated  from  God  to
(  {Wan,  which  authorized  him  to  net  for
God;  and  without  this  Priesthood  no
man,  from  the  day  thti  world  ml  ltd
into  existence  lias  any  ri^lit  to  admi-
vjfljUlcL  in  any  u!  the  ordinances  of  his
holy house  neither  has  any  man  a
ri^ht;  to  that  Priesthood  save  lie  be
called  ot  God  as  was  Aaron  who,  we
are  informed  was  called  by  revelation,
What  is  the  priesthood  for? It  is
to  administer  the  ordinances  of  the
Gospel,  even  the  Gospel  of  our  Father
in  heaven,  the  eternal  God,  the  Elo-
heim  ot  the  Jew*  and  the  God  of  the


Gentiles,  and  nil  he  hns  ever  done
from  the  beginning  has  been  performed
by  and  through  the  power  of  that
Priesthood,  which  is  "Without  father,
without  mother,  without  descent,
having  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor
end  of  life,"  and  the  administration  of
Lis  servants  holding  this  priesthood  is
binding,  being  the  savor  of  lifk  unto
life  or  deal !>  uu!o  den'h,  It  was  by
virtue  pf  this  prints  hood  the  twelve
apostles  ancient  fry  went  into  the  world
to  preach  the  Gospel,  and  it  wafi  be-
cause ot  I  hi*  priesthood  which  they
held  that  men,  iu  rejecting  them,  re-
jected Him  vho  send  them  and  cnn-
sequeutly  brought  *'iipou  thejxi selves
condemnation,  Ligfet  has  again  come
into  the  world;  bur  men  love  dark-
ness rather  than  light  because  their
deeds  are  evil.  Hence  condemnation
rests  down  upon  the  world,  for  the
consequences  of  rejecting  the  Gospel
must  overtake  the  world  itiv  this  the
last  dispensation,  just  as  much  as  they
did  iu  former  ones*  in  the  days  of
Noah  and  Lot  and  thoseof  the  Savior.

Aal  before  slated,  so  say  I  again,
the  Gospel  of  Christ  requires  faith
all  the  day  long,  for  no  man  can  con-
finne  faithful  to  the  end  without  it.
God  has  set  his  hand  a  second  time
to  build  up  that  kingdom  which
Daniel  was  permitted  to  see  in
vision,  and  to  establish  that  Zion
in  the  mountains*  which  Isaiah  saw,
He  has  set  his  hand,  for  the  last
time,  to  gather  together  all  tilings
which  ate  in  heaven  and  on  earth
which  arc  iu  Christ,  unto  himself.
The  day  has  come  when  the  Lord
lias  sent  forth  a  proclamation  to  warn
the  nations  to  prepare  for  his  second
coming;  and  the  signs  of  both  hea-
ven and  earth  all  indicate  the  coming
ot  the  Son  of  Man,  which  is  near  at
the  door.  No  man  know.-  the  day  or
the  hour  when  Christ  will  come,  but
the  generation  is  clearly  pointed  out,
the  fig "  tree is  leaving,  and  great


FAITH,  ETC.


30 1


changes  are  near  at  band.  Greit
Babylon  is  coming  in  remembrance
before  God,  and  the  Lord  lias  called
upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  who

are  verv  wicked,  to  repent  of  their
aius  and  turn  unto  him.  The  gen#»ra-
tiori  in  which  we  live  is  a  wicked  and
an  adulterous  generation,  and  wicked-
ness and  abomination  of  every  kind
arc  increasing,  and  the  earth  has
Commenced  to  groan  under  the  evil
practices  of  roan.  Ti  e  heavens  are
iu  pain  over  the  disobedience  and  un-
righttousness  of  the  children  of  men,
and  the  angels,  we  are  told,  are  wait- .
iug  in  their  places  in  the  Temple  for
the  time  to  come  when  tlmy  will  be
called  upon  to  etc  forth  and  reap  down
the  earth.  Judgments  await  the
world,  but  they  h  ed  not,  and  appar-
ently do  not  care.  Willi  fire  and
sword  the  Lord  will  plead  with  all
flesh,  and  as  the  prophet  has  said
respecting  this  event,  4 *  the  slain  of
the  Lord  will  be  many  and  these
tli i tigs  will  overtake  the  world  in  an
hour  when  tney  expect  them  not,  when
they  will  lie  crying  peace,  but  alas,
peace  will  have  departed  from  them,
and  thoy  left  to  devour  and  destroy
each  other.  All  these  things  are
foretold  and  many  of  them  are  written
in  these  revelations  given  in  our  day,  |
and  they  are  already  being  fulfilled
before  uitr  eyes ;  and  they  will  con-
tinue to  be  fulfilled,  until  all  that  is
spoken  of  shall  have  come  to  pass.
Therefore,  I  want  to  say  to  the
Latter  day  Saints  :  exercise  faith  in
G<>d,  and  exercise  faith  in  his  revela-
tions, and  read  them  and  ponder  over
them,  and  pray  earnestly  that  you
may  have  a  correct  understanding  ol  ,
all  that  God  has  revealed,  that  you
may  grow  in  the  light  and  knowledge  j
of  God ,  and  see  the  importance  of
living  your  religion  and  of  living
uprightly  before  him  ;  fur  all  men,
both  Jew  and  Gentile,  Saint  and  sin-
ner, will  be  judged  according  to  the  !


deeds  done  in  the  body,  and  for  the
opportunities  which  we  have  of  in-
forming ourselves  ot  the  will  of  God
concerning  us,  which  we  allow  to  go

unimproved,  we  cannot  be  held  guilt-
ier It  certainly  becomes  us,  who
have  named  the  name  of  Christ,  to
walk  uprightly  befoiv  God,  for  we
cannot  escape  his  chastening  hand  if
we  reject  the  light  we  have  received.
Our  condemnation  will  be  far  greater
than  those  who  never  embraced  the
principles  of  the  Gospel,  if  we  aposta-
tize, or  through  indifitareut  carelessness
we  allow  the  carts  and  things  of  this
world  to  choke  down  the  good  seed
planted,  we  hav#  **  tasted  the  good
word  of  God,  and  the  powers  ot  the
world  to  come  we  *'  know  the
blaster's  will,*'  and  if  we  do  it  not  we
will  be  "  beaten  with  many  stripes."
The  religious  world  talk  about  non-
essentials, there  are  no  such  things
ex i&ting  in  the  Gospel  of  the  Lord
Jesus,  He  requires  us  to  obey  the
same  laws  that  he  hi: i  s*. If  obeyed,
aud  which  hu  taught  in  hio'day.  Why
did  he  go  into  Jordan  to  bo  baptized
of  John  ?  To  fulSl  all  righteousness.
It  was  a  righteous  law.  it  belonged  to
him*  and  his  example  is  in  toiec  to
all  the  world,  No  man  can  enter
into  the  kingdom  of  God  except  he  is
born  of  the  water  and  of  the  Spirit.
Men  may  be  judged  and  their  bodies
lie  iu  the  grave  until  the  last  resur-
rection, to  come  forth  and  receive  of
a  telestial  glory,  but  no  man  will
receive  of  the  celt  stial  glory  exeept
it  be  through  the  otdinances  of  the
House  of  God*  Jesus  peribrmed  that
act  that  he  might  .set  the  example  ;
he  was  the  way  for  others  to  follow.
The  Jews,  as  I  have  said,  rejected
him  aud  the  Gospel  he  brought  to
them,  and  they  shed  his  blood.  They
have  been  paying  the  penalty  of  their
misdeeds  for  the  last  1SGC  years*  It
custs  something  to  shed  innocent
blood,  it  costs  something  to  shed  the


3u2


JOURNAL  UF  DISCOURSES.


blood  of  prophets  and  apostles.  And
I  have  sometimes  taken  the  liberty,
before  strangers  as  well  as  I  letter- day
Saints,  to  express  my  views  in  regard
to  shedding  the  blood  of  Joseph
Smith  and  other  prophets.  It  has
cost  this  nation  four  years1  war,  laying-
in  the  dust  nearly  a  million  and  a
half  of  men,  and  it  has  also  cost  mil-
lions upon  millions  of  dollars,  creating
a  debt  which  it  will  never  live  lo  pay.
This  is  the  faith  of  Wilford  Woodruff,
and  I  think  1  have  a  right  to  exercise
my  faith  in  this  matter.  I  say  then,
it  costs  something  to  shed  the  blood
of  righteous  men  iu  this  as  well  as  in
previous  generations.

My  testimony  is  that  judgments
await  Babylon,  judgments  await  the
Christian  world,  and  if  people  will
read  their  Bible,  they  will  see  these
declarations  written  down,  and  tnese
judgments  will  increase  until  the
world  is  cleansed  ftom  wickedness,
And  I  say  to  all  the  world,  Repent
of  your  sins,  and  be  baptized  for  the
remission  of  them,  that  you  may
receive  the  Holy  Ghost  by  the  laying
on  of  hands,  and  be  saved  in  the
kingdom  of  God,  Without  complying
with  these  requirements,  you  nor  I
can  never  go  where  God  and  Christ
dwell,  worlds  without  end,  for  these
things  have  been  made  known  to  us
by  ancient  and  modern  prophets.

Therefore,  yours,  as  well  as  my
eternal  destiny,  our  future  position
throughout  the  ages  of  eternity,  de-
pend upon  the  few  hours,  the  few
days,  the  few  weeks  we  spend  in  the
flesh.  If  I  ever  obtain  a  full  salvation
it  will  be  by  my  keeping  the  laws  of
God.  If  I  sin  against  God  and  man,
I  shall  have  to  foot  the  bill  ;  it  will
be  so  with  you  and  with  the  whole
world.  This  is  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ;  this  is  the  Zion  of  God,  and
what  you  see  already  accomplished
in  this  desert  land  is  really  in  fulfil-
ment of  the  revelations  of  God*  The


hand  of  God  has  guided  this  Church
from  iU  incipiency  to  the  present
time.  God  will  continue  to  direct  its
affairs,  and  there  is  no  power  :on  the
earth  or  under  the  earth  that  can  ever
stop  its  progress,  for  he  himself,  has
decreed  that  the  Zion  of  the  latter-
days  shall  never  be  overthrown  ;  but
on  the  contrary,  as  he  has  said  through
the  mouth  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah,
w  For  the  nation  and  the  kingdom
that  will  not  serve  thee  shall  perish  ;
yea,  those  nations  shall  be  utterly
wasted/'  Pretty  strong  doctrine  to
be  taught  by  a  humble  man  of  God.
Nevertheless,  time  will  bring  it  about
and  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  man  Ao
prevent  it  I  am  a  believer  in  revela-
tion. I  am  a  believer,  from  Un-
crown of  my  head  to  the  soles  of  my
feet,  with  every  particle  of  spirit  in
me,  that  God  will  bring  about,  liter^
ally  and  to  the  very  letter,  all  that  be
has  spoken  through  his  servants,  hl
cient  and  modern.

By  way  of  concluding  my  remarks
I  wish  to  bear  testimony  to  this  con-
gregation and  to  the  strangers  pre-
sent, that  Joseph  Smith  was  a  prophet
of  the  living  God;  he  was  raised  up
by  the  Lord,  and  laid  the  fuundati
of  this  Church. He  lived  to  accom
plish  the  work  be  was  raised  up  iv
do. He  received  the  keys  of  the  ]
Priesthood  from  under  the  bands  of
Peter,  James  and  John,  and  these  j
pertaining  to  the  gathering  of  scat-  j
tered  Israel,  from  under  the  hands  of
M'*ses,  the  leader  of  ancient  Israel.
Elijah,  or  Klias,  also  visited  him  and
bestowed  upon  him  the  keys  to  "  turn
the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  child-
ren, and  the  heart  of  the  children  to
the  fathers/'  which  was  iu  fulfilment
of  a  prediction  by  the  Prophet  Ma  In-
ch l  He  also  received  the  keys  of  the
Aaronic  Priesthood  under  the  bauds
of  John  the  Baptist,  which  Priesthood
pertains  to  the  temporal  govern  merit
of  the  Church.  After  performing  his


work  be  sealed  his  testimony  with  his  1
blood,  passed  behind  the  vail,  and  he
with  his  brethren  who  have  also  gone,
is  still  engaged  in  carrying  on  the
same  great  work.  He  still  labors  by
virtue  of  this  Priesthood  which  ho
received  on  earth,  and  which  he  will
continae  to  hold,  worlds  without  end.
And  this  will  be  the  case  with  every
faithful  man  of  God  why  magnifies  !


his  calling  and  Priesthood  here  below.

May  God  bless  you,  my  brethren
and  sisters  and  friends,  with  his  Holy
Spirit,  and  give  yon  faith  in  him,  and
in  his  revelations,  that  you  may  be
led  to  do  his  will  while  you  live  upon
the  earth.  But  whether  you  live  to
be  thus  favored  or  not,  my  testimony
is  that  they  will  have  their  fulfilment.
Even  so,  amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon

June  16,  1878.


(Reported  by  Geo.  F.  GibbtJ


THE  HEAVENS  FULL  OF  INTELLIGENCE — GOD  HAS  REVEALED  PORTIONS
OF  THAT  FOR  THE  WELFARE  OF  HIS  CHILDREN  — REASONING  FROM
SCIENCE  TO  SACRED  THINGS— ALL  DIVINE  LAW  UNCHANGABLE.


Aa  has  been  remarked  by  one  of
the  speakers,  a  great  deal  might  be
said  upon  the  principles  of  the  gospel
of  the  Son  of  God.  The  heavens  and
the  earth  are  full  of  intelligence,  and
God  ruler  over  and  directs  the  affairs
of  nations  as  well  as  those  of  individ-
uals and  people;  and  whatever  may
be  onr  peculiar  notions  or  ideas  of
other  men  aad  their  profession,  the
time  will  come,  and  is  not  far  distant
when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  will  be
revealed,  and  when  all  of  us,  Latter-
day  Saints  and  others;  Jews  and
Gentiles,  peoples  who  now  live,  those
that  shall  live  and  those  who  have
lived,  will  be  judged,  not  according  to
their peculiar theories, ideas,  or


notions,  bat  according  to  the  prin-
ciples of  eternal  troth  as  it  exists  in
the  bosom  of  God,  or  is  manifested
by  his  eternal  laws.

He  has  from  time  to  time  revealed
his  will  to  mankind,  and  be  has  in
these  last  days  revealed  himself
to  the  human  family  and  the  men
to  whom  he  has  revtaled  himself  in
the  different  ages,  comprehend  all  the
principle  of  truth  and  the  laws  of  God
alike,  so  fur  as  they  were  understood
by  them,  having  been  taught  by  the
same  Lord  and  instructed  from  the
same  source,  and  had  intelligence  from
the  same  fountain,  they  have  compre-
hended, according  to  the  position*
which  they  have  occupied,  and  so  far


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


u  revealed  unto  them,  alike,  whether
they  were  things  pertaining  to  the
living,  or  rhe  dead,  or  to  the  various
kingdoms  tViat  exist  in  the  eternal
worlds,  teleatial,  terrestrial  or  celestial
a*  the  case  mil! lit  be,  and  as  it  may
-have  been  revealed  unto  them;  but
do  man  in  any  age  of  the  world  1ms
understood  anything  pertaining  r.j
G^d  and  godliness  only  as  a  has  i*en
revealed  unto  hirn  by  tie  Lord.  "Eftr
what  man  k&oweth  the  things  of  a
m»m,  save  by  the  spirit  of  a  man
which  is  in  him  :  Even  so  the  things
of  God  kijoueth  no  man,  bat  by  the
Spirit  of  God."  And  hence  it  is  im-
possihle  under  certain  circtirns lances,
for  mankind  to judge  correctly  of  these
principles.  For  although  the  Lord
has  yiven  unto  every  man  a
portion  of  his  Spirit  to  profit  withal,
no  matter  who  he  may  be,  or  what
el  tine  In*  may  live  in,  yet  at  the  sunn-
time,  if  he  does  not  improve  ugon  this
manifestation  of  t hi  Spirit  of  God,
and  cultivate  correct  principles,  it
would  be  impossible  for  him  to  com-
prehend the  things  of  God,

Jesus,  when  upon  the  earth,  m*ids
44  My  sheep  hear  my  voice  and  know
me  and  follow  me;  but  a  stranger  will
they  not  follow,  fi;r  they  know  not
the  voice  of  a  stranger,"  It  may  ap-
pear singular,  and  it  does  to  the  mindp
uf  many  when  they  reflect  upon  the
various  dispensations  of  Gud  to  man,
and  the  p  osition  that  the  various  na-
tions of  the  earth  have  occupied  in
the  di  fie  rent  ages  of  lime.  All  men
have  knowledge,  more  or  less,  and
f#el  a  revere:  ce for  the  Divine  Being,
which  manifested  in  various  lorms
of  worship.  But  there  are  few  men,
comparatively,  who  have  understood
correctly  the  relationship,  that  exists
between  God  and  man.  Such  has
been  the  power  of  the  adversary,  and
so  profound  has  been  the  darkness  of
the  human  mind,  and  so  great  the
-disparity  between  God  and  hi<;  crea-


tures here  upon  the  earth,  that
light, effulgence,  glory  and  intellige
that  exists  with  him  and  with  th
by  whom  he  is  surrounded,  has  lj
little  understood  by  man  upon
earth,  grovelling  in  the  midst  of  d*
ness, weakness mid  imperfecta
Combatting continually with  t
and  with  the  pi)  wets  of  the  ad  vers
it  «eeins  almost  impossible  for  w
to  foster  and  maintain  these  h
aspirations  and  feelings  which
gospel  alone  can  inspire,  placing  n
in  his  true  position  before  God,  i
causing  his  anticipations  and  hi'
to  ascend  to  thoso  high,  maguiSo
and  glorious  principles  that  exist
the  bosom  of  God,  and  in  the  bos
of  those  intelligences  with  whom
is  surrounded. Nothing  but  lij
and revelation, nothing  save
manifestations  of  the  Spirit  of  G
nothing  but  communication  from  1
can  bring  man  into  relationship  w
him. It  is  impossible. And  be
the  theories,  wild  notions,  err
views  and  peculiar  feelings  that  ]
vail  among  men,  yea,  among
wisest  of  men — among  statesmen, j
kings,  and  emperors,  and  potentaj
and  governors,  and  rulers,  as  w*-lli
well  as  aruoug  divines,  priests  a
people;  and  how  different  the  St
merit ! How  widely  apart  are  t
religious  beliefs,  forms  of  worship*
ordinances  of  ail  of  them  !  What
culiar  darkness  is  manifested  in  u
tion  to  these  things,  in  comparison]
many  other  things  with  which  wei
acquainted !  If
When  we  talk  about  practical  :
tors  of  fact,  the  laws  of  nature  aL.
matter,  the  motions  of  this  and  o::t
planets;  or  when  we  ntiect  upontt
various  organizations  of  matter,  a:;
of  man,  aud  of  the  brutecreation,  we*i
and  comprehend  in  part  concerniigjtl
laws  by  which  they  are  governed.  Ac
although  we  may  speak  in  differet
languages,  yet  at  the  same  time  w


IP  K


rrive,  in  a  proat  measure, ftt  tin
inclusions  in  regard  to  most  of  Hi es e
prominent  facts ;  we  agree  in  regard
o  these  matters,  But  when  weeome
f>  Jesus  ami  God,  we  are  altogether
issiruilar.  What  is  the  mutter  ?  We

0  not  comprehend  the  law,  we  have
lot  been  taught  by  t\)e  same  ruifs,
he  principles  of  instruction  wr4  not
titliin  onr  resell,  w©  wander  in  the
l-'irk  and  act  foolishly  and  ignorant  ly
p  relation  to  Hn-se  matters.  But  H
pe  were  taught  in  these  schools  as
t?e  are  taught  in  tho  schools  of
cienc*,  and  art,  and  literature,
.old  comprehend  things  alike;  and
tot  until  we  have  a  teacher,  not  until
m  have  tho.se  who  are  competent  to
peach,  who  understand  rohe  laws  of
ife  and  the  principles  uf  Siivititm

1  in  we,  no  matter  what  our  in  tell  i-
;euce  otherwise  may  b- i Until  ihen
re  shall  have  to  grope  in  the  dark,
ve  in  the  dark,  and  when  ive  leave
lis  world  we  mu^t,  accord  in g  to  lha
lying  of  an  eminent  philosopher,
[  take  a  leap  in  the  dark."  Weeont-
rehend  nothing  of  o\n  origin,  of  the
iject  of  our  existence,  or  of  our
kstiny  ;  neither  can  we  comprehend
I  unless  God  reveals  it.

I  He  has,  as  lief  ore  stated,  in  differ*
nt  ages  uf  time  manifested  bit  will
p  certain  individuals,  and  he  has
^r»t  them  forth  to  make  known  his
Mil  to  the  human  family.  And  ihoy
p;lare  certain  principles,  simple  in
mselves,  yet  emanating  from  God,
\\lc\i  are  calculated  to  enlighten,  to
part  intelligence  ; to  bring  him

0  relationship  with  the  Almitrhty,
give  him  a  knowledge  of  God,  of

he  Savior,  of  his  own  being  and  the
|T:ject  of  God  in  creating  the  earth

1  man  upon  it,  and  also  of  the
I  tetiny  of  the  earth,  the  work!  in
Mich  we  live,  and  all  its  inhabitants.

These  ibings,  however,  are  almost
koo  simple  for  the  human  mind,
bystitied  and  befogged  by  false  theo-


ries nnd  notions;  they  are  almost  too
simple  for  them  to  how  unto.  What
is  it?  Jesus  said  to  his  disciples  in
former  tim^s,  "Go  ye  into  all  the
world  snd  pteach  the  Gospel  to  every
creature.  He  that  believefh  and  is
baptized  shad  be  saved;  but  he  thtf
belie  vet  h  not  shall  be  damned."  He
gare  anto  them  p  >wer  to  lay  t;  tjir
h*nds  upon  believers  and  imparr  to
them  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  placed
them  in  communion  with  God,  and
wnose  faith,  as  we  are  told,  ,(  entered
within  the  veil,  whither  Christ  their
forerunner  had  pone. 51  And  still  the
words  that  thest*  men  preached,  as
Ji'sas  himself  expresses  it  in  referring
to  the  same  thing,  were  not  his  o*vtf#
but  the  Father  that  dwelt  in  him  :  iie
did  the  works.  A  n  J  we  MW  tol  l  rJiafc
when  those  ancient  men  of  God
preached,  their  words  went  with  power
and  with  much  assurance,  and  the
Spirit  of  God  and  with  the  H  >ly
Ghost,  to  the  convincing  of  those  who
desired  to  know  the  truth  and  be
governed  thereby.  What  was  the
result  ?  This  confu  inn  heretofore
existing  among  them  departed  ;  they
were  no  longer  split  up  into  sects  and
parties,  but  they  had  *'  one  Lord,  one
faith,  uae  baptism,  and  one  God,  the
Father;  of  whom  are  all  thing**;1*
p reoi.se I y  the  same  as  we  have  in  all
the  works  of  nature,  in  all  organized
mutter.  There  are  certain  eternal,
unalterable,  unchangeable  laws  by
which  it  is  governed  ;  and  no  chemist
or  philosopher  can  change  these  laws ;
they  *re  eternal,  inexorable,  and  al-
ways prod u '-e  the  same  results.

We  think  these  things  correct  upon
natural  principles;  why  nat  in  rtgod
to  these  higher  principles  which  God
has  revealed  to  the  human  a  inly  ?
We  read  o(  men  in  former  l  imes  who
said  they  gazed  upon  the  Lord;  (hey
r-avv  him,  and  his  train  filled  the
Temple-  But  says  one,  44  X*  d@  not
believe  it/' Who  cares  whether  j  oa


Jul  UNA  I.  h.M  ul  KM->,


do  or  nut  ?  that  does  not  invalidate
the  fact. Your  ignorance  in  regard
to  these  matters  does  not  affect  in  the
least,  the  great  truths  of  God.  And
unless  you  yourselves  have  had  some
revelation  to  show  you that  this
statement  is  incorrect,  it  is  foolishness
in  any  man  to  dispute  these  principles
thus  com mufl Seated- We  understand
these  things,  having  obeyed  the  law.
What  do  you  understand  ?  What
does  man  know  ?  Nothing,  only  some
few  principles  pertainig  to  the  laws
of  nature.  Who  organized  these  laws  1
That  very  being  whom  we  affect  to
despise.  Who  organized  the  universe?
Who  makes  this  planet  and  other
planets  revolve  in  their  several  orbits,
and  by  what  influence  and  power  are
they  governed  ? By  a  power  far
greater  than  we  know  anything  about
What  can  we  do  ? Where  is  there  a
philosopher  that  can  organize  a  blade
nt  grass,  or  a  grain  of  sand  producing
the  material  to  make  it  from  ?  You
cannot  find  them.  The  great  Creator,
who  governs  and  regulates  these  and
other  systems,  has  given  a  law  to  man
telling  him  how  to  approach  him, and
.showing  him  the  means  whereby  he
can  obtain  intelligence  from  him  ;  and
he  is  able  to  carry  out  that  law,  for
he  comprehends  it And  what  is  it  ?
Why,  "Repent,  and  be  baptised  every
one  of  you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ
for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall
receive  the  Holy  Ghost/' And  what
shall  that  do  for  you  ? It  shall  take
of  the  things  of  God  and  show  thorn
unto  you. But  you  would  learn  it  in
some  other  way,  would  you  ?  You
cannot  do  it That  is  the  way  God
has  appointed,  and  man  may  exert  ail
his  influences  and  bring  into  requisi-
tion all  his  talents  and  powers,  but
he  never  can  obtain  it  only  in  the
way  which  God  has  appointed/  I
have  a  watch. The  man  who  made
it  tells  me  if  I  would  keep  it  going,
I  must  wind  it  up  every  day.  But


suppose  I  should  want  it  to  go  in
some  other  way,  would  it  go  ?  No.
Should  I  blame  the  maker  then?
Ctrtainly  not ;  in  fact,  you  might
consider  me  a  fool  for  not  carrying
out  the  maker's  instructions.  And
when  God  points  out  a  path  whereby
we  can  obtain  a  knowledge  of  him
and  of  his  laws,  that  is  the  way  to
receive  it,  if  we  receive  it  at  all.

The  laws  of  matter  and  of  mechan
ism  are  unchangeable,  and  so  are  the
laws  pertaining  to  life,  and  also  the
medium  of  communication  between
God  and  man. And  hence  Paul,
after  speaking  some  time  to  a  congre-  I;
gation  that  he  was  addressing,  said
the  words  that  we  speak  unto  you,  I
we  speak  by  the  power  of  God  and  by  1
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  much  assur-
ance. And  then  in  speaking  of  these
things,  he  says,  Ye  are  my  witnesses*
Who? Those  who  received  his  word
and  obeyed  it.  You  are  ray  witnesses,
as  also  is  the  Holy  Ghost  that  bears
witness  of  us* He  bad  the  living
witness  within  him  ;  and  they  among
themselves  had  thia  evidence.  And
John,  in  speaking  to  some  of  his
disciples  said, 41  But  ye have  u
unction  from  the  holy  one,  and  ye
know  all  things/'  "  Ye  need  not  that
any  man  teach  you;  but  the  same
anointing  teacheth  you  all  things,
and  is  truth,  and  is  no  lie" And  in
speaking  to  the  people,  Paul  said,
*'  Which  hope  we  have  as  an  anchor
of  the  soul,  both  sure  and  stedfaat,
and  which  entereth  into  that  within
the  veil ;  whither  the  forerunner  is  for
us  entered/'

This,  Latter-day  Saints,  is  your
privilege.  You  have  embraced  tke
same  Gospel ;  you  h  a  ve  been  baptised
into  the  aamt  baptism,  have  partaken
of  the  aame  hop*,  and  are  in  posses-
sion of  the  same  apirit  Do  not  aWbw
your  feelings  to  be  overturned ;  do
not  give  way  to  the  follies  and  dela-
tions of  men,  nor  to  the  powers  of


OWOfcSlilON  to  COIX  KTC \


kness,  but  maintain  your  integrity
before  God  in  all  fidelity  ;  and  live
your  religion,  keeping  the  command-
ments of  God,  and  your  faith  will  be
as  the  faith  of  the  just,  that  shines


brighter  and  brighter  until  the  perfect
day.

God  bless  you  and  lead  yoa  in  the
path  of  life,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


[FROM  THK fc*  TBKtUTOmiAL  KNCjUiKfik/']

DISCOURSE  BY  COUNSELOR  DANIEL  IL  WELLS,

Dklivkkkd  ix  thk  Pkovu  Mkktln'l;  House,  Saturday  Mormvu,

June  1,  1878,


( He pt tried  hy  John  t\  (rrahmm.)


OPPOSITION  TO  GOD  AMONG  MANKIND — RKI.KilOl'S  INToLKRANt  E A  t.oN
SEQUENCE — INFIDELITY  THK  RESULT  OK  DEPARTURE  KROM REV  KALE D
ORDER—THE  UNITED  ORDER.


There  is  an  opposition  to  the  Lord
having  on  the  earth  a  people,  called
by  his  name  and  doing  bis  will  It
has  been  so  from  the  beginning.  The
Lord  never  had  a  people  who  were
rec  eived  with  open  arms  by  the  world,
admired,  cherished  and  respected  ;  on
the  contrary  they  have  been  persecu-
ted or  totally  deatroyed  from  off  the
earth.  The  wicked  have  invariably
prevailed  over  the  good  :  it  might
almost  be  said  that  the  first  had  man
killed  the  first  good  man.  The
Latter-day  Saints  have  had  the  same
•xperieaoe  to  pass  through,  and  when
a  time  of  comparative  peace  has  come
ar  i and,  as  it  has  sometimes,  they  are
apt  to  ask,  "  What  is  the  matter?
Have  we  lost  our  faith,  that  the  Ad
Ycraary  should  thus  let  nt  alone?"


There  will  come  a  tinie*  however,  in
the  history  of  the  Saints,  when  they
will  be  tried  with  peace,  prosperity,
popularity  and  riches.

The  world  look  with  terror  toward
that  period  when  the  Lord's  pur-
poses in  regard  to  building  Temples
predominates,  when  universal  peace
is  established,  and  the  sceptre  of
righteousness  is  wielded.  The  world
would  not  like  any  religions  power  to
predominate  on  the  earth,  and  right-
ly, too,  considering  the  tyranny  and
despotism  that  hare  marked  the  his
tory  of  religious  rule.  We  find,  in
days  past,  that  various  religious  in-
fluences have  swayed  the  sceptre  in
a  moat  unrighteous  manner,  made
captive  the  human  will,  and  men
have  heeri  ferced  t«  yield  submission


308  JOURNAL  OF  DLSCOl


to  t  he  niost  oppressive  measures.  The
rel i^ioiiH  wars  have  b -en  more,  ter-
rible in  th_*ir  effects,  ciused  more


Beeidefl  thTsfntnleranwtfif*re  is  an-
other reason  why  religion  has  hecome
asteful  taTQHiiy  people,  and  why


nniil  th

lit  a  le  fi


hlojdshei  : t tiri  sorrow,  than  all  t ho  the  natrms  have  •shewed  reli^i-m
Others  put together,  A  gradual  hut  1  from  their  councils.  Because  tJtn-se
sun*  relief  from  religious  rule  and  n  tellers  :md  professors  of  religion  h re
dictation has  been  brought  about,  I  without  the  knowledge  of  Gal,  and

jrttttions  of  the  enrth are  |  their  idea*  ahd  dua'riae*  h  *ve  been
X  i  w.  mdm tlnm t!i  »r so  f  ir  different  t<*  the  written  word,
t  he  people  i < >•  i tc  with  ill  favor  upon th  it  reasonable  people  say,  "HuaH

bu^  !  *  and  fly  to  the  other  extreme

After  witness-
iriety  of  forma,
and  being  unable  to  Rain  assurance
fiom such  source?


any  one  reiigNitrs  clement  gaining
aendancy  over  the  other. A*  the  !  and  become  infidel*,
old s  lying goes,  "A  burnt  child in?  the  strife  and
dreads  the  fire."


In  this  count rv  there  i*  no  fell


respecting  I  ho


gious  piwer  predominating,  but  now  '  rfalities  of  the  future,  they  s:iyt  **  We
that  the  kiuefdorn of  (Jo4 ;  it  established  '  don't  know  ijny  thing  about  i*  ;  we'll
this  opposition  is  brought  about  and  live  good  nigral  lives  ami  all  will  bo
is  felt  eve*
be' ore.  T

growing  power  and,  htmeo,  its  bitter
and  unrelenting  npposilion So  op-


to a  ^ro  it (*r  .exiet

\a  world i>  jt*alous


4)


f  its


V


i  i


D  to  the  i


office  hiv


Toe  greatest  difficulty  the  elders
have  to  contend  with  in  the  n*or!d  is
this  wide  spread in|f  infidtdity,  brought
about,  by  the  assurnpf  ions  of  so  c; died
religious  teachers,  Now,  theL)rd
hasrenrored  his  Holy  Priesthood,  .big
mind  and  will, — the  glorious  Gospel
uf  trust  or  •  which  is  "  the  power  of  God  onu>  sal-


no  p


a? id  .spread  of  relifior
pjwer  that  in  many  p
holding  a  religious
m  i  ned  *  to  hold  a  j,

pr under  the  government. It  was  '  ration,1*  and  fearful


4

'SOI  I

ner-


.me  reason  that  the  name  ol
iJinenlioued  in  the  Const  i-


for  tms
God  is'i
tntion  of  the  United  S


iver  rhev  hold  ov
eik  these  self


rf  mm  what
the  minds'  of
lecte  1  teachers  nud


PuritaM  t,J
fjinas  oppri


The  I  priests  h


tu  o\


th  suffered  from  reli-
m. and  rat h^r  than- be


Now,  in  order  to  understand
ciples  of the  trdfe  and


se  it,

r  :i-


made  io  bow  the  head  or  the  knee Gospel,  we  must  look  fit  them  by  the

tlie  n:imc  of  J  sus  j  spiff!  of  God,  for  u  the  things  of  Gj4


Christ,  or  Iwjiig  c  impelled to  place  !  knoweth  no  mtn  except  by  thi-  nptrtt


the  cross  nn  i


ehu


!  God.'*


uvai  e.


111!


and  is  >t.»lt  cMtortary  with  the  Roman  ;  the  things  of  itthu  with  the  spirit  of


light  elsewhere

tain


Catho!  jeciitucb,  t  he

■

that  tide  nil  ion  they  could  fiot
in  their  native  land  j  but  singular  to
say,  aftpr  the  lapse  of  time,  when  the
colonies  wi-re  founded,  tb^y  were  un-


a  horse  or  an  ox  ;  then  how  can  a  man
understand  the  things  ol  God  except
by  the  spirit  of  God, — a  higher  errade
oiintelligei.ee.  By  that  Spirit,  iho
Bible,  with  all  its  apparent  inconrf^


\  ™3jr  f  J *  r  l^t.

willing  to  accord  u u to  others  of  d if-  •  teneies,  is  made  plain  to  thehonoiQ
ferent  tiihha  (o  iheir  own,  that  v<  li-  mind.  People  have rnieconat rued,  ha va
giouS  1  freedom  Inr  wtiich  tiiev  them- turned the  truth  into  lies  and  per


selves  had  forsaken  fatherland,  and
expelled  in>m  the  colonies  all  who
differed  with  them  in  a  religious  p  ^Int
of  view.


verted  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  When
a  Latter-day  Saint  has  conformed  to
the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  and  re-
ceived the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Bible  baa


OPPOSITION  TO  GOD,  ETC,


369


seemed  a  new  book  to  him,  although,
in  UisohiMhood  he  may  have  perus-
ed its  pages  over  and  over  again.
The  light  and  intelligence  of  the  Spirit
has  beamed  upon  his  underst-mdin?,
so  as  to  enable  him  to  form  a  insfc  and
Correct  conception  of  its  sacred  truths.

Through  the  great,  variety  of  forms
systems  and  creeJs,  infidelity  h:is  beeh
brought  about.  The  true  plan,  a*
revealed  to  the  L  .tter-day  S  nuts,  is
Sufficiently  ample  to  s-ivo  all  nicu,  bfit
the  phv\s  and  creeds  of  men  are  not
ample  to  any  great  extent,  even  if
they  were  true.  Take  the  Catholics,
for  instance;  they  consign  to  perdition
all  Inr  ! hemsdve*,  contrary  to  the
meaning  of  the  term  Catholic,  which
is  universal  ;  but  they  have  become
sectarian.  The  plan  designed  in  our
pre  existent  state  has  been  ignored,
but  in  this  dispensation  it  has  been
restored  and  we  can  see  wherein  it
is  ample  to  provide  for  the  salvation
of  the  children  of  men.  It  is  to  be
preached  to  all  nations,  and  those
who  will  accept  it  may  be  redeemed
and  exalted.  Then  why  should
people  be  afraid  of  the  government
of  God  I  It  is  bound  to  come  and
rule*  When  it  is  established  in  its
greatness,  glory  and  power  it  will
be  the  most  efficient  and  complete  go  v-
ernment  on  the  face  of  the  earth*
People  are  afraid  of  the  government
of  God,  even  some  Mormons  (I  will
not  say  Latter-day  Sainte,)  lest  some
man  or  men  get  undue  author-
ity. Some  persons  in  the  Church
think  that  an  Apostle  or  a  Bishop  has
no  right  to  interfere  in  temporal
things:  that  their  business  alone  is
to  look  after  the  spiritual  affairs,  and
their  temporal  affairs  they  can  attend
to  themselves.  It  is  very  possible
some  of  these  men  understand  finan-
cial matters  better  than  the  servants
of  tht  Lord  ;  but  it  should  not  be
forgotten  that  the  spirit  of  God  and
the  Holy  Priesthood  will  qualify  men

No.  24.


for  fill  positions  of  life.  People  cau,
through  these  agencies,  acquire
superior  intelligence  to  administer  in
the  things  of  this  world,  and  it  must
be  done  before  the  eternal  riches  are
eonferre  1  upon  this  people,  because
the  light  of  heaven  is  superior  to
that  of  the  world.  The  kingdoms
of  tii is  e;tfth  are  i->  become  the  kins-
domy  of  our  Go* I  and  his  Christ.  !
look  for  this  govern  men  t  to  come
through  the  Holy  Priesthood,  and  to
exercisp  power  in  temporal,  political
and  all  other  things, —  a  government
that  will  extend  to  all  men  their
rights  and  privileges.

Confusion  reigns  over  the  face  of
the  whole  earth.  Look  at  the  com-
binations and  warfare  being  waged
one  against  another;  capital
against  labor,  and  labor  against
capital  There  are  thousands  of  broad
acres  lying  uncultivated,  and  yet  men
are  going  without  bread  to  eat*  We
hear  of  organizations  parading  the
street?,  with  banners  on  which  are
inscribed  the  words,  "Give  us  Bread  ;
Labor  or  Blood  f  *  There  should  be
no  strikes  for  higher  wages — no  strife
between  capital  and  labor.  The  labor
of  men  should  command  a  subsistence,
and  if  everything  is  regulated*  as  it
would  be  under  the  government  of
God,  there  would  be  no  hard  times,
no  complaints,  no  strikes,  no  war-
fare.

There  is  plenty  of  unoccupied  land
in  this  country  and  any  man  can  get
a  piece  of  it*  *'  But,*'  says  one,  u  I
have  no  team,  nor  seed  to  plant,  and
no  money  with  which  to  boy  either.
What  can  I  do  V  You  can  take  up
a  piece  of  land,  get  your  citizenship
papers  ;  and  the  moment  you  do  so,
you  have  the  right  to  file  upon  it,
and  have  two  or  three  years  in
which  to  pay  for  the  land*  No
other  perso*  can  go  to  the  Land
Office  and  take  that  land  away  from
you. In  order  to  get  a  start,  you

Vol  XIX


JOUKNAL  UF  DISCO  UKfciX


can  work  for  your  neighbor  and  for
your  labor  get  the  privilege  of  using
h  i*  team,  plough  and  seed,  and  after-
wards attend  to  it  yourself  You
have  then  bread  enough  for  yourself
and  family  for  one  yean  A  man,  by
this  course,  fomis  the  nucleus  of  his
prosperity,  wealth  and  comparative
independence*  Subsequently  he
gathprs  around  him  the  comforts  of

tig  or  two,
lis  position


a


life:  Jie

and  a  few  chickens.  T
in  life  is  much  more  self-reliant  and
independent  than  employment  by
the  day,  week  or  the  month  in  cities
or  overcrowded  business  centres.
There,  when  a  day's  labor  stops,  the
supply  stops  ;  but  when  you  have
your  own  source  of  supply,  and  your
labor  temporarily  fails,  you  still  have
plenty  of  grain,  and  other  produce
of  the  farm  by  which  you  can  get
along*

President  Young  gave  more
houses  to  the  poor  than  all  the  so-
cieties in  the  world,  and  laid  the
foundation  of  a  great  nation — a  king,
dom — even  the  kingdom  of  God.  All
these  stakes  of  Zion  are  strengthen*
iug  with  the  saints  of  God,  It  it
the  outsiders  who  come  here  to  Utah
that  build  up  the  country  ?  No  ;
the  material  prosperity  of  Zion  is
alone  attributable  to  the  labors  of  the
Saints,  guided  and  directed  by  the
Almighty.  It  is  they  w  ho  are  to  be
found  in  the  nooks  and  coiners— in
all  directions — wherever  there  is  a
spring  or  a  bit  of  land — building  up,
making  the  earth  bring  forth  its  pro-
ducts, and  strengthening  and  en-
larging the  borders  of  Zion.  It  does
my  heart  good  to  see  the  settlements
extending*  even  to  the  remote  corners
of  the  Territory.  Besides,  this  class
of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  who  are
branching  out  and  developing  remote
sections  of  the  country,  are  generally
the  most  faithful,  hardw  orking  and
industrious  of  the  community.  Some


of  the  people  think  that  the  Lord  is
not  showing  the  signs  of  his  coming ;
they  get  disheartened  ;  they  expect
to  see  some  great  apostle  come  from
heaveu  with  the  mysteries  of  the
Kingdom.  Now  the  church  and
kingdom  of  God  is  to  be  built  up  by
our  practical  efforts*  Industry  should
be  employed  in  Zion,  and  the  labor
of  the  people  ought  to  be  put  to  the
best  possible  practical  use.  This  has
everything  to  do  with  the  kingdom  of
Uod,  and  this  is  where  we  require
revelations  of  God — to  teach  us  how
to  build  up  his  temporal  work.  We
do  not  raise  feed  enough  for  our
teams  ;  we  do  not  cultivate  as  much
as  we  ought,  and  do  not  know  how
to  cultivate  that  that  we  have.  All
these  things  should  be  known.  a>
they  tend  to  the  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  God.  We  require  intelli
getice  to  guide  the  cultivating  hand,
1  contend  it  is  building  up  God's
kingdom  to  make  a  yard  of  cloth,  t*>
build  sohool  1  louses,  to  cultivate  the
earth,  and  to  practically  apply  every
conceivable  plan  of  life  necessary  for
our  common  subsistence  ;  and  in
order  to  accomplish  these  tilings  wr
must  have  intelligence  that  comes
from  heaven, — that  is,  if  we  desire  to
exceed  our  fellows.  Until  we  know
how  to  properly  accomplish  and  apply
all  these  things,  the  Lord  will  never
hand  over  to  us  the  riches  of  the
earth.  As  it  is  we  have  not  sufficient
of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  to  entitle
us  to  this  great  blessing.  As  soon  as
he  finds  out  he  has  got  a  people  who
will  hold  what  he  gives,  he  will  be-
stow it,  and  when  he  knows  that  they
will  apply  it  to  his  glory.  Why
could  not  we  establish  the  United
Order  among  the  people]  Because
we  did  not  know  how  to  do  so,  and
I  have  not  seen  a  man  who  knew  how,
and  for  the  reason  that  we  were  not
prepared  to  receive  it  When  the
Lord  finds  he  has  a  people  who  will


or


SITIUX  TO  UUO,  KiV.


not  give  them  over  to  the  devil  and
waste  them,  then  lie  will  bestow  the
eternal  riches,  but  this  will  not  be
done,  and  cannot  be  done  consistent-
ly, until  he  has  a  people  who  will
use  them  for  the  glory  of  his  king-
dom.

I  think  the  Saints  are  on  the  road
of  improvement  Their  labore  are
being  directed  to  the  welfare  of  Zion;
but  there  is  yet  a  great  deal  of  un-
employed labor  that  can  be  made
available  to  that  end.  We  should
open  up  new  industries,  when  others
fail  to  employ  ail  the  material  at
command,  When  one  branch  is
overdone,  open  up  another  and  there-
by find  the  means  of  employment
for  those  in  need  of  it.  It  has  been
thought  that  labor-saving  machinery
and  railroads  have  injured  us.  It  is
not  so  ;  men  should  go  at  something
else,  and  so  keep  on,  constantly  turn-
ing our  attention  to  something  that
will  pay  better  and  accomplish  more.

The  time  will  come  when  the
thread  will  be  cut,  but  I  think  we
could  live  if  the  thread  were  cut  to-
morrow. We  can  produce  everything,
except  perhaps  what  are  called  the


luxuries  ;  still  we  would  suffer  much
inconvenience.  There  are  a  great
many  things  we  would  have  to  do
without,  and  if  the  thread  were  cut
we  would  have  to  do  a  great  many
things  that  we  now  neglect  to  do.
We  should  not  be  forever  dependent
on  Babylon.  Call  them  little  thiags
if  you  please,  but  they  are  as  essen-
tial to  the  building  up  of  the  kingdom
as  they  are  to  any  other  kingdom  on
the  earth.  Wickedness  is  permitted
only  to  try  men  and  women, — to
prove  their  integrity.  If  we  could
have  learned  and  accomplished  all
things  just  as  well  in  the  spirit  world
as  here  on  the  earth,  do  you  think
the  Lord  would  have  sent  us  to  this
world  of  sorrow  and  wickedness!
Jesus  had  to  pass  through  these
ordeals,  in  order  to  get  an  exaltation.
Then  let  us  apply  our  labors  to  the
circumstances  and  requirements
which  surround  us,  and  serve  God —
if  we  believe  there  is  a  God— and
use  all  our  abilities  for  the  accom-
plishment of  his  purposes,  that  we
may  pass  on  to  glory,  and  exaltatiom
in  his  kingdom,  which  may  God
grant  Amen,


DISCOURSE BY ELDER CHARLES C.  RICH,
Delivered  in"  the  Tabeenacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday,  June  3G,  1878.

{Reported  by  Geo.  F.  GtibbsJ

NO  SALVATION  IN  IGNORANCE— REVEJLATION  OF  CALAMITY — THXSjWORLB
NOT  A  BAD  ONE;  SUITED  TO  ITS  PURPOSE — UNBELIEF  OF  MANKIND —
THE  SAINTS  WILL  LIVE.


I  am  thankful  to  have  the  oppor-
tunity of  meeting  with  the  Latter-day
Saints,  this  afternoon  in  this  Taber-


nacle. I  trust  that  I  may  be  able  fc*
impart  a  few  words  of  instruction^
you,  inasmuch  as  I  shall  be  assisted


372


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


to  to  do  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  without
this  aid,  I  am  aware  that  I  would
not  be  qualified  to  speak  to  your  edi-
fication.

We  have  met  this  Sabbath  day  for
the  purpose  of  offering  up  our  Sacra-
ment to  the  Moat  High  God,  to
worship  him  ;  and  while  we  are  thus
engaged,  let  me  request  you,  my
brethren  acd  sisters,  to  call  in  the
wanderings  of  your  minds,  and
implore  His  Holy  Spirit  to  rest  upon
us,  that  our  worship  may  be  accept*
able  unto  the  Lord,  and  truly  bene-
ficial unto  ourselves ;  for,  as  we  have
learned,  all  blessings  flow  from  Him,
and  that  we  are  dependent  upon  him
for  every  good  thing  that  we
receive.

We  are  a  blessed  people  in  having
received  a  knowledge  of  the  plan  of
salvation  ;  for  we  are  in  a  position  to
improve  our  condition,  day  by  day,
by  the  instruction  we  receive,  inas-
much as  we  are  desirous  to  be  found
obedient  to  all  the  requirements  of
God  concerning  us.  We  have  com-
menced to  walk  the  straight  and
narrow  way  which,  we  are  told,  leads
to  the  exaltation  and  continuation  of
the  lives,  and  few  there  be  that  find
it.  The  fact  of  our  having  found  the
way  of  life,  ought  to  inspire  in  our
hearts  a  desire  to  learn  all  that  is
necessary  for  us  to  know  in  order  to
enable  us  to  continue  in  the  way,
serving  our  God  with  all  our  hearts.
I  presume  these  are  the  feelings  of
my  brethren  and  sisters  present  to-
day. You,  doubtless,  want  to  know
what  the  Lord  requires  of  us,  in  the
hope  of  overcoming  every  imperfec-
tion and  folly,  and  every  evil  that  we
are  subject  to  while  in  the  flesh.

The  Lord  has  told  us  in  our  day,
through  the  mouth  of  his  servant
Joseph,  that  a  man  cannot  be  saved
in  ignorance.  This  one  item  itself  is
very  important  for  us  to  continually
beat  in  mind,  for  it  is  calculated  to


stimulate  us  to  seek  after  that  know*
ledge  and  wisdom  that  come  from  God,
which  will  enable  us,  under  all  circum-
stances, to  decide  between  right  and
wrong,  and  eventually  lead  us  back
to  His  presence.  And,  having  at-
tained to  a  portion  of  that  knowledge
that  we  are  seeking  after,  we  are
doubtless  willing  to  live  according  to
and  practise  it  in  our  lives.  For
everything  that  is  right  and  pleasing
in  the  sight  of  God,  is  not  likely  to
produce  an  evil ;  on  the  contrary,
its  natural  fruit  is  good.  By  doing
right,  by  carrying  out  the  will  of  God,
we  injure  nobody ;  but  on  the  other
hand,  we  are  then  in  a  condition  to
bless  and  benefit  others.  We  have
already  demonstrated  this  fact  We
all  know  that  the  more  nearly  we
live  to  the  Lord,  the  better  we  feel,
and  the  greater  the  degree  of  happi-
ness  that  exists  in  our  midst,  and  we
exert  an  influence  for  good  wherever
we  go.  I  have  known  people  whose
religious  belief  has  led  them  to
imagine  that  salvation  was  not  to  be
obtained  short  of  what  we  term  the
spirit  world.  But  we  have  learned
that  the  principles  of  righteousness
produce  happiness  in  this  world  as
well  as  in  the  world  to  come,  1
So  far  as  the  religious  world  is
concerned  it  seems  to  be  perfectlj
understood  by  all  classes  and  all  de-
nominations, that  it  makes  but  little
difference  what  mode  of  worship  ■
chosen  or  adopted,  so  that  the  indi-
viduals themselves  are  suited  ;  the
idea  as  to  whether  the  service  thej
aim  to  render  Him  be  acceptable  and
approved  of  him  or  not,  does  not
seem  to  be  worthy  of  their  con
lideration,  in  fact  it  is  never  ques
tioned,  -  I

There  were  many  creeds  existing
when  the  Sfivior  was  upon  the  eftrt^
having  for  the  foundation  of  theii
faith  the  Old  Testament.  Since  hi*
day  many  have  had,  and  do  hare  a:


OPPOSITION  TO  GOD,  ETC*


73


existence,  and  the  saying  of  the
Savior  is  just  as  applicable  to  day  as
when  he  spoke  it.  '*  Straight  is  the
gate,  and  narrow  is  the  way  which
leadeth  onto  life,  and  few  there  be
that  find  it/*  Jesus  told  it  precisely
as  it  is,  and  he  knew  whereof  he
spoke.  The  Christian  world,  as  a
whole,  will  find  when  they  get  through
with  this  life,  that  this,  as  well  as
many  other  savings  and  teachings  of
the  Savior,  is  full  of  significance,  and
they  will  fiud  out,  too,  that  it  is  true,
a  truth  that  cannot  be  changed  or
done  away.  It  is  not  everybody  that
will  find  the  gate,  neither  will  the
creeds  of  men  nor  the  notions  of  men
enable  them  to  find  it.  God  himself
has  a  voice  in  the  matter ;  he  has
provided  the  way,  it  is  according  to
his  appointment,  which  is  no  more  or
less  than  the  plan  de?ised  and  fore-
ordained in  the  heavens  and  before
the  foundations  of  the  earth.  This
Gospel  plan  cannot  be  changed  or
altered ;  it  is  the  u  narrow  way'1  and
the  only  way  by  which  man  can
serve  God  acceptably.  If,  therefore,
it  be  according  to  the  plan  that  men,
in  order  to  become  bearers  of  his
message,  should  first  themselves  obey
certain  unchangeable  requirements,
and  then  be  commissioned  of  hi  in,
before  they  could  be  authorized  to
preach  his  word  and  will  to  their
fellow  men,  and  thtrehy  become  vir-
tnally  his  servants,  such  requirements
must  be  complied  with,  it  will  never
do  for  individuals  who  disregard  these
requirements  and  who  are  wholly  un-
authorized of  him,  to  go  forth  and  act
as  ministers  sent  of  God  to  declare
the  way  of  life  to  the  children  of
men.  Neither  would  it  answer  for
persons  to  accept  the  doctrines  of
these  men,  however  popular  and
acceptable  to  man  they  may  be,  for
God,  with  whom  all  of  us  have  to  do,
will  not  countenance  them.  The
service  we  render  him  must  be  done


according  to  hia  will,  if  done  in  some
other  way,  he  will  not  approve  of  it.
The  ordinances  pertaining  to  his  holy
Temples  must  be  performed  only  as
he  has  directed,  and  in  the  place  that
he  has  commanded,  unless  the  Lord
reveals  otherwise.  This  is  consistent
with  reason.  If  we,  for  instance,
employ  people  to  serve  us,  we  want
to  dictate  their  labors,  and  we  want
them  to  do  just  as  we  wish  them,
and  not  as  they  may  desire  to  do.
And  how  much  more  so  with  our
heavenly  Father.  If  our  services  be
not  acceptable  to  God,  we  are  not
serving  him ;  then  whose  servants
are  we  ?  Says  the  Snvior,  "  he  that
guthereth  not  with  me  scatte  eth
abroad.  And  again,  uhe  that  is  not
for  me,  is  against  me."  And  the
Apostle  Paul  says,  41  Know  ye  not,
that  to  whom  ye  yield  yourselves
servants  to  obey,  his  servants  ye  are
to  whom  ye  obey  ;  whether  of  sin
unto  death,  or  of  obedience  unto
righteousness/'  Therefore,  my  bre-
thren, let  us  duly  consider  the  im-
portance of  this,  fearing  the  service
we  do  may  not  be  of  "  obedience  unto
righteousness,"  and  consequently  lost
unto  us,  and  prove  to  be  in  opposition
to  the  will  of  our  heavenly  Father,
We  must  conform  oar  will  unto  hia
will ;  the  Savior  himself  did  this,  and
he  sought  to  do  no  more,  nor  no  less*
And  if  we  serve  him  acceptably  it
must  be  as  he  is  pleased  to  direct,
not  as  we  might  please  unless  we
please  to  do  as  be  wishes  us  to  do.

Wh  en  we  understand  the  true
position  we  occupy  as  the  children
of  God,  and  not  of  this  world,  we
shall  find  that  we  occupy  a  peculiar
position.

We  have  to  learn  something,  and
we  have  to  learn  through  the  proper
channel  what  the  Lord  requires  of  us  ;
and  when  we  have  learned  this,  we
must  be  ready  attd  willing  to  comply
with  it,  whatever  it  may  be. And  if


the  world  did  bat  know  it,  this  is  the
in iasion  given  unto  us  to  this  earth,
that  we  might  learn,  in  this  earthly
school,  things  we  could  not  learn  else-  i
where. And  in  order  that  we  may  '
learn  correctly  we  mast  be  willing
to  be  taught  by  those  who  are  com-
petent to  teach,  and  we  must  accept
and  study  the  lessons  provided  for  us,
Nearly  half  a  century  ago,  when  the
Lord  first  commenced  to  reveal  the  !
principles  of  salvation  to  us  hii  child-
ren, he  began  to  tell  us  what  was
coming  upon  the  earth  \  be  predicted
the  overthrow  of  the  kingdoms  of  this
world,  and  he  commissioned  and  sent
forth  hih  servants  to  bear  testimony
of  his  second  coming  and  reign  on  the
eailh. He  told  us  of  earthquakes,  of
famine  and  pestilence,  and  of  other
judgments  that  must  eventually  over-
take the  wicked  in  their  unrighteous-
nebs,  and  that  was  said  at  a  time  when
the  world  was  crying  peace,  But  people
are  as  blind  concerning  the  fulfilment
of  prophecy  in  these  days  as  they  were
anciently,  when  the  Savior  said  of
them u  they  seeing  see  not ;  and
hearing  they  hear  not,  neither  do  they
understand/' Such  has  been  the  con-
dition of  all  generations,  notwithstan-
ding the  revelations,  given  to  them
have  been  plain  and  positive,  and
many  have  been  fulfilled  and  many
are  being  fulfilled. As  it  was  with
the  overthrow  of  the  Jews,  so  will  it
be  in  these  last  days. The  Lord  will
fulfil  his  word,  and  he  will  fulfil  all
that  he  has  said  concerning  his  com-
ing, whether  we  are  prepared  or  not
He  will  overturn  the  kingdoms  of
this  world, and  will  establish  his
kingdom,  and  the  world  of  mankind
cannot  prevent  it. It  is  for  us  to
prepare  ourselves  for  the  dispensation
of  bis  providences  by  doing  right,
not  by  thinking  so,  or  guessing  so,
or  may  be  so,  but  by  knowing  what
is  right. We  have  the  opportunity
to  lean  what  right  is,  and  what  is


required  of  us,  and  we  have  the  powtr
to  do  it ;  and  if  we  do  not  do  it,  sure*
ly  we  shall  be  found  wanting.  In
comparison,  we  will  be  like  unto  the
foolish  vigins  whose  lamps  had  gone
out,  and  who,  when  the  time  came
for  them  to  appear  ready  to  go  forth
to  meet  the  Bridegroom,  whom  they
were  waiting  for,  found  they  had  no
oil  in  their  lamps;  and  while  they
were  seeking  to  renew  their  stock,
the  bridegroom  came  and  they  wers
too  late  to  meet  him.  There  are  a
great  many  things  pertaining  to  us,
Latter-day  Saints,  that  should  occupy
our  serious  attention.  It  h  an  easy
matter  to  make  mistakes  unless  we
are  very  careful;  and  if  we  do
make  mistakes  we  will  find  oar*
selves  more  or  less  injured,  and
astray  from  the  right  path,  and  de-
void of  that  portion  of  the  Holy
Spirit  that  we  otherwise  might  enjoy.

So  far  as  this  world  is  concerned,
some  people  look  upon  it  as  a  horrid
world,  a  world  full  of  pain,  sorrow
and  suffering.  I  do  not  regard  it  as
such.  I  consider  it  a  blessed  world,
a  glorious  world,  which  affords  us
very  many  privileges-  What  other
place  is  there  besides  this  world
where  we  can  obtain  remission  of
sins  ?  That  ordinance  belongs  to
thislifetnd  this  world  and  tone  other*
And  a  great  many  things  pertaining  to
this  world  we  can  do  here,  but  which  we
cannot  do  after  we  pass  behind  the
vail.  If  we  attend  to  the  duties  of  this
life  in  the  time  and  season  thereof,
not  leaving  undone  anything  whieh
we  are  able  te  do,  all  will  be  well  with
us  hereafter ;  but  if  we  fail  in  the
performance  of  our  duties  here*  we
certainly  shall  regret  and  perhaps
meant  our  negligence  when  we  shall
,  have  passed  away;  and  besides  we
shall  then  have  to  depend  upon  others
to  do  things  in  our  behalf,  which  we
might  have  done  ourselves.  Let  m
improve  our  opportunities  here,  and


OPFOSI 1  ION


TO GuDj  ETC.


appreciate  them  as  fully  we  ought  to.
They  are  great  and  glorious,  and  if
we  not  make  a  good  use  of  them,  we
will  certainly  be  sorry  when  we
pass  away,  and  what  makes  it  more
serious  is  that  we  do  not  know  when,
if  ever,  we  shall  cease  to  be  sorry.
This  probation  is  short,  and  when  we
shall  have  done  everything  in  our
power  to  do,  using  our  very  best
exertions  to  fulfil  every  obligation
and  duty,  we  shall  then  no  more  than
be  prepared.  The  more  we  learn
and  understand  pertaining  to  the
things  of  God,  the  more  sensible  we
will  become  of  the  importance  of
being  careful  and  determined,  on  otir
part,  never  to  yield  to  the  spirit  of
indifference  or  be  guilty  <>i  committing
an  act  that  is  wrong.  We  should
be  astonished  if  a  messenger  from  the
eternal  world  co  ild  be  influenced  to
commit  an  act  of  folly  or  wrong  ;  As
saints  of  God  we  ought  to  be  so
firm,  and  have  that  determination,
in  connection  with  our  knowledge,
that  we  could  nut  be  moved  by  any
influence  or  power  to  do  a  wrong,
however  trivial.  What  is  at  stake  in
re^;ird  to  this  matter  ?  Everything
so  far  as  our  exaltation  is  concerned.
This  is  something  that  we  should
think  of  and  bear  in  mind  in  all  our
associations  and  situations  in  life,
being  careful  and  cautious  that  we
do  not  produce  an  evil  that  will  live
longer  than  we  do.  Seeing  that  we
are  all  the  time  subject  to  temptation,
and  consequently  to  do  wrong,  we
ought  to  be  determined  in  our  own
hearts,  never  to  allow  any  wrong  that
we  may  do  to  live  longer  than  we
do;  let  us  see  that  no  evil,  however
small,  finds  place  in  our  hearts ;  but
rather  cultivate  the  good  fruit  in  all
of  our  associations  in  this  life,  feeling
thankful  that  we  have  the  privilege
of  laboring  for  the  cause  of  right  and
truth,  and  of  developing  these  prin-
ciples within  use.


1  We  are  called  upon  now  to  build
Temples  I  can  say  with  great
pleasure  that,  so  far  as  my  knowledge
extends  among  the  Latter-day  Saints,
that  they,  as  a  whole,  are  willing  to
perform  this  labor.  We  have,  through
the  goodness  and  mercy  of  God,
learned  that  Temples  are  for  an  im-
portant use,  and  that  without  them
we  cannot,  in  our  present  condition,
receive  certain  blessings  necessary  to
our  salvatiun  and  exaltation  in  the
Kingdom  of  God,  Why  so  ?  Be-
cause the  Lord  has  ordained  that
those  blessings  shall  be  administered
in  such  places,  and  which,  if  not  per-
formed as  he  hus  directed,  are
without  effect.  These  are  things  that
we  understand,  because  the  Lord  has
en  lightened  us  through  his  Holy
Spirit,  It  has  been  a  common  say-
ing in  the  world  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  were  led  blindly  of  the  Pro-
phet Joseph  ;  after  his  death  it  was
said  they  were  the  dupes  of  the
Prophet  Brigham  ;  and  now  it  may
be  sriid  that  we  yield  blind  obedience
to  President  Taylor,  But, as  Latter*
day  Saints,  we  understand  it  is
every  man's  privilege  and  every
woman's  privilege  to  know  for  them-
selves that  these  men  were  and  still
are  servant  of  the  living  God,  and
that  it  is,  therefore,  God  who  leads
and  directs  them.  And  if  any  be-
longing to  this  church  are  not  satisfied
on  this  point,  it  is  because  they  are
not  living  up  to  their  privileges ;  and
to  all  such,  if  there  be  any,  1  would
say  it  is  time  you  were  obtaining  tbis
knowledge;  it  is  time  that  every  man
and  woman,  claiming  membership  in
the  churcti  and  kingdom  of  God,
were  enabled  to  rise  up  and  bear
testimony  to  the  world,  if  necessary,
that  they  do  know  that  God  has  set
his  hand  to  build  up  his  kingdom,
and  that  it  has  been  established  in
the  earth  in  our  day,  and  that  we
have  been  permitted  to  receive  it*


376


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


When  we  can  bear  this  testimony,  it
will  not  be,  "  I  guess  so,  "  or  u  may
b©  so  f  but  it  will  be  "  Yerily,  thus
gaith  the  Lord,"

I  can  say  now,  as  I  have  often  said
before  you  and  before  the  world,  that
I  know  for  myself  that  God  has
established  his  kingdom  on  (he  earth
in  these  days,  and  that  he  requi'es
obedience  to  the  Ia*ws  of  his  kingdom
and  that  he  not  only  requires  it,  but
that  it  is  onr  duty  to  willingly  and
gladly  submit  to  his  will  whatever
it  may  be,  for  he  can  require  nothing
of  usonlv  that  which  will  be  for  our
good,  and  that,  too,  which  we  most
perform  in  order  to  purify  our-
selves to  enter  into  the  Celestial
kingdom.  "  Well, 11  ooe  may  say,*'  But
the  world  do  not  believe  it."  I  know
the  world  did  not  believe  Noah,  when
he  preached  unto  them  for  the  space
of  120  years  that  if  they  did  not  re-
ceive his  testimony,  the  Lord  would
tend  a  flood  of  water  upon  them.  The
world  did  not  believe  Jesus  the  Son
of  God,  when  he  told  them  the  future
of  Jerusalem.  I  know,  too,  that,  so
far  as  history  informs  us,  the
world  never  has  received  the  testi-
monies of  the  servants  of  God,  neither
do  they  believe  now  what  is  being
preached  to  them  by  his  servants.
tint  for  all  that  the  Lord  has  always
fulfilled  his  word, and by  it  the


r  righteous  have  been  saved,  and  tha
I  disobedient  destroyed.  And  we
know  that  he  will  bring  to  pass  all
that  has  been  spoken  by  the  tnou  h
of  his  servants,  whether  the  wor  ld
believe  or  not.  And,  as  the  people
of  God,  vf  ho  have  been  simple-minded
enough  to  receive  the  message  he  lias
sent  unto  usT  we  have  the  nonsolation
of  knowing  that  while  wickedness
and  abomination  and  all  who  delight
therein,  will  be  swept  away  from  the
eat th,  according  to  the  decree  of
the  Almighty,  his  saints,  with  their
children,  will  live  to  increase  and
spread  abroad  and  ultimately  fill  the
whole  earth.  Let  us  cultivate  within
us  the  knowledge  of  God,  by  living
according  to  the  light  we  have
received  ;  and  let  us  ever  appreciate
the  privileges  that  this  world  affords
|  us  of  learning  good  and  evil,  and  of
being  able  to  distinguish  between
that  which  is  right  and  that  which  is
wrong.  We  have  the  power,  if  faith-
ful,  to  overcome  evil  and  opposition
and  all  the  powers  of  darkness,  and
of  sanctifying  ourselves  before  the
Lord  through  his  truth,  and  of  pre-
paring ourselves  while  on  this  earth
to  inherit  his  glorious  presence  in  the
world  to  come.

;  That  this  may  be  our  happy  lot,  is
ray  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.
