JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES
RY
PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOK,
MIS CO  i:  XS  K  Li)  [i  S  ,
THE T  WELV  K A  POST LBS
REPORT SO  BY
UECX  F.  GIBBS,  JOHN  IRVINE  ANDiOTITERR
R P  FXTFU  L  L  Y MEDICATED  Tu  THK  LATTER  DAY  SAINTS  l>  ALL  THE  WOULD,
VOL.  XXVI.
h\TKREh \  r -TO  f 1 '  N  -  * I  -  -XI  '
LIVERPOOL :
PRINTED  AND  PUBLISHED  BY  DANIEL  U.  WELLS,  42,  ISLINGTON.
LONDON :
LATTER-DAY  FAINTS*  BOOK  UKPOT,  19t  8LTH  KILL  AND  STREET,  PIMLICO.  LONDON,  S.  W.
18  8  0,
L>  R  E  F  A  C  E
By  thft  blessing  of  our  Heavenly  Father  wr  are  enabled  to  present  to  our
readers  Volume  Twenty-six  of  the  J «ir of  I>[srnrnsrcs,
It  will  not  be  less  appreciated  because  its  completion  has  been  some
what  delayed  by  the  unsettled  condition  of  tiling  in  tTttdi,  caused  by
peremption. Tin  First  l'residemv  and  many  <»f  the  Apostles  have  hail
to  partially  withdraw  from  public  Jife  to  avoid  the  consequences  of  mock
trials  and  packed  juries  with  which  a  prejudiced  and  wicked  judiciary
an-  sfrkin*r  U*  hurras  ihe  servant*  nl (mil,  ;i|ul hi.-hn- pilbhr  discourses
1 )  y  t  licse  brethren  h  a  ve  late  I  y  b  een  rwffc
lint  while  power  is  thus  given  to  our  enemies  for  a  little?  season,
when  the  purposes  of  the  Almighty  have  been  accomplished  thereby,  this
temporary  cloud  will  pass  away  and  leave  ZUm  purer,  fivn  mid  mote
powerful  than  before*
THE  PUBLISHER.
JjNI)  bx,
I  M  ■■.  Vn^v.
Ble^ngs  follow  certain  ordinances  l-\  P.  Kirhnrdt. Uet.  1 884
i 1  niseis  that  potern  us  in  settling  new  pi  ares
...Our  respect  for  t  ho  <  oust  it  lj  tioti  of  our
country  .  Womuwt  in'1  concede  | ^ri n-c iplo
fa  the  privilege  of  S  tat  ft  i\ ove r  n m r n t . . .
The  Kingdom  of  God  protects  all  reli-
gions**! Holding  I  lie  Priesthood  should  n>t
disn, ualify  from  holding  ci  vil  office  or  #iv*
iug  counsel.  I 'resident  Vt&,  Q„  trillion. Nov. 20,  3
The  Personality  of  i  iod VairunnoiF.  of  the  com-
mon idra  of  I'ri'y W lit)  and  what  («,nli*
Tlir  Spirits  of  Men  the  rdVspring  of  I  Joel
.^-Spirit not Immaterial... The  Trinit,
Treed  of  i  hmti  hilom...  \1  *li  mav  beromo

like  God  in  II  in  tilory,  Chas\  Wt  Penrose Nov,  Ifl, 1  ftS-l  IS

Ubjeet  of  tialheting.*.Our  Principles  and  Ov*
Bfaui/.atiou  revenlcd  Ti  om  liod»..Onr  Faith
rrul  .-* 1  **«"*!-=  3  l'_v  t  l'ie  jdtM^  "f"  Mi?n  rMi'  .  !*■
I  endemee  upon  (mdh,*Enoch's  t  'it y .,,<  Wn
■fust ice  in  tending  the  Rood.,  The  Lo*d
will  bless  I  In  People,,  Wi>  wilt  stand  by

I  lie  t  Constitution  though  other  a  ignore  it. ,  I  ol  i  t .  Ts  y  I o  r . heo.  H , I  *4  "I**

The  Second  timing  of  our  Savior. ..Pre aching
of  the  Gospj'l  ami  the  Sign*  following...
I " fe a i ■  i  imliPT'ii^  ,  Hut  red  nf  ilit  world  fee.
ward  the  Lattir-day  Saints  ..No  power
ran  overthrow  the  work  of  Oodt4tEirhor-

tatromi  lo  faithfulness.  Qifr  Q.  i  tmoti. Dec. 7P W4  ;|J

Visit  to  the  South..  Testimony  obtained  front

i  ;i>d.1P  Necessity  aud  benefit*  of  prayer. (Jen,  Teasdale. .Ian.  11, lHSf»  45

Power  attending  the  action  of  lienor.' I  <  ,
fere-iuvs... I I  confirms  the  authority  of
Hi*  servants  by  manifestations  nf  Hi*
jiowev  uri'l  favor  .  I  use  pi  i  Ssjnlh  t'liosni
and  ordained  to  organize  the  Church  ot
God,..  The  Lord  revealed  to  the  Saints
His  choice  of  President.  liriprham  Voim-,
and  also  of  President  Jo] m  Taylor... Pol iy

and  wickedness  of  witchcraft*  Q.  t  anno  n. l>ec.  M, 1884  55

Tlieiialhering  .OurTerril^rial  t  'ondition  and
Organization... The  Eternal  Nat un  of
our  <  ,"Vcnants...Tlii:  Law  of  Ancient
Israel,  which  required  a  man  to  marry  his
brother's  widow. t#  Settlement  uf  th«  diffi-
culty connected  with  the  Utah  Lake  and
Jordan  River  h*uu.*The  Flood.  ..We must

Tint  .associate  with  the  wicked,  John  Taylor. Nov.  30, 1864  Sfi

Similarity  of  ct  ream  stance*  surrounding  for-
user  and  LaHer*dav  Saint*. . .< M  sk  no
v ?n  \ ft r '  c r  of  persons.*  Revelation  to  Kn ooh
...Christ  preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison
between  the  times  of  His  crucirixioi.  and
resurrection.^  All  must  hear  the  (Toaptd,
and  be  judged  thereby.  We  in ivA progress

or  retrograde,  ( !eo- Q.  Cannon, Nov,  9,  1684  77

Hostility  of  the  world  to  the  Gospel  .  Rebel-
lion of  Lucifer  in  lleaveu.,.Seth  ^ive


iv


place  of  Abel...  Wickedness  **f  the  Ante -
iihivi  ana...  Enoch'*  Ziou  ...  Necessity  of
opposing  powers  and  principles,  that  men
may  bp  teste  1 ...  Difference  between  Big-
Amy  and  Plural  M  irria^e..  AJur  M  arrive
I ;  oven  ants  aru  Eternal. ... Our  Children
sIjouLI  be  correctly  taught
Our  labors  are  interesting  and  peculiar.  .Char-
acter of  the  Lalter-day  .Saiut&s„..,The
blessing  and  privilege  of  Priesthood...
'Ihe  Primary  Associations  Our  warfare
is. one  of  faith. .. We  man  Imparl  unc  for
our  Hiffhts... Necessity  for  Good  Lawyer*
•♦.TheGift  of  Wisdom... Persecution  will
lend  to  unite  us.

The  Work  of  (rod  only  partUUj  understood*..
Manifestation  of  the  Father  and  the  Son
to  the  Prophet  Joseph... The  Priesthood
conferred  tipou  him  ...Kin  laud  Temple,
audi  he  Ministrations  of  Moses  and  E£Jijah
...Benefits  and  uses  of  1  em pW.  Public
and  private  improvements  advocated...
Children  shoultl  !>■  properly  taught...
Wives  shoulil  he  kin  illy  treated...  Exhor-
tation to  virtue  and  purity.

fommiiTiilics  art  made  up  of  family  •rgaiii/a-
tiom...The  Marriage  Relationship  insii
tutcd  by  the  Almighty ...  De>ctQt  of  the
human  family  from  God...  Plural  Marriage
System  of  Ancient  Israel,.. Potency  of
Love. ..Eternity  of  Marriage  necessarily
leads  to  Plural  M  ar  r  iage . .  *  Pol ygam  i  r
form  of  Marriage  moat  prevalent  m  the
world.. Fruiu  whence  Monogamy  is  derived
... M on oga my  sometimes neresaa  r  y F r ui i a
of  Monogamy  and  Plural  Marriage  com-
pared ,  .  The  Saints  should  not
marry  outside  the  Church.

Privilege  of  ineei  iu^  together,. .We  are  here  to
do  our  Father*  Will..* All  dependent
upon  God  for  assistance,  guidance  and
direction.., The  Lord  revealed  to  Adam
the  purpose  of  SacrinVe  Adam,  before
hi  i  death,  called  his  family  together  and
bios  Aid  them  and  prophesied  .  Many
Spirits  hare  been  destined  to  hold  cer-
tain positions  among  men... Why  we  are
gathered  We  i u  u st  folio w  t h c  teachi ngs
of  the  Spirit,  and  honor  the  Prieathood
in  all  its  callings  Prepare  ourselves  10
enter  holy  places., . The  Priesthood  must
not  tolerate  i  n  iq  ui t y . . .  The  ( 1 1  u  rr  h  mutt
he  purified.,. Concluding  exhortations,

Importance  of  our  Sunday  Schools aud  Mutual
Jm  nro  v  cm  en  t  A  s  ■  or  iatians.  ..Necr^silv  of
Leaeli iti^  i.ur  HiiMr+Ti  lj;e  pri  ni'iple  ■* ■  r  vir
X  u  e . . .  The  \  jot  d  will  build  up  His  K  i  n  g  ■
dom  in  His  own  way... .Self -preservation
requires  us  to  be  united. .  We  have  to  con-
tend with  mohocracy  in  Irgal  form  and
guise  No  one  has  prospered  in  opposing
the  work  of  I  -u«f.


Date,


Page,


John  Taylor. Ftb.  12,  1*82  ^7


P.  D,  Richards. Jan.  13,  lSSfi  L>S


lohn  Taylor. Get.  2D,  1881  105


II.  W.  Naisbitt. .March 8,  liXi  Mi


John  Taylor. OeU o,  1883  128


i;eo.  Q.  Cannon. Jan,  IS,  1 B95  156


INTERN.


la  r.hf  South.  EVr*onution  in  Arizona...
An  American  Si^TL;i+.*B»MfatiQ*ii  tm
.Missouri  and  Illinois  ti-'  I  be  tvsulb  of

I'oty.aan.y  -  AlTecting  reference  to  the
Martyrdom  of  J  oaep H  and  Hyrtim..
•  I  Lu]{ffiiient  begins  at  rhe  House  of  <!od,..
Ejc  Pout  Facto  A I'jilicaTiori  of  the  l  id
in  Linda  Law  "Viri'ni}.:s  (he  Speaker  to
can  form  to  the  Uwa^  far  a*  possible — No
one  ever  piniialioJ,  according  to  law,  for
killing  u  Mormon.

The  Work  of  the  Lord  in  this  Sandwich  Lsl;m<]»,
ami  in  N'l'iv  Xrabmd^Tbe  Inhabitants  trf
i  lir^i-  Inlands  probably  of  the  blond  of
I  srael. .  .ThtM  » entile  Nations  have  meas-
urably rejected  lue  Gospel,  hence  thwir
disunion  mul  scepticism ...  hi  *1<><\  IS  our
nidy  trust., .Our  mission  is  to  do  p?owL„
Education  ran  only  modify,  but  the  Holy
<  i host  rlian^i's  t In-  nature  of  Man. ..The
path  of  duty  is  the  path  of  safety  and
blessing

Present  Conditions^  The  hatred  of  the  world
t i > w arc  1  the  Saints . . .  W  h y  t h l1  Leader t of
the  Church  arc  attacked**. The  purpose  of
perieeution^.Tb**  sift in.LT  process  The
Kpistla  of  the  First  Presidency,.,  The
Gospel  revealed  hi  tins  day  was  thu  Gosnel
that  was  revealed  to  Adam. . .  M  ore  re  vela-
tion  to  be  given, .  .When  a  Nation  perverts
Justice,  then  commences  its  downfall.,.
The  t  Vjjjst itutio]]  \<\  the  I'niled  States.*,
Kihnrlation  to  faithfulness.


1  >atc(


Love  of  Home..  .  Visit  to  Friends  ^  tit  to  pre-
side fiver  the  Europes-ii  Mission*** Former
ill -health  in  tin  inland .  .  Kuensi  sysjrin
of  tract  distribution  inaugurated. .  .Tribute
t"  the  worth  and  efficiency  of  the  Mi«-
Hinnai-i«s**.Kcpeift  of  the  condition  of  the
work  in  various  Kiirepean  countries  .
AnieriLM  the  I  lawn  of  Freedom.. .Truth
has  ever  met  with  persecution... No  one
injured  by  our  principles., .Plural  Mar-


Page


.Mm  Taylor, Feb. 1,  Its


Geo.  LlevnobK Mar*2H,  1885  157


F.  D,  Richards,  April  4  &  5,  ISSo  lift


t  iujj-e  .Tin;  Social  Evil.


The  Latter-day  Saints  attract  much  attention
.♦.God  has  revealed  tn  us  the  purposes  of
our  existence, .God  is  the  Father  of  our
Spirit*.,. He  has  given  us  an  agency ..  (iod
foreseeing  lint  Adam  would  fall  prepared
a  Redeemer. .  The  conscience  of  Man  is
the  Spirit  of  God  prompting  ms  to  do  right
„. Got!  in  His  Wisdom  hides  from  us  the
glories  beyond  tho  veil,

God  the  source  of  all  intelligence... Mankind
His  offipriu  -  and  the  instruiueiiU  of  His
Wi  1 1 , , ,  H  e  o  ver r  ules  t  h  o  re  suits  of  men 's
actions.,.  Preexist  en  ce  of  Man  and  Plu-
rality of  Worlds.., The  Gospel  One  nnd
I  '  I  lan^eablc...  Charges  of  Excluaive-
ness,  etc..  against  the  faints... Th#  Chris-
tian  world  deny  Revelation  and  repudiate


John  Henry  Smith. April  6,  1SS5  174


Geo.  Q,  Csnnom Sept.  28,  1334  132


VI


i  N  r»  r.  X


Date.


LiMe  Uoctriue...The  Uospel  restored  ami

the  last  dispensation  .  What  ih  Mormon''

treason  consists  oL..The  Mission  of  the

American  lie public... A  Fable  and  its  an-

pl  i  cat  ion .  P .  A  P  r<  ipli  ecy . . .  T  h  e  \  'eaccabl  e  *

Mission  of  the  &iiuU*  Orson  F.  Whiim  >  .

The  Speaker's  pleasure  in  again  meeting  with
ihe  Saints,  and  partaking  of  r-;e  Sacra-
m * nt . . .  Th 1 t '  om  pM  i  onshi  p  of  the  W  oh
*jhust  it  more  preci-nu  than  ;;old  ..Future
destiny  of  the  Saints  ...Their  love  for  the
Mountains...  Bleating*  only  appreciated
by  contrast  Nobility  ami  scarcity  of
i j. oral  c<iurage.„Tyranny  of  public  opin-
ion What  constitutes  a  son  of  perdition
.Truth  hat  ever  hern  timely  opposed. \Usa*  Thnhlier,

Th  e  i  'r eetion  ...Male  ami  Ke  mil  e . . .  t 3  a)  1  i  □  jr  of
Enoch  and  Sdih...tiod  selected  Abraham
and  His  seed  to  be  a  chosen  People ...  I  JJu
ral  Marriage  enjoined  upon  Abraham  and
fada  seed  to  make  them  a  ^reat  People,..
The  principle  of  1 1 f «.*  and  i't<-rnn]  increase
II  a  S|  'i  ritual  p*  ■  wer  M  odern  <  'iiruteuriom
imposed  to  large  families... The  Kdmunds
Lav  passed  with  the  pretence  of  repress-
ing immorality  among  the  Mormons.  .
That  mask  of  hvpocnty  now  thrown  oft'.,,
<  "on  eluding  Kxho  nations.

Ignorance  of  the  world  regarding  the  Latter-
day  Saint**,. Our  doctrine*  are  Chris ti an
and  era  subaiautiaU'd  by  the  Scrip  litres...
Nevciflity  of  present revelation  .  Pirsi
principles  of  the  Gospel...  <  nomination  of
i  lie  I  Minrch  of  I  *Hrtat . Mormon  ism"  is  a
restoration of ancient I  hristiamty.,.
•loseph Smith  a  trur> ll j phet... Plural
Marriage  practii-cii  l'.y  Men  of  Ood  in


Page.


April  J''.  is»:>  HM


April  13T  IH»5  'JiH


KrastiiK  Snaw. May li^'i  213


Mi&-c*lLed  dark  age*.


Henry  W.  Nai&biit* J mii*-  7t  iSSii  'JvH


Priesthood.,.  Its  Authority  necessary  to  admin
inter  in  the  ordinance*  of  the  Gospel...
.  1  e s  n ■  otHc i atud  by  v i it  ue  of  1  he  M  elchia-
edec  Priesthood. .  herein  the  Priest-
hood from  Aiidtii...  Necessity  of  Temples  in
which  the  jmwer  of  the  Priesthood  can  be
exercised  for  tnosr  wh<)  died  without  the
t 1  oi pel . . .  Ileal oi al  i  u  •  •  l  the  Priesthood  in
these  last  day *,,,  finding  Power  of  the
H«dy  Priesiuoi>d.„()pDoiitioo  of  Satan  to
she  Priesthood. Virtues  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints.

Prosperous  coin  Lit  ion  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
in  ilie  Valleys  uf  the  Mountains. ./The
Kingdom  of  liodisone  of  Peare,  ivliile
those  of  the  world  are  kingdom*  of  w:ir
•Mid  oppression . l^xhortatiims  to  Faiih-
tulueaa.  TIil%  Sasnt.%  art  not  nsin^;  carnal
weapons  to  defend  themselves  against  the
Indians,  nor  against  tlieii  eneniea ...
The  Blesain^a  of  t3od  invoked  upon  the
Saints,


lieo.  Q.  I  annon.  Ort.  J8t  1«M  341


P. Richnrda. April  0,  1S85  ^53


rtfO'EX.  vil

\*au\  Pai?e.

Prophecy  of  «*f>1in  the  Revelator...  Mission  of
the  ancitfM  Apostles, .  .Their  retention  iind
tkte  ..  /The  Apostasy . . , 'Preservation

of  the  ApM]'1  John.  Hit  ItevHation*..
Restoration  of  tlie  I  iospel..  The  Earth  to
he  baptised  by  lire  as  it  was  omv  haptiied
by  water  We  are  sent  to  the  world  with
\*  w.irn  ii^  m^iii*e«.. Testimony  to  the

truth  uf '  MoHiionisin,^  1  »r  on  I •'.  Whitney. June  21.  18*j  2t>n

Refusal  of  so-called  ('hriatians  to  receive  the
gospel  of  »  hri«t,./rjie  Latter-day  Saints
desire  invest  lira!  inn  l>i"  iheir  principles,..
The  truth  can  Lint  be  destroyed. -  We  have
every  requisite  for  self-government  ...
WeiuviHi  maintain  our  fidelity  lo  (he  truth
, . .  UarUy  oi  erime.  among  the  Mormons'*
Pnrilyof  l%  Mormon"  Homes...  Tharae-
ter  of  the  Latter -ilay  Suinis.  Junius  P.  Wells* July  12,  1*8.1  2o*>

Value  of  I  liberty  Persei'iitimi  e\peetcd.  .
Mors*  «k ml  nth ei\s were  nr  tirsl  -pi -vd...
God  overrules  lor  good. . .  Faith  and  works
J^j-'fht ;unv  and  Baptism  .  .  ttevelation
Witness  of  the  Spirit*. ♦Mission  nf
Joseph  Smith... Nn  malice  to  Men,  but
hatred  of  their  ^  irkod  nets...  Plural  Mjt

liage.  J. II-  Smith. July  27, t,  37i;

The  Wax  to  Tun  I  out  God.., Testimony  of  the
1'lders. ..  *  *  Whorm  rceuivHli  Vmi  ret  rivetll
Me'.. .The  Mt>sinti:u  y  learns  to  know  1  ioil
iv  his  Friend.  .We must  suffer  persecution
.  Ft  usis  of  theSpirii . . . 11  Mormon"  Society
Saints  in  Maintain  Freedom  and  to
Uphold  the  restitution,  i  leorge  t,'.  I  JMtoOD. Nov,  23,  U8i  281

iWotion  to  (tod..J("w  it  is  made  manifest...
hi  vera  opinions. ..Liberty  to  worship  (in  J
..Jesus  Christ  the  Savior  of  the  world
His  Apostles  were  unlearned  men. ..They
were  rejected  by  the  masses...  Writings  of
t hfl  Prophets . , .  Peratcut  ion  for  rigbteou s *
ness'  Hake... Selfishness,.. Compromise  of
principle.*  Uod must  be  obeyed  rather

than  Man.  (Jeorge  ^  .  !-y water. Auar.  2.  297

['arable  nf  i  Ten  \'n  :n:-  [in  pi  J  di-vi-lup
ment  of  the  Arts  and  Sciences... T lit1  Lord
hastening  Mis  work  in  its  time... The
Withering  together  of  people  from  every
nation  after  they  have  been  luptized  into
one  spirit  ..The  law  of  Tithing. .living
to  the  poor. .  Jehovah ...Jesus  Christ..,
His  M  imstry  . . ,  His  Folio  vera , . .  Their
Mission Preaching  to  th«  Spirits  in  Pris-
i  m . . .  Baptism  for  the  Dead* ,  .Saviors  upon
Mount  Ziflii»,.&  word  of  encouragement  to

the  Missionaries,  F.  D,  Richard*. Aug.  S0t  1885  29G

The  Speaker's  dependence  upon  rli*  Inspira-
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost... Comprehensive
an  J  exulted  nature  of  thw  Plan  of  Sill  Va-
lium,,  tt  at  an' s  coe  rci  ve  Sc  h  em  e .  -  -The  Son  s
of  Perdition  .The  Testimony  of  Jesus.,*


i


V II J


TN'OFX.


Physical  and  Moral  Courage  .  True  Reli-
gion is  practical.,  .One  Straight  and  Nar-
row Way  to  Ktcrnal  Life... True  Faith  is
inseparably  connected  with  works. . .  Ajj' >.s ■
ties,  Prophet i,  etc.,  placed  in  t lie  Church
Testimony  obtained  by  obedience...  All
will  be  saved  except  the  sons  of  Perdi-
tion .. Paradise,  ..Salvation  Beyond  the
Grave ..  Pat  riarchal  M  arriaprr.

Growth  of  of  the  letter' Hay  Saiuls. . .  Neces*ity
of  the  Spirit  of  lUvel  at  ion,.  .Conditional
promises  The  Lord  designed  Israel  lo  he
a  peculiar  and  Holy  People,  and  He  hui

the  same  design  concerning  U*.„,\Vp
should  not  intermarry  wit  li  those  not  of
our  faith.- We  should  build  up  not  king
that  is  opposed  to  Z  ion..  .The  favsr  of  (iod
ta  belter  than  earthly  ricliei..  Exhortations
to  Faith  ml  i  loss.  Qeo

Nature  of  the  Uospel,  and  of  ou-  position  and
oiilli  tig f.,  t!  e^ponsibil  i  (its  of  the  I &\ U:,r -da y
Saint*  The  right  of  all  Men  to  religious
Freedom  Huuurahh'  Mm  nf  the  lotrtli
...We  aim  at  a  higher  exaltation  than  the
rfst  of  the  world*

The  Lord  is  teaching  us  valuable  lessons  in
mir  present  experience,,.  Nature  if  the
(.torem  merit  of  tbe  United  States,,,  Physi-
cal  aue  M  oral  Courage . . .  The  Judge  of  the
Third  1  list  rut  Court  not  a  Christian...
The  Character  of  Abraham  vindicated
When  t)iv  ^iii it! h  learn  to  he  strictly  im-
partial, Judgment  and  Mule  will  be  given
them... Power  of  Secret  Societies  ,  Zion
to  be  a  place  of  refuse  and  safety...
We  [runt  purify  ourselves  that  liberty  may
eome.

Our  efforts  to  inform  the  world  of  our  Doc-
trines ..We  must  expect  persecution. +  l
Man  has  no  right  to  mitke  laws  contrary
to  the  law  of  God... Plural  Murriage  is  no
crime... Bigamy  a  Crime.. .There  are  more
for  us  than  against  us...  The  Blood  of  the
P  r  optic  t  s  \  i  ii  po  n  the  A  m  ericau  N  ation . . .
(Jed  wiil  test  U9+

Remarks  by  Pre* idea 4  John  Taylor*

No  prominent  1  *attev -day  Saint  who  live*  his
religion  need  expect  Justice  in  the  i  'eurts
...The  same  sacrifices  may  he  required  of
Modern  lis  iht"  Ancient  Apostles. ..The
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day
Saints  established  by  Divine  Revelation,..
We  will  be  made  perfect  by  sui faring,..
Our  character  as  Latter-day  Saints  must
he  preserved  iuviohite...  Visit  of  Jesus  to
Ivirtland  Temple  Farewell.

The  Go£p?l  - --It  brings  temporal  as  well
spiritual  salvation... The  Prophet  Joseph
Smith . . , Persecution . .  .Our Religion  cannot
lie  destroyed.


Date.


J  W,


Moses  Thatcher, Auj?.  2#,


ti


Kl  Cannon, Aug,  '26,  1883  Ml!


John  Taylor, Julv  9fc  332


Moses  Thatcher, Oct. Si,  1  Rftf  321


\*\  D.  Richards,  Hct.
John  Tay^r, !<>b,  20t


1884  :ito


Lorenzo  Snow, oan.  M\  138l>  3M


Loren2o  Snow.


JOUBNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE BY AT  JSTLK F, l>.  ltlCHAUIW,

Delivered  in  fke  Tahnmidc,  Salt  Ijihe  Clhfl  Sunday  Mmiing,  October

StK  1884.


REPORTED  BY  JOHN  IRVINE!


[Being  the  portion  omitted  in  last  volume.]

BLESSIKGS  FOLLOW  CERTAIN  ORDINANCES.


The  whole  tenor  of  God's  deal-
ings and  instructions  to  His  people
have  been  enriched  and  adorned
with  affectionate  i omenibraiice,
instruction  and  illustration  of  the
youth  of  His  people.  They  are  the
redeemed  of  Christ  from  before  the
foundation  of  the  world.  Jesus  said
their  angels  or  spirit*  do  always
behold  the  face  of  my  Father  which
is  in  heaven.  F Ee  ha<  promised  that
they  shall  come  forth  in  the  first  re-
surrection, that  they  11  shall  grow-
up  until  they  become  old,"  and
when  he  would  demonstrate  who
should  be  greatest  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven f — He  took  a  little  child
and  placed  him  in  their  midst,  say-
ing, *!  Except  ye  repent  and  become
as  tliis  little  child,  ye  can  in  no  wise
enter  therein  ;  but  whosoever  shall
bumble  himself  as  this  little  child,
the  same  is  greatest  in  the  king-
dom of  liea veil ;  and  whosoever
shall  receive  one  audi  little  child  in
my  name  receiveth  me."

In  relation  to  all  these  matter
there  is  a  great  deal  of  importance
attached  to  them,  Hot  only  in  the
matter  of  our  children — which  seems
to  be  of  primary  importance  to  us, —
but  in  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.
We  that  have  ministered  in  the
Gospel  have  learned  of  tl*e  truth  of
that  Gospel*  and  are  able  to  compre-

HY  1,


hend  by  the  Spirit  in  some  degree
the  revelations  and  commandments
which  have  I  n  ^ivou  for  the  guid-
ance of  the  Church.  It  is  hy, vir-
tue of  repentance  and  baptism  for
the  remission  of  sins  that  men's  si  us
;oe  remitted,  k  is  by  attend  tug  to
certain  ordinances  that  the  blessings
of  eternity  are  sealed  upon  us,  and
by  which,  in  the  plain  language  of
the  Scriptures,  our  calling  and  elec-
tion are  made  sure.  But  we  tnnst
obey  those  ordinances  in  faitii  or
their  efficacy  will  not  avail.  Our
Elders  go  abroad  and  preach  to  the
world,  and  their  hearts  are  hi  led
with  charity  and  loving  kindness
towards  their  fellow  creatures.
They  administer  to  the  sick  among
the  Saints,  and  they  are  often  called
upon  to  administer  to  those  who
do  not  belong  to  the  Church,  to
whom  they  administer  according  to
their  faith,  and  thus  the  power  of
faith  through  the  ordinance  of  God
is  made  manifest  among  the  children
of  men.

But  there  is  one  ordinance  that
the  Elders  may  have  perhaps
neglected — and  1  do  not  know  but  I
have  myself— and  that  is,  that  if  we
enter  a  house  and  the  people  thereof
receive  us,  there  our  peace  should
abide.  This  was  the  instruction  of
the  Savior  in  His  day ;  and  if  we  enter

VoL  XXVL


2


JOURNAL OK  DISCOURSES,


a  house  and  the  people  receive  us
not,  then  we  should  go  away  and  re-
turn not  again  to  that  house,  and
wash  our  feet  with  pure  water,  as  a
testimony  against  them  in  the  day
of  judgment,  and  thus  bear  witness
u h to  tht*  Lord  that  we  have  offered
them salvation, that we  have
sought  to  jneach  to  them  the  princi-
ple of  everlasting  life,  that  we  have
offered  to  them  the  Gospel  of  peace
and  desired  to  administer  unto  them
a  blessing. The  same  is  applicable
to  a  town,  village  or  city  that  rejects
you. Ill  this  way  you  do  your  duty
and  leave  them  in  the  hands  of  the
Lord. You  are  not  called  upon  to
contend  with  any  body  in  public
congregations,  or  to  do  anything
that  would  stir  up  wrath  and  indig-
nation. The  Savior  simply  told  his
disciples  to  wash  their  feet  as  a  testi-
mony against  such  people. But  the
generous, charitable feeling  of
our  Elders  prompts  them  not  to  do
a  thing  against anybody ;  they
would  rather  pour  out  a  blessing
upon  the  whole  people.  Consequent-
ly, it  is  a  very  rare  thiug  that  this
ordinance  is  attended  to  by  the  El-
ders ot this last dispensation —
speaking  from  my  own  experience,
and  conversation  had  with  the  breth-
ren. But  when  it  comes  to  tins,
that  we  are  persecuted  and  our  lives
taken,  it  would  seem  as  if  this  was
a  duty  depending  upon  those  Elders
who  are  thrust  out,  and  warned
away  from their  fields  of  labor.
These  things  have  happened  of  late,
.and  it  seems  a  duty  devolving  upon
the  Elders  to  do  that  which  the  law
requires  and  leave  the  responsibility
.  of  its  reception  or  rejection  with  the

Seople  and  their  God. We  have  no
uarrel  with  anybody. We  simply
preach  the  Gospel  to  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth. If  they  receive  it,
well  and  good  ;  if  they  will  notnthen
/t  is  a  matter  between  them  and


their  God  ;  but  the  Lord  requires
this  duty  at  the  hands  of  his  ser-
vants.

Again,  we  go  abroad  and  gather
in  many  people  to  this  place,  and
they  desire  to  find  wurk.  One  of
the  brethren  has  referred  to  this
matter  ami  likened  it  unto  a  man
going  into  a  field  and  working  dili-
gently to  plow  the  field,  sow  the
grain,  harrow  it  in,  harvest  it,  and
then  leave  it  to  waste.  It  is  too
much  so  in  bringing  home  our
brethren  and  our  sisters  to  this  coun-
try and  not  furnishing  them  labor.
It  MB  a  very  pleasing  thought  that
occasionally  companies  of  400  or
f>00  people,  or  even  1,0 0U,  are  de-
livered here  from  abroad.  Why  is
it  pleasing  J  Because  it  si  lows  the
work  of  God  is  progressing ;  it
shows  that  God  is  gathering  home
His  Saint?,  and  soon  after  their  ar-
rival, the  new  comers  are  taken
home  by  their  friends  and  relatives,
and  provided  for,  made  comfortable
until  another  spring,  or  until  they
look  around  ami  find  or  make  a  home.
And  it  is  a  blessed  thought  that,
notwithstanding  hundreds  and
thousands  of  people  are  brought
here  yearly  and  cared  for,  so  great  a
proportion  of  them  live  in  their  own
homes,  raise  their  own  cows,  pigs,
chickens,  etc.

Frequently  when  we  go  to  the
Seventies  and  ask  some  of  them  if
they  are  willing  to  go  on  a  mission
to  preach  the  Gospel,  one  replies :  al
am  no  preacher  at  all  ;  I  could  not
preach  a  sermon  if  1  were  to  try
and  wind  up  by  saying  :  "  If  I  can't
go  out  myself  and  preach,  I  am
willing  to  help  support  the  families
of  missionaries  while  they  are  gone."
Many  have  said  this,  and  many  more
of  them  have  thought  it.

The  Seventies  are  a  numerous
concourse  of  men  who  are  called  in
connection  with  the  Twelve  to  tee


BRETHREN  SHOULD  PROVIDE  LABOR  FOR  NEW  COMERS.


that  the  Gospel  is  carried  to  the
nations  of  the  earth.  Many  of  them
are  aged — some  having  been  in  the
Church  almost  from  the  days  of  its
first  organization  in  Ohio,  and  many
since  the  days  of  Nauvoo — too  aged
to  be  called  to  go  upon  missions —
yet  they  could  help  their  brethren
coming  in  to  find  employment,  and
*fl  do  the  Twelve  after  having
labored  iu  the  vineyard  to  help
gather  the  harvest,  labor  together
ill  the  threshing  floor  to  help  garner
the  wheat,  clean  it,  ami  assist  to
make  it  fit  for  the  Master's  use.
The  younger  men,  after  having  se~
cured  homes  for  their  families,  feel
free  to  go  on  missions,  knowing  that
their  interests  at  home  are  not  being
neglected.

If  the  aged  Seventies  and  all  men
of  experience  would  interest  them-
selves in  the  different  parts  oF  the
Territory,  and  find  or  make  work  for
the  newcomers,  they  might  do  a  vast
deal  of  good.  They  might  help  their
brethren  who  come  in  from  the  old
country  so  obtain  a  living,  When


we  first  came  here  every  man  had
to  be  a  farmer,  had  to  cultivate  the
land  in  order  to  obtain  a  living.  To-
day many  of  the  brethren  who  come
from  the  old  country  have  no  idea
of  farming,  and  have  never,  perhaps
\  raised  a  chicken  T  a  pig  or  a  cow.  The
brethren  should  take  hold,  there  Tore,
and  assist  each  other  iu  these  things.
Let  us  help  to  build  each  other  up
more  earnestly  and  more  extensively
than  we  have  done.  Let  us  not
cultivate  feelings  of  cove tousn ess
to  the  crowding  out  of  those  en  no-
bling  and  generous  sentiments  which
should  fill  the  bosom  of  every  Latter-
day  Saint.

My  brethren,  you  are  Elders  in
Israel,  and  the  blessing  and  power  of
the  Priesthood  are  upon  you.  There-
fore we  should  do  all  the  good  we
can,  that  those  of  our  brethren  who
are  constantly  coming  in  here  may
obtain  work,  that  they  may  not  be
led  away,  through  idleness,  into  sin,
and  their  hearts  be  turned  away
from  the  Gospel  which  they  have
embraced.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT GEORGE Q,  CANNON,
Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Provfy  Sunday  Afternoon,  Xor20th7  1884.


REPORTED  BY  JOHN  IRVINE


CAUSES  THAT  GOVERN  US  IN  SETTLING  NEW  PLACES  —  OUR  RESPECT
FOR  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  OUR  COUNTRY — WE  MUST  NOT  CONCEDE
PRINCIPLE  FOR  THE  PRIVILEGE  OP  STATU  GOVERNMENT— PRACTICAL
MEN  HAVE  HELD  OFFICE  —  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  PROTECTS  ALL
RELIGION  —  HOLDING  THE  PKIE  THOOD  SHOULD  NOT  DISQUALIFY
FROM  HOLDING  CIVIL  OFFICE  OR  GIVING  COUNSEL.


Jn  attempting  to  address  you  this
afternoon,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
I  trust  I  shall  iyive  the  assistance


of  your  faith  ami  prayers,  that  I
may  be  led  to  speak  upon  those
priuciples  that  are  adapted  to  your


4


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES


circumstances  and  wants.  We  as
a  people  are  living  at  a  time  when
we  need  the  assistance  and  direction
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  Tu  be  taught
by  men  and  by  men  k  wisdom  in  our
position  would  be  of  little  or  no  avail
to  us,  from  the  fact  that  the  comli-
tionswhich  surround  us  are  different
in  many  respects  from  those  which
surround  every  other  people.  We
are  a  peculiar  people.  We  are  not
bound  together  by  associations  such
as  exist  among  other  peoples.  We
have  not  come  together  because  this
land  suited  us,  and  was  desirable  for
us  to  make  a  living  in,  but  we  have
gathered  to  this  land  through  force  of
circumstances  over  which,  to  a  certain
extent,  we  had  no  control.  We
have  come  together  impelled  by
motives  such  as  do  not  operate  upon
ordinary  people,  and  having  objects
to  accomplish  such  as  are  not
thought  of  nor  labored  for  by  others.
Other  people,  when  they  form  settle-
ments such  as  we  have  in  these
mountains,  are  generally  drawn
together,  if  they  are  new  settlements,
by  the  advantages  of  locality,  by  the
opportunities  for  making  a  living
or  in  creating  wealth,  or  for  some
consideration  or  reason  of  this  char-
acter— that  is  in  the  first  place.
Afterwards,  in  succeeding  genera-
tions, they  stay  there  because  it  is
their  birth  place,  because  it  is  the
home  in  which  they  have  been  reared.
But  these  considerations  have  not
influenced  us  in  our  settlement  in
these  valleys.  It  is  due  to  none  of
these  causes  that  we  are  organized
in  communities  as  we  are  to-day,
but  it  is  due  to  causes  that  are  higher
and  diverse  from  those  that  operate
upon  other  people  where  they  form
settlements  such  as  we  have  done.
Hence,  this  being  our  condition,
it  requires  wisdom,  it  requires
strength,  it  requires  enlighten,
rnent  from  God,  to  enable  us  to


maintain  ourselves  upon  the  principle
that  we  came  here  in  the  beginning
for,  and  to  escape  the  evils  by  which
we  are  threatened.  We  believe
that  it  was  God  who  led  us  to  this
land  ;  that  it  was  God  who  prepared
this  laud  as  an  abode  for  us ;  that  it
has  been  His  Almighty  power  that
has  preserved  us  thus  far,  and  has
ameliorated  the  condition  of  affairs
— that  is  the  soil  and  the  climate
and  the  water — that  has  produced
changes  that  have  made  this  land
desirable  and  a  delightful  home  for
us — and  that  there  has  been  a  pur-
pose and  a  design  in  all  tins,  and
that. we  have  been  the  instruments
in  the  hands  of  God  of  working  out
and  accomplishing  that  design  up  to
the  present  time*  Hence  there  is,
as  I  have  said,  a  necessity  that  we
should  receive  from  the  same  source
that  has  hitherto  guided  us,  con-
tinued guidance  and  continued  in-
struction, so  that  we  shall  not  stop
half-way  in  the  work  that  we  have
undertaken,  but  by  divine  help  be
able  to  accomplish  it.

There  were  some  reflections  that
passed  through  my  mind  as  I  sat
in  your  meeting  this  morning  con-
cerning the  circumstances  which
surround  us,  that  if  I  can  get  the
Spirit  I  would  like  to  speak  upon.

In  the  first  place  it  will  not  do
to  judge  or  measure  us  by  the  stand-
ards that  obtain  among  other  people,
and  by  which  people  are  measured
in  other  places.  To  form  a  correct
judgment  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
men  must  understand  the  motives
which  prompt  them  to  action,  the
considerations  which  affect  them,
and  the  objects  they  have  in  tow  to
accomplish  ;  to  form  a  correct  esti-
mate of  our  character  these  all  must
be  taken  into  consideration.  But  it
is  often  the  case  that  we  are. measured
by  standards  that  do  not  apply  to
us,  which  may  very  well  answer  for


OUR  RESPECT  FOR  THE  CONSTITUTION.


measuring  other  people  and  other
communities,  but  not  for  us,  ami  in  |
consequence  of  this  we  are  frequently
misjudged,  and  men  and  women
come  to  incorrect  conclusions  re-
specting us.  Fault  is  constantly
found  with  us  by  our  enemies  be-
cause  of  these  peculiarities  which  [
they  do  understand,  or  which  if  they
do  not  understand,  they  pay  no
attention  to.  For  instance,  it  is
frequently  said  to  us  that  we  are  a  j
disloyal  people,  that  we  are  not  friends
16  the  government,  that  we  respect
a  power  and  an  authority  in  our  midst
which  we  consider  paramount  to  the
authority  of  the  government  ;  and
because  of  the  circulation  of  this
accusation  and  its  wide-spread  belief,
we  are  refused  rights  to  which  we
are  fully  entitled,  which  belong  to
us,  which  should  not  be  withheld  j
from  or  denied  to  us.  It  is  very
remarkable  when  we  think  about
our  numbers,  how  few  we  are,  com-
paratively speaking, — it  is  very
remarkable  that  there  should  be  such
jealousy  entertained  about  us  as
there  is.  Pharaoh  and  the  Egyp-
tians were  never  more  afraid  appar-
ently of  the  great  power  of  the
children  of  Israel  in  their  midst  than
our  fellow-citizens,  and  many  of
them  too  that  are  in  high  places,
appear  to  be  afraid  of  us,  They
seem  to  look  upon  us  as  aliens,  as  an
alien  power,  and  treat  us  according-
ly, when  there  is  not  the  least  justi-
fication for  doing  so.

Now,  you  remember,,  doubtless,
Pharaoh's  treatment  of  the  Israelites,
He  saw  that  they  were  increasing,
aud  he  became  alarmed.  4 4  Why/1
said  he,  -1  If  we  were  going  to  have
a  war,  the-e  Israelites  are  becoming
so  numerous  they  may  join  our  en-  I
emies  and  take  away  our  kingdom
from  us.  Ue  must  stop  their  in-
crease." And  he  counseled  with  his
people  as  to  the  best  method  to  stop  I


this  increase.  He  issued  a  decree
that  all  male  children  that  were  born
of  the  Israelites  should  be  destroyed
and  cast  into  the  river  Nile,  but  that
the  female  children  should  be  spared.
In  this  way  he  hoped  to  eheck  the
increase  of  the  children  of  Israel  in
Egypt.  There  is  nothing  in  history
that  has  come  down  to  us  to  furnish
grounds  or  justification  for  this  cruel
action  on  the  part  of  this  king.  But
tins  action  was  well  adapted  to  force
the  children  of  Israel  into  the  feel-
ing that  the  government  under  which
they  lived  was  a  harsh,  a  cruel  and
an  unfriendly  government,  and  to
create  antipathy  in* their  breasts
against  it.  hi  this  way  this  tyrant
— as  all  tyrants  have  ever  don*3 — in
trying  to  accomplish  the  object  he
had  in  view,  took  the  very  means  to
bring  upon  himself  and  his  nation
the  evils  that  he  dreaded  ;  because
if  he  had  desired  to  make  the  Israel-
ites join  the  enemies  of  the  nation
and  be  traitors  in  the  midst  of  the
kingdom  he  could  not  have  taken  a
more  effective  method  than  that
which  he  did  take.

And  so  it  is  with  us.  If  we  had
not  had  a  profound  attachment  to
the  Constitution  of  theUnited  States
aud  to  the  institutions  of  this  gov-
ernment, the  course  Shaft  is  taken
against  us  by  those  who  have  repre*
sen  ted  the  government  has  been
and  is  of  a  character  to  have  driven
us  into  open  and  avowed  enmity  to
the  government  years  and  years  ago.
Without  that  deep-rooted  attachment
we  should  have  lost  all  our  respect
for  a  government  under  which  we
have  suffered  such  cruel  wrongs.
There  could  be  no  better  evidence
of  the  kind  feeling  and  the  loyalty
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  to  I  he
government  of  the  United  States,
than  the  fact  that  in  our  breasts  and
throughout  these  mountains,  there
prevails  an  unquenchable  love  aud


6


JOURNAL  0>  DISCOURSES


respect  for  the  Constitution  ami  the
institutions  that  spring  therefrom,
notwithstanding  we  have  been
denied  our  rights  and  been  treated
with  the  utmost  cruelty.  There  is
scarcely  an  act  of  oppression  that
could  be  practiced  that  we  have  not
had  to  endure,  from  the  time  the
church  of  which  we  are  members,
was  organized  up  to  the  present  time.
We  have  been  falsely  accused  of  all
kinds  of  crimes,  have  been  mobbed
and  repeatedly  driven  from  our
homes  with  the  entire  loss  of  our
property,  have  been  outraged,  war-
red upon,  subjected  to  violence  of
almost  every  description,  and  mur-
dered One  by  one  our  rights  have
been  assailed*  We  have  been  stripped
of  them  under  forms  of  law ;  Ave  have
been  denied  justice,  and  treated
witli  extreme  vindictive!?  ess.  Our
families — if  those  who  had  the  ex-
ecution of  the  laws  in  their  hands
could  have  accomplished  it — would
have  been  rent  asunder ;  wives
would  have  been  torn  from  their
husbands,  children  from  their
parents ;  households  would  have
been  destroyed  ;  distrust  and  enmity
and  hatred  would  have  been  engen-
dered in  the  breasts  of  the  people
one  towards  another — that  is,  if  the
measures  that  have  been  framed
against  us  could  have  been  success-
fully carried  out  as  they  were  de-
signed by  those  who  framed  them.
Just  think  of  it!  Think  of  the
manner  the  women  of  this  commu-
nity have  been  tempted  to  turu
traitors  to  their  husbands  and
their  friends  !  Every  inducement
possible  has  been  offered  to  them  to
turn  against  and  betray  their  hus-
bands, and  the  seeds  of  enmity  have
been  sown,  or  have  endeavored  to
be  sown,  in  the  breasts  of  families,
and  of  children  against  parents,  and
against  each  other,  throughout  the
entire  laud. When  you  contemplate


all  these  acts,  they  equal  in  cruelty
and  perfidy,  and  inhumanity,  any
of  the  acts  of  which  we  read  in  the
Scriptures.  Men  are  shocked  when
they  read  the  story  of  the  treatment
of  the  Israelites  by  Pharaoh.  All
the  preachers  throughout  the  land,
when  they  read  that,  comment  mora
or  less  upon  it  to  their  congrega-
tions, and  talk  about  the  cruelty  of
which  that  king  was  guilty,  and
praise  the  Israelites,  and  praise
Moses  for  that  which  they  did.  At
the  same  time  they  are  guilty  them-
selves of  as  great  crimes.  They  are
guilty  of  iu citing  a  government
against  its  citizens — its  peaceful
citizens — and  stirring  up  th*  govern-
ment to  acts  of  harshness,  of  cruelty,
and  even  some  of  them  go  so  far  as
to  defend  the  use  of  the  army  by
the  government  to  destroy  a  peace-
ful people  from  the  face  of  the
earth.

Now,  as  I  have  said,  no  people  in
the  world  have  given  greater  proofs
of  attachment  to  their  own  govern-
ment, and  of  devotion  to  those
sacred  principles  of  liberty  that  we
have  inherited  than  the  Latter-day
Saints  have  done  in  thesu  mountains.
But,  as  1  have  said,  the  cry  is  still
that  we  are  disloyal ;  that  we  unite
church  and  state  ;  that  we  have  an
authority  in  our  midst  that  we  re-
spect and  obey,  while  we  disregard
the  civil  authority  of  the  land.
These  things  are  a  frequent  cause  of
complaint  against  us,  and  we  are
denied  our  rights.  We  to-day*
should  be  a  State,  This  Territory
of  Utah  should  be  one  of  the  United
States,  We  should  have  the  right
to  elect  our  own  Governor,  to  elect
our  own  Judges,  to  elect  every  offi-
cer iu  fact  that  executes  the  laws  or
has  anything  to  do  with  the  admin-
istration of  the  government  in  our
own  laud.  We  have  been  here  3T
years,  and  during  34  years  of  that


NOT  TO  CONSIDER  PRINCIPLE  FOR  STATE  GOVERNMENT.


7


time  we  have  been  can  organized
Territorial  government,  longer  than
any  other  community  on  the  conti-
nent except  New  Mexico,  which  was
organized  at  the  same  time.  Other
Territories  have  sprung  up  and  had  ,
speedy  recognition  as  States,  and
are  now  numbered  as  members  of
the  Union  years  after  we  settled  this
country.  There  is  no  good  reason  !
why  we  should  not  have  hail  this  |
same  right  granted  unto  us;  no  good
reason  whatever.  We  have  shown
our  capability  for  good  government,
for  main tair dug  good  government,  I
Our  Territory  to  day  is  an  example
for  maintaining  to  all  the  Territories
and  to  manv  States,  so  far  as  ^ood
government  is  concerned,  ami  free-
dom from  debt,  and  everything
in  fact  that  makes  lite  enjoyable  and
easy  for  the  citizen.  We  are  lightly
taxed,  and  we  have  maintained  our-
selves  without  aid  front  the  general
government  or  from  any  other  com-
munity ;  while  other  communities
that  have  had  nothing  like  tin*  diftl
culties  to  contend  with  that  we  have
had,  have  been  beggars  either  at  the
door  of  the  National  Congress,  or  of
their  neighboring  States  ami  their
fellow  citizens.  When  other  places
were  visiter  I  by  grasshoppers,  the
whole  bun  I  resounded  with  appeals
for  aid  ;  but  though  we  for  live  years
in  succession,  in  some  of  our  settle-
ments, had  crops  destroyed  by  the
same  cause,  yet  no  wail  went  up  from
Utah,  asking  the  nation  for  help.  We
have  been  so  independent,  and  so
disposed  to  sustain  ourselves,  and  t<»
fight  our  own  battles  with  the  diffi-
culties that  environed  us,  that  we
have  managed  to  get  along  without
having  recourse  to  this  method  of  j
obtaining  assistance,  (aud  in  this
respect  our  course  has  been  un-
exampled.

Now,  as  I  say,  there  is  no  good
reason  why  we  should  not  have  been


admitted  as  a  State  in  the  Union,
except  for  the  reason,  and  that  has
no  foundation  in  truth,  that  we  are
not  to  be  trusted,  that  we  are  in
such  a  condition  that  if  we  were  to
get  a  State  government  there  would
be  danger  resulting  from  that  grant
of  power  unto  us.  Of  course  all  of
you,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  know
how  untrue  this  is,  how*  utterly  with-
out foundation  such  accusations  are,
but,  nevertheless,  they  are  listened
to  and  believed.

Efforts  have  been  made  among  ug
to  change  this  condition  of  affairs.
There  have  been,  and  still  are,  per-
haps, some  who  call  themselves
Latter-day  Saints,  who  are  almost
ready  to  lend  themselves  to  any
scheme  that  has  for  its  object  the
obtaining  of  a  State  organization  for
Utah.  Such  persons  lnok  upon  this
as  so  great  a  blessing  and  so  great
a  boon,  that  they  are  almost  willing
to  forego  their  religious  belief  and
to  pander  to  thosw  who  have  got
power,  and  to  make  some  sort  of  a
concession  to  them,  in  order  to
achieve  this,  what  they  consider,
very  desirable  end.  There  has  been
ssime  agitation  in  years  past  respect-
ing plural  marriage,  and  some  people,
calling  themselves  Latter-day  Saints,
have  been  afltnost  ready  to  go  into  the
open  market,  and  bid  lor  a  State
government,  at  the  price  of  conceding
this  principle  of  our  religion,  for  the
privilege  of  becoming  a  State  of
the  Union,  Those  who  are  ready
to  do  this  are  ready  also  to  cast  oft*
obedience  to  the  Priesthood  of  the
Sou  of  God,  and  to  say,  "  We
do  not  believe  that  men  who  hold
an  office  in  the  Church  should  have
any  voice  in  the  affairs  of  the  State."
They  are  ready  to  sell  out  their  belief
as  Latter-dav  Saints,  and  their
veneration  and  reverence  for  that
power  which  (rod  has  ie*toie  I,  for
the  sake  uf  obtaining  a  hule  rec.ig-


&


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Dition  of  their  rights  as  citizens,  on
the  part  of  those  in  power.  It  does
not  require  much  familiarity  with
the  Spirit  of  God,  or  with  the  princi-
ples of  our  holy  religion  to  under-
stand exactly  the  position  that  such
persons  as  these  to  whom  I  allude,
occupy  among  us.  When  a  in  an  is
ready  to  barter  any  principle  of  salva-
tion for  worldly  adv  antage,  that  ipan
certainly  has  readied  the  position
that  he  esteems  worldly  advantage
above  eternal  salvation.  Can  such
persons  retain  the  Spirit  of  God,  and
take  such  a  course  as  this  1  No,
they  cannot,  That  other  spirit  will
lead  such  persons  astray,  and  they
will  be  left  to  themselves,  Wiil
there  be  such  persons  continue
among  us  and  be  associated  with
us  ?  1  do  not  question  it  I  expect
we  shall  have  such  characters  with
us,  during  our  future  career  as  we
have  had  in  the  past  We  have  hod
all  sorts  of  people  connected  with
this  Church.  As  the  work  rolls
forth;  as  it  increases  in  numbers,  so

will  these  characters  increase — that
is,  for  a  certain  time,  until  the  day
comes  when  the  kingdom  of  God
and  the  reign  of  righteousness  shall  j
be  fully  ushered  in.

Now,  regarding  this  accusation
that  is  made  concerning  the  Priest-  j
hood  :  It  is  the  most  common  charge
that  is  made  against  us  that  we  listen
to  the  Priesthood,  that  we  are  more
obedient  to  the  Priesthood  than  we

are  to  those  who  hold  civil  authority.
The  question  may  be  very  proper! v
asked  :  Have  we  not  had  good  I
reason  for  this  ? Should  we  not  be  j
most  consummate  fools  if  we  did  I
not  listen  to  our  friends  instead  of
our  enemies  1 From  the  time  that
President  Young  was  superseded  j
as  Governor  of  this  Territory,  until
the  present  time,  what  kind  of  offi-  j
cers  have  we  had  sent  into  our  midst
to  administer  the  affairs  of  the


government?  Has  there  been  a
man  who  has  come  here  as  Governor,
who  has  had  the  ability,  even  if  he
had  the  disposition,  to  guide  and  to
counsel  the  people  of  this  Territory,
and  to  manage  its  affairs  as  well  as
the  men  among  us  who  have  had
leading  positions  in  the  Priesthood  1
Why,  there  is  not  an  instance  of  the
kind.  You  take  the  best  disposed
Governor  we  have  had — and  they
are  easily  mentioned,  the  few  that
we  have  had  who  have  been  well
disposed — you  take  them  and  com-
pare them  with  the  men  who  laid
the  foundation  of  this  common-
wealth, who  laid  the  foundation  of
this  Territorial  government,  and  built
up  this  government,  and  there  is  no
comparison  between  them.  So
that,  aside  from  every  other  con-
sideration, men  are  ustified  in
seeking  wisdom  and  guidance  at  the
best  fountain,  at  the  best  source.  If
1  want  counsel  I  will  go  to  the  men
who  are  fitted  to  give  me  counsel.
If  I  were  not  a  Latter-day  Saint  it
would  make  no  difference  to  me  who
the  person  was  if  he  could  give  me
good  counsel  If  he  was  a  man
of  ripe  experience  I  would  feel  justi-
fied in  going  to  that  man  and  get-
ting his  advice.

This  has  been  our  position  as  a
people.  We  have  had  men  among
us  who  have  proved  themselves  in
the  best  possible  manner,  beyond
dispute,  to  to  be  entirely  capable  of
directing  and  managing  and  counsel-
ing in  all  matters  that  pertain  to  our
earthly  existence.  Have  they  not
shown  this  through  years  and  years
of  experience  i  The  people  have
proved  them.  Now,  would  not  the
people  be  great  fools,  would  it  not
be  the  height  of  folly  for  people  who
have  this  knowledge  to  say  :  '*  No,
1  won't  ask  these  men  for  counsel  ;
I  won't  go  to  them  for  advice ;  I  won't
listen  to  anything  they  saj ,  because


SEEK  COUNSEL  FROM  FRIENDS.


9


if  I  do  so,  I  am  listening  to  the
Priesthood ;  but  I  will  go  to  some-
body who  does  not  know  anything ;
I  will  go  to  some" — I  was  going  to
say  ass — (laughter) — for  if  ever  men
have  proved  themselves  to  be  fools,
it  luts  been  some  oi  our  govern-
mental officials — 44 1  will  go  to  some
man  of  this  kind  and  ask  his  conn-
sel,  and  have  him  to  tell  me  what  to
do,  because  1  am  anxious  to  show
that  I  am  loyal  to  the  government
of  the  United  States."

Now,  would  you  not  call  any  man
who  would  do  this  an  idiot,  when  he
could  have  got  good  counsel  from
his  friends  ;  when  he  would  turn  his
back  on  his  friends,  and  go  to  some-
body for  counsel  who  did  not  know
anything,  not  as  much  as  he,  the
person,  did  himself  about  the  ques-
tion In*  submitted  to  him?  I  would
say,  and  you  would  say,  that  people
ivho  would  do  such  a  thing  were  lit-
tle less  than  idiots.

Well,  now,  what  crime  are  we
guilty  of  1  If  we  have  men  among
us  who  have  more  experience  than
they,  and  who  have  proved  them-
selves capable  of  guiding  the  people,
what  crime  are  we  guilty  of  in  giv-
ing heed  to  their  counsel  and  seeking
it?  Because  they  hold  the  Priest-
hood are  their  mouths  to  be  stopped
up  so  that  they  cannot  speak  ;  are
they  to  be  deprived  of  the  rights  of
citizenship,  and  all  the  rights  that
men  have  that  are  born  free,  because
they  huld  the  Priesthood  ]  Is  that
a  good  reason?  A  more  senseless
reason  never  was  given*  If  these
government  officials  and  these  men
that  represent  the  government  are
so  niuch  better  and  so  much  more
capable  of  guiding  the  people,  and
have  so  much  greater  right  to  be
listened  to  and  obeyed,  let  them ;
show  it  by  their  works.  When  they
have  proved  it,  I  suppose  there
will  be  no  lack  of  disposition  on  the


part  of  the  people  to  go  to  them,
and  to  listen  to  them,  and  to  expect
from  them  all  the  necessary  teach-
ings and  counsels.  There  will  be
no  lack  of  disposition  on  the  part  of
sensible  men  and  women  such  as  wTe
profess  to  be  ;  but  until  they  do  this,
until  they  show  this  capability  and
this  power,  they  had  better  hold
their  tongues  and  say  nothing  about
others  leading  the  people.  The
fact  is  tins,  and  it  is  apparent  to  all
of  us,  that  there  are  certain  men
who  can  destroy  much  easier  than
they  can  build  up.  It  required  a
great  deal  of  skill  to  build  the  Tem-
ple at  Ephesus :  it  required  the
highest  skill  in  architecture  :  but  a
fool  destroyed  it  with  a  little  blaze.
It  takes  men  to  build  up,  but  chil-
dren can  burn  down  and  destroy.
It  takes  men  to  build  a  common-
wealth, and  lay  the  foundation  of
that  which  we  see  around  us  j  it
takes  labor  and  years  of  experience
and  wisdom  to  accomplish  such
results  ;  but  any  poor  creature  that
Ls  half-witted  can  destroy  all  these
labors  in  a  very  short  time,  and
those  that  have  come  among  us
in  too  many  instatices  representing
the  government  have  been  men  of
this  calibre  ;  the)  would  like  to
destroy,  tear  down,  and  reduce
to  chaos.  That  would  suit  them
far  better  than  it  would  to  build
up.

My  brethren  and  sisters,  I  would
like  to  have  us  as  a  people  look  at
these  matters,  if  we  can,  from  a  sen-
sible point,  from  the  standpoint  of
common  sense  and  reason,  and  not
allow  ourselves  to  be  diverted  from
the  course  that  we  have  adopted  hy
the  outcry  that  is  made  against  us  and
by  the  howl*  that  are  laised  about
us.  It  would  be  exceedingly  foolish
for  us  to  do  so*

God  has  given  unto  us,  as  we  be-
lieve and  as  we  testify,  His  Gospel ;


10


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSED


He  has  given  unto  us  His  Church  ;
He  lias  given  unto  us  the  authority
by  which  men  and  women  are  led
into  His  Church  and  governed  in
His  Church — the  authority  which
He  Himself  recognizes  and  the  only
authority  that  He  has  given  to  man
on  the  eat tli  to  act  in  His  stead,
"We  believe  this,  we  testify  of  it.  At
the  same  time  while  we  have  this
belief,  and  form  ourselves  into  a
Church  organization,  we  never  have
at  any  time  in  our  history  attempted
to  make  our  Church  organization
the  only  organization  and  the  domin-
ant urbanization  in  matters  that
pertain  to  every  day  affairs  and  to
civil  government  There  lias  always
been  among  the  Latter-day  Saints,
great  respect  shown  for  civil  author-
ity, and  for  the  laws  of  the  laud.  In
fact,  as  soon  as  possible  after  our
first  settlement  here,  a  Legislature
was  organized  and  the  provisional
government  of  Deseret  was  formed,
when  there  was  no  one  but  Latter-
day  Saints  in  the  country  at  the  time.
We  could  have  been  governed  by
our  Church  organization  ;  it  was
sufficient  tor  our  purpose  during
the  winter  of  1M7-S,  and  during
the  summer  of  1848.  It  was  quite
sufficient  There  was  no  other
organization.  But  as  soon  as  the
Pioneers  returned,  President  Young
and  the  rest  of  the  brethren —
there  was  no  time  lost  in  organizing
a  civil  government — the  Provisional
Government  of  the  State  of  Deseret  —
and  laws  were  enacted  in  due  form
by  the  civil  authority,  and  from  that
day  until  the  present  it  has  been
respected  and  honored  among  us,
ami  will  be  from  this  time  forward,
as  long  as  this  people  exist  There
is  no  people  on  the  lace  of  the  earth
that  draw  a  nicer  distinction  than
we  between  that  which  belongs  to
the  Church  and  that  which  belongs
to  the  State. But  it  is  frequently


j  said — and  I  have  had  to  meet  it
|  often  in  my  life  time,  particularly  in
Washington  ;  they  have  said  and  do
say,  "Why,  your  Probate  Judges
are  Elders  and  Bishops,  and  your
other  officials  hold  offices  in  the
Church/'

!  Well,  is  this  a  crime]  Is  there
an}  thing  in  the  law  or  the  Constitu-
tion of  our  country,  or  is  there  any-
thing else  that  is  recognized  as
binding  among  men  that  would
prevent  Elders  and  Bishops  from
holding  office*?  I  do  not  know  of
anything, I  do  not  know  that  a

I  man  is  any  worse  for  being  a  Bishop
or  an  Elder,  or  any  more  unfitted  for
civil  employment,  or  the  discharge
of  civil  functions,  than  if  he  were
not  a  Bishop  or  an  Elder,  especially
among  a  people  organized  as  we  are.
As  1  say  this  charge  has  been  fre-
quently brought  against  us  in  my
hearing,  and  I  have  had  to  meet
it  before  committees  of  Congress
and  elsewhere.  The  reply  1  have
made  to  such  charges  is  this  :  that
among  the  Latter* day  Saints  in  Utah
every  reputable  man  in  the  commu-
nity hears  some  office  in  the  Church-
As  soon  as  he  arrives  at  a  sufficient
age,  if  he  is  a  reputable  man  lie
receives  an  ordination  in  the  Priest-
liooil.  The  befit  and  the  most  active
men  in  our  community  are  the  men
who  become  prominent  in  Church
affairs,  Our  Bishops  live  without
salaries,  or  support  from  the  people,
they,  before  being  chosen,  having
shown  their  ability  to  sustain
themselves.  They  are  not  like
members  of  other  denominations
who  are  a  burden  to  the  people,  or
who  receive  an  education  especially
for  those  duties,  and  thus  live  by  the
salaries  that  are  furnished  them  by
the  members  of  their  congregation.
In  a  community  where  there  is  a
class  of  that  kind  there  may  be  some

|  propriety  in  saying  that  ministers


PRACTICAL  MEN  H


AVE  HELD  OFFICE.


II


of  religion  shall  not  take  part  in  the
affairs  of  state,  although  there  is
nothing  of  that  kind  said  anywhere
in  the  constitution  or  the  laws  ;  but
there  may  be  some  propriety  in  say-
iuii  this  where  men  are  educated
especially  for  the  ministry — where
they  devote  themselves  to  that
labor  and  withdraw  themselves  from
the  practical  affairs  of  life  and  de-
pend upon  their  parishioners  furnish*
ing  them  support  There  might
be  some  propriety  in  saying  to  a  class
of  that  kind,  u  you  are  not  fit  to
take  part  in  civil  affairs,  and  the
practical,  every  day  affairs  of  life,
because  of  your  calling  and  because
of  the  nature  of  your  duties/1
But  we  say  there  is  great  impro-
priety in  saying  that  those  who  labor
in  the  ministry  among  us  shall  not
take  part ;  for  this  reason  :  that  all
the  men  among  us  who  are  the  most
practical,  the  most  energetic,  and
the  most  business  like — from  these
men  the  ministers  are  chosen,  that
is,  men  who  labor  in  the  ministry
as  Bishops,  as  Elders,  as  missionaries,
and  in  other  capacities.  They  have
proved  that  they  are  capable  of
sustaining  themselves  by  their  own
efforts,  and  at  the  same  time  devote
a  certain  portion  of  their  time  to
pub  He  affairs.  Hence,  you  will
find  among  us  as  a  rule  that  our
Bishops  are  all  practical  men;
our  Presidents  of  Stakes  and  their
Counselors,  and  the  Bishops  and
their  Counselors,  the  Teachers  ami
others,  are  all  active  business  men
among  us.  They  have  gained  expe-
rience, and  because  of  that  they  are
sometimes  chosen  to  till  local  offices.
Take  the  Legislature  of  Utah  Terri-
tory, composed  as  it  has  been  of
some  holding  positions  in  the
Church,  and  you  will  find  a  body  of
practical  men,  the  superiors  of  whom
are  not  to  be  found— I  say  it  without
fear of truthful  contradiction-^


anywhere  in  any  Legislature  in
this  country,  men  who  understand
the  wants  of  their  constituents  and
of  the  people,  and  the  kind  of  laws
that  are  best  adapted  to  them,
I  have  had  some  experience  in
mingling  with  men  in  public  life,
and  1  must  say  that  for  practical  wis-
dom, and  for  a  knowledge  of  the
affairs  of  the  country  and  of  the
people  represented  iu  Utah  Terri-
tory, there  was  found,  previous  to-
the  passage  of  the  Edmunds  law,
a  class  of  men  that  had  not  their
superiors  anywhere  in  this  land,  for
practical  wisdom  and  the  ability
necessary  to  lay  the  foundation,  and
to  perpetuate  the  institutions  of  a
great  country.

Is  it  wrong  for  men  who  have  the
Priesthood,  and  who  act  in  this
capacity,  to  act  in  civil  offices  and
to  let  the  people  have  the  benefit  of
their  experience  in  these  matters —
is  til  ere  any  wrong  in  this  ]  I  can
see  none,  and  I  am  sure  that  no  man
who  is  a  true  friend  to  his  country
can.  There  is  no  good  reason  why
these  men  should  be  excluded  ;  in
fact  there  is  every  reason  why  they
should  be  invited  to  take  part  in
establishing  the  affairs  of  the  coun-
try, I  have  often  said,  in  speaking
to  our  brethren  and  sisters  in  various-
parts  of  the  Territory,  that  that
which  we  behold  to-day  in  our
Territory — the  good  order,  the  peace,
the  freer! o in  from  debt,  the  lightness
of  taxation,  and  all  the  circumstan-
ces that  are  so  favorable  to  us  as  a
people,  are  due  to  the  men  who
have  borne  the  Priesthood,  com-
mencing with  President  Brigham
Young,  his  Counselors,  and  the
Twelve  Apostles,  and  the  leading
men  in  Israel — the  circumstances
which  surround  us,  I  say,  are  due  to
the  wisdom  that  God  has  given  unto
them  in  managing  these  affairs*
At  the  same  time,  because  this  is


12


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  case,  there  is  no  necessity  that
there  should  be  a  blending  of  church
and  state.  There  is  no  necessity
for  this  ;  it  is  not  wise  to  blend
church  and  ztate.  I  do  not  believe
that  as  members  of  the  Church  we
.should  pass  decrees  or  laws  that
would  bind  other  people.  I  have
no  such  belief,  never  did  have.  I  do
not  think  I  ever  shall  have.  But
because  a  man  is  a  member  of  a
chinch,  and  because  a  uian  is  a  ser-
vant of  God,  and  because  a  man
bears  the  Priesthood  of  the  Son  of
God,  lie  should  not  be  prevented
because  of  that  from  acting  in  any
-civil  capacity,  from  taking  part  in
civil  matters  and  executing  the  laws
that  are  enacted  by  civil  authority.

The  province  of  the  Kingdom  of
God  that  Daniel  saw,  the  kingdom
that  would  be  established  in  the  last
days,  is  to  b*1  as  a  shield  to  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  to  be  as  a  bulwark
around  about  that  Church,  and
around  about  that  Church  alone!  No.
The  apostate  will  have  Ins  civil  rights
under  that  kingdom.  The  non-
Mormon,  or  Gentile  as  he  is  called,
will  have  his  rights  under  that  king-
dom.  The  Chinaman,  the  negro,
and  the  Indian  -each  of  them  will
have  his  rights  under  that  kingdom,
and  yet  not  be  members  of  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints,  A  good  many  of  our
people  confound  the  Kingdom  of
God  with  the  Church  of  God.
Now  there  is  a  very  wide  distinction
between  the  two.  A  man  may,  in
-one  sense,  be  a  member  of  the  Church
of  Christ,  and  not  a  member  of  the
Kingdom  of  God.  The  two  organ-
izations are  entirely  distinct.  The
Kingdom  of  God  when  it  shall  pre-
vail in  the  earth — as  it  will  do —
will  be  the  civil  power  which  will
shield  and  protect  the  Church  of
Christ  against  every  attack,  against
■every  unlawful  aggression,  against


every  attempt  to  deprive  it  of  its
legitimate  rights.  At  the  same
time  it  will  protect  the  Methodist
just  as  much  as  it  will  the  Latter-
day  Saint;  it  will  protect  the  Roman
Catholic  just  as  much  as  it  will
the  Methodist ;  it  will  protect
men  of  every  creed  ;  it  will  protect
the  worshipper  of  idols  in  his  civil
rights,  in  his  lights  as  a  man  and  as
a  citizen.  A  man  may  be  an  infi-
del j  a  man  may  have  been  a  Lat-
ter-day Saint,  and  denied  the
faith  and  lost  his  standing  in  the
Church  of  God,  ana  yet  so  far  as
the  civil  authority  is  concerned,  so
far  as  the  power  that  is  wielded  by
that  which  we  call  the  Kingdom  of
God  is  concerned,  that  man  will
receive  the  amplest  protection  ;  he
will  have  the  fullest  t enjoyment  of
his  rights.

President  Taylor  told  us  this
morning — told  us  as  plainly  as  it
could  be  told — the  manner  in  which
all  men  should  be  treated.  And
that  is  the  design  of  God  ;  and
therein  our  friends  in  the  east  are
trampling  upon  the  true  principles
of  liberty  in  their  attacks  upon  us,
and  in  their  treatment  of  us.  Such
treatment  will  just  as  surely  bring
down  condemnation  and  destruction
upon  a  government  that  practices
these  things,  as  that  the  setting  of
the  sun  will  bring  darkness  upon  the
earth.  It  is  not  possible  for  men  to
continue  in  such  a  course  of  oppres-
sion and  wrong  doing  as  has  been
pursued  by  our  fellow  citizens  that
have  had  the  reins  of  government
in  their  hands,  without  involving
themselves  in  trouble.  It  is  impos-
sible that  they  can  perpetuate  their
power,  and  conduct  themselves  as
they  have  been  doing  towards  us  and
towards  others.  There  are  eternal
principles  of  justice  that  cannot  be
violated  without  injury  to  the  person
who  violates  them. A  government


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  PROTECTS  ALL  RELIGIONS,


1*


that  lends  itself  to  the  oppression
of  its  citizens,  will  sooner  or  later
receive  punishment.  That  which
it  sows  it  will  reap*  It  will  be  a
harvest  that  will  be  most  bitter
and  sorrowful  for  those  who  reap
it.

We  are  now  citizens  of  this  Terri-
tory. We  fled  here.  As  Latter-
day  Saints  we  came  here  as  exiles,
seeking  for  a  home  in  the  wilderness.
God  led  us  to  this  land,  in  which,
notwithstanding  all  that  maybe  said
to  the  contrary,  we  have  laid  the
foundation  of  this  Territory,  we
have  made  this  land  a  peaceful,  a
happy  land.  There  is  no  man  in  the
country,  no  matter  what  his  creed
may  be,  that  is  oppressed  or  has
been  oppressed  by  the  Latter-day
Saints.  We  have  not  been  tyran-
nical in  the  exercise  of  our  power.
We  have  not  discriminated  against
those  not  of  us.  We  have  given
them  the  same  rights  that  we  have
ourselves.  The  same  peace  that  we
have  desired  to  enjoy  we  have  been
willing  that  they  should  enjoy,  and
we  have  extended  these  privileges
to  them  in  common  with  ourselves.
We  have  sought  in  no  manner  to
interfere  with  their  belief,  nor  with
the  exercise  of  it.  The  Komau
Catholic  in  Salt  Lake  City,  has  been
as  unmolested  as  the  Latter-day
Saint  has  been.  We  may  not  believe
in  their  religion ;  we  may  think
the  Methodist  religion  a  poor  reli-
gion to  believe  in  and  practice,  and
so  with  other  forms  of  religion  ;
but  while  we  believe  this,  we  have
no  right,  neither  have  we  ever  exer-
cised any  power  towards  restraining
them  or  restricting  them,  or  in  any
manner  depriving  them  of  the  free
exercise  of  their  rights  of  con-
science and  of  faith,  and  no  govern-  1
ment  can  stand  and  prosper  that '
will  do  it  upon  this  land,  for  God
has  made  promises  concerning  this


land  that  no  government  can  stand
that  will  do  this.  None  of  us  lias
any  right  to  interfere  with  the  faith
and  the  worship  of  our  fellow  citi-
zens, unless  their  faith  and  their
worship  interfere  with  our  rights.
That  is  a  proposition  that  is  easily
comprehended.  If  I  do  not  inter-
fere with  any  man's  right  by  my
worship,  and  by  that  which  I
consider  right  to  do  to  my  Maker,
no  man  has  any  right  under  any  form
of  government  to  interfere  with
me.

Hence  it  is  that  all  this  action
concerning  marriage  is  wrong —
this  interference  with  marriage —
it  is  all  wrong  from  beginning  to
end,  especially  in  view  of  the  fact
that  it  is  an  important  principle  of
our  religion.  We  are  ready  to  testify
that  our  belief  in  marriage  and  our
practice  of  it,  is  interwoven  with
our  hopes  of  eternal  salvation.
Select  every  man  who  lias  had  more
wives  than  one  and  retained  the
faith  of  the  Gospel  ;  take  him  and
his  wives  and  interrogate  them
respecting  their  faith,  and  every  one
would  say:  "  this  principle  is  so
intimately  interwoven  with  my  hopes
of  eternal  salvation,  that  I  would
be  afraid  that  I  would  be  damned
if  I  tiid  not  obey  it"  I  believe
that  in  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine
cases  out  of  a  thousand  where  people
are  in  the  faith  they  would  make  this
response.

Well,  now,  what  right  has  any
number  of  people — there  may  be
unnumbered  millions  who  say  this
is  not  religion — but  what  right  have
they  to  do  tins  1  If  there  was
only  one  person  on  the  face  of  the
earth  that  entertained  that  belief,
and  he  were  alone  and  all  the  rett
of  mankind  were  opposed  to  him,
it  would  be  just  as  precious  to  him
as  if  millions  entertained  a  belief
in  common  with  him.  Therefore,


14


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


because  there  are  millions  who  say
it  is  not  religion,  this  does  not
make  it  go.  We  testify  in  the
most  solemn  manner  that  it  is  a  part
of  our  religion,  and  that  we  cannot
forego  this  principle  without  feel-
ing that  we  forego  our  salvation,
our  eternal  exaltation,  by  so
doing.

Then  the  question  arises  in  the
practice  of  this  principle — tlo  those
who  practice  it  infringe  upon  the
rights  of  their  fellow  citizens  1  Is
society  disturbed  1  Are  there  wrongs
done  to  society  at  large  by  thejpract ice
of  this  principle  1  Let  those  who
have  live- 1  among  us  answer  this
question.  There  never  was  a  more
peaceful  society  than  our  society —
that  is,  not  for  the  past  few  hun-
dred years  at  least.  Go  through  our
settlements,  and  is  there  quarrel-
ing, is  there  strife,  are  there  bad
examples  yet  to  the  rising  genera-
tion, is  impurity  taught,  or  any  ex-
amples of  impurity  shown]  No,
there  is  not.  We  all  know  this,
and  we  know  that  in  practicing
our  religion  we  do  not  infringe
upon  the  rights  of  our  fellow-
citizens.

But  tliis  attempt  has  been  made
just  as  it  was  in  ancient  days,  I
look  upon  it  as  a  revival  of  the  same
spirit  that  prompted  Pharaoh  to
seek  the  destruction  of  the  male
children  anion g  the  Israelites,  If
we  wi  re  guilty  of  those  crimes  so
fashionable  in  the  world  whereby
the  increase  of  families  is  prevented,
I  do  not  suppose  there  would  be  one
word  said  about  our  system  of  mar*
riage  ;  I  have  no  idea  there  would
be.  But  the  fact  that  we  do  raise
children — the  fact  that  our  bouses
ami  settlements *are  full  of  healthy
offspring,  is  a  standing  protest
against  the  crimes  of  the  age  ;  it  is
a  stan  1 1  hi g  protest  against  those
abominable practices that  are


destroying  the  foundation  of  many
communities  within  the  confines  of
the  United  States,  and  they  are  de-
termined— those  who  are  guilty  of
these  things — that  we  shall  not  exist.
The  loudest  outcry  against  us,  and
the  most  devoted  efforts  against  us,
come  from  the  region  where  these
dreadful  practices  prevail,  where
women  murder  their  offspring  be-
for  they  are  bom,  are  guilty  of  this
pre-natal  murder,  among  the  people
of  the  United  States  who  think
themselves  the  most  enlightened.
Twenty-five  years  ago  when  I  was
laboring  in  the  ministry  in  that
region  I  visited  one  of  the  towns,
and  the  President  of  the  branch
of  the  Saints  there,  (an  old  resident,
whose  ancestors  were  among  the
first  settlers  of  the  town)  told  me
his  wife  was  continually  jeered  at —
and  this  was  25  years  ago — by  her
associates,  because  she  bore  children,
and  bore  them  regularly — that  she
did  not  take  means  to  prevent  the
increase  of  her  family  !  If  I  had
not  known  him  I  could  scarcely
have  believed  it,  it  was  too  horrid*
I  have  learned  since,  however,  that
that  is  a  common  practice  in  that
region.  The  feature  of  that  society
that  impresses  most  vividly  a  traveler
from  Utah  is  the  fewness  of  children
in  what  are  called  the  best  families,
And  yet  it  is  from  there  that  the
principal  outcry  is  raised  against  us,
and  the  determination  expressed  to
break  up  our  families  and  to  destroy
as.  *'  ~-

God  has  gathered  a  few  people  out
from  the  nations  of  the  earth,  out  of
Babylon,  But  shall  they  partake
of  these  influences!  I  say  to  you,
my  sisters,  you  teach  your  daughters
against  this  accursed  practice,  or
they  will  go  to  hell,  they  will  be
damned,  they  will  be  murderers,
and  the  blood  of  innocence  will  be
found  upon  them. A  man  that


Wfi  SHOULD ENCOURAGE  MARRIAGE.


15


would  sanction  such  a  thing  in  his
family,  or  that  would  live  with  a
woman  guilty  of  such  acts,  shares  in
the  crime  of  murder,  I  would  no
more  perform  the  ordinance  of  lay^
iny  on  of  hands  on  a  woman  who  is
guilty  of  that  crime,  if  I  knew  it,
than  I  would  put  my  hands  on  the
head  of  a  rattlesnake.  We  must
set  our  faces  like  flint  against  such
acts.  These  dreadful  practices  are
coming  up  like  a  tidal  wave  and
washing  against  our  walls  ;  for  there
are  women  among  us  who  secretly —
so  I  am  told,  i  know  nothing  about
this  personally,  but  I  am  told  there
are  women  among  us  who  are  instill-
ing this  murderous  and  accursed
idea  into  the  breasts  of  women  and
girls  in  our  midst  Now  just  as  sure
as  it  is  done,  and  people  yield  to  it,
so  sure  will  they  be  damned,  they
will  damned  with  the  deepest
damnation  ;  because  it  will  be  the
damnation  of  shedding  innocent
blood,  for  which  there  is  no  forgive-
ness ;  and  I  would  no  more,  as  I  *ay,
administer  to  such  women,  baptize
them,  or  perform  any  ordinance  of
the  Gospel  for  them,  than  I  would
for  a  reptile.  They  are  ont&ide
the  pale  of  salvation.  They  are
in  a  position  that  nothing  can  be  done
for  them.  They  cut  themselves  off
by  such  acts  from  all  hopes  of  salva-
tion.

As  a  people  we  should  encourage
marriage.  1  am  always  delighted
when  1  hear  President  Taylor  speak
as  he  did  this  morning  on  the  princi-
ple of  brothers  taking  their  brothers'
widows  to  wife.  There  are  many
young  women  among  us  pining
away,  that  should  be  mothers  in
Israel,  that  should  he  raising
posterity,  because  the  brothers  are
jso  indifferent  to  the  rights  that
belong  to  the  institution  of  marriage
as  to  let  these  young  women  stay  in
this  condition. And  there  is  one


thing  that  I  am  impressed  with,  and
that  is,  there  will  be  considerable
condemnation  rest  down  upon  the
Elders  of  this  Church  for  their
neglect  in  these  matters.  Women
are  led  astray  and  fall  into  the  bauds
of  wicked  men  because  of  relatives
to  the  dead  neglecting  to  do  that
which  is  their  duty;  acting  as  though
the  Lord  cannot  reward  a  man  for
keeping  His  law.  "  Oh,11  says  a
man,  and  as  President  Taylor  has
remarked,  '*  I  want  to  raise  up  a
family  for  myself."  He  forgets  God
can  bless  him  and  his  seed  after  him.
Look  at  the  case  of  Boaz  and  Ruth.
He  took  Ruth,  who  was  the  wife  of
his  kinsman.  She  had  no  children,
but  he  took  her  when  another  kins-
man who  had  a  prior  right  to  her,
rejected  her.  From  that  alliance
sprang  the  noblest  men  that  were  in
Israel — Obed,  Jesse,  David,  Solomon,
and  through  Boaz  and  Ruth  came
the  Sou  of  God.  And  that  was
a  proxy  case,  as  it  is  called.  Ruth
wan  the  wife  of  Boaz's  kinsman  who
had  died.  Boaz  took  her  to  wife,
and  raised  up  an  honorable  posterity.
And  it  is  a  wicked  thing  among  us
to  allow  such  cases  to  go  uucared  for.
A  young  woman  is  left  a  widow,
sometimes  without  a  son  to  repre-
sent her  deceased  husband  ;  she
should  be  cared  for,  and  not  left  to
fall  into  bad  hands,  as  frequently
is  the  case  among  us  for  the  want
of  care  on  the  part  of  those
whose  duty  it  is  to  attend  to  such
mutters,

'lMy  brethren  and  sisters,  God  is
watching  over .  us,  and  He  holds
us  to  a  strict  accountability  for  the
things  He  has  revealed  to  us,  He
has  revealed  to  us  eternal  principles.
Lei  us  be  faithful  to  that  Priesthood
which  He  has  given  unto  us  ;  let
us  honor  it,  and  not  be  intimidated
by  the  outcry  that  is  raised  against
us  that  we  are  doing  wrong  because


1G


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


we  listen  to  the  Priesthood.  There
is  no  such  tiling  as  wrong  connected
with  tli is.  God  has  inspired  His
servants,  and  has  given  them  wis-
dom to  manage  the  affairs  of  this
people,  and  to  guide  them  in  spirit*
ual  matters.  They  have  full  author-
ity to  do  this,  and  they  will  do  it  if
the  people  will  listen  to  them,  and
then  in  temporal  matters  they  will
guide  them  as  far  as  they  have  the
opportunity.  Because  they  are
Priests  of  the  Most  High  God,
they  are  no  worse  for  that ;  they  are
not  handicapped  because  they  have
the  Priesthood.  In  a  civil  cepaeity
they  can  act  as  fairly,  justly,  wisely,
as  those  who  do  not  have  the  Priest-
hood. They  do  not  act  with  any  less
wisdom  or  any  less  power  because
they  have  the  Priesthood  than  they
would  do  if  they  did  not  have  it,
I  have  heard  so  much  of  this  sort
of  talk  that  to  me  it  is  perfectly  ri-
diculous. They  talk  a  1  tout  our
management  of  elections,  and
management  of  other  affair*.  I  will
tell  you  my  experience,  and  I  have
had  some  experienced  these  matters.
I  have  attended  caucuses  elsewhere;
I  know  the  machinery  that  is  used  ;
I  know  the  wire  pulling ;  I  have  seen
it  in  operation,  and  I  say  to  you  that
there  is  not  the  interference  on  the
part  of  leading  men  here  with  the
will  of  this  people  that  there  is  in
the  States  in  political  circles.  And
I  tell  you  this  :  that  leading  men  in
other  communities  seek  to  exercise
more  influence  and  lay  their  plans
to  have  their  wishes  carried  out  to  a
far  greater  extent  than  the  leading
men  of  this  community  do  among
us — I  mean  those  who  have  the
Priesthood.  There  is  a  disposition
on  the  part  of  the  leading  Priesthood
te  let  the  people  have  their  way,
not  to  interfere  with  theft  selections.
There  is  that  disposition,  and  it  is
encouraged,  and  the  desire  is  to  have


all  the  people  be  wise  and  exercise
wisdom,  and  have  the  Spirit  of  God
to  discern  who  are  suitable  for  office.
If  the  people  could  do  this  I  can  tell
you  that  President  Taylor  and  his
Counselors,  and  the  Twelve,  and  the
other  leading  men  of  Israel  would  be
very  glad  indeed.  But  you  know
as  well  as  we  do  that  there  are  un-
wise men  among  us  who  would,  if
they  had  the  power,  destroy  the  peo-
ple ;  not  because  they  would  design
to  do  it,  but  because  of  their  ignor-
ance ;  they  are  ignorant  and  would
do  it,  without  knowing  what  the
consequences  would  be  ;  and  on  this
account  it  is  right  that  experienced
men  should  give  the  people  the
benefit  of  their  knowledge,  not
however,  interfering  with  the  rights
uf  the  people,  not  in  the  least ;  and
it  never  has  been  done,  at  least  with-
in my  knowledge,  in  my  public  ex*
perieuce  among  the  people.  And
I  repeat  there  has  been  less  of  this
among  us,  considering  the  influence
the  Priesthood  have,  than  in  any
other  community  or  any  other  people
tli at  I  am  acquainted  with  anywhere
in  the  laud,  I  wanted  to  say  this
much,  because  I  know  there  is  a
great  deal  of  misapprehension  upon
these  points.  There  are  men,
agitators,  who  talk  about  interfer-
ence on  the  part  of  the  Priesthood,
and  try  to  breed  disturbance  and
confusion  among  the  people,  un-
settle their  minds  and  have  them
think  there  is  something  very  wrong
going  on  here,  I  speak  of  it  to  re-
move these  wrong  impression *t  and
to  disabuse  the  minds  of  tho^e  who
entertain  them,  for  they  are  not
correct.  There  are  more  caucuses,
more  plans,  more  pipe  laying,  mora
log  rolling,  more  wire  pulling  in
the  States  in  one  day,  than  you  will
see  in  a  month  or  a  year  among  us.
They  resort  to  all  sorts  of  devices  to
get  their  man  elected  under  promise


EVILS  OF  OFFICE  SEEKING,


17


of  preferment  and  office.  Why,
there  is  scarcely  a  man  that  gets  an
office  in  the  United  States  that  is
not  bound  by  pledges  of  this  kind,
A  man  cannot  be  Speaker  of  the
House  of  Representatives,  without
being  hampered  by  promises  he  is
compelled  to  give  in  order  to  get  the
position,  promises  to  put  this  man
on  this  committee,  and  the  other
man  upon  another  committee,  some
to  be  chairmen  of  committees,  and
so  on,  So  with  the  President  of  the
United  States*  Probably  G  rover
Cleveland  will  be  an  exception,
because  he  has  not  been  much  in
public  life  :  but  it  is  a  rule  that  the
nominees  of  the  different  parties
give  certain  promises  as  to  what
they  will  do,  and  who  will  get  lead*
ing  positions.  They  are  just  as
much  fettered  as  though  chains
were  on  their  wrists  and  ankles.
They  cannot  move  only  in  a  certain
direction.  All  freedom  is  taken
away.  A  President  is  nearly  killed
after  he  gets  his  position  in  endeav-
oring to  satisfy  the  clamors  and
wishes  of  those  who  claim  they
elected  him  to  office*  This  is  the  case
all  through  the  government.  There
is  na  office,  even  to  that  of  a
constable,  but  is  obtained  in  the
asme  way.

No,  2,


I  hope  we  shall  never  be  in  such
a  position  as  this,  for  it  would  lead
to  the  destruction  of  liberty  and
free  government  among  us,  if  we
should  ever  give  way  to  these  things.
Let  men  go  into  office  free  and
untrammelled.  Let  them  be  elected
because  they  are  the  men  most  suit-
able, and  not  because  they  want  the
office-  Let  us,  as  a  people,  endeavor
tg  find  men  who  do  not  seek  for
office,  and  who  do  not  want  it,  but
who  take  it  because  it  is  the  wish  of
their  fellow  citizens.  And  let  us
keep  our  salaries  so  low  that  men  will
not  scramble  for  office  and  live  on
the  people  as  office-holders,  than
which  there  is  nothing  more  hate-
ful in  a  free  land.

I  pray  God  to  fill  you  with  the
Holy  Ghost,  to  guide  you  in  the  path
of  righteousness,  to  enable  you  to
avoid  the  many  evils  abroad  in  the
world,  and  as  Zion  progresses  to
avoid  evils  that  will  crowd  upon  us;
because  as  Zion  increases  there  will
be  new  temptations  and  circumstan-
ces thrown  around  us  that  will  be  a
trial  to  us,  unless  we  have  the  aid
of  our  God  to  help  us  contend  with
and  overcome  them ;  and  that  we
may  have  this  aid  is  my  prayer  in
1  the  name  of  Jesus,  Amen.

Vol.  XXVI.


t


18


JOURNAL  OH  DISCOURSES,


DISCOURSE  DELIVERED  BY  ELDER  CHARLES  \V.  PENROSE,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lnke  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

November  1H,  1  8  S  4  «


[  REPOETED  IBY ABTHUB  WINTEB. )

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  GOD  —  VAGUENESS  OF  THE  COMMON  IDEA  OF
DEITY— WHO  AND  WHAT  GUI*  IS  —  THE  SPIRITS  OF  MEN'  THE  OFF-
SPRING OF  GOD  —  SPIRIT  NOT  IMMATERIAL  —  THE  TRINITY  CREED
OF  CHRISTENDOM— MAN  MAY  BECOME  LIKE  GOD  IN  HIS  GLORY.


The  remarks  which  have  been  made
to  us  tliis  afternoon  by  Bishop  Pres-
ton are  of  a  practical  nature  and
calculated  to  lead  our  minds  to  re-
flection upon  our  duties  as  Latter-
day  Saints.

The  religion  of  God  is  a  practical
religion,  and  God  is  a  real  and  prac-
tical being.  It  has  been  stated  by
one  of  our  leading  men  that  God  is
"a  business  God/'  and  many  remarks
have  been  made  concerning  that
expression  by  persons  opposed  to
us,  with  the  desire  of  turning  it  to
ridicule.  It  has  not  been  stated  by
any  of  our  brethren  that  God  is  only
a  business  God,  but  the  remark  was
made  with  reference  to  some  of  his
.attributes  and  of  His  works.  The
people  of  the  present  day  who  pro-
fess to  believe  in  God.  generally
speaking,  have  very  little  idea  in
regard  to  what  He  is.  They  con-
sider that  He  is  incomprehensible,
Their  ideas  concerning  Him  are  very
vague,  and  the  attempts  which  have
been  made  to  explain  God  to  the
children  of  men,  by  persons  who
claim  to  be  teachers  of  religion,  and
to  have  authority  to  speak  in  the
name  of  the  Lord,  are  of  such  a  char-


acter that  no  one  cau  understand
them.  The  reason  of  this  is  because
those  persons  who  have  attempted
to  make  an  explanation  have  not
understood  the  subject  themselves;
and  when  a  person  does  not  under-
stand a  thing  it  is  very  difficult  for
him  to  try  and  make  somebody  else
understand  it.  Now,  1  do  not  pre-
tend to  say  that  there  is  anybody
living  who  fully  and  entirely  com-
prehends God  ;  but  there  are  many
people  livingwho  have  some  definite
ideas  concerning  Him,  concerning
His  attributes,  concerning  His  ways,
concerning  His  will ;  and  what  they
understand  they  are  at  liberty  to
declare  and  to  try  ami  make  other
people  understand,  particularly  if
they  are  called  upon  by  the  Lord,
and  authorized  by  Him  so  to  do.
People  very  frequently  refer  to  that
passage  of  Sen pt tire  which  says  :
"God  is  a  spirit,"  and  as  their  no-
tions concerning  what  spirit  is,  are
not  very  clear,  that  passage  of  Scrip-
ture does  not  make  very  plain  to
their  understanding  what  God  is.
People,  generally  speaking,  have
an  idea  that  spirit  is  something
intangible,  something  that  cannot


PERSONALITY  OF  GOD.


19


be  comprehended,  nor  seen,  nor
handled  ;  that  it  is.  far  different  in
every  respect  from  any  tiling  that  is
material  ;  in  fact,  the  philosophers
and  theologians  call  spirit  4<  imma-
terial substance."  Now,  this  is  for
want  of  knowing  better.  Men  in
these  times,  like  men  in  former  days,
have  tried  to  find  out  God  and  the
things  of  God  by  human  wisdom
and  learning,  and  they  have  tailed  :
for  44  man  by  searching,1'  the  Scrip-
ture says,  kl  cannot  find  out  God."
But  God  can  manifest  Himself  to
man  ;  and  if  God  chooses  to  make
Himself  manifest  to  His  children
thev  can  measurably  comprehend
Him*  But  in  their  mortal  state,  in
this  state  of  probation  in  which  we
live,  mankind  cannot  fully  grasp
Deity  to  comprehend  Him  as  He  is
in  His  majesty,  and  might,  and
power  and  glory;  but,  as  I  said,  they
can  measurably  comprehend  God
when  He  manifests  Himself  to  them,
and  they  can  understand  Him  to
the  extent  that  He  manifests  Him-
self  to  them.

According  to  the  book  called  the
Bible,  God  the  Eternal  Father  has
manifested  Himself  at  different
times  to  individuals  living  upon  the
face  of  this  earth,  and  according  to
the  testimony  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  God  has  manifested  Himself
in  this  age  of  the  world  in  a  similar
way  to  men  whom  He  called  and  ap-
pointed to  act  in  His  name;  and
from  what  we  read  of  God's  revela-
tions in  former  days  as  well  as  in
latter  days,  we  learn  that  He  is  a
person,  an  individual  ;  that  He  is
not  a  myth,  not  an  imaginary  being,
bnt  a  reality,  and  that.  He  is  in  the
form  and  likeness  of  man,  or  in
other  words,  that  man  is  made  in
the  ima-e  of  God.  In  the  opening
book  of  the  Bible,  in  the  very  first
chapter  of  that  book,  we  read  : 14  And
God  said,  Let  us  make  man  in  our


image,  after  our  likeness,
*  *


So  God  created  man  in
His  own  image,  in  the  image  of  God
created  lie  him  ;  male  and  female
created  he  them,"  God  is  a  spirit ;
but  it  does  not  follow  that  because
God  is  a  spirit,  He  has  no  form,  no
shape,  no  extent,  no  limit ;  or  that
He  can  be,  as  an  individual,  in  every
place  at  the  same  time,  as  many  peo-
ple imagine.  We  are  told  that  God
dwells  in  heaven,  and  when  Jesus
Christ  was  upon  the  earth  He  always
taught  llisVlisciples  that  theirFather
was  in  heaven.  He  said  that  as  He
came  from  the  Father  so  He  was  iroinsj
back  to  the  Father.  This  individual,
then,  has  a  location,  a  place  of  resi-
dence. He  occupies  a  certain  posi-
tion, He  d wells  in  the  heavens,  and
He  made  man  in  His  image,  in  His
likeness,  /esus,  we  are  told,  was
in  the  "  express  image"  of  His
Father's  person.  When  He '  was
upon  the  earth  He  came  to  represent
His  Father,  and  we  are  told  con-
cerning Him,  "Who,  being  in  the
form  of  God,  thought  it  not  robbery
to  be  equal  with  God."  And  the
Apostle  Paul,  who  makes  this
declaration,  advised  his  breth-
ren to  have  the  same  mind  in
them  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus  :

44  Let  tiiis  mind  be  in  you  which
was  also  in  Christ  Jesus ;

M  Who,  being  in  the  form  of  God,
tli ought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal
with  God  ;

ht  But  made  Himself  of  no  repu-
tation, and  took  upon  Him  the  form
of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the
likeness  of  men  ;

44  And  being  found  in  fashion  as
a  man,  He  humble' 1  Himself,  and
became  obedient  unto  death,  even
the  death  of  the  cross  ;

4%  Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly
exalted  Him,  and  given  Him  a  name
which  is  above  every  name ;

"That  at  the  name  of  Jesus,


10


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


every  knee  should  bow,  of  things  in
heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and
things  under  the  earth  ;

"  And  that  every  tongue  should
confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,
to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father,—
Philippians  li,  v.  2  "

Now  Jesus,  who  was  in  the  form
of  God,  was  only  one  of  the  sons
of  God.  He  called  His  disciples
His  brethren,  and  He  impressed
upon  them  the  great  fact  that  His
Father  was  their  Father,  that  His
God  was  their  God,  that  He  was  one
of  them.  When  He  returned,  or
was  about  to  return  to  the  Father,
with  His  resurrected  body.  He  told
Mary  to  tell  His  disciples  that  He
was  going  to  ascend  to  His  Father
and  their  Father,  to  His  God  and
their  God.

In  the  Old  Testament,  which  gives
accounts  of  God's  occasional  mani-
festations of  His  presence  to  men
upon  the  earth,  we  fi nd  that  they  all
saw  Him  as  a  person,  with  the  form
of  a  man,  Moses  talked  with  Him
face  to  face*  Nadab  and  Abihu
and  seventy  Elders  of  Israel,  with
Moses  and  Aaron,  went  up  in  the
mount

"  And  they  saw  the  God  of  Israel,
and  tli ere  was  under  His  feet  as  it
were  a  paved  work  of  a  sapphire
stone,  and  as  it  were  the  body  of
heaven  in  His  clearness  ;  also  upon
the  children  of  Israel  He  laid  not
His  hand,  also  they  saw  God,  and
did  eat  and  drink, — [Exodus  xxiv,

10,  11.)"

L  might  refer  to  a  number  of  pas-
sages of  Scripture  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment, showing  that  whenever  God
appeared  to  man,  manifesting  Him-
self to  man,  He  appeared  in  the
form  of  a  man.  We  are  told  re-
peatedly in  the  Scriptures  that  the
children  of  men  are  the  sons  of  God.
He  is  the  Father  and  God  ot  the
spirits  of  all  flesh.  .The  spirit  of  man,


which  inhabits  his  body,  and  whichc
is  the  life  of  the  body  in  addition  to
the  blood — blood  being  the  life  of
the  flesh,  but  the  spirit  animated  all
— comes  from  God,  and  is  the  off-
spring of  God.  Because  of  this,
we  undei  stand  what  is  said  in  1  John,


in


2


"  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of
God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear
what  we  shall  be  :  but  we  know
that,  when  He  shall  appear,  we  shall
be  like  him  ;  for  we  shall  see  Him
as  He  is/'

God,  then,  the  God  of  the  Bible,
who  is  called  Jehovah,  the  person
who  manifested  Himself  to  Israel
as  Jehovah,  is  an  individual,  a  per-
sonality, and  He  made  man  in  His
image  and  His  likeness*  Now,  if  we
are  the  children  of  God,  and  if
Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  we
can  upon  that  reasoning  understand
something  about  what  God  is  like,
for  there  is  an  eternal  principle  in
heaven  and  on  earth,  that  every
seed  begets  of  its  kind,  every  seed
brings  forth  in  its  own  likeness  and
character.  The  seed  of  an  apple,
when  it  is  reproduced,  brings  forth
an  apple,  and  so  with  a  pear,  and  ao
with  a  plum,  and  so  with  all  the
varieties  of  the  vegetable  kingdom.
It  is  the  same  witli  all  the  varieties
of  the  animal  kingdom.  The  doc-
trine of  evolution,  as  it  is  called,,
is  true  in  some  respects — that  inr
that  species  can  be  improved,  ex-
alted, made  better,  but  it  remains
of  the  same  species.  The  advance-
ment is  in  the  same  line.  It  is
unfoldment.  We  do  not  find  any
radical  change  from  one  species  to
another.  It  is  an  eternal  principle
that  ever}  seed  produces  its  own
kind,  not  another  land.  And  as
we  are  the  children  of  God,  w*
can  follow  out  the  idea  and  perceive
what  God  our  Father  is,  the  Being
who  is  the  progenitor  of  our  spiritual


LIFE,  LIGHT

•existence,  the  being  from  whom
we  have  sprung.  We  being  the
seed  of  God,  that  Being  is  a  person-
ality, an  individual,  a  being  in  some
respects  like  us,  or  rather  we  are
made  in  His  image.

14  Man  also  is  spirit/1  we  are  told
in  the  revelations  ot  God  to  the
Latter-day  Saints,  Man,  the  real
man,  is  a  spirit,  an  individual  that
dwells  in  a  body,  a  spiritual  person
clothed  upon  with  earth  ;  a  being
who  will  live  when  the  earth  goes
back  to  mother  dust.  Man's  spirit,
then,  is  an  individual,  a  personality,
and  the  spirit  is  in  the  likeness  and
shape  of  the  body  which  it  inhabits.
When  the  spirit  goes  out  of  the
body  there  is  a  person,  a  perfectly
formed  individual,  looking  like  the
body  which  we  now  see  with  our
natural  eyes.  Spirits  living  in  the
flesh,  unless  operated  upon  abnorm-
ally by  some  spiritual  influence,
cannot  see  spiritual  beings,  A
spirit  can  see  spirit.  Spirit  ministers
to  spirit ;  and  when  the  spirit  goes
out  of  the  body  that  spirit  can  see
other  spirits,  beings  of  the  same
character  and  nature,  and  we  shall
find  when  we  have  emerged  from  tins
body,  that  we  will  be  in  the  company
of  a  great  many  persons  like  our
selves  ;  and  if  we  should  have  the
experience  that  the  Prophet  Joseph
had  when  the  mob  took  him  and
tore  his  flesh  with  their  nails,  and
tried  to  poison  him  with  a  vial  of
some  corrosive  substance,  if  our
spirits  should  be  separated  from
our  bodies  as  his  was,  we,  like  him,
could  look  at  our  bodies  and  see  that
they  are  in  form  like  our  living
spiritual  realities.

"The  body  without, the  spirit  is
dead/1 The spirit without the  (
body  is  not  dead  ;  that  is  a  real  per-
sonality, a  living  individual,  and  the
body  of  flesh  is  but  a  house  to  dwell  ,
in  or  a  covering  for  it  to  wear  ;  not  |


AND  SPIRIT.  SI

essential  to  its  existence,  but  essen-
tial to  its  progress,  essential  to  its
experience  on  the  earth  and  ultimate*
ly  in  its  glorified  condition,  essential
to  its  eternal  happiness,  and  progress
and  power  in  the  presence  of  the
Father

While  our  Father,  then,  is  a  per-
son, an  individual,  it  may  be  asked  :
"  How  can  He  be  here,  there  and
everywhere  at  the  same  time  f
Well,  He  is  not,  in  His  personality;
but  He  can  be  omnipresent  in  a  cer-
tain sense.  There  is  a  spirit,  an
influence,  that  proceeds  from  God,
that  fills  the  immensity  of  space,  the
Holy  Spirit,  the  Light  of  Truth.
As  the  San  itself,  a  planet  or  heav-
enly body,  is  not  present  in  any
other  place  except  that  which  it  ac-
tually occupies,  so  the  individual
Father  occupies  a  certain  locality  ;
and  as  the  light  that  proceeds  from
the  sun  spreads  abroad  upon  all  the
face  of  the  earth  and  lights  up  other
planets  as  well  its  this  earth,  pene-
trating to  the  circumference  of  an
'  extended  circle  in  the  midst  of  Gods
|  great  universe,  so  the  light  of  God,
the  Spirit  of  God,  proceeding  forth
from  the  presence  of  God,  fills  the
immensity  of  space,"  It  is  the  light
and  the  life  of  all  things.  It  is  the
light  and  the  life  of  man.  It  is  the
life  of  the  animal  creation.  It  is  the
life  of  the  vegetable  creation.  It
is  in  the  earth  on  which  we  stand  ;
it  is  in  the  stars  that  shine  in  the
firmament  ;  it  is  in  the  moon  that
reflects  the  light  of  the  sun  :  it  is  in
the  sun,  and  is  the  light  of  the  sun,
and  the  power  by  which  it  was  made ;
and  these  grosser  par  tides  of  light
that  illuminate  the  heavens  and
enable  us  to  behold  the  works  of
nature,  are  from  that  same  Spirit
which  enlightens  our  minds  and
unfolds  the  things  of  God,  As  that
light  comes  forth  from  the  sun,  so
the  light  of  God  conies  to  us.  That


22  JOURNAL  OF

natural  light  is  the  grosser  sub-
stance or  particles  of  the  same
Spirit,

Spirit  is  a  substance,  it  is  not  im-
material i  it  may  have  some  proper-
ties that  are  different  from  that
which  we  see  and  handle,  which  we
call  matter,  but  it  is  a  reality,  a  sub-
stantial reality.  And  spirit  can
understand  spirit  and  grasp  spirit*
A  spiritual  person  can  take  the  hand
of  another  spiritual  person  and  it  is
substantial.  A  person  in  body  could
not  grasp  a  spirit,  for  that  spirit  has
different  properties  to  those  of  our
bodies,  and  it  is  governed  by  differ-
ent laws  to  those  that  govern  us  in
this  sphere  of  mortality.  A  spirit*
ual  substance,  organized  into  form,
occupies  room  and  space  just  as
much  in  its  sphere  as  these  natural
particles  occupy  in  this  sphere*

God  our  Father,  then,  is  a  person,  ;
an  individual,  and  He  really  is  our
Father,  actually  and  literally.  We
sprang  from  Him.  He  is  the  Father
of  our  spirits,  and  not  only  the
Father  of  the  spirits  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  but  the  Father  of  the
spirits  of  latter-day  sinners.  He  is
the  God  and  the  Father  of  the  spirits
of  all  flesh.  Not  only  those  that  now
dwell  on  the  earth,  but  all  people
who  dwelt  aforetime  ;  all  people
who  ever  lived  upon  the  face  of  this
planet,  are  the  children  of  God.
And  so  with  people  who  dwell  upon
other  planets,  they  are  the  offspring
of  Godt  And  our  Father  and  our
God  is  an  individual,  a  personality;
He  is  a  spirit,  and  they  tliau  worship
Him  must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and
in  truth  ;  but  He  dwells  in  a  taber-
nacle,  in  a  body,  though  that  body  >
is  different  from  our  bodies,  it  being
a  spiritual  body.  It  is  quickened
by  spirit.  Our  bodies  are  quickened
by  that  corruptible  substance  which
we  call  blood;  but  our  Heavenly
Father  s  body  is  quickened  by  spirit.


DISCOURSES.

It  is  not  governed  by  the  same  laws^
as  tnose  by  which  earthly  bodies  are
governed.  It  is  a  body  something
similar  to  that  which  Jesus  had
after  His  resurrection.  Jesus  Christ*
when  He  rose  from  the  dead,  had
the  same  body  that  He  had  upon
the  earth,  but  a  change  had  been
wrought  upon  it.  He  had  shed  His
blood  for  the  remission  of  sins.
This  body  was  quickened  by  spirit.
"  He  was  put  to  death  in  the  tb*shv
but  quickened  by  the  Spirit so
we  are  told  in  the  Scrip turesr
and  He  was  raised  up  from  the
dead  by  that  Spirit.  Paul  says,
in  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  viiich.
11  v.  :

"But  if  the  Spirit  of  Him  that
raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell
in  you,  He  that  raised  up  Christ
from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken
your  mortal  bodies  by  His  Spirit  that
dwelleth  in  you."

Jesus  Christ's  body  was  put  in  the
sepulchre  a  natural  body  ;  it  was
raised  a  spiritual  body.  It  was
placed  there  in  weakness  ;  it  was
raised  in  strength.  It  was  a  mortal
body  when  placed  in  the  sepulchre  ^
but  when  it  came  forth  quickened  by
spirit,  it  was  no  longer  a  natural  or
mortal  body,  it  was  a  spiritual  and
an  immortal  body ;  and  with  that
immortal  body  He  ascended  from
the  earth.  It  was  no  longer  bound
by  the  laws  of  earthly  gravitation,,
as  it  was  before*  He  stood  upon
the  mount  of  Olives,  in  the  presence
of  His  disciples,  and  ascended  up
to  heaven  from  their  midst  and  dis-
appeared from  their  view.  He
could  manifest  Himself  to  them,
and  then  take  Himself  away  from
their  gaze.  He  could  enter  the
room  when  the  doors  were  shut,  as
He  did  in  the  case  when  His  disci-
ples gathered  in  secret  for  fear  of
the  Jews,  and  manifest  Himself  to
them. And  yet  at  the  same  txtn&


SPIRITUAL  SUBSTANCE.


23


His  body  was  tangible,  and  the  un-
believing Thomas  could  reach  forth
his  hand  and  thrust  it  into  His  side,
and  put  his  fingers  into  the  prints
of  the  nails.  But  this  body  was  a
glorious  body,  <£  the  glorious  body
of  the  Son  of  God,"  and  it  was  in
the  fashion  and  likeness  of  the
lorious  body  of  His  Eternal  Father,
t  was  a  celestial  body  quickened  by
the  celestial  glory.  And  if  we  wish
to  attain  to  the  Heavenly  kingdom
we  must  walk  in  the  ways  of  life,
and  sanctify  ourselves  before  God,
as  Jesus  did,  so  that  the  influence
and  power  of  the  celestial  king' lorn
can  be  with  us.  Then,  in  the  resur-
rection,  when  we  come  forth  from
the  grave,  we  shall  be  quickened
also  by  the  operation  of  tin*  <v|.^tial
glory  and  receive  of  the  same,  even
the  fullness  t  hereof,  and  he  made  like
unto  Jesus  Christ,  ami  thus  become
like  unto  God  the  Father.

As  I  have  previously  explained,
God  is  not  everywhere  present
personally,  but  He  is  omnipresent
in  the  power  of  that  spirit — the  Holy
Spirit — \?hich  animates  all  created
things  ;  that  which  is  the  light  of
the  sun,  and  of  the  soul  a*  well  as
the  light  of  the  eyo,  that  which  en-
ables the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  to
understand  and  perceive  the  things
of  God.  As  the  light  of  the  sun
reveals  natural  objects  to  our  eyes,
so  the  spirit  that  comes  from  Go  I,
with  a  tilting  place  to  occupy  end
conditions  to  operate  in,  reveals  the
things  of  God.  We  see  natural
things  by  the  light  of  the
sun.  We  see  spiritual  things  by
spiritual  light,  and  he  that  is  spirit-
ual discerneth  all  things  ami  judgeth
all  things,  and  he  that  is  not  spirit-
ual cannot  comprehend  spiritual
things.  They  are  foolishness  to
him.  And  while  the  Saints  of  God,
quickeued  by  the  spirit  which  they
have  obtained  through  obedience  to
he  Gospel,  can  comprehend  the«e


things  of  which  I  am  speaking
and  discern  their  meaning  and
signification,  those  that  are  wicked
and  corrupt  and  obey  not  the
ordinances  of  God,  cannot  see  these
things  nor  comprehend  them  as
they  are,  but  they  are  foolishness  to
them.

But,  if  God  is  an  individual  spirit
and  dwells  in  a  body,  the  question
will  arise,  "  Is  He  the  Eternal  Fa-
ther V  Yes,  He  is  the  Eternal
Father,  "  Is  it  a  fact  that  He  never
had  a  beginning  f  In  the  element-
ary particles  of  His  organism,  He
did  not.  But  if  He  is  an  organized
Being,  there  must  have  been  a  time
when  that  being  was  organized.
This,  some  one  will  say,  would  intVr
that  God  had  a  beginning.  This
spirit  which  pervades  all  thing*,
which  is  the  light  and  lifeof  all  things,
by  which  our  heavenly  Father  oper-
ates, by  which  He  is  omnipotent,
never  had  a  beginning  and  never
wid  have  aa  end.  It  is  the  light  of
truth  ;  it  is  the  spirit  of  intelligence.
We  are  told  in  the  revelations  of  God
to  us  that,  "  Intelligence  or  the
light  of  truth  never  was  created,
neither  indeed  can  be,"  And  we
are  told  further,  that  this  Spirit,
when  it  is  manifest,  is  Go  I  moving
in  His  glory.  When  we  look  up  to
the  heavens  and  behold  the  starry
worlds,  which  are  kingdoms,  we  be-
hold Gol  moving  in  His  Mnjesty
and  in  His  power.  Now,  this  Spirit
always  existed  ;  it  always  operated,
but  it  is  not,  understood,  and  cannot
be  comprehended  except  through
organisms.  If  you  see  a  living  blade
of  itt'ass  you  sec  a  manifestation  of
that  Spirit  which  is  called  Go  1.
If  you  see  an  animal  of  any  kind
on  the  face  of  the  earth  having  life,
there  is  a  manifestation  of  that
Spirit*  If  you  see  a  man  you  behold
its  most  perfect  earthly  man  it  est  a-
tion.  And  if  you  see  a  glorified
man,  a  man  who  has  passed  ihrotigli


24


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


the  various  grades  of  being,  who  has
overcome  all  things,  who  lias  been
raised  from  the  dead,  who  has  been
quickened  by  this  spirit  in  its  full-
ness, there  you  see  manifested,  in
its  perfection,  this  eternal,  begin-
ningless,  endless  spirit  of  intelli-
gence.

Such  a  Being  is  our  Father  and
our  God,  and  we  are  following  in
His  footsteps.  He  has  attained  to
perfection.  He  has  arisen  to  king-
doms of  power.  He  comprehends
all  things,  because  in  Him  dwelleth
the  fullness  of  the  Godhead,  bodily.
He  is  a  perfect  manifestation,  ex
pression  and  revelation  of  this  eternal
essence,  this  spirit  of  eternal,  ever-
lasting intelligence  or  light  of  truth.
It  is  embodied  in  His  spiritual  per-
sonality or  spiritual  organism.  This
spirit  cannot  be  fully  comprehended
in  our  finite  state.  It  quickens
all  things.  As  we  are  told  in  the
Book  -  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
it  is  :

'4  The  light  which  is  in  all  things,
which  givetli  life  to  all  things,  which
isiihe  law  by  which  all  tilings  are
governed,  even  the  power  of  God,
who  sitteth  upon  His  throne,  who
is  in  the  bosom  of  eteruty,  who  is
in  the  midsi  of  all  things. — Sec.
lxxxviii,  p.  13,"

That  spirit  exists  wherever  there
is  a  particle  of  material  substance  ;
that  spirit  is  round  about  it,  and  in
it,  and  through  it ;  but  that  we  may
comprehend  it,  it  must  be  manifested
through  organisms.  The  perfection
of  its  manifestation  is  in  the  per-
sonality of  a  being  called  God.
That  is  a  person  who  has  passed
through  all  the  gradations  of  being,
and  who  contains  within  Himself
the  fullness,  manifested  and  ex-
pressed, of  this  divine  spirit  which
is  called  God.

Some  people  may  think  this  is
rather  a  low  idea  of  a  Divine  Being.
But  I  think  it  a  most  exalted  one.


The  person  whom  I  worship  I  ac-
knowledge as  my  Father.  Through
Him  I  may  learn  to  understand  the
secrets  and  mysteries  of  eternity,
those  things  that  never  hadja  begin-
ning and  will  never  have  an  end.
He  has  ascended  above  all  things
after  descending  below  all  things.
He  has  fought  his  way  from  the
depths  up  to  the  position  He  now
occupies.  He  holds  it  by  virtue  of
His  goodness,  of  His  might,  of  His
majesty,  of  His  power.  He  occupies
that  position  by  virtue  of  being  in
perfect  harmony  with  ail  that  is  right,
and  true,  and  beautiful,  and  glorious
and  progressive.  He  is  the  perfect
embodiment  and  expression  of  the
eternal  principles  of  right.  He
has  won  that  position  by  His  own
exertions,  by  His  own  faithfulness,
by  His  own  righteousness.  Jesus
Christ,  the  only  begotten  son  of  God
in  the  flesh,  but  His  firstborn  in  the
spirit,  has  climbed  His  way  up  in  a
similar  manner.  He  loved  riffht-
eousness  and  hated  iniquity.  He
kept  every  law  and  every  command-
ment. He  knew  no  sin,  and  guile
was  not  found  in  His  mouth.  He
loved  not  His  own  life,  as  a  para-
mount cosideration  but  sacrificed  it
to  atone  for  the  sins  of  others.
Whatever  He  learned  was  right,  He
practised,  and  He  broke  no  com-
mandment of  the  Father,  but  obeyed
every  one*  He  came  not  to  do  His
own  will,  but  the  will  of  the  Father
that  sent  Him,  and  because  He  did
this  and  was  faithful  unto  death,  He
was  exalted  on  high.  He  overcame
evil  He  conquered  mortality.  He
triumphed  over  death.  He  con-
quered that  being  who  is  the  expres-
sion of  evil  principles,  who  is  the
embodiment  of  the  principles  of
darkness,  who  is  the  embodiment  of
all  the  principles  that  are  in  opposi-
tion to  those  that  exist  and  burn  in
the  bosom  of  Deity.  He  met  him  and
conquered  him  and  overcame  him


THE  CREEDS  OF  CHRISTENDOM,


25


He,  being  in  the  truth  and  living  by
the  truth  ;  therefore  he  is  now  to  us,
**  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life.11
Overcoming  ail  things  He  was
entitled  to  inherit  all  things,  and  all
that  the  Father  hath  was  given
unto  Him. And  we  read  :

"The  Son  can  do  nothing  of  him-
self, but  what  he  seeth  the  Father
do  ;  for  what  thing  soever  he  doeth,
these  also  doeth  the  Son  likewise."
(John  v,  20.)"

As  the  Father  had  taken  His
upward  course  in  worlds  before  this,
so  Jesus  Christ  followed  in  his  foot-
steps in  every  respect ;  therefore
he  is  entitled  to  sit  down  at  the
right  hand  of  God  in  the  heavens,
t*  sit  on  his  throne  and  be  one  with
the  Father  in  all  tilings  ;  and  all  the
power  and  glory,  and  dominion  that
the  Father  hath  he  conferred  also
upon  Jesus.  And  the  promise  to
the  sons  of  God  on  the  earth  is,  that
if  they  will  follow  in  the  footsteps  of
Jesus,  they  shall  be  also  exalted  and
shall  partake  of  that  glory  which  he
partakes  of,  and  they  shall  became
Gods,  even  the  sons  of  God,  and
**  all  things"  shall  be  theirs."  And
we  are  told  in  the  revelations  of
God  to  us  in  the  latter  days,  that
if  we  are  faithful  in  all  things,
u  all  that  Father  hath"  shall
be  given  unto  us.  We  shall  be-
come like  Him,  and  we  shall  receive
power  and  dominion  and  glory  simi-
lar to  that  which  he  enjoys,  only  He
will  always  be  above  us,  Gi>d  as  our
Father,  and  Jesus  Christ  our  elder
brother.

Now,  we  can  understand  a  little
about  a  being  like  this,  but  a  being
of  the  character  that  divines  attempt
to  describe  is  one  we  cannot  under-
stand at  all.  They  say  that  there
are  three  of  them,  and  yet  there  is
only  one  ;  that  God  has  no  body,
neither  parts  nor  passions.  Yet
this  thing  that  has  no  substance,


and  no  parts,  we  are  told,  has  three
parts,  one  part  of  which  had  a  body,
and  that  body  was  composed  of  parts.
And  we  are  told  also  that  it  has  no
passions.  Yet  this  one  part  of  that
thing  which  has  no  body  and  no
parts  and  no  passions  had  a  body
and  parts  and  had  passions.  Jesus
experienced  the  same  things  that  a
man  experiences,  lived  like  a  man,
and  died  like  a  man,  to  some  extent.
Now,  who  can  understand  these  con-
tradictions which  are  to  be  found  in
the  creeds  of  modern  Christendom  1
The  Athanasian  Creed  was  read  in
the  Church  of  England,  as  it  is  called,
when  I  was  a  boy,  and  I  believe  it  is
now,  I  think  the  American  Epis-
copal Church  has  discarded  it,
which  was  very  sensible.  It
says  :

44  Whosoever  will  be  saved,  before
all  things  he  must  hold  the  Catholic
faith,  which  faith  except  he  do  keep
whole  and  undefiled  he  shall,  with-
out doubt,  perish  everlastingly.
And  the  Catholic  faith  is  this  :
"That  we  worship  one  God  in  Trinity,
and  trinity  in  unity,  neither  con-
founding the  persons  nor  dividing
the  substance.  For  there  is  one
person  of  the  Father,  another  of  the
Son,  and  another  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
bur  their  glory  is  equal,  and  their
majesty  co-eternal  Such  as  the
Father  is,  such  is  the  Son,  and  such
the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Father  is  God,
the  Sou  is  God,  and  the  Holy  Ghost
is  God  ;  and  yet  there  are  not  three
Gods,  but  one  God.  The  Father  is
Lord,  the  Son  is  Lord,  and  the  Holy
Ghost  is  Lord,  and  yet  there  are  not
thee  Lords,  but  one  Lord.  For
while  we  are  compelled  by  Christian
verity  to  acknowledge  each  person
by  himself  to  be  both  God  and
Lord,  so  we  are  forbidden  by  the
Catholic  faith  to  say  that  there  be
three  Gods  or  three  Lords."

It  goes  on  to  show  how  that  these


2G


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


three  are  all  exactly  alike,  and  then
to  declare  that  they  are  all  essential-
ly different  It  explains  that  the
Son  is  begotten  while  the  Father  is
not,  and  then  that  the  Holy  Ghost
is  proceeding  not  begotten,  while
the  Son  is  not  proceeding,  neither
is  the  Father,  yet  at  the  same  time
tWy  are  all  the  same,  and  to  cap  the
climax  ot"  the  pile  of  absurdities  it
announces  that  :

44  The  Father  is  incomprehensible,
the  Son  is  incomprehensible,  and
tho  Holy  Ghost  is  incomprehensible,
yet  they  are  not  three  incomprehen-
sible*,  but  one  is^'uiiipn^henjaihle."

U  ell,  that  is  an  attempt  of  man  to
explain  God.  As  I  said  in  the  begin-  \
ning  of  my  remarks,  we  do  not  pre-
tend that  we  can  coin  prebend  God
in  Ins  fullness  in  our  finite  and  mor-
tal condition  here  on  the  earth,  be*
cause  he  is  an  infinite  being.  But
we  are  promised  that  "the  day  shall
conn*  when  we  shall  comprehend
God,  being  quickened  in  hirn."  Jesus
said  :  \  4

"This  is  life  eternal  to  know
thee  the  only  living  and  true  God,
and  Jesus  Christ  whom  thou  hast
sent1'

How  can  we  learn  to  know  God  1
We  can  learn  of  our  Father  by
hearkening  to  his  voice  by  listening
to  the  whisperings  of  the  holy
Spirit,  that  spirit  that  comes
from  him.  44  They  that  are  led  by
the  Spirit  of  God  are  the  sons  of
God. 11  We  can  understand  much
concerning  him  by  the  power  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  The  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost  is  conferred  on  us  that  we  may
learn  something  about  God,  so  that
we  may  go  on  to  perfection  ;  that
we  may  walk  in  his  ways  ;  that  we
may  climb  the  ladder  which  he  has
climbed  to  perfection  ;  that  we  may
perad venture  overcome  and  be  made
like  him,  share  in  his  glory,  and
be  one with him. And  if  we


will  take  the  course  that  our  Father
has  taken,  living  by  every  word  that
comes  from  his  mouth,  we  shall
know  what  is  right,  for  he  will  reveal
unto  us  what  is  true,  and  it  is  the
knowledge  and  practice of  truth
that  exalts. If  we  will  learn  this
as  he  learned  it,  advance  step  by
step,  overcoming the Evil One  ;
overcome  the  world  and  the  flesh,
grapple  with  evil  as  we  meet  it  and
conquer  it,  we  will  have  the  help  of
the  Lord,  and  may  raise  ourselves
by  our  own  exertions,  by  our  faith-
fulness, by  our obedience,  and
perad  venture will overcome  all
things,  and  inherit  all  tiling?.  We
may  thus  rise  above  all  tilings.
We  may  obtain  glorious  bodies  like
unto  the  glorious  body  of  the  Son
of  God. We  may  prepare  ourselves
for  the  celestial  glory  in  which  the
Father  dwells,  and  in  which  the  Son
dwells,  and  be  made  like  him  in
every  respect, becoming  spiritual
beings  dwelling  in  spiritual  bodies,
quickened  with  the  celestial  glory,
among  the  Gods,  and  enter  into
hoi}  order  which  is  without  begin-
ning of  days  or  end  of  years —
the  everlasting  order  of  ti»e  huly
Priesthood  — w  Inch Jesus  Christ
has,  and  a  portion  of  which  he  im-
parted unto  his  disciples  when  he
w;ts  upon  the  earth,  and  which  he
has  restored  to  the  earth  in  these
latter  days.

There  are  things  connected  with
this  that  we  cannot  dwell  upon  in  a
short  discourse.  But  the  keys  of
this  Priesthood  have  been  restored,
and  by  them  we  can  obtain  heavenly
knowledge  ;  learn  to  comprehend
onr  Father  who  is  at  the  head  of
that  Priesthood  ;  learn  to  compre-
hend Jesus  Christ  our  Great  High
Priest.  By  this  same  Priesthood,  a
portion  of  which  we  have  received,
we  can  obtain  com ru union  with
the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  with  the


BOUNDLESS  SPACE  AND  ETERNITY  OF  MATTER*  27


spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,
with  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  new
covenant,  and  with  God  who  is  the
holiest  of  all  Tiiat  Priesthood  had
no  beginning,  and  will  never  have
an  end.  As  we  are  told  in  Scripture
it  is  *'  without  father  or  mother,
without  beginning  of  days  or  end
of  years;*'  it  always  existed.  The
individual,  the  organized  person
may  have  had  a  beginning,  but  that
spirit  of  which  and  by  which  they
organized  never  had  a  beginning.
That  Priesthood  winch  is  the  power
of  government  in  the  heavens,
never  had  a  beginning,  and  it  will
nerer  come  to  rn  end.  The  works
of  that  eternal  spirit  of  intelligence,
the  great  Eternal  God,  manifested
to  us  in  our  Father  and  through
Jesus  Christ,  never  had  a  beginning.
There  never  was  a  first  world  or  man ;
there  will  never  be  a  last.  We  can-
not grasp  that  in  its  fullness,  but  we
can  understand  a  little  of  it  by  com-
paring it  with  other  things.  For
instance,  we  will  take  space-  This
tabernacle  contains  so  much  space,
bounded  by  the  walls  of  thebuilding ;
but  go  outside  ot  these  walls  and
space  is  there.  Go  to  the  farthest
bounds  of  this  Territory,  space  is
there.  Go  to  tho  ends  of  the  earth,
if  you  can  find  them,  and  there  is
space  beyond.  Mount  upward  to
the  stars  ■  go  to  the  sun,  pass  above
the  sun  to  the  two  worlds  that  gov-
ern it,  that  we  read  about  in  the  Book
of  Abraham,  in  "  The  Pearl  of
Great  Price;"  go  even  unto  Kolob,
the  nearest  to  the  throne  of  God,
and  there  is  just  as  much  space  be-
yond as  that  which  you  have  left.
There  is  no  outside  to  space — no
beginning,  no  end.

Thus  there  is  boundless  space,
and  we  cannot  fully  comprehend  it,
yet  we  must  admit  that  it  exists
without  limit.  "There  is  no  king-
dom in  the  which  there  is  no  space,


and  no  space  in  the  which  there  is
no  kingdom,  either  a  greater  or  a
lesser  kingdom/'  So  we  learn  in
the  Doctrine  and  Covenants.  So
travel  where  we  will,  there  we  find
space,  and  also  inexhaustible  mate-
rial. And  the  elements,  whether
they  be  spiritual  or  what  we  call
natural — we  use  these  terms  to  dis-
tinguish them — never  hail  a  begin-
ning— the  primal  particles  never
had  a  beginning.  They  have  been
organized  in  different  shapes  ;  the
organism  had  a  beginning,  but  the
elements  or  atoms  of  which  it  is
composed  never  had.  You  may
burn  this  book,  but  every  atom  of
which  the  book  was  composed,  every
particle  of  substance  that  entered
iuto  its  composition,  still  exists;
they  are  indestructible.  When
you  go  right  down  to  the  primary
elements,  they  never  had  a  begin-
ning, they  will  never  have  an  end.
For  in  their  primal  condition  they
are  not  "  created."  They  did  not
come  from  nothing  ;  they  were
organized  into  different  forms,  but
the  elementary  parts  of  matter  as
well  as  of  spirit,  using  ordinary
terms,  never  had  a  beginning,  and
never  will  have  an  end.

Now,  here  are  some  things  that
you  can  understand  to  some  extent,
that  are  begin ningless  and  endless.
It  is  the  same  with  duration.
Duration  never  had  a  beginning,
and  it  never  will  have  an  end.  We
measure  portions  of  time,  but  time
itself,  cannot  be  counted.  Go  back
as  far  as  we  can  think,  and  tlnjrc  was
just  as  much  time  or  duration  before
that  period  as  since,  and  think  as
much  as  we  can  down  the  stream
of  time  there  is  just  as  much
ahead.  There  is  no  limit  to  dura-
tion, no  beginning,  no  end.  Thus
there  are  boundless  space,  an
infinity  of  substance,  endless  dura-
tion. The  elements  of  that  eternal


^spirit  which  exists  in  and  tli rough
and  round  about  all  things,  and  is
the  law  by  which  all  things  are  gov-
erned, never  had  a  beginning  and
will  never  have  an  end.  There  was
no  beginning  and  there  will  be  no
end  to  its  operations.  And  there-
fore we  are  told  that  11  the  works
of  God  are  one  eternal  round."
There  was  no  beginning  to  the  works
of  God,  and  there  will  be  no  end.
The  Priesthood,  as  I  have  quoted  to
you,  is  without  beginning  of  days  or
end  of  years.  It  was  always  exis-
tent and  always  active.  And  there-
fore there  was  never  a  first  world  or
being,  neither  will  there  be  a  last
one.  We  are  here  to  learn  those
principles  that  pertain  to  this  lower
sphere  $to  learn  how  to  raise  our-
selves  from  this  groveling  mortal
condition,  and  make  ourselves  like
God,  that  we  may  dwell  with  hitnf
come  into  perfect  harmony  with  that
spirit  of  which  I  have  been  speak-
ing, be  one  with  the  Father  and
participate  with  him  in  the  power
which  he  wields,  in  the  midst  of
eternity.

Now,  my  brethren  and  sisters*
will  we  walk  in  this  way  1  Will  we
fit  ourselves  to  enter  into  our  next
estate  with  honor  1  We  have  come
down  from  God  as  his  offspring.
That  part  of  us  which  is  spirit  was
with  dim  in  the  eternal  world.  We
have  come  down  here  in  our  time
and  season,  and  God  11  determined
the  time  before  appointed  and  the
bounds  of  our  habitation/1  We
are  here  to  learn  the  laws  that  gov-
ern this  lower  world ;  to  learn  to
grapple  with  evil  and  to  understand
what  darkness  is.  We  came  from
an  abode  of  bliss  to  understand  the
pain  and  sorrow  incident  to  this  pro
bat  ion.  We  came  here  to  compre-
hend what  death  is.  We  existed  in
our  first  estate  among  the  sons  of
God  in  the  presence  of  our  Father,


"when  the  morning  stars  sang  togeth-
er, and  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for
joy."  The  knowledge  of  our  former
state  has  fled  from  ns.  Like  Jesus,
"in  our  humiliation  our  judgment
is  taken  away,"  and  the  veil  is  drawn
between  us  and  our  former  habita-
tion. This  is  for  oar  trial  If  we
could  see  the  things  of  eternity,
and  comprehend  ourselves  as  we
are  ;  if  we  could  penetrate  the
mists  and  clouds  that  shut  out  eter-
nal realities  from  our  gaze,  the  fleet-
ing things  of  time  would  be  no  trial
to  us,  and  one  of  the  great  objects
of  our  earthly  probation  or  testing
would  be  lost.  But  the  past  has
gone  from  our  memory,  the  future
is  shut  out  from  our  vision  and  we
are  living  here  in  time,  to  learn  little
by  little,  line  upon  line,  precept  upon
precept.  Here  in  the  darkness,  in
the  sorrow,  in  the  trial,  in  the  pain,
in  the  adversity,  we  have  to  learn
what  is  right  and  distinguish  it  from
what  is  wrong,  and  lay  hold  of  right
and  truth  and  learn  to  live  it.  For
it  is  not  only  the  learning  of  it  that
is  needful,  but  we  must  live  it,  being
guided  and  governed  by  it  iu  all
tilings.  If  we  have  any  evil  pro-
pensities—inherited from  progeni-

|  tors  who  for  ages  have  gone  astray
from  God — we  have  to  grapple  with
them  and  overcome  them.  Each
individual  must  find  out  his  own
nature,  and  what  there  is  iu  it  that
is  wrong,  and  bring  it  into  subjec-
tion to  the  will  and  righteousness  of
God.  He  must  w  ork  with  it  until
he  is  master  of  it  ;  until  he  can  say

1  to  this  mortal  flesh  which  is  contin-
ually warring  against  the  spirit,  *'  I
am  your  master  by  the  grace  of  God,"
Every  passion,  every  inclination,
every  desire  must  be  controlled  and
made  subject  to  the  will  of  God,
Though  we  mingle  with  the  world,
yet  we  must  not  pattern  after  their
evil  ways  nor  "touch  the  unclean


THE  GL0R3T  OF  THOSE  WHO  ARE  FAITHFUL.


thing.*'  We  need  not  partake  of  the
sins  of  the  world.  We  can  be  wrap-
ped around  by  the  influence  of  our
religion  as  by  the  garments  that  we
wear,  and  be  separate  even  though
in  the  midst  of  the  wicked.  We
need  not  follow  their  ways  nor  be
guided  by  their  enticements,  or  be
governed  by  their  nations,  but  should
live  according  to  the  light  of  God  ;
and  when  evil  spirits  tempt  us  and
seek  to  turn  us  aside  from  the  strait
path  that  leads  to  the  celestial  city,
stand  firm  in  the  spirit  of  the  Gos-
pel and  overcome  them.  And
if  we  overcome  all  things  we  shall
inherit  all  things,

"To  him  that  overcometh  will  I
grant  to  sit  with^me  in  my  throne,
even  as  I  also  overcame,  and  am  set
down  with^Hy  Father  in  his  throne.
—Rev.  hi,  21."

We  are  the  children  of  God,  and
when  we  go  back  into  the  presence
of  our  Father,  if  we  return  with
honor,  there  will  be  joy  in  heaven  ;
there  will  be  joy  in  our  own  bosoms,


I  such  joy  as  is  not  expressible.  How
we  shall  rejoice  !  We  will  then
comprehend  all  we  knew  before  we
came  here.  We  will  comprehend
everything  we  learned  when  we  dwelt
in  the  flesh  ;  and  we  will  be  clothed
upon  with  the  spirit  and  power  of
Uod  in  its  fullness,  and  kingdoms
and  power  and  glory  eternal  will  be
given  unto  us.  We  shall  have  the
gift  of  eternal  and  endless  increase.
Our  families  will  be  with  us  and  be
the  beginning  of  our  dominion,  and
upon  that  basis  we  shall  build  for-
ever Our  wives  and  our  children
will  be  ours  for  all  eternity.  Our
increase  shall  never  cease  while
duration  rolls  along  and  the  works
of  God  spread  forth,  and  our  poster-
ity and  kingdoms  will  grow  and  ex-
tend till  they  shall  be  as  numerous
as  the  stars,  and  we  will  enter  into
the  rest  of  onr  Father  and  enjoy  his
presence  and  society  for  evermore*
God  help  us  to  attain  to  the  fullness
of  this  glory,  for  Christ's  sake.
Amen.


30


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  in  the  Tabermcle,  Salt  Lake  Citif,  Sunday  Evening,  December

1MK  1884.


EEPORTED  BY  JOHN  IETINE.


OBJECT  OF  GATHERING  — OUR  PRINCIPLES  AND  ORGANIZATION  RE-
VEAUtf)  FROM  GOD — HE  IS  COGNIZANT  OF  ALL  THINGS— OUR  FAITH
NOT  AFFECTED  BY  THE  IDEAS  OF  M EN  —  OUR  DEPENDENCE  UPON
GOD—  KXOCH'S  CITY— GOD'S  JUSTICE  IN  SENDING  J  HE  FLOOD,  AND
IN  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  SODOM  AND  GOMORRAH— HIS  JUDGMENTS
WILL  COME  UPON  THOSE  WHO  PERSECUTE  HIS  SAINTS— THE  LORD
WILL  BLESS  HIS  PEOPLE— WE  WILL  STAND  BY  THE  CONSTITUTION
THOUGH  OTHERS  IGNORE  IT.

We  hear  a  great  many  tilings  asso-
ciated with  the  Church  and  King-
dom of  God  in  which,  as  a  people,
-we  are  very  much  interested.

We  meet  together,  from  time  to
time,  to  sing,  to  pray,  to  speak,  to
hear  and  to  attend  to  the  various
duties  and  responsibilities  that  de-
volve upon  us,  Wc  are  taught  of
things  pertaining  to  time  and  things
pertaining  to  eternity,  and  perhaps
we  are  more  favored — well,  there  is
no  perhaps  about  it — we  are  more
favored  than  any  other  people  that
dwell  upon  the  face  of  the  whole
€arth.  We  have  been  gathered
together  from  among  the  nations  of
the  earth  in  order  that  we  may  lie
instructed  in  the  laws  nt  God,  and
in  the  principles  of  truth  and  life,
that  we  may  he  able  to  comprehend
our  relationship  to  our  heavenly
Father,  to  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  to
the  Priesthood  that  exists  in  the
heavens,  and  tc  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  by  whom  we  are  surround-
ed, and  among  whom  we  dwell.

There  is  something  very  peculiar


about  the  position  which  we  occupy
among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  We
have  not  received  any  of  the  intelli-
gence which  we  possess  from  these
nations,  with  the  exception  of  some
matters  pertaining  to  science,  to  art,
and  the  common  education  of  the
day.  But  as  regards  our  religious
principles  we  are  not  indebted  to
any  men  who  live  upon  the  earth  for
them.  These  principles  emanated
from  God.  They  were  given  by
revelation,  and  if  we  have  a  First
Presidency,  if  we  have  High  Priests,
if  we  have  Seventies,  if  we  have
Bishops,  Elders,  Priests  and  Teach-
ers, if  we  have  Stake  and  other
organizations,  we  have  received  them
all  from  God,  If  we  have  Temples,
if  we  administer  in  them,  it  is  be-
cause we  have  received  instruction
in  relation  thereto  from  the  Lord.
If  we  know  anything  pertaining  to
the  future,  it  comes  from  him,  and
in  fact  we  live  in  God.  we  move  in
God,  and  from  him  we  derive  our
being.  Men  generally  will  not  ac-
knowledge this,  but  we  as  Latter-


GOD  IS  COGNIZANT  OF  ALL  THINGS,


day  Saints  belie  re  in  these  truths.
Not  one  of  us  could  have  entered
this  house  this  evening  without
being  sustained  by  the  power  of  God.
Not  one  of  us  could  leave  this  house
without  guidance,  strength  and
power  from  him  to  accomplish  it.
We  have  been  taught  to  believe
that  he  is  the  Creator  of  all  tilings
visible  and  invisible,  whether  they
be  things  in  the  heavens  or  on  the
earth,  whether  they  belong  to  this
world  or  other  worlds,  and  that
there  is  an  all  wise,  all  powerful
Beim;,  who  controls,  manipulates
and  manages  all  the  affairs  of  the
human  family,  and  this  is  true
whether  it  relates  to  the  world  in
which  we  live,  to  the  heavens  that
are  above  us,  or  to  other  world*  by
which  we  are  surrounded-  It  relates
to  our  bodies  and  to  our  spirits,  and
to  all  thing*  associated  therewith.
Hence  we  are  very  dependent  beings.
In  the  organization  of  man,  in  the
organization  of  this  earth,  and  in
the  organization  of  the  heavens,
there  were  certain  things  designed
by  the  Almighty  to  be  carried  out,
and  that  will  be  carried  out  accord-
ing to  the  purposes  of  the  Most
High,  which  things  were  known  to
him  from  the  beginning.  There
exists  all  manner  of  curious  opinions
about  God,  and  many  people  think
it  impossible  for  him  to  take  cogni-
zance of  all  men,  but  that  is  very
easily  done.  If  I  had  time  to
enter  into  this  subject  alone  I  could
show  you  upon  scientific  principles
that  man  himself  is  a  self-registering
machine,  his  eyes,  his  ears,  his  nose,
the  touch,  the  taste,  and  all  the  vari-
ous senses  of  the  body,  are  so  many
media  whereby  man  lays  up  for  him-
self a  record  which  perhaps  nobody
else  is  acquainted  with  but  himself
and  when  the  time  comes  for  that
xecord  to  be  unfolded  all  men  that
have  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear,


will  be  able  to  read  all  things  as  God
himself  reads  them  and  comprehends
them,  and  all  things,  we  are  told,
are  naked  and  open  before  him  with
whom  we  have  to  do.  We  are  told
in  relation  to  these  matters  that  the
hairs  of  our  heads  are  numbered ;
that  even  a  sparrow  cannot  fall  to
the  ground  without  our  heavenly
Father  s  notice ;  and  predicated
upon  some  of  these  principles  are
some  tilings  taught  by  Jesus,  where
he  tells  men  to  ask  and  they  shall
receive.  What  !  the  millions  that
live  upon  the  earth]  Yes,  tiie
millions  of  people,  no  matter  how
many  there  are.  Can  ho  hear  and
answer  all  J  Can  he  attend  to  fill
tiiese  things?  Yes.  "Ask,  and
it  shall  be  given  yon  ;  seek,  and  ye
shall  find ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be
opened  unto  you.  For  every  one
that  asketh  receiveth  ;  and  he  that
seeketh  findeth  ;  and  to  him  that
knocketh  it  shall  be  opened."  It  is
difficult  for  men  to  comprehend  some
of  these  things,  and.  as  they  cannot
comprehend  them  they  begin  to  think
they  are  all  nonsense— that  is,  many
do — and,  hence,  infidelity  and
skepticism  prevail  to  a  great  extent
A  great  many  strange  notions  are
entertained  in  regard  to  God  and
his  dealings  with  humanity-  This
is  because  men  do  not  understand
the  things  of  God.  I  read  in  one
of  our  papers  a  short  time  ago,  that
there  was  some  kind  of  a  commis-
sion going  to  meet — some  two  or
three  professors  or  scientists,  men
who  are  supposed  to  possess  superior
intelligence — to  examine  the  manu-
script of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  to
find  out  whether  it  was  true  or  not,
and  1  suppose  if  these  people- —
especially  if  they  should  he  pious
men,  possessing  a  little  learning  ami
science — should  come  out  and  say
the  Book  of  Mormon  was  not  true,
we  ail  of  us  should  have  to  lay  it


32  JOURNAL  OF

aside  should  we  not  1  This  to  roe,
is  the  veriest  nonsense.  It  would
jiot  make  one  hair's  difference  with
us  whether  such  a  commission  should
decide  that  the  Book  of  Mormon
is  right  or  wrong.  If  they  decide
that  it  is  true  it  will  not  increase  our
faith  in  it  ;  if  they  decide  that  it  is
not  true,  it  will  not  decrease  our
faith  in  it  Yet  these  are  ideas  that
men  entertain.

Speaking  upon  this  point  I  am
reminded  of  an  incident  that  took
place  a  number  of  years  ago.  Several
prominent  European  scientists  called  i
upon  me,  and  they  talked  a  little
upon  our  religious  principles*  Then
they  asked  me  if  I  was  acquainted
with  the  advanced  ideas  in  regard
to  geology,  I  told  them  I  knew  a
little  about  them  from  what  I  had
read.  i;  What  do  you  think,"  said
one  of  them  to  me,  of  these  views
as  compared  with  the  scriptural
account  of  the  creation  of  the
world?"  "Well,"  said  I,  "  the
great  difficulty  is  that  men  do  not  I
understand  the  Scriptures/'  They
could  not  see  any  difficulty  on  that
ground,  for  they  all  had  their  eyes
to  see,  and  they  had  an  understand-
ing of  words,  languages,  etc.  "Well/1
said  I,  "we  won't  go  through  the
whole  Bible,  for  that  is  quite  a  large
book  ;  but  I  will  take  one  or  two  of
the  first  lines  in  the  Bible.  *  In  the
beginning,  God  created  the  heavens
and  the  earth.'  Will  you  please  tell
me  when  the  beginning  was  1  "We
don't  know,"  "When  you  find  that
out,"  said  I,  "then  I  will  tell  you
when  the  world  was  created."  A
good  many  other  things  trans-
pired associated  with  this  interview,
that  I  do  not  wish  now  to  repeat.
Suffice  it  to  say  that  before  they  got
through,  one  of  them  said  :  "I  have
read  a  good  deal,  I  have  studied  a
good  deal,  I  find  I  have  a  good  deal
more  to  read  and  study  yet."  I


DISCOURSES.

I  thought  so  too.  I  thought  if  mea
could  not  understand  the  first  two
lines  of  the  Bible,  it  wTould  be  quite
a  task  to  teach  them  the  whole
of  it

In  regard  to  the  work  in  which
we  are  engaged,  as  I  said  before
and  as  you  have  heard  over  and  over
again,  it  emanated  from  God,  and
all  the  principles  pertaining  to  it,
came  from  Him.  We  talk  some-
times about  this  work,  and  how  it  is
going  to  be  accomplished.  The  work
we  are  engaged  in  is  the  work  of
j  God.  If  it  is  accomplished  it  will
be  accomplished  by  the  power  of
God,  by  the  wisdom  of  God,  by
the  intelligence  of  God,  and  by  the
Priesthood  that  dwells  with  the  Gods
in  the  eternal  worlds,  together  with
that  w  hich  he  has  conferred  upon  his
people  here  upon  the  earth,  and  not
by  any  other  power  or  influence  in
existence.  We  talk  of  a  Zion  that
is  to  be  built  np.  If  a  Zion  is  ever
built  up  on  this  earth,  it  will  have
to  be  under  the  guidance  and  tlirec-
j  tion  of  the  Almighty.  We  talk
about  a  Chureh  that  is  to  be  built
up  and  purified.  If  it  is  ever  built
1  up  and  purified,  it  will  be  under  the
influence  of  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  the  power  of  God  manifested
among  his  people,  whereby  iniquity
will  be  rooted  out,  righteousness
sustained,  the  principles  of  truth
advanced,  honor,  integrity,  truth
and  virtue  maintained,  and  hypoc-
risy, evil,  crime  and  corruption  of
every  kind  be  rooted  out.  That
will  have  to  be  done  by  the  aid  and
under  the  guidance  of  the  Almighty.
There  is  no  man  living  in  and  of
himself,  can  guide  the  ship  of  Zion
or  regulate  the  affairs  of  the  Church
and  Kingdom  of  God  unaided  by
the  Spirit  of  God,  and  hence  he
has  organized  the  Church  as  he  has
with  all  the  various  quorums  and
organizations  as  they  exist  to-day*


GOD,  THE  AUTHOR  OF  OUR  EXISTENCE,


33


Who  can  boast  or  has  anything  to
say  in  relation  to  these  things  1  No
man  living,  no  man  that  has  lived
If  Joseph  Smith  knew  anything
about  these  things,  it  was  because
God  revealed  it,  and  He  has  re-
vealed many  great  and  precious
principles  in  which  the  children  of
men  are  interested  pertaining  to
this  world  and  to  the  next,  pertain-
ing to  the  living  and  the  dead,  per-
taining to  time  and  eternity,  and
pertaining  to  all  tilings  associated
with  the  happiness  and  exaltation
of  man.  All  these  things  emanated
from  God.  And  if  Brigham  Young
knew  anything  he  received  his  intelli-
gence from  God  and  from  the
Prophet  of  God ;  and  if  any  of
us  know  anything  we  have  received
it  from  the  same  source.  We  are
told  t  hat  He  is  in  all  things,  through
all  things,  and  about  all  things,  and
by  Him  all  things  exist.  He  is  the
light  of  the  sun  and  the  power  there-
of, by  which  it  was  made  ;  the  light
of  the  moon  and  the  power  thereof,
by  which  it  was  made  ;  and  the
light  of  the  stars  and  the  power
thereof,  by  which  they  were  made  J
and  it  is  the  same  light  that  enlight-
en eth  the  understanding  of  man.
This  may  seem  strange  doctrine  to
some.  We  have  been  taught  to  be-
lieve that  there  was  a  difference
between  mental  and  visual  light  ;
nevertheless  the  above  statement
is  philosophically  true.

In  regard  to  the  earth,  is  it  the
Lord's?  Yes.  We  are  told  that
lie  made  it,  that  he  created  all  things,
visible  and  invisible,  whether  pertain-
ing to  the  earth  or  to  the  heavens.
And  where  did  man  originate  I
As  we  read  it,  he  originated  also  f  rom
God.  Who  formed  man  according
to  the  Bible  record  !  The  Lord.
Whence  came  our  spirits  f  We
are  told  that  God  is  the  God  and
Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh.

No.  3.


to  these  matters  in  tracing
genealogies* Who  was  Seth  i


Then  He  of  coarse  is  interested  in
the  welfare  of  all  flesh  and  all  people
of  all  languages,  of  all  tongues,  of
every  color,  and  of  every  clime*
That  is  the  way  that  I  understand
these  things.  Our  spirits  are  eter-
nal and  emanate  from  God.  So  we,
as  a  people,  have  alwajs  understood
and  do  understand  to-day.  We
possess  our  boding  also,  and  they
also  emanated  from  God.  The
Bible  tells  us  something  in  relation

out
He

was  the  son  of  Adam.  Who  was
Adam  ?  The  son  of  God.  In
another  place  we  are  told  that  "  all
we  are  His  offspring"  —  that  is,
according  to  that,  we  are  all  the  off-
spring of  God.

Now,  this  earth  was  formed  for
a  certain  purpose4,  and  man  was  also
formed  for  a  certain  purpose.  And
there  are  certain  principles  laid  do  wn
— you  will  find  them  in  the  Bible,
in  the  Book  of  Mormon,  in  the  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  and
in  the  various  revelations  that  God
has  made  through  his  servants —
there  are  certain  principles  laid  do  vn
indicating  that  there  are  different
grades  of  men  possessing  varied
powers  and  privileges,  and  that  these
men  have  to  pass  through  a  certain
ordeal — called  by  many  a  probation
— -that  is,  that  we  are  here  in  a
probationary  state,  in  a  state  of  trial;
and  that  as  men  live  and  act  accord-
ing to  the  intelligence  they  are  in
possession  of,- — the  privileges  which
they  enjoy,  and  the  deeds  that  they
perform,  whether  for  good  or  evil,
there  will  be  a  time  of  judgment,
and  that  there  will  be  a  separation
of  these  various  peoples  according
to  the  way  in  which  they  have  lived
ami  acted  upon  the  earth.  Hence
Paul  tells  that  there  are  bodies  celes-
tial and  bodies  terrestrial,  that  there
is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  anotherof  the

Vol.  XXVI.


u


JOURNAL  Oh  DISCOURSED.


moon,  ami  another  of  the  stars,  and
as  one  star  differeth  fro  in  another
star  in  glory,  so  shall  it  also  be  in  the
resurrection,  Joseph  Smith,  in
speaking  on  the  same  subject,  tells
us  that  there  are  bodies  celestial
bodies  t  erres trial,  and  bodies  telestial,
which  agrees  precisely  with  the  re-
marks  made  by  Paul,  only  in  other
language.  Thus  there  are  many
curious  things  associated  with  our
existence  here  upon  the  earth,  which
the  natural  man  does  not  and  can-
not comprehend.  No  man  can  know
the  things  of  Uod,  but  by  the  Spirit
of  God.

Now,  then,  on  this  earth — which
we  call  the  Lord's  vineyard — He  has
sent  forth  His  servants  from  time  to
time  to  gather  people  into  His  fold,
to  gather  out  a  few  here  and  a  few
there  who  would  be  prepared  to  act
and  operate  with  Him,  ami  then,
generally,  these  have  been  a  com-
paratively small  number,  Jesus  said
when  He  was  upon  the  earth  :
"Wide  is  the  gate,  ami  broad  is  the
way  that  leadeth  to  destruction,
and  many  there  he  who  go  in  there-
at:  Because  strait  is  the  gate,  and
narrow  is  the  way,  which  leadeth
unto  life,  and  few  there  be  that  find
it"  And  it  would  seem,  according
to  the  testimonies  we  have  both  In
the  Bible  and  in  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, that  the  Lord  has  taken  great
pains  in  different  ages  of  the  world
to  send  forth  His  servants  to  preach
the  Gospel  to  the  people.  We  find
this  especially  so  in  Noahs  day,  and
in  the  days  of  Enoch.  There  was
a  remarkable  work  performed  then
according  to  the  revelations  which
have  been  given  to  us,  which  will  be
more  fully  developed  when  the  Lord
shall  see  fit  to  reveal  other  things
associate d  therewith.  But  we  learn
that  there  was  a  Church  organized
about  a  *  ours  may  be  ;  we  learn  that
t!iey  went  forth  and  preached  the


Gospel  5  we  lenrn  that  they  were
gathered  together  to  a  place  called
Zion  ;  we  learn  that  the  people  of
Ziou  were  under  the  guidance,  di-
rection and  teaching  of  the  Almighty;
in  order  that  they  might  be  prepared
for  another  Zion  in  the  grand  drama
associated  with  the  dealings  of  God
ami  his  purposes  pertaining  to  this
earth  and  the  heavens.  We  read
that  they  walked  with  God  for  305
years.  We  are  told  in  the  Bible  a
little  short  storv  about  it,  because  it
was  one  of  those  things  that  it  was
not  necessary  that  everybody  should
know.  We  are  told  that  44  Enoch
walked  with  God,  ami  was  not,  for
God  took  him. '  But  there  was
more  about  it  than  that.  Enoch
preached  the  Gospel  to  the  people,
and  so  d  id  hum  I  reds  of  Elders  as
they  are  doing  to-day  ;  and  they
gathered  the  people  together  and
built  up  a  Zion  to  the  Lord,  and
when  Enoch  w;is  not,  but  was  caught
up,  Enoch's  city  was  not,  but  was
caught  up,  and  there  were  certain
things  associated  therewith  that
are  very  peculiar.  Why  were  they
taken  away  from  the  earth?  Because
of  the  corruptions  of  men,  because
of  the  wickedness  of  men,  because
mankind  hat  I  forsaken  God,  and
become  as  broken  cisterns  that
could  hold  no  water,  because  they
were  not  fulfilling  the  measure  of
their  creation,  and  because  it  was
not  proper  that  they  should  live  and
perpetuate  a  race  that  was  so  corrupt
and  abominable*  But  before  this
was  done,  the  righteous,  the  virtu-
ous, the  honorable,  the  pure,  the
upright  were  gathered  together,
and  taught  and  instructed  in  the
things  of  God,  And  what  came
next  t  Why,  the  destruction  of  the
world.  It  was  overflowed,  we  read,
by  the  flood,  What  !  And  all  the
people  destroyed  ?  Y«s,  except  a
very  few,  according  to  the  statement*


GOD'S  DEALINGS  WITH  ENOCH  AND  THE  ANTEDILUVIANS.  33


we  have.  "  Well,"  say  some  of  our  |
wise  men,  "was  not  that  cruel  to
destroy  so  many  people?'  Perhaps
it  would  be  according  to  your  ideas,
but  it  was  not  according  to  the  Lord's
ideas  :  because  lie  looked  upon  men
as  immortal  beings.  These  men
were  accountable  to  their  Maker,
they  had  a  dual  existence,  they  were  ,
associated  wit h  time  and  with  eter-
nity., and  we  might  go  still  farther
anil  say  they  they  were  associated
with  the  past,  the  present  and  the
future,  and  the  Lord  as  a  great  !
cosmogonist,  took  in  the  various
stages  of  man's  existence,  and
operated  for  the  general  l)enefit  of
the  whole.  But  was  it  not  cruel  to
destroy  them  ?  I  think  God  under-
stood precisely  what  He  was  doing.
They  were  His  offspring,  and  He
knowing  things  better  than  they
did,  and  they  having  placed  them-
selves under  the  power  and  dominion
of  Satan,  He  thought  they  had  bet-
ter be  removed  and  another  class  of
men  be  introduced.  Why  1  There
were  other  persons  concerned  besides
them.  There  were  millions  of  spirits
in  the  eternal  worlds  who  would
shrink  from  being  contaminated  by
the  wicked  and  corrupt,  the
debauchee,  the  dishonest,  the
fraudulent,  the  hypocrite,  and  men
who  trampled  upon  th^  ordinances
of  God.  It  miidit  seem  harsh  for
these  men  to  be  swept  off  from  the
face  of  the  earth,  and  not  allowed
to  perpetuate  their  species  thereon  ;
but  what  about  the  justice  of  forcing
these  pure  spirits  to comeaud inhabit
tabernacles  begotten  by  debauched
corrupt  reprobates,  the  imagi  :j
of  whose  heart  was  only  evil,  and
that  continually — what  about  them  1
Had  they  no  rights  that  God  was
bound  to  respect  ?  Certainly  they
had,  and  He  respected  them.  He
cut  off  the  wicked-  What  did  he
do  with  them  % He  did  with  them


as  we  do  with  some  of  the  wicked,
and  that  we  do  not  do  with  a  great
many  otliers — that  is,  they  were  put
in  prison.  Had  He  a  right  to  do
that!  I  think  He  had.  They  were
his  offspring,  I  think  He  had  the
right  to  act  according  to  the  counsel
of  His  own  will  At  any  rate  he  took
the  liberty  of  doing  it.  And  who
was  there  to  say,  "  Why  doest  thou
this  f  First  He  called  upon  them
to  forsake  their  wickedness,  but  they
would  not,  and  a  while  after  He  des-
troyer I  them.  Had  He  a  right  to  do
it  I  He  had  and  He  sent  them  to
hell.  Some  people  talk  about  roast-
ing there.  That  is  something  of
man's  getting  up.  He  sent  them  to
prison,  and  they  were  confined  there,
and  when  the  proper  time,  came,
Jesus,  when  He  was  put  to  death  in  the
flesh,  was  quickened  by  the  Spirit,
and  went  and  preached  to  those
spirits  that  sometime  were  disobe-
dient iu  the  days  of  Noah.  Perhaps
they  had  time  enough  during  their
stay,  to  reflect  upon  their  acts,
and  to  become  a  little  steadier,
and  to  reflect  upon  Got  I  and  His
laws.  At  any  rate  Jesus  went  and
preached  to  those  spirits  in  prison.
What,  then,  became  of  the  inhab-
itants of  the  world  1  There  were
a  few  who  weut  through  the  narrow
gate  that  Jesus  spoke  of,  and  they
were  caught  up  and  Zion  with  them,
]  and  the  Lord  is  taking  care  of  them
■  iu  his  own  way.  They  will  be  dealt
with  according  to  His  purposes  and
designs,  and  be  numbered  among
His  jewels.  The  otheis,  as  I  have
said,  were  cast  into  prison,  and  there
they  remained  about  2,500  years.
It  was  a  pretty  long  imprisonment.
I  Still  the  Lord  had  a  right  to  manip-
ulate these  things  as  He  pleased,  ami
He  so  manipulated  them,  and  al-
though this  time  seems  very  longt
yet  iu  the  eternities  to  come  it  would
only  be  a  comparatively  short  period ;


36


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ami  if  they  needed  a  schooling  of
this  kind  He,  as  their  Father  and
Creator,  was  the  proper  one  to
adjudge  their  punish  in nt.

Sometime  after  this  there  Mere
certain  cities  that  had  become  very
corrupt,  such  as  Sodom  and  Gomor-
rah, and  the  Lord  had  a  reckoning
with  them,  handled  them  in  His  own
way  according  to  His  best  judgment.
Abraham  was  a  man  who  feared  God,
and  God  said  :  "Shall  I  hide  from
Abraham  that  thing  which  I  do/*
So  He  informed  Abraham  about  it.
Abraham  plead  with  the  Lord,
"  Why,"  said  lie,  "  Lot  lives  down
there,  a  nephew  of  mine,  and  a  pretty
good  sort  of  a  man,  and  there  may
be  a  great  many  others/'  The  Lord
said:  "If  I  find  in  Sodom  fifty
righteous,  within  the  city,  then  1
will  spare  all  the  place  for  their
sakes."  Abraham,  hewever,  thought
this  was  more  than  lie  could  pick  out.
I  expect  there  was  a  crowd  of  mean
"  cusses"  among  them  as  we  have
among  us.  And  finally  the  Lord
said  that  if  ten  righteous  could
be  found  in  the  city,  He  would  not
destroy  it  for  ten's  sake.  But  ten
righteous  people  could  not  be  found,
and  therefore  the  city  had  to  be
destroyed.  W hat !  All  the  people !
Yes,  all  the  people.  Bui  before  they
were  destroyed  he  sent  two  angels
and  they  brought  out  Lot,  his  wife
and  daughters.  His  wife  was  a  lit-
tle tinctured  with  geutilism  :  she
looked  back,  and  the  Scriptures  tell
us  she  was  turned  into  a  pillar  of  salt.
When  they  got  away,  brimstone  and
fire  fell  upon  the  cities  of  Sodom
and  Gomorrah  and  destroyed  them,
Tli us  the  Lord  has  taken  the  privi-
lege in  many  instances  of  correcting
mankind.  He  used  the  children  of
Israel  to  kill  the  people  who  dwelt
in  the  laud  of  Canaan,  and  directed
them  to  spare  them  not,  because  of
their  wickedness,  to  cut  them  off  root


and  branch.  He  raised  up  one  na-
tion and  put  down  another,  and
raised  up  one  king  and  put  dowa
another.

There  were  times  when  the  iniqui-
ty of  these  people  was  not  yet  full-
In  Abraham's  day  the  Lord  told  that
Patriarch  that  he  should  go  to  Ins
fathers  in  peace,  but  in  the  fourth
generation  his  posterity  should
"  come  hither  again  :  for  the  iniqui-
ty of  the  Amornes  is  not  yet  full
by  the  days  of  Moses  they  appear  to
have  filled  the  cup  of  their  iniquity,
for  he  enjoined  upon  the  Israelites,
thou  shalt  utterly  destroy  them,"  "as
the  Lonl  thy  God  hath  commanded
thee.1'  So  that  the  Lord  takes  upon
Himself  to  manipulate  the  nations
according  to  the  counsels  of  His
own  will,  and  as  they  all  of  them
have  to  do  with  eternity  as  well  as
time,  He  adjudges  them  according  to
the  eternal  laws  ami  principles  by
which  He  is  governed  ;  and  hence  we'
are  told  that  eternal  punishment  is
God's  punishment,  and  everlasting
punishment  isGod's  punishment, thus
men  and  nations  are  adjudged  by
the  Almighty,  according  to  the
infinite  ai  d  eternal  laws  and  princi-
ples which  exist  in  the  heavens,
and  with  a  reference  to  eternal  dura*
tion  and  not  according  to  the  finite,
erratic  and  limited  ideas  of  men.
Jonah  was  sent  to  the  city  of  Nine-
vah,  lo  tell  the  people  to  repent,  and
that  if  they  did  not  repent  they  would
all  be  destroyed.  But  they  listened
to  the  voice  of  the  Prophet.  They
clothed  themselves  in  sackcloth  and
sat  in  ashes  and  repented  before  the
Lord,  and  then  the  Lord  forgave
them.  Why  was  it  that  a  great
many  people  were  thus  judged  by
the  Almighty!  It  was  because  of
their  iniquity.  The  same  thing
prevailed  upon  this  continent.  The
spirit  of  evil  and  contention,  war
and  strife,  existed  amongtheancienfc


THE  LORD'S  WORK

Jaredites,  when  they  forsook  their
God,  and  violated  his  laws*  They
fought  one  with  another.  They
were  maddened  by/ury,  even  that
fury  which  was  lit  up  by  the  fires  of
hell  ami  by  the  spirit  of  fiends,  until
they  completely  destroyed  one
another.  So  it  waa  with  the  Nephites
who  had  departed  from  the  law  of
God,  and  trampled  under  foot  his  j
ordinances-  They  and  the  Lamau-
ites  were  stirred  up  one  against
another,  until  at  last  they  gathered
together  thousands  and  tens  of  thou-
sands and  hundreds  of  thousands
of  fighting  men — they  were  four
years  in  gathering  tiieir  armies,  and
they  fought  and  shed  blood  and
spread  destruction  and  death  wher-
ever they  went.  We  can  read  the
account  of  it  in  the  Book  of  Mormon,
and  I  do  not  propose  to  repeat  it
here  this  evening.

Now,  how  is  it  pertaining  to  the
last  days  1  As  it  was  in  the  days  of
Noah,  so  shall  it  be  in  the  days  of
the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.
As  it  was  in  the  days  of  Lot,  so
shall  it  also  be  in  the  days  of  the  I
coming  of  the  Sou  of  Man.  In  what
respect]  In  the  days  of  Xoah  did
they  have  the  Gospel  preached  unto
them  f{  Yes,  Did  the  people  gener-
ally reject  it  ?  Yes.  Did  the  people
gather  gather  together  and  build
up  a  Zionl  Yes.  How  is  it  in
these  days  !  The  Lord  has  revealed  ;
his  Gospel  to  us  as  he  did  to  them.
He  has  sent  forth  the  words  of  life,
and  is  sending  them  to  the  nations
of  the  earth.  Hundreds  of  Elders
are  going  to-day,  and  taking  their  j
lives  in  their  hands,  and  some  of
them  have  to  sacrifice  their  lives]
and  others,  in  this  land  of  liberty,
because  they  will  be  virtuous  and  i
keep  the  commands  of  God,  are  to-
day weltering  in  prison*  Woe  !  to
those  who  have  a  hand  in  these
things.  I  tell  you  and  I  tell  them,
as  a  servant  of  God,  in  the  name  of ;


:0  BE  CARRIED  ON,  3J

God,  that  he  will  be  after  them,  and
they  shall  suffer  worse  than  that
which  they  inflict  upon  innocent,
pure  and  virtuous  men.  Now,  I
bear  testimony  to  this,  and  you  will
know  it  when  it  comes  to  pass,
Woe  !  to  them  that  fight  against
Zion,  fur  God  will  fight  against
them— hypocrites  !  who  are  wallow-
ing in  filth iness, corruption,  adultery,
fornication  and  deception,  in  the
name  of  virtue  are  seeking  to
destroy  a  virtuous  people,  and
those  who  date  honor  and  obey
the  commandments  of  God.

Then,  in  regard  to  the  work  in
which  we  are  engaged.  Will  it  go  on?
I  tell  you  it  will.  Will  Zion  be  built
upl  I  tell  you  it  will.  Will  the
Zion  that  Enoch  built  up,  descend?
It  most  assuredly  will,  and  this  that
we  are  building  up  will  ascend,  and
the  two  will  meet  and  the  peoples
thereof  will  fall  on  each  other's  necks,
and  embrace  each  other.  So  frays
the  word  of  God  to  us.  Will  we  go
on  with  our  work  !  With  the  help
of  the  Lord  we  will.  He  has  told  us
to  do  a  work,  and  we  will  try  to  carry
it  out  -  we  of  the  First  Presidency,
we  of  the  Twelve,  we  of  the  Seven-
ties,  we  of  the  Elders,  we  of  the
High  Pries  ds,  we  of  the  Presidents
of  Stakes,  we  of  the  Bishops,  and
we  of  the  Holy  Priesthood  in  all  its
various  forms.  By  the  help  of  the
Lord,  we  will  try,  first,  to  purify
ourselves,  to  purify  our  households,
to  get  rid  of  covetousness,  deception
and  fraud  of  every  kind,  to  act,
honorably  before  Uod  and  before  all
men,  and  to  love  not  the  world,
nor  the  things  that  arc  in  the  world ;
for  if  any  man  love  the  world,  the
love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him*
Anything  that  we  may  have  or  pos-
sess conies  from  God  j  and  if  we
are  exalted,  if  we  possess  the  good
things  of  the  world — which  I  tell
you  in  the  name  of  Israel's  God  we
shall,  in  spite  of  all  men  and  all


38


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


their  influences,  for  the  people  of
Zion  will  be  the  richest  of  all  people.
This  is  in  accordance  with  the  Scrip-
tures, The  Scripture  tells  us  :  14  Fur
brass  I  will  bring  gold,  and  for  iron
I  will  bring  silver,  and  for  wood  brass,
and  for  stones  iron  :  I  will  also  make
thy  officers  peace,  and  thine  exactors
righteousness.  Violence  shall  nomore
be  heard  in  the  land,  wasting
nor  destruction  within  thy  bor-
ders,"

The  Lord  has  gathered  us
together  that  we  may  learn  His
law  ;  that  we  may  be  ins  true  ted
in  the  principles  of  truth,  right-
eousness ami  virtue  ;  that  we  may
be  prepared  to  honor  and  magnify
our  calling,  and  glorify  our  God,

Well,  what  would  you  have  us  do
when  men  are  so  corrupt — when  it
is  enough  for  a  man  here,  because
he  has  the  kindness  to  take  some
chicken s  for  a  poor  woman  to  sell  for
her — when  that  is  enough  evidence
to  convict  him  that  he  is  an  adul-
terer, and  must  be  placed  under  bonds
and  subjected  to  trial  and  punish-
ment What  do  they  do  with  their
Christian  whores  that  they  have  in
our  midst?  Where  do  they  come
from!  They  are  not  our  institu-
tion. But  they  are  protected,  they
can  vote,  they  can  do  as  they  please,
no  process  can  be  introduced  against
them,  for  they  are  a  part  of  their
institution,  and  must  be  protected  ;
but  anything  b<  in  the  marriage  re-
lation," you  know,  is  different  from
that

Well,  what  shall  we  do  ]  We  will
treat  all  decent  men  very  well,  and  ,
we  will  give  tlie  others  a  wide  berth,  I  the  living  God,  who  is  the  Savior  of
These  corrupt  and  villainous  men  all  men,  especially  of those  that


not  try  to  make  these  affairs  any
worse.  We  will  treat  them  as  well
as  we  can.  There  are  thousands
and  tens  of  thousands  who
their  meanness  and  corruption
honorable  Americans,  thousands  and
tens  of  thousands  of  them  who  are
ashamed  of  the  meanness  and  cor-
ruption of  these  wretches ;  and  there
are  thousands  of  men  abroad  who
have  just  the  same  feeling,  I  saw
and  conversed  with  a  member  of  the
British  Parliament  recently,  and
in  speaking  about  Rudger  Clawson's
case,  said  he  :  "  It  is  one  of  the
most  infamous  things  I  ever  heard
of,  and  if  you  will  permit  me  I  will
go  to  the  President  of  the  United
States  and  ask  him  to  pardon  that
man/'  "  Why,  yes,"  said  I,  "you
have  my  permission  certain  ly.*
That  is  the  way  a  British  member
of  Parliament  talked  about  the
acts  and  doings  of  some  of  our  offi-
cials here  right  Hi  our  midst  Yet,
notwithstanding  the  wickedness,
the  corruption,  venom,  the  hypocrisy,
and  the  deception  that  is  practiced
here,  right  under  our  noses,  we  will
stand  still  and  eee  the  salvation  of
God,  and  God  in  His  own  time  will
remove  these  vindictive  men  out  of
their  places.  Meantime  w*e  will
continue  to  fear  God,  and  work
righteousness  ;  we  will  cleave  to
the  truth,  live  our  religion,  be  hum-
hie  before  God,  train  up  our  children
in  purity,  virtue  and  holiness,  and
set  ourselves  against  everything
that  is  corrupt,  hypocritical,  fraudu-
lent, and  contrary  to  the  principles
of  righteousness. We  will  trust  in


who  are  seeking  to  trample  under
foot  the  rights  of  free  men  and  de-
prive them  of  everything  in  life  that
is  wrorth  having,  will  suffer  the  bond*
age  they  are  seeking  to  bring  upon
us, I  tell  you  that,  and  we  need


believe.  We  will  do  right,  we  wilt
treat  all  men  right,  and  we  will  main-
tain every  institution  of  our  country
that  is  according  to  the  Constitution
of  the  United  States,  and  the  laws
thereof,  and  we  will  sustain  them^


JSECOND  COMING  OF  OUR  SAVIOR,


39


By  an<t  by,  you  will  find  they  will
tear  the  Constitution  to  shreads,  as
they  have  begun  now;  they  won't
have  to  begin  ;  they  have  started
long  ago  to  rend  the  Constitution
of  our  country  in  pieces  \  and  in
doing  so  they  are  letting  loose  and
encouraging  a  principle  winch  will
re  act  upon  themselves  with  terrible
consequences  ;  for  if  law-makers
and  administrators  can  afford  to
trample  upon  justice,  equity,
and  the  Constitution  of  this
country,  they  will  find  thousands
and  tens  of  thousands  who  are
willing  to  follow  in  their  wake  in


the  demolition  of  the  rights  of  man;
and  the  destruction  of  all  principles
of  justice,  and  the  safeguards  of
the  nation  ;  hut  we  will  stand  by
and  maintain  its^priuciples  ami  the
rights  of  all  men  of  every  color,  andf
every  clime  ;  we  will  cleave  to  the
truth,  live  our  religion  anil  keep  the
commandments  of  God,  and  Clod
will  bless  us  in  time  ami  through-
out the  eternities  that  are  to
come.

God  bless  you  and  lead  you  in
the  paths  of  life,  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT GEORGE Q.  CANNON,

.  Deluded  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  Ciiy,  Sunday  Afternoon,  Dec,  ?th,h

1884.


REPORTED  BY  JOHN  IBVIHE.


the  second  coming  of  our  savior— preaching  ok  the  gospel  and
the  siuns  following — the  gathering — hatred  of  the  world
toward  the  latter-da v  saints  -no  power  can  overthrow
the  work  of  liuu — exhortations  to  faithfulness.


The  speaker  commenced  by  reading
the  24th  chapter  of  Matthew  ;  alter
which  he  spoke  as  follows  :

1  have  rea<l  this  chapter  to  call
yonr  attention  to  the  predictions  of
the  Son  of  God  concerning  the  last
days,  and  the  circumstances  which
would  surround  His  people  previous


to  His  making  His  second  appear-
ance on  the  earth.  Great  interest
has  heen  manifested  al  different
periods  by  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  who  have  believed  in  Jesus,
respecting  his  second  coming.  Great
desires  have  been  manifested  from
time  U>  time  to  understand  the  signs


40


JOURNAL  G*  DISCOURSES


of  His  ail  vent,  and  some  have  gone
so  far  as  to  predict  the  day  and  even
the  exact  time  when  He  would  make
hi&  appearance.  According  to  the
revelations  that  we  have  received
upon  this  subject,  the  day  and  the
hour  are  not  revealed  unto  man,
neither  is  it  probable  that  they  will
be,  but  we  have  been  told  that  that
time  is  near  at  hand,  and  that  it  is
our  duty  as  the  people  of  God,  to
prepare  ourselves  for  that  great  and
terrible  day.  The  message  which
the  Elders  of  this  Church  were  com
missioned  to  declare  unto  the  inhab-
itants of  the  earth  54  years  ago,  and
which tliev  have  .since  that  time

fe<

been  declaring  wherever  they  have
gone  lt|  that  the  time  is  near  at  hand
for  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ
to  make  His  second  appearance,  and
the  Killers  of  this  Church  have  been
sent  with  a  warning  message  lo  all
the  nations  of  the  earth,  to  deelaie
unto  them  that  the  hour  of  God's
judgment  is  near  at  hand  ;  that  the
time  for  the  fulfillment  of  the  pre-
diction of  the  holy  Prophets  has
arrived,  and  that  it  is  the  duty  of
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  to  pre-
pare themselves  for  the  great  events
that  ate  about  to  take  place  connect
ed  with  tht  last  days.  And  in  order
that  they  might  the  better  prepare
themselves,  the  servants  of  Uod  are
commanded  to  call  upon  the  people
together  out  from  the  various  nations
where  they  are  living  to  a  place  that
God  has  designate*  1  as  a  place  of
gathering  for  His  elect,  where  they
might  prepare  themselves  tor  the
coming  of  our  Lord  ami  Savior.
This  was  the  message  which  the  El-
ders were  bent  forth  to  bear  54  years
ago,  and  from  that  time  until  the
present  they  have  been,  tothe  extent
of  their  ability,  proclaiming  it  to  the
various  nations  to  which  they  have
had  access,  warning  them  in  meek-
ness and  in  humility,  that  the  time


was  near  at  hand  for  the  fulfillment
of  all  that  had  been  spoken  by  the
mouths  of  the  servants  of  God  in
ancient  days  concerning  the  last
da) ft.  Yet,  as  I  have  said,  we  have
hail  no  authority  given  unto  us,  no
mesage  to  designate  the  hour  nor
the  day,  nor  even  the  year  when  the
Lord  would  make  His  appearance.
That  has  been  kept  by  the  Father.
The  angels  did  not  know  the  hour
nor  the  day  when  our  Savior  spoke
the  words  that  1  have  read  in  your
hearing;  and  if  the  angels  have
since  been  informed  of  it.  we  have
not  been  advised  to  that  effect.  We
have  been  told  that  the  time  is  near
at  hand,  and  as  an  evidence  of  the
near  approach  of  this  event  we  have
seen  the  fulfillment  of  many  things
that  were  told  should  take  place.
This  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,  Jesus
said,  had  to  be  pleached  unto  all
nations  as  a  witness — the  same  Gos-
pel that  was  preached  by  Him  and
His  disciples  when  they  were  upon
the  earth — that  Gospel  of  the  King-
dom had  to  be  preached  unto  all
nations  before  the  end  should  come.
And  it  is  being  preached  in  that  man*
ner  now.  The  same  principles,  the
.same  doctrines,  the  same  plan  of  sal-
vation, the  same  gifts  and  graces,
the  same  organization  of  the  Church,
the  same  authority  that  was  in  the
Church  in  ancient  days — these
having  been  restored  are  now  being
preached  as  a  wi  tness  by  the  Elders  of
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints  unto  all  nations,  in  order
that  every  inhabitant  of  the  earth
should  be  warned,  that  every  man
should  hear  the  glad  tidings  of  salva-
tion it i  his  own  tongue,  and  have  the
opportunity  of  embracing  or  reject-
ing the  same,  and  of  being  gathered
out  and  numbered  with  the  people
of  God,

I  need  not  say  to  you,  my  breth-
ren and  sisters,  who  are  familiar  with


SIGNS  OF  THE  SECOND  ADVENT  BEING  FULFILLED


41


this  work,  that  God  has  accom-
panied the  preaching  of  this  Gospel
by  signs  following.  You  know  this.
You  are  living  witness  yourselves
of  the  power  of  God,  of  the  mani-
festation of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  of
the  gifts  that  pertain  thereto.
This  whole  people,  called  Latter-day
Saints,  living  in  these  mountains,
from  north  to  south,  from  east  to  west,
are  a  body  of  living  witnesses  of  the
truth  of  that  which  1  say  respecting
the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  its  gifts  upon  the  people  ;  for
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  have
they  been  gathered  ;  by  the  manifes-
tations of  the  power  of  God  have
they  wended  their  way  from  the
various  lands  they  formerly  dwelt  in,
to  this  land — impelled  by  the  Spirit
of  God  to  do  this,  iti  a  most  extra-
ordinary manner,  ready  to  abandon
homes,  ready  to  forsake  their  frit-mis,
ready  to  sever  their  connection  with
all  that  was  near  and  dear  to  them
previous  to  their  reception  of  the
Gospel,  What  a  host  of  witnesses
could  rise  up  if  they  could  be  gath-
ered together  throughout  these
mountains  !  men,  women  and
children,  who  in  their  various  lan-
guages—  every  language  almost  of
Europe,  and  I  see  here  some  from  the
Pacific  Islands,  others  from  fur  off
Africa,  others  from  far  oft'  Australia,
would  testily,  had  they  the  opportu-
nity, to  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit
and  power  of  God  upon  them  in  the
lands  where  they  dwelt  when  they
heard  the  Gospel  and  obeyed  it,  as
taught  to  them  by  the  Elders  of  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints,  In  this  manner  God
has  borne  witness  to  the  inhabitants
of  the  ear tli,  and  is  stili  bearing
witness  to  them  wherever  they
receive  His  Gospel,  whenever  they
bow  in  humility  and  submission  to
His  requirements,  whether  in  the
United  States,  in  Canada,  in  Mexico,


in  Central  or  South  America,  in
Europe,  in  Asia,  in  Africa,  or  in
any  Islands  of  the  sea — wherever
the  Elders  of  this  Church  go,  carry*
ing  this  message  of  salvation,  and
the  people  receive  it,  they  receive
with  it  a  testimony  from  God,  not
given  by  man  nor  by  man's  wisdom,
nor  through  man's  power,  but
through  the  power  of  the  Eternal
God,  —that  testimony  resting  down
upon  them  in  fullness,  burning  within
them,  impelling  them  to  do  that
which  they  never  contemplated
doing  before, — that  is,  impelling
them  to  forsake  all  their  old  associa-
tions, and  sever  the  ties  that  had
heretofore  bound  them  to  their
kindred  and  their  homes,  and  to
come  to  the  land  which  God  has
designated  as  the  place  to  which  they
should  gather  In  this  manner  God
is  fulfilling,  as  I  have  r>aid,  the  testi-
mony of  His  ancient  servants,  for
John  the  Kevelator,  testified  that
there  should  be  a  cry  go  forth  unto
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  to  come
out  from  the  midst  of  Babylon.
Jesus  says  in  this  chapter  that  the
elect  should  be  gathered  from  the
four  quarters  of  the  earth,  from  the
four  winds  of  heaven  they  should  be
gathered  together,  and  this  prepara-
tory to  His  coming.  And  that
which  I  have  read  in  your  hearing
is  abundantly  fid  filled  this  day  in
our  sight  and  to  our  knowledge.
Speaking  of  His  disciples  and  to
His  disciples,  He  said  :  41  Then
shall  they  deliver  you  up  to  be
afflicted,  and  shall  kill  you  :  and  ye
shall  be  hated  of  all  nations  for  my
name's  sake."  If  this  is  not
fulfilled  this  day  in  our  sight  and
in  our  hearing,  then  when  can  it  be
f  ulfilled  ?  How  can  it  be  fulfilled  t
To-day  here  is  a  people  gathered  in
these  mountains,  brought  from  the
nations  of  the  earth,  as  I  have  said,
dwelling  here  in  peace  and  in  quiet-


ness,  free  from  strife,  free  from  litiga-
tion, free  from  war,  free  from  every-
thing that  disturbs  ami  annoys,  in
every  settlement  from  north  to  south,
from  east  to  west,  wh  erever  they  have
formed  themselves  into  a  community,
living  in  the  possession  of  unex-
ampled peace.  Take  the  settlements
of  this  people  in  Colorado  ;  visit
those  in  Arizona  and  New  Mexico  ;
go  north  and  travel  through  Utah
and  visit  Idaho — go  where  you  will,
wherever  they  have  settled,  you  will
find  a  community  dwelling  in  peace
and  in  quietness,  loving  one  another,
obeying  the  law  of  Goth  striving  to
keep  His  commandments,  seeking
to  oveieome  evil,  endeavoring  to
live  themselves  in  accordance  with
His  requirements,  and  to  teach
their  children  to  do  likewise.  These
are  the  characteristics  of  the  settle-
ments of  the  Latter-day  Saints
throughout  all  these  mountains.
So  far  as  we  are  concerned  ourselves,
we  have  scarcely  any  need  of  lawyers.
They  are  very  necessary  as  convey-
ancers, they  are  very  necessary  in
drawing  up  papers,  in  making  wills,
in  making  deeds,  in  forming  con-
tracts, in  doing  business  of  this
character ;  but  bo  far  as  the  practice
of  the  law  in  litigation  is  concerned,
there  is  no  need  for  their  services
in  any  of  the  settlements  of  the
Latter-day  Saints.  The  law  of  God
to  us  when  obeyed  is  sufficient  to
lift  us  above  these  petty  strifes  and
difficulties.  We  should  live,  if  we
do  not.  in  a  purer  and  higher  atmos-
phere, in  a  region  elevated  far  above
that  which  is  occupierl  by  people  of
this  character.  If  you  travel  through
the  settlements  where  the  Latter-
day  Saints  have  control  you  will  not
find  drunkenness  prevalent,  in  fact,
if  they  be  true  Latter-day  Saints,
there  will  he  no  drunkenness.  You
will  not  hear  the  name  of  God  blas-
phemed where Latter-day  Saints


live  ;  you  will  not  hear  quarrelling;
you  will  not  hear  of  adulteries  and
seductions ;  you  will  not  witness
Sabbath-breaking;  but  you  will
see  the  people  living  in  the  observ-
ance of  the  laws  of  God,  a  moral,
pure,  peaceable,  orderly,  people.
These  are  the  characteristics  of  the
communities  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
where  they  live  according  to  the
requirements  of  their  holy  religion.
And  though  we  are  far  from  being
perfect  in  these  respects,  though
there  are  many  things  to  complain
of  and  to  find  fault  with  among  usf
nevertheless  these  characteristics  do
prevail  to  an  extent  that  cannot  be
found  in  other  communities  of  the
same  size  and  in  the  same  circum-
stances. And  yet  these  words  that
I  have  read  in  your  hearing  are  this
day  fulfilled,  11  They  shall  deliver
you  up  to  be  affile  ted/1  said  Jesus,
li  and  shall  kill  you"  (this  has  been
and  is  our  fate)  44  and  ye  shall  be
hated  of  all  nations  for  my  name's
sake/'  Most  singularly  has  this  pre-
diction been  and  is  being  fulfilled  in
regard  to  us.  There  is  not  another
community  on  ihe  face  of  the  earth
to-day  who  are  hated  by  all  nations
for  the  sake  of  Jesus  as  are  the  Latter-
day  Saints.  Go  where  yon  will
throughout  our  own  nation  ;  go  where-
you  will  throughout  Christendom;
travel  among  all  people  and  ask  them
concerning  the  Latter-day  Saints,  and
they  will  tell  you  that  they  hate
them,  that  they  are  a  people  to  be
hated,  that  they  are  a  people  that
should  be  destroyed,  that  they  should
not  be  tolerated,  and  that  measures
should  be  taken  for  their  entire  ex-
tirpation from  the  earth.  One  of
the  most  remarkable  features  con-
nected with  this  work  is  this  hatred
that  exists  in  the  minds  of  men  and
women  concerning  it.  I  look  upon
it  as  one  of  the  greatest  and  most
striking  evidences  of  the  truth  of


HATED  FOR  OUR  RELIGION


the  words  of  the  Savior,  and  of  the
divinity  of  this  work.  There  is  no
other  people  with  whom  I  am  ac-
quainted who  so  strikingly  fulfill  the
words  of  the  Savior,  and  the  promises
which  He  made  unto  His  disciples
respecting  the  consequences  of  obey-
ing His  doctrine  as  do  the  Latter-day
Saints.  And  it  is  not  for  their  wick-
edness, because  when  their  lives  are
compared  with  the  lives  of  others,
they  stand  out  in  striking  contrast
with  them.  This  is  admitted  even
by  our  enemies.  They  give  us  credit
for  not  being  adulterers,  they  give
us  credit  for  not  being  seducers  ;
they  give  us  credit  for  not  being
thieves ;  they  give  us  credit  for
keeping  our  word ;  they  give  us  credit
for  being  honest  in  our  dealings.
To-day,  our  bitterest  enemies  in  this
city,  the  men  who  hate  us  the  most*
who  would  destroy  us  if  they  had
the  power,  never  dare  say  that  we
are  dishonest  in  our  dealings.  We
keep  our  word.  We  abstain  from
drunkenness.  We  abstain  from
gambling.  We  do  not  support
houses  of  ill  fame.  We  maintain
order  and  peace  wherever  we  go.
But  we  are  accused  of  many  crimes.
We  are  accused  of  being  guilty  of
mauy  misdeeds.  But  when  the
proof  is  asked  for  it  is  something
that  has  happened  some  time  ago,
something  that  somebody  else  knows.

We  can  be  truthfully  accused  of
nothing  except  this:  that  we  mam-
wives,  that  we  sustain  them  honor-
ably, and  that  we  keep  our  children
and  train  them  up  in  the  fear  of  God,
and  make  good  citizens  of  them.
This  is  the  head  and  front  of  our
offending.  It  is  not  truthfully  said
that  we  prostitute  women  ;  of  that
she  is  degraded  here  by  making  her
a  prey  to  lust,  it  is  not  said  we
destroy  our  offspring.  No  such
charges  are  ma<le  against  us.  But
the  crime  is  that  we  honorably  take


wives  in  wedlock  and  rear  children,
and  bring  them  up  legitimately,
teaching  them  the  principles  df
righteousness  as  we  understand
them.  We  could  vote  to-day — you
men  who  are  disfranchised,  and  you
women  who  are  disfranchised — you*
could  vote  to  day  if  you  were  adul-
terers and  adulteresses.  Yes,  in
this  land  of  ours,  in  this  Territory
of  Utah  you  could  go  to  the  poll&
and  cast  your  vote  if  you  lived  out-
side of  wedlock,  if  you  prostituted
yourselves,  if  you  made  women  the
victims  of  vile  lust,  if  you  trampled
upon  everything  that  is  holy  and
pure  in  the  sight  of  God  and  of  good
men,  you  would  not  be  disfranchised.
You  could  cast  your  vote.  You
could  hold  office — that  is,  you  could
be  a  candidate  foroffice,  and  if  elected
you  could  hold  it.  Therefore,  it  is
not  for  adultery,  it  is  not  for  reduc-
tion, it  is  not  for  crimes  of  this  kind
that  we  are  hated,  but  it  is  because
in  righteousness  and  in  truth,  with-
out deception  and  without  fraud,  we
honorably  and  in  the  sight  of  flay —
that  is  we  have  done  so  in  times  past
— married  wives  in  accordance  with
what  we  believed  to  be  the  command
of  our  Great  Creator.

We  are  hated  of  all  men  and  of
all  nations  for  Christ's  sake.  It  is
because  of  our  religion.  If  we  dis-
carded the  forms  of  religion  ;  if  we
did  not  attach  importance  to  the
solemnization  of  the  marriage  ordi-
nance ;  if  it  were  done  in  any  other
name,  or  in  any  other  form,  or  for
any  other  purpose,  it  would  pass,
doubtless,  as  it  does  iu  other  society,
without  being  challenged  or  receiv-
ing particular  condemnation.  But
it  is  admitted — I  have  been  told  it
hundreds  of  times — that  it  is  because
you  make  this  religion.  *  That  is
why  we  hate  it,"  they  say.  "  That
is  why  we  will  legislate  against  it.
If  you  had  not  made  it  religion  we


44


JOURNAL OK  DISUOUUSKS.


would  not  care  anything  about  it/'
When  I  have  plead  with  members
of  Congress  in  Washington,  and
told  them  this  institution  was  part ;
of  our  religion,  they  have  said  :  j
*f  Yes,  Mr.  Cannon,  that  U  the  diffi-
culty* It  is  because  you  make  it  |
religion  that  we  want  to  legislate  i
against  it. If  you  did  nut  make  it
religion  there  would  not  be  that 1
objection  to  it  that  there  is. 11  There-  [
fore,  as  1  have  said,  the  words  of  j
the  Savior  are  fulfilled.  Because
we  make  this  the  religion  of  Jesus,  j
because  we  profess  to  be  the  follow-  J
ers  of  Jesus,  and  because  of  being
His  followers,  therefore,  as  Jesus
said,  "  you  shall  be  hated  of  all  na-
tions lor  my  name's  sake  "  not  for
anything  else,  but  for  the  sake  of
the  name  of  our  Lord  and  Savior
Jesus  Christ,  whose  religion  we  have
espoused,  whose  followers  w«  claim
to  be,  and  because  of  being  his  fol-
lowers we  do  as  we  are  doing-  Host
signally,  then,  has  this  prediction
■been  fulfilled  in  our  sight  and  hear*
iug. One  of  the  most  remarkable
features  of  the  present  age  is  the
hatred  that  is  manifested  against
this  people. It  might  be  that  as  a
people  of  uur  numbers,  situated  as
we  ate,  so  far  removed  from  other
-communities  in  these  remote  regions.
Blight  escape  observation,  and  that  j
we  might  be  lei t  to  pursue  our  own  |
course,  quietly,  so  long  as  we  did  not
intrude  upon  our  neighbors.  We
came  to  this  land  a  baud  of  religious
-exiles  seeking  a  home  amid  these  f
mountain  wilds,  content  to  live  here  j
if  we  had  only  bread  and  water,  if
we  could  get  sufficient  to  sustain  1
life;  for  the  sake  of  that  peace  and
quiet  which  was  denied  us  in  the  ;
lands  whence  we  were  driven  we
ivere  content  to  endure  all  the  hard-
ships that  could  possibly  be  en  coun-
tered in  this  mountain  region,  Jf
we  could  only  sustain  life  we  would


have  been  satisfied  with  our  home
here.  And  we  thought  we  might
escape  persecution.  We  thought
we  had  got  so  far  away  that  we  could
worship  our  God  henceforth  without
let  or  hindrance.  We  did  not  wish
to  injure  others*  We  did  not  wish
to  force  our  religion  upon  others.
We  had  no  design  upon  any  human
being,  no  design  to  injure  any  soul
upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  Our
hearts  were  tilled  with  the  desire
that  others  might  comprehend  the
truth  as  we  comprehend  it,  that
they  might  partake  of  the  blessings
of  the  Gospel  as  we  had  received
them,  and  to  do  this — that  is  to
make  them  familiar  with  these
things — we  were  willing  to  spend
our  lives  in  traveling  from  land  to
land  and  from  continent  to  continent,
without  purse  and  without  scrip,
preaching,  in  humility  and  in  meek-
ness, the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,
as  we  understand  it  as  a  witness
unto  all  nations  before  the  end  should
come.  We  went  from  land  to  land
preaching  this  Gospel,  calling  upon
the  inhabitants  <>f  the  earth  to  listen
to  our  message,  and  tins  was  the  ex-
tent of  our  wrong  doing.  We  had
not,  as  I  say,  any  designs  against
the  peace  of  any  soul  upon  the  face
of  the  earth,  but  our  hearts  over-
flowed with  a  strong  and  unquench-
able desire  that  they  might  also
receive  the  Gospel  and  the  blessings
of  the  Gospel  as  we  had  received
them.  That  Gospel  has  brought  to  us
happiness,  peace,  joy  unexampled.
That  Gospel  had  tilled  us  with  a
foretaste  of  heaven.  Th rough  that
Gospel  we  had  received  the  Holy
Ghost  and  the  gilts  thereof,  and  be-
cause of  that  precious  gift  we  were
able  to  endure  all  the  hardships  and
all  the  persecutions  that  the  wicked
might  see  fit  to  bring  upon  us  for
the  sake  of  our  religion.  We  were
willing  to  do  this.  We  rejoiced  in  it.


We  knew  it  was  more  precious  than
life  itself,  and  many  have  been  wil-
ling to  lay  down  their  lives  for  the
sake  of  the  Gospel  We  had  left
everything  that  men  held  dear  upoD
earth  for  the  sake  of  this  great  truth
that  God  had  revealed  to  us,  and
our  souls  burned  with  an  overpower-
ing desire  that  others  might  also  par-
take of  the  same  blessing.  Therefore
we  traveled  from  nation  to  nation,
bearing  these  glad  tidings  and  call-
ing upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
to  receive  them  and  partake  of  them
as  we  had  done.

Now,  it  might  he  thought  that  a
people*  thus  situated  would  be  left
alonft  to  the  enjoyment,  the  peaceful
enjoyment  of  their  religion.  If  their
religion  was  a  heresy  they  were  the
sufferers.  If  their  religion  was  faKe
they  would  be  the  ones  that  would
receive  the  punishment  But  not
content  with  driving  us  out,  not
content  with  compelling  us  to  flee
to  these  mountain!?,  the  same  foul
and  deadly  spirit  of  persecution
followed  us  up  here  into  these  moun-
tain recesses.  They  envied  us  the
possession  of  these  sterile,  barren
valleys.  That  cruel  spirit  of  perse-
cution still  followed  us,  envious  of
the  quiet  homes  we  had  reared  by
untold  and  uncounted  toil  out  of
the  elements  that  surround  us.  We
had  raised  a  scanty  subsistence  from
the  soil  ;  we  had  struggled  with  dif-
ficulties and had eventually  sue-

if

ceeded  in  surmounting  them,  that
we  could  hope  to  live,  live  without  fear
of  starvation  at  least  before  us.
But  scarcely  was  the  experiment
decided — for  it  was  but  an  experi-
ment at  best — than  the  same  spirit
that  had  made  our  lesidenc*  in  the
States  intolerable  and  unendurable
to  us,  followed  us  across  these  plains
that  stretched  out  between  us  and
our  old  homes  and  the  old  civiliza-
tion which  we  had  left — followed  us


here,  and  it  has  followed  us  from
that  day  until  the  present,  it  has
sought  to  kill  us,  and  it  has  sought
to  destroy  our  liberties.  It  has
sought  to  do  to  us  that  which  was
done  before— to  drive  us  from  our
homes,  and  send  us  forth  homeless
wanderers  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.
This  has  been  its  manifestation  in
our  midst  in  this  Territory,  and  it
seems  as  though  it  would  not  be  fully
gratified  or  satisfied  until  it  has
made  victims  of  every  one  of  us  ;
until  we  should  be  numbered  with
the  silent  dead,  and  our  voices  no
more  be  heard  in  proclamation  of
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  that
we  have  been  authorized  to  pro-
claim to  the  inhabitants  of  the-
earth*

My  brethren  and  sisters  :  I  do
not  wish  in  my  remarks  to  harrow
up  your  feeli:  gs.  I  wish  merely  to
impress  you  with  some  of  the  events
that  are  occurring  around  about  us,
that  you  may  know  that  they  are
only  in  fulfillment  of  the  word  of
God,  spoken  hundreds  and  hundreds
of  years  ago  by  the  Son  of  God
Himself,  and  by  His  inspired  ser-
vants. We  are  only  moving  in  the
sphere  that  He  intended  we  should
move  in  ;  we  are  only  enduring  the
trials  and  afflictions  that  in  His
providence  He  foresaw  and  deemed
necessary  for  us  to  encounter  in  our
passage  through  life,  and  in  the
establishment  of  His  work  upon  the
earth,  and  in  preparing  the  way  for
the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Let  not
your  hearts  fail  you,  therefore  :  be
not  discouraged  nor  consider  your-
selves in  the  least  degree  oppressed
beyond  that  which  is  right  and  pro-
per. All  these  things  are  necessary
in  tiie  provident  of  our  God.  We
shall  have  more  to  encounter:  but
we  shall  have  the  strength  and  the
grace  necessary  to  enable  us  to  meet
them  and  to  bear  them  patiently.


46


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


and  to  come  out  of  them  victorious-
ly ;  tor  as  you  are  often  told,  what-
ever  may  be  the  fate  of  individual*
connected  with  this  work,  it  is  de-
creed in  the  heavens  by  our  Eternal
lather,  that  this  work,  the  founda-
tion of  which  He  has  laid,  will  never
be  taken  from  the  earth  again,  it
will  never  be  overthrown.  There
is  no  power  that  can  overthrow  this
work  of  our  God.  Men  may  he  sent
to  prison,  as  Brother  Kudger  Clawson
ha*,  as  Brother  Joseph  H.  Evans
has,  as  others  in  Arizona  have,  for
their  religion,  for  practicing  that
Tvhich  they  believe  to  be  of  God —
men  may  be  sent  to  prison  by  hun-
dreds, men  may  be  slain,  as  our
brethren  were  in  Tennessee  lately,
and  as  Joseph  S  lain  ling  was  in
Georgia,  and  as  brethren  were  in
years  gone  past  in  Missouri,  as  our
Prophet  and  Patriarch  were  in  Illi-
nois, as  our  revered  President  was
shot  to  pieces  at  the  same  time —
men  s  blood  may  be  slied,  the  blood
of  the  Saints  may  stain  the  ground,
the  soil  may  he  drenched  with  it,
but  though  this  may  be  the  case,
yet  as  sure  as  God  lives  so  sure  will
this  work  that  He  has  established,
roll  forth  and  prevail  The  princi-
ples of  truth  connected  with  it  are
unalterable  and  eternal.  They  can-
Hot  be  changed,  they  cannot  be
destroyed.  You  might  as  well  try
to  destroy  the  throne  of  the  Great
Eternal  Himself,  as  to  destroy  this
work,  for  it  is  eternal.  The  truths
of  this  Gospel  are  imperishable.
They  cannot  be  changed  ;  th**y
cannot  be  obliterated  nor  over-
thrown. And  God  has  said  this
concerning  this  work— that  it  will
stand  forever.  It  will  overcome
every  obstacle.  It  will  grow,  it
will  increase.  Everything  done
Against  it  will  only  be  the  means
of  accelerating  it,  or  pushing  it
forward,  or  insuring  to  it  the  victory


that  God  has  promised.  I  testify
this  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  for  I  know  it  to  be  true,  and
I  know  that  every  po  wer  that  opposes
this  work  will  perish.  God  has  said
it,  and  His  words,  thus  far  have  been
fulfilled.  Recount  the  list  of  the
oppose rs  of  this  work,  and  who  is
there  among  the  vast  host  that  has
ever  succeeded  I  Is  not  failure,  is
not  shame,  is  not  ignominy  written
upon  every  man's  character  and  the
characterof  every  community  that  has
fought  against  this  work  of  our  God
from  the  beginning  up  to  the  pres-
ent time  ?  The  enemies  of  this  work
have  perished,  they  have  gone  down
into  oblivion,  and  they  have  not  sue*
nr  led.  Look  at  the  list  from  the
beginning,  from  the  6th  of  April,
1830,  until  this  day  of  our  Lord,
ami  go  through  it,  and  where  can  you
find,  where  can  you  put  your  finger
upon  a  man  or  upon  a  community
that  has  prospered  in  fighting  against
Ziou,  against  this  work  of  our  God  f
They  have  gone  down,  while  this
people  have  gone  forward,  have
risen,  gone  upward,  have  continued
to  increase  in  influence,  in  power  in
the  earth  and  have  become  more  and
more  solidified.  Antl  it  will  be  so
to  the  end  ;  for  this  work  is  designed
in  the  providence  of  our  God  to
prevail,  and  there  is  no  power  uor
influence  that  can  prevent  it.

It  behooves  us  as  Latter-day
Saints  to  be  faithful  to  our  God.  [
will  tell  you,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
there  is  only  uue  tiling  that  can  in-
jure this  work,  and  that  is  the  sins
of  the  people  themselves.  You  can
injure  it,  that  is,  you  can  injure
yourselves  in  connection  with  it.
There  is  no  man  can  prevent  another
from  receiving  salvation.  God  has
not  placed  it  in  the  power  of  man  to
prevent  either  a  man,  or  a  woman,
or  a  child  from  receiving  salvation,
He  has  placed  that  within  the  power


EXHORTATIONS  TO  RIGHTEOUSNESS,


47


of  the  individual  himself  or  herself.
If  a  man  be  damned  it  is  because
he  takes  a  course  tu  be  damned  ;  he
breaks  the  laws  of  God,  So  H  is
with  us  as  a  people.  If  we  are
chastened,  if  we  are  scourged,  if  our
enemies  have  power  over  us,  it  will
be  because  we  do  not  live  as  we
should  do,  and  this  is  a  subject  that
I  would  like  very  much  to  speak
about.  I  would  like  very  much  to
tell  my  feelings  upon  this  point  to
the  Bishops  and  to  the  Teachers  and
to  the  officers  of  the  Church.  There
are  practices  being  indulged  in
anions  us  that  are  sins  in  the  sight
of  God,  and  the  officers  of  tins
Church  will  be  held  accountable  for
them,  unless  they  take  a  course  to
eradicate  them  from  the  midst  of  the
Saints.  Tli ere  should  be  no  man
allowed  to  remain  in  this  Church
who  is  a  Sabbath-breaker,  and  when
you  know  that  there  are  men  and
women  or  children  who  are  Sabbath-
breakers  you  should  take  steps  to
have  them  warned,  to  have  the  in
reproved,  and  if  they  will  not  repent
to  have  them  severed  from  the
Church  of  God,  No  man  in  this
Church  should  be  allowed  to  have  a
standing  in  it  who  is  a  drunkard  ;
God  does  not  approve  of  drunken-
ness ;  and  if  there  are  any  drunk-
ards remaining  in  the  Church,  hear
it,  0  ye  Bishops,  and  0  ye  officers,
you  will  be  held  accountable  for  their
sins — the  condemnation  will  rest
upon  you.  The  same  with  men  who
blaspheme,  either  young  or  old,  who
take  the  name  of  God  in  vain,  they
ought  not  to  be  permitted  to  remain
in  the  Church,  It  is  a  sin  in  the
sight  of  God,  and  He  will  visit  a
people  with  condemnation  who  per-


mit these  things  to  exist  in  their
midst.  And  so  with  fornication.
No  fornicator,  no  adulterer  nor
arlultress,  should  have  a  place  among
us.  They  should  he  warned,  they
should  bo  dealt  with,  they  should
he  cut  off  from  the  Church.  And
so  with  every  other  sin.  We  have
been  too  lenient,  and  have  permitted
things  to  exist  which  are  wrong  in
the  sight  of  God.  Now  that  our
enemies  are  waging  war  against  us,
there  is  only  one  way  in  which  we
can  expect  to  withstand  assaults
made  upon  us,  and  that  is  in  being
a  [>ure  people,  in  being  a  people  who
live  according  to  the  laws  of  our  Go  L
This  wc  must  be,  or  the  favor  of  LJod
will  be  withdrawn  from  us.  There-
fore, let  the  Church  be  cleansed.
Let  the  Teachers  visit  under  the
influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  and
the  gift  of  discernment,  and  where
they  find  those  that  are  living  in
opposition  to,  or  in  violation  of  the
laws  of  God,  let  them,  by  the  Spirit
of  Uod,  which  will  rest  upon  them,
teach  and  warn  that  household,  and
thus  take  steps  to  purify  the  Church.
Let  every  Priest  and  every  Teacher
go  forth  in  that  spirit  in  the  midst
of  the  Letter  day  Saints,  and  you
will  see  good  results  ;  and  then  let
hell  boil  over,  let  hell  array  itself
with  all  its  forces,  let  earth  and  hell
combine  against  this  work  of  our
God,  ami  they  cannot  succeed.  I  am
not  afraid  of  all  hell  ;  I  am  not  afraid
of  ail  the  earth,  if  the  Latter-day
Saints  will  be  pure,  if  they  will  live
their  religion  I  know  that  we  shall
triumph  ami  come  off  victorious  in
every  contest,  which  may  God  grant
in  the  name  of  Jesus,  Amen.


■


48  •  JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE BY APOSTLE GEORGE  TEASDALE,


Delivered  in  ike  Tabernacle^  Salt  Lake  Cittf,  Sunday  Afternoon,  January

lllkf  1885.  ,  x


KE PORTED  BY  JOHN  IRVIHE.


VISIT  TO  THE  SOUTH— TESTIMONY  OBTAINED  FROM  GOD

AND  BENEFITS  OF  THAYER.


NECESSITY


Sinck  the  last  time  I  had  the  privi-
lege of  worshiping  in  this  house  I
have  had  the  opportunity,  in  com-
pany with  Brother  F.  M.  Lyman,  of
making  a  tour  through  the  Southern
wards  and  Stakes  of  this  Territory,
and  I  must  say,  though  it  was  my
first  visit  to  several  places,  that  I
have  enjoyed  my  labors  exceedingly.
I  appreciated  my  association  with
the  Saints,  who  are  striving  in  their
weakness  to  establish  the  righteous-


ness of  God  u
treated  with  t


joi i  the  earth,  I  was
ie  greatest  kindness.
It  is  impossible  for  us  to  be  asso-
ciated as  we  are  in  a  great  work — a
work  that  from  the  beginning  has
been  opposed  by  the  world — without
feeling  the  greatest  admiration  for
men  and  women  who  are  filled  with
the  spirit  of  integrity,  who  manifest
a  love  for  God  and  for  the  principles
of  righteousness,  that  is  surprising
in  the  day  and  age  in  which  we  live,
when  righteousness  is  so  unpopular.
1  had  always  been  given  to  under-
stand that  1  was  living  in  an  enlight-
ened age  in  the  blaze  of  the  Gospel ;
that  we  had  passed  from  the  dark
agos  and  living  in  an  enlightened
age,  among  educated  people  ;  that
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  was
being  promulgate  \  in  all  nations,


|  and  that  we  had  the  Bible  foraguide,
so  that  we  need  not  be  mistaken.
This  being  the  case,  it  is  something
very  curious — I  often  think  so  in
my  reflections — that  men  and  women

are  today  in  the  penitentiary,
doomed  to  associate  with  the  worst
class  of  villains,  because  they  believe
in  God.  The  same  principle  that
exalted  Abraham  and  made  him  the
"  friend  of  God,"  because  he  believ-
ed God  and  obeyed  Him  to  day  is
considered  a  crime  :  for  men  and
women  who  manifest  that  they  have
the  faith  of  Abraham  by  doing  the
works  of  Abraham  are  considered
fit  subjects  to  be  placed  among
murderers  and  the  worst  class  of
characters,  I  presume  if  &0  years
ago,  any  man  had  said  that  the  time
would  come  when  the  doctrine  of
Christ  should  be  so  unpopular  that
those  who  believed  God,  and  who
practiced  the  principles  that  ! -ad  to
endless  lives,  would  be  incarcerated
in  dungeons,  he  would  ha  e  been
considered  slightly  insane.  It  has
been  the  boast  of  the  nation  to  which
we  are  attached,  that  wherever  tht
glorious  flag  waved  it  was  a  source
of  consolation  to  the  people  of  all
nations  to  know  that  there  was  a  spot
on  earth  that  was  the  land  of  the


TESTIMONY  RECEIVED  FROM  GOD,


49


free  and  the  home  of  the  brave.
With  a  Constitution  that  is  the
admiration  of  all  nations  and  peoples,
nobody  would  have  ever  thought  for
a  moment  that  the  circumstances
that  we  see  to-day,  and  the  facts  that
we  are  in  possession  of,  would  ever
be  recorded  upon  the  pages  of
American  history,  and  they  never
would  have  been  had  the  spirit  of
patriotism  that  dwelt  in  the  bosoms
of  those  who  consecrated  their  lives,
their  sacred  honor,  and  their  all,  for
the  establishment  of  a  spot  on  earth
that  should  be  indeed  the  land  of
the  free,  and  the  home  of  the  brave,
been  manifested  to-day.  No  brave
man  would  ever  interfere  with
another  man's  religion.  It  is  all
that  I  have.  My  hope,  my  joy.
Take  my  religion  away,  ami  1  arn  a
beggar  of  the  poorest  kind.  If  I  am
wrong  show  me  mv  wrons;  :  1  am
open  to  conviction*  I  embraced
the  doctrine  taught  by  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  because  1  believed  that
it  was  true,  and  that  it  promised  to
me  something  more  than  I  was  in
possession  of.  The  humble  man
that  brought  the  idad  tiding  of  the
restoration  of  the  Gospel,  told  me
that  if  I  would  appeal  to  God  who
dwells  in  the  heavens,  and  would
appeal  honestly,  lie  would  give  me
light  and  intelligence,  and  that  if
1  would  obey  the  Gospel  I  should  be
put  in  possession  of  knowledge  that
it  was  true  ;  that  I  would  learn  that
Joseph  Smith  was  no  false  prophet,
but  a  true  prophet  sent  of  God  ;
that  holy  angels,  holding  keys  of
power  a! id  authority,  had  visited
the  earth  for  the  express  purpose  of
restoring  the  Priesthood  of  God,
that  the  Gospel  might  be  taught  in
power  and  authority  in  all  nations,
preparatory  to  the  coming  of  the
Son  of  Man,  which  is  nigh  at  our
doors.  Wishing  to  be  kit.fl  to  my-
self; wishing  to  understand  if  there
No.  i.


was  any  truth  in  all  these  things,  I
went  where  we  should  all  go — to
the  throne  of  grace,  and  asked  God
the  Eternal  Father  in  the  name  of
Jesus  Christ,  that  if  the  testimonies
I  had  heard  were  true,  that  I  might
have  a  knowle  iu<  of  the  same  ;  that
I  was  willing  to  embrace  the  Gospel
provided  that  it  was  true,  and  it
would  guarantee  the  excellency  of
knowledge  that  was  promised  me  if  I
would  seek  wisdom  at  His  hands
and  obey. I  asked  that  if  it  was
the  truth  I  might  know  it;  because
if  any  man  desired  eternal  life  I  did;
if  any  man  desired  to  serve  God  I
did ;  if  any  man  desired  the  remis-
sion of  his  sins  I  did;  and  conse-
quently I  went  to  that  source  that  I
would  presume  all  intelligent  men
and  women  would  appeal  to  when  a
message  of  the  kind  that  came  unto
us through the Prophet  Joseph
Smith  was  sounded  in  our  ears.  I
obtained  that  knowledge,  and  I  have
endeavored  faithfully  to  bear  my
testimony  wherever  I  have  been,
and  under  whatever  circumstances
I  have  been  placet  I And  I  have
never  taken  any  step  but  what  I  have
appealed  to  the  same  source,  believ-
ing as  I  do  in  the  Gospel  of  Christ,
believing  as  I  do  in  the  Bible,  and
believing  that  James  meant  what
he  said  when  he  stated  : V  If  any
of  you  lack  wisdom  let  him  ask  of
God,  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally
and  uphraideth  not ;  and  it  shall  be
given him." I  went  forth  in  the
simplicity  of  my  heart  believing  God
would  answer  my  prayer. He  did
so,  and  from  that  day  to  this  I  have
had,  in  my  associations  with  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints,  a  living  testimony  of  the
truth  of  tins  work,  and  the  closer  I
live  to  the  requirements  and  to  the
principles  that  have  been  enunciated,
and  are  continually  enunciated,  by
inspired  men,  the  greater  the  hamii-

Vol.  XXVI.


50


JOUHNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


ness  and  peace  T  enjoy.  Do  I  wish
to  interfere  with  the  rights  and
privileges  of  anybody  I  G#d  forbid.
Do  I  wish  to  do  anything  that  would
be  a  reproach  to  this  nation  ?  God
forbid.  The  course  that  the  Latter-
day  Saints  are  taking  is  an  honor  to
the  nation.  It  is  an  honor  to  this
country.  That  God  our  Eternal
Father  selected  men  who  had  been
born,  and  raised  on  this  soil  to  usher
in  the  dispensation  of  the  fullness
off  times.  It  certainly  ought  to  be
a  source  of  joy  to  all  men  who  are
honest  in  heart,  and  who  desire  to
obtain  eternal  life,  to  know  that  the
keys  are  turned  by  which  they  can
obtain  the  same.  But  as  it  was  in
the  days  of  Christ,  so  it  is  to  day.
The  world  by  wisdom  know  not  God  :
and  the  course  that  they  are  taking
to-day  in  fighting  against  the  princi-
ples of  righteousness  is  a  shocking
record  to  make  upon  the  pages  ol
history.  Can  a  false  religion  benefit
me  1  Can  man-made  systems  benefit
me?  Can  I  obtain  the  remission  of
ray  sins  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  through  uninspired  men  ?  1
think  not,  I  have  no  guarantee  for
that  inside  or  outside  of  the  lids  of
the  Bible,

In  my  travels  among  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  circumstances  have  arisen
that  have  caused  me  some  reflection,
more  especially  with  regard  to
grayer.  It  might  not  be  believed
that  among  the  people  who  profess
rto  be  Latter-day  Saints,  there  are
ttlkose  who  neglect  prayer.  We
diave  had  to  ask  young  men,  some-
times, that  were  Elders  and  who  had
been  recommended  to  be  Seventies,
if  they  prayed,  and  in  telling  us  the
truth,  they  have  stated  that  they
did  sometimes,  I  never  should
;have  doubled  for  a  moment  that
there  was*  anybody  professing  to  be
.a  Latter-day  Saint  who  did  imt  pray,
J. cannot understand it. 1  was


inducted  into  the  Kingdom  of  God
by  prayer,  and  I  have  been  sustained
by  the  Almighty  Father,  by  prayer,
ever  since  that  day, I  do  not  pray
for  form  sake :  I  pray  because  I
earnestly  desire  to  have  the  fellow-
ship of  the  Holy  Ghost, I  cannot
understand  how  anybody  can  pray
for  form's  sake,  although  I  have
almost  been  led  to  believe  that  we
do  so  on  a  great  many  times  and
occasions,  and  I  will  give  you  my
reasons  for  so  thinking. What  is
the  idea,  after  singing,  of  one  of  the
brethren  standing  up  here  to  open
this  meeting  by  prayer? Is  he  not
our  spokesman,  the  mouthpiece,  and
should  we  not  while  he  utters  the
sentences, have those  sentences
pass  through  our  minds  in  a  prayer
as  a  congregation,  and  when  he  has
finished  it,  endorse  the  same  by
saying "amen." What is  the
meaning of "  amen  f So  be  it.
Well,  I  noticed  to-day  that  there
were  few  u  aniens," \\  hy  is  this  1
Did  we  not  endorse  tue  prayer  7
Did  we  not  sanction  it  ? I  should
think  if  we  did  we  would  naturally
say  "amen" — so  let  it  be. But  1
will  tell  you  what  I  am  afraid  of — I
am  afraid  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
getting  into  a  form  of  religion  and
being  no  better  off  than  their  neigh-
bors, or  getting  into  the  habit  of
going  to  meeting  and  hearing  the
singing  and  praying  and  the  dis-
course without  their  having  any  in-
fluence whatever  upon  our  minds
any  more  than  perchance  to  criticise.
I  cannot  understand  how  that  kind
of  a  worship  can  be  acceptable  to
God. If  I  understand  it, He  re-
quires our  hearts,  and  He  desires
when  we  pray  that  we  mean  what
we  say. What  is  the  meaning  of
jrwiyer] Why,  it  is  to  earnestly  ask
something  that  we  require  with  all
our  hearts. All  who  are  in  fellow-
ship of  the  Holy  Ghost,  willaskGod


IMPORTANCE  OF  FAMILY  PRAYER.


51


for  His  Spirit  to  be  in  their  hearts
in  all  their  business  relations,  even,
that  they  might  not  soil  their  hands,
but  keep  them  clean  and  their  hearts
pure,  that  they  might  merit  His
approbation.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ
encouraged  His  disciples  to  pray—
to  pray  without  ceasing,  Upon  one
occasion  He  spoke  a  parable  on  this
very  subject,  that  meu  ought  always
to  pray  and  not  faint.  And  I  think
if  any  people  on  the  face  of  the  earth
ought  to  pray  it  certainly  should  be
the  Latter-day  Saints  ;  for  we  have
no  friends  on  the  earth.  All  the
friendship  that  \-e  can  depend  upon
is  in  God  our  Eternal  Father,  who
controls  the  actions  of  all  men,  and
who  allows  men  to  go  to  a  certain
-extent,  that  they  may  prove  before
the  heavens  their  corrupt  hearts  and
what  they  would  do  if  they  were
permitted  ;  that  every  man  through
the  agency  that  God  has  given  him,
may  manifest  himself  before  GodT
before  the  heavens,  and  before  all
mankind,  as  to  the  spirit  he  is  of  in
the  record  that  he  makes.  The  Savior
said  there  was  a  certain  judge,
"which  feared  not  God,  neither
regarded  man  :  And  there  was  a
widow  in  that  city  ;  and  she  came
unto  him  saying,  avenge  me  of  mine
adversary.  And  lie  would  not  for
a  while  :  but  afterward  he  said
within  himself,  though  I  fear  not
God,  nor  regard  man  ;  y*+t  bruise
this  widow  troubleth  me,  I  will
avenge  her,  lest  by  her  continual
coming  she  weary  me."  This  way
the  parable  that  the  Lord  Jesus  gave
the  people  when  persuading  them
"  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint"  "  And
the  Lord  said,  hear  what  the  unjust
judge  saith  :  "  And  shall  not  God
avenge  his  own  elect,  which  cry  day
.and  night  unto  him,  though  he  bear
long  with  them  1  I  tell  you  that
He  will  avenge  them  speedily.
Nevertheless,  when  the  son  of  man
cometh,  shall  He  find  on  the  earth,"


We  as  a  people  should  certainly  be
a  prayerful  people,  and  I  would  ven-
ture to  say  that  if  we  were  not,  if
we  depended  upon  our  own  strength,
the  time  will  come  when  we  will  fail,
I  cannot  understand  how  in  a  well
ordered  house  family  prayer  can  be
dispensed  with.  I  cannot  under-
stand how  it  is  that  men  under-
standing the  responsibility  that  rests
upon  them,  understanding  their  own
weakness  and  insufficiency,  under-
standing the  blessing  that  God  our
Eternal  Father  has  promised  unto
us  through  our  faithfulness,  should
consider  that  they  can  do  without
God.  Why,  it  seems  to  me  that  in
every  well  regulated  family  the  head
thereof  should  gather  Ids  wives
and  children  around  him  and  bow  at
the  altar,  even  the  family  altar,  and
offer  unto  God  thanksgiving  and
praise  for  His  protecting  care  and
to  entreat  Him  for  His  Spirit,  that
we  might  be  led  by  its  counsels,  that
He  might  not  suffer  us  to  be  led  into
temptation,  but  that  He  would  de-
liver us  from  evil.  And  I  do  not
consider  that  this  duty  is  all  the.
time  upon  the  head  of  the  house.
I  consider  that  his  family  should  take
a  part  in  family  prayer.  I  do  not
consider  it  necessary  for  the  man  to
be  the  mouthpiece  ?11  the  time.  I
think  it  is  just  as  acceptable  to  God
our  Eternal  Father,  for  the  wife  to
take  her  part  in  prayer,  ami  for  tho
boys  au  l  girls  to  take  their  part  in
the  same  exercise.  It  seems  to  me
there  is  something  very  shockin
that  young  men  should  be  allowed
to  grow  up  until  they  are  about
twenty  years  of  age  and  have  it  to
say  that  their  father  never  asked
them  to  pray  in  the  family  circle.
We  ex  pect  our  wives  to  be  associated
with  the  Relief  Societies,  an  1  certain-
ly they  should  know  how  to  pray.
We  expect  our  youug  men  to  he  as-
sociated with  Young  Men  s  Associa-
tions, and  they  certainly  should


52


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


know  how  to  pray.  We  expect  our
daughters  to  he  associated  with  the
You li"  Ladies'  Mutual  Improvement
Associations,  and  they  certainly
should  know  how  to  pray.  We
expect  our  children  to  be  associated
with  the  Primary  Associations,  and

w

they  certainly  should  know  how  to
pray.  We  do  them  au  injustice
when  we  do  not  divide  up  the  honors
in  prayer  in  this  way.  It  h  requisite
that:  all  should  take  their  turn  in
prayer,  and  1  do  not  think  it  should
be  clone  for  form's  sake.  It  should
be  the  expression  of  glad  hearts,
understanding  the  great  blessings
that  have  been  conferred  upon  us
through  the  liirht  and  intelligence
of  the  Gospel,  and  feeling  glad  that
we  are  not  under  the  condemnation
of  priestcraft,  but  that  we  have  the
privilege  of  priesthood  ;  that  we  are
not  led  bv  false  teachers  who  have
no  authority,  and  who  know  not  the
way  of  life  and  salvation,  but  that
God  has  given  unto  us  true  teach-
ers, inspired  by  Him,  that  His  peo-
ple may  learn  of  His  ways  and  walk
in  His  paths.  And  I  believe  in  the
counsel  of  the  Savior  when  He  ad-
vised His  disciples  to  pray  for  their
enemies.  If  there  are  people  on
the  face  of  the  earth  who  ought
to  be  prayed  for,  it  is  our  enemies.
I  would  pray  the  Eternal  Father
that  He  would  have  mercy  upon
them,  that  He  would  enlighten  their
minds,  that  they  might  understand
they  were  fighting  against  the  truth.
1  would  plead  before  Him  that  they
might  he  prevented  from  making
the  dreadful  record  that  they  are
making  against  themselves  ;  I  would
plead  that  the  Lord  would  be  merci-
ful unto  them,  that  tiny  might  he
converted  as  we  are  converted.  Who
converted  us?  The  Spirit  of  God.
What  do  we  know  only  as  we  are
taught  of  God,  and  what  can  they
know  of  the  true  faith  only  as  they


are  taught  of  God.  The  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  in  His  dying  agonies,  and
the  martyrs  Stephen  filled  with  the
Spirit  of  His  master,  said,  '*  Father,
forgive  them,  for  they  know  not
what  they  do."  Lord,  lay  not  this
sin  to  their  charge  !  Behold  the
unbounded  love  and  charity  that  were
in  the  breast  of  the  Savior  and  His
servant  Stephen.  We  should  have
this  same  Spirit,  It  is  a  most  aw-
ful thing  to  die  in  one's  sins.  It  is
most  awful  to  be  classed  with  those
who  misrepresent,  who  are  called  in
the  Bible  liars,  who  are  to  have
their  portion  in  the  lake  of  lire  and
brimstone,  which  is  the  second  death.
When  I  think  that  men  id*  professed
intelligence  will  stoop  to  such  1 1  is-
honorable  means  to  brinif  tmuMe
upon  innocent  people,  I  think  they
ought  to  be  prayed  for  that  God
would  have  mercy  upon  them,  that
He  would  convert  them  from  the
error  of  their  ways,  that  they  might
not  he  blotted  out  f  i  <  m  the  book  of
remembrance  and  become  subject  to

the  second  death,  1  think  common
humanity  should  inspire  us  to  pray
for  them,  They  are  the  children  of
God,  and  they  are  in  the  image  of
God,  they  are  our  brethren  and  sis-
ters, children  of  the  same  parent  :
and  it  is  a  duty  we  owe  to  God  and
to  mankind  to  pray  that  the  Lord
may  have  mercy  upon  sinners.  I
also  believe  that  we  should  pray  for
the  Chief  Magistrate  of  this  nation.
We  should  praj  that  He  mi^ht  be
inspired  of  God,  ami  be  a  blessing
to  the  nation  in  his  integrity  to  t he-
Constitution.  I  believe  we  should
pray  that  God  might  overturn,  and
displace  the  wicked,  and  put  in
righteous  men  who  would  repeal  the
unrighteous  acts  and  laws  that  have
been  passed,  and  thus  demonstrate
that  they  were  willing  that  all  man-
kind should  enjoy  what  they  them-
selves wish  to  enjoy — the  pursuit  of


BLESSINGS  TO* BE  SOUGHT  BY  PRAYER


53


life,  liberty,  and  happiness.  All  the
happiness  that  I  have  is  in  keeping  the
com  main!  merits  of  God.  All  the
happiness  that  I  have  has  been  given
unto  me  through  the  new  and  ever-
lasting covenant,  which  God  lias
restored  to  the  earth.  Ami  then  I
believe  in  secret  prayer.  I  can  go
and  toll  my  Fat  ler  things  that  I
would  not  want  anybody  else  to  know.
I  can  go  and  ask  His  direction  when
I  require  it.  So  can  the  sisters,  who
are  entrusted  with  these  bright
spirits  that  have  been  reserved  in
the  heavens  and  foreordained  to
come  down  on  the  earth  in  the  dis^
pen  sat  ion  of  the  fullness  of  times
to  assist  in  the  establishment  of  the
Kingdom  of  God*  How  are  you  going
to  exercise  righteous  dominion  over
your  children  and  teach  them  cor-
rect principles,  unless  you  enjoy  the
revelations  of  God,  I  cannot  under-
stand how  a  woman  can  love  her
children  and  not  plead  before  the
Almighty,  that  they  may  be  pro-
tected from  all  accident,  that  they
may  enjoy  their  senses,  that  they
may  be  preserved  in  the  use  of  their
limbs,  that  they  may  not  meet  with
any  accident  that  would  disfigure  or
disable  them  in  the  battle  of  life.  I
think  all  these  things  arise  on  com*
mon  sense  principles.  When  we
know  that  God  lives ;  when  we  know
that  He  hears  and  answers  our
prayers  ;  when  we  know  that  we  are
dependent  upon  Him  and  upon  Him
alone  ;  when  we  know  that  we  have
no  friends  outside,  and  that  the
world  is  at  enmity  with  God,  is  at
enmity  with  us,  and  with  the  princi-
ples of  righteousness,  we  should
humble  ourselves  to  the  dust,  and
ask  God  to  be  merciful  to  us  and  to
all  mankind..

Then,  again,  how  can  we  have
faith  in  the  Gospel,  unless  we  have
the  Spirit  of  God.  In  a  revelation
that  has  been  given,  and  that  is


frequently  quoted,  we  are  told  that
when  we  do  as  the  Lord  sayeth  He
is  bound  to  fulfill;  but  when  we  do
not  we  have  no  proum?.  And  on
another  occasion  He  said  that  He
could  nut  look  upon  sin  with  the
slightest  degree  of  allowance.  Do
we  believe  this  1  Do  we  believe
that  all  we  have,  or  that  we  ever
expect  to  have,  comes  or  will  come
from  God  J  Do  we  understand  this
principle]  Do  we  understand  that
if  we  do  not  obey  the  Gospel,  that
if  we  do  not  offer  unto  the  Father
the  offering  of  a  broken  heart  and
a  contrite  spirit,  we  will  not  be  ac-
cepted  of  Him?  Do  we  understand
that  unless  we  live  the  principles
that  He  has  revealed  from  the  heav-
ens, that  we  have  no  promise  of  the
future,  and  then  to  think  it  a  light
thing  not  to  pray.  The  Lord  has
said  with  regard  to  the  work  of  the
ministry,  and  the  establishment  of
11U  Kingdom  on  the  earth  that,
"  Xo  one  can  assist  in  this  work,
except  he  shall  be  humble  and  full
of  love,  having  faith,  hope  and  char-
ity, being  temperate  in  all  things,
whatsoever  shall  be  entrusted  to  his
care."  How  is  it  possible  for  us  to
be  put  in  possession  of  these  inesti-
mable virtues  unless  we  desire  them
with  all  our  hearts  !  And  how  can
we  obtain  them  but  by  earnest  prayer
to  Him  from  w  lie  nee  all  these  price-
less blessings  flow  1  From  what
other  source  can  we  obtain  them  t
Why,  if  we  thoroughly  understand
our  position,  and  our  entire  de-
pendence upon  God  our  Eternal
Father,  our  prayers  would  ascend
up  to  heaven  night  and  day,  and
they  would  be  mingled  with  praise
and  thanksgiving  to  God,  for  the
mercies  and  blessings  He  has  vouch-
safed unto  us.  If  we  do  not  see
the  necessity  of  this  it  is  because  we
are  too  ignorant  to  understand  the
loving  kindness  of  God,  and  it  is


54


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


time  we  should  wake  up  to  riyht-  [
eousness  and  good  works,  thatT  we  I
may  have  wise  and  understanding
hearts.  The  Lord  has  indeed  been
merciful  to  us  as  a  people.  How
marvelously  He  has  protected  us  I
How  marvelously  He  has  blessed  us  |
as  a  people,  and  how  cheerfully  He
has  poured  out  His  Spirit  upon  us
when  we  have  sought  it.  It  behooves
us  to  walk  in  His  paths.  It  is  our
duty  to  walk  in  the  light,  even  as
the  beloved  Apostle  said  :  "  If  we
walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is  in  the
light,  we  have  fellowship  one  with
another,  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ
His  Son,  cleanse  th  us  from  all  sin/'
The  same  beloved  Apostle  said  :
"  Marvel  not,  my  brethren,  if  the
world  hate  you.  We  know  that
we  have  passed  from  death  unto
life,  because  we  love  the  brethren.
He  that  loveth  not  his  brother
ahideth  in  death.  Whosoever
hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer  ;
and  ye  know  that  no  murderer
hath  eternal  life  abiding  in
nm.

My  brethren  and  sisters:  Let
us  pray  to  God  our  Eternal  Father;
let  us  make  ourselves  familiar  with
His  Spirit  and  the  impress  thereof ;
let  us,  if  we  have  not  done  so,  put


our  houses  in  order,  remembering
that  we  are  living  in  perilous  times,
that  we  are  living  in  the  hour  of
God's  judgment,  that  we  are  on  the
eve  of  famine, of  pestilence,  of
earthquakes  ;  and  it  behooves  every
man  and  woman  professing  to  be
Latter-day  Saints  to  be  alive  to  their
duties,  to  put  away  all  folly,  to  live
humbly  and  frugally  before  God,  and
to  prepare  for  the  calamities  that  are
coming  upon  the  earth. We  have
been  warned  and  forewarned,  and  I
say  unto  the  Latter-day  Saints  pre-
pare ye,  0  prepare  ye,  tor  the  calam-
ities that  are  at  our  doors. Let  us
cease  all  extravagance  ;  let  us  re-
member the  children  entrusted  to
our  care  that  they,  too,  may  have
something  for  a  day  when  nothing
shall  be  raised  ;  let  us  sanctify  our-
selves before  the  Lord,  striving  to
do  His  will  and  keep  His  command*
ments,  calling  upon  Him  in  mighty
prayer,  (remetnbt  ring  "The  effectual
fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man
availeth  much,")  to  have  mercy  upon
His  heritage;  and  that  these  valleys
(if  the  mountains  may  indeed  and
of  a  truth  be  the  land  of  the  free
and  the  home  of  the  brave ;  which
blessings  I  ask  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ.  Amen,


POWER  ATTENDING  THE  ACTION  OF  G


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT GEORGE Q,  CANNON,


Delivered  in  the  Tabermde,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Aftermon,

December  24* 188  4*


EEPOKTED  BT  JOHN  DIVINE*


POWER  ATTENDING  THE  ACTION  OF  GENERAL  CONFERENCES— GOD  CON-
FIRMS THE  AUTHORITY  OF  II IS  SERVANTS  BY  MANIFESTATIONS  OF
HIS  POWER  AND  FAVOR  —  JOSEPH  SMITH  CHOSEN  AND  ORDAINED
TO  ORGANIZE  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOF> — THE  LORD  REVEALED  TO  THE
SAINTS  HIS  CHOICE  OF  PRESIDENT  B&IGHAM  YOUNG,  AND  ALSO  OF
PRESIDENT  JOHN  TAYLOR  —  GOD  BLESSES  EVERY  MAN  WHO  WILL
MAGNIFY  HIS  OFFICE  AND  CALLING,  AND  GIVES  TO  ONE  MAN  ONLY
AT  A  TIME,  REVELATION  TO  GOVERN  THE  CHURCH  —  FOLLY  AND
WICKEDNESS  OF  WITCHCRAFT.


It  is  always  an  impressive  sight  to
me  to  see  a  congregation  numbering
so  many  people  as  this  does,  raise
their  hands  before  the  Lord  to  sus-
tain the  names  of  men  who  are  pre-
sented to  them  as  holding  office  in
the  Church,  and  though  we  do  this
semi-annually,  in  our  general  con-
ferences for  the  General  Authorities,
and  quarterly,  that  is,  four  times  a
year  for  the  local  authorities,  it
should  not  be  in  our  feelings  nor  in
our  practice  the  performance  of  an
empty  form,  but  should  be  done  in  a
spirit  that  will  be  acceptable  unto  our
Father,  and  in  consonance  with  the
responsibility  that  devolves  upon  the
men  whom  we  sustain.  For  when
we  thus  sustain  these  men  it  means
more  than  the  mere  lifting  of  our
hands,  or  at  least  should  do  so.  It
means  the  sustaining  of  these  men
by  our  faith  and  by  our  prayers,  and
so  far  as  works  are  required,  by  our
works,  and  when  we  thus  vote  and
thus  act,  there  is  a  power  and  an
influence  accompanying  such  action


as  we  have  performed  this  afternoon,
that  are  felt  by  those  in  whose  favor
we  vote  :  they  feel  strengthened,
ami  God  our  Eternal  Father  seals
His  blessing,  or  causes*  it  to  descend
upon  those  who  are  voted  for,  and
there  is  a  spirit  that  rests  down
upon  them  from  that  time  forward,
so  long  as  they  are  faithful  and  are
thus  sustained,  that  manifests  itself
unto  all  with  whom  they  are  brought
in  contact.  Let  this  congregation
lift  up  their  hands  to  sever  a  man
from  the  Church,  and  no  matter
how  high  he  may  be  in  authority,
no  matter  what  Priesthood  he  bears,
no  matter  how  great  and  mighty  he
may  have  been  in  the  Church  and  in
the  ministry — let  this  congregation
for  just  cause  lift  up  their  hands
against  any  such  man  and  howquick-
ly  the  effect  is  felt,  how  quickly  that
man  is?  stripped  of  his  power  and  of
his  influence,  and  of  that  spirit  and
chose  gists  which  have  been  cons  pic*
uous  in  his  labors  previous  to  such
action,  or  while  lie  was  in  good


56


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


standing  and  in  fellowship  with  God
and  his  brethren  and  sisters.  We
have  seen  numerous  illustrations  of
this  in  our  history. Name  after
name  might  be  mentioned  of  men
who  have  been  bright  stars  in  the
firmament,  who  have  been  stripped
—by  their  own  conduct  to  begin
with,  and  afterwards  by  the  action
of  the  Saints  of  God  upon  their
case — of  that  lustre,  of  that  bright-
ness, and  of  that  glory  that  seemed
to  attend  their  ministrations.  And
while  this  is  the  case  with  those
who have  transgressd when  the
Saints  of  God  act  upon  their  cases,
so  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  with  those
who  are  sustained  in  their  ministry,
and  in  their  Priesthood,  and  in  their
calling  by  the  united,  uplifted  hands
of  the  Saints  of  God  in  conference
assembled,  as  we  have  done  this
afternoon. Men  may  sneer  at  the
Latter-day  Saints,  and  gay  this  is  but
an  empty  form,  and  that  it  is  all
pre- arranged. Men  may  say  what
they  please  about  this. It  is  pre-
arranged according  to  the  spirit  and
mind  of  God,  so  far  as  that  can  be
ascertained. When  men  are  chosen
for  office,  the  Spirit  o(  God  is  sought
for  by  those  who  have  the  right  to
select,  and  if  there  be  doubt  upon
certain  points  men  are  not  chosen  ;
but  when  they  are  chosen  ami  the
mind  of  the  Lord  is  sought  for  to
know  whether  it  will  be  agreeable  to
Him  that  they  receive  this  office,  or
that  they  should  act  in  those  por-
tions,  and  when they  are  thus
selected  and  thus  submitted,  as  1
have  said,  to  the  Conference,  then
if  they  themselves  live  so  as  to  have
the  Spirit  of  God  with  them,  they
will  be  clothed  with  it,  and  when
they  seek  to  magnify  their  office  God
will  magnify  them  before  the  people
and  will  show  them  and  the  people
that  they  are  indeed  His  chosen  ser-
vants, and  that  their  ministrations


are  acceptable  unto  Him,  that  He
confirms  them  by  the  outpouring
of  His  Spirit  and  the  bestowal  of
His  gifts. It  is  a  remarkable  fact
in  this  age  of  unbelief,  in  thia  age  of
doubt,  in  this  age  of  darkness,  in
i  this  age  when  men  pride  themselves
upon  there  being  no  revelation,  and
no  knowledge  from  God — I  say  it  is
a  remarkable  fact  that  ii.  this  age
such  as  we  now  live  in,  and  such  as
1  we  are  familiar  with,  God,  in  the
history  of  this  people  is  accompany-
ing His  labors,  and  the  labors"  to
which  He  assigns  His  servants,  with
the  ancient  power,  with  the  ancient
manifestations, and  with  the  ancient
confirmations  by  gifts  and  by  mighty
>n*ns  and  works  that  He  causes  His
servants  to  accomplish.

When  Moses  was  about  to  depart
God  required  uf  him  that  he  should
lay  his  hands  upon  another  mart  to
take  his  place  to  act  as  the  leader  of
the  people  of  Israel. He  laid  Ins
hands  upon  Joshua,  and  a  portion
of  that  spirit  and  power  that  had
attended  the  ministrations  of  Moses
in  the  midst  of  Israel  was  imme-
diately manifested  through  Joshua,
and  God  confirmed  the  selection
and  impressed  upon  the  people  by
the  signs  and  the  mighty  works
which  Joshua  accomplished  that  he
was  indeed  God's  chosen  servant.
He  magnified  him  in  the  midst  of
the  people;  he  was  enabled  to  per-
form mighty  works,  and  the  people,
if  they  had  had  any  doubts  whatever,
had  those  doubts  removed  by  those
manifestations  of  power. You  re-
member how  the  Lord  showed  in  the
sight  of  all  Israel  that  Joshua  was
His  inspired  and  chosen  'servant,
for  under  his  direction  the  children
of  Israel  crossed  the  river  Jordan
dry  shod. It  was  at  the  time  of
high  water  in  the  river  Jordan  ;  but
the  Jordan  was  stayed  in  ils  onward
course,  its  waters  stopped  running,


SAUL  CHOSEN  BY  THE  LORD  TO  BE  KING


57


and  the  whole  hosts  of  Israel,  by  the
direction  of  this  servant  of  God,
passed  over  dry  shod*  In  this
manner  God  showed  unto  His  people
that  He  had  indeed  chosen  this  man
to  be  His  servant  And  so  it  has
been  in  the  entire  history  of  God's
dealings  with  His  people.  He  has
not  left  them  without  a  testimony.
He  has  not  left  them  to  proclaim
His  word  unaccompanied  by  His
power.  They  have  not  been  leh  t.>
argue  for  themselves,  to  plead  for
themselves,  to  protest  in  the  ears  of
t  he  people  that  they  were  the  servants
of  God,  and  to  constantly  contend
for  their  rights  as  leaders  of  the
people  cf  God,  Bat  in  every  in-
stance when  He  chose  a  man  to  be
His  servant,  He  accompanied  that
choice  by  the  manifestations  of  His
power,  by  Hie  outpouring  of  His
spirit,  and  His  gifts,  so  that  every
honest  soul,  eveiy  humble  man  and
woman  who  sought  the  Lord,  might
know  for  themselves  that  those  men
were  His  chosen  ones,  A  most
striking  illustration  of  this  suggests
itself  to  my  mind  now.  It  occurred
at  the  time  the  children  of  Israel
desired  a  kin*'.  The  Lord  was
displeased  with  them  for  this.
Samuel  also  felt  offended,  for  they
had  rejected  him  and  his  house.
They  hail  a  good  reason  for  desiring
a  king,  ac  least  they  thought  so.
The  surrounding  nations  had  kings
who  went  out  and  in  before  them  to
battle  and  were  their  leaders,  and
they  desired  to  have  a  king,  espe-
cially when  the  two  sons  of  Samuel,
whom  he  had  chosen  as  Judges  over
Israel,  were  men  who  had  turner!
aside  after  lucre,  and  took  bribes,
and  perverted  judgment.  This
Prophet  of  God,  this  mighty  man  of
God,  happened  to  have  two  sons
who  were  unworthy  of  their  father's
reputation,  unworthy  of  the  Priest-
hood, unworthy  of  their  position


as  Judges  in  Israel.  In  consequence
of  this  the  leaders  of  Israel  gath-
ered together  and  said  unto  Samuel:
-*  Behold,  thou  art  old,  and  thy  sons
walk  not  in  thy  way  :  now  make  us
a  king  to  judge  us  like  all  the  na-
tions f*  Samuel  was  greatly  offended
with  the  thought*  But  the  Lord
said  unto  him  :  "  Hearken  unto
the  voice  of  the  people  in  all  that
they  say  unto  thee  :  for  they  have
not  rejected  thee,  but  they  have  re-
jected me,  that  I  should  not  reign
over  them/'  In  other  words,  the
Lord  had  led  them  and  chosen  for
them  those  who  should  lead  them
up  to  that  time,  and  now  He  would
give  them  a  king.  He  designated
to  Samuel  t  he  kind  of  man  he  should
be,  who  he  should  be,  and  told  him
he  should  visit  him.  The  person
designated  was  Saul,  ami  Samuel
anointed  him  king  of  Israel.  After
he  was  chosen  king*  it  seems  that  he
went  about  his  ordinary  business,
and  the  next  we  hear  of  him  he  was
following  the  herd,  driving  up  the
cattle,  when  the  news  came  to  him
that  Nahash,  the  Ammonite,  would
only  be  pacified  towards  the  men  of
Jahrsh -Gilead  upon  one  condition,
and  that  was  that  he  might  thrust
their  right  eyes  out,  in  token  of  their
subjection,  and  as  a  reproach  upon
all  Israel,  And  then,  at  that  time,
when  danger  threatened  Israel,  when
there  was  a  necessity  for  a  general,
for  a  man  to  lead  the  hosts  of  Israel,
the  Spirit  and  power  of  Almighty
God,  and^tbe  anointing  that  lie  had
received  under  the  hands  of  the
Prophet  of  God,  descended  upon
that  young  man,  Saul,  and  his  auger
was  kindled  at  the  insult  that  had
been  offered  to  his  nation,  and  he
took  a  yoke  of  oxen  and  lie  wed
them  iu  pieces,  and  sent  them
throughout  all  the  coasts  of  Israel,
by  the  hands  of  messengers,  saying:
Whosoever  cometh  not  forth  after


58


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Saul  and  Samuel,  so  shall  it  be  clone
unto  his  oxen.  And  great  fear  fell
upon  the  people;  they  gathered  out,
and  he  organized  his  army,  and  they
fell  upon  their  enemies  and  cleaned
them  out

Now,  this  is  an  illustration  of
the  manner  in  which  God  operates
upon  His  servants  and  opo::  Mis
people.  This  young  man  was  follow-
ing peaceful  pursuits.  Though  lie
had  been  chosen  a  king,  he  had  not
seemed  to  assume  kingly  dignity,  he
had  gone  about  his  business  ;  but
when  the  crisis  arose,  when  there
was  a  necessity  for  some  one  to  step
forward  and  take  the  leading  posi-
tion, then  the  spirit  of  that  position
to  which  he  had  been  anointed,  and
to  which  he  had  been  chosen  by  the
voice  of  God,  by  the  act  of  His
Prophet,  and  by  the  approbation
of  the  people,  rested  upon  him,
and  he  emerged  from  his  obscurity
and  arose  in  their  midst  a  king,
a  leader  in  very  deed  and  in  truth,

And  so  it  was,  you  remember,  in
the  case  of  Elisha* When  Elijah
was  about  to  be  taken  to  heaven,
the  spirit  of  prophecy  seemed  to
rest  upon  ;dl  the  prophets.  The  sons
of  the  prophets  came  forth  to  Elisha,
ami  said  unto  him,  "Knowest  thou
that  the  Lord  will  take  away  thy
master  from  thy  head  to-day  1  And
he  said,  Yea,  I  kuow  it  ;  hold  ye
your  peace/' At  a  former  time  he
had  been  pi  o  win  g  in  the  field,  with
twelve  yoke  of  oxen,  when  Elijah
came  along,  and  Elisha  dropped  his
work  and  followed  the  prophet  of
God. Afterwards, when  Elijah's
departure  drew  near,  he  said  unto
Elisha, "  Ask  what  1  shall  do  for
thee?  before  I  be  taken  away  from
thee  . And  Elisha  said,  1  pray  thee,
let  a  double  portion  of  that  spirit
be  upon  me- And  be  said,  Thou
hast  a  hard  thing  ;  nevertheless,  if
thou  see  me  when  X  am  taken  from


thee,  it  shall  be  so  unto  thee  ;  but
if  not,  it  shall  not  be  so/'  And  sure
euousfh,  he  beheld  a  chariot  of  fire
ami  horses  of  fire,  and  he  saw  his
master  ascend  in  his  sight  to  heaven,
and  undoubtedly  that  gift  that  he
had  asked  for,  and  that  Elijah  said
shonld  be  granted  unto  him  if  he
beheld  his  departure,  was  given  to
this  man  of  God,  it  rested  upon  him,
and  when  he  came  to  the  Jordan,
having  Elisha's  mantle  which  lie  had
dropped,  he  smote  the  water  in  the
power  of  God,  and  cried,  "  Where
is  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah  ?"  so  that
the  waters  divided,  and  he  passed
overdryshod.  God  accompanied  that
man  by  His  power  wherever  he  went,
A  great  and  a  mighty  prophet  was  he;
so  great  and  so  mighty,  that  it  is  re-
luted  of  him  that  after  his  death  a
band  of  Moabites  came  into  the  land.
The  people  of  Israel  were  burying  a
man.  While  in  this  act,  they  became
frightened  at  seeing  a  band  of  men,
and  cast  the  man  into  the  sepulchre
of  Elisha ;  and  when  the  man  was
let-  down  and  touched  the  bones  of
Elisha,  he  revived,  and  stood  upon
his  feet/'  He  was  a  mighty  prophet,
and  he  received  those  gifts  and  this
power  from  God,  which  He  bestows
upon  all  those  who  receive  the  ever*
lasting  Priesthood,  and  who  seek
to  magnify  it  in  the  spirit  thereof.

Head,  too,  of  the  transformation
that  occurred  when  Jesus  laid  His
hands  upon  His  apostles.  The  lowly,
the  ignorant,  and  the  unlettered
fishermen  were  transformed  into
might y  men,  men  of  power,  men  of
influence,  men  who  had  communica-
tion with  the  heavens,  unto  whom
God  revealed  His  mind  and  will,
and  through  whom  He  performed
mighty  works.  These  men  previously
were  obscure  men,  men  of  humble
lives,  lis  her  men,  probably  one  of
the  lowest  occupations  that  men
followed  in  those  days,  as  it  is  in


our  day.  It  is  a  lowly  occupation
is  that  of  a  fisherman.  It  is  not
one  that  brings  great  wealth ;  it  does
not  bring  men  into  public  notice  j
it  gives  them  no  opportunity  for  dis-
tinction ;  but  these  men  were  men
whose  lives  were  hid  with  God.
These  were  Princes  in  disguise,  men
who  had  been  chosen,  like  their  Lord
and  Master,  according  to  my  view,
before  the  foundations  of  the  earth
were  laid,  to  be  His  companions  in
the  flesh,  and  like  Him  they  were
born  in  lowly  and  obscure  circum-
stances. But  when  He  chose  them,
when  their  hearts  were  touched  by
the  great  truths  He  taught,  and
they  came  forward,  in  obedience  to
His  authority,  to  cast  their  lot  with
Him,  then  the  power  of  God  desce  tid-
ed upon  them,  they  performed
mighty  works,  and  while  they  lived
upon  the  earth  the  Holy  Ghost  was
their  companion,  and  their  fame  has
come  down  to  us  embalmed,  it  may
be  said,  through  the  ages  that  have
transpired,  through  the  ignorance,
and  the  gloom,  and  the  darkness,
and  the  apostaey  that  have  since
taken  place — their  names  have  come
down  to  us  from  our  ancestors,  and
the  most  glorious  edifices  and
structures  that  the  world  know  any-
thing of,  are  dedicated  to  their
memories.  God  made  them  mighty
in  the  midst  of  the  children  of  men.
And  so  it  was  with  all  the  prophets.
When  God  made  promises  unto
them  they  received  them.  But  they
did  not  receive  these  tilings  without
exertion  on  their  part,  without  their
seeking  industriously  to  magnify
that  Priesthood  which  had  been
bestowed  upon  them.  The  spirit
and  power  of  God  will  rest  upon  a
man  if  he  listens  to  it.  It  will
impel  him  to  action.  If  he  cherishes
it,  it  w  ill  be  his  constant  companion.
It  will  be  with  him  in  times  when
he  will  need  it,  and  when  he  does


need  it,  if  he  magnifies  his
calling,  the  spirit  and  power  of  the
Almighty — that  spirit  and  power
and  those  gifts  which  belong  to  his
particular  office— will  rest  upon
him,  and  he  will  be  made  equal  to
every  emergency,  to  every  trial,  and
will  come  oft'  victorious.

How  was  it  with  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith  1  Whose  origin  could
be  more  lowly  in  a  land  like  oura
than  his,  springing  from  the  hum-
blest ranks  of  life,  of  parents  that
were  not  distinguished,  or  of  any
family  that  was  known  particularly,,
hearing  a  name  more  common  than
any  other  name  in  our  language.
Yet  this  man,  because  God  had
chosen  him,  manifested  extraordinary
power.  Those  who  saw  him,  those
who  listened  to  him,  those  who  wit-
nessed his  acts,  know  how  mighty
he  was  in  the  midst  of  Ins  fellow
men,  and  how  mightily  God  wrought
through  him.  God  chose  and
ordained  him.  He  gave  unto  him
His  everlasting  Priesthood.  He
gave  unto  him  the  full  authority  to
organize  His  Church,  He  did  so —
organized  this  Church,  the  most
glorious  fabric  that  ever  was  estab-
lished upon  the  face  of  the  earth  ;
because  it  is  God's  Church  :  it  is  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ,  unparal-
elled  by  anything  else.  No  other
organization  approaches  to  it  iu
perfection  ;  nothing  lacking,  every
detail,  beautiful,  harmonious,  sym-
metrical, leaving  nothing  ro  be  de-
sired. Such  is  the  Church  and  such
the  organization  that  the  Prophet
Joseph  was  the  means  in  the  hands
of  God  of  restoring  once  more  to
the  earth.  The  plan,  the  pattern,
had  been  lost  entirely.  The  officers
that  formerly  filled  the  Church  were
withdrawn.  The  Priesthood  that
they  held  was  taken  back  to  God,
and  the  men  who  bore  it  also  were
taken  from  the  earth. There  had.


-60


JOURNAL  0¥  DISCOURSES


therefore,  to  be  a  complete  restora-
tion. It  could  only  come  from  the
God  of  heaven,  ami  Joseph,  inspired
of  God,  was  the  meatus  through
which  the  restoration  was  made —
Joseph,  a  youth,  obscure,  illiterate
in  some  respects — that  is,  he  was
not  what  men  would  call  learned,
but  al  ter wards,  through  industry
ami  perseverance,  became  learned,
and  if  lie  had  lived,  he  would  un-
doubtedly have  become  one  of  the
most  learned  of  men  through  thegifts
God  gave  him.  The  progress  he
made  when  lie  did  live  was  very  re-
mar i b I e.  By  h  i  s  fai  t  h ,  and  it i spi re d
of  God,  lie  laid  the  foundation  of
this  work,  and  not  only  did  this,
but  he  laid  his  hands  upon  other
men  and  they  partook  of  the  same
spirit  and  influence  that  rested  upon
him.  They  were  able  to  drink  at
the  same  fountain,  which  God,
through  him  had  opened  up  for
them  to  drink  at.  They  could  go
to  that  fountain,  and  partake  of  its
holy  influence,  ami  t  heir  eyes  were
opened  and  their  minds  were  illu-
minated by  the  power  of  God.  They
were  able  also  to  go  forth  in  the
power  which  He  had  restored,  and
thus  once  more  among  men  was  wit-
nessed the  mighty  gifts  that  were
chanictt ;ris tic  of  bygone  age?,  when
God  had  a  Priesthood  on  the  earth,
When  lie  had  prophets  and  apostles,
and  mighty  men  whom  He  clothed
with  a  portion  of  His  Spirit  and
power.

And  when  Joseph  was  taken,  how
was  it  then  ?  Were  the  people  left
without  some  man  or  men  to  stand
up  in  their  midst  to  declare  to  them
the  counsel  of  their  Almighty  Father?
!No  :  the  Lend  did  not  leave  His
people  without  a  shepherd.  He  had
anticipated  the  dreadful  tragedy
which  would  rob  us  of  His  anointed
one;  rob  us,  the  Church  of  Christ,
of  our  Prophet  and  Patriarch.  He


had  anticipated  this,  and  previous
to  this  horrid  tragedy,  He  inspired
His  servant  Joseph  to  call  other  men,
upon  whom  He  bestowed  all  the
keys,  all  the  authority,  all  the  bless-
ings, all  the  knowledge  so  far  as
endowments  were  concerned,  so  far
as  the  power  to  go  unto  God  and
ask  Him  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and
obtain  His  mind  and  will,  was  con-
cerned. He  bestowed  upon  these
men  t lie  same  gifts,  and  blessings,
and  graces,  he  had  received ;  so  that
there  was  a  body  of  men  with  all
the  authority,  a  body  of  prophets
with  all  the  gifts  of  seers  and  r*»vel-
ators — a  body  of  men  left  instead
of  one  man — a  body  of  men  were
endowed  with  this  power  when
Joseph  was  taken,  and  the  earth  was
not  robbed  of  that  Priest  hood
which  God  had  sent  His  angels  from
heaven  to  restore  once  more  to  the
children  of  men,  and  to  act  on  the
earth  in  the  plenitude  of  its  power.
There  was  no  more  need,  therefore,
for  angelic  visitation  to  restore  it.
It  was  not  taken  back  to  God  by  the
slaying  of  the  Prophet  and  Patriarch,
but  remained  with  mortal  man  here
on  the  earth.  And,  then,  when  the
question  arose  as  to  who  should  lead
Israel,  notwithstanding  Sidney  Rig-
don  stood  up  in  the  congregation  of
the  Saints,  and  plead  for  the  leader-
ship of  the  people,  the  spirit  and
power  of  the  Almighty  descended
upon  the  man  whom  God  had  chosen
to  hold  the  keys.  In  the  midst  of
all  Israel,  in  the  face  of  the  entire
congregation  of  believers  and  un-
believers, God  clothed  His  servant
with  such  power  and  in  such  a  man-
ner that  every  man  that  had  the  least
portion  of  the  spirit  of  God,  and
every  woman,  knew  by  the  manifes-
tations of  that  spirit,  and  by  the
outpouring  of  the  gift  of  God  upon
that  man,  that  he  was  the  chosen
one,  and  that  upoinhirn  rested  the


GOD  CONFIRMS  THE  ORDINATIONS  OF  UIS  SERVANTS


01


authority,  and  the  power,  ami  the
gifts  that  had  been  borne  by  the
Prophet  Joseph  tin  ring  his  lifetime.
No  more  plainly  was  the  power  of
God  manifested  in  behalf  of  Elishaj
after  the  taking  away  of  Elijah,  than
it  was  man i tested  in  behalf  of  Pre-
sident Brigham  Young,  when  the
Prophet  Joseph  was  taken  from  the  j
earth,  and  from  that  day,  while  be
lived  on  the  earth  until  lie  died,  the
Lord  magnified  him  in  the  eyes  of
the  people  and  blessed  those  who
listened  to  his  counsel.  ]
When  he  departed  there  was  no
con te ut ion,  there  was  no  strife  as  to
who  should  be  the  leader.  The
men  of  God  had  learned  by  experi-
ence concerning  the  Pries thood,
and  as  to  who  should  hear  the  keys.
There  was,  therefore,  no  contention
among  the  leaders  nor  among  the
people.  There  was  no  special  neces-
sity for  any  particular  manifestation.
But  I  appeal  to  you,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  to-day,  in  this  conference
assembled — has  not  God  accom-
panied the  President  of  Ills  Church
who  succeeded  Brigham  Young-
has  lie  not  accompanied  him,  has
He  not  accompanied  his  acts,  his
counsels  and  his  leadership  of  the
people  by  every  sign,  by  every  bless-
ing, by  every  niamfesf  ntiou  ut"  power
necessary  to  confirm  in  the  hearts  of
Israel  the  truth  that  lie  is  indeed
the  man  whom  God  had  designated,
whom  God  had  chosen,  ami  whom
God  desired  to  lead  His  people
Israel  ]  I  have  no  doubt  of  it,  never
had  any.  I  kpew  it  before  anything
was  heard  or  anything  was  said.  1
knew  it  by  the  revelations  of
Almighty  God  to  me,  that  God  had
chosen  His  servant  John  Taylor,  to
preside  over  this  Church.  1  know
it  to-day.  I  rejoice  in  this  knowl-
edge, and  1  rejoice  that  God  still
continues  to  manifest  His  power
through His anointed one,  and


through  the  channel  of  the  Holy
Priesthood,  having  but  one  man  at
a  time  on  the  earth  unto  whom  He
gives  the  keys  to  preside  over  the
Church,  and  give  revelations  to  the
entire  Church,  as  a  church  and  as  a
people.  He  has  chosen  him  from
among  the  prophets,  apostles,  seers
and  revelators,  to  bear  the  keys  of
the  everlasting  Priesthood  upon  the
earth  in  the  llesh,  he  having  the
power  and  authority  to  act  for  the
entire  people,  and  to  receive  tho-
rn ind  and  will  of  God  for  the  entire
people.  And  thus  God  up  to  the*
present  time  has  con  fin  nod  His  work
by  signs  following  :  every  man  in
his  place,  en  joying  the  spirit  of  God,
and  the  gifts  of  his  office — the
President  of  the  Twelve  in  his  office
and  in  his  calling ;  blessing  the
Apostles  who  act  as  the  council  of
the  Twelve  ;  blessing  the  Presidents
of  Stakes  with  the  spirit  and  power
and  girt*  of  that  calling — blessing
their  counsels  and  filling  them  with
the  power  necessary  to  magnify  the
Priesthood  to  which  they  are  called;
blessing  the  Presiding  Bishop  and
his  Counselors  ;  blessing  the  Bishops
and  their  Counselors  ;  hlessing  the
High  Councils ;  hlessing  the  Seven-
ties, High  Priests,  Elders  and  Lesser
Priesthood  ;  every  mat)  in  his  place
and  station  receiving  his  portion  of
the  gifts  and  blessings  and  power  of
God  according  to  his  faith  and  dili-
gence, and  his  obedience  to  the  com-
mands of  God,  and  also  according
to  the  office  and  position  that  he
holds  in  the  Priesthood  of  the  Son
of  God.

God  in  His  marvelous  kindness
and  mercv  has  organized  His  Church
in  perfection,  and  has  given  to  every
man  that  bears  a  portion  of  the  Holy
Priesthood,  it'  he  will  magnify  the
same,  the  gifts  and  graces  necessary
thereto  ;  given  to  every  woman  and
to  every  child  wdio  is  faithful  in  the


^2


JOUHNAL UK  DISCO  U  USES »


Church  of  God,  the  spirit  that  be-
longs to  the  position  of  each,  ac-
cording to  the  faith  and  necessities
of  each.  Aud  thus  it  is  that  heaven
is  moved  on  our  behalf;  thus  it  is
that  the  power  of  God  is  manifested
from  time  to  time;  thusnt  is  that
the  people  are  led  and  guided  as
they  are  awl  as  they  have  been  from
the  beginning  until  the  present
time,  and  thus  it  will  be  until  t he
end,  until  the  Church  shall  be  as  a
bride  prepared  for  the  coming  of
the  bridegroom,  for  the  coming  of
the  Lord  Jesus,  who  is  our  head,
and  who  will  preside  over  us  ami
over  the  Church  and  Kingdom
that  will  be  organized  upon  the
earth .

Oh,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  God
is  not  working  in  vain  in  our  midst.
He  is  not  working  in  hidden  places.
He  is  not  concealing  His  hand  and
His  powei.  He  is  ready  to  bless
«very  man  in  His  Church  who  will
magnify  His  oifice  and  calling.  He
is  ready  to  bestow  the  gifts  and
^qualifications  of  that  office  upon
every  man  according  to  his  diligence
.and  faithfulness  before  Him.  But
the  idle  man,  the  slothful  man,  the
man  that  shirks  his  responsibility,
the  man  that  avoids  duty,  the  duty
of  a  Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest,  or
Bishop,  Elder,  Seventy,  High  Priest,
♦or  an  Apostle,  or  one  of  the  first
Presidency — every  man  that  does
this  Gud  will  take  from  him  His
gifts  and  His  blessings;  He  will
withdraw  them  and  give  them  to  the
fail h fu  1  one.  He  will  clothe  His
faith (ul  servants  with  the  power
that  belongs  to  the  Priesthood  in
proportion  to  the  diligence  and
faithfulness  in  seeking  to  magnify
their  wiling,  and  to  live  near  unto
their  Glut  Mark  tin?,  and  let  it
bear  with  weight  m  on  vcur  miml.
lor  J  tell  win  it  is  .*o,  V-  u  may
ordain  a  man  to  be  an  ajustle,  bin


if  he  does  not  seek  to  magnify  that
office  and  priesthood,  the  gifts  of  it
will  not  be  with  him  as  they  would
be  with  a  man  who  does  seek  to
magnify  his  calling  :  no  matter  how
great  his  ability,  the  power  of  God
will  not  accompany  him  unless  he
seeks  for  it,  for  God  will  be  sought
af  ter,  and  God  will  be  plead  with  for
His  gifts  and  graces  and  for  revela-
tion and  knowledge  ;  He  will  be
sought  after  by  His  children,  and
then  when  He  is  sought  after,  He
will  bestow,

Now,  when  I  speak  about  one
who  has  a  right  to  give  revelations
to  the  Church,  I  do  not  mean  by
that  to  say  that  others  shall  not
receive  revelation  ;  for  this  is  a  day
of  revelation.  We  know  the  senti-
ment of  Moses  when  Joshua  became
j palo us  of  two  of  the  Seventy  Elders
prophecying.  The  Seventy  were
gathered  around  about  the  taber-
nacle to  receive  the  words  of  the
Lord  from  Moses,  when  the  Spirit
rested  upon  them,  as  also  upon  two
of  the  men  who  hail  remained  in  the
camp.  Joshua  was  jealous  for  the
honor  of  his  mas  ten  and  asked
Moses  to  forbid  them  prophecy iug.
But,  no,  Moses  replied  :  14  Would
God  that  all  the  Lord's  people
were  Prophets,  and  that  the  Lord
would  put  His  Spirit  upon  them,"
He  had  no  jealousy  about  prophecy.
He  desired  that  every  man  in  the
whole  camp  of  Israel  might  have  the
spirit  uf  prophecy,  and  he  gave
utterance  to  that  beau  Li  ltd,  giorious
expiession  which  1  have  just  quoted.
So  with  the  Klders  of  Israel  to-day*
Would  to  God  all  the  Lord's  people
were  Prophets.  Would  to  God  that
every  man  in  Israel  had  the  spirit
and  power  and  gift  of  prophecy
renting  upon  him  Would  to  God
that  every  woman  had  the  spirit  of
pi  npheey  resting  upon  her,  and  t-very
uhU Would  to  God  that  all  the


■


ONLY  ONE  MAN  AT  A  TIME  RECEIVES

hosts  of  Israel,  those  of  the  Church
of  God,  had  the  Holy  Ghost  and  its
gifts  resting  in  power  upon  them.
There  is  no  room  for  jealousy  in
regard  to  the  possession  of  this  gift
in  the  breast  of  a  servant  of  God*
The  only  feeling  that  it  ought  to
produce  in  the  breast  of  a  faithful
man  is  one  of  thankfulness,  one  of
thanksgiving  to  God  that  others
share  in  this  blessing,  that  others
can  partake  of  this  power,  that  others
have  received  of  this  glorious  gift
from  our  Father  in  Heaven.  There
is  no  room  for  jealousy,  therefore,
in  such  cases,  Let  every  man  press
forward  humbly  and  obediently  in
the  path  of  exaltation,  in  the  path
that  leads  to  God.  Let  every  man
press  forward.  He  need  not  be
afraid  that  any  Latter-day  Syint  will
impede  his  progress.  Let  every
man  speak  and  act  and  do  as  though
he  were  a  servant  of  God,  as  he  is,
as  a  son  of  God  ;  let  him  do  this  and
rejoice  in  it.  At  the  same  time  let
him  be  careful  not  to  be  lifted  up  in
pride,  not  forgetting  who  he  is,  but
obedient  to  constituted  authority,
that  authority  which  God  lias  placed
in  His  Church,  and,  then,  if  he  do
not  forget  these  things,  there  is
nothing  to  prevent  his  onward  pro*
gress.  If  he  be  an  Elder,  if  he  shoul- 1
have  the  gifts  and  power  that  an
Apostle  should  have,  who  will  be
jealous?  Certainly  no  servant  of
God,  If  lie  be  a  Deacon,  and  he
has  gifts  from  God,  through  faithful-
ness, that  belong  to  an  office  higher
than  his  own,  is  there  any  one  who
will  not  rejoice  in  it,  or  any  one  who
will  retard  him  or  throw  obstructions
in  his  way  ?  God  forbid  that  there
should  he.

Now,  in  connection  with  this
■subject,  a  man  a  lew  days  ago — it
BOgge^ts  itself  to  my  mind  and  I  will
speak  upon  it — brought  a  eon  mi  u-
Jiication  addressed  to  President  T a}  -


REVELATION  FOR  THE  CHURCH.  63

lor  and  his  Counselors,  and  we  read
it.  It  purported  to  be  a  message
i  from  God — a  message  from  God  to
us,  that  is  to  the  First  Presidency,
and  through  us  to  the  Church.
We  read  the  message,  but  could  see
nothing  in  it  particularly;  there
was  considerable  said,  but  there  was
nothing  tangible,  or  that  gave  us
light  upon  any  point  that  we  did  not
understand  before.  The  man  said
he  had  been  in  the  Church  three
years,  but  lie  had  not  received  the
Priesthood.  He  had  had  some
spiritual  manifestation,  in  which
ho  heard  a  voice  say,  "thou  art  a
Priest  after  the  order  of  Melcbis-
edec."

I  wish  to  speak  upon  this  point,
that  is,  in  connection  with  this  sub-
ject that  I  have  been  speaking  upon.
God  has  organized  His  Church.
He  has  placed  in  that  Church  its
officers.  As  I  have  said,  He  has
given  to  one  man,  and  to  one  man
only,  at  a  time,  the  keys  to  preside
over  and  to  communicate  the  mind
and  will  of  God  to  that  Church.
While  that  man  is  in  that  position,
seeking  to  magnify  it,  he  will  not
speak  to  other  men  and  give  them
revelations  for  His  Church.  I  wish
1  you  all  to  understand  what  I  have
endeavored  to  impress  upon  you  —
that  it  is  the  privilege  of  every  one
to  receive  revelation.  It  is  the
privilege  of  every  mother  to  receive
revelation  from  God  for  guidance
in  the  training  of  her  children;
to  be  in  communication  with  the
Father  through  the  Holy  Spirit.
It  is  the  privilege  of  children  to  have
the  same  Spirit,  and  to  have  knowl-
edge from  God  through  that  Spirit,
Wha^  fori  To  teach  the  parents  1
No.  If  their  parents  are  in  the
path  of  duty,  it  is  not  do  ;  but  it  is,
as  I  have  said,  the  privilege  uf  HVHry
man,  woman  and  child  in  t  In*  Church
to  have  revelation,  to  have  knowledge,


G4


JOURNAL  UK  DISCOURSES,


to  be  instructed  of  the  Lord,  But
that  dues  not  give  them  the  right  to
give  revelations  to  the  Church,  God
did  not  design  ii.  God  never  has
warranted  or  sustained  any  such
action.  Therefore,  lie  that  cometh
in  by  any  other  way  than  by  the  door,
you  know  what  is  said  of  him  ;  lie
that  climhuth  over  the  wall,  he  that
receiveth  authority  from  some  source
outsit le  of  that  which  God  recog-
nizes, we  as  a  people  are  not  bound
to  receive  anything  that  may  be
communicated  to  hi  in.  Out  of  that
which  in  communicated  in  that  way,
tli ere  may  he  nineteen  truths  out
of  twenty  statements ;  but  there
will  be  error,  there  will  be  falsehood,
there  will  be  something  that  will
mislead,  because  there  is  not  the
authority  from  God  to  lead  arid  to
act.  God  has  His  own  method  of
doing  things.  He  chooses  whom
He  will  ;  He  takes  away,  and  re*
move  fro ni  the  path  those  that  He
wishes.  It  is  all  according  to  His
good  will  and  pleasure.  He  gives
unto  us  authority,  and,  as  I  have
said,  lie  confirms  it  by  signs  follow-
ing j  and  this  Church  from  the  day
of  its  organ ization*up  to  the  present
time  has  never  been  one  hour,  yea
I  may  say,  one  moment  without
revelation,  without  having  a  man
iti  our  midst  who  can  tell  us  as  a  peo-
ple the  mind  and  will  of  God,  who
can  point  out  to  us  that  which  we
should  do,  who  can  teach  us  the  doc-
trines of  Christ,  who  can  point  out
to  us  that  which  is  false  arid  incor-
rect, and  who  can,  upon  all  matters
that  cume  within  the  range  of  our
ex  pe  lie  nee,  and  that  are  necessary
f  or  us  to  attend  to  give  us  t  he  neces-
sary counsel  and  instruction,  This
lias  been  the  case  always.
Therefore,  a  man  may  receive
jni-hty  signs — I  heard  the  Prophet
Joseph,  when  I  was  a  boy,  say  that
the  tin;e  Wi  it!d  cume  when  false


ion  the  hearts
y.  and  those


prophets  would  work  mighty  mira-
cles in  the  eyes  of  the  people  of  the
^ar tli,  and  they  would  seek  to  estab-
lish their  authority  by  the  perform-
ance of  mighty  miracles,  and  we
have  heard  of  such  things  in  our
day,  since  his  death — but  this  does
not  sustain  a  man  in  claiming  to  be
leader  of  a  people,  and  to  give
revelations  from  God.  But  there
is  a  spirit  that  God  gives  ;  there  is
an  influence  that  accompanies  His
word  when  it  is  proclaimed  by  His
servants  that  seals  itself  upon  the
hearts  of  the  honest,  u

of  the  meek  and  low
who  are  living  in  close  communion
with  God  themselves  seals  upon
their  hearts  the  truth  of  that  which
He  says  :  I  have  no  fears  of  any  of
you,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  if  you
will  only  live  near  to  God.  I  said
the  leaders  of  this  Church  do  not
come  bolstering  up  their  own  claims.
It  is  not  necessary.  You  are  the
witnesses.  You  are  the  witnesses
whether  John  Taylor  is  President
of  the  Church  ;  whether  his  Coun-
selors are  the  men  they  should  be  ;
whether  the  Twelve  have  the  aut  hor-
ity they  claim  ;  whether  the  Presi-
dents of  Stakes  have  the  authority
they  claim — you  have  this  testi-
mony, you  are  our  witnesses,  and  all
the  Israel  of  God,  wherever  they
live,  are  witnesses  of  the  troth  of
these  things,  You  can  testify  be-
cause you  have  received — if  you
should  live  as  you  should  do — a
testimony  independent  of  that
which  we  can  give  to  you,  or  any
argument  that  we  may  n  ■ — you
have  received  it,  if  you  hilt  *i  receiv-
ed it  properly,  from  our  Eternal
Father.  You  received  it  in  answer
to  prayer,  direct  to  yourselves — not
through  any  intermediate  source,  not
through  any  man,  but  through  the
Eternal  Spirit  of  our  Father  descend-
upon  you  and


nig


bearing  witness


n

I


EVILS  OF  WITCHCRAFT


65


to  you — a  testimony  that  these
things  are  true.  You,  there  lore,
are  living  witnesses  of  the  truth  of
these  things,  and  know  far  your-
selves w  lie  titer  they  are  true  or
not

Now.  I  have  heard  that  there  are

#

men  among  us  who  are  professing
to  cure  witchcraft  and  other  evils
of  that  kind.  I  believe  they  call
themselves  astrologers.  More  in  in-
rious  ideas  and  practices  than  these
cannot  he  introduced  among  a  peo-
ple to  lead  them  to  destruction,  and
I  wish  to  warn  you  before  sitting
down,  in  regard  to  this,  Do  not
seek  for  those  who  have  peepstones,
for  soothsayers,  and  for  those  who
profess  to  be  able  to  counteract  the
influence  of  witchcraft.  They  who
say  so,  seek  to  play  upon  your  fVars,
they  seek  to  take  advantage  of  super-
stitious fears,  and  seek  to  use  them
for  their  own  advantage  and  bring
those  who  will  listen  to  them  in
bondage  to  an  influence  and  spirit
that  i*  as  foreign  to  the  spirit  of  God
as  hell  i*  foreign  to  heaven.  Any
man  who  professes  to  have  this  au-
thority, to  have  this  power,  and  to
use  power  outside  of  that  which  the
Priesthood  authorizes,  is  a  man  that
should  not  be  listened  to  ;  his  claims
are  false,  and  his  methods  are  from
beneath  and  not  from  God.  And  1
say  to  all  of  you,  witchcraft  you
may  defy  if  you  live  as  you  should
do — defy  it,  not  in  a  spirit  of  defiance,
not  in  a  spirit  to  bring  evil  influences
upon  you,  but  in  the  power  and
strength  of  our  Father  and  God.
No  evil  influence  of  that  kind,
if  you  live  as  you  should  do,  can
have  power  over  you;  you  are
entrenched  in  the  power  of  God,  in
the  spirit  and  gifts  of  God  ;  you
are  entrenched  round  about  so  that
none  of  these  wicked  influences  can
have  power  over  you.  I  wonder  if
Job  thought  there  was  somebody
No.  5.


bewitching  him  when  his  property

was  stolen  and  destroyed,  when  his
servants  were  killed,  when  his  son's
house  fell  and  killed  his  children,

[  when  his  boils  came  upon  hire.  I
wonder  if  he  thought  that  he  was
bewitched.  Why,  I  hear  of  some
people,  if  anything  happens  to  them,
eveli  if  any  of  their  chickens  die,
who  are  ready  to  say  :  "  I  am  he-
witched  ;  there  is  somebody  bewitch-
ing me/'  Such  expressions  and
ideas  are  prompted  by  the  worst  folly
that  ever  possessed  the  mind  of  a
Latter-day  Slain t  Do  not  such  per-
sons know  that  not  a  hair  of  their
1  leads  can  fall  to  the  ground  un-
noticed ?  Has  not  the  Savior  said
so,  our  Lord  and  Master !  And  if
so,  do  you  not  think  He  will  can!  for
us  ?  Do  not  your  angels  st;iud
continually  before  the  face  of  our
Father  in  heaven?  And  yet  shall
people  unto  whom  God  has  made
such  glorious  promises,  and  upon
whom  He  has  poured  out  such
glorious  blessings — shall  they  bow
to  these  wicked  influences,  these

!  spirits  that  are  not  of  God,  that  are
full  of  vile n ess  and  darkness  and
evil,  and  do  that  which  they  say,
and  seek  to  wizards  and  to  sooth-
sayers, and  to  diviners  and  to  men
and  women  who,  by  hidden  works  of
darkness,  profess  to  obtain  knowl-
edge— will  the  Latter-day  Saints
do  this  to  take  their  vile  remedies,
and  if  their  children  are  sick,  seek
unto  them  1  The  men  and  women
who  dm  this — I  do  not  want  to

|  prophecy  evil  about  them  —are  in
great  danger  of  losing  the  spirit  and
power  of  God,  and  having  it  with-
drawn from  them,  and  if  they  do  not
repent  it  will  most  assuredly  be  with-
drawn from  them.  All  who  take
these  methods  and  encourage  tVse
practices  1  say  that  the  an^er  of
Almighty  God  will  descend  nun
them  unless  they  repent,  and  they  will

Vol.  XXVI.


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


find  that  their  hidden  works  of  dark-  i
ness  will  not  avail  them  when  the
Lord  I  eels  after  th*jm,  and  when  His
condemnation  rests  upon  them ;
they  \\  ill  find  this  out  to  their  ever-
lasting sorrow.  Men  who  are  guilty
of  these  practices,  and  who  seek  to
iead  away  the  unwary,  and  to  prey
upon  the  ignorant  and  unsophis-
ticated, and  to  take  advantage  of
their  fears,  and  instil  superstition
into  the  mind,  cannot  escape  con-
detonation.  These  methods  are  not
of  God,  and  beware  of  them,  all
of  you,  and  tell  all  your  friends  that
it  is  .sinful  in  the  sight  uf  (.Jod  to
yield  to  such  influences.  Pray,
rather,  to  the  Father,  in  the  name
of  Jesus,  to  let  His  angels  be  around


about  you,  to  let  His  power  encircle
you,  t©  let  His  Spirit  be  in  your
hearts  ami  in  your  habitations,  and
rest  down  upon  your  little  ones,  and
be  of  strong  faith,  and  ^iy,  like  Job,
"Though  He  slay  me,  yet  will  J  trust
in  Htm."  Yes,  that  righteous  man,
though  God  should  slay  him,  yet  he
would  not  fail  to  trust  Him  to  the
uttermost

Let  these  truths  rest  upon  your
minds  And  be  not  forgotten,  and  let
us  seek  as  a  people  to  have  the  gifts
and  power  and  blessings  of  our  Fa-
ther and  God  resting  upon  us  con-
tinually. I  pray  God  for  this  bless-
ing to  be  with  you  always,  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,
Delivered  in  the  Stake  Meetiuq  I  [misc.  Prow,  Sunday  Morning,  November

r , 80th, 188  A.  rfi


REPORTED  BY  JOHN  IRV1KE.


THE  GATHERING  —  OUR  TERRITORIAL  CONDITION  AND  ORGANIZATION —
THE  ETERNAL  N ATI  - RE  OF  ol'U  COVENANTS — THE  LAW  OF  ANCIENT
ISRAEL,  WHICH  REQUIRED  A  MAN  TO  MARRY  HIS  BROTHER'S
WIDOW — SETTLEMENT  OF  THE  DIFFICULTY  CONNECTED  WITH  THE
UTAH  LAKE  AND  JORDAN  RIVER  DAM  —  THE  FLOOD  —  THE  LORD
WILL  SUSTAIN  AND  UPHOLD  US  —  WE  MUST  NOT  ASSOCIATE  WITH
THE  WICKED.


I  AM  pleased  to  have  an  opportu-
nity of  meeting  with  you  in  your
•conference,  and  of  talking  with  you


on  some  principles  nssoci  sited  with
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  in
which  we,  all  of  us;  are  more  or  less


WHAT  WE  A  TEH  HERE  FOR


67


interested.  We  are  gathered  together
from  among  the  nations  of  the  earth.
We  have  assembled  ourselves  thus
together  because  of  a  work  which
the  Lord  has  commenced  in  the  in-
terests of  humanity,  not  only  per-
taining to  ourselves,  hut  pertaining
to  the  world  of  mankind.  In  obe-
dience to  the  revelations  of  His
will,  and  the  command  that  He  has
given  unto  His  servants  through  the
restoration  of  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel, we  have  many  of  us  gone  forth
anion i;  the  nations  of  the  earth  to
proclaim  those  principles  which  God
has  revealed  for  the  salvation,  hap-
piness and  exaltation  of  the  human
family.  We  have  been  gathered
together  according  to  the  word  of
the  Lord  which  He  spake  by  His
ancient  Prophets  who  bare  lived  in
the  world  in  generations  that  are
past,  and  who,  under  the  influence
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  have  given  a
very  graphic  account  of  the  gat  her
ing  of  the  people  together,  in  the
last  days  j  and  of  the  instructions
they  should  receive  preparatory  to
other  events  that  will  necessarily
transpire  upon  the  earth,  as  spoken
of  by  all  the  holy  Prophets  since  the
world  was*  We  are  living  in  what
is  called  "  the  dispensation  of  the
fullness  of  times,"  wherein  it  is  sain
God  will  gather  together  all  things
in  one,  whether  they  be  things  lit
the  heavens  or  things  on  the  earth.

And  wv.  are  gathered  together  to
this  land  of  Zion.  (which  has  been
spoken  of  also  in  the  Scrip; u res)
where  we  might  learn  more  per-
fectly the  law  of  God,  arid  carry  out
th$se  principles  which  lie  has
made  known  for  our  information,
for  our  instruction,  for  our  guidance
aud  direction,  as  regards  the  cmnse
that  we  should  pursue,  and  the
blessings  that  should  attend  those
wdio  have  obeyed  His  laws  and  kept
His  cjimnand  merits. We  are  here


really  to  build  up  and  purify  the
Church  of  the  living  God.  We  are
lie  re  to  build  up  and  establish  the
kingdom  of  God  We  are  here  also
to  build  up  a  Zion  unto  our  God,
wherein  His  laws  can  be  taught,  the
principles  of  eternal  truth  be  com-
municate-I,  the  relationship  aud
communication  opened  hetween  the
heavens  and  the  earth,  aud  men
placed  in  a  position  whereby  they
will  be  enabled  to  act  intelligently,
in  regard  to  all  matters  pertaining
to  this  world  as  well  as  to  the  world
that  is  to  come.

We  have  been  told,  and  it  has
beer*  prophesied  of,  that  great
calamities  will  overtake  the  nations
of  the  earth.  One  of  the  ancient
Prophets  (Isaiah,  in  the  24th  chap-
ter) makes  use  of  very  peculiar  lan-
guage mi  relation  to  this  matter.  He
says  :  J  "  \. \t&*** > 1

"  Behold,  the  Lord  maketh  the
ear tli  empty,  and  maketh  it  waste,
and  turneth  it  upside  down,  and
scattereth  abroad  the  inhabitants
thereof.

'*  And  it  shall  be,  as  with  the  peo-
ple, so  with  the  priest  ;  as  with  the
servant,  so  with  his  master  ;  as  with
the  maid,  so  with  her  mistress  ;  as
with  the  buyer,  so  with  the  seller;
as  with  the  lender,  so  with  the  bor-
rower ;  as  with  the  taker  of  usury,
g$  with  the  giver  of  usury  to  him.

'•The land shall be  utterly

emptied,  and  utterly  spoiled ;  for

the  Lord  hath  spoken  this  word.  *
*  *  *  #  *

"The  earth  also  is  defiled  under
the  inhabitants  thereof;  because
they  have  transgressed  the  laws,
changed  the  ordinance,  broken  the
everlasting  covenant.

'*  Therefore  hath  the  curse  de-
voured the  earth,  and  they  that  dwell
therein  are  desolate  :  therefore  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  burned,
and  few  men  left."


GS


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


In  relation  to  these  matters  we  as
a  people  have  been  very  much  inter-
ested, an*]  these  things  .have  been
spoken  of  for  a  long,  long  time.  I
have  been  preaching  them  between
forty  and  fifty  years,  ami  a  great
many  others  who  are  now  living,
have  borne  testimony  of  these  tilings;
and  have  gathered  together  a^  we
have  done,  This  plates  us  in  a  verv
peculiar  position,  for  we  not  only
bring  our  religion  with  us,  and  the
spiritual  ideas  connected  with  it —
we  not  only  bring  these  things  that
are  spiritual,  but  we  bring  our  bodies
along  with  us  which  ai«j  very  tem-
poral ;  and  when  we  gather  as  we
have  done  here  in  this  land  and  form
a  people  such  as  we  are,  we  neces-
sarily become  part  of  t  he  body  politic
of  the  nation  with  which  we  are
associated — that  is,  of  the  United
States.  We  are  organized  here  in
a  Territorial  capacity,  as  other
Territories  are  organized,  and  are
now  living  iu  what  was  before  the
unsettled  poitious  of  the  Ulrited
States  ;  we  are  organized  according
to  the  geneial  provisions  made  and
provided  by  the  nation  in  which
we  live,  and  we  are  organized  under
what  b  called  an  Organic  Act,
whereby  the  action  of  the  (Govern-
ment *of  the  United  Slates  has
plated  us  in  the  position  that  we
now  occupy.  We  have,  for  instance,
as  other  Territories  have,  a  governor.
We  have  district  judges  of  the
United  States;  we  have  a  V.  S.
marshal,  an  attorney,  etc.,  etc.,
and  the  same  kihd  of  officers  that
exist  iu  other  Territories  that  aie
under  and  associated  with  the  gov-
e  i  men t  of  the  United  States.  We
have  granted  unto  us  in  the  instru-
ment called  the  Oigauic  Act  certain
rights  ami  piivileges.  We  send  a
Delegate  to  Congress,  and  are  au-
thorized so  to  do.  We  have  our
Legislature,  and  have  ibe  right  of


voting  for  it We  have  our  County

i  Courts  and  Probate  Courts,
as  c^t her  Territories  have,  and  are
placed  under  general  regulations
pertaining  to  these  matters  as  exist
itk  the  order  that  prevails]  n  the  United
States.  Iu  this  respect  we  act  as
others  do  -that  is,  we  are  placed
pretty  much  under  the  same  laws,
not  quite ;  pretty  much  under  ihe
same  form  of  government,  not  quite;
we  have  certain  rights  and  privileges
ceded  to  us,  not  like  others  have
exactly  ;  but  to  a  very  great  extent
similar  to  others.  In  this  respect
we  act  and  operate  as  other  citizens
of  the  United  States  do,  and  in  this
respect  we  have  rights,  privileges
and  immunities  as  others  have  so  far
as  tlu-v  go.  But  they  don't  go  with
us  ipiite  to  the  extent  that  they  do
with  other  people  under  the  same

!  circumstances.  Nevertheless,  per-
haps we  enjoy  as  many  privileges
and  as  many  rights  as  we  are  capable
of  comprehending  and  of  magnify-
ing, and  it  may  be  possible  in  the
inscrutable  wisdom  of  the  Lord,
that  we  should  be  subjected  to  cer-
tain kinds  of  prohibition  and  enact-
ments, that  differ  materially  in
many  respects  from  those  of  other
people,  But  so  it  is,  and  these
things  are  quite  as  beneficial  to  us
as  other  things.  It  we  had  nothing
to  cope  with  or  to  contend  with,  we
might  feel  as  the  Methodists  do
sometimes  when  they  talk  a  lout

!  sitting  and  singing  themselves  away
to  everlasting  bliss;  but  as  we  are
not  going  to  the  same  place  as  they
are,  it  don't  make  much  difference  ;
they  can  take  their  road,  and  we  will
take  ours.  We  have  other  ideas  of
a  religious  nature  from  those  enter-
tained by  other  people. But  take

I  it  as  a  whole  we  enjoy  very  many
^reat  blessings.  We  are  living  here
in  a  goodly  land. We  have  many

,  privileges  in  this  land  :  and  in  our


orU  BLESSINGS  I  'nME  FIH  >M  COR


09


endeavors  to  preach  the  Gospel  and
gather  together  the  people  under  the
blessing  and  guidance  and  direction
of  the  Almighty,  we  have  been  very
successful  thus  far.  Although  in
our  history  there  are  many  things
which  have  been  unpleasant  for  peo-
ple to  meet  with — such  as  mobbing*
and  drivings,  killings  and  imprison-
merit,  and  a  variety  of  other  things
that  are  not  pleasant  to  the  feelings
of  human  nature,  yet  upon  the
▼hole  the  Lord  has  controlled  these
things  for  our  good,  just  in  accord*
anee  with  the  words  of  the  Psalmist,
where  lie  says  :  "  Surely  the  wrath
of  man  shall  praise  thee  :  the  re-
mainder of  wrath  shall  thou  restrain/'
It  lias  not  been  pleasant  for  people
to  be  driven,  hiiy  as  I  have  been,
and  as  many  of  you  have  been  from
our  homes  ;  but,  then,  we  had  to
endure  it,  and  there  is  no  use  grunt-
ing about  it  We  had  to  do  it  in
Missouri,  We  were  driven  from
our  homes  there.  Then  we  went  to
Illinois,  and  at  first  we  were  treated
very  kindly.  But  when  we  began
to  grow  and  increase,  they  did  not
like  our  religion,  and  they  don't  like
it  to-day,  and  we  don't,  fancy  t heir's
much  either  ;  so  on  the  religious
question  there  is  not  much  love  lost
We  had  to  leave  Illinois  and  come
here.  It  w  as  not  very  agreeable,  as
I  have  said,  to  have  to  leave  our
homes  and  our  farms  and  come  out
here  to  live  amon^  the  Redskins:
for  this  was  a  desert  when  we  first
came  here.  It  was  not  full  of  beau
tiful  farms  and  houses,  orchards  and
gardens,  cities,  villages  and  hamlets.
It  was  a  desert  where  the  red  man
roamed  unmolested,  where  the
^cricket*  had  full  sway,  and  where
the  white  man  had  scarcely  trodden.
There  had  been  a  few  [kiss  through
before  we  came  here,  and  it  had
been  discovered  perhaps  a  hundred
years  or  tw©  by  some  travelers  that


had  existed  in  those  days  ;  but  to
all  intents  and  purposes  it  was  what
was  called  then  and  marked  on  the
maps  as  the  "  Great  American
Desert'1  Since  then  the  solitary
place  has  been  made  glad,  and  the
desert  has  been  made  to  blossom  as
the  rose.  The  Lord 'has  been  very
kind  and  merciful  to  us,  and  opened
out  our  way,  and  provided  for  our
wants,  and  although  we  may  have
some  little  things  to  complain  of —
all  of  winch  are  very  trifling  in
comparison  to  many  things  that
exist  among  other  peoples — yet  are
we 1  abundantly  blessed  all  over  the
land.  Is  there  anybody  here  in  your
conference,  or  is  there  at iy body  in
any  of  the  conferences  of  the  Stakes
of  Zion,  that  lacks  the  necessaries
of  life?  Is  there  anybody  that
is  destitute  of  food,  or  of  clothing,
or  of  habitations?  Not  that  I
know  of,  and  if  there  are  any  such
tilings,  they  ought  not  to  exist
among  us,

Now,  then,  if  we  are  blessed  we
have  not  to  thank  any  man,  or  any
set  of  men  for  it  If  we  are  pro-
vided for,  we  have  not  obtained  it
from  anybody  else,  but  from  the
Lord  God  of  Israel,  who  has  watched
over  and  protected  His  people  just
as  He  said  He  would  do.  He  said
it  was  His  business  to  take  care  of
Hi.s  Saints,  but,  then,  it  is  our  busi-
ness to  be  Saints,  And  being  gath-
ered together  as  we  are  under  these
circumstances,  we  are  organized  ac-
cording to  certain  laws  laid  down  in
the  order  of  God,  and  given  by  reve-
lation of  God,  for  our  guidance  and
direction,  wherein  we  ate  instructed
in  things  pertaining  to  this  world
and  to  the  next;  pertaining  to  things
that  are  past,  things  that  are  present,
and  tilings  that  are  to  come — per-
taining to  time  and  eternity.  By
this  means  man,  the  noblest  work
of  God,  is  brought  into  closer  rela-


70


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


tionsliip  with  God  than  he  has  been
for  generations  past  Jinny  things
have  been  revealed,  and  there  will
be  many  more  yet  revealed  that
have  been  hidden  from  before  the
foundation  of  the  world  according
to  the  word  of  God  to  us,  and  we  are
trying  to  act  wisely,  pindently  and
intelligently,  to  live  and  act  and
conduct  ourselves  in  a  manner  that
will  be  honorable  before  God,  that
will  he  honorable  before  the  holy
am  els,  that  will  be  honorable  before
all  honorable  men  and  all  men  who
love  righteousness  and  truth  and
virtue,  and  who  are  inspired  by  the
principle  and  integrity  and  by  thoee
principles  that  emanate  from  God,
and  that  always  lift  up  and  exalt
and  elevate  those  that  have  tan-
braced  and  are  governed  by  them.
These  prin cities  are  revealed  to  us
according  to  the  laws  which  God  has
introduced,  and  through  the  medium
of  the  Holy  Priesthood,  which  He
has  again  restored  unto  the  earth,
and  we  are  here  to  learn  His  laws
that  we  may  walk  in  His  paths.
We  are  here  that  we  may  build  tem-
ples unto  His  name,  and  that  we
may  administer  in  those  temples*
This  is  the  object  of  our  being  gath-
ered together,  that  we  may  l  ie  brought
into  a  closer  union  and  relationship
to  God  our  heavenly  Father,  that  we
may  be  instructed  in  the  laws  of  life,
and  that  we  may  comprehend  the
relationship  that  exists  between  us
and  Him.  And  while  we  are  looking
for  calamity  and  trouble — wars,
pestilence  and  famine,  and  all  those
things  that  have  been  spolu-n  of  by
the  holy  Prophets — yet  there  is  to
be  a  voice  heard  before  that  day
crying  :  "  Come  out  of  her  my  peo-
ple, that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her
sins  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her
plagues" — that  is,  speaking  of  a  cer-
tain something  that  is  called  Baby-
lorn  Well,  we  have  been  doing  that.


and  Ave  have  been  gathered  together
that  we  may  comprehend  those  prin-
ciples of  which  1  have  spoken.  We
have  come  here  that  we  may  enter
into  covenants  that  are  eternal,  and
winch  continue  behind  the  veil.
And  we  expect  that  while  we  are
organizing  Zion  here  upon  the  earth,
and  seeking  to  establish  the  king-
dom of  God,  we  have  those  who  are
co  operating  with  us  above,  those
who  are  building  ami  preparing  for
us  in  the  heavens  mansions  to  go  to.
Jesus  went  to  prepare  mansions  for
those  of  His  followers  in  His  day.
Says  He  :  In  my  "Father's  house  are
many  mansions  :  if  it  were  not  so,  I
would  have  told  you*  I  go  to  pre-
pare a  place  for  you.  And  if  1  go
and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will
come  again,  and  receive  you  unto
myself;  that  where  1  am  there  ye
may  be  also."  There  is  something
very  peculiar  about  those  things,
about  I  lie  preparing  of  those  man-
si- ins  for  those  that  go  behind  the
veil.  Hut  it  is  for  us  to  learn  to
comprehend  all  these  matters.  We
read  about  beautiful  cities.  We
read  of  the  new  Jerusalem  and
the  old  Jerusalem.  We  talk  about
cities  the  most  magnificent  that  can
be  thought  of.  Do  you  think  they
grow  out  of  nothing?  No,  they
have  to  be  nmle  just  as  we  make
things  here,  only  more  intelligently.
What  is  meant  by  a  certain  saying  :
u  Make  to  yourselves  friends  of  the
man  in  Kin  of  unrighteousness  ;  that
when  ye  fail,  they  may  receive  you
into  everlasting  habitations.*  Ah  !
indeed.  Well,  you  can  guess  what
it  is, I  will  leave  it  with  you.

People  find  a  good  deal  of  fault
with  us  about  our  having  more  wives
than  one;  but,  then,  that  is  nothing;
we  attribute  that  to  their  ignorance.
If  they  were  better  informed  they
would  know  better.  Abraham  was
a  friend  of  God,  and  he  practiced.


•  1


OUR  COVENANTS  ARE  ETERNAL.


71


polygamy,  under  the  direction  of  t  he
Lord  ;  Davit  1  was  a  man  after  God's
own  heart,  and  he  had  wives  given
to  him  of  the  Lord*  They  would
have  put  them  in  the  Penitentiary,
if  they  had  btvu  here  to-day.  But
then  because  of  many  things  that
transpire  in  these  days,  the  Lord
will  make  the  earth  empty.  Why  ?
Because  they  have  transgressed  the
laws,  changed  the  ordinances,  broken
the  everlasting  covenant  We  are
gathered  together  here  in  order  that
we  may  observe  the  laws  which  have
been  restored  unto  us,  and  keep  the
everlasting  ^covenant.  While  they
make  covenants  for  time  only,  we
make  covenants  for  time  and  for  eter-
nity. There  is  the  difference.  Ours
is  everlasting ;  theirs  until  deatli
do  them  part.  We  as  wives  and
husbands  expect  to  be  associated
after  death  in  the  eternities  that  are
to  come*  We  believe  in  an  everlast-
ing covenant,  and  i si  an  everlasting
Gospel.  An  angel  was  to  bring
the  everlasting  Gospel,  and  every- ,
thing  associated  with  it  is  everlast-
ing. It  existed  before  we  came  here.
It  exists  with  us  in  time,  it  readies
into  eternity,  and  people  that  do  not
have  the  Gospel  have  no  everlasting
covenants.  They  think  we  are  very
low,  on  the  one  hand,  because  we
cannot  comply  with  their  ideas,  and
we  think  they  are  very  ignorant  be-
cause they  don't  understand  ours.
But  so  it  is.  We  are  here  to  do  the
will  of  God,  to  carry  out  His  law  in
all  humility  and  faithfulness  to  God
our  h  ea ve  uly  Fa  1 1  l  e  r — fai  t h  f u  1  n  ess
aw  men  to  the  nation  in  which  we
live — faithfulness  to  all  men — to
make  known  the  things  that  God
has  communicated  to  us.

Now,  then,  in  speaking  of  coven-
ants, let  me  follow  that  subject  a
little  further.  Have  we  to  do  with
time?  Yes.  Have  we  to  do  with
eternity  t Yes. Did  we  exist  be-


fore w<*  came  here  I  Yes,  and  we
shall  exist  when  we  leave  here.  The
principles  that  we  are  in  possession
of,  go  back  into  eternity  and  reach
forward  into  eternity.  We  are  here
in  a  state  of  probation,  and  God,
in  ihe  infinitude  of  His  mercy  and
kindness,  has  seen  proper  to  bring
us  together  as  we  are,  at  id  l\vm  we
are  nothing  to  brag  of  when  He  has
got  us  here.  Still  while  many  have
rejected  the  truth  we  have  receive  I
it+  God  has  given  us  His  grace  t  >
enable  us  to  comprehend  the  Gospel
and  to  give  us  power  to  obey  it.  and
some  of  us  have  kept  faithful  for
quite  a  long  time,  and  it  is  pretty
hard  work  for  some  of  us  to  be  faith-
ful. It  is  good  to  be  a  saint.  When
we  get  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  upon
us,  we  feel  to  rejoice  exceedingly,
and  sometimes  when  we  don't  have
much  of  that,  it  feels  rather  what  we
user  I  to  call  lrird-slediliiw  But  there
is  nothing  that  makes  tilings  go  so
well  among  the  saints  of  God  as  liv-
ing their  religion  and  keeping  the
commandments  of  Go  i,  and  when
they  don't  do  that,  then  things  go
awkward  and  cross  and  every  other
way  but  the  right  way  ;  but  when
they  live  their  religion  and  keep  the
commandments,  "  their  peace  flows
as  a  river,  and  their  righteousness
as  the  waves  of  the  sea."

Now,  in  regard  to  these  matters
there  is  a  subject  I  have  referred  to
at  one  or  two  of  the  conferences  we
have  visited  lately,  and  1  will  mention
it  here.  The  ancient  Israelites  had
a  very  peculiar  law  among  them,  and
yet  it  was  a  very  proper  law,  namely,
that  if  a  man  died,  his  brother  was
to  take  his  wife  and  raise  up  seed  to
him.  That  would  he  a  curious  kind
idea  among  the  world,  where  thej
did  not  believe  anything  of  that  kind;
singular  kind  of  a  doctrine  ;  but  it
was  a  thing  that  was  practiced  among
the  Israelites,  and  it  is  a  thing  we


72


JOURNAL  OV  DISCOURSES.


ought  to  be  practicing  anions  us.
That  is,  if  a  man  has  a  brother  t  end
who  has  left  a  widow,  let  the  woman
left  in  that  kind  of  a  position  be
just  as  well  off  as  a  woinru  who  has
a  husband.  Here  is  a  principle
developed  which  then  existed,  and  I
will  speak  a  little  on  that  subject
and  show  certain  reasons  and  certain
whys  and  wherefores  forthe* e  tilings.
If  a  man  should  die  and  leave  a  Drift)
and  she  should  be  childless,  why  not
her  be  taken  care  of  as  well  as  any
body  else  ?  Would  not  that  be  just.
Would  not  that  be  proper  1  Would
not  that  he  right  ?  Yes.  Hut  says
the  man,  "  1  do  not  know  about
that.  I  would  rather  ►raise  up  seed
for  myself/'  Perhaps  you  might
do  both. You  might  if  the  law  did

not  prevent  you  cairying  out  the
law  of  God  in  the  United  States.
If  these  worthy  ancients  had  lived
here,  they  would  not  have  allowed
them  to  cany  out  such  a  law.  Still
there  is  a  principle  of  that  kind  exists.
Why  should  it  not  be  put  into  prac-
tice t  We  do  believe,  you  know,
more  or  less  in  this  principle.  But
then  there  are  a  certain  class  of  men
who  will  say  :  "  1  would  nuher
somebody  else  attended  to  that
business  ;  I  would  rather  attend  to
my  own  affairs,  and  let  everybody
attend  to  theirs."  All  right.  Suppose
you  do  it  We  will  carry  the  tiling
a  little  further.  This  woman's  hus-
band has  gone  behind  the  veil,  and
he  is  operating  there,  and  probably
he  will  be  called  Upon  in  a  family
capacity  to  look  after  those  that  were
coming  there,  or  help  prepare  man-
sions for  somebody  who  is  yet  on  the
earth,  as  Jems  did  for  His  disciples.
He  has  left  His  wife  behind  here,
but  lie  is  there  operating  for  others.
Now,  what  would  you  think  of
making  to  yourselves  friends  of  the
Mammon  of  unrighteousness ;  that,
when  you  fail,  they  may  receive  you


into  everlasting  habitations  1  What
would  you  think  of  that]  We  talk
about  angels  taking  care  of  us,  and
all  sorts  of  things  like  that.  But  I
expect  that  when  we  get  behind  the
veil  we  shall  have  business  to  do  as
much  as  we  have  here,  and  one
thing  will  be,  perhaps,  to  look  af-
ter the  arrangement  of  our  family
affairs,  ami  things  associated  there-
with, f  :  '  "  ' i  f"  '  j:*t  5-  '  ,
Now, then,  a  man  here  says  :

i(  I  would  not  like  to  embark  in  a

thing  of  that  sort — marry  a  broth-
er's wife,  and  raise  up  seed  for  him."
What  did  they  do  with  such  men  in
olden  times!  The  woman  had  an
opportunity  of  loosing  his  shoe  ami
spitting  in  the  man's  face  that  would
not  raise  up  seed  unto  his  brother,
and  it  was  said  :  "  So  shall  it  be  done
unto  that  man  that  will  not  build
up  his  brother's  house.  And  his
name  shall  be  called  in  Israel,  the
house  of  btnt  that  hath  his  shoe
looser]."  (See  Deut.  xxv,  5  to  10.
See  also  Ruth  iii  and  iv.)

But  we  will  go  a^atn  to  the  other
side,  and  find  those  there  engaged
in  doing  certain  works  in  the  heav-
ens  and  preparing  mansions  for
those  that  are  coming,  Now,  when
Jesus  went  to  prepare  mansions  I
do  not  suppose  that  He  did  it  Him-
self. He  had  plenty  of  hands
to  set  to  work  of  that  sort,  same  as
we  have  here.  This  man  that  has
died  hears  his  brother  say,'1  I  would
rather  attend  to  my  own  affairs,"
and  lie  says,  "All  right,  come  here
and  attend  to  your  a  flairs  also.  If
you  are  selfish  perhaps  I  will  turn
selfish  too."  Now,  what  is  sauce  for
the  goose  is  sauce  for  the  gander.
That  is  the  way  it  presents  itself  to
me  in  relation  to  these  matters.  If
a  woman  is  left  by  her  husband,  let
her  have  somebody  to  take  care  of
her ;  if  not  her  husband's  brother,
then  his  next  of  kin. That  is  the


THE  UTAH  LAKE  AND  JORDAN  RIVER  DAM.


73


order  so  far  as  I  understand  it,  and
I  wanted  to  say  so  nutch  in  relation
to  these  matters.  Why  should  not
women  have  equal  rights  with  men?
They  have  these  rights  and  they
oiinht  to  be  sustained  and  maintain-
ed  among  us  as  Saints.  We  ought
to  look  after  the  welfare  and  interest
of  all

1  shall  now  refer  to  what  is  known
as  Utah  Lake  and  Jordan  river  dam
water  question.  This  is  a  suhject
that  has  troubled  you  a  great  deal
and  upon  which  there  has  been
much  awkwardness  and  unpleasant
feeling.  It  was  adjusted  ,some  time
ago,  but  the  agreement,  it  appears,
was  not  carried  out :  in  consequence
of  which  considerable  trouble  was
likely  to  ensue.  President  Angus
M,  Cannon  showed  me  a  letter  in
which  it  was  stated  that  a  law-suit
was  commenced  in  regard  to  the
affair,  some  of  the  parties,  thereto
being  outside  of  the  Church  and
some  inside.  In  commencing  this
suit  those  inside  the  Chinch  were
not  taking  the  right,  course,  and  they
would  have  subjected  themselves  to
be  cut  off  the  Church,  because  God
has  given  us  laws  in  relation  to  these
matters  whereby  they  can  be  properly
regulated  wisely  and  in  accordance
with  His  laws.  Brother  Cannon
(who  is  President  of  the  Salt  Lake
Stake)  came  to1  me  and  wanted  to
know  what  to  do.  He  said  he  could
not  regulate  these  matters  as  his
jurisdiction  did  not  extend  beyond
Salt  Lake  Stake,  nor  could  President
Smoot  becau.se  his  jurisdiction  did
not  go  beyond  Utah  Stake.  Here
was  a  dilemma.  What  shall  be  done  *i
Could  I  show  him  a  way  out  of  the
difficulty  1  1  told  him  I  could;  that
a  council  had  been  provided  through
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  for  just
such  cases.  Some  people  don't  know
anything  about  that,  but  yet  that  is
a  tact. They  did  not  know  that  it


had  ever  been  used  before.  It  is  a
council  of  twelve  High  Priests  over
which  the  First  Presidency  of  the
Church  should  preside  to  adjudicate
upon  difficult  cases  that  might  arise
in  the  Church,  and  this  should  be
the  highest  council  in  the  Church,
and  from  which  there  should  be  no
appeal  We  called  together  this
council  and  met  here  in  this  house,
and  the  parties  were  heard — some
outside  erf  the  Church  and  some  in-
side. Finally  we  got  the  matter  ad-
justed, and  I  am  informed  that  the
decision  is  satisfactory  to  all  parties.
The  council  was  composed  of  the
following  brethren,  viz.  :  Abraham
O.  Smoot,  President  of  Utah  Stake;
Angus  M.  Cannon.  President  of  Salt
Lake  Stake  ;  \\  arren  X.  Dusenberry,
Probate  Judge  of  Utah  County;
Elias  A.  Smith,  Probate  Judge  of
Salt  Lake  County;  Jonathan  S.  Page
and  A.  D.  Hold  a  way.  Selectmen  of
Utah  County;  Ezekiel  Holtnan  and
Jesse  W.  Fox,  Jr,  Selectmen  of  Salt
Lake  County  ;  Presiding  Bishop
Win,  B.  Preston  ;  John  T.  Caiue,
Delegate  to  Congress  from  Utah  ;
Bishops  Thos.  R.  Cutler  aud  John
E.  Booth.  After  the  first  session  of
the  council,  in  consequence  of  Hon.
John  T.  Caine  being  required  at  Salt
Lake  City  on  official  business,  Elder
L.  John  Nuttall  was  appointed  a
member  of  the  council  in  place  of
Elder  Caiue,  Myself  and  Brother
George  Q.  Cannon  presided  in  all  the
meetings  of  the  Council.  In  se-
lecting  the  council  we  selected  men
from  the  two  counties  who  were  con-
versant with  count)  affairs,  and  both
counties  were  equally  represented.
But  some  people  will  say — How  is
it  the  High  Council  could  not  settle
the  question  1  Because  the  High
Council  in  Utah  Stake  has  no  juris-
diction  over  affairs  in  Salt  Lake
Stake,  nor  has  the  High  Council  of
Salt  Lake  Stake  any  jurisdiction


74


JOURNAL OV  DISCOURSES.


over  affairs  in  Utah  Stake,  and  the  f
other  council  was  formed  just  to
meet  such  an  emergency, i  speak
of  this  fnr  your  information  ;  and,  .
as  I  have  said,  when  the  matter  I
is thoroughly  completed,  it  will
prove to he satisfactory  to  all
parties,

.Now,  I  want  to  read  you  a  curious
Scripture.  We  talk  a  goad  deal
about  water,  and  about  certain  laws
—  laws  of  hydraulics  and  hydro-'
statics — we  have  had  a  good  deal  of
talk  about  these  things  lately,  I
have  heard  some  very  singular
remarks  made  pertaining  to  the  I
waters  of  the  Utah  Lake  by  Brother
Madden,  who  has  kept  a  very  accurate
account  of  the  condition  of  the  waters
of  the  lake  under  various  circumstan-
ces for  a  great  number  of  years.
Among  other  things  he  said  that  it
was  very  difficult  to  tell  how  and  in
what  manner  the  waters  of  the  lake
were  sometimes  increased.  That
he  had  frequently  seen  large  fount-
ains or  springs  rising  in  the  lake,  |
that  he  should  think  furnished  more
water  than  any  of  the  rivers  that
flowed  into  it — and  these  springs
were  very  fluctuating,  so  much  so,  !
that  it  was  found  very  difficult  to
make  any  accurate  calculations  per-
taining thereto.

It  is  thought  and  so  stated  by
some  writers  that  there  are  subter-
raneous passages  for  water  flowing
fiom  Luke  Superior.

This  may  appear  strange  to  some.
But  in  regard  to  the  flood,  the  laws
governing  hydraulics,  as  we  under-
stand them,  were  not  strictly  carried
out  on  that  occasion.  Speaking  of
the  flood  we  read  :

"  And  it  came  to  pass  after  seven
days,  that  the  waters  of  the  flood
were  upon  the  earth.

44  In  the  six  hundredth  year  of
Xoah's  life,  in  the  second  mouth,
the  seventh  day  of  the  month,  the  j


panic  day  were  all  the  fountains  of
the  great  deep  broken  up,  and
the  windows  of  heaven  were
opened."  T  , :  *  .,■-',<*;  >>;  I

What  was  done  ?  "  The  windows
of  heaven  were  opened,"  ami  the
immense  bodies  of  waters  that  exist
in  the  upper  firmament  were  let
down,  or  as  it  is  expressed,  "the
windows  of  heaven  were  opened."
What  else]  14  The  same  day  were
all  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep
broken  up."  You  have  got  a  Brig-
hu:n  Young  Academy  here.  I  would
like  to  give  the  professors  and  pupils
of  that  establishment  a  problem  to
solve,  and  that  is — Mow  they  could
manage  to  get  enough  water  out  of
the  seas,  and  out  of  the  oceans,  and
out  of  the  rivers,  and  out  of  the
clouds,  to  cover  the  tops  of  these
mountains  and  fifteen  cubits  above,
and  let  that  spread  all  over  the  earth  1
1  would  like  to  know  by  what  known
law  the  immersion  of  the  dobe  could
he  accomplished.  It  is  explained
herein  a  few  words  :  "The windows
of  heaven  were  opened" — .that  is,
the  waters  that  exist  throughout  the
space  surrounding  the  earth  from
whence  come  these  clouds  from  which
the  rain  descends.  That  was  one
cause.  Another  cause  was  **  the
fountains  of  the  great  deep  were
broken  up"— that  is  something  be-
yond the  oceans,  something  outside
of  the  seas,  some  lcservoirs  of
which  we  have  no  knowledge,  were
made  to  contribute  to  this  event,
and  the  waters  were  let  loose  by  the
hand  and  by  the  power  of  God  ;  for
God  said  He  would  bring  a  flood
upon  the  earth  and  lie  brought  it,
but  Me  had  to  let  loose  the  fountains
of  the  great  deep,  and  pour  out  the
waters  from  there,  and  when  the
flood  commenced  to  subside,  we  are
told  "  that  the  fountains  also  of  the
deep  and  the  windows  of  heaven
were  stopped,  and  the  rain  from


GOD  CONTROLS  THE  FOUNTAINS  OF  WATER.


75


heaven  was  restrained,"  an{l  the
waters  returned  from  oft'  the  earth."
"Where  did  they  go  to  ?  From  whence
they  came.  Now,  I  will  show  you
something  else  on  the  back  of  that.
Some  people  talk  very  philosophically
about  tidal  waves  coming  along.
But  the  question  is— How  could  you
get  a  tidal  wave  out  of  the  Pacific
ocean,  say,  to  cover  the  Siena
Nevadas!  But  the  Bible  does  not
tell  us  it  was  a  tidal  wave.  It  sim-
ply tells  us  that  "all  the  high  hills
that  were  under  the  whole  heaven
Were  covered.  Fifteen  cubits
upwards  did  the  waters  prevail  :
and  the  mountains  were  covered."
That  is,  the  earth  was  immersed.
It  was  a  period  of  baptism.

I  will  find  you  another  Scripture.
It  will  be  found  in  the  book  of  Job.
Job  had  been  complaining.  It  is
said  lie  was  the  most  patient  man  on
the  earth.  Still  he  had  been  com-
plaining about  the  treatment  he  had
received.  He  had  lost  his  camels,
and  sheep,  and  his  children  ;  the
lightning  had  struck  his  son's  house,
and  finally  he  was  smitten  with  boils,
etc.  He  was  not  very  patient  then,
not  any  more  so  than  any  of  us  would
be  under  similar  circumstances.  He
got  a  little  out  of  hut  nor  ;  did  not
fancy  it  very  much  ;  found  himself
scraping  his  body  with  a  potsherd,
and  wallowing  in  ashes.  After  some
of  his  friends  had  talked  to  him,
the  Lord  spake,  saying:

"Gird  up  now  thy  loins  likea  man;
for  I  will  demand  of  thee,  and  answer
thou  me.

"Where  wast  thou  when  1  laid
the  foundations  of  the  earth  ?  De-
dans if  thou  hast  understanding.

"  Who  hath  laid  the  measures
thereof,  if  thou  kuowest  ?  or  who
hath  stretched  line  upon  it.

"  Whereupon  are  the  foundations
thereof  fastened  1  or  who  laid  the
corner  stone  thereof ;


"  When  the  morning  stars  sang
together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God
shouted  for  joy  1

"  Or  who  shut  up  the  sea  with
doors,  when  it  brake  forth,  as  if  it
had  issued  out  of  the  womb."

Who  managed  that  matter?
Who  shut  up  the  sea  with  doors,
when  it  brake  forth,  as  if  it  had
issued  out  of  the  womb  V  Why,
the  Lord  did  it.  These  are  singu-
lar expressions.  It  is  said  in  the
other  place  that  "the  fountains
of  the  great  deep  were  broken
up,"

Now,  then,  I  want  to  say  to  the
Latter-day  Saints,  that  God  has
more  to  do  with  the  earth,  with  the
waters,  wit  h  the  fountains  of  waters,
with  all  the  affairs  of  men,  and  with
everything  we  have  to  do  with,  than

men  are  willing  to  acknowledge  in  a
great  many  instances.  What  means
the  saying,  "In  the  wilderness  shall
waters  break  out,  and  streams  in  the
desert/'  Do  any  of  you  know  of
such  things  1  I  guess  you  do.
Plenty  of  them,  what  means  that
Scripture  wit  ere  it  speaks  of  Muses
in  the  wilderness,  when  the  children
of  Israel  cried  out  for  water  in  the
desert  land,  and  called  on  him  for
water  1  Hie  Lord  told  Moses  to
smite  the  rock,  and  it  should  give
forth  water.  Moses  felt  angry  with
the  people  because  of  their  murmur-
ing. And  when  the  people  were
gathered  together  before  the  rock,
Moses  said  :  "  Hear  now,  ye  rebels;
must  we  letch  you  water  out  of  this
rock!"  and  he  smote  the  rock  and
water  came  out  of  it.  But  Moses
did  not  honor  the  Lord  in  that  in-
stance as  he  omjht  to  have  done.
The  Lord  felt  angry  with  him,  and
would  not  allow  him  to  go  into  the
land  of  Canaan  because  he  did  not
sanctify  the  God  of  Israel.  At  the
same  time  the  Lord  fulfilled  His
word  to  Moses,  for  when  he  smote


76


JOURNAL OK  DISCOURSES.


the  rock  the  waters  came  our.  By
what  principle  ? Was  that  accord-
ing to  the  law  of  hydraulics  ?  It
was  the  power  of  God  that  manipu-
lated that  ailair. So  it  was  in  the
■case  of  Elijah. There  had  been  a
drouth  in  t  he  land  of  Israel,  and  there
was  great  suffering  in  consequence
of  it. Elijah  went  and prayed  t<»
the  Lord  that  the  drouth  might  pa>s
off,  and  that  rain  mi"htcome.  The
Lord  heard  his  prayer,  ami  sent  the
rain. At  first,  we  are  told,  a  little
cloud  arose  out  of  the  sea,  like  a
mans  hand; but by  and  by  the
heaven  was  black  wth  clouds,  and
there  was  great  rain. W  in*  was  it
that manipulated these  matters?
It  was  the  Lord. It  would  appear-
to  some  to  be  according  to  the  laws
of  nature,  etc. Ho  it  would  ;  but  at
the  same  time  this  was  done  by  the
prayer  of  faith,  and  the  water  flowed
forth. And  I  want  to  say  one  thing
here,  Mid  that  is,  that  it  we  are  sus-
tained in  these  hitter  days,  God
must  .sustain  us;  if  we  are  upheld.
God  must  uphold us. Men  are
raging  and  have  been  raging  against
us  ;  but  I  will  saw  as  1  have  often
said.  Woe  !  to them that  fight
against Zion,  for  God  will  fight
against  them,  and  He  will  have  His
■  own  waj  of  doing  it It  is  for  us
to  pursue  the  even  tenor  of  our  way,
and  if  wo  will  work  righteousness
and  fear  Soil,  and  keep  His  com-
mandments, t  he  wilderness  and  the
solitary  places  shall  be  made  glad,
(as  it  has  been  already  abundantly
among  u*)  and  the  desert  shall  blos-
som as  the  lose. But  it  will  not  be
to  me,  or  to  Brother  Cannon,  or  to
President Young,  or  to  anybody
else,  that  the  glory  will  belong.  We
will  give  God  the  glory  for  all  our


deliverance.  He  lias  been  very  kind
and  merciful  to  us  all  the  day
long.

Therefore,  let  us  do  right.  Let  us
observe  the  laws  of  God,  and  keep
His  commandments,  and  the  blessing
6f  God  w  ill  be  with  us.  We  will  go
forward  and  build  our  temples  and
labor  therein.  We  will  go  forth  and
build  up  the  Kingdom  of  God  ;  we
will  go  forth  and  purify  the  Church
of  ( lod  ;  we  will  go  forth  and  establish
the  Zion  of  God.  When  Zion  ex-
isted upon  the  earth  it  took  365
years  to  prepare  the  people  thereof
to  be  translated.  But  the  Lord  in
these  last  days  will  cut  His  woik
short  in  righteousness  Therefore
let  us  do  right.  Do  right  by  every-
body. Bear  with  the  infirmities  of
men  and  the  follies  of  men.  Treat
ail  men  kindly,  no  matter  who  they
may  be— whether  they  are  insiders
or  outsiders,  or  apostates,  or  anybody
else — neat  everybody  kindly.  But
do  not  be  partakers  of  the  practices
of  the  wicked.  Do  not  mix  up  with
the  corrupt  and  evil,  II  they  are
hungry,  feed  them ;  if  they  are
naked  clothe  them  j  if  the)  are  sick,
administer  to  them  ;  but  do  not  asso-
ciate with  them  in  their  abomina-
tions and  their  corruptions.  Come
out  from  tiie  world  and  be  ye  sepa-
rate, ye  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the
Lord,  and  let  "Holiness  to  the  Lord"
he  written  in  every  heart ;  and  let  us
all  feel  that  we  are  for  Zion  and  for
God  and  His  Kingdom,  and  for  those
principles  that  will  elevate  us  in  time
and  throughout  the  eternities  that
are  to  come,

God  bless  and  lead  you  in  the
paths  of  life,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT G  EO 1 1 0  E ffi  CANNON,


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  Cify,  Sunday  Afternoon^

November  9  ,  1  884.


REPORTED  BY  JOHN  IRVINE


SIMILARITY  OF  CIRCUMSTANCES  SURROUNDING  FORMER  AND  LATTER-
DAY  SAINTS — GOD  IS  NO  RESPECTER  OF  PERSONS — REVELATION  TO
ENOCH — CHRIST  PREACHED  TO  THE  SPIRITS  IX  PKISnN  BETWEEN
THE  TIMES  OF  HIS  CRUCIFIXION  AND  RESURRECTION — ALL  MUST
HEAR  THE  GOSPEL,  AND  BE  JUDGED  THEREBY — WE  MUST  PROGRESS
1 OR  RETROGRADE.  •  * '  .

doing,  than  for  evil  doing.

18  For  Christ  also  hath  once  suf-
fered for  sins,  the  just  lor  the  un-
just, that  he  might  bring  us  to  God,
being  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but
quickened  by  the  Spirit  ;

19  By  which  also  he  went  and
preached  unto  the  spirits  in  prison  ;

20  Which  sometime  were  disobe-
dient, when  once  the  long  suffering
of  God  waited  in  the  day*  of  >i  oah,
while  the  ark  was  a  preparing,  where-
in fewf,  that  i>,  eight  souls  were  saved
by  water,

21  Thft  like  figure  whereunto
even  baptism  doth  also  now  save  us,
(not.  the  putting  away  of  the  tilth
of  the  flesh,  but  the  answer  of  a
good  conscience  toward  God.)  by
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ :

22  Who  is  gone  into  heaven,  and
is  on  the  right  hand  of  God  ;  angels
and  authorities  and  powers  being
made  subject  unto  him.


I  WILL  read  a  portion  of  the  3rd
chapter  of  the  first  epistle  of  St  1
Peter,  and  a  portion  of  the  4th
chapter;  commencing  at  the  12th
verse  of  the  3rd  chapter  :

1 2  For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are
over  the  righteous,  and  his  ears  are
open  unto  their  prayers:  but  the  face
oi  the  Lord  is  against  them  that  do
evil

13  And  who  u  he  that  will  harm
you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which
is  good  ?

1-t  But  and  if  ye  suffer  for  right-
eousness* sake,  happy  are  ye  ;  and  be
not  afraid  of  their  terror,  neither  be
troubled  ;  -

15  But  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in
your  hearts  :  and  he  ready  always  to
give  an  answer  to  every  man  that
asketh  you  a  reason  of  t lie  hope  that
is  in  you,  with  meekness  and  fear  ;  ■

16  Having  a  good  conscience;
that,  whereas  they  speak  evil  of  yon,
as  of  evil  doers,  they  may  be  ashamed
that  falsely  accuse  your  good  conver-
sation in  Christ,

17  Fort/  is  better,  if  the  will  of*
God  be  so,  that  ye  suffer  for  well


•li-


ft


1  Forasmuch  then  a*  Christ  hath
buffered  for  us  in  the  ffe«li,aim  your-
selves  likewise  with  the  same  mind  ;
for  he  that  hath  suffered  1:1  tV?


7s


JOURNAL  G*  DISCOURSES


flesh  liath  ceased  from  sin  ;

2  That  he  no  longer  should  live
the  rest  of  his  time  in  the  flesh  to
the  lasts  of  men,  but  to  the  will  of
God,

3  For  the  time  past  of  our  life  may
suffice  us  to  have  wrought  the  will  of
the  Gentiles,  when  we  walked  in
lascivious i less,  lusts,  excess  of  wine,
revelling?,  bauquetings,  and  abomin-
able idolatries  :

4  Wherein  they  think  it  strange
that  ye  run  not  with  th/'m  to  the
same  excess  of  riot,  speaking  evil
of  you.

5  Who  shall  mve  account  to  him
that  is  ready  to  judge  the  quick  and
the  dead.

<*  For,  for  this  cause  was  the  gos-
pel preached  also  to  them  that  are
dead,  that  they  might  be  judged
according  to  men  in  the  flesh,  but
live  according  to  God  in  the  spirit.

7  But  the  end  of  all  things  is  at
hand  :  be  ye  therefore  sober,  and
watch  unto  prayer.

8  And  above  all  things  have  fer-
vent charity  among  yourselves  :  for
charity  shall  cover  the  multitude  of
-sins.

These  words,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  embody  to  us  to-day,  though
written  by  the  Apostle  Peter,  1800
years  ago,  the  Gospel  of  life  and
salvation.  They  are  exceedingly
appropriate  to  Latter-day  Saints,
.as  doubtless  they  were  when  written
to  former-day  Saints.  The  circum-
stances which  surrounded  our  breth-
ren and  sisters  in  former  uaya,  no
doubt  were  similar  in  many  respects
to  those  which  surround  us  in  this
our  day,  probably,  with  this  differ-
ence :  that  we  are  not  scattered  to
the  same  extent  they  were  ;  we  have
been  gathered  together  from  the
nation*  where  the  Gospel  was
pn  acnel  tu  us,  and  are  nutv  living
in  uue  community  in  these  moun-
tain But  the  same  doct:iueF,  the


same  principles,  the  same  powers  of
evil,  the  same  powers  of  good,  the
same  Spirit  of  God,  and  the  same
spirit  of  evil,  were  extant  then,  ami
were  experienced  then  by  the  Saints
who  took  upon  themselves  the  name
of  Christ,-  as  they  are  by  us  who  now
live.

Since  I  have  come  into  this  stand
mvmind  has  reverted  to  a  eon  versa-
tion  which  I  had  a  few  days  ago  with
a  minister  of  the  Dutch  Reform
Church,  who  was  pas  dug  through
this  city,  and  who  was  introduced  to
me,  and  had  a  good  many  inquiries
to  make  respecting  tour  doctrines.
When  I  told  him  how  God  had
revealed  Himself  in  these  last  days,
how  He  had  restored  the  Everlasting
Priesthood,  the  ordinances  of  life
and  salvation,  the  Gospel  in  its
original  purity  and  power,  accom-
panied with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  its
gifts,  ami  had  organized  the  Church
as  in  ancient  days,  and  related  to
him  what  God  had  said  concerning
all  the  churches  in  Christendom,  he
had  the  question  to  ask,  which  is  so
frequently  asked  of  all  our  Elders
when  they  travel  and  declare  the
same  message,  *■  Why  has  Uod  left
the  Christian  world  for  so  lung  a
time  without  these  blessings  and
these  powers  and  these  gifts  that  you
now  claim  as  belonging  to  your
Church  and  having  been  restored!
from  heaven  ?  And  what  has  be-
come of  those  Christians  whom
)ou  say  died  in  ignorance  of  th«
fullness  of  the  Gospel  of  salvation  T

These  are  very  pertinent  questions.
They  are  questions  frequently  asked
of  all  our  Elders.  They  are  ques-
tions which  suggest  themselves  to
the  minds  of  every  thinking  man
when  he  is  told  that  Go  I  has  restored
the  truth  in  its  original  purity,  with
the  po-ver  aid  authority  of  the
Priesthood  which  have  been  so  long
withdrawn. Our  ancestors  we  may


god's  work  not  confined  to  this  life


have  known,  at  least  some  of  them;
we  may  have  known  the  morality  of
their  lives,  the  purity  of  their  inten-
tions, the  goodness  of  their  motive?,
their  exemplary  conduct ;  and  if  we
tlo  not  understand  the  principles  of
the  Gospel  when  we  are  told  the
message  that  the  Elders  have  to  bear,
the  inquiry  Naturally  arises,  "  Is  it
possible  that  my  grandfather,  my
grandmother,  my  uncle,  or  perchance
my  father  and  my  mother,  have  not
gone  to  heaven,  that  thej  are  not
in  the  presence  of  God  1  Why,  bet-
ter people  I  never  knew,  and  1  have
always  thought,1'  says  the  inquirer,
"that  they  reall}r  had  gone  to  heaven,
and  now  yon  tell  me  that  unless  I  am
baptized  1  shall  be  damned,  and  yet
they  are  dead  and  have  not  been
baptized."

I  expect  many  feel  as  the  heathen
king  once  felt.  He  was  a  kin.:  <>f
the  Franks,  one  of  the  old  races  that
invaded  what  is  now  called  France.
He  had  .surrendered  his  old  convic-
tions sufficiently  to  consent  to  receive
the  rite  of  baptism.  A  Catholic
Bishop  from  Rome  was  to  sprinkle
him.  But  before  submitting  to  be
sprinkled  the  thought  suggested
itself  to  the  king  to  ask  the  question
what  had  become  of  his  ancestors.
The  Bishop,  more  ready  than  politic,
said,  "  They  have  gone  to  hell."
"Then,"  said  the  king,  "  I  will  go
to  hell  with  them  ;  I  shall  not  be
separated  from  my  ancestors,"  and
he  retired  to  receive  the  rite  of  bap-
tism.

Now,  I  expect  that  there  are
many  people  in  the  world  who,  in  the
absence,  or  for  the  want  of  knowl-
edge concerning  the  plan  of  salvation
would  almost  feel  the  same  when
told  that  if  they  did  not  obey  the
Gospel,  they  would  be  damned.
But  uheu  people  are  enlightened
concerning  the  plan  of  Jehovah,
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  they


can  easily  reconcile  justice  and
mercy  a*  being  attributes  of  the
Great  Being  whom  we  worship.
As  I  remarked  to  this  gentleman,
fc*  I  might  easily  answer  your  question
by  propounding  another  question  to
you.  You  are  a  Christian  minister;
you  preach  what  you  believe  to  be
the  Gospel ;  what  has  become  of  tlie
millions  of  heathen  who  died  in
ignorance  of  that  Gospel  which  you
profess  to  obey  and  accept  as  the
plan  of  salvation — the  millions  of
heathen  who  never  heard  the  name
of  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  name  given
under  heaven  whereby  man  can
be  saved  —what  has  become  of
them!"

"Oh,"  said  he.  "but  they  were
not -Christians."

Said  I,  ;t  Do  you  think  that  God
makes  a  distinction  bet  wee:,  the
souls  or  the  spirits  of  men  ?  Is
there  one  class  of  .spirits  for  whom
He  has  a  greater  respect  than  He
has  for  others  !  Is  a  Christian  soul
more  valuable,  or  more  precious,  in
ttie  sight  of  our  Great  Creator,  than
the  soul  of  a  heathen!  I  do  not
believe  it  myself,  I  have  no  such
idea."

But  he  could  see  a  wide  distinc-
tion between  those  who  were  Chris-
tians and  those  who  were  not.

Nevertheless  the  difficulty  still
remains,  and  it  will  ever  remain  to
those  who  do  not  comprehend  the
plan  of  salvation  as  revealed  by  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We  must  re-
member that  Gods  work  is  not  con-
fined to  this  life  ;  that  God's  plan
of  salvation  extends  throughout
eternity ;  that  according  to  our  belief
it  began  to  operate  in  eteruiiy, 'if  it
ever  began  at  all — for  it  never  really
in  truth  began,  it  always  operated,
operated  from  eternity  and  will  oper-
ate to  eternity,  for  all  the  children
of  men,  for  every  human  soul.
The  plan  of  salvation  devised  by  our


80


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Father  ami  God,  is  intended  to  save
every  human  being  that  will  be  saved  ;
to  reach  them  all,  unless,  during  this
probation,  they  commit  what  is
termed  the  unpardonable  sin,  the
sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  anil  be-
come sons  of  perdition,  in  which
event  salvation  ceases  (so  far  as  they
are  concerned)  to  operate  ;  they  put
themselves  outside  of  the  pale  of
salvation.

There  is  a  very  interesting  revela-
tion contained  in  the  new  translation
by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  which
is  found  in  the  Pearl  of  Great  Price.  «
The  revelation  says :

u  And  it  came  to  pass  that  the
God  of  heaven  looked  upon  the
residue  of  the  people,  and  wept;
and  Enoch  bore  record  of  it,  saying,  i
How  is  it  that  the  heavens  weep,
and  shed  forth  t  heir  tears  as  the  rain
upon  the  mountaiusl  And  Enoch
said  unto  the  Lord,  How  is  it  that
thou  canst  weep,  seeing  thou  art
holy,  and  from  all  eternity  to  all
eternity  1  And  were  it  possible  that  i
man  could  number  the  particles  of
the  earth,  yea  and  millions  of  ear Lhs
like  this*  it  would  not  be  a  begin-
uimg  to  the  number  of  Thy  creations;
and  Thy  curtains  are  stretched  out
Still ;  and  thou  art  there,  and  thy
bosom  is  there  ;  and  also  thou  art
just  :  thou  art  merciful  and  kind
forever;  thou  ha*t  taken  Zion  to
thine  own  bosom,  from  all  thy  crea- 1
tious,  from  all  eternity  to  all  eternity  ;  .
and  naught  but  peace,  justice,  and
truth  is  the  habitation  of  thy  throne;
and  mercy  shall  go  before  thy  face  '
and  have  no  end  :  how  is  it  that  thou
canst  weep?  |

"The  Lord  said  unto  Enoch,  Be-
hold these  thy  brethren  ;  they  are
the  work manship  of  mine  own  hands,
and  I  gave  unto  them  their  knowl
edge,  in  the  day  that  I  cr  eated  them  ;
and  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  gave  I
unto  man  his  agency;  and  unto  thy


brethren  have  I  said,  and  also  gave
commandment,  that  they  should
love  one  another,  and  that  they
should  choose  me,  their  Father;  but
behold,  they  are  without  affection  ;
and  they  hate  their  own  blood  ;  and
the  tire  of  mine  indignation  is  kin-
dled against  them  -  and  in  ntv  hot
displeasure  will  I  send  in  tin*  Hoods
upon  them,  for  my  tit -iv  anger  is
kindled  against  them.  Behold, lam
God  ;  Man  of  Holiness  is  thy  name  ;
Man  of  Counsel  is  my  name  ;  and
Endless  and  Eternal  is  my  name,
also.  therefore,  1  can  stretch
forth  my  hands  and  hold  all  the  crea-
tions which  1  have  made  ;  and  mine
eye  can  pierce  them  also ;  and
among  all  the  workmanship  of  my
hands  there  has  not  been  so  irreat
wickedness  as  amony  thy  brethren  ;
but  behold,  their  sins  shall  be  upon
the  heads  of  their  fathers  :  Satan
shall  be  their  father,  and  misery
shall  he  their  doom  ;  and  ihe  whole
heavens  shall  weep  over  them,  even
all  the  workmanship  of  my  hands  :
wherefore  should  not  the  heavens
weep,  seeing  these  shall  suffer?  But
behold,  these  which  thine  eves  are
upon  shall  perish  in  the  flood  ;  and
behold,  I  will  shut  them  up :  a  prison
have  I  prepared  for  them.  And
that  which  I  have  chosen  has  plead
before  my  face.  Whcivfore,  lie
suffered!  for  their  sins,  inasmuch  as
t  hey  will  repent  in  the  day  that  my
Chosen  shall  return  unto  me,  and
until  that  day  they  shall  be  in  tor-
ment;  wherefore,  for  this  .shall  the
heavens  weep,  yea,  and  all  tl  *■  work*
manship  of  my  handy."

A  most  important  revelation,  thisr
to  Enoch,  showing  unto  him  i  lie  fate
of  the  wicked  after  his  city  should  he-
translated  and  taken  to  heaven.  The
inhabitants  of  the  earth  should  grow
worse  and  worse,  more  abandoned
than  ever  in  their  wickedness,  until
the  time  should  come  for  the  Lord


ATE  OF  THE  ANTEDILUVIANS


81


to  send  forth  His  floods  and  drown
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  except
Noah,  and  those  who  received  His
testimony.  All  this  was  shown  unto
Enoch ;  and  he  was  shown  that
those  who  had  thus  acted,  or  who
should  thus  act,  "would  be  consigned
to  prison,  they  would  be  consigned
to  a  place  of  torment,  and  because
of  their  sufferings,  because  of  that
which  they  should  have  to  pass
through,  the  heavens  themselves
wept  over  their  fate.  Enoch  was
told  that  they  should  remain  there
until  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
or  in  these  words  :  *'  And  that  which
I  have  chosen  has  plead  before  my
face.  Wherefore,  He  suffereth  for
their  sins,  insomuch  as  they  will
repent  in  the  day  that  my  Chosen
shall  return  unto  me/1

That  is,  after  the  Savior's  advent
in  the  flesh,  after  He  has  suffered
for  their  sins  j  until  then,  when  He
should  return  unto  the  Father,  they
should  remain  in  this  prison  and  in
this  condition  of  torment.  "Where-
fore, for  ths  shall  the  heavens  weep,
yea,  and  all  the  workmanship  of  my
hands."

Those  millions  of  spirits  who  had
thus  committed  sin  and  iniquity  un-
it could  be  borne  no  longer,  until
the  earth  groaned  under  their  wicked-
ness, and  cried  aloud  as  with  a  human
voice  against  the  wickedness  upon
its  surface  of  which  those  inhabitants
had  been  guilty — those  millions  of
spirits  were  swept  off  with  a  flood,
the  whole  family  of  man  was  de-
stroyed, except  Noah  and  those
seven  souls  who  received  his  testi-
mony, a  part  of  Ins  family,  and  a
part  only,  for  there  were  children
that  Noah  had  who  rejected  his
testimony,  and  who  also  shared  in
the  destruction  that  came  upon  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth.  But  those
eight,  including  Noah,  were  the  sole
surviving  remnant  of  the  entire

No.  t


i


family  of  man.  The  antideluvian
world  numbered  millions  doubtless ;
millions  were  swept  away  from  the
face  of  the  earth,  and  consigned  to
a  place  of  torment,  or  to  a  prison.
In  this  prison  they  were  immured,
doubtless  in  utter  darkness — in  the
condition  that  is  so  expressly
described  by  the  Savior  Himself,
when  upon  the  earth — in  outer
darkness,  where  there  is  weeping
and  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth,
a  place  of  torment,  where  they  were
kept  until  the  Savior  Himself  came
in  the  flesh,  and  proclaimed  unto
the  children  of  men  the  Gospel  of
life  and  salvation.

Jesus  Himself,  on  one  occasion,
went  into  the  synagogue  after  His
baptism  by  John  the  Baptist,  and
there  was  handed  to  Him  a  book
containing  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,
or  as  it  is  written  in  the  New  Testa-
ment Esaias.  He  took  it  and  read
these  words  :  "  The  Spirit  of  the
Lord  God  is  upon  me  j  because  the
Lord  hath  anointed  me  to  preach
good  tidings  unto  the  meek  ;  He
hath  sent  me  to  bind  up  the  broken-
hearted, to  proclaim  liberty  to  the
captives,  and  the  opening  of  the
prison  to  them  that  are  bound  j  to
proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the
Lord/'  He  there  proclaimed  in  the
words  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah,  the
exact  character  of  the  mission  that
had  been  assigned  Him  by  His  Father
in  heaven.  He  was  not  only  com-
manded to  preach  good  tidings  unto
the  meek,  and  to  bind  up  the  broken
hearted,  but  He  was  sent  to  pro-
claim liberty  to  the  captives  and
the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them
that  were  bound.  Thus  was  a  part
of  His  mission  foretold  by  the
Prophet  Isaiah  a  long  time  before
His  birth.  He  Himself  confirmed
the  correctness  of  the  prediction  by
reading  it  in  the  ears  of  the  people;
and  when  He  left  the  earth,  after

Vol  XXVI.


82


JULUNAL  Ol-  I>ISCoUKSIi>>.


having  established  Hi*  Gospel  upon more,  and  gave  unto  them  the  privi
it?  af'er  having  commenced  the  work lege  of  receiving  it  in  the  spirit  even
of salvation here, after having  M  though  they  were  in  the  flesh.


ordained  men  to  the  authority  of
the  everlasting  Priesthood  which  He
held,  the  Priesthood  of  MelchUedec,
after  having  done  this  and  was  slain
by  wicked  men,  suffered  for  the  bins
of  humanity  in  the  flesh,  He  then
went  in  the  words  that  I  have  read
in  your  hearing  from  this  epistle  of
Peter,  and  preached  to  the  spirits  in
prison  which  sometime  were  diso-
bedient when  once  the  long-suffering
of  God  waited  in  the  days  uf  Noah*
He  went  and  proclaimed  liberty  to
the  captive  ;  He  went  to  epeii  the
prison  doors  to them  that  were
bound. He  alone  could  do  this.
No  Prophet  that  preceded  Him  had
the  authority,  for  none  of  the  Proph-
ets that  had  preceded  Him  had  this
mission  assigned  them. It  was  His
duty  as  the  Son  of  God,  as  the  Re-
deemer of  the  world,  after,  as  1  have
said,  corn  nut  ting  the  Gospel  to  men
in  the  flesh,  after  ordaining  men  to
preach  that  Gospel  and  administer
its  ordinances  in the  power  and
authority  of  the  everlasting  Priest-
hood, to  preach  to  those  spirits  in
prison*  It  did  not  take  a  great  while
to  commence  the  work  ;  tor  He  was
crucified  on  Friday,  and  was  resur-
rected on  Sunday ;  but  in  the  inter
im,  while  His  body  laid  in  the  tomb,
His  Spirit,  as  is  correctly  stated  in
one  catechism — 1  believe  that  of  the
Episcopalians  —  "  descended  into
hell,"  and,  according  to  the  mission
that  had  been  assigned  Him,  accord-
ing to  the  revelation  that  God  gave
>to  Enoch  before  the  floods  descended
;Upon  the  w  icked  world,  according  to
the  predictions  of  Isaiah,  and  ac-


T  here  fore  says  Peter,  4  4  by  which
also  He  went  and  preached  unto  the
spirits  in  prison  which  sometime
were  disobedient  when  once  the  long-
suffering  of  God  waited  in  the  days  of
Noah, while  the  ark  wasa  preparing,™
Then  he  goes  on  and  he  says — after
telling  the  Saints  huw  they  should
live,  how  the  wicked  should  act,  and
how  they  should  be  treated — he
says  ;  "  For  this  cause  was  the  Gos-
pel preached  also  to  them  that  are
dead,  that  they  might  be  judged
according  to  men  in  the  flesh,
but  live  according  to  God  in  the
spirit"

Now,  say  some,  "  Oh,  this  means
when  men  are  dead  in  their  sins.
This  is  what  Peter  means — dead  in
their  sins/1

It  does  not  mean  any  such  thing.
That  is  not  the  meaning  of  it.  It
means  just  what  it  says.  It  means
that  the  Gospel  shall  be  preached  to
them  that  are  dead  ;  that  the  Savior
should  carry  the  glad  tidings  of  sal-
vation to  them,  and  not  only  to  those
who  were  disobedient  in  the  days  of
Noah,  but  to  all  the  spirit  world,  to
every  soul  of  Adam's  race  that  had
up  to  that  time  diet!  who  hat!  not
received  the  Gospel  in  the  flesh.  He
commenced  the  work  there  just  as
He  did  here.  He  commenced,  as  I
have  said,  by  preaching  the  Gospel,
by  revealing  il  to  His  disciples,  by
giving  them  the  authority  to  preach
it,  and  then  He  descended  into  Hades
or  hell,  and  He  there,  doubtless,
chose  His  ministers,  the  men  who
had  the  authority  of  the  Holy  Priest-
hood, and  set  them  to  the  same  labor
wording  to  the  power  and  authority  that  was  commenced  on  the  earth,
which  He  exercised  as  the  Sun  of  God,  the  labor  of  preaching  His  ever  last-


He  went  and  opened  the  prisuii  doors


Iftg  Gospel  to  all  the  spirit  world,


to  them  that  were  bound,  preached  to  the  millions  of  spirits  who  had
,to  them  the  everlasting  Gospel,  once  died  either  in  disobedience  to  the


CHRIST  PREACHED  TO  THE  SPIRITS  IN  PRISON.


83


Gospel  of  Christ,  or  in  ignorance  of
that  Gospel,  never  having  heard  the
sound  nf  it.  The  Gospel  was  sent  to
the  entire  spirit  world,  except,  as  I
have  before  stated,  to  those  sons  of
perdition  who  had  committed  the
unpardonable  sin,  or  the  sin  against
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  labor  lias
doubtless  continued  from  that  day
until  the  present  time  in  the  spirit
world.  In  the  authority  and  power
of  the  everlasting  Priesthood  the
servants  of  God  have  been  calling
upon  the  inhabitants  of  that  world
to  repent  and  believe  in  Jesus  :  first
to  repent  of  their  sins  and  be  willing
to  receive  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God  in  its  fullness  and  in  its  purity,
just  as  men  would  receive  it  in  the
flesh — that  is,  be  willing  to  comply
as  far  as  possible  with  all  its  require-
ments, and  also  to  have  this  further
willingness,  that  if  they  were  in  the
flesh  they  won  hi  submit  to  and  re-
ceive every  ordinance  of  the  Gospel
of  life  and  salvation.  They  must
not  only  believe  in  Jesus,  as  I  have
said,  and  repent  of  their  sins  ;  not
only  be  willing  to  go  that  far,  but  be
willing  to  go  the  full  extent  of  the
requirements  of  the  Gospel,  be
willing  to  obey  every  ordinance  and
every  law  that  is  necessary,  and  say
in  the  spirit,  "  Oh,  if  I  were  in  the
flesh  I  would  be  baptized  for  the
remission  of  my  sins  ;  I  would  have
hands  laid  upon  me  fur  the  reception
of  the  Holy  Ghost;  I  would  be
willing  10  obey  every  law  of  God,
my  Eternal  Father,  if  I  had  the
opportunity  in  the  flesh  of  doing
so.'3


Jeans  illustrated  this  principle
and  the  work  which  lay  before  Him
very  beautifully,  in  the  case  of  the
thief  on  the  cross.  One  of  the  thieves
reviled  Him.  The  other  turned  and
rebuked  his  companion  for  reviling
the  Savior,  and  asked  the  Savior  to
remember  him  when  He  ca.ne  into


His  kingdom  ;  for  you  must  under-
stand that  the  idea  ha  ]  become  pre-
valent then  that  Jesus  was  a  kin  sr.
ami  they  had  written  over  His  cross
in  three  languages,  "  Jesus,  King
of  the  Jews,"  partly  in  derision,
doubtless;  but  it  was  the  truth*
Pilate  asked  Him  if  He  was  not  a
king,  and  tins  robber,  doubtless,
shared  in  the  feeling  that  Jesus  was
a  king.  Therefore  he  besought  Him
to  remember  him  when  He  came  into
His  Kingdom.  Jesus  said  to  him  :
u  To-day  s halt  thou  be  with  me  in
paradise/1  "  There  I  can  speak  to
you,"  He  might  have  said,  u  more
fully  than  I  can  now.  This  is  our
dying  hour,  and  I  am  not  in  a  posi-
tion to  preach  to  you  or  explain  to
you  the  plan  of  salvation  that  I  have;
but  wait  awhile,  before  this  day  ends
you  will  be  with  me  in  paradise,  and
there  I  can  make  full  explanations  to
you  concerning  all  that  you  desire
to  know."

And  this  in  reality  was  the  case.
That  day  they  were  in  paradise
together.  Jesus  was  in  a  position
to  preach  to  him  in  the  spirit  as  He
had  done  to  men  in  the  flesh.  And
you  will  remember— although  it
seems  almost  unnecessary  to  repeat
it  to  this  congregation  who  are  so
well  instructed;  but  there  are  young
people  who  are  not  so  familiar  with
these  doctrines,  and,  therefore,  for
their  benefit  I  quote  the  Scriptures
You  will  rememberwhen  Mary,  after
she  missed  the  body  from  the  sepul-
chre, rushed  forward  to  a  man,  sup-
posing him  to  be  the  gardener,  and
asked  him  where  lie  had  laid  the
body.  She  did  not  recognize  Him
at  first,  but  as  soon  as  He  made
Himself  known  she  essayed  to  clasp
Him  in  womanly  affection.  He,
however,  told  her  to  stand  back,  not
to  touch  Him,  You  must  not  put
your  hands  on  me,  Mary.  Whatever
your  relations  may  be  to  me,  you


Si


JOURNAL  0*  DISCOURSES,


must  not  touch  me  now,  "Touch
me  not  ;  for  I  am  not  yet  ascended
to  my  Father  ;  but  go  to  my  breth-
ren, and  say  unto  thero,  I  ascend
unto  my  Father,  and  your  Father  ;
and  to  my  God  and  your  God. 11
This  was  His  expression  when  His
body  had  been  resurrected  from  the
tomb.  He  had  not  yet  been  to  His
Father — that  is,  directly  to  the  im-
mediate presence  of  His  Father.
Therefore  it  was  not  fit  that  any
mortal  should  put  hands  upon  Him.
It  was  not  the  privilege  even  of  Mary,
closely  connected  asshe  was  with  Him
— it  was  not  her  privilege  to  put  her
baud  upon  her  resurrected  Lord.
He  had  notyet -ascended  to  the  Father.

Thus  you  see  the  Scriptures  cor-
roborate that  which  I  have  said  in
this  respect  His  body  had  lain,
as  I  before  remarked,  from  Friday
until  Sunday,  in  the  tomb,  and  then
it  was  resurrected.  But  during
that  period  His  spirit  had  been  en-
gaged preaching  to  the  spirits  in
prison  ;  they  heard  the  glad  tidings
of  salvation  from  the  Savior*  His
voice  penetrated  the  depths  of  hell,
the  gloom  of  darkness,  and  it  awak-
ened hope  within  their  hearts.  He
proclaimed  liberty  to  the  captive.  He
opened  the  prison  dours  to  those
that  were  bound.  He  preached
unto  them  the  acceptable  year  of
the  Lord  :  for  the  time  had  come  for
them  to  be  redeemed  from  their
prison  house  in  which  they  had
been  so  long  incarcerated  for  the
s:ns  committed  in  the  flesh.

This  is  the  Gospel  of  salvation
that  God  lias  revealed.  Every  human
being  that  has  ever  been  born  upon
the  face  of  the  earth,  every  human
being  that  ever  will  be  born  will  hear
these  glad  tidings  of  salvation  pro-
claimed by  those  who  have  authority
to  administer  it  unto  fallen  man,
whether  they  lived  before  Jesus,
w >  h  ?r  they  lived  at  the  time  of  or


since  Jesus,  or  w  hether  they  will  live
yet  in  the  future. They  cannot
hear  the  Gospel They  cannot  be
judged  until  they  do  hear  it.  Every
principle  of  salvation  will  be  pro-
claimed  to  those  who  have  died
without  the  privilege  of  hearing  it  ill
the  flesh — they  must  hear  it  in  the
spirit  world  as  well  a*  those  who
hear  it  in  the  flesh. Therefore,  we
need  nut  be  in  any  anxiety  concern-
ing our  ancestors ;  we  need  not
puzzle  ourselves  with  questions  as  to
the  fate  of  the  heathen  ;  we  need
not  be  disturbed  in  our  feelings  to-
reconcile  the  justice  of  God  with  His
mercy,  or  His  mercy  with  His  jus-
tice, to  the  children  of  men.  None
of  these  questions  need  trouble  us,
fur  the  reason  that  by  the  revelation
of  these  glorious  principles  God's
mercy  is  reconcilable  in  the  most
perfect  manner  with His  justice.
\\  e  see  by  this  that  God  will  not
consign  any  soul  to  endless  torment
without  hist  giving  him  an  opportu-
nity of  receiving  or  rejecting  the
Gospel. If  he  be  consigned  to  tor-
ment it  will  be  as  a  punishment  for
violating  law. Where  there  is  no
law  there  is  no  transgression  of  the^
law. There  can  be  therefore  no*
punishment  if 'a  man  does  not  com-
prehend the  law. If  it  is  not  made
plain  to  him,  its  binding  force  does
not  operate  upon  him  ;  but  when  he
understands  it,  when  his  mind  com-
prehends it,  when  it  is  declared  to
him,  then  it  begins  to  operate  upon
him,  and  if  he  reject  it,  then  the
penalty  begins  to  operate  also,  and
unless  he  repents  and  obeys  that  law
he  will  receiv  e  severe  condemnation.
Therefore  in  the  spirit  world  there
are  grades  of  punish  men  t  just  as
there  are  grades  of  spirits.  Some
are  ignorant* Some  men  who  never
heard  the  name  of  Jesus  have  lived
according  to  the  light  that  God  gave
them;  for  God  has  given  to -every  man.


ME3NT  RESPONSIBLE  FOR  LIGHT  RECEIVED.


«that  is  born  into  the  world,  according
to  the  revelations  we  have  received,
His  Spirit.  He  has  given  unto  every
man  and  woman  His  Spirit,  not  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  HisSpirit
by  which  they  are  led  and  guided.
Some  call  it  the  light  of  conscience,
the  voice  of  conscience.  No  man
ever  committed  awrou?  that  listened
to  that  voice  without  being  eluded
for  it,  whether  he  be  Christian  or
heathen,  whether  he  has  lived  ac-
cording to  the  light  of  the  Gospel  or
been  in  entire  ignorance  of  it.  Every
man  has  within  him  a  spirit  which
comes  from  our  Great  Creator,  and
if  we  grieve  it  not  it  leads  us,  guides
us,  though  we  may  not  know  the
Gospel,  as  has  been  the  case  with
many  thousands  and  millions  of
human  beings.  It  leads  all  the
children  of  men  when  they  listen  to
it ;  it  leads  them  in  the  path  of
peace,  in  the  path  of  virtue,  in  the
path  of  happiness  ;  but  if  they  violate
that  spirit  or  grieve  it,  if  they  go
contrary  to  its  monitions,  if  they
harden  their  hearts  against  and  sin
against  it,  then  it  departs,  and
another  spirit  takes  its  place,  game-
ly, the  spirit  of  the  evil  One,

Thus  it  is  that  the  heathen,  many
of  them  have  lived  lives  most  exem-
plary, lives  which  are  the  admiration
of  posterity.  Men  not  confined  to
one  race,  not  to  one  nationality,  but
men  of  every  race,  men  of  every
clime,  men  of  every  language,  have
received  the  same  spirit  and  have
been  enlightened  by  it  and  their
lives  have  been  noble  and  admirable,
and  no  doubt  have  been  acceptable
to  God  our  eternal  Father.  Therefore,
when  you  think  about  your  grand
parents  whom  }ou  have  known,
when  you  think  about  your  parents
or  some  other  relatives  whom  you
have  known,  who  died  in  ignorance
of  the  Gospel,  you  have  known  their
lives,  you  have  known  how  good


their  desires  were,  you  have  known
how  they  conformed  to  the  law  so
far  as  they  understood  it,  how  moral
they  were,  how  exemplary,  how  cor-
rect in  their  conduct,  in  their  con-
versation and  in  their  dealings —
when  you  think  of  these,  you  need
not  be  afraid  that  they  have  lost
anything  because  they  died  in  ignor-
ance of  the  Son  of  God,  I  tell  you
that  God's  providence  is  over  all  His
children,  and  He  will  reward  every
man  and  every  woman  according  to
his  or  her  works,  and  He  will  reward
those  who  have  lived  exemplary  lives,
those  who  have  been  moral,  whether
they  be  heathen  or  Christian,  wheth-
er they  have  known  the  name  of
Jesus  or  not,  whether  they  have  the
Bible,  or  the  Koran,  or  some  other
book,  or  no  book  at  all  ;  whatever
may  have  been  their  condition  and
circumstances,  if  they  have  lived
according  to  the  light  that  God  has
given  them,  and  to  laws  that  they
understood,  God  will  reward  them,
and  will  eventually  bestow  every
blessing  upon  them  which  they  are
capable  of  receiving.  Yes,  those
poor  people  who  persecute  us,  those
people  who  would,  in  their  ignorance
destroy  us,  we  can  well  say  to  them
and  concerning  them  that  winch
Stephen  said,  when  about  to  give  up
the  ghost.  They  stoned  him.
They  treated  him  most  cruelly  for
his  belief*  He  had  declared  to  them
the  Gospel ;  but  they  stoned  him
to  death.  Before  he  (lied  he  said —
and  it's  the  spirit  which  every  mau
of  God,  who  comprehends  the  pur-
poses of  God,  atid  the  plan  of  salva-
tion will  cherish  and  always  give
utterance  to  under  all  circumstances
— '*  Father  forgive  them,  they  know
not  what  they  do."  They  were
ignorant.  He  therefore  besought
the  Father  to  forgiva  them*  They
did  not  know  what  they  were  doing.
They  did  it  ignorantly. This  was


86


JOURNAL  O*  DISCOURSES


proved  by  the  fact  that  the  young
man  at  whose  feet  lay  the  cUthes
of  those  who  committed  this  bloody
deed,  afterwards  became  a  flaming
light  in  the  Church  and  Kingdom  of
God,  and  ultimately  laid  down  his
life  for  that  Gospel  which  he  had
witnessed  Stephen  die  for,  and
which  at  the  time  he  thought  was
a  righteous  judgment  upon  Ste-
phen,

My  bn  tluen  and  sisters,  we  can
of  all  people  be  charitable.  As  the
Apostle  Peter  says  :  "  Above  all
things  have  fervent  charity  among
yourselves  :  for  chanty  shall  cover
the  multitude  of  sins/1  And  not
only  among  ourselves,  but  have
charity  for  an  ignorant  world  who
know  not  what  they  do  in  fighting
against  God,  in  fighting  against  His
truth,  in  seeking  to  destroy  His
Priesthood  from  the  face  of  the
earth  :  they  know  not  what  they
do.  We  would  save  them  if  we
could.  We  would  carry  the  Gospel
of  salvation  fo  them.  We  are  ready,
as  we  have  been,  to  endure  all  things
fur  t  he  sake  of  the  souls  of  our  fellow
men.  We  have  gone  from  continent
to  continent,  from  land  to  land,
from  island  to  island,  wherever  there
was  a  dooropen,  to  preach  theOospel.
AVe  have  forsaken  home,  forsaken
wives  and  children,  and  all  the  en- 1
dearments  of  home,  everything  that
men  love  and  hold  sacred,  even  to
the  sac  lit  icing  of  our  lives  fur  the  J
salvation  of  our  fellow  men — irtme
without  purse  or  scrip,  gone  forth  in
the  midst  of  shame  and  ignominy,  in
the  face  of  persecution  of  the  most
cruel  and  sometimes  of  the  most
dreadful  character.  We  have  done
this,  we  are  still  doing  it,  we  sliall
do  it,  until  every  soul  under  the
broad  canopy  of  heaven  shall  hear
the  Gospel  of  the  Sou  of  God,  this
message  of  life  and  salvation  which
has  been  entrusted  to  us.  Every


mortal  shall  hear  the  glad  tidings  of
salvation.  They  shall  be  judged
by  this  message.  They  shall  receive
the  blessings  of  God  or  His  con-
demnation, according  to  their  wil-
lingness to  receive  or  their  deter-
mination to  reject  the  Cos  pel  ;  and
then  when  this  life  is  ended,  when
this  mortal  is  laid  aside,  we  shall
go  into  the  spirit  world,  endowed
with  the  same  Priesthood  and  au-
thority of  the  Son  of  Gad  ;  clothed
with  that  authority  ;  enveloped  with
it,  even  the  fullness  of  it  ;  we
shall  go  into  the  spirit  world  and
continue  this  glorious  labor  of  warn-
ing our  brethren  and  sisters  who
once  were  in  the  flesh,  until  through-
out the  spirit  world  the  Gospel  of
salvation  shall  be  heard  from  one
end  of  it  to  the  other.  It  is  a  never-
ending  work  that  which  we  have
taken  upon  ourselves.  It  will  never
terminate  until  this  earth  shall  be
redeemed,  until  the  power  of  Satan
shall  be  subdued,  until  wickedness
shall  be  banished  from  the  earth,
until  He  reigns  who.se  right  it  is  to
reign,  and  every  knee  shall  bow  and
every  tongue  confess  that  Jesus  is
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  Then
will  this  labor  cease  so  far  as  the
family  of  man  is  concerned  ;  but  it
will  never  cease  until  all  who  belong
to  this  earth,  whoever  were  bom
upon  it — no  matter  in  what  age,
no  matter  what  time,  no  matter
what  nationality,  shall  be  redeemed
who  can  be  redeemed.

Now, my  brethren  and  sisters,  you
have  some  little  idea  of  the  character
of  the  work  in  which  we  are  engaged.
Do  we  set  too  much  value  upon  our
Priesthood — when  we  talk  about
Priesthood  and  authority — when
these  are  the  labors  that  attend  the
Priesthood  and  that  devolve  upon
it  1  No,  we  cannot  value  our  calling
too  highly*  And  I  say  to  you  that
you  have  entered  upon  a  pathway


that  leads  back  to  God,  You  may
dally  hy  the  wayside ;  you  may  fool
away  your  time ;  you  may  be  idle,
indifferent  and  careless ;  but  you
only  lose  thereby  the  progress  that
you  ought  to  make.  Unless  you
commit  the  in  \  pardon  able  sin,  you
will  have  to  progress.  It  is  written
in  the  eternity  of  our  God  that  every
soul  must  progress  that  does  not
retrograde.  Therefore,  make  good
use  of  the  time  you  have.  Now  is
the  time  of  your  probation,  now  is


the  time  of  harvest,  now  is  the  sum"
mer  of  your  days.  Let  it  not  te
said,  the  harvest  is  past,  the  summer
is  ended,  and  my  soul  is  not  saved.
But  let  us  bear  in  mind  that  now  is
the  probation  that  God  has  given  us.
Let  us  make  use  of  it  by  doing  the
works  of  righteousness,  by  keeping
the  command ments  of  God,  by  hav-
ing our  eye  on  the  mark  of  our  high
calling  in  Christ  Jesus;  which  nuiy
God  grant  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,
Delitzrnl  in  the  Assembly  Hall,  Salt  Lafce  City,  Felrriimij  12th,  188$


REPORTED  BY  GEO-  F.  GIBBS,


HOSTNITV  OF  THE  WORLD  TO  THE  UOSPEL —  REBELLION OF  I  UCIFER  IN
HEAVEN — SETH  GIVEN  IN  PLACE  V>F ABEL— WICKEDNESS OF  THE

ANTEDILUVIANS— ENOCH'S  zion — NECESSITY  of  opposing  powers

AND  PRINCIPLES,  THAT  MEN  51  AY  BE  TESTED— DIFFERENCE  BE-
TWEEN mo  AMY  AND  PLURAL  MARRIAGE— OUR  MARKIAOE  COVEN-
ANTS ARE  ETERNAL— ENMITY  OF  RELIGIOUS  TEACHERS  —  OUR
CHILDREN SHOULD  RE  CORRECTLY  TAUOHT.


It  is  well  sometimes  for  us  to  reflect
upon  the  position  we  occupy  before
God  ;  it  is  well  for  us  to  understand
the  relation  we  sustain  to  each  other  ;
it  is  well  for  us  to  comprehend  the
relation  that  we  sustain  to  the
Church  and  Kingdom  of  (Jod  ;  it  is
also  well  for  us  to  know  the  position
that  we  occupy  in  relation  to  the
world  in  which  we  live.  As  intelligent


beings  it  is  for  us  to  comprehend  all
truth  so  far  as  we  are  capable  of  un-
derstanding it.

The  Gospel  is  spoken  of  as  being
liiiht  ;  and  when  it  was  introduced
by  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ
it  was  then  said,  that  ligh  t  had  come
into  the  world.  But  while  light  had
come  into  the  world  then*  was  a  cer-
tain class  of  people  that  loved  dark-


88


JOURNAL OK  DISCOURSES


.  liess  rather  than  light,  because  their
deeds  were  evil  Jesus,  iu  alluding
to  himself,  said  :  I  am  the  true  light.
And  He  is  spoken  of  as  being  the
light  that  enlightens  every  man  that  I
cometh  into  the  world.  And  again
it  is  said  of  Him  :  the  light  shineth
in  darkness,  but  the  darkness  com-
prehendeth  it  not  There  are  many
very  significant  spyings  on  the  same
subject,  that  afford  food  for  thought
and  reflection.

The  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  has
always  been  obnoxious  to  a  great
portion  of  the  human  family.  In  it  1
there  is  too  much  light,  too  much
truth,  too  much  intelligence ;  for
the  bulk  of  mankind  ;  its  principles
are  too  pure,  too  noble,  too  elevating
to  accord  with  the  general  feelings
of  humanity  and  with  that  spirit  that
proceeds  from  the  poweis  of  dark-
ness, and  which  rules  in  the  midst
of  the  children  of  disobedience.
And  hence  people  generally  have
been  opposed  to  it,  and  they  are
opposed  to  it  to-day.  People  oppose
it,  but  they  do  not  comprehend  it.
They  speak  against  it  ;  hut  they
speak  of  that  which  they  know  not
of.  And  while  they  think  we  are
superstitious  and  ignorant,  we  know
that  they  are  ;  there  is  no  doubt  on
that  question.  We  knov.  that  they
11  understand  neither  what  they  say,
nor  whereof  they  affirm. "  Therefore
to  us  they  are  objects  of  commisera-
tion more  than  anything  else*

Talk  of  Christianity  and  of  the
Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  in  all  the
ages  of  the  world,  whenever  and
wherever  it  was  proclaimed,  there
was  a  spirit  of  hostility  and  antagon-
ism manifested  towards  it  from  the
very  first.  We  may  go  back  as  far
as  the  Hays  of  Cain.  We  read  that
Adam  had  two  tons,  named  Cain
and  Abel.  Cain  lent  himself  to  the
enemy  of  all  righteousness,  and  be-
came what  is  termed  in  Scripture,


the  father  of  lies,  lie  rebelled
against  God,  and  rebelled  against
his  father,  and  instigated  by  the
spirit  of  enmity  which  proceeds
from  the  evil  one,  he  killed  his
brother.

These  things  are  not  always  un-
derstood nor  the  reasons  for  them.
But  it  has  been  revealed  uuto  us  that
Cain  loved  Satan  more  than  he  loved
God,  and  that  he  placed  himself
under  his  influence.  And  when
Cain  and  Abel  offered  up  their  sacri-
fice, Cain  offered  his  at  the  instiga-
tion of  the  devil  j  and  his  sacrifice,
of  course,  was  not  accepted.  God
knew  his  heart  and  the  feelings  by
w  hich  lie  was  actuated,  and  therefore
rejected  his  offering.  Then  came
Lucifer,  the  devil,  and  says  to  Cain,
"  I  told  you  the  Lord  would  treat
you  wrong ;  He  has  treated  me
wrong;"  and  he  instigated  him  to
kill  his  brother,  which  he  did.  And
why  1  Because  his  brother  believed
in  God,  and  obeyed  God  ;  and  be-
cause he  believed  in  the  atonement
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  w  hich  had
been  made  know  n  to  them  ;  because
he  believed  these  principles,  and
because  Satan  was  opposed  to  them,
he  instigated  Cain  to  kill  his
brother.

It  looked  a  rather  awkward  thing
for  the  world  under  these  circum-
stances. As  we  read  it — t  he  re  were
two  sons,  one  of  them  righteous,  the
other  wicked  ;  the  wicked  killed
the  righteous,  and  the  world  was  left
under  these  influences  to  a  certain
extent.  But  then  Adam  had  other
sons  and  other  progeny,  and  he  him-
self was  there  ;  and  he  believed  in
God,  and  blessed  God  lor  having
revealed  the  Savior,  and  the  plan  by
which  he  and  his  children  were  to
be  redeemed  from  the  fall,  which  he
had  been  an  active  participator  in
bringing  about,  which,  probably,
was  all  right  that  it  should  be  brought


THE  GOSPEL  PREACHED  TO  THE  ANTEDILUVIANS.


89


about.  And  from  that  time  the
spirit  of  antagonism  existed  between
the  two  principles ;  the  power  of
God  and  the  power  of  the  adversary.
It  had  commenced,  in  fact,  before
that  time,  Lucifer  and  those  that
were  associated  with  him  were  cast
out  of  heaven  because  they  rebelled
against  God  their  Heavenly  Father.
They  were  not  willing  that  He  should
cany  out  the  plan  of  redemption
and  salvation  which  He  had  devised
before  the  world  was  ;  and  having
been  cast  out  of  heavei:,  he,  with
them,  became  full  of  wrath  and  of
hostility  against  the  purposes  and
designs  of  the  Almighty  in  regard
to  the  salvation  and  exaltation  of
the  human  family.  And  this  spirit
continues  to  grow  and  extend  ;  and
the  descendants  of  Cain  multiplied
as  did  the  other  descendants  of
Adam.

By  and  by  another  seed  was  raised
up  to  Adam,  namely  Seth,  to  stand
iu  the  place  of  Abel.  "  For  God
.(said  Eve)  hath  appointed  for  me
another  seed  instead  of  Abel,  whom
Cain  slew."  And  he  became  the
representative  of  God,  as  Adam  was
the  representative  of  God.  He  took
Abel's  place  as  the  representative  of
God  and  the  laws  of  God  ;  and  he
had  revelation,  and  the  Priesthood,
and  the  Gospel,  and  was  acquainted
with  the  principles  of  truth.
Finally,  there  was  a  number  of
prominent  men  of  whom  we  read,
but  of  whom  a  very  short  account
is  given  ;  no  matter,  it  is  not
necessary  to  enter  into  details  on
these  subjects,  but  I  wish  to  touch
upon  .some  of  the  leading  points
thereof.

Altera  while  wickedness  had  spread
very  extensively  upon  the  face  of  the
earth  ;  so  much  so,  that  we  read  that
the  thoughts  of  men  were  evil  and
that  continually ;  and  it  became
inexpedient  to  the  Lord  to  permit


the  people  to  live  to  perpetuate  their
corruptions  and  infamies.  And,
therefore,  God  decreed  that  He
would  cut  them  off  from  the  face  of
the  earth,  that  they  should  not  have
the  power  to  perpetuate  their  species,
and  thus  become  the  fathers  and
mothers  of  lives  and  be  the  media
through  which  the  intelligent,  pure
spirits  that  existed  in  the  eternal
world  should  receive  bodies  or  taber-
nacles. They  were  to  be  deprived
of  that  privilege.

But  before  this  was  done  the  Lord
sent  messengers  among  the  people
proclaiming  to  them  what  was  about
to  befall  them  if  they  did  not  repent
and  turn  from  their  evil  ways.
Enoch  was  one  of  these  ;  he  stood
at  the  head  of  that  dispensation.
He,  as  we  are  doing,  sent  out  mis*
sionaries  among  the  people  who  had
become  very  numerous.  Their  mis-
sion was  to  call  upon  the  people  to
repent  and  to  obey  the  Gospel  and
to  believe  in  the  Son  of  God  and  to
obey  His  law  ;  and  to  tell  them  that
God  had  prepared  a  scourge  for
those  who  would  not  repent,  that
they  would  be  destroyed  from  off
the  face  of  the  earth  by  a  floor  1  ;
and  the  people  thus  destroyed  should
be  cast  into  prison,  a  prison  which
God  had  prepared  on  purpose  for
them.  And  when  these  men  went
to  preach  this  doctrine  many  be-
lieved on  them  and  they  were  gath-
ered together,  as  we  are,  unto  a  place
which  they  called  Zion.  And  they
were  placed  under  the  direction  of
the  Holy  Priesthood,  men  who  were
inspired  of  God,  with  whom  He
communicated  ;  and  whom  he  taught
in  all  the  principles  pertaining  to
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  ;  and
they  continued  in  this  condition  for
a  length  of  time.  .And  as  they
gathered  out  from  among  the  people,
the  Spirit  of  God  was  withdrawn
from  among  the  people  ;  and  they


■


90


JOUltNAI.  O V  DISCOURSES.


became  exceedingly  angry,  angry  at
Enoch  ami angry  at those  who
preached  the  Gospel  to  them*  And
the  nature  of  men  is  just  about  the
same  now  as  then. They  spoke  all
manner  of  evil  against  the  servants
of God who ministered  amonu
them ;  they  rejected  their  testimony,
and  not  only  that,  but,  like  some  of
t lie  very  pious  people  in  our  day  do
towards  us,  they  thought  it  would
be  doing  Hod  service  to  sweep  these
men  off  the  face  of  the  earth.  And
they  thought  so  in  earnest  for  they
gathered  together  their  armies  for
that purpose. The Saints  were
under  the  immediate  direetion  and
guidance  of  the  Lord,  and  Ave  re,
therefore,  governed by  revelation,
and  the  power  and  Spirit  of  the  Lord
reeled  upon  Enoch. And  he  rase
up  and  prophesied  and told  the
wicked of  the  tate  that  awaited
them  ;  and  the  power  of  God  rested
upon  him  in  a  marvelous  manner,  so
much  so,  that  the  mountains  trem-
bled and  the  earth  shook,  and  the
people  were  afraid  and  tied  away
from  his presence, because  they
could  not  endure  it. Their  armies
were  scattered,  and  they  failed  to
accomplish that which they  in
their  wickedness  had  designed 'to  da
But  still  the  same  spirit  that,  ani-
mated them  continued  to  glow  and
increase. And finally  after  the
Saints of  that day  had  become
sufficiently  taught,  they  and  their
city — that  is,  the  great  majority  nf
them  and  their  city,  ascended  up  to
heaven. We  are  told  in  the  Scrip-
ture— which  is  a  meagre  account  of
it,  that- — u  Enoch  was  not,  for  God
took  him."  And  we  may  add,  Enoch's
city  and  Enoch's  people  were  nut,  for
Got!  took  them  ;  they  were  translated.
The  principle  of  translation  was
a  principle  that  at  that  time  ex-
isted in  the  Church, and  is  one
of  the  principles  of  the  Gospel,
and  which  will  exist  in  the  last  da  vs.


Many  of  those  that  were  left,  con-
tinued  to  bear  testimony  to  the
truths  taught  by  their  predeces-
sors ;  and  they  themselves  were
caught  up  from  time  to  time,  accord-
ing to  certain  revelations  commu-
nicated through  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith.

The  spirit  of  antagonism  to  the
truths  of  God,  and  to  the  order  of
God,  and  to  the  law  of  God,  and  to
the  Priesthood  of  God  and  the  Gos-
pel of  the  Son  of  God,  continued
to  exist.  By  and  by  the  flood  came,
and  the  tilings  spoken  of  by  the  men
who  had  preached  among  them,
were  fulfilled,  and  the  people  swept
from  the  face  of  the  earth.  They
were  shut  up  in  prison,  in  the  prison
house  which  bad  been  prepared  for
them,  A  few  people  were  left,
eight  only — Noah  and  his  wile,  and
his  three  sons  and  their  wives.

One  of  the  great  evils  that  existed
among  the  people  was  that  the  sons
of  God  married  the  daughters  of
men  ;  or,  in  other  words,  many  who
were  connected  with  the  Church
mixed  themselves  up  with  those
who  were  not ;  and  thus  their  hearts
were  drawn  away  from  God,  and  in
the  sight  of  God  they  were  no  bet-
ter than  those  who  rejected  His  ser-
vants, and  consequently  they  per-
ished with  the  disobedient  and
wicked.  inn

There  is  something  associated
with  these  things  that  it  may  be  ne-
cessary to  refer  to.  It  is  necessary
there  should  be  opposing  principles,
light  and  darkness,  truth  and  error,
virtue  and  vice,  good  and  evil,  etc.
it  is  necessary  that  man  should  go
through  a  state  of  probation  and
trial,  that  he  should  have  the  op-
portunity of  receiving  or  rejecting
correct  principles,  or  the  Gospel  of
the  Son  of  God.  And  it  is  a  fur-
ther development  to  us,  that  if  men
have  not  had  this  opportunity  upon
|  the  earth,  they  will  still  have  it.


THE  TWO  OPPOSITE  PRINCIPLES.


91


There  is  a  further  principle  exhibited
here  in  relation  to  this  matter.  Those
very  men  who  rejected  the  Gospel
in  their  day  were  visited  by  Jesus
after  He  was  put  to  death  in  the  flesh
and  was  quickened  by  the  Spirit  j
He  went,  we  are  told,  and  preached
to  those  spirits  in  prison  who  had
been  disobedient  in  the  days  of
Noah.  And  connected  with  that
there  is  another  principle  ;  it  is  to
place  all  mankind  on  the  same  foot-
ing, that  all  men  of  every  age  and
nation  may  have  the  same  privilege.
And  we  are  informed  thej  will  have.
Ami  hence,  the  Gospel  is  an  ever-
lasting Gospel ;  the  Priesthood  is
an  everlasting  Priesthood  ;  the  work
in  which  we  are  engaged  commenced
with  our  Father  in  heaven,  it  has
been  revealed  from  time  to  time  to
man  upon  the  earth,  and  it  will  con-
tinue in  all  it  a  power,  fullness  and
glory  in  the  eternal  worlds,  until  all
things  that  God  has  designed  per-
taining to  the  welfare  anil  exaltation
of  the  human  family  will  be  accom-
plished.

In  relation  to  these  things  there
are  some  remarkable  passages  con-
tained in  the  Bible.  For  in-
stance :

**  As  the  days  of  Hoe  were,  so  shall
also  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  be.

For  as  in  the  days  that  were  be-
fore the  flood  they  were  eating  and
drinking,  marrying  and  giving  in
marriage,  until  the  diiy  that,  Noe
entered  into  the  ark,

And  knew  not  until  the  flood
came  and  took  them  all  awav  !  so
shall  also  the  corning  of  the  Son  of
Man  he."

This  is  a  very  significant  Scripture,
and  if  correct  is  pregnant  with  the
greatest  consequences  to  the  human
family  ;  if  not  correct  then  every-
thing we  believe  in  is  a  phantom
and  our  worship  and  religion  are
vain,  and  not  only  ours,  but  every-


body else's.  But  if  such  a  personage
as  Jesus  existed,  and  if  he  spoke
those  words,  He  most  assuredly
spake  the  truth,  and  they  will  most
assuredly  be  fulfilled.

Now,  in  speaking  of  the  two  great
principles,  the  twoopposites,  it  must
needs  be  that  there  be  opposition  in
all  things  ;  that  is,  darkness  as  op-
posed to  light  ;  error  as  opposed  to
truth  j  evil  as  opposed  to  good,  etc.
We  are  told  by  one  of  the  old  Apos-
tles that  the  41  Fruit  of  the  Spirit  is
love,  joy,  peace,  longsu  tiering,  gentle-
ness, goodness,  faith,  meekness,  tem-
perance j"  and  the  spirit  of  evil
is  envy,  hatred,  malice,  lying,
slandering,  uucharitableness,  etc.
We  are  told  also  in  the  Book  of
Mormon  the  same  things  precisely.
Whenever  we  see  lying,  slandering,
enmity,  hatred,  malice,  we  see  the
fruit  of  the  spirit  of  darkness,  no
matter  how  pious  the  people  are  who
profess  the*e  sentiments  and  who
operate  therein.  And  this  is  carried
out  still  further  in  the  revelations  of
John  ;  the  Lord  through  him  says:
"For  without  [the  city]  are  dogs,,
and  so rce re rs,  and  w  ho  re  mo n gers,
and  murderers,  and  idolaters,  and
whosoever  loveth  and  maketh  a  lie.'*
Such  characters  have  noplace  within;
but  those  wlio  fear  God  ran  1  work
righteousness,  who  have  washed
their  robes  and  made  them  white  in
the  blood  of  f  he  Lamb,  they  will  be
introduced  into  the  presence  of  God,
to  participate  with  Him  in  the  glories
there  referred  to,  1

Hence,  while  these  things  here
upon  the  earth  make  men  feel  ex-
ceedingly unpleasant,  exceedingly
unhappy  ami  uneasy,  when  they  get
through  iUid  expect  to  get  to  heaven
they  will  find  themselves  outside  the
city,  because  thn  pure  would  not
have  such  society  among  them,
neither  won  id  they  here.  It  is
necessary,  I  say,  that  those  prinei-


92


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


pies  should  exist  in  order  to  test
men,  to  try  and  prove  thera.  It
was  necessary  that  Jesus  should  be
tried  in  this  way.  We  are  told  that
u  it  became  Him,  for  whom  are  all
things,  at  id  by  whom  are  all  things,
in  bringing  many  sons  unto  glory,
to  make  the  Captain  of  their  salva-
tion perfect  through  suffering."
And  again,  when  John  saw  an  innu-
merable company  clothed  in  white,
■one  was  heard  to  ask,  "  What  arc
these  which  are  arrayed  in  white
robes  ]  and  whence  came  they  P
The  answer  was  :  **  These  are  they
which  came  out  of  great  tribulation,
and  have  washed  their  robes  and
made  them  white  in  the  blood
■of  the  Lamb.  Therefore  are
they  before  the  throne  of  God,  and
serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His
temple."

There  is  something  very  interest-
ing for  Saints  to  reflect  upon  in  rela-
tion to  these  matters.  And  there
is  something  that  goes  a  little  fur-
ther than  we  think  about  .sometimes;
ami  that  is,  while  we  profess  to  be
followers  of  the  Lord,  while  we  pro-
fess to  have  received  the  Gospel,
and  to  be  governed  by  it,  a  prof  ession
will  amount  to  nothing  unless  we
have  washed  our  robes  and  made
them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,
It  is  not  enough  for  us  to  be  con-
nected with  the  Zion  of  God,  for  the
Zion  of  God  must  consist  of  men
that  are  pure  in  heart  and  pure
in  life  and  spotless  before  God,  at
least  that  is  what  we  have  got  to  ar-
rive at.  We  are  not  there  vet,  but
we  must  get  there  before  we  shall
be  prepared  to  inherit  glory  and
exaltation ;  therefore  a  form  of
godliness  will  amount  to  but  little
with  any  of  us,  for  he  that  knoweth
the  master's  will  and  doeth  it  not
shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes.
It  is  41  not  every  one  that  saith  unto
me  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into  the


|  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  but  He  that
doeth  the  will  of  my  Father  which
is  in  heaven."  These  are  doctrines
of  the  Gospel  as  I  understand  them.
And  it  is  not  enough  for  us  to  em-
brace the  Gospel  and  to  be  gathered
here  to  the  laud  of  Zion,  and  be
associated  with  the  people  of  God,
attend  our  meetings  and  partake  of
the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  supper,
and  endeavor  to  move  along  without
much  blame  of  any  kind  attached
to  us  ;  for  notwithstanding  all  this,
if  our  hearts  are  not  right,  if  we  are
not  pure  in  heart  before  God,  if  we
have  not  pure  hearts  and  pure  con-
sciences, fearing  God  and  keeping
H  is  command  men  ts,  we  shall  not
unless  we  repent,  participate  in  these
blessings  about  which  I  have  spoken,
and  of  which  the  Prophets  bear  testi-
mony.

However,  tu  proceed  in  relation
to  these  matters  I  said  that  it  was
necessary  there  should  be  opposing
;  powers,  and  that  men  should  be
tested  and  tried  as  Jesus  was,  and
just  as  other  people  have  been.  And
why]  Having  passed  tli rough  this
ordeal  that  we  may  overcome  the
'  evil  with  the  good  ;  for  it  is  to  him
\  that  overcometh,  saith  Jesus,  that  I
will  grant  to  sit  down  with  me  upon
my  throne,  as  I  have  overcome  and
sit  down  upon  my  Fathers  throne.
It  is  not  to  him  that  puts  on  the
armor  only,  but  to  him  that  fights
the  good  tight  of  faith,  and  over-
comes the  world,  the  flesh  and  the
devil ;  for  him  there  is  laid  up  a
crown  of  righteousness  which  the
!  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  shall
give  unto  Him.

That  power  and  spirit  that  dis-
turbed the  elements  and  affected  the
j  people  of  the  old  world  still  operates
1  among  the  children  of  men,  and  it
is — I  was  going  to  say  a  necessary
adjunct  to  the  Gospel,  in  order  that
men  may  be  tried  and  proven.  Jesus,


CALMNESS  OF  THE  SAINTS  UNDER  PERSECUTION


93


of  course,  understood  these  things  j
when  He  said,  "  If  they  do  these
things  in  a  green  tree,  what  shall  be
done  in  the  dry?"  Said  He,  "Blessed
are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you,
and  persecute  you,  and  shall  say  all
manner  of  evil  against  you,  falsely,
for  my  sake.  Rejoice  and  be  exceed-
ingly glad :  for  great  is  your  reward
in  heaven  :  for  so  persecuted  they
the  prophets  which  were  before  you/'
There  is  something  very  pleasing  in
reflecting  upon  these  tilings.  To  be
thrown  into  a  world  of  evil  where
strife  and  corruption  exist,  and  to
be  mixed  up  with  it  ;  and  then  to
have  sent  to  them  the  principle  of
truth,  a  spark  of  intelligence  de-
scending from  the  throne  of  God,
the  light  of  the  everlasting  Gospel,
which  if  men  receive  in  their  hearts
will  bring  them  into  communication
with  God  their  Hravertlj  Father,
and  make  them  to  feel  that  they  are
fighting  on  the  side  of  God  and  the
right,  for  everything  that  ennobles
and  has  a  tendency  to  exalt  man.
There  is  something  worth  striving
for  in  a  battle  of  this  kind,  and
there  is  something  glorious  in  being
able  to  conquer.  It  tries  men's
souls  sometimes.  Peter,  you  know,
trembled  under  it ;  but  Jesus  said,  !
"  Fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body,
but  are  not  able  to  kill  the  soul ;  but
rather  fear  him  which  is  able  to
destroy  both  body  and  soul  in  hell."
I  say  unto  you  fear  Him ;  never  mind
the  other  power*  You  have  drank
from  the  river  the  streams  whereof
make  glad  the  city  of  our  Goth  The
light  of  eternal  truth  has  beamed
upon  your  minds,  and  your  hearts
have  been  glad  in  the  hopes  of
eternal  liffe  which  have  been  pre-
sented to  you  when  under  the  influ-
ence of  the  Spirit  of  God.  You
have  rejoiced  in  the  hope  that  blooms
with  immortality  and  eternal  lives.
Filled  with  this  Spirit  you  feel  that


you  are  an  eternal  being  having  the
principles  of  the  everlasting  Gospel
within  you  ;  that  you  have  received
the  everlasting  Priesthood,  that  you
are  associated  with  principles  that
will  exalt  and  ennoble  man  in  time
and  throughout  the  eternities  to
come.  There  is  something  pleasing
about  it

And  when  these  miserable  "dogs"'
howl  and  the  coyotes  yelp  and  ex-
hibit their  folly  and  nonsense — I
was  going  to  say,  who  the  devil  cares?1
Some  people  would  think  it  is  im-
pious to  say  a  thing  like  that.
Yes,  and  the  same  people  think  it
very  honorable  to  lie  in  order  to  op-
pose the  truth.  No  matter  what
men  think  of  these  things,  I
am  not  very  precise  in  choosing  my
words  in  reference  to  such  matters.

But  then,  did  we  expect  to  get
along  much  better?  People  are
very  much  exercised  about  us.  Well,
let  them  exercise  themselves.  They
are  very  much  troubled.  Let  them
trouble  themselves,  I  am  pleased
to  witness  the  spirit  of  calmness
and  quiet  and  unconcern  that  exists
among  the  Saints  of  God.  It  is  the
Spirit  of  God  and  the  Gospel  of  the
Son  of  God  that  gives  that.  And
it  is  for  us  to  continue  to  do  right
and  *keep  the  commandments  of
God  ;  and  let  us  be  careful  that
when  men  tell  these  horrible  stories
about  us,  that  they  are  not  true.
Blessed  are  you  when  men  revile  and
persecute  you,  and  say  all  manner  of
evil  against  you,  falsely,  for  Christ's
sake  ;  but  if  they  should  speak  evil
of  us,  and  that  evil  be  true,  then
there  would  be  no  blessing  connected
with  it.  We  could  tell  a  great  many
things  truthfully  against  these  same
people  that  slander  and  lie  about  us;
but  it  is  a  dirty  business,  a  business
that  reflects  no  credit  upon  any  one
that  is  etigaged  in  it  Let  them
take  their  course. We  can  afford  to


94


JOU14NAL UK  IU3U0UKSKS


move  upon  a  higher  plane,  doinggood
to  them  that  injure  us  ;  and  we  can
pray  for  those  who  evil  entreat  us  ;
that  we  may  lie  the  children  of  our
Father  in  heaven,  who  makes  Mis
sun  to  shine  on  the  evil  and  the  good,
and  His  rains  to  descend  on  the  just
and  un  the  unjust.  Who,  let  me
ask,  were  to  be  pitied  during  the
time  of  the  flood  !  the  people  that
disbelieved  and  disobeyed  the  Gos-
pel, or  the  people  that  were  caught
up  to  heaven  1  Would  you  feel
very  sorry  for  those  who  Mere  con-
nected with  the  Zion  of  Go>.l,  or
would  you  feel  sorry  for  those  poor,
•miserable,  little-fouled,  ignorant
people  who  rejected  God  and  His
law,  and  who  in  consequence  had  to
be  swept  otf  from  the  face  of  the
earth — which  class  won  hi  solicit
your  emu  numeration  ?

To-day  Cod  has  revealed  to  us
great  principles;  and  lie  is  desirous
that  we  should  do  right  and  obey
His  law,  anil  keep  His  command-
ments.

Among  other  things  thre  is  a  great
hue  and  cry  about  what  they  call
polygamy  and  what  they  call  bigamy;
but  our  plural  marriage  is  no  more
their  bigamy  than  white  is  black
or  than  light  is  darkness,  but  seem-
ingly neither  they  nor  their  judges
nor  legislators  either  can  or  do  want
to  comprehend  the  difference  be-
tween the  two,  great  as  it  is.  It
would  seem  that  they  either  do  nut
know  px  do  not  want  to  know  the
difference  between  a  man's  marry  inj,
-a  second  wife  without  the  consent  or
knowledge  of  the  first  wife,  and  in
doing  so  deceiving  the  one  he  mar-
ries, who  believes  him  to  be  a  single
man  ;  and  a  man's  manying  a
second  wife  with  the  knowledge  and
consent  of  the  fir^t  wife,  and  living
with  hi*  vviivsiii  honorable  wedlock,
pei  forming  the  duty  of  a  husband  to
them  and  ol  a her  to  thei:  children,


audi  n  a  i  n  t aiu  i  1 1  g  sacred  I  y  h  is  mar  r  iage
vows, I  would  suggest  either  a  lit-


tle gas  or  electric  light  be  turned
on,  and  that  it  be  allowed  to  shine
upon  the  visions  of  their  dull  under-
standings; it  may  help  them  some.
Hut  it  is  evident  that  men  do  not
want  the  truth,  therefore  they  must
bet i eve  as  they  choose  iu  regard  to
these  tilings  ;  it  is  really  a  matter  of
no  moment  to  us.  But  for  the  in-
formation of  such  people,  if  there
be  any,  let  me  say,  their  bigamy
is  deception  and  fraud  and  a  breach
of  the  marriage  covenant  ;  while
our  polygamy,  a.s  it  is  called,  is  the
fulfil  ling  of  the  marriage  covenant,
it  is  honorable  and  the  fruits  of  it
are  good  ;  theirs  is  done  clandestine-
ly, ours  openly  ;  we  acknowledge
ours,  they  repudiate  theirs.  They
judge  us  from  their  own  standpoint,
and  their  eye  being  evil,  of  course
they  see  nothing  but  evil  in  us.
With  them  a  man  may  have  Ids  wife
and  also  be  mixed  up  with  other
women,  and  while  he  may  be  rolling
in  wealth,  at  the  same  time,  perhaps,
bis  poor,  unfortunate  offspring,  the
product  of  his  vice  and  corruption,
may  be  swiepiug  the  crossings  of
the  streets  of  our  Jarge  cities,  beg-
ging from  his  father  a  penny  to  help
to  support  a  miserable  existence*
This  is  compatible  with  their  high
state  of  civilization  aul  purity,
God  sav«ua  from  such  "Christianity/*
fnun  this  time,  henceforth  and  for-
ever, [*•  Amen'1  from  voices  in  the
congregation,]  We  do  not  want
iL  We  wouid  say  iu  relation  to
that  what  a  Prophet  said  on  a  cer-
tain occasion,  "0  my  soul,  come  not
thou  into  their  secret  ;  into  their
assembly,  mine  honor,  be  not  thou
united."  We  expect  to  be  acsociated
with  more  honorable  principles,  and
wiih  more  honorable  people  in  time
ami  throughout  all  the  eternities  to
come,*-


OUR  MARRIAGE  COVENANTS  ETERNAL.


There  is  one  thing  I  wish  to  say,
we  do  not  preach  to  them  this  very
obnoxious  doctrine  of  polygamy  for
them  to  practice.  Our  Elders  are
sent  forth  to  preach  faith,  repentance
and  baptism  fur  remission  of  sins.
The  doctrine  of  plural  marriage  does
not  belong  to  people  who  are  gov-
erned by  fetich  principles  as  they  are,
people  who  break  their  marriage
vows  an 'I  who  wink  at  those  who  do
it ,  people  who  violate  their  sacred
honor  with  the  opposite  sex  and
trample  upon  and  destroy  millions
of  the  "laughters  of  Eve,  and  drag
them  down  to  death  and  destruction
— it  does  not  belong  to  such  people ;
it  belongs  to  the  people  who  have
obeyed  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,
the  people  who  are  in  possession  of
the  principles  of  life,  and  who  are
keeping  the  commandments  of  God;
it  does  not  belong  to  Latter-* lay
Saints  even  unless  they  are  pure  and
virtuous ;  unless  they  are  honorable
and  worthy  they  cannot  be  associated
with  any  such  thing,  much  less  can
the  class  that  I  have  referred  to  who
are  making  so  much  noise  about  it ;
so  they  need  not  trouble  their
heads.

These  things  you  Latter-day  Saints
understand.  When  President  Hayes
was  here,  in  conversing  with  him  I
told  him  that  it  was  not  our  inten-
tion to  crowd  our  peculiar  ideas  upon
the  religious  world  ;  that  we  had
receivei I  the  doctrine  of  plural  mar*
riage  as  a  part  of  the  Gospel,  and
that  it  was  only  for  pure  men  and
pure  women,  that  class,  and  that  class
only,  could  receive  it  and  practice  it,
and  make  it  honorable  ;  it  was  not
for  the  licentious  and  corrupt,  but
for  those  who  feared  God  and  worked
righteousness,  who  were  true  to
themselves  and  true  to  the  female
sex,  and  who  would  stand  by  and
sustain  them  and  preserve  them
in  purity  and  honor* There  is


quite  a  difference,  you  perceive,
between  the  one  and  the  other.

We  are  seeking  to  carry  nut  the
word  and  will  of  God,  according  to
the  revelations  which  he  has  given
unto  us,  all  of  which  are  based  upon
truth,  virtue*  purity  and  holiness,
principles  that  are  eternal,  that  al-
ways have  existed  and  always  will
exist  The  Christian  world  make
their  covenants  for  time  only  ;  we
for  time  and  for  eternity.  They  ex-
pect to  be  associated  with  their  wives
•'until  death  do  them  part."  We
expect  to  be  associated  with  ours  not
only  for  time  but  for  eternity.  They
not  entering  into  any  covenants  tor
eternity,  assume  no  obligations  be-
yond this  life;  but  I  am  sorry  to  say,
it  is  quite  a  common  thing  among
them  to  violate  the  covenants  they
make  pertaining  to  this  life.  But
that  I  may  not  be  misunderstood
let  me  say  fur  titer  with  regard  to  this,
there  are  many  honorable  people  in
our  nation  as  well  as  other  parts  of
the  world,  men  who  regard  strictly
the  honor  of  their  social  ties  men
who  feel  interested  in  the  welfare  of
society,  who  are  desirous  to  see  cor-
rect principles  prevail  ;  but  with
the  understanding  they  have  of  us —
they  believing  that  we  are  corrupt
and  are  introducing  religious  tenets
for  the,  purpose  of  gratifying  the
sensual  passions  of  man ;  that  all
are  vile  and  corrupt  at  heart,  and
that  we  take  the  ground  that  we  do
for  the  purpose  of  defending  our
position  and  of  making  it  statutory
— A  do  not  wonder  at  such  men  enter-
taining the  feelings  they  do  against
us,  because  believing  the  lies  that
are  circulated  about  us,  they,  of
course,  think  t  hat  we  are  introducing
that  which  will  corrupt  and  demoral-
ize society  ;  and  they  know  the  state
of  society  now,  and  so  do  we.  And
they  are  desirous  to  stop  a  thing  of
this  kind. The  clergy,  too,  are  very


96  JOURNAL  OK

much  exercised,  as  a  class,  about
us,  and  they  appear  to  be  the  most
incapable  of  all  classes  to  tell  the
truth  concerning  us ;  these  pious
people  circulate  all  kinds  of  false*
hood  about  us  under  the  name  of
religion.  I  need  not  refer  to  those
things,  the  fact  is  well  known  to
you.

Is  it  then  to  be  wondered  at  that
people  generally  who  do  not  compre-
hend the  true  situation  should  come  j
to  the  conclusions  they  do  about
usf  I  think  not.  Should  we  feel
an<?ry  at  such  a  feeling?  No.
Should  we  feel  angry  at  those
falsifiers  ]  No ;  they  are  to  be
pitied  because  they  yield  them-
selves to  work*  iniquity  ;  they,
therefore,  become  subjects  of  com-
passion. What  did  the  same  class
of  persons  say  of  Jesus  ?  If  he  healed
the  sick,  or  opened  the  eyes  of  the
blind,  they  persuaded  the  people  to
give  God  the  glory  for,  said  they,
u  we  know  this  man  is  a  sinner."  If
He  cast  out  devils,  this  pious  class
said,  He  did  it  through  Beelzebub
the  Prince  of  devils.  And  even
when  he  was  condemned  to  die  and
the  people  were  asked  whether  He
should  be  released  or  whether
Barabbas,  the  thief,  should  be  re-
leased, it  was  "  the  chief  priests
and  elders,"  the  pious  clergy  of  that
day,  that  led  the  popular  clamor,
that,  "  persuaded  the  multitude  I
that  they  should  ask  Barabbas,  and
destroy  Jesus/'  The  same  spirit
that  moved  upon  the  religious  teach-
ers of  that  day  to  incite  the  popu-
lace against  Jesus  and  the  Apostles,
is  moving  upon  the  same  class  to-
day to  do  the  same  towards  us  ;
and  they  are  doing  all  they  can  do.
They,  notwithstanding  their  piety,
are  of  their  father  the  devil  whose
works  they  do.  And  what  shall  we
do  1  "  Rejoice  and  be  exceeding
glad  :  for  great  is  your  reward  in


DISCOURSES,

heaven  :  for  so  persecuted  they  the
prophets  which  were  before  you."

Do  we  want  to  force  the  Gospel
upon  them  J  No.  All  religious
classes,  the  Methodists,  the  Presby-
terians, the  Baptists,  the  Catholics,
and  all  others  have  the  right  to
worship  God  as  they  please,  they
have  the  right  to  either  receive  or
reject  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  If  we
had  the  power  to  force  it  upon  them
we  would  not  do  it ;  freedom  of  the
mind,  and  the  free  exercise  of  the
rights  of  men  is  part  of  our  religious
belief ;  therefore,  we  would  not
coerce  them  if  we  could.  And  if  I
would  not  coerce  them  in  that  I
certainly  would  not  crowd  upon
them  the  doctrine  of  plural  mar-
riage, for  it  is  well  known  that
after  men  join  our  Church  they
must  prove  themselves  sometime
before  they  are  considered  worthy
of  it,

When  I  reflect  upon  the  terrible
degradation  that  exists  in  the  land,
and  the  dens  of  vice  and  infamy  that
flourish  and  keep  pace  with  our
boasted  enlightenment,  I  am  not
surprised  that  honorable  people
should  feel  horrified  at  the  misrepre-
sentations and  lies  that  have  gone
forth  concerning  us,  I  received  a
letter  not  long  ago  from  Brother
Cannon,  in  which  he  states  that  he
was  approached  on  the  subject  by  a
gentleman,  a  member  of  Congress,
who  had  visited  here.  He  told
Brother  Cannon  that  when  he  was
here  he  was  told  some  very  strange
stories  about  the  Mormon  people,
and  he  had  made  up  his  mind  when
he  should  meet  Brother  C  >  mo  i  to
speak  to  him  about  it.  He  sai-fc
that  a  gentleman,  or  at  least,  a  per-
son that  had  the  appearance  of  re-
spectability, told  him  when  he  was
here  that  doings  akin  to  a  Saturnalia
were  quite  a  common  thing  among
the  people — the  promiscuous  mixing


PROPER  EDUCATION  OF  OUR  CHILDREN.


of  the  sexes  indulging  in  unres-
trained license.  This  gentleman
says  that  this  was  told  to  him  in  the
most  solemn  manner,  and  that  too  by
a  resident  of  this  city.  He  told
Brother  Cannon  too  that  he  was  glad
to  hear  him  contradict  it  You  know
Latter-day  Saints  whether  such  a
condition  of  things  exists  among
us  or  not  ;  and  yet  such  wilful
falsehoods  are  fabricated  and  circu-
lated by  persons  who  pass  themselves
off  as  our  friends,  It  cannot  be
wondered  at  that  honorable  men
should  feel  exercised  in  their  feel-
ings against  u*  ;  but  when  this  class
of  people — and  there  are  thousands
and  tens  of  thousands  and  millions
of  such  people— are  correctly  in-
formed, they  will  feel  differently
toward  us.  But  then,  it  matters
not  really  what  men's  ideas  and
feelings  may  be  j  and  I  do  not  feel
that  we  are  called  upon  to  con  t  rat  lie  t
all  the  infamous  lies  and  misrepre-
sentations that  are  circulated  about
us  by  men  and  women  who  are  living
in  our  midst  I  say  now,  as  I  said
to  a  gentleman  not  long  ago  who
remarked,  that  a  great  racket  was
being  made  about  us,  meetings  were
being  held  and  resolutions  were
being  passed,  etc,  —I  said,  they
may  work  as  they  please  and  i£  reso-
lute" as  much  as  they  please,  this  we
could  easily  stand,  but  hands  off.

We  are  accused  of  being  degraded
and  ignorant.  I  find  that  there  is
nearly  twice  the  amount  of  illiteracy
in  the  whole  of  the  United  States
pro  raiaf  as  there  is  in  Utah  ;  and
this  fact  exists  notwithstanding  they
have  had  millions  of  dollars  to  sus-
tain their  institutions  of  learning
while  we  have  not  had  a  penny.  I
am  grateful  to  God  our  Heavenly
Father,  that  we  stand  in  as  favorable

No,  7.


a  position.  Let  us  continue  to  go
on  in  every  good  word  and  work.
Let  our  young  people's  improvement
associations,  and  our  Sunday  and
day  schools  receive  our  encourage-
ment, and  aid  ;  and  let  our  children
be  taught  by  our  friends  and  not  our
enemies.  Latter-day  Saints  will,
i  you  send  your  children  to  be  taught
I  of  people  who  would  teach  them
enmity  to  their  fathers  and  mothers,
and  who  would  sow  in  their  young
hearts  the  seed  of  enmity  to  the
principle  of  religious  liberty,  men
who,  if  they  had  the  power/  would
destroy  the  altars  of  freedom  that
the  fathers  of  this  country  fought
for  !  We  do  not  want  our  children
to  be  instructed  by  persons  whose
mission  among  us  is  to  endeavor  to
instil  into  their  young  hearts  enmity
to  the  Gospel  of  the  Sou  of  God  as
revealed  by  Him  through  His  ser-
vant Joseph  Smith.  We  have  men
quite  as  capable  to  teach  as  they  are,
we  stand  on  a  platform  as  elevated
as  theirs,  and  a  great  deal  more  so.
And  by  and  by  we  expect  to  be  as
far  ahead  of  them  in  science,  art
and  literature,  and  everything
calculated  to  ennoble  and  exalt  a
people  and  a  nation,  as  w*  are  wow
ahead  of  them  in  regard  to  religious
matters.  But  as  to  their  religious
matters,  you  may  wrap  up  the  whole
of  Lhem  in  a  thimble  and  put  it  in
your  vest-pocket,  and  hardly  know
it  was  there.  [Laughter.]  Any
ten  year-old  boy  of  ours  who  could
not  meet  any  of  their  ministers  on
matters  of  religion,  I  should  consider
very  ill-informed.

Well,  it  is  for  ns  to  keep  the  com-
mandments, to  train  up  our  children
in  the  fear  of  God,  to  live  unto  God,
and  I  will  risk  the  balance.  Amen,

Vol.  XXVI.


9S


JOURNAL OF  DISCO  UKSE2S


DISCOURSE BY APOSTLE F, D. KIC  HARDS,


Delivered  in  tlie  Tabernacle,  Ogden,  Sunday  After  mum,  January  18th,

1885. V  VtuiriI  "V"  ■


EEPOETED  BY  JOHN  IRVINE,


OUR  LABORS  ARE  INTERESTING  AND  PECULIAR — CHARACTER  OF  THE
LATTER-DAY  SAINTS— THE  BLESSING  AND  PRIVILEGE  OF  PRIESTHOOD
—THE  PRIMARY  ASSOCIATIONS — OUR  WARFARE  IS  ONE  OF  FAITH
— WE  MUST  IMPORTUNK  FOR  OUR  RIGHTS— N KCESSITY  FOR  GOOD
LAWYERS  — THE  GIFT  OF  WISDOM  —  PERSECUTION  WILL  TEND  TO
UNITE  US — WE  SHOULD  BE  PURE,


It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  meet  with
the  Saints,  and  I  always  find  sub-
stantial pleasure  in  bearing  that
portion  of  the  labor  of  the  ministry
which  devolves  upon  me.  Of  course
there  are  times  when  human  nature
is  physically  incapacitated  from
labors.  Nevertheless  I  rejoice  ex-
ceedingly in  the  contemplation  of
the  work  that  we  are  engaged  in.
Certainly  the  review  of  our  immense
subject,  our  great  calling,  our  vast
labor,  and  the  wonderful  results
that  follow  them— when  they  are
reviewed  as  they  were  this  morning,
and  called  up  before  our  minds,
must  awaken  deeply  interesting  and
I  should  hope  broadly  expanded
views  and  refections  in  the  minds
.  of  the  Saints.

We  are,  as  a  people,  and  also  our
labors  as  well  as  the  results  of  them,
a  great  outstanding  witness  to  the
world  of  the  divine  character  of  the
work  we  are  performing— the  high
,  order  of  our  calling  to  perform  that


work,  as  well  as  pointing  significant-
ly to  the  grand  and  glorious  results
which  must  inevitably  follow  the
labor  and  toil  that  are  now  upon  the
Latter-day  Saints.  Any  person
whose  bosom  is  warmed  and  whose
intellect  is  lit  up  by  the  Holy  Spirit
must  rejoice  greatly  in  the  contem-
plation of  the  great  last  dispensation
which  is  now  fairly  before  the  world,
fairly  upon  the  Saints,  like  the  har-
ness that  is  upon  those  that  are  ap-
pointed to  labor,  to  pull,  to  lift,  and
to  toil.

Where  is  there  any  people  upon
the  face  of  the  earth,  except  the
Latter-day  Saints,  who  have  from
their  religious  convictions — or  from
any  system  of  ethics  or  morals  that
they  possess,  gone  forth  upon  the
face  of  the  earth,  and,  from  honest,
conscientious  convictions,  and,  from
their  most  heart-felt  appeal?,  taken
hold  of  the  honest  in  heart,  ur  of
the  vicious  in  heart  ;  anywhere  upon
the  face  of  the  earth,  and  gathered


POWER  OF  THE  GOSPEL.


90


together  a  people  comprising  twenty
to  thirty  different  languages  and
nations,  and  brought  them  together
to  any  place,  located  them,  and
established  a  system  of  government
that  has  been  for  their  improvement,
for  their  benefit,  for  the  increase  of
their  influence,  their  peace,  or  their
happiness  in  any  sense,  either  spirit-
ual or  temporal  ?

You  can  look  abroad  upon  the
earth  in  vain  to  fine)  any  other
example  that  has  any  kind  «f  re-
lationship, or  bears  any  kind  of  an-
alogy or  appearance  like  unto  the
work  that  is  being  performed  by  the
Latter-day  Saiuts  in  the  days  in  which
we  live.

Who  is  it  that  is  doing  this  work!
What  is  the  character  of  this  people  t
Are  they  those  that  have  been
through  the  schools  and  been  edu-
cated to  appear  in  the  most  plausible
.and  convincing  manner  in  all  classes
of  society]  Are  they  those  that
have  been  brought  up  in  affluence
and  comfort ;  that  can  present  every
thing  that  is  pleasing  and  engaging
to  the  eyes,  the  ears  and  the  minds
-of  those  they  address]  Not  at  all.
Not  many  learned  or  noble.  It
is  often  the  inexperienced  boys  that
are  picked  up  from  the  plow,  from
the  workshop,  to  the  humblest  of
laboring  men,  toiling,  struggling,
and  many  a  time  when  tliey  have
not  been  able,  from  persecution  and
oppressive  circumstances  in  which
they  have  been  placed,  to  make  a
comfortable  livelihood,  yet  Uiey
have  left  the  bosoms  of  their  families
and  gone  forth  in  faith  carrying  the
principles  of  eternal  truth  and
administering  them,  with  an  honest
heart  and  clean  hands  and  by  the
authority  of  the  Holy  Priesthood
from  heaven  to  the  children  of  men*
And  what  have  tney  done  ]  What
has  this  simple,  humble  plan  ac-
complished! Without  money  in


tli  eir  pockets,  without  letters  of
recommendation  even  to  the  people,
without  means  oft  times  to  make
them  comfortable,  abnegating  them-
selves, deficient  in  the  comforts
and  necessities  of  life,  they  have
gone  forth  with  their  hearts  full  of
love  and  blessing  to  the  human  fam-
ily to  find  other  bosoms  kindred  to
their  own,  though  strangers  in  ap-
pearance, ready  to  receive  the  glad
testimony  of  thuse  servants  of  God,
It  is  not  the  l^arne  1  and  the  noble,
nor  the  wealthy  of  the  earth  that
have  brought  their  hundreds,  their
thousands  and  their  tens  of  thous-
ands to  this  country.

It  has  been  the  potency  of  those
principles  that  have  been  taught  by
the  simple  and  many  times  silent
testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  the
still  small  voice,  that  has  carried
conviction  to  the  honest,  the  hum-
ble, laboring  poor,  and  lias  brought
thtMu  home  here  to  Ziou — th*y  that
want  to  know  more  of  God,  they
that  come  from  the  crowded  cities
and  other  portions  of  the  earth — find
here  a  piece  of  a  new  world  ;  they
take  hold  and  make  to  themselves
homes,  ail  in  the  name  of  Israels
God,  and  by  the  calling  of  the  voice
of  the  Good  Shepherd, Oh,  how
beneficient  and  how  munificent  has
the  Lord  our  God  been  unto  us  !
Behold  !  as  I  look  abroad  this  after-
noon i j i  this  house,  I  contemplate
the  great  mass  of  this  congregation
that  are partakers  of  the  Holy
Priesthood, It  is  not  a  few  that  are
partakers  of  the  holy  calling,  the
authority  to  administer  in  the  name
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. It  is  the
echo  of  that  saying  that  is  written
in  the  Scriptures  where  the  Lord
has  said  that  He  would  take  of  Israel
and  make  of  them  a  nation  of  kings
and  priests  unto  Himself.  Behold
ye,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  here
they  are.


100


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Here  is  Israel  gathering  together,
being  taught  of  the  Lord,  to  learn  i>T
His  ways  ami  walk  in  His  paths,
that  they  may  receive  the  blessing
and  he  clothe*!  upon  with  power,  as
the  Prophet  snul\  "  A  wake,  awake ;
put  on  thy  strength,  0  Zion,  put  on
thy  beautiful  garments,  0  Jerusa-
lem." WM  «9  thwe  beautiful
gar m cuts  t  Tin beau ti f u  1  ga r-
ments  are  the  clothing  upon  with
the  authority  ami  power  of  the  Holy
Priesthood.  It-it?  that  which  makes
people  beautiful  j  it  is  that  which
makes  people  useful  ;  it  is  that
which  causes  the  Saints  to  sing  :
"How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains
are  the  feet  of  Him  that  bringeth
good  tidings,  that  puhlisheth  peace  ;
that  bringeth  good  tidings  of  good,
that  puhlisheth  salvation  jthatsaith
unto  Zion,  Thy  God  reigneth.3*  It
is  that  excellence  of  the  knowledge
of  God  that  makes  men  and  women
beautiful,  ami  makes  their  acts  de-
lightful when  they  are  performed  in
righteousness  in  the  name  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ*  I  rejoice  when
I  look  around  and  contemplate  this
precious  privilege — that  t  here  is
scarcely  an  individual  that  has  come
to  years  of  judgment  and  under-
standing but  is  a  partaker  of  some
measure  of  the  Priesthood,  if  no
more  than  the  office  of  a  Deacon
that  can  administer  blessing  by  at-
tending to  the  door,  wait  upon  the
tables,  and  also  by  attending  to
other  temporal  duties  from  time  to
time  as  they  may  occur.

Here  let  me  say,  that  every  offi-
cer in  the  Church,  from  the  Deacon
up  to  tlie  Apostle,  should  realize
ihut  it  is  his  duty  to  endeavor  to  ad-
minister blessings  by  the  virtue  of
the  calling  of  God  which  is  upon
him  ;  he  ought  to  feel  thus,  and
every  sister  that  is  the  wife  of  such
an  husband  should  feel,  if  she  lias
revived  with  him  her  blessings  in


the  house  of  the  Lord,  that  it  is  her
privilege  and  duty  to  administer
blessings,  comfort  and  happiness
to  her  husband,  to  her  children,  to
her  family  and  household,  Every
one  in  all  the  Church  should  be  filled
with  a  spirit  of  blessing.  The
authority  of  the  Priesthood  should
cause  a  gushing  forth  from  the
fountain  of  the  heart,  a  bubbling
forth  of  streams  of  blessing,  of
consolation,  of  comfort  and  of  re-
joicing, each  should  try  to  help  and
benefit  the  other  in  every  possible
way.  ":>  "i^ojtw

Contemplate  the  immense  army,
I  may  say  of  Seventies  and  Elders
we  have  among  us,  ami  what  a  work
are  they  doing  in  the  nations,  and
wlnt  a  work  are  they  doing  and
ought  they  to  do  at  home  in  preach-
ing the  Gospel  to  each  other,  in
encouraging  and  strengthening  those
whose  hands  sometimes  hang  down,
and  whose  knees  tremble  ;  speaking
comforting  words  to  the  Saints,
saying,  14  Dear  brother,  thy  God
reigneth,  trust  in  him."  Notwith-
standing all  that  we  see  on  the  right
ham  I  and  on  the  left,  and  all  that
we  hear,  the  Lord  God  lias  not  for-
gotten His  people,  nor  has  He  for-
gotten to  educate  ami  instruct  them
io  all  that  He  knows  is  for  their
greatest  good,  so  that  by  and  by  He
may  come  and  find  a  nation  of  kings
and  priests  who  shall  reign  with  Him
on  the  earth  a  thousand  years,  AVe
ought  never  to  forget,  that  we  are
in  a  school  of  experience.  Every
brother  and  every  sister  should
feel  that  they  exert  an  influence
that  will  tend  for  good  or  for
evih  jjift

We  ought  to  feel  concerned  for
our  little  ones.  How  precious  they
are  !  Sometimes  I  hear  the  breth-
ren testify  how  much  good  is  being
done  by  the  Relief  Society  and  the
Associations* I  want  to  hear  them


WE  ARE  A  PEOPLE  OF  PEAC1


101


talk  about  the  Primaries,  ami  tell  us
how  the  little  children  are  getting
along.  It  seems  h?rd  to  get  it  into
the  heads  of  some  of  the  parents  as
well  as  some  of  the  Bishops  to  realize
the  importance  of.  teaching  and
instructing  these  youngsters,  some
seem  to  consider  it  the  sole  duty  of
the  Primary  Associations,  while
others  think  it  the  duty  of  the
parents  only  to  see  after  them.  Now,
I  think  we  miss  it  in  trying  to  thus
shirk  the  responsibility.  I  think
we  should  all  try  to  understand  more
perfectly  the  worth  of  souls.  Oh,
if  the  sisters  and  brethren  that  have
the  charge  of  these  little  Primary
Associations  could  only  realize  that
every  little  child  is  a  gem  that  they
are  called  upon  to  polish,  to  cut,  to
refine,  to  shapeu,  to  burnish,  to  fit
and  prepare  to  stand  in  the  diadem
of  its  father's  crown.  This  is  the
way  in  which  we  ought  to  look  at
these  small  but  precious  jewels.
We  should  assist  the  little  ones  to
grow  up  to  be  mighty  men  of  Ziou,
that  shall  come  up  to  teach  Senators
wisdom,  rebuke  strong  nations,
though  they  may  be  Tar  off  and  be-
come  a  wholesome  terror  to  the
ungodly.

As  Apostles,  as  Bishops,  as  High
Priests,  as  Elders,  as  well  as  fathers
and  mothers,  we  need  to  get  more
of  the  spirit  of  this  great  work  in
all  its  different  branches,  and  keep
it  with  us ;  always  have  a  blessing
to  dispense  ;  everywhere  a  word  of
comfort  and  consolation  to  bestow.
We  should  seek  for  the  Spirit  of  God
and  get  that  measure  of  it  that  will
bear  us  up,  that  they  will  make  us
feel  the  cares  of  life  are  trivial ;  that
will  sustain  us  under  every  circum-
stance. We  can  bear  wonderful
trials  ;  we  can  live  though  and  out-
grow them  and  look  back  on  them
and  wonder  how  we  passed  through
them,  realizing  that  we  never  could


have  done  so  but  for  the  help  of  God
that  sustained  us  in  it.  Then  give
Him  the  glory.

Every  officer,  then,  in  the  Church
should  be  full  of  blessing  to  his
fellow  man,  Only  think  how  many
patriarchs  there  are.  They  should
feel  to  bless  all  around.  Xo  doubt
they  do,  sealing  upon  those  to
whom  they  administer  the  bles-
sing of  eternal  life  in  perpe-
tuity.

The  school  that  we  are  being  ed-
ucated in  is  a  strange  one.  You
cannot  pick  up  the  Bible  and  find
anything  that  is  like  it.  In  ancient
days,  when  there  was  a  warfare,  it  was
a  warfare  of  carnal  weapons,  many
timed.  Not  so,  in  our  days;  and
as  if  the  Lord  were  determined  to
put  carnal  weapons  far  away  from
us,  lie  even  permitted  the  Guber-
natorial order  preventing  us  carrying
firearms  with  which  to  celebrate  the
4th  of  July,  and  then,  on  the  top
of  that,  He  has  given  us  the  abund-
ant testimony  of  peace  all  around,
even  with  the  hostile  natives.  Is
not  this  an  overwhelming  testimony
that  the  Lord  wants  us  to  work  with
the  other  class  of  weapons — the
sword  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  the  power
of  eternal  truth — the  ammunition
that  wants  to  be  kept  alive,  active
and  burning  in  our  hearts.

When  we  come  to  contemplate
this  matter,  our  warfare  is  eniirelv
in  another  direction,  it  has  to  be  car-
ried on  ami  accomplished  by  the
power  of  faith.  We  have  to  contend
for  our  liberties  and  the  riyhts  of
the  people  before  the  courts,  where-
in we  strive  to  maintain  the  Consti-
tutional rights  to  which  we  are  en-
titled, both  civilly  and  politically.
We  have  not  gone  to  the  authorities
that  are  over  us  in  the  nation  and
supplicated  them  saying :  "  Will
you  please  give  us  some  extraordi-
nary liberties or privileges — we


102


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


contend  for  the  rights  of  every  Ameri-
can citizen,  which  are  our  rights/1
We  have  not  cut  ourselves  off  from
the  rights  of  citizenship* Our  fa-
thers fought  to  help  obtain  and  bled
to  help  establish  the  blessings  and
privileges,  the  liberties  and  powers
of  this  glorious  government  to  all  its  1
loyal  citizens  ;  and  when  this  Church
was  established,  it  went  on  for  more
than  thirty-two  years — no  law  of  the
Church  conflicted  with  the  laws  of
the  land,  until  it  became  necessary
in  the  opinion  of  some  politicians
that  the  Saints  should be  made
offenders  in  the  eyes  of  the  nation
and  of  the  world. Then  it  was
that  Congress  passed  a  law — the  law
of  1802 — prohibiting  plurality  of
wives,  polygamy,  or  bigamy,  as  they
choose  to  call  it. Now,  then,  we
have  not  risen  up  against  the  Jaws
of  the  land  ;  it  is  the  laws  of  the
land  and  the  men  of  the  land  that
have  risen  up  against  the  people  of
God,  and  have  brought  their  offen-
sive warfare  in  this  matter,  and  we
are  thereby  placed  on  the  defensive.
The  nation  have  been  pleased  to  say
that  we* shall  not  worship  God  ac
cording  to  the  dictates  of  our  con-
sciences, as  required  by  some  of  the
laws  and  ordinances  of  His  Church;
and  have  made  laws  to  prevent  us
from  so  doing,  if  possible.  Hence
it  is  that,  while  we  go  before  the
courts  we  do  not  gro  as  suppliants
for  something  extraordinary,  or  for
something  that  other  people  have
not  got. We  ask  to  be  }  *  reserved
our  rights,  the  rights  that  belong  to
every  American  citizen. It  is  for
this  that  we  go  through  the  courts,
appealing  from  the  District  Court
to the Supreme Court of  the
Territory, and then to  the  Su-
preme Court of the  United
itates.

Now,  is  not  this  a  great  and  an
important  lesson  of  experience  and


instruction,  and  yet  there  is  occasion^
for  all  this  is  required  in  the  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants.  The
Lord  has  said  through  the  Prophet
Joseph  to  us,  that  we  must  impor-
tune at  the  feet  of  the  judges — do
you  remember  it  1 — and  at  the  feet
of  Governors—do  you  recollect  that  I
— and  at  the  feet  of  the  President,
and  then,  says  He,  if  your  impor-
tuning does  not  prevail,  and  you  do
not  obtain  all  things  which  you  have
a  right  to,  He  will  come  out  of  His
hiding  place  and  take  the  matter
into  His  own  hands. So  you  see
we  have  some  importuning  to  do
before,  or  at  the  feet  of  Judges,
Governors,  and  Presidents,  in  order
to  maintain  the  liberties  guaranteed
by  the  Constitution  of  our  coun-
try-
Right  here  I  want  to  say  a  word
or  two  especially  in  regard  to  the
way  we  have  to  do  our  importuning.
I  refer  to  a  discourse  by  President
Young,  in  which  he  said  he  wished
he  had  five  hundred  young  lawyers
full  of  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel  who
would  rise  up  and  help  to  maintain
and  defend  our  rights  before  the
courts  of  our  country.  The  discourse
was  published  in  the  Deseret  News
and  republished  in  the  Journal  of
Discourses. It  is  public  matter  for
anybody  to  read  that  wishes  to.  But
a  few  days  ago,  however,  a  Bishop
remarked  that  it  looked  very  singu-
lar for  one  of  the  Apostles  to  raise
up  a  lawyer,  and  thought  there  must
be  a  screw  loose  somewhere.  It
happens,  however,  once  in  a  while
that  some  Bishop  wants  my  son  or
some  one  else's  son  to  help  defend
them  before  the  courts.  (Laughter)
I  wonder  if  there  is  any  screw  loose
there.  Excuse  me,  brethren,  for  this
reference ;  but  I  wish  we  could
have  a  goodly  number  of  substantial
young  men  growing  up  in  our  midst
who would become skilled  and


WISDOM  THE  BEST  DEFENSE.


103


mighty  in  the  law,  and  who  could
go  into  any  of  the  courts  and  set
forth  the  true  principles  of  justice
and  equity  in  all  cases.  We  need
more  of  such  men.  We  do  not
want  meu  to  become  lawyers,  turn
intidels,  and  live  for  nothing  but  the
little  money  they  can  make.  We
want  to  raise  up  a  corps  of  young
men  armed  with  the  Spirit  of  the
Gospel,  clothed  with  the  Holy
Priesthood,  who  can  tell  the  judges
in  high  places  what  the  law  is,  and
what  equity  is,  and  can  plead  for  the
cause  of  Zion,  and  help  maintain
the  rights  of  God's  people.  Hence
you  see  we  have  got  to  carry  on  these
matters.  Our  rights  are  infringed,
and  we  have  got  to  defend  ourselves
as  best  we  can.  We  are  told  that
we  must  plead  with  the  dignitaries
of  the  earth  ;  plrad  with  them  until
their  position  on  our  question  is
known  ;  they  have  gJt  tu  declare
themselves.

There  are  different  branches  of
the  government,  which  are  consid-
ered co-ordinate.  For  instance —
there  is  the  legislative  branch,
namely,  Congress.  Then  there  is
the  President,  who  represents  the
executive  branch.  Then  there  is
the  army  and  navy,  which  is  the  arm
of  power  to  carry  out  and  maintain
physical  defenses.  And  then  there
is  the  Supreme  Court,  the  legal
tribunal  that  stands  at  the  very
head,  if  you  please,  and  pronounces
upon  the  constitutionality  of  the
acts  which  Congress  passes.  Hence
we  see  our  case  has  not  only  to  be
brought  before  and  had  cognizance
of  in  the  Congress  of  the  United
States  to  ascertain  x(  they  will  make
laws  to  oppress  us,  but  these  laws
can  be  taken  to  higher  courts,  to  see
whether  they  will  maintain  the
rights  of  God's  people  in  the  land.
Ami  does  it  seem  a  terrible  thing
that  one  or  two  should  get  cast  into


prison  ?  As  President  Cannon  con-
templated this  morning,  half  a
dozen  would  cover  all  such  cases
within  the  last  twenty- two  years,
and  the  persons  connected  with  the
most  notable  cases  have  come  in  and
furnished  the  evidence  for  their  own
crimination,  under  the  promise  that
punishment  would  not  be  inflicted*
But  like  the  Governor  of  Illinois,
who  pledged  his  honor  and  the  hon-
or of  the  state  to  protect  our  Prophet
and  Patriarch,  all  such  promises  were
broken.  Nevertheless,  in  this  man-
ner we  have  got  to  test  the  purity  or
impurity,  the  integrity  or  otiierwise,
of  the  different  branches  of  the  gov-
ernment under  which  we  live,

God  is  going  to  make  His  peo-
ple a  great  people.  He  h;is  designed
them  to  be  the  means  not  only  of
revealing  among  themselves,  what
they  are,  and  what  they  are  here  for,
but  of  making  them  a  standing  testi-
mony of  the  truth  before  the  whole
world.  The  great  knowledge  of
which  we  have  become  possessed
cannot  be  hid  under  a  bushel,  cannot
be  hid  up  in  a  dark  place.  Here  we
are  in  the  heights  of  the  continent,
calling  Israel  home,  ready  to  impart
the  light  that  is  within  as,  to  all  of
Adam's  children  who  will  receive  it,
Li-t  us  seek  to  be  wise.  The  Lord
has  lob  I  us  of  certain  classes  of  de-
fense which  are  better  even  than
the  employment  of  weapons  of  war.
Ami  what  is  it  ?  It  is  the  gilt  of
wisdom."  Wisdom  is  better  than
strength  or  weapons  of  war/'  suid
the  ancient  man,  who  tested  the
matter  and  found  it  out.  Now,
let  us  understand  that  the  "fear
of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of
wisdom"  and  a  good  understanding
have  all  they  who  keep  His  com-
mandments.

My  brethren  and  sisters  :  let  us
not  be  discouraged  in  the  least.
Remember  that  no  great  revolution


104


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


was  ever  achieved  without  some
fighting.  Some  battles  have  had  to
be  fought,  some  victories  had  to  be
achieved.  It  is  while  the  war  is
going  on  that  some  get  wounded,  \
and  other  contingencies  arise,  and
some  things  necessarily  happen  that
are  unpleasant  But  after  the  war
is  over,  and  the  new  govern  meat  is
instituted,  the  grain  I  improvement
is  then  felt,  as  it  has  been  felt  in  this
nation  ever  since  the  thirteen  colon-
ies fou glit  ami  maintained  their
independence  from  the  mother  coun-
try. It  is  true  we  have  been  op-  ;
pressed  a  little.  But  our  enemies
do  not  make  very  much  at  it.  We
live  and  thrive  notwithstanding,  do
we  not!  How  singularly  the  Lord
works  with  men.  The  people  of
the  Southern  States  through  the
war  and  since,  have  been  limited  or
deprived  of  some  of  their  rights.
And  some  few  men — Senator  Brown
for  one — are  not  afraid  to  rise  up
from  their  seat  and  defend  the  right
whether  in  behalf  of  Mormon  or  non-
Mormon,  and  expose  the  doings  of
self  righteous  men  in  New  England,
exposing  the  fruits  of  their  monog-
amous marriage  relations  as  com-
pared with  our  marriage  institution.
The  Lord  lias  raised  up  men  .some-
times  to  maintain  the  rights  of  His
people*  He  will  allow  us  to  be
pinched  from  time  to  time  as  it  may
be  necessary  to  unite  us  together,  to
make  a  wife  love  her  husband  a
little  better,  to  make  a  husband  love
his  u  ives  and  children  a  little  better,
and  to  strengthen  the  bond  of  union
in  every  heart.  For  my  part  1  rejoice
in  this  work,  and  seek  continually  to
gather  knowledge.  1  rejoice  that  I
have  lived  to  see  the  work  of  God
established  on  the  earth.  Let  me
tell  you,  my  brethren  and  sisters,


the  greatest  affliction  some  of  us
have  :  it  is  some  great  fearful  appre-
hension that  something  is  going  to
happen.  We  naturally  borrow
trouble.  We  should  not  do  that.
Just  consider  that  the  work  is  the
Lord's.  Be  certain  you  do  *your
duty  every  day.  And  when  you  lay
down  at  night  do  so  with  a  clear  con-
science, and  enjoy  slumber  and  be
ref  reshed,  and  rise  up  in  the  morn-
ing, in  the  likeness  of  the  resurrec-
tion, prepared  to  renew  the  contest
of  life.  Thus  we  should  go  on  step
by  step,  adding  faith  to  faith,  keep-
ing the  commandments  of  God,  and
purifying  ourselves  all  we  can.  The
Lord  will  bless  us  in  proportion  to
the  degree  that  we  endeavor  to  purify
ourselves,  ai  d  keep  His  command-
ments. That  is  the  great  secret  of
our  full  acceptance  with  find.  We
must  purify  ourselves  as  He  is
pure.

I  do  not  consider  it  proper  for  me
to  occupy  more  of  your  time  this
afternoon.  I  feel  to  say  I  rejoice
in  this  work.  And  I  say  unto  every
brother  and  sister  that  keeps  the
commandments  of  God,  be  joyful
and  rejoice  in  Him,  He  has  called
us  to  the  work  in  which  we  are  en-
gaged, and  He  is  educating  us,  as  I
said  before,  in  order  that  by  and  by
He  may  have  a  nation  of  kings  and
priests,  judges  and  rulers  to  help
Him  bear  government  and  rule  over
this  earth  in  righteousness,  when
the  curse  shall  be  taken  from  it,  and
when  truth  shall  prevail  from  one
end  of  the  earth  to  the  other.  May
it  be  our  happy  lot  to  be  there  and
rejoice  with  father  Abraham  and  all
his  family,  is  my  humble  prayer,  in
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
Amen.


GREAT  OF  THE  WOKE  OF  G"l>


10.5


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  at  Mtrfad, Oneida  Comity,  Idaho,  Wednesday  Morning,  October

20th,  1881,


REPORTED  BY  GEO, F.  GIBBS.


THE  WORK  OF  GOD  ONLY  PARTIALLY  UNDERSTOOD— MANIFESTATION  OF
THE  FATHER  AND  SON  TO  THE  PROPHET  JOSEPH — THE  PRIESTHOOD
CONFERRED  UPON  HIM — KIR'l  LAND  TEMPLE,  AND  THE  MINISTRA-
TIONS OF  MOSES  AND  ELIJAH — BENEFITS  AND  USES  OF  TEMPLES —
PUBLIC  AND  PRIVATE  IMPROVEMENTS  ADVOCATED  —  CHILDREN
SHOULD  BE  PROPERLY  TAUGHT  — -  WIVES  SHOULD  BE  KINDLY
TREATEft— EXHORTATIONS  TO  VIRTUE  AND  PURITY


I  AM  pleased  to  have  the  opportu-
nity of  meeting  with  you.  We
have  been  traveling  during  the
summer  through  many  of  the  various
Stakes  of  Zion,  and  we  thought
that  our  labor  would  not  be  com-
plete without  visiting  you.  We
have  general  ami  Stake  Conferences,
but  the  circumstances  and  numbers
of  the  people  do  not  allow  of  them
attending  these  meetings,  and  there-
fore we  think  it  well  to  come  among
you  at  your  own  homes,  to  see  you,
and  converse  with  you,  and  to  feel
after  your  spirits,  and  that  you  may
see  and  talk  with  us  and  feel  after
our  spirits,  that  we  may  be  mutually
benefited  and  blessed  ;  and  that  we
may  be  the  better  prepared  to  op-
erate together  ;  for  if  we  can  com-
prehend  it  we  are  engaged  in  a  very
great  work.  Not  only  we  who  are
here,  for  we  form  but  a  very,  very
small  portion  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  ;  but  the  people  that  are
Latter-day  Saints  in  this  Territory
and  those  that  are  in  Utah,  and  Unit
are  in  Colorado  and  Arizona,  and


those  tli at  are  scattered  abroad  in
the  different  places  throughout  the
earth,  wherever  a  branch  of  the
Church  is  organized.  We  do  not
all  comprehend  this  work  ;  in  fact,
comparatively  a  very  few  do.  It  is
a  work  in  which  not  only  the  Latter-
day  Saints  are  interested,  but  every-
body else,  if  they  could  understand
it ;  but  they  do  not.  And,  indeed,
we  can  hardly  understand  it  our-
selves. We  get  a  faint  glimpse,  as
it  were,  of  certain  truths,  mixed  up
with  many  errors  which  we  have

1  previously  entertained  ;  but  it  is  very
difficult  for  us  to  understand  correct
principles  ;  and  if  we  would  com-
prehend them  at  all,  it  must  be  by
a  life  of  devotion  to  God,  and  by
complying  with  His  laws,  some  of
winch  Brother  Joseph  F.  has  spoken
upon  this  morning,  and  which  the

j  other  brethren  present  talked  about

■  yesterday.

The  object  that  God  has  in  view
is  to  benefit  mankind  as  much  as
lies  in  His  power We  talk  some-

!  times  about  moving  heaven  and


106


JOURNAL  C»  DISCOURSES.


earth,  but  God  has  moved  heaven  I
and  earth  for  the  accomplish  men  t
of  that  object Men  in  most  in-  '
stances  have  been  blinded  by  the
adversary  who  leads  them  captive  '
at  his  will,  but  they  do  not  know  it.
And  lie  operates  very  frequently
among  us  trying  to  lead  us  astray,
and  we  do  not  know  it. It a  very
difficult  thing  for  us  to  comprehend
the position that  we occupy  to
God  and  to  His  Church  and  King-
dom,

God  desires  our  welfare,  and  He
has  instituted  laws  for  that  purpose;
He  has  introduced  the  everlasting
Gospel  for  that  purpose  ;  and  He
lms  restored  the  Holy  Priesthood
that  existed  anciently,  together
with  all  the  principles,  blessings,
powers,  rites,  ordinances,  and  privi-
leges that  have  graced  the  earth
from  the  commencement  of  time.
We  can  hardly  realize  this  important
fact,  but  when  you  reflect  you  will
see  some  peculiar  features  associated
with  this  work*

We  all  look  upon  Joseph  Smith
as  being  a  Prophet  of  God.  God
called  him  to  occupy  the  position
that  he  did.  How  long  ago  ?
Thousands  of  years  ago  before  this
world  was  formed.  The  Prophets
prophesied  about  his  coming,  that
a  man  should  arise  whose  name
should  be  Joseph,  and  that  his  fa-
ther's name  should  be  Joseph,  and
also  that  he  should  be  a  descendant
of  that  Joseph  who  was  sold  into
Egypt.  This  prophecy  you  will  find
recorded  in  the  Book  of  Mormon.
He  had  very  great  and  precious
promises  made  to  him  by  the  Lord.
I  have  heard  him  say  on  certain  oc-
casions, "  You  do  not  know  who  I
am."  The  world  did  not  like  him.
The  world  did  not  like  either  the
Savior,  or  the  Prophets;  they  have  >
never  liked  revealed  truth  ;  and  it
is  as  much  as  a  bargain  for  the  Saints
even  to  bear  the  truth.


In  the  commencement  of  the  workr
the  Father  and  the  Son  appeared  to
Joseph  Smith.  And  when  they
appeared  to  him,  the  Father,  point-
iug  to  the  Son,  said,  "  This  is  my
beloved  Son,  hear  him."  As  much
as  to  say,  il  1  have  not  come  to
teach  and  instruct  you  ;  but  I  refer
you  to  my  Only  Begotten,  who  is
the  Mediator  of  the  New  Covenant,
the  Lamb  slain  from  before  the
foundation  of  the  world  ;  I  refer
you  to  Him  as  your  Redeemer,  your
High  Priest  and  Teacher.  Hear
Him."

What  next  i  Then  came  men
who  had  held  the  Priesthood  before*
Who  were  they  ?  Moroni,  an  ancient
Prophet  who  had  lived  upon  this
continent  and  who  had  charge  of  the
records  from  which  the  Book  of
Mormon  was  translated — a  fitting
pei son  to  introduce  the  same  princi-
ples again.  Afterwards  it  was  ne-
cessary that  the  Priesthood  should
be  conferred  ;  and  John  the  Baptist
came  and  laid  his handsupon  Joseph
Smith  and  Oliver  Cowdery,  saying,
M  Upon  you,  my  fellow  servants,  I
Iny  my  hands,  and  confer  upon  you
the  Aaron ic  Priesthood,  which  shall
never  be  taken  from  the  earth  again
until  the  sons  of  Levi  offer  an  ac-
ceptable offering  before  me/'  That
was  the  Lesser  Priesthood  —the
Aaronic— appertaining  to  thebishop-
ric.  And  why  was  John  the  Baptist
chosen  to  confer  this  Priesthood  I
Because  he  was  the  last  that  held
this  holy  Priesthood  upon  the  earth.
And  why  did  he  come  %  Because
the  Priesthood  administers  in  time
and  eternity ;  both  the  Aaronic  and
Melchisedec.  Ami  he,  holding  the
k*ys  of  that  Priesthood,  came  and
conferred  it  upon  Joseph  Smith,
When  he  had  conferred  this  Priest-
hood upon  Joseph  Smith,  other
things  had  to  be  conferred  ;  that  is,
what  is  called  the  Melchisedec
Priesthood. But you  understand


GOD  OPERATES  FOR  THE  BENEFIT  OF  ALL.


107


but  very  little  about  that,  as  the
Indian  would  say,  about  so  much
{meaning  the  point  of  the  finger).
If  you  did  you  would  think  and  act
differently  from  what  you  do.  Who
held  the  keys  of  that  Priesthood  1
Peter,  James  and  John,  who  were
three  presiding  Apostles.  Did
they  confer  this  Priesthood  upon
Joseph  Smith  ?  Yes  ;  and  if
you  were  in  Salt  Lake  City  and
should  go  into  the  Assembly  Hall,
you  might  see  these  things  pictured
out  on  the  ceiling  of  that  build-
ing.

What  next  ?  They  built  a  Temple
by  and  by,  as  we  are  doing  now,  in
Kirtland,  Ohio,  And  in  that  Tem-
ple the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  appeared
to  them  again/the  account  of  winch
you  may  read  for  yourselves  in  the
Doctrine  and  Covenants.  Jesus
appeared  there,  and  Moses  appeared
there,  and  Moses  conferred  upon
Joseph  the  keys  of  the  gathering
of  Israel  from  the  four  quarters  of
the  earth,  and  also  the  ten  tribes.
And  you  are  here  because  that
Priesthood  was  conferred  upon  the
Elders  who  came  to  von  with  the
Gospel  ;  and  when  they  laid  their
hands  upon  your  heads,  among  other
things  you  received  the  Holy  Ghost
and  the  spirit  of  th«  gathering,
But  you  did  not  know  what  it  was
that  was  working  in  you  like  yeast
sometimes  under  certain  conditions,
producing  an  influence  causing  you
to  come  to  Zion,  Yet  you  could
not  help  it  ;  if  you  had  wanted  to
help  it,  yuu  could  not  while  you  were
living  your  religion  and  were  gov-
erne"!  thereby,  for  that  spirit  brought
that  influence  and  power  along  with
it,  and  it  carries  it  with  it  wherever
it  goes.  And  as  men  received  the
Holy  Gli os t  80  they  received  the
spirit  of  the  gathering,  which
was  conferred  by  Moseei  upon
Joseph  Smith,  and  by  him  upon


others,  and  which  created  that
anxiety  you  all  felt  to  gather  to
Zion,

What  next  1  Elijah  was  to  come
to  "  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers
to  the  children,  and  the  hearts  of
the  children  to  the  fathers/'  This
lias  not  been  the  case  with  this  world,
generation  after  generation,  yet  it
must  be,  for  the  same  Prophet  says
that  "If  it  is  not,  God  will  smite
the  whole  earth  with  a  curse/*
There  is  a  very  trite  saying,  "  every
man  for  himself  and  the  devil  for
the  whole,"  and  I  am  inclined  to
believe  that  there  is  more  truth
than  poetry  in  it.  God  feels  inter-
ested la  the  welfare  of  all  mankind
as  peoples  and  nations,  white  and
black  of  all  classes  and  conditions,
Jew  and  Gentile,  bond  and  free.  He
does  not  run  on  a  narrow  track  as
we  do,  We  are  too  apt  to  feel  as
the  man  did  when  he  prayed,  *£  O
Lord,  bless  me  and  my  wife,  my  son
John  and  his  wife,  us  four  and  no
more.  Amen.1'  That  is  the  way
we  feeh  And  if  anything  is  intro-
duced among  the  people  that  would
be  calculated  to  promote  the  general
good  the  first  thing wedo  is  to  screw
ourselves  up  and  begin  to  inquire,
How  is  that  going  to  affect  me,  I
wonder  1  Who  cares  about  ^you?
It  is  not  for  you  we  are  operating.
It  is  not  for  you  God  is  operating.
It  is  not  to  make  you  rich  ur  to  exalt
you  particularly  that  God  is  operat-
ing ;  but  it  is  in  the  interest  of  the
whole  human  family  that  has  ever
lived  or  ever  will  live  or  that  now
live*  That  is  the  religion  that  I  be-
lieve in,  I  do  not  believe  in  this*
narrow  tucked  up  thing  that  you  can
pinch  up  and  stick  in  your  vest
pocket,  and  nobody  knows  w  lie  re  it
is.  We  want  something  more  liberal,
something  that  will  reach  the  wants
of  the  whole  human  family.  But
Satan  lias  had  so  much  power  in


i


108


JO  URN  X  h  OK  D1SCGUKSKS


the  world  ;  ami  God  has  been  trying
to  f  rustrate  his  designs,  and  He  will
do  it  as  sure  as  He  lives.  He  will
accomplish  that  which  He  set  out
to  do  when  He  organized  this  earth,
and  placed  man  upon  it.  And  He
will  keep  striving  and  working  at  it
until  every  knee  shall  bow,  and
every  tongue  confess  that  Jesus  is  the
Christ  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Fa-
ther* Until  every  person  in  heaven
and  on  the  earth  and  underthe  earth
shall  he  heard  to  say,  u  Blessing
and  honor  and  glory,  might,  majesty
and  dominion  be  ascribed  to  Him
that  sits  upon  the  throne,  and  unto
the  Lamb  for  ever."  And  He  will
do  it  in  His  own  way  and  in  His
own  due  time.  And  this  principle
that  I  have  spoken  of  turning  the
hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  children,
etc.,  is  one  of  those  methods  by
which  He  will  do  it.  How  many
thousands  and  millions  of  people
have  died  without  a  knowledge  of
the  Gospel  ]  Do  you  know  '!  No,
you  do  not.  But  as  Jesus  has  said,
u  Wide  is  the  gate  and  broad  is  the
way  that  leads  to  destruction,  and
many  there  are  that  go  in  thereat.
They  have  found,  as  the  anted  el u-
vians  did,  a  prison  in  which  they  are
put,  and  in  which  they  will  stop
until  they  are  redeemed  by  the  holy
Priest! lood.  As  Jesus  went  and
preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison  after
He  was  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  to
those  spirits  that  were  sometime
disobedient  in  the  thus  of  Noah  ;
so  those  men  that  go  the  broad  way
will  go  into  the  prison  house,  and
they  will  have  to  endnre  the  wrath
of  God.  Ami  whatever  they  think
about  it,  after  many,  many  years
shall  have  rolled  away,  when  the  due
time  of  the  Lord  conies,  this  very
Priesthood  that  the  world  have  de-
spised and  refused  to  accept,  will  be
their  deliverers,  by  going,  as  Jesus
did,  and  preaching  to  the  spirits  in
prison.


I  What  else!  We  will  administer
for  them  on  the  earth.  Here  is  the
turning  of  the  hearts  of  the  fathers
to  the  children,  and  the  heart?  of  the
children  to  the  fathers.  The  ancient
Prophets  and  Patriarchs  and  men
of  God  who  held  the  Priesthood
and  preached  in  and  labored  in  time
are  now  operating  in  eternity;  and
those  whose  names  I  have  mentioned
came  to  Joseph  Smith  and  revealed
to  him  whatt  Why,  the  dispensa-
tion of  the  fullness  of  time,  when
God  would  not  only  gather  all  tilings
in  one,  but  when  Temples  should  be
erected  and  the  dead  as  well  as  the
living  should  be  looked  after  ;  when
saviors  should  come  upon  Mount
Zion,  and  t  he  Kingdom  be  the  Lord's.
Others  had  their  time.  They  had
the  Mosaic  time  ;  and  Moses  who
stood  at  the  head  of  it,  came  and
conferred  his  authority  upon  Joseph
Smith.  They  had  their  prophetic
time  :  and  the  Prophets  came  and
conferred  upon  him  the  prophetic
influences.  They  had  the  Aaronic
Priesthood;  and  those  who  held  it
came  and  conferred  it  upon  Joseph.
They  had  the  Melchisedec  Priest-
hood, and  the  keys  thereof,  and  they
came  and  conferred  it  upon  him
They  had  the  gathering  dispensa-
tion ;  ami  Moses  was  appointed,
who  held  that  in  his  day,  to  confer
it  upon  Joseph.  This  is  not  one
dispensation,  but  the  dispensation
of  the  full j iess  of  times  wherein  all
things  are  gathered  together  into
one.  Then  the  hearts  of  the  fathers
who  are  living  in  the  heavens  are
turned  to  the  children  ;  they  are
feeling  an  interest  in  their  welfare,
like  a  great  many  men  whom  we
know  to-day,  good  men,  but  their
sons  do  not  do  right*  Adam  had
two  sons,  one  of  whom  was  a  wicked
man,  and  the  wicked  one  killed  the
good  one.  At  this  stage  of  things
I  suppose  the  Devil  thought  he  had
a  good  thing.  But  he  did  not.  And


WE  ARE  BUILDING  UP

then  he  led  the  people  into  sin  until
they  were  prepared  to  be  overthrown
by  the  flood.  1  suppose  the  Devil
laughed  at  the  way  tilings  were
going,  But  Jesus  went  and  preached
to  those  spirits  in  prison.  And
the  people  that  are  independent,
who  think  they  can  get  along  without
religion  or  without  God,  will  find
that  in  time  or  eternity  they  will
have  to  come  to  the  Priesthood  of
God.

I  will  go  back  to  the  things  I  was
talking  about,  concerning  the  hearts
of  the  fathers  being  turned  to  tin*
children,  etc.  This,  when  fully
accomplished,  will  reach  all  men  that
have  ever  lived.  At  the  present
time  we  are  connected  with  it  to  a
certain  extent,  and  the  Spirit  of  God
leads  us  to  build  temples.  Why  is
it  that  you  go  to  work  and  build
temples  ?  You  hardly  know.  You
see  them  ;  they  are  pretty  nice  build-
ings. We  talk  about  being  saviors;
but  are  we  saviors  unless  we  save
somebody  !  No.  But  we  build  our
temples  as  the  Lord  has  directed,
and  then  we  administer  in  them  for
the  living  and  the  dead  ;  and  then
we  are  saviors  upon  Mount  Zion.
You  here  have  this  same  kind  of
feeling— have  they  not  Bishop  !
[Answer  :  Yes  sir.]  Moses  confer-
red that  upon  Joseph  Smith,  and
Joseph  conferred  it  upon  the  Elders,
and  they  preached  to  you,  and  you
received  the  Holy  Ghost.  Ami  when
you  gatiiered  together  they  began  to
talk  about  these  tilings;  and  that
Spirit  rested  upon  you,  and  you  said,
'*  I  want  a  hand  in  it ;  I  want  to  re-
ceive  blessings  in  that  temple,  and
J  want  also  to  look  to  my  father's
family,  and  those  I  have  been  asso-
ciated with  who  have  died  without
the  Gospel/1  And  that  is  the  mean-
ing of  the  turning  of  the  hearts  of
the  fathers  to  the  children,  etc.

The  world  want  to  know  what


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.  109

Mo  mi  nu  ism  is  doing.  Some  of  us
hardly  know.  But  it  is  known
that  we  are  building  temples  ;  but
the  Christian  world  do  not  know
what  temples  are  for.  If  temples
were  built  for  them  they  would  not
know  how  to  administer  in  them.
Ami  we  did  not  know  until  God  re-
vealed it.  And  unless  Elijah  had
come  and  conferred  the  keys  it
would  not  have  been  revealed.
Hence  I  was  showing  you  who  and
what  Joseph  Smith  was,  lie  has
introduced  the  Gospel  together  with
the  dispensation  of  the  tidiness  of
times,  which  embraces  all  other
tilings.

Then  again,  did  Enoch  build  up
a  Zion  i  So  \\v  are  doing*  What
is  it?  The  Zion  of  God.  What
does  it  mean  ]  The  pure  in  heart
in  the  first  place.  In  the  second  place
those  who  are  governed  by  the  law  of
God — the  pure  in  hrart  who  are
governed  by  the  law  of  God.  Shall
we  build  up  a  Zion  1  We  shall ;  but
we  shall  not,  every  one  of  us,  have
our  own  way  about  it.  We  shall
feel  that  we  need  the  will  of  God  ;
and  we  shall  feel  that  we  require  the
Priesthood,  under  His  direction,  to
guide  ami  direct  us,  not  men  who
are  seeking  to  aggrandize  themselves ;
but  men  who  are  seeking  to  build  up
the  Church  and  Kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth  ;  men  of  clean  hands
and  pure  hearts,  every  one  honoring
his  Priesthood  and  magnifying  it.
Then  we  shall  feel  that  we  want  to
act  like  little  babes,  to  a^k  them  for
counsel  and  instruction,  and  then  be
governed  by  it,  under  the  counsel
and  direction  of  the  Almighty  and
the  aid  of  His  Spirit.  Now,  this  is
what  we  are  building  up,  and  they
built  up  a  similar  thing  before  the
Hood  ;  and  the  Elders  w*"it  forth  in
those  days  its  they  m**-  go  forth;
a  nil  they  baptized  people  and  laid
hands upon them,  and  gatiiered


110


JOUKNAL OK  DISCOURSES


them  to  Zion  ;  and  after  a  while
that  Zion  was  caught  up  from  the
earth.  And  we  will  huild  up  a
Zion :  that  is  what  we  are  aiming  at.
And  that  Zion  also,  when  the  time
comes,  will  ascend  to  meet  the  Zion
from  above,  which  will  descend,  ant]
both,  we  are  tuld,  will  fall  on
each  others  necks  and  kiss  each
other.

These  are  some  of  the  things  we
are  after.  And  we  are  traveling
about  to  teach  the  people.  Why?
Because  we  want  all  to  have  the
spirit  of  Zion.  We  sing  sometimes
and  talk  about  Zion,  that  she  shall
arise,  and  the  glory  of  God  shall  rest
upon  her.  We  want  to  lift  up  Zion.
And  we  want  you  Welsh  and  other
folks  to  work  to  this  end — I  suppose
most  of  you  are  Welsh,  and  if  you
are  not,  you  are  Latter-day  Saints,
and  if  you  are  not  Latter-day  Saints,
you  ought  to  be*  And  you  ought
to  be  pure  in  heart,  too  ;  you  ought
to  be  living  your  religion,  and  if
you  are  not,  you  had  better  turn
round  and  live  right  before
God,  and  walk  worthily  of  the
high  vocation  that  he  has  conferred
upon  you.  I  have  not  time  to  talk
upon  these  principles,  but  I  have
said  enough  to  give  yoti  a  general
outline.

God  is  interested  in  this  work,
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the
Patriarchs  and  men  of  God  are  in-
terested in  it;  and  we  are  in-
terested in  it.  And  we  have  a  little
of  that  spirit  upon  us ;  and  we  won  hi
like  you  to  drink  of  it  too*  Having
been  baptized  by  the  same  baptism
that  you  may  all  partake  of  the  same
spirit,  that  we  may  build  temples  and
ad  minister  in  them ;  and  having
received  the  Gospel,  to  feel  free  to
preach  it  to  ntliers.  Our  duty  is  to
preach  the  Go-pel  to  all  men.  Who,
the  First  Pre>u;ency  1  Yes,  if  there
is  unho  ly  eUr, The  Twelve  ]  Yes,


it  is  their  especial  calling  to  preach
it  themselves  or  see  that  it  is  preach-
ed to  all  the  world.  And,  then,  the
Seventies,  it  is  their  duty  to  go  forth
at  the  drop  of  the  hat,  as  minute
men,  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  all
nations,  under  the  guidance  of  the
Twelve,  And,  then,  it  is  for  those
who  are  in  Zion,  the  High  Priests,
ami  others  to  go  ami  preach  the
Gospel.  And  we  are  doing  this  in
spite  of  the  opposition  of  men,  ami
in  the  name  of  God  we  will  do  it
until  He  who  directs  us  shall  say,
**  It  is  enough  :  turn  now  to  Israel."
When  He  says  that,  then  we  will  quit.
And  if  they  love  the  devil  better
than  God,  they  can  do  so  and  sup
trouble  and  sorrow  and  calamity  and
war  and  bloodshed.  For  nation  will
rise  against  nation,  country  against
country ;  and  thrones  will  be  cast
down  and  empires  will  be  scattered
to  the  four  winds,  and  the  powers  of
the  earth  everywhere  will  be  shaken ;
and  the  Lord  will  come  forth  by  and
by  to  judge  the  nations,  and  it
behooves  us  to  know  what  we  are
doing,  and  while  we  profess  to  be
theSaints  of  God  not  to  be  hypocrites,
but  be  full  of  truth  and  full  of  in-
tegrity and  magnify  our  calling  and
honor  our  God.  This  is  what  God
expects  of  us.  And  then  to  build
temples,  and  what  then?  Admin-
ister in  them.  Send  the  Gospel  to
the  nations  of  the  earth.  _  And  then
gather  the  people  in.  What  then  1
Build  more  temple*.  What  then!
Have  men  administer  in  them.
And  when  we  get  through  with
our  relatives  aud  friends,  and  trace
back  our  ancestry  as  far  as  we  can,
then  we  will  call  upon  God  to  give
us  information  as  to  who  need  to  be
administered  for  in  the  heavens  ;  aud
we  will  work  at  it  for  a  thousand  years,
until  all  the  purposes  of  God  shall  be
|  accomplished,  and  everything  sp< >ken
of  in  the  Prophets  shall  be  fulfilled.


RELIGIOUS  LIBERTY  ADVOCATED


111


Now,  yon  who  live  in  this  little
place,  look  to  it  that  you  are  found
in  the  line  of  your  duty.  You  have
a  beautiful  location,  and  I  would  like
to  see  you  make  the  most  of  it.  I
would  like  to  see  at  least  a  hundred  j
times  more  apple,  pear  and  cherrj
trees  planted  out ;  and  all  of  your
streets  lined  with  shade  trees.  And
improve  your  dwelling  houses.  If
you  cannot  find  the  style  of  a  house
to  suit  you,  go  off  to  other  places
until  you  do  find  one,  and  then  come
back  and  build  a  better  one.  Beau-
tify tli is  place,  and  make  your  homes
pleasant  and  agreeable,  that  you  ,
may  have  nice  places  for  your  wives
and  children,  and  thus  help  to  fulfill
that  Scripture  which  says,  that  Z\ot\  ;
shall  become  the  praise  of  the  whole
€arth  ;  and  that  kings  will  come  to
gaze  upon  her  glory.  I  have  alreadj
had  many  honorable  men  from  many
of  the  civilized  nations  call  upon  me,
and  they  generally  express  themselves
in  this  way:  "What  a  beautiful
place  you  have  here,  Mr.  Taylor  f
"O,  yes,  (I  would  say)  it  is  well
enough  for  us,  we  can  please  our-
selves, it  is  very  difficult  to  please
others,  we  do  not  profess  much.  You
hear  curious  stories  about  us;  but
we  would  rather  have  our  works
speak  for  us."  There  is  nothing  to
boast  of,  and  what  there  is  we  should
not  have  if  God  did  not  give  it  to  ;
us.  For  we  are  dependent  upon  Him
for  all  we  have.  We  live  and  move
in  Him,  and  through  Him  we  have
our  being.  And  if  we  can  operate
together  upon  the  principles  of  vir-
tue ami  holiness,  ami  have  more
brotherly  feeling,  we  should  feel
much  better.  Some  people  say,  I
hate  such  a  person.  I  would  not  like
to  have  that  feeling  about  me,  1
don't  know  of  a  person  upon  the
*arth  whom  I  hate.  What,  not  the  j
wicked  1  No,  I  would  say,  u  The
Lord  judge  between  thee  and  me/'  I


For  if  they  can  afford  to  do  wrong,
I  cannot.

I  will  talk  about  some  other  things.
Go  to  work  and  build  a  mee  ting-house
half  an  inch  bigger  than  this.  (Laugh-
ter). Then  you  have  a  public  square,
make  some  nice  groundsill  andabout
it.  And  then  beautify  your  private
squares  at  your  own  homes.  Let
every  man  make  his  own  grounds
pleasant  and  agreeable.  And  let
every  woman  make  her  husband  as
happy  as  she  can.  The  sisters  ought
to  belike  angels,  ought  they  not?
Be  full  of  good,  kind,  pleasant  and
agreeable  feelings.  And  we  men
who  profess  to  be  saints  of  God —
saints  of  God  !  What  an  expression  !
Do  we  understand  it]  There  is  a
peculiar  form  of  expression  in  the
German  language.  The  term  Latter-
day  Saint  in  the  German  is  :  Der
Heiligen  der  Letzteu  tage,  which
being  interpreted  is,  the  holy  of  the
last  days.  There  is  something  very
expressive  about  that.  We  should
be  the  holy  of  the  last  clays,  under
the  influence  and  guidance  of  the
Lord.

We  talk  about  the  Kingdom  of
God.  God's  Kingdom  is  not  our
kingdom.  Who  manages,  directs
and  controls?  God.  In  whose  in-
terest? In  the  interest  of  the  commu-
nity, and  for  the  happiness  and  the
welfare  of  all  Israel,  and  the  whole  of
the  human  family,  so  far  as  they
will  let  Him,

I  want  to  talk  about  a  principle
here.  We  get  up  sometimes  a  very
rash  feeling  against  people  who  do
not  think  as  we  do.  They  have  a
right  to  think  as  they  please  ;  and
so  have  we.  Therefore,  if  a  man
does  not  believe  as  I  do,  that  is  none
of  my  business  ;  and  if  I  do  not  be-
lieve as  he  does,  that  is  none  of  his
business.  Would  you  protect  a  man
that  did  not  believe  as  you  do  1  Yes,
to  the  last  bat's  end. He  should


112


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


have  equal  justice  with  me;  and
then  1  would  expect  to  be  protected
in  my  lights.  We  have  in  Salt  Lake
City,  Met  hodists,  Presbyterians,
Baptists,  Roman  Catholics,  and  all
kinds.  Do  we  interfere  with  theml
No,  not  at  all.  Nobody  persecutes
them,  but  they  do  us  in  their  weak
way.  They  get  up  meetings  anil
pass  resolutions  against  us,  poor,
miserable  "  cootes."  They  do  not
know  any  better  ;  they  do  not  know
nor  understand  the  rights  of  men
as  American  citizens,  much  less
about  the  Kingdom  of  God.  So  let
them  "resolute/'  We  believe  in
returning  good  for  evil,  right  for
wrong.  Because  they  lie  about  us,
that  is  no  reason  why  we  should  lie
about  them  ;  it  would  be  bad  enough
many  times  to  tell  the  truth  about
them,  much  less  to  resort  to  false-
hood. On  the  same  grounds  I  would
not  wish  to  interfere  with  their  polit-
ical rights,  nor  have  them  interfere
with  mine.  I  think  that  is  correct
doctrine  •  it  is  good  democracy  and
good  republicanism  which  we  can  all
subscribe  to.  But  because  I  would
treat  the  in  right  I  would  not  want
them  to  teach  my  children.  1  want
good,  honorable  Latter  day  Saints
to  teach  my  children  because  1
want  them  taught  correct  principles
and  t  he  fear  of  God  along  with  their
secular  education.

It  has  been  published  in  our
papeis  about  d  i  fl  e  r  en  t  re  1  i  gious
bodies  getting  up  resolutions  against
the  "Mormons"  to  the  effect  that
it  is  necessary  something  should  be
done  to  them.  We]],  what  about  itl
Oh,  let  them  "resolute;*1  our  corn
and  potatoes  grow  just  tin*  same  ;
>o  it  makes  but  little  difference.
AH  we  say  is,  "  bands  off."  We  do
not  want  it  to  go  any  further  than
talk.  And  if  blab-mouthed  people
who  do  not  like  the  truth  choose  to
tell  falsehoods  about  us,  let  them  do


so.  Who  cares  ?  I  do  not,  and  I
do  not  think  you  care.  And  so  ia
regard  to  other  things.  What  will
we  do  ?  Try  to  educate  ourselves
and  our  children,  and  get  good
teachers  who  fear  God,  who  are
honorable  men  and  women,  and  who
take  delight  to  instil  honorable
principles  into  our  children.  And
set  them  good  examples  at  home,
you  fathers  and  mothers.  You
should  never  say  a  word  or  do  an  act
which  you  would  not  want  your
children  to  copy  after.  The  idea  of
men  who  profess  to  fear  God,  and
some  of  t  hem  Elders  in  Israel,  being
addicted  to  swearing.  It  is  a  shame
and  a  disgrace  to  high  heaven,  and
this  is  sometimes  done  before  their
families  ;  it  is  a  shame.  Ami  then
some  men  give  way  and  say  they
have  a  bad  temper  :  I  would  sell  it
for  nothing,  and  give  something  to
boot  to  get  rid  of  it.  I  would  be
careful  that  all  my  acts  and  doings
were  right.  And  it  is  right  for  heads
of  families  to  get  their  families
together  every  morning  and  evening,
ami  pray  with  them.  Every  man
and  woman  to  dedicate  themselves
to  God ;  and  in  their  secret  prayers
to  ask  God's  care  over  thein  during
the  day.  That  will  not  hurt  any
of  you.  That  was  the  doctrine  that
Joseph  Smith  taught  me; and  I  have
always  appreciated  it,  I  would  look
upon  it  as  a  very  great  trial  if  I  were
stopping  at  a  place  and  if  I  could
not  have  my  private  prayers.  If  we
cannot  lean  upon  God,  what  is  our
religion  worth!  Not  mne\  We
will  treat  our  wives  ri^ht.  He  is  a
mean  man  who  would  ah  use  ...  wo:im;i.
I  never  liked  to  see  a  big  doir  bite  a
little  one  ;  but  if  a  little  dog  bit**  a
big  one,  it  is  not  so  reprehensible.
And  if  a  man  abuse  a  woman,  who
is  the  weaker  vessel,  it  is  an  outrage
to  me.  Have  you  not  made  coven-
ants with  your  wives  for  time  and


EXHORTATIONS  TO  PURITY  AND  VIRTUE


113


eternity.  Yes,  you  have.  Would
you  not  like,  when  you  get  through,
to  be  able  to  say,  Mary,  Jane,  Aim,
or  whatever  the  name  may  be,  I
never  injured  you  in  my  life.  And
if  you  are  wives,  would  you  not  like
to  be  able  to  say,  Thomas  or  \\  illiam,
I  never  injured  you  in  all  ray  life.
And,  then,  to  spend  an  eternity
together  hereafter.

Then,  lay  aside  your  cove  ton  sness ;
that  is  idolatry.  And  while  labor-
ing to  be  industrious,  do  not  covet
any  man's  house,  nor  his  farm,  nor
any  tiling  that  is  his  ;  nor  defraud
one  another,  nor  bite  nor  devour  one
another.  But  love  one  another,
and  work  the  works  of  righteous-
ness, and  look  after  the  welfare  of
all,  and  seek  to  promote  the  happi-
ness of  all  That  is  what  God  is
doing.  That  is  why  He  has  told  us
to  go  to  the  nations  of  the  earth —
and  many  of  us  have  been  hundreds
and  *  thousands  of  miles  without
purse  or  scrip.  I  have  seen  you,
lots  of  you  Welshmen,  in  Wales.
And  what  was  I  doing  there?
Preaching  the  Gospel.  How]
Without  purse  or  scrip.  Did  God
take  care  of  me  }  Always,  and  at
every  time  and  place ;  and  I  bear
this  record  for  God  and  His  Priest-
hood and  His  Kingdom,  that  I  was
never  at  a  loss  for  anything  that  1
needed.  He  always  took  care  of
me,  and  I  could  do  it  without  beg-
ging, too.  I  believe  in  the  same
God  yet.  And  I  believed  then  I
was  benefiting  mankind  ;  and  1  be-
lieve in  doing  so  now. But  I  do

No.  8.


not  believe  in  our  being  led  away
by  their  evils.  Keep  yourselves
pure.  Do  not  let  corrupt  men
ingratiate  themselves  among  you,  to
defile  you.  Preserve  your  virtue,
you  men  and  you  women  ;  preserve
your  virtue*  and  live  uprightly  before
God.  For  as  sure  as  you  do  not  the
wrath  of  God  will  rest  upon  you  ;
and  the  Spirit  of  God  will  be  with-
drawn from  you.  Keep  yourselves,
therefore,  pure,  and  be  honest  and
virtuous,  and  be  honest  with  all  men,
and  treat  all  men  honorably.  We
can  afford  to  do  that ;  and  not  be
governed  by  their  vices,  nor  permit
them  to  introduce  them  into  our
midst.  We  cannot  afford  to  follow
after  the  ways  of  the  Gentiles,  nor
to  copy  after  their  illiberality.  We
want  the  principles  of  liberty  to
extent  and  to  expand  so  that  all
men  can  worship  God  as  they  please,
without  any  one  to  interrupt  them.
Brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  be
virtuous  and  pure  and  holy,  and  God
will  bless  us  and  lift  us  up  and  the
power  of  God  will  be  with  us  ;  and
we  will  rejoice  upon  the  mountains ;
and  we  will  build  our  Zion  upon  the
principles  of  righteousness,  and  we
will  love  and  fear  God  all  the  days
of  our  lives.  And  by  and  by  when
the  dead  that  are  in  their  graves
shall  hear  the  voice  of  God,  the
Saints  of  God  shall  come  forth  to
live  and  reign  forever  among  the
just  who  have  lived  in  different  ages,
and  have  the  privilege  to  perpetuate
the  lives  in  the  eternal  worlds,
worlds  without  end.  Amen.

Vol.  XXVI.


i


JOURNAL  or  U1SU0UK.SLS.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER H. W.  NAISBITT,

Delivered  in  tlie  Tabernacle,  Sail  Lake  City*  Stmdaif  Aft er noon,  March  8,

1885.  ^  1


REPORTED  BY  JOHN  JRYINE.


*  COMMUNITIES  ARE  MADE  VP  OF  FAMILY  ORGANIZATION'S — THE  MAR-
RIAGE RELATIONSHIP  INSTITUTED  BY  THE  ALMIGHTY — DESCENT  OF
THE  HUMAN  FAMILY  FR< »M  GoD  -PLURAL  MARRIAGE  SYSTEM  OF
ANCIENT  ISRAEL — POTENCY  OF  LOVE — JETERNFTY  OF  MARRIAGE
NECESSARILY  LEADS  TO  PLURAL  MARRIAGE — POLYGAMIC  FORM  OF
MARRIAGE  MOST  PREVALENT  IN  THE  WORLD  —  FROM  WHENCE
MONOGAMY  IS  DERIVED  —  MONOGAMY  SOMETIMES  NECESSARY  —
FRUITS  OF  MONOGAMY  AND  PLURAL  MARRIAGE  COMPARED — THE
MARRIAGE  COVENANT  CHANGED  FROM  A  RELIGIOUS  RITE  TO  A  CIVIL
CONTRACT  —  MARRIAGE  REQUIRES  THE  SANCTION  OP  THE  HOLY
PRIESTHOOD  —  THE  SAINTS  SHOULD  NOT  MARRY  OUTSIDE  THE
CHURCH*


My  brethren,  sisters  and  friends  :
The  congregation  is  large,  and  I
Lope  to  be  so  directed  by  the
Spirit,  that  all  present  who  so  desire
may  be  enabled  to  hear  and  under
stand.

The  Sabbath  is  the  day  provided
expressly  for  the  reception  of  spirit-
ual food.  The  speakers,  or  t-hosft
vrho  may  be  called  upon  to  teach,
need  all  the  resources  that  are  with-
in their  reach  in  order  to  satisfy  a
congregation  of  hungry  souls,  they
need  particularly  the  fait  h  and  prayers
<of  the  Saints,  the  influence  and
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  mani-
festation of  the  authority  of  the
Holy  Priesthood,  so  that  there  may
be  instruction  upon  the  important
topics  and  principles  of  the  Gospel,
not  the  theoretical  ones  alone,  hut
those  that  are  interwoven  with  our
xlaily  life-


There  is  a  vast  amount  of  expe-
rience in  the  aggregate  among  the
people.  Individual  experience  forms
one  of  t he  t  reas  u  re  h  o  u  ses  fro  m  w  h  e n  ce
a  speaker  can  draw  the  supplies  that
are  necessary  and  advantageous  for
a  sympathetic  audience.  There  is
a  great  deal  implied  in  a  congrega-
tion like  the  present  one  ;  there  is
much  more  implied  in  the  aggregation
of  congregations  forming  a  commu-
nity, from  communities  to  nations,
from  nations  to  mankind  at  large.
The  most  narrow  as  well  as  most
dense  communities  are  made  up  of
the  family  organization.  There  is
found  circle  within  circle,  or  as  the
Prophet  had  itt  "  wheel  within
wheel  and  the  homes  of  a  commu-
nity should  be  the  outgrowth,  not
of  theories  alone,  but  of  the  faith,
knowledge,  and  understanding  of
those  relationships  which  exist  there^


MA  UK  I  AGE  ORDAINED  OF  GOD


1 15


When  these  family  organizations  are  1
based  upon  knowledge  they  are  likely
to  be  more  permanent.  If  they  are
only  thoughtless  or  theoretical,  or  if
they  exist  without  information,  cir-
cumstances, pressure,  opportunities
are  very  likely  to  disintegrate  them,
to  break  them  up,  to  dissolve  them,
and  so  through  indifference  for  each
other  substitute  an  anomalous  con-
dition of  selfishness  amongst  those
members  who  otherwise  should  form
-connected  and  interwoven  circles.

In  Christendom  the  marriage  ;
covenant  is  the  foundation  of  the
home.  The  ideas  which  men  hold
concerning  it,  lay  at  the  foundation
of  all  social  order,  all  unity  and  all
government,  and  even  the  we  1  fore  of
future  ages  depends  upon  the  theories
cherished  in  regard  to  home  and
family  associations.  The  thoughts
held  and  the  practice  growing  out  of
these,  are  surely  higher  than  could
be  possible  in  the  families  of  a  com-
munity where  the  sexual  relations
remain  undetermined,  where  they
are  without  restraint  and  without
order,  there  will  inevitably  be  chaos,
disruption  and  contention,  and  the
body  politic  would  speedily  and
inevitably  under  loose  conditions,
degenerate  and  p  is*  away.  But  this
marriage  organization  and  institution
has  existed  from  the  beginning.  It
has  been  the  binding  aid  sealing
power  of  the  family  ;  it  h as  perpet-
uated those  families  from  the  time
that  Eve  was  given  to  Ad  un  to  the
last  marriage  that  took  place  hi  our
own  immediate  neighborhood.  The
Lord  said  that  it  was  not  good  that
man  should  be  alone.  He  gave  to
him  as  a  helpmate  one  of  HU  daugh-
ters by  the  name  of  Eve.  Tuis  re
lationship  was  then,  institute  I  by
the  Almighty,  an  I  therefore  a  in  in
and  his  wife  should  redly  become
one  ;  their  interests,  their  labors
'  should  be  blended  ;  tinir  responsi-


bilities should  be  mutual  ;  and  in
thus  helping  and  aiding  each  other
they  should  train  the  posterity  that
God  might  give  them  in  His  fear
and  in  the  practice  of  righteousness,
so  that  His  rule  and  Kingdom
might  exist  ami  prevail  upon  ttie
earth.

In  all  nations,  from  the  highest
civilized  to  the  lowest  tribal  rela-
tion, among  the  wanderers  of  the
earth,  there  is  more  or  les*  semblance
of  this  organization,  this  family
compact,  this  united  responsibility  ;
garnished  in  many  lauds  with  pomp
and  ceremony,  and  with  all  the  ap-
pliances and  sanctities  of  religion.
In  others  with  less,  and  still  less  of
this,  until  we  come  to  where  with
but  little  ceremony  the  dusky  Indian
captures  the  maiden  of  Ins  choice,
and  takes  her  to  the  tent  which  he
has  erected  for  himself

The  Scriptures  ^ive  an  account
simply  of  the  woman  Eve  ;  declaring
that  this  name  was  given  her  of
Adam,  because  she  was  "  the  mother
of  all  living  but  outside  of  biblical
record  there  has  been  handed  down
from  time  immemorial  th^  idea  that
J  Adam  had  two  wives,  the  narrators
go  so  far,  or  rather  so  near  perfecting
the  tradition  so  as  to  give  their
names,  Lilith  being  said  to  be  the
nam*  of  one  as  Kve  was  the  name
of  the  other,  and  while  it  may  be
diffhult  to  harmonize  all  the  Rib*
!  hiuical  bud  Taluiu  He  versions  of
this  nutter,  it  is  said  that  Joseph
Smith  the  Pmphet  taught  that  Adam
hail  two  wives.  Without  however,
1  assuming  or  basing  anything  upon
this  theory,  or  upon  this  tradition
— which  may  be  mythical  in  its
character — it  is  nevertheless,  very
j  evident  that  marriage  wa*  ordained
of  G  >  I  ;  a' id  when  we  take  into  our
hau  ls  the  record  of  the  Holy  Scrip-
tures tint  have  heei  hande  I  down
to  us  by  our  fathers,  that  have  been


116  JOURNAL  OF

cherished  in  parts  by  the  ancient
people  of  God,  and  in  latter  times
consolidated  ;  passing  through
various  channels  under  peculiar
circumstances,  ™d  with  an  apparent
special  providence  continuing  and
protecting  the  same — we  find
throughout  the  pages  thereof  that
marriage  everywhere  lor  four  thous-
and years,  at  all  events,  was  recog-
nized as  of  divine  origin.  One  of
the  latest  assertions  in  regard  to  it,
as  addressed  to  the  early  Saints  by
Paul  was,  that  marriage  was  honor-
able  in  all,  and  further  that  it  was
typical  of  that  union  and  headship

Jbeld  by  Jesus  to  the  Church,  and
from  this  comes  an  added  force  to
the  Savior's  won  Is,  who,  when  speak-
ing on  this  topic  said  :  "what  God
hath  joined  together  let  no  man  put
asunder."

The  sanctity  of  the  marriage  rela-
tion had  another  feature  in  ancient
Israel :  that  gn  at  family  of  promise
were  divided  into  tribal  relations,
and  by  these  their  genealogical  tables
were  kept  perfect.  Any  marital
connection  or  alliance,  outside  of  that
order  was  visited  with  indignation,
condemnation  and  punishment.
Those  who  were  guilty  of  violating
the  order  of  marriage  were  looked
upon  as  guilty  of  something  winch
destroyed  the  root  and  foundations
of  society.  They  were  held  to  be
guilty  of  introducing  things  and
practices  which  vitiated  the  value
of  genealogical  record,  and  which
made  the  perpetuity  of  families  a

.comparative  impossibility  and  had
it  not  been  for  tribal  carefulness  in
this  direction,  for  this  supervision
which  controlled  and  regulated  the
people  of  God,  it  would  have  been
impossible  in  the  days  of  the  Savior
for  the  Apostles  to  have  traced  His
genealogy  back  to  the  early  Prophets
and  Patriarchs.  That  which  men
now  apply  only  as  a  rule,  in  regard


DISCOURSES,

i  to  stock,  or  to  some  of  the  most
ancient  families  of  mankind,
by  the  people  of  God,  was  looked
upon  as  the  one  perfect  chain  to
demonstrate hereditary  descent.

If

We  are  told  in  tracing  one  of  the
genealogies  from  father  to  son — or
from  son  to  father,  in  a  backward
direction  to  Adam — that  finally
Adam  was  said  to  be  the  son  of  God,
and  by  a  close  application  of  the
principles  of  logic,  it  miry  be  assumed
that  all  the  posterity  of  Adam  are  by
I  direct  descent  the  sons  and  daughter*
of  the  living  God,  It  will  also  be
found  in  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah
regarding  the  Savior,  that  lie
should  lie  called  the  "  Wonderful,
Counselor,  the  Mighty  God,  the
Everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of
Peace/'  W  hen  we  come  to  Ilia
own  conversation,  where  His  Apos-
tles asked  Mini  if  He  would  show
unto  them  the  Fattier,  He  said:
*'  Have  I  been  su  long  with  you,
and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  me  ?
he  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the
Father."  This  statement  is  reiterated
time  and  again  in  the  Hm  >k  of  Mormon,
and  in  the  sacred  writings  that  we
have  received.  Jesus  Christ,  the
Son  of  God,  the  Redeemer  ot  the
,  world,  was  not  the  Son  only,  but
the  prophetic  declaration  was  ful-
filled in  Him — He  was  verily  and
indeed  the  Everlasting  Father.
So  by  the  same  application  of  logic
and  inferential  evidence  from  holy
writ,  wherever  you  find  a  man  he  ia
the  son  of  somebody,  and  his  exist-
ence is  perpetual  and  eternal  Every
Father  becomes,  by  virtue  of  hia
position,  an  everlasting  father.  He
in  this  respect  represents  the  same
characteristic  as  that  occupied  by
the  Great  Father  of  us  all  And
throughout  the  countless  ages  of
eternity,  any  man  who  has  ever  as-
sumed or  occupied  the  position  and
continues  faithful to it&  respon*


sibilities,  will  forever  remain  to
his  posterity  "  the  Everlasting
Father."

As  far  as  we  can  glean  from  the
sacred  records,  we  find  that  this  re-
lationship was  established  for  the
bringing  upon  this  sphere  of  action
a  posterity.  The  powers  and  func-
tions which  had  been  conferred  upon
man  and  woman  were  exemplified  in
this  direction,  and  when  a  man's
wife  was  barren,  when  any  of  these
daughters  of  Israel  in  ancient  times
were  childless,  it  was  considered  to
be  a  reproach  t*j  them,  yet  in  the
exercise  of  faith  and  by  the  blessing

of  the  Almighty,  and  hy  obedience

to  the  patriarchal  order,  many  of
these  ancient  sisters,  the  progenitors
of  the  Israel  of  the  latter  days,  were
delivered  from  barrenness,  and  be-
came th<i  mothers  of  a  vast  and  ever
increasing  host  of  posterity.  Those
who  are  I  ami  liar  with  the  sacred
Scriptures  will  remember  one  of  the
wives  of  Jacob  ;  they  will  remember
the  case  of  Hannah,  the  mother  of
Samuel  the  Prophet,  and  there  are
♦others  which  arefamiliar  to  our  minds
which  need  not  be  quoted.  The
desire  for  offspring  among  the  wives
of  Israel  was  a  prevailing  feeling,
because  it  was  understood  that  from
that  lineage  should  come  the  Mes-
siah of  the  latter  days,  and  ev-
ery daughter  of  Israel  was  anxious
that  in  a  direct  line  she  miidit  be

O

the  honored  of  God,  in  being  the
medium  through  which  should  come
the  Redeemer,  the  promised
Immanuel

It  nuidit  also  to  be  remarked  in
-connection  with  this  question,  that
marriage  was  at  times  polygamic  as
well  as  inonouamic — that  is,  ri^ht
away  in  the  earl}  history  of  the  world
there  were  men  who  had  more  wives
than  one.  Lantech  was  the  first  who
is  mentioned  in  Scripture.  And  here
it might be observed,  although


probably  all  understand  it,  that  the
Bible  does  not  profess  to  give  a  per-
fect history  in  derail  ot  the  habits
I  and  practices  of  the  ancient  people
I  of  Gud,  for  these  are  only  secondary
to  the  ever  present  assertions  of
divine  interest  in  and  regulation  of
the  human  family.  There  are  only
reveal ings  or  incidental  glimpses
here  and  there  in  regard  to  the  prin-
ciples of  social  and  domestic  life,
find  hiniings  of  some  which  have
befn  kept  hid  from  then  to  now;
hut  that  marring  was  the  heritage
of  man  is  certain,  ami  that  while
under  many  circumstances  it  was
monogamic,  there  were  also  many
cases  in  which  it  was  of  a  polygamic
character,  ami  in  ho  til  instances  it
was  given  by  command  and  then
received  the  approbation  of  the  heav-
ens. It  was  regulated  and  sustained
by  the  great  lawgivers  of  ancient
Israel,  who  were  inspire.  I  to  point  out
in  detail  the  limits  of  consanguinity,
the  times  and  seasons  of  privilege,
ami  what  should  be  the  method
of  securing  posterity  under  such  and
such  circumstances ;  until  the  time
came  when  Israel  as  a  nation  enjoyed
its  highest  glory,  and  then  we  find
that  this  principle  (polygamy)
formed  one  of  the  leading  features
ot  the  household  extension  in  the
kings  of  that  time*  I  >avid  is  a  noted
illustration.  Solomon  was  another,
and  in  the  comments  of  the  Scrip-
tures regarding  these  two  men,
notwithstanding  their  multiplicity
of  wives,  we  find  no  condemnation
save  in  the  fact  that  they  in  other
respects  violated  the  fundamental
law  of  ancient  Israel,  Davit  I,  we  are
told,  captured  the  wife  of  another
man  by  strategem  and  because  he
did  this  he  fell  under  condemnation.
The  son  that  was  horn  to  him  of  that
connection  died  a  premature  death  ;
but  afterwards  when  he  repented,
he  married  and  still  retained  that


118


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


self  same  voman,  Bathsheba ;  the
Lor<I hies  Sim  I and  acknowledged
David's  repentance  and  her  position
by  giving  lier  fur  a  son  the  great
Jedediah,  or  Solomon,  and  finally  in
a  direct  line  through  her,  came  also
tlie  Redeemer  of  Israel- The  Scrip-
tures in  commenting  upon  David's
practice  say  that  in  "  none  of  these
things  tlid  he  violate  the  command-
ments, save  in  the  case  of  the  wile
of  Uriah"  [1st  Kings,  15,  5.1  We
are  also  told  that  Solomon  multiplied
wives  and  families  unto  himself,  yet
his  reign  formed  an  era  in  the  national
life  of UraeL It  was  during  his
administration  as  King  and  Priest
under  the  order  of  God,  that  that
wonderful  temple was built  and
dedicated  which  received  the  sanc-
tion and  approbation  of  the  heavens;
of  the  resting  upon  it  of  the  cloud
bv  day tliat  the  Priests  could  not
minister  at  the  altar,  and  the  descent
of  tire  from  heaven,  which  consumed
the  'sacrifice  presented,  ueie  both
tokens  of  divine acceptance  and
recognition,  and  we  have  not  found
in  reading  the  history  of  Solomon
that  his  conduct  was  condemned  save
in  the  fact  that  he  took  unto  himself
wives  of  the  outside  nations  contrary
to  the  law,  wkkh  declared  tliat  the
marriages  of  Israel  should  be  within
their  own  immediate  families,  (Dent
7th,  3rd,)  and  as  a  result  the  record
declares  that  it  was  the-e  heathen
wives  which  he  took,  those  women
that  wpre  captured  in  war  or  tho^e
that  lie  had  from  choice  or  were
given  to  him  for  couciliatoiy  alliance
from  etmounding  nations  who  led
away  his  heart  from  the  wot  ship  of
the  God  of  Israel,  and  turned  him
to  the  practices  of  idolatry.  With
this  exception  the  presumption  is
from  tin*  evidence  that  his  other  mar-
riages were  approved,  and  in  them
wns  his  posterity  perpetuated.  It
was  the  direct  result  of  the  blessing


of  the  Almighty,  and  through
him,  as  he  stood  in  a  representative
position,  we  may  surely  assume  what
the  feelings  of  Israel  were  in  regard
to  polygamy  or  the  plurality  of
wives.

It  is  more  than  inferential  evidence
in  favor  of  this  principle  which  grows
from  the  consideration  of  the  practice
of  Solomon  and  David,  and  Abraham
and  Jacob,  and  Moses  and  Gideon,
and  Jehoida  and  Ah  don,  and
Kehoboam  and  Abijah,  and  Esau
and  Lamech,  and  Jerubbaal  and
Jair,  though  some  of  these  men
were  not  examples  in  every  act  of
their  lives,  yet  the  facts  are  no  more
in  favor  of  monogamists  as  to  this
than  in  the  day  and  age  iii  which  we
live.  >j;;

Unfair  advantage  has  been  taken
by  opponents  of  this  practice,  be-
cause of  the  Adainic  era,  but  the
Rabbinical  tradition  already  men-
tioned, while  not  conclusive,  shows
that  no  repulsion  existed  in  the
minds  of  the  honored  priesthood
of  Israel ;  land,  as  the  Rev.  Dr,
N  e  w  r  n a u  q u o  t  e d  t  h e  w  o r<  1  s  of  Lai  nech ,
so  we may  also  have  our  opinion  and

that  is  that  Ins  declaration  possessed
no  reference  whatever  to  his  plurality
of  wives.

However,  in  the  Christian  dis-
pensation it  has  been  assumed  tliat
this  piactice  had  become  almost
obsolete;  some  have  said  that  it  died
away  because  it  was  deprecated  by
the  Savior  and  by  His  Apostles,  but
there  appears  to  have  been  thoughts
in  the  minds  of  the  hitler  concerning
marriage  which  open  to  our  minds-
many  things  in  regard  to  that  insti-
tution. For  instance  we  are  told
that  man  is  not  without  the  woman
in  the  Lord,  neither  the  woman  with-
out the  man.  [1  Cor.,  11,  11.]  It
takes  the  two,  at  least,  to  make  a
complete  and  rounded  man.  When
tile  Hist  pair  were  created  the  Bible


expressly  declares,  "  male  and
female  created  he  them,"  and
called  their  name  Adam.  [lieu.
5,  2.]  It  included  the  two;  it
included  the  man  and  wife  ;  and
the  theory  of  the  Gospel  in  Apostolic
times  was,  that  n  man  was  an  imper-
fect being  without  the  woman,  and
that  a  woman  was  aUo  an  imperfect
being  without  the  man,  and  this
perfect  state  could  not  be  realized  or
wrought  out  without  the  institution
of  marriage.

It  is,  then,  by  this  marriage  rela-
tion that  men  and  women  were  in
the  Lord  according  to  the  divine
order,  carrying  out  the  example*  of
their  great  predecessors,  and  of  their
Father  m  heaven.  It  may  safely  he
assumed  that  marriage  with  the  in
was  an  eternal  principle  ;  that  it  was
not  meant  for  time  only,  but  for  eter-
nity ;  that  it  was  a  relationship  that
was  perpetuated,  and  that  this  not
only  ineluded  the  man  and  wife,  but
of  necessity  the  entire  family  organ-
ization. Fur  our  Hod  is  nut  the  God
of  the  dead  but  of  the  living,  4*aud
what  he  hath  joined  together  no
man  shall  put  asunder.1'  To  the  older
people  here,  who  are  familiar  with
the  facts  made  manifest  in  the  human
organization,  it  may  be  said  that  there
are  cert  Sin  elements  of  attraction
which  lead  the  one  sex  towards  the
other.  This  attraction  is  designated
by  the  name  of  love.  We  arc  some-
times afraid  to  exhibit  this  character-
istic ;  we  think  it  is  uu worthy  of
men  or  women  ;  and  that  when  a
man  is  said  to  be  in  love,  ura  woman,
it  is  something  that  should  bevelled
from  the  eyes  and  knowledge  and
understanding  of  everybody  but
themselves.  But  insomuch  as  love
is  one  ot  the  great  attributes  of  Deity,
this  idea  does  not  recommend  itself.
It  is  not  only  a  great  attribute  of
Deity,  but  it  is  the  greatest  and
most  potent  attribute  to  be  found


in  man's  and  woman's  organization.
To  those  who  have  been  allured  by
its  power;  to  those  who  understand
its  force ;  to  those  who  realize  that
it  is  the  parent  of  all  action  almost
in  life  ;  how  it  leads  men  to  sacrifice,
to  labor,  to  effort,  no  argument  is
needed  to  show  that  it  is  the  greatest
power  of  the  human  heart.  For  it
men  will  endure  any  amount  of  sacri-
fice ;  for  it  women  will  endure  and
submit  to  almost  any  indignity.
The  fact  is,  it  is  the  only  element
that  will  bind  together  in  its  original
purity  the  family  circle  :  it  is  that
which  leads  a  man  to  iro  forth  in  the
battle  of  life  to  earn  the  bread  that
perisheth  :  it  is  that  which  enables
him  to  look  upon  his  wife  as  para-
mount to  all  els,-?  ;  it  is  that  which
enables  her  to  watch  by  her  infant
children,  and  in  the  moment  of  sick-
ness, with  sleepless  nights  and  flays
of  vigilance,  await  until  there  is  a
restoration  to  health  ;  it  is  this  that
ghnifies  the  family  circle  and  makes
it  a  little  heaven  upon  earth  ;  and
every  man  and  every  woman  is
cognizant  of  the  fact,  that  where  love
has  died  out  from  the  altar  of  home,
that  home  lias  lost  its  greatest
attraction.  A  man  does  not  go  there
and  look  upon  it  as  his  little  resting
place  from  the  care  and  anxiety  of
the  world  when  that  feeling  has  uied
our.  No,  He  finds  his  pleasure  in
the  club  room,  on  the  race,  course,
at  the  gaming  table,  in  political  life,
in  business,  or  in  many  other  direc-
tions, rather  than  in  the  little  heaven
called  home.  Ah  !  sad  indeed  is
the  fate  of  those  families  when*  this
beautiful,  this  beneficent,  this
almighty,  this  glorifying  principle
has  failed,  or  finds  no  resting  place
therein.

Now,  this  is  the  key  to  marriage

in  the  abstract  It  is  its  foundation.
It  constitutes  the  glories  of  its
architecture. It  brings  upon  it  its


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSED


capstone,  and  finishes  the  edifice  I
that  God  Almighty  hath  ordained.
Yet  this  element  which  lays  at  the
foundation  and  runs  through  the
whole  fabric  ol  married  life,  in  and
of  itself  is  not  sufficient  to  produce
and  perpetuate  that  perfect  happiness
which  men  and  women  desire  in  this
relationship.  Man  is  a  compound
being.  Woman  is  a  compound  being.
There  are  oilier  feelings  of  tin*  heart
beside  affection  and  love,  although
these  will  cover  a  multitude  of  sins.
But  it  is  necessary  for  the  best  inter-
ests of  the  family  relation  that  the
tastes  and  habits,  feelings  and
thoughts  of  the  high  contracting
parties  should  run  pretly  much  in
the  same  direction — that  is,  so  far  as
intelligence  is  received*  Hence  we
have  the  apostolic  injunction  given
to  the  early  Christians  which  said  :
*' Be  not  unequally  yoked  with  un-
believers." This  was  one  of  the
commands  given  to  the  early  Chris-
tians ;  because  it  was  realized  that
though  the  fire  of  love  may  burn
fiercely  in  the  early  years  of  wedded
life,  yet  unless  there  is  unity  of
sentiment,  of  thought  and  of  action
in  regard  to  the  religion  that  married
couples  should  posses?,  and  that
should  be  imposed  upon  the  children
there  will  ever  he  a  probability  of
disintegration  and  disruption,  and
this  rule  had  its  counterpart,  or  had
its  origin,  in  ancient  Israel.  It  was
not  intended,  as  already  stated,  that
the  sons  of  any  of  the  tribes  of  Israel
should  take  to  themselves  wives  of
the  nations  that  were  round  about
them  ;  they  were  commanded  strict-
ly to  keep  wi  th  that  family,  and  where
they  failed  in  this,  whether  as  indi-
viduals or  in  a  national  capacity,
it  brought  down  upon  them  the
blighting  curse  of  the  Almighty,
and  led  them  finally  to  bondage,
and  to  be  carried  away  to  the
ends of the earth, and  so


many  families  in  our  Israel,  after
years  of  suffering  of  counsel
and  commandment,  have  become
in  a  measure  lost  through  the  influ-
ence of  misdirected  and  disobedient
love.

We  all  realize  the  influence  that  a
woman  exerts  over  a  man.  A  man,
to  be  sure,  exerts  a  good  deal  of  influ-
ence over  a  woman.  But  I  think
the  bulk  of  experience  will  show
that  if  even  a  good,  devoted  Latter-
day  Saint  woman  should  be  foolishly
guilty  of  marrying  outside  of  the
Church,  or  marrying  a  man  in  the
Church  who  is  half  hearted,  that  her
children  will  retain  more  of  her
individual  impress  than  they  will  of
the  fathers.  1  think  observation
will  establish  this  fact;  that  where
there  is  a  devoted  father,  and  an
i  n  d  i  fl  e  r  e  n  t ,  u  n  be  I  i  e  v  i  u  g  mo  t  h  er,
the  probabilities  are  that  disintegra-
tion will  set  into  that  family,  and
that  the  majority  of  them  will  pass
away  from  the  influence  of  the
Church  and  from  the  institutions  of
the  Gospel.  Not  that  either  of  these
conditions  is  good — that  is,  they  are
not  the  best  conditions.  The  best
conditions  are  where  there  is  a  de-
voted man  and  a  devoted  woman,  or
women,  all  laboring  in  the  interests
of  the  Kingdom  of  God  upon  the
earth,  and  impressing  their  own
individuality,  by  the  powers  of  an
educational  character  upon  the
posterity  that  God  may  give
them.

But  in  regard  to  this  objection-
able form  of  marriage  called  poly-
gamic, if  this  marriage  is  an  eternal
principle,  it  follows  almost  of  neces-
sity that  there  will  be  a  period  in
the  experience  of  thousands  when  it
must  be  essentially  and  eternally
polygamic.  How  many  young  wives
are  there  who  leave  this  stage  of
action  sometimes  without  children,
and  sometimes  leaving  a  little  fam-


POLYGAMY  MOKE  PREVALENT  THAN  MONOGAMY


121


ilvi  And  under  these  circumstances
a  man  marries  again  ;  he  takes
another  wife  and  raises  up  another
family,  and  for  two  or  three  times
or  more  tins  may  be  the  experience
of  some.  Now,  if  marriage  is  not
for  time  only,  but  for  eternity  ;  if
the  marriage  relation  is  continued,
there  is  a  condition  of  things  which
demonstrates  that  in  the  life  to  come
at  all  events,  marriage  must  be  in
many  cases  polygamic — that  is,  a
man  must  be  possessed  of  several
wives.

Now,  our  theories  of  heaven  are,
that  there  is  nothing  there  save  that
winch  is  pure,  save  that  which  is
ennobling,  save  that  which  is  pro-
gressive, save  that  which  is  accord-
ing to  the  orderof  God.  If,  lie,  then,
in  the  eternities  that  are  beyond
the  veil  can  admit  of  this  relation-
ship by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  mar-
riage is  eternal,  does  it  not  appear
strange  that  such  an  order  is  decried
by  His  children  upon  the  face  of  the
earth.

Nor  need  it  be  urged,  that  in  some
experiences  there  is  a  reversal  of  this
order,  that  a  woman  may  be  the  wife
of  several  men  while  in  the  flesh,
ami  that  as  a  consequence,  this
arrangement  must  also  be  eternal.
It  has  already  been  said  that  woman
is  subordinate  to  man,  she  was  given
to  be  his  helpmeet,  he  was  to  rule  over
her,  to  he  the  head,  as  Christ  is  the
Lead  of  the  Church,  that  the  man
was  not  created  for  the  w  oman,  but
woman  for  the  man.  [See  1st  Cor.,
1  to  12,]

Besides  in  the  keeping  of  geneal-
ogical record,  in  the  tracing  of  fam-
ily or  tribal  relations,  it  is  evident
that  a  woman  must  be  the  acknowl-
edged wife  of  some  one  man,  and
that  to  him  alone  pertains  the  eter-
nity of  the  marriage  covenant  by  the
authority  of  the  Holy  Priesthood.
This  query  is  however  old  in  history,


it  is  precisely  the  one  addressed  to
the  Savior  by  the  Saddticees,  (who
did  not  believe  in  the  resurrection,
He,  however,  witjbout  condescending
to  explain  the  sealing  power  to  them
declared  that  "  when  they  rise  fiom
the  dead  they  neither  marry  nor  are
given  in  mar  Wage/ 'and  the  darkened
inference  of  Christendom  has  been,
that  all  family  organizations,  all
characteristics  of  sex,  all  procreation
of  the  species  would  be  obliterated
as  something  pertaining  only  to  the
shores  of  time.

This  polygamic  form  of  marriage,
however,  when  we  come  to  consider
humanity,  is  far  in  excess  of  the
mouogamic.  Its  influenceand  power
and  practice  are  lelt  around  the
globe,  and  we  can  judge  of  its  nature
by  that  which  we  have  seen  and  heard
of  in  our  own  experience.  Ishmael,  the
son  of  Abraham,  was  of  polygamic
lineage.  It  was  prophesied  of  him
that  lie  should  become  the  father  of
manv  nations,  and  in  the  eastern
lands  of  the  earth  he  has  multiplied
exceedingly  ;  and  today  we  find
thai  the  gigantic  power  of  England
with  all  its  wealth,  with  all  its
appliances  of  science  and  civiliza-
tion, is  held  in  check  by  this  self-
same Ishmael,  the  son  of  Abraham,
the  friend  of  God,  so  that
assumed  degeneracy  consequent  on
this  system  is  not  established  by
facts.

In  this  land  of  ours,  we  find  that
monogamy  is  the  rule  ;  that  there
are  laws  preventing  a  departure
from  tins  order,  and  that  any  de-
parture from  that  is  visited  with  a
good  deal  of  criticism,  with  some
legislation,  with  some  pains  and
penalties,  and  is  made  to  the  nation
a  stone  of  stumbling,  and  a  rock  of
offense.  Yet  we  might  here  perti-
nently ask  the  American  nation —
u  From  whence  did  you  derive  your
monogamy  T We  might  ask  Old


122


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


England  the  name  question.  I  would
like  to  ask  if  it  has  been  accepted
as  the  result  of  an  intelligent  un-
derstanding of  the  two  modes  of
marriage?  Kather  has  it  not  been
inherited  without  investigation,
without  thought,  without  reflection,
without  understanding  the  marriage
covenant]  We  all  know  it  is  the
outgrowth  of  tradition  ;  that  it  has
been  received  from  the  fathers  ;  ami
so  far  from  having  been  an  intellec-
tual reception  of  a  principle,  funda-
mental and  eternal,  it  possess
nothing  of  that  character  whatever.
Monogamy  wall  practiced  by  the

fathers,  the  same  as  the  religions  of
mankind  were  practiced  by  them,  it
was  received  and  accepted  unhesi-
tatingly without  comment  or  con-
sideration, without  understanding
as  to  whether  it  was  conclusively  the
best,  or  whet  her  it  was  the  worst,  or
whether  it  was  of  God,  or  whether
it  was  of  man,  or  whether  any  tiling
different  to-day  might  or  might  not
be  of  Hiim

Now,  here  is  a  little  community
called  Latter-day  Saints,  who  believe
in  both  orders.  They  have  accepted
marriage  in  the  abstract.  They  do
not  believe  that  society  should  inn
at  loose  ends  in  its  sexual  relations.
They  believe  that  a  violation  of  those
laws  is  as  much  a  wrong  to  day  as  it
was  in  the  days  of  ancient  Israel,
and  they  believe  further  that  all
sexual  irregularities  should  be  visited
by  penalties  of  divine  sanction  and
appointment ;  and  still  more,  that
that  which  was  right,  that  which  was
commanded,  that  which  was  encour-
aged, tli at  which  was  practiced,  that
which  was  regulated  among  rncient
Israel,  and  that  which  will  be  prac-
ticed and  is  inevitable  behind  the
veil,  cannot  be  art  offense  in  the  sight
of  God,  in  the  day  and  age  in  which
we  live*

But  it  may  be  said,  why  speak  of


this  matter  when  there  is  so  much
excitement  in  regard  to  it  ?  For
the  best  of  all  reasons,  that  this  is  a
free  country,  that  free  speech  has
never  been  forbidden,  has  never
been  checked,  has  never  been
curtailed.  It  is  the  heritage  we  have
received  from  our  fathers,  and  we
are  at  liberty  to  speak  of  the  institu-
tions that  lay  at  the  foundation  of
society,  and  to  analyze  and  under-
stand them.  There  are  thousands
of  our  youth  growing  up  that  are
not  familiar  wth  the  fundamental
principles  pertaining  to  marriage  ;
with  t  he  ideas  and  theories  and  prac-
tices of  the  nations  that  have  grow  a
out  of  this  relationship  ;  and  it
needs  that  they  should  understand
why  this  turmoil  exists,  and  whether
there  is  a  good  foundation  for  the
position  that  men  take  every  where
in  regard  to  that  principle,  and
which  leads  to  the  persecution  »f
their  fathers,  and  the  ostracism  of
their  community.

When  we  come  to  the  sacred  books
that  have  been  received  by  the  Church
we  find  that,  in  regard  to  this  dual
idea  ot  marriage — marriage  in  the
monogamic  form,  and  marriage  in
the  polygamic  form— the  Book  of
Mormon  expressly  declares  that  it
was  necessary  in  the  first  coloniza-
tion of  this  country  that  marriage
should  be  monogamic,  because  the
sexes  were  equal,  and  the  people
realized  that  marriage  was  an  indis-
pensable thing  to  both  man  and
woman  ;  but  there  is  also  indica-
tion that  necessity  would  give  final
enlargement  to  this  practical  ques-
tion.

So  it  was  when  Noah  came  out  of
the  ark,  and  there  are  other  periods
in  the  history  of  mankind  when
nothing  but  monogamic  marriage
could  prevail  without  doing  an  injus-
tice to  those  round  about  them.
But  where  there  is  no  chance  of  this


POLYGAMY  AND  MONOGAMY  COMPARED


injustice ;  where  every  man  is  free  ;
where  every  woman  is  free  ;  where
there  are  thousands  of  mankind
that  never  marry  at  all,  and  thous-
ands of  women  who  by  law  cannot
marry,  there  is  room  for  the  exercise
of  the  polygamic  form  thereof ;  so
that,  in  argument,  the  sacred  books
of  old  Israel,  the  sacred  books  of
Christendem,  the  sacred  books  of
the  Mormons,  or  Latter-day  Saints,
all  tend  to  substantiate  the  idea  that
marriage  in  the  abstract  is  of  God  ;
and  that  it  is  or  has  been  of  Him,
both  in  the  mouogamic  and  poly-
gamic form.  Still  further,  these
written  revelations  are  not  the  only
evidence  of  the  fact  that  mouogamic
marriage  and  polygamic  marriage
are  both  susceptible  of  practice  by
the  human  family.  Who  is  there
that  is  acquainted  with  himself  or
herself — where  is  the  man  and  where
is  the  woman  who  does  not  realize,
if  they  have  attained  to  mature  vears
and  experience,  that  all  the  func-
tions of  manhood  and  womanhood
can  be  subserved  in  both  forms  of
marriage,  and  often  better  in  the
polygamic.  If  in  this  ever  present
revelation  of  the  Almighty,  of  the
finger  of  God  in  man  s  organization,
and  in  woman's,  it  had  been  decreed
that  *  polygamy  was  an  immoral
thing,  and  that  it  did  violence  to
either,  then  that  would  be  evidence
to  iro  against  the  sacred  books  that
we  have  received  from  the  past,  and
from  those  of  the  present ;  and  if
Joseph  Smith  hail  come  forth  claim-
ing to  be  a  Prophet  of  God,  and  had
given  a  revelation  testifying  to  the
necessity  anil  advantage  of  polygamic
marriage,  and  this  revelation  had
come  in  contact  with  the  revelation
of  man's  experience,  with  the  reve-
lation written  in  his  own  organiza-
tion, then  it  would  have  nullified
itself  ;  hut  it  is  in  harmony  with
such  a  revelation,  and  si  lows  the


possibility  and  susceptibility  and
natural  character  of  marriage  in  the
polygamic  relation*  During  a
certain  debate  held  in  this  house  in
regard  to  this  very  question,  Doctor
Newman  asserted  that  there  were
evidence!  against  this  practice  in
the  Bible.  1  consider  that  the  Bible
has  been  read  by  the  Latter-day
Saints  as  much  as  ever  it  was  read
hy  Dr.  Newman,  although  they  may
not  have  done  so  in  the  original  tongue
— they  may  not  have  Leviticus  18,
18 — as  he  had  it — but  yet  they
have  that  great  gift  of  God  which
is  called  common  sense,  to  say
nothing  of  the  inspiration  of  His
Spirit,  ami  they  are  just  as  well  able
to  understand  the  revelations  of  the
past  as  Doctor  >ewmau  with  all  his
knowledge  of  the  original  rendition
and  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  charac-
ter.

And  if  a  tree  is  to  be  judged  by
its  fruits,  what  of  the  whoredoms,
the  adultery,  the  fornication,  the
prostitution  of  women  in  monogamic
nations?  What  of  sexual  diseases,
of  blighted  lives,  of  martyred  wo-
men, of  little  graves  dotting  every
hillside  and  the  resting  places  of  the
dead  ?  What  of  foeticide,  infanti-
cide and  abortion  1  What  of  the
decimated  power  and  numbers  of
the  best  society,  what  of  their
liasons  and  their  divorce  courts,
and  other  damning  features  which
cling  closely  to  the  skirts  of  mo-
dern Sodoms,  the  paragons  and
promoters  of  monogamic  mar-
riage? • <  \y<t  •

Dr.  Newman  also  made  another
remark  something  like  this  :  that
polygamy  was  not  intended  for  the
poor  man,  that  it  was  intended  for
the  kings  of  the  earth,  overlooking
the  fact,  however,  that  Israel  is  a
nation  of  kings  and  priests  ;  so  that
when  he  said  that  polygamy  or  the
practice  of  a  plurality  of  wives  was


124


JOURNAL  Ul"  WSCUURSKS


intended  only  for  kings,  it  brought
home  a  truth  pregnant  with  thought;
for  God  decreed  that  he  would  gather
His  Israel  from  the  poor  of  all  na-
tions, and  so  in  Rev.  5,  10,  they  are
represented  as  singing  a  ww  sovg,
u  Thou  hast  made  us  Kiu^s  and
Priests  to  God,  and  we  shall  reign
on  the  earth  ;  and  this  principle
was  to  extend  not  through  time
only,  but  through  the  countless  ages
of  eternity,  so  that  His  people  might
occupy  the  position  of  eternal  fathers
and  eternal  mothers,  and  be  indeed
Kings  and  Priests  for  ever  and  for
ever.

There  are  al*o  other  avenues  of
information  besides  those  sacred
records,  and  besides  those  revelations
written  in  the  organization  of  man
ami  woman  at  large,  and  that  is  the
revelation  of  individual  experience.
There  are  many  men  and  women
who  have  practiced  this  principle  in
the  midst  of  Israel  for  thirty  years
and  upwards.  I  have  heard  their
testimonies  time  and  time  again,
and  they  declare  that  theirexperience
♦corroborated  the  exhortation,  com-
mandments and  practices  of  Holy
Writ,  and  the  revelations  written  in
their  own  organization  ;  and  they
tell  me  that  in  this  relation  they  have
foeen  blessed,  they  have  been  prosper-
ed, they  have  had  around  them  the

influence  of  the  Spirit  of  the
Almighty  ;  that  |  eace  has  been
upon  their  household  and  habitation,
and  that  they  have  been  enabled
through  that  principle  to  multiply
their  posterity  upon  the  earth.
Where  are  these  ?  They  are  every-
where throughout  this  Territory,
and  their  experience,  corroborating
those  other  revelations  which  I  have
mentioned,  forms  a  threefold  cord
that  cannot  hy  any  process  or  by  any
power  be  broken.  I  will  say  as  the
result  of  my  own  experience  — for  1
-have  Jived  in  that  relationship--


that  to  me  and  to  mine  it  was  pro-
ductive of  good,  although  it  came
in  contact  with  our  tradition.
Although  it  came  in  contact  with
the  practices  of  the  fathers,  and  with
our  feelings,  yet,  in  its  experience  it
demonstrated  itself  to  he  of  God,
and  no  better  time  have  I  had  in
thirty  years  of  married  life  than
when  1  had  three  wives  given  me
of  God,  and  occupying  but  one
habitation.  The  power  of  God  was
in  that  home;  the  spirit  of  peace
was  there,  the  spirit  of  intelligence
•was  there  ;  and  we  had  our  ever  pres-
ent testimony  that  God  recognised
the  patriarchal  order,  that  which
had  been  practiced  by  His  servants
a*jres  and  ages  ago  and  revealed  to
us  in  the  dispensation  of  the  fullness
of  rimes  :  and  although  two  of  these
have  gone  behind  the  veil,  they  went
t  here  with  a  consciousness  of  having
done  their  duty  in  this  life,  and  that
they  would  meet  in  the  life  beyond
those  who  agreed  with  them  in  prac-
tice and  in  faith  ;  from  this  condition
came  the  discipline  of  life,  the
power  of  self-restraint,  a  tender
regard  for  each  others'  feelings,  and
a  sort  of  jealousy  for  each  others'
rights,  all  tempered  by  the
consideration  that  relations  meant
'  to  be  enduring  claimed  more  love
and  interest  and  soul  than  did
monogamy  under  its best  condi-

tious.  *  **

Here,  then,  are  some  of  the  evi-
dences in  regard  to  this  married  re-
|  lation  that  forms  the  foundation  of
civilization  and  of  human  life,  and
that  lays  at  the  foundation  of  the

I  Government  of  God  upon  the  earth;
according  to  our  ideas  concerning
this  relationship  so  will  our  society

;  and  this  community  become.  If  we
treat  the  marriage  relation  with
levity  ;  if  "e  should  believe  that  it
was  but  a  civil  contract,  and  for
time  only,  we  should  be  weak  as


DEFENERATION  OF  MARRIAGE  TO  A  CIVIL  CONTRACT


125


others  and  should  not  excel  :  if  it  is
not  part  of  our  religion  and  of  God,
then  it  is  not  of  value  to  us.  In
my  experience — and  that  is  not  a
very  lengthy  one — I  have  market  1
the  change  in  feeling  that  has  come
over  thenations  in  regard  to  this
marriage  question.  When  I  was  a
lad  it  was  very  unusual  for  a  man  to
take  to  himself  a  wife  without  the
sanction  of  religion.  All  the  mar-
riages of  OKI  England  I) ad  to  be
celebrated  in  the  Established  Church,
and  a  record  was  kept,  of  them  there,
and  of  the  posterity  issuing  from  that
marriage,  ami  when  these  die  J,  their
death  also  was  recorded ,  so  that  j
there  was  an  unbroken  chain  of
genealogical  evidence  in  that  respect
often  of  immense  value  for  legitimacy  ■
and  other  purposes.  But  by  and  by
the  spirit  of  religious  liberty,  as  it
was  called,  began  to  spread.  It  is
but  a  hundred  years  ago,  or  a  little
over,  since  Methodism  was  estab-
lished— the  now  dominant,  or  next
to  dominant  religious  organization
of  Christendom,  It  began  in  a  small
way;  but  it  increased  and  spread
abroad ;  it  multiplied  its  converts,
its  ministers  ami  its  chapels  ;  it  be-
came a  potent  factor,  in  a  political
sei^e,  in  the  nation,  and  it  was  ne-
cessary that  political  parties  should
conciliate  and  cater  to  this  iucreas-  j
ingly  wealthy  religious  organization ;  j
and  when  the  Methodists  wanted
marriages  performed  in  their  own,
instead  of  going  to  the  Established
Churches,  their  power  and  influence,
the  influence  of  wealth  and  numbers,
their  power  as  a  political  factor  of
the  nation,  gave  them  favor  in  the
eyes  of  the  ministry  and  the  legisla-
ture. By  and  by  they  were  allowed
the  privilege  of  marry  in  gin  their  own
churches  and  chapels,  and  by  their
own  ministers.  And  as  it  was  with
this  body,  so  it  was  with  the  smaller
bodies,  the satellites  thrown  off


and  revolving  around  the  great
planets  of  religious  organization  in
that  country.  And  then  as  this
so  called  religious  liberty  increased
in  spirit,  scepticism  began  to  grow
in  the  minds  of  many  in  regard  to
religious  doctrines.  There  were
thousands  of  people  that  had  no
more  faith  in  Methodism  than  in  the
Established  Church,  or  in  Cathol-
icism. They  had  more  faith  in  Tom
Paine,  and  Voltaire,  and  Rosseau,
and  such  men  as  Ingersoll,  and  their
liberty  made  it  appear  plausible  to
them  that  there  was  no  necessity  to
go  to  unj  church,  ur  seek  the  aid  of
any  minister,  or  have  any  religious
ceremony  in  connection  with  their
own  marriage  or  t  he  marriage  of  their
families.  So  provision  was  made
for  this  ever  increasing  host  of
sceptics,  and  finally  it  was  decreed
that  marriage  was  no  tiling  but  a
civil  contract,  not  needing  theservice
of  a  minister,  or  the  sanction  of  reli-
gion, but  requiring  simply  that  it
could  be  entered  into  after  due  notice
was  given,  in  a  public  place  and  not
before  a  worshiping  assembly.  In
such  cases  marriage  was  entered
into  as  "a  civil  contract,1'  and  when
this  stage  was  reachel,  inasmuch  as
it  was  but  a  civil  contract,  "  only
this  and  nothing  more;'  the  next
step  cf  necessity  was*  that  it  could
be  dissolved.  Where  is  there  a
contract  of  this  nature  that  cannot
be  dissolved  1  If  I  am  engaged
by  an  employer  we  can  dissolve  the
engagement  whenever  either  of  us
is  dissatisfied.  And  so  this  feature
was  applied  to  marriage  ;  the  laws
of  divorce  were  introduced,  and  that
which  was  once  considered  discredit-
able, difficult  and  expensive,  and
would  have  been  sounded  from  one
end  of  the  laud  to  the  other  as  such,
became  common  and  unworthy  of
remark.

Thus  the  bonds  of  society  ate


12G


JOURNAL UK  IUSCOURSKS


loosened  ;  the  sanctity  of  the  mar-
riage relation  is  destroyed  ;  and  the
world  is  filled  with  entanglements
that  are  th<*  prod  net  of  this  civil
contract  business,  and  even  win1  if
this  contract  remains  intact,  there
is  a  spirit  made  manifest  to  avoid
the  lesponsihilities  of  marriage  as  to
offspring  and  to  live  together  in
numberless  eases  without  any  mar-
riage at  all ;  so  that  when  the  con*
flection  is  broken  it  may  be  swept
to  the  wind  with  no  results  traceable
or  injurious  to  any  of  those  con-
cerned.

Now,  for  the  safety  of  society,  for
the  welfare  of  the  human  famiiv,
for  the  love  of  order  and  responsibility
upon  the  earth,  for  faith  in  the  reve-
lations of  God,  and  for  hiirh  regard
to  the  practices  of  His  anointed,  I
am  in  favor  of  the  marriage  relation.
The  Latter-day  Saints  are  in  favor
of  the  marriage  relation,  and  they
are  utterly  opposed  to  sexual  inter
course  out>ide  of  that.  And  they
do  not  believe  that  marriage  is  a
civil  contract  alone.  Whatever
power  there  may  be  in  the  courts  to
enforce  the  claim  of  a  wife  against
a  husband,  or  the  husband  against
the  wife  as  a  matter  of  protection,  in
the  main,  marriage  is  of  God,  is  of
divine  origin.  Marriage  requires
the  sanction  of  the  authority  of  the
Holy  Priesthood  in  order  to  give  it
force,  in  order  to  make  it  valid  in
this  life  and  the  life  to  come,  and
marriage  -polygamic  or  monogatn  c,
according  to  the  necessities  of  the
case  and  the  condition  of  those  who
enter  therein — is  in  harmonv  with
all  the  laws  of  life  ;  ami  despite
what  the  world  may  say,  those  that
are  of  ]>olygamic  descent  without
knowing  it  are  to  be  found  among
the  1  uleit  of  to-day — the  most  ex
alted  and  the  most  prominent  in  a
natiu.  ;J  ht'i*»c— even  in  jepuJiating


In  the  carrying  out  of  this  rela-
tionship the  Latter-day  Saints  are
numerous  everywhere  throughout
this  Territory  :  and  it  is  incumbent
upon  the  rising  generation  that  they
should  hold  to  those  sacred  views
that  are  held  by  their  fathers  ;  that
they  should  marry  within  the  eon-
tines  of  the  Church  ;  that  they
should  seek  for  their  husbands  or
wives,  as  the  case  may  be,  among
those  who  have  been  obedient  to  the
principles  of  the  everlasting  Gospel,
and  who  comprehend  something  of
the  nature  of  the  marriage  covenant.
Those  of  our  posterity  should  not
depart  from  the  ways  of  our  Father;
they  should  not  be  willing  to  take
up  with  the  practices  of  Christen-
dom. They  should  be  under  proper
restraint,  proper  control  and  direc-
tion in  all  the  relationships  of  life,
because  this  parental  relation  among
the  faithful  is  an  eternal  authority.
Those  children  of  ours,  they  never
can  get  away  from  their  fat  Iter  and
mother  in  this  hfe,  nor  in  the  life
to  come.  If  they  should  form  con-
nection with  those  outside  of  die
Church  and  become  aliens  to  the
Gospel,  after  a  long  day  of  repent-
ance they  will  have  to  return  and
bow  the  knee  if  they  would  have
access  within  that  organization,  if
they  would  enjoy  all  that  belongs
to  that  relationship,  if  the?  would
inherit  the  glory  with  which  that
relationship  U  identified  ;  they  will
have  to  repent,  as  it  were,  in  dust
and  ashes  and  come  buck  to  the  fam-
ily circle,  compact  an  I  covenant,
wherein  the  Almighty  gave  them  a
being.  And  in  this  respect  it  may
be  well  10  drop  ;i  hint  in  regard  to
the  practices  of  some  of  our  sons
and  daughters  in  this  city — where
they  step  outside  of  what  some  call
priestly  authority.  When  they
come  to  get  up  amusements  of
their  own,  they  should  see  that  that


CONCLUDING  DESIRES.


127


only  which  pertains  to  good  order
and  good  government  are  introduced,
for  those  inevitably  tend  to  consolida-
tion and  unity.  It  would  be  well
if  our  boys  would  listen  to  their  fa-
thers' counsel ;  would  respect  the
authority  of  their  fathers  and  mothers
who  are  good  Latter-day  Saints  ;  and
when  they  want  enjoyment  they
should  seek  to  keep  within  the  cir-
cumscribed limits  of  all  reputable
authority.

There  are  a  great  many  thoughts
arise  in  my  mind,  but  I  presume  that
I  have  occupied  all  the  time  desirable
and  I  do  not  wish  to  weary  the  con-
gregation. The  subject  I  have
touched  upon,  however,  is  a  very
important  one.  It  lies  at  the  foun-
dation of  things,  and,  as  I  said  be-
fore,  as  it  is  comprehended  by  the
human  family,  by  us  as  Latter-
day  Saints,  so  will  be  their  position
among  the  nations,  so  will  be
their  power  in  renovating  society,
and  so  will  be  their  measure  of
approbation  by  the  heavens.


I  May  God  give  us  wisdom  to  so
I  maintain  ourselves  in  this  relation
whether  it  be  polygamic  or  monog-
araic —  that  we  may  gain  His  smile
and  approbation,  that  we  may  feel
His  Spirit  in  our  families,  in  our
hearts,  in  our  going  out  and  coming
in,  and  may  we  realize  that  we  have
the  approbation  of  heaven,  and  the
sanction  of  all  the  powers  of  the
eternities  past,  present  ami  to  come*
as  well  as  the  example  of  the  Patri-
archs and  Prophets.  And  when
i  this  life  shall  come  to  its  end  witli
us,  may  we  be  privileged  to  sit  down
with  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  in
j  the  kingdom  of  our  Father  and  God,
and  make  part  of  a  family  there,  a
great  nation  of  Kings  and  Priests,
associating  with  those  who  have
passed  through  much  tribulation
and  washed  their  robes  white  in  the
blood  of  t lie  Lamb  through  the
ordinances  of  the  Gospel  ;  which  I
ask  may  be  the  case,  through  Jesus
Christ,  Amen.


123


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES


DI8COI  l;SK BY PRKSIDIOT JOHX  TAYLOR,


Delivered  at  a  Priesthood  Mating,  hid  in  th«  Suit  bttc  Assembly  Hall,

Sat un la  if  /:  a  n  ina, October Hth ,  J  S  X  -  >  .


(REPORTED  BY JOHN  IRVINE*


PKIVILKUE  OF  MKKTINM  Tun  ETHER — WE  ARK  1 1  ERE  TO  DO  OUR  FATHERS
WILL— ALL  DEPENDENT  1-PuN  COD  FOR  ASSISTANCE,  GUIDANCE  AND
DIRECTION — THE  LORD  REVEALED  TO  ADAM  THE  PURPOSE  OF
SACRIFICE  —  ADAM,  V.kFQRK  HIS  DEATH,  CALLED  HIS  FAMILY  TO-
GETHER AND  BLESSED  THEM  AND  PROPHESIED  —  MANY  SPIRITS
HAVE  BEEN  DESTINED  TO  HOLD  CERTAIN  POSITIONS  AMONG  MEN —
WHY  WE  ARE  GATHERED— WE  MUST  FOLLOW  THE  TEACHINGS  OF
THE  SPIRIT,  AND  HONOR  THE  PRIESTHOOD  IN  ALL  ITS  CALLINGS—
PREPARE  OURSELVES  TO  ENTER  HOLY  PLACES  —  THE  PRIESTHOOD
MUST  NOT  TOLERATE  INIQUITY  —  THE  CHURCH  MUST  BE  PURIFIED
— CONCLUDING  EXHORTATIONS,


It  is  quite  a  privilege  for  us  to  meet
together  in  *udi  assemblies  as  this —
to  associate  with  the  Priesthood  of
the  Son  of  God,  which  Priesthood  is
also  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec,
and  after  ttie  power  of  an  endless
life. H  is  a.  great  privilege  for  us  to
meet  together,  to  talk  over  the  things
pertaining  to  the  Kingdom  of  God,
and  to  reason  and  reflect  upon  those
things  thatt  iod  has  revealed  for  our
salvation  in  time  and  throughout  the
eternities  that  are  to  come, It  is
proper  that  we  should  comprehend
the  various  positions  of  men  in  rela-
tion to  this  Holy  Priesthood,  and
further  that  we  should  understand
the  various  orders,  callings,  ordinal  1-
ces  and organizations  associated
with  the  Church  anil  Kingdom  of
God  upon  the  earth  ;  that  we  each
of  us  may  be  prepared  to  magnify
our  calling,  to  honor  our  Go  l,  and  to
pursue  that  course  always  which
shall  be  acceptable  in  the  sight  of
our  Heavenly  Father.


We  are  here  as  Jesus  was  here,  not
to  do  our  own  will,  but  the  will  of
our  Father  who  sent  us.  He  b«0
placed  us  here;  we  have  a  work  to
do  in  our  day  and  generation  ;  and
there  is  nothing  of  importance
connected  with  any  of  us  only  as  we
are  associated  with  God  and  His
work,  wli ether  it  be  the  President
of  the  Church,  the  Twelve  Apostle*?,
the  Presidents  of  Stakes,  the  Bishops,
or  anybody  else,  and  we  can  only  thus
be  of  any  service  by  placing  ourselves
in  a  position  to  act  as  God  dictates
us;  as  He  regulates  and  manipulates
the  affairs  oV  His  Church  in  the  in*
teres ts  of  humanity,  in  behalf  of
the  living  and  of  the  dead,  in  behalf
of  the  world  in  which  we  live,  a  il
in  behalf  of  those  who  have  livr  I
before  us,  and  who  will  live  after  u*.
We  can  none  of  us  do  anything  only
as  we  are  assisted,  guided  and  direct-
ed by  the  Lord.  No  man  ever  lived
that  could,  Adam  could  not.  Noah
could  not. Even  Jesus  could  not.


OUR  DEPENDENCE  UPON  GOD


129


Nor  could  the  Apostles.  They  were
all  of  them  dependent  upon  the  God
of  Israel  to  sustain  them  in  all  of
their  acts.  And  in  regard  lo  Adam
himself,  as  we  are,  so  was  he  very
ignorant  of  many  principles  until
they  were  revealed  to  him.  And  if
they  were  revealed  to  him  they  did
not  originate  with  him;  and  so  it  was
with  others.  We  find  that  Adam
was  directed  of  the  Lord  to  do  a
certain  thing — that  is,  to  offer  up
sacrifices — and  when  the  angel  of
the  Lord  came  to  him  and  said  :
"  Adam  why  do  you  offer  up
sacrifices?"  Adam  replied,  "I
do  not  know  ;  but  the  Lord
commanded  me  to  do  it,  ami
therefore  I  do  it"  He  did  not  know  [
what  those  sacrifices  were  for  until
the  Lord  revealed  unto  him  the
doctrine  of  the  atonement  and  the
necessity  of  the  fall  of  man,  and
pointed  out  to  him  the  way  and
manner  to  obtain  an  exaltation.
Then  he  and  Eve  his  wife  rejoiced
exceedingly  at  the  mercy  and  kind-
ness  of  the  Almighty,  and  realized
that  even  in  their  tall  they  were  \
placed  in  a  position  to  obtain  a
higher  glory,  and  a  greater  exaltation
than  they  could  have  done  without
it  Now,  who  revealed  this  to  them  ]
The  Lord,  through  the  ministering
of  an  holy  angel  ;  and  in  relation
to  the  dealings  of  God  with  all  of
the  human  family  it  has  been  pre-
cisely the  same.  We  are  told,  for
instance,  that  when  Adam  had  lived
to  a  great  age — that  three  years  be-
fore his  death  he  called  together  his
family — that  is,  some  of  the  leading
branches  thereof  who  held  the  Holy
Priesthood,  mentioning  the  names
of  many  of  the  more  prominent  that
had  received  certain  peculiar  bless-
ings from  the  hand  of  God — and
there  was  manifested  to  him  all
things  that  should  transpire  to  his
posterity  throughout,  all  the  future;
No.  9.


generations  of  time,  and  he  prophe-
sied of  these  things  ;  and  also  upon
those  who  were  with  him,  rested  tha
spirit  of  prophecy,  and  he  blessed
them,  and  they  turned  around  and
blessed  him  and  called  him  Michael
the  Archangel,  the  Prince  of  Peace,
etc.  By  what  spirit  then  did  Adam
prophesy,  and  under  what  influence
was  he  operating  at  that  time  t  We
are  told  in  Scripture  that  the  testi-
mony of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  pro-
phecy, and  he  in  common  with  his
sons  who  were  then  associated  with
him  were  in  possession  of  that  spirit
which  enlightened  their  minds,
unfolded  unto  them  the  principles
of  truth,  and  revealed  unto
them  the  things  that  would
transpire  throughout  every  subse-
quent period  of  time.  Who  mani-
fested these  things  !  The  Lord.
Who  organized  the  world  ?  The
Lord,  Who  made  man  upon  it  T
The  Lord.  Who  placed  upon  it  the
fowls  of  the  air,  the  beasts  of  the
field,  and  the  fish  of  the  sea?  The
Lord,  Who  sustains  all  things  by
his  power  1  The  Lord,  Who
controls  the  affairs  of  the  world  t
The  Lord.  To  whom  are  we  indebted
for  life,  for  health,  and  for  every
blessing  that  we  enjoy!  To  the
Lord.  He  is  the  God  of  the  earth,
and  the  giver  of  every  good  and  per-
fect gift  which  we  enjoy,  and  He  de-
sires to  gather  together  a  people  that
will  observe  His  laws,  that  will  keep
His  commandments,  that  will  rentier
obedience  to  His  will,  that  will  sub-
mit to  His  authority,  and  for  this
purpose,  in  different  ages  of  the  world,
He  has  introduced  the  Gospel  and
has  placed  man  in  possession  there-
of*

Now,  what  about  the  positions  of
ment  Why,  it  is  a  good  deal  as
spoken  of  in  the  Scriptures  and  in
the  revelations  which  have  been
given  to  us  pertaining  to  tfiese  mat^

Vol  XX  VL


130


JOURNAL  UK  DISCOURSES.


ters — that  many  have  been  called
and  chosen,  and  that  many  were
elected  and  selected  to  fulfill  certain
offices.  It  was  so  revealed  to  Abra-
ham. Hs  was  told  that  there  were
a  great  many  spirits,  many  of  whom
were  noble,  who  were  destined  to
hold  particular  positions  among  the
children  of  men,  and  it  was  said  to
him,  "  And  thou  Abraham  wast  one
of  these.1'

Now,  there  are  events  to  transpire
in  this  day  as  there  have  been  in
Other  days  ;  and  we,  the  Elders  of
Israel  of  the  Church  of  the  living
God,  have  to  build  up  the  Church
of  God,  the  Zion  of  God,  and  the
Kingdom  of  God,  and  the  Church
has  to  be  purified  according  to  the
law,  order,  rule  and  dominion  which
God  lias  appointed.  It  is  not  for  us
— as  the  brethren  have  expressed  it
— to  receive  certain  portions  ©f  light
and  intelligence,  and  with  regard  to
other  portions  follow  the  desires  of
our  own  hearts,  thus  laying  aside
God,  His  rule,  His  dominion  and
His  authority.  "  Having  begun  in
the  spirit,"  as  Paul  said,  "are  ye
now  made  perfect  by  the  flesh  T
No,  that  is  the  wrong  way  about ;
but  on  the  contrary  we  ought  to  add
to  our i faith  virtue,  to  virtue  broth-
erly kit  illness,  to  brotherly  kindness  :
charity,  to  charity  godliness,  that
we  may  be  full  of  the  light  and  life,
and  of  the  spirit  and  power  of  God,
and  approach  more  closely  to  the
law  of  God,  and  be  governed
thereby.

Why  are  we  gathered  here  to  the
land  of  Zion  I  This  is  called  the
land  of  Zion.  We  are  called  the
people  of  Zion.  What  does  Zion
mean  t  The  pure  in  heart.  Why
are  we  gathered  here  1  One  of  the
Prophets  in  talking  about  it,  says  :
*  1  will  take  you  one  of  a  city,c  and
two  of  a  family,  and  I  will  bring  you
k  to,  Zion." What .  then  1 « I  will;


give  them  Pastors  according  to  mine
own  heart,  which  shall  feed  you  with
knowledge  and  understanding."
That  is  what  we  are  here  for.  That
we  may  be  fed  with  knowledge  and
understanding,  that  we  may  learn
the  law  of  the  Gospel,  the  law  of  the
Zion  of  God,  the  laws  of  the  King-
dom of  God,  and  that  we  may  be
instructed  in  all  things  tending  to
promote  the  welfare,  exaltation  and
happiness  of  ourselves,  our  wives,
our  children,  the  people  with  whom
we  are  associated,  and  the  world
in  which  we  live  and  act ;  and  that
we  may  operate  for  the  benefit  of
those  who  have  lived,  and  stand  as
"  saviors  upon  Mount  Zion."

In  all  this,  as  has  been  said,  there
is  an  order.  We  are  all  dependent
the  one  upon  the  other.  The  head
can  not  say  to  the  foot  I  have  no  need
of  thee,  nor  the  foot  to  the  head  I
have  no  need  of  thee,  nor  the  hand,
the  arm,  the  leg  to  the  body,  I  have
no  need  of  thee-  We  are  formed
into  a  compact  body  according  to
the  law  of  God  in  the  organization
of  His  Church,  and  it  is  for  us  to
magnify  the  callings  unto  which  we
are  called,  and  unless  we  all  of  us
are  placed  under  the  guidance  and
direction  of  the  Almighty,  we  cannot
do  so — that  is,  those  who  do  not  yield
themselves  subject  to  the  law  of
God,  cannot  do  that  thing.  But
those  who  yield  themselves  subject
to  the  law  of  God.  can  do  it  and  do
it  quite  easily,  for  Jesus  says:  "Take
my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me  ;
for  1  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart;
ami  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls*
For  my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  burden
is  light."  Now,  if  we  yield  obedi-
ence to  God  and  to  the  spirits  that
dwell  within  us,  then  will  our  light
become  like  that  of  the  just  that
shi  net  1 1.  brighter  and  .brighter  unto
the  perfect  day;  but*  if  we  do  not
yield t  an  obedience  to  the  law  and


WE  MUST  FOLLOW  THE  SPIRIT  AND  HONOR  THE  PRIESTHOOD,  131


word  and  order  of  the  Church  and
Kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth,
the  light  that  is  within  us  will  become
darkness,  and  then,  as  it  is  said,  how
great  is  that  darkness  !  We  see
sometimes  men  of  that  character.
They  are  occasionally  referred  to  as
cranks,  or,  as  the  Germans  use  that
t6rm,  sicL  They  lose  the  light,  spirit
and  power  of  God,  and  they  do  not
comprehend  the  order  ef  the  Church
and  Kingdom  of  God,  nor  do  they
place  themselves  in  the  way  to  obtain
a  knowledge  oF  these  things.  The
first  thing  they  begin  to  do  is  to  try
to  pervert  the  order  of  God,  and  to
find  fault  with  their  brethreu  in  the
Holy  Priesthood — with  their  Btsh-'
ops,  with  their  Bishop's  Counselors,
with  the  High  Council,  perhaps
with  the  Presidents  of  Stakes,  as
the  case  may  be,  or  with  the  Apos-
tles, or  with  the  First  Presidency  ;
no  matter  which,  or  how,  or  when,
or  where,  Now,  if  these  men  were
walking  in  the  light  as  God  is  in  the
light  they  would  have  fellowship  one
with  another,  and  the  blood  of  Christ
would  cleanse  them  from  all  sin  ;
but  when  they  begin  to  murmur  and
complain,  to  find  fault  and  to  give
Way  to  improper  influences,  they  give
place,  to  the  devil,  and  he  takes  pos*
session  just  as  fast  and  as  far  as  he
cin,  and  forces  upon  them  feelings,
ideas  and  principles  that  are  at  vari-
ance with  the  law  and  order,  and
word  and  will  of  God*  I
What,  then,  are  we  here  for  ?
What  did  Jesus  come  to  du  ?  He
tells  us  that  He  "came  not  to  do  |
His  own  will,  but  the  will  of  His
Fattier  who  sent  Him."  How  are
we  to  obtain  a  knowledge  of  that
WHI  i  I  frill  tell  you  what  Joseph
Statth  told  ma.  1  have  frequently
mentioned  it.  Between  forty  and
fifty  years  ago  he  said  to  me  ttm  :
^  Elder  Taylor,  yoa  have  received
the  Holy  Ghost.  '  Follow  its  teach-


ings. Sometimes  it  will  seem  to
you  as  though  it  was  hardly  the  right
way.  No  matter,  follow  its  teach-
ings, and  it  will  always  lead  you
right,  and  if  you  do  so  it  will,  by  and
by,  become  to  you  a  principle  of
revelation,  so  that  you  will  know  all
things  that  are  necessary  % for  you  to
become  acquainted  with."  Now,  I
know  that  is  true,  I  know  that  he
spoke  the  truth.  And  1  would  say
that  it  is  the  privilege  of  every
Elder  in  Israel  who  has  received  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  follow
its  teachings.  What  was  said  by
one  of  tho  old  Apostles  1  '*  As
many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God
are  the  sons  of  God."  Follow  its
teachings,  therefore,  and  do  not  give
way  to  your  own  feelings,  nor  to
covetousness,  to  pride,  nor  to  vain
glory ;  for  we  none  of  us  have  any-
thing to  boast  of.  We  have  none
of  us  received  anything  but  what
God  has  given  us.  If  we  possess
light,  or  intelligence,  or  a  knowledge
of  the  things  of  God — which  we  do
— from  whence  did  it  emanate  1
From  God  our  Heavenly  Father,
through  the  medium  that  He  has
appointed.  I  do  not  wish  to  dictate
to  Him  the  way  these  things  shall  be
done.  I  never  did.  While  Joseph
Smith  was  on  the  earth  I  looked  to
him  as  a  Prophet  of  God,  and  I  do
not  believe  I  ever  disobeyed  Him
in  one  solitary  thing  that  he  ever
required  at  my  hand^,  and  I  have
l>+>en  put  in  some  pretty  tight
places.  But  that  was  my  feeling,
tfhat  was  the  idea  I  entertained
towards  the  Priesthood  of  the  Son
of  God,  tin ;  ,

I  have  also  lived  in  wards.  I  do
not  know  that  I  have  ever  disobeyed
the  requests  of  a  Bishop,  Why  t
Bednilse  lie  presided  over  me  in  a
ward  capacity,  ami  if  he  had  a  right
to  respect  mrf  is  sin  Apostle.ol  had
ar  ght  to  respect1  him  us  a  Bishop*


132


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


and  I  always  felt  a  desire  to  comply
with  all  the  require meuts  that  were
made  of  me  by  any  of  the  proper
authorities,  I  feel  and  always  have
felt  the  same  towards  Teachers.  If
a  Teacher  came  to  my  house — or
Teachers,  they  generally  came  two
at  a  time— if  I  happened  to  be  there
I  have  told  them  that  I  felt  happy
to  nit eb  with  them,  and  I  called  to-
gether the  members  of  my  family
that  were  within  my  reach,  and  told
them  that  the  Teachers  had  come
to  instruct  us.  Permit  "me  here  to
ask,  have  not  I  a  right — say  as  the
President  of  the  Church,  or  as  an
Apo-tle,  which  1  was  fur  many  years
— have  not  I  aright,  or  my  family
a  right  to  possess  the  same  privileges
that  others  possess,  and  to  have  the
Teachers  come  to  inquire  after  my
welfare  and  that  of  my  family,
and  to  see  that  there  is  no  wrong
existing — have  not  I  that  right]
I  think  I  have.  If  they  are  the
servants  of  God,  have  not  I  a  right
to  listen  to  them  ?  Yes,  I  have,
and  1  feel  it  my  duty  to  receive  them
kindly,  treat  them  properly  and  lis-
ten lu  their  teaching.

On  the  other  hand,  when  the
Teacher*?  got  through,  I  might  give
them  a  little  instruction,  say  as  an
Apostle,  or  as  a  brother — put  it  any
way  you  like  ;  that  while  I  and  my
family  were  receiving  benefits  from
them,  it  was  my  duty,  on  the  other
hand,  to  teach  and  instruct  them  in
some  things  that  I  thought  might
benefit  them.

Now,  these  are  correct  principles
in  the  Church  and  Kingdom  of  God.
The  Teacher  occupies  his  place  ;  the
Priest  and  Deacon  occupy  their
places  ;  the  Elder  occupies  his  place ;
the  Bishop  his  place  ;  the  High
Councils  their  places  j  the  Presi-
dents of  Stakes  their  places,  and
e  ery  0  ie  in  his  poaion  ought  to
be  honored — the  Twelve  in  their


place,  the  First  Presidency  itt
their  place  —  each  one  yieldir
proper  respect  and  courtesy  am
kindness  to  the  other.  And
when  we  talk  about  great  big  per-
sonages, there  is  no  such  thing.
\\  e  are  none  of  us  anything  only
as  God  confers  blessings  upon  us,
and  if  He  has  conferred  anything
upon  us,  we  will  give  Him  the
glory.

Having  been  called  to  these  posi-
tions, God  expects  that  we  will  honor
them  ;  that  we  will  esteem  it  aa
hoinir  to  he  the  messengers  of  salva-
tion, the  legates  of  the  skies,  to  the
nations  of  the  earth.  We  have  a
great  work  to  perform  both  at  home
and  abroad,  We  are  preaching  the
Gospel  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth.  Israel  is  heing  gat  tiered  home-
to  Zion.  And  in  Zion  we  are  rear-
in  if  temples  to  the  name  of  the
Most  High  God.  And  I  will  tell
you  how  I  feel — that  as  these  tem-
ples are  advancing,  while  we  are
preparing  holy  places  in  which  to
administer  the  ordinances  of  God
pertaining  to  the  living  and  the
dead — I  feel  that  we  ought  to  begin
to  prepare  ourselves  to  enter  into
these  holy  places,  and  to  feel  that
we  are  the  sons  of  God  without
rebuke  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked
ami  perverse  generation.  We  ought
to  wake  up  and  put  our  houses  id
order,  and  our  hearts  in  order  ;  we
ousjht  to  conform  to  the  word,  the
will,  and  the  law  of  God ;  we  ought
to  let  God  rule  in  Zion,  to  let  His
law  be  written  upon  our  hearts,  and
to  feel  the  responsibility  of  the  great
work  we  are  called  upon  to  perform.
We  should  see  that  our  bodies  and
our  spirits  are  pure,  and  that  they
are  free  from  contamination  of  every
kind.  We  are  here  to  build  up  the
Zion  of  God,  and  to  this  end  we
must  subject  our  bodies  and  our
spirits  to  the  law,  to  the  word,*  and


WE  MUST  NOT  TOLERATE  INIQUITY,


133


to  the  will  of  God.  Being  here  in
Zion  we  want  to  see  that  thing  that
Jesus  told  His  disciples  to  pray  for
lake  place.  "Thy  King-lorn  come,
thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in
heaven How  was  it  done  in  heaven  i
God  spake  and  the  worlds  were
formed  according  to  His  word.  God
said  let  us  do  this,  and  that  and  the
other,  and  it  was  so.  Was  there
anybody  in  heaven  to  object  and  say,
11  Don't  you  think  you  had  better
put  it  off  a  little,  Would  nut  this  be
abetter  wayf*  Yes,  the  devil  said
80,  and  he  says  so  yet,  and  he  is  lis-
tened to  sometimes  by  sinners  and
sometimes  by  Saints  ;  tor  we  become
the  servants  of  those  whom  we  list
to  obey.

There  are  besides  these  other
considerations  in  connection  with
these  matters.

The  brethren  who  have  preceded
me  this  evening  have  referred  to  the
celestial  terrestial  and  telestial
kingdoms,  and  the  laws  pertaining
thereunto.  We  are  told  that  if  we
cannot  abide  the  law  of  the  celestial
kingdom  we  cannot  inherit  a  celestial
glory.  Is  not thatdoctrinel  Yes.  "But,"
says  one,  "Are  not  we  all  going
/  into  the  celestial  kingdom  V  I  think
not,  <u u  less  we  turn  round  and  mend
our  ways  very  materially.  It  is  only
those  who  can  abide  a  celestial  glory
and  obey  a  celestial  law  that  will  be
prepared  to  enter  a  celestial  king-
dom. "Well,"  says  aii  other,  "are
the  others  going  to  be  burned  up,
■etc?'  No*  Do  you  expect  every-
body to  walk  according  to  this  higher
law  t  No,  I  do  not.  And  do  I
expect  those  that  do  not,  are  going
into  the  celestial  kingdom  1  No,  1
do  not  Well,  where  will  they  go  ?
If  they  are  tolerably  good  men  and
do  not  do  any  tiling  very  bad,  they
will  get  into  a  terrestrial  kingdom,
and  if  there  are  some  that  cannot
abide  a  terrestrial  law,  they  may  get


into  a  telestial  kingdom,  or  other-
wise, as  the  case  may  be,  eta,  etc,
Dili  you  ever  read  in  your  Bibles
that  tc  Strait  is  the  gate,  and  narrow
is  the  way,  which  Ieadetk  unto  life,
and  few  there  be  that  find  it"  Did
you  ever  rearl  of  the  parable  of
Jesus,  where  He  speaks  of  the  sower
going  forth  to  sow,  and  some  seed
fell  by  the  wayside,  some  among
thorns,  and  some  on  stouey  ground,
etc.  ?  "  But,"  says  one,  "  we
thought  we  had  got  it  all."  Yes:
but  the  thorns  have  grown  up  in
many  places  and  choke- i  the  good
seed.  Sometimes  you  keep  down
your  weeds  in  the  field,  but  do  they
come  up  again  1  Yes  ;  fresh  crops
keep  coming  all  the  time ;  and  I
think,  too,  that  the  wheat  and  the
tares  were  to  grow  together  for  a
certain  length  of  time.

Well,  what  shall  we  do  ]  Shall
we  go  to  work  and  get  an ^ry  against
people  that  do  not  do  exactly  right  ?
No.  They  can  only  do  right  as  God
helps  them  to  do  it.  They  can  only
do  right  as  they  seek  to  God  for  His
help  to  enable  them  to  do  so  ;  they
can  only  do  right  as  they  are  sus*
tained  by  the  power  of  Hod  ;  and
if  we  allow  covetousness,  pride,  envy,
jealousy,  hatred,  malice,  lascivious-
ness,  drunkenness,  Sabbath- breaking,
or  any  other  influence  to  corrupt  and
lead  us  astray  from  the  light  of
truth  and  ttie  sweet  consoling  influ-
ences of  the  Spirit  of  God,  we  shall
et  into  darkness,  and  then,  as
said  before,  if  the  light  that  is
within  us  becomes  darkness,  how
great  is  that  darkness  !  It  is  for  us
to  do  right — to  observe  the  law  and
to  keep  the  commandments  of  God.
It  is  right  also  for  the  Presidents  of
Stake?  and  for  the  Bishops  to  see
that  none  of  these  things  that  I  have
referred  to  be  permitted  among  the
people  over  whom  they  preside.
Wnat  ! Shall  we  uu5  let  the  drunk-


134


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


aid  wallow  in  his  drunkenness  ]  No;
deal  with  him  according  to  the  law
of  God, Shall  we  not  let  the  lasciv-
ious man  wallow  in  his  corruption  1
No.  According  to  certain  principles
that  are  laid  down  in  the  book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants  in  regard
to  those  things,  those  who  have  en-
tered into  the  new  and  everlasting
covenant,  and  have  taken  upon
themselves  certain obligations,  if
they  commit  adultery  it  is  positively
said  they  shall  be  destroyed.  Now,
can  you  change  that,  or  can  I  change
it! No,  I  cannot,  and  you  cannot ;
and  you  have  no  right  to  permit  men
to  break  the  Sabbath,  nor  to  do
many  of  those  acts  that  many  of  the
Saints  are  doing.  What  are  Apostles,
Prophets,  Pastors,  Teachers,  Evan-
gelists, etc,  placed  in  the  Church
for  1 What  were  they  for  in  former
days  1 For  the  perfecting  of  the
Saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,
for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Jesus
Christ, What  are  the  High  Councils
and  Bishops*  Counsels  for  but  to  ad-
judge all  these  things  ? What  are
the  Teachers  and  the  Priests  fori
To  assist  the  Bishops  in  their  endeav-
ors to  promote  purity  and  virtue,
holiness  and  righteousness  anions
the  people. That  is  their  office,
and  if  they  do  not  fulfill  that  office
they  are  not  magnifying  their  calling.
They  have  no  right  to  condone  the
sins  of  men. The  law  of  God  is
perfect  converting  the  soul,  and  we
must  be  governed  by  that  law  and
carry  it  out,  or  be  made  amenable
unto  the  Lord  our  God  for  the  course
we  pursue,  or  for  neglecting  to  per-
form our  duties. That  is  the  way  I
look  at  these  things,  and  if  that  is
pot  the  case,  why  are  these  laws
given  to  us. Are  they  the  laws  of
God  ? We  so  understand  them.
Theu  let  us  perform  our  duties  and
seek  to  magnify  our  callings  that  we
may  stand  approved  and  acknowl-
edged of  the  Lord.


When  I  speak  of  these  things,  I
do  not  believe  in  any  kind  of  tyran-
ny, I  believe  in  long  suffering,  in
mercy,  in  kindness,  in  gentleness,
and  in  the  love  and  fear  of  God.
I  do  not  believe  that  the  Priesthood
was  given  to  man  to  exercise  domin-
ion and  authority  over  the  souls  of
other  men.  Everything  ought  to
be  done  with  kindness  and  long-
suffering,  yet  with  fidelity  to  God,
The  Church  must  be  purified  from
iniquity  of  every  kind,  that  we  may
stand  before  God  "  a  glurious
Church,  not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,
or  any  such  thing  ;"  that  when  we
get  our  temples  finished  we  may
enter  therein,  approach  the  living
God, and  call  upon  Him  for  blessings,
for  life  anil  salvation  for  ourselves
and  others,  for  deliverance  from  our
enemies,  and  God  will  hear  our
prayers  if  we  will  only  be  obedient
and  observe  His  law,  God  is  on
our  side*  All  heaven  is  on  our  side.
The  ancient  Prophets  and  Patriarchs,
ami  the  Son  of  God  and  God  the
Father,  are  enlisted  in  the  cause  of
Zion.  It  is  for  us  to  be  true  to
ourselves,  and  I  ask  no  odds  of  this
world  or  of  its  powers,  (**  Amen")
God  will  take  care  of  His  Saints,
but  we  must  be  careful  to  be
Saints.

**  Arise  !  therefore,  ye  Elders  of
Israel — ye  Priests,  Teachers  and
Deacons,  ye  Presidents  of  Stakes,
Bishops  and  High  Counselors,  ye
Apostles  and  First  Presidency,  and
al  l  of  us — A  rise  !  and  let  us  go  to
work  with  a  will  to  do  the  will  of
God  on  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven:
;  for  if  ever  that  is  done,  where  is  it  to
j  start,  do  you  think,  if  it  does  not
begin  lie  re  among  us  t  God  expects
it  at  our  hands.  We  are  full  of
weaknesses  and  imperfections,  every
one  of  us;  but  we  want  to  learn
the  word,  the  will,  and  the  law  of
God,  and  to  conform  to  that  word
I  and  will  and  law. Let  that  law  be


CONFIDENCE  IN  GOD


written  upon  our  hearts.  Let  us
seek  to  magnify  our  callings  and  hon-
or our  God,  and  the  Lord  will  take
care  of  the  balance.  We  need  not
trouble  ourselves  much  about  our
enemies.  They  have  their  ideas,
we  have  ours.  We  will  do  as  we
have  done.  We  will  do  the  best  we
can  with  them,  put  our  trust  in  the
living  God,  and  pursue  a  course  that
is  wise,  prudent  and  intelligent.
We  will  glory  not  in  ourselves,  but
in  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  We  will
dedicate  ourselves,  our  wives,  our
families,  our  houses  and  our  lands,
and  all  that  we  possess  to  the  Lord,
atid  feel  that  we  are  His  children.


If  we  do  this,  He  will  bless  us  with
life, health  and  prosperity.  He
will  control  the  efforts  of  our  enemies
in  the  future  as  He  has  don*  in  the
past. And  here  I  feel  to  call  upon
evory  soul  to  bless  and  magnify  the
I  God  of  Israel  for  His  mercies  ex-
tended to  us  in  the  past;  for  putting
I  a  hook  into  the  jaws  of  our  enemies
I  that  they  have  not  had  power  to
1  harm  us,  and  He  will  continue  to  do
!  it,  if  we  will  continue  to  be  faithful,
only  much  more  so  ;  and  woe  unto
them  that  fight  against  Zion,  tor  the
Lord  God  of  Hosts  will  fight  ;igainsfc
them.  Amen.


13f>


TOUKNAL  OF  i>[S(!OlfHSES.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT GEORGE Q,  CANNON,
Delivered  in  the  Tahermtde,  dgdeu. Stun  (ay  Mwmtuj,  January  18th,

t  oi  %Mttt<>p  iih*  «fi  MtiKwi 1885:  -i-mm**  ^^Mim^mm


(REPORTED  BY JOHN  IRVINE.


IMPORTANCE  OF  OUR  SUNDAY  SCHOOLS  AND  MUTUAL  IMI'KOVKMEXT
ASSOCIATIONS—THE  GOOD  WORK  DUNE  BY  THEM  IN  QUALIFYING
fOUNO  MEN  TO  BE  MISSIONARIES  —  NECESSITY  OF  TEACHING  OUR
CHILDREN  THE  PRINCIPLE OP  VIRTUE  —  DETERMINATION OF  OUR

enemies  to  destroy  the  work  of  god — the  lord  will  build

UP  HIS  KINGDOM  IN  HIS  OWN  WAY  —  HE  WILL  STAND  BY  US  IF
WE  ARE  VALIANT — GOD  RAISED  UP  MEN  TO  FoKM  THE  CONSTITU-
TION AND  ESTABLISH  THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES —
SELF-PRESERVATION  REQUIRES  US  TO  BE  UNITED — -ALL  REPUTABLE
MEN  AMONG  THE  LATTER-DAY'  SAINTS  HOLD  THE  PRIESTHOOD — WE
HAVE  TO  CONTEND  WITH  MOBOCKACT  IN  LEGAL  FORM  AND  GUISE
— THIS  WORK  DEPENDS  UPON  GOD— OUR  ENEMIES  HAVE  No  POWER
TO  INJURS  US  —  NO  ONE  HAS  PROSPERED  IN  OPPOSING  THE
WORK  OF  GOD  —  THE  LORD  WILL  STAND  BY  US  IN  THE  HOl  R
OF  NEED — CONCLUSION.


I  am  pleased  to  have  the  opportu-
nity of  meeting  with  the  Latter-day
Saints  this  morning  in  Ogden,  and
of  listening  to  the  reports  which
have  been  made  by  the  brethren
respecting  the  Sun, lay  Schools,  and
the  Young  Men's  Mutual  Improve-
ment Associations, These  institu-
tions furnish  an  index  to  the  growth
and  development  of  the  people,  and
the  future  character  of  those  who
are  now  and  who  will  be  members
of  the  Church  in  years  to  come.  I
think  a  very  fair  estimate  can  be
formed  of  what  our  people  will  be  by
closely  observing  the  condition  of
the  Sunday  Schools  and  the  Mutual
Improvement  Associations ;  because
those  children  and  those  young  men
and  young  women  who  are  now


members  of  these  schools  and  as-
sociations will  in  a  very  few  years
take  their  place  as  active  members
in  t  he  community,  and  the  character
of  the  community  be  largely  depend-
ent upon  their  characters  and  upon
the  development  which  they  have
made  in  the  directions  that  these
institutions  seek  to  form  them.
1  look  upon  it  myself  as  exceedingly
important  that  our  schools  should
be  properly  conducted,  aud  that  our
associations  should  receive  that
attention  from  those  who  have
influence  and  knowledge  that  will
make  a  proper  impression  upon  the
minds  of  those  who  are  members.
In  whatever  capacity  1  might  he  act-
ing in  the  Pries thood,  with  the
proper  feeling  of  anxiety  about  the


THE  GOOD  WORK  ACCOMPLISHED  BY  SUNDAY  SCHOOLS.  137


Hi


growth  and  development  of  the  peo-
ple, I  could  not  fail  to  take  interest
in  all  these  associations,  and  to  see
that  they  were  properly  conducted
as  far  as  my  influence  would  extend.
1  do  feel  this  interest,  I  have  for
many  years  felt  it.  It  has  been  one
of  the  great  delights,  I  may  say,  of
my  life  for  many  years,  to  see  the
■owth  and  development  of  our
unday  School  interest
For  many  years,  while  laboring  in
the  ministry  abroad  I  saw  how  small
was  the  amount  of  fruit  resulting
from  the  labors  of  myself  and  other
Klders  in  the  world  ;  that  we  labored
sometimes  for  years  and  were  only
able  to  bring  into  the  Church  a
comparative  few,  and  then,  out  of
those  that  were  converted  and
brought  into  the  Church,  there  was
a  large  percentage  who  did  not
remain,  but  who  lost  the  faith  and
fell  away.  1  became  convinced  in
my  mind  that  more  satisfactory
results  and  a  larger  amount  of  fruit
could  he  obtained  by  devoting  atten-
tion to  the  cultivation  of  our  chil-
dren, and  for  years  before  1  had  the
opportunity,  I  had  resolved  in  my
own  mind  that  if  I  were  ever  per-
mitted to  remain  at  home  long  enough
I  would  devote  attention  to  the
cultivation  of  the  young.  I  think
that  which  has  been  done  in  this
direction  has  amply  rewarded  every
man  and  woman  who  have  taken
interest  in  this  cause.  You  can  better
tell,  probahlj',  than  1  can  -  or  at
least  some  of  you  can—  what  the
effect  upon  our  community  is — the
effect  of  the  Sunday  School,  and  of
the  teachings  of  the  Sunday  Schools.
Yoft  are  familiar  with  the  children.
You  can  contrast  their  present  condi:
tion  with  the  condition  of  children
a  few  years  ago,  and  by  making  this
contrast  you  can  estimate,  at  pretty
near  its  true  value,  that  which  is
and  has  been  done. So  far  as  my


observation  is  concerned  I  am  satis-
fied that  a  great  amount  of  good
has  been  accomplished.  I  have
been  on  missions  when  Elders  have
come  from  the  valley — young  men —
and  I  have  been  very  much  ashamed
to  see  their  ignorance  in  regard  to
the  doctrines  of  the  Church,  and  of
the  history  of  the  Church,  and  their
ignorance  of  the  Scriptures,  I  have
felt  that  it  was  almost  a  shame  that
young  men  brought  up  in  Zion
should  go  as  missionaries  and  be  so
ignorant  concerning  the  most  vital
points  connected  with  our  religion.
1  am  happy  to  believe  that  that  has
passed  away  to  a  very  great  extent,
and  that  those  who  now  go  out  in
the  capacity  of  missionaries  do  so
with  a  more  thorough  understanding
respecting  the  history  of  the  Church,
the  doctrines  of  the  Church,  and  a
wider  intelligence  concerning  every-
thing connected  with  the  Church
than  was  formerly  manifested*  In
our  Sunday  Schools  I  have  listened
to  children  being  catechised,  and
their  answers  upon  points  of  history
of  the  Church,  and  other  matters,
have  been  given  with  a  correctness
that  could  not  be  excelled,  if  equalled
by  many  of  the  Elders  of  mature
years  if  they  were  interrogated  upon
the  same  points.  Every  one  who
has  visited  Sunday  Schools  must  be
convinced  of  this.  Therefore*  when
we  hear,  as  we  do  to-day,  that  in
some  of  your  settlements  nearly  all
the  children  are  enrolled  in  theSun-
day  Schools,  it  speaks  well  for  the
future  of  the  children.  If  these
schools  are  properly  conducted  the
effect  must  be  immense  in  lifting
them  up  from  ignorance  and  giving
them  correct  knowledge  concerning
the  doctrines  and  history  of  the
Church,  and  indoctrinating  them
in  the  principles  which  we  view  as
So  important  for  men  and  women  to
understand, It  is  therefore  very


158


JOURNAL OK  IHSCOUJiSBK.


gratifying  to  hear  such  reports,  and
that  wlncli  we  have  heard  to-day
respecting  the  schools  in  Weber
Btake  is  a  very  fair  sample  of  the
reports  which  are  made  iu  other
Stakes,

We  have  to-day,  so  far  as  statistics
inform  us,  nearly  50,(100  children
iu  Sunday  Schools.  These  50,000
children  will  iu  a  very  few  years  be
men  and  women,  taking  their  place
in  society,  probably  married,  and
their  influence  will  be  felt  upon  the
future  families  of  the  people,  and
if  they  are  properly  taught  in  the
priiiriples  of  the  Gospel  and  are
fortified  against  si  in  ancl  are  taught
the  evil  effects  thai  will  result  from
the  practice  of  everything  that  is
wrong,  we  can  imagine  what  an  effect
this  will  have  on  the  entire  body  of
the  people !  It  is  therefore  very
encouraging  to  all  those  who  lake
an  interest  iu  the  growth  of  Zion,
in  the  development  of  the  work  of
God,  to  know  that  our  chill reu,  iu
Primary  Associations,  in  Sunday
Schools,  and  in  Young  Men  and
Young  Women's  Mutual  Improve-
ment Associations,  are  receiving
the  instruction  that  is  best  adapted
for  their  future  good  and  happiness.

There  are  a  few  points  that  I  have
always  deemed  as  of  the  utmost
importance  that  our  children  should
be  taught ;  the  more  so  because  such
teaching  guards  them  against  some
of  the  growing  evils  of  the  age  iu
which  we  live.  f  It  has  seemed  to  me
sometimes  that  if  the  Lord  had  not
established  this  Church  at  the  time
He  did,  the  future  of  our  race  would
be  in  some  respects  very  dark  and
hopeless  to  contemplate.  The
growth  of  intemperance,  the  spirit
of  infidelity  concerning  God  and
concerning  every  tiling  pertaining
to  God  and  to  righteousness,  the
wonderful  spread  of  corruption,
the  low  value  placed  upon  virtue,


and  the  increase  of  the  evils  that
result  from  the  absence  of  virtue,*
are  of  such  a  nature  that,  if  you  look
outside  this  Church,  the  picture  is
a  most  discouraging  one.  God  has
established  this  Church  and  He  has
told  us  from  the  very  beginning  that
the  chief  corner  stone,  it  may  he  said,
of  this  great  edifice  that  He  has
reared  and  is  rearing,  is  virtue.
Early  in  the  history  of  the  Church
the  Prophet  Joseph  received  revela-
tions to  this  effect :  that  he  who
looked  upon  a  woman  to  lust  after
her  should  deny  the  faith,  and  un-
less he  repented,  he  should  he  cast
out.  What  an  amount  of  purity  is
embodied  iu  this  statement  of  the
Lord  to  us  in  this  revelation  !  A
man  must  not  only  refrain  from
doing  that  which  is  wrong  with  the
opposite  s^x  ;  he  must  not  only  re-
frain from  carrying  his  lust  into  the
actual  commission  of  crime,  but  he
must  be  so  pure  iu  heart  that  he
shall  not  look  upon  the  other  sex
with  a  lustful  eye  ami  a  lustful  desire*
If  lie  does  so,  we  are  told  by  the
Almighty  that  he  shall  denj  the
faith.  Now,  I  cannot  imagine  how
the  Lord  can  make  more  plain  to  us
than  He  has  done  in  these  revela-
tions— for  it  is  repeated  more  than
once  in  the  revelations  that  we  have
received — the  importance  of  virtue,
the  importance  of  purity,  purity  iu
thought  as  well  as  purity  in  action*
The  frequent  apostasies  irom  this
Church,  the  many  who  have  left  the
Church,  denied  the  faith,  lost  the
Spirit  of  Go  J,  the  most  of  them,  no
doubt,  are  traceable  to  the  coinoiis.
sion  of  this  si ik  It  is,  as  I  have
said,  the  crying  sin  of  the  age.
Outside  of  this  Church  virtue  is  not
fostered  as  it  should  be.  Of  course
there  are  exceptions.  I  do  not  mean
to  say  that  all  people  are  corrupt ;  I
would  not  be  so  sweeping  ;  but  iu
society  generally  there  is  not  that


A  CRITICAL  PERIOD  IN  OUR  HISTORY*


139'


value  placed  upon  virtue  that  should
be,  and  in  many  circles  the  virtue
of  man  is  derided,  A  man  who
claims  to  be  virtuous,  or  who  desires
cr  seeks  to  be  virtuous,  finds  himself
alone,  as  it  were,  among  his  fellows.
Therefore,  it  is  of  the  utmost  im-
portance that  we,  in  training  our
children,  should  lay  deep  and  solid
in  their  minds  the  importance  ot
virtue.  They  should  be  taught  that
their  whole  lives  as  Latter  day  Saints
depend  upon  the  cultivation  and
preservation  of  this  principle  ;  and
that  if  they  are  guilty  of  wrong  in  this
direction,  unless  there  is  sincere  and
heartfelt  repentance  before  the  Lord,
He  will  undoubtedly  withdraw  His
Holy  Spirit  from  them  and  leave
them  to  themselves  to  become  a  prey
to  those  wicked  influences  that  are
seeking  constantly  to  take  posses-
sion of  the  hearts  of  the  Saints  of  God.

Now,  we  can  best  do  this  in  child-
hood ;  we  can  teach  our  children  in
childhood  and  in  youth,  and  as  they
grow  to  manhood  and  to  womanhood
we  can  fortify  them  against  those
evils.  It  has  been  necessary,  appa-
rently,— tor  tlie  Spirit  has  seemed
to  indicate  the  necessity  of  this, —
that  there  should  be  greater  strictness
enforced  among  our  people.  There
lias  been  a  growth  of  wrong-doing
in  many  quarters  that  has  been  most
painful  to  all  those  who  have  the
welfare  of  the  Saints  of  God  at  heart,
and  who  desire  the  prosperity  of  Zion,
Many  cases  have  come  to  the  knowl-
edge of  the  First  Presidency  and  of
the  Twelve  and  of  other  leading
men  wherein  people  have  been  com-
pelled, in  order  to  conceal  their
wrong-doing,  to  marry,  and  even
then  have  failed  to  cover  it  up.
Now,  such  a  condition  of  things  if
permitted  to  continue  in  our  midst,
unchecked,  would  be  productive  of
the  most  terrible  consequences.
The  Spirit  of  God  would  undoubt-


edly be  so  grieved  that  it  would
forsake  not  only  those  who  are  guilty
of  these  acts,  but  it  would  withdraw
itself  from  those  who  would  suffer
them  to  be  done  in  our  niidst  un-
checked and  u ure bilked  ;  and  from
the  President  of  the  Church  down,
throughout  the  entire  ranks  of  the
Priesthood,  there  would  be  a  loss  of
the  Spirit  of  God,  a  withdrawal  of
His  gifts  and  blessing  and  His  power,
because  of  their  not  taking  the
proper  measures  to  check  and  to
expose  their  iniquity.

My  brethren  and  sisters  :  I  sup-
pose you  must  be  impressed,  as  I  am,
with  this  truth,  that  our  only  source
of  strength  is,  that  we  shall  live  so
that  the  spirit  and  power  ami  gifts
of  our  religion  and  the  favor  of  our
God  shall  he  extended  unto  us  and
be  in  our  possession.  There  never
was  a  more  critical  period  in  many
respects  in  the  history  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  than  that  which  we
now  witness,  I  never,  iu  my  recol-
lection, or  iu  reading  the  history  of
the  Church  have  seen  a  time  nor
heard  of  a  time  when  the  adversary
of  God's  Kingdom  was  more  de-
termined, apparently,  to  destroy
the  work  of  God  than  he  is  at  the
present  time.  On  every  hand  there
are  the  most  persistent  efforts  made
to  check  the  growth  of  the  Kingdom
of  God,  and  not  only  that,  but  to
destroy  this  religion,  the  religion  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  to  throw  obstacles
iu  the  pathway  of  its  progress  ;  and
to  actually  deprive  members  of  this^
Church  ot  every  right  that  men  and
women  value — every  political  right,
every  civil  right — to  place  us  in
bondage,  and  to  make  it  odious  in
the  eyes  of  mankind  to  be  Latter-
day  Saints,  or  to  have  any  faith  in
the  religion  that  God  has  revealed  to
us,  and  of  which  we  are  so  proud,
and  for  which  we  are,  as  a  rule,  so
thankful


HO


JOURNAL  Oh  DISCOURSES


Now,  we  do  not  have  wealth  with
which  to  combat  the  designs  of  our
enemies  ;  we  do  not  have  numbers ;
we  do  not  have  influence  ;  there  is
no  strength  that  we  have  that  men
value  and  that  men  seek  for  in  a
-contest  such  as  that  in  which  we  are
engaged.  We  possess  no  advantage,
none  whatever,  that  men  place  value
upon.  But  we  possess  advantages
that  we  understand,  and  which  we  as
Latter-day  Saints  highly  value,  and
they  are  the  best  advantages,  how-
ever much  they  may  he  disliked  by
the  world.  However  little  import-
ance they  may  attach  to  the  advan-
tages that,  we  possess,  we  know  that
in  a  contest  such  as  this  in  which
we  are  now  engaged  they  are  of  the
utmost  importance.

To  begin  with  we  must,  as  I  have
said,  be  a  virtuous  people.  AVe
must  love  virtue  better  than  we  love
our  lives.  We  must  he  so  pure,  not
only  in  our  actions,  but  in  our
thoughts,  that  God  s  favor  will  be
with  us,  and  His  Spirit  rest  down
upon  and  we  must  live  the  lives
-of  Latter-day  Saints,  carrying  otuin
our  lives  the  principles  that  God  lias
revealed.  This  is  our  only  strength.
Let  us  be  deprived  of  this  and  we
are  weak,  because,  us  1  have  said,  we
possess  no  other  advantage.  If  we
prevail,  as  undoubtedly  we  shall,  it
must  he  because  of  God's  help  ;  it
must,  he  because  He  is  at  our  right
and  at  nur  left,  and  His  power  is
round  about  us  and  near  unto  us.
Looking  at  our  position  from  a  hu-
man standpoint  everything  looks
dark;  Men  today  are  calculating
on  the  destruction  of  this  people.
They  think  that  we  shall  at  least  be
compelled  to  abandon  some  features
our  religion,  in  some  places  and
with  some  people  it  is  Church  and
-State  they  complain  of-  Jn  other
places  it  is  that  we  practice  plural
marriage. In  other  places  there  are


I  other  reasons  assigned  for  their  dis-
like to  us — we  are  too  united  ;  we
do  not  divide  into  parties,  wherever
we  go  we  cling  together,  and  do  not

I  assimilate  with  the  rest  of  our  fellow

^citizens,  but  are  a  party  of  ourselves,
and  are  dangerous  because  of  this.
And  various  accusations  are  made  as

,  justification  for  the  treatment  that
is  extended  to  us.  Men  whose  lives
are  so  vile  that  they  Would  not  bear
the  least  examination,  much  less
exposure,  make  tlie  charge*  against
us  that  we  practice  plural  marriage,

|  and  therefore  that  we  should  be

!  dealt  with  in  the  harshest  and  most
severe  maimer.  On  the  other  hand,
men  who  are  constantly  seeking  for
political  influence,  whodo  not  scruple

!  to  use  that  influence  in  the  most
reprehensible  manner,  and  to  the
utmost  extent  possible,  and  frequent-
ly preachers,  loo,  charge  that  we
unite  Church  and  State.  They
would  gladly  use  the  influence  that
we  have  if  they  had  it,  and  use  it
in  a  manner  so  obnoxious  to  indiv  id-
ual liberty,  that  it  would  bear  no
comparison  to  the  maimer  influence
is  used  anmng  the  Latter-day  Saints.
That  would  be  all  right  if  they  used
it,  but  it  is  all  wrong  if  we  use  it.
And  so  it  is  with  everything  else.
If  they  could  unite  a  people  together

j  as  we  are  united  that  would  be
perfectly  justifiable  ;  but  because
Latter-day  Saints  unite  together,
that  is  exceedingly  \vrong,  especially
when  they  do  so  as  a  religious  com-

I  munity,

I  For  myself  1  want  to  do  that  which
God  directs.  That  is  the  wish  of  my
heart.  I  want  to  honor  mv  God  if  I
know  how  to  do  it.  I  believe  this
entire  people  have  the  same  feeling.

I  They  desire  to  do  the  will  of  God,
if  they  cart  find  out  what  that  will
is,  and  if  He  will  communicate  it  to
us,  as  I  know  He  does,  1  am  satisfied

■  that the  great majority of;  the


WE  MUST  BE  VALIANT  FOR  THE  TRUTH.


Latter-day  Saints  will  do  that
will  regardless  of  consequences.
It  is  the  attempt  to  do  that,  that
has  brought  us  into  disre-
pate.

God,  in building  up  His  King-
dom, does  not  take  pattern  from
men. He does not  ask  counsel  ;
from  men  as  to  how  that  Kingdom
shall  be  built  up,  and  the  methods
that  shall  be  employed  to  establish
it. He  is  going  to  build  His  King*
dom  up  in  His  own  way,  and  if  it
does  not  suit  men  or  the  nations  of
the  earth,  why,  I  suppose  they  will
have  to  be,  as  they  have  been  and
as  they  are  sometimes  at  present,  j
angry  with  tho.se  who  strive  to  do  |
that  which  He  requires. I  know
this  that  many  things  that  men  ad-  ;
mire  are  an  abomination  in  the  sight
of  God  ;  many  things  that  they
think  most  admirable  God  holds  as
an abomination. Therefore,  in
building  up  His  Church  and  His
Kingdom  He  is  going  to  take  His
own  plan  of  doing  it,  and  for  one,  I
so  far  as  1  can  I  feel  willing  to  allow
Him  to  dictate  how  it  shall  be  done,
and  then  leave  the  consequences  to
Him. I  know  that  He  will  bring
off  those  who  put  their  trust  in  Him
victorious,  and  He  will  ask  no  odds
of  thff  nations  of  the  earth.  He
delights  in  a  people  who  are  courage-
ous and  valiant,  who  are  not  afraid.
He  delights  in  people  of  this  kind.
The  greatest  blessing  almost  that
we  read  of  that  was  ever  given  to
a  man  in  the  flesh  was  given  to  a
man  possessed  of  this  courage.  You
will  remember  him,  doubtless,  when
I  mention  His  name. His  name
was  Nephi. He  was  the  son  of
Helaman,  and  had  a  brother  named-
LeliL He  was  the  grandfather  of
Nephi,  who  was  the  President  of  the  |
Twelve  whom  Jesus  chose  on  this
continent. Head  the  life  of  that  I
man,  and  observe  the  blessings  that  I


God  bestowed  upon  him,  God  gave
him  great  power  because  of  his  valor
and  fearlessness  in  His  cause,  and  it
is  so  with  every  Pruphet  and  with,
every  man  of  God  of  whom  we  have
any  record,  and  it  is  so  with  every
people  and  generation  who  put  their
trust  in  the  Lord,  and  are  valiant
for  His  cause.  He  will  give  them
great  blessings  and  power,  and  He
will  bring  them  off  victorious.  He
has  done  so  in  the  past.  He  is  doing
so  now,  and  He  will  do  so  in  the  fu-
ture ;  and  whenever  you  find  a  man
or  a  people  weak-kneed  and  limber-
hacked,  nervous,  their  hand  -  shaking
and  their  hearts  trembling,  you  will
find  a  people  that  have  not  very
much  of  the  strength  and  power  of
God  with  them  ;  but  when  they  are
full  of  courage,  zeal  and  determina-
tion, God  is  with  them,  He  strength-
ens them,  and  gives  them  victory.
He  will  do  it  every  time,  with  every
individual.  You  read  the  history  of
Elijah,  and  see  how  valiant  he  was,
and  how  God  blessed  him,  and  I
might  go  on  and  enumerate  a  great
many  mure  men  who  have  been  dis-
tinguished in  the  world's  historyi
because  of  their  valor.  God  stood
by  them  always,  and  will  stand  by  us
if  we  are  valiant.  Look  at  the  men
who  have  been  most  valiant  in  this
Church  in  defending,  advocating
and  practicing  the  principles  which
God  has  revealed,  and  doing  this,
too,  in  the  face  of  mankind  who
have  been  determined  that  we  shall
not  do  these  things,  and  see  ,1*0^
God  has  blessed  and  sustained  tWm<
in  so  doing.  Therefore,  having  had
this  experience  in  these  matters,  it
is  for  us  to  be  valiant  in  the  cause  o£
God,  to  show  our  faith  by  our  works,;
and  not  be  Latter-day  Saints  with
our  lips  alone,  but  b  *  Latter-day
Saints  in  all  the  acts  of  our  lives,
in  all  our  words,  and  in  everything
there  is  connected  with  us.  Let


142


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


us  not  imagine  that  God  ha*  es
tab]  is  bed  His  work  to  take  pattern
in  its  methods  of  procedure  and
management  after  the  corrupt
nations  of  the  earth.  He  has
not  done  so-

We  live  under  a  Government,  the
best  that  ever  was  formed  by  man
upon  this  earth — a  Government  in
which  every  human  being  can  live
without  interfering  with  the  rights
of  others  in  the  practice  of  the  prin-
ciples which  God  reveals,  God  has
purposely  arranged  this.  He  raited
up  wise  men  to  lay  the  foundation  of
this  Government,  and  He  defended
them  against  the  mother  country,
and  enabled  them  to  achieve  victory
over  the  greatest  power  them  was
upon  tin?  facH  of  the  earth — the
power  of  Great  Britain,  He  gave
them  power  to  form  a  Constitution
under  which  every  man  and  woman
can  dwell  in  perfect  freedom — thai
is,  if  they  wanted  to  do  right.  This
land  has  been  dedicated  to  liberty,
dedicated  by  the  Lord  our  God,  and
by  men  who  have  lived  upon  this
land,  to  liberty,  and  as  long  as  this
land  shall  be  a  laud  of  liberty  it  will
be  a  blessed  hind  to  the  inhabitants
thereof ;  but  when  it  ceases  to  be  a
land  of  liberty,  then  as  sure  as  God
has  spoken,  this  Government  will
go  down — that  is,  any  Government
will,  that  will  war  against  the  prin-
ciples of  liberty — and  the  men  who
are  now  engaged  in  their  assaults
upon  us  became  of  our  religion,  are
traitors  to  this  Government,  and
they  are  the  most  deadly  enemies  to
the  Government  of  the  United
States  thcfc  can  be  found  any  wluue
upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  They
are  laving  the  axe  at  the  root  of  tbe
tree,  nm\  are  taking  measures  to
destroy  this  Government,  because
it  can  only,  as  1  have  said,  be  pre
served  by  mai  Uaming  the  principle*
of  libi  i  ty  tliat  are  contained  in  the


Constitution  which  God  gave  to  the
land,  or  which  He  ins  piled  men  to
frame  for  tbe  land.  But  in  our
contention  for  liberty — -for  we  to-day
are  the  defenders  of  the  Constitu-
tion, and  we  shall  have  Constitu-
tional principles  to  maintain  and
defend  in  the  courts  of  the  nation,
we  are  being  forced  into  this  duty
and  position — God  will  bless  us  and
preserve  us,  and  carry  us  off  triumph-
antly, and  the  words  of  Joseph,
which  were  inspired  by  t  he  Almighty,
will  be  fulfilled  to  the  very  letter,
namely,  that  the  Elders  of
this  Church  will  be  the  men  who  will
uphold  and  maintain  the  Constitu-
tion of  the  United  States,  when
others  are  seeking  to  trample  it  in
the  dust,  and  to  destroy  it.  We  are
a  free  people — let  others  seek  to
bring  us  into  bondage  as  they  may
—we  are  a  free  people,  with  the
perfect  right  to  worship  our  God  and
to  carry  into  effect  the  principles  that
He  has  revealed.  And  if  thf*  whole
world  array  themselves  against  us,
and  the  combined  power  of  the  na-
tion pits  itself  against  this  work,
they  must  go  down  in  the  struggle,
because  they  are  occupying  a  false
position.  If  fifty  hundred  millions
of  people  were  to  say  the  contrary,
no  matter,  the  principle  still  remains
true,  that  under  the  Constitution  in
this  land,  a  man  has  a  perfect  t  ight
to  do  that  which  God  requires  at  his
hands  as  long  as  he  does  not
intrude  upon  the  rights  of  his
neidibor.

If  one  man  stood  alone  in  this
position,  and  millions  of  men  were
to  say  it  is  not  so,  that  lone  man
I  would  still  be  right.  We  have  that
right.  God  has  given  it  to  us  under
the  Constitution  of  the  laud  in
which  we  dwell,  and  if  men  enact
laws  and  pile  one  la  v  upon  another
until  they  reach  to  the  sky,  it  would
tiot  change  tins. It  is  an  eternal


PRIESTHOOD  DOES  NOT  DISQUALIFY  FOR  CIVIL  OFF[CK


H3


principle,  ami  it  will  stand — this
principle  of  liberty,  the  liberty  that
God  lias  given  unto  every  human
being — the  right  to  do  that  which
seemeth  good  in  his  own  sight,  to
follow  the  dictates  of  his  own  con-
science, as  long  as,  in  so  doing,  he
does  not  trespass  upon  the  rights  of
his  fellow  man.  We  stand  by  that
fearlessly,  and  stand  by  it  for  our-
selves, and  lor  our  children  after  us.
I  would  not  abate  one  iota,  not  a
hair's  breadth,  myself,  in  this  feeling*
I  wold  teel  that  1  was  a  traitor  to
myself  and  to  my  posterity  if  I  were
to  yield  in  the  least  upon  this.  We
most  maintain  our  rights,  not  ag-
gressively, not  in  any  quarrelsome
spirit,  but  in  a  spirit  of  quiet  firm-
ness, quiet  determination  to  main-
tain  our  rights,  to  contend  for  them,
and  to  never  yield  one  hair  s  breadth
in  maintaining  them.  This  is  our
duty  as  individuals  and  as  a  people,
-and  in  thus  determining,  we  band
ourselves  together  more  closely-
Complaints  are  made  of  us  that  we
are  so  exclusive.  Why,  in  the  very
nature  of  things  we  should  be  fools
to  be  otherwise  than  exclusive.  We
cannot  help  it.  We  are  driven  into
oxclusiveness  by  the  acts  of  our  en
miea,  and  by  the  pressure  that  is
brought  to  bear  upon  us.  A  flock
of  sheep  when  attacked  by  dogs  or
wolves,  huddle  together,  and  seek
to  protect  themselves  by  getting
into  a  cluster.  So  it  is  with  u*.
It  is  the  law  of  preservation,  that  we
should  jjet  close  together  when  we
are  assaulted  as  we  have  been.  We  s
can  not  put  trust  in  others  who  are
not  of  us  to  any  extent.  There  are,  i
however,  many  honorable  men,  j
hundreds  and  thousands  of  them.  I
If  there  were  not,  we  would  not  send
missionaries  out  as  we  do.  We  be
lieve  they  are  just  as  honest  as  we
are,  just  as  sincere  as  we  are,  and  i
desire  as  much  to  do  right  as  we  do.  ■


I  believe  there  are  millions  of  them
in  the  earth,  men  and  women,
whose  desires  are  as  good  as  the  best
Latter-day  Saints.  They  desire  to
do  the  will  of  God,  and  to  keep  His
commandments  as  much  as  any  of
us  do,  and  are  as  sincere  in  it ;  hub
many  people  are  ignorant  and  do
things  through  ignorance  which  are
wrong.  But,  as  I  say,  self  preserva-
tion demands  that  we  should  cling
together;  that  we  should  be  unite!  ;
that  we  should  sink  all  personal
differences  ;  that  we  should  have
no  preference  that  we  would  not  be
willing  to  forego  for  the  sake  of  the
Kingdom  of  God.  It  is  an  import-
ant t  ime  with  us.  We  have  enemies
all  around  us.  A  determination  is
made  manifest  to  destroy  every  one
of  our  liberties,  if  possible,  and  to
bring  us  into  bondage.  That  is  the
design,  if  it  can  be  accomplished.
But  it  will  not  be  accomplished.  You
wiil  see  it  will  fail,  it  will  signally
fail,  and  God  will  preserve  us  in  our
liberties,  and  especially  will  He  do
this  if  we  keep  His  commandments,
and  do  that  which  He  requires  at  our
hands,

A  great  many  people  seem  to  think,
and  some  who  are  among  us  act
upon  the  thought,  that  because  a
man  holds  the  Priesthood,  and  is  a
religions  man,  and  practices  religion,
that  he  should  not  have  any  voice
in  matters  that  belong  to  civil  gov-
ernment. In  Washington  the  charge
has  been  frequently  made  that  all
the  lea* ling  offices  of  the  Territory
of  Utah  were  held  by  Mormon  El-
ders, Mormon  Bishops  and  others.
I  have  frequently  said,  in  answer  to
this,  before  committees  of  the  Senate
and  House,  that  if  we  did  not  take
Mo  niton  Elders  we  would  have  no
officers,  for  the  reasons  that,  as  a  rule,
evr-ry  reputable  man  in  Utah  Terri-
tory, when  he  attains  the  age  of
majority,  holds  the  office  of  an


144


JOURNAL  OK  DISCQUHSES.


Elder,  or  some  other  office  in  the
Priesthood.  This  explanation  gave
a  very  different  view  to  men  who  did
not  understand  our  organization,
and  whose  ignorance  was  taken  ad-
vantage of.  In  the  world  there  are
a  few  men  in  religious  societies,  who
hold  leading  positions,  hold  what  we
would  call,  if  in  our  Church,  the
Priesthood,  and  the  rest  are  debarred,
and  are  mere  laymen.  But  it  is  not
so  with  us.  The  hulk  of  the  Mormon
people  hold  the  Priesthood,  and
every  man  of  repute  of  any  agp  is  an
officer  in  the  Church,  It  is  said  that
the  members  of  our  Legislature  ;
are  men  who  are  prominent  in  the
Priesthood.  How  could  it  be  other-
wise? If  a  man  is  energetic  ami
has  any  talent  he  of  course  holds
some  position  in  the  Priesthood,  and
he  i?  very  apt  to  hold  some  promi-
nent place.  But  does  this  prevent
him  from  acting  in  a  civil  office,  and
iron i  dealing  justly  and  wisely  for
the  good  of  the  people?  No,  we
have  proved  to  our  entire  satis-
faction, that  this  is  not  the  |
case. mi  t :  rltt.iiv.

When  we  look  at  Utah  Territory
to  day,  and  compare  it  with  other
Territories  it  will  be  conceded  by
everybody  who  is  impartial  that  the
position  of  affairs  here  is  equal  to,
if  not  much  better  than  the  position
of  affairs  in  any  other  Territory  and
in  many  of  the  States.  Has  that
been  because  there  has  been  a  union
of  Church  and  State,  No,  it  is  not
due  to  that ;  for  that  has  never  ex-
isted here.  Has  it  been  because
there  has  been  one  man  dictating
everything — has  it  been  due  to  that
entirely  ?  No  ;  for  no  one  man  has
done  this.  But  it  has  been  because
tjie  men  who  have  acted  in  these
capacities  have  been  men  of  wisdom,
aud  the  people  have  had  confidence
in  them.  Wherever  we  if o  as  a  people,
we  carry  with  us  our  religion.  You


cannot  dissever  our  religion  from  our
lives.  It  is  a  part  of  our  lives,  and,
of  course,  because  of  this,  we  are  ex-
posed to  those  charges  that  are  made
against  us.  Yet  at  the  same  time,  I
do  not  believe  there  is  a  people  to
be  found  within  the  confines  of  the
Kvpubhe  who  draw  the  Hue  more
strictly  between  religious  and  civil
affairs,  and  between  Church  and
State,  than  do  the  Latter-day
Saints.

We  are  living  in  peculiar  times,
I  think  the  youth  of  this  commu-
nity— those  who  are  growing  up  now
— should  closely  observe  that  which
is  bring  done.  I  c  is  an  important
epoch.  Events  are  taking  place  now
that  are  worthy  of  our  remembrance,
and  we  are  being  put  in  a  position
to  be  tested  thoroughly.  The  con-
test seems  to  he  narrowed  down  to
this  point — whether  we  shall  be  able
to  live  as  a  people  and  enjoy  our
rights  as  members  of  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
or  not.  Formerly,  the  question  was
soon  solved.  A  mob  would  form
itself  against  us,  and  by  force  of
superior  numbers,  and  backed  by  a
public  opinion  that  was  too  strong
for  us  to  contend  with,  w  ^  had  to
vacate  our  homes  and  Her.  The
alternative  was  presented  t->  us  of
flight,  or  the  abandonment  of  our
religion.  This  is  not  quite  the
alternative  now  presented  he  fore  us.
The  question  is,  will  you  abandon
your  religion  ?  W  ill  you  renounce
those  principles  that  God  has  revealed
to  you,  and  which  He  has  declared
are  essential  to  salvation  a  s  I  exalt-
ation in.  His  Kingdom —  >ill  yon
renounce  them?  Will  you  renounce
obedience  to  the  Priesthood  of  the
Son  of  God  I  If  you  w  ill  I  expect
you  can  enjoy  some  sort  of  peace—
a  peace  that  would  be  the  peace  of
death.  Who  will  accept  it  1  Will
any  true  Latter-day  Saint  i No ;


no  true  Latter-day  Saint  will  accept
that.  What  next?  You  cannot  have
your  rights  as  citizens.  You  must
be  put  under  bonds.  You  must
have  penalties  affixed  to  your  practice
or  to  your  faith.  If  you  continue
to  be  Latter-Say  Saint*  you  must  be
discriminated  against.  That  is
another  alternative  presented  to  us.
Will  we  accept  that  ?  Yes.  I  be-
lieve that  I  speak  your  feelings.  I
believe  I  give  voice  to  them  when  I
say  that  you  are  willing,  all  of  you,
to  take  tins  choice  and  these  conse-
quences. What  next  1  Will  a  mob
come  and  drive  us  from  our  homes?
Not  yet,  You  will  see  fun  whenever
that  occurs.  That  is  not  in  the  pro-
gramme as  I  view  it  at  present.  No
mobs.  What  then,  shall  we  do  ?
We  shall  have  to  contend  in  the
courts  ;  we  shall  have  to  make  this
a  legal  fight.  It  is  mo  hoc  racy  in
legal  form  and  in  legal  guise  that
now  attacks  us.  It  comes  to  us  in  a
shape  that  we  can  meet  better  than
we  could  the  old  forms,  when  a  mob
banded  together  and  came  in  such
overwhelming  numbers  that  we
could  not  resist  it  It  may  be  just
as  wicked.  The  present  mode  of
attack  may  be  just  as  cruel  ;  the
ultimate  object  may  be  just  as  bad
in  every  sense  and  in  every  respect;
but  it  can  be  met  in  a  different  form
and  in  a  different  way.  We  have
to  contend  now  for  our  rights  in  the
courts  of  the  land  ;  we  must  see
whether  there  is  a  willingness  on  the
part  of  those  who  hold  authority  as
judges,  to  give  us  our  rights,  and  in
this  way  we  shall  test  the  nation,  our
Government,  and  prove  whether
there  is  a  willingness  on  the  part  of
those  who  administer  the  government

to  give  us  those  rights  that  belong
to  us  as  American  citizens.  If  they
do  not,  who  will  be  the  sufferers !  We
shall  suffer  to  some  extent;  but
our  sufferings  will  be  light  compared
No.  10.


with  those  that  will  fall  upon  the
men  who  shall  prove  untrue  and
recreant  to  the  principles  of  liberty
and  truth.

Now,  I  look  forward  myself  with
great  pleasure  to  the  future.  Every
step  of  this  kind  that  we  take  is  an
assurance  of  that  which  is  to  come.
We  cannot  press  forward  as  a  people;
we  cannot  become  the  people  that
God  designs  we  shall  be,  and  that
He  has  predicted  we  shall  be,  with-
out having  just  such  contests  as
these.  They  are  the  natural  conse-
quences of  the  position  that  we  oc-
cupy, and  of  the  growth  and  devel-
opment of  this  people.  But  the
same  God  that  protected  this  Church
when  it  was  but  a  small  handful,  a
few  iudividualst  still  reigns,  and  His
promises  are  as  much  to  be  relied
upon  as  they  were  when  the  mob
(hove  the  Latter-day  Saints  out  of
Missouri ;  as  much  to  be  relied  upon
as  when,  in  that  dark  hour,  the  mob
killed  our  Prophet  and  our  Patriarch,
and  afterwards  compelled  the  Saints
to  flee  from  their  homes  ;  as  much  to
be  relied  upon  as  when  we  came  to
these  valleys;  they  are  just  as  reliable
to-day  as  they  were  then.  It  is  for
us  to  so  live  that  when  we  call  upon
Him  that  we  do  so  with  an  assurance
that  we  have  done  our  duty,  that
there  is  nothing  lacking  on  our
part  so  far  as  human  and  mortal
beings  can  do.  We  have  our  sins,
our  frailties,  our  many  weaknesses  ;
but  God  looks  down  in  mercy  upon
them  when  we  repent  of  them,  and
show  a  disposition  to  put  them  awuy
from  us.  When  we  are  in  this  con-
dition we  can  call  upon  Him  an  1
leave  ourselves  to  His  mercy,  with
the  full  assu ranee  that  He  has  always
stood  by  His  feithful  people,  His
faithful  servants  and  handmaidens,
and  that  He  will  not  forsake  them
in  any  hour  of  extremity  or  of  pet  ih
He  will  stand  by  them ;  He  will

Vol  XXVI.


146


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


hear  their  prayers  ;  an- J  at  the  very
time  when  it  will  seem  the  darkest,
when  it  will  be  as  though  there  is  no
power  to  save,  God's  arm  will  be
stretched  out  for  our  deliverance,
and  we  shall  he  rescued  and  be
triumphant.  He  will  so  control
circumstances  and  arrange  affairs,
that,  at  the  very  *  moment  when
the  adversary  will  be  glorying  in
triumph,  and  floating  over  the  pros-
pect before  him,  He  will  then  be
ready  to  extend  His  arm  of  deliver-
ance in  our  behalf, and  rescue  us  from
the  power  of  those  who  desire  our
destruction.

As  I  said  in  the  beginning,  if  this
work  depended  on  us  alone  we  would
soon  go  down.  It  depends  upon  God.
He  is  at  the  head  of  it  He  is  behind
it.  He  is  all  around  it.  He  estab-
lished it.  He  has  controlled  circum-
stances thus  far  in  a  most  wonderful
manner ;  and  when  I  look  at  that
which  has  been  done  in  this  country,
with  all  the  efforts  that  have  been
made  by  the  wicked,  one  act  after
another,  one  act  of  wrong  piled  on
top  of  another,  and  see  the  meager
results  to  show  for  their  base  course,
I  feel  to  praise  God  with  all  my
heart  for  His  goodness  and  mercy  to
as,

A  Governor  of  this  Territory  per-
jured himself  to  do  us  a  great  wrong.
He  gave  the  certificate  of  election  to
a  man  who  was  not  elected,  thinking,
in  so  doing,  he  was  dealing  Mor-
mouism — or  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints— a  dead-
ly  blow.  What  has  been  the  result]
Who  is  injured?  Is  anybody  injured  1
I  do  not,  myself,  know  of  anybody
that  is  injured,  except  the  man  who
did  this  perfidious  act,  who  perjured
himself  by  violating  his  oath  of  office.
I  do  not  know  of  any  one  else,
Gertaiidy  the  people  of  Utah  are
not  Go  back  and  look  at  Jud^e
McKean's  rulings  and  acts.  We


had  a  reign  of  judicial  terror  in  the
Third  Judicial  District  for  about
eight  months,  and  no  man  knew
when  he  was  to  be  pounced  upon,
Prominent  men. were  indicted  and
put  under  bonds,  some  for  one
thing  and  some  for  another.  Who
has  been  injured  by  this  ]  Has  any
one  been  injured?  We  have  not
We  have  ate,  and  slept,  and  enjoyed
ourselves,  and  been  as  happy  as  men
could  be.  I  am  sure  President
Young,  when  he  was  living,  was  a
happy  man.  It  did  not  interfere
with  his  happiness  and  enjoyment,
ami  others  who  were  indicted  in
like  manner,  they  enjoyed  them-
selves, and  the  people  have  not
been  injured.  We  have  had  a
great  deal  of  this  kind  ot  experi-

ence,  < »J1  1

Now  we  are  passing  through  a  sim-
ilar condition  of  affairs  to  some  ex-
tent We  shall  come  out  of  this
just  as  we  have  come  out  of  other
perils  and  trials  and  ordeals.  We
shall  gain  experience,  and  it  will  in-
crease our  faith  to  see  the  power  of
God  manifested,  and  to  see  how
wonderfully  He  controls  the  acts  of
men  for  His  glory  and  for  the  accom-
plishment of  His  purposes.  Look
at  the  hubbub  that  has  beea  raised
in  Congress.  There  has  been  a
tremendous  amount  of  pressure
brought  to  bear  upon  that  body  in
regard  to  the  Mormons.  Delegation
after  delegation  has  gone  from  Utah
to  Washington  and  appeared  before
Committees,  for  the  purpose  of  get-
ting bills  made  into  laws.  It  will
be  most  interesting  reading  in  years
to  come,  the  various  bills  that  have
been  presented  to  Congress  against
Utah.  Every  sort  of  scheme  has
been  resorted  to.  You  cannot  think
of  anything,  scarcely,  that  has  not
been  embodied  as  a  feature  in  some
of  these  bills.  And  with  what  re-
sult? Have  we  slept  any  less?  Have


APOSTATES  HAVE  NOT  PROSPERED


147


we  been  any  more  unhappy  1  Have
we  had  any  less  prosperity  1  Has
the  sun  shone  less  upon  us?  Has
Heaven  withdrawn  its  smile  from
us] Have  our  fields  been  less  fruit*
ful  % Have  our  children  been  less
numerous  ? Has  any  blessing  that
we  value  been  withheld  or  withdrawn
from  us  because  of  these  things !
If  they  have  I  am  not  aware  of  it,
I  cannot  think  of  any  evil  that  has
come  upon  us  as  a  people. L  look
over  the  past ;  I  review  the  acts  of
the  wicked  ;  I  review  their  combina-
tions; I  review  the  many  conspiracies
that  have  been  formed,  the  many
determinations that have  been
reached  to  destroy  us,  to  cripple  us,
to  deprive  us  of  our  rights,  and  1
must  confess  to  you  this  day,  my
brethren  and  sisters,  in  the  presence
of  our  Father,  that  I  cannot  think  of
a  single  tiling  that  has  been  done
that  we  could  call  injurious  to  us  as
a  people  ;  not  a  single  thing.  With
all  the  force  that  has  been  arrayed
against  us,  with  all  the  threats  that
have  been  made  about  us,  we  have
lived,  we  have  prospered,  we  have  in-
creased, we  have  been  blessed  of  the
Lord, You  know  how  blessed  you
have  been  in  your  families,  in  your
homes. You  know  how  much  peace
has  feigned  there  ;  how  much  you
have  had  in  your  hearts,  and  in  your
meetings,  and  in  your  associations.
You  know  bow  tree  you  have  been
from  fear  and  from  trepidation*  You
have  not  suffered  in  your  feelings,
for  God  has  given  unto  you  a  peace
that  the  would  cannot  bestow,  that
the  World  cannot  take  away.  The
world  has  not  given  unto  us  those
blessings;  the  world  cannot  tak^
them  away  from  us  ;  they  are  ours,
given  unto  us  by  God  our  Eternal
Father. They  will  still  be  given
unto  us. God's  promises  will  be
verified  to  the  very  letter.

But  you  watch  the  men  who  have


fought  against  this  work.  Watch
the  men  who  have  apostatized  from
this  work.  Ask  yourselves  what
their  fate  has  been.  Where  are  the
men  who  have  sought  to  oppress  the
people  of  Utah]  Where  are  they
to-day  1  Who  is  there  among  them
that  has  prospered  in  this  work  of
oppression  1  Go  through  the  list  of
Governors,  Judges,  ami  other  officers*
Go  through  the  list  of  those  who
luive  held  any  office,  and  who  have
sought  the  oppression  of  the  people
and  the  destruction  of  their  liberties,
through  their  spirit  of  antagonism
to  the  work  of  God,  and  their  desire
to  destroy  it — go  through  the  list  of
them,  and  ask,  who  among  them  has
had  prosperity  ami  has  been  blessed,
and  to  whom  we  can  look  and  say,
i;  Oil,  how  successful  that  man  has
been  ;  how  he  has  prospered  in  fight-
ing  the  Mormons  V  Is  there  any
such  man  among  theml  You  are
familiar  with  the  names  of  apostates
who  have  left  this  work  through  fear
or  some  other  cause,  corrupt  iu  their
lives  or  for  some  other  reason  ?  Can
you  recall  among  the  long  list  of  men
who  have  come  out  and  pitted  them-
selves against  this  work  of  our  God,
any  who  have  prospered  and  had
happy  lives]  Is  there  any  of  them
with  whom  you,  the  humblest  of
you  to-day,  t  he  humblest,  the  poorest
of  you  Latter-day  S:dnts — is  there
one  of  them  with  whom  you  would
exchange  places  to-day]  Not  one.
I  am  sure  that  I  C:in  reply  for  the
whole  of  you — that  is,  t  lie  re  is  not
one  in  that  long  list  of  names  of  men
who  were  once  members  of  this
Church,  who  have  come  out  against
it,  with  whom  you  would  exchange
places  ;  not  one.

Why  then,  should  we  fear?  Why
should  we  tremble !  Why  should
we  be  afraid  of  that  which  is  threat-
ened! I  tell  you  in  the  name  of
the  Lord  He  will  stand  by  us,  He  will


148


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


stand  by  all  His  people.  There  is
this  peculiarity  about  our  God.  He
is  not,  like  the  devil.  When  the  devil
gets  a  man  in  a  tight  place  he  leaves
him  there  ;  he  encircles  him  in  his
net,  he  lets  him  get  entangled  in  its
meshes,  and  then  loaves  him  to  him-
self. That  is  the  devil's  way.  He
deserts  those  who  follow  him  when
they  most  need  his  help.  But  with
God,  in  the  time  of  the  greatest  ex-
tremity, in  the  time  when  help  is
most  needed,  then  He  is  close  to
His  faithful  servants  and  His  faithful


children  ;  then  is  the  time  that  He
stands  by  them.  In  the  deepest
waters  He  is  wth  them ;  in  the  midst
of  the  heaviest  and  sorest  afflictions
He  is  at  their  right  hand  and  at  their
left ;  He  is  around  about  to  sus-
tain and  carry  them  off  victo-
!  rious.

God  help  us  to  be  true  and  faithful
to  the  cause  that  He  has  established,
that  in  the  end  we  may  lie  permitted
to  sit  down  with  him  and  His  Son  in
His  Kingdom,  is  my  prayer  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,  Feb.  1,

1885.


REPORTED  BY  JOHN  IRVINE.

VISIT  TO  THE  SOUTH — PERSECUTION  IN  ARIZONA — AN  AMERICAN  SIBE-
RIA PERSECUTIONS  IN  MISSOURI  AND  ILLINOIS  NOT  THE  RESULT

OF  POLYGAMY  —  AFFECTING  REFERENCE  TO  THE  MARTYRDOM  OF
JOSEPH  AND  HYRUM— JUDGMENT  BEGINS  AT  THE  HOUSE  OF  GOD—
No  MAN  HAS  A  RIGHT  TO  ATTEMPT  TO  CONTROL  ANOTHER'S  fcELIEF
OR  CONSCIENCE  —  Ex  Post  Facto  APPLICATION  OF  THE  EDMUNDS
LA\V  —  ATTEMPTS  OF  THE  SPEAKER  TO  CONFORM  TO  THE  LAW  AS
FAR  AS  POSSIBLE  —  OUTRAGES  HEAPED  UPON  THE  LATTER-DAY
SAINTS— NO  ONE  EVER  PUNISHED,  ACCORDING  TO  LAW,  FOR  KILL-
ING A  MORMON  THE  SAINTS  COUNSELED  TO  ENDURE  THEIR
AFFLICTIONS,  TAKE  CARE  OF  THEMSELVES,  AND  SERVE  GOD —
CONCLUSION.  <■''«.

I  have  been  very  much  interested
in  the  remarks  made  by  Brother
Erastus  Snow,  who  has  addressed
ns.


These  are  precious  principles
which  only  the  Saints  know  how
to  comprehend  and  appreciate.  We-
are  told  "that  the  natural  man.


perceive  th  not  the  things  of  God,
neither  can  he  know  them,  for  they
are  spiritually  discerned,"  and  there-
fore those  outside  of  that  influence
and  spirit  which  is  communicated  to
the  Saints  of  the  Most  Hi  eh,
through  obedience  to  the  Gospel
of  the  Son  of  God,  find  it  very  diffi-
cult to  understand  them.  But  we
comprehend  them,  because  God  has
given  unto  us  His  Spirit,  which  takes
of  the  things  of  God,  and  shows
them  unto  us,

I  and  a  few  others  have  been  away
from  here  for  some  time,  visiting
among  our  southern  brethren  ;
Brother  Snow,  who  has  just  spoken
to  you,  was  one  of  the  party.  It
appears  rather  an  inclement  season
of  the  year  to  go  on  a  journey  of  that
kind  ;  but  circumstances  seemed  to
make  it  necessary  that  we  should  go
and  look  after  the  interests  of  the
people,  socially  and  politically  ;  for
notwithstanding  our  religions  ideas,
-we  still  have  certain  rights,  privileges
and  immunities,  which  belong  to  us
as  individuals  and  as  citizens  of  the
United  States,  in  common  with
others,  And  seeing  that  things
were  quite  loose  in  those  far-off
settlements,  and  that  men  and  their
families  were  being  subjected  to
various  kinds  of  outrage,  usurpation
and  imposition,  iu  many  instances
under  the  form  of  law.  it  seemed
necessary  that  somebody  should
attend  to  these  matters,  and  [thought
it  best  for  me  to  go,  in  company  with
others  of  our  brethren,  to  ascertain
what  was  the  true  position  of  affairs,
and  to  give  such  counsel  as  the  cir-
cumstances might  demand.  We
found  that  a  great  many  outrages
had  been  perpetrated  upon  many  of
our  brethren ;  that  they  had  been
dealt  with  contrary  to  law,  and  in
violation,  as  lias  been  referred  to,  of
the  rules  of  jurisprudence  governing
such  matters  ;  that  a  vindictive  and


persecuting  spirit  had  been  mani-
fested, and  that  several  of  the  breth-
ren had  been  sent  off  to  a  distant
land  from  their  own.  I  did  not
know  but  that  they  were  without  a
prison  in  Arizona,  when  I  heard  of
these  things,  and  that  therefore
they  had  sent  a  number  of  honor-
able men  who  differed  from  them,  in
their  religious  sentiments  off  to
Detroit.  I  hail  these  things  inquired
into  and  found  they  had  a  good
Penitentiary  in  Arizona,  and  that
there  was  no  necessity  for  any  such
outrage  as  this  to  be  perpetrated
upon  decent  men.  I  was  sorry  to
find  that  things  had  been  conducted
iu  this  unusual  and  vindictive  man-
ner, and  without  any  ostensible  rea-
son for  such  extra- judicial  acts.
Not  only  because  injustice  had  been
heaped  upon  honorable  men,  but
also  because  of  the  position  in  which
it  places  the  nation  which  was  once
the  pride  and  glory  of  all  lovers  of
freedom  and  equal  rights,  and  boasted
of  as  being  n  the  laud  of  the  free,  the
home  of  the  brave,  and  an  asylum
for  the  oppressed."  These  foolish
men  are  now  seeking  to  carry  out
the  enormities  that  existed  among
what  was  called  the  civilization  and
intelligence  of  ancient  barbarism,
then,  as  now,  under  the  name  of
Christianity,  and  other  euphonious
appellations  which  are  common  to
us,  and  that  we  ore  well  ac-
quainted with.  I  was  in  hopes  that
things  were  not  so  bad  as  they  were
represented  to  be,  but  I  found  that
I  was  mistaken  in  that  matter,  'and
I  was  sorry  to  find  myself  so  mis-
taken.

In  relation  to  this  anomalous  form
of  proceeding  they  are  now  copying
the  example  of  Russia,  w  hich  is  gen-
erally considered  an  arbitrary  gov-
ernment, and  where  despotism  has
been  suppose- 1  to  reign  supreme  ;
they  have  in  that  nation  a  place


150


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


callled  Siberia,  to  which  they  banish
men,  under  a  despotic  rule,  without
much  formality  of  trial  I  was  hardly
prepared  to-day  to  suppose  that  we
needed  an  Americau  Siberia  under
the  form  and  in  the  name  of  liberty
and  the  rights  of  men.  But  this  is
the  fact.  We  have  here  in  America
to-day  an  American  Siberia  in  De-
troit, to  which  place,  upwards  of
two  thousand  miles  from  their  homes,
men  are  banished  fora  term  of  years;
and  what  for  1  Because  they  have
the  temerity  to  worship  God  accord-
ing to  the  dictates  of  their  own  con
science,  and  cannot  fall  down  and
worship  before  the  Moloch  of  an
effete  Christianity.

These  extraordinary  proceedings
that  have  been  going  on  in  this  Terri-
lory,  in  Arizona  and  in  other  places,
simply  exhibit  the  very  principle
that  Brot  her  Snow  has  been  speaking
of*  I  need  not  tell  you  about
affairs  that  have  transpired  here.
You  are  quite  as  well  acquainted
with  them  as  I  am,  and  ought  to  be
better  :  for  I  have  been  away  from
here  for  about  four  weeks  visiting
the  Saints  in  our  southern  settle-
ments, and  we  have  hail  a  most
pleasant  visit.  Outside  of  these
extraordinary  proceedings,  we  found
the  people  prospering  very  well,  with
pleasant  homes  and  bright  prospects
before  them.  We  had  with  us  several
of  our  best  brethren,  and  we  visited
many  of  our  settlements  in  that  dis-
trict of  country,  the  residents  of
winch  were  very  much  gratified  at
our  appearance  in  their  midst,  and
for  the  counsels  thej  received.  But
I  found  that  such  had  been  the  out-
rages committed  that  it  was
impossible  almost  for  any  man
standing  in  an  honorable  position  to
maintain  his  position  unless  he  broke
the  law  by  resisting  the  officers,  and
they  thought  it  not  prudent  to  do
so,  and  so  did  I. It  may  suit  others


to  violate  the  law,  to  trample  upon
human  rights,  and  desecrate  the
sacred  term  of  liberty,  and  this  is
frequently  done  by  the  arbiters  and
minions  of  the  law  in  the  name  of
justice ;  but  we  profess  to  be  gov-
erned by  higher,  by  nobler  and  more
exalted  principles,  and  to  move  on
a  higher  plane  ;  and  if  Jesus  could
a  fiord  to  endure  the  attacks  of  sin-
ners against  Himself,  we,  if  we  have
the  Gospel  that  we  profess  to  have,
ought  to  be  able  to  endure  a  little
of  the  same  thing,  There  is  nothing
new  in  these  affairs,  nothing  strange
in  this  at  all.  Many  of  you  have
had  much  to  do  with  these  matters.
Some  of  these  grey-headed  men  that
I  see  before  me  know  a  little  more
about  those  matters  than  some  of
the  younger  portion  do.  Many  of
you  have  been  driven  from  your
homes,  robbed  of  your  property,  dis-
possessed of  your  possessions  aud
had  to  flee  from  your  homes  to  these
mountain  valleys,  and  seek  an  asylum
anions  the  red  savages  which  was
denied  you  by  your  so  called  Chris-
tian brethren.  Before  you  came
here  you  were  banished  from  the
State  of  Missouri  into  the  State
of  Illinois,  What  for?  Because
you  had  the  audacity  to  worship  God
according  to  the  dictates  of  your
ow  n  consciences,  I  have  had  to  flee
from  blood-thirsty  bandits  time  and
time  again.  Brother  Snow  had  to
do  it,  and  many  of  you  grey-headed
tupu  and  women  have  had  to  do  it.
What  fori  Because  of  polygamy?
No,  there  was  no  such  thing  then
alleged,  \\  hat  for  ?  Because  you
had  the  hardihood,  in  this  laud  of
freedom,  to  worship  God  according
to  the  dictates  of  your  own  con-
sciences. For  this  crime  you  had
to  leave  your  homes,  and  you  were
despoiled  and  robbed  and  plun-
dered, and  had  to  flee  as  exiles  into
another  land. I  had  to  do  it,  you


JUDGMENTS  OF  THE  LORD,


in


have  had  to  do  it.  You  fled  from
Missouri  to  Illinois,  ami  then  from
Illinois  to  tins  land,  and  why?  Why
did  you  leave  Illinois  and  come  litre?
Di<l  you  injure  anybody  ]  No.
They  killed  your  Prophers,  and  I
saw  them  marly  red,  and  was  shot  .
most  unmercifully  myself,  under  the
pledge  of  protection  from  the  Gov-
ernor,  and  they  thought  they  had
killed  me  ;  hut  I  am  alive  yet  by  the
grace  of  God  (sensation).  Why  had
you  to  leave  ?  Because  they  mur- !
dered  your  Prophets,  'and  wanted  to
possess  themselves  of  your  property;
murder  and  spoliation  generally  go  '
together.  And  because  they  killed
them,  they  accused  you  of  doing
some  wrong,  said  you  must  leave
your  homes,  and  there  was  nobody
found  in  all  that  wide  land  to  cheek
the  outran 's  of  those  re<l -handed
assassins  to  administer  justice
and  to  preserve  you  in  your  rights.
I  do  not  know  any  other  reason  ;  I
never  did  know  any  other,  and
never  expect  to  be  informed  uf  any
other.

The  history  of  these  tilings  is  quite
familiar  to  you  as  Latter-day  Saints,
and  you  do  not  think  it  anything
strange.  Some  of  our  young  people
think  *hat  the  present  proceedings
are  very  remarkable.  But  many  of
us,  grey-headed  folks,  have  seen
plenty  of  such  proceedings,  and  have
had  many  experiences  of  this  kind  ;
they  are  nothing  new  to  us  at  all.
And  did  we  ever  expect  them  to  get
better?  We  have  not  so  under
stood  it.  We  are  told  in  the  Scrip-
tures, and  we  have  kept  teaching  it
all  the  while,  that  44  the  wicked
would  grow  worse  and  worse,  de-
ceiving and  being  deceived,"  That
is  doctrine  which  I  have  believed  in
for  the  last  50  years  and  I  have  had
a  good  deal  of  testimony  and  practi
cal  confirmation  on  that  point.  We
expect  that  these  things  will  tran-


spire. We  have  been  told  about*,
secret  organizations,  that  should
exist,  and  they  are  beginning*  to
permeate  these  United  States,  and
are  laying  the  foundation  for  disrup-
tion, disintegration  and  destruction.
Iw  is  not  necessary  that  Cuugresn
and  the  Judiciary  should  set  exam-
ples of  tyranny  and  violation  of
Constitutional  law,  and  attack  the
fundamental  principles  of  free
govern  met  it  and  the  rights  of  man  ;
for  there  is  plenty  of  that  kind  of
spirit  ahroad  ;  yet  men  who  profess
to  be  the  conservators  of  the  peace
and  the  maintainers  of  law  join  in
these  nefarious,  unholy,  tyrannical
and  oppressive  measures.  There
are  any  number  who  are  ready  to  fol-
low in  their  footsteps,  and  the  whole
n  a t i  01 1 1  o-  d  ay  is  s  t a  ud  i  n  ^r  una  volcano ;
hut  they  do  not  seem  to  comprehend
it.  Well,  are  we  surprised  ?  I  am
not.  It  is  strictly  in  accordance
with  my  faith  :  it  is  strictly  in  ac-
cordance with  the  Old  Testament
Scriptures;  and  it  is  strictly  in
accordance  with  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon ;  it  is  strictly  in  accordance
with  the  revelations  given  to  us  by
Joseph  Smith,  and  all  these,  events
that  have  heen  predicted  will  most
assuredly  transpire.  But  I  suppose
it  is  necessary  that  "judgment
should  first  begin  at  the  house  of
God,"  and  if  it  does,  u  where  will
the  wicked  and  the  ungodly  appear,"
when  it  comes  upon  them?  We  aie
told  that  the  wicked  shall  slay  the
wicked.  We  need  not  trouble  our-
selves about  the  affairs  of  the  nations,
tiie  Lord  will  manipulate  them  in  His
own  way.  I  feel  full  of  sympathy
for  the  nation  in  which  we  live,  and
for  other  nations,  in  consequence  of
the  troubles  with  which  they  are
beset  and  which  are  now  threatening
them  ;  yet  they  do  not  seem  to  com-
prehend the  position.  I  know  a
little  of  some  of  the  tilings  that  will


152


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES,


transpire  among  them,  and  I  feel
sorry.  Do  you  feel  sorry  for  your-
self 1  Not  at  all?  not  at  all,  Do  you
feel  sorry  for  your  people  ?  Not  at
all,  not  at  all.  The  Lord  God  has
revealed  unto  us  great  and  eternal
principles  which  reach  beyond  this
earth  into  the  eternal  heavens,  and
which  have  put  us  in  possession  of
light  and  truth  ami  intelligence,  and
promises  and  blessings  that  the  world
are  ignorant  of  ami  do  not  and  cannot
comprehend.  I  feel  every  day  to
bless  the  name  of  the  God  of  Israel,
and  feel  like  shouting,  "  Hosanna  !
Hosanna  !  !  Hosanna  !  !  !  to  the
God  of  Israel,  Amen  ami  Amen/1
Who  will  rule  among  the  nations  of
the  earth,  and  manipulate  things
according  to  the  counsel  of  His  own
will.  These  are  my  feelings  in  re-
gard  to  these  matters.  But  then  I
feel  interested  in  the  welfare  of  my

-if

brethren  and  sisters,  and  when  I  see
their  rights  interfered  with  and
trampled  ruthlessly  under  foot,  I
feel  that  there  is  something  at  work
that  ought  not  to  be,  and  yet  that  is
quite  necessary  to  teach  us  some  of
the  principle;*  of  human  nature,  that
we  may  be  able  to  discern  between
the  good,  the  virtuous,  the  upright
and  the  holy  ;  and  the  impure,  the
foolish,  the  vindictive,  the  corrupt,
the  lascivious,  and  those  who  are
trampling  under  foot  the  laws  and
principles  of  eternal  truth,  God
has  revealed  unto  us  certain  princi-
ples pertaining  to  the  future  which
men  may  take  objection  to+  He  has
revealed  unto  us  certain  principles
pertaining  to  the  perpetuity  of  man
and  of  woman  ;  pertaining  to  the
sacred  rights  and  obligations  which
existed  from  the  beginning;  ami
He  has  told  us  to  obey  these  laws.
The  nation  tells  us,  "  If  yon  do  we
will  persecute  you  and  proscribe
you/'  Which  shall  we  obey?  I
would  like  to  obey  and  place  myself


in  subjection  to  every  law  of  man.
What  then  ]  Am  I  to  disobey  the
law  of  God  ?  Has  any  man  a  right
to  control  my  conscience,  or  your
conscience,  or  to  tell  me  I  shall  be-
lieve this  or  believe  the  other,  or
reject  this  or  reject  the  other  ?  No
man  has  a  right  to  do  it.  These
principles  are  sacred,  and  the  fore-
fathers of  this  nation  felt  so  and  so
proclaimed  it  in  the  Constitution  of
the  United  States,  and  said  44  Con-
gress shall  make  no  law  respecting
an  establishment  of  religion,  or
prohibiting  the  free  exercise  thereof/1
ISow,  I  believe  they  have  violated
that,  and  have  violated  their  oaths,
those  that  have  engaged  in  these
things  and  passed  that  law,  and
those  that  are  seeking  to  carry  it
out.  Congress  and  the  President
of  tire  United  States  and  the  Judi-
ciary, and  all  administrators  of  the
law  are  as  much  bound  by  that  in-
strument as  I  am  and  as  you  are,
and  have  sworn  to  maintain  it
inviolate.  It  is  for  them  to  settle
these  matters  between  themselves
and  their  God-  That  is  my  faith  in
relation  to  this  matter.  Yet  by  their
action  they  are  interfering  with  my
lights,  my  liberty  and  my  religion,
and  with  those  sacred  principles
that  bind  me  to  my  God,  to  my
family,  to  my  wives  and  my  children ;
and  shall  I  be  recreant  to  all  these
noble  principles  that  ought  to  guide
and  govern  men  ?  Nof  Never !
No,  never  !  NO,  NEVEK  !  I
can  endure  more  than  I  have  done,
and  all  that  God  will  enable  me  to
endure,  I  can  die  for  the  truth  ;  but
I  cannot  as  an  honorable  man  dis-
obey my  God  at  their  behest,  forsake
my  wives  and  my  children,  and
trample  these  holy  and  eternal  obli-
gations under  foot,  that  God  has
given  me  to  keep,  and  which  reach
into  the  eternities  that  are  to  come.
I  won't  do  it,  so  help  me,  God


INTERVIEW  WITH  MR,  PIERREPONT,


153


[Here  the  speaker  vigorously  struck
the  book  on  the  desk,  and  the  large
audience  responded  with  a  loud
"  Amen,"  ]  The  Constitution  ex-
pressly says  that  no  law  shall  be
passed  impairing  the  obligation  of
contracts.  But  we  have  entered
into  covenants  aud  contracts  in  our
most  sacred  places,  and  that,  too,  in
many  instances,  before  there  was
any  law  prohibiting  the  same,  and
yet  the  attempt  is  now  being  made
to  give  the  Edmunds  law  an  ex  post
facto  application  and  to  punish  us
for  these  contracts  which  were  not
criminal,  even  from  the  standpoint
of  our  enemies,  at  the  tirtie  they
were  formed.  I  myself  married
my  wives  long  before  there  was  any
law  upon  the  subject,  and  many  of
you  did  the  same,  yet  by  an  post
Judo  application  of  laws  since  enacted
the  attempt  is  now  made  to  punish
us  as  criminals,  I  have  never  broken
any  law  of  these  United  States,  ami
I  presume  that  some  of  you,  whom
our  enemies  now  seek  to  criminate
an*l  draij  into  court  as  violators  of
law,  can  say  the  same.  Under  the
present  system  of  things  in  this
Territory,  harlotry  ami  adultery  are
vindicated  sustained  and  unblush
ingly  protected,  ami  honorable  and
virtuous  wedlock  is  trampled  upon,
condemned  and  punished.  Well,
what  will  you  do  \  I  will  obey  every
Constitutional  law  so  far  as  God
gives  me  ability.  What  else  will
you  do?  1  will  meet  these  men  as
far  as  I  can  without  violating  princi-
ple, and  I  have  done  it*  When  this
infamous  Edmunds  law  was  passed,
I  saw  that  there  were  features  in  that
which  were  contrary  to  law,  violative
of  tiie  Constitution,  contrary  to
justice  and  the  rights  and  the  free-
dom of  mem  But  I  said  to  myself
I  will  let  that  law  take  its  course  ;
I  will  place  myself  in  accordance  with
it,  so  far  as  I  can. Did  I  do  it  1


I  did-  I  remember  talking  to  Mr.
Pierrepont,  wdio  was  Attorney  Gen-
eral under  President  Grant's  admin-
istration. He  with  his  son  called
upon  me.  They  dined  with  me,  and
perhaps  I  can  explain  my  views  on
this  subject  by  repeating  our  con-
versation as  well  as  any  other  way,
I  have  a  sister  keeping  my  house  for
me— the  Gardo  House,  When  Mr,
Pierrepont  came  in,  I  said  :

"  Mr.  Pierrepont,  permit  me  to
introduce  you  to  my  sister,  who  is
my  house  keeper*  It  is  not  lawful
for  us  to  have  wives  now.  And
when  the  Edmunds  law  was  passed
I  looked  carefully  over  the  document,
and  saw  that  if  I  was  to  continue  to
live  in  the  same  house  with  my  wives
that  I  should  render  myself  liable
to  that  law.  I  did  not  wish— al-
though I  considered  the  law  in-
famous— to  be  an  obstructionist,  or
act  the  part  of  a  Fenian,  or  of  a
Nihilist,  or  of  a  Kuklux,  or  com-
munist, or  Molly  Maguire,  or  any  of
those  secret  societies  that  are  set  on
foot  to  produce  the  disintegration
of  society  and  disturb  the  relations
tli  at  ought  to  exist  be  ween  man  and
man.  between  man  and  woman,  or
man  and  his  God.  I  desired  to
place  myself  in  obedience  or  in  as
close  conformity  as  practicable  to
the  law,  and  thought  1  would  wait
and  see  what  the  result  would  be  ;
and  that  if  the  nation  can  stand
these  things  I  can  or  we  can.  These
are  my  feelings.  Men  and  nations
and  legislator*  tftten  act  foolishly,
and  do  things  that  are  unwise,  and
it  is  not  proper  that  a  nation  should
be  condemned  for  the  unwise  actions
of  some  few  men.  Therefore  I
have  sought  to  place  myself  in  ac-
cord with  that  law.  I  said  to  my
wives  :  (i  We  are  living  in  this
building  together.  We  were  quite
comfortably  situated,  and  we  might
so  have  continued,  but  I  said  to  them


tli.it  urnler  the  circumstances  it  will
be  better  for  me  or  for  vou  to  leave

if

tin*  place  ;  you  can  take  your  choice.
They  had  their  homes  down  here
which  they  now  inhabit  ;  which  were
quite  comfortable.  So  I  said  to
them,  you  can  go  there  and  I  will
stay  here,  or  you  can  .stay  at  the
Gardo  House  arid  I  will  go  there  or
somewhere  else ;  fori  wish  to  con*
form  to  this  Edmunds  law  as  much
as  I  can,"  fM

1  am  always  desirous  to  let  every-
thing have  its  perfect  working.  We
talk  sometimes  about  patience  hav-
ing its  perfect  work.  If  we  have
laws  passed  against  us  I  like  to  see
them  ha ve  a  fair  opportunity  to
develop  and  see  what  the  result  will
be.  These  were  my  feelings  then,
and  t  hey  are  my  feelings  to-day.

Well,  do  you  think,  then,  that  the
people  have  been  outraged  I  I  most
certainly  do.  The  usage  has  been
in  all  legal  trials  among  all  civilized
nations  to  presume  that  all  men  are
innocent  until  proven  guilty  ;  hut
we  now  have  test  oaths  introduced,
which  is  another  violation  of  the
Constitution  and  by  which  an  at-
tempt is  being  made  to  hold  all  men
guilty  until  they  prove  themselves
innocent.  Again  :  there  is  a  usage
which  has  existed  among  the
civilized  nations,  and  in  this  nation
also,  that  a  man  must  be  tried  by  a
jury  of  his  peers,  selected  from  the
vicinage,  hut  the  juries  selected  fur
our  courts  are  composed  to-day  of
our  bitter  persecutors  and  our  most
relentless  enemies,  and  in  many
instances  selected  from  the  lowest
and  most  debased  men  who  can  be
found  or  picked  up  from  the  gutters*
We  also  have  another  class  of  courts
improvised  for  the  occasion  in  the
shape  of  "  IT,  S.  Commissioners'
court*,"  which  are  operated  and
run  after  the  order  of  the  ancient
notorious "Star  Chamber.'1  Such


institutions  provoke  the  contempt
of  all  honorable  men,  and  the  parties
assuming  such  offices  place  them-
selves in  a  position  to  be  despised
of  their  fellows,  I  might  enumerate
many  other  outrages,  but  time  will
not  permit  on  this  occasion.  No
man's  liberties  are  safe  under  such
administration.  What  will  be  the
result?  The  result  will  he  that
those  that  sow  the  wind  will  reap
the  whirlwind.  When  men  begin  to
tear  down  the  barriers  and  tamper
with  the  fundamental  principles
and  institutions  af  onrcountry,  they
are  playing  a  very  dangerous  game,
ami  are  severing  the  bonds  wnich
hold  society  together,  and  the  begin-
ning of  these  irregularities  is  like
the  letting  out  of  water  The  next
step  that  followed  the  Edmunds  Act
was  the  introduction  of  a  test  oath.
The  legislation  already  provided
was  not  good  enough  for  some  of  our
officials  here  and  another  portion  of
the  Constitution  must  be  broken  to
introduce  a  test  oath  without  any
authority.  I  think  this  was  intro-
duced by  our  Governor,  Then
comes  another  class  of  men  called
Commissioners,  rarher  a  new  idea
in  American  Government.  Yet
it  was  thoujjit  necessary  that  ex-
traordinary operations  should  be
entered  into  in  relation  to  the
Mormons.  Why  1  Because  it  is
necessary  that  they  should  be  dealt
with  differently  from  anybody
else.  %;  M  »

Now,  I  have  seen  some  of  my
brethren  shut  to  pieces  in  cold  blood
and  under  the  protection  of  the
State  Government,  and  the  promise
of  the  Governor  made  to  myself  and
Dr.  John  M.  Bernhisel,  who  is  some-
time ago  dead.  In  Missouri  a  great
deal  of  that  thimj  was  done.  In
Georgia  lately,  and  in  Tennessee  acts
of  the  same  kind  have  been  perpe-
trated. Now,  I  want  to  know  if


t


RELIGIOUS  PERSECUTION  IN  FREE  AMERICA,


155


anybody  can  tell  me — bere  is  a  large
congregation,  and  many  thousands
of  you  acquainted  with  our  history —
I  want  to  know  if  any  one  of  you
can  tell  me  of  any  individual  that
was  ever  punished  according  to  law
for  killing  a  Mormon.  Speak  it  out,
if  you  know  it.  I  do  not  know  of
any  such  thing.  Brother  Snow  says
there  is  not  an  instance  on  record.
Well,  I  would  rather  he  on  the  side
of  the  Mormons  in  that  case  than  on
the  side  of  those  who  are  their  per-
secutors and  murderers,  for  they
have  got  something  to  atone  fur
yet,  which  we  have  not  under  those
circumstances.  We  have  got  through
with  our  part  of  it.  The  other  is  not
through  with  yet.  There  are  eternal
principles  of  justice  and  equity  that
exist  in  the  bosom  of  God,  and  He,
in  His  own  time,  will  manipulate
these  things  according  to  the  conn-
sel  of  His  own  will ;  and  with  what
measure  men  mete,  as  sure  as  God
lives,  it  will  be  measured  to  them
again,  pressed  down  and  running
over.

Very  well,  what  would  you  advise
us  to  do?  Are  we  suffering  any
wrongs  1  Yes,  Well,  what  would
you  do  ?  I  would  do  as  I  said  some
tinTe  ago.  If  you  were  out  in  a
storm,  pull  up  the  collar  of  your  coat
and  button  yourself  up,  and  keep  the
cold  out  until  tiie  storm  blows  past
This  storm  will  blow  past  as  others
have  done ;  and  you  will  see  that
many  of  the  miserable  sneaks  who
are  active  in  those  measures,  and
who  are  crawling  about  your  doors,
and  trying  to  spy  into  your  houses,
etc.,  will  be  glad  to  crawl  into  their
holes  by-and-by.  Well,  what  will
you  do  1  Get  angry  1  No,  not  at
all  Let  these  men  have  their  day
and  pursue  their  own  course  ;  we
will  protect  ourselves  from  them  as
well  as  we  can.  Why,  some  of  our
folks  in  the  South  were  actually  try«


ing  to  seek  an  asylum  in  another  land
away  from  the  persecutions  of  free
America,  and  I  do  not  know  but
that  we  shall  have  a  lot  of  pilgrim
Fathers  again  here  in  this  country,
fleeing,  not  from  England  by  way  of
Holland,  nor  from  France,  nor  from
any  of  those  countries  where  they
used  to  persecute  people  and  proscribe
them  for  their  religion,  but  from
America,  "  The  land  of  the  free,
the  home  of  the  brave,  and  the  asy-
lum for  the  oppressed" — fleeing  from
there  because  of  their  religious  sen-
men  ts.  What  an  idea  !  Who
could  have  thought  of  it?  People
say  that  history  repeats  itself.  It
is  so  doing  in  our  day,  Well,  what
would  you  do?  Observe  the  laws
as  much  as  you  can,  Bear  with  these
indignities  as  much  as  you  can.  But
it  would  not  be  well  for  these  men
to  perform  their  antics  anywhere
else  than  among  the  Saints,  or  they
would  dangle  to  the  poles,  lots  of
them,  by  the  neck,  if  they  attempted
any  such  acts.  No  people  would
endure  these  tilings  as  the  Latter-
day  Saints  do.  Will  you  endure
them  1  Yes,  a  little  longer.  Wait
a  little  longer  And  after  you  have
borne  with  a  good  deal,  then  endure
"as  seeing  Him  that  is  invisible,"
and  cultivate  those  principles  that
Brother  Snow  has  so  beautifully  set
before  us  and  feel,  li  Blessed  are  ye,
when  men  shall  revile  you,  and  per-
secute you,  and  shall  say  all  manner
of  evil  against  you  falsely,  for  my
sake*  Rejoice  and  be  exceedingly
glad  for  great  is  your  reward  in
heaven  ;  for  so  persecuted  they  the
Prophets  which  were  before  you."
Well,  what  would  you  dol  Would
you  resent  these  outrages  and  break
the  heads  of  the  men  engaged  in
them,  and  spill  their  blood?  No.
Avoid  them  as  much  as  you  possibly
can — just  as  you  would  wolves,  or
hyenas,  or  crocodiles^  or  snakes,  or


15G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


any  of  these  beasts  or  reptiles  ;  j
avoid  them  as  much  as  you  can,  ami
take  care  they  do  not  bite  you.
{Laughter.] And  get  out  of  the
way  as  much  as  you  can. What  ?
won't  you  submit  to  the  dignity  of
the  law. Well,  I  would  if  "the  law
would  only  be  a  little  dignified.  But
when  we  see  the  ermine  bedraggled
in  the  mud  and  mire,  and  every
principle  of  justice  violated,  it  be-
hooves  men  to  take  care  of  them
selves  as  best  they  may, That  is
what  I  have  told  people  while  I  have
been  in  the  south — to  take  care  of
their  liberties,  to  put  their  trust  in
the  living  God,  to  obey  every  con-
stitutional law,  and  to  adhere  to  all
correct  principles. But  when  men
tamper  with  your  rights  arid  with
your  liberties,  when  the  cities  are
full  of  spies  and  the  lowest  and
meanest  of  men  are  set  to  watch
and  dog  your  footsteps  ;  when  little
children  are  set  in  array  against  their
fathers  and  mothers,  and  women  and
children  are  badgered  before  courts,  !
and  made  to  submit,  unprotected,
to  the  gibes  of  libertines  and  corrupt
men  ;  when  wives  and  husbands  are
pitted  against  each  other  and  threat-
ened with  pains,  penalties  and  im-
prisonment, if  they  will  not  disclose
that  which  among  all  decent  people  I
is  considered  sacred,  and  which  no  !
man  of  delicacy,  whose  sensibilities
had  not  been  blunted  by  low  ass o eta- :
tions,  would  ever  ask  ;  when  such  a
condition  of  affairs  exists,  it  is  no  ;
longer  a  land  of  liberty,  and  it  is
-certainly  no  longer  a  land  of  equal
rights,  and  we  must  take  care  of
ourselves  as  best  we  may,  and  avoid
being  caught  in  any  of  their  snares.
I  cannot  think  that  this  crusade  is
aimed  entirely  at  us  ;  from  many  ;
-circumstances  that  have  transpired,
I  have  been  led  to  believe  that  whilst
we  are  made  t  he  victims,  these  pro
•ceedings  are  introduced  as  a  political  \


ruse,  for  the  purpose  of  embarrassing
the  incoming  administration.  What
would  you  do? Would  you  fight
theml No. I  would  take  care  of
myself  as  best  I  can,  and  I  would
advise  my  brethren  to  do  the  same.
Would  you  resist  law  I No. As  I
said  before,  I  can  stand  it  if  they
can. It  is  for  us  to  do  what  is  right,
to  fear  God,  to  observe  His  laws, and
keep  His  commandments,  and  the
Lord  will  manage  all  the  rest.  But
no  breaking  of  heads,  no  bloodshed,
no  rendering  evil  for  evil. Let  us
try  and  cultivate  the  spirit  of  the
Gospel,  and  adhere  to  the  principles
of  truth. Let  us  honor  our  God,
and  be  true  to  those  eternal  princi-
ples which  God  has  given  us  to  hold
sacred. Keep  them  as  sacredly  as
you  would  the  apple  of  your  eye.
And  while  other  men  are  seeking  to
trample  the  Constitution  under  foot,
we  will  try  to  maintain  it. We  have
prophecies  something  like  this  some-
where ;  that  the  time  would  come
when  this  nation  would  do  as  they
are  now  doing — that  is,  they  would
trample  under  foot  the  Constitution
and  institutions  of  the  nation,  and
the  Killers  of  this  Church  would
rally  around  the  standard  and  main-
tain those  principles  which  were  in-
troduced for  the  freedom  and  pro-
tection of  men. We  expect  to  do
that,  and  to  maintain  all  correct
principle. I  will  tell  you  what  you
will  see  by  and  by. You  will  see
trouble,  trouble,  trouble  enough  in
these  United  States. And  as  I  have
said  before  I  say  to-day,  1  tell  you  in
the  name  of  God,  Woe  !  to  them
that  fight  acainst  Zion,  for  God  will
fight  against  them. But  let  us  be
on  the  side  of  human  liberty  and
human  rights,  and  the  protection  of
all  correct  principles  and  laws  and
government, and maintain  every
principle  that  is  upright  and  virtu-
ous and  honorable,  aud  let  the  world


MAORIS,  A  KINDRED  RACE  TO  THE  HAWAII  JANS


157


take  the  balance  if  they  want,  we
don't  want  it,  We  will  cleave  to
the  truth,  God  being  our  helper,  and
try  to  introduce  principles  whereby
the  will  of  God  will  be  done  on  earth
as  it  is  in  heaven.  And  we  will  obey
every  institution  of man  for  the


Lord's  sake  so  far  as  we  can  without
violating  our  consciences  and  doing
things  that  are  wrong  ami  improper.

God  bless  you  and  lead  you  in  the
paths  of  life,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


REMARKS BY ELDER GEORGE  REYNOLDS,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  CUi/,  Sunday  Afternoon^  March  -

29th,  1885.


;  REPORTED  BY JOHN  IRVINE/;


THE  WORK  OF  THE  LORD  IN  THE  SANDWICH  ISLANDS  AND  IN  NEW
ZEALAND — THE  INHABITANTS  OF  THESE  ISLANDS  PROBABLY  OFF-
SHOOTS OF  THE  NEPHITES  AND  LAM  AN  ITES,  AND  CONSEQUENTLY
OF  THE  BLOOD  OF  ISRAEL— THE  GENTILE  NATIONS  HAVE  MEASUR-
ABLY REJECTED  THE  GOSPEL,  HENCE  THEIR  DISUNION  AND  SCEPTI-
CISM— WE  CAN  ONLY  BE  UNITED  ON  THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  RIGHT-
EOUSNESS— IS  GOD  IS  OUR  ONLY  TRUST— WE  CANNOT  COMPRO-
MISE WITH  EVIL — OUR  MISSION  IS  TO  DO  GOOD — CAUSES  OF  OPPO-
SITION TO  THE  GOSPEL— EDUCATION  CAN  ONLY  MODIFY,  BUT  THE
HOLY  GHOST  CHANGES  THE  NATURE  OF  MAN— THE  PRINCIPLE  OF
REVELATION  DISTINGUISHES  US  FROM  THE  REST  OF  THE  WORLD
— THE  PATH  OF  DUTY  IS  THE  PATH  OF  SAFETf  AND  BLESSING.


I  stand  before  you  this  afternoon,
my  brethren  and  sisters,  with  the
desire  in  my  heart  that  while  I  do  so
I  may  speak  to  the  strengthening  of
the  faith  of  the  Saints  of  God,  and,
therefore,  I  crave  an  interest  in  your
faith  and  prayers,  that  whatever
time  I  occupy  I  may  do  so  in  a  way
and  manner  that  shall  tend  to  the
building  up  of  God's  kingdom  here
upon  the  earth.


We  have  been  interested  in  hear-
ing the  report  of  Brother  Edward
Partridge,  who  ha*  just  returned
from  a  mission  to  the  Sandwich  Is-
lands, where  the  work  of  the  Lord
has  been  received  for  many  years,
tit  *  very  gratifying  manner  by  the
remnant  of  the  house  of  Israel  who
dwell  thereon.  It  is  also  noticeable
that  the  Maoris,  a  people  of  a  kin_
dred  race  to  the  Hawaiian,  who  in"


138


JUL  UN  A  L  UK  DISCO  IF  K8*>


habit  the  inlands  of  New  Zealand,
many  hundred  miles  to  the  south-
ward in  the  Pacific  Ocean,  are  also
receiving  the  glad  tidings  of  the
Oospel  of  Christ  with  joy,  and  that
hundreds  are  there  being  added  to
the  Church  at  the  present  time.  It
has  long  been  the  belief  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  that  these  races
are  ntishoots  of  the  great  people  who
once  flourished  upon  this  continent;
who  were  drought  out  of  the  land
of  Jerusalem  under  Lehi,  Mulek
and  others,  and  who  have  inhabited
this  land  from  about  600  years  be-
fore Christ ;  that  people  whose  letn-
nants  are  now  found  scattered  far
and  wide  over  the  North  and  South
American  continents.  There  ap-
pears to  he  a  great  similarity  in  the
habits,  customs,  manners  and  lan-
guage of  the  natives  of  those  two
groups  of  islands  ;  which  similarity,
in  many  respects,  extends  to  some
of  the  races  that  inhabit  this  conti-
nent. And  for  these  and  other  rea-
sons we  believe  that  in  these  island-
ers Hows  the  blood  ol"  Israel  to  a  great
extent  ;  and  where  it  does,  those
who  are  thus  blessed  by  being  the
children  of  the  fathers  to  whom
the  promises  were  made,  as  races
receive  the  truths  of  the  Gospel
much  more  readily  and  apparently,
notwithstanding  their  many  weak-
nesses, cleave  unto  them  much  more
<levote*Hy  than  do  very  many  of  those
who  embrace  its  saving  principles
among  the  Gentile  nations.  It  would
seem  as  though  at  the  present
time  the  Gentile  nations  of  the  earth
were  turning  from  the  truths  of  the
Everlasting  Gospel ;  they  have
measurably  rejected  them  ;  and  the
€on sequence  is  we  find  to-day  that
there  is  an  increase  ol  scepticism,
that  there  is  an  increase  of  a  spirit
Oppose  !  to  iioud  or  der,  tu  ohedience,
to  taitlitand  tu  many  other  admirable
>b«acften*Uco  of  generations  gone


by.  The  present  is  an  age  of  unrest,
of  turmoil,  of  contention,  of  a  lack
of  faith,  not  only  in  religious  mat-
ters, but  it i  almost  everything  else.
We  may  be  said  to  be  living  in  a
period  of  transition,  and  that  tran-
sition does  not  always  appear  to  be
in  the  most  desirable  direction.  But
this  spirit  of  doubt  and  incredulity,
of  uncertainty  and  unrest  is  more
manifest  regarding  religious  subjects
than  any  otherquestions  that  attract
the  attention  of  mankind  ;  and  is
perhaps  mole  in atn test  in  those  na-
tious  to  whom  the  Gospel  has  been
preached  for  many  years  than  in  any
other  parts  of  the  world.  This  is
the  natural  result  of  the  course  the
people  of  those  countries  have  taken.
Haw  rig  rejected  the  principles  that
God  in  His  kindness  Iras  caused  to
he  revealed,  His  Spirit,  which  is  the
spirit  of  life,  light,  intelligence  and
truth,  is  of  necessity  measurably
withdrawn  from  them,  and  they  are
left  to  themselves  to  serve  God  as
best  they  may  when  they  will  not
serve  Him  as  He  requires.  The
consequence  is  division  and  subdi-
vision in  the  churches ;  for  every
mans  opinion  is  as  good  as  that  of
his  neighbor ;  and  there  remains  no
trustworthy,  much  less  infallible,
standard  by  which  to  guage  the
beliefs  of  mankind  ;  consequently
every  man  walks  in  his  own  way  and
professes  such  a  belief  as  best  suits
his  fancy.  But  with  us  it  is  differ-
ent. And  the  very  fac  that  we  are
united  with  legard  to  that  which
God  requires  at  our  hands  in  all
things  is  a  rock  of  offence  to  many  ;
it  is  regarded  as  an  evil  by  those  who
do  not  love  us  j  by  those  who  make
it  their  business  to  bring  evil  accu-
sations against  us.  Our  union  is  aa
opposite  condition  of  affairs  to  that
winch  exists  amort"  the  secU  in  the
Christian  world,  and  be  ng  contrary
they  imagine  ough  t  to  be  stigmatized*


NO  COMPROMISE  WITH  EVIL,


159


decried  and  derided. But  in  our
union  lies  our  strength  ;  because  we
Cannot  be  united  on  any  ot  her  prin-
ciple than  obedience  to  the  law  of
the  Lord. There  is  no  spirit  but  the
Spirit  of  the  Moat  High  God  that
will  make  this  people  one.  They
can  trust  in  no  one  but  in  God  our
Father  who  has  revealed  His  mind
and  will  to  them,  and  has  established
in  their  midst  the  principles  that  will
make  them  wise  unto  salvation,  if
they  will  hut  give  heed  to  them.  It
is  useless,  worse  than  useless,  for  us
to  attempt  to  bo  united  on  any
principle:  but  the  principle  of  right-
eousness and  godliness. We  can
find  no  union  in  doing  that  which
is  displeasing  in  the  sight  of  God  ;
we  can  find  no  union  in  following
any  course  other  than  that  which
God  lias  marked  out. We  cannot
be  united  in  anything  but  the  truth.
The  truth  will  not  only  make  us  free,
but  it  will  make  us  united,  and  we
cannot  be  united,  however  much  we
may  strive,  on  the  principles  of  error,
because  there  is  no  bond  of  union
in  them. There  is  only  one  path
that  leads  to  exaltation  ;  one  path
by  which  we  can  become  like  unto
our  Father  and  our  God,  and  if  we
ever  attain  to  that  which  we  are
Seeking — eternal  life  in  His  presence
— we  must  walk  in  the  path  which
He  has  marked  out,  and  in  no  other,
for  no  other  will  will  lead  us  back
into  His  presence. We  must  every
one  walk  in  that  path,  and  as  we
must  all  Widk  in  it,  therefore  we
must  be  united. Our  union  must
be  in  God,  our  trust  must  be  in  Him,
We  are,  I  presume,  from  present
circumstances,  learning  that  lesson
very  rapidly. 1  have  noticed  on
the  coins  of  this  nation  the  inscrip-
tion, u  In  God  we  trust/'  Perhaps
that  motto  may  have  been  applicable
at  the  time  it  was  first  placed  on  the
money  of  the  United  States,  but  at


present  it  does  not  appear  to  be  so;
for  this  nation  and  other  nations
seem  to  be  rapidly  losing  all  trust  in
God.  They  are  willing  to  trust  in
themselves,  in  their  own  strength,
in  their  own  wisdom,  in  their  own
ways,  in  their  own  methods  and
their  own  plans,  rather  than  trust  in
the  word  of  the  Lord,  for  that  the
great  majority  of  their  peoples  will
not  have.  But  we,  the  Latter-day
Saints,  are  learning  rapidly  that  we
can  trust  no  one,  save  God  our  Fa-
ther, and  those  whom  He  appoints
tn  he  His  representatives  upon  the
earth.  Let  u»  look  around  in  the
world*  What  do  we  find  today?
Is  there  any  power  upon  earth  to
which  we  can  look  for  succor  or  aid,
for  guidance  or  inspiration  under
the  circumstances  through  which
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  is  now
passing?  If  there  is  where  is  it?
Whereon  the  face  of  this  wide  world
can  we  look  for  sympathy,  for  help,
for  support]  We  cannot  outside
of  ourselves.  As  has  ever  been  the
case  those  that  are  not  for  us  are
against  us.  But  we  are  learning
the  lesson  that  God  is  with  us  ;  that
He  will  deliver  us  ;  that  this  is  His
kingdom  ;  and  the  nearer  we  live  to
linn  the  greater  will  be  the  deliver-
ances that  He  will  bring  to  pass  in
our  favor,

I  have  met  a  few  in  our  midst  who
seemed  to  have  an  idea  that  there
was  a  Gospel  of  comprom^e,  if  I
may  so  use  the  term,  that  might  be
advocated.  In  all  the  history  of  this
world,  from  its  creation  to  the
present,  I  have  never  read  of,  never
heard  of  the  time  when  God
Almighty  compromised  with  the
Evil  Cue  ;  when  he  was  willing  that
evil  should  have  a  place  in  the  midst
of  His  people  ;  when  He  was  witling
that  any  of  the  principles  of  eternal
truth  should  be  relinquished  by
those  of  His  sous  and  daughters,  to


I

JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES


whom  He  had  revealed  them.  No,
The  word  of  instruction,  the  word
of  revelation,  the  word  of  counsel
has  always  heen  for  man  to  live  by
every  word  that  proceeds  from  the
mouth  of  God  ;  to  keep  inviolate
the  ordinances  of  God  ;  to  preserve
the  principles  of  truth  and  right-
eousness intact,  and  never  to  con-
sider for  one  moment  that  man  can
gain  his  salvation  by  giving  up  or
resigning  any  principle  or  law  that
God  has  said  is  necessary  for  the
accomplishment  of  His  purposes,
which  purposes  we  understand  to
be  the  salvation  of  mankind  and  the
redemption  of  the  world.  Any  plan
less  than  the  one  devised  by  Him  is
imperfect ;  anything  else  will  not
save  the  first  one  of  us.  It  is  God's
law  and  God's  law  alone  that  will
deliver  Israel  from  his  enemies.
It  is  hy  perfect  confidence  in  the
word  of  the  Lord,  and  by  willing,
humble  obedience  to  all  His  require-
ments, accepting  all  His  providences
as  for  our  best  good,  that  we  shall
be  delivered.  Do  you  ever  recollect]
Have  you  ever  heard  of  a  time  in
any  age  or  dispensation  since  this
earth  first  rolled  forth  from  the
presence  of  God,  that  men  profess-
ing to  be  His  servants  have  gained
anything  in  this  life  or  for  the  next
by  faltering  in  their  obedience  to  the
requirements  of  heaven,  by  laying
aside  the  armour  (if  faith,  by  turning
from  that  which  they  had  espoused,
and  which  they  realized  to  be  of
God  ]  If  you  have  ever  heard
of  such  a  people,  if  you  have  ever
known  such  a  time,  your  reading
and  your  experience  have  been  dif-
ferent to  mine.  Judging  by  the
experience  of  the  Saints  in  the  past,
and  judging  by  our  own  experience
in  tins  dispensation — as  far  as  I
know  it  has  all  gone  to  prove  that
the  closer  we  cleave  to  the  Lord,  the
nearer  He  will  draw  unto  us,  the


grealer  will  be  the  manifestations
of  His  power  in  our  behalf,  and
the  sooner  will  be  our  triumph
over  those  who  seek  to  injure  us.

We  have  no  conflict  with  the
worhl  only  as  they  may  bring  it  upon
us,  We  are  the  friends  of  all  man-
kind. We  are  sent  forth  to  preach
life  and  salvation  to  every  soul  who
will  hearken  and  obey.  Our  mission
is  one  of  good  will  to  all  men  the
wide  world  over.  We  seek  the  hurt
or  injury  of  no  people  upon  the  face
of  the  earth.  The  principles  that
we  proclaim  are  those  which  the
Savior  Himself  taught  to  the  sons
and  daughters  of  mankind  when  He
was  here  upon  the  earth,  and  which
His  disciples  in  after  years  taught
also.  They  are  peace  on  earth  and
good  will  to  all  men.  Does  any  man
ever  injure  his  brother  or  his  sister
— be  they  members  of  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ,  or  of  any  church,
or  of  no  church  whatever — be  they
Christian,  Mahommedan,  heathen
or  Jew — by  following  the  teachings
which  God  has  given  through  His
servants  in  this  age  in  which  we  are
living  %  I  say  emphatically,  no;
under  no  circumstances  whatever*
The  Gospel  that  we  preach  will  do
all  men  good.  There  are  no  excep-
tions to  this  rule.  It  will  teach  KM
all  to  be  loving,  to  be  virtuous,  to
be  temperate;  it  will  teach  us  to
seek  to  live  near  unto  God,  that  we
may  become  godlike  ;  it  will  teach
us  to  treat  all  men  aright,  to  infringe
upon  the  privileges  or  rights  of
none,  but  to  teach  to  them  thoee
principles  that  will  make  tl^m  better
and  happier  here  on  the  e.ith,  an- 1
bring  to  them  eternal  salvation  it
the  world  to  come.

Then  why  are  we  maligned,  as
Brother  Partridge  has  spoken  of!
Why  are  we  hated  t  Why  are  we
misrepresented  ?  for  surely  there
never  were  people  who  were  more


EDUCATION  ONLY  WILL  NOT  CHANGE  MAN'S  NATURE. -  101


misrepresented  than  the  Latter-day
Saints.  1  will  tell  you,  it  is  because
the  day  approaches  when  Satan's
reign  upon  the  earth  will  be  brought
to  a  close.  He  knows  and  realizes
tins  fact  and  fills  the  hearts  of  those
over  whom  he  has  power  on  the  earth
with  hatred  towards  the  principles
that  the  servants  of  God  teach.
This  is  the  great  secret.  This  is  the
originating  cause  of  the  trouble.
But  then,  some  will  ask  why  Chris-
tians, believers  in  the  divine  mission
of  the  Son  of  God,  act  in  this  way
towards  us  J  Why  should  they
attempt  to  overthrow  that  which  we
claim  to  be  the  Gospel  of  Christ  ]
For  the  simple  reason  that  the  same
causes  produce  the  same  effects.
Whenever  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God  has  been  preached  upon  the
earth,  in  every  generation,  it  has
brought  forth  antagonism  from  the
great  majority  of  mankind,  no  mat-
ter whether  they  professed  to  worship
the  true  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  or  whether  they  did
not.  It  is  no  more  remarkable  that
those  who  call  themselves  Christians
should  oppose  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ  in  this  age  than  it  was  that
the  Jews,  who  claimed  to  be  the
children  of  Abraham,  should  oppose
those  same  principles,  in  that  which
is  commonly  called  the  Gospel  dispen-
sation, when  Christ  the  Son  of  God
Himself  was  here.  The  causes
are  the  same;  the  results  are  the
same  ;  men's  natures  are  the  same  ;
and  though  the  civilization  of  to-
day may  be  somewhat  different  from
the  civilization  of  former  ages,  it  has
not  changed  the  nature  of  mankind.
Men  today  as  in  ancient  times  are
governed  by  the  same  loves  and  the
same  hatreds  ;  by  the  same  antip-
athies and  the  same  prejudices  ;
they  are  influenced  by  the  same  spirit;
that  spirit  of  evil  which  reared  its
head  in  the  heavens  and  was  cast
No-  11.


down  upon  the  earth,  by  which
overthrow  the  warfare  was  trans-
ferred from  heaven  to  earth, — that
same  spirit  has  instigated  and
carried  on  and  continues  to  carry  on
the  same  warfare  against  the  truth
and  against  the  Kingdom  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  the  present  day.
Civilization  and  education  are  no
doubt  potent  factors  in  the  present
history  of  the  world  ;  but  mere  edu-
cation and  mere  civilization  do  not
cause  men  to  love  the  truth  as  it  is  in
Christ  Jesus,  any  better  than  they
did  in  former  times.  They  may  learn
philosophical  truths;  they  may  learn
scientific  truths  ;  they  may  be
educated  to  a  very  great  fineness,
and  to  a  very  great  extent  be  versed
in  the  learning  of  the  world  ;  hut  it
is  only  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  we
are  told  in  the  Scriptures,  that  man
can  understand  the  things  of  God,
and  the  best  educated  in  the  tilings
of  the  world  alone,  appear  to  be  no
better  aide  to  understand  the  thiuga
pertaining  to  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ  than  the  most  uneducated
who  are  equally  honest  in  their  efforts
to  serve  God,  or  equally  dishonest,
as  the  case  maybe.  Education  does
not  change  the  nature  of  men;  it
simply  develops  and  polishes  that
which  is  in  them  ;  it  makes  the  best
of  that  w  I  licit  there  is.  As  the  lime-
stone when  it  is  polished  is  not
changed  into  a  diamond,  but  remains
limestone  still,  though  it  is  more
beautiful  and  can  be  used  for  more
varied  purposes,  so  it  is  with  the  man
who  is  educated  in  the  learning  of
the  schools  only ;  his  nature  remains
the  same  but  the  most  is  made  of
him  j  but  when  a  man  receives  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  is  then  that
his  nature  is  changed.  He  learns
to  love  the  truth  ;  he  learns  to  seek
after  it,  he  understands  it.  He  sees
things  in  a  light  so  different  to  that
which  he  did  previously,  that  it  is

Vol  XXVI.


102


JOUKNAL OK JJJSt  UUKSKS


difficult  for  him  to  comprehend  how
it  was  possible  that  he  could  have
been  so  ignorant  and  so  blind  before
times.  The  reception  of  the  Spirit
of  God  i.-,  ms  we  understand  it,  a  new
birth.  We  are  born  to  things  etei  nul
when  we  receive  it.  It  purities  our
hearty  it  mlightens  our  minds  in
regard  Mi  the  things  of  (lod,  and
gives  us  that  knowledge,  that  testi-
mony, which  comes  to  all  tlio.se  who
listen  to  and  follow  its  dictates.
Herein  is  the  great  difference  between
us,  the  people  of  God,  the  Church  of
Je*us  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
and  the  people  and  the  churches  of
the  wo i  hi  We  have  this  testimony,
this  ki.i»wlcdg«  given  us  of  (J  or  I,
through  the  gift  and  power  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  that  none  others  possess.
Ami  this  goes  behind  all  argument,
all  assertion,  all  attempts  to  convince
us  that  we  are  wrong.  However
wise,  however  strong,  however  potent
the  arguments  of  the  world  may  he
in  their  own  estimation,  they  cannot
go  behind  the  God  given  testimony
that  we  po>$ess.  We  may  say  unto
them,  j appear  to  be  very  wise
in  your  own  conceit  with  regard  to
these  things  but  we  can  go  be-
yond at. 1 1  behind  all  your  arguments,
for  we  most  assuredly  know  that  that
which  ue  have  received  is  of  Got],
ami  join  arguments  amount  to
nothing  when  directed  against  that
which  \ie  are  satisfied  is  God  s  word.
And  U  e  nasou  is  because  we  have
each  of  us  the  word  of  the  Lord  for
ourselves;  it  is  a  constant  revelation
to  our  own  hearts  and  minds.  The
•word  ot  the  Lord  is  the  end  of  all
tcoiiti  overs}  as  far  as  we  are  concerned.

We  know  that  we  are  of  God" — to
use  the  expression  of  the  Apostle
John — c-  and  the  whole  world  lieth
in  w  i  eked  n  ess."  We  wish  to  God
it  were  not  so.  We  wish  they
could  see  a*  we  see.  We  wish
aliey  con iii  know  as  Ml  know.  We


wish  they  could  understand  as  we
understand  that  this  is  the  work  of
God,  and  that  He  has  no  pleasure  in

!  the  death  of  the  sinner,  but  desires
the  salvation  of  ail  His  children.

|  But  all  mankind  will  have  to  learn
as  we  have  had  to  learn  that  these
tilings  cat)  be  attained  only  by  an
obser  vance  of  the  word  and  will  of
God  ;  by  walking  in  that  straight

I  and  narrow  path  of  obedience  to
which  I  referred  a  short  time  ago.
That  is  the  only  way  by  which  they
can  obtain  this  knowledge  ;  it  is  the
only  way  that  we  obtained  it ;  and

jail  men  must  obey  the  truth,  for

!  the  love  of  the  truth,  or  the  testi-

I  mony  ot  Jesus  Christ  will  not
have  a  [dace  within  their  bosoms.
Other  motives  will  not  stand  the  test
of  God's  scrutiny.  In  this  testimony,

I  as  I  have  said,  lies  the  great  differ-

I  ence  between  the  doctrine,  the
principles  and  faith  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  the  rest  of  the  world.
God  is  to  us  a  God  of  revelation  ;
of  constant  and  continued  revela-
tion, of  revelation  to-day  as  much  as
in  any  other  age  of  this  world's  his-
tory since  Adam  saw  its  prime.  "In
this  we  can  and  do  rejoice.1*  In  this
we  receive  streugth.  In  this  we
have  a  power  that  surprises  the
votaries  of  uninspired  creeds,  that
astonishes  unbelievers,  that  causes

|  the  world  to  wonder  how  in  the
midst  of  all  the  varied  circumstances
of  an  untoward  nature  we  have  to
pass  through,  we  can  remain  linn  in
our  faith,  firm  in  our  reliance  upon
the  beneficent  power  and  goodness
of  God.  It  is  because  we  know
that  this  is  His  work  ;  it  is  because
we  are  not  dependent  on  the  testi-
mony or  say  so  of  any  man  or  woman
— we  have  the  knowledge  in  our*
selves  that  He  will  deliver  us,  that

|  He  will  cause  the  wrath  of  man  to
praise  Him,  that  He  will  restrain
the  rest,  and  that  He  will  accomplish


T11E  PATH  OF  DUTY  IS  THE  PATH  OF  SAFETY,


good


all  His  purposes  in  His  own
time  and  according  to  His  own
methods*  Whatever  He  permits,
be  it  little  or  much,  will  be  for  the
best  good  of  those  who  put  their
trust  in  Him,  of  those  who  are  wil-
ling to  abide  by  His  laws,  and  who
are  desirous  of  doing  His  will  and
not  their  own.

This  principle  of  continuous
revelation  is  one  which  finds  great
opposition  from  the  wicked  when-  (
ever  it  is  taught.  We  find  there
are  many  ways  in  which  they  strive  ,
to  cut  off  the  voice  of  heaven.  Borne  I
stop  at  the  Hebrew  Scriptures ;
some  bring  revelation  to  au  end  with
the  New  Testament ;  others  will
admit  that  Joseph  Smith  was  in-
spired of  God,  but  say  that  with
him  it  eude  1 — that  the  Bible,  the
Book  of  Mormon,  and  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants  contain  all
the  word  of  the  Lord  that  we  shall
receive.  Well,  no  matter  where  it
ends,  it  is  all  of  the  same  spirit.
The  ohject  is  to  shut  out  the  voice  of
God  from  man  to-day,  to  close  tli*j
heavens  against  us,  to  prevent  us
who  are  now  living  from  receiving
the  word  and  will  of  God  forourselves
in  this  year  of  God's  grace.  But  the
tru|li  is  that  God  will  continue  to
-speak  to  His  people  through  His
servants  a  in  I  in  such  ways  as  may
seem  to  Uim  good,  as  long  as  His
Church  is  on  the  earth,  aud  that  will
be  forever  ;  for  He  has  said  that  this
Kingdom  Ahall  never  be  given  to  j
another  people,  but  it  shall  reign  and  i
rule  furewr,  and  the  greatness  of  |
that  Kingdom  shall  be  given  to  the
Saints  of  the  Mos:  High  God,  and
they  shall  possess  it  without  end.
Therefore  vnLli  those  unchangeable


assurances  we  have  all  cause  to.  feel
confidence  in  God.  Our  dependence
should  be  in  the  great  I  Am  contin-
ually. We  need  not  fear  the  arm
of  man  ;  we  need  not  fear  what  the
world  will  do-  If  we  will  but  trust
in  God  and  rely  upon  His  arm  contin-
ually, He  will  hear  iu  off  more  than
conquerors.  He  will  bring  to  pass
all  His  righteous  purposes  and  save
us  in  His  Kingdom.  But  the  path
of  duty  is  the  only  path  of  safety,
it  is  the  only  path  wherein  we  can
walk  ami  have  the  assurance  of  God's
continued  blessing,  of  His  continued
deliverances.  Any  other  course
does  not  carry  with  it  this  assurance.
Any  other  path  leads  to  darkness,  to
contention,  to  evils  of  many  kinds  ;
for  it  leads  away  from  the  truth  and
the  light. But  if  we  continue  in  the

path  that  is  marked  out  tor  us  by

divine  instruction,  trusting  implicitly
in  God,  then  shall  we  be  delivered
from  all  impending  evils  that  are
sought  to  be  brought  upon  us,  no
matter  what  they  maybe;  and  th$
nearer  wo  live  to  God  the  greater
will  be  the  blessings  showered  upon
us,  and  seeming  evils  will  be  changed
to  blessings  or  untold  worth.  Of
this  1  am  assured,  not  only  by  the
testimony  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in
jut*,  not  only  by  the  testimony ol  the
Spirit  of  God  mat  is  in  my  brethren,
hue  hy  the  experience  of  the  people
of  God  in  all  past  ages,  and  the
promises  of  God  for  the  future.

May  God  bless  us  and  enable  us
Lo  r«e  tii  in,  true  and  uuthful,  relying
upon  His  arm  at  all  times,  trusting
in  Him  for  succor,  for  guidance  and
inspiration  continually,  that  we  may
be  I  lis  people  and  He  our  God,  is  my
prayer  through  debits  Christ,  Amen.


JOURNAL O*  lUSUUUllSKS;


DISCOURSE BY APOSTLE F. D.  RICHARDS,

Delivered  at  the  Annual  Conference,  held  in  the  Tabernacle,  Logan,  Cache

Cowittft  Saturday  aid  Sunday,  April  J$h  and  5th,

1885.  fo»  ,


REPORTED  BY  JOHN  IRVINE.


PRESENT  CONDITIONS— THE  HATRED  OF  THE  WORLD  TOWARD  THE
SAINTS — WHY  THE  LEADERS  OF  THE  CHURCH  ARE  ATTACKED
THE  PURPOSE  UF  PERSECUTION  —  THE  SAINTS  NEED  NOT  BE
AFFLICTED  OR  WORRIED  ABOUT  THE  PRESENT  STATE  OF  AFFAIRS
— THE  SIFTING  PROCESS— THE  EPISTLE  OF  THE  FIRST  PRESIDENCY
— WORK  OF  GOD  ALWAYS  MET  WITH  OPPOSITION  —  THE  GOSPEL
REVEALED  IN  THIS  DAY  WAS  THE  GOSPEL  THAT  WAS  REVEALED
TO  ADAM— MORE  REVELATION  TO  BE  GIVEN— SAINTS  Ml  ST  NOT
BORROW  TROUBLE  — WHEN  A  NATION  PERVERTS  JUSTICE,  THEN
COMMENCES  ITS  DOWNFALL— THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  UNITED
STATES— SAINTS  MUST  COMMIT  NO  OVERT  ACT — EXHORTATION  TO
FAITHFULNESS — CONCLUSION.


It  is  very  pleasing  and  it  is  also  an
occasion  of  heartfelt  gratitude  to  be
permitted  to  meet,  so  many  of  us,
this  morning  and  under  such  favor-
able circumstances  as  those  which
surround  us  ;  even  the  elements
conspire  to  make  ourcoming  together
convenient  and  agreeable  Circum-
stances are  such  as  prevent  our
brethren  of  the  First  Presidency
and  several  of  the  Twelve  Apostles
from  being  with  us,  and  perhaps
others  from  among  the  people,  who
would  be  glad  to  be  with  us  at  this
General  Conference,  but  who  deem
it  advisable,  or  are  so  situated  that
they  cannot  consistently  attend.
Let  us  that  have  come  together  seek
unto  the  Lord  for  His  Spirit  and
His  guidance*  that  we  may  receive
that  measure  of  grace  and  blessing
at  His  hand  which  we  need  under  the
p resen t  con il i tious  win c h  ait e u d
upon  uf.  I


If  any  evidence  were  wanting  to
indicate  to  the  doubtful  the  unbe-
lieving, or  the  half-hearted,  as  to
whether  we  are  of  the  world  or  the
world  of  us,  we  are  obtaining  daily
evidence  of  the  fact  that  we  are  not
of  the  world.  The  Savior  told  the
brethren  that  sojourned  with  Him  :
lt  If  ve  were  of  the  world,  the  world
would  love  you  :  but  because  ye
are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have
chosen  you  out  of  the  world,  there-
fore the  world  hateth  you,'1  Tiie
same  reason  essentially  exists  to-day
that  existed  then.  But  the  Lord
has  made  very  gracious  and  precious
promises  to  His  people — that  where
only  two  or  three  are  agreed  as
touching  matters  pertaining  to  the
interest  of  His  Kingdom  and  the
honor  of  His  name,  their  prayers
shall  be  heard.  There  never  was  a
day  since  the  Church  has  been  organ-
ized in  these  last  days  that  the  Saints-


ADVERSE  TIMES  AND  SEASONS.


165


had  better  reasons,  or  more  of  them,
to  be  strong  and  confident  in  God
their  living  Head,  than  they  have
this  morning*  We  need  to  know
and  realize  that  our  trust  is  in  Him
and  not  in  man,  for  woe  !  to  him
that  putteth  his  trust  in  man  and
maketh  flesh  Ids  arm.  God  has
undertaken  to  perform  a  work  in  the
earth  which  is  going  to  astonish  the
world,  and  which  will  give  to  His
name  honor,  and  glory,  power  and
dominion.  Now,  all  these  things
that  occur — I  need  not  go  into  any
enumeration  of  them,  because  in  all
of  your  different  settlements  circum-
stances and  conditions  are  more  or
less  varied — it  has  been  the  studied
plan  of  our  adversaries  to  spread
snares  for  our  feet  throughout  the
land  ;  and  it  need  not  be  wondered
at,  of  course,  that  they  who  stand
highest  in  authority  should  be  the
objects  more  particularly  of  their
wicked  designs.

Take  a  look  at  this  thing  ration*
ally  and  in  a  common-sense  view  for
a  moment.  The  forest  trees  that
are  shaken  with  the  wind  sometimes
almost  srem  as  if  they  would  he
uprooted  by  it,  and  blown  over.  By
this  operation  the  soil  is  wonderfully
loosened  about  the  roots.  By  this
storm  the  strength  of  a  tree  is  tested,
and  the  trunk  and  the  branches  of
it,  as  to  whether  they  bear  proper
relation  to  each  other  and  derive
that  support  that  sustains  every  part
in  its  natural  position.  It  is  also
very  natural  that  in  that  grove,  as
the  wind  passes  over  it,  the  tallest
trees  are  really  the  most  tried  part
of  it,  for  the  wind  and  storm  will
dash  and  blow  upon  them,  while  the
smaller  ones  that  are  protected  by
each  other,  scarcely  feel  it,  perhaps.
Then  you  need  not  wonder  if  some
of  the  tallest  trees  do  not  happen  to
be  here  to-day.  We  will,  however,
remember  our  brethren who  are


absent,  and  pray  for  them  ;  we  will
ask  the  Lord  to  bless  and  protect
them,  to  strengthen  and  fill  them
with  the  wisdom  of  the  Holy  Ghost
continually,  that  the  joy  and  comfort
of  the  truth  and  of  the  holy  Gospel
shall  be  theirs,  and  that  they  shall
be  preserved  from  the  hands  of  their
enemies.

We  who  are  gathered  together,
instead  of  entertaining  ill  feeling  of
cultivating  malicious  designs  towards
our  enemies,  will  ask  the  Lord  to
strengthen  us  and  to  qualify  us  not
only  for  what  is  upon  us  now,  but
for  what  is  before  m  ;  for  we  d<»  not
know  what  there  may  be  for  us  in
the  purposes  of  Jehovah,  All  this
may  be  necessary  and  profitable  to
give  us  an  experience  thatwe  should
pass  tli rough  trials,  that  may  tend
to  ourimprovemeHtiind'piatification,
enable  us  in  our  different  positions
to  better  magnify  our  callings,  and
to  bear  off  His  Kingdom  in  the  last
days  as  He  requires.

There  are  times  and  seasons  when
the  hoary  frosts  of  winter  not  only
prevent  the  trees  from  showing  forth
their  foliage,  from  developing  any
bloom,  but  cause  them  to  cast  their
fruit  to  the  earth,  scarcely  giving
indications  of  life.  It  may  not,  be
wondered  at  then,  if  through  the
storms  and  blasts  of  adversity  which
come  upon  the  Church  from  time  to
time  that  its  members  are  not
spreading  forth  and  reaching  out
their  branches,  or  that  the  foliage
si iow 6  no  such  immediate  prospects
of  fruit,  as  we  might,  under  more
favor  aide  sunshine  and  with  more
beautiful  weather,  expect  While
this  adverse  season  is  on  and  the
leaves  perhaps  have  blown  to  the
ground,  and  all  presents  the  appear-
ance of  barrenness  and  death  itself,
the  sap  is  at  work  down  in  the  roots.
Do  you  understand  this]  Gardeners
and nurserymen especially  will


166


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


understand  that  at  the  close  of  the  I
adverse  season,  when  the  winds  and
storms  have  loosened  the  soil,  the
roots  have  extended  themselves
deeper  into  the  earth,  when  the
sun  shines  and  the  gentle  rain  falls
and  the  pleasant  spring  appears,
those  roots,  now  greatly  enlarged,
will  cause  the  tries  to  put  forth
larger  leaves,  with  more  abundant
bud  and  bloom,  and  wit  h  larger  and
more  lupcious  fruit  than  before.  So
it  is  and  will  be  with  the  great  tuv
of  Life  which  God  has  pi  anted  in
the  earth,  and  which  is  bringing
forth  and  will  yield  more  abund-
antly the  fruits  of  Everlasting  Life.

Veil,  then,  we  have  nothing  that  1
we  need  be  afflicted  or  worried
about,  except  our  own  unrighteous-
ness, I  know  how  the  Saints  feel
about  many  tilings  which  are  men-
acing and  intimidating  them  at  the
present  time ;  but  brethren  and
sisters,  now  is  the  best  of  all  times
to  go  often  into  your  closets,  for
secret  prayer,  and  there  find  that
grace  and  help  of  God  which  is  able
to  buoy  you  up  in  every  time  of  need.
Men  that  are  the  heads  of  families
need  now  to  be  filled  with  the  Holy
Spirit,  to  be  Prophets.  Seers  and
Kevelators  to  their  families,  to  their
kindred  and  to  those  that  are  around
them.  You  need  to  have  your  roots
strike  deep  into  the  soil  of  Heaven
and  stronger  into  the  soil  of  eternity,
that  you  may  derive  that  nourish-
ment and  that  strength  that  shall
bring  to  you  greater,  more  abundant
and  more  glorious  blessings  than
ever  you  have  yet  realized.

Am  one;  other  benefits  that  will  be
produced  by  the  strange  conditions
that  attend  us  i«  this  :  that  while
there  are  those  among  us  who  have
not  known  whether  they  were,  fal-
lowing for  the  loaves  and  fishes,  or
whether  they  were  following  for  the
truth's  aaki — many  who  are  ready  I


to  dabble  in  spirituous  liquors  and
in  those  intoxicating  drinks  which
inflame  the  passions,  which  madden
the  soul,  daze  their  intellects,  des-
troy the  faculties  of  man,  drowuing
their  souls  in  the  perdition  of  the
u  n  god  ly;  many  who  have  never  sought
to  dig  deep  and  lay  their  foundation
upon  the  rock  of  revelation  which
is  the  only  foundation  of  eternal
truth.  It  h  absolutely  important
that  we  and  they  should  know  which
j  side  of  the  fence  they  dwell  on  ;
that  thev  make  up  their  minds  either
to  serve  God  or  the  devil  ;  and  this
is  a  time  that  calls  all  people  pro-
fessing to  be  Saints  to  make  up
their  minds  determinedly  whom  it
is  best  to  serve,  and  if  the  Lord  is
their  God,  to  get  some  oil  in  their
vessels  that  they  be  not  always  in
darkness.  «

Again,  there  are  conditions  which
■  pertain  to  all  animated  nature,  and
which  are  incident  to  the  great  body
of  the  Church  as  well,  and  they  aro
these  :  Notwithstanding  it  may  be
the  choicest  food  we  may  eat,  not-
withstanding the  most  healthful  or
precious  drinks  we  may  use — there
are  operations  going  on  in  the  sys-
tem whereby  those  elements  that
are  not  found  of  use  are  cast  off  as
waste  by  the  various  avenues  pro-
vided by  nature  for  the  expulsion  of
that  which  is  not  useful  to  the  sys-
tem. Just  so  this  principle  of  life
exists  with  God's  people.  They
who  will  not  in  their  due  time  and
place  become  articles  of  nutriment
and  health  to  the  Church  and  the
Saints  will  become  refuse  and  will
be  cast  off.  These  are  principles  in
nature  and  it)  life  which  all  are  con-
versant with  ;  we  know  and  under-
stand them,  In  this  dispensation
of  Providence,  wherein  it  seems
as  though  all  the  powers  of  darkness
were  arrayed  against  us,  we  need  to
understand  that  it  is  to  God  and  to


EXALTING  CHARACTER  OF  THE  GOSPE'


167


God  alone  that  we  must  look.  We
need  to  understand  the  laws  of  all
things  well.  The  Lord  has  borne
us  off  in  troubles  and  iu  tribulations
while  in  Ohio,  in  Missouri,  and  in
Illinois,  and  the  God  that  has  been
with  us  through  these  troubles  will
not  forsake  us  at  the  present  time.
The  ureat  tiling  for  us  to  do  is  to
feel  after  Him,  and  repent  of  our
sins,  our  waywardness  and  of  our
weaknesses  and  sinfulness,  and  ptltn
away  everything  that  is  unrighteous
and  that  which  is  displeasing  iu  the
siicht  of  Go  I  and  of  angels  and  good
men.  If  we  do  this  His  favor  and
His  power  will  rest  upon  us,  and  He
w  ill  allow  nothing  to  com*1  upon  u*
but  what  He  will  sanctify  to  our
greatest  <jood  and  to  I  lis  own
eternal  honor  an  I  glory,  and  we
shall  see  by  and  by  I  lis  infinite  wis-
dom in  all  His  providences  towards

I  appreciate  with  you  the  many
precious  sentiments  that  have  been
uttered  in  our  hearing  since  wo  have
come  together  at  this  conference,
and  alsu  appreciate  with  you  the
consideration  which  our  absent
brethren  of  the  First  Presidency
have  felt  concerning  us,  and  the
work  in  which  we  are  engaged.

There  is  something  about  our  labor
that  is  strangely  peculiar,  but  not
111  ore  so,  perhaps,  in  our  day  than
has  existed  in  former  ages  of  the
world  when  the  Gospel  has  been
revealed  to  man.  It  has  always
seemed  to  he  the  case  that  whatever
period  of  time  we  take  up  to  read
concern  in 2:  the  work  of  God  and  its
effects  anions  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth — we  always  find  that  the  peo-
ple of  God  and  the  people  of  the  wurld
have  been  iu  direct  antagonism  ;  and
when  we  get  back  to  the  most  remote
items  of  history — .or  items  of  in-
formation which  history  is  permitted
to  furnish  us — we  find  that  even  iu


the  spiritual  state  of  man's  existence,
before  the  family  of  Adam  came  to
dwell  in  the  flesh,  that  there  was
antagonism  there  between  truth  and
error,  between  those  that  embraced
truth  and  thou  that  embraced  error,

and  following  down  through  the  ages


that  same  antagonism  hu»


1


and  been  made  manifest  iu  one  form
nr  in  another,  so  that  the  peuple  of
the  earth  have  never  bee.)  iu  a  posi-
tion  to  see  and  understand  the
principles  uf  the  doctrine  or  C'irUt,
the  doctrine  of  salvation,  in  the

same light,  and to  iiieh'slaud  it

together  and  correctly.  Tue  priucU
pies  of  the  Gospel  which  have  been
revealed  of  God  have  been  admitted
by  the  greatest  moral  philosophers
who  have  lived— aside  from  religious
professors— to  be  the  most  noble
principles,  the  most  calculated  to
exalt  mankind,  in  the  belief,  in  the
exercise,  and  in  the  obedience  of
theui,  of  any  doctrines  or  principles
of  ethics  that  have  ever  been  given
to  the  human  family  ;  great  moral-
ists, great  scientists  have  been  wil-
ling to  tjive  this  credit  to  the
principles  and  doctrines  of  our  Savior.
Philosophers  of  this  world  have  done
this  ;  and  all  they  of  the  Saints  who
have  rendered  obedience  to  these
principles  know,  truly,  how  a  taith
iu  them  exalts  those  that  embrace
them,  until  it  has  come  to  be  a
truism  among  the  people  of  God,
"  that  righteousness  exalteth  a
nation,  but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any
people."

Therefore,  let  it  be  known  to  all
the  world  that  it  is  one  of  the  tirst
principles  of  the  Gospel  of  Canst
that  men  should  repent  of  their  sins,
that  they  should  be  washed  in  the
waters  of  regeneration  for  the  re  mis*
sioti  of  their  sins,  that  then,  in  pur-
suance thereof,  they  may  receive  the
Holy  Ghost  from  heaven,  which  is
promised  unto  obedient  believers.


1C8


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


This  is  not  only  the  doctrine  of
the  Gospel  of  this  dispensation,  and
the  doctrine  of  the  Gospel  in  the
dispensation  when  Jesus  and  the
Apostles  of  His  day  were  upon  the
earth,  hut  this  is  the  very  piinciple
and  doctrine  that  was  revealed  to
Father  Adam,  after  he  was  cast  out
of  the  Garden  of  Eden,  when  the
ani:el  of  the  Lord  came  to  him  and
asked  him  why  he  offered  sacrifices.
He  replied  that  he  knew  not,  only
that  the  Lord  had  told  him  to  do  so.
Then  the  angel  of  the  Lord  proceeded
to  explain  the  matter  to  him — told
him  thai  the  object  of  his  u  tiering
sacrifices  was  to  keep  before  his
mind  the  great  sacrifice  that  must
be  offered  up  in  the  meridian  of  time.
This  was  I  lie  only  symbol  and  type
given  to  men  to  cause  them  to  look
forward  through  an  ordinance  they
practised  to  the  Savior,  who  was  to
come  as  a  sacrifice  fur  sin  and  i<>
become  the  Savior  of  the  world.
Thus  early  did  God  place  this  prin-
ciple before  the  mind  of  the  great
father  of  ihe  human  family  when  in
that  ten  i  hie  dilemma, he  having
consented  in  partake  of  the  fruit
and  £0  out  of  the  garden  with  mo-
ther Eve* It  was  then  that  our  first
parents  began  to  be  taught  this

principle. Adam  was  taught  that

he  nuiM  be  burn  of  the  water  and  of
the  Spirit,  and  in  demonstration  of
this  he  was  caught  up  by  the  Spirit
and  plan  il  in  the  water  and  bioughx
forth  out  of  the  water,  as  the  revela-
tion of  God  to  Joseph  declares.
Then  be  was  baptized  by  the  Holy
Ghost  and  with  tire.  And  the  Lord
told  htm  to  teach  those  things  to  his
chiMit-n  that  they  might  look  for-
ward with  him  to  the  time  when  the
Only  hi\Lotieu  should  come  in  the
flesh  ;uni  should  be  made  an  offering

•

lor  the  sins  of  the  world.  Adam
was  further  told  that  if  he  taught
these  things,  to  his  children  he  and


ihev  should  have  in  this  life  the
words  of  eternal  life,  and  in  the  life
to  come  eternal  life  itself.  Mark
the  careful  distinction  ;  that  if  they
would  keep  the  commandments
they  should  in  this  life  have  the
words  of  eternal  life  given  to  them,
and  in  the  life  to  come  they  should
have  eternal  life  itself,  and,  added
the  Lord  to  this  great  promise,
"thus  may  all  become  my  sons/'
•  Thus  the  plan  of  salvation  was
in  brief  laid  out  in  plainness  to
our  Father  Adam,  that  he  and  all
his  children  might  be  thought  meet
to  enter  into  the  favor  of  God.
receive  the  fellowship  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  be  born  of  water  and  of  the
Spirit,  and  thus  come  to  a  knowl-
edge of  the  principles  of  eternal
life.

We  see  from  this  that  the  first
step  to  be  taken  in  those  days,  when
the  works  of  Cain  had  gone  forth,
and  when  the  people  had  become
!  exceedingly  wicked — so bad  that
the  Scriptures  say  the  thoughts  of
I  their -hearts  were  only  evil  and  that
1  continually — the  very  first  thing  to
consider  was  how  to  deprive  sinful-
ness of  its  power  and  make  right-
eousness to  take  hold  of  the  children
of  men  so  that  they  might  find  favor
with  the  Gods,  and  with  all  the  rid  it-
eons  both  in  heaven  and  on  the
earth,

I  This  was  the  principle,  this  was
the  doctrine,  and  this  was  the  way
by  w  hich  the  Patriarch  Enoch — that
great  and  ancient  worthy  of  whom
we  know  so  little — went  forth  and
by  the  power  of  God  reasoned  with
those  wicked  people  and  preached
the  Gospel  to  them,  and  baptised  all
who  would  receive  \i  ami  gathered
them  together  into  a  place  which  he
called  Zion,  It  was  a  very  great
and  mighty  work  he  had  to  perfoim ;
for  the  people  had  become  terribly
wicked,  tilled  with the  spirit  of


MORE  REVELATION  TO  EE  GIVEN.


169


murder  and  every  manner  of  abom-
ination that  the  human  heart  can
conceive  of.

This,  then,  is  the  foundation
that  all  men  have  to  lay  in  their
hearts  and  lives  before  they  begin  to
receive  the  principles  of  eternal  life
as  they  are  revealed.  You  my
brethren  and  sisters  that  are  from
Scandinavia,  from  the  northern
countries,  from  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  Xew  Zealand,  Australia,  and
from  the  islands  of  the  sea,  including
the  frozen  regions  of  Iceland —
every  one  of  you  were  taught  and
embraced  those  first  principles  in
the  primitive  part  of  your  faith  and
belief  in  the  Gospel  It  was  the
beginning ;  it  was  the  step  which
every  son  and  daughter  of  Adam
has  had  to  take,  from  the  days  of
Adam  until  now,  in  order  to  cleanse
themselves  before  God,  so  as  to  receive
the  blessings  of  eternal  life.  It  was
by  carrying  out  these  principles  ami
preaching  that  Adam  was  saved.
It  was  by  an  obedience  to  the  same
principles  that  Enoch  succeeded  in
gathering  out  the  honest  in  heart
unto  the  city  of  Zion.  He  was  365
years  in  building  up  that  Zum  and
in  gathering  into  it  a  people  on  the
same  principles  that  have  heen
revealed  to  us  in  these  latter  days.
We  are  preaching  the  same  Gospel
that  was  given  to  those  ancient
worthies.  You  can  tract!  the  Priest-
hood by  referring  to  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenant* — thr  holy,
high  Priesthood  that  has  come  down
from  Adam  to  Noah,  and  down
through  Enoch,  Methuselah  and  the
different  men  of  God  who  lived  in
ancient  times  —you  can  trace  it  clear
back  to  Adam  who  was  ordained
under  the  hands  of  God,  who  told  him
that  that  Priesthood  should  abide  in
his  generations  and  that  it  should  be
on  the  earth  at  the  end  of  time.
What  is  the  Priesthood  that  you


grey-headed  fathers  are  bearing  be-
fore us  to-day  in  the  midst  of  Israel?
It  is  the  holy,  high  Priesthood  of
Melchisedec,  which  is  after  the  order
of  the  Son  of  God,  and  which  is  after
the  power  of  an  endless  life.  Then,
brethren  and  sisters,  understand  it.
It  is  not  a  new  Gospel  revealed  now
for  the  first  time — these  first  princi-
ples are  not  new,  because  they  have
been  revealed  from  the  beginning.
They  are  the  same  principles  that
Christ  commenced  to  preach  when
He  was  upon  the  earth.  They  were
the  first  principles  that  John  the
Baptist  taught  when  ho  came  to
prepare  the  way  for  the  coming  of
the  Son  of  Man  ;  they  were  the  very
first  principles  that  Joseph  mid
Oliver  taught  in  this  dispensation
when  they  began  to  preach  the  Gos-
pel. They  were  ordained  to  the
Aaronic  Priesthood.  This  is  the
beginning  of  the  work  of  righteous*
ness.

There  are  revelations  and  doc-
trims  given  unto  us  in  uiir  day,
however,  which  were  not  given  in
former  ages,  because  the  people  were
not  prepared  and  were  not  in  a  suit-
able condition  to  receive  such*  Do
not  let  us  think  that  we  have  got
all  the  revelation  there  is.  In  the
last  great  revelation  which  the  Lord
gave  to  Joseph,  He  told  him  that
He  had  not  revealed  all  to  him,  but
that  there  were  many  laws  pertain-
ing to  His  Priesthood  which  He
would  reveal  hereafter.  Do  you
remember  it !  But  if  the  world  is
going  to  get  scared  and  terrified  and
ready  to  lay  waste  ami  ties  troy  the
Latter-day  iSaints  before  we  have  got
so  far  advanced  in  the  civilization
of  heaven  as  to  understand  the  mar-
riage laws  and  some  of  the  marital
relations  of  the  sexes? — f  they  go
crazy  over  this  what  will  happen  to
them  when  something  more  comes
along  i


170


JOl'RNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


Now,  1  hope  that-  none  of  t lie
Saints  will  grow  weak  in  the  knees  ;
do  not  let  them  hang  down  their
heads,  nor  allow  their  hearts  to  be
t ton  hied  ;  do  not  let  the  sisters  He
awake  at  nights  brooding  over  this
and  that  that  is  going  to  happen,
and  getting  a  great  deal  of  borrowed
trouble.  There  is  no  promise  of
grace  to  sustain  them  in  such  trou-
ble ;  but  the  Lord  has  promised  that
His  zt"An*  shall  be  sufficient  for  our
day,  sufficient  for  the  troubles  we
have  to  bear ;  but  we  have  no  pro-
mise of  grace  to  sustain  us  in  bor-
rowed trouble.  Do  not  be  alarmed
though  the  heathen  rage  and  the  peo-
ple in umine  vain  things,  While  they
are  in  confusion  and  strife  of  every
kind, you  will  multiply  upon  th e  ear 1 1 1
and  establish  lasting  peace  upon  the
face  thereof.  The  Latter-day  Saints
who  are  the  object  of  all  observation
from  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth,
are  the  only  people  that  have  pine
and  settled  peace  in  their  hearts
ami  in  their  midst.  Do  you  realize
this?  Our  missionaries  go  to  the
Southern  States,  and  the  North
Western  States ;  they  go  to  Europe,
to  Asia,  Africa,  ami  every  point  of
the  compass,  and  when  they  return
they  tell  us  that  in  no  place  do  they
find  as  true,  settled  and  substantial
peace,  as  there  is  right  here  in  Utah,
where  one  would  think,  from  all  that
is  going  on  and  all  that  is  threat
ened,  that  the  waves  of  the  sea  were
going  to  roll  over  us.  Our  peace  is
that  which  the  Gospel  brings.  The
fruit  of  the  Spirit  which  the  wicked
can  neither  give  nor  take  away.
There  is  no  use  beinir  worried  over
these  things.  It  is  part  of  our
heritage.  They  who  will  live  godly
in  Christ  Jesus  must  suffer  persecu-
tion ;  we  have  every  reason  to  expect
it.  It  is  our  duty  to  seek  wisdom  of
the  Lord  in  all  matters  ;  seek  tor  the
Holy  Spirit,  and  attend  to  our  own
business.


!


In  regard  to  the  principles  of  the
Gospel  which  the  Lord  has  reve;d*>d
to  us  beyond  what  He  has  to  other
people,  we  should  rcm  uber  that
we  shall  be  called  to  account  for  rhe
use  we  make  of  them;  remember
that  we  use  them,  live  titean,  ami
administer  them  in  all  righteous-
ness in  our  lives  and  conduct*  and
while  there  are  no  two  families
whose  conditions  and  circumstances
are  just  alike,  still  the  same  general
principles  will  have  their  general
effect  in  all  households.  We  must
cultivate  righteousness.  We  are
learning  the  principles  of  the  Gospel
one  after  another  j  how  to  observe
and  obey  them.  We  want  to  know
how  to  hold  them  in  righteousness,
because  we  cannot  hold  these
precious  eternal  treasures  in  unright-
eousness ;  if  we  think  we  can  we
shall  be  deceived  and  will  some  day
find  out  that  they  are  not  to  be  held
in  unrighteousness,  for  they  only
take  effect  with  the  pure  in  heart,
they  that  are  willing  to  keep  the
commandments  of  God,  and  walk
in  the  way  of  His  counsels.

Sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people.
It  is  better  for  us  right  here  in  this
life  that  we  keep  the  commandments
of  Go-1,  even  if  we  <!id  not  look  lor
any  future  reward  of  glory.  Don't
you  know  it  is  ?  Why  1  Because
we  feel  happy  and  strong  within
ourselves  when  we  lie  down  at  night
and  rise  up  in  the  morning;  when
we  go  out  and  when  we  come  in;
we  feel  the  sustaining  influence  and
approval  of  an  honest  heart,  of  a
pure  conscience,  and  of  all  just
people — a  conscience  void  of  offense
towards  God  and  His  people.  This
is  the  greatest  treasure  that  a  per-
son can  possess  in  this  life.  And  do
you  know  that  go  where  you  will —
amonij  those  iguorant  tribes  that
surround  us,  or  to  the  highest  civil-
ized, and  most  cultivated  portions
of  the  European  or  American  na-


PERVERSIONS  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION.


171


tions,  —the  man  that  is  obedient  to
the  holy  principles  of  the  everlasting
Gospel — if  they  do  not  know  he  is
called  a  Mormon — is  respected  above
all  men  who  disregard  the  principle!
of  righteousness  and  truth.  If
some  of  our  brethren  who  work  in
the  mining  camps  behave  themselves
and  live  their  religion ,  the  very  men
around  them  respect  and  honor  them.
Why  1  Because  they  are  reliable  j
because  the  principles  they  have
embraced  and  put  into  practice  render
them  substantial  and  trustworthy.
You  go  into  the  classes  of  the  univer-
sity or  of  the  colleges  where  young
men  have  gone  in  quest  of  an  educa-
tion, and  you  will  find  that  the  man
who  is  pure  and  virtuous  in  his  feel-
ings, in  his  thoughts  and  in  his
ways,  who  does  not  delight  in  tolly,
in  sin  and  the  secret  works  of  dark-
ness, but  is  at  home  attending  to
his  lessons  and  his  duty — it  is  he
that  makes  his  way  to  the  head  of
the  class,  and  gets  the  highest  honor
among  his  fellows.  It  is  he  that
they  look  up  to  because  of  his  up-
right  conduct  and  all  that  is  excellent
in  man.  That  is  the  kind  of  men
that  go  forth  and  make  their  way
and  mark  among  their  neighbors
and  jheir  countrymen.  True  virtue
and  righteousness  exalt  individuals,
and  it  therefore  must  exalt  a  nation
composed  of  such  individuals.  When
a  nation  disregards  the  principles
of  justice,  equity,  righteousness
and  truth — so  far  as  to  fail  or  refuse
the  administration  of  its  laws  equi-
tably to  any  portion  or  class  of  its
citizens,  then  the  people  have  reason
to  fear  the  dreadful  consequences
that  must  follow,  unless  a  reforma-
tion is  effected ;  then  the  noble,
the  honorable,  the  virtuous  am  1  the
pure  should  be  willing  to  make
sacrifice  for  that  which  is  ennobling,
exalting,  upright  and  praiseworthy.
Go  back  in  the  history  of  the


world  and  you  will  see  that  the
greatest  nations  that  ever  existed,
as  soon  as  they  commenced  to  pervert
justice,  crush  truth  and  right,  perse -
cute  God's  people  and  exalt  iniquity,
then  commenced  their  downfall,  and
t hei r  way  w as  d o w  n ,  d o  w n ,  d o w n ,
to  demolition  and  destruction,  until
more  substantial  and  better  elements
were  found  in  their  ruin*  with  which
to  raise  up  and  create  something
new.  It  was  that  excellence  and
polity  which  God  saw  in  the  Puritan
fathers  that  came  over  to  this  country
for  the  love  of  the  truth,  and  tu  wor-
ship God  according  to  the  dictates
of  their  own  consciences, — it  was
that  excellence  that  preserved  them
and  established  them  here,  and  as
long  as  they  maintained  the  princi-
ples of  liberty,  allowed  others  to
enjoy  the  same  rights  that  they
themselves  enjoyed,  just  so  long
did  they  prosper.  They  were  power-
ful iu  that  that  they  had  influence
and  faith  to  receive  inspiration  from
God,  to  draw  up  and  establish  the
greatest  Constitution  that  has  ever
been  known  ou  the  earth — the
grandest  combination  of  loyal  princi-
ples and  fundamental  truths  that
has  been  established  by  man,  since
the  days  of  Noah,  and  that  is  the
Constitution  with  which  politicians
have  become  so  reckless,  in  constru-
ing its  provisions,  and  have  gone
outside  of  its  limitations  to  rule
and  regulate  the  people  of  this  great
nation  as  they  please.  That  glorious
Constitution  was  made  to  remdate
rulers  as  well  as  the  ruled.  It  was
so  constructed  that  those  who  should
be  appointed  to  rule  over  the  people
should  not  be  their  masters,  but
their  servants.  How  comes  it  now,
that  the  whole  polity  has  been  per-
verted to  another  way;  the  rulers
have  come  to  be  masters  of  the  peo-
ple, and  are  undertaking  now  to
lord  it  over  God's  heritage.  We


172


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


ought  to  understand  these  things.
It  is  our  duty  to  do  so.

I  desire  now  to  refer  to  a  particu-
lar expression  in  the  epistle  which
has  just  been  read,  wherein  the
brethren  of  the  First  Presidency
have  exhorted  the  Saints  not  to
allow  themselves  to  commit  any
overt  act  No  matter  how  much
you  are  worried,  no  matter  how
much  you  are  aggravated  by  the
acts  of  the  ungodly,  do  not  do  a
thing  that  you  could  afterwards  be
sorry  for.  Do  nothing  that  could
let  blood  st  ick  to  one  of  you.  Bear
with  every  impious  insult.  Put  up
with  it  as  Christ  did  when  he  was
hanging  upon  the  cross  and  his  life's
blood  oozing  out  from  his  heart,  and
his  spirit  ready  to  depart,  and  say
"Father  forgive  them,  for  they  know
not  what  they  do."  That  is  the  way
we  want  to  look  as  farasnvecan
upon  those  who  are  oppressing  ami
injuring  us,  breaking  up  cur  homes,
and  scattering  our  women  and  chil-
dren to  the  four  winds*  It  is  some-
thing that  could  not  be  allowed  in
the  old  monaiebial  countries,  winch
are  looked  upon  as  being  measurably
beneath  the  United  States  in  the
matter  of  a  constitutional  govern-
ment, and  yet  we  see  men  among
us  who  are  ready  to  demolish  the
very  sanctity  of  home,  lay  waste  and
destroy  that  which  lies  at  the  very
foundation  of  all  law,  natural  and
governmental.  It  is  painful ;  it  is
sorrowful  Let  us  pity  while  they
are  so  blind,  so  ignorant,  so  ill-na-
tured, and  so^ willing  to  depart  from
good  government,  even  to  enact  laws
to  prevent  their  ft  How- citizens  from
worshipping  God  according  to  the
dictates  of  their  own  conscience.
But,  for  my  own  part,  I  feel  like
the  First  Presidency  in  this  matter.
Let  us  commit  no  overt  act,  which
in  any  event  we  could  be  sorry  for.

We  never  saw  a  time  when  we  had


reason  to  feel  more  thankful  and
lifted  up  in  our  hearts  before  the
living  God  than  the  present.  Why  1
Beause  the  Savior  said  :  "  Woe  unto
you,  when  all  men  shall  speak  well
of  you  !  for 'so  did  their  fathers  to
the  false  prophets."  But  says  He,
u  Blessed  are  ye,  when  men  shall
hate  you,  and  when  they  shall  sepa-
rate you  from  their  company,  and
shall  reproach  yon,  and  cast  out
your  name  as  evil,  for  the  Son  of
Man's  sake/'

I  wish  to  exhort  the  Saints  to
frequent  their  closets  more  than  they
I  do ;  to  neglect  not  their  prayers
night  and  morning,  and  in  the  sea-
son thereof  fail  not  to  bow  the  knee
and  call  your  sons  and  daughters
around  you.  I  f  you  do  this,  by  and
by  your  sons  and  daughters  will  rise
up  and  call  you  blessed  ;  if  you  do
not  they  will  get  cold  ami  depart
from  truth  and  the  faith  of  the  living
God,  and  thatwill  brim;  the  greatest
sorrow  you  can  conceive  of.  This  is
a  time  when  we  are  called  upon  to
bring  our  practical  religion  into  use,
to  put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,
and  to  trust  in  Him.  The  Savior
said  He  could  call  to  His  help  more
than  twelve  legions  of  angels  ;  more
than  the  Roman  hosts ;  but  He
knowing  the  great  purposes  of  Jeho-
vah could  go  like  a  lamb  to  the
slaughter.  He  understood  those
purposes,  could  curb  His  powers,
control  His  feelings,  and  could  make
a  manly  fight  for  righteousness  and
truth,  and  carry  out  the  decrees  of
heaven.  Can  we  do  so?  Can  you
and  I  do  so  ?  If  we  cannot,  can
we  be  counted  worthy  to  be  called
His  brethren,  and  Saviors  upon
Mount  Zion  t  We  have  got  to  be
considerably  more  like  him  than  we
are  before  we 'attain  unto  all  those
excellencies  that  are  promised.

Inasmuch  as  the  work  of  God
spreads,  and  its  influence  and  potency


are  felt  among  the  nations  of  the
earth,  so  long  will  this  opposition
and  this  antagonism  exist,  and  we
must  expect  it;  it  cannot  be  avoided.
It  is  an  eternal  consequence  of  our
faith.  If  we  reckoned  upon  any-
thing else,  we  reckoned  wrongly.
Every  true  Saint,  when  he  embraced
this  Gospel,  felt  to  lay  down  his  good
name,  his  earthly  substance,  and  life
itself, — all  was  laid  upon  the  altar
AVe  need  not  think,  however,  that
although  the  Lord  permits  certain
things  to  come  upon  us,  that  He  will
not  soften  the  hearts  of  the  wicked
and  ungodly.  He  has  told  us  with
a  firm  decree,  that  from  a  time  when
the  Saints  commenced  to  be  more
faithful  they  should  begin  to  prevail
against  their  enemies,  and  they  have
proved  this  in  the  deliverances  that
have  been  wrought  out  in  their  he-
half  from  time  to  time.  Have  we
any  reason  to  doubt  or  lack  confi-
dence in  the  promises  of  God  for
the  future  ?  Hot  a  particle.  Every
step  of  the  way  affords  a  greater,  a
more  powerful  confirmation  and
assurance  that  He  is  true  to  His
promises,  and  will  carry  them  out
in  our  behalf.

Do  you  know,  says* one,  how  far
these  things  will  go1  Just  so  far
as  tlie  Lord  will  allow  them.  When


it  comes  to  the  right  time  He  will
put  a  stop  to  them.  He  knows  how
to  do  it,  just  at  His  good  pleasure.

We  should  go  to  work  and  put
transgression  from  our  midst,  culti-
vate righteousness  and  put  away
all  sin,  ;m  l  by  keeping  i  lis  com-
mandments and  living  by  every  word
that  proceedeth  from  the  mouth  of
His  servants  the  work  of  sanctifica-
tion  will  go  on  in  our  hearts,  our
homes,  and  our  habitations  will  be
holy  in  His  sight.  He  will  not  allow
the  acts  of  the  wicked  to  come  against
us  any  longer  than  will  be  for  His
own  glory  and  our  greatest  good.
Let  us  feel  that  we  are  in  the  hands
of  tht*  Lord,  that  He  is  our  Father
and  friend.  Let  us  draw  near  to
Him  ;  find  Him  out,  and  walk  with
Him  here  in  the  Hesh,  then  we  shall
know  that  it  will  be  well  with  us
hereafter,

I  pray  that  the  good  Spirit  of  God
may  dwell  in  our  hearts  ;  may  write
His  law  on  the  tablets  of  our  hearts;
may  impress  the  principles  of  truth
upon  our  minds,  so  that  we  may  live
them  and  make  them  profitable  to
us  in  the  future.  That  God  may
grant  these  blessings  unto  us,  I
humbly  ask  in  the  name  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  Amen.


174


JOURNAL  OF  DISCO UKSI->,


DISCOURSE BY APOSTLE JOHN HENRY  SMITH,


Bel


!  at  the  Annual  Conference,  held  in  the  Tabernacle,  Logan,  Cache

Comity )  Mondny  Morning  April  6tk,

'  iSSSl ^^^W^":i' 188  5%^^^  , . I  '


REPORTED  BY JOHN  1EVIHEJ


LOVE  OF  HOME — VISIT  TO  FRIENDS —  SENT  TO  PRESIDE  OVER  THE
EUROPEAN  MISSION — FORMER  I LL-H  HALT  II  I N  ENGLAND — KX  TEN-
SIVE SYSTEM  OF  TRACT  DISTRIBUTION  INAUGURATED — TRIBUTE  TO
THE  WORTH  AND  EFFICIENCY  OF  THE  MISSIONARIES  —  REPORT  OF
THE  CONDITION  OF  THE  WORK  IN  VARIOUS  EUROPEAN  COUNTRIES
— HATRED  MANIFESTED  TOWARDS  US  AFTER  THE  MURDER  OF  OUR
J  M<  Ell  I R  EX  I  N  TEN  X  ESSEE — A  M  El  1 1  <  A  I  I  IE  II A  V  E  N  ( >  F  F  R  EE  DOM —
TRUTH  HAS  EVER  MET  WITH  PERSECUTION — PROFESSED  MINISTERS
OF  THE  GOSPEL  OUR  GREATEST  ENEMIES  —  NO  ONE  INJURED  BY
OUR  PRINCIPLES— RE  URAL  MARRIAGE — THE  SOCIAL  EVIL — CON-
CLUS1UN.


It  affbnls  me  pleasure  to  meet
again  with  the  Saints  in  Zion,  and
to  have  ihe  privilege  of  mingling
with  tin'  people  of  Goil  in  a  general
con IV1  it 1 1 it.  U  is  sometime  since  I
had  this  privilege,  ami  I  can  assure
you  that  I  appreciate  it  very  much.
I  do  not  think  it  is  possible  for  me
to  express  in  proper  language  my
feelings  in  regard  to  my  mountain
home,  1  never  learned  but  one
verse  of  poetry  in  my  life,  and  that
one  I  have  repeated  many  times,  and
I  do  not  know  but  what  it  would  be
well  for  nie  to  repeat  it  this  morn-
ing. The  verse  to  winch  1  allude
says :

**  There  is  a  magical  tie  h\  the  land  of
home

That  the  heart  cannot  break,  though  the

fn»tlKte}H  may  roam,
Be  th  \t  U  n«i  where  it  may,  at  the  line  or

thu  pole,

It  still  hi'iih*  the  magnet  that  draws  back
my  soul.w


Such  is  the  case  this  morning  in
arising  to  address  you  for  a  short
time.  What  the  Lord  may  have  for
me  to  say  to  you  I  cannot  imagine.
For  a  few  mouths  past  I  have  not
addressed  any  congregations  ;  1  have
been  visiting  ;  I  have  been  reason-
ing wit  h  my  f  riends  upon  the  princi-
ples of  the  Gospel,  and  seeking  to
enlighten  them  in  regard  to  my
position.  Having  accepted  the
Gospel,  ami  dedicated  my  life  to  the
preaching  of  the  same,  1  was  desir-
ous that  my  kindred  should  hear  it.
1  have  not  been  idle,  but  have  been
laboring  with  zeal  lo  impress  upon
theiu  the  nature  of  the  latter  day
work.  1  did  not  go  there  expecting
to  make  converts  but  to  relieve  my
friends  of  prejudice,  1  have  found,
so  to  speak,  that  my  utterances  have
fallen  ou  >Uj:  y  ground  outside  of  my
kimljeit ami  thai  while  I  was  re-


EFFICIENCY  OF  THE  ELDERS  IN  EUROPE


173


ceived  with  kindness,  and  trust  that
good  may  in  time  come  from  my
labors  in  certain  directions,  yet  I
cannot  say,  as  many  have  said,  that
I  have  accomplished  much  good,  and
that  1  have  removed  a  world  of  pre-
judice 1  trust,  however,  that  1  may
have  done  some  good  during  the
past  few  weeks  among  my  kindred
in  the  Eastern  States.

As  von  are  aware,  in  1882  I  was
sent  by  my  brethren  to  preside  for  a
season  over  the  European  mission.
I  proceeded  to  my  field  of  labor
with  some  dubiety  in  regard
to  my  own  self.  My  former
experience  upon  the  island  of  Great
Britain  had  been  such  that  I  was
really  fearful  in  regard  to  my  health.
For  five  years  after  my  first  mission
to  the  British  Isles,  I  had  never
passed  a  night  in  sound  and  perfect
sleep.  I  suffered  from  a  cold  con-
tracted on  that  mission.  On  my
departure  in  1882,  however,  my
brethren  promised  me  I  should  go
in  peace  ;  that  1  should  enjoy  good
health  ;  that  the  blessings  of  the
Lord  should  be  around  me;  and
that  1  shun  Id  be  enabled  to  ac-
complish the  object  ior  which  1  was
sent  forth.  And  while  1  went  with
some  foreboding  with  regard  to  my-
self, slid  it  appears  1  had  to  return
to  tii  eat  Britain,  to  lose  that  which
bad seized  upon  me. on  a  former

mission,

1  tumid  upon  my  arrival  in  that
land  a  corps  of  very  excellent  Elders.
The  mission  was  in  a  very  good  con-
dition, with  an  earnest  and  deter-
mined lot  of  missionaries  who  were
willing  to  do  anything  that  might
be  required  at  their  hands  for  the
furtherance  of  the  purposes  of  the
Lord.  1  found,  however,  upon
investigation  and  mingling  with  my
brethren,  that  the  road  seemed  to
be  hedged  up  in  a  manner  so  that
they  could  not  accomplish  that  which


their  hearts  desired. After  visiting
various  conferences,  and  giving  the
brethren such instructions  and
counsel  as  the  spirit  suggested  as  to
the  best  method  to  reach  the  people,
getting  their  views  and  the  result  of
;  their  experience  in  the  field,  siune
of  them  having  been  there  tor  a  year
or  two — it  was  decided,  on  the  sug-
gestion uf  several,  that  an  effort  be
made  to  distribute  more  of  the  wjit-
,  ten  word  than  had  heretofore  been
•  done. Communications were  ad-
dressed  to the  Presidency  of  the

far

;  Church,  and  by  their  consent  a  sys-
tem of  truct  distribution  was  inau-
gurated and  has  been  followed  sys-
tematically from  that  day  to  tins.
What  the  result  may  be  in  the  future
we  cannot  say.  Nevertheless,  we
have  done  the  best  we  could  in  our
ministrations  among  the  people,  and
have  striven  with  the  power  that
the  Lord  has  given  us  to  warn  our
fellowmen  of  the  re-establishment  #f
the  Kingdom  of  God.  The  Et iters
that  have  been  sent  to  labor  under
my  watch  care  and  counsel t  have
been  men  of  worth.  It  is  a  mutter
of  pride  to  me  that  those  who  nave
been  sent  to  labor  under  my  direc-
tion have  been  good  and  hum  bio
'men.  Many  of  them  have  been
!  young  men,  reared  in  these  u.niiii-
tntns  ■  -that  were  taken  from  the
farm,  from  the  stock  range,  iVutn
the  frtore,  and  from  the  work  o*mc1l
They  had  received  comparatively
little  training  in  the  ministry ;  but
a  few  weeks  lime  has  'leveloped
them,  and  they  have  gone  forward
in  faith  j  the  Lord  has  blessed  t.iem
in  their  administrations.  1  have
had  much  joy  and  satisfaction  in
laboring  with  them,  and  in  ah  my
ministrations  and  counsels  to  them
1  believe  they  have  listened  to  them
and  sought  to  the  best  of  their  abil-
ity to  carry  out  these  counsels,  and
labor  for  the  advancement  of  the


176  JUUKNAL  Ob

work  of  the  Lord.

Since  I  returned  home  there  has
nothing  afforded  me  greater  pleasure
than  during  this  conference  to  take
into  my  arms  and  press  to  my  breast
the  men  that  have  been  laboring  in
the  same  cause  as  myself;  for  I  respect
and  honor  them  as  I  would  my  own
brother.  These  sentiments  are  from
the  heart  in  regard  to  them,  and  I
trust  that  their  experience  with  me
and  our  acquaintance,  and  the
friendship  that  springs  up  amid
adversity  and  trials,  may  be  as  last-
ing as  life  itself.

I  am  pleased  to  report  that  in
Great  Britain  we  continue  to  do
some  baptizing.  During  my  admin-
istration in  that  land  a  little  new
ground ?  or  rather  ground  that  had
been  worked  years  ago  and  been
abandoned,  has  been  opened  up  in
various  places.  We  have  gained  a
foothold  in  Finland,  and  a  few
have  been  baptized  in  that  land.
Brother  Fj  els  ted  sent  some  native
Elders  into  that  section  of  country,
Some  men  that  were  inspired  with
zeal,  and  who  were  humble,  and  who
were  ready  to  meet  any  trial  and
difficulty  that  might  come  in  their
way,  succeeded  in  opening  a  little
door.  Seed  has  been  sown.  Away
north  on  the  borders  of  Prussia  and
Russia,  an  opening  has  been  made
through  a  native  who  had  been  or-
dained by  Brother  J.  A.  Smith,  of
Cache  Valley,  and  there  is  a  prospect
of  the  Gospel  being  introduced  in
that  country.  We  have  also  made
a  little  effort  to  introduce  the  Gospel
in  Austria.  Brother  Beisinger  has
been  there  and  labored  some  time.
Brother  Hammer  was  there  also,  but
was  run  off  by  the  authorities.
Brother  Beisinger  and  Brother  Jen-
nings are  now,  I  suppose,  in  Aus-
tria, probably  in  Bohemia,  I  felt
while  in  Switzerland,  in  December,
that  it  would  be  impossible  for  me


disco  uuss  Eh.

to  return  home  without  another
effort  being  made  to  open  up  the
Gospel  to  Austria,  although  the
brethren  had  already  suffered  con-
siderable in  that  land.  The  author-
ities there  do  not  treat  our  Elders
as  they  should  ;  but  I  trust  that  by
wisdom  and  prudence,  the  Gospel
may  be  preached,  ami  that  the  in-
habitants thereof — a  fine  race  of
people — may  sense  their  position
and  embrace  the  truth.  We  have
also  made  an  effort  to  establish  our-
selves in  Turkey,  and  I  trust  that  a
work  will  be  opened  up  there.  A
tew  baptisms  have  already  been
made.

The  brethren  throughout  the
British  Isles  have  been  making  -  ef-
forts  to  introduce  the  Gospel  in
every  corner  and  place  where  oppor-
tunity presented  itself.  I  would
say,  however,  that  the  England  of
a  few  years  ago  is  not  the  England
of  to-day.  While  the  same  spirit
of  liberty — the  love  of  the  rights
of  man — may  exist  among  the  Eng-
lish people,  still  that  spirit  of  hospi-
tality that  characterized  them  years
and  years  ago,  seems  to  be  on  the
wane.  Many  people  are  out  of  em-
ployment* the  numbers  that  are
wandering  around  begging  their
bread,  closes,  in  a  measure  the  hearts
of  the  people,  and  they  feel  that
they  cannot  carry  the  load*  that
they  have  been  carrying.  Still,
among  the  Latter-day  Saints,  the
'  same  hospitality  is  to  be  found.
Their  hearts  are  as  warm  to-day  as
they  ever  were.

We  have  made  recently — through
the  labors  of  Brothers  Wilson  an  I
Marshall,  two  Irish  brethren — a*i
opening  in  the  north  of  Ireland,
and  we  trust  that  with  care  much
good  will  result  in  that  neighbor-
hood Some  very  fine  people  have
embraced  the  Gospel  there,  people
in  good  circumstances, and  who>


HATRED  TOWARDS  THE  SAINTS  IN  EUROPE.


177


inspired  with  zeal,  desire  to  spread
the  principles  of  the  Gospel.  And
thus  little  by  little  we  accomplish
the  object  of  our  mission,  and  the
world  is  being  warned.  When  I  lett
England  there  were  three  valley
Elders  in  Ireland,  and  I  hope  others
may  be  added  to  their  number  be-
fore  long,  so  that  the  work  may
spread  at  least  in  the  protestant
portion  of  that  country.  I  am  in-
clined to  believe  that  there  are
hundreds  and  thousands  of  people
in  Ireland  who  will  receive  the  Gospel.
My  prejudices  in  regard  to  the  Irish
people  have  been  wiped  away  in
mingling  among  them,  I  find  them
among  the  purest  of  the  stocks  upon
the  earth*  Virtue  is  held  at  a  high
premium  among  them.  The  statis-
tics of  Great  Britain  show  this  fact ;
that  illegitimate  births  in  Ireland
constitute  3  per  cent.  In  England
six,  in  Scotland  nine.  I  say  this
speaks  volumes  for  Ireland,  and  I
trust  that  the  Gospel  may  spread  in
that  land  and  that  thousands  may
receive  its  truths.

I  have  visited  nearly  all  parts  of
the  mission — at  least  where  there
are  any  Saints,  and  some  portions
where  there  are  none,  I  went  to
Italy  in  the  hope  that  I  might  see
somtf*  chance  of  making  an  opening
in  that  country.  I  came  very  near
having  two-  of  the  Elders  starved
by  staying  there.  I  was  determined,
however,  to  try  and  introduce  the
Gospel.  There  are  some  sections
of  the  country  that  are  Protestant,
and  I  trust  there  may  be  a  time
come  when  the  Gospel  will  spread
among  that  people,  But  1  regard
Italy  as  in  such  a  condition  that
there  are  but  few  chances  at  the
present  time  for  any  opening  to  be
marie.  The  Italians  are  bound  up
in  the  religious  faith  that  they  have
been  reared  in,  or  they  are  infidel
almost  entirely. ■ I  noticed  in  my

No.  IXC


attendance  at  the  churches,  that
they  are  usually  well  filled  with
priests  and  beggars,  and  that  few,
comparatively  speaking,  of  the  well-
to-do  classes,  or  the  middle  classes,
or  the  better  informed  classes,
were  paying  any  attention  what-
ever to  religious  observance.  ;

I  have  also  during  my  adminis-
tration in  the  British  mission,  sought
to  have  the  Gospel  preached  among
the  French  people.  Brother  Bnnot
ami  Brother  West  made  an  effort
on  the  Island  of  Jersey.  Brother
Bunot  was  sent  to  France,  and  he
stayed  there  just  as  long  as  he
could  possibly  live,  using  his  own
means,  and  striving  by  every  means
in  his  power  to  open  some  door  to
his  countrymen.  Brother  Bunot  is
a  man  who  was  educated  for  the
Catholic  ministry,  a  man  of  intelli-
gence ami  learning,  and  a  humble
man  who  did  everything  in  his
power  to  warn  his  countrymen.
He  was  not  successful  in  accomplish-
ing the  desires  of  his  heart.  On  the
borders  of  Switzerland  and  France
a  number  of  the  Elders  have  labored,
and  while  we  have  not  reaped  as  we
could  have  wished  to  have  done,
still  there  has  been  satisfaction  in
the  labors  we  have  performed ;
for  we  realize  that  it  is  not  only  a
day  of  gleaning  and  gathering  the
people,  but  it  is  also  a  day  of  warning.

1  will  say  here,  that  about  the
time  our  brethren  in  the  southern
States  were  murdered  in  cold  blood,
a  wave  of  hatred  seemed  to  have
b§BO  engendered  in  the  minds  of  the
people  in  every  direction.  The
prf*s  of  Europe  teemed  with  the
most  horrid  stories  that  can  be  im-
agined. Everything  that  had  ever
been  thought  of;  everything  that  had
ever  been  manufactured  for  partisan
purposes  in  our  own  land  was  scat-
tered broat least  throughout  Europe,
and  the  masses  of -the  people  were

Vol  XXVI.


178


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


warned  in  every  direction  in  regard
to  lit5.  And  nut  only  were  they
warned  thrush  the  newspapers,
but  lectin  ei*  lieuan  to  take  the  field

-

in  everv  direction,  and  incite  the
people  not  III  avoid  our  meetings,
but  on  the  contrary  to  follow  us  up
and  to  mob  us,  giving  us  no  chance
to  explain  lo  lhem  the  principles  of
the  (Josjel,  i-r  represent  ourselves
as  we  ikoutti,  1  his  feeling  has  been
growing  i ■  ^  power  from  that  time
until  ihiMnnr  I  left  that  land.  But
as  hereto;oie  a  cool  wave  will  by  and
by  come  along,  and  as  a  result  of  the
heated  condition  of  the  people  over
theMoi  nion  pioblem,  and  the  efforts
that  ha\e  1m  hi  made  to  impede  the
Lord's  vuikt  people  will  begin  to
inquire,  thoughtful  people  will  look
into  ti  e  sin  li,  and  the  work  will
continue  lu  puw  in  the  future  as  it
has  done  in  the  past.  It  is  tine  that
people  do  nu  come  by  hundreds
and  thon^tn-i*  to  hearthe  good  word
of  lite  a«-d  j-:  I \  ;i t ion  ;  but  the  eyes
of  the  \* urtd  ftie  directed  to  this  our
mountain  in  me  They  recognize
the  foiee  ol  li  e  utterance  of  Henry
Ward  ]>*  ecner.  when  he  said  :  "Gen-
tlemen, .^j)  w  i  -tt  you  will,  but  yon-
der in  ihi  li'-eky  Mountains  is  the
phenome,  o.,  ui  the  nineteenth  cen-
tury.11 H  is  a  living  lact  that  peo-
ple in  evny  land  and  clime  are
turning  then  eves  towards  this
region  of  Kun.tr^  and  wondering
what  will  lie  ihe  upshot  of  the  pro-
blem that  lfr  being  worked  out  by  the
Latter  t lay  Saints  in  their  western
home.  jVIen  of  intelligence  are
traveling  ;  they  are  mingling  among
our  people  ;  they  see  their  industry  ;
ithey  recognize  the  perseverance  they
iiave  manifested  ;  they  see  the  oh-
stacles  they  have  overcome  ;  they
recognize  in  them  a  growing  race
that  knows  no  failure,  that  meets
no  rebuff,  that  cannot  understand
,nor  sense what defeat means ;


:  and  th**ysee  in  the  Latter-day  Saints
the  growth  and  development  of  a
power  that  will  accomplish  its  object
in  the  earth,  ami  that  object  Deity
has  designed  it  should  accomplish —
the  gathering  in  of  the  honest  in
heart,  the  establishment  of  right-

j  eousness,  the  combating  of  wicked-
ness, the  driving  back  of  the  forces

,  of  evil  as  they  cluster  aiouud  the
hearts  of  men  and  that  are  leading
men  step  by  step  to  inevitable  shame
and  dest ruction.

It  affords  me  pleasure,  my  brethren
and  sister*,  to  again  put  my  feet  on
the  soil  ot  America.  I  recognize
in  it  the  home  of  a  free  mam  There
may  be  those  who  desire  to  pervert
this  freedom,  who  may  seek  to  en-
gender strife  anc'  drive  us  from  the
soil  upon  which  we  live  ;  there  may
be  those  who  seek  to  trample  upon
the  rights  and  liberties  of  man  ;  but
I  believe  from  the  hot  torn  of  my
heart  that  Deity  has  stamped  it
upon  this  soil,  that  He  has  written
it  throughout  the  universe,  that,  in
this  land  His  work  should  prosper?

I  that  it  should  go  forward  and  in-

j  crease  until  its  great  destiny  shall  be
accomplished  ;  that  this  is  the  *pot
chosen,  that  here  it  will  be  nourished,
here  it  will  grow,  here  it  will  go  for-
ward, ami  the  nations  of  the  earth
will  look  upon  it  and  recognize  it  as
the  great  force  that  will  conquer  the

|  earth  and  bring  subject  to  it  the
powers  that  exist  thereon  ;  and  all
this  will  be  brought  about  by  the
law  of  righteousness,  the  law  of
truth,  the  law  of  God  gi  ven  to  man-
kind for  their  guidance  and  control,
and  they  will  accept  it  and  live  in
accordance  with  it*  principles.  You
and  I  may  tread  a  thorny  path  :  it
may  be  strewn  with  rugged  places  ;
we  may  break  the  flesh  upon  our
hands,  and  be  bruised  in  our  forward
movement;  but  the  work  will  ad-
vance and  progress. Deity  is  our


THE  SAINTS  NEED  NOT  FEAR.


179


friend,  our  guide,  our  protector.  All
we  need  do  as  a  people  is  to  keep
our  eye  upon  the  mark  of  divine
truth  ;  move  forward  without  fear,
and  ask  no  favors  so  far  as  mankind
is  concerned  ;  only  seek  to  do  right
by  our  fellow  creatures.  Hate  no
one.  I  dare  not  ha  to  any  man  upon
the  face  of  the  earth.  No  matter
how  vile,  how  wicked,  how  corrupt
he  maybe,  if  I  find  him  in  want  of
a  friend  I  would  extend  to  liira  the
hand  of  friendship  ;  I  would  give
him  bread  if  he  was  hungry  ;  water
if  he  was  thirsty  ;  clothing  if  lie  was
naked  ;  for  1  would  recognize  in  him
the  fact  thai  lie  was  a  creation  of
my  Father,  and  I  won  hi  not  dare  to
hate  him,  no  matter  how  vile  lie
might  be.  1  might  hate  the  princi-
ples lie  had  espoused  ;  the  wicked
acts  of  which  lie  was  guilty  ;  but  I
would  recognize  in  him  something
that  I  should  seek  to  bene  tit,  bless
and  save,  and  1  would  u*e  all  the
powers  Go  i  had  bestowed  upon  me
in  that  direction.

"  Brother  Smith,1'  some  may  say,
*'  don't  you  feel  uneasy  over  the
condition  of  thin???  that  now  exists
in  our  Territory Vf  I  have  some-
times wished  that  things  were  not  as
they  are-  As  I  have  wandered  i 1 1
the  e*frth  MM  stood  up  in  the  streets
and  parks  and  halls  preaching  the
Gospel,  1  have  .said  to  myself,  twish
that  my  Fa  titer  had  not  set  me  to
this  work  ;  1  wish  that  these  tiling
were  not  Hsij  m  e  1  at  my  hamU.  1
have  sometimes  felt  liiuid  in  being
brought  in  c>  uaet  with  the  worhl,
and  the  ejl',»t  ts  that  were  being
made  against  me  and  my  brethren.
1  have  wished  a  emihl  ue  otherwise,
and  yet  wlm.i  I  &ioji  and  reflect,
when  1  look  nvrr  iiu?  history  of  the
past,  whim  I  *»  i  lthr  lacuna  history
brings  them  >i.s,  I  sec  no  other
way,  I  see  "i ier  road  to  travel.
Every  fibre  of  my  being  is  convinced


of  the  truth  of  this  Gospel.  It  is
stamped  upon  every  feature,  upon
every  part  of  my  being.  I  regard  it
as  dearer  than  life  and  everything
else  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  Why
need  I  be  fearful,  why  need  I  trem-
ble, why  needd  be  wrought  up  at
the  prospect  that  is  before  us  %  No
great  system  has  ever  been  estab-
lished upon  the  face  of  the  earth
without  much  labor  and  persever-
ance, Look  at  the  inventions  that
have  been  brought  out  and  the  efforts
that  have  been  directed  against  them,
even  in  those  things  that  were  to  be
utilized  for  our  own  clothing,  for
our  own  movements  from  place  to
place,  or  for  the  comfort  and  con-
venience of  our  homes.  The  men
that  have  invented  these  things
have  met  with  continual  persecution.
They  have  struggled  against  nature
itself  \  and  why  need  we,  who  have
had  given  to  us  the  great  plan  of  life
and  salvation,  that  which  will  bring
us  back  iii to  the  presence  of  God,
that  which  stamps  upon  our  souls
the  prospect  of  eternal  union  with
our  wives  and  our  children,  and  of
mingling  with  our  friends  and  rela-
tives that  have  gone  before — why
need  we  fear  the  hand  of  our  enemies.
Who  cannot  stand  a  few  weeks  of
imprisonment,  a  few  months  of
torture,  a  lew  years  o- difficulty,  that
they  may  offer  an  offering  in  right-
eousness to  that  God  that  called
them  forth  I  Not  one  of  us.  There-
fore, so  far  as  [  am  concerned,  my
brethren  and  sisters, asan  individual,
1  am  perfectly  happy,  jusc  as  happy
as  1  can  possibly  be  under  the  ci rcu in-
stances in  wiiicti  we  are  placed.  I  have
no  worry  nor  concern.  One  of  my
uncles,  whose  home  I  left  but  a  few
weeks  ago,  warned  me  that  certain
things  were  inevitable  ;  that  it  was
impossible  for  us  to  hope  to  tight
longer  these  things  our  pronounced
enemies  were  seeking  to  bring  upon


leu


JUUHNAL  UK  DISCO  URhE*.


us*  All  I  said  to  him  was,  "  Wait
and  see.1'  That  is  what  I  propose
to  do — wait  and  see,  just  wait  and
see.  I  have  been  waiting  from  my
childhood,  and  expect  to  continue
to  wait.  It  is  possible  that  a  tew
men  like*  myself  maybe  hustled  with-
in the  prison  walls  ;  it  is  possible
tli at  a  few  "  Mormons"  may  be
outraged  and  banished  from  their
native  laud  ;  it  is  possible  that  men
may  follow  us  to  the  death  ;  but
while  men  die,  systems  continue  to
live  and  grow,  and  the  powers  of
earth  and  hell  can  never  check  their
advancement  and  development.
Such  is  the  case  in  regard  to  the
work  we  have  embraced.  It  is  a
living  work.  It  is  one  of  the  active
forces  in  nature.  It  is  backed  by
the  powers  of  heaven,  and  ye  are
its  emissaries  sent  here  at  this  time
to  aid  in  its  advancement.  The
Gospel  must  be  preached ;  the
nations  of  the  earth  must  be  warned,
and  this  nation,  or  any  other  nation,
will  fall  beneath  the  judgment  of
an  enraged  God  if  they  reject  the
message  of  glad  tidings,  which
our  Father  has  offered  them  for
their  exaltation  in  His  kingdom.
The  work  of  God  must  conquer  every
ioe,  it  must  overcome  every  opposing
force,  and  it  will  accomplish  that
destiny  as  sure  as  there  is  a  God  in
heaven.  Write  it  upon  the  page  of
history  ;  stamp  it  upon  your  souls;
for  deity  has  designed  that  it  should
be  the  case,

I  find  in  mingling  among  the  peo-
ple in  the  east,  that  the  moving  force
to-day  against  the  Latter-day  Saints
is  not  the  politicians  of  the  country.
The  politicians,  so  far  as  they  are
concerned  would  care  little  about
us,  but  there  are  behind  them  the
people.  There  are  first  the  minis*
ters  of  the  Gospel,  I  do  not  desire
to  sp3ak  harshly  of  the  ministers  that
live  among  us,  or  make  charges


I


against  them,  for  I  have  been  away
for  some  time ;  but  this  fact  is  patent
to  every  one — that  the  fervor  against
the  ••Mormons*  is  worked  up  right
from  our  own  homes,  and  largely  by
Christian  ministers.  Letters  are
written  to  the  ministers  of  the
country  ;  the  ministers  work  upon
their  Hocks.  Go  among  many  of
the  peoples  of  the  east — among  the
old  Puritan  stock,  of  which  my
lathers  are  descendants — and  you
will  find  that  the  tales  of  the  hor-
rors of  Morraonisra  are  of  the  most
startling  character.  This  I  discov-
ered while  visiting  among  my  rela-
tives in  New  England.

They  were  all  more  or  less  preju-
diced against  Mormon  ism  ;  but  I
trust  that  the  little  light  I  was  able
to  throw  upon  the  question  may  re-
sult in  good.  The  New  En  glanders
as  a  rule,  have  but  small  families,
arid  the  evil  practices  that  are  re-
sorted to  by  many  to  prevent  their
having  children  at  all,  will  be  the
means  of  carrying  them  down  to
the  pit.

Mow,  brethren  and  sisters,  whom
have  we  wronged  1  Whom  have  we
wronged  by  peopling  this  desert
land  1  Nobody*  If  there  was  any-
body \v rouged  it  was  the  red  man,,
and  he  has  not  been  wronged  but
blessed  ;  for  we  have  tried  to  feed
instead  of  tight  him.  The  first
principle  of  the  Gospel  is  faith*
Whom  have  we  hurt  if  we  have
frith  ?  Then  there  is  the  principle
of  repentance,  Whom  have  we
injured  if  we  have  repented?  Is
anybody  hurt  1  Is  the  government
hurt  ?  Does  repentance  beget  hos-
tility to  the  government !  If  we
make  a  covenant  with  God  in  the
waters  of  baptism  that  we  will  be
pure,  is  anybody  wronged?  No!'
Have  we  plotted  for  the  overthrow*
and  destruction  of  the  government
in  which  wre  live  because  the  hands


ALL  WOMEN  SHOULD  HAVE  THti  PRIVILEGE  OF  MARRYING.  181


of  the  servants  of  God  have  been
laid  upon  our  heads  and  they  have
bestowed  upon  us  the  Holy  Ghost,
the  witness  of  the  Spirit  that  shall
guide  us  into  all  truth  ?  No.  Have
you  or  I  made  a  contract  with  our
God  to  wage  antagonism  to  the
institutions  of  the  country  in  which
we  live,  or  sign  allegiance  to  any
other  government  upon  the  earth  ?
I  have  not.  I  have  sworn  allegiance
to  the  government  in  which  I  live.
My  labors  as  a  man  are  in  the  inter-
ests of  humanity— the  freedom  of!
man  ;  that  his  conscience  may  not
be  chained  up  ;  that  his  body  may
not  be  bowed  down  with  the  yoke
t  of  tyranny;  but  that  before  God
he  may  stand  erect,  fearless  and
strong,  determined  to  benefit  and
bless  the  human  iamily.  Need  we
be  fearful  in  regard  to  these  things  1
I  think  not,  there  is  one  that  will
recompense  at  the  last  day  ;  and  the
man  who  denies  the  -other  his  liber-
ties, who  binds  him  in  chains,  who
ties  him  to  the  rack,  is  the  man  who
should  tremble  when  the  reckoning
of  Deity  is  made  with  His  sons  and
daughters.  We  might  go  through
all  the  principles  of  the  faith  we
have  espoused  and  then  ask  who  is
wronged  t  We  have  made  grass
grow  where  it  did  not  grow  before.
If  we  have  built  homes,  if  we  pay
taxes  for  the  sustenance  and  govern-
ment of  the  cities  and  towns  that
are  to  be  found  upon  this  once  sterile
spot,  and  which  whs  once  the  great
American  desert,  who  is  wronged  ]
No  one.  Who  has  raised  a  stand-
ard against  the  government  in  which
we  live  \  Not  one  of  us*  But  you
believe  in  the  Priesthood,  You  ac-
cept of  a  system  of  government
that  is  most  perfect  on  the  face  of
the  earth.  Who  is  wronged  if  we
do  ?  You  have  not  changed  it.  It
has  not  changed  you.  It  has  not
wronged  you  ;  and  that  which  we


have  accepted  we  have  accepted  of
our  own  free  will  and  choice,  re-
cognizing the  fact  that  Deity  has
required  it  at  our  hands.  Who  13
injured  if  my  wife  makes  a  sacrifice
with  me  and  takes  into  our  home
one  of  her  sisters  and  makes  her
my  wife*  If  she  makes  the  sacrifice  ;
if  I  shoulder  the  additional  respon-
sibility, and  open  the  door  that  will
save  one  of  Eve's  fair  daughters,
who  is  wronged  S  Do  I  plot  for  the
overthrow  of  the  government,  the
breaking  in  pieces  of  the  powers
that  be,  because  I  desire  that  my
sister  or  my  daughter,  my  aunt  or
my  cousin  may  be  preserved  from
the  evils  thrown  around  them  by  the
systems  that  man  has  created  %  No,
God  has  laid  upon  every  woman  the
decree  placed  upon  mother  Eve —
multiply  and  replenish  the  earth.  In
sections  of  the  land  in  which  we  live,
thousands  of  women  to-day  must
become  the  playthings  of  some  vile
wretch,  if  they  answer  the  design  of
their  being.  My  whole  being  "is
convinced  of  the  fact — that  it  is  a
decree  of  God  Himself  that  these
women  shoal  1  have  a  chance  to
marry,  and  that  He  Himself  has
opened  the  door.  He  Himself  has
es  tab  lis  lied  the  principle*  I  want  my
daughters  married  as  I  desired  to
marry  myself ;  I  want  them  honored
wives,  whether  plural  ones  or  other-
wise, no  matter  who  may  seek  to
brand  their  offspring  as  infamous.  I
know — for  God  has  given  me  the
witness,  He  has  stamped  it  upon
tliis  heart — that  they  who  come
through  that  lineage  are  as  much
honored  of  God  and  approved  of
Him,  as  any  that  have  ever  walked
His  footstool  from  the  day  that  this
earth  was  peopled  until  the  day  in
which  we  live.  This  principle  was
given  for  a  purpose,  and  that  pur-
pose is  the  salvation  of  the  female
sex  as  well  as  the  male  sex. Go  to


1*2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Great  Britain,  ami  you  will  find  a
million  more  women  than  men
moving  upon  the  streets  of  the  great
cities.  Go  up  the  Strand  in  Lon-
don ;  Go  up  Lime  Street,  in  Liver-
pool; and  the  streets  in  Manchester;
go  into  any  of  the  leading  streets  of
the  great  cities  of  the  world,  and
gaze  upon  as  fine  specimens  of
womanhood  as  our  Father  ever  put
breath  into*  AY  hat  are  their  pros-
pects in  life?  What  is  written  across
their  brow  1  Infamy,  shame — going
to  their  graves  the  victims  of  loath-
some disease.  It  is  not  one,  it  is
not  two  or  three  ;  but  it  is  millions
of  them  that  are  going  this  inevita-
ble road.  Who  is  responsible  ?  Who
placed  upon  them  the  interdict,  pre-
venting them  from  fulfilling  the  ob-
ject of  their  creation  1  Not  God  ;
for  He  made  His  law  so  liberal  and


established  principle  so  correct  that
there  was  no  necessity  for  such  a
tiling.  It  is  man  that  has  introduced
it ;  it  is  man  that  has  overturned
the  com!  it  ion  of  society  j  it  is  man
that  has  turned  his  daughter  into
the  street,  I  say  again  and  again
that  the  i£  Mormon"  people  can  wait
the  result  of  this  thing  without  fear;
they  can  afford  to  suffer  pains  and
penalties  if  that  will  but  open  the
door  by  which  the  fair  daughters  of
Eve  can  be  redeemed  from  the  posi-
tion in  which  they  are  placed  and
be  made  honored  and  respected
women  of  society*

The  speaker  concluded  by  reit-
erating his  allegiance  to  the  Amer-
ican government,  and  exhorting  the
Saints  to  be  faithful  in  keeping  the
commandments  of  God  in  all  things.


D1SCOUKSE BY PRESIDENT GEORGE Q,  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Jfternoon,  September

REPORTED  BT  JOHN  IEVIHH


THE  LATTER -BAY  SAINTS  ATTRACT  MUCH  ATTENTION — THEY  ARE  THE
VICTIMS  OF  SCANDAL  AND  FALSEHOOD,  BUT  HAVE  BEEN  SUSTAINED*
BY  THE  SPIRIT  OF  PEACE  —  GOD  HAS  REVEALED  TO  US  THE  PUR-
POSES OF  OUR  EXISTENCE  —  GOD  IS  THE  FATHER  OF  OUR  SPIRITS
—  HE  HAS  GIVEN  US  AN  AGENCY— GOD  FORESEEING  THAT  ADAM
WOULD  FAIL  PREPARED  A  REDEEMER* — WE  ARE  HERE  ON  THE
EARTH  TO  PROVE  OUR  INTEGRITY  AND  TO  OBTAIN  A  KNOWLEDGE
OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL  —  THE  CONSCIENCE  OF  MAN  IS  THE  SPIRIT  OF
GOD  PROMPTING  US  TO  DO  RIGHT  —  GOD  IN  HIS  WISDOM  HIDES
FROM  US  THE GLORIES  BEYOND  THE  VEIL — CONCLUSION.

We  are  living  in  a  very  peculiar  age,  I  which  attracts  the  attention  of  man-
and  as  a  people  we  are  doing  a  work  I  kind. Our  name  is  known  for  good


THE  SAINTS  BLESSED  WITH  THE  SPIRIT  OF  PFACE.


183


and  evil  in  all  lands.  At  no  time
in  the  history  of  mankind  that  we
have  any  accouut  of,  has  there  been
a  people  of  uur  number  who  have
attracted  as  much  attention  and
created  as  great  an  interest  in  the
minds  uf  the  public  as  these  have
who  live  in  these  mountains  and  are
known  as  fci  Mormons"  or  Latter-
dav  Saints.

The  a^e  in  which  we  live  is  one
in  which  intelligence  .travels  with
great  rapidity. Knowledge  is  com-
municated with  ease,  and  by  means
of  the  newspaper, the  telegraph
wiie,  and  other  facilities  which  the
age  afford^  everything  connected
with  us  as  a  people  is  heralded  from
one  end  of  the  earth  to  the  other  in
common  with  all  the  acts  of  the
children of  men.  Unfortunately,
however,  with  these  facilities  for  the
transmission of true  knowledge,
there  are  also  equal  facilities  for  the
transmission  of  falsehood  and  mis-
representation. We  have  been  the
victims  of  falsehood  and  slander.
Herculean  efforts  have  been  made
to  create  false  impressions  concern-
ing the  Kingdom  of  Gcd  and  the
Church  which  our  Father  in  heaven
has  established. It  is  well  for  us,
howayer,  that  we  have  been  pre-
pared for  this. In  the  commence-
ment of  this  work  of  our  God  they
who  received  it  were  warned  of  the
character  of  the  warfare  that  would
be  instituted  against them.  The
Lord  revealed  in  great  plainness
that  it  might  cost  them  everything
they  held  dear  upon  the  earth,  and
that  the  warfare  that  would  be  waged
against  them  would  be  one  of  un-
ceasing hatred. These  difficulties
and  trials,  therefore,  have  not  come
upon  the  people  without  some  degree
Of  preparation  for  them. The  Lord
gave  the  spirit of  prophecy  ami
revelation  unto  His  servants  and
unto  His  people  to  prepare  them  for


these  events,  and  there  is  nothing
that  has  yet  taken  place  connected
with  this  work  of  our  Gil  that  has
not  been  made  manifest  through  the
revelations?  which  Hi*  has  given.
This  has  been  :t  grea*.  cause  of
strength  to  the  people  and  has
prepared  them  to  hear  with  some
degree  of  equanimity  a  id  fortitude,
the  trials  and  tlie  affl  cHons  to  which

they  have  be*n  subjected.  It  is
well  for  us  that  this  has  been  the

I  case. It  is  well  for  us,  also,  that

1  accompanying  the  wurk  oi  our  God,
therj  has  been  a  spirit  of  peace

;  bestowed upon those who  have

i  espoused  that  work.  If  this  had
not  been  the  case  how  unfortunate

I  our  lot  would  have  been  !  How
unbearable  !  We  could  never  have
endured  that  which  we  have  been
called  to  pass  through  had  there  not
been  this  spirit  of  peace  that  God
promised  in  the  beginning  to  bestow
upon  us. I  douh".  myself  whether

-  there  can  be  found  anywhere  within
the  confines  of  the  globe  another
people  living  in  greater  peace,  in  the
enjoyment  of  more  happiness,  pure

I  happiness,  than  can  be  found  in
the^e  vallevs  from  north  to  south.
While  all  manner  of  evil  has  been
spoken  against  the  Latter-day  Saints,
while  our  names  have  been  every*
where  cast  out  as  evil,  God  has  given
compensation  to  us  by  bestowing
upon  us  these  blessings  to  which  I
have  referred.

It  is  well  for  us  to  lu<  »k  at  the  cir-
cumstances which  surround  us  and
to  take  a  proper  survey  of  all  the
events  that  lie  before  us,  that  are
likely  to  take  place  in  the  future

i  connected  with  us. God  has  given

;  unto  us  the  truth.  This  we  have
received  accompanied  by  abundant
testimonies.  Those  who  have  entered
into  covenants  with  God,  who  have
gone  down  into  the  waters  of  baptism

i  in  obedience  to  His  requirements,


1«4


JOURNAL OF  OISCOUHSES


submitting  to  the  ordinances  that
He  has  instituted  for  salvation,  and
have  done  this  in  sincerity  and  with
purity  of  purpose,  have  received  for
themselves  testimonies  from  God
respecting  the  divinity  of  the  work
with  which  they  have  become  iden-
tified .  It  is  of  the  utmost  import-
ance that  we  should  cherish  this
spirit  and  feeding,  that  it  should  be
with  us  constantly  in  our  movements,
in  every  act  of  our  lives,  and  that  we
should  hu  live  that  the  Holy  Ghost
will  rest  down  in  power  and  in  testi-
mony upon  us.  It  is  not  only  neces-
sary that  those  who  stand  at  the
bead  should  know  lor  themselves
concerning  this  work,  its  divinity
and  the  purposes  of  God  connected
with  it,  but  tli at  every  member,
however  humble  and  obscure,  should
in  like  manner  receive  of  that  spirit
and  enjoy  its  presence  and  its  power,
have  its  gifts  resting  down  upon
him  or  her.  Each  member  should
stand  as  a  living  witness  of  the  truth
that  the  Father  has  revealed,  and
which  each  of  us  who  have  com
plied  with  His  requirements  have
received,

God  has  placed  us  here  upon  the
earth  to  accomplish  important  pur-
poses. These  purposes  have  been
in  part  revealed  unto  us.  Probably
it  is  not  possible  for  men  and  women
in  this  mortal  state  of  existence  to
comprehend  all  the  designs  of  God
connected  with  man's  existence  upon
the  earth  :  but  much  has  been  re-
vealed upon  this  subject  to  us  as  a
people.  In  this  respect,  if  in  no
other,  the  Latter,  day  Saints  should
be  the  happiest,  the  most  contented,
the  most  joyous  of  all  people  that
live ;  for  not  only  has  the  knowledge
of  the  past  been  communicated  to
US,  but  the  present,  that  which  is
connected  with  our  probation  here,
and  also  much  knowledge  concerning
the  future.


Now,  if  a  man  can  only  know
whence  he  came,  why  he  is  here,  and
that  which  awaits  him  after  this  life,
it  seems  to  me  that  he  has  abundant
causes  of  happiness  within  his  grasp.
Much  of  the  unhappiness  and  uncer-
tainty that  prevail  to  day  in  the
minds  of  mankind  arise  from  ignor-
ance upon  these  points.  Hence,  we
see  the  course  that  many  of  the  chil-
dren of  men  are  taking.  If  a  man
knew  exactly  why  God  sent  him  here,
the  object  that  He  had  in  giving
unto  him  a  mortal  existence,  do  you
think  that  men  or  women  who  had
this  knowledge  would  be  guilty  of
suicide,  would  have  any  disposition
to  cut  off  their  own  existence  and
to  destroy  that  gilt  which  God  in
Mis  mercy  has  given  unto  us]  I  do
not  believe  that  any  human  being
who  properly  comprehends  the  ob-
ject that  God  has  had  in  placing  man
here  upon  the  earth,  and  who  has  a
desire  to  carry  out  that  purpose,
would  ever  attempt  self- destruction.
He  would  shrink  from  such  an  aet
with  horror,  and  would  never  dare
to  destroy  the  earthly  tabernacle
given  him  by  God.  In  these  respects,
as  I  have  sab  I,  we  possess  rare
advantages.  It  is  a  great  favor  front
God  to  have  this  light.  There  is
no  unwillingness  on  His  part  to
communicate  it  ;  but  there  is  an
unwillingness  on  the  part  of  the
children  of  men  to  receive  it  when
it  is  communicated.

The  Bible  tells  us  we  came  from
God.  The  Bible  tells  us  He  is  the
Father  of  our  spirits.  How  is  He
the  Father  of  our  spirits  ?  This  is
an  important  question,  and  one  that
each  of  us  should  endeavor  to  un-
derstand. I  think  it  is  of  the  utmost
importance  that  the  Latter*  day
Saints  should  understand  and  be
able  to  comprehend  this  question
thoroughly ;  because  upon  the  proper
understanding  of  this,  must,  to  a


THE  EXISTENCE  OF  MAN


185


great  extent,  depend  their  actions
in  this  life.

It  has  been  argued  that  because
we  have  no  recollection  of  any  pre*
vious  state  of  being,  our  existence
must,  therefore,  have  commenced  at
our  birth — that  that  was  the  incep-
tion of  existence  so  far  as  we  are
concerned.  This  is  the  general  be-
lief throughout  Christendom,  No
body  of  worshippers  who  call  them-
selves Christians,  that  we  have  any
account  of,  have  any  belief  in  a
pre-existent  state  lor  man.  They
consider  his  birth  into  mortality  as
the  beginning  of  life  for  him.  Yet
the  belief  is  universal  among  them
that  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,
and  the  Redeemer  of  the  world,  had
a  pre  existence  It  is  the  corner-
stone of  their  faith.  If  Jesus  did
not  have  life  till  He  appeared  in
mortality,  then  their  faith  in  Him  is
vain,  for  He  would  not  be  God*  But
they  profess  to  believe  that  He  is
Got!,  the  Son  ;  that  He  dwelt  in
the  heavens  and  was  the  Creator  of
all  tilings  before  He  took  upon  Him
self  humanity.  In  believing  this
they  are  correct.  But  why  they
should  be  willing  to  believe  tins
concerning  our  elder  brother  Jesus,
and  ftt  the  same  time  be  mi  willing
to  believe  that  the  whole  family  of
man  also  existed  in  the  heavens
with  the  Father  before  they  came
here,  is  not  clear.  Those  who  saw
the  Savior  while  in  mortality  saw
nothing  in  Him  to  distinguish  Him
particularly  from  other  mortals.
Doubtless  those  who  were  enlight-
ened by  the  Spirit  of  God  could  per-
ceive evidences  of  His  superiority
over  ordinary  men,  and  of  His  divin-
ity. But  did  Pilate]  Did  the
Pharisees  and  Scribes  1  In  the  eyes
of  the  latter  classes  He  was  a  com-
mon man  and  a  vulgar  impostor  who
deserved  an  ignominious  death.  His
divine  glory  was  veiled  from  mortal


!  eyes.  Would  any  one  have  suspected
from  the  appearance  of  the  Savior,
from  His  teachings,  from  His  treat-
ment  of  His  disciples,  that  He
j  differed  so  widely  from  them  as  to
be  of  au  entirely  distinct  species  %
Certainly  not  He  taught  to  them
and  to  others  the  great  doctrine  of
equality.  If  they  would  obey  cer-
tain laws,  conform  to  certain  require-
ments, they  were  to  be  His  equals,
that  is,  be  one  with  Him,  as  He
would  be  one  with  the  Father,  In
this  teaching  He  offended  the  Jews.
Their  dislike  to  these  ideas  of  His,
found  expression  in  th*;  words  :
"  that  thou  being  a  man,  makest
,  thyself  God/*  His  disciples  had
the  right  to  think  from  all  that  He
taught,  that  if  He  had  been  with
the  Father  before  coming  into  this
mortal  life,  they  also  had  been  there.
If  they  were  to  he  so  closely  asso-
ciated with  Him  in  the  great  future
what  was  there  to  suggest  to  them

that  they  had  not  bo™  intimately
connected  with  Him  in  the  past?
if  He  had  been  chosen  from  before
the  foundation  of  the  earth  to  do
!  the  work  which  He  was  then  doing,
,  what  inconsistency  would  there  he
j  in  their  being  chosen  also,  as  His
ministers and associates, at  the
same  time  I To  look  at  them  as
they  traveled  and  labored  together
throughout  Jewry,  there  was  no-
thing unreasonable  in  the  idea  of
their  common  origin.

The  Lord  Jesus  was  undoubtedly
selected  for  the  great  mission  of
redeeming  the  world,  because  of  Hi*
great  qualities  and  I  lis  peculiar
iitness  as  one  of  the  Godhead.  It
is  written  of  Him  :  ,4  Thou  lovest
righteousness,  and  hatest  wicked-
ness ;  therefore  God,  thy  God,  hath
anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  glad*
ness  above  thy  fellows/'

Who  were  his  fellows  1  Were
not  all  the  distinguished  of  hear.


186


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ens  sons  there — they  who  afterwards
made  their  appearance  on  the  earth
as  Prophets,  Apostles  and  righteous
men  1  If  He  was  chosen  ahove  all
His  fellows,  and  anointed  with  the
oil  of  gladness,  is  it  not  consistent
and  reasonable  to  suppose  that  His
faithful  Apostles  Mere  also  chosen
and  anointed  to  perform  their  part
i  n  the  great  d  rama  of  h  u  man  existence
for  the  enactment  of  which  the  earth
was  to  be  prepared  ?  If  He  had
companions  in  the  heavens,  or  to
u fee  the  language  of  the  Scriptures —
**  fellows/'  is  it  reasonable  to  sup*
pose  that  He  left  them  there  while
He  came  down  here  and  took  upon
Himself  mortality  f  Does  it  violate
in  the  least  any  idea  that  we  derive
fiom  the  sacred  records,  to  think
that  His  **  fellows*'  also  came  here,
and,  as  He  did,  also  obtained  mortal
tabernacles  1

If  we  grant  that  His  4i  fellows"
in  the  heavens  came  here,  as  He  did,
and  obtained  mortal  bodies,  what
shall  we  say  of  the  undistinguished
millions  who  have  crowded  their
way  forward  into  mortal  life  from
the  beginning?  Shall  we  divide
humanity  into  classes,  and  say  one
class  had  a  heavenly  existence  be-
fore coming  here,  while  another  class
sprung  into  existence  at  mortal
conception  or  birth  1  If  we  are  not
justified,  by  either  Scripture  or
reason,  in  placing  the  Redeemer
of  the  world  in  a  class  by  Himself,
so  far  as  pre-existence  is  concerned,
and  in  separating  Him  in  this  respect
from  His  *;  fellows/'  how  can  we  find
warrant  for  dividing  the  rest  of  the
family  of  God,  into  two  classes —
one  as  having  a  pre-existence,  and
another  as  not  having  any  life  till
they  arrive  here  1

If  it  were  possible  for  the  Lord
Jesus  to  descend  from  the  mansions
of  glory  and  take  possession  of  a
mortal  tabernacle,  and  be  born  of  a


woman  in  the  shape  of  an  infant,
is  it  not  equally  possible  that  we  all
did  the  same  1  Everything  that  we
know  concerning  the  mysteries  of
this  life  justifies  us  in  thus  believing.
But  we  lire  not  left  to  speculation
upon  this  point*  God  has  revealed
this  in  great  plainness.  The  Bible
proves  to  us  that  Jesus  existed  with
the  Father,  and  that  He  descended
from  His  high  estate  in  the  regions
of  glory  to  become  a  mortal  man  j
for  He  speaks  Himself  in  praying
to  the  Father,  of  the  glory  he  had
with  the  Father  before  He  came
here,  that  glory  having  been  revealed
to  Him,  Now,  is  there  any  tiling
difficult  or  incomprehensible  in  the
thought,  that  we  all  in  like  manner,
existed  with  the  Father,  and  with
our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,
before  we  came  here  ?  The  Lord  in
speaking  to  Jeremiah,  reveals  to
him  in  great  plainness,  that  he  had
a  pre-existence.  In  the  first  chapter
of  Jeremiah,  He  tells  him  that  be-
fore lie  was  formed  in  the  womb  He
knew  him,  that  He  chust;  him  to  be
a  Propliet,  that  he  had  been  desig-
nated lor  the  work  that  he  had
to  accomplish  ;  and  thousands
of  others  among  mankind  have
felt — though  they  knew  nothing
I  by  recollection  of  their  previous
existence — that  they  were  called
ami  designated  and  destined  to
,  accomplish  great  works  upon  the
earth,

!  The  revelations  that  have  been
given  unto  us  as  a  people  have  com-
municated this  doctrine  unto  us.
We  are  taught  in  the  record  of
Abraham,  which  has  been  translated
and  given  unto  us,  that  prior  to
man's  coining  upon  the  earth,  he
had  an  existence  with  the  Father,
and  that  we  all,  all  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth,  every  man  and  woman

;  and  child  that  has  ever  been  bom
upon  the  earth,  or  that  ever  will  be


THE  VEIL  BETWEEN  GOD  AND  MAN.


187


bom  on  the  earth — have  had  an  ex-
istence with  the  Father,  before
coming  here.

With  these  views  that  I  have
endeavored  to  set  before  you  wc  can
have  some  understanding  concerning
the  object  of  man  being  placed  upon
the  earth.  If  we  are  the  children
of  our  God,  then  God  our  Eternal
Father  has  had  an  object,  a  great
object  to  accomplish  in  placing  us
here  on  the  earth.  Jesus  had  a  mis-
sion to  perform.  He  came  and  took
upon  Himself  mortality.  A  mortal
probation  was  assigned  Him.  It  was
a  part  of  the  plan  of  salvation,  not
only  connected  with  His  exaltation,
but  with  the  redemption  of  the  hu-
man family.  There  has  been  a
purpose  in  all  this.  This  earth  has
been  created  for  a  purpose.  Man  is
here  for  a  purpose.  Death  is  in  the
world  for  a  purpose,  just  as  much  as
life,  and  all  these  are  a  part  of  the
Divine  plan  connected  with  man's
existence  in  the  past,  at  the  present
and  for  the  future.

A  great  many  have  stumbled  and
have  questioned  the  justice  of  our
God^  aufl  have  also  gone  so  far  as  to
question  the  very  existence  of  God,
because  of  the  earthly  circumstances
which  surround  the  children  of  men.
It  has  been  said  by  those  who  have
taken  this  view  that  if  there  were
an  all-powerful  Being,  such  as  God
is  described  to  he,  He  would  inter-
pose in  behalf  of  the  children  of
men,  and  deliver  them  from  the  try*
ing  scenes  and  circumstances  which
they  frequently  have  to  pass  through.
The  fact  that  man  is  in  such  a  condi-
tion and  is  surrounded  by  such  cir-
cumstances is  frequently  urged  as  an
evidence  that  there  is  no  God,  that
there  can  be  no  God,  possessing  such
attributes  as  are  ascribed  to  Him  by
those  who  believe  in  Him,  Many
people  have  been  deluded  by  this
kind  of  reasoning  j  they  have  be-


come infidels,  and  rejected  all  belief
in  God  and  in  any  providence  con-
nected with  man  and  with  man's  ex-
istence upon  the  earth.  They  have
abandoned  themselves  to  complete
unbelief  upon  this  point.  But  those
who  have  sought  after  God,  those
who  have  humbled  themselves  before
Him,  and  obtained  knowledge  from
Him  in  the  way  that  He  has  appointed
— though  to  them  all  may  not  be  per-
fectly plain — do  perceive  and  ac-
knowledge the  providence  nf  God
in  all  the  circumstances  which  sur-
round tli em.  They  perceive  His
hand  and  acknowledge  it  in  all
the  eve rtts  connected  with  their
mortal  existence,  and  with  the
mortal  existence  of  their  fellows.

God  has  hail  a  purpose  in  with-
drawing  himself  from  man  ;  it  has
not  been  a  part  of  His  purpose  to-
re veal  Himself  in  His  fullness,  in
His  glory,  in  His  power,  unto  His
children  upon  the  earth.  Many*
not  understanding  why  this  should
be,  and  unable  to  comprehend  any
purpose  in  it,  have  stumbled  and
yielded  to  doubts  and  been  ready,
because  of  this,  to  deny  His  exist-
ence. Now,  it  has  been  a  part  of
the  plan  of  salvation,  as  revealed  in
all  the  records  that  have  come  down
to  us  from  the  beginning — from  the
days  of  our  Father  Adam  until
now — it  is  a  part  of  the  plan  of  sal-
vation, I  say,  connected  with  man's
existence  upon  the  earth  that  God
should  thus  withdraw  himself,  as  it
wers,  from  man,  and  that  a  veil  should
be  drawn  between  himself  and  man,
and  that  if  knowledge  of  Him  be
obtained,  it  should  be  obtained  by
the  exercise  of  great  faith  and  con-
tinued labor  on  the  part  of  His  chil-
dren. But  why,  it  may  be  asked,  is
this  necessary  ?  Why  is  it  that  God
has  not  revealed  himself  with  great
fullness  and  power  unto  all  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth,  and  left


188


JOURNAL  OV  IiISCOUKSES


them  in  complete  possession  of  all
the  knowledge  necessary  to  prove
to  them  that  He  is  God  ?  Questions
of  this  kind  are  frequently  pro-
pounded hy  men.  They  ask  :  Why
does  He  not  reveal  Himself  fully  to
His  creatures'?  Why  should  He
leave  them  a  prey  to  doubt  ?  Why
should  He  leave  them  in  darkness  1
Why  should  He  give  opportunities
to  the  adversary  of  their  souls  to
assail  them  as  He  does  for  want  of
that  knowledge  which  He  might
communicate  so  easily.  These
are  important  questions,  and  they
are  questions  which  as  Latter-day
.Saints  we  should  understand.

We  must  remember,  to  begin
with,  that  God  our  Eternal  Father
has  given  unto  each  of  us  our
agency.  There  is  no  human  being
born  cm  the  earth  from  whom  God
has  withheld  his  or  her  agency.  We
have  as  much  right  to  exercise
our  agency  in  our  sphere  as  God  the
Eternal  Father  has  to  exercise  His
agency  in  His  sphere ;  just  an  much.
It  n  not  sacrilege,  it  is  not  any
infringement  upon  the  power  of
our  God  to  indulge  in  this  thought
or  to  have  this  belief.  It  does  not
detract  in  the  least  from  His  glory,
from  His  power,  nor  from  our  im-
pendence upon  Him  as  an  infinite
and  almighty  Being  to  entertain  this
view  of  ourselves,  Jesus  said  when
He  was  upon  the  earth  :  48  Be  ye
perfect,  even  as  your  Father  in
heave j »  is  perfect.''  How  could  we
be  if  man  did  not  have  the  power
within  him,  through  the  agency
which  God  has  given  him,  to  be  thus
perfect :  Everywhere  throughout
the  divine  record  where  God  has
communicated  His  mind  and  His
will  to  men,  this  principle  is  plainly
manifest :  that  man  has  had  given
unto  him,  in  the  greatest  freedom
and  without  limit,  the  power  to
exercise  Ids  own  agency. It  was  so


f  in  the  beginning — in  the  very  com-
mencement  of  the  work  of  our  God
upon  the  earth  when  He  placed
Adam  in  the  garden  and  gave  Eve
unto  him  for  a  wife.  He  set  before
them  the  principle  oi  knowledge —
that  is,  He  told  them  what  they
should  do  ;  He  told  them  what  they
should  refrain  from  doing.  He  told
them  that  if  they  did  certain  things,
certain  penalties  should  follow.
Hail  such  a  thing  been  possible  and
consistent  with  the  purposes  of
Heaven,  He  might,  at  the  very
beginning,  have  prevented  Adam
from  exercising  His  agency.  Instead
of  saying  to  him,  "  Of  every  tree  of
the  garden  thou  may  est  freely  eat
except  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good
and  evil"  and  leaving  him  free  to

1  eat  of  the  fruit  of  that  tree,  He
might  have  put  it  out  of  his  power
to  touch  or  taste  ic.  But  not  so  j
He  gave  him  the  opportunity  of  ex-
ercising Ids  agency ;  He  told  him  he
could  eat  of  every  tree  freely,  except
the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and
evil,  but  that  he  should  not  eat  of
it,  t£  for  in  the  day  that  thou  eatest
thereof,  thou  shalt  surely  die/'
There  was  no  attempt  on  the  part

'  of  our  Father  to  interfere  with  the
agency  of  Adam  in  this  respect.  He
left  him  perfectly  free  ami  in  the  ex-
ercise of  that  freedom  Adam  did
partake  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of
good  ami  evil* His  wife,  Eve,  was

1  deceived  in  eating  of  the  fruit ;  she
partook  of  it,  being  beguiled,  yet  in
the  perfect  exercise  of  her  agency,  and
after  she  had  partaken  of  it,  and
become  subject  to  the  penalty  that

|  God  had  pronounced — the  penalty
of  death  aud  expulsion  from  the
garden — -then  she  came  and  told

|  Adam  what  she  had  done*  Adam
was  fully  conscious  of  all  the  conse-
quences that  had  attended  this  act.
He  knew  perfectly  well  that  the
penalty  would  |be  executed — that


■

■


THE  FREE  AGENCY  OF  MAN,


189


that  Eve  had  become  mortal,  that
death  had  entered  into  her  taberna-
cle, and  the  penalty  that  God  hail
pronounced  would  be  fully  executed ;
that  she  would  be  thrown  out  of  the
garden  and  that  they  would  be  sepa-
rated forever — that  is,  so  far  as  this
life  was  concerned.  He  knew  this,
and,  fully  conscious  of  all  the  conse-
quences which  should  follow  his
partaking  of  the  fruit,  he  partook  of
it.  In  doin?  so  he  was  not  deceived.
He  partook  of  it  because  of  his  de-
sire to  fulfill  the  commandments  of
God.  God  had  given  unto  him  this
woman  for  a  wife  ;  they  were  bound
together  by  immortal  ties  ;  but  be-
cause of  this  act  of  hers  there  must
necessarily  have  been  a  separation
that  would  have  endured  as  long  as
her  mortal  life  endured,  Adam
understanding  this,  partook  of  the
fruit,  and  as  is  said  by  the  Prophet
Lehi,  "  Adam  fell  that  man  might
be,  and  men  are  that  they  may  have
joy."  If  he  had  not  fallen  ;  if  he
had  not  partaken  of  that  fruit,  there
won  hi  have  been  no  human  race  on
the  earth.  He  understood  this,
therefore  he  partook  of  it  and  ac-
companied his  wife.  It  was  a  part
of  the  plan  that  was  understood  in
the  heavens  before  Adam  was  placed
iirthe  garden.  God  by  His  fore-
know ledge  understood  perfectly  that
Adam,  in  the  exercise  of  his  agency,
would  fall.  Therefore  He  prepared
v  a  Redeemer  in  the  person  of  His
Son  Jesus  Christ,  who  we  are  told
was  "  a  lamb  slain  from  before  the
foundation  of  the  world.*'  God
having  seen  that  Adam  would  fall,
that  death  would  come  upon  him,
and  that  a  Redeemer  would  be  ne-
cessary in  order  to  redeem  man  from
the  effects  of  the  fell— for  unless
th^re  had  been  a  Redeemer  provided,
Adam  and  all  his  posterity  would
have  slept  an  eternal  sleep,  they
would  have  been  consigned  to  the


tomb,  and  there  would  have  been
no  redemption  therefrom  because
of  the  penalty  that  had  been  pro-
nounced by  the  Father  upon  him  if
he  committed  this  act — God  know-
ing all  this  provided  a  Redeemer.
That  Redeemer  was  the  Son  of  God,
Jesus  our  Savior,  in  whose  name  we
all  approach  the  Father,  in  whose
name  salvation  is  uiven  unto  the
children  of  men.  It  was  arranged
beforehand  that  He  should  come  and
perform  His  mission  in  the  me ri diau
of  time—Jay  down  His  life,  as  it
was  known  that  He  would  do
through  the  wickedness  of  bad
men.

Now,  it  maybe  said,  why  did  not
God  prevent  man  and  woman  from
taking  this  course  1  Because,  as  I
have  b e fore  said,  it  was  right  that
they  should  exercise  their  agency.
God — shall  I  say  could  not?  Do  I
tie  tract  from  His  majesty  and  His
glory  by  placing  a  limit  on  His  power]
I  will  say  that  God  would  not,  be-
cause it  would  be  in  violation  of  His
own  laws ;  it  would  be  in  violation
of  tho-e  eternal  laws  winch  our  God
Himself  recognizes,  for  Him  to  have
interfered  and  deprived  man  and
woman  of  their  agency.  But,  know-
ing the  consequences  of  their  actions,.
He  prepared  away  for  their  salvation
arjd  their  redemption,  and  thus  it  is
that  we  are  born  on  the  earth.  It
was  part  of  the  design  that  we
should  be  subjected  to  alt  these
afflictions  and  trials  and  ordeals  that
belong  to  this  mortal  state  of
existence.  This  was  part  of  the
plan.

I  have  been  told  by  objectors  that
God  ought  to  reveal  Himself  in
fullness.  Why  does  He  not  do  it  1
Because  if  He  were  to  do  so,  we
should  be  deprived  of  the  opportu-
nities of  proving  our  integrity  which
we  now  have*  He  has  marked  out
the  path  for  us  to  walk  in. He  has


190


JOURNAL  OF  DLSCOUKSLS


designed  that  we  shall  struggle;  that
we  .shall  exercise  faith ;  that  we
shall  contend  with  the  temptations
Of  the  adversary  ;  that  we  shall
overcome  evil  ;  and  by  a  continued
exercise  of  fa i th  progress  in  the
course  that  He  lias  assigned  to  us.
It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  we
should  be  tempted  and  tried  in  or*
der  that  we  should  receive  the  glory
that  He  has  in  store  for  us.  What
would  our  salvation  amount  to  ;
what  would  heaven  amount  to  if  we
had  never  been  tried,  if  we  were  to
be  placed  in  heaven  without  trial,
without  effort,  without  exertion
upon  our  part  to  overcome  evil  and
to  contend  with  those  influences  that
abound  in  this  mortal  state  of  exis-
tence. It  would  not  be  such  a  heaven
as  God  inhabits,  and  such  a  heaven
as  He  designs  that  all  His  children
shall  inhabit.  For  let  me  say  to
you,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  God
designs  thai  we  shall  be  like  Him.
He  designs  that  His  children  shall
attain  unto  the  Godhead — that  is  if
they  will  obey  the  laws  necessary  to
briii,^  thnu  up  to  that  exaltation,
and  bettor  they  can  attain  unto  that,
before  they  can  enjoy  that,  before
they  can  lie  in  a  coudiou  to  appre-
ciate that,  they  must  pass  through

just  such  scenea  of  trial  and  tribula-
tion ami  i  llliction  as  we  are  subjected
to  in  ibis  mortal  condition  of  ex-
istence.

Theie  is  an  interesting  passage  in
the  new  uauslatiuii  ot  the  Bible,  in
the  IVm  i  ut  Great  Price,  that  I  have
often  htt-n  struck  with-  It  shows
clearly  tin:  feelings  of  our  tirst
parents  after  they  hail  been  thrust
out  of  the  garden  of  Eden.  I  will
read  a  paiagraph  or  two  :

"And  Adam  called  upon  the
name  of  the  Lord,  and  Eve  also,
his  wife,  and  they  heard  the  voice
of  the  \j>\  d,  from  the  way  towards
the  garden  of  Eden,  speaking  unto


them,  and  they  saw  him  not,  for
they  were  shut  out  from  his  pre-
sence." '  ; ■■"  :  V  1

That  was  one  of  the  consequences
of  the  fall.  The j  were  shut  out,
and  man  has  been  from  that  time
to  this  shut  out  from  the  presence
of  the  Father.

"And  he  gave  unto  them  com-
maudments,  that  they  should  wor-
ship the  Lord  their  God,  and  should
offer  the  firstlings  of  their  Hock,  for
an  offering  u:Uo  the  Lord.  And
A i lam  was  obedient  unto  the  com-
maudments  of  the  Lord*

.:  w  #  *

"  And  Eve,  his  wife,  heard  all
these  things  and  was  glad,  saying
Were  it  not  for  our  transgression
we  never  should  have  seed,  and
never  should  have  known  good  and
evil,  and  the  joy  of  our  redemption,
and  the  eternal  life  which  God
giveth  unto  all  the  obedient.

"And  Adam  aud  Eve  blessed  the
name  of  God,  and  they  made  all
things  known  unto  their  sons  and
daughters."

Now  this  couple  blessed  God
because  of  their  transgression.
Their  eyes  were  opened  ;  they
bad  become  as  Got  Is  ;  for  the
devil  in  tempting  Eve,  had  told
a  truth  when  he  said  unto  her  that
when  she  should  eat  of  the  tree  of
knowledge  of  good  aud  evil  they
should  become  as  Gods.  He  tuid
the  truth  in  telling  that,  but  lie
accompanied  it  wit h  a  lie  as  he  always
does.  He  never  tells  the  complete
truth.  He  said  that  they  should
not  die.  The  Father  had  said  that
they  should  die.  The  devil  had
to  tell  a  lie  in  order  to  accomplish
his  purposes  ;  hut  theie  was  some
truth  in  his  statement.  Their  eyea
were  opened.  They  \md  a  kuo  n  ledge
of  good  and  evil  just  as  the  Gods
have.  They  became  as  Gods  ;  for
that  is  oue  of  the  feaiui>s,  01  e  of


THE  SPIRIT  OF  GOD  STRIVES  WITH  ALL  MEN.


191


the  peculiar  attributes  of  those  who
attain  unto  that  glory — -they  under-
stand the  difference  between  good
and  evil  In  our  pre-existent  state,
in  our  spiritual  existence,  1  do  not
know  ho vi  extensive  our  knowledge
of  trnod  and  evil  was.  Tiiat  is  not
fully  revealed.  But  this  I  do  know,
that  when  wh  come  to  earth  and  be-
come clotiie  I  with  mortality  we  do;
arrive  at  a  knowledge  of  good  and
«vi!,  and  that  knowledge  prepares
us  for  that  hi  lure  existence  winch
we  will  Ii:* v*t  in  the  eternal  worlds;
it  will  enaMe  us  to  enter  upon  a
career  thai  is  never  ending,  that  will
continue  onward  and  upward
throughout  all  the  ages  of  eternity*
It  U  for  this  purpose  that  we  are
here,  God  has  given  unto  us  this  pro-
bation fur  riie  express  purpo.se  of
obtaining  a  knowledge  of  good  and
evil — of  understanding  evil  and
being  ;d>le  to  overcome  the  evil —
and  by  overcoming  it  receive  the
exaltation  and  glory  that  He  has  in
store  for  us.  Here  we  are  subjected
to  the  powei  of  the  adversary.  He
can  tempt  us  ;  try  us.  Satan  has
power  in  tin*  earth,  and  in  tin*  exer-
cise of  ins  *ig**m;y  he  tempts  the  chil-
dren of  men,  ile  has  rebelled
against  Go  !  in  the  exercise  ot  his
ageTiey  ;  for  he  was  a  great  and  i
a  mi  :hty  auigH  Ml  the  presence  of
our  Fa-iier  n:\  \  oar  ( rod.  But.  in  the
exeicisi*  of  his  agency  lie  rehtiled
against  the  Father  and  drew  a>vay
with  him  o:ie  third  of  the  host;?  of
hea\>  i,  who  likewise  exercised  their
agency  ami  I  olio  wed  him  in  prefer-
ence r  >  following  the  Lord  God,
their  K.ithe/;  ami  in  the  continued
exem»e  of  his  agency  he  tempts  us.
He  has  power  over  us  to  that  extent
in  this  fallen  condition.  At  the
same  time  we  have  the  sweet  influ-
ence of  the  Spirit  of  God  pleading  !
with  ns  to  do  that  which  is  right,  I
pleading  with  every  human  being  !


that  does  not  drive  it  from  him  ;  for
every  human  being  has  a  portion  of
the  Spirit  of  God  given  unto  him.
We  sometimes  s  call  it  conscience;
we  call  it  by  one  name  and  we  call
it  by  another  ;  but  h  is  the  Spirit  of
God  that  every  man  and  woman
possesses  that  is  born  on  the  earth.
God  has  given  unto  all  his  children
this  Spirit.  Of  course  it  is  not  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  its  full-
ness ;  for  that  is  only  received  by
obedience  to  the  commandments  of
Got  I — to  the  Gospel  of  our  Lord
and  Savior  Jesus  Christ.  But  it  is
a  Spirit  that  pleads  with  men  to  do
right  The  heathen  have  it.  There
is  no  degraded  Indian  in  these
mountains  or  valleys  who  does  not
have  a  portion  of  that  Spirit  plead-
ing with  him  to  do  that  which  is
right.  It  pleads  with  all  the  heathen,
the  Pagan  as  well  as  the  Christian  ;
the  Methodist  ami  Baptist,  as  well
as  the  Latter-day  Saints.  Every-
where throughout  the  earth  wlu-re
man  dwells  this  Spirit  rests  upon
him.  It  comes  from  Go  1.  It
pleads  with  man  to  do  right.  It
pleads  with  man  to  resist  the  bland-
ishments of  Satan.  No  iimii  ever
did  a  wrong  but  that  Spirit  warded
him  of  it  to  a  greater  or  ie^i
extent.  No  man  ever  put  his
hand  forth  to  do  a  wrong  to
his  neighbor  without  that  S/nit
telling  him  it  was  wrong.  He  never
put  forth  his  hand  or  influence  to
wrong  the  gentler  sex — to  commit
sin  in  that  direction — without  that
warning  voice  which  is  in  every
human  being  telling  him  of  the  mm.
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  t  ie
influence  of  evil,  the  influence  of  the
Adversary  enticing  men  to  do  wrong,
leading  into  paths  of  sin,  leading
til  em  away  from  righteousness  and
from  God  ;  infusing  doubt,  infusing
unbelief,  infusing  hardness  of  heart,
infusing  rebellion  against  everything


192


JOURNAL  O*  DISCOURSED.


that  is  holy  and  pure.  We  are  all
conscious  of  the  existence  of  these
two  influences  within  us.  There  i.s
no  chih  1  that  has  reached  the  a^e  of
lOtsouatahility  and  in  the  possession
of  his  or  her  faculties  hut  what  has
had  these  two  influences  pleading
with  him  or  her — one  entreating  to
do  right,  the  other  enticing  to  do
wrong,  to  commit  sin  and  to  violate
the  commandments  of  Goth  If  we
cultivate  the  good  influence  it  will
lead  us  into  the  truth  (if  we  are  not
already  in  possession  of  the  truth)
when  we  hear  it.  It  was  through
this  Spirit  that  you  Lat  ter-day  Saints
accepted  the  Gospel  in  the  various
lands  where  you  heard  it  preached*
That  Spirit  that  came  from  God
taught  you  by  its  sweet  and  heaven-
ly influence  that  it  was  the  truth
you  heard,  and  when  yuu  espoused
it  you  had  a  feeling  in  your  hearts
that  you  cannot  describe.  It  was
the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  of  God
that  this  was  indeed  the  truth  of
heaven,  and  it  led  you  to  obey  the
commandments  of  God,  and  to  re-
ceive in  greater  fullness  and  power
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which
you  have  received  through  obedi-
ence to  the  commandments  that
God  has  given.

Time  will  not  permit  me  to  say  a
great  many  things  that  1  have  on
my  mind.  1  see  the  time  is  nearly
expired.  But  I  wisli  to  say  that  we
had  an  existence  before  we  came
here,  "But/'  says  one,  "I  do  not
remember  anything  about  it."  No,
you  do  not.  You  do  not  remember
the  day  you  were  born  on  the  earth,
yet  you  will  not  deny  that  you  had
an  existence  at  that  time,  When
you  were  a  year  old  you  do  not  re-
member beginning  to  walk,  yet  you
will  not  deny  ihat  you  had  an  exis-
tence t  lien.  Uod,  in  His  wisdom,
has  withdrawn  the  recollection  of
these  things  from  us. If  we  could


understand  the  glory  we  once  had
with  our  Father  in  heaven  we  would
be  discontented  in  dwelling  in  this
condition  of  existence.  We  would
pine  for  the  home  we  left  behind  us.
Its  glory  and  its  beauty,  its  heav-
enly graces  and  delights  were  of
such  a  character  that  we  would  pine
for  it  with  that  home-sickness  that
men  have  some  partial  knowledge
of  here  on  the  earth.  It  is  said  that
at  one  time  in  the  French  army,  the
bands  were  forbidden  to  play  certain
airs  because  of  the  effect  they  had
upon  the  Swiss  soldiers  whom  they
employed.  These  Swiss  airs  would
arouse  such  sensations  of  home
sickness  as  to  cause  the  Swiss  to
throw  down  their  arms  and  desert
and  go  back  to  their  native  valleys
and  mountains.  Now,  if  such  a
feeling  of  home  sickness  can  be
brought  about  in  that  way,  how
much  more  would  it  be  the  case  if
we  could  recollect  our  association
with  our  Father  and  God  in  the
eternal  world !  Wisely,  in  the
providence  of  God,  this  knowledge
is  withdrawn  from  us.  We  can
have  a  glimpse  occasionally,  through
the  revelations  of  the  Spirit  to  us*
of  the  glory  there  is  awaiting  us,
and  sometimes  when  men  and  wo-
men are  approaching  death  —when
they  are  ready  to  step  out  of  this
existence  into  the  other — the  veil
becomes  so  thin  that  they  behold
the  glories  of  the  eternal  world,  ami
when  they  come  back  again — as
some  have,  wre  all  probably  have
met  those  who  have  been  snatched
from  death — they  come  back  to  this
mortal  existence  with  a  feeling  ©?
regret.  They  have  had  a  foretastes
of  the  glory  that  awaited  them  ;
they  have  had  a  glimpse  of  tha&
glory  that  is  behind  the  veil ;  and
the  love  of  life  is  so  completely  lost
— the  love  of  earthly  home  and
friends  is  so  completely  taken  from


CONCLUDING  EXHORTATIONS,


19*


them,  that  they  desire  with  all  their
hearts  to  take  their  exit  from  this
life  into  that  glorious  life  which  they
knew  was  on  the  other  side  of  the
veil.  Has  not  this  been  the  case  in
many  instances  1  Certainly  it  has.
Therefore  our  God  in  His  wisdom
has  withdrawn  this  knowledge  from
us,  and  left  us  to  seek  for  and  obtain
that  aid  and  strength  necessary  to
enable  us  to  successfully  battle  with
and  overcome  the  powers  of  evil
that  assail  us  on  every  hand.

My  brethren  and  sisters  :  it  is
for  us  to  contend  with  the  evils  that
surround  us,  patiently  bearing  all
the  afflictions  and  trials  that  belong
to  this  mortal  life-  We  should
remember  our  destiny,  and  at  the
same  time  look  forward  to  that
glorious  future  that  God  has  pre-
pared for  us. We  should  be  filled

No.  13.


with  the  most  noble  aspirations.
We  should  never  cond  rid  to
commit  any  low,  mean,  unworthy
act  when  we  consider  who  we  are,
and  what  we  are,  and  the  glory  that
God  has  promised  unto  us  if  we  are
faithful  to  Him.  Let  us  keep  those
things  in  mind.  Let  us  bear  patiently
the  afflictions  that  come  upon  us*
Let  us  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith
that  God  desires  we  should  havet
seeking  unto  Him  for  that  knowl-
edge which  He  has  to  bestow,  and
though  we  may  not  behold  His  face
now,  yet  we  will  behold  it,  and  will
dwell  eternally  with  Him  and  His
Son  Jesus  in  the  heavens,  if  we
keep  the  commandments  He  has
given  unto  us.

May  God  grant  that  we  may  do
so,  is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
Jesus.  Amen.

Vol  XXVL


JOURNAL  Oh  D1SCOUK8KS


DISCOURSE BY BISHOP ORSON F.  WHlTXEYt


Delivered  in  the  Tabwmcle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Ajhvnomi,  April  29,

1S85.


(REPORTED  BY JOEN  IfiVIKE.)


GOB


THK  SOURCE  OF  ALL  INTELLIGENCE— MANKIND  HIS  OFFSPRING
AND  THK  INSTRUMENTS  OF  HIS  WILL — HE  OVERRULES  THE  RE-
SULTS OF  MEN'S  ACTIONS— PRK-EXISTEXCE  OF  MAN  AND  PLURALITY
OF  WORLDS— THE  GOSPEL  ONE  AND  UNCHANGEABLE— CHARGES  OF
EXCLUSIVENESS,  ETC.,  AGAINST  THE  SAINTS— THE  CHRISTIAN  WORLD
DENY  REVELATION  AND  REPUDIATE  BIBLE  DOCTRINE  —  THEIR
APOSTACY  PREDICTED  AND  FULFILLED— THE  GOSPEL  RESTORED
AND  THE  LAST  DISPENSATION— THE  ICARTH's  WEEK  OF  HISTORY
AND  MILLENNIAL  SABBATH— WHAT  "MORMON  TREASON  CONSISTS
OF— THE  MISSION  OF  THE  AMERICAN  REPUBLIC— A  FABLE  AND  ITS
APPLICATION — A  PROPHECY- —  THE  PEACEABLE  MISSION  OF  THE
SAINTS- -V  :SY.  ti'


I  HAVE  been  called  upon,  my  breth-
ren and  sisters  and  friends,  to  ad-
dress you  for  a  portion  of  the  time
which  belongs  to  this  meeting,  and
I  assure  you  that  in  responding  to
that  call  1  have  no  desire  in  my  heart
but  to  be  led  to  say  those  things
which  will  be  pleasing  and  accept-
able to  God  our  Father,  and  benefi-
cial to  ourselves*

I  have  always  been  taught  to
regard  our  Father  in  heaven  as  the
source  of  all  intelligence,  and  that
wherever  intelligence  is  manifested
throughout  the  earth,  among  His
creatures,  it  has  its  primal  origin
in  Him  who  is  the  fountain  of  life
and  light ;  and  that  if  men  are
qualified  to  perform  any  great  or
good  work,  it  must  necessarily  be  by
reason  of  the  power  from  God  which
rests  upon  them.  The  Latter-day
Saints  take  this  view  of  the  relation-
ship of  God  with  mankind  ;  that
He  is  not  simply  the  Father,  or


creator  of  a  part  of  the  human  race  ,
or  a  portion  of  earth's  creatures,  but
He  is  the  creator  of  all  tilings — the
maker  of  the  earth,  the  maker  of
heaven,  and  that  the  children  of
men  are  the  sons  and  daughters  of
one  common  parentage  ;  that  He
feels  tor  them  all  the  day  lung  ;  that
He  has  their  welfare  constantly  in
view,  and  He  makes  no  movement,
so  far  as  His  children  upon  this
earth  are  concerned,  but  He  does  it
for  their  salvation  and  their  good
here  and  hereafter

The  Latter-day  Saints  are  said  to
be  exclusive,  and  are  called  selfish
and  presumptuous  because  they
maintain  that  a  certain  mission  has
been  given  unto  them  ;  that  they
have  received  revelations  from  God;
that  the  Maker  of  the  world  has
deigned  to  speak  in  these  last  days,
and  raise  up  men  and  women  whom
He  knew  before-hand  would  do  His
will This  unfavorable  view  arises


PRE- EXISTENCE  OF  MAN,


195


from  the  fact  that  our  motives  are  r
misunderstood  ;  that  our  mission,
which  we  continually  proclaim  to
the  wnrhl  is  not  believed  in,  and  we
are  looked  upon  as  an  assembly  of
upstarts,  enthusiasts  and  fanatics,
who,  in  our  blindness  and  our
narrowness  think  that  God  has
only  regarded  us  ;  that  we  are  His
favorites,  and  that  He  cares  nothing
at  all  for  the  rest  of  mankind.  This
is  a  wrong  idea  of  our  position,  and
it  is  because  our  position  is  thus
misconceived— one  cause  at  least —
that  we  are  persecuted  and  abused,
derided,  oppressed  and  trampled  1
upon  as  we  are.  However,  I  do  not
believe  that  we  could  escape  the
common  fate  of  those  whom  God  has
chosen  for  a  peculiar  work  in  all  ages
of  the  world.  For,  while  we  ac-
knowledge that  God  is  the  Father
of  the  human  race,  and  interested
in  the  salvation  of  all,  we  do  main-
tain that  our  mission  as  a  part  of  the
human  family  is  peculiar,  separate
and  distinct  from  the  missions  which
have*" been  given  to  others.  God  is
the  author  of  many  plans  and  pur-
poses, but  all  his  plans,  all  his  pur-
poses and  designs  converge  to  one
point,  have  one  focus,  whether  He
usesJJie  Christian  world,  the  heathen
world,  or  even  this  little  haud tul  of
Latter-day  Saints  \  no  matter  whom
He  uses  to  accomplish  His  ends,
these  purposes  blend  ami  have  but
one  grand  object.  They  are  like
rivers  or  streams  of  different  kinds
and  sizes  flowing  towards  one  ocean
into  which  they  all  must  empty.
And  though  men  deem  themselves
independent — and  it  is  true  that  in
one  sense  they  are — while  they  fail,
many  of  them,  to  take  God  into
consideration,  and  seem  to  think
they  can  do  about  as  they  please,  and
accomplish  what  ends  they  desire,  all
their  independence,  all  their  freedom,
simply  amounts  to  this ;  ihat  they


have  the  privilege  to  do  right  or  do
wrong,  but  the  results  of  their  ac-
tions God  will  over-rule  to  suit  him-
self, u  Man  proposes  but  God  dis-
poses," and  the  history  of  this  world,
or  any  other  world  which  has  passed
tli rough  a  similar  probation  and  been
red ee met!  and  glorified  by  the  power
of  God  and  obedience  to  the  princi-
ples of  righteousness,  is  one  vast
exemplification  of  that  great  truth.
While  man  is  left  free  to  propose,
to  adopt  what  plans  he  chooses,  to
exercise  his  agency,  and  to  carry,  so
far  as  he  is  permitted,  the  thoughts
and  desires  of  his  heart  to  their  con-
clusion, God  has  never  declare- 1  that
He  would  not  overrule  the  results
of  men's  acts  to  accomplish  His  own
purposes.

We  are  placed  in  this  world
measurably  in  the  dark.  We  no
longer  see  our  Father  face  to  face.
While  it  is  true  that  we  once  did  ;
that  we  once  stood  in  His  presence,
seeing  as  we  ere  seen,  knowing,
according  to  our  intelligence,  as  we
are  known  ;  the  curtain  lias  drop-
ped, we  have  changed  our  abode,  we
have  taken  upon  ourselves  flesh;
the  vail  of  forgetful ness  intervenes
between  this  life  and  that,  and  we
are  left,  as  Paul  expresses  it,  to  "see
through  a  glass  darkly,"  to  "know
in  part  and  to  prophesy  in  part  \  to
see  only  to  a  limited  extent,  the  end
from  the  beginning.  We  do  not
comprehend  things  in  their  fullness.
But  we  have  the  promise,  if  we  will
receive  and  live  by  every  word  that
proceeds  from  the  mouth  of  God,
wisely  using  the  intelligence,  the
opportunities,  the  advantages,  and
the  possessions  which  He  continu-
ally bestows  upon  us — the  time  will
come,  in  the  eternal  course  of  events,
when  our  minds  will  be  cleared  from
every  cloud,  the  past  will  recur  to
memory,  the  future  will  be  an  open
vision,  and  we  will  behold  things  as


106


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


they  are,  and  the  past,  present  and
future  will  be  one  eternal  day,  as  it
is  in  the  eyes  of  God  our  Father,
who  knows  neither  past,  present  or
future  ;  whose  course  is  one  eternal
round  ;  who  creates,  who  saves,  re-
deems and  glorifies  the  workman-
ship of  His  hands,  iu  which  He
Himself  is  glorified.

The  earth  upon  which  we  dwell  is
only  one  among  the  many  creations
of  God.  The  stars  that  glitter  in
the  heavens  at  night  and  give  light
unto  the  earth  are  His  creations,
redeemed  worlds,  perhaps,  or  worlds
that  are  passing  through  the  course
of  their  redemption,  being  saved,
purifier),  glorified  and  exalted  by
obedience  to  the  principles  of  truth
which  we  are  now  struggling  to
obey.  Thus  is  the  work  of  our  Fa-
ther made  perpetual,  and  as  fast  as
one  world  and  its  inhabitants  are
disposed  of,  He  will  roll  another
into  existence,  He  will  create  another
earth,  He  will  people  it  with  His
offspring,  the  offspring  of  the  Gods
in  eternity,  and  they  will  pass
through  probations  such  as  we  are
now  passing  through,  that  they  may
prove  their  integrity  by  their  works ;
that  they  may  give  an  assurance  to
the  Almighty  that  they  are  worthy
to  be  exalted  through  obedience  to
those  principles,  that  unchangeable
plan  of  salvation  which  has  been
revealed  to  us.

It  is  one  of  the  grandest  attributes
of  Deity  that  He  saves  and  exalts
the  human  family  upon  just  and
eternal  principles  ;  that  He  gives  to
no  man,  or  no  woman  that  which
they  have  not  been  willing  to  work
for,  which  they  have  not  deserved,
which  they  have  not  expanded  them-
selves to  receive,  by  putting  in
practice  the  principles  He  reveals,
against  all  opposition,  facing  the
wrath  and  scorn  of  the  world — the
world  which  cannot  give  a  just  cause,


a  reasonable  pretext  for  the  opposition
it  has  ever  manifested  to  the  truths
of  heaven.  It  is  a  characteristic  of
our  Father,  a  principle  of  His  divine
economy  to  exact  from  every  soul  a
fitting  proof  of  its  worthiness  to
attain  the  exaltation  to  which  it
aspires.  There  are  no  heights  that
may  not  be  surmounted,  but  they
must  be  reached  in  the  way  that  God
has  ordained.  Man  may  think  to
accomplish  his  salvation  by  carrying
out  the  selfish  desires  of  his  own
heart  ;  but  when  he  fails  to  take
God  into  consideration,  his  Creator,
and  the  framer  of  the  laws  whereby
we  mount  unto  exaltation  and  eter-
nal life,  he  knocks  the  ladder  from
under  him  whereby  he  might  climb
to  that  glorious  state.

The  exclusiveness  which  the
Latter  day  Saints  exhibit  is  this  r
they  maintain  that  the  Lord  has  but
one  way  to  save  the  human  race  ;
that  the  term  "  everlasting  gospel n
is  not  a  misnomer,  but  means  exactly
what  it  says,  and  that  it  is  eternal
as  its  maker  or  framer  is  eternal.  It
can  no  more  change  than  He  can
change.  A  man  must  obey  the  same
principles  now  that  were  obeyed  two
thousand  years  ago,  or  six  thousand
years  ago,  or  millions  of  ages  ago,
in  order  to  attain  the  presence  of
His  Father  and  God.  There  is  but
one  way,  one  plan  of  life  and  salva-
tion, and  there  need  be  but  one;  for
God,  being  an  economist,  does  not
create  that  which  is  superfluous ;
and  there  can  be,  in  the  very  nature
of  things,  only  one  true  plan  of
eternal  life,  for  if  there  were  two
they  must  necessarily  differ,  since
no  two  things  can  be  exactly  alike,
and  if  one  of  these  two  things  »
perfect,  that  whicb  differs  from  it,,
must  be  imperfect.  Of  a  necessity
God  is  the  author  of  perfection  j
His  works  are  not  deficient  in  any
respect ;  and  what  He  erdains  for


EXCLUSIVENESS  OF  THE  SAINTS  EXPLAINED*


the  salvation  of  man  is  the  only  way
for  man  to  be  saved*  Thus  it  is  that
the  Latter-day  Saints  preach  the
everlasting  Gospel,  the  unchangeable
way  of  eternal  life,  and  to  corroborate
it,  they  point  to  the  Scriptures  which
are  now  being  fulfilled.  Among
other  things,  to  the  vision  of  the
Prophet  John  upon  the  isle  of  Patmos,
who  saw  "  another  angel  fly  in  the
nri<Ut  of  heaven,  having  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  to  preach  unto  them
that  dwell  on  the  earth,  and  to  every
nation,  and  kindred  and  tongue,
and  people,  saying  with  a  loud  voice,
fear  God  and  give  glory  to  Him  for
the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  come."
This  is  the  exclusive n ess  of  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  ;  it  is  as  far  as  it  ex-
tends. There  is  but  one  way  to
eternal  life,  and  while  there  are
many  systems  extant  called  plans  of
salvation,  yet  they  differ  from  each
other  as  the  stars  of  heaven  differ
in  magnitude,  or  as  the  sands  of  the
sea-shore,  or  as  the  countenances  of
the  children  of  men;  nay,  more  than
this,  for  most  of  them  are  lacking
in  features  which  are  necessary  in
order  to  form  a  perfect  whole.  It
the  Latter-day  Saints  are  in  posses-
sion of  the  everlasting  Gospel,  all
sects7  creeds  and  parties  that  preach
a  Gospel  which  differs  from  it,  must
be  wrong  ;  or  vice  vtr$a¥  if  the  Saints
preach  any  other  Gospel  than  that
which  was  preached  in  the  days  of
the  apostles,  which  was  delivered  to
them  by  the  Sons  of  God,  then  the
Latter  day  Saints  must  be  wrong
also.

The  selfishness  which  this  people
exhibit  is  of  the  same  character  that
might  be  evinced  in  the  case  of  a
man  who  was  lost  and  had  the  right
way  pointed  out  to  him  by  another.
If  a  traveler  had  lost  his  way  and
should  meet  one  who  professed  to
know  the  direction  he  desired  to
pursue;  or,  if  the  traveler  should


ask  which  was  the  way  to  such  and
such  a  place,  and  the  guide  should
tell  him,  and  he  in  his  self-will  and
obstinacy  should  persist  in  taking  a
contrary  course,  how  in  the  name  of
consistency  could  he  blame  his  guide
if  he  did  not  reach  his  destination  ;
or  how  could  he  charge  him  with
being  selfish  or  presumptuous,  when
he  himself  confessed  his  ignorance
and  appealed  to  this  man  who  testi-
fied in  all  earnestness  that  he  knew
which  was  the  right  way  ?  Yet  this
is  similar  to  the  position  of  the  world
in  relation  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
who  solemnly  testify  that  the  God
of  heaven  has  revealed  to  them  the
only  way  to  life  and  salvation,  a
claim  which  no  other  sect,  church  or
party  advance  at  the  present  time.
They  deny  revelation  ;  they  say  the
heavens  are  closed ;  that  God  no
longer  speaks  to  the  human  family;
that  He  has  left  them  with  a  Bible,
the  record  of  a  people  who  are  dead;
which  speaks  of  commandments
given  to  an  ancient  people,  who  like
ourselves  were  the  children  of  God.
This  is  the  claim  of  the  Christian
world — that  this  book  is  the  canon
of  scripture,  and  that  it  is  full,  and
we  need  no  more  revelation,  no  more
light  than  is  contained  within  the
lids  of  this  book.  They  take  that
position,  and  yet  say  we  are  exclu-
sive, we  are  presumptuous,  narrow-
minded  and  contracted,  because  we
testify  that  God  does  speak,  and
has  revealed  a  newer  revelation
than  this  Bible  which  I  hold.

It  is  true  that  our  testifying  of
this  does  not  make  it  true,  in  and
of  itself*  Nevertheless,  men  are
responsible  if  they  do  not  carefully
weigh  and  consider  the  testimonies
of  those  who  claim  to  have  more
light  than  they  have.  I  would  hold
myself  ready,  as  a  speaker  after
truth,  if  not  certain  that  I  already
possessed  it,  and  I  hold  myself  ready


198


JOURNAL OK  DISCOURSES.


now,  while  believing  that  my  feet  j
are  planted  upon  the  rock  of  truth,  i
and  that  this  is  the  only  Gospel  of  j
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  to  pay  due
respect  to  the  honest  opinions  of  my
fellow  creatures,  proving  all  things
and  holding  fast  that  which  is  good.
If  the  Christian  world  shall  bring
forth  something  better,  if  they  have
it,  orever  will  have  it,  than  Mormon-
ism,  I  hope  I  will  not  be  so  bigoted
as  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  their  honest
testimonies,  claiming  that  I  have  light
already,  and  that  I  want  no  more
light  I  would  at  least  examine
their  professions,  whatever  they
were,  and  try  them  by  *'  the  law
and  the  testimony  ; ,f  for  if  men
"speak  not  according  to  that,
it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in
them/1

The  Bible  is  a  blessing  ;  we  do  not
depreciate  its  value,  for  it  enables  us
to  meet  the  Christian  world  upon
their  own  ground,  using  this  Bible
as  the  touch-stone  of  truth,  in  rela-
tion to  their  doctrines  and  those
that  we  advance,  which  are  taught
and  confirmed  by  this  very  Book  in
-which  Cristians  profess  to  believe.
There  is  no  doctrine  preached  or
believed  by  the  Latter  day  Saints,
but  they  can  find  confirmatory  proof
of  its  authenticity  within  the  lids
of  the  Holy  Bible  ;  and  when  their
views  are  not  received,  and  they
are  laughed  to  scorn  and  derided  by
the  Christian  world,  it  is  simply  an
acknowledgment  on  the  part  of  those
who  mistreat  them  that  they  do  not
believe  their  own  Bible,  that  they
have  no  faith  in  the  record  which  they
claim  is  all-sufficient  —the  be-all  and
the  end-all  of  revelation.  They
profess  great  reverence  for  this  good
Book,  yet  they  do  not  believe  or
practice  what  it  inculcates.  It  is
a  prevalent  idea  in  the  world,  with
those  who  are  in  possession  of  the
Scriptures,  that  it  is  only  necessary


to  believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of
God,  and  that  constitutes  salvation,
taking  I  suppose  as  a  basis  for  it,
the  Scriptural  passage  which  declares*
that  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that
He  gave  His  Only  Begotten  Son,
that  whosoever  should  believe  in-
Him  should  not  perish  but  have*
everlasting  life/'  Now,  we  take
this  position.  We  hold  that  belief
in  God  and  the  Savior  of  mankind  is
absolutely  essential  to  salvation*
But  we  do  not  stop  there.  We  claim
that  if  men  believe  in  Jesus  Christ
they  will  keep  His  commandments;
they  will  live  His  laws  ;  they  will
not  repudiate  any  of  the  doctrines
He  preached  ;  they  will  not  say  bap-
tism is  unessential ;  that  Apostles
and  Prophets  are  no  longer  needed  ;
they  will  not  wrest  the  Scriptures  f
they  will  not  say  the  blessings  of
the  Holy  Ghost  are  done  away  with;
they  will  not  say  it  is  not  in  the  pro-
vince of  inspired  men  bearing  the
Holy  Priesthood  to  cast  out  devils,
to  speak  in  new  tongues,  to  lay
hands  upon  the  sick  and  admin-
ister those  spiritual  blessings  as
they  are  empowered  by  the  Priest-  *
hood  bestowed  upon  them  for  that
purpose.  The  Christian  world  would
not  repudiate  these  these  things  if
they  believed  their  own  Bible  ;  for  I
nowhere  read  within  the  lids  of  this
sacred  volume  that  the  time  would
ever  come,  except  through  transgres-
sion and  apostacy,  when  these  things
would  be  done  away  with,  and  it
would  be  said  they  were  no  longer
needed.

It  is  trne  that  the  Apostles  of  old
predicted  there  would  come  a  time
when  men  would  wander  from  the
truth,  when  they  would  heap  to
themselves  teachers,  and  have
itching  ears,  desiring  to  hear  simply
the  things  which  suited  their  selfish
natures ;  that  the  day  would  come
when  they  would  not  endure  sound


RESTORATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL.


19*


doctrine,  but  would  hire  teachers  to
preach  for  the  commandments  of
God  the  precepts  of  men  ;  when
the  world  would  be  turned  upside
down  and  be  emptied  of  its  in-
habitants, because  they  had  trans-
gressed the  law,  changed  the  ordi-
nances arid  broken  the  everlasting
covenant.  Thiswastobe  the  con-
dition of  the  world  when  these  drifts
and  blessings  would  be  said  to  be  no
longer  needed.  They  could  no  longer
lay  claim  to  them  because  they
would  persecute,  oppress  and  put  to
death  those  who  preached  sound
doctrine  ;  and  having  destroyed  the
temporal  Church  from  the  face  of  the
earth,  its  spiritual  counterpart  would
necessarily  depart,  just  as  naturally
as  the  spirit  of  man  will  depart  when
the  body  ceases  to  live.  The  body
is  but  a  lump  of  clay  without  the
enlivening  agency  of  the  spirit  with*
in  it.  When  the  body  returns  to
dust,  the  spirit  is  free  to  soar  away.
When  the  body  of  Christ  was  dead,
the  spirit  returned  to  Gud,  passed
into  the  spirit  world.  So  it  is  with
the  Church,  which  is  called  the  body
of  Christ.  Kill  the  temporal  Church,
and  the  spirit  Church  will  take  its
departure  ;  it  will  be  received  into
the  heavens*

This  is  our  belief ;  that  the  Chris-
tian Church,  established  in  the  days
of  Christ  and  His  Apostles,  apos-
tatized and  turned  from  the  truth,
it  became  paganized,  mixed  up  with
the  religion  and  traditions  of  pagan
Home,  and  that  that  is  the  cause  of
this  wide  diversity  of  beliefs  and
conjectures,  these  many  forms  of
godliness,  denying  the  power  there-
of ;  which  are  eaid  to  be  the  Church
of  Christ,  yet  bear  little  or  no  sem-
blance to  the  Church  which  He
established  ;  all  claiming  to  be  one,
yet  divided  innumerably;  to  have
the  same  Gospel,  yet  not  able  to
stand  the  test  of  comparison  with


the  Gospel  preached  in  former  days;
claiming  the  same  power,  yet
repudiating  and  denying  that  power
and  trampling  upon  those  who  still
maintain  that  it  ought  to  exist*
This  is  the  consistency  of  the
position  of  the  opponents  of
"  Mormonism,"  which  claims  to  be
the  old  Gospel  brought  back  again,
the  old  Church  resurrected,  no  new-
religion,  no  new  plan,  but  simply
the  everlasting  Gospel  revealed
anew,  (1  i**t

I  might  occupy  your  time  citing
evidences  almost  innumerable  to
show  how  the  Christian  world  have
departed  from  the  teachings  of  this
sacred  Book.  I  might  appeal  to  it,-
also,  to  confirm  the  teachings  of  the
Latter-day  Saints.  It  is  an  old
story,  many  times  told,  and  perhaps
I  had  better  not  dilate  upon  it  this
afternoon.  Suffice  it  that  we  claim
that  God  has  spoken  from  heaven  ;
that  He  has  re-opened  the  long-closed
portals  of  eternity,  and  has  raised  up
a  people  to  usher  in  the  dispensation
of  Gospel  grace  as  He  has  I  leaded
every  dispensation  which  has  pre-
ceded it;  raising  up  inspired  men  to
do  His  bidding  ;  to  preach  to  the'
world  the  principles  of  everlasting
life  ;  to  establish  upon  the  earth  a
system  which  will  foteshaduw  and
usher  in  the  millennial  reign  of  uni-
versal peace  and  righteousness.  We
believe  that  we  are  living  in  the  last
days ;  that  these  are  the  days  when
God  said  He  would  perform  a  mar-
velous work  and  a  wonder;  that  He
would  set  His  hand  the  second  time
to  recover  the  remnant  of  his  people;
that  He  would  gather  them  from  the
north  and  from  the  south,  from  the
east  and  from  the  west,  and  would
bring  them  to  Zion,  and  give  theni
pastors  after  His  own  heart,  to
teach  them  the  law  of  the  Lord,
and  that  the  law  should  go  forth
from  Zion  to  the  inhabitants  of  the


200


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


earth,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord
from  Jerusalem,

We  believe  that  we  are  living  in
the  evening  of  history,  that  we  are
closing  the  Saturday  of  the  great
week,  each  day  of  which  is  a  thou-
sand years,  the  period  preordained
in  which  this  earth  should  accom-
plish the  purpose  appointed  by  its
creator.  We  believe  that  when
God  spake  to  Adam  and  told  Him
he  should  die  in  the  day  that  He
partook  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  that
He  kept  His  word,  and  that  Adam
did  die  within  the  day ;  but  it  was
not  a  dpy  of  twenty-four  hours,  one
revolution  of  our  little  earth  ;  the
<Jay  of  which  He  spake  was  based
upon  a  revolution  of  the  planet
upon  which  God  dwells,  which  we
are  taught  revolves  once  in  a  thou-
sand years.  This  world  was  ap-
pointed a  probation  through  which
to  pass,  six  working  days,  before  it
should  have  a  rest,  or  sabbath.  We
believe  we  are  living  in  the  Saturday
Bight  of  this  world's  history,  that
we  are  closing  the  six  thousand
years  of  its  mortal  probation,  and
that  the  dawn  of  the  seventh  day,
or  the  seventh  thousand  years,  now
nearly  upon  us,  will  be  the  millen-
nium, the  reign  of  peace,  when
Christ  the  Ruler  and  Lord  of  this
world,  who  labored  and  suffered  and
died  to  redeem  its  inhabitants  from
death,  will  be  here  in  His  glory  to
reign  upon  the  earth  King  over  His
people  and  over  the  human  race.

These  simple  truths,  most  of
which  are  plainly  spoken  of  in  this
holy  word  of  God,  the  Bible,  are
distorted  by  the  enemies  of  the
Saints  to  indicate  that  they  are
treasonable  to  the  government  under
which  they  live*  They  say  we  are
traitors  because  we  speak  of  the
Kingdom  of  God ;  that  a  kingdom
cannot  exist  within  a  republic  ;  that
it  is  imperium  in  imperii);  that  there


is  no  room  in  this  broad  land  for
the  Kingdom  of  our  God.  They
might  as  well  say  there  is  no  room
in  Christianity  for  the  love  of  God,
Why,  this  great  government
was  established  for  the  very  purpose
cf  introducing  this  work.  Inspired
men  like  Washington  and  Jefferson
were  raised  up  to  frame  a  Constitu-
tion liberal  in  its  provisions,  extend-
ing the  utmost  freedom  to  all  men,
Christian  or  heathen,  who  desired
to  make  this  glorious  land  their
home ;  that  they  might  have  the
unrestricted  right  to  worship  God
according  to  the  dictates  of  their
consciences*  We  believe  that  God
raised  up  George  Washington,  that
He  raised  up  Thomas  Jefferson,  that
He  raised  up  Benjamin  Franklin
and  those  other  patriots  who  carved
out  with  their  swords  and  with  their
pens  the  character  and  stability  of
this  great  government  which  they
hoped  would  stand  forever*  an  asy-
lum for  the  oppressed  of  all  nations,
where  no  man's  religion  would  be
questioned,  no  man  wotild  be  limited
in  his  honest  service  to  his  Maker,
so  long  as  he  did  not  infringe  upon
the  rights  of  his  fellow  men.  We
believe  those  men  were  inspired  to
do  their  work,  as  we  do  that  Joseph
Smith  was  inspired  to  begin  this
work  j  just  as  Gallileo,  Columbus,
and  other  mighty  men  of  old,  whom
I  have  no  time  to  mention,  were
inspired  to  gradually  pave  the  way
leading  to  this  dispensation  ;  senti-
nels, standing  at  different  periods
down  the  centuries,  playing  their
parts  as  they  were  inspired  of  God;
gradually  freeing  the  human  mind
from  error,  gradually  dispelling  the
darkness  as  they  were  empowered
by  their  Creator  so  to  do,  that  in
culmination  of  the  grand  scheme
of  schemes,  this  great  nation,  the
Republic  of  the  United  States,
might  be  established  upon  this  land


PATRIOTISM  AND  TREACHERY  COMPARED


201


as  an  asylum  for  the  oppressed  ;  a
resting  place,  it  might  be  said,  for
the  Ark  of  the  covenant,  where  the
temple  of  our  God  might  be  built ;
where  the  plan  of  salvation  might
be  introduced  and  practiced  iu  free-
dom, and  not  a  dog  would  wag  his
tongue  in  opposition  to  the  purposes
of  the  Almighty.  We  believe  that
this  was  His  object  in  creating  the
Be  public  of  the  United  States ;
the  only  land  where  his  work  could
be  commenced  or  the  feet  of  his
people  find  rest  No  other  land  had
such  liberal  institutions,  had  adopted
so  broad  a  platform  upon  which  all
men  might  stand.  We  give  glory
to  those  patriots  for  the  noble  work
they  did  5  but  we  give  the  first
glory  to  God,  our  Father  and  their
Father,  who  inspired  them.  We
take  thera  by  the  hand  as  brothers.
We  believe  they  did  nobly  their
work,  even  as  we  would  fain  do
ours,  faithfully  and  well,  that
we  might  not  be  recreant  in  the  eyes
of  God,  for  failing  to  perform  the
mission  to  which  He  has  appointed
us.

This  is  the  "treason"  of  the
Latter- day  Saints.  They  preach
the  coming  of  the  King  of  Kings,
whom  all  Christians  ought  to  wor-
ship ;  whom  tall  Christians  ought
to  welcome  ;  and  instead  of  passing
laws  to  prohibit,  and  prevent,  if
possible,  the  growth  of  this  work,
which  has  as  its  object  the  blessing
of  all  mankind,  they  should  join
bands  with  the  Latter-day  Saints
in  consummating  it ;  for  as  sure  as
there  is  a  God  in  heaven  it  is  Mis
work,  and  He  will  accomplish  it
Haling  men  before  magistrates ;
immuring  them  in  dungeons  ;  driv-
ing them  from  city  to  city,  or  shed-
ding their  blood,  will  no  more  stamp
out  this  work  than  it  will  blot  out
the  glory  of  the  sun.  They  who
take  up  the  sword  to  fight  against


Zion  will  perish  by  the  sword  before
she  perishes  ;  they  who  leave  God
out  of  the  question  in  dealing  with
the  (<  Mormon  problem"  will  find
before  they  get  through  that  it  is
suicide  to  run  against  Jehovah's
buckler.

We,  to  all  appearances  are  help-
less. We  make  no  boast  of  our  own
strength.  We  are  only  a  handful
in  the  midst  of  millions.  But  Gad
has  given  us  a  mission  to  perform.
We  can  110  more  shrink  from  that
mission  than  the  fathers  of  the
revolution  could  shrink  from  theirs.
That  indeed  would  be  treason,
treason  to  God,  treason  to  humanity,
and  we  should  justify  the  charges
which  are  now  so  utterly  false.
We  might  be  complimented,  "patted
upon  the  back,"  if  we  would  play
the  part  of  traitors  and  recreants,
but  we  cannot  afford  to  buy  the
compliments  of  the  world,  the  good
opinion  of  mankind,  at  such  a  terri-
ble sacrifice.  Men  who  died  to
found  this  nation,  have  their  names
held  in  everlasting  remembrance,
while  the  narau  of  the  traitor,  who
would  have  betrayed  his  country,
and  deserted  it  in  the  hour  of  peril,
is  loaded  with  opprobrium.  He
lived  while  many  of  the  patriots
died  ;  but  who  are  living  to-day  in
the  true  sense  of  the  term  3  The
name  of  the  patriot  will  live  forever,
because  he  had  the  courage  to  die  for
his  convictions ;  but  the  name  of
the  traitor  will  go  down  to  oblivion,
because  to  save  himself  he  deserted
in  the  hour  of  danger  the  cause  of
his  country,  thinking  it  was  of  no
use  to  stand  up  against  the  great
power  which  had  lifted  its  mighty
arm  to  crush  out  the  colonies.  We
think  of  these  things,  but  we  do  not
propose  to  fight.  We  are  a  people
who  have  peace  as  our  object — the
ushering  in  of  a  reign  of  peace.  We
are  a  people  who  build  temples.  We


202


JOL-KNAL  O*  DISCOURSES.


must  not  imbrue  our  hands  in  blood.
But  it  is  not  through  fear  of  man
that  the  Latter-day  Saints  take  this
position.  They  have  shown  their
bravery  ;  they  have  proved  their
courage  by  coming  out  of  the  world
and  forsaking  it,  patiently  enduring
its  scorn  and  opposition  ;  it  is  a
braver  part  sometimes  to  live  than
to  die.

There  are  sacrifices  which  would
try  the  souls  of  some  men  more
than  to  face  death  in  a  thousand
farms.  But  the  Latter  day  Saints
have  taken  a  stand  ;  they  cannot
recede  from  it  with  honor.  They  j
are  prepared  to  meet  tin*  consequen-
ces, and  leave  the  result  in  the  hands
of  God.  We  du  not  look  to  mail
for  our  preservation.  If  there  is
no  God  in  "  Mm  monism"  then
it  will  fail,  then  w  ill  our  mind  a  he
undeceived  ;  but  if  there  is  a  God
in  it,  woe  !  to  those  who  fin  lit  against
Him,  who  fight  against  their  Creator,
and  suppose  that  they  can  trample
upon  the  rights  of  their  fellow-men
and  not  endanger  their  own  rights
and  liberties  as  welL

The  old  fable  which  ^Esop  tells
of  the  woodman  who  went  into  the
forest-  to  get  a  handle  for  his  axe,
describes  accurately  the  position
in  which  we  find  ourselves.  The
woodman  went  and  consulted  the
trees  of  the  forest,  asking  them  to
give  him  a  handle  for  his  axe.
The  other  trees,  the  stronger  ones,
arrogating  to  themselves  authority
and  ignoring  the  rights  of  others,
thought  that  they  could  dispose  of
them  as  they  pleased.  They  con-
ferred together  and  decided  to  grant
the  request,  and  they  gave  to  the
woodman  the  ash.  The  a&h  fell ;
but  the  woodman  had  no  sooner
fitted  the  handle  to  his  axe,  than  he
began  upon  th«*  other  trees.  He
did  not  stop  with  the  ash,  but  he
hewed  down  the  oaks  and  the  cedars,


and  the  great  and  mighty  monarch^
of  the  forest  who  had  surrendered
in  their  pride,  the  rights  of  the
humble  ash.  An  old  oak  was  heard
to  complain  te  a  neighboring  cedar,'
M  if  we  had  not  given  away  the
rights  of  the  ash  we  might  have'
stood  forever  ;  but  we  have
surrendered  to  the  destroyer  the
rights  of  one,  and  now  we  are
suffering  from  the  same  evil  our*
selves.11

Tii is  nation  may  think  that  it  is
strong  enough — powerful  enough —
to  treat  the  people  of  Utah  as  they
please.  They  are  ;  we  do  not  pre-
tend to  compare  with  them  so  far  as
that  is  concerned.  But  if  there  is-
any  truth  in  eternal  justice  ;  if  there
is  such  a  thing  as  retribution,  woe !
be  unto  this  forest  of  States  if  they
surrender  into  the  hands  of  tyranny
the  rights  of  the  Utah  ash  !  It
cannot  be  done  with  safety.  If  they
trample  upon  the  rights  of  their
fellow  men,  there  must  conu?  a  time
in  the  eternal  revolutions  of  the
wheels  of  justice  when  their  own
necks  will  be  beneath  the  tvnuitV
heel.  They  will  suffer  themselves
from  the  laws  they  ha\t  passed
against  the  maligned,  mis  a  1 1  ■  Uj  rstood  >
down-trodden  people  or  Utah,  I
hope  to  God,  as  an  American  patriot,
that  this  never  need  come,  I  hope
the  eyes  of  this  nation  will  be  open-
ed, that  they  may  see  the  danger  in
which  they  stand  from  alar  ;  but  if
I  were  a  prophet  1  would  prophesy
in  the  naine  of  God  that  if  they  give
away  our  rights,  if  they  trample
upon  our  liberties,  and  surrender  us-
as  a  sacrifice  to  popular  clamor,  the
day  will  come  when  their  own  necks
will  feel  the  galling  joke  ;  the  laws
they  pass  now  to  deprive  us  of  our
rights  as  American  citizens,  will  de-
prive them  of  their  rights,  and  they
will  drink  the  cup  heaped  up,  pressed
down,  and  running  over. I  hope


MISSION  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS


20$


this  never  need  be  ;  but  I  dare  pre-
dict it  on  that  condition,  in  all
humility,  with  no  spirit  of  treason,
or  of  ill  will  to  my  country  ;  but
with  a  feeling  of  sorrow  that  some
of  our  fellow-citizens  have  it  in  their
hearts  to  treat  us  in  this  cruel
manner.

We  are  a  people  of  peace.  We
only  desire  to  be  let  alone  to  accom-
plish  our  mission  in  peace*  God
would  not  permit  us  to  build  tem-
ples, any  more  than  He  permitted
Da v id,  if  we  imbrued  our  hands  in
blood*  David  was  forbidden  to  build
the  temple  of  God  at  Jerusalem,  be-
cause he  had  been  a  man  of  blood.
It  was  reserved  for  his  son  Solomon,
a  man  of  peace,  to  build  the  temple.
So  it  is  with  us.  Wc  will  not  need
to  fight,  we  do  not  propose  to  take
up  arms,  we  do  not  desire  and  will
not  be  compelled  to  shed  the  blood
of  our  fellow-men.  We  may  have
our  own  blood  shed  in  instances,
though  the  work  of  God  will  not  be
trampled  out ;  but  we  will  let  them
monopolize  that  part  ;  they  may
shed  our  blood,  but  we  must  not
Bhed  theirs.  We  must  build  tern-
pies  to  the  honor  of  our  God,  and
administer  in  them  for  the  salvation
of  the  living  and  the  dead ;  and
thus  go  onward,  if  reading  peace,
pouring  oil  upon  the  troubled  waters ;
and  while  there  will  l>e  wars  and
rumors  of  wars,  while  nation  will
clash  against  nation  and  go  down
in  the  whirlpool  of  fury,  the  Latter-
day  Saints  must  preach  peace  on
earth  and  good  will  to  men,  and  be
exemplars  in  ail  righteousness  j
seeking  to  let  their  light  so  shine
that  the  glory  of  God  will  radiate
from  them  to  others.

This  is  the  treason  which  we
preach.  We  desire  to  benefit  our
country  ;  benefit  our  fellow-citizens;
benefit  our  fellow-men.  We  be-
lieve this  world  is  the  Lord's,  and


1  that  He  is  coming  to  reign  upon  it
as  it  is  His  right  to  reign, I  care

i  not  how  soon  it  is  accomplished. 1
The  reiim  of  Christ  will  rob  no  man
of  his  rights  ;  no  righteous  govern-'
ment  need  fear  it;  neither  the  United
States,  nor  the  nations  of  Europe,*
if  their  consciences  are  clear,  need
dread  the  coming  of  the  King  of
Kings. They must  acknowledge
if they are Christian  nations,
that  they  owe  their  allegiance  to
Him  whose  right  it  is  to  reign.
They  should  be  proud  to  lay  their
crowns  and  sceptres  at  Hi*  feet,
and  acknowledge  Him  to  be  Lord  of
Lords,  and  crown  Him  King  of
Kings.

This  is  a  glance  at  the  mission  of
the  Latter-day  Saints.  These  are
some  of  the  views  we  cherish  and

I  which  we  cannot  recede  from  ;  we

'  would  be  unworthy  of  our  lineage
as  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Abra-
ham, the  sons  and  daughters  of.
Liberty,  if  we  should  forsake  the
things  for  which  our  forefather*  lived
and  died,  and  suffered  all  manner
of  persecution.  We  leave  the  issue
with  God.  Let  the  world  persecute
us,  if  they  desire  to  assume  that

I  responsibility;  we  will  seek  to  return
good  for  evil.  When  they  come  with
the  sword  we  will  meet  them  with
the  olive  branch.  We  will  say  peace

'  on  earth  when  they  have  war  on
earth.  We  will  do  our  duty  as  God
shall  give  us  strength,  and  leave  the
result  with  Him  who  over-rules
the  acts  of  all  men  and  all  nations
for  the  ultimate  redemption  of  the
human  family,  of  which  we  are
some  of  the  bumble  represen-
tatives.

May  God  speed  the  day.  May  He
bless  those  who  are  persecuted,  who
are  driven  and  imprisoned  for  right  *
eousuess'  sake.  May  He  bless  the
honest,  the  good,  the  pure  and  the
patriotic  among  the  American  peo-


204


JOURNAL  OV  DISCOURSES.


pie ;  the  honest  and  the  upright
among  all  nations,  who  desire  to
enjoy  their  own  rights  arid  liberties,
and  are  willing  that  others  should
•enjoy  theirs*  May  God  bless  all
fair-minded  people,  and  may  He
have  mercy  upon  those  who  seek  to


trample  upon  the  rights  of  their
fellow  creatures,  and  oppose  the
great  and  glorious  purposes  which
have  been  foreordained,  This  is
my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ.  AmeiL


REMARKS BY APOSTLE MOSES  THATCHER,
Delivered  in  Logan Tabernacle,  Sunday, April  13, 188  5.

REP0BTED  BT  F.  E.  BARKER


THE  SPKAKER's  PLEASURE  IN  AGAIN  MEETING  WITH  THE  SAINTS,  AND
PARTAKING  OF  THE  SACRAMENT — THE  COMPANIONSHIP  OF  THE
HOLY  GHOST  IS  MORE  PRECIOUS  THAN  GOLD — FUTURE  DESTINY  OF
THE  SAINTS  —  THEIR  LOVE  FOR  THE  MOUNTAINS — BLESSINGS  ONLY
APPRECIATED  BY  CONTRAST — NOBILITY  AND  SCARCITY  OF  MORAL
COURAGE— TYRANNY  OF  PUBLIC  OPINION— WE  CANNOT  LOVE  GOD
AND  HATE  OUR  FELLOW-MAN — MEN  AND  WOMEN  DO  WRONG  WHEN
THEY  YIELD  TO  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  SATAN— WHAT  CONSTITUTES  A
SON  OF  PERDITION — AGENCIES  WHICH  MEN  USE,  COMPARED  TO
E"  ECTRICITY —  TRUTH  HAS  EVER  LEEN  FIERCELY  OPPOSED  —  OUR
TRIALS  ARE  AGREEABLE  To  GOD'S  PURPOSES — CONCLUSION-

My  brethren  and  sisters,  I  have  choir,  and  rejoice  in  listening  to  the

spoken  but  little  hi  public  during  testimony  oi my  brethren  ;  but

the  past  three  months.  And  without  beyond  and  above  all  these  things,

the  assistance  of  your  faith and  I  am  grateful  for  another  peaceful

prayers, through  the  medium  of  opportunity  of  partaking  of  the

which  I  may  enjoy  a  portion  of  the  sacrament  with  the  Saints  ;  for  as

Holy  Spirit,  to  direct  my  mind  and  often  as  we  do  so  worthily,  we  renew

inspire  my  thoughts,  I  have  no  wish  I  our  covenants  with  our  Heavenly

to  address  you  this  afternoon. 1  Father,  and  receive  the  promise  of

believe,  however,  that  I  appreciate  the  Holy  Spirit  through  whom  comes


the  privilege  of  meeting  with,  and
of  enjoying  your  society  once  more,
and  I  am  especially  delighted  to


communion  with  God*  To  us  such
communion  h  worth  more  thau  all
earthly  things. Men  devote  their


bear  again  the  sweet  melody  of  the  time  and  talents — the  best  energy


VALUE  OF  OUR  MOUNTAIN  TRAINING.


205-


and  deepest  devotion  of  their  lives  I
in  the  acquirement  of  perishable
wealth  ;  and  of  which,  when
acquired,  they  often  make  golden
gods  to  pay  homage  and  soulless
worship  to,  imagining  that  in  these
things  are  found  fame,  honor,
worldly  glory  and  earthly  happiness.
Gold,  when  compared  with  the  riches
of  eternity,  becomes  almost  value-
less, and  yet  it  is  the  creation  of
God,  and  no  mau  has  ever  brought
an  ounce  of  it  into  the  world,  nor
can  he  take  a  grain  of  it  out  of  the
world.  But  notwithstanding  this
fact  known  to  all,  men  for  its  brief
possession  willingly  encounter  un-
told dangers,  in  traversing  deserts,
climbing  mountains,  navigating
seas,  antl  battling  with  angry  waves;
they  willingly  endure  the  heats  of
torrid  and  the  colds  of  frigid  zones,
often  sacrificing  the  endearments  of
home  and  friends,  and  sometimes
truth  and  honor.  Created  by  the
Almighty,  gold,  when  honestly  ac-
quired, becomes  a  means  of  minis-
tering to  the  comfort  and  conveni-
ence of  man  -  but  there  is  that
which  the  Lord  bestows  upon  the
honest,  obedient  and  good,  of  far
higher  value.  The  Holy  Ghost,  the
Comforter,  hath  the  power  of  peace
and  bestows  salvation  upon  obedient
humanity,  regardless  of  their  earthly
surroundings.  Let  us,  therefore,
secure  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  the
testimony  of  the  Father  and  of  the
Son  which  He  alone  bestows,  we
shall  have  secured  the  "pearl  of
great  pice"  which  the  world  can
neither  give  nor  take  away,  Let  us
gain  the  constant  companionship  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  doctrines
of  the  Priesthood  will  distil  upon
our  minds  as  the  dews  of  heaven,
and  the  gates  that  lead  to  peace  and
happiness  in  time  and  in  eternity
will,  by  the  power  and  authority  of
his  keys,  stand  wide  open  for  us  to


pass  through  to  exaltation,  dominion
and  glory.

Since  the  beginning  of  the  new
year  I  have  been  almost  constantly
on  the  move,  having,  during  that
time,  traveled  a  distance  almost
equal  to  that  of  half  the  earths
circumference ;  most  of  it  being
by  rail,  but  at  least  a  thousand  miles
was  accomplished  with  teams,  00
horseback  and  on  foot.  I  have  ex-
amined a  country  never  before  seen
by  me,  consisting  of  waterless,  tim-
berless  plains,  and  mountains  rugged,
wild,  and  uninhabited.  During
my  absence,  my  reflections  have  been
mainly  in  reference  to  the  future
destiny  of  the  Saints  of  the  Most
High*  And  these  reflections  have
led  me  to  note  the  striking  attach-
ment they  have  manifested  of  late
years  for  countries  "  exalted  above
the  hills,"  In  our  choice  of  loca-
tions we  cling  to  the  mountains  as
naturally  as  a  child  to  the  bosom  of
its  mother.  As  during  our  infancy
we  have  clung  to  them,  learning  to
love  their  crags,  canyons  and  valleys,
so,  I  believe,  we  shall  continue  in
them  until  we  grow  stroug,  and  be
able  not  only  to  stand  erect,  but  to
walk  forth  with  godlike  dignity  at
least  respected,  if  not  honored  by
all  peoples.  We  are  not  strong
now,  \V e  are  weak  and  few  in  num-
bers. But  there  is  much  in  the
training  we  are  receiving  calculated
to  make  our  posterity  strong  physi-
cally and  bright  intellectually-  In
illustration  of  a  part  of  this  training
I  am  reminded  of  some  of  the
remarks  of  the  last  speaker,  Elder
Villet,  who  recently  returned  from
an  Italian  mission.  On  reaching
his  native  land,  according  to  his
statement,  he  found  the  food  offered
him  exceedingly  distasteful,  but  later
he  ate  it  with  relish.  Hunger
changed  and  improved  his  appetite.
That  hunger  was  the  result  of  de*


206  JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


privation.  And  in  like  manner,
love  of  liberty  and  a  keen  relish  for
'its  blessings  are  intensified  by  the
'constant  encroachments  marie  upon
cur  rights  by  those  who  little  dream
that,  in  sowing  to  the  wind  they  will
have  to  reap  the  whirlwind,  when
their  rights  will,  also,  not  only  be
invaded,  but  taken  away  from  them;
for  the  measure  which  they  meet  to
others,  will,  in  the  eternal  justice
of  (totl,  be  measured  back  to
them.  The  Almighty  hath  decreed
it.  Who  can  prevent  its  fulfill-
ment I

In  further  illustration,  I  am  re
minded  of  a  well  known  elder  in  the
Church  whose  name  in  this  connec-
tion 1  feel  not  at  liberty  to  mention,
-but  who,  gathering  with  others  from
England  to  Zion,  became,  in  the
bourse  of  years,  wealthy  and  culti-
-vated,  as  many  having  abundant
means  do.  Luxurious  habits  of
living  linaliy  satiated  his  appetite,
«,nd  lie  went  back  to  old  England,
anticipating  among  other  things
♦to  erjuy,  when  there  again,  the
famous  "mast  beef"  of  his  native
laud,  the  like  of  which,  in  his  opin-
ion,  this  country  did  not,  and  never
could  produce.  After  searching  in
vain  he  declared,  on  coming  back
here,  that  there  was  no  beef  in
England  half  so  good  as  that  raised
in  Utah,  Had  the  beef  of  that
-coun t rv  <  1  eteriorated  ?  No,  but  ou r
English  brothers  appetite,  through
being  pampered,  had.  Had  he
eaten  it  once  a  week,  as  was  doubt-
less hi*  former  habit,  instead  of
three  times  a  day,  as  is  too  fre-
quently the  custom  here,  the  differ-
encein  quality  of  English  beef  had  per-
haps remained  undiscovered  by  him
until  this  day.  In  parallel,  who
shall  declare  that  blessings  so
abundantly  flowing  to  our  nation
from  blood-bought  freedom  and
•human  liberty  bestowed  without


I  stint  from  heaven,  have  not  pam-
pered the  average  Americans  appe-
tite or  relish  for  blessings  that  men
,  of  other  ages  have  fought  to  estab-
lish and  longed  to  enjoy.

Ponder  this  matter  carefully,
1  deeply,  and  you  will  find  few  truths
more  apparent  Consult  railway,
banking  and  commercial  kings;
statesmen,  philosophers,  priests  and
people,  and  then  note  the  voice  of
pulpit  and  press,  and  you  will  find
an  indifference  born  of  pride  that
plainly,  unmistakably,  indicates  that
the  rights  and  lil jetties  for  the
securing  of  which  our  fathers  pledged
their  fortunes,  honor  and  lives,  are
now  received  by  their  children,  in
most  instances,  as  inherent  blessings
flowing  as  a  natural  consequence
rather  than  as  gifts  for  which  daily
gratitude  is  due.

Not  so  with  the  Saints,  They
of  all  people  on  earth  are  most  ap-
preciative, most  grateful.  And
why  ?  The  answer  is  simple  :  their
most  sacred  rights  being  daily
encroached  upon,  their  conscientious
convictions  sneered  at,  their  religious
privileges  trampled  under  foot,  and
even  the  domain  of  their  heaven-
inspired  thought  invaded,  they
could  not  it  they  would  fail  to  re-
gard with  intense  appreciation  and
undying  love  the  bequests  of  the
fathers.  The  very  threats,  as  well
as  the  attempts  of  the  wicked  to
deprive  them  of  blessings  wrung
from  tyrants  by  revolutionary  sires,
will  but  teach  the  Saints  more  accu-
rately to  estimate,  by  the  cost,  their
value  ;  and  your  high  estimate  being
transmitted  to  your  children,  will
bud,  bloom  and  ripen  into  most
glorious  fruit,  as  delicious  and  sweet
as  that  produced  when  first  the  tree
of  liberty  was  moistened  with  the
blood  of  patriots.  Let  others
therefore  become  pampered,  glut-
tons, if  they  will,  but  for  us  and


MORAL  COURAGE


207


cur  children,  fewer  privileges  well
appreciate] ,  are  better  than  many,
without  gratitude.

Impress  these  things  upon  the
minds  of  our  children,  and  among
these  mountains  will  grow  up  a  race
of  free  men  whose  views  will  be
broad,  high,  and  deep  enough  to
appreciate  liberty  themselves,  and
to  wish  to  have  all  others  enjoy
its  blessings.  By  contrast,  they
will  lean i  this  and  much  more.  If
they  taste  the  bitter  the  sweet  will
be  to  them  all  the  more  agree*
able.

You  who  for  years  have  had
peaceful  possession  of  homes  with
society  of  families  and  friends,  can
greatly  increase  your  estimation  of
such  blessings  by  going  abroad  occa-
sionally. 1  have  tried  it  many
times,  always,  1  trust,  with  profit.
And  yet  wherever  1  go  it  has  been
my  good  fortune  to  find  friends.
There  may  be  present  those  who  may
think,  **if  we  have  friends  abroad,
why  don't  they  speak  out  in  our  favor
using  their  influence  to  stop  the  per-
secutions of  the  wicked  against  us?"
A  pertinent  query,  perhaps,  but  I
am  not  quite  sure  that  the  Lord
wants  them  stopped ;  indeed  1
rathgr  incline  to  think  otherwise.
And  while  there  are  thousands  and
hundreds  of  thousands  of  people  in
the  midst  of  the  Christian  world
who,  if  left  to  their  own  agency,
would  be  just,  generous,  and  good
men  worthy  of  the  blessings  of  the
Lord,  but  who  to-day  are  surrounded
by  circumstances  which  they  can
neither  control,  nor  have  they  the
moral  courage  to  even  combat.  And
for  this  reasun  they  dare  not  publicly
express  their  sympathy  for,  nor
Utter  a  protest  against  the  wrongs
heaped  upon  us.  But  notwithstand-
ing this  condition,  which  all  must
Concede  to  be  deplorable,  let  us  have
charity, remembering  that  moral


courage  is  heaven-born  and  so  pre-
cious that  the  world  has  at  no  period
of  its  history  ever  been  over-stocked
with  it.  It  is  a  sentiment  than  which
none  is  more  noble,  beautiful  or
grand,  emanating  from  God  it  abided
not  in  an  ignoble,  quaking  heart.,
Demanding  what  the  truly  cour-
ageous alone  can  give,  self-sacrifice,
mural  courage  numbers  in  her  ranks
at  no  time  vast  multitudes.  It
is  a  sentiment  of  which,  at  no  time,
even  among  us,  have  we  had  too
much  \  but  wherever  found  it
shines  brightly  like  a  star  of  the
first  magnitude,  like  a  diamond
of  the  first  water  that,  cannot  be
successfully  imitated.

A  man  with  right  convictions  and
the  courage  to  stand  by  them  in  life
and  death  hath  moral  courage,  stam-
ina, and  the  help  of  God.  Testing
its  quality  we  will  find  it  here  as
elsewhere,  good  ;  too  good  indeed
to  abide  with  those  whose  acts  are
predicated  not  on  principles  of
justice,  equity  aiul  truth.  He
who  possesses  moral  courage  weighs
according  to  equity/  unbiassed  by
popular  clamor,  unswerved  by  pri-
vate prejuiee.  In  trying  cases  he
judges  cases*  not  men,  and  on
this  principle  Satan  himself,  tried
before  such  a  judge,  would  stand
the  same  chance  to  get  justice  as
would  an  angel  of  God.  And,  by
parity  of  reason,  an  angel  would
stand  as  good  a  chance  to  get  justice
as  would  a  veritable  devil,  although
a  discussion  of  that  kind  might
innovate  modern  jurisprudence  as
practiced  in  some  countries  not  far
distant  from  here.  Now,  let  me,  if
I  can,  bring  this  matter  home  to
your  hearts.  Suppose  judgment
wiithout  appeal  was  irrevocably
placed  in  your  hands  with  none  to
say,  why  do  you  so  ?  Now  imagine
in  your  midst  a  despicable  charac-
ter, a  Judas  Iscariot,  ready  to  betray


208


JOURNAL  UF  DISCOURSES


for  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  or  to
gratify  a  hatred  born  of  hell,  your
best  friends — the  servants  of  the
Lord,  or,  Benedict  Arnold  like,  sell
human  liberty,  God's  best  heritage,
for  gold.  Popular  clamor  demands
punishment,  and  at  the  same  time
brands  the  accused  as  traitor,  apos-
tate ;  an  assassin  of  good  character,
a  murderer  of  peace  and  good  order.
Now  bring  him  to  judgment  without
malice,  without  bias,  protecting  him
from  insult  while  giving  him  every
right,  every  privilege,  every  immu-
nity guaranteed  by  the  law  of  God
and  man  and  pass  upon  his  case,
not  upon  him  nor  his  reputation,
according  to  the  rules  of  equity
without  fear  of  popular  criticism  or
condemnation,  and  you  have  demon-
strated iu  actual  practice  what  a
beautiful  and  heavenly  thing  moral
courage  is.  Without  it  God  would
cease  to  be  God.  Without  it  we
cannot  be  His  people.  He  who
habitually  sacrifices  principle  at  the
shrine  of  policy  or  power,  cannot  be
a  Saint  Unless  those  who  rule,
govern,  control  and  judge  under
the  rules  and  restrictions  of  princi-
ple, the  liberties  of  those  who  are
subject  to  them  are  constantly
endangered*  And  here  let  me  say
that  public  opinion  is  often  the
worst  tyrant  this  world  lias  ever
known.  It  crucified  Christ,  killed
His  disciples,  martyred  Joseph  and
Hyrura,  drove  the  Saints  into  these
mountains  and  continues  to  track
them  as  persistently  and  unrelent-
ingly as  bloodhounds  ever  tracked
fugitive  slave.  Avoid  therefore  at
home  and  abroad,  the  seductive
influence  of  the  hateful  tyrant,
public  opinion,  which,  wrought  to
frenzy  by  popular  clamor,  is  always
dangerous,  often  destructive.

Planting  your  feet  firmly  on  prin-
ciples of  eternal  justice,  emanating
from  God,  the  billows  of  hate,  born


of  envy,  and  malice,  will  beat  and
foam  harmlessly  about  you.  And,
when  judgement  shall  be  given  into
your  hands,  friend  and  foe,  Pagan
and  Christian,  white  and  black,  Saint
and  sinner,  will  alike  receive  even-
handed  justice,  which  here  let  me
say,  never  has  been  and  never  will
be  bestowed  under  the  pressure
and  bias  of  public  opinion,  or  by
men  claiming  to  be  a  law  unto
themselves.  Place  moral  courage
in  the  judgment  seat  and  the  Saint,
as  to  righteousness  of  judgment  has
no  advantage  over  the  most  wicked
apostate  sinner  on  earth,  their  rights
being  held  equally  sacred.

The  reason  this  high  moral,  god*
like  plane  has  has  not  long  since
been  reached,  is  because  of  human
imperfections  and  the  darkness  that
clouds  and  narrows  the  souls  of  men.
We  as  the  Saints  of  the  Most  High
God,  having  received  the  light,
should  struggle  upward  until  we
reach  it ;  and  when  we  do,  then,  and
not  until  then  will  the  Almighty
give  us  dominion,  rule  and  govern-
ment. When  we  are  prepared  to
exercise  judgment  in  righteous-
ness the  Lord  will  mightily  increase
our  influence  and  power,  and  mil-
lions will  flock  to  the  standard  of
Zion  to  avoid  oppression  and  wrong
elsewhere.

This  being  among  the  greatest  of
all  the  great  lessons  that  God  has
decreed  we  shall  learn,  I  say  speed
the  means  by  which  we  may  most
readily  accomplish  the  task.  If
persecutions,  unjust  judgments,
imprisonments  and  martyrdoms,
be  the  means,  let  us  receive  them
them  not  with  feelings  of  delight
because  of  the  woes  that  will  surely
come  upon  those  who  inflict  these
things  upon  us,  but  because  the
standards  of  value  are  established
by  the  cost  of  things  received,  and
by  this  rule  we  know  that  no  good


ALL  MANKIND  KEPI  THEIR  FIRST  ESTATE.


209


thing  has  ever  come  into  this  world
without  having  cost  the  equal  of  its
value.  Nor  has  any  great  thought
or  noble  idea  ever  been  introduced
that  hat!  not  to  fight  its  way  inch  hy
inch.  Think  of  what  the  principles
of  the  everlasting  Gospel,  that  are
freely  given,  has  without  money,
without  price,  cost?  Agony  that
caused  the  Son  of  God  to  sweat
great  drops  of  blood*  And  that
being  too  little,  He  must  needs  be
insulted,  spat  upon,  scourged,  ad-
judged to  die,  and  that,  too,  by  a
heathen  who  knew  Him  to  be  inno-
cent of  crime,  and  finally  He  was
ignominiously  crucified  by  those
whom  He  came  to  save,  Humil-
iated, deprived  of  judgment  and
sacrificed,  the  Lamb  of  God  de-
scended beneath  all  things  that
He  might  arise  above  all  things,
leading  captivity  captive  and  giving
gifts  to  men,  while  holding  the
keys of death, hell, and  the


grave.


Had  Christ  been  unable  to  ac-
complish that  foreordained  work,
this  world  would  forever  have
remained  without  a  Redeemer.  Ex-
piring on  the  cross,  amid  the  taunts
and  jeers  of  the  wicked,  in  the
agony,  of  death,  crying  :  "  Why
hast  Thou  forsaken  me,"  yet  was
He,  being  the  spotless  Son  of  God,
able  to  say,  "  Father  forgive  them,
for  they  know  not  what  they  do."

No  shadow  of  hatred,  no  tinge  of
revenge,  can  be  found  in  that  in-
spired sentence.  From  its  utterance,
under  those  terrible  circumstances,
let  us  learn  what  He  then  taught  so
clearly,  namely  :  That  we  cannot
hate  man,  however  wicked  and  cruel
he  may  be,  and  love  God  at  the  same
time.  As  an  aid  tu  the  comprehen-
sion of  this  great  truth,  it  may  be
well  to  remember  that  man,  how-
ever low  and  debased  we  may  find
him  in  this  world  of  trial,  is  not


naturally  vicious,  nor  would  lie  of
his  own  inclinations  seek  to  destroy
human  agency,  God  made  man,
and  he  is,  therefore,  naturally  good.
But,  under  the  influences  of  him
who  rebelled  in  heaven,  his  judgment
warps,  his  heart  hardens,  his  whole
nature  changes,  and,  while  hatred
misplaces  love,  envy,  malice  and
jealousy  supplant  in  his  heart  the
nobler  sentiments  of  justice,  mercy
and  charity.  The  sea  captain  who
unselfishly,  and  without  hope  of
earthly  reward,  placed  the  life  boats
and  as  many  of  the  helpless  and
weak  as  they  would  safely  hold  in
charge  of  his  under  officer  and,  with
the  stranger,  remained  and  nobly
went  down  with  his  ship,  was  the
natural  man.  The  ignoble,  selfish,
unnatural  man  would  desire  to  save
his  own  worthless  life,  at  the  expense
and  sacrifice  of  untold  numbers  of
others.

The  natural  woman  clings  to  her
husband,  keeping  sacred  the  cove-
nants made  with  him,  and  loving
with  undying  affection  the  fruits  of
the  union.  The  unnatural  wife  and
mother  is  true  to  neither.  Cain  as
the  murderer  of  his  brother,  was  an
unnatural  man  whose  soul  was  sold
to  Satan  under  the  provisions  of
an  unholy  alliance.  And  where
men  steal,  rob,  commit  whoredom,
bear  false  witness,  inflict  unlawful,
cruel  punishments,  and  kill,  they,
too,  have  listed  to  obey  him  whom
they  serve.  But,  notwithstand-
ing all  this  we  should  never  forget
that  all  such,  however  debased,
corrupt,  wicked  and  low,  kept
their  first  estate  by  fighting  in
heaven  against  him,  whom,  by
reason  of  darkness  and  destructive
influence,  they  now  willingly  serve.
Let  us  remember  how  the  angels'
song  of  rejoicing  when  the  H  accused
of  his  brethren"  was  cast  out  of
heaven,  was  turned  into  lamentation

Vol  XXVL


210


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


■when  they  beheld  the  sorrows  and
woes  he  would  bring  upon  the  in-
hahiianis  of  the  earth,  by  reason  of
\m  Iracbery,  deceit  and  cruel  mur-
ders. When  we  look  upon  the  dark,
sinful  wmks  of  men  ever  tearing
down  and  destroying  but  never
building  up  and  saving;  when  we
think  of  those  who  lack  their  brains
vainly  trying  to  stop  the  onward
progress  u!  God's  work  ;  when  we
think  of  proscriptive,  special  retro*
active  laws,  and  those  who  enacted
tin  1 1 1 .  o I"  mission  jurists  who  cond em n
with  malice,  of  test-oath  commission-
ers  who  letter  the  innocent  and  free
the  guilty,  of  governors  who  tram-
ple beneath  their  feet  the  liberties
»nd  rights  of  a  people  with  whom
they  have  no  interest  and  for  whom
they  have  no  compassion,  of  marshals
TFho  fraternize  with  criminals  while
puttiug  sj  otters  and  spies  on  the
track  of  men  good  and  true,  who  to
save  their  lives  would  commit  no
dishonorable  act ;  of  juries  packed
and  pledged  to  convict,  and  of
Christian  ministers  who  gloat  and
glory  in,  and  hound  all  this  on,  how
should  we  feel.

We  should  feel j  while  despising
their  wicked  ways,  that  they  who  do
them  are  the  children  of  God  upon
whom  Satan  hath  laid  his  hand
hoping  to  ruin  both  body  and  soul,
and  cast  them  down  to  hell  Can
We  behold  their  wickedness,  endure
their  aggressions,  persecutions  and
malice,  without  hating  them  1  If
so  we  are  Saints,  If  we  cannot,
are  we  not  sinners  ?

Itead  the  vision  of  the  three  glories
and  *  learn  that  a  compassionate
Father  has  decreed  that  even  these
shall  not  be  cast  into  outer  dark-
ness, but  shall  be  saved  with  a
glory  beyond,  far  beyond  the
■  comprehension  of  the  finite  mind.

There  is  but  one  class  of  human
.beings  whom  God  hath  decreed  shall


endure  eternal  punishment,  utter
and  everlasting  condemnation,  and
they  are  the  "  sons  of  perdition."
How  few,  thank  God,  will  be  their
numbers  and,  correspondingly  how
fruitless  and  barren  after  all  will  be
the  efforts  of  Satan  to  frustrate  the
designs  of  the  Almighty  in  his
glorious  plan  of  human  redemp-
tion !

You,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
know  what  constitutes  a  *'  son  of
perdition."  To  become  such,  a
man,  by  the  testimony  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  must  know  that  God  the
Father  and  Jesus  the  Sou  live,  and
aie  the  authors  of  salvation.  Belief
is  insufficient,  positive  knowledge
is  necessary,  I  say  that  this  which  I
hold  in  my  hand  is  a  book.  Do  I
base  the  statement  on  belief  or
knowledge  ]  I  do  not  believe  it  to
be,  I  know  it  to  be  a  book.  And
my  testimony  to  the  fact  would  be
taken  everywhere,  because  if  required
to  state  how  I  know  this  to  be  a  book
1  could  say  I  see  the  binding,  paper,
and  imprint  of  the  type.  1  tap  the
lids  and  leaves  and  hear  sounds.  I
smell  the  binding,  paper  and  iuk.  I
put  them  to  my  lips  and  tongue  and
taste  them,  and  with  my  hands  and
fingers  feel  them.  Thus  all  my
senses  combined  furnish  evidence
that  together  give  indisputable
knowledge  ;  and  yet  the  testimony,
the  turning  away  from  which,  and
thereafter  denying  the  efficacy  of  the
atoning  blood  of  Jesus,  putting  him,
after  having  positive  knowledge,  to
an  open  shame  again,  is  as  much
stronger  than  my  testimony  that
this  is  a  book,  as  God  is  stronger
than  man.  In  the  one  instance,
knowledge  is  founded  on  the  evi-
dence of  the  five  senses — seeing,
hearing,  tasting,  smelling  and  feel-
ing ;  in  the  other,  every  faculty  of
the  soul,  every  fibre  of  the  body,
receives  testimony  direct  from  God,


through  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  lie  who
After  having  received,  denies  it,  sins
against  light  just  as  much  as  Satan
did  when  his  ambition  and  pride  led
him  to  rebel  against  God  ;  and  no
power  in  heaven,  on  earth  or  in  hell
can  keep  such  a  man  out  of  the
realms  of  the  damned,  where  he  has,
in  the  exercise  of  his  own  agency,
elected  to  go,  People  without  this
knowledge  cannot  be  damned  ;
those  with  it  should  be  if  they  turn
away  and  deny  it  Those  who  perse-
cute and  hate  this  people,  have  it
not,  and  while  they  may  have  to  dwell
without  the  gates  of  the  holy  city,
among  dogs,  liars,  thieves  and
whoremongers,  they  cannot  be
damned  in  the  literal  sense,  as  we
understand  eternal  condemnation,
forever  hid  from  the  face  of  a  mer-
ciful but  just  Father  Think  of
these  thing*,  ye  Litter  day  Saints,
who  expect  to  come  up  through
much  tribulation  while  your  gar-  ;
ments  are  being  washed  white  in
the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Chains  and
fetters  may  bind  your  limbs,  and
the  rack  and  wheel  of  the  Spanish
inquisition  may  be  revived  to  tor-  |
ture  your  bodies,  but  prison  walls  ;
have  never  yet  been  made  thick
enough,  nor  iron  bars  strong  enough
to  keep  a  good  man's  prayers  from
ascending  to  his  God.  And  if  He
wills  to  let  trials  and  difficulties
gather  around  us,  they  are  hut  for
our  good.  Offences  must  needs
come,  but  woe  to  those  by  whom
they  come.  I  love  my  family  and
the  Latter-day  Saints  with  my  whole
heart,  and  enjoy  their  society
beyond  measure,  and  yet  as  a  test,
God  may  require  the  sacrifice  of
their  society  temporarily,  and
that  my  heart  remain  un hardened.
Let  the  wicked  do  what  they
may,  remember  we  cannot  hate  man
&nd  love  God  at  the  same  time.
Love  of*  God  banishes  or  consumes


hatred  as  electricity  consumes  iron*
While  in  the  city  of  San  Francisco
recently,  I  witnessed  an  exhibition
of  the  incandesent  electric  light,
produced  from  stored  electricity
previously  generated  and  forced
into  vats,  composed  of  substances
unknown  to  me.  These,  though
filled  with  the  subtle  power,  are
cold  and  unresponsive  to  the  touch
of  the  hand  ;  but  wishing  to  give
a  sample  of  the  destructive  ages  icy
of  the  power  sleeping  in  those  vats,
the  professor  in  charge  requeste  1  us
to  note  the  result  when  touched
with  the  piece  of  wire  held  in  his
hand.  While  explaining,  the
piece  of  wire  turned  in  Ins  hands
accidcntly,  ami  felt  about -midday
of  its  length  across  one  of  the  vats,
and  instantly,  as  quick  as  lightning,
for  it  was  lightning,  it  became  tea
thousand  flying  sparks,  and  that
part  in  the  professor's  hand  like
molten  lead,  was  burning  into  the
Hesh  before  he  could  shake  off  the
liquid  mass.  It  is  said  that  elec-
tricity once  generated,  remains  elec-
tricity until  it  coine-*  in  contact
with  substances  which,  consuming,
it  returns  to  its  original  uugeuerated
condition.  Thus  it  may  be  seen
how  man  plays,  as  a  child  with  sharp
tools,  with  agencies  that  may
consume  him  instantaneously.  Sub-
servient to  his  call  he  flashes  thought
around  the  world  by  means  of  elec-
tric wires,  conveys  his  voice  thous-
ands of  miles,  and  rivals  the  light
of  the  sun,  but  when  the  universe
shall  roll  up  like  a  scroll,  the  earth
melt  with  fervent  heat,  and  moun-
tains run  down  like  wax,  unregen-
erate  man,  full  of  pride,  will  learn
what  God  hath  in  reserve  for  those
who  hate  Him  and  despise  His  works.
As  this  earth  was  cleansed  by  a
literal  baptism  of  water,  so  will  it
be  purified  by  a  literal  baptism  of
fire,  and  all  the  proud  and  those


212


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


who  love  iniquity j  will  be  burned  up,
even  as  stubble  is  consumed  by  fire.
Happy  then  will  ye  be  if  you  have  I
been  tried  as  gold  in  the  furnace  j
seven  times  heated.  Better  welcome
a  few  trials  now,  that  tend  to  in-
crease your  love  of  God  and  of  your
fellow  man,  than  to  go  heedlessly  ■
like  the  dumb  brute,  to  the  sacrifice*
Let  us  pray  only  for  deliverance  from
such  trials  as  harden  the  heart  and
wither  the  soul,  but  not  from  such
as,  bearing  patiently,  testify  of  in-
tegrity. What  matters  trials,  perse-
cutions, scorns,  scoffs  and  contempt
so  long  as  we  remain  true  to  God,  1
and  the  covenants  we  have  made
with  Him  and  each  other?  So  long
as  we  violate  neither  these  nor  our
consciences,  which  should  be  void  of
offense,  we  are  safe.  But  in  our
struggles  to  maintain  the  right  in  a
world  filled  with  strife,  we  may  draw
consolation  in  reflecting  upon  the
fact  that  every  pure  thought  coming
to  us  from  above,  meets  fierce  oppo-
sition, and  our  fallen  natures  con-
tend against  its  permanent  lodg-
ment in  our  hearts ;  and  in  like  man-
ner every  heaven-born  truth  has  in
every  instance,  had  to  fight  its  way
inch  by  inch  before  it  could  bear
abundantly  the  fruits  of  righteous-
ness. Nothing  good  has  come  into
this  world  since  the  fall  of  man,
that  has  not  met  the  fierce,  concen-
trated and  persistent  opposition
and  hatred  of  the  wicked,  Thus  we
find  how  true  is  the  inspired  saying:
11  there  must  needs  be  an  opposition
in  all  things/'  Enlightened,  in-
spired thoughts  crystaliziug  into


undying  truths,  have  in  every  age
caused  great  sacrifices,  often  human
\  life  to  establish  them,  but  those  who
have  had  the  moral  and  physical
courage  to  stand  by  their  convic-
tions in  life  or  death,  shine  as  beacon
lights  along  the  shores  of  time,  and
their  works  will  bear  glorious  f  ruits
in  eternity.

Let  us  endeavor  to  imitate  all
worthy  examples,  following  as  nearly
as  we  can  in  the  footprints  of  our
Master,  who,  if  we  are  faithful  unto
death,  will  give  us  the  crown  of  life
with  the  keys  of  death,  hell  and  the
grave,  by  which  we  may  descend
down  into  the  depth  of  darkness
and  misery  into  the  abode  of  the
damned,  and  there  bid  those  who
have  despised,  hated  and  persecuted
us,  look  up,  repent,  and  receive  de-
liverance at  the  hands  of  a  compas-
sionate Father,  whose  mercy  and
salvation  extend  beyond  the  grave
into  eternity.  Thus,  in  becoming,
j  mediators,  minis  tars  to  those  who
despiteful  ly  used  us,  we  shall  find
the  mystery  of  glory  that  cometh
I  from  doing  good  for  evil  and  loving
those  who  have  hated  us.

May  God  grant  that  we  may
speedily  and  thoroughly  learn  the
great  lessons  that  He  is  now  seeking
to  teach  us,  and  which  are  of  so  much
importance  we  should  learn.  The
trials  through  which  we  are  now
passing  are  but  a  part  of  the  great
programme  of  the  Almighty,  long
since  predicted  by  His  holy  prophets.
Let  us  meet  them  in  a  proper  spirit,
trusting  iu  Him  always,  and  our
victory  will  be  complete.  Amen.


THE  CREATION.


213


DISCOURSE BY APOSTLE  ERASTUS  SNOW,

DelUered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Prove,  Sunday  Morning,  May  31st,  (Quarterly

Conference )  1885.


(REPORTED  BY  JOHN  IRVINE. )


THE  CREATION,  MALE  AND  FEMALE— CALLING  OF  ENOCH  AND  NOAH —
GOD  SELECTED  ABRAHAM  AND  HIS  SEED  TO  BE  A  CHOSEN  PEOPLE
— HE  COMMANDED  HIS  PEOPLE  TO  MULTIPLY  BUT  FORBADE  ADUL-
TERY AND  WHOREDOM  IN  EVERY  FORM  —  PLURAL  MARRIAGE
ENJOINED  UPON  ABRAHAM  AND  HIS  SEED  TO  MAKE  THEM  A  GREAT
PEOPLE— THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  LIFE  AND  ETERNAL  INCREASE  IS  A
SPIRITUAL  POWER— MODERN  CHRISTENDOM  OPPOSED  TO  LARGE
FAMILIES— LATTEK-DAY  SAINTS  ENCOURAGE  THEM— THE  EDMUNDS
LAW  PASSED  WITH  THE  PRETENCE  OF  REPRESSING  IMMORALITY
AMONG  THE  MORMONS — THAT  MASK  OF  HYPOCRISY  NOW  THROWN
OFF — THE  RELIGIOUS  SENTIMENT  OF  THE  LATTKR  DAY  SAINTS  THE
REAL  OBJECT  OF  PERSECUTION — CONCLUDING  EXHORTATIONS,


The  speaker  commenced  by  reading
from  the  1st  chapter  of  Genesis —
from  the  25th  verse  to  the  end  of
the  chapter.  I

Proceeding,  he  said  :  In  the  writ-
ings of  Moses  we  have  an  account
of  the  creation  of  this  earth  and  the
inhabitants  thereof,  both  man  and
beast  and  every  living  thing,  as  also
vegetation.  In  the  first  verse  we
read,  "  In  the  beginning  God
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth/1

In  attempting  to  communicate
intelligence  upon  any  theme,  if  we
attempt  to  do  it  by  using  words  and
phrases,  we  are  obliged  to  use  such
language  as  the  hearers  or  readers
are  able  to  comprehend,  and  if  the
language  be  imperlect  the  ideas  con-
veyed may  be  somewhat  imperfect
or  defective,  and  if  the  understand*
ing  of  the  persons  to  whom  this
language  is  addressed  is  limited,  and
their  use  and  understanding' of  lan-


guage is  limited,  the  information
sought  to  be  communicated  to  them
will  be  correspondingly  limited  and
detective.  It  is  only  by  the  inspira-
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost  that  we  are
able  to  see  clearly  the  things  of  God ;
but  the  language  employed  by  the
writer  of  the  Book  of  Genesis  and
by  the  translators  of  that  work  is
perhaps  sufficiently  clear  for  our  pur-
pose at  this  time,  though  the  in-
spired translation  rendered  by  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  is  somewhat
clearer  and  more  impressive  than
the  present  King  James1  translation.
In  the  inspired  translation  by  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  it  is  \m,ten
that  in  the  beginning  the  Godscie  tted
the  heavens  and  the  earth  ;  tl  at  the
earth  was  empty  and  desolate,  and
God  said  unto  His  Only  Begotten,
let  us  do  so  and  so  ;  let  us  divide
the  light  from  the  dark  ties  ;  let  us
separate  the  waters  aud  cause  the


214  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


dry  land  to  appear  ;  let  there  be
lights  in  the  firmament  in  the  midst
of  the  heavens  to  give  light  to  the
earth  ;  let  vs  create  animals  tc  walk
upon  the  earth,  and  creeping  things,
and  fowls  to  fly  in  the  air  and  fish
to  swim  in  the  waters,  &c.  ;  and  let
us  make  man  in  our  own  image  and
after  our  likeness— that  is  the  Father
addressing  the  Son,  taking  counsel
together.  This  rendering  of  this
first  chapter  of  Genesis  is  sustained
by  the  wiitings  of  the  Apostle  Paul,
when  he  says:  "For  of  Him"
— speaking  of  the  Only  Begotten —
"and  through  Him,  and  for  Him,
are  all  things "  Again,  it  is  written
in  the  New  Testament  concerning
the  Savior,  that  He  is  "  the  bright-
ness of  His  glory,  and  the  express
image  of  His  person."  So  that  when
the  Father  said  unto  His  Son  in  the
beginning,  let  us  make  man  in  our
image  and  after  our  likeness,  it  con-
veys to  us  the  idea  that  man  was
organ ized  in  the  same  form  and
general  appearance  of  both  the
Father  and  the  Son,  This  especially
in  relation  to  the  man  himself  ;  for
you  will  remark  the  wording  of  the
text  which  we  have  read — "  in  the
image  of  God  created  He  him" —
referring  to  Adam — "male  and
female  created  He  them."  You
will  perceive  a  difference  in  the  lan-
guage in  regard  to  the  creation  of
females.

Now,  it  is  not  said  in  so  many  words
in  the  Scriptures,  that  we  have  a  Mo-
ther in  heaven  as  well  as  a  Father.
It  is  left  for  us  to  infer  this  from
what  we  see  and  know  of  all  living
things  in  the  earth  including  man.
The  male  and  female  principle  is
united  and  both  necessary  to  the
accomplishment  of  the  object  of
their  being,  and  if  this  be  not  the
case  with  our  Father  in  heaven  after
whose  image  we  are  created,  then  it
is  an  anomaly  in  nature. But  to


our  minds  the  idea  of  a  Father  sug-
gests that  of  a  Mother  :  As  one  of
our  poets  says  :

"  In  the  heaven*  are  parents  single  ?

No  ;  the  thought  makes  reason  atare  !
Truth  ib  reason  ;  truth  eternal

Tells  me,  I've  a  Mother  there."

Hence  when  it  is  said  that  God
created  our  first  parents  in  His  like-
ness— "  in  the  image  of  God  created
He  him  ;  male  and  female  created
He  them" — it  is  intimated  in  lan-
guage sufficiently  plain  to  my  under-
standing that  the  male  and  female
principle  was  present  with  the  Gods
as  it  is  with  man.  It  needs  only  a
common  understanding  of  the
organism  of  man  and  of  all  living
creatures,  and  the  functions  of  this
organism  to  show  the  primary  object
of  the  Creator,  ami  that  is  the
multiplication  of  the  species,  the
fulfillment  of  the  commandment
given,  to  multiply  and  replenish  the
earth,  given  to  both  man  and  beast
We  need  only  to  study  the  anatomy
and  construction  of  the  human  sys-
tem, and  to  understand  its  powers
and  capabilities,  to  comprehend  the
ohject  and  purpose  of  the  Creator,
even  though  the  commandment  had
not  been  written  to  multiply  and
replenish  the  earth.  The  ancients
who  feared  God,  and  kept  His  com-
mandments, showed  that  they  under-
stood this  principle  and  were  willing
to  obey  it.  It  is  written  of  the  first
fourteen  generations,  that  each  suc-
ceeding generation  of  them  lived  so
many  years  and  begat  sons  and
daughters,  and  some  of  them  lived
well  nigh  on  to  a  thousand  years.
They  multiplied  and  increased  in
the  land  until  wickedness  overran
the  land  and  it  pleased  God  to  check
the  growth  of  wickedness  by  the
flood,  which  swept  the  wicked  off
the  earth.  But  before  thus  destroy-
ing the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  He
caused  the  righteous  to  be  gathered


god's  covenant

out  from  among  the  wicked  by  the
preaching  of  the  Gospel.  Enoch,
the  seven tli  from  Adam,  was  a
powerful  instrument  in  the  hands
of  Clod,  of  rebuking  the  wickedness
of  the  times.  He  taught  righteous
ness,  gathered  the  people  together,
and  established  a  Zion.  He  labored
we  are  told  .some  365  years,  in  the
which  he  communed  with  God,  and
taught  the  people  and  sanctified  his
people,  so  that  they  were  trail-dated
to  heaven.  Many  others  who  re-
mained upon  the  earth,  who  had
accepted  the  Gospel,  but  were  not
sanctified  and  prepared  to  be  caught  (
up  with  Enoch  and  his  people,
sought  diligently  to  follow;  they
purified  themselves  so  that  angels
ministered  unto  them,  and  they
were  caught  up  unto  Zion  he  fore
the  flood  ;  even  all  who  remained
and  kept  the  faith,  excspt  Noah  and
his  sons  and  their  families,  who  were
especially  called  as  id  chosen  and
detailed  to  build  the  ark  and  enter
tli  ere  in  with  a  selection  of  the
beasts  of  the  earth  and  the  fowls
of  the  air,  to  preserve  seed  through
the  flood.  Thus  did  the  Lord  gather
a  harvest  of  souls  unto  Himself,  of
those  who  believed  and  obeyed  the
Gospel  and  worked  righteousness,
while  the  wicked  perished  in  the
flood*  Then  again,  the  command-
ment of  Got!  to  multiply  and  replen-
ish the  earth,  was  renewed  to  Noah
ami  his  posterity,  ami  soon  the  deso-
late places  became  inhabited.  But
in  the  course  of  a  few  generations,
blindness  and  darkness  and  ignor-
ance again  began  to  prevail ;  wicked-
ness began  to  raise  its  head  among
the  children  of  Noah,  and  it  became
necessary  that  the  Lord  should  se-
lect from  among  the  children  of  Noah
the  better  and  nobler  seed  with
whom  He  would  establish  His  cove-
nant, and  upon  whom  He  would
confer  the  keys  of  the  Priesthood,


WITH  ABRAHAM.  215

and  from  anions;  them  should  be
raised  up  Prophets  ami  Seers  and
Revelators  to  teach  the  people  of
the  nations  of  the  earth,  a*  the  ora*
cles  of  God.  The  si*  chosen  people
were  Abraham  and  his  seed.  Of
Abraham  it  is  written  that  God
called  him  from  his  fathers  house
when  he  dwelt  in Ur of  r he  Chaldees,
and  commanded  him  to  go  out  from
his  fathers  ha  use  because  his
father  was  given  to  the  ways
of  the  heathen  and  to  the  idol-
atry of  the  surrounding  peoples.
He  called  him  to  go  to  another  land
where  he  should  he  separate  from
the  traditions  and  teachings  of  his
father,  and  where  he  would  make  of
him  a  great  nation,  and  raise  up  from
his  seed  a  holy  people.  God  appeared
unto  him  in  Canaan,  whither  He  led
him,  and  swore  by  Himself — because
He  could  swear  hyno  greater — that
io  blessing  He  would  bless  him,  and
in  tiiultiplyi  He  would  multiply
him  ;  that  his  sted  should  be  as
the  stars  of  the  heavens  and  as  the
sand  which  is  upon  the  sea  shore  for
multitude.  He  renewed  tins  promise
to  his  sou  Isaac,  and  his  grandson
Jacob,  who  was  also  named  Israel,
and  from  them  sprung  the  house  of
Israel,  and  also  the  children  of
Arabia,  the  sons  of  Ishmaei,  and  the
chief  tribes  of  central  Asia-  It  was
the  seed  of  Abraham  that  dwelt  in
Eg j-  p t  w 1 1 o  w e re bro ug h t i n to  bondage
to  the  Egyptians,  and  subsequently
delivered  by  the  hand  of  Moses,
after  wandering  forty  years  in  the
wilderness,  in  the  land  of  Canaan*
It  was  from  among  this  people  that
God  raised  up  prophets  from  genera-
tion to  generation  to  whom  He
revealed  His  mind  and  will.  It  was
I  this  people  that  was  commanded  to
build  first  the  tabernacle  journeying
in  the  wilderness — a  sort  of  moveable
temple  and  subsequently  a  temple
I  in the land of  promise  when


JuUKNAL  Dl*WUKSKK>


law  prevailed  in  all  a^es  among  the
people  of  God,  encouraging  honor-
able wed  kick,  and  restraining  illicit
sexual  intercourse,  and  there  art
many  physical  as  well  as  theological
ieasons  forth  is  law.  It  is  especially
binding  upon  mankind,  because  they
are  organized  after  the  image  of
(It)'l,  and  ale  His  offspring.  I  refer
now  tu  the  spirit  j  for  we  under  stand
that  man  in  the  nobler  sense  and  the
true  sense,  is  that  immortal  eter
nal  being  which  has  come  forth  from
(jf>il,  and  that  the  earthly  tabernacle
is  but  an  outer  clothing  of  that
imn:ni  tal  brinj:  ;  t bat.  the  earthly
the  sands  upon  the  .sea  sdnue  tal^ruaele  is  in  the  image  and
for  multitude,  while  many  of  the  i  likeness  of  the  heavenly  or  eter
other  unbelieving  nations  ami  peo-  I  tial  being;  in  other  words  die  body
pies  comparatively  dwindled  away  ;  is  in  the  likeness  and  form  of  t!i'.
snd  when  the  history  of  the  genera-  [  soul  or  the  spirit,  tad  that  it  is  made
tions  of  Adam  shall  1<e  revealed  j  couformahle  to  any  for  the  spirit  to
and  comprehended  by  the  human  dwell  in,  and  to  ill  I  every  purtiuti
Tac.  it  will  he  found  that  in  the
providence  of  God  1 1 1 -  has  greatly
restricted  the  more  corrupt,  while
lie  bis  enlsir-ed  am)  multiplied  the
fieni  4,1  AJ'i'aliUin,  wh(«  did  abide  ill
the  covenant  ;  at.d  although  many  of


thev  should  become  settled  and
located  there. It  was  among  this

Cfcple  the  Savior  was  bom,  and
bored  and  taught  the  Gospel,  and
was  cmicihYd,  and  rose  again  from
the  dead*  It  v\a>  froin  among  this
people  that  He  (the  Savior)
selected  and  ordained  His  Apos-
tles iO plfilCll iLl- (idi-prd  to

all  the  world.  The  whole  tenor
of  ihe  Script  y  res  sIiowe  us
that  those  who  believed  God  and
were  counted  11  is  people  mul-
tiplied ami  replenished  the  earth
and  became  numerous  as  the
Mai- in tlie heavens and  as


and  particle  thereof,  and  to  itirect
ir .-,  energies  and  powers  to  develop
its  capabilities  and  to  guide  u$  ac-
tion** Hence  that  immortal  mm  \>
held  responsible  for  the  deeds  ut"  tlie
body,  and  it  is  n  lit  ten  he  shall  be


litem  have  come  thnrt in many  l  judged  according  to  the  deeds  duti?

things  and  have  wandered  in  dark-  in  the  body  ;  because  the  body  does

ness  and  uitl>eli#fi  yet  as  a  people  in  it  control  the  spirit,  but  tlie  spirit

the} have  maintained  a  degree  uf  controls  tin-  ■  ■  ly. Still  the  Apostle

sexual  purity  unknnwu  in  ihegep-  Paid  says  that  there  is  a  law  df  (Jkt

tile  world,  and  fat  tlds  reason  lias  tfesb — that  wars  against  the  spirit:

(jn'l  multiplied  the  ni  in  ;!.■■  laud.  ;il<!, ^iys Paul, "  to  be  carnally

They  have  great  nnd  special  promises  minded  is  death;  but  to  be  spirit-

that  in  the  latter  days  God  would  indly  minded  is  life  and  peace."  He

Te  me  in  I "  ■  i  them.  further  says  that  this  law  of  the

Now,  while  God  commanded  His  ilesh — that  is,  in  our  members  and

people  to  multiply  and  replenish  the  the  lusts  thereof — that  wars  against

eari  1 1.  lie  gave  strict  laws  against  the  law  of  the  spirit  brings  oui  -bodies

promiscuous sexual in  Ut  course,  |  into  bondage,  even  the  bondage  of

"  lli>  forbade  adultery,  fornication,  sin  ;  but  it  is  made  the  duty  of  the

whoredom  in  every  hum,  and  the  .spirit  to  subdue  the  tiesli  and  the

same  doctrine  wa-  taught  by  Paul,  lasts ami  the  desires  thereof,  am)  t0

the  Apostle, namely, "  Marriage  )  bring  it  into  subjection  to  the  lav?


is  1  cu  orable  in  all,  and  the  bed  un
defiled; but whoi  mongers  and
adnlteJrJ>  <*od  will  jud^e."  This


of  the  spirit.  This  is  the  warfare
a i id  the  struggle  of  our  lives*
This  begins  with  the  development


OBJECT  OF  PLURAL  MARRIAGE.


of  our  physical  power  and  the  lusts
and  desires  of  the  flesh*  The  spirit
of  man  i$  capable  of  receiving  from
the  Spirit  of  our  Father  the  Holj
Spirit,  which  is  *in  connection  with
the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  is  a
minister  of  God  unto  men  ;  which
light eth  up  our  minds  and  giveth  us
understanding  ;  for  "  the  spirit  of
man  is  the  candle  of  the  Lord,"
says  one  of  old.  This  teaches  us
just  as  far  as  we  will  give  heed  to  it,
how  to  walk  in  obedience  to  the  law
of  God,  and  how  to  resist  and  over-
come evil  with  good,  and  as  far  as
the  written  word  of  God  is  given  to
us,  its  object  and  influence  upon  us
is  to  restrain  the  flesh  and  bring  it
into  subjection  to  the  spirit.  The
lusts  and  desires  of  the  flesh  are  not
of  themselves  unmitigated  evils.
On  the  contrary  they  are  implanted
in  us  as  a  stimulus  to  noble  deeds,
rather  than  low  and  beastly  deeds.
These  affections  and  loves  that  are
planted  in  us  are  the  nobler  quali-
ties that  emanate  from  God.  They
stimulate  us  to  the  performance  of
our  duties ;  to  multiplying  and
replenishing  the  earth  to  assume
the  responsibilities  of  families,
and  rear  them  up  for  God,  j
They  encourage  and  stimulate  the
womafi  to  bear  her  burden  and  per-
form the  duties  of  life  because  of
the  hope  of  a  glorious  future,  while
it  stimulates  the  husband  and  father
in  like  manner.  Every  instinct  in
us  is  for  a  wise  purpose  in  God  when
properly  regulate  1  and  restrained,
and  guided  by  the  Holy  Spirit  and
kept  within  its  proper  legitimate
bounds.  But  all  these  instincts
and  desires  of  the  flesh  are  -suscep-
tible of  perversion,  and  when  per-
verted result  in  sin.  Whenever  the
Gospel  has  been  preached  on  earth,
and  Prophets  and  holy  men  have
been  sent  among  the  people,  the
burden  of  their  lives  lias  been  to


encourage  them  to  the  proper  exer,
cise  of  their  powers  and  functions
and  to  regulate  them  and  restrain
them  within  proper  limits,  such  as
are  prescribed  in  the  written  law,
and  in  the  law  of  our  bein*r.  Ex-
cesses  of  all  kinds  tend  to  death  and
to  sickness  and  misery,  physically
ami  spiritually ;  while  temperance
and  moderation  and  the  proper  use
of  all  our  functions  tends  to  the
glory  of  God  and  the  welfare  of
His  children.  The  chief  study
of  man  is  to  comprehend  these  prin-
ciples, and  to  apply  them  in  their
lives*

I  said  there  was  a  time  after  the
flood  that  the  seed  of  Noah  bejran
to  corrupt  their  ways,  and  God  chose
out  from  among  them  the  seed  of
Abraham,  with  whom  He  established
His  covenant  that  He  might  preserve
unto  himself  tlie  Priesthood  and  its
ordinances,  and  a  people  who  would
receive  His  law,  and  among  whom
He  would  raise  up  Prophets,  and
through  whom  He  would  send  II is
Sou  in  the  meridian  of  time  to
become  the  Savior  and  Redeemer  of
the  world.  Thus  Abraham  was
blessed  of  the  Lord  to  multiply
and  increase  in  the  e-i rtii  greatly.
When  the  Lord  determined  to  bless
and  multiply  Abraham  and  His  seed,
He  commands!  that  they  should
take  of  the  daughters  of  Eve  for
wives  and  multiply  and  increase  in
the  hind.  I  do  not  say  that  plural
marriage  was  not  practiced  prior  to
this  time,  but  1  say  from  and  after
Abraham  it  was  enjoined  upon
Israel,  the  seed  of  Abraham,  for  a
wise  and  glorious  purpose  in  Him,
namely,  that  of  ii. creasing  thein
and  giving  them  the  ascendency
among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  as
I  once  heard  the  Prophet  Joseph
remark.  In  speaking  of  these
things,  and  inquiring  wherefore
God  hail  enjoined  plural  marriage


218


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


upon  Abraham  and  his  seed,  his
answer  was,  because  He  had  pur-
posed to  multiply  and  increase  them
in  the  land  and  make  of  them  a
great  people  and  give  them  the  as-
cendency over  other  peoples  of  the
earth,  and  that  because,  as  lie  said
of  Abraham,  He  knew  that  He
would  s-erve  Him  and  command  his
seed  after  Him,  I

We  are  aware  that  in  modern
Christendom  there  are  some  people
wImi  fnrhnl  to  many. In  one  of  the
Epiatltt  of  Paul  [1  Timothy  iv.  3]
he  states  that  in  the  latter  times
there  would be  those  who  would
for bi* I  to  many. We  know  there
are  some  professing  Christians  win*
regard  the  union  of  the  sexes  as  an
evil,  as  a  sin,  as  the  result  of  our
fallen  nature*,  and  as  a  form  of  the
gratification  of  fleshly  lusts  which  is  I
offensive before  (lod. Hence  we
have  the  SI  Kike  is  who,  acting  upon
this  doctrine,  abstain  from  marriage.  |
If  all  were  to  embrace  their  faith,
and  carried  it  out  in  their  lives,  the
human  race  won  id  soon  be  extinct,
and  the  great  purpose  of  Jehovah
in  their  creation  would  seem  to  have
failed. J^ut  fortunately  those  who
embrace  this  faith,  and  exemplify  it
in  their  live*,  are  few. Yet  there
are  many  who  are  willing  to  gratify
the  lusts  of  the  flesh  but  strive  to
avoid  its  consequences  and  respon-
sibilities. But those who  have
received  in  good  faith  the  command-
ment of  God  to  multiply  and  re-
plenish the  earth  and  assume  the
proper  responsibilities  of  the  hou.se
hold,  and  regulate  their  lives  and
household  by  the  law  of  the  Lord,
have  always  been  blessed  and  favored
of  God,  and  the  great  difference
between  the  Latter-day  Saints  at
the  present  time  and  modern  Chris-
tendom, is  this  more  extensive  com-
prehension of  this  first  law  of  God
to  man. We  understand  there  is  a


purpose  in  all  these  things  ;  that
the  Supreme  Being  is  working  with
an  object  in  view  and  for  the  accom-
plishment of  an  en<J.  and  that  object
and  etui  is  worthy  of  the  God  who
has  created  us;  that  in  infinite  space
He  may  cause  to  be  organized  in-
numerable worlds  and  glorious  orbs
to  be  tilled  with  intelligent  beings
capable  of  enlargement,  of  an  ex-
pansion of  glory  and  of  happiness  ;
fiir  in  their  enlargement  and  increase
He  is  glorified,  while  they  in  turn
are  glorified  in  and  through  Him
in  the  performance  of  their  labors
and  duties  and  the  multiplying  and
increasing  of  their  species,  inasmuch
as  they  do  it  unto  the  Lord  and  keep
His  law,  so  that  they  can  be  sancti-
fied before  Him  and  be  endowed
with  the  power  of  endless  lives.

1  know  it  is  supposed  by  some  that
the  power  of  increase  is  inherent  in
us  and  in  all  living  things,  and  in
all  plants,  but  I  do  not.  view  it  in  that
light. I  view  the  temporal  organism
as  the  instrument  and  not  the  creator
itself  ;  it  is  only  the  instrument,  by
which  it  is  worked  out  and  accom-
plished ;  that  the  principle  of  life
and  eternal  increase  pertains  not  to
the  Hesli  nor  to  the  grosser  elements
of  this  earth,  but  it  is  the  spiritual
power  that  has  emanated  from  a
nobler  sphere  that  has  come  out
from  God,  or  that  had  its  existence
previously  in  a  first  estate.  Our
Savior  Himself  is  an  example  of
this. We  are  told  He  was  bora  of
the  Virgin  Mary,  in  the  meridian  of
time. Vet  we  learn  He  was  with
the  Father  from  the  beginning  and
was  with  Him  in  the  morning  of
creation. While  he  was  here  upon
the  earth  180U  years  ago,  He  said  to
the  Jews,  "  You  speak  of  Abraham
as  your  father. Verily  I  say  unto
you  before  Abraham  was, I  am."
And  again  in  John's  revelations  it
is  written  that  He  was  as  a  lamb


LARGE  FAMILIES  UNPOPULAR  IN  NEW  ENGLAND,


219


slain  from  the  foundation  of  the
world.  He  is  called  a  lamb  of  God
typically  speaking,  because  the  offer-
ing of  a  lamb  in  sacrifice  upon  the
altar  was  a  type  of  the  crucifixion
of  the  Savior,  and  the  commandment
of  God  given  to  the  children  of  men
in  the  beginning  to  build  an  altar
and  offer  sacrifice  with  a  lamb  upon
it,  was  typical  of  the  Savior  of  the
world.  Hence  came  the  term  that
He  was  the  Lamb  of  God  which  the
Father  sent  unto  the  world  to  be  an
offering  tor  sin.  So  also  it  is  writ-
ten in  the  Scriptures — speaking  of
God— that  He  is  the  Father  of  our
spirits,  and,  says  Paul,  it  is  necessary
to  be  in  subjection  to  the  Father  of
spirits  and  live.

In  modern  Christendom — in  these
United  States  especially,  and  in  staid
New  England  more  than  perhaps
any  other  portion  of  this  American
continent — is  tiiis  commandment  of
God  to  multiply  and  replenish  the
earth  null  tied.  The  Latter-day
Saints  are  looked  upon  with  envy,
with  jealousy  and  reproach  because
they  do  not  take  the  same  view  as
they  do,  and  their  numerous  families
stand  out  in  bold  contrast  with  the
New  England  families,  where  you
williind  as  you  go  through  the  land
one,  two,  oral  most  three  chitren  in
a  family,  and  many  families  with
none.  In  some  instances  this  appa-
rent sterility  may  have  resulted  from
various  abuses,  but  in  most  causes
the  result  of  devices  of  wicked  men
and  women  to  counteract  and  pre-
vent the  fulfilling  of  the  great  com-
mandment of  God  to  multiply  and
replenish  the  earth,  and  in  many  in-
stances, foetecide,  infanticide  and
child  murder  are  the  result  of  this
very  general  desire  to  avoid  the
responsibility  of  families.  It  has
become  a  crying  evil  in  the  land.
Some  writers  deeply  deplore  this
crying  evil,  anil  represent  it  in  its


true  light ;  while  many  other  writers
and  speakers  are  either  silent  upon
the  subject  or  give  their  voice  and
influence  in  its  favor.  A  few  years
ago  I  remembered  to  have  read  a
discourse  of  Brooklyn's  great  orator,
Henry  Ward  Beecher,  in  which  he
took  the  ground  that  any  consider-
able increase  of  the  human  species
would  be  a  positive  evil,  something
to  be  deplored;  and  he  elaborately
attempted  to  portray  the  evils  that
would  result  from  it,  and  the  whole
tendency  of  the  discourse  was  to
discourage  the  multiplication  of
the  human  species.  Others  have
follower!  in  the  same  train  of  reason-
ing. They  teem  to  have  forgotten
the  commandment  given  to  our  lirst
parents,  and  never  to  have  com  pre*
bended  the  purposes  of  Jehovah.
Those  who  adopt  these  views  have*
seemed  to  imagine  that  there  would
be  greater  happiness  in  the  gratifica-
tion of  fleshly  lusts,  and  in  pander-
ing to  pride  and  worldly  pleasures,
and  the  increase  of  wealth,  than  to
obey  the  commandment  of  God.
They  have  resolved  to  avoid  raising
large  families.  The  last  tour  I  took
through  New  England,  (which  is  my
native  country),  about  twelve  yeaii
ago,  I  was  more  deeply  impressed
with  this  state  of  things  than  I  had
ever  been  before.  When  I  was  %
boy,  in  Vermont,  I  knew  not  the
ways  of  the  world,  and  comprehend-
ed not  what  was  going  on,  in  our
large  cities  and  more  populous  parts
of  the  country,  1  was  born  of  honest
parentage,  who  reverenced  the
principles  of  life  and  salvation,  and
I  understood  not  what  was  going  on
around  me,  nor  do  I  think  thoic  evils
existed  there  to  the  same  extent  that
they  now  do*  But  as  I  remarked,
when  I  made  my  last  tour  through
New  England,  I  was  more  forcibly
impressed  with  this  state  of  society
than  ever  before. I  spcke  of  it  to


.220


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


my  aged  aunt  in  Rhode  Island  I
said  to  her  :  "  Aunt,  when  you  were
young,  and  when  my  mother  was
young,  rearing  large  families,  it  was
a  source  of  joy  and  pleasure  to  rear
offspring.  Now  as  I  go  through  the
laud,  I  see  the  efforts  of  the  people
are  in  an  opposite  direction/*  '*  Oht
yes,"  said  she,  "  it  is  unpopular  now,
for  people  to  have  large  families  ;
it  is  considered  vulgar,  men  and
women  now  seek  to  avoid  these
responsibilities/'  This  is  a  well
known  fact.  The  tendency  of
the  age  is  to  animalism,  to  the  gratifi-
cation of  fleshly  lusts  and  worldly
pleasures.

Well,  the  Latter-day  Saints  have
-experienced  in  their  own  lives  some-
thing nobler,  and  have  learned  to
recognize  the  wisdom  of  Jehovah  in
that  order  of  things  which  He  en-
joined upon  our  first  parents.  This
is  the  marked  difference  between
the  unbelieving  world  anil  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints.  I  fay  the  unbelieving
world,  because  I  regard  this  doctrine
which  I  have  referred  to  as  a  doctrine
of  devils  and  not  the  doctrine  of
Christ ;  that  the  tendency  of  it  leads,
as  1  before  remarked,  to  foeticide,
infanticide,  child  murder,  and  to
the  gratification  of  fleshly  lusts  and
worldly  pleasure  without  fulfilling
the  great  object  and  purposes  of  our
Father,  and  the  effect  in  the  end
would  be  the  wasting  away  of  the
human  species  if  it  were  generally
adopted.  It  is  high  time  that  a
voice  from  heaven  should  rebuke  it.
It  is  high  time  that  the  Lord,  who
wishes  to  raise  up  seed  unto  Himself,
should  command  His  people  ami
renew  upon  them  the  obligations
placed  upon  our  first  parents.  It  is
to  the  Latter  day  Saints  that  this
mission  has  been  committed,  and
the  result  is  the  multitude  of  school
children  that  we  find  all  over
this  Territory. Over  fifty  thousand


Sabbath  school  children  in  the  Terri-
tory of  Utah — nearly  one-third  of
the  entire  population,  as  shown  in
our  statistics  at  our  various  Confer-
ences— are  children  under  eight
years  of  age.  This  is  a  startling
fact  to  that  class  of  the  Christian
world  who  at  e  pursuing  the  opposite
course.  One  of  the  Sabbath  school
superintendents  of  the  City  of  New
York,  recently  expressed  himself
very  pointedly  and  plainly  upon  this
subject  in  relation  to  the  wealthy
portion  of  the  church  going  people
of  New  York.  In  several  thousand
families  attending  the  popular
churches  of  New  York,  there  could
be  mustered  only  about  eighty  Sab-
bath school  children,  and  he  attrib-
uted it  to  this  prevailing  desire  for
pleasure,  wealth,  and  the  shirking  of
the  cares  ami  responsibilities  of  the
household,  until  the  rearing  of  fam-
ilies was  left  almost  entirely  to
the  poor,  to  what  is  termed  the
vulgar  people,

1  need  not  harrow  up  the  feelings
of  the  people  with  lengthy  details
such  as  are  found  in  police  reports
and  statistics  irom  various  sources,
showing  the  alarming  increase  of
these  crying  evils.  Suffice  it  to  say
that  the  chief  warfare  against  the
Latter  day  Saints  at  the  present  time
is  an  endeavor  to  compel  us  to  con-
form to  their  new  state  of  things,  or
to  their  ideas  of  social  sins  and  social
duties.  In  other  words  it  is  lacon-
ically expressed  by  President  Cleve-
land in  the  late  interview  he  had
with  our  delegates  that  were  sent  to
him  with  the  memorial  and  protest
adopted  by  the  Latter-day  Saints  in
mass  meeting  a  few  weeks  ago.
President  Cleveland  listened  with
courtesy  to  what  our  delegation  had
to  say  with  regard  to  the  feeling  and
desires  of  the  people,  and  expressed
himself  in  this  wise  :  that  he  would
endeavor  as  far  as  lay  in  his  power


THE  EDMUNDS  LAW  PASSED


UNDER  FALSE  PRETENSES.


121


to  give  us  honest  men  to  administer  r
the  law,  and  he  concluded  with  a  !
smile  upon  his  countenance,  with
this  expression  :  "I  wish  you  peo-  I
pie  out  there  could  he  like  the  rest
of  us."  This  is  a  homely  phrase,  it
might  not  attract  any  special  atten-  '
tion  under  ordinary  circumstances  ;
but  when  we  consider  the  facts  as
they  exist,  and  the  tendency  of  the
age,  and  of  the  Christian  world  at
the  present  time,  ami  the  state  of
things  in  the  east  when  compared
with  us,  the  remark  is  very  signif-
icant. It  comes  home  to  us,  and
we  ask  ourselves,  c?n  we,  after  the
light  that  w<i  have  received,  after
the  experience  that  we  have  had,
and  with  the  hopes  that  are  placed
before  us  in  the  Gospel  of  a  glorious
future — -can  we  relapse  back  into
that  state  of  things  and  be  like  unto
them  ]  I  would  not  say  aught  per-
sonal in  relation  to  Mr*  Cleveland,
believing  him  to  be  an  honorable
man  of  the  world,  yet  his  enemies
in  the  campaign  accused  him  of  some
irregularities  of  life  that  are  com-
mon in  the  world,  and  it  is  reported
that  he  knows  something  of  sexual
relationship,  though  he  has  not
assumed  the  responsibility  of  a  fam-
ily and  household  ;  and  in  this
respect,  though  perhaps  among  the
most  honorable,  he  represents  a
large  and  respectable  portion  of
unmarried  men.  We  do  not  under-
stand that  in  thus  expressing  himself
to  our  delegates  that  he  desired  us
to  exactly  imitate  himself,  but  that
he  wished  we  could  confine  ourselves
at  least  to  one  wife.  If  however,
the  parallel  were  carried  out  more
fully,  we  would  not  only  confine  our-
selves to  one  wile  as  far  as  owning
them  in  that  capacity  is  concerned,
but  we  would  try  like  others
have,  to  limit  our  children  also  and
imitate  the  other  vices  of  the
age.


Well,  now,  the  expounders  of  the
federal  laws  in  our  midst — the
Prosecuting  Attorneys  Judges,
Marshals,  and  other  federal  repre-
sentatives that  have  been  sent
among  us  to  enforce  the  special  laws
that  have  been  passed  by  Congress
against  the  Latter-day  Saints,  seem
to  make  the  line  of  distinction  more-
marked  than  has  ever  before  been
done.  During  the  great  furore
which  swept  over  the  land  four  years
ago,  which  resulted  in  the  passage
of  tlie  Edmunds  law,  the  Christian
ministers  urged  their  congregations
to  send  memorials  to  Congress  for
the  passage  of  that  law  on  the  ground
of  repressing  immorality,  Ikentioiisiiest
and  crime  among  the  Mormons%  and  it
was  this  hypocritical  mask  which
they  took  on  at  thai  time  that  hood-
winked and  deceived  the  great  body
of  the  people  and  lashed  the  coun-
try into  a  furore  and  crowded  Con-
gressmen to  vote  for  the  unconstitu-
tional measure,  that  wicked  and
malicious  law  known  as  the  Edmunds
law,  I  may  he  accused  of  treason
for  speaking  in  this  way,  in  calling
this  a  wicked  and  malicious  law.  I
may  be  counted  guilty  of  treason
because  I  dare  to  think  j  but  yet,
treason  has  never  been  defined  by
the  Constitution  of  our  country  nor
the  Courts,  to  consist  in  a  freedom
of  speech,  much  less  in  the  freedom
of  thought,  but  has  been  defined  as
levying  of  war  against  the  Govern-
ment, or  aiding  and  abetting  its  en-
emies in  time  of  war.

The  great  furore  in  the  Christian
world,  or  at  least  throughout  the
Christian  denominations  of  America
four  years  ago,  urging  upon  Congress
the  passage  of  the  Edmunds  lawt
I  was  on  the  ground  of  the  immorality
and  licentiousness  of  the  Mormons,
and  a  desire  to  repress  it  But  now
the  federal  representatives  in  their
efforts  to  enforce  it  in  our  country,


222


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES


have  found  themselves  under  the
necessity  of  throwing  the  in  ask  off
themselves  ami  off  the  country — off
the  priests  and  religious  people,  I
believe  some  of  you  in  Provo  hail
something  to  do  in  bringing  this
about  and  rendering  it  necessary  for
them  to  lay  off  the  mask,  I  believe
Commissioner  Smoot  was  called  upon
to  investigate  a  case  of  an  outsider
seducing  his  wife's  sister,  and  a  child
was  the  result ;  and  lie  felt  called
upon  under  the  law  to  hold  him  to
answer  before  the  grand  jury  for
Unlawful  cohabitation.  The  assistant
prosecuting  attorney  unwillingly
allowed  the  thing  to  go  on  until  the
man  was  committed  for  this  offense;
intimating  at  the  same  time  that  he
thought  this  was  pushing  trie
Edmunds  law  a  little  too  iar  and
beyond  what  was  the  spirit  and  intent
of  the  law.  If  this  case  should  be
carried  to  its  legitimate  end,  ami
the  man  should  be  sent  to  prison
and  lined  for  unlawful  cuhahitation,
then  the  door  would  be  thrown  wide
Open  for  many  others  to  follow  for
the  sarin;  offense.  Hence  such  a
construction  was  considered  an  ele-
ment of  danger  to  themselves,  to
the  representatives  of  the  federal
government  and  their  aiders  and
abettors  in  this  country  ;  that  such
a  construction  of  the  Edmunds  law
as  had  been  the  popular  construction
and  the  understanding  of  the  masses*
and  as  was  the  professed  under*
standing  of  the  Christian  world —


for  they  urged  its  passage  to  repress
immorality  and  sexual  crime — that
if  this  construction  was  allowed  to
prevail  in  Utah  and  the  surrounding
Territories,  and  the  District  of  Col-
umbia, and  other  places  where  the
United  States  exercise  jurisdiction,
it  would  operate  very  hard  on  a  great
znaiiV  who  would  not  be  so  well  pre-
iart  d  to  bear  it  as  the  Latter-da v
Saints. Hence  it  seemed  very*  de-


sirable that  their  feet  should  be
slipped  out  of  the  trap  and  ours  left
in.  Accordingly  their  wits  were
brought  to  bear  in  this  direction,
and  on  the  occasion  of  the  trial  of
President  Angus  M.  Cannon  on  the
charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation  a
plan  was  concocted  and  carried  out,
with  all  the  leading  attorneys  of  tiie
laud  and  the  Chief  Justice  upon  the
bench,  to  discuss  this  question  and
decide  upon  it.  In  this  connection
the  representative  of  the  government
boldly  came  to  the  front  and  threw
off  the  mask  and  proclaimed  at  the
outset  of  this  trial  that  he  knew  he
could  not  prove  sexual  intercourse
between  the  parties  at  bar,  and  that
he  should  not  attempt  it.  Further-
more he  stated  that  he  did  not  con-
sider sexual  intercourse  any  element
of  crime  ;  that  the  Edmunds  law,
so  called,  was  a  blow  aimed  at  the
status  of  the  Mormon  system  of
marriage  alone,  and  that  the  third
section  of  that  law  relating  to  un-
lawful cohabitation  had  no  reference
to  sexual  sins  ;  that  it  was  not  de-
signed to  repress  adultery,  fornica-
tion, lust,  or  any  form  of  sexual  sin;
that  that  was  left  to  local  legislation ;
that  the  legislation  of  Congress  iu
the  third  section  of  the  Edmunds
law,  as  wed  as  all  other  legislation
upon  that  subject  was  aimed  directly
at  the  status  of  the  marriage  alone.
In  this  regard,  therefore,  he  took
precisely  the  ground  that  Governor
Murray  did  when  he  first  issued  his
oath  for  notaries  public,  and  which
was  afterwards  adopted  by  the  board
of  Utah  Commissioners  and  incor-
porated in  their  test  oath  for  regis-
tration, referring  to  cohabitation
with  more  than  one  woman  iu  the
marriage  relation.  Mr.  Dickson
took  this  view,  that  Murray  was
right;  that  the  Utah  Commissioners
were  right ;  that  this  was  the  sense
of  the  country  ^  that  this  was  the


INTEGRITY  OF  THE  SAINTS  TO  THE  MARRIAGE  RELATION


223


design  of  Congress  ;  that  the  Ed-
munds law  was  a  blow  aimed  at  the
Mormon  system  of  marriage,  or  to
use  Judge  Zanes  term,  the  habit
and  repute of  marriage, or  the
"  holding  out,"  to  use  another  favor-
ite phrase,  of  two  or  more  women
as  wives  of  one  husband — .that  the
whole  and  only  object  of  the  third
section  of  the  Edmunds  law  relating
to  unlawful  cohabitation,  as  well  as
all  other  anti-polygamy  acts  of  Con-
gress was  against  the  institution  of
marriage. Finding, however,  it
difficult  to  prove  marriages  because
of  the  disinclination  of  people  to
testify,  aud  because  of  the  difficulty
of  reaching  any  record  evidence  of
these marriages, it was  thought
necessary  to  take  high  grounds  and
assume  this  :  that  the  Mormons  are
known  to  be  a  virtuous  people,  are
known  to  condemn  in  strong  terms
and  by  every  influence  in  their  power
every  form  of  sexual  sin,  and  that
they  do  not  indulge  in  intercourse
with  the  sexes  to  any  extent  only  in
the  marriage  relation- This  was  the
well  known  and  established  character
of  the  Mormon  people,  and  w;ts  ihe
result  of  their  teachings  and  practice
for  a  generation  past. Hence  wher-
ever children  were  found  in  Mormon
families,  they  are  the  result  of  mar-
riage. If  a  woman  is  found  preg-
nant, she  must  be  looked  upon  as  a
wife,  and  the  officers  are  justified  in
sezing  her  and  bringing  her  before
a  commissioner,  or  a  jury  or  judge,
and  compelling  her  to  give  the  name
Of  the  lather  of  her  child,  and  that
is  deemed  sufficient  proof  that  he
is  guilty  of  polygamy,  or  if  two  or
more  women  live  in  close  proximity
to  a  man,  and  he  is  seen  visiting
them,  and  especially  if  the  children
call  him  father,  it  is  sufficient  proof
on  which  the  jury  may  indict  for
polygamy  or  unlawful  cohabitation,
as  the  case  may  be.  Consequently


they  have  takeu  this  high  ground
that  it  is  no  longer  necessary  to
prove  even  the  first  or  second  mar-
riage, nor  is  it  any  longer  necessary
to  prove  sexual  intercourse  in  order
to  establish  unlawful  cohabitation,
but  the  common  habit  aud  repute  of
marriage  and  the  appearance  of
marriage  is  alt  sufficient.  Thus  the
ordinary  rules  of  evidence  are  set
asitle,  and  the  mask  of  hypocrisy
which  governed  the  Christian  world
when  they  were  urging  the  passage
of  this  Edmunds  law  through  Con-
iiress  is  thrown  asitle.  A  bolt  I  and
important  testimony  is  given  to  the
world  through  our  persecutors  to
the  morality  of  the  Mormon  people
being  so  far  in  excess  of  the
rest  of  the  world  of  mankind,
and  to  our  integrity  to  the  marriage
relation.  We  wish  indeed  that  all
that  is  said  iu  this  respect  were
strictly  true,  that  there  were  no  irre-
gularities among  us.  We  cannot
quite  say  that,  but  we  do  rejoice  ami
thank  God  for  the  general  good  te*ti~
mony  which  has  been  given  of  us  iu
truth  in  this  behalf.  Mot  long  since
Preside ut  8 moot  and  myself  aud
some  others  were  epngraLuhiUng
ourselves,  ami  President  Taylor  w*is
congratulating  himself,  and  many
others  of  our  aged  fathers,  iu  hav-
ing placed  themselves  in  a  condition
to  escape  the  operation  of  the  third
section  of  the  E  imuuds  law  by  con-
fining themselves  to  one  woman.  I
said  to  some  of  my  brethren  in  a
Priesthood  meeting  iu  St.  George,
one  time  when  they  were  very  badly
agitated  and  not  knowing  whom  the
lightning — or  the  Edmunds  act
would  strike  next — I  said  to  them,
you  old  grey- 1  leaded  men  whose
wives  have  grown  old  with  you  and
are  past  bearing  children,  if  you
choose  now  to  agree  among  your-
selves that  you  will  live  within  the
third  section  of  the  E  Imunds  law


224


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


and  allow  the  husband  and  father
to  confine  himself  to  one  wife,
while  he  cares  for  the  balance  and
cares  for  and  protects  his  children,
I  see  not  but  what  you  may  do  this
with  honor  to  yourselves  and  without
sacrificing  any  principles  of  the  law
of  God,  or  goini;  back  upon  your
covenants,  providing  this  be  agree-
able among  yourselves.  I  was
somewhat  with  others,  congratulat-
ing myself  in  being  able  to  do  this
without  sacrificing  any  special  prin-
ciple or  going  back  on  our  families,
but  it  would  seem  that  these  noble,
aged  sires  in  Israel  were  not  to  be
let  out  quite  so  easily  as  this,  for  I
am  a  little  inclined  to  feel  it  was  a
little  dishonorable,  and  yet  perhaps
not  altogether  before  God.  The  idea
was  that  they  might  possibly  escape,
while  their  sons  and  others  who
might  have  taken  wives  and  raised
families,  and  entered  into  those
sacred  relations  which  are  to  them
dearer  than  life  itself,  would  have  to
abide  the  consequences.  But  it  seems
that  under  Judge  Zane's  ruling  it  is
not  these  who  are  raising  families
that  are  always  liable  ;  tor  you  may
raise  a  family  by  your  sister-in-law,
if  you  don't  call  her  your  wife,  as
you  understand  from  the  easel  have
referred  to,  No  sooner  had  Judge
Zane  sustained  Prosecuting  Attorney
Dickson  s  view  of  the  case,  than  this
Mr*  Aimes  was  brought  before  him
on  habeas  corpus  and  discharged,  and
he  (the  Judge)  fully  announced  the
doctrine  that  a  man  could  have  as
many  children  by  sister-in-laws  as
he  pleased  j  that  no  matter  how
much  a  man  might  seduce  his
neighbor's  wife,  or  neighbor's
daughter,  if  he  is  not  in  the
marriage  relation  with  them,  it  is
no  offense  against  the  Edmunds  law*
But  with  a  Mormon,  whether  he  is
raising  a  family  or  not,  if  he  is  even
80  unfortunate  as  to  have  no  chil-


dren, or  if  his  wives  are  past  bearing
children,  and  he  has  entirely  separat-
ed himself  so  far  as  bed  is  concerned,
and  there  is  evidence  of  entire
restraint  on  his  part,  still,  unless  he
goes  back  on  himself  and  on  his
wives  and  children,  he  comes  under
the  law.  In  other  words,  if  he  con-
tinues to  41  hold  them  out"  as  wives
he  is  guilty  of  cohabitation.  Hence,
Brother  Smoot  and  myself,  and
others,  have  been  congratulating
ourselves  a  little  too  soon-  You  will
find  that  the  old  men  and  the  young
men  are  all  coupled  together,  their
feet  still  in  the  trap,  while  the  adul-
terer, fornicator,  whoremonger,
harlot  and  libertine,  the  trap  is
open  just  enough  to  let  their  feet
out.  Now  they  can  vote,  they  can
hold  office,  they  can  raise  children
providing  they  do  not  do  it  in  the
marriage  relation,  and  they  hold  out
this  inducement  to  you  and  me  :
"  Become  like  one  of  us/'  "  I  wish
you  out  there  could  be  like
the  rest  of  us."  "  I  wish  you
would  only  disown  your  wives,
then  do  what  you  will  you  are  secure
— that  is,  you  must  only  own  one
wife,  for  this  is  the  popular  idea,  the
sentiment  of  the  age.  This  is  the
voice  of  fifty  millions  of  people.
You  must  listen  to  it.  Congress
has  said  it  If  you  hesitate,  (some
go  so  far  as  to  say)  you  will  be  held
to  answer  for  treason.  Treason
against  what?  Treason  against
the  law.  Well,  then,  of  course
every  thief  is  guilty  of  treason*
Every  man  that  steals  an  axe  handle
shall  be  tried  for  treason  because  he
disobeys  the  law,  by  the  same  parity
of  reasoning.  Again,  if  you  try  to
avoid  the  law  and  we  can  catch  you*
why  you  are  doing  a  terribly  wicked
thing.  Yes ;  if  spotters  are  hunting
down  some  luckless  fellow  or  hia
wife,  and  they  slip  out  at  the  back
door,  or  hide  in  a  haystack,  whyj


THE  PRESENT  ISSUE  IS  A  RELIGIOUS  ONE


22r


you  must  be  held  for  treason,  or  some
other  crime.  Now,  I  have  always
understood  that  catching  goes  before
hanging ;  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the
officers  to  make  arrests  when  indict-
ments are  found  j  and  it  is  equally
understood  that  there  is  a  guarantee
in  the  Constitution  of  the  United
States  that  no  man  shall  he  held  to
answer  for  any  crime  except  on  pre-
sentment of  an  indictment  by  a
grand  jury.  Furthermore,  when
indictments  are  found,  the  parties
against  whom  they  are  found  are
known  only  to  the  jury  and  public
prosecutor ;  the  general  public  are
not  supposed  to  know  anything
about  them,  and  the  general  maxim
of  law  is  that  everybody  is  innocent
until  they  are  proven  guilty.  Con-
sequently, we  are  not  supposed  to
know  that  when  anybody  is  going  out
to  the  haystack  that  th«y  are  fleeing
from  an  officer,  or  that  every  tramp
that  comes  along  is  a  deputy  marshal,
or  if  he  is  that  he  has  a  warrant  in
his  pocket  for  that  man,  and  if  he
has  it  is  his  business  to  catch  him
and  not  ours.  Does  not  the  law
forbid  you  to  aid  in  the  escape  of
a  criminal  ?  Yes,  if  he  has  been
found  a  criminal  by  a  competent
jury  and  under  sentence  of  the  law.
Then  it  is  public  notice  to  tyou  that
he  is  a  criminal,  but  not  otherwise*
I  merely  make  mention  of  this  be-
cause of  the  foolish  threats  that  are
sometimes  made  to  terrify  ignorant
people.  Because  it  is  well  known
the  world  over,  so  far  as  anything
is  known  of  us,  and  of  the  legisla-
tion of  Congress  against  us  as  a  re-
ligious people,  that  there  is  an  issue
between  Congress  and  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  and  that  issue  is  of  a
religious  character  and  relating  to
the  social  relations  of  the  Latter-day
Saints.  The  views  which  we  hold
are  founded  upon  the  revelations  of
God,  both  ancient  and  modern.  We

No,  Iff,


have  given  evidence  to  the  world
of  our  sincerity  in  this,  and  jet  the
world  do  not  seem  to  accept  it,  I
believe  that  Mr.  Dickson  was  honest
enough  to  express  his  conviction  of
our  sincerity  in  this,  and  that  the
Mormon  people,  as  a  people,  were
moral  people,  and  that  their  teach-
ings and  actions  showed  that  they
did  not  indulge  in  these  sexual  sins
outside  of  the  marriage  relation  to
any. great  extent ;  while  the  great
mass  of  mankind  who  know  us  not
are  not  willing  to  give  us  this  credit.
They  have  raised  the  hue  and  cry
all  over  the  land  for  so  many  years,
that  we  were  guilty  of  gross  immo-
rality, that  it  seems  as  if  the  Lord
intended  in  the  way  now  being  dona
to  give  the  world  ocular  demonstra-
tion and  a  strong  testimony  of  the
integrity  of  this  people,  of  the
sincerity  of  their  actions,  of  the
depth  and  strength  of  their  faith,
and  their  devotion  to  their  religious
convictions,  and  their  integrity  in
carrying  them  out.  It  is  a  source
of  gratification  and  thanksgiving
that  but  few,  comparatively  speak-
ing, among  us  have  felt  to  go  back
on  themselves  and  to  throw  off  al-
legiance to  God  and  to  their  families
and  friends,  and  to  violate  their
consciences ;  but  few  have  been
found  to  do  this  in  order  to  escape
fine  and  imprisonment.  How  far
it  will  become  necessary  that  this
testimony  should  go  forth  to  the
world,  and  how  mauy  should  suffer
so  that  their  testimony  should  go
abroad  to  mankind  to  convince  the
world  and  to  vindicate  God  and  His
people,  I  am  not  yet  able  to  say,  for
1  am  persuaded  it  will  be  as  the  Lord
will ;  that  whatsoever  is  necessary
we  must  submit  to  with  the  best
grace  possible.  I  do  not  mean  to
say  that  every  one  who  may  be
thought  to  come  under  the  third
section  of  the  Edmunds  law  shall

Vol  XXVI.


226


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


go  and  complain  on  himself,  or  if
complained  of  by  some  spotter  that
he  shall  go  strait  way  and  confess
guilt,  or  if  arraigned  for  trial  on  an
indictment,  that  he  shall  plead
guilty  without  a  trial ;  I  do  not  say
this.  Every  man  must  be  left  to
choose  for  himself  what  course  he
Trill  pursue  in  relation  to  those  mat
ters;  for  pleading  guilty  or  not  guilty
when  arraigned  before  the  Court  is
a  mere  technical  form  and  a  liberty
which  every  prisoner  enjoys,  that
of  pleading  guilty  or  not  guilty.  The
plea  of  guilty,  of  course,  saves  the  ex-
pense of  a  trial,  while  a  plea  of  not
guilty,  means  that  the  prosecutor
must  prove  the  charge  made  in  the
indictment.  I  do  not  say,  therefore,
that  in  submitting  as  best  we  can  to
the  operation  of  the  law  that  we  shall
not  avail  ourselves  of  constitutional
privileges  and  the  rights  accorded  to
lis.  We  have  the  right  to  be  tried
by  a  jury  of  our  peers  if  we  can  get
one,  but  we  cannot  get  one  under
this  act.  The  act  was  purposely
framed  to  cut  off  that  right.  The
right  of  a  man  to  be  tried  by  a  jury
of  his  peers — this  term  originated
in  Great  Britain  and  was  guaranteed
in  the  Magna  Charta — means  simply
a  jury  of  his  equals.  If  a  man  be-
longed to  the  nobility  of  the  land,
he  was  entitled  to  be  tried]bya  jury
of  his  equals.  If  he  was  a  plebeian,
a  common  laborer  in  the  humble
walks  of  life,  he  was  entitled  to  a
jury  of  his  equals,  his  associates,
neighbors,  those  that  knew  him  best
and  were  able  to  sympathize  with
him  and  comprehend  his  position
and  circumstances  and  the  motives
governing  his  acts,  so  that  a  right-
eous judgment  might  be  rendered
concerning  him.  This  guarantee
was  incorporated  in  the  American
Constitution.  The  right  of  a  man
to  be  tried  by  a  jury  of  his  peers
implied  all  that  was  necessary  to  pro-


tect  the  citizens  against  malicious
prosecutions;  but  in  our  special
case,  under  the  operation  of  special
laws  enacted  against  the  Latter-day
Saints,  we  are  compelled  to  go  to
trial  before  a  jury  of  our  avowed
enemies  j  indeed,  none  are  qualified
to  sit  upon  juries  in  our  case  unless
they  are  pronounced  against  us  ;
because,  as  I  said  before,  it  is  not  a
sexual  crime  that  is  on  trial  ;  it  is  a
religious  sentiment  of  the  Mormon
people;  it  is  this  status  of  their
social  relations  founded  upon  their
religious  convictions  that  is  on  trial.
Hence  it  is  the  pronounced  opposi-
tion to  our  convictions  that  is  a  qual-
ification for  a  juryman  in  our
case.

Well,  we  were  told  by  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith,  that  the  United  States
Government  and  people  would  come
to  this  :  that  they  would  undermine
one  principle  of  the  Constitution  af-
ter another,  until  its  whole  fabric
would  be  torn  away,  and  that  it
would  become  the  duty  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  and  those  in  sympathy
witli  them  to  rescue  it  from  destruc-
tion, and  to  maintain  and  sustain
the  principles  of  human  freedom  for
which  our  fathers  fought  and  bled.
We  look  for  these  things  to  come  in
quick  succession*  When  I  first
heard  of  the — what  shall  I  call  it  1
the  somersault  of  Judge  Zane  and
Prosecuting  Attorney  Dickson,  the
question  was  asked,  Now  that  the
mask  is  thrown  off,  how  will  this
take  throughout  the  country  1  Will
the  hireling  priests  throughout  the
land  sustain  this  action  ]  Will  they
consent  to  have  this  hypocritical
mask  thrown  off  then,  and  will  the
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States
and  the  people  of  the  United  States
sustain  the  ruling t  I  unhesitatingly
answer,  yes,  they  will,  and  if  ever
it  reaches  the  Supreme  Court  of  the
United  States,  they  will  sustain  it ;


WE  NEED  NOT  BE  SELF-COMMITTED,


227


the  hypocritical  hireling  priests  will
sustain  it ;  the  people  will  sustain
it  and  say,  "  Crucify  them,  crucify
them,  they  have  no  friends/1

It  becomes  us,  then,  to  be  better
Saints,  does  it  not  ?  Yes.  It  be-
comes us  to  be  more  united  than  we
have  ever  been  before.  It  becomes
us  to  put  away  our  foolishness ;  to
cease  all  sin  ;  to  observe  the  words
of  wisdom  j  to  walk  in  all  humility
before  God  ;  to  be  faithful  and  earn-
est in  our  prayers,  and  to  imitate
good  old  Daniel,  Never  mind  the
lion's  den  nor  the  murderer's  Pen,
but  so  live  that  we  can  be  counted
worthy  before  God,  and  whatsoever
He  has  designed  should  come  upon
vlb  that  we  may  have  grace  given
unto  us  according  to  our  day,  and
that  the  world  may  record  of  us  in
future  generations  that  we  were  an
honest  and  a  noble  race,  true  to  our
God  and  to  our  convictions,  and
worthy  of  the  high  calling  of  God,
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,
We  should  not  blame  one  another
for  not  going  to  the  Penitentiary,
We  should  not  find  fault  with  Presi-
dent Taylor,  or  President  Cannon,


or  President  Woodruff,  because  they
do  not  rush  into  the  Penitentiary,
or  go  into  court  and  plead  guilty,
and  at  once  go  to  prison.  Nor  need
we  until  the  Lord  requires  it,  rise
up  and  say,  "  build  a  new  Peniten-
tiary and  let  us  all  go  in  together/*
We  are  not  required  to  do  this,  but
may  claim  our  rights  under  the  law.
We  may  leave  the  Government  offi-
cials to  do  their  duty,  and  if  they
will  honestly  and  rightly  act  accord-
ing to  the  rules  of  evidence  within
their  prescribed  jurisdiction,  it  will
take  them  some  time  to  get  us  all
into  the  Penitentiary,  because  under
the  law  we  can  insist  upon  a  trial
and  upon  a  jury.  Judge  Howard
was  reported  to  have  said  that  it  took
very  little  law  and  less  evidence  to
convict  a  Mormon  in  Arizona.
Nevertheless  there  are  certain  forma
that  they  have  to  go  through,  ail  of
which  takes  a  certain  length  of  time,
and  a  certain  amount  of  labor  on
the  part  of  the  Prosecuting  Attorney,
and  if  he  gets  but  for  each  in-
dictment, give  him  the  privilege  of
drawing  up  the  indictment  and
proving  the  charge  therein.  Amec»


528


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE BY ELDER HENRY Wl  XAISBITT,


Delivered  in  the  Tahemadel  Salt  Lake  CUt/}  Sunday  Afternoon,  Jam  7f


(REPOKTED  BY JOHN  IRVINE  J


IGNORANCE  OF  THE  WORLD  REGARDING  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS — OUR
DOCTRINES  ARE  CHRISTIAN  AND  ARE  SUBSTANTIATED  BY  THE
BCJ6UPPTURES — NECESSITY  OF  PRESENT  REVELATION — FIRST  PRINCI-
PLES OF  THE  GOSPEL —  FAITH,  REPENTANCE,  BAPTISM  FOR  THE
REMISSION  OF  SINS  AND  LAYING  ON  OF  HANDS  FOR  THE  GIFT  OF  THE
HOLY  GHOST — ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST — "  HQR-
MONISM"  IS  A  RESTORATION  OF  ANCIENT  CHRISTIANITY — JOSEPH
SMITH  A  TRUE  PROPHET — PLURAL  MARRIAGE  PRACTICED  BY  MEW
OF  GOD  IN  MISS-CALLED  DARK  AGES — CONCLUSION.


My  brethren  and  sisters  and  friends  :
I  arise  to  speak  with  a  little  embar-
assment,  but  I  look  to  the  Saints,
asking  for  their  faith  so  that  I  may
overcome.

There  is  nothing  that  interests
the  Latter-day  Saints  so  much  as
the  enunciation  of  the  principles
which  they  profess  and  literally  ac-
cept ;  but  it  would  seem  as  if  there
was  in  the  outside  world,  less  com-
prehension and  understanding  in
regard  to  the  principles  that,  the
Saints  believe  in,  than  there  is  in
regard  to  any  other  subject  which
has  acquired  the  same  prominence.

The  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  for
a  great  many  years  has  kept  a  large
number  of  missionaries  in  the  field  ;
they  have  traversed  the  whole  of
Christendom,  in  a  greater  or  less
degree,  visited  also  the  heathen  na-
tions and  lands  that  are  afar  off ;
but  yet  a  traveler  would  find  that
but  little  impression  has  been  made
among  the  masses  of  mankind.  Even
among  those  which  are  most  ad-


vanced, and  whose  citizens  are  pre-
sumed to  be  intelligent,  and  to  com-
prehend the  questions  which  agitata
the  public  mind,  there  is  an  amount
of  ignorance  which  is,  to  say  the
least,  discreditable.  It  has  been
my  lot  individually,  to  come  in  con-
tact with  many  who  have  visited
this  Territory  and  city,  and  to  hear
their  expressions  of  surprise  in  re-
gard to  the  religious  faith  of  the
Latter-day  Saints.  To  tell  a  stran-
ger that  the  people  of  Utah  believe
in  the  Bible,  appears  to  l3e  some-
thing altogether  un  looked  for  The
assertion  of  their  faith  in  God  and
in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  appears  to
be  received  with  more  or  less  incre-
dulity, and  there  are  others  w  ho  be-
lieve that  the  marriage  customs  of
the  Latter-day  Saints  are  the  begin-
ning and  the  end,  and  all  there  was
and  is  or  will  be,  to  give  them  dis-
tinction and  peculiarity  among  the
people  of  this  nation.  And  yet  if
you  were  to  sweep  your  eye  over
this  congregation — which  is  pro-


THE  LATTER  DAY  SAINTS  ARE  TRUE  CHRISTIANS.


221


bably  an  average  one  of  the  people
of  this  Territory,  you  would  in-
stantly say,  that  there  does  not  ap-
pear to  be  much  difference  in  the
appearance  of  the  people  here  and
the  average  congregations  of  wor-
shippers elsewhere.  The  facts  are
that  the  people  here — the  older
ones  at  all  events — have  been  called
and  gathered  from  among  mankind,
and  from  Christendom,  as  a  rule.
There  are  in  this  Church  many  na-
tive-born citizens,  who  have  come
from  every  State  of  the  American  i
Union,  and  are  fully  acquainted  with
all  its  reliinous  sects  and  creeds.
There  are  those  who  havp  come
from  the  different  nations  of  Europe,
and  they  have  been  familiar  with  the
institutions  which  exist  there ;  they
have  attended  the  services  and  been
identified  with  the  same  organiza-
tions that  you  find  to  day.  They
know  all  about  the  churches  and  the
ministers  and  the  Sabbath  schools
and  the  literature  of  the  religious
world.  They  have  analyzed  and
compared  and  contrasted  these  until
they  understand  not  only  the  differ-
ences that  exist  between  the  several
churches,  individually,  as  they  are
known  in  Christendom,  but  they
understand  also  the  vast  diifiirences  i
between  those  churches  and  that
record  called  the  Bible.  They  have
been  familiar  with  that,  including
the  New  Testament,  from  their
childhood.  They  were  taught  it  of
their  mothers  and  their  fathers.
They  read  it  in  the  Sabbath  school
They  listened  to  the  exposition  of  its
truths  and  doctrines  in  the  churches
to  which  they  belonged,  and  it  was
personal  mental  analysis  and  com-
parison that  gave  conviction  to
their  souls  and  induced  them  to
receive  that  order  which  the  world
has  designated  H  Mormon  ism,"  As
a  rule  the  people  of  Utah  are
"  Mormons,"  from  conviction  and


from  choice.  They  have  left  the
institutions  of  their  fathers  because
of  the  defects  which  were  discovered
therein,  because  of  the  inconsistencies
which  prevailed  there,  and  in  thou-
sands of  instances  have  reached
conclusions  because  of  the  teachings
that  many  of  them  received  in  the
religious  organizations  of  the  world*
The  Latter-day  Saints,  to  the  sur-
prise of  many,  call  themselves
Christians.  Notwithstanding  the
opposition  that  they  have  encoun-
ered  ;  notwithstanding  the  prejudice
with  which  they  have  had  to  con-
tend ;  notwithstanding  the  ignor-
ance that  is  everywhere  manifest  in
regard  to  them  and  to  their  institu-
i  tiona,  they  claim  to  be  Christians, —
or  followers  of  Christ ;  and  in  as-
suming this  title,  they  accept  it  with
all  that  it  implies*  They  defend
with  as  much  devotion  and  persist-
ence the  character  and  institutions
and  teachings  that  were  given  of
their  Lord  and  *Savior  as* recorded
in  the  Books  that  have  been  handed
down  from  the  fathers  as  do  the  dis-
ciples of  any  system,  either  secular
or  religious,  who  follow  out  the  dic-
tates, theories  and  ideas  of  those
whom  they  have  accepted  as  their
!  leaders.  The  followers  of  John
Wesley  are  no  more  tenacious  of  the
teachings  of  their  illustrious  pre-
decessor, the  founder  of  their  church,
than  are  the  Latter-day  Saints  in
regard  to  the  teaching,  of  the  Savior,
and  of  His  servant  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith.  Those  who  revere
the  name  of  Washington  and  of  the
fathers  of  this  republic,  and  because
of  that  reverence,  cherish  the  funda-
mental truths  of  the  Constitution,
and  the  Declaration  of  Independence,
are  no  more  tenacious  of  the  truths
uttered  by  those  whom  they  accept
as  leaders,  than  are  the  Latter-day
I  Saints  in  regard  to  the  teachings  and
ordinances  as  established  by  Christ,


4


230


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


They  have  accepted  Him  as  their
authority  ;  they  have  accepted  Him
as  their  example ;  they  have  accepted
Him  as  their  leader  ;  and  while  their
claims  to  Christianity,  or  the  epithet
of  Christians,  may  he  ignored,  dis-
puted, or  repudiated  by  others,  still
they  are  abundantly  able  to  prove
that  their  position  is  correct  To
those  who  would  dispute  this  let  it
be  said  that  they  can  find  (if  they
so  desire  it)  testimony  in  abundance
in  the  publications  which  have  been
issued  by  this  Church ;  they  can
find  testimony  in  abundance  if  they
will  visit  our  Sunday  schools  ;  they
can  find  testimony  in  abundance  if
they  will  inquire  of  those  who  are
4i  Mormons1  *  or  Latter-day  Saints  by
faith  and  and  profession.  It  is  not
usual,  however,  for  inquirers  to
address  thomselves  to  this  class.  It
is  wFell  known  that  of  the  thousands
who  travel  this  Territory,  and  who
visit  the  people  in  the  capacity  of
tourists  every  summer,  that  there
are  but  few,  very  few,  who  ever  seek
an  interview  with  those  who  are  be-
lievers in  and  receivers  of,  that
which  they  designate  "Mormonism."
They  as  a  rule  are  more  willing  to
receive  all  the  flying  rumors  and  re-
ports, and  to  listen  to  all  who  but-
ton-hole them,  and  believe  anyone
they  come  in  contact  with,  in  regard
to  the  character  of  this  community,
in  regard  to  their  faith  and  practice,
their  social  theories,  and  the  results
of  these,  than  they  are  to  in-
quire of  Latter-day  Saints  ;  and  yet
there  is  not  a  man  or  woman  within
the  confines  of  this  Territory  or
elsewhere,  who  is  a  believer  in  the
Gospel,  but  who  is  more  than  willing
to  impart  what  information  they
possess  and  to  give  a  reason  for  the
hope  that  is  within  them,  though
they  might  do  it  conscious  of  their
own  weakness  and  with  a  measure
of  fear — not  fear  as  to  the  truth  of


that  which  they  might  repeat — not
fear  because  they  have  any  doubt  as
to  the  character  of  the  truths  they
have  received,  but  with  that  trem-
bling which  inevitably  grows  in  the
feelings  of  those  who  are  ostracized
by  society  and  who  are  vilified  and
repudiated  by  the  world.

It  may  be  asked,  what  then  as
"  Mormons'1  are  your  views  in  a  re-
ligious sense  1  What  are  your  pecu-
liarities 1  Where  do  you  get  the
doctrines  that  you  teach  1

I  am  of  the  opinion  that  the  doc-
trines of  the  Latter-day  Saints  can
be  easily  proved  and  established
from  the  sacred  Scriptures,  and  I  can
further  say  that  the  missionaries
who  have  gone  from  Utah — the
Elders  who  have  labored  in  the
midst  of  the  nations  of  the  earth —
have  always  been  able  to  substantiate
their  testimony  by  the  word  of  God.
They  have  never  asked  the  world  to
receive  a  doctrine  that  they  could
not  read  in  their  own  Bible,  in  their
own  study  and  in  their  ow*n  homes.
They  have  never  asked  mankind  to
accept  any  dogma,  doctrine  or  prin*
ciple  which  they  believed  would  be
calculated  to  work  them  injury,  but
they  have  believed  that  the  nature
of  man  everywhere  was  of  such  a
uniform  character,  and  the  purposes
of  his  creation  were  of  such  divine
intent,  that  those  truths  which  iu
their  essential  nature  would  bless
one  man,  were  equally  calculated  to
bless  all  mankind.

I  presume  that  it  "is  everywhere
comprehended  that  man  is  a  reli-
gious being ;  that  he  has  within
him  aspirations,  feelingsand  thoughts
in  regard  to  the  Supreme,  which
unitedly  declare  that  he  needs  some
assistance  from  outside  sources  if
he  is  to  possess  knowledge  and
understanding  of  the  nature  of  his
existence.  Knowledge  in  regard  to
the  purpose  of  that  existence,  in  re-


NECESSITY  OF  PRESENT  REVELATION  AND  INSPIRATION.  231


gard  to  its  past,  and  in  regard  to  the
present  and  future  of  that  existence.
All  the  facts  of  a  man's  organization
bear  testimony  to  the  necessity  (and
where  there  is  necessity  there  is
advantage)  of  religious  training,
culture  and  education.  The  soar-
ings of  his  spirit,  the  dissatisfaction
with  earthly  things,  with  its  failures,
and  lack  of  recompense,  the  conse-
quent reaching  out  into  the  future
for  an  assurance  of  compensation,
are  all  so  many  evidences  that  there
is  somewhere  the  material  to  satisfy
these  aspirations  ;  the  same  as  the
feeling  of  hunger  and  thirst  is
abundant  testimony  that  somewhere
there  are  elements  to  minister  to  the
gratification  of  that  hunger  and
thirst.  And  when  this  conclusion
is  reached  it  is  very  easy  to  advance
another  step  in  religious  science,
and  to  understand  that  if  there  is
that  material,  that  intelligence  cal-
culated to  minister  to  his  religious
aspirations,  its  faith  and  hope,  it
must  come  from  a  source  outside
of  himself — in  other  words  it  must
proceed  from  that  Being  who  is  the
originator,  the  Creator,  the  Lord  of
man,  that  in  Him  alone  there  must
be  that  fountain  of  inspiration,  reve-
lation and  intelligence  which  is
essential  in  developing  in  man  the
purposes  of  his  creation.  This  argu-
ment appears  to  me  to  be  philoso-
phical, to  be  sound,  to  be  suited
to  every  man's  condition,  and  there
is  implied  in  that  conclusion  the
inevitable  necessity  and  advantages
of  inspiration  and  revelation.  The
Christian  world  have  accepted  this
idea,  and  they  will  tell  you  that  the
fountain  of  inspiration  was  open  to
man  some  1,800  years  ago,  The  j
religious  world  hold  to  the  theory
that  there  was  a  period  in  the  his-
tory and  experience  of  mankind
when  this  spirit  of  inspiration  ex-  j
sted  among  men,  but  that  it  was


some  two  or  three  or  four  thousand
years  ago.  The  Christian — I  might
emphasize  that  and  say  the  christ-
ian world — have  professed  to  have
faith  in  the  Savior  of  mankind  as
occupying  an  intermediate  position
between  theCreator  and  his  children.
They  will  take  up  the  Scriptures
and  point  us  to  illustrations  which
establish  his  character  in  that  re-
spect. They  will  tell  us  in  quoting
the  same  that  "  He  was  a  teacher
sent  from  God  that  "  He  sought
not  His  own  will  but  the  will  of  the
Father  who  sent  Him;  that  He  de-
clared that  He  spoke  not  of  Himself*
but  of  His  Father  who  sent  Him;
that  He  did  nothing  of  Himself,
but  as  my  Father  hath  taught  me*
I  speak  these  things,  for  I  do  always
those  things  that  please  Him  P
They  will  tell  us  that  even  his  en-
emies said,  "  He  spoke  like  one
having  authority,  and  not  as  one  of
the  Scribes,11  In  all  the  churches
of  Christendom  they  will  repeat  the
marvelous  parables  that  He  gave  to
His  disciples  ;  they  will  read  tu  us
the  sermon  on  the  mount ;  t'iey  will
tell  us  of  His  miracle^;  ihywill
endeavor  ostensibly  to  carry  o  it  the
institutions  which  He  esablehed,
all  of  which  substantiates  she  idea
that  they  have  at  least  some  faith  in
the  mission  which  He  claim  ?d  upon
the  earth.  But  if  you  ask  whether
that  spirit  of  inspiration  and  rt /ela-
tion which  He  promised  His  disciples
was  to  be  continuous,  or  •whether
it  has  been  continuous,  or  whether 'it
is  now  necessary,  the  whole  religious
world,  both  priests  and  people  have
reached  the  conclusion  that  it  ba-
loug*  to  an  era  of  the  past;  yet  if
evtn*  the  religious  world  needed
teachers  it  is  now.  If  ever  mankind
needed  revelation  it  is  to-day.  If
ever  t  he  re  was  a  necessity  for  inspi-
ration, we  feel  and  know  that  it  is
in  the  midst  of  the  nineteenth  ce  1-


232


JOURNAL  OF  mSCOUKSES.


tury.  If  ever  there  was  a  time  when
confusion, contention  and  strife,
when  inconsistency  and  skepticism
prevailed  it  is  surely  now,  among
the most advanced nations  of
civilization  and  of  Christendom  ;
there  men  ate  to  be  found  laying
the  axe  at  the  foundation  of  reli-
gious laiih,  emirnvorin^  to  popular
ize  their  own  doctrines,  and  to  bring
into  disrepute  and  into  contempt
the  teachings  of  the  Book  that  for
ages  has  been  held  sacred. This  is
being  dune  with  t  hat  force  of  rhetor-
ic, with  that  glow  of  imagination,
and  with  that  wealth  of  illustration
which  belongs  to  men  of  the  type
of Ingersoll, and  congregations
everywhere,  hang  with  breathless
-suspense  upon  the  words  they  utter,
and  thousands  are  grateful  in  their
iniquity  that  the  myth  of  religion,
the  fear  of  God,  the  certainty  of
punishment,  the  future  life,  have
been  Mvept  away  by  sn  ruthless  and
so  untiring  a  hand. Ministers  are
paralyzed  and  stand  aghast  in  pres-
ence ot  tha  enemy,  and  before  a  sin-
sick  world,  and  nowT  if  there  is  one


medicine  needed  more  than  another
in  this  age,  it  is  that  medicine  which
will  minister  to  faith,  to  peace,  to
•order,  to  confidence,  which  will  bring
assurance,  and  will  give  men  that
trust  and  satisfaction  with  and  in
the  doctrines  that  they  teach  and
practice,  fetich  as  was  possessed  by
the  Apostles  and  Teachers  and  Saints
of  olden  time.  Where  in  the
churches  of  the  world  can  you  find
men  ready  to  my  as  Paul  said  to  his
converts,  "  The  Gospel  came  not
unto  vou  in  word  only,  but  also  in
power  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  much
assurance  f  1  Thess.  1,  5,  verses.
Where  are  those  who  have  the  same
authority  to  say,  "though  we  or
an  atigtd  from  heaven  preach  any
other  Gospel  unto  you  than  that
which  we  have  preached  unto  you,
let  him  be  accused," "I  certify


you,  brethren,  that  the  Gospel
which  was  was  preached  of  me
is  not  after  man,  for  I  neither  re-
ceive it  of  man,  neither  was  I  taught
it  but  by  the  revelation  of  Jesus
Christ"  Gal  1  and  12.  Thi*  as-
surance is  not  to  be  found.  It  is
not  known.  The  spirit  of  authority,
the  confidence  which  grows  from
the  possession  of  truth  is  not  in
!  connection  with  the  churche?,  or  en-
joyed among  the  intelligent  of
Christendom.  To  be  sure  the  world
go  to  a  great  expense  in  order  that
they  may  secure  religious  instruc-
tion. Colleges  are  erected.  Men
of  certain  temperament  spend  years
and  years  in  order  that  they  may
be  fitted  for  the  ministerial  profes-
sion. The  people  delight  to  pour
out  of  their  wealth  for  the  spiritual
food  that  they  receive  of  their  teach-
ers ;  but  with  it  all,  that  uniformity,
that  beauty,  that  simplicity,  that
consistency,  that  force,  that  assur-
ance which  pertained  to  the  primitive
daysof  Christianity  in  not  to  be  found
in  the  religious  world  of  to-day.

Now,  I  might  ask  what  wras  the
order  of  things  in  the  primitive
church  as  established  by  the  Savior]
There  are  certain  first  principles
which  pertain  to  all  branches  of  sci-
ence— chemical  science,  agricultural
science,  astronomical  seiecen,  or
any  other  branch — there  is  im-
Plied  in  connection  with  all  these
a  possession  and  use  of  primary  or
fundamental  principles  upon  which
the  superstructure  is  built,  and  it  is
the  Fame  in  regard  to  the  science  of
religion.  There  are  certain  lun da-
mental  and  foundation  principles
upon  which  the  superstructure
is  built,  and  it  is  the  same
in  regard  to  the  science  of  re-
ligion. There  are  certain  funda-
mental ami  foundation  principles
upon  which  the  edifice  is  to  be  built,
and  upon  which  it  must  tor  ever
[  stand,  and  these  principles  did  not


FAITH  AND  REPENTANCE*


233


originate  in  any  school  in  connection
with  any  college,  or  really  in  connec-
tion with  any  organization  or  body
of  men.  They  are  divine*  They
were  revealed*  They  came  through
chosen  messengers  who  tabernacled
in  the  flesh,  who  taught  and  then
transmitted  them  to  their  fellows,
who  in  turn  taught  others,  and  thus
made  them  powerful  by  final  dissem-
ination among  nations.  This  idea,
I  think,  is  invulnerable.  What,
then,  are  the  primary  or  foundation
principles  of  religion  ?  Faith  in  God,
growing  out  of  the  necessities  of
man's  nature,  growing  out  of  the
nature  of  his  spirit,  the  origin  of
his  being,  the  history  and  memory
of  the  past,  the  outlook  into  the
future — these  all  foreshadowing  the
necessity  and  advantages  and  bless-
ings of  faith  in  God.  Hence  every
man  who  is  a  religionist  has  sought
unto  a  Being  of  some  kind  ;  what-
ever hid  conception  of  that  Being
may  be,  he  looks  upon  it  as  funda-
mental that  there  is  a  God,  and
there  are  none  but  those  that  David
speaks  of,  namely,  the  fool,  who
has  said  in  his  heart  that  "  there  is
no  God."  Having  established  this
faith  in  God,  we  want  to  know  what
position  we  occupy  towards  Him.
He  is  our  benefactor.  He  is  our
friend.  We  are  His  children.  The
Scriptures  tell  us  that  we  are  created
in  His  image  and  likeness.  They
tell  us  that  the  Savior  was  '*  the  ex-
press image  of  His  Father's  person."
We,  then,  are  like  our  Father.
We  are  His  posterity*  We  are  His
sons  and  daughters  dwelling  and
tabernacling  in  the  flesh.  What  is
the  position  that  a  man's  children
occupy  toward  him  as  their  parent  ?
Every  parent  expects  obedience*
Eveiy  parent  expects  respect  to  las
wishes*  Every  parent  expects  that
when  he  makes  a  law  that  that  law  will
be  carried  out  in  his  household  j
that  there  shall  be  order,  rule  and


authority  there.  This  is  the  idea
which  prevails  between  God  and
man  upon  the  earth,  and  that  again
implies  the  principle  to  which  I  have
already  alluded,  the  spirit  of  inspira-
tion and  revelation  ;  for  in  our  pres-
ent condition  the  Almighty  cannot
communicate  directly,  probably,  but
He  has  selected  certain  mediums
of  communication*  Who  are  they  1
His  servants  who — like  His  servants
of  Biblical  note,  —teach  in  His
name.  He  promised,  and  gave  unto
mankind  a  witness  of  Himself,  even
when  there  was  no  law,  by  His  Holy
Spirit,  and  He  has  sent  that  true
light  which  lighteth  every  man  that
cometh  into  the  world,  while  to
every  baptized  believer  is  given  "  the
manifestation  of  the  Spirit,  to  profit
withal"  1  Cor.,  12,  7*  And  this
Spirit  will  hear  testimony  to  the
truths,  or  laws,  that  are  revealed  by
His  Son,  and  taught  by  His  ap-
pointed servants.

Well,  now,  how  shall  we  ascertain
these  truths?  Why,  through  this
channel.  Jesus  Christ  was  the  law-
giver. He  established  that  system
of  things  calculated  to  bring  man
back  into  the  presence  of  His  Father,
and  He  commanded  men  everywhere
that  they  should  seek  after  Him,
that  they  should  pray  unto  Him,
"  Our  Father,  who  art  in  Heaven,*
Thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is
done  in  heaven,"  ami  He  communi-
cated that  will  unto  those  who
listened  to  His  teaching.  What  was
that  will  %  He  continuously  advo-
cated and  enforce' I  the  spirit  of  re-
pentance. Why  ]  Because  men —
all  men,  had  wandered  from  the
path  of  rectitude*  They  lived  in
violation  of  those  laws  which  are
divine  ;  they  failed  to  carry  out  that
which  would  lead  them  on  toward
perfection*  Hence  as  a  natural  and
philosophical  conclusion  men  are
called  upon  to  repent  What !
Does  this  generation  need  to  repent  ?


234


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


There  are  many  who  think  they  need
no  repentance  ;  that  they  occupj
positions  in  society  too  elevated  ;
that  they  belong  to  the  upper  crust,
the  great  "  upper  ten,"  who  are
leaders  in  science,  in  art,  and  in
literature,  and  who  are  among  the
cultured  of  our  nation  and  in  other
nations  of  mankind.  They  think  ■
they  have  no  occasion  to  repent ;
they  '*  thank  God  that  they  are  not
as  other  men,  not  even  as  this  pub-
Bean,  or  as  this  Mormon."  But,
brethren  and  sisters  and  friends,
there  is  no  royal  road  to  salvation
in  the  economy  of  God.  There  are
no  principles  in  the  science  of  reli-
gion that  can  he  repudiated,  or
neglected,  or  disobeyed  by  man,
without  his  subjection  to  the
penalty,  repentance  of  all  evil
and  a  return  to  that  which
is  right  is  one  of  the  primary  ele-
ments and  evidences  of  true  man-
hood and  womanhood,  and  it  is  also
an  essential  part  of  the  Gospel  of
Jesus  Christ.  When  man  has  thus
accepted  and  manifested  his  faith  in
God  by  his  repentance,  having  be-
lieved on  aud  in  the  word  of  His
servants,  aud  acquired  active  faith
in  them,  he  has  made  an  advance.
When  1  say  His  servants,  I  mean
the  Lord  ami  Savior  Jesus  Christ,
in  a  primary  sense,  and  those  whom
He  has  delegated  ami  appointed  iti
a  secondary  sense  ;  for  we  read  that
the  Apostles  were  commanded  to
teach  that  which  He  had  taught
them  ;  they  were  sent  out  to  "teach
them  to  observe  all  things  whatso-
ever I  have  commanded  you  they
were  not  to  teach  their  own  ideas,
their  own  theories,  their  own  con-
clusions, but  that  they  should  teach
the  principles  taught  by  Him,  when
they  were  asked  the  question,  What
is  necessary  for  us  "to  do  to  be  saved/'
It  is  almost  an  insult  to  a  great
many  people  now%  to  tell  them  that


they  need  salvation,  but  yet  in  the
innermost  recesses  of  every  man's
heart  and  every  woman's  soul,  in
the  depths  that  no  plummet  hath
sounded,  not  even  t lie  one  made  by
themselves, — -there  rests  the  fVelin£
that  they  need  be  sorry  for  many  of
the  things  that  they  have  done  in
life,  and  if  not  for  thos*  that  they
have  clone,  at  least  for  the  thousand
aud  one  things  that  they  have  left
undone,  for  there  are  sins  of
omission  as  fatal  as  those  of  com-
mission.

Faith  in  God  aud  repentance,
then,  and  faith  in  His  servants,
re^ts  upon  a  philosophical  as  well
as  upon  a  scriptural  basis.  It  is
rational  and  reasonable,  it  is  easy  to
be  comprehended,  these  things  are
true,  in  and  of  themselves  !

What  shall  we  dt>  after  we  have
thus  repented?  What  say  the
Scriptures!  What  said  the  Apos-
tles} Why,  when  asked  the  ques-
tion, "  What  shall  we  do  T  Peter
replied,  "  Repent,  and  be  baptized
every  one  of  you  in  the  name  of
Jesus  Christ  for  the  remission  of
sins."  11  Why/'  say  the  religious
world,  u  we  don't  believe  in  that."
I  know  it.  I  cannot  help  that.  If
you  choose  to  repudiate  the  author-
ity that  you  at  other  times  profess
to  accept,  I  do  not  know  that  it  is
much  of  my  business.  If  Americans
choose  to  apostatize  from  the  polit-
ical principles  of  the  fathers  of  the
Republic,  I  do  not  know  that  I  can
help  that.  If  any  man  belonging
to  any  religious  or  social  organiza-
tion chooses  to  neglect  or  repudiate
the  principle  of  that  organization,
I  do  not  know  that  I  can  help  it.  I
do  not  know  that  any  community
can  help  it,  we  can  only  state  the
facts  as  they  are,  premising,  how-
ever, that  apostacy  admissible  from
the  institutions  of  men  in  no  way
justifies  the  same  action  in  regard


BAPTISM.


to  that  which  is  divine.  Jesus  as
an  example  went  and  was  baptized
of  John  in  Jordan,  and  there  is
abundant  proof  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, if  I  had  time  to  quote  it,  to
show  that  all  the  early  christians
were  baptized  f  Have  you  any
record  that  all  the  early  christians
were  baptized  1  No.  But  we  have  !
a  record  that  many  were  baptized,
and  the  fact  that  one  ur  more  were
baptised  is  evidence  presumptive  1
that  the  whole  were,  for  we  read  of
only  4t  one  Lord,  one  faith,  and  one
baptism.1'  Well,"  says  one,  "I!
do  not  attach  any  importance  to
baptism/1  Probably  not.  1  was
amused  just  before  I  came  to  meet-
ing in  rending  an  account  in  the  news-
paper of  a  circumstance  that  occur-
red lately  in  the  experience  cf
General  Giant  We  have  all  sym-
pathized with  General  Grant  in  his
affliction.  We  have  honored  him
for  the  position  that  he  occupied  in
the  nation,  and  many  of  us  have
hoped  that  lie  would  live  long  to  do
good  among  the  people.  But  at  one
period  of  his  sickness  the  doctors
asserted  that  the  disease  was  likely
to  prove  fatal  at  any  moment,  and
Mrs.  Grant  was  called  into  the  room
where  he  was.  Dr.  Newman,  and
two  or  three  of  the  General's  medi-
cal advisers  were  present,  and  Dr.
Newman  in  the  excess  of  his  religion,
or  of  his  soul,  and  probably  with
some  faith  in  the  ceremony,  got  a
little  water  and  baptized  the  General
— that  is,  sprinkled  the  water  upon
him — in  the  name  of  the  Father  and
of  the  Son  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost
General  Grant  was  at  the  time  un-
conscious and  not  expected  to  rally.
But  one  of  the  doctors  went  out  to
an  attendant  and  asked  if  he  had
a  little  brandy  ?  Yes.  After  pro-
curing the  brandy  he  injected  a  lit-
tle into  the  General's  veins,  which
speedily  restored  him  to  conscious-


ness. Dr.  Newman  on  this  recovery
immediately  said,  "  Oh  !  our  faith
and  prayers  have  saved  theiGeneral
again.  (t^o,"  says  the  doctor,"  This
incident  I  only  mention  to  show
that  there  are  theories  in  the  Chris-
tian churches  and  among  its  most
noted  ministers  in  regard  to  the
ordinance  of  baptism,  and  probably
the  great  majority  of  Americans  at
some  period  of  their  lives  have  bee  a
baptized— as  it  is  called,  some  hav-
ing been  sprinkled  in  childhood,
some  in  more  mature  years,  others
by  immersion,  having  been  raised
among  the  persuasion  called  Bap-
tists, whether  or  no,  there  is  some
little  importance  attached  to  this-
ordinance  of  baptism,  and  this  ordi-
nance of  baptism,  the  Latter-day
Saints  accept  in  common  with  their
fellow-Christians,  or  with  other  so-
called  Christians.  They  believe  in
being  baptized  as  a  necessary  conse-
quence of  their  faith  in  God  and  in
His  Son  Jesus  Christ !

Now,  how  were  the  early  Chris-
tians baptized  1  I  do  not  think
that  there  is  a  shadow  of  evidence4
in  the  New  Testament  that  they
were  any  of  them  baptized  by  sprink-
ling, or  in  any  other  way  save  by  that
of  immersion.  We  read  of  some
that  were  baptized  in  a  certain  place
M  because  there  was  much  water
there."  We  read  of  others  who  were
converted  in  the  night  time,  and
who  went  straightway  and  were
baptized.  We  read  that  the  Savior
told  Nicodemus  that,  '*  except  a
man  be  born  of  water  and  of  the
spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the
Kingdom  of  God/'  We  read  that
Paul  in  writing  to  the  Romans  said
that  they  were  buried  with  Christ
in  baptism,  and  that  their  being
raised  from  the  water  was  an  ill us-
tration  of  the  rising  of  the  Savior
from  the  tomb,  and  we  are  further
told  by  Peter  that  as  the  ark  sa*ed


JOURNAL OF  DISCO  UKSKS


Noah,  so  also  doth  u  baptism  now strangers  to  the  advantages  of  or-


save  us." Baptism,  indeed,' was  a ganization.  They  formed  themselves


divine  ordinance.  It  was  one  of
the  steps  in  the  science  of  religion
having  its  own  special  position  of
power  and  blessing  in  the  economy
of  God — one  of  the  ordinances
established  for  securing  a  certain
measure  or portion of  salvation.

And  after  the  disciples  had  thus
been  baptized  they  received  the
Holy  Ghost  by  the  "lajing  on  of
hands."  Numerous  illustrations  of
tills  fact  might  be  pointed  out ;  *but
as  we  are  not  speaking  to  heathens,
as  we  are  not  speaking  to  skeptics,
but  to  those  who  profess  to  believe
the  Bible,  they  can  at  their  leisure
refer  to  these  illustrations,  where  the
early  converts  had  hands  laid  upon
them  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
And  they  can  also  look  at  the  prac-
tice of  the  churches  in  our  day,
where  in  some  denominations  there
is  practiced  the  ordinances  of  con-
firmation and  where  the  minister
says  unto  those  of  his  flock,  "receive
ye  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost/1
This  was  also  one  of  the  principles
of  thf  Gospel.  This  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost  was  the  source  of  life,
the  source  of  intelligence,  the
source  of  knowledge  and  under-
standing :  it  was  the  power  of  inspi-
ration and  revelation  resting  upon


into  little  groups  called  churches-
In  some  places  in  the  New  Testa,
tnent  they  are  called  the  "church,"
in  other  places  u  the  Church  of
God,1'  in  others  "  the  Church  of
Christ"  In  these  organizations
there  were  officers.  There  were
men  appointed  to  fill  certain  posi-
tions tit  these  organizations.  This
implied  rule,  authority;  their  power
and  authority  to  teach  are  every-
where exemplified  in  the  Acts  and
Epistles  of  the  New  Testament.  So
much  so  that  one  of  the  apostles  tells
us  that  God  had  set  in  His  Church
Apostles,  Prophets,  Teachers,  Evan-
gelists, etc,,  for  the  perfecting  of  the
Saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,
for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ.
These  were  the  officers,  the  most
active  members  of  the  church —
those  who  had  charge  of  its  interests
— those  who  had  charge  of  the
spiritual  and  temporal  education  of
these  early  converts  in  the  Church.
There  was  a  Christian  church,  then,
in  the  early  history  of  Christianity.
Men  were  organized  into  groups —
into  churches  and  belonged  to  the
true  church  of  which  Christ  was  the
head  !  So  there  are  organizations
called  churches  in  our  day,  and  in
the  a»:e  in  which  we  live. But  there


the  baptized—the  men  and  women is  one  great  difference  between  our


who  had  accepted  the  Savior  as  their
leader  and  guide.

1  might  multiply  these  illustra-
tions of  the  science  of  religion.  I
migh  t  go  on  to  show  that  there  were
other  important  elements  in  the
teachings  of  those  who  were  con-
verted in  early  times  to  Christianity.
The  world  to-day  is  full  of  organiza-
tions. It  knows  the  weakness  of
individual  effort.  It  is  when  men
and  women  are  aggregated  that  they
wield  large  influence  over  mankind,


age  and  that  one.  And  what  is  that!
Why,  there  is  diversity  in  our  time.
The  Church  of  Jesus  Christ,  the
Church  of  the  former-day  Saints,
was  an  unit.  There  was  no  rebel-
lion within  its  ranks,  no  division  in
its  councils,  no  clashing  theories
taught  by  its  apostles.  There  was  no
rival  or  other  organization  ostensibly
christian  that  could  stand  up  and
presume  to  dispute  or  deny  that  au-
thority which  the  Church  of  God
maintained.  Yet  in  our  time  we  have


and  the  early  christians  were  no  j  every  variety  of  Church  organization


"MORMON ISM"  IS  CHRISTIANITY  RESTORED,


237


— the  Mother  Church ;  the  Episcopal
Church  ;  Methodism  in  all  its  forms
and  phases;  Presbyterians,  Baptists,
and  a  host  of  others,  These  are
diverse  from  each  other  in  doctrine
and  sentiment  and  organization  and
theory  and  practice,  and  consequent-
ly unlike  the  primitive  church  as
established  by  Christ  and  His  Apos-
tles. Now,  can  they  with  these
differences,  with  these  divergences,
and  with  this  variety  of  teaching, —
can  they  accomplish  that  designed
by  the  founder  of  the  original  church1!
I  hardly  think  so.  Common  sense
says  this  is  impossible.  If  the  first
church  was  divine  in  its  order,  divine
in  its  ordinances,  divine  in  its  officers,
divine  in  its  institutions,  if  it  was  to
accomplish  a  divine  purpose,  nothing
short  of  that  divine  order  could  ac-
complish that  purpose  in  this  or  any
other  age  of  the  world*  That  is  why
Sectarianism  has  failed  to  bring  the
people  to  a  unity  of  the  faith.  That
is  why  it  has  not  accomplished  so
much  good  as  it  might  have  done
upon  the  earth.  It  is  like  a  rope
of  sand.  Every  minister  fighting,
and  every  congregation  quarrelling
for  the  ascendency  of  their  own  spe-
cial and  peculiar  sect  and  faith.  You
go  into  any  little  village  of  a  few
scattered  hundreds  and  you  will  find
four  or  five  churches  there,  each  one
endeavoring  to  perpetuate  its  own
special  idea*  partly  irrespective  of
the  salvation  of  the  masses.  In  fact
they  have  become  money  making
institutions.  Ministers  have  become
professionals.  They  preach  for
money  and  divine  for  hire.'1  They
are  more  content  to  ask  the  cong re-
gat  ion  what  they  shall  preach  than
to  stand  valiantly  for  the  truth  as
preached  by  Jesus  Christ  and  His
Apostles,  add  as  recorded  in  the
book  which  from  first  to  last  they
profess  to  reverence  md  sustain.
This  is  the  criticism  of  the  Latter*


day  Saints  upon  the  religious  world,
and  because  of  this  criticism,  because
of  this  understanding,  thousands
and  tens  of  thousands  have  been
led  to  embrace  that  which  is  known
to  the  world  as  41  Harmonism."

What  is  "Mormonism  f  It  is
a  restoration,  a  re-re  ve&lment  of
the  same  principles  that  were  prac-
ticed by  the  early  Christians.  They
had  not  a  doctrine,  they  had  not  an
ordinance,  they  had  not  an  officer,
but  what  is  taught  and  found  in  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints,  Now,  the  world  have
no  idea  we  have  got  away  with  them
that  far.  Has  it  come  about  by  our
own  wisdom  1  No,  sir.  Where
did  you  get  it  ?  Right  in  the  State
of  New  York,  through  a  chosen  man
— a  boy,  rather — by  the  name  of
Joseph  Smith.  Who  was  Joseph  7
Smith  1  A  man  like  you  and  I.
Who  were  the  old  prophets  ?  Who-
was  Elijah  1  He  was  a  man  with
all  the  failings  of  his  fellow  men ;
subject  to  Jlike  passions  with  his
brethren.  Who  were  the  Savior's  1
Apostles  1  Men  like  ourselves !
Who  was  Joseph  Smith  1  A  young
man  with  many  weaknesses  and
follies,  it  may  be,  of  his  own,  and
some  akin  to  the  failings  of  those
by  whom  he  was  surrounded.  How
did  he  acquire  this  knowledge  and
information  1  It  was  communicated
from  on  high.  The  spirit  of  inspira-
tion and  revelation  rested  upon  him*
He  held  communion  with  God  and
with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  He  re-
ceived the  ministration  of  Angels,
and  the  power  and  authority  of  the
Holy  Priesthood  from  those  who
once  exercised  that  authority  in  the
flesh  and  he  was  ordained  and  dedi-
cated to  introduce  this  order  again  >
among  mankind.  Do  you  believe  4
that!  We  Latter-day  Sainis  be-  1
lieve  it  Nay,  more,  we  know  it  for
ourselves. We  have  had  testimony  *


233


JOUKNAX  OF  DISCOURSES.


for  year  upon  year  in  our  experience
that  God  was  with  him  in  manhood;
that  He  enabled  him  to  establish
His  Church,  and  that  He  gave  him
power  to  ordain  others  to  go  forth
to  the  nations  of  the  earth  and  gath-
er the  obedient  and  the  good  from
the  masses  of  mankind. The  good
I said. iS  Well,"  says  one, "  do
you  mean  that  you  Latter-day  Saints
are  any  better  than  we  are/'  I  de  not
know  that  I  do  in  this  sense  of  the
word, I  mean  that  there  was  found
scattered  among  the  nations  a  peo-
ple prepared  of  God  for  the  recep-
of the  truth. Individuals  were
looking  for  the  salvation  of  Israel
They  had  been  suffering  under  the
inconsistencies,  traditions  and  su-
perstitions of  the  churches  to  which
they belonged, and they  were
waiting  for  the  coming  of  the  man
sent  ol  God. And  when  he  came
or  sent  his  representatives,  there
were  thousands  everywhere  that
heard  the  word  gladly. Where  1
In  enlightened  America,  in  the  land
of  Bibles,  in  the  land  of  churches,
in  the  land  of  culture,  in  the  land  of
religious  liberty,  where  every  one  is
supposed  to  have  the  right  to  wor-
ship God  according  to  the  dictates
of  his  own  conscience,  and  with
none  to  molest  him  or  make  him
afraid.  They  accepted  the  teachings
of  this  lad. Was  he  an  educated
person  I No,  not  in  the  sense  that
the  world  would  call  education.  He
had  not  been  raised  in  any  college
of  our  great  country ;  he  had  not
studied  the  classics;  he  was  not  born
in  Boston,  or  anywhere  in  its  imme-
diate vicinity  ;  but  he  was  taught  of
the  heavens,  he  was  inspired  of  God,
and  he  went  forth  in  'the  strength
of  that  education,  and  Utah  Terri-
tory spreading  from  the  north  to
the  south,  from  the  east*1  to  the
west  is  the  product  of  his  labors  and
the  labors  of  the  Elders  that  have


followed  in  his  wake. "And/'  says
one,  "you  believe  this,  that  he  was
a  prophet  of  God." Yes,  we  do*
\\  e  will  apply  the  same  test  that
was  applied  in  former  days,  the  days
of  the  Savior. Jesus  said  : If  any
man  will  do  his  will,  he  shall  know
of  the  doctrine  whether  it  be  of  God
or  whether  I  speak  of  myself,  and
as  was  said  of  the  Savior  "  we  know
that  thou  art  a  teacher  sent  from
God,  for  no  man  can  do  the  things
that  thou  doest  except  God  be  with
him/'  so  we  can  say  of  the  Prophet
Joseph Smith. Though lie  was
called  in  poverty  and  raised  in  ignor-
ance, yet  the Lord made  him
mighty,  and  no  man  unless  he  had
been  thus  sent  of  God,  could  have
accomplished  the  work  that  he  has
performed. You  can  find  in  this
Territory  people  of  every  nationality
almost. You  can  find  them  from
every  &tate  *of  this  Union.  You
can  find  people  that  have  been  iden-
tified with  every  religious  organiza-
tion. You  can  find  people  that  are
well  up  in  the  doctrines  of  the  reli-
gious world,  and  who  comprehend
the  truths  that  are  taught  to  them
from  time  to  time.  These  have  been
gathered  from  the  nations  by  the
power  of  truth,  by  the  influence  that
the  Elders  carried,  anil  they  have
colonized  and  spread  abroad  until
the  population  is  numerous  in  all
the  valleys  of  this  mountain  country.
Strangers  come  here  very  curious  to
know  what  kind  of  people  these
"  Mormons"  are. They  come  filled
with  prejudice  and  with  hatred,
with  contention  and  strife.  Many
envy  our  prosperity,  and  some  say,
"  If  we  let  this  people  alone  they
will  take  away  our  place  and  na-
tion." Well,  as  I  have  said,  this  has
been  done  by  the  power  of  truth,  by
the  preaching  of  the  simple  princi-
ples that  you  can  find  in  the  Bible,
and  that  can  never,  no  never,  be


AGES  OF  THE  PAST,  MIS- CALLED  THE  DARK


239


overthrown.  The  El  tiers  of  Israel
have  never  been  met  successfully  by
the  combined  learning  of  the  minis-
ters  in  Christendom.  The  Elders
have  gone  for  them  like  giants,  while
conscious  of  personal  weakness ;  ;
like  little  David,  they  have  taken
the  sling  and  the  stone  gathered
from  the  brook,  until  the  heads  of
many  goliaths  of  our  day  have  reeled
and  fallen  beneath  the  blow.

This  is  what  "  Mormonism"  is.
It  is  nothing  more,  nothing  less,
than  the  restoration  of  the  old  Gos-
pel under  the  sanction  and  approba-
tion of  the  heavens.  The  Elders
of  Israel  hold  the  authority  of  the
Holy  Priesthood  to  induct  men  into
the  Kingdom  of  God  ;  to  baptize  in  J
water  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and
to  lay  hands  upon  them  for  the  gift
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  as  in  olden
times,  the  signs  have  followed  the
believer.

With  this  knowledge  don't  you  ,
think  we  can  stand  a  good  deal  of
this  persecution  to  which  we  are
subject?  Do  you  think  that  bonds
or  imprisonment  or  death  affects  so
sublime  and  decided  a  faith  1  "But,"  '
say  some,  "you  are  not  persecuted
for  these  things  :  you  are  perse-
cuted for  other  things*  Here  is  that
offensiye  practice  that  you  call  poly-
gamy, this  is  the  great  trouble  be-
tween  you  and  the  fifty-five  millions
of  the  nation/'  Well,  who  of  that
fifty -five  millions  have  we  robbed
in  that  ]  Have  we  taken  any  man's
wife  who  may  have  passed  through
this  Territory  against  his  consent  1
What  law  have  we  violated  in  regard
to  this  thing  1  Any  law  in  this  book  |

giolding  up  the  Bible)  against  it  ?
an  you  find  it,  you  ministers,  you
religious  professors,  you  wide  spread
organizational  Have  we  done  vio-
lence to  the  laws  of  God,  or  have
we  not  honored  the  practice  of  the
patriarchs  t Have  we  not  accepted  j


that  which  was  approved  of  God  in
the  ages  that  are  past,  and  which
gave  men  prestige  as  the  favored  of
our  race.  Men  whom  we  are  told
were  the  friends  of  God."  Ah,  well,'*
says  one,  "  that  was  in  the  dark
ages."  Just  so.  But  it  was  when
God  made  Himself  manifest  among
His  children ;  when  angels  com-
muned with  those  that  dwelt  upon
the  earth ;  when  the  spirit  of  reve-
lation was  felt  among  mankind ;
when  the  institutions  of  God's
house  and  the  ordinances  thereof
prevailed  among  the  chosen  people
of  God  1  And  you  call  that  a  day
of  darkness  !  Boston  was  not  known
then,  it  is  true.  The  great  cities
of  this  day  had  no  existence  in  their
present  form.  Civilization  with  all
its  concomitants  were  not  then  in
existence,  or  like  Sodom  and
Gomorrah  under  the  hall  of  brim-
stone and  almighty  wrath,  its  cities
might  only  have  been  found  to-day,
as  great,  dead,  saline  seas.  The  dark
ages  !  The  age  of  Abraham  !  The
age  of  Jecob  and  the  founding  of
the  tribes  of  Israel  The  ages  of
Samuel !  The  age  of  the  Judges  of
Israel !  The  ages  when  God  made
Himself  manifest  among  that  great
people  in  delivering  them  from  the
hand  of  the  iron  rule  of  Pharaoh,
and  gave  unto  them  a  goodly  land
The  ages  that  gave  David  and  Solo-
mon and  the  magnificent  Temple  of
Jerusalem.  Dark  ages,  that  brought
on  to  this  stage  of  action  the  Savior
of  mankind !  Dark  ages,  when
the  church  which  He  established,
flourished  in  the  midst  of  persecu-
tion, when  its  leaders  suffered
martyrdom.  Dark  indeed,  if  they
had  uot  had  the  light  of  the  Gospel ;
if  they  had  not  had  this  sunshine  of
inspiration  ;  if  they  had  not  knowa
of  the  power  of  God ;  if  they  had
not  had  a  testimony  within  them-
selves that  they  had  received  that


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


which  would  enhance  their  welfare
not  only  in  this  life,  but  the  life  to  j
come. Would  to  God  we  had  again
a  renewal — nay,  a  glimpse  of  the
dark  ages  of  the  past,  and  that  the
same benignant light was  now
spreading  throughout  this  our  land
with  its  Christian  churches,  schools  j
and  colleges,  that  its  corruptions
and  evils  might  hide  their  head  and
be  banished  from  the  midst  of  sor- j
rowing  mankind.

This,  then,  as  I  have  intimated  to
you,  is  "  Mormonism/*  It  is  the
power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  all
those  who  shall  obey.  And  the
promise  is  not  unto  us  only,  but
unto  our  children,  and  our  children's
children,  down  to  the  latest  genera-
tion. And  if  men  and  women  any-
where, want  that  salvation  which
comes  of  God,  which  comes  of  the
Gospel,  which  comes  of  the  accept-
ance of  Jesus  as  the  Savior  of  man-
kind! they  will  have  to  find  it  in
*  Mormonism"  as  the  world  call  it,
or  in  other  words  in  the  restoration
of  the  Gospel  of:  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ ;  and  if  they  want  men  to
induct  them  into  that  Kingdom,  to
baptize  them  in  water  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins,  to  lay  hands  on  them
for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  they


will  have  to  find  them  in  the  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
the  poor,  despised,  derided,  and
as  men  believe  everywhere,  ignor-
ant people  in*  the  valleys  of  the
mountains,  ;called  "  Mormons
whose  faith  and  institutions  are
now  sought  to  be  overthrown  by
their  enemies,  by  legislation  of  Con-
gress, by  proclamations  of  Governors
and  the  action  of  the  Courts,  they
will  find  salvation  with  that  people
just  as  assuredly  as  in  primitive
Christian  times  the  Pharisees,
the  Saducees,  and  other  sectarians,
f  found  salvation  at  the  hands  of  the
fishermen  of  Galilee,

I  presume  I  have  taken  up  all
the  time  that  is  necessary  ;  but  I
pray  that  the  power  of  God  may
rest  upon  this  congregation;  that
strangers  may  lay  aside  their  preju-
dices and  preconceived  notions  ia
regard  to  the  Latter-day  Saints ;
that  they  may  be  willing  to  believe
that  some  good  may  come  out  of
Nazareth,  even  from  here ;  that
every  man  and  woman  professing  to
be  a  Saint  of  God,  may  be  able  to
give  "  a  reason  for  the  hope  that  is
in  them,"  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ,  Amen.


PRIESTHOOD


241


DISCOURSE Br PRESIDENT GEORGE Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  hi  the  Tabernacle^  Ogden^  Sunday  Morning ,  October  18th>

ji  8  8  J?, .


(REPORTED  BY JOHN  IKVINEJ


PRIESTHOOD  — ITS  AUTHORITY  NECESSARY  TO  ADMINISTER  IN  TIIK  ORDI-
NANCES OF  THE  GOSPEL. — THIS  PRINCIPLE  WELL  ILLUSTRATED  IN
THE  LIFE  AND  EXAMPLE  OF  THE  PROPHET  JOSEPH  —  JESUS  OFFI-
CIATED BY  VIRTUE  OF  THE  MKLCfllSEDEC  PRIESTHOOD  —  DESCENT
OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD  FROM  ADAM— NECESSITY  OF  TEMPLES  IN*
WHICH  THE  POWER  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD  CAN  BE  EXERCISED  FOR
THOSE  WHO  DIED  WITHOUT  THE  GOSPEL  —  RESTORATION  OF  THE
PRIESTHOOD  IN  THESE  LAST  DAYS  — THE  LEGITIMATE  ACTS  OF
THOSE  HOLDING  THE  PRIESTHOOD  ARE  ACKNOWLEDGED  AND  RAT-
IFIED BY  THE  LORD — BINDING  POWER  OF  THE  HOLY  PRIESTHOOD —
OPPOSITION  OF  SATAN  TO  THE  PRIESTHOOD  —  VIRTUES  OF  THE
LATTER-DAY  SAINTS— CONCLUSION.


I  will  read  a  portion  of  "the  7th
chapter  of  Paul's  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews.

[The  speaker  read  the  whole  of
the  7th  chapter]

Proceeding  he  said  :  This  chapter
that  I  have  read  in  your  hearing  is
the  7th  chapter  of  Paul's  Epistle
to  the  Hebrews.  In  this  entire
book  of  Hebrews,  Paul  reasons  with
the  Jews,  unto  whom  the  epistle
was  addressed,  to  show  them  that
Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  whom  they
had  crucified,  was  a  Priest  after  the
order  of  Melchisedec,  and  that  the
Priesthood  which  had  been  taken
away  during  the  days  of  Moses  in
the  wilderness,  had  been  restored
through  Him.  The  Jews  entertained
the  idea  that  Priesthood  necessarily
came  through  the  tribe  of  Levi,  and
that  the  power  and  the  authority

No.  16.


thereof — that  is,  to  minister  in  all
things  pertaining  to  the  Priesthood
were  confined  to  that  tribe,  and  that
no  one  had  the  right  outside  of  that
tribe  to  officiate  in  the  ordinances
pertaining  to  God  and  to  mediation
between  God  and  the  people  or  the
people  and  God.  But  Paul  very
clearly  proved  in  his  reasoning  with,
them  that  there  was  a  Priesthood
higher  than  that  which  had  been
exercised  by  the  descendants  of
Aaron.

It  is  well  for  us,  who,  as  a  people,
believe  in  Priesthood,  that  we  should
understand  the  nature  and  character
and  power  of  the  Priesthood  which.
God  confirms  upon  man  when  He
calls  him  to  act  in  His  stead  in  the
midst  of  the  people.  As  a  people  we
differ  in  our  views  upon  these  points
from  almost  every  other  church.

Vol.  XXVI  r


242


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


There  are  one  or  two  sects  in  existence
which  attach  a  great  importance  to
Priesthood,  but  the  most  of  them
which  form  the  so  called  Christian
world  reject  the  idea  of  Priesthood,
and  deny  that  ii  is  necessary  for  it
to  he  bestowed  upon  man.  This
fteling  lias  doubtless  arisen  as  a  con
sequence  of  the  abuses  that  have
grown  up  through  the  maladmin-
istration of  what  is  termed  the
Priesthood,  In  rebelling  against
the  Catholic  Church  and  its  preten-  '
sions  men  have  gone  to  the  other
extreme,  and  have  discarded  the
idea  of  Priesthood  entirely,  and
claimed  that  all  men  are  alike  before
God  ;  that  all  men  are  equally  en-
dowed with  authority  from  God,
and  to  exercise  the  power  and  the
authority  that  were  originally  be-
stowed upon  those  who  held  the
truth.

In  these  last  days,  in  the  organiza-
tion of  this  Church,  God,  in  His  infi-
nite wisdom,  impressed  upon  his
servant  Joseph  Smith  the  necessity
of  there  being  a  re-bestowal  of  the
Priesthood,  in  order  to  give  him  the
authority  to  officiate  in  the  ordinan-
ces of  the  Kingdom  of  God.  This
must  have  been  impressed  upon  the
prophet's  mind  at  a  very  early  day,
from  the  fact  that,  notwithstanding
lie  had  been  brought  up  among  the
protestant  sects,  and  had  doubtless
shared  in  the  views  which  they
entertained  respecting  the  right  of
all  men  who  were  impressed  by  the
spirit,  and  who  were  prompted  by
an  inward  call  to  act  as  ministers  of
13 od,  he  refrained  from  attempting
in  the  least  degree  to  do  anything
in  the  name  of  God  or  of  Jesus
Christ  until  he  had  received  the
power  and  authority  from  on  high
through  the  bestowal  of  the  Priest-
hood  upon  him.  The  revelatious
he  had  received  from  the  Lord,  with
the  ministration  of  holy  angels,  did


not,  he  plainly  perceived,  authorize
him  to  act  as  a  minister  of  the  Lord
in  the  administration  of  ordinances.
He  never  attempted  to  do  anything
in  ad  ministering  ordinances,  or  any-
thing that  a  Priest  uiii^ht  do,  until
he  had  been  ordained  of  God  through
the  administration  of  John  the  Bap-
tist Then,  and  not  till  then,  did  lie
officiate  in  the  ordinance  ot  baptism.
Much  as  he  and  his  companion  de-
sired that  ordinance  ;  much  as  they
desired  to  become  participants  in
the  blessings  that  flow  from  the
reception  of  an  ordinance  of  that
holy  character,  he  never  attempted,
until  he  had  been  thus  empowered
from  on  high,  to  administer  it

Now,  the  prevalent  idea  in  the
world  has  been  that  if  a  man  should
be  so  favored  as  to  receive  the  min-
istrations or  visitations  of  angels,  or
to  receive  any  manifestations  of  what
might  be  termed  a  supernatural
character,  he  would  be  completely
invested  with  the  power  necessary
to  preach  the  Gospel  unto  his  fellow-
men  and  to  administer  all  the  ordin-
ances thereof.  But  the  Prophet
Joseph  not  only  received  the  minis-
trations of  angels,  but  actually  had
revelations  from  >God,  which  are
written  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  and  which*  are  now  the
word  of  God  to  the  Church,  He
received  these  revelations  through
the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty.
He  also  by  means  of  the  Urim  and
Thummim  translated  the  Book  of
Mormon;  was,  in  fact,  a  seer  as  well
as  a  revelator ;  had  the  spirit  of
prophecy  to  predict  those  things
that  should  take  place  in  the  future^
aad  many  events  that  have  since
taken  place  were  prophesied  of  by  him
before  he  was  really  ordained  of  God
to  administer  the  ordinances  of  life
and  salvation.  I  know  that  this  is
an  exceptional  instance.  It  may  be
possible  that  there  is  not  another


AUTHORITY  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD


243


like  it  in  the  history  of  oar  race
where  a  man  was  so  highly  favored
of  God,  end  owed  with  such  author-
ity, such  power  and  had  such  mani-
festations of  the  mind  and  will  of
God  as  he  received  without  having
the  Holy  Priesthood,  But  it  accords
with  the  ideas  so  frequently  ex*
pressed  by  the  brethren  respecting
the  Prophet  Joseph  and  many  others,
that  they  were  ordained  before  the
foundations  of  the  world  were  laid
to  come  forth  and  accomplish  the
labor  and  the  work  that  they  did*
There  is  no  room  for  doubt  in  re-
gard to  the  truth  of  this  statement
that  is  so  frequently  made.  In  the
early  boyhood  of  the  Prophet
Joseph,  he  was  moved  upon  in
a  mysterious  manner  to  seek  unto
God,  By  the  exercise  of  a  faith
that  was  uncommon,  and  in  fact  it
may  be  said  unknown  upon  the
earth,  he  was  able  to  receive  the
ministrations  of  God  the  Father,
and  of  His  Sou  Jesus  Christ;  thus
showing  in  the  very  beginning  of
his  career,  that  he  was  a  man  or  a
spirit  that  was  highly  favored  of  God
— ii  man  to  whom  God  desired  to
give  particular  manifestations  of  his
kindness  and  goodness  and  power,
and  this  was  followed  up  from  that
time  until  his  death  by  continued
manifestations  of  the  favor  and  the
will  and  the  power  of  God  unto  him.
But  it  is  a  remarkable  fact— and  I
wish  to  impress  it,  I  think  it  is  wor-
thy of  remembrance  by  all  of  us —
that  notwithstanding  the  Prophet
Joseph  had  all  these  manifestations,
and  was,  as  I  have  said,  a  prophet
and  seer  and  revelator,  he  never
attempted  —  notwithstanding  the
ideas  that  were  so  prevalent  among
mankind,  and  especially  in  the  region
where  he  lived  and  where  he  received
his  education — to  officiate  in  any  of
the  ordinances  of  the  house  of  God,
or  of  the  Gospel  of  salvation,  until


he  received  the  everlasting  Priest-
hood. When  that  was  bestowed
upon  him ;  when  he  received  the
Priesthood  after  the  order  of  Aaron,
and  was  ordained  by  the  angel  who
alone  held  the  keys,  who  was  a  literal
descendant  of  Aaron,  and  by  virtue
of  that  descent  entitled  to  the  keys
of  that  Priesthood,  having  exercised
the  authority  thereof  while  in  the
flesh — then  and  not  till  then  did  he
administer  the  ordinance  of  baptism
for  the  remission  of  sins.  And  then
he  refrained  from  acting  in  ordinan-
ces belonging  to  the  Melchisedec
Priesthood,  that  higher  Priesthood,
by  the  authority  of  which  the  bap-
tism of  tire  and  the  Holy  Ghost  is
administered  unto  the  children  of
men.  Having  authority  to  baptize
in  water  given  unto  him,  he  did  not
go  any  farther,  until  the  Lord  in
His  kindness  and  mercy  bestowed
upon  him,  through  the  administra-
tion of  those  apostles  who  held  the
keys  after  the  death  of  our  Savior,  the
authority  to  administer  in  those
higher  ordinances  and  to  exercise
the  power  and  authority  of  this
higher  Priesthood.  This  illustrates
most  perfectly  how  careful  men  ought
to  be  in  acting  in  the  name  of  God,
not  to  overstep  the  bounds  of  the
authority  conferred  upon  them,  but
to  carefully  keep  within  those  limits
that  are  assigned  tu  them  in  which  to
exercise  authority.  It  is  a  lesson
unto  us  as  a  people.  We  should  be
particular  ourselves  and  should  im-
press every  man  with  the  great  care
that  he  should  exercise  to  confine
Ins  acts  to  the  authority  which
he  has  received  from  the  Almighty,
Jesus  .himself,  no  doubt,  was
equally  careful  in  regard  to  the  au-
thority which  He  held.  He  was
called  to  be  a  Priest  after  the  order
of  Melchiiedec — that  is,  this  higher
Priesthood.  He  exercised  the  au-
thority  thereof  among  the  children


244  JOURNAL  Ob

of  men.  He  still  is  a  Priest  after
that  holy  order.  It  was  by  virtue
of  that  Priesthood  that  He  officiated
in  the  ordinances  that  He  admin-
istered unto  men.  Though  the  Son
of  Cod,  the  Savior  himself,  did  not
attempt,  because  of  His  sonship,  be-
came of  His  high  descent,  to  officiate
among  the  children  of  men  aside
fir  m  find  independent  of  the  author-
it  3T  of  the  Holy  Priesthood,  that  is,
the  Piiesthood  after  the  order  of
Midchisedec.  It  was  by  virtue  of
that  Priesthood  and  authority  that
lie  <  Hiriated,  that  he  administered
tin*  baptism  of  fire  and  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  which  John  the  Baptist  an-
nounced unto  the  people  he  would
do  w  hen  He  came.  Jesus  in  admin-
istering that  baptimi  and  conferring
that  blessing,  did  so  by  virtue  of  and
in  the  authority  of  the  Melchisedec
Priesthood.  He  would  not,  as  I
have  said,  have  dared  to  do  this
independent  of  that  authority;  so
in  laying  His  hands  upon  His  Apos-
tles He  conferred  upon  them  this
power  and  this  authority.  He  com-
manded tli em  to  go  forth  and  ad-
minister unto  the  children  of  men
by  virtue  of  that  power  and  author-
ity, and  the  Church  that  He  built
lip,  and  this  Church  of  His  that  is
now  established  in  these  last  days,
and  the  officers  of  it,  derive  their
authority  from  that  source.  It  has
come  down  legitimately  from  the
days  of  Melchisedec ;  in  fact  it
has  come  down  from  our  great  father
Adam.  He  receiver!  the  Priesthood
of  the  Son  of  God ;  He  was  ordained
to  that  Priesthood,  and  it  lias  come
down  by  lineal  descent  from  him
unto  all  his  children  who  have  that
authority  to  day  and  w  ho  exercise
it  upon  the  ear  tit.  It  can  be  traced
in  the  same  manner  as  the  descent
of  man  can  be  traced*  It  can  be
traet-d  to  Father  Adam.  He  received
it  through  angelic  administration.


DISCOURSES.

It  was  bestowed  upon  him  and  upon
his  son  Abel  and  upon  his  son  Seth,
and  from  them  it  has  come  down
through  the  line  of  the  Priesthood
— from  Seth  to  Enos,  from  Enos  to
Cain  an,  from  Cainan  to  Mahalaleel,
and  so  on  down  until  the  days  of
Noah,  who  received  it  from  his  grand-
father. These  men  were  ordained
in  their  various  generations  to  this
Priesthood,  the  Priesthood  after  the
holiest  order,  the  Priesthood  after
the  order  of  the  Son  of  God.  By-
virtue  of  this  Priesthood  Noah  and
hi*  sous  ministered  and  labored,  as
we  are  told,  among  the  children  of
men  to  persuade  them  to  forsake
their  sins  and  to  turn  to  righteous-
ness, lest  the  Lord  should  overwhelm
them  with  a  flood.  This  Hood  had
been  predicted  long  before  it  came.
Enoch  had  beheld  it  in  vision,  and
he  went  forth,  as  we  are  told  in  the
record  that  has  come  down  to  us
from  him,  and  labored  to  the  best

;  of  his  ability  among  the  children  of
men  to  avert  the  dreadful  conse-
quences oi  this  threatened  floods
which  he  had  been  informed  by  the
Lord  would  overwhelm  the  inhab-
itants because  of  their  wickedness.
He  labored  in  this  Priesthood  for
i65  years  and  upwards — that  is,  he
walked  with  God  for  that  length  of
time,  —and  by  the  exercise  of  that
Priesthood  he  obtained  such  great
power  from  God  that  he  and  his
people  were  translated.  Zion  was
not.  It  was  taken  to  the  bosom  of
the  Lord.  The  Priesthood,  however,
was  still  left.  His  sou  Methuselah
received  it,  and  he  bestowed  it  upon
Lamech,  and  Noah  received  it,  from
Methuselah,  and  the  sons  of  Noah
received  and  exercised  the  authority

i  of  it  in  the  midst  of  the  children  of
men  in  order  to  save  them,  but  were
unsuccessful.  Melchisedec  received
it,  and  because  of  his  greatness  aud
the  power  that  he  attained  unta


TEMPLES  NECESSARY.


245


with  God,  he  became  so  distin-
guished that  the  Priesthood  after
the  order  of  the  Son  of  God  has  been
called  after  his  name  from  that  time
until  the  present,  to  avoid,  as  we  are
told  in  the  revelations,  the  too  fre-
quent repetition  of  the  name  of  our
Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ.  Then
Abraham  received  it,  and  he  be-
stowed it  upon  his  children.  Moses,
however,  received  it  through  a  differ-
ent line,  as  we  are  told.  He  received
it  from  his  father-in  law,  Jethro,  and
exercised  it  among  the  people.  It
was  the  same  Priesthood  that  his
ancestor  Abraham  held,  and  by  it  he
performed  the  mighty  works  that  he
accomplished.

To  return  again  to  Melchise  lec.
We  find  here  that  Paul  in  speaking
about  him  says  that  he  was  '*  King
of  peace."  And  he  goes  on  to  say,
as  we  have  it  translated,  that  he  was
"  without  father,  without  mother,
without  descent,  having  neither  be-
ginning of  days,  nor  end  of  life,"
and  the  whole  Christian  world  have
gone  astray  over  this  expression  of
Paul,  not  being  able  to  understand
it,  thinking  that  that  which  I  read
in  your  hearing  referred  to  Mel-
chisedec  himself,  when  in  reality  it
was  the  Priesthood  he  bore.  It  was
after  the  power  of  an  endless  life.
It  had  no  beginning;  no  end.  It
is  eternal  as  our  Father  and  God,
and  it  extends  into  the  eternities  to
come,  and  it  is  as  endless  as  eternity
is  endless,  and  as  our  God  is  end
less  :  for  it  is  the  power  and  author-
ity by  which  our  Father  and  God
sits  upon  His  throne  and  wields  the
power  He  does  throughout  the
innumerable  worlds  over  which  He
exercises  dominion.  It  is  the  power
and  authority  by  which  the  Son
of  God,  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus
Christ,  has  attained  unuo  that  which
has  been  promised  unto  Him,  and
by  which He has become  the


Savior  and  the  Redeemer  of  the
world.

This  Priesthood,  as  I  have  said,
came  down  unto  Moses,  but  the
children  of  Israel  would  not  have
it  in  their  midst.  We  are  told  very
plainly  in  the  revelation  that  Moses
sought  diligently  to  sanctity  his
people  and  to  lead  them  into  t  he
presence  of  God  by  means  of  this
Priesthood,  but  they  would  not
have  it.  The  ordinances  of  godli-
ness that  were  administered  by  it
were  not  acceptable  to  that  genera-
tion ;  they  rejected  them,  and  be-
sought Moses  to  stand  between  them
and  their  Father  and  God,  for  they
could  not  endure  His  presence.
Hence  the  Priesthood  was  taken
away,  and  there  was  no  exercise  of
the  power  and  the  authority  of  it
among  the  Jews,  except  occasionally,
when  Prophets  received  authority
from  the  Lord,  until  the  days  of  the
Savior,  when  it  was  restored  once
more  in  its  fullness  and  in  the  plen-
itude of  its  power  to  the  earth,  and
men  began  to  exercise  the  authority
thereof.

My  brethren  ami  sisters,  we  are
building  temples  at  the  present  time
in  which  we  have  ordinances  admin-
istered unto  us  for  those  who  have
died.  Why  is  this  necessary  I  It
is  because  the  Priesthood  of  the
Son  of  God  was  withdrawn  for  a
long  period  of  time  from  the  earth.
The  children  of  men  have  been  born,
they  have  lived,  they  have  died  with*
out  any  of  the  ordinances  being  ad-
ministered unto  them  by  those  who
held  the  Priesthood  of  the  Sou  of
God.  It  is  true  that  many  sought
after  God  in  a  certain  manner  and
according  to  the  light  they  had,  and
many  obtained  some  degree  of
knowledge  concerning  God.  Some
of  them  had  a  testimony  of  Him
through  their  faith,  and  died  at  peace
with  God Many  of  our  ancestors


246


JOURNAL OK  DISCOURSES


lived  in  this  condition,  and  God
bore  witness  to  them  by  His  Holy
Spirit  that  He  was  pleased  with
them.  But  what  of  that  ?  Is  that
e\l  that  is  necessary  to  place  them
in  a  saved  condition  f  By  no  means*
Something  more  than  that  is  neces-
sary to  obtain  for  them  the  lull
remission  of  their  sins  and  to  place
them  in  a  condition  where  they  can
be  saved  and  exalted  in  God's  pres-
ence. As  I  said  to  yon  in  the  begin-
ning, something  more  was  necessary
for  Joseph  than  that  he  was  a  Re  ve-
la tor,  a  Seer,  and  a  Prophet  to  con-
stitute him  a  servant  of  God  em-
powered to  administerthe  ordinances
of  life  and  salvation.  A  Wesley,  a
Luther,  a  Calvin,  a  Wycliffe,  and
a  host  of  others  who  have  arisen  in
the  world,  imbued  with  the  highest
and  purest  motives,  and  the  highest
and  most  intense  desires  for  the  sal-
vation of  their  fellow  men,  have
labored  zealously  to  turn  men  to
God,  and  to  bring  them  to  a  knowl-
edge of  the  Savior  ;  but  they  have
not  had  the  authority  of  the  Holy
Priesthood,  They  themselves  could
not  usher  people  into  the  Church
of  God,  They  could  not  legitimately
administer  an  ordinance  pertaining
to  the  salvation  of  the  human  family.
Yet  God,  in  many  instances,  accepted
oi  them,  where  they  sought  unto
Him  according  to  the  best  light
they  possessed;  He  accepted  of
them  and  their  labors,  and  He  wit-
nessed unto  them,  by  the  outpour
ing  of  His  Spirit  upon  them,  that
He  was  pleased  with  them  and  He
whispered  peace  to  their  souls.  In
every  land,  in  every  nation,  and
among  the  people  of  every  creed,
men  and  women  of  this  kind  have
been  found,  and  according  to  their
faith  and  diligence  their  works  have
been  acceptable  to  our  Father.  Men
have  thought  that  the  Christian
lands  and  the  Christian  people,  so


called,  have  been  the  most  favored
of  God  in  this  respect.  No  doubt
they  have,  because  th*y  have  had
knowledge  concerning  the  Savior
that  other  lauds  and  other  peoples
have  not  had  ;  but  in  pagan  lands,
where  the  name  of  Jesus  has  never
been  heard,  where  men  have  sought
after  God  and  endeavored  to  live
according  to  the  li£jht  that  He  has
given  unto  them  and  the  Spirit  that
He  has  bestowed  upon  them,  and
which  He  bestows  upon  every  man
and  woman  born  into  the  world,
He  has  accepted  of  them,  and  in
the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the
heathen  will  have  part  in  the  first
resurrection.  Our  ancestors  have,
in  common  with  others,  been  desti-
tute of  the  power  and  the  authority
of  the  Holy  Priesthood.  Hence  we
build  temples ;  hence  we  go  into
these  temples  and  attend  to  the
ordinances  of  life  and  salvation  for
our  kindred  who  have  died  in  ignor-
ance of  tins  power,  or  were  in  a
position  where  they  could  not  have
it  exercised  in  their  behalf.  They
could  not  be  baptized  for  the  remis-
sion of  their  sins  ;  they  could  not
have  hands  laid  upon  them  for  the
reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  they
could  not  have  any  other  ordinance
administered  unto  them,  because
the  authority  to  administer  was  not
upon  the  earth,  and  whatever  might
be  done  in  the  name  of  God  or  in
the  name  of  Jesus,  by  those  who
thought  they  had  the  authority,  or
who  assumed  to  possess  it,  was  of
no  avail  so  far  as  salvation  was  con-
cerned ;  so  far  as  acceptance  by  the
Lord  our  God  is  concerned  it  was
as  though  nothing  had  been  done.
Hence  it  is  that  in  these  last  clays,
God  having  in  His  great  kindness
and  mercy,  opened  the  heavens
once  more  and  sent  from  heaven
that  authority  which  has  so  long  been
withdrawn — God  having  done  thfe)


RESTORATION  OF  THE  HOLY  PRIESTHOOD.


we  are  put  in  possession  of  the  au-
thority to  administer  to  each  other
the  ordinances  of  life  and  salvation,
and  not  only  to  administer  to  each
other,  but  to  exercise  that  authority
in  behalf  of  those  who  have  lived
before  us,  lived  in  ages  that  are  past,
so  that  we  can  connect  generation
unto  gene  rati  on  until  we  reach  back
to  the  time  when  our  ancestors  did
hold  the  Holy  Priesthood.  In  this
manner  the  work  of  salvation  will
progress,  until  throughout  the  mil-
lennium, temples  will  be  built,  and
the  servants  and  handmaidens  of
God  will  go  into  these  temples  and
officiate,  until  al!  who  have  been
born  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  who
have  not  become  sous  of  perdition,
will  be  redeemed,  and  the  entire
family  be  re  united,  Adam  standing
at  the  head.

You  can  see,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  ike  importance  there  is  in
our  having  the  Priesthood  of  the
Son  of  God  in  our  midst.  You  see
how-  necessary  it  is  that  it  should  be
exercised  and  exercised  properly.
You  can  see  how  necessary  it  is  that
the  ordinances  of  life  and  salvation
should  be  administered  by  those
who  are  legitimately  ordained  to
this  authority.  When  a  man  lays
Ills  hands  upon  the  head  of  his  fel-
low man  and  professes  to  bestow
authority,  the  mere  profession  of  that
authority  will  avail  nothing  unless
he  has  indeed  the  authority  and  has
it  legitimately.  A  man  who  may
profess  to  have  the  authority  ;  a
man  who  may  say  I  have  ordained
this  person  or  the  other  person,  un-
less he  has  the  authority  to  do  so  is
a  mere  pretender,  and  his  acts  can-
not be  recognized  nor  acknowledged
of  God.  I  believe  the  time  will
come  when  it  will  be  necessary  tor
every  man  to  trace  the  line  in  which
he  has  received  the  Priesthood  that
he  exercises.  It  is  therefore  of  great


importance  in  our  Church  that  re  I
cords  should  be  kept,  and  that  every
man  should  know  whence  he  derives
iris  authority — from  what  source,
through  what  channel  he  has  re-
ceived the  Holy  Priesthood,  arid  by
what  right  he  exercises  that  author-
ity and  administers  the  ordinances
thereof.  I  believe  this  is  of  extreme
importance,  and  that  where  there
are  doubts  as  to  a  man's  legitimately
exercising  that  authority,  that  doubt
should  be  removed.  Every  man
should  be  careful  on  this  point,  to
know  where  he  gets  his  Priesthood;
that  it  has  come  to  him  clean  and
uudetiled,  legitimately;  and  when
men  are  cut  off  from  that  Priest-
hood by  the  voice  of  the  servants
of  God,  there  is  an  authority  on  the
earth  which  God  recognizes  in  the
heavens,  and  that  man  is  cut  off
from  the  Priesthood.  He  said  in
ancient  days  in  speaking  to  Hi 3
Apostles :

Whosesoever  sins  ye  remit,  they
are  remitted  unto  them  ;  and  whose-
soever sins  ye  retain  ;  they^  are  re-
tained,"

u  Whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  on
earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven  ;
and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose  on
earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven."

In  these  last  days  God  lifts,  in  like
manner,  restored  this  same  authority
of  the  Holy  Priesthood.  He  lias
restored  to  man  the  po'.wr  to  bind
on  earth  and  it  shall  be  bound  in
heaven.  He  has  restored  the  au-
thority to  remit  sins  on  earth,  and
He,  the  Great  Eternal,  our  Father
in  heaven,  says  that  when  these  sins
are  remitted  they  shall  be  remitted,
but  when  they  are  not  remitted
they  shall  stand  against  those  who
commit  the  sins.

Therefore,  there  is  this  authority
in  the  Church,  and  you  can  witness
the  exercise  of  it,  and  the  power  of
it,  in  your  own  experience*  When-


248


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES


ever  the  voice  of  the  people  of  God,
and  the  authorities  that  God  has
placed  in  Mis  Church,  whom  He  has
ordained — whenever  they  lift  up
their  hands  against  a  man  to  cut
him  off  from  the  Church,  to  with-
draw from  him  the  authority  of  the
Priesthood  that  he  has  exorcised,  in
every  instance  without  a  single  ex-
ception, from  the  beginning  of  this
Church  until  to-day,  God  has  most
signally  and  wonderfully  manifested
His  approval  of  their  acts  and  has
Withdrawn  fiom  that  man,  (who-
soever he  may  be,  however  great
and  mighty  he  may  have  been  in
the  Church)  His  power  and  His
Westing,  It  was  so  with  Oliver
Cowdery,  the  companion  of  Joseph,
the  man  who  received  with  him  the
Priesthood,  upon  whose  head  John
the  Baptist  kid  his  hands,  and  upon
whose  head,  also,  the  Apostles  Peter,
James  and  John  laid  their  hands.
These  glorious  blessings  and  favors
that  God  gave  to  him  did  not  pre-
vent his  falling  into  sin.  When  he
did  fall  into  sin  and  the  Church  and
the  Priesthood  united  in  lifting
their  hands  to  cut  him  oft*  from  the
Chuich,  and  take  from  him  the
Pnest hood  and  the  authority  that
he  had  so  powerfully  exercise*  1  and
which  God  hail  favored  him  with  so
much,  God  recognized  the  action.
Other  men  fell,  also.  Six  of  the
original  twelve  fell  into  transgres-
sion. They  were  men  of  ability,
men  of  talent.  Some  of  them  were
greatly  favored.  Lyman  Johnson
had  wonderful  man  i  festal  ions  given
unto  him j  but  when  he  fell  into
transgression-  and  the  Church
with  the  Priesthood  united  in  lifting
up  their  hands  against  him  the
power  and  authority  that  had  dis-
tinguished him  before  was  with-
drawn and  he  became  as  other  men.
And  so  with  all  of  them.  So  with
Sidney  Kigdon,  that  mighty  man,


that  eloquent  man,  that  spokesman
for  the  Prophet  Joseph,  of  whom
the  Book  of  Mormon  had  spoken
for  hundreds  yes,  it  maybe  said  for
thousands  of  years  before  his  birth.
He  also,  when  the  Priesthood  and
Church  in  Nauvoo  lifted  up  their
hands  against  him,  fell  like  Lucifer,
who  once  was  a  mighty  angel  in  the
presence  of  God,  and  exercised  great
authority  ;  like  Lucifer  he  fell,  and
the  authority  and  power  that  had
attended  him  were  withdrawn,  and
he  became  like  unto  other  men.
Tins  lias  been  the  case  in  every  in*
stance.  Can  you  point  out  an  excep-
tion '?  Look  at  them  wheiever  you
see  them,  the  men  that  have  held
the  Priesthood,  who  were  bright
and  influential  and  powerful,  whom
God  blessed,  whose  administrations
God  sealed  when  they  were  in  the
possession  of  that  authority,  exer-
cising it  in  purity  and  in  singleness
of  purpose— when  this  was  the  case
He  was  with  them  ;  but  wh^n  they
went  into  transgression  and  fell  and
the  Priesthood  was  taken  from  them,
they  became  weak,  and  theirstrength
was  gone.  They  are  marked  among
the  people  wherever  you  see  them*
Thus  showing  that  God  in  these  last
days  confirms  the  promise  that  He
made  unto  His  servants,  that  what-
soever they  bound  on  earth  should
be  bound  in  heaven,  and  that  what-
soever they  loosed  on  earth  should
be  loosed  in  heaven.

It  is  by  the  exercise  of  this  power
in  our  midst  that  we  are  preserved.
God  has  given  it  unto  us.  It  is  true
He  has  placed  this  authority  and
power,  it  may  be  said,  in  earthen
vessels.  He  has  chosen  weak  men,
fallible  men,  men  who  are  subject
to  all  the  failings  and  weaknesses  of
human  nature.  But,  nevertheless,
it  is  the  authority  of  God.  It  is  the
authority  by  which  He  has  built  up
His  Church  in  all  ages. It  is  the


GOD  CONFIRMS  THE  LEGITIMATE  ACTS  OF  HIS  PRIESTHOOD.  249


authority,  the  only  authority  upon
the  earth  that  can  act  in  His  name.
When  a  man  has  this  authority  ami
goes  forth  ami  confines  himself  to
its  legitimate  exercise  and  keeps
within  the  bounds  of  his  authority,
Ood  is  with  him  ;  God  confirms
that  which  he  does ;  God  places
His  seal  and  His  blessing  and  ap
proval  upon  his  acts  ;  and  though
all  the  earth  should  endeavor  to
undo  them  and  to  say  they  are  of
do  effect,  they  will  stand,  neverthe-
less, ami  in  the  Courts  of  heaven
will  ho  recorded  and  confirmed.
There  is  no  power  among  men  that  j
can  disannul  these  acts,  that  can
revoke  or  invalidate  them  in  any
manner.  It  is  this  that  raises  this
Church  beyond  the  power  and  reach
of  man.  Courts  cannot  affect  in
any  manner  the  decisions  or  the  acts
or  the  ordinances  that  are  adminis-
tered bv  the  servants  of  God.  That
which  is  done  in  the  name  of  the
Holy  Priesthood  will  stand  and  will
be  fulfilled  both  in  the  world  and
out  of  the  world,  both  in  time  and  in
eternity.  Hence  it  is  that  when  an
Elder  Lfoes  forth  in  the  authority  of
the  Holy  Priesthood,  and  baptizes  a
candidate  who  has  repented  of  his
sins,  God  confirms  that  ordinance  ;
God  remits  the  sins  of  that  indi-
vidual ;  God  by  bestowing  His  Holy
Spirit  witnesses  unto  that  soul  that
his  sins  or  her  sins  are  remitted.  In
like  manner  when  an  Elder  lays  Ids
hands  upon  the  head  of  a  man  or
a  woman  who  has  been  thus  baptized
ami  says  unto  that  individual,  "  re-
ceive ye  the  Holy  Ghost,"  God  in
heaven  bound  by  the  oath  and  the
covenant  that  He  lias  made,  bound
by  all  the  conditions  that  pertain  to
the  everlasting  Priesthood,  will  cause
the  Holy  Ghost  to  descend  upon  that
soul,  and  he  or  she  will  be  filled
therewith.  He  receives  the  baptism
of  fire  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  it


stands  on  the  earth  ami  it  stands  in
heaven  recorded  in  favor  of  that  soul
if  he  continues  to  observe  the  condi-
tions under  which  that  baptism
arid  confirmation  are  administered.
There  is  no  human  power  that  can
deprive  that  individual  of  the  fruits
of  that  blessing  which  has  been  thus
sealed  upon  him  by  authority  of  the
Holy  Priesthood.

So  with  other  ordinances.  When
men  go  forward  and  at  tend  to  other
ordinances,  such  as  receiving  their
endowments,  their  washings,  their
anointings,  receiving  the  promises
connected  therewith,  these  promises
will  be  fulfilled  to  the  very  letter  in
time  and  in  eternity — that  is,  if  they
themselves  are  true  to  the  conditions
upon  which  the  blessings  are  prom-
ised. And  so  it  is  when  persons  go
to  the  altar  and  are  married  for  time
and  eternity.  When  the  man  who
officiates  says  :  "  I  seal  upon  you
the  power  to  come  forth  in  the
morning  of  the  first  resurrection,
crowned  with  glory,  immortality,
and  eternal  lives/'  just  as  sure  as
that  promise  is  made,  and  the  per-
sons united  (to  whom  the  promise
is  made)  conform  with  the  conditions
thereof,  just  so  sure  will  it  be  ful-
filled. There  is  no  power  any  where
in  existence  that  can  invalidate  the
force,  the  efficacy,  or  that  can  pre*
vent  the  fulfill  meat  of  that  promise
when  it  is  pronounced  upon  a  man
and  woman  hy  the  authority  of  the
Holy  Priesthood — that  is,  there  is
no  power  but  that  which  they  them-
selves can  exercise.  It  is  a  remark-
able fact,  that  there  is  no  blessing
that  God  has  promised  unto  us  that
any  human  being,  that  any  angel,  or
any  devil  can  take  from  us.  There
is  no  power  of  that  k;ml  that  can
take  it  from  us.  But  a  man  himself,
by  sinning,  can  rob  himself  of  his
blessing  ;  he  can  prevent  its  fulfill-
ment;  but  no  human  being  can  do


JOURNAL  UK  DISCOURSES


it  beside  himself*  Remember  tins,
Latter-da}  Saints;  remember  it,  and
treasure  it  up  in  your  hearts,  that
you  have  salvation  within  your  own
keeping.  If  you  are  damned,  you
damn  yourselves  ;  you  will  be  the
instrument  of  your  own  damnation.
It  will  not  be  because  God  will  damn
you  ;  it  will  not  be  because  Satan
has  such  power  that  he  can  take
away  every  blessing  from  you ;
it  will  not  be  because  of  anything
of  that  kind.  How  will  it  come
about?  It  will  come  to  every  soul
by  wrongdoing  on  the  part  of  that
soul.  He  or  she  alone  can  bring
condemnation  on  himself  or  herself.
There  is  no  other  power  can  do  it
Hence  if  we  are  damned  we  shall
have  no  one  to  blame  but  ourselves;
we  shall  have  no  one  to  condemn
but  ourselves  j  it  will  be  the  result
of  our  own  agency,  the  exercise
of  that  power  which  God  gave  to
Adam  and  Eve  in  the  Garden  of
Eden  when  he  ban  I,  M  of  every  tree
of  the  garden  thou  mayest  freely  eat ;
but  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of
good  and  evil,  thou  shall  not  eat/'
He  gave  them  their  agency.  He  said
to  tli em  :  t(  You  can  eat  of  every
tree  but  one,  and  you  can  eat  that
also;  but  1  forbid  you  to  eat  of  it,
the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good
and  evil  ;  if  you  do  eat  of  that  tree
you  will  have  to  endure  the  pen-
alty. n

in  the  exercise  of  their  agency
they  did  eat  of  that  tree,  and  the
result  was  expulsion  from  the  gar-
den of  Eden  and  death*  And  so  it
has  been  with  all  the  rest  of  the
human  family  from  that  time  unto
the  present.  Every  one  of  us  will
bring  upon  ourselves  either  salvation
or  condemnation  as  the  case  may
be,  according  t  o  the  manner  in  which
we  exercise  our  agency  before  God.
It  is  by  this  Priesthood  and  the
exercise  of  it,  that  the  blessings  of


God  will  flow*  unto  us*  It  is  by  this
Priesthood  that  we  are  bound
together.  God  has  surrounded  us
by  bonds  that  are  indissoluble.
They  cannot  be  separated.  Time
cannot  wear  them  out  They  will
endure  throughout  eternity*  It  is
a  most  wonderful  tie,  the  binding
tie  of  the  holy  Priesthood.  Never
were  a  people  upon  the  face  of  the
earth  since  the  Priesthood  was
among  men,  so  bound  together  as
we  are  being  bound  ;  and  this  is  the
glorious  feature  of  the  tie  that
bind*  us  together ;  it  can  only
operate  upon  those  who  are  right-
eous ;  it  can  only  have  effect  when
right  ousness  prevails  and  where
people  live  in  such  a  manner  as  to
receive  the  promises  of  God.  A
man  who  practices  wrong  may  have
all  these  blessings  pronounced  upon
him  ;  he  may  have  been  baptized
and  have  had  hands  laid  upon  him  ;
he  may  go  through  the  Temple  and
have  wives  sealed  to  him  and  have
every  blessing  promised  unto  him
that  is  promised  to  the  most  faithful
of  the  children  of  God,  and  yet  if
he  does  not  live  so  as  to  be  worthy
of  these  blessings  he  will  not  receive
them  ;  he  will,  sooner  or  later,  be
bereft  of  them  ami  left  destitute.
This  is- the  glorious  feature  of  this
great  tie  that  God  has  restored  to
the  earth.  It  only  hinds  the  right-
eous. It  does  not  bind  the  wicked
to  the  righteous*  It  does  not  bind
the  wicked  to  the  wicked-  Its
power  and  saving  force  can  only  be
exercised  or  enjoyed  where  right-
eousness pre  vails.  Hence  when  the
people  of  God  come  forth  in  the
resurrection,  they  will  come  forth
pure.  There  will  then  be  a  separa-
tion of  the  wicked  from  the  right-
eous. The  righteous  will  enjoy
their  own  society.  In  this  proba-
tion it  seems  to  be  designed  in
providence  of  ourGod  that  we  should


THE  CAUSE  OF  OPPOSITION  TO  THE  PRIESTHOOD.


251


all  be*  mixed  up  together — no
thorough  separation*  When  we
came  to  these  valleys  we  thought  we
had  left  the  world  behind  us.  We
thought  that  because  these  mighty
mountains,  which  reared  themselves
on  every  hand  as  an  impassable
barrier  between  us  and  the  rest  of
the  world,  Babylon  was  left  behind.
We  thought  we  could  live  compar-
atively pure  lives,  and  that  we  would
be  comparatively  free  from  the  asso-
ciations of  the  world.  But  such
ideas  have  been  dispelled — very
rudely  dispelled — by  that  which  has
occurred,  Babylon  followed  us.
We  find  that  these  mountains  are
not  sufficient  to  divide  us  from  the
rest  of  the  world  ;  that  we  must
share  with  the  rest  of  mankind  the
evils  and  the  blessings  that  pertain
to  this  mortal  condition  of  Existence,
We  have  these  circumstances  to  con-
tend with.  We  are  mixed  with  the
wicked.  The  tares  and  the  wheat
grow  together,  and  will  grow  until
the  harvest  This  seems  to  be  de-
signed in  the  providence  of  our
Father.  But  the  time  will  come
when  there  will  be  a  separation,  a
final  separation,  of  the  righteous
from  the  wicked,  and  that  separa-
tion will  be  brought  about  by  the
exercise  of  the  Priesthood  which  God
has  bestowed.  That  Priesthood
will  draw  up  from  the  earth  the
pure,  the  holy,  the  worthy.  It  will
draw  them  up  to  the  society  of  God.
Everything  that  is  not  pure  will  be
left  behind.  Then  we  will  feel  and
know  the  value  of  that  tie.  By  it
the  man  will  draw  his  wives  to  him;
by  it  the  father  and  mother  will
draw  their  children  to  them ;  by  it
generation  will  be  linked  to  genera-
tion, until  all  will  be  united  clear
back  to  our  father  Adam,  the  father
of  the  human  race  ou  the  earth.
All  this  will  be  accomplished  by  the
power  and  authority  of  the  Priest-
hood.


Do  you  understand,  then,  why  the
Priesthood  of  the  Son  of  God  is
hated  ;  why  the  lives  of  the  servants
of  God  are  sought  after ;  why  it  is
that  they  are  sought  to  be  impris-
oned and  ensnared  in  various  forms?
It  is  because  the  adversary  of  souls
knows  lull  well  that  if  this  Priest-
hood remains  on  the  earth,  then
farewell  to  his  authority,  farewell  to
his  kingdom,  farewell  to  the  domin-
ion that  he  has  exercised  over  the
children  of  men.  It  cannot  con-
tinue its  existence.  He  knows  that
as  well  as  we  do.  He  understands
it  perfectly.  Hence  he  has  ever
sought  to  destroy  from  the  face  of
the  earth  the  men  who  have  held
the  Priesthood  of  the  Son  of  God.
He  wa^  not  satisfied  until  the  earth
drank  the  precious  blood  of  the  Sa-
vior of  the  world,  and  the  life  of
every  man  who  has  held  the  Priest-
hood, and  has  exercised  it  from  the
days  of  righteous  Abel  down  to  the
present  time,  has  been  sought  for
to  a  greater  or  less  extent  by  the
adversary  of  souls.  He  has  used
men  as  his  agents  to  accomplish
this.  He  cannot  himself  come  here
and  exercise  his  power  in  his  own
person,  because  it  was  forhidden  him,
and  his  angels  who  rebelled  with
him,  in  consequence  of  their  great
transgression,  that  they  should  have
tabernacles  of  flesh.  This  was  their
punishment,  that  they  should  not
have  tabernacles  of  flesh.  But  from
the  day  he  entered  into  the  serpent
in  the  garden  of  Eden  to  the  present
he  has  sought,  through  the  agency
of  man  or  beast,  the  lives  of  those
who  have  held  the  Priest  hood.  In
this  way  he  has  sought  to  exercise
his  power  and  authority  among  men.
He  did  so  with  Cain.  Read  in  the
Pearl  of  Great  Price  what  he  did
with  him  ;  how  he  tempted  him,
and  how  Cain  succumbed  to  his
temptation.  He  said  to  Cain,  11  be-
lieve it  not,"  and  he  lias  been  using


252


JOURNAL  Of  DISCOURSES


the  same  words  to  all  the  children
of  men  from  that  time  to  the  pres-
ent "Believe  it  not !" When  the
servants  of  God  have  proclaimed
the  truth  Satan  lias  ever  been  ready
to  say,  "  believe  it  not  !" He  has
instilled  into  the  minds  of  the  chil-
dren of  men  hatred  for  the  truth —
that  is,  every  one  that  has  been  wil-
ling to  listen  to  him He  lias  entered
into  them,  taken  pnsn.^Mou  of  their
souls,  and  has  used  them  to  accom-
plish his  wicked  purposes. He  lias
done  this  through  man. He  could
not  do  it  without  he  had  some
tabernacle to operate  through.
He  could  not  deceive  Eve— or  did
not  deceive  her — except  through
the  means  of  the  serpent.  He
entered into the serpent.  The
serpent  was  willing,  doubtless,  to  let
him  enter,  and  he  spoke  through  the
serpent It  was  the  mouth  of  the
serpent,  but  it  was  the  voice  of  Satan
that  beguiled  the  woman. He  was
determined  that  God's  work  should
not  prosper  in  the  earth. He  has
determined  that  the  children  of  men
shall  do  as  he  wishes. He  has  been
angry  from  the  beginning  because
his  plan  was  not  adopted  ;  because
the  Father  did  not  see  proper  to
select  him  to  save  man  without  the
exercise  of  man's  agency ;  because
of  this  he  has  determined  that  he
will  destroy  the  work. He  has
drenched  the  earth  with  innocent
blood  to  accomplish his  purpose.
He  is  still  engaged  in  that  work.
He  would  destroy  us  if  he  could.
See  what  is  being  done  all  over  the
Territory. See  the  agencies  that
are  at  work. See  how  many  men
are  being  used  by  the  adversary  of
souls  to  accomplish  his  purposes  in
regard to this people — a  people
-unexampled  for  sobriety,  for  temper-
ance, for  industry,  for  frugality,  for
kindness,  for  good  order,  for  all  the
virtues  that  men  revere.  Where


can  you  find  a  people  like  them?
There  is  no  place  upon  the  face  of
the  earth  where  these  virtues  are
better  exemplified  in  the  lives  of
the  people  than  they  are  in  Utah
Territory.  What  woman  cries  aloud
in  our  streets  because  of  being  de-
filed ?  What  woman  cries  in  vain
for  protection  in  all  our  land,  from
east  to  west,  from  north  to  south?
Has  the  cry  of  distress  gone  up?
Has  the  cry  of  the  poor  and  the
oppressed  ascended  from  these  val-
leys unto  God  unheard  by  the  peo-
ple ?  Do  orphans  and  widows  mourn
and  weep  because  of  the  circum-
stances which  surround  them?
No,  not  in  any  part  of  our  land.
Not  a  beggar  to  be  seen  throughout
all  our  settlements.  No  cry  of
distress  either  from  man  or  beast
Virtue  is  upheld.  Women  are
shielded  as  safely  as  they  were
when  they  were  infants  in  their
mother's  bosoms — shielded  from
harm,  shielded  from  the  seducer,
from  those  who  would  wreck  their
happiness.  This  is  the  case  through-
out all  our  society.  Do  drunkards
flourish  among  us1  Are  they
encouraged?  We  know  they  are
not.  Are  persons  encouraged  in
litigation  and  quarrelling  ?  No  ;
nowhere  in  the  laud  is  there  any-
thing of  this  kind.  Peace  prevails;
good  order  prevails  ;  quarrellings
are  seldom  heard  ;  virtue  is  pro-
tected and  encouraged.  Marriage
is  encouraged  everywhere.  Yet  on
this  land  we  are  threatened  as  a  peo-
ple because  of  these  things.  Our
liberty  is  jeopardized.  All  kinds
of  machinery  are  put  into  opera-
tion to  destroy  us,  or  to  entrap
and  ensnare  us,  and  deprive  us  of
liberty.

Thank  God,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  for  the  restoration  of  the
Priesthood.  Thank  God  for  the
blessings  we  receive every  day.


PROSPERITY  OF  THE  SAINTS,


255


Thank  God  for  the  persecutions  we
are  called  upon  to  endure.  As  the
Savior  said,  let  us  rejoice  and  be  ex-
ceedingly glad  because  the  wicked
array  themselves  against  us  in  this
manner.  It  is  a  testimony  to  us  that
we  are  not  in  harmony  with  the
wicked  ;  that  we  are  not  taking  the
course  that  Belial  would  like  Oi  to
take  ;  that  we  are  pursuing  the  path
that  God  has  marked  out  for  us.
We  can  do  this  witli  perfect  safety,
and  with  the  perfect  assurance  that
it  will  all  come  out  right.  As  I
have  said,  there  is  no  power  that


can  separate  a  virtuous  man  and
woman  who  have  been  united  by  the
power  of  the  Holy  Priesthood ;  no
power  can  Jo  it ;  they  must  do  ifc
themselves  if  done  at  all  These
ties  that  bind  us  together  will
endure  through  time  and  eternity.
Let  us  so  live  that  we  shall  never
forfeit  our  claim  upon  the  promises
of  our  God,  and*  that  we  may  ever
be  faithful  from  this  time  forward,,
until  we  receive  the  fulfillment  of
all  those  promises  in  the  presence  of
I  God  and  the  Lamb,  I  ask  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  Amen*


KEMAKKS BY APOSTLE F. D.  RICHARDS,

Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  held  in  Logan,  on  the  Oth  Apilr

w  mi;  >ml  n*;-: :^t<\ 18  85. v  1


REPORTED  BY  JOHN  IRVINE.


PROSPEROUS  CONDITION  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS  IN  THE  VALLEY*
OF  THE  MOUNTAINS  —  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  IS  ONE  OF  PEACE,
WHILE  THOSE  OF  THE  WORLD  ARE  KINGDOMS  OF  WAR  AND  OP-
PRESSION— EXHORTATIONS  TO  FAITHFULNESS — WE  MUST  TRUST  IW
GOD  AND  HE  WILL  PRESERVE  US— THE  SAINTS  ARE  NOT  USING
CARNAL  WEAPONS  TO  DEFEND  THEMSELVES  AGAINST  THE  INDIANS*
NOR  AGAINST  THEIR  ENEMIES  —  IF  NECESSARY,  WE  SHOULD  BE
WILLING  TO  GIVE  OUR  LIVES  FUR  THE  CAUSE  OF  TRUTH— THE
BLESSINGS  OF  GOD  INVOKED  UPON  THE  SAINTS.

The  Latter-day  Saints  have  veiy  consider  the  same  carefully — wheth-
great  reason  to  rejoice  and  to  be  ex-  er  it  be  in  temporal  matters  or  in
ceedingly  glad  before  our  Father  spiritual  concerns — we  are  better
who  is  in  heaven  and  before  the  and  more  comfortably  situated  Un-
people here  on  the  earth.  If  we  |  day  than  any  other  people  of  the
take  a  look  at  our  condition,  and  ,  same  number  anywhere  on  God's


254


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


footstool.  If  we  take  into  consid-
eration our  present  condition  as  to
the  comforts  of  life,  we  are  better
situated  to-day  with  grain  in  our
granaries  ami  food  in  our  houses,
than  any  other  people  of  the  same
number  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,
or  that  can  be  found  located  together
upon  the  same  extent  of  territory
anywhere.  If  we  take  into  consid-
eration our  condition  as  to  honius,
there  is  a  greater  proportion  of  this
people  to-day  who  have  comfortable
homes  of  their  own  than  can  be
found  anywhere  else ;  more  of  them
have  nu  need  to  strive  for  the  privi-
lege of  earning  a  living,  as  a  great
many  of  our  people  had  to  do  before
they  were  gathered  when  they  often
found  it  difficult  to  obtain  employ-
ment, and  even  if  success  fid  were
obliged  to  work  by  the  piece  or  by
the  day,  receiving  their  pay  regularly
at  the  end  of  the  week,  and  in  this
way  measuring  the  conditions  of
their  living  by  the  amount  of  means
which  they  were  permitted  to  earn.
In  this  manner  life  or  existence  and
its  comforts  were  measured  out  to
them.  There  wa*  comparatively  no
room  for  the  exercise  of  enterprise,
of  skill,  of  native  wit,  and  those
qualities  which  God  has  placed  in
their  nature,  and  which  He  designed
they  should  practice  and  thus  be-
come wise  and  skilled  by  their  own
ingenuity.

We  sometimes  feel  that  we  are
oppressed,  that  we  are  pinched  and
persecuted  by  the  people  who  are
intruding  upon  our  rights,  and
trampling  upon  our  liberties,  but  as
yet  we  know  but  little,  comparative-
ly speaking  about  oppression.  The
people  of  the  countries  of  Asia  and
of  Europe,  with  all  of  the  liberty
that  they  enjoy,  are  under  the  inoet
severe  daily  oppression,  continued
dependence  and  subordination  to
those  that  are  over  them. In  those


countries  there  is  a  feeling  of  fear —
fear  of  their  rulers,  terror  in  their
minds  caused  by  the  dread  of  threat-
ening war  which  is  liable  at  any
time  to  come  upon  them  with  all  its
horrors.  In  every  national  dispute
that  arises  they  see  and  feel  at  once
the  liability  that  their  sons,  fathers,
neighbors  and  kinsmen  may  be
drafted  and  sent  off  to  the  war,
perhaps  never  to  return.  And  their
hearts  are  filled  with  fear  and  anx-
iety over  this  and  other  similar
things.

We  see  in  newspapers  that  in
Egypt,  China,  Central  America,  and
almost  everywhere  else  the  air  is
thick  with  tht  mists  and  clouds  of
war.  Where  is  the  mother  or  sister,
father  or  sou  among  us  that  is  to-day
away  from  one  of  their  kindred  on
account  of  war?  The  worst  you
have  to  dread  is  a  short  imprison-
ment and  a  few  hundred  dollars
fine;  that  is  the  worst  thing  you
can  find  to  mourn  and  worry  oven
Why,  bless  your  dear  souls,  there  is
not  another  community  of  the  same
number  anywhere  on  the  whole  earth
in  which  there  is  to  be  found  such
settled  peace  as  right  here  among
this  very  people  that  are  before  me,
and  the  people  that  fill  this  territory
all  around  us.  And  yet  you  think
the  times  are  terribly  hard  with  your
granaries  full  of  wheat  that  you
cannot  sell,  with  large  quantities  of
potatoes  and  vegetables  that  you
cannot  dispose  of,  with  flocks  and
herds  about  you ;  because  you
cannot  sell  your  products  and  get
as  good  prices  as  you  would  like,
some  of  you  think  you  are  in  a
terribl^distressed conditio* .  (Laugh-
ter).

I  wish  the  Saints  would  put  away
these  foolish  idea*.  I  waut  to  have
you  realise  that  you  are  in  a  condi-
tion of  peace  and  plenty,  with  liber-
ty, too,  for  God  hu  made  you  free.


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  IS  ONE  OF  PEACE.


255


God  has  made  His  people  free  from
the  bondage  of  sin  and  death  ;  we
are  at  liberty,  and  there  is  no  power
on  the  earth  that  has  the  ability  to
fasten  the  shackles  of  sin  and  Satan
upon  us.  It  all  depends  upon  our
own  conduct,  as  to  whether  we  are
and  shall  continue  free*

In  almost  all  of  the  countries
from  which  you  came  and  in  the
nations  that  surrounded  you  in  your
former  homes,  people  are  taxed  with
a  taxation  that  is  oppressive.  On
the  green  Isle  of  Ireland,  where  the
poor  and  afflicted  are  numerous  there
are  people  who  have  to  pay  a  rent
of  five  pounds  an  acre  for  laud,  and
they  must  raise  sufficient  off  it  to
support  their  families,  and  raise  the
money  to  pay  the  rent.  But  here
we  can  buy  or  take  up  laud,  and
have  it,  toq,  for  the  taking,  but  borne
of  us  consider  it  an  awful  job  to  fence
it.  (Laughter).  No,  we  don't  know
anything  about  oppression,  as  com-
pared with  the  Jews,  the  Poles  atid
the  Irish.  In  older  portions  of  the
United  States,  we  never  could  have
enjoyed  the  blessings  we  enjoy  herej
we  never  could  have  located  and
built  up  our  towns  and  cities  ;  as  it
was  the  mobs  plundered  us  of  our
homes  and  drove  us  out  here  to  this
part"  of  the  earth.  It  was  like  a
new  world  ;  it  looked  so  entirely
new,  that  it  seemed  as  if  the
work  of  creation  was  scarcely  fin-
ished. By  the  blessing  of  God  we
brought  life  with  us  and  life  came
from  heaven  ;  life  that  animated  the
soil  under  our  feet ;  that  tempered
and  controlled  the  elements  over
our  heads  j  so  that  in  these  high
valleys  and  canyons,  where  it  was
thought  no  grain  or  fruit  could  be
raised,  with  snow  and  frost  every
month  in  the  year — now  we  raise

rd  crops  and  varieties  of  fruits,
few  years  ago  it  was  a  problem
whether  an  apple  or  a  peach  could


be  raised  here  in  Cache  valley  ;  but
it  is  not  long  since  her  enterprising
fruit  growers  took  the  premium  in
the  Territorial  Fair  for  the  best  col-
lection of  apples  to  be  found  in  the
Territory.

Who  lias  done  this  for  u*  1  It  is
the  Lord  our  God.  He  brought  us
to  this  land  as  He  brought  the  ehil-
dren  of  Israel  to  the  land  of  -Tudea,
which  He  gave  to  them  and  to  their
children  after  them,  to  be  their  in-
heritance forever.

I  want  to  have  us  consider  these
things ;  and  instead  of  being  anxious
and  worried,  troubled  and  filled  with
fear,  learn  to  rely  upon  the  arm  of
the  Lord  and  trust  Him  for  His
goodness ;  cultivate  the  peace  of
heaven  and  let  the  love  of  God  dwell
in  our  hearts.  Though  our  enemies
may  harass,  trouble,  ami  disturb  us  ;
the  trouble  that  they  will  bring
upon  us  will  be  but  as  a  drop  in  the
bucket  compared  with  what  will
come  upon  them  by  and  by.  They
cannot  stop  the  work  of  God,  His
decree  has  established  it  We  have
the  promise  that  it  never  shall  be
overthrown  or  given  to  another
people.  Understand  it.  This  form
of  government  which  the  Lord  has
given  to  us,  is  the  strongest  form
of  government  that  was  ever  re-
vealed to  man.  The  governments
of  the  world  have  power  to  oppress,
annoy,  make  war  upon  and  destroy
men  from  the  face  of  the  earth.
But  this  Kingdom  that  God  has
given  to  His  people  is  to  be  a  king-
dom of  peace,  a  kingdom  of  right-
eousness, and  its  righteousness  is
going  to  exalt  His  people,  to  make
them  become  the  greatest  people  on
the  face  of  the  earth,  filled  with
power,  wisdom  and  intelligence  that
all  the  surrounding  nations  will  look
up  to.

The  people  that  are  around  us  in
our  midst,  and  who  wish  to  dictate


256


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


to  us;  those  who  sit  in  the  council
chambers  to  make  laws  against  us
and  our  holy  faith,  and  thereby
make  us  offenders — are  themselves
filled  with  fear  and  anxiety  at  what
is  taking  place  in  this  and  other  na-
tions. This  spirit  of  fear  will  in-
crease upon  them.  Look  at  the
dread  they  experienced  at  the  work
of  the  dynamiters  in  the  old  coun-
try, ami  that  is  but  a  beginning  of
what  is  to  come.  These  secret
societies  will  work  great  mischief
and  death,  with  frequent  assassina-
tions, and  by  and  [»y  these  things
will  come  so  thick  and  last  that  peo-
ple will  not  know  what  way  to  es-
cape. The  Lord  is  gathering  His
people  together  that  He  may  deal
with  them  by  themselves.  The
great  trouble  is,  that  we  have  too
many  among  us  who  are  careless  ami
indifferent ;  that  are  wicked  and
sinful  ;  that  ought  to  be  dealt  with
and  cut  off  the  Church.  There  are
plenty  who  are  ready  to  sell  their
brethren  into  the  hands  of  their
enemies,  but  the  day  will  come,
when  they  will  realize  the  awful
consequence  of  their  acts.  We
have  not  much  to  fear  unless  we
offend  the  God  whom  we  agreed  to
serve.

Brethren  and  sisters,  let  not  your
hearts  be  troubled*  Obey  the  com-
mandments of  God,  keep  your  cove-
Bants  inviolate  and  learn  to  live  by
every  word  that  proceeds  from  Him
and  the  constituted  authorities  of
His  Church — and  if  you  find  trials
in  your  pathway  you  will  find  help-
to  endure  them.  Parents,  cultivae
affection  toward  each  other,  toward
your  children  and  toward  all  included
in  your  households;  do  right  by  your
wives,  your  husband,  your  children
and  your  God.  You  will  find  that
all  tlte  rest  will  come  right  in  its
own  due  time.  The  Lord  will  bring
it  about  in  so  Grange  and  simple  a


manner  that  it  will  be  astonishing
to  us  when  we  find  out  how  He  has
done  it*  v\  e  cannot  go  to  the  Bible,
Book  of  Mormon  or  the  Book  of
Doctrine  aud  Covenants,  to  be  in-
formed how  this,  that  and  the  other
thing  will  be  solved  and  arranged.
We  can  read  how  He  did  anciently
according  to  the  circumstances  that
surrounded  His  people  then  ;  but
we  cannot  find  out  I  [is  methods
and  plans  of  to-day  only  as  He  man-
ifests them  to  us  by  the  spirit  of
i  revelation*  His  ways  are  past  find-
ing out  He  tells  us  that  Zion  shall
be  redeemed  with  judgment,  and  her
j  converts  with  righteousuess.  We
must  remember  this.  If  we  would
have  power  with  God  and  with  the
angels,  it  must  be  because  of  our
diligent  attention  to  God,  to  the
work  He  has  called  us  to  do,  and
we  must  see  that  we  establish  it  in
1  the  earth.  Every  man  should  warn
his  neighbor ;  should  teach  his  chil-
dren and  his  family,  and  establish
righteousness  in  his  household.
Presidents  and  Bishops  should  deal
with  transgressors  in  the  Church,
that  they  may  repent,  or  be  cut  off.
It  is  that  righteousness  may  be
established  in  the  earth  that  the
Lord  has  commenced  His  work  again,
that  it  may  be  established  not  in  a
little  place,  but  in  all  the  land,  and
it  shall  spread  until  His  righteous
word  and  work  fchall  fill  the  whole
earth,  as  the  waters  cover  the  mighty
deep.

l)o  not  let  anything  divert  you
from  the  path  of  duty ;  let  nothing
cause  you  to  commit  an  overt  act..
Honor  and  respect  the  laws  of  the
land  as  far  as  possible,  consistent
with  the  laws  and  commandments
of  God.  Observe  and  obey  every
constitutional  law.  When  our  en-
emies place  us  in  violation  of  a
law  of  the  land,  it  is  painful  to  usf
aud  it  is  our  trial,  but  the  respon*


FIREARMS  NOT  NEEDED  FOR  OUR  DEFENSE*


257


siljility  of  it  rests  with  them.  Let
us  make  up  our  minds  to  bear  this
crusade  of  legal  persecution  with
fortitude  as  Saints  have  had  to  do
in  all  ages  of  Gospel  reform,  be-
cause they  believed  in  the  revela-
tions of  Jesus  Christ.  We  have
not  revolted  against  any  law  of  the
land  ;  we  have  not  contended  against
any  constitutional  principle,  law  or
doctrine  that  could  benefit,  improve
or  exalt  the  human  family,  nor
anything  that  could  promote  the
pursuit  of  happiness — we  seek  after
all  these  things.  Bat  our  Congress-
men, Governors  and  Judges,  in  the
supreme  wisdom  with  which  they
imagine  they  are  endowed,  impose
penalties  upon  God's  people  for
keeping  His  commandments.  Thus
we  see  that  when  the  wicked  rule,
the  people  mourn.

We  ought  to  gain  by  all  this  ex-
perience valuable  knowledge.  We
want  to  profit  by  it.  Let  every  mail
question  himself: "Can  I  stand


that  people  wll  be  so  far  from  having
peace  that  they  must  either  take  up
the  sword  to  contend  against  their
neighbor,  or  flee  to  Zion  and  gather
with  God's  people.  You  will  s^e  this
come  to  pass.  Mark  my  words.
All  kinds  and  conditions  of  people
will  desire  to  come  here  and  mike
homes  with  us.  You  will  -see  the
day  when  it  will  be  u  har  htb  k^ep
the  wicked  away  from  us  as  it  ever
has  been  to  get  people  to  pin  us,
Mark  that,  too.  I  tell  you  tint;  a
people  with  full  granaries,  afp-jiple
of  peace  and  prosperity,  u  a?peiple
that  will  be  sought' after  by  the  peo-
ples of  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and
things  cannot  always  go  oJtfiu  the
way  they  are  going  with  us,  vrfchout
bringing' down  upon  our  cppteisura
the  retribution  of  an  offended  God.
We  ought  to  vely  upon  lit*  prom-
ises. ThttstV  experiences'  nte  well
calculated  to  do  us  good,  and  teach
us  to  tfust  in  the  Lord,  n  I
Not  should  we  forget  thftt  when


this  or  that  without  getting  angry  V  i  a  governor  of  unsavory  metuiiry  for*
Or  can  we  be  righteously  angry  and  [  bade  tlwuft&of  the  militiatfllke  for
sin  notl If  m>t  we  should  go  into
our  closets  and  ask  God  for  that
measure  of  His  spirit  that  is  ueces


saiy  to  sustain  us  in  a  propter  frame  single  preda Wry  excursion  of  4he  red


of  mind. This  i*  the  kind  of  eicpe-


defense  against  Indian  depredations,
as  well  as  for.-ifouvth  of  July  cele*
btatrotiB  ;  trti&fc  i  Sine©  that!  date,  no


man  has  befebixperieuced  by-Anyone


rience,  the  very  kind  of  discipline  I  of  our  ^ttilraieufe.  0*1  the  contrary
that  is  necessity  for  usT  to  niake  tts  j  it  would  deem  thit  all  u$o  'of  fire
" 1 — -»  f  —  arms  fur  any  kind  of  mil  itatry  defense

had  beeotak>  entirely  obsolete— gone
into  nttier  desuetude— so  entirely  at


find  out  whether  we  will  draw  near
to  Him  and  have  fellowship,  and
communion  with  Him.  1  These
things  are  all  for  our  experience,
for  our  profit.  The  Lord  has  made
known  to  ufc  that  the  days  we  livt*
in  are  dark  \tith  :  threaten iiiga  of
war.  The  hour  of  his  judgment'  ie
mgli  at  hand.  We  have  werr^ue:
terrible  war  in  our  kttid—^uid  it  is
w«lt  that  we  should'  $?tim  heed  to
Hi*  cduhfcetel Ward  And  ramfcrfc


peace  have  the  Lamanites  become,
that  instead  of  either  iioiee  of  war,
or  ev^ft  the  apprehension*  thereof,
there  i«  giteu  us  of  tiod  ta!  enjoy
the  most  settle  J  peace  from  the  red
man  on  all  bur  borders  round ;  and
now  havitig- assisted  totbuBd  our
tetbplefe; >thepirfeteu joying  frith  us
*Ud  <  iiiaitenly  ^bleMiti^  hiteto  wed
thfcreirtl  t£IwiecUisof  :roatniiiil  wild


hud  iaw4^y^\J«b'bUa  pitting  nura-


o{  wsnf&  ar«  ^pteadjng' td^ad  djjou^
ifoefi&f  off :4htr  Mtth,'*  anri. it .  tyiil!

eort^-tb  ty&i  before  *  gffcftl  ;Wkitft^  tftfir  tribal

»•->  Xo^lTiiniiUiM  fc«  noiib .aonaioinoa  aidi  guhob  noVtiu&XVL
loi  mrt  hioJ  edT Aiins  e>x!i  *ft  H&wm  ho&ibs  ihuia  imd  sy/uI  I


253


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


relations,  sworn  allegiance, to  govern-
ment, have  pre  empted  or  home-
stead ed  lands  of  ihe  public  domain,
are  raising  crops,  cultivating  their
flocks  and  herds,  are  building  and
occupying  comfortable  dwellings,
as  good  neighbors  among  their  white
brethren,  as  is  evidenced  at  Wash*
akie  in  Oneida  Stake,  and  at  India-
nola  in  the  San  Pete  Stake.  Their
schools  are  turning  out  scholars  in
the  elementary  branches  of  good
common  school  education.

Not  only  has  the  need  of  firearms
been  done  away  as  between  us  and
the  natives,  but  we  have  very  great
reason  to  be  thankful  that  in  the
present  unholy  crusade  against  the
Church  the  onslaught  has  not  been
with  tire  and  the  sword  as  in  former
times,  but  with  mind  and  moral
suasion  in  the  application  of  the
law  by  a  perversion  of  many  of  its
well  settled  methods  of  interpreta-
tion, construction  and  application.
These  conclusions  have  been  the
implements  and  the  tactics  of  the
present  warfare.

It  is  devoutly  to  be  hoped  that  no
one  with  a  zeal  which  is  not  according
to  knowledge  shall  commit  an  overt
act  that  shall  precipitate  a  conflict
with  carnal  weapons  and  give  the
enemy  an  occasion  or  opportunity  to
shed  the  blood  of  the  Saints  or  to
increase  their  unhallowed  oppres-
sions upon  us.

Since,  then,  the  weapons  of  our
warfare  are  not  powder,  lead  and
fine  steel ;  let  us  put  on  the  whole
armor  of  God ;  banish  unrighteous-
ness from  our  midst,  and  we  or  our
.children  shall  see  the  governments
.of  this  world  become  the  Kingdom
■of  tQitr  God  and  of  His  Christ  in
His  *  own  due  time,  for  which  all
iSainta  should  ever  labor  and  pray.

iWe  have  had  a  great  deal  of  good
instruction  during  this  conference.
J  have  been  much  edified  myself  I


hearing  my  brethren  talk,  and  I  am
sure  you  all  have.  The  teachings
which  have  been  gi  ven  are  of  a  char-
acter to  promote  good  feelings  be-
tween brethren  and  sisters,  fathers
and  mothers,  parents  and  children,
and  it  is  pleasant  to  hear  of  each
others  welfare.

When  we  go  to  our  respective
homes  let  us  no  with  the  determina-
tion  to  stand  steadfast  in  the  faith*
I  am  sure  that  after  such  a  confer-
ence as  this  every  honest  soul  who
has  met  with  us,  if  he  wanted  a
portion  of  the  bread  of  life,  has  re-
ceived that  portion,  has  received
something  which  he  can  take  home
for  his  own  use — some  words  of
encouragement,  some  strengthening
exhortation,  seme  good  words  that
will  help  to  put  away  weakness  and
enable  the  feeble  to  say  I  am  strong
in  the  Lord.

I  pray  God  to  bless  you,  to  com-
fort your  hearts ;  to  increase  your
faith  towards  Him ;  to  strengthen
you  that  you  may  not  be  overcome
of  sin,  and  that  you  may  seek  in  all
things  to  overcome  evil  with  good.
Remember  and  pray  for  the  breth-
ren— our  leaders.  We  do  not  know
what  awaits  us ;  we  care  but  little.
The  main  thing  devolving  upon  us
is  to  do  our  duty  acceptably  day  by
day.  We  will  trust  in  God  and  go
forward.  What  if  it  were  necessary
that  some  of  our  lives  should  be  ta-
ken 1  There  is  no  need  for  fear  or
worriment  about  it.  It  has  always
been  so  when  God  had  a  people  on
the  earth.  Some  of  the  best  lives
have  been  taken — taken  as  witnesses
in  yonder  heavens  to  testify  to  facts
as  they  exist  here.  Do  you  under-
stand this  !  It  •  is  in  accordance
with  the  great  principles  of  eternal
justice  which  rule  and  regulate  in
heaven  with  a  great  deal  more  pre-
cision and  certainty  than  here  on
the  earth. The  Lord  has  told  us


CONCLUSION,


259


how  He  does  business  in  some  of
these  matters  before  the  councils  of
the  Church,  namely  by  the  voice  of
two  or  three  witnesses  every  word  is
to  be  established,  and  so  it  has  to
to  be  up  yonder.  Perhaps  it  is
necessary  uuce  iu  a  while  to  have
some  go  in  that  kind  of  a  way,  Well
don't  get  scared  about  that.  We  have
all  to  die  some  day.  It  will  be  all
right  whether  it  shall  be  to-morrow
or  next  week,  if  we  keep  the  com*
mandments  of  God  in  all  matters.
Choose  the  wise  and  the  perfect  way,
and  if  we  ate  right  we  will  be  willing
to  say,  **0  Lord,  thy  will  be  done/'  If
when  we  embraced  the  Gospel  we
placed  our  all  upon  the  altar,  it  is  of
very  little  consequence  about  all
these  things.  For  if  we  seek  to
save  our  lives  we  may  lose  them,
but  if  we  lose  them  in  the  ser-
vice of  God,  we  shall  find  life
eternal.


I  pray  that  God  may  bless  us  all;
you  who  are  parents,  should  bless
your  children — that  they  may  render
more  loving  obedience  to  you,  that
you  may  be  more  affectionate  to
them,  remembering  the  union  in
which  you  have  been  united  and  in
which  you  have  been  sealed  ;  that
you  may  be  strengthened  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  be  enabled  to  go
into  the  holy  temples  and  set  your-
selves in  order  before  the  Lord ;
that  you  may  obtain  those  eternal
gifts  that  shall  bring  an  eternal
weight  of  glory  to  your  household,
families,  friends  and  kindred  ;  that
you  may  have  the  full  assurance  of
the  promises  of  God,  and  have  joy
to  animate,  stimulate  and  sustain
you  through  every  trying  circum-
stance in  life,  and  bring  you  safely
back  into  the  presence  of  our  heav-
enly Father,  Amen.


200


JOURNAL  UJ  DISCOURSES,


DISCOURSE BY BISHOP ORSON R  WHITNEY,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,  June  21,

188$.


(REPOETED  BY JOHN  IRVINE.)

PROPHECY  OF  JOHN  THE  REVELATOR — MISSION  OF  THE  ANCIENT  APO!
TLES— THEIR  REt'EPTIOM  AND  FATE— THE  GREAT  APOSTASY— PRE-
SERVATION OF  THE  APOSTLE  JOHN — HIS  REVELATION— RESTORA-
TION OF  THE  GOSPEL— THE  EARTH  TO  BE  BAPTIZED  BY  FIRE  AS
IT  WAS  ONCE  BAPTIZED  BY  WATER— WE  ARE  SENT  TO  THE  WORLD
WITH  A  WARNING  M  ESS  AGE — THEY  CAN  RECEIVE  OR  REJECT  IT-
TESTIMONY  TO  THE  TRUTH  OF "  MORMON  ISM."


Having  been  calif  J  upon,  my  breth-
ren and  sisters  ainl  friends,  to  ad-
dress you  this  afternoon,  I  feel  as
though  I  would  like  to  read  a  por-
tion of  the  word  of  God.  I  will
therefore  read  to  you  a  part  of  the
14th  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Revela-
tion, from  the  Bible  known  as
King  James*  translation,

"And  1  looked,  and,  lo,  a  Lamb
stood  on  the  mount  Sion,  and  with
him  a  hundred  forty  and  four  thou-
sand, having  his  Father's  name  writ-
ten in  their  foreheads.

'*  And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heav-
en, as  the  voice  of  many  waters,  and
as  the  voice  of  a  great  thunder  ;  and
I  heard  the  voice  of  harpers  harping
with  their  harps.

"  And  they  sang  as  it  were  a  new
song  before  the  throne,  and  before
the  four  beasts  and  the  elders  ;  and
no  man  could  learn  that  song  but
the  hundred  and  forty  and  four
thousand,  which  were  redeemed
from  the  earth.


^  These  are  they  which  were  not
defiled  with  women  ;  for  they  are
virgins.  These  are  they  which  fol-
low the  Lamb  whithersoever  he
goeth.  These  were  redeemed  from
among  men,  being  the  first  fruits  un-
to God  and  to  the  Lamb.

M  And  in  their  mouth  was  found
no  guile  :  for  they  are  without  fault
before  the  throne  of  God.

"  And  I  saw  another  angel  fly  in
the  midst  of  heaven,  having  the
everlasting  Gospel  to  preach  unto
them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  and
to  every  nation,  and  kindred,  and
tongue,  and  people  ;

"  Saying  with  a  loud  voice,  Fear
God,  and  give  glory  to  him  ;  for  the
hour  of  his  judgment  is  come  ;  and
worship  him  that  made  heaven,  and
earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the  fountains
of  waters.

"  And  there  followed  another
angel,  saying,  Babylon  is  fallen,
is  fallen,  that  great  city,  because
she  made  all  nations  drink  of  the


MISSION  OF  THE  ANCIENT  APOSTLES.


261


wine  of  the  wrath  of  her  fornica-
tion/'

It  has  been  charged  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints  that  they  set  but  little
value  upon  the  Christian  Bible ;
that  they  criticise  its  translation
and  the  revisions  through  which  it
has  passed,  and  that  it  is  our  en-
deavor to  belittle  the  importance
of  this  holy  book.  The  words  which
I  have  read  are  a  portion  of  that  sa-
cred record  which  we  are  charged
with  undervaluing,  and  I  choose
them  as  a  basis  for  my  remarks,  in
order  to  show  how  ground  less  is
that  charge,  with  many  others,  which
are  made  falsely  against  this  people.
The  words  you  have  heard  include
a  prophecy  uttered  some  1800  years
ago  by  an  Apostle  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  one  of  the  Twelve  whom
He  chose  in  the  days  of  His  personal
ministry  upon  the  earth.  He  had
delivered  unto  them  the  keys  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven,  promising  them
that  whatsoever  they  bound  on  earth
should  be  bound  in  heaven  ;  what-
soever they  loosed  upon  earth  should
be  loosed  in  heaven  ;  whosesoever
sins  they  should  remit  should  be
remitter!,  and  whosesoever  sins  they
should  retain  should  be  retained.
He  gave  tliem  power  to  go  forth  to
all  nations  and  preach  the  Gospel  of
life  and  salvation,  telling  them
among  the  last  things  He  said  that,
"  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized
shall  be  saved  ;  but  he  that  believ-
eth not  shall  be  damned  ;"  and  that
certain  signs  should  follow  them
that  believed-  The  Apostles  went
forth  baptizing  in  the  name  of  the
Lord,  and  confirmed  His  word  by
signs,  following  :

On  a  certain  occasion,  towards  the
close  of  the  career  of  the  Son  of  God
in  the  flesh,  His  disciples  asked  Him
if  He  would  at  that  time  restore  the
Kingdom  to  Israel,  and  what  would
be  the  signs  of  His  second  coming


and  of  the  end  of  the  world.  Among
other  thintr*  He  told  them  chat  this

O

Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  should  be
preached  in  all  the  world  as  a  witness
unto  all  nations  an  I  then  shouidthe
end  come.  The  Apostles  set  out
upon  the  mission  which  had  been
given  them,  and  we  read  in  the  Acts
of  the  Apostles,  and  in  their  Epis-
tles contained  within  the  lids  of  this
holy  hook,  of  the  adventures  which
befell  them,  and  the  persecutions
which  they  endured.  It  had  been
said  of  them  by  their  Lord  and
Master,  that  they  should  he  hated  of
all  men  for  His  names  sakt* ;  but
M  blessed  are  ye,"  said  He,  **  when
men  shall  revile  you,  and  persecute
yuu,  and  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil
against  you  falsely  for  my  sake.
Rejoice,  and  be  exceeding  glad ;
for  great  is  your  reward  in  heaven  ;
for  so  persecuted  they  the  prophets
which  were  before  you/*  And  the  day
would  come,  He  said,  when  they
that  put  His  disciples  to  death
would  think  they  were  doing  God's
service.

Thus  were  the  minds  of  the
Apostles  prepared  for  the  fate  which
afterwards  befell  them.  They  em-
braced the  truth,  knowing  that  it
might  cost  them  their  lives ;  for
they  had  been  told  that  if  a  man
loved  his  life,  or  loved  earthly  pos-
sessions of  any  kind  more  than  he
did  his  God,  more  than  he  loved  the
work  of  that  God,  he  was  in  no  wise
fit  for  His  kingdom.  They  weutinto
it  with  their  eyes  open  j  they  knew
what  would  befall  them  ;  but  being
men  of  integrity,  men  who  loved
truth,  who  based  themselves  upon
principle,  and  thought  more  of
doing  the  will  of  Him  who  sent  them
than  they  did  of  doing  their  ownf
they  embraced  their  glorious  mission
and  were  willing  even  to  lay  down
their  lives  for  the  sake  of  that  King-
dom for  which  they  were  hi  bo  ring.


■


262


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES.


Their  expectations  were  fulfilled.
The  truth  was  {not  popular.  Al-
though devils  were  subject  to  these
men  j  ,  although  they  performed
mighty  miracles  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
yet  they  were  despised,  persecuted
or  ignored  by  the  great  mass  of  hu-
manity, A  few  believed  in  their
words  ;  a  few  rejoiced  exceedingly
that  the  Church  of  God  was  estab-
lished on  the  earth  ;  that  the  Savior
who  had  been  promised  as  a  lamb
slain  from  before  the  foundation  of
the  world,  had  at  last  come  in  fulfill-
ment of  the  prophecies  of  old.
Their  minds  were  prepared  to  receive
I  [im,  and  they  rejoiced  in  the  work
of  God,  Churches  were  formed  in
different  lands.  The  Apostles  went
forth  from  Jerusalem,  after  they  had
been  f  endued  with  power  from  on
high/1  and  built  up  churches  in  many
of  the  surrounding  nations,  perhaps
in  all  the  nations  that  then  existed.
But  although  they  were  successful
in  planting  the  tree  of  life  upon  the
soil  of  a  fallen  world,  it  seems  that
the  lime  had  not  come  lor  it  to  re-
main there  and  bear  fruit  throughout
the  ages  of  eternity.  It  was  destined
to  he  uprooted,  and  there  was  to
come  another  time  when  the  truth
should  be  transplanted  once  more,
and  should  bear  the  fruits  of
righteousness  forever.  The  glory
of  God  was  not  destined  in  that  day
to  cover  the  earth,  as  He  has  snid
it  would  in  the  latter  days,  M  as  the
waters  cover  the  mighty  deep."
The  Apostles  labored  faithfully ;
they  went  forth  baptizing  in  the
name  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,
and  the  Holy  Ghost ;  but  the  power
of  sin,  the  power  of  the  evil  one  was
so  great  that  it  did  not  please  the
Almighty  to  establish  upon  the  earth
in  that  day  a  work  which  should
endure  forever.  He  permitted  it
for  a  wise  purpose  to  be  thrown
down,  and  of  this  fact  we  are  well


assured  by  the  prophecies  of  the
Apostles  which  they  have  left  on

|  record.  Paul,  one  of  the  most
faithful  laborers  in  the  vineyard  of
our  Lord  in  that  day,  said  the  time
would  come  when  the  people  would

(  not  edure  sound  doctrine ;  but  after
their  own  lusts  should  heap  unto
themselves  teachers,  and  having
itching  ears,  should  turn  away  their
ears  from  the  truth,  and  should  be
turned  unto  fables.

If  we  follow  the  history  of  the
Apostles,  we  will  see  how  their  words
were  fulfilled.  Neatly  every  one  of
the  Twelve  whom  Jesus  chose,  met
with  a  tragic  death  in  defence  of
the  principles  which  they  proclaimed.
Some  were  draped  to  death,  some

,  beheaded,  one  was  crucified  with  his
head  downward,  others  were  thrown
into  cauldrons  of  boiling  oil  and
others  to  wild  beasts ;  so  that  at  the
end  of  the  second  century  after
Christ,  the  Church  of  God  in  its

i  purity  no  longer  existed  upon  the
face  of  the  earth.  It  had  been  torn
asunder  j  it  had  apostatized  from
the  truth  j  they  who  were  faithful
had  been  put  to  death,  and  in  their
place  sprang  up  a  race  of  compro-
misers, who  were  willing  to  barter
away  to  the  world  the  principles
of  truth,  being  too  weak  and  coward-
ly to  stand  and  die  for  their  convic-
tions as  their  fellow  laborers  had
done.  They  were  willing  to  give
up  this  principle,  and  concede  that
point,  to  amalgamate  for  the  purpose
of  making  them  popular  and  palat-
able the  doctrines  of  the  pure  Chris-
tian faith  with  the  pagan  ideas  of
ancient  Rome.  So  that  the  tem-
poral hotly  of  Christ,  the  Church,
became  corrupt,  deformed  by  this
departure  from  first  principles*
Apostles,  Prophets,  were  done  away
with  ;  spiritual  gifts  became  extinct
and  were  said  to  be  no  longer
needed  j  Bishops  were  put  into  the


VISION  OF  JOHN


THE  RKVELATOK.


263


places  of  Apostles,  and  a  multitude
of  new  offices,  unknown  to  the  I
original  church,  were  created.
Finally  two  Bishops  appeared,  t lie
Bishop  of  Rome  and  the  Bishop  of
Constantinople,  contending  as  to
which  was  the  greatest,  and  striving,
in  a  church  professing  to  regard
unity  and  brotherly  love,  to  divide
the  dominions  of  the  Christian  world
between  them.  More  attention
was  paid  to  outward  forms,  to  grand
and  imposing  ceremonies,  than  to
the  simple  beautiful  principles  of
the  Gospel,  and,  in  course  of  time  |
were  fn [filled  the  words  of  Isaiah,
who  said  that  they  would  "trans-!
gress  the  law,  change  the  ordinances,
ami  break  the  everlasting  covenant."
The  result  of  this  wide-spread  de-  |
parture,  this  apostacy  from  the
primitive  faith,  was  the  withdrawal
of  the  power  of  the  Priesthood,
typified  by  the  a  taanchild"  of  the
Apocalypse,  which  was  taken  into
the  heavens  to  preserve  it  from  the
mouth  of  the  Dragon  which  sought
its  life  ;  there  to  remain  until  a  more
auspicious  time  should  arrive  for
the  establishment  of  the  work  of
God,  and  the  winding  up  of  the
great  plan  of  human  redemp-
tion. '•'  >

But  one  of  these  original  Apostles
Was  left/  The  Latter-day  Saints  are
taught  that  Jesus,  uti  a  certain  occa-
sion, speaking  to  the  Twelve,  wished
to  bestow  upon  them  each  a  gift,  to
grant  the  desire  of  their  hearts,  and
He  asked  them  what  they  would  He
should  do  for  them.  They  all  but
one  requested  to  be  taken  home  to
Him  in  heaven  when  they  should
have  filled  the  allotted  age  of  man.
But  one  turned  away  sorrowful,
feeling  that  the  wish  lie  cherished
in  his  heart  was  too  great  to  be
granted,  Peter  asked  the  Savior,
"What  shall  this  man  do  1"  and  re-
ceived the  reply,  "  If  I  will  that


he  tarry  till  I  come  what  is  that  to
theei"  "Then  went  this  saying
abroad  among  the  brethren  that
that  disciple  should  not  die."  It  is
vaguely  given,  I  admit,  in  the  Bible
from  which  I  have  quoted,  but
modern  revelation  has  made  it
plainer,  and  shown  us  that  the
Apostle  John  obtained  a  promise
from  the  Savior  that  he  should  re-
main upon  the  earth  to  witness  the
downfall  and  the  rise  of  nations,
that  he  should  live  to  perform  a
mighty  mission  in  the  midst  of  the
children  of  men  ;  that  he  should
prophesy  before  kings  and  rulers,
and  should  tarry  upon  the  earth  un-
til the  Sou  of  God  came  in  His
glory.  This  Apostle  was  the  only
one  who  escaped  the  tragic  fate  of
his  fellows.  He  was  the  only  one  of
the  original  Twelve  who  was  not  pub
to  death.  An  attempt  was  made  upon
his  life  by  throwing  him  into  a  caul-
dron of  boiling  oil,  but  lie  escaped
miraculously,  and  his  enemies,  not
having  the  power  to  put  him  to
death,  ban  is  lied  him  to  the  desert
island  of  Patmos,  It  was  (hiring
his  exile  upon  this  lonely  spot,  that
God  condescended  to  reveal  to  him
what  should  come  to  pass  in  the  last
days,  and  the  book  which  is  called
the  Apocalypse  is  a  record  which
the  Apostle  left  of  the  great  things
that  were  shown  him,  and  which  he
should  remain  upon  the  earth  to  see*
An  angel  appeared  unto  him;  John
j  mistook  him,  it  seems,  for  the  Lord,
and  fell  down  at  his  feet  to  worship
him,  his  person  was  so  glorious.
But  the  angel  reproved  him  and  said,
"  See  thou  do  it  not :  for  I  am  thy
fellow-servant  and  of  thy  brethren
the  prophets/'  Here  was  one  of
I  the  prophets  who  had  been  slain  for
the  testimony  of  Jesus,  who  was
so  glorious  when  he  appeared  that
John,  who  perhaps  had  labored
I  with  liim,  did  not  recognize  him,  He


264


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


had  been  sent  unto  him  to  show  him
what  should  come  to  pass  there-
after.

But  not  only  was  John  shown
what  should  occur  after  the  time  in
which  he  was  living,  hut  ho  was
shown  what  had  already  taken  place;
rot  ss  the  imperfect  records  oi  pro-
fane  history  have  yiven  it  to  us,  but
he  saw  it  typified  in  its  fullness.
The  event 8  «>f  tie  seven  thousand
years  of  the  world's  temporal  exist-
ence passe 1 1  before  him,  like  the
scenes  of  a  mighty  panorama.  If
you  will  read  tin-  book  which  he  left,
you  will  there  find  portrayed  Sym-
bolical I  y  each  of  the  seven  thousand
years.  He  saw  the  e vents  which
had  followed  the  creation  down  un-
til one  period  had  passed  ;  lie  then
^aw  the  events  of  the  second  thous-
and yeai**  or  until  two  periods  had
parsed,  and  then  the  third  and  the
fourth  ]  eiiods,  at  the  end  of  which
Jetns  mine  as  tie  Savior  of  man-
kind, to  perform  a  j  ei  tonal  work  in
the  fle*h.  dohn  saw.  further,  the
events  of  the  fifth  thousand  years.
He  f;iw  the  g'eat  apnstaey  that  was
to  take  place  in  the  Christian  church,
when  they  put  to  death  every  in-
spiied  man  ;  when  thvy  did  away
wiih  the  gxftH  and  blessings  of  the
Holy  Ghost  ;  when  they  fttid  they
weie  .  no  longer  necessary  ;  when
the)*  engrafted  1 1 1  on  the  olive  ttee
of  tie  Christum  faith  the  wild
branches  of  paganism.  He  saw  all
this  taking  place  down  to  the  sixth
thousand  years,  and  after  the  world
had  wain  It-red  in  darkness  for  cen-
turies, he  say  a  :

Arid  I  *aw  another  an^cl  flv  in
the  midst  of  heaven,  having  the
evor  lasting  Gospel  to  preach  unto
them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  and
to  every  natioa  and  kindred,  and
tongue,  ami  ]»eople.

**  Saying  with  a  loud  voice,  fear
God,  and  <;ive  glory  to  Him;  for  the


hour  of  His  judgment  is  come  :  and
worship  Him  that  made  heaven,
and  earth,  and  the  sea,  ami  the
fountains  of  waters."

Showing  conclusively,  as  well  as
language  can  show,  that  tins  was  to
be  an  event  of  the  last  days— the
hour  of  God's  judgment,  which
Christianity  itself,  in  its  perverted
state,  will  admit  is  at  the  end  of  the
world.  John  saw  the  angel  restor-
ing the  Gospel  shortly  before  the
hour  of  Gods  judgment,  saying
with  a  loud  voice  to  all  nations,
kindreds,  tongues  and  peoples — not
only  to  the  heathen  Tuitions,  hut  to
those  who  professed  tu  have  the  true
Christian  faith — "Fear  God,  ami
give  glory  to  Him,  for  the  hour  of
his  judgment  is  come."  This  to  us
is  another  proof  of  the  apostasy  of
the  Christian  world  ;  for  if  they  had
the  truth,  as  they  claim,  by  apostolic
succession,  from  St  Peter  down  to
the  present  day — what  need  of
restoring  the  Gospel  in  it*  fullness
to  preach  to  themf  It  would  be  su-
perfluous, unnecessary,  a  work  of
supererogation,  to  preach  to  those
who  were  living  in  the  full  blaze  of
Gospel  light,  and  call  upon  them  to
repent  of  their  sins.

I  never  like  to  wound  people's
feelings  in  regard  to  religious  mat-
teis.  1  never  like  to  have  my  own
feelings  wounded.  I  try  to  have
charity  for  the  sincere  bentiments
of  all  men  ;  but  it  is  needful  that
the  truth  be  spoken  in  plainness*
It  is  no  act  of  friendship  to  flatter,
to  deceive  and  to  gloss  over  error,
when  by  exposing  it  the  souls  of
some  honest  people  may  be  saved.
The  Latter-day  Saints  erect  a  nobler
structure  before  they  tear  down  that
which  is  old.  They  do  not  wish  to
ridicule  the  opinions  of  their  fellow
creatines,  it  should  never  be  done
except  where  good  will  be  the  result.
All  men  have  the  right  to  believe


god's  day  a  thousand  of  our  years


265


as  they  please.  They  have  a  right
to  worship  where,  how  and  what  they
please.  God  has  made  us  free.
Vie  are  in  bondage  to  no  man,  to
do  power.  His  children,  from  the
rising  to  the  setting  of  the  sun  have
been  made  free.  Therefore  I  do
not  feel  to  ridicule  the  religion  of
my  Christian  friends;  but  1  desire
to  lay  hefore  them  and  before  this
congregation  the  religion  of  the  J
Latter-day  Saints,  We  claim  that
the  Christian  world  is  in  a  state  of
apostasy,  and  though  thousands
and  millions  of  tliem  are  perfectly
sincere — just  as  sincere  in  their  be-
lief as  we  are  in  ours — still,  it  de-
volves upon  me  as  a  servant  of  God
to  preach  what  I  know  to  be  the
truth,  and  you  can  take  your  choice
whether  you  accept  or  reject  it.
The  responsibily  ends  with  me  here;
it  is  assumed  by  those  who  listen,
who  can  act  as  they  fo*»l  led  ;  they
will  be  accountable  whether  they
give  heed  to  the  warning  message,
or  whether  they  ignore  and  reject  it.

At  any  rate  John  saw  the  time  j
when  an  angel  would  come  and  re-
store the  everlasting  Gospel — not  ■
another  Gospel,  not  various  kinds
of  gospels,  not  the  precepts  ami  fa-
bles 5f  men,  but  the  good,  old,  ,
"  sound  doctrine"  of  ancient  times.
The  Gospel  of  Christ  in  its  fullness
was  to  be  preached  to  all  the  nations  ,
of  the  earth. What  for? To  fulfill
the  prediction  of  the  son  of  God,  i
who  said  that  11  this  Gospel  of  the  !
kingdom**— that  Gospel. which  had
Apostles  to  preach  it  and  Prophets;
which  had  gifts  and  miracles  and
signs  following  ;  a  gospel  of  faith,
repentance,  baptism  by  immersion  j
for  the  remission  of  sins,  ami  laying
on  of  hands  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  other  principles  to  be  re-
vealed one  after  another  as  fast  as
the  people  were  able to  receive
them — that  this  old  original  Gospel


of  the  kingdom  should  come  back
to  the  earth  to  be  preached  as  a  wit-
ness unto  all  nations,  and  then
should  the  end  come.

That  these  are  the  last  days  very
few  people  will  deny*  The  earth
has  almost  fulfilled  its  mortal  ]n.
hation,  its  working  time.  It  is
closing  the  six  thousand  years  of
its  temporal  history.  It  has  worked
nearly  six  days  ;  for  **  a  day  with
the  Lord  is  as  a  thousand  years.
When  God  said  to  Adam,  41  hi  the
day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shah
surely  die/1  He  did  not  mean  a
short  day  of  twenty-four  hours,  a
day  ma<le  by  one  little  revolution  of
the  little  earth  upon  which  we  dwell,
but  it  was  a  day  of  a  thousand
years,  corresponding  to  one  revolu-
tion of  the  great  and  mighty  planet
upon  which  God  onr  Father  dwells.
44  In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  there-
of thou  shalt  surely  die."  Adam
lived  to  the  age  of  DM  years,  so  that
he  died  within  the  day  that  God  had
reference  to.  The  earth  has  labored
nearly  six  days — six  days  of  one
thousand  years  each.  It  is  yet  to
have  its  sabbath,  its  milleuium  of
peace,  when  the  Savior  ot  the  world
will  come  to  take  the  reins  of  gov-
ernment, to  reign  upon  the  earth
King  of  kings  as  He  now  reigns
king  of"  Saints  ;  the  seventh  period,
whose  dawn  is  almost  upon  us,  is
the  sabbath,  the  day  of  rest  which
God  has  cmiained  tor  the  planet
upon  which  we  live,  and  He  will
celebrate  that  sabbath  by  coming  in
person  to  reign  upon  the  earth  over
all  nations.  It  is  for  this  that  the
Latter-day  Saints  are  preparing  ;
having  fulfilled,  as  the  instruments
of  God,  the  prediction  of  John  the
Kevelator;  an  angel  in  this  day
having  restored  the  Gospel,  which
is  now  being  preached  as  a  witness
unto  all  nations,  and  then  shall  the
end  come.


26G


JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES


It  is  a  merciful  characteristic  of
our  Heavenly  Father  that  He  brings
to  pass  upon  the  human  family  no
event  affecting  their  eternal  welfare,
but  He  first  sends  Prophets  to  pre-
pare the  way,  to  tiive  the  people  a
warning  that  such  and  such  things
are  coining  to  pass,  that  they  may
he  preparer!  fur  them  and  not  be
caught  napping  by  the  suddenness
of  their  coming,  even  as  a  thief  in
the  night,  \\\*  read  that  as  it:  was
in  the  days  of  Noah,  so  shall  it  be
in  the  davs  of  the  coin  ins;  of  the  Sou
of  Man,  What  was  done  in  the
days  of  Noah?  A  prophet — Noah
himself — was  :aised  up  and  sent
forth  to  preach  a  warning  message
to  the  children  of  men.  What  was
his  warning  i  That  the  world  was
about  to  be  deluged.  Its  sins  had
cried  unto  heaven,  and  God  had  re-
membered its  iniquities,  He  was
about  to  baptize  the  earth  in  water,
to  wash  away  its  sins,  that  they
should  no  longer  smoke  to  heaven,
an  ottering  of  wrath  to  an  offended
God.  Noah  preached  this  warning,
and,  as  usual,  was  met  with  ridicule
and  scorn.  Never  did  a  prophet
come  forth  that  was  not  ridiculed
and  persecuted,  and  the  message
that  he  proclaimed  considered  fool-
ishness by  the  wisdom  of  the  world.
But  how  did  it  result?  Did  the
superior  (?)  wisdom  of  the  world
in  that  day  save  them  from  the  truth
of  the  words  of  Noah  ?  Or  did  God
stand  by  that  prophet?  Did  He
make  good  His  words?  Did  He
drown  the  world?  Did  He  sweep
the  wicked  from  its  surface?  History
will  tell  you  what  took  place.  It
sees  that  Noah  and  the  few  souls
that  clung  to  him  were  right,  and
the  world  at  large  were  in  the  wrong.
Noah  had  really  received  a  revelation
from  God,  He  was  pointed  at,
despised  and  derided,  doubtless
called  visionary  and  fanatic,  an  old


fool,  or  anything  else  ;  but  he  had
received  a  revelation  and  God  made
good  the  words  which  he  pro-
claimed*

The  earth  underwent  a  baptism
by  being  immersed  in  water,  for  the
remission  of  its  sins,  the  washing
away  of  its  iniquities*  "  As  it  was
in  the  days  of  Noah,  so  shall  it  be
in  the  days  of  the  coming  of  the  Son
of  Man,"  Is  the  world  to  be  deluged
in  water  again  1  No;  because  God
gave  a  promise  to  Noah  and  set  his
bow*  in  the  clouds  as  a  sign  that  the
world  should  never  again  be  drowned
in  water ;  but  in  the  day  of  the  com-
ing of  the  Son  of  Man  it  will  receive
the  baptism  of  fire  and  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  John  the  Baptist  said  :
i ere  comet h  one  mightier  than
I,  after  me,  the  latchet  of  whose
shoe*  I  am  not  worthy  to  stoop  down
and  unloose.  I  indeed  have  bap-
tized you  with  water  :  he  shall  bap-
tize you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and
with  lire/1  Not  only  man,  but  the
ear tli  itself,  which  is  a  living  crea-
ture, must  undergo  this  ordinance —
this  dual  baptism,  and  Jesus,  when
Hp  comes  in  the  clouds  of  heaven
with  power  and  great  glory,  to  take
vengeance  upon  those  who  know  not
God,  who  have  not  sought  to  know
Him,  who  have  persecuted  His  peo-
ple, and  set  aside  the  Gospel  as  a
thing  of  naught,  will  deluge  the
earth  with  fire  and  the  Holy  Ghost
Then  will  the  Scriptures  be  fulfilled
which  say  that  the  glory  of  God
shall  radiate  from  the  rivers  to  the
ends  of  the  earth.

Nor  is  this  all.  The  earth  and
its  elements  will  melt,  as  Peter  the
Apostle  said,  "  with  fervent  heat,
!  and  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that
do  wickedly  shall  be  stubble  ;  and
the  day  that  cometh  shall  burn
them  up,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,"
These  things  are  coming  to  pass.
God  only  has  to  turn  upon  this


TIIK  WARNING  MESSAGE  OF  THE  GOSPEL,


267


world  the  glory  of  His  presence  to
consume  it  from  before  His  face  and  !
cause  it  to  vanish  like  chaff  in  a
flame*  We  are  not  prepared  for  the
glory  of  His  coming.  But  this  work
which  has  been  established  in  our
day,  is  one  that  will  prepare  us  for
His  glorious  advent.  All  who  believe
and  are  baptized  into  this  Church
have  been  promised!  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  What  is  the  Holy
Ghost?  It  is  the  Spirit  of  God.
God  dwells  in  the  pure  element  of
fire  ;  it  is  the  atmosphere  which  the  j
holy  angeU,  the  spirits  of  the  just,
the  Gods  in  eternity  breathe  and
live  within,  but  which  would  con-
sume us  if  we  came  too  suddenly
upon  itt  or  it  upon  us.  We  must
needs  approach  it  gradually.  We
read  that  in  the  days  of  Moses,  whin  j
God  wished  to  commune  with  him,
He  called  him  up  into  a  high  moun-
tain, anil  filled  him  with  the  Holy
Ghost,  Moses,  therefore,  could  j
endure  His  presence  ;  hut  when
he  came  down  from  the  Mount  Ins
face  shone  like  an  angel's,  and  he
had  to  put  a  vail  upon  it  lest  the
children  of  Israel  shoul 1  l><1  con-
sumed before  him.  This  shows
what  we  may  expect  when  God
comes  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  if  we
do  not  rid  ourselves  of  iniquity  and
prepare  our  souls  to  meet  Him.
But  ere  that  day  comes  there  shall
be  wars  and  rumors  of  wars,  thun-
ders and  lightnings,  famines  and
pestilences ;  the  sea  shall  heave
itself  beyond  its  bounds,  and  all
things  shall  lie  in  commotion  ;  the
sun  shall  be  darkened,  the  moon
shall  be  turned  lo  blood,  and  the  .
stars  shall  fall  from  heaven  like  figs
from  off  a  fig  tree.  The  judgments
of  God  shall  stalk  through  the
earth,  decimating  the  human  race,
before  the  great  day  of  the  Lord
shall  come.

Are  we  to  suppose  that  in  a  day


like  this,  when  such  mighty  anrt
terrible  things  are  coming  upon  the
earth,  God  would  leave  the  world
in  darkness;  that  he  would  shut  the
heavens,  as  our  Christian  friends
say  He  has  done  ;  and  send  forth
no  more  prophets  to  prepare  us  for
these  great  events  which  are  at  our
doors  ?  I  for  one  would  have  a  very
poor  opinion  of  a  God  w  ho  wuuid
leave  His  children  in  that  cruel
manner.  But  the  God  we  worship
is  just  and  merciful  He  never
i  brings  upon  the  earth  any  judgment
but  He  sends  first  a  warning  mes-
sage to  prepare  the  people  for  its
coming

This  is  our  warning  to-day — that
the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom  is  being
preached  unto  all  nations  as  a  wit-
ness, and  then  the  hour  of  God's
judgment,  or  the  predicted  end  of
the  world  shall  come.  It  is  a  mes-
sage of  mercy,  not  one  of  anger,  not
orm  of  cruelty.  It  is  not  cruel  to
tell  men  the  truth.  If  we  see  a
man  on  the  brink  of  a  precipice  and
tell  him  that  if  he  takes  another
step  for  war- 1  he  will  be  dashed  to
pieces,  is  that  cruelty,  or  is  it  charity
oi  the  truest  kind  I  It  may  humil-
iate htm  to  be  told  of  his  danger  ;
it  may  cast  reflection  upon  his  eye-
sight ;  he  may  not  see  the  precipice^
men  do  not  always  see  things  which
are  immediately  near  them ;  they
who  are  at  a  distance  sometimes
observe  the  danger  first  and  give
warning.  It  is  not  uncharitable,  it
is  not  intolerant  to  tell  men  the
truth  ;  wu  must  sometimes  be  cruel
in  order  to  be  kind  ;  and  hurt  mens
feelings  if  necessary  in  order  to  save-
!  their  souls.  I  do  not  mean  the
saving  of  their  souls  by  the  killing
of  their  bodies.  Heretics  used  to>
be  punished  on  that  theory,  Tim
object  of  "  Mor monism"  is  to  save
the  body  and  the  spirit,  which
together  constitute  the  soul.


268  journal  or

This  is  the  message  we  bring,  the
olive  branch  that  we  extend  to  the
world,  and  for  so  doing  we  are  des-
pised and  persecuted  and  trampled
tipom  But  we  know  that  we  need
expect  no  different  fate  from  that
which  our  predecessors  have  expe-
rienced. They  laid  down  their  lives
in  preaching  this  same  Gospel  We
must  he  willing  to  lay  down  ours,  if
need  be,  to  establish  these  truths
upon  the  earth.

God  does  not  punish  except  to
save,  He  never  c  has  tens  except  to
purity.  In  sweeping  the  antedilu-
vian races  from  the  earth,  it  was  an
act  of  mercy  to  them,  that  they
might  not  add  sin  to  sin  and  heap
up  iniquity  until  they  could  not  have
been  pardoned.  He  swept  them
off  when  their  cup  was  full,  and  im-
prisoned their  spirits  while  their
bodies  mouldered  in  the  grave,
Jesus,  however,  while  His  body  was
lying  in  the  tomb,  went  and  preach-
ed to  the  spirits  in  prison  ;  those
who  rejected  the  message  that  was
offered  to  them  by  Noah,  ant  I  were
swept  away  by  the  flood.  So  it  will
be  in  tins  day,  if  this  message  is
rejected  ;  God  will  bring  judgments
upon  the  world  until  He  has  humbled
the  people  to  a  state  where  they  will
be  clad  to  receive  it  He  says  to
His  Elders;  Go  ye  into  all  the  world
and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  crea-
ture ;  and  after  your  testimony,
comes  the  testimony  of  earthquakes
and  tempests,  of  thunders  and  light-
nings, of  the  sea  heaving  itself  be-
yond its  bounds,  of  wars  and  rumors
of  wars,  of  famine  and  pestilence.
Says  He,  the  time  shall  come  when
he  that  will  not  take  up  his  sword
against  his  neighbor  must  needs  tiee
unto  Zion  for  safety,  for  there  shall
be  gathered  to  it  of  every  nation  un-
der heaven,  and  they  shall  be  the
only  people  who  are  not  at  war  one
with  another.


DISCOURSES.

It  is  that  the  world  may  escape
these  terrible  judgments  and  plagues
that  will  desolate  the  wicked,  that
we  put  our  lives  and  liberties  in

•jeopardy  in  preaching  that  which  is
unpopular,  and  which  brings  upon
us  the  wrath  and  hatred  of  the  world.
We  desire,  as  much  as  men  can  de-
sire, the  salvation  of  our  fellow- men.
Our  mission  is  to  save,  not  to  con-
demn. This  is  the  Gospel  of  salva-
tion, not  a  Gospel  of  damnation.
Damnation  follows  as  a  necessary
alternative  of  the  rejection  of  the
truth.  Men  who  reject  the  truth
damn  themselves.  The  man  who
will  shut  the  door  in  his  own  face
keeps  himself  out  from  the  King-
dam  :  it  is  nobodVs  fault  but  his
own.  The  waters  of  life  are  free  ;
come  and  partake  of  them,  without
money  and  without  price  !  If  you
will  not  partake  of  them,  how  can
you  blame  any  one  but  yourself  if

j  you  die  of  thirst  in  the  desert  1  If
you  put  out  the  light  by  persecuting
the  Saints  of  God,  how  can  you
blame  anybody  but  yourself  if  you
are  left  in  darkness  ?  Could  the
ancients  blame  God  for  taking  His
Church  from  the  earth,  when  they
tuck  every  pains  to  exterminate  it?
They  destroyed  the  hotly  of  the
Church,  fmd  the  spirit  departed,  just
as  naturally  n>  wIrmi  the  body  of  a
man  is  killed;  his  spirit  has  no
longer  any  business  upon  the  earth.
It  returns  to  God  who  gave  it,  to
come  again  at  a  more  auspicious
time,  with  the  Sou  of  God  in  clouds
of  glory,  provided  it  be  one  of  the
144,000  faithful  ones  who  follow
the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.

If  condemnation  follows  the  re-
jection of  the  Gospel,  God  cannot
help  it,  His  servants  cannot  help  it.
If  we  invite  men  to  come  out  into
the  sunlight  and  they  prefer  to  stay
in  the  shade,  who  is  to  blame  but

I  themselves! They  prefer  darkness


TESTIMONY.


269


to  light.  They  have  their  choice.
Light  has  burst  forth  in  the  midst ;
of  darkness,  but  the  darkness  com-
prehend eth  it  not.  Men  Jove  dark-
ness rather  than  light,  because  their
deeds  are  evil.  If,  however,  we  ex-
tend the  message  of  mercy  and  of
peace,  our  responsibility  ends.  Men  j
will  be  judged  by  the  light  they
possess.  The  heathen  nations  will
be  redeemed  and  will  obtain  a  higher
exaltation  than  those  who  receive  .
the  truth  and  turn  away  from  it,  or
refuse  to  accept  it  when  it  is  offered
to  them,  God  is  merciful  to  ignor-
ance and  lack  of  opportunity  ;  but
responsibility  rests  like  a  mountain
upon  those  who  hear  the  truth  and
then  reject  it.

My  testimony  to  this  congrega-
tion is  that  Joseph  Smith  was  a
Prophet  of  the  living  God ;  that  I


Brigham  Young  was  a  Prophet  of
God  ;  That  John  Taylor  is  their  le-
gally ordained  successor  ;  that  there
are  Prophets  and  Apostles  in  this
Church  to-day;  that  we  preach  the
same  Gospel  that  was  preached  in
the  days  of  Paul,  for  if  we  preached
any  other  we  should  be  accursed.
My  testimony  is  that  "Mormonisiu"
stigmatized  and  hated  as  it  is,  is  the
fullness  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  the  only  plan  of  life  and  sal-
vation, the  only  one  that  will  exalt
man  in  the  presence  of  God ;  and
the  world  reject  it  to  their  condem-
nation. I  pray  God  to  bless  this
congregation,  and  grant  that  the
words  I  have  spoken  may  sink  into
some  honest  hearts,  like  good  seed
upon  fertile  soil,  to  spring  forth  and
bear  fruit  for  their  salvation  to  the
honor  aud  glory  of.God.  Amen.


REMARKS BY JUNIUS F.  WELLS,

^.Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

July  JMht  1885.


REPORTED  BY  JOHN  IRVINE*


REFUSAL  OF  SO-CALLED  CHRISTIANS  TO  RECEIVE  THE  GOSPEL  OF  CHRIST
— THE  LATTEK-DAY  SAINTS  DESIRE  INVESTIGATION  OF  THEIR  PRIN-
CIPLES— THE  TRUTH  CANNOT  BE  DESTROYED — WE  HAVE  EVERY
REQUISITE  FOR  SELF-GOVERNMENT— WE  MUST  MAINTAIN  OUR
FIDELITY  TO  THE  TRUTH — RARITY  OF  CRIME  AMONG  Tfi^"  MOR-
MONS*'— PURITY  OF  "  MORMON**  lIptyKS  —  CHARACTER  6f  THE
LATTER-DAY >AIJiXS,  ^{j  j  my eaiulUiiD >  ^nh  i

It  is  with  pleasure  that  I  arise  to  1  and  to  bear  myv  testimony*" tootle

speak  to  you,  for  a  few'Diomejits,  1  truth  bf  the  work-in  which  we  aie

r ■  ttj  at  TSlio  u  stii  ilfc  To h  il  v dt  lu  t9lu<j&Kr


270


JOURNAL  O*  UiSCUUUSl>.


engaged.  I  desire  while  I  am  before
you  that  I  may  have  the  support  of
your  faith  and  prayers,  that  what  I
may  say  may  be  dictated  by  the
spirit  of  truth.  I

I  rejoice  in  assembling  with  the
Latter-day  Saints,  in  looking  upon
their  faces,  in  mingling  with  them
in  the  exercises  of  devotion  which  I
WC  are  accustomed  to  pay  our  Father
and  God,  I  rejoice  in  the  society  of
Latter-day  Saints,  because  in  their
society  I  recognize  a  spirit  of  purity,  |
of  holiness  and  virtue,  that  in  con-
trast with  the  state  of  things  that
predominates  in  the  world  is  as  the
heavens  to  the  earth,  I  love  to  be
with  our  people  in  times  when  the
wicked  assail  them,  for  I  feel  among
them  a  sense  of  safety,  a  feeling
of  security,  of  contentment,  of
happiness  that  I  do  not  believe  can
be  realized  to  so  great  an  extent
Among  other  people,

We  have  among  us  our  differences
and  evils.  We  have  causes  to  mourn;
occasions  that  make  us  feel  sad  ;  but
1  knowof  nothing  that  produces  this
feeling  to  so  great  a  degree  among
the  Saints  as  the  growing  conscious-
ness among  them  that  w  hat  is  called
the  Christian  world  has  concluded
Dot  to  receive  Christianity  as  it  was
revealed  in  the  ministry  of  Jesus
Christ.  We  know  that  God  lias
revealed  in  the  day  in  which  we  live
the  principles  of  truth  as  they  were
in  the  beginning,  as  they  ever  have
been,  as  they  ever  must  be  in  time
and  all  eternity.  We  know  that
that  which  He  has  revealed  in  our
day  and  generation  is  identical  with
the  truths  that  fell  from  the  lips  of
our  Savior  in  the  meridian  of  time,
and  challenge  the  world  to  a  com-
parison of  the  doctrines  to  convince
themselves.  This  challenge  has
been  sent  abroad  to  almost  every
nation,  and  kindred  and  tongue  aud
people,  of  the  whole  earth. It  is


open  to-day.  We  ask  the  investiga-
tion of  mankind.  We  ask  our  fel-
low-men, brethren  and  sisters,  sons
and  daughters  of  the  same  God,  to
listen  to  the  truths  of  heaven,
eternal  truths  that  God  has
revealed,  But  mankind  prefers,
apparently,  even  in  this  enlightened
age  the  truth  that  men  by  their  own
wisdom  are  enabled  to  discover  to
the  truths  which  God  by  His  infinite
wisdom  reveals.  Tins  is  true  to  so
great  an  extent  that  the  foremost
thinkers  even  among  what  is  called
the  religious  world,  have  concluded
to  lay  aside  the  old  truths  of  Chris-
tianity— the  old  doctrines  of  Chris-
tianity— as  unfitted  to  the  age  in
which  we  live.  I  had  the  pleasure,
I  think  eight  weeks  ago  to-day,  to
listen  to  first  of  a  series  of  sermons
by  perhaps  the  foremost  clergyman
of  this  age,  certainly  of  the  country,
in  which,  in  his  inimitable  manner,
he  said  lie  had  concluded,  after  the
profoundest  thought  and  research,
that  people  should  wipe  out  many
of  the  old  ideas  of  religion  that  have
prevailed  in  Christendom  for  1S0O
years,  so  as  to  maintain  harmony
with  the  modern  discoveries  of
science — with  the  Darwinian  theory
and  philosophy.  He  has  also  sac-
rificed the  book  upon  which  tiieir
faiths  and  beliefs  are  founded,  and  as
the  surest  possible  evidence  that
faith  in  that  sacred  record,  the  Holy
Bible,  is  a  thing  of  the  past,  Rev.
Henry  Ward  Beech er  declares  that
if  it  is  true  then  **  Mormouism"  is
true  !  We  are  exactly  of  the  same
opinion  as  Rev,  Beecher  in  that
respect  But  it  dues  not  prove
altogether  the  falsity  of  that  which
has  been  accepted  in  the  world  as
Christianity,  The  Bible  contains
the  doctrines  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  preach,  that  the  Latter-day
Saints  have  the  courage  in  the  face
of  all  the  world  to  practice.  They


THE  WORLDS  JUDGMENT  DOES  NOT  AFFECT  THE  TRUTH.  271


are  doctrines  of  truth,  of  holiness,
of  progress  and  advancement,  de-
signed to  save  men,  to  build  them
up,  to  develope  the  best  thoughts
iu  them,  and  prepare  them  for
greater  light  and  greater  knowledge  '
and  understanding  than  dawned  \
upon  mankind  in  ages  past;  to  pre-
pare a  people  by  their  intelligence,
by  their  fully  developed  characters,
for  that  glorious  day  when  the  Son
of  God  shall  come  among  them  and
dwell  with  them.  It  is  true  that  it
is  impossible  for  the  Christian  world
to  harmonize  many  of  the  doctrines
that  are  growing  in  favor  with  them
to-day  with  the  holy  Scripture?,  and
for  that  reason  the  Latter-day  Saints
mourn  that  their  brethren  ami  sis-
ters of  the  world,  though  ptofessiug
Christianity,  should  be  averse  to
receiving  the  principles  of  Chris-
tianity  as  they  were  revealed  by  the
^Savior  Himself.  To-day  with  all  the
Christianity  that  prevails  in  the
world  where  do  you  find  men  who  are
willing  to  receive  the  very  first,  the
fundamental  principles  of  the  doc-
trine of  Christ  1  Where  are  those
who  will  receive  the  ministry  of  such
as  conveyed  Christian  principles  iu
the  meridian  of  time  to  the  under-
standing of  men  1  What  !  the  ad-
ministration of  angels  in  our  day
and  age  of  the  world  1  A  greater
absurdity  could  not  be  proposed.
What !  faith  as  the  first  principle  of
salvation  1  No,  reason  is  the  first
principle  of  salvation  in  the  day  and
age  in  which  we  live.  But  it  is  not
so  written  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ.
u  Believe  and  thou  shalt  be  saved"
is  the  doctrine  of  the  Savior.  It
is  belief,  it  is  faith,  that  underlies
that  knowledge  which  secures  man-
kind an  entrance  into  the  Kingdom
of  God,  We  teach  and  have  been
taught  that  we  must  have  faith  in
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  that  we  must
believe  in  the  words  of  truth  that


have  been  revealed  from  Him  ;  that
we  must  put  our  trust  in  God  who
has  delivered  His  people  iu  times
that  are  past  ami  gone;  that  we  must
rely  upon  His  direction  and  walk  in
the  path  that  He  shall  lead  us  in,
fearing  only  Him,  fearing  not  mm
who  can  destroy  the  body  but  fear-
ing God  who  can  destroy  both  body
and  soul.  In  our  endeavor  to  keep
the  commandments  of  God,  to  prac-
tice them,  to  heed  the  teachings  of
angel3  sent  from  the  throne  of  grace,
to  put  away  our  sins,  to  live  pure
lives,  holy  and  righteous  in  the  sight
of  God  and  our  fellow  men,  to  enter
into  sacred  places  -and  administer
the  ordinances  of  everlasting  life
for  ourselves  and  for  our  dead — iu
endeavoring  to  do  these  things  we
I  have  incurred  the  displeasure  of  an
unbelieving  world,  of  those  who
have  substituted  something  else  as
the  first  principles  of  life  and  salva-
tion for  those  which  were  given
1800  years  ago  by  the  Savior  of  the
world.  The  world  has  assumed  co
sit  in  judgment  upon  us  for  this  be-
lief. The  world  has  assumed  to
say  that  we  have  done  wrong  in  ac-
cepting these  truths  and  living  re-
cording to  the  law  which  God  has
revealed  for  our  guidance  and  our
government.  Now,  for  one  I  do  not
believe  that  the  judgment,  in  this
respect,  of  the  world  will  materially
affect  us  in  practicing  and  carrying
out  the  purposes  of  Jehovah.  Cer-
tainly it  cannot  change  the  truth.
If  Mormon  ism  is  truth  the  adverse
criticism  and  judgment  of  mankind
cannot  materially  affect  its  practice.
They  certainly  cannot  stand  against
that  power  which  ever  accompanies
the  promulgation  of  truth,  Because
of  this  Latter-day  Saiuts  have  no
fears  of  the  future.  We  are  daunt-
less in  our  advocacy  of  these  princi-
ples because  we  know  that  they  are
true  and  must  therefore  prevail.  m


272


JOURNAL  OF  PISCOUKSE8.


There  is  very  little  endeavor,  I
may  here  remark,  on  the  part  of
those  who  seek  to  abuse,  and  misre-
present us  and  to  bring  down  upon
us  evils— there  is  among  them  very
little  disposition  to  examine  the
principles  tliat  we  profess  and  teach;
there  is  very  little  disposition  among
them  or  desire  to  ascertain  if  these
things  are  not  true,  M  to  find  any-
thing in  th  e  way  of  argument  against
that  which  we  teach  and  practice
before  the  world.  They  have  sent
up  the  strong  religious  men  of  the
nation  to  *how  us  the  error  of  our
ways.  We  have  gladly  met  them.
\V  e  have  met  them  in  this
building  in  discussion  for  the
purpose  of  having  them  bring
iorth  their  reasons  to  show  that  we
are  in  error  and  that  the  judgment
of  the  world  is  right  What  lias
br  en  thft  result  ?  The  faith  of  the
Latter  day  Saints  has  been  increased;
they  have  been  con  finned  and
strengthened  in  their  belief ;  and
we  have  heard  very  little  boasting  of
the  success  of  those  who  were  sent
to  show  us  the  error  of  our  ways.  I
imagine  that  if  there  had  been  suc-
cess we  would  never  have  heard  the
last  of  it,

Tins  judgment  of  the  world
against  us,  assuming  that  we  are
wrong,  assuming  that  there  is  some-
thing up  lie  re  in  Utah  that  is  not
ri^ht,  that  is  not  consistent  with
Christianity,  or  the  enlightenment
of  the  age,  has  caused,  perhaps,  some
distress,  caused  us  to  witness  scene?
that  have  a  tendency  to  try  the  faith
of  the  Latter  day  Saints,  to  prove
their  integrity.  For  one,  viewing
the  matter  in  that  light,  I  thank
God  for  it  I  thank  God  that  we
are  permitted  to  live  in  a  day  and
age  of  the  world  when  He  has  not
forgotten  His  people,  and  has  demon-
strated  to  them  and  to  mankind  as
well,  that  they  are  in  possession  of


the  truth.  If  we  were  of  the  world
the  world  would  love  its  own  ;  but
we  have  come  out  of  the  world,
therefore  the  world  hate  us.  They
have  in  various  ways  manifested
their  evil  disposition  towards  us,
since  the  commencement  of  tho
Church  and  Kingdom  of  God  upon
the  earth  in  this  generation.  Since
the  day  that  Joseph  Smith  received
the  revelations  of  God  through  the
administration  of  angels  from  heaven,
there  has  been  a  hue  and  cry  raised
against  our  people — an  endeavor  to
blot  out  the  work  that  the  Saints
have  been  engaged  in.  But  let  me
tell  you,  my  faith  and  belief  and
testimony  is  that  the  world  has  lost
its  opportunity  to  destroy  that  which
is  called  44  Mormonism  f  that  God's
eternal  truth,  as  receive  1  and  prac-
ticed by  the  Latter-day  Saints  in
these  mountains,  is  rooted  and
grounded  so  deeply  and  firmly  that  it
will  never,  while  time  and  eternity
lasts,  be  uprooted  or  destroyed.  I
cannot  conceive,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  of  the  destruction  of  a  truth.
If  mankind  will  assume  that  there  is
an  error  here  that  needs  to  be  rooted
out — if  their  assumption  were  cor-
rect— I  would  not  deny  their  power
to  succeed  in  the  effort  They  have
said  —that  which  they  say  most  is —
that  our  homes  are  not  pure,  that
our  homes  are  not  constructed  upon
the  right  plan.  They  forget  that
the  homes  that  God  most  honored
in  ages  that  are  gone  by,  were  con-
structed upon  the  plan  that  the
Latter-day  Saints  advocate  and  hold
out  to  the  world  as  the  plan  of  God.
They  forget  that  Jesus  Christ,  the
Son  of  God,  delighted  iri  ^tracing
His  earthly  lineage  through  the
homes  of  polygamiste.  They  have
undertaken  to  destroy  such  \ homes.
I  feel  in  my  heart  sorry  for  (flie  man
who  conceives  that  be  ba^  thi  power
td  succeed  in  such  tra^fi^  work.


A  COMMISSION  WANTED — A  CH ALLEGE.


273


But  they  say  fifty  millions  have  de~
dare  J  against  us.  I  Ho  not  take  any
stock  in  this  assumption  on  the  part
of  a  few  that  fifty  millions  have  con-
demned us — have  said  that  we  are
wrong,  and  that  we  must  go*  There
are  those  who  have  been  throwing
dust  in  the  eyes  of  the  fifty  millions
who  say  so.  But  let  me  tell  you
how  it  can  very  readily  be  discovered
whether  we  are  wroiK'  or  not.  We
have  petitioned,  we  have  plead
with  the  powers  of  this  government
to  send  among  us  a  commission  of
honorable  men  to  investigate  the
situation  here,  and  to  let  all  the
world  know  what  the  great  error  ami
crime  is  that  we  are  accused
of.

The  kind  of  commission  we  want
is  this  :  We  want  the  government
— if  it  is  possible  in  alt  this  land  of
enlightenment,  among  all  these
people  that  are  offended  at  the
immorality  of  the  "  Mormons" —
to  select  a  commission  of  men  who
are  perfectly  true  to  their  marital
relations,  who  are  virtuous,  and  we
challenge  the  commission  of  men  to
prove  us  an  immoral  people.  Let
them  go  into  our  homes  and  what
will  we  show  them  there  1  We  will
show  them  respect  of  husbands  for
wives,"wives  for  husbands,  parents
for  children,  children  for  parents
and  for  each  other.  We  will  show
them  faith  ;  we  will  show  them  vir-
tue, and  we  challenge  them  to  deny
the  truth  of  our  showing  to  the
American  people.  Then  if  we  are
not  immoral,  why  this  hue  and  cry
raised  against  usl  Can  you  answer
who  have  passed  laws  to  send  men,
whose  lives  are  above  reproach,  into
prison,  and  to  scatter  their  families!
Can  you  who  have  passed  such
wicked  laws  answer  if  we  prove  that
we  are  a  moral  people  1

They  may  say  that  we  are  indepen-
dent. Well,  I  thank  God  for  one

No,  18,


i


that  I  trace  my  lineage  hack  through
a  race  of  independent  men,  who  had
the  courage  over  200  years  ago  to
stand  up  in  the  face  of  inimical  laws
against  their  religion  and  say,  "My
conscience  is  my  own.  If  need  be
I  will  leave  my  native  land  that  I
may  serve  my  God/'  Ami  they  did
so,  and  helped  to  form  a  government
upon  this  land  that  God  in  His  infi-
nite mercy  and  wisdom  had  held  in
reserve  for,  many  ages  for  ;i  people
that  would  accord  to  his  sons  and
daughters  the  right  to  worship  and
honor  Him  according  to  the  light
that  was  in  them.  We  do  not  see,
unless  "  there  is  something  rotten
in  Denmark,"  why  the  American
people  should  fear  the  independence
of  the  "Mormons/'  I  do  not  see
why  there  should  be  any  dread  at
giving  us  our  equal  rights — the
privilege  to  elect  our  officers  and
administer  the  laws  according  to  the
wisdom  that  is  in  us.  God  knows,
our  fellow  men  know,  these  hypocrites
and  liars  who  are  misrepresenting  us
to  the  world  know  we  are  capable
of  self-government,  and  of  institut-
ing and  preserving  the  securest  and
safest  government,  and  the  most
economical  of  any  people  in  this
land.  I  say  that  without  boasting.
But  we  would  not  have  that
reputation  if  we  elected  our  vilifiers
to  the  offices,  and  I  do  not  think  we
will  do  it.  I  cannot  see,  my  heart
cannot  conceive,  my  understanding
is  not  broad  enough  to  fathom  the
reason  why  we  should  not,  because
of  our  religion,  be  accorded  equal
rights  with  our  fellow-citizens  of  this
country.  We  have  the  stability  of
commerce  and  society ;  we  have  the
wealth  ;  we  have  the  population ;  we
have  every  requisite  qualification  for
self-government,  and  in  the  light  of
freedom  I  have  yet  to  hear  a  reason
assigned  for  withholding  from  us
our  rights. The  nearest  thing  to  a

Vol.  XXVL


274


JOURNAL  O*  DISCOURSES


reason  I  have  heard  is  that  we
are  ait  unpopular  people  with  the
rest  of  the  citizens  of  this  country,
ami  then  the  next  reason  is — and
that  which  1  really  believe  is  deeply
fe\t — the  jealousy  of  the  east  with
respect  to  the  west — the  feeling  that
the  great  commercial  interests  of
the  east  should  have  greater  repre-
stntatiou  in  the  halls  of  Congress
than  the  sparsely  settled  regions  of
the  west.

But  I  look  forward,  my  brethren
and  sisters,  to  the  time  when  the
truth  will  dawn  upon  this  nation  with
respect  to  this  people.  I  look  for*
ward  to  the  day  when  they  will  dis-
cover that  there  has  been  i4  a  great
bugaboo11  raised  over  this  question
of  "  Mormonism,'1  which  they  will
be  ashamed  to  think  they  have  paid
much  attention  to,  or  taken  much
notice  of,  1  may  say  in  a  word  that
I  look  forward  to  the  time  when  t he
powers  that  be  in  Washington,
bavitig  raked  and  scraped  the  coun-
try as  with  a  fine  tooth-comb,  will
perhaps  find  half-a-dozeu  men  of
the  character  I  have  referred  to,  who
will  look  into  this  question  out  here
in  the  mountains.  And  when  that
time  shall  come  perhaps  we  shall  be
vindicated  in  the  eyes  of  our  fellow-
men  ;  perhaps  there  will  be  a  blush
of  shame  mantle  the  cheeks  of  some;
and  perhaps  they  will  discover  some
slight  improprieties  nearer  home
that  it  will  be  well  to  regulate  before
sending  all  creation  up  here  to  set
us  right.

There  is  one  thing  and  only  one
thing  for  us  to  do  that  I  can  see,  and  1
that  is  to  maintain  oar  fidelity,  to
be  true  to  that  which  we  know  is
true.  We  ought  not  to  be  threat-
ened  or  put  in  jeopardy  for  that.
We  ought  to  be  protected  in  that.
AH  the  strength,  all  the  power,  all
the  influence  of  the  land,  of  thai
government,  of  Christian  sentiment,  j


of  enlightenment,  of  civilization —
all  these  ought  to  sustain  us  in  main-
taining our  fidelity  to  that  which
our  conscience  teaches  us  is  truth*
If  we  quail,  if  we  vary  one  iota  from
that  which  we  know  to  be  true,  we
should  be  undeserving  of  support ;
but  if  we  maintain  our  integrity  in
the  opposition  we  may  meet,  God
will  not  forsake  us,  and  the  better
sentiment,  the  genuine  and  true
civilization  that  is  to  be  found  in  the
world — for  the  world  is  full  of  truth,
notwithstanding  there  are  errors
and  wickedness  alongside  of  it — will
aid  us  in  maintaining  our  integrity,
I  have  yet  failed  to  meet  the  man
of  honor,  the  man  of  sense,  the  man
of  discernment,  the  man  of  good
judgment  who  would  condemn  me
for  maintaining  the  position  that  in
my  heart  I  feel  to  take  respecting
this  question,  even  in  these  times.
I  have  but  recently  returned  from
visiting  atnon^  men  in  various  cla3ses
of  society  in  the  east,  and  I  have
talked  over  this  question  of  "  Mor-
monism"  in  various  forms.  I  have
put  the  question  in  this  manner  to
a  great  many,  and  the  reply  I  have
received,  I  must  confess,  has  been
one  of  encouragement,  and  one  that
has  been  gratifying  to  me.

There  have  been  gross  errors  com-
mitted in  regard  to  Utah.  For  some
cause  the  nation  has  received  the
idea  that  the  *'  Mormons"  are  a
wicked  people.  Their  record  dis-
proves it.  There  has  been  a  law
passed  which  makes  a  crime  of  a
principle  of  the  Latter-day  Saints*
religion,  but  there  is  in>  people  in
this  land  who  have  so  free  a  record
in  the  criminal  courts.  What  was
the  percentage,  as  shown  by  the
crime  records  in  this  territory,  be-
fore the  operation  of  this  law  against
the  "  Mormons  V  I  believe,  a&
nearly  as  I  remember,  while  five*
sixths  of  the  population  of  this


CRIMINAL  STATISTICS — VIRTUE  AND  FREEDOM


275


territory  are  u  Mormons,"  and  one-
sixth  iiou-"  Mormons/*  eighty-five
percent,  of  the  criminals  were  from
the  ranks  of  the  one-sixth,  and  fif-
teen per  cent,  of  the  criminals  were
from  the  ranks  of  the  five  sixths,
who  are  "Mormons."  Now  it  is
intended,  itappears  to  me,  to  change
that  by  making  a  feature  of  the
"  Mormon"  religion  a  crime,  and
sending  just  as  many  as  possible
into  the  ranks  of  the  criminals,  so-
called,  for  practicing  that  principle,
I  maintain  that  it  Ms  a  mistake  to
say  that  the  Latter-day  Saints  are
criminals,  and  have  asked  men
everywhere  to  carefully,  candidly,
and  honestly  examine  the  .situation
for  themselves.  I  would  undertake
to  show  that  in  our  homes  there  is
not  the  element  of  crime  or  sin  or
wrong,  hut  that  they  will  compare
favorably  with  the  homes  of  any.
But  to  call  that  which  I  owe  my
being  to,  a  crime — to  take  that  posi-
tion, when  I  know  it  is  God's  eter-
nal truth,  I  would  be  a  coward  and
a  poltroon.  I  would  be  undeserving
the  respect  of  any  man  if  I  should
thus  reflect  upon  the  holy  institution
to  which  I  owe  my  being,  I  know
there  is  virtue  in  it ;  I  know  there  is
purity  in  it;  that  it  is  right  in  the
sight  of  my  God  and  my  conscience,
and  when  I  deny  that,  put  a  stone
round  my  neck  ami  cast  me  into  the
sea.  I  would  have  no  courage  to
live  ami  meet  face  to  face  auj  hon-
orable man ;  1  would  slink  ami
cower  as  a  miserable  lying  hypocrite.
So  I  consider  those  who  deny
u  Mormonisni."  The  homes  of  the
14  Mormon"  people  are  homes  con-
structed upon  the  principles  of
purity  and  virtue.  Those  men  who
are  abusing  us  and  sending  lies
broadcast  through  the  land  concern-
ing  us  know  that  I  speak  the  truth.
Of  eour.se  the  facilities  are  not  so
good  to-day  for  them  to  enter  our


homes  as  they1  were  before  they
showed  the  cloven  hoof,  before  they
proved  themselves  ravening  wolves
in  sheeps*  clothing,  going  about
seeking  whom  they  may  devour.
Their  aim,  purpose  and  ambition  is
to  bring  reproach  upon  this  people;
to  see  if  they  cannot  in  their  insid-
ious efforts  introduce  sin  in  the  midst
of  our  pure  homes  and  society.
Think  you  they  would  hesitate  to
lead  the  women  of  "  Mormondom"
astray?  No,  not  they.  Think
you  they  would  hesitate  to  destroy
the  virtue  of  the  sens  of  "  Mormon-
dom  T  No,  not  they.  They
have  the  effrontery,  they  have  the
sham  el  ess  n  ess  to  advocate  lechery,
to  advocate  prostitution  as  a  remedy
for  "  Mormouism,"  as  a  corrective
of  "  Mormon"  society,  as  a  means
of  liberation  from  u  Mormon"  in-
fluence. Oh,  freedom  at  such  a  price !
Give  me  the  thraldom  that  the  world
thinks  the  "  Mormons"  are  subjected
to,  and  let  such  free  lorn  be  embraced
by  those  poor  slaves  to  passion  and
to  sin,  God  has  given  us  the  truth,
and  the  truth  has  ma  le  us  free.
And  we  are  indeed  free  if  we  have
that  freedom  which  comes  through
obedience  to  the  will  of  God.  If
we  are  pure  men  ;  if  we  are  virtuous
women,  though  chains  should  bind
us,  or  prison  walls  hold  us,  yet  we
are  free  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  are
better  prepared  to  judge  our  persecu-
tors than  they  us,  I  know  that  is
the  prevailing  condition  among  the
Saints  ;  [  know  that  we  are  a  pure
people  in  the  main.  We  have  those
among  us  who  sin  j  we  all  have  our
imperfections  and  weaknesses  ;  but
God  knows  we  are  pure  in  our  inten-
tions and  desires.  He  knows  that
this  people,  gathered  from  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth,  have  been
brought  out  from  Babylon  through
faith  in  Jesus  Christ  and  repentance
of  their  sins,  entering  into  holy  a  id


276


JOURNAL  UK  DISCOURSES


sacred  covenants  not  to  repeat  them;
;i  people  gathered  here  for  the  pur-
pose of  honoring  and  serving  God,
and  not  for  com  nutting  sin  of  any
form,  fchape,  or  description.  That
is  our  character.  The  world,  so  far
as  they  will  judge  us  candidly,  gives
us  the  reputation  for  sobriety,  tem-
perance, industty,  frugality,  virtue;
but  still  we  are  called  the  most  im-
moral people  that  the  sun  ever  shone
upon. What  absurdity  !

Brethren  and  sisters,  I  look  to
see  the  day  when  the  refuge  of  lies
shall  be  swept  away,  and  we  as  a


people,  clothed  upon  with  the  power
and  favor  of  Almighty  God,  shall
go  forth  in  the  world  promulgating
the  principles  of  peace,  preaching
true  holiness  as  it  comes  from  the
Eternal  Father ;  and  the  honest,  the
pure,  the  upright  among  men  shall
lift  up  their  hearts  and  rejoice,  and
shall  say,  Welcome,  welcome,  thrice
welcome  are  those  who  come  to  us
i;i  the  name  of  the  Lord.  May  He
l  bless  and  preserve  us  that  we  maybe
among  that  valiant  throng  is  my
prayer, and  desire  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  Amen.


REMARKS BY APOSTLE J. H.  SMITH,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle^  Salt  Lake City,  Sunday }  July  27th,

-  *i«  1885.


REPORTED  BY  GEO,  F,  GIBBS,


VALUE  OF  LIBERTY  —  PERSECUTION  EXPECTED — MORSE  AND  OTHERS
WERE  AT  FIRST  DESPISED — GOD  OVERRULES  FOR  GOOD — FAITH
AND  WORKS — REPENTANCE  ANI>  BAPTISM — REVELATION — WITNESS
OF  THE  SPIRIT — MISSION  OF  JOSEPH  SMITH— THE  WHEAT  WILL
REMAIN— NO  MALICE  TO  MEN,  BUT  HATRED  OF  THEIR  WICKED
ACTS — PLURAL  MARRIAGE,


If  there  is  any  one  thing  in  this
world  above  another  that  I  prize  it
is  my  liberty— liberty  to  speak,
liberty  to  act,  liberty  to  move
among  my  fellows,  discharging  the


duties  and  obligations  of  life  without
regard  to  the  frowns  or  favors  of
anybody  in  the  world.  I  rejoice  in
the  fact  that,  so  far  as  I  ana  individ-
ually concerned,  my  faith  in  God


PERSECUTION  EXPECTED.


277


and  in  His  promise  to  us,  His  people,
was  never  better  than  it  is  to-day.
And  although  the  dark  cloud  may
hang  over  us,  and  the  storm  of  op-
position beat  against  us,  I  am  as  con-
fident aa  I  am  that  I  stand  before
you  that  God  will  vindicate  the
righteousness  of  His  Saints  and
bring  them  off  conquerors  in  the
end.  So  far  as  I  am  concerned  I
see  but  little  cause  for  mourning.
It  is  true  that  some  of  our  brethren
are  serving  out  terms  of  imprison*
ment,  but  it  is  also  true  that  they
are  thus  afflicted  not  for  wrong-
doing but  for  conscience  sake  ;  and
they  do  not  mourn,  so  why  should
we.  If  they  or  we  should  put  on
the  garb  of  mourning,  it  would  not
be  because  of  any  inflictions  we
may  have  to  endure  in  consequence
of  our  religious  convictions,  for
such  things  we  may  expect,  and  have
expected  ;  our  cause  of  mourning
would  be  and  is  in  man's  inhumanity
to  man,  in  the  tearing  away  of  the
barriers  of  civil  and  religious  liberty,
the  results  of  which  none  may  be
able  to  divine.

I  have  preached  iu  many  lands
and  to  many  peoples  that  the  little
stone  cut  out  of  the  mountain  with-
out hands  would  cause  a  commotion
in  the  earth,  exciting  the  jealousy
of  the  people,  not  only  of  our  own
land,  but  eventually  of  all  lauds ;
but  that  while  this  would  be  the  case,
we  would  be  able  at  all  times  to  give
tangible  reasons  for  the  peculiar
position  we  occupy,  and  for  the  hope
and  faith  we  have  in  the  God  of
heaven,  who  has  called  us  to  it

I  did  not  design  at  all  to  refer  to
the  persecutions  of  the  Saints  ;  they
are  no  cause  of  surprise  or  wonder-
ment to  me;  I  have  expected  such
things,  having  been  taught  in  my
youth  that  such  a  condition  of  things
would  come.  But  while,  we  may
expect  to  be  persecuted  and  hated


of  all  men,  we  have  consolation  in
the  promise  of  the  Lord  that  He
would  from  time  to  time  soften  the
hearts  of  our  enemies,  and  that
nothing  should  intervene  to  destroy
tli is  work,  or  to  frustrate  the  pur-
poses that  it  is  designed  to  accom-
plish.

The  doctrines  which  we  believe
in  and  practice  shouhUnot,  many
opinion,  create  the  feelings  against
us  which  now  exist.  W  hen  it  is
borne  iu  mind  that  we  believe  in
faith  as  the  primary  and  fundamental
principle  of  the  Gospel  :  that  we  be-
lieve in  working  out  our  salvation
with  fear  and  trembling  before  the
Lord,  through  keeping  His
commandments  and  observing  the
laws  and  ordinances  which  He  has
made  known  to  us  for  our  guidance,
and  which  when  carried  out,  produce
the  fruits  of  righteousness,  it  does
seem  singularly  strange  that  men
professing  Christianity  should  be
found  among  our  most  bitter
opponents.

Brother  Moyle,  who  has  just  ad-
dressed you,  referred  to  some  of  the
famous  characters  of  earth,  among
them  our  own  Morse,  and  his  strug-
gles to  make  men  believe  in  the  in-
spiration with  which  he  was  pos-
sessed. Although  he  has  since
demonstrated  to  the  whole  world
that  he  was  most  wonderfully
wrought  upon  in  producing  marvel-
ous results  from  the  workings  of
electricity,  yet  when  he  appealed  for
assistance  he  was  regarded  as  and
even  called  mad.  He,  however,
was  not  daunted,  but  persevered  in
his  work,  a  work  that  has  since
brought  blessings  and  benefit  to
mankind  generally.  The  experience
of  Morse  has  been  the  common  lot
of  men  who  have  been  the  means  of
introducing  new  truths  into  the
world  ;  and  who  is  able  to  say,  that
history  will  not  yet  record  the  fact


278


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


that  the  sons  and  daughters  of  our
most  bitter  opponents  have  recog-
nized the  Latter-day  Saints  as  bene-
factors to  the  human  family.

The  principle  of  faith  has  been
the  great  motive  power  by  which  all
reformers  have  been  actuated  ;  it
-was  faith  that  impelled  us  to  gather
to  this  land,  and  it  is  faith,  in  con-
nection with  the  knowledge  we  now
possess,  that  inspires  us  to  stead-
fastly and  firmly  move  on  in  our
work  of  redeeming  the  land  and
building  up  towns  and  cities,  and
bringing  order  out  of  chaos.  Thus,
so  far  as  the  principle  of  faith  is
concerned,  we  do  not  differ  from
Christians  generally,  except  in  being
more  practical  believing,  as  we  do,
that  faith  without  works  is  dead.
There  are  no  doubt  many  people
who  are  as  practical  in  their  views
as  the  Latter-day  Saints,  and  cling
to  their  views  as  tenaciously  as  we,
and  perhaps,  so  far  as  that  goes  are
similarly  treated,  but  their  faith  is
centered  in  other  matters  than  reli-
gion or  spiritual  things,  as  was  the
ease  with  Morse.

We  turn  to  the  principle  of  re-
pentance, that  principle  that
prompts  men  to  cea^e  doing  wrong
*nd  to  mend  their  ways.  In  this
we  are  in  harmony  with  active
Christians  generally,  although  we
may  not  place  this  principle  in  the
game  relative  position  in  the  cate-
gory of  tenets,  as  others  da  We
also  accept  and  regard  as  essential,
the  ordinance  of  baptism,  and  could
furnish  ample  testimony  to  show
that  this,  as  well  as  the  other  ordi-
nances, principles  and  laws  of  the
Gospel,  as  believed  in  and  practiced
by  us  are  Scriptural ;  that  it  is  or-
dained of  the  Lord  ;  that  He  has
declared  that  except  a  man  is  born
of  the  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he
cannot  enter  into  the  kin g< lorn  of
heaven.


One  of  the  most  striking  points
of  difference  between  the  religion
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  and  that
of  other  people  is  our  belief  in  reve-
lation. We  not  only  believe  that
the  Lord  did  in  ancient  days  reveal
Himself  to  man,  but  we  accept  the
doctrine  of  revelation  as  necessary
for  the  guidance  of  the  Church  to-
day; that  the  same  Lord  who  so  sig-
nal Iv  blessed  and  sustained  His
people  anciently  can  bestow  similar
blessings  in  our  day  ;  ami  our  faith
is  just  as  firmly  fixed  in  the  good-
ness and  power  of  the  Almighty
to  move  in  our  behalf  as  in  that  of
any  other  people.  If  it  were  not
for  the  fact  that  our  heavenly  Father
1ms  spoken  and  revealed  to  us  cer-
tain fundamental  truths,  and  that
He  does,  through  1  lis  servant,  to  the
Church  as  a  body,  and  through  His
spirit  to  the  people  individually,  we
would  be  as  others  are — without
any  living  distinctive  faith.  To  do
away  with  revelation  would  be  to
refuse  to  recognize  the  Author  of
our  faith  as  our  guide  and  teacher.
Who  can  find  out  the  things  of  God
except  he  is  taught  either  of  the
Almighty  Himself,  or  those  who  are
taught  of  Him  1  It  is  a  matter  of
utter  impossibility  for  man  through
his  own  wisdom  to  either  find
out  God,  or  to  act  in  the  things
of  God,  without  first  having
been  taught  and  authorized  so  to

do- >;? !  m  1  rv  thl !  "li:"//  )r,  IU

Thus  might  we  compare  these
principles  and  reason  upon  them.
We  have  done  this  abroad  whenever
opportunity  has  been  afforded.  But
when  we  have  declared  the  fact  that
preset  it  revelation  was  and  is  essen-
tial for  the  guidance  of  man,  and
that  the  Church  of  Christ  never  did
or  could  exist  without  it,  and  that
the  Lord  had  again  revealed  Himself
to  man,  our  hearers  would  generally
either  turn  aside  or  perhaps  show


MISSION  OF  JOSEPH  SMITH


279


some  sign  of  pity  for  "  the  poor
deluded  Mormons,"  for  this  is  the
light  in  which  we  are  hell  for  be-
lieving in  such  tilings.  It  is  a  singu-
lar tiling  to  me  that  men  and  women
can  take  their  Bible  and  sit  down
with  the  Elders  of  our  Church  and
compare  the  doctrines  of  the  scrip-
tures with  those  taught  by  our  El-
ders, ami  fail  to  sense  their  truth.
It  does  seem  singular  to  me — ami
yet  I  should  not  "regard  it  as  strange
for  this  reason  :  whenever  there  has
been  a  Gospel  dispensation  a  man
having  the  Holy  Spirit  could  bear
witness  of  the  correctness  of  these
things.  When  that  spirit  of  testi-
mony rests  down  upon  a  man  it
begets  conviction  in  his  heart,  wheth-
er he  is  willing  to  aeknowle  Ige  it  or
not.  Nicodemus  could  find  his  way
by  night  to  Jesus,  and  acknowledge
that  there  was  a  power  with  him  that
other  men  were  not  possessed  of.
Others  received  the  witness  of  the
Spirit,  and  were  able  to  abide  by  its
dictates,  renounce  their  former  ways,
and  take  up  the  cross  unpopular
though  it  was.  Others  again  treated
the  whole  thing  with  ridicule,  not  be-
ing able  to  see  anything  in  it.  Such
doubtless  would  be  the  case  were  the
same  persons  to  teach  the  same
things  now.

To  me  it  has  always  appeared  sin-
gular that  there  should  be  any  re-
flecting honest  hearted  person  unable
to  believe  in  the  mission  of  Joseph
Smith.  We  may  take  such  men  as
Luther,  Calvin  and  Wesley,  and
others  equally  learned,  who  are  re-
cognized by  all  Christians  as  beacon
lights,  and  yet  notwithstanding
their  education  and  ability  to  act  in
the  roles  they  so  nobly  played,  not
one#  of  them  nor  any  other  orthodox
Christian  has  been  able  to  evolve  a
per  feci  system  of  Church  govern-
ment. Their  productions  are  as  a
rope  of  sand,  void  of  ^strength  or


spiritual  force.  The  spirit  ml  desires
of  men  are  not  gratified  to  satiety,
their  souls  are  nol  fed ;  it  is  the  let-
ter without  the  spirit,  the  b  Ay  with-
out  the  soul.  1  do  not  say  this  by
way  of  disparagement  to  the  names
nf  these  illustrious  heroes ;  they
did  their  work  and  did  it  nobly,  but>
it  was  not  for  them  to  reveal  to  mart
a  perfect  system  or  church  govern-
ment In  later  times,  however,  we
find  a  boy  without  experience  or
education,  presenting  to  the  world
a  system  of  government  pronounced
by  statesmen  of  eminence  to  be  supe-
rior toanvthini;  known  among  men.
Our  organization  is  a  Imitte  I  to  be
without  a  parallel  ;  and  this  through
a  mere  hoy.  But  the  fact  is,  he  was
not  the  author,  neither  did  ht3  ever
claim  its  authorship  ;  he  was  merely
the  honored  iristrume  it  under  God
to  reveal  it  to  and  instit  ute  it  among
men.  And  although  the  press  and
the  pulpit  unite  in  deuoum-iug  him
as  a  crazy  fanatic  and  a  vile  impostor,
his  work  challenges  tlie  admiration
of  the  best  thinkers  of  the  age.  The
principles  that  he  unf olde  I  are  in
harmony  with  the  sc r-ipt tires  and
with  reason  ;  they  are  in  harmony
with  true  science  and  with  the  laws
of  the  universe  ;  anil  he  lias  pre-
sented them  cletrly  and  distinctly
so  that  none  need  misunderstand
them.  It  is  most  singular  that  the
intelligence  of  the  I9&h  ceutury  can
look  upon  this  boy  and  mark  him
I  as  being  so  infamous  a  being  as  they
say  he  wa?,  when  the  fruits  of  his
I  labors  are  before  the  world  and  none
can  gainsay  them.  This  is  the  work
of  the  Divine  Master,  and  Joseph
Smith  wan  His  servant.  T.ie  Lord
God  stands  at  the  helm.  We  need
not  feel  concerned  about  wlut  is
1  termed  4*  Mormo:jisu  He  decreed
j  it,  and  He  is  carrying  it  oau  It  is
true,  it  may  take  us  through  perse-
J  cution  and  tribulation,  but  it  is  true


280


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


all  the  same  ;  this  I  know  as  well  as
I  know  that  1  live.  Having  received
the  m  i  1 1  iess  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
neither  you  nor  I  need  entertain  any
doubts  or  fears  as  to  the  result.  And
I  bear  witness  before  yon  and  before
my  Father  in  heaven,  whom  I  expect
to  meet  at  the  latter  day,  that  we
possess  the  fullness  of  the  new  and
everlasting  Gospel,  and  that  God
revealed  it  unto  us  ;  and  I  further
testily  that  it  will  remain  firm  as
the  n  ek  of  ages,  that  its  course  will
continue  onward  ai  d  upward,  gath-
ering sttength  as  it  goes,  until  it
shall  at  last  1i!l  the  whole  earth,
as  Daniel  foresaw  that  it  would.

It  seems  that  the  people  of  the
Lord  in  every  age  have  had  to  pass
through  certain  ordeals  in  order  to
accomplish  certain  results ;  they
would  become  careless  and  negligent
of  duty  and  worldly-minded  and,  in
many  instances,  forgetful  of  their
sacred  covenants;  and  we,  it  would
seem,  need  to  pass  through  the  same
purifying  process  as  they  before  us.
Ami,  in  order  to  develop  a  better
state  of  things  tor  Zion,  some  will
pass  through  the  prison  house,  and
others  may  suffer  death,  as  some
have  already  ;  but  whatever  the
infliction,  the  wheat  will  yet
remain  and  the  chatf  will  be  blown


away.

One  may  ask.  Have  you  any  feel-
ings of  hatred  in  your  heart  toward
those  who  delight  in  persecuting
and  oppressing  you?  If  they  were
hungry,  and  it  was  in  my  power,  I
would  feed  them  ;  I  desire  not  to

bear  malice  or  hatred  towards  any  lis  our  Father  ami  friend He  has


in  the  flesh.  I  hate  the  misdeeds  of
men,  especially  when  they  are  aimed
at  the  liberty  of  their  fellows ;  but
1  hate  none  of  the  sons  and  daughters
of  God.  I  would  bless  them  and  do
anything  in  my  power  for  their
good  ;  but  I  would  not  yield  my
soul  into  their  keeping,  or  turn
traitor  to  the  principles  of  my  faith
for  the  satisfaction  of  any  living
being.

I  have  been  reared  among  the  Lat-
ter- i lay  Saints.  My  father  and
mother  were  as  old  in  citizenship*  of
the  United  States  and  as  honorable
in  their  ancestry  as  any  that  can  he
found  in  the  land,  I  love  my  reli-
gion, I  love  my  country,  and  1  have
no  other  desire  than  to  honor  my
God,  and  do  good  to  my  t  el  low-
man.

There  is  no  necessity  for  us  to  be
concerned  or  worried  in  the  least.
It  is  true  we  may  have  difficulties  to
meet ;  but  with  patient  forbearance,
pursuing  an  earnest  determined
course,  time  will  prove  to  the  truly
loyal  citizens  of  this  great  nation,
that  we  are  the  friends  of  liberty  ;
that  to  be  free,  free  from  the  power
of  wicked  men,  and  free  from  the
power  of  the  destroyer  of  men's  souls
is  the  aim  and  object  of  our  lives.
There  is  no  necessity  for  overt  acts
of  any  kind,  or  indulging  the  spirit
of  revenge;  cur  course  is  one  of
peace  and  good  will  to  man,  blessing
all  with  whom  we  come  in  contact
And  as  long  as  we  observe  strictly
the  principles  of  our  religion,  the
way  will  open  up  before  us,  for  God


Of  the  children  of  my  heavenly  Fa-
ther. We  must  tight  the  battles  of
ttuth,  with  a  desire  for  the  ascend-
aney  of  truth,  and  not  personal
gratification,  remenihering  that  those
who  oppose  us  are  of  the  same  family,
hereafter  to  be  rewarded  for  the
good  or  evil  which  they  may  do  while


been  our  guide  in  the  past ;  and  He
in  His  ow  n  way  has  cast  down  every
man,  from  the  commencement  of
this  work  until  the  present  time,
who  has  raised  his  hand  against  us,
and  their  lives  have  ended  in  dis-
grace or  been  clouded  by  some  mis-
detcLfc


PLURAL  MARRIAGE.


281


While  in  distant  lands  I  have
had  joy  in  gazing  upon  the  stars
and  stripes  as  they  have  floated  on
the  breeze  fioni  the  mast  heads  of
American  vessels,  or  wherever  my
eye  has  happened  to  see  the  flag  of
our  country,  I  have  honored  and
revered  my  parents  who,  in  harmony
with  their  convictions,  taught  me  to
obey  the  laws  of  the  land  ;  and  I
trust  ever  to  be  found  true  to  my
country,  and  true  to  my  religion
and  my  God.  The  laws  of  Heaven,
as  revealed  through  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith,  are  grounded  in  my
heart,  and  I  can  acknowledge  the
power  of  no  man,  however  great,
to  stand  'between  me  and  my
God.


Referring  for  one  moment  to  the
question  of  plural  marriage,  I  will
here  say  that  it  is  my  candid  opinion,
freely  expressed,  that  if  fifty  million
of  the  people  of  the  United  States
believed  in  patriarchal  marriage  and
only  twenty  in  monogamic  marriage,
that  the  judges  placed  in  power
by  the  majority  would  decide  in
favor  of  the  plural  form  of  marriage,
being  religion.  That  prejudice  and
political  influence  affect  to  a  great
extent  the  judgment  of  men  in  de-
ciding such  questions,  no  person  can
deny,  Amen.


REMARKS BY PRESIDENT GEORGE Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle Salt  hike  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,  Nw\  23rd,

1884. ' - !,  Ji  T'*ii  hi  M  i-'\*tr


(  REPORTED  BT JOHN  IRVINE.  |


THE  WAY  TO  FIND  OUT  GOD— TESTIMONY  OF  THE  ELDERS — "  WHOSO
RECKIVETH  YOU  KECEIVETH  ME*' — THE  MISSIONARY  LEARNS  TO
KNOW  GOD  IS  HIS  FRIEND— WE  MUST  SUFFER  PERSECUTION —
FRUITS  OF  THE  SPIRIT — **  MORMON"  SOCIETY —TROUBLE  FuR  THE
WICKED  IN  THE  FUTURE — SAINTS  TO  MAINTAIN  FREEDOM  AND  TO
UPHOLD  THE  CONSTITUTION.

There  are  a  few  moments  remain- 1  turned  therefrom  as  our  brethren
ingf  which  it  is  desired  I  should  oc-  j  who  have  spoken  this  afternoon,
cupy.  and  to  me  particularly  so  in  the  case

It  is  very  interesting  to  hear  the  of  young  men  like  Brother  Leo


testimony  of  the  Elders  who  have
been  oti  missions  and  who  have  re-


Clawson,  whose  voice  we  have  heard
and  whose  testimony  has  been  given


2S2  JOURNAL  OK

to  us.  Sen rling  young  men  upon
missions  is  an  excellent  method  of
testing  their  integrity  and  also  of
giving  them  an  opportunity  of  prov-  1
ing  for  tli  em  selves  whether  the
testimony  they  have  heard  from
their  parents  and  others  is  true.
When  a  young  man  leaves  home  to
go  to  a  foreign  land,  in  the  midst  of
a  cold-hearted  and  prejudiced  world,
without  purse  or  scrip,  with  no  funds
in  his  pocket  to  depend  upon  to  pay
his  wny,  and  has  to  depend  upon  his
Maker,  and  upon  the  promises  which
He  has  made,  he  is  in  a  most  excel-
lent position  to  learn  for  himself  the
truth  of  the  words  of  the  Savior  and
the  ti  in h  of  the  testimonies  that  he
has  heard  from  Is  is  parents  and
friends.  I  rejoice  exceedingly  that
our  young  men  have  this  opportu-
nity, because  it  brings  home  to  them
in  a  most  unmistakable  and  convinc-
ing manner  the  truth  of  those  testi-
monies they  have  heard.  When  a
man  has  no  food  to  eat,  when  he  lias
no  friends,  and  is  a  stranger  in  a
strange  land,  traveling  as  a  servant
of  God,  he  has  a  good  opportunity
of  testing  for  himself  whether  there
is  a  God,  and  whether  that  God  hears
and  answers  his  prayers.  In  tins
way  faith  becomes  knowledge  ;  be-  ;
cause  if  a  man  prays  to  God  and  asks
for  that  which  he  wants  and  God  i
gives  it  to  him,  he  then  knows  for
himself  that  God  hears  and  an*
swers  prayer.  It  is  in  this  way  that
the  knowledge  of  the  Gospel  that
we  have  received  is  perpetuated  in
our  hearts  and  in  the  hearts  of  our
children — transmitted  from  one
generation  to  another,  as  it  has  been
and  is  being  done  at  the  present
time  among  these  Latter-day  Saints,
To-day  there  is  a  host  of  young  men
growing  up  in  this  country  who  have<
in  this  manner  proved  for  themselves
the  truth  of  that  which  I  am  now
speaking  of It  was  in  this  manner


DISCOURSES.

that  I  learned  most  convincingly  in
my  youth  that  this  was  the  work  of
God  I  believed  it,  yes,  I  may  say  I
knew  it  to  be  true,  but  when  I  was
sent  out  as  a  missionary  without
purse  and  scrip  and  compelled  to  feel
after  God  and  ask  Ilim  for  those
things  that  I  wanted,  I  learned  to
my  entire  satisfaction  that  when  I
did  need  God's  blessings  He  was, aft
hand  to  confer  them  upon  mo  ac-
cording to  the  desires  of  my  heart
and  the  necessities  of  my  case*  In
this  manner  men  who  are  now  of
middle  age  have  grown  up  with  this
knowledge,  and  the  youth  to-day
are  in  their  turn  acquiring  the  samo
knowledge,  obtaining  it  through  the
means  which  God  has  appointed
and  in  the  manner  He  has
designed.

There  are  two  objects  to  be  ac-
complished by  the  Elders  going  out
without  purse  and  scrip  upon  the
apostolic  plan.  In  the  first  place,
they  learn  for  themselves  that  God
lives  and  that  He  hears  and  answers
prayer ;  in  the  second  place,  they  test
the  world.  The  Savior  say s :  "  Whoso
receive th  you  receive th  met  ami  the
same  will  feed  you,  and  give  you
money.  And  he  who  feeds  you,  or
clothes  you,  or  gives  you  money t
shall  in  no  wise  lose  his  reward  ;  and
:  he  that  doeth  not  these  things  is  not
my  disciple  ;  by  this  you  may  know
my  disciples/1

We  test  the  world  in  this  manner
and  prove  whether  they  will  receive
the  servants  of  God  and  supply  their
simple  wants  when  they  travel
preaching  the  Gospel  without  salary
or  pay  of  a  pecuniary  character  ;  but
looking  unto  the  Lord  for  the  reward
that  lie  has  promised  to  bestow.
When  a  man  has  been  gone  as.
Brother  Clawson  has,  and  as  Brother
George  God* lard  has — Brother  Claw-
sou  for  two  years  and  upwards — he
becomes  acquainted  with  the  Lord


PERSECUTION — FRUITS  OF  THE  SPIRIT*


lie  learns  to  know  God  is  his  friend,
and  he  through  his  life  afterwards,
if  he  cherishes  that  knowledge
which  he  has  then  acquired,  is  a
faithful  servant  of  God.  There  are
to-day  hundreds  of  our  youth  scat-
tered throughout  the  various  fields
acquiring  this  knowledge  of  God,
becoming  familiar  with  the  things  of
God,  learning  for  themselves  that
which  they  have  been  taught  in
theory,  and  having  it  so  thoroughly
instilled  into  them,  and  becoming
so  indoctrinated  in  these  princi-
ples, that  they  never  will  forget
them,  J
My  brethren  and  sisters  :  we  can
rejoice  exceedingly  in  the  prospects
before  us.  We  may  be  hated  as  our
brethren  have  described  ;  we  may
be  maligned  and  calumniated  and
called  all  manner  of  evil  names ;  but
with  all  these  thing*  we  can  rejoice,
because  it  is  the  lei:auv  that  was  left
to  us  and  left  to  every  follower  of
Jesus  Christ  by  himself  when  he
was  upon  the  earth.  He  that  lives
godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  Paul  says,
shall  suffer  persecution.  He  did  not
say  that  they  might  suffer  it — He  did
not  put  it  in  a  doubtful  manner — •
but  He  said  they  should  suffer — ■
*  they  shall  suffer  persecution."
We4tave  proved  the  truth  of  that
aaying  of  the  Apostle's.  But  not-
withstanding all  this,  we  can  look
around  us,  and  see  whatGod  is  doing
for  us.  We  have  the  most  abundant
causes  for  thanksgiving  and  praise.
He  is  blessing  us  as  nootherpeople  to-
day upon  the  face  of  the  earth  are
being  blessed.  Outside  of  our  com-
munity there  is  hatred,  there  is  an-
imosity, there  is  a  feeling  of  wrath
entertained  against  us.  We  are
hated  by  those  who  know  us  not.
But  inside  there  is  peace,  there  is
happiness,  there  is  joy,  there  is
health,  growth  and  development
— a  people  growing  up  in  these


mountains  that  will  yet  astonish  the
world  by  the  exhibition  of  those*
grand  virtues  that  God  is  develop-
ing in  our  midst  through  the  teach-
ings of  the  everlasting  Gospel  that
we  have  received.  A  union  unpar-
alleled, unexampled  at  this  tt ma-
il pon  the  earth  exists  throughout
our  settlements  and  in  all  our  asso-
ciations from  north  to  south,  from
east  to  west — a  people  dwelling
together  in  peace  and  in  love,  loving
each  other  with  an  intensity  of  love,
begotten  of  God,  and  that  is  un-
known elsewhere— the  fruits  of  the
outpouring  of  the  spirit  and  power
of  God  upon  us.  Men  say  that
this  is  imposture  ;  that  these  aro
the  fruits  of  ignorance  ;  that  the
binding  of  this  people  together  in
the  maimer  in  which  we  are  asso-
ciated in  these  valleys  is  merely  the
result  of  the  combination  of  shrewd
men.  A  most  extraordinary  specta-
cle this  !  That  wherever  you  go*
throughout  our  settlements  in  what-
soever  house  you  enter,  if  the  owners
are  Latter-day  Saints,  you  will  find
there  the  spirit  of  peace  and  of  love;,
a  willingness  to  do  everything  possi-
ble for  each  other.  And  then  when
we  contemplate  the  growth  of  the
people  in  intelligence,  to  me  it  is
something  marvelous  what  God  is
doing  for  us  in  this  direction.  There
is  no  community  upon  the  face  of
the  earth  today  among  whom  you
will  find  so  many  men  who  have
traveled,  who  have  mingled  with
people  in  foreign  lands,  who  are  so
familiar  with  the  religious  and  social
usages  and  with  the  history  of  the  peo-
ple of  other  lands,  as  you  will  find  in
this  community  of  Latter-day  Saints.
Scarcely  a  man  among  us  now  of
middle  age  who  has  not  been  in  for-
eign lands,  who  has  not  traveled
throughout  his  own  country,  and
acquired  a  knowledge  of  human;
nature  such  as  cannot  be  acquired


284


JOOKNAL  OK  DlSUuUUSKS.


under  any  other  circumstances.
The  effect  of  this  upon  the  comma
nity  I  can  perceive ;  we  all  can  ob-
serve it  wherever  we  go.  It  is
uplifting  the  people — not  very  rapid-
ly, it  is  true,  but  still  in  such  a  man-
ner that  it  is  easily  perceived.  You
can  perceive  the  effect  upon  the
people  of  the  education  thus  gained
by  the  Elders  in  traveling  and
preaching  the  Gospel  abroad.  Nearly
all  returning  missionaries  express
themselves  as  our  brethren  have
this  afternoon,  Brother  Clawsou
bas  said  that  he  is  determined  from
this  time  for  wan  I  to  do  his  share  in
helping  forward  the  work  of  the
redemption  of  the  human  family.
When  such  men  return,  bringing
with  them  the  spirit  that  they  have
upon  their  missions — the  Spirit  of
God* — what  a  strength  it  is  to  their
Bishops,  what  a  sUength  it  is  to  their
Teachers,  what  a  strength  it  is  to
the  entire  Priesthood  in  the  Ward
where  they  reside,  or  the  Stake  to
which  they  belong.  And  when  they
come  back,  as  they  do  by  scores,  this
effect  is  felt  throughout  the  entire
body  of  the  people,  and  excellent
results  follow,  a  higher  tone  is  de-
veloped, a  higher  standard  is  aimed
at,  ami  there  is  an  uplifting  of  the
people,  as  it  were,  to  that  higher
standard.

This  is  going  on  all  the  time,  and
the  effect  is  marked  and  already  felt.
Those  who  travel  through  our  settle-
ments see  many  things  that  strike
them,  and  strike  them  more  forcibly
because  of  the  different  impression
created  by  the  falsehoods  told  con-
cerning us.  These  falsehoods  have
their  good  effect  in  this  respect ;  for
when  a  man  hears  so  much  about
the  f'  Mormons,"  he  naturally
pictures  to  himself  the  kind  of  socie-
ty that  he  will  meet  when  he  goes
among  them.  If  he  has  never  met
u  Mormons,"  he  has  an  id*a  in  his


mind,  from  what  he  has  read,  or
from  what  he  has  been  told,  as  to
the  kind  of  people  he  will  meet  when
he  sees  them.  But  he  is  thrown
into  "  Mormon "  society.  He
finds  that  they  have  no  horns  ;  that
they  have  no  cloven  feet ;  that  they
do  not  garnish  their  conversation
with  oaths  ;  and  that  if  he  had  not
been  told  these  were  "  Mormons,"
he  would  not  have  discovered  it  by
any  outward  sign.  When  he  comes
into  our  cities,  instead  of  seeing
drunkenness,  instead  of  hearing  blas-
phemy, instead  of  seeing  the  pro-
fanation of  all  that  is  holy,  he  sees
a  people  dwelling  in  peace,  lie  sees
quietude  prevailing,  and  the  contrast
strikes  him  very  forcibly.  "  Why,'1
says  he,  f1  this  is  not  what  I  expected
to  see ;  these  are  not  the  people  t
expected  to  meet ;  this  is  uoi  the
society  for  which  I  looked  when  I
came  into  the  settlements  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  in  Utah/'  These
very  falsehoods,  therefore,  have  the
effect  of  impressing — where  men
have  the  opportunity  of  mingling
with  the  people — more  forcibly  upon
the  mind  than  otherwise  would  be
the  case  that  which  they  see.  It
takf*s  time,  however,  to  remove  pre-
judice, to  disabuse  people's  minds.
They  think  that  there  is  something
hidden,  something  that  is  very  bad,
that  they  have  not  yet  discovered,
and  this  sometimes  remains  in  the
mind  a  good  while.

But,  as  sure  as  God  lives  so  sure
will  we  live  down  these  false  charges
and  impressions,  and  the  day  is  not
far  distant  when  lovers  of  good  gov-
ernment, lovers  of  peace,  will  turn
their  attention  to  these  valleys  in
which  we  dwell  and  to  this  society
of  which  we  form  a  part.  For  there
is  trouble  in  the  future  ;  there  is
perplexity  not  very  far  off.  We  can
hear  a  faint  rumbling  of  it,  as  it
were,  in  the  distance. The  time


TROUBLE  IN  STORE  FOR  THE  WICKED.


285


will  come,  as  sure  as  we  live,  when
distress  and  calamity  will  fall  upon
the  wicked,  and  our  own  nation  has
a  great  deal  to  answer  for.  They
have  to  answer  fordeeds  that  cannot
be  easily  mid.  The  blood  of  inno-
cence has  stained  the  soil  of  free
America — the  blood  of  a  Prophet,
of  a  Patriarch,  and  of  other  right-
eous men  and  women  who  have  suf-
fered for  their  religion,  and  for  no
other  cause  than  that  they  chose  to
espouse  the  truth  and  to  advocate
it,  living  lives  of  purity,  offending
no  one — that  is,  no  one  who  should
be  offended — breaking  no  law,
trampling  upon  no  human  right.
They  were  cruelly  murdered,  ami
we  as  a  people  were  driven  out  by
violence,  driven  out  from  the  midst
of  civilization,  driven  out  from  our
homes  and  our  hard-earned  posses-
sions, and  our  track  is  marked  with
the  blood  and  with  the  graves  of  our
own  people  from  the  borders  of
civilization  till  we  reached  these
Rocky  Mountains,  and  for  no  other
cause  for  which  we  could  he
punished  legally.  We  broke  no
law;  we  committed  no  offense  against
the  majesty  of  the  law.  We  have
lived  lives  of  purity  as  we  do  here
in  these  mountains.  But  prejudice
was  created  j  men  became  excited  ;
mobs  were  formed,  and  extermina-
tion was  decided  upon,  and  there
was  no  alternative  presented  to  us
but  this  :  either  tc  submit  to  be
killed  off,  men,  women  and  children,
from  the  face  of  the  earth,  or  to  take
our  flight  as  best  we  could  in  our
poverty  to  some  remote  land  where
we  could  worship  God  according  to
the  dictates  of  our  own  conscience
in  peace  and  in  quietness*  We  chose
the  latter  alternative.  We  preferred
to  face  the  wilderness  with  all
its  untold  terrors.  We  preferred
to  come  out  among  tribes  of  Indians
of  which  we  knew  nothing,  and  live


in  their  midst  and  trust  to  their
mercie4  savages  though  they  were,
than  to  remain  among  civilize  1  men,
men  who  called  themselves  Chris-
tians. We  did this  thirty-seven


ago.


Fifty- four  years  and  a  half  have
passed  since  the  organization  of  the
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-
day  Saints,  and  in  this' land  there
has  never  b^en  a  man  punished  for
killing  a  u  Mormon/1  never  been  a
man  punished  for  burning  a  "  Mor-
mon's'1 house,  never  been  a  man
punished  for  engaging  in  mobs  and
binding  together  for  the  extirpation
of  the  "  Mormons"  and  the  destruc-
tion of  their  property.  And  this,
too,  in  this  lam!  of  boasted  liberty;
this  in  this  land,  the  most  glorious
under  the  canopy  of  heaven,  the  most
free  that  ever  existed,  the  best  gov-
ernment ever  formed  by  human  wis-
dom ;  this  in  this  land  with  the  con-
stitution as  free  as  God  Himself  has
revealed  it,  so  free  that  every  human
being  may  dwell  under  it  without
let  or  hindrance,  without  interfering
with  the  rights  of  his  fellow  man,
giving  me  the  perfect  freedom  to
worship  God  according  to  my  own
conscience,  and  giving  no  man
the  riirht  to  interfere  with  me  in  that
worship,  and  giving  every  other  man
the  same  right,  and  depriving  me  of
the  right  to  interfere  with  any  other
man  in  his  worship,  if  he  worship  ac-
cording to  the  dictates  of  his  own
conscience  and  does  not  interfere
with  the  rights  of  his  fellow  man.
Hut  in  this  land  Latter-day  Saints
have  been  murdered,  murdered  for
no  other  cause  than  because  they
believed  in  God  and  believed  He
was  a  God  of  revelation,  and  to-day
Utah  exists  because  of  this.  Because
of  this  spirit  of  persecution  to-day,
Utah  is  a  Territory,  [a  grand  Terri-
tory, and  we  as  a  people  are  living
in  these  valleys  of  the  mountains


28G


JOUKNAL OK  DISCOURSES


for  that  very  cause.  We  are  a  standing
monument  before  God  and  before  all
men  of  the  inhumanity  of  man  to
his  fellow  man.  This  is  the  position
that  we  occupy.

Will  not  these  things  be  remem-
bered I  Yes,  they  will,  and  they
will  bring  down  the  anger  of  a  just
God  upon  the  nation.  Not  for  this
alone.  There  are  other  things  ;  and
the  time  will  yet  come  when  men
will  flee  for  safety  to  the  land  where
the  Saints  dwell ;  for  we  design,  by
the  help  of  our  God,  to  maintain
freedom,  freedom  for  every  man,
freedom  for  every  creed,  freedom
for  every  race  wherever  we  live  and
can  have  power.  All  men  shall  have
equal  freedom  with  us,  they  shall  be
protected  with  us  in  every  human
right,  in  the  exercise  of  every  belief
that  they  choose  to  indulge  in  as
long  as  by  its  exercise  they  do  not
trample  upon  the  rights  of  theii
fellow  man.  And  we  shall  maintain
organized  government.  Others
may  trample  upon  the  laws  of  the
|and ;  others  may  seek  to  bring  us


into  bondage ;  but  we  shall  be  free
through  the  help  of  our  God,  and
our  country  shall  be  a  free  country  ;
for  if  others  trample  upon  the  Con-
stitution, we  will  elevate  it,  we  will
bear  it  aloft,  we  will  invite  the  men
of  all  cities  and  all  parts  of  our  lands
to  come  and  dwell  in  peace  and
safety  protected  by  that  glorious
instrument,  and  the  principles  it
contains,  that  God  helped  the
founders  of  this  government  to
frame.

Therefore  I  say,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  let  us  be  encouraged  ;  let
us  cultivate  the  virtues  that  belong
to  our  religion  ;  let  us  love  each
other  j  let  us  cultivate  peace  wher-
ever we  go,  and  extend  its  bless-
ings as  far  as  our  influence  will
permit.

May  God  help  ns  to  endure  all
the  trials  that  we  may  be  called
upon  to  pass  through,  and  may
He  bless  yuu  my  brethren  and  sisters,
and  all  who  are  seeking  to  do  His
will,  I  ask  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
Amen.


DEVOTION*  TO  GOD.


287


DISCOUKSE BY GEORGE G. BY  WATER,


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  Afternoon,

Aug. ft  1885.


REPOETED  BY  JOHN  IRVINE.


DEVOTION  TO  GOD— HOW  IT  IS  MADE  MANIFEST— DIVERS  OPINIONS —
LIBERTY  TO  WORSHIP  GOD— JESUS  CHRIST  THE  SAVIOR  OF  THE
WORLD  —  HIS  APOSTLES  WERE  UNLEARNED  MEN  ■ — -  THEY  WERE
REJECTED  BY  THE  MASSES — WRITINGS  OF  THE  PROPHETS  —  PERSE-
CUTION FOR  RIGHTEOUSNESS*  SAKE — SELFISHNESS — LOVE  OF  DARK-
NESS RATHER  THAN  LIGHT— COMPROMISE  OF  PRINCIPLE  —  INFAMY
OF  SACRIFICING  TRUTH  TO  GAIN  PLACE  —  GUD  MUST  BE  OBEYED
RATHER  THAN  MAN.


Brethren  and  sisters  and  friends:
We  have  met  this  afternoon  to  com-
memorate the  death  and  suffering
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  His
crucifixion  on  Calvary's  cross  as  an
atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  world.
We  have  met  here  to  worship  God.
The  spectacle  of  a  worshiping
congregation  is  not  new  either  in
Utah  or  throughout 1  Christendom
at  large,  A  country  or  a  people
who  are  devoid  of  the  sensibilities
of  the  obligations  which  they  owe
to  theSupremeRulerof  the  universe,
to  the  creator  of  the  world  and  all
tilings  that  in  it  are,  would  be  con-
sidered pagan,  would  be  considered
an  uncivilized  people.  In  speaking
of  civilization  Emerson  once  said
that  a  nation  without  a  well-defined
language,  without  clothing,  without
a  system  of  marriage  we  call  heathen,
we  call  barbarous,  and  he  might
have  added  with  propriety  and  like
truthful ne«s,  that  a  people  who
assemble  not  to  pay  their  devotion
to  the  Great  God,  the  architect  of
the  universe*  and  the  common  Fa-


ther of  the  human  race,  are  an  uncivil-
ized people.  While  we  admit  this
to  be  true  there  are  other  facts  asso-
ciated with  and  belonging  to  this
subject  of  the  worship  of  the  Deity,
that  present  themselves  very  forcibly
to  our  new,  and  I  may  enumerate  a
few  oF  them.

As  I  have  already  said,  the  assem-
bling together  of  a  people  in  a  con-
gregational capacity  to  pay  their
adorations  to  God  their  Heavenly
Father  is  not  a  strange  or  an  excep-
tional spectacle/  but  is  common
throughout  the  world.  Never-
theless there  is  great  diversity  of
opinion  regarding  divine  worship  ;
there  are  varied  methods  of  paying
those  adorations  to  the  Supreme
Being,  The  worship  that  they  offer
to  Deity  is  presented  in  ritualistic
forms  and  described  methods,  in
systematic  modes  ;  in  the  form  of
homilies,  in  the  exercise  of  prayer,
of  singing  of  psalms,  of  the  admin-
istration of  sacraments,  that  differ
very  widely  the  one  from  the  other.
But  who  on  account  of  this  diversity


288


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


of  opinion,  who  on  account  of  this
presented  variety  of  modes  of  bowing
before,  or  of  lifting  up  unto  the  Su-
preme Being  our  hands  in  adoration
and  praise,  or  in  the  discharge  of
our  devotional  obligations  would  say,
that  but  one,  two,  three,  or  auy  re-
stricted number  should  be  guaranteed
the  liberty,  the  freedom,  the  religious
toleration,  the  political  and  moral
right  of  bowing  the  knee  before
God,  and  of  lifting  up  their  voices  in
praise  and  prayer  to  Him  who  made
the  sun,  the  moon  and  the  stars,  and
who  created  all  things  that  live  aud
move  and  have  a  being?  Show  me  a
people,  cite  to  me  a  nation  or  a  fam-
ily of  nations  that  have  come  to  the
conclusion,  that  have  made  a  pre-
determined decree  that  none  shall
worship  the  God  of  Daniel,  or  none
shall  worship  the  Dianah  of  the
Ephesians,  or  none  shall  worship  the
golden  image  made  by  Kebuchad-
nezzar — you  show  me  a  people,  a
community,  or  a  nation,  or  family
of  nations,  that  are  fettered  end
bound  by  this  presciiptive  spirit  and
the  dogmatic  institutions  and  tradi-
tions of  their  times,  and  I  will  show
you  a  people  that  are  fettered  with
chains  forged  in  the  fires  of  bigotry
and  superstition  and  that  will  prove
to  them  a  barrier  to  national  and
universal  progress.

The  subject  that  we  have  had
presented  before  us  by  my  respected
brother  who  preceded  nie  is  a  very
interesting  one,  interesting  from
more  sides  than  one,  interesting  from
every  side,  interesting  from  centre
to  circumference,  in  part  ami  in
entirety.  It  is  the  subject  of  the
liberty  to  worship  God  according  to
the  dictates  of  a  people's  own  con-
science, unrestricted  and  unrestrain-
ed by  arbitrary  or  compulsory  meas-
ures. He  has  referred  to  historical
instances  related  in  sacred  history  to
circumstances  under  which  aud  by


the  development  of  which  the  spirit
of  persecution,  the  spirit  of  intoler-
ance, the  spirit  of  tyranny  and  op*
pression  lias  manifested  itself.  It
is  a  well  known  aud  universally
recognized  fact  throughout  all
Christendom  today,  that  Jesus
Christ  is  the  Savior  of  the  world  ;
that  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  Son  of
God,  the  redeemer  of  the  human
race,  is  the  captain  of  our  salvation,
and  that  there  is  no  other  name  given
under  heaven  whereby  man  can  be
saved  but  the  name  of  Jesus.  This
will  be  readily  and  clamorously
conceded,  persistently  avowed,  aud
zealously  declared,  by  every
church  that  lays  au>  claim  to  the
name  of  Christian  throughout  the
whole  world ;  that  he  was  the  founder
aud  finisher  of  that  faith  which  can
alone  save  the-  family  of  man  ;  that
through  His  life,  death  and  resur-
rection, in  connection  with  the
principles  of  immortality  and  eternal
life  which  He  brought  forth  to  the
knowledge  of  the  world,  in  His  own
person,  fulfilling  very  many  of  the
prophecies  relative  to  the  dispensa-
tion of  the  fullness  of  times — that
through  Him,  and  through  Him
alone,  should  salvation  come  unto
Israel,  and  a  fallen  world  be  redeem-
ed. The  Apostles  he  was  pleased  to
select  from  among  the  unlettered,
the  uncultivated  and  the  undistin-
guished among  His  fellow  men, were
called  to  be  ministers  of  his  word,
to  be  ambassadors  of  the  message
of  salvation,  to  be  His  heralds  of
peace — peace  on  earth  and  good  will
to  all  men.  It  is  true  He  selected
them  from  among  the  humble  fisher-
men that  were  following  their  occu-
pation of  fishing  on  the  sea  of  Galilee,
It  is  true  He  did  not  select  them
from  the  learned  doctors  of  the  law.
It  is  also  true  that  they  were  men
that  had  not  attained  to  any  high
repute,  or  had  been  elevated  to  any


PRESENT  GRIEF  FOR  THE

dignified  or  scholastic  position  in
the land, either  ecclesiastical  or
political. They  were  graded  as  the
offscourings  and  dregs  of  the  human
race. They  were,  so  to  speak,  the
dregs  of  human  society. Yet  to-
day, in  this  age  of  boasted  Christian
enlightenment,  in  this  a?e  of  boasted
Christian  freedom— pardon  me  tor
the  remark — they  claim  that  these
men  were  the  servants  of  the  Lord,
men  that  bore  in  their  possession
the  principles  of  life  and  salvation
unto  all  the  world,  ami  these  men
were  in  their  day  hold  to  make
affirmations  such  as  fell  very  unwet-
comely,  very  unacceptably  upon  the
ears  of  the  elite,  of  the  educate'],  of
the refined, of the  professional
classes  of  Jewish  and  of  Roman
society,  and  also  upon  those  who
were  cultivated  in  Greek  literature,
and  constituted  the  most  refined
element  of  human  society,  Yet  they
were  bold  to  declare,  "We  know
that  we  are  of  God,  and  the  whole
world  lieth  in  wickedness.  *  What
do our Christian friends  say!
What  do  our pulpit dec  1  aimers
announce  to  theireongregationswheu
they  select  such  positive  declarations,
such  strong  doctrinal  enunciations
as  the  one  I  have  quoted  and  many
mort  like  unto  them — what  do  they
sayt Oh,  they  tell  their  Christian
friends  that  they  lament  the  dark-
ness, the inural blindness,  the
intellectual  and  doctrinal  opaqueness
of  that  age  ;  that  had  they  lived  in
the days  when  Jesus  sojourned
among  men,  when  He  went  about
speaking  words  of  kindness,  uttering
sentences  of  love  and  mercy, express-
ing His  good  will  to  the  whole  hu-
man family,  and  seeking  to  promul-
gate the  principles  of  peace  in  a
distracted  age  ;  say  they,  "  Oh  that
we  had  lived  in  the  days  of  Jesus  ;
oh  that  we  had  had  the  privilege  of
bowing  down  at  His  feet  like  Mary
No,  If.


UNBELIEF  OF  THE  FAST.  289

and  Martha ;  oh  that  we  had  had  the
opportunity  of  surrounding  Him
when  the  precious  words  of  life  fell
from  His  hallowed  lips — the  lips  of
Him  who  spake  as  never  man  spake j
ch  that  we  had  had  this  privilege/'
And  the  tears  of  penitence  for  the
sins  of  the  dead  who  had  gone  cen-
turies before  them  trickle  down
their  face  and  stain  the  pages  of  the
sacred  scriptures  from  which  they
select  their  texts  when  they  refer  to
the  blindness  and  hardness  of  heart
of  th<j  people  who  treated  with  igno-
miny and  contempt  the  worlds
greatest  reformer,  the  world's  uni-
versal  redeemer,  the  Sou  of  God
Himself.  What  do  they  say  of
them]  "Oh,1*  say  they,  "how
strange  i&  is,  how  remarkable  it  is
that  those  people  with  the  writings
of  the  blessed  Prophets — with  *  the
writing 4  of  Hosea,  of  Jeremiah,  of
Amos,  of  Joel,  of  Habakkuk,  of
Zechariah,  of  Malachi,  and  of  all  the
prophets  in  their  possession,  where-
in are  found  so  many  prophecies
relating  to  the  coming  of  the  Mes-
siah, relating  to  the  ushering  in  of
a  new  dispensation,  relating  to  the
inauguration  of  a  reign  of  peace  such
as  the  world  had  never  seen,  such  as
God  had  not  promised  unto  the
children  of  men,  until  the  period  of
the  world's  history  when  Shiloh
ghould  come — how  remarkable  with
all  this  that  they  did  not  receive
the  Son  of  God.  "If  we  had  lived
in  these  days,"  say  they,  "  we  believe
that  we  would  have  been  able  to  see
the  hand  of  God  ;  we  would  have
marked  His  divine  footprints  among
the  people  \  we  would  have  recognized
by  our  ears  the  voice  of  the  Good
Shepherd  ;  we  would  have  listened
with  hearts  subdued  with  humility,
with  minds  illuminated  by  inspira-
tion, to  the  marvelous  and  inimitable
truths  uttered  by  the  Savior  of  the
world* Oh,  how  wicked  it  was  for

Vol  XXVI


230


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


those  people  to  be  so  hardhearted  ;
how  wicked  it  was  not  only  for  the
common  people  but  for  the  rulers
of  the  Jews,  for  the  members  of
the  Senate,  for  the  doctors  of  the
law,  for  the  lights  of  the  generation,
t  he  lead  i  t jg  m  e  n  o  f  th  e  pe  r  i  ud  i  n  w  h  i  ch
they  hvnl  that  they  -should  be  guilty
of  such  inhuman,  such  unnatural,
such  unjust  conduct  as  to  persecute
men  against  whom  no  charge  in
truth  and  in  verity  could  be  found
except  it  was  that  they  were  pleased
to  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of
the  Lord,  to  announce  unto  the
world  of  mankind  that  a  dispensa-
tion of  divine  providence  had  been
ushered  in,  wherein  a  change  should
take  place  over  the  minds  of  the
people;  wherein  a  new  order  of  things
should  be  developed,  and  wherein
the  Mosaic  law  with  all  its  sacerdotal
rites  and  ceremonies  were  to  be  con-
summated and  brought  to  a  termi-
nation in  the  fulfillment  of  the
prophecies,  and  in  the  introduction
of  a  higher  and  a  purer  law."  These
are  their  feelings;  the  ministers
preach  to  the  people  after  this  fash-
ion, and  read  to  them  such  passages

as  these  :

'*  Blessed  are  they  which  are  per-
secuted for  righteousness'  sake  j  for
theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.

**  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall
revile  you,  and  persecute  you,  and
shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against
you  falsely,  for  my  sake.

"Rejoice  and  be  exceedingly  glad:
for  great  is  your  reward  in  heaven  :
for  so  persecuted  they  the  prophets
which  were  before  you."

This  language,  my  beloved  friends,
is  of  a  very  forcible  character.  Pro-
bably a  few  reflections  upon  the
sentiments  incorporated  in  these
declarations  of  uninspired  men
may  not  be  altogether  uninstructive
or  unprofitable  unto  us  at  this
time.


We  learn  from  these  declarations
that  Jesus  Christ  and  his  followers
hat!  their  names  cast  out  as  evil.  If
these  historians  record  veritable  facts
— and  we  have  no  right  to  question
the  historical  verity  of  these  state-
ments,  because  they  are  established
and  verified  by  secular  history:  if
then,  they  are  true  it  becomes  every
thinking  student  of  history,  every
earnest  and  avowed  student  of
natural  theology  or  sectarian  lore,
to  understand  what  it  was  that  con-
stituted the  essence  of  the  disagree-
ment, what  constituted  the  gist,
the  kernel,  if  you  please,  the  special
reason  why  the  existing  spirit,  faith
and  teachings  of  the  Jewish  people,
and  of  the  Roman  people,  in  the
commencement  of  the  Christian  era,
were  so  opposed  to  the  doctrines  of
Jesus  Christ  and  His  apostles.  I
have  already  referred  to  the  general
recognition  by  the  Christiau  world
of  the  doctrines  of  Christ  and  His
apostles  as  being  the  foundation  of
the  hope  of  all  enlightened  nations
for  salvation  before  God;  for  salva-
tion in  eternity,  for  the  redemption
of  the  human  race.  What,  then,
was  it  that  was  the  cause  of  the
opposition  which  was  so'pronouuced,
so  persistent  and  so  prolonged
against  Jesus  Christ  and  His  follow-
ers. This  opposition  was  not  con-
fined to  a  narrow  region.  It  was
an  opposition  that  was  not  limited
within  any  special  circle ;  for  we
read  of  one  inquirer  who  appears
to  be  a  man  of  very  general  informa-
tion addressing  himself,  in  the  lorm
of  an  inquiry  in  his  own  behalf,  and
in  behalf  of  those  whom  he  re-
presented, to  the  Apostles,  say-
ing :

"  We  desire  to  hear  of  thee
what  thou  thinkest  :  for  as  con-
cerning this  sect,  we  know  that
everywhere  it  is  spoken  against,"

It  was  not  a  matter  of  conjecture


SELFISHNESS


291


-with  him.  It  was  a  matter  of  con-
jecture with  him  as  to  what  the
Apostle  Paul  thought  :  for  Paul
was  a  mat j  of  letters,  a  man  of  a
very  extended  range  of  experience
and  observation  ;  so  much  so  that
one  of  the  learned  rabbis  of  his  time
told  him  that  much  learning  had
made  him  mi  l.  But  he  was  in-
quiring respecting  his  (Paul's)
information  concerning  the  Church
of  Christ,  a  body  of  religious  wor-
shipers with  whom  he  was  iden-
tified, and  in  the  midst  of  whom
he  was  an  authorized  Apostle.

"We  desire  to  hear  of  thee  what
thou  thiukest ;  for  as  concerning
this  sect,  we  know  that  everywhere
it  is  spoken  against*"

"We  know  ! "  "What  do  you
know,  sir!"  "We  know  that  it  is
spoken  against."  * 4 Where  is  it
spoken  against,  sir  V  "  It  is  every-
where spoken  against"  Hence  we
see  the  universality,  the  general
character  of  the  opposition  that  was
raised  against  the  doctrines  of  the
humble  and  despised  Nazarene,
Why  was  it,  my  friends,  that  they
were  oppose*  1  to  Him  1  Why  was  it
that  His  cause  was  so  much  misrepre-
sented; that  he  was  charged  with
keeping  company  with  publicans  and
sinners,  and  considered  worthy  of
death]  Simply  because  he  introduced
an  organized  system  of  principles,  of
ordinances  and  divine  institutions
that  were  antagonistic,  not  in  their
essential  nature  to  the  welfare  of
mankind,  but  antagonistic  to  the
existing  dogmas,  theologies  and
schools  of  philosophy  that  were  then
in  existence.  They  were,  moreover,
systems  of  theology,  ami  schools  of
philosophy  and  organized  methods
of  procedure — in  matters  theological
as  well  as  matters  doctrinal  and
political— that  were  becoming  ex-
hausted.  They  had  reached  the
period  of  their  decrepitude.  They


had  attained  unto  the  period  of  old
age.  They  had  manifested  within
them  the  elements  of  social,  moral
and  organic  decay.  Their  deteriorat-
ing effects  were  becoming  painfully
apparent.  They  were  becoming  illy
adapted  to  the  newly  developing
condition  of  things  ;  inapplicable  to
the  unfolding  environments  of  those
times;  and  God,  who  sits  enthroned
in  the  realms  of  purity  and  of  truth,
had  given  these  systems  for  the  sake
of  His  people.  Whatever  there
was  of  a  regenerating  progressive
nature  in  these  systems,  God  sus-
tained. He  sustained  them  until
the  day-star  had  dawned  for  a
brighter  and  more  glorious  epoch  in
the  world's  history,  when  the  shep-
herds were  visited  by  rikdtaenger*  of
light  from  the  realms  of  the  Eter-
nal Gods,  crying,  "  Peace,  peace
on  earth  and  good  will  toward  all
men," A f *  /

But  my  brother  who  precede  !  me
spoke  of  selfishness.  He  touched
a  chord  that  seems  to  me  to  be  un-
broken and  of  a  very  extended
length.  I  think  it  reaches  over  all
the  ages.  I  think  it  has  come  down
from  the  border  times  of  prehistoric
|  history.  I  think  it  is  found  right
through  human  nature,  crude  and
cultivated,  civilized  and  unciv-
ilized.

The  doctrine  which  the  Savior
taught  touched  this  feeling  of  selfish-
ness. It  touched  the  personal  vanity
of  many.  The  supporters  of  the
systems  that  I  have  alluded  to — I
have  no  time  to  name  them  ;  there
may  be  many  of  you  who  are  histor-
ically well  informed  and  know  all
abou'i  them ;  you  know  there  were  a
number  of  philosophical  schools  in
■  existence  in  Athens  and  elsewhere
at  that  time ;  you  are  acquainted#
no  doubt,  with  the  dogmas  of  the
period.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the
most  violent  and  determined  opposi*


292  JOURNAL  UK

tion  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  met
with  in  His  day  ami  generation  wjM
from  the  very  class  of  men  that  the
Christian  world  today  have  sup-
posed and  thought  He  ought  to  have
derived  the  greatest  possible  support.
Our  christian  preachers  and  ministers
tell  their  congregations  that  the
learned  doctors  of  the  law  who  had
little  else  to  do  but  study  the  tech-
nicalities of  the  laws,  to  familiarize
themselves  with  the  genius  of  their
construction,  with  the  wisdom  that
promulgated  them,  with  the  neces-
sities underlying  t lie  need  for  their
legislation  ;  these  ministers  tell  us
that  they  of  all  other  men  ought  to
have  discovered  the  signs  of  the
times*  ought  to  have  been  able  to
read  them,  and  in  reading  them  to
have  discovered  that  the  set  time
had  come  for  God  to  bring  forth  His
Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  usher  in  a
reign  of  peace.  But  it  was  from
this  class  of  people  that  Jesus  met
with  the  most  violent  and  persistent
persecution.

And  how  is  it  to-day,  my  friends  ?
How  is  it  to-day  with  the  Latter-day
Saints?  I  want  to  propound  a  few
questions  to  my  friends,  as  well  as
to  those  who  have  no  desire  \o  be
considered  our  friends.  I  have  one
word  to  say  to  them.  I  would  say,
as  my  brother  before  me  has  said,
would  to  God  tli at  they  could  be
inspired  by  the  same  divine  intelli-
gence, by  the  same  supreme  wisdom
and  enlightened  by  the  same  heav-
enly understanding  that  chased  away
the  darkness  of  ages,  cleared  up  the
obscurity  in  which  the  human  mind
was  enveloped  in  the  days  of  Jesus;
would  to  God  they  were  sincere  and
devout  and  honest,  consistent  be-
lievers in  the  Bible,  the  word  of  God,
Then  we  would  not  have  so  much
trouble  in  reasoning  with  our  friends.
We  have  no  trouble  to-day  in
obtaining  an  intelligent  reply  from


DISCOU  USES.

our  Christian  friends  when  we  ask
them,  Why  did  Jesus  and  His  Apos-
tles receive  persecution  at  the  hands
of  the  Jews  and  of  the  Romans  in
their  day,  both  as  religious  and
political  communities  t  Why  did
they  do  it  ? The  answer  would  be

1  freely  given.  Because  they  loved
darkness  rather  than  light ;  because
they  would  not  purify  their  lives  by
the  regenerating  principles  of  Christ-
ianity; because  they  would  not  deny

I  themselves  of  those  forbidden  fruits
and  of  those  unrestrained  passions
which  ran  riot,  and  which  the  ad-
herents of  the  Christian  religion
pronounce  against ;  because  Jesus
upbraided  them  for  sin  and  iniquity.
It  was  because  he  told  them  the  truth
against  themselves  that  they  were
opposed  to  Him. What  were  the

|  principles  He  taught  1  "  Oh,"  says
our  Christian  friend,  "  they  are  to
be  found  in  the  writings  of  Matthew,
Mark,  Luke  and  John,  and  in  the
epistles  of  the  Apostles,  You  will
find  there  the  teachings  that  Jesus
and  His  Apostles  taught,  and  there,
too,  are  found  the  reasons  for  ail  the
opposition  and persecution  which

|  they  endured  even  unto  death,  even
to  the  ignominious  death  of  cruci-
fixion.

Well,  suppose  we  were  to  ask  the
question  now,  what  is  the  reason  that
the  Latter-day  Saints  are  everywhere
spoken  against  1  What  is  the  answer!
Well,  we  would  be  answered  various*
ly,  but  all  in  harmony  with  one  cer-
tain note  of  disapproval.  The
answer  would  be  :  44  You  are  unlike
us.  You  choose  to  profess  a  religion
and  a  polity  different  to  us.  The

'  constitution  of  your  social  structure
is  at  variance  with  our  ideas  of  moral-

I  ity.  We  are  enthusiastically,  frantic-
ally, and  mercilessly  incensed  against
your  social  system.  We  cannot  en-
dure it.  You  must  believe  as  we
do. You  must  think  as  we  do,  and


COMPROMISE  OF  PRI>XIPLE.


293


if  you  don't  choose  to  think  and
believe  as  we  do,  you  must  act  as  we
do,  or  you  cannot  be  in  fellowship
with  us,"  Now,  my  friends,  this  is
the  spirit  of  the  age  in  which  we  live,
and  I  am  respectfully  at  the  whole
world's  defiance  to  present  to  me  or
any  other  intelligent  Latter-day  Saint
a  solid,  logical  or  truthful  argument
of  a  contradictory  nature.  There
never  has  been  and  there  never  will
be  an  opponent  whose  acumen  La
equal  to  the  task  of  formulating
reasons  rational  and  sufficiently
cogent  to  overthrow  the  doctrines
of  the  religion  of  the  Latter  * lay
Saints.

Now,  then,  if  the  people  in  the
days  of  Jesus  and  His  Apostles  were
as  consistent — or,  pardon  me,  rather
inconsistent— as  the  people  of  our
day  are,  they  would  persist  in  main-
taining that  these  doctrines  should
not  be  taught  in  Judea,  nor  in  the
regions  round  about,  nor  in  Para-
philia, nor  in  Rome,  nor  in  Galatia,
nor  anywhere.  You  must  renounce
these  doctrines  they  said.  But  they
did  not  renounce,  and  they  put  them
to  death.  Ah  !  That  is  the  secret.
Do  yon,  then,  Christians— the  pro-
fessed promulgators  of  Bible  Christ-
ianity— do  you  choose  to  repeat  the
deeds  of  your  forefathers  ?  Do  you
choose  to  imitate  the  examples  of  the
persecutors  of  the  humble  and  des-
pised Nazarene  by  persecuting,  im-
prisoning and  putting  to  death  men
and  women  who  profess  precisely  the
same  theology,  who  worship  the
same  God,  who  bow  at  the  same  sa-
cred altar  as  Jesus  and  His  Apostles
did,  who  advocate  the  same  doctrines,
who  administer  in  the  same  ordinan-
ces, and  who  in  every  doctrinal  par-
ticular are  following  their  divine
Master  and  fellow  laborers,  the
Apostles  of  old  ?  "  Ah  f  says  one,
u  it  is  not  that  exactly.  If  you
would  only  promise  that  you  would


remove  from  your  religion  every
objectionable  feature  that  it  now
presents  to  the  Christian  world  we
would  hail  you  as  brethren,  as  fel-
low Christians/'  What  did  the
Jewish  people  do  I  What  did  the
Roman  people  do  t  They  told  Jesus
of  Nazareth  in  effect  that  if  he  would
strike  out  of  the  constitution  of  the
new  faith  every  principle  and  doc-
trine that  was  uncongenial,  if  not
with  the  prophecies  which  they  pro-
fessed to  believe  in,  at  all  events,
with  their  construction  of  them;  if
they  would  only  put  these  away,  then
they  could  live  with  them.  What
would  our  divines  to-day  think  of
Jesus  and  His  Apostles  if  they  had
permitted  to  be  handed  down  to
history  that  in  consequence  of  the
opposition  winch  the  revelations  of
God  had  evoked  in  the  human  mind,
and  had  caused  the  public  puke  to
beat  high,  to  arise  to  feverish  tem-
perature, until  they  came  to  this
conclusion  :  if  we  let  these  men
alone  they  will  take  away  our  name
and  nation;  we  cannot  stand  it;
crucify  him  !  crucify  him  !  release
unto  us  the  thieves — Barabbas,  any-
body except  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ;  cru-
cify him  !  crucify  him  ! — His  blood
he  upon  us  and  upon  our  children
forever  ;  this  was  the  cry  of  the  pop-
ulace ;  and  had  He  made  this  affirm-
ation, that  in  consequence  of  the
determined  opposition,  of  the  broad
and  deep-seated  enmity  that  was
engendered  in  the  hearts  of  the  peo-
ple against  the  revealed  will  of  Uod,
it  was  bestyto  cease  to  proclaim  His
glorious  principles,  it  was  best  to
stop  the  administration  of  His
ordinances,  it  was  best  to  surrender
their  allegiance  to  Almighty  God,
and  bow  in  crouching  servility  to
their  fellow  men,  in  deference  to
th cm  and  rebellion  to  the  Gud  of
heaven.  What  would  our  christian
ministers  think  ot  such  a  bo  ly  of


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


men  as  that  of  Jesus  and  His  Apos-
tles assuming  a  position  of  that  kind
before  them?  How  well  they  have
declaimed  in  favor  ol  the  martyrs
of  Christianity.  With  what  burning
eloquence  they  have  extolled  the
heroism,  the  stout-heartedness  of
the  men  and  women  who  were  willing
to  go  as  lambs  to  the  slaughter,  like
their  divine  Master,  rather  than
prove  recreant  to  the  sacred  obliga-
tions they  had  assumed.  "What
would  they  say  of  such  a  Christian-
ity 1  They  would  *ay,  Fie!  upon
such  miserable  stuff  j  fie  !  upon
such  men  and  women  who  should
attempt  to  lay  hold  of  such  glorious
and  benignant  principles  as  those
of  Christianity.  They  would  say,
the  touch  of  such  men  and  women
upon  such  principles  was  a  contam-
inating touch  ;  it  would  have  been
an  upas  breath  that  the)  would  have
breat  hed  when  vindicating  Christian-
ity ;  while  they  themselves  were  so
inadequate  to  the  responsibilities —
being  devoid  of  the  inspiration  per-
taining to  the  truth — and  so  indis-
posed to  live  a  life  of  purity  which
those  principles  required  at  their
hands.

If  you  would  so  judge  of  the
former-day  Saints,  how  would  you
judge  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  1
What  would  you  think  of  us  if  we
were  to  tell  you  that  we  would  cease
to  believe  in  the  religion  of  Jesus
Christ  t  It  is  true  you  do  not  know
what  it  means,  and  hence  we  pity
you,  It  is  true  that  we  know  we
are  of  God  ;  we  know  that  these
principles  and  revelations  are  divine;
we  know  that  they  have  emanated
from  Him  who  cannot  lie  ;  we  know
these  things,  and  if  you  knew  them
would  you  ask  us  to  deny  our  faith,
to  prove  recreant  to  our  trust,  to
become  unworthy  the  confidence  of
our  families  and  of  honest  men
around  us  on  every  hand.  A  gentle-


man in  this  city  was  known  to  say —
and  lie  said  it  in  language  more
forcible  than  eloquent,  and  you  will
excuse  me  for  not  repeating  it,  be-
cause it  might  be  considered  sacrilege
in  a  sacred  desk  to  do  ko — he  was
known  to  say:  "If  1  knew  what  you
say  to  be  true,  I  would  go  to  prison
— I  would  not  dery  it  for  anybody/'
Well,  what  would  you  think  of  a  man
who  would  deny  that  which  he  knew
to  be  true,  or  say  no  when  the  truth
requited  him  to  sa)  yes]  Could  you
trust  him  as  a  Free  Mae  on  or  an
Odd  Fellow,  or  in  any  other  capacity
where  true  hearted ness  and  genuine
human  worth  is  to  be  appreciated
and  sought  1 Certainly  not.

Well,  now,  my  friends,  we  have
made  some  very  plain  remarks  this
af  ternoon,  Permit  me  in  conclusion
to  say  t  hat  I  am  very  sorry  that  we
are  forced  into  this  uninviting  situa-
tion ;  but  being  forced  into  it,  push-
ed into  it,  if  you  please,  driven  into
it,  legislated  into  it,  what  can  we
dol  What  would  you  advise  us  to
do?  Your  advice  would  be  this
possibly  :  "  M:e  believe  that  you
people  only  say  that  )ou  know  this
work  in  which  you  are  engaged  is  of
God,  We  do  not  believe  you  do
know.  We  think  you  are  like  the
rest  of  the  Christian  world,  and  that
your  knowledge  is  no  more  divine,
or  that  you  have  any  closer  commu-
nion with  God  than  the  rest  of  the
sects  of  the  Christian  world,  and
they  don't  profess  to  know,  only
to  believe.  Therefore  you  are  very
presumptuous  to  say  you  know  these
things.  You  ought  to  know  better.
You  had  therefore  better  place
yourselves  in  accord  with  us,  come
a  little  nearer  to  us,  and  just
say  you  don't  believe  certain  prin-
ciples in  your  religion,  and  we
will  tolerate  the  other  portion. **

My  friends,  if  we  were  placed  in
this  position  of  our  own  doing,  we


GOD  MUST  BE  OBEY  KB  RATHER  THAN  MAN


295


would  gladly  come  to  terras,  we
would  gladly  settle  this  question
before  the  setting  of  another  day's
sulu  But  when  we  know  that  God
has  spoken  from  heaven  ;  when  we
know  as  well  as  we  know  that  we
live  that  the  revelations  which  we
have  received — against  which  the
world  are  now  fighting — are  of  God,
born  of  heaven,  of  heavenly  descent,
we  can  but  say  in  conclusion  that  we
Will  do  all  we  can,  we  will  keep  every
law  that  it  is  possible  for  us  to  keep,
we  will  honor  our  government  to
the  best  of  our  ability  ;  but  if  we
are  asked  to  choose  this  day  whom
we  will  serve,  God  or  Belial,  what  do
you  take  us  for  ?  Hypocrites,  knaves,
fools,  asinine  actors  in  the  drama  of
life,  or  what  ?  No,  my  friends,  I
will  say  as  one  of  old  said  :  *  'Though
He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him/1
We  know  the  principles  are  right ;
we  know  they  are  e tenia),  no  matter
wb*t  may  be  the  consequences.
Suppose  some  of  us  are  put  to  death,
what  of  that?  By  putting  us
to  death  they  simply  place  us  be-


yond their  power — they  can  do
nothing  more.  As  Jesus  said,
"  Fear  not  them  winch  kill  the  body,
but  are  not  able  to  kill  the  soul ;
but  rather  fear  Him  which  is  able  to
destroy  both  soul  and  body  in  hell."
Now,  if  we  are  philosophers,  if  we
are  men  of  wisdom,  if  we  are  students
of  the  principles  of  intelligence  and
of  truth,  why  certainly  we  will  make
a  wise  selection,  we  will  elect  to
serve  Him  who  created  us,  and  we
trust  that  God  our  heavenly  Father
when  He  has  so  far  matured  His
purposes,  which  are  essential  to  the
consummation  of  the, end  for  which
He  has  permitted  this  crusade  to  be
waged  against  us,  will  be  pleased  to
soften  the  hearts  of  those  around
us  as  He  did  in  for  mer  dispensations,
and  as  He  has  done  with  our  own
nation  in  our  own  day — that  He  will
mould  and  temper  the  dispositions
of  men,  and  that  He  will  make  the
wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him,  and
the  residue  He  will  restrain.  May
God  grant  this  is  my  prayer  in  the
name  of  Jesus.  Amen,


29G


JOUKNAL  OK  OlSUOORSfcS.


DISCOURSE BY APOSTLE R D,  RICHARDS,


Delittred  in  the  New  Stale  Tabernacle^  Proro,  Smtduy  Afternoon,

\ \ Jvij.  S0tht  18 85.


( EEPOETED  BY JOHN  IRVINE.)


PARABLE  OF  THE  TEN  VJRGINS— RAPID  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  ARTS  AND
8CIINCKS — THE  LORD  HAS1EMNG  HIS  WOKK  IN  ITS  TIME —
ENMITY  BETWEEN  THE  ('HTIiCH  OF  CHRIST  AND  THE  WO  It  I  D —
THE  GATHEklNii  TOiJEI'IIER  OF  PEOPLE  FROM  EVERY  NATION  AFTER
THEY  HAVE  11  KEN  BAPTIZED  INTO  ON  K  SPIRIT— THE  LAW  OF
TITHING— BLESSINGS  WHICH  FO!  LOW  OBEDIENCE  THERETO — BIND-
ING UPON  ALL,  RICH  AND  POOR  ALIKE— (JIVING  TO  THE  POOR —
POWER  OF  THE  PKIKCIL'LBfcj  OF  THE  GOSPEL  AND  EFFECTS  OF
THEIR  OBSERVANCE — JEHoVAII — JESUS  CHRIST — HIS  MINISTRY  —
HIS  FOLLOWERS — THEIR  MISSION  —  PREACHING  TO  THE  SPIRITS  IN
PRISON — BAPTISM  FOR  THE  DEAD  —  SAVIORS  UPON  MOUNT  ZIUN —
RESPONSIBILITY  RESTING  UPON  THE  SAINTS — A  WORD  OF  ENCOUR-
AGEMENT TO  THE  MISSIONARIES,


Occasions  of  this  kin* I  have  a
very  precious  significance  to  those
who  are  in Ler«stt**l  in  the  great  work
of  the  last  d^pemation.  They
awaken  I  he  belter  feeling*  of  our
Halm  e&  to  commune  together  as  the
people  of  God,  tt>  con  template  His
providences  law  an  Is  11  is  people,  the
experiences  through  which  they
have  passe^l,  and  are  passing  It
ih  veiy  pleasant  to  the  Klders  wlio

are  called  to  speak  to  the  people  in
going  from  place  to  place,  to  meet
those  with  whom  I  hey  associated  in
earlier  times  and  in  far  distant  coun-
tries. In  tlds  icspect  my  journey
■was  made  pleasant  this  morning
upon  finding  myself  in  the  carriage
With  b  re  tin  en  whom  1  labored  with
almost  thirty- five  years  ago  in  the
British  Isle*.

Thirty  years  ago,  in  about  one
month,  our brother  ami  friend,


Professor  Maeser,  with  several  others,
in  the  City  of  Dresden,  the  capital  of
Saxony,  strolled  away  one  night,
and  finding  ourselves  beyond  the
surveillance  of  the  police,  a  mile  or
more,  down  to  the  banks  of  the  river
Elbe,  we  there  had  the  pleasure  of
seeing  him  enter  into  the  covenant
of  the  everlasting  Gospel  with  us.
This  ami  like  circn instances  cause
me  to  thank  the  Lord  for  His  grace
that  has  preserved,  helped  and  sus-
tained us,  and  kept  us  in  the  truth
until  this  present  time,  while  many
who  have  beeu  baptized  into  the
Church  have  fallen  out  by
the  way.  When  we  contem-
plate the  parable  of  the  Savior
111  reference  to  the  ten  virgins — five
of  whom  were  wise  and  five  foolish
— behold,  we  are  seeing  in  part  the
fulfillment  of  that  parable.  When
we  consider  how  many  have  turned


WHY  THE  SAINTS  GATHER,


297


away  at  one  time  and  another  because
the  way  was  too  straight  or  the  road
was  too  rousjh  for  them,  we  have  rea-
son to  be  very  thankful  that  the  love
of  the  truth  has  continued  and  in-
creased in  our  hearts.  It  is  fitting  that
we  should  labor  with  diligence  and
faithfulness  and  with  our  mights  to
bring  to  pass  the  purposes  of  God,
inasmuch  as  they  are  rolling  upon
us  rapidly,  and  seeing  that  He  has
promised  that  He  will  cut  His
work short in  righteousness.

Since  the  Father  came  forth  from  j
the  heavens  with  His  Son  and  spoke  ,!
to  the  Prophet  Joseph — then  a  boy  J
only  about  fourteen  years  old,  and
told  him  that  all  the  people  of  the
earth  had  gone  as  t  my  from  His  ordi-
nances and  had  broken  the  ever-
lasting covenant — I  say  since  that
time  what  wonderful  progress  has
been  made  in  developing  the  arts
and  sciences. Those  were  the  days
of  the  fetaire  coach  instead  of  the
railroad.  Then  postal  faciltties  were
very  slow. It  required  months  for
communications  10 go from this  !
country  to  Europe  and  back  again,
How  it  is  done  in  an  instant,  steam
and  electricity  enable people  to
transact  business  in  one  day  or  an
hour,  perhaps,  that  used  to  take
mouths  to  accomplish. The  Lord
is  in  this  way  fulfilling  His  promise  |
that  He  would  hasten  His  work  in
its  time.  •  He  has  increased  facilities
during  our  day  and  generation  for
the  accomplishing  of  work  ami  bring-  |
ing  about  His  purposes  which  it
would  take  many  times  as  long  to
accomplish  under  the  old  regime—
the  slow -coach  order  of  things.  1

Thirty-eight  years  ago,  when  we
came  across  the  plains,  it  took  us  all
summer  to  get  from  the  Missouri
river  to  Salt  Lake,  We  had  to  walk
and  toil  by  the  road  ;  our  teams
gave  out  and  died  by  the  way.  A
company  of  us  in  the  year  1843  were


from  the  18th  of  February  till  the
19  th  of  October,  coming  from
Liverpool  to  this  Territory.  Now
the  Saints  start  from  the  old  coun-
try and  come  here  by  steam  in  about
three  weeks,  a  journey  that  formerly
took  nine  months  to  perform.  This
is  one  of  the  ways  in  which  the  Lord
is  shortening  His  work — cutting  it
short  in  righteousness — and  further-
more He  lias  said  He  will  hasten  it
in  its  time.

Now,  there  must  necessarily  be,
as  there  always  has  been,  the  same
enmity  between  the  Church  of  Christ
and  the  world  that  ever  has  existed.
And  what  k  the  great  reason  why
there  must  be  such  opposition  1  I
can  tell  you  one  reason.  It  is  be-
cause that  we,  by  the  blessing,
power  and  requirement  of  God,
have  been  enabled  to  £?o  forth  and
preach  the  Gospel,  gather  the  be-
lievers together,  organize  churches,
build  cities  and  temple?,  and  estab-
lish a  church  and  kingdom  unto
God,  and  that  the  world  cannot  do.
That  is  one  reason  why  they  feel
enmity  toward  us.  This  is  a  great
testimony  to  the  whole  world — the
work  of  gathering  the  people  of  every
language  under  the  sun,  from  the
frigid,  the  temperate  and  the  torrid
zone*.  From  Iceland  on  the  North,
as  well  as  from  New  Zealand  and  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope  on  the  South,
and  all  countries  intermediate,
where  the  Gospel  has  been  preached.

If.  is  a  subject  that  is  an  enigma
for  the  greatest  statesman  of  tliA
earth  ;  this  gathering  together  of
people  of  d  life  rent  languages,  differ-
ent education  and  habits,  and  har-
monizing them  all.  The  i*reat  secret
is  that  they  are  first  baptized  into
the  same  spirit,  one  baptism,  one
faith,  and  one  Lord.  They  come
here  and  being  taught  correct  prin-
ciples they  govern  themselves.  That
is  just  what  we  want ;  and  is  what


29S


JOURNAL  UK  DISCOURSES.


every  family  needs,  that  those  who
become  rulers  in  Israel,  or  heads
of  families,  shall  be  men  of  God,
tilled  with  the  knowledge,  the
revelations  and  power  of  God,

I  am  thankful  that  I  live  with  you
to  see  the  great  and  mighty  opera-
tion hi  of  Jehovah's  purposes  going
on  in  the  earth.  1  feel  thankful  I
that  I  am  permitted  to  perform  any
humble  part  in  this  marvelous  work.
The  Saints,  even  those  in  the  hum-
blest station,  should  feel  thankful
that  they  can  contribute  one  way  or  j
another  by  their  efforts  or  their
means  to  help  advance  any  of  the
interests  of  the  Church  or  Kingdom
of  God.

Former  speakers  have  referred  to
the  principle  of  tithing.  This  is
one  of  the  very  important  features
of  the  fait) i  of  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel. It  always  was  when  there  was
a  people  of  God  on  the  earth.  Go
back  to  our  Father  Abraham —
whom  all  professed  Christians  would
like  to  claim  heirship  with— and  we
find  that  he  was  verv  tenacious  in
paying  his  tithing,  his  whole  tithing,
W  lieu  he  went  io  war  against  the
thirteen  kings,  with  his  company  of
three  hundred  and  eighteen  tiained
servants,  followed  them  all  night,
overtook  them,  and  became  their
victors,  lie  brought  home  the  spoils,  j
and  when  he  reached  Jerusalem  he  I
found  there  Melchisedec,  the  ruler
of  the  country,  the  minister  of  the
Lord,  the  king  of  peace ;  one  of  the
first  things  he  did  was  to  pay  his
tithing  of  the  booty,  and  he  received
a  blessing  at  Melchisedec  s  hands.
So  it  was  with  Isaac  and  Jacob,  We
are  informed  in  the  Scriptures  that
Jacob  covenanted  with  the  Lord,
saying  :  11  Of  all  thou  shalt  give  me,
I  will  surely  give  the  tenth  unto
thee,"  which  he  did.  And  when  in
after  years  the  Lord  brought  Israel
back  from  Egypt  to  Canaan,  where


He  promised  they  should  live  and
have  an  everlasting  inheritance  if
they  would  keep  His  law,  He  gave
it  them  with  this  reserve,  that  a
tenth  of  the  peoples  possessions
(should  be  paid  to  Him  :

"And  all  the  tithe  of  the  land,
whether  of  the  seed  of  the  btudg
the  fruit  of  the  tree,  the  tithe  of  the
herd  or  of  the  flock,  is  the  Lord's,
and  shall  be  holy  unto  the  Lord.
(Lev.  xxvii,  30-32,)

If  they  did  not  do  this  they  would
be  robbing  the  Lord.  The  fact  was,
all  they  possessed  was  the  Lord's,
and  when  they  appropriated  all  to
their  own  use,  paying  nothing  into
the  Lord's  storehouse,  they  did  that
for  which  He  afterwards,  by  the
Prophet  Malachi,  charged  them  with
robbing  Him,  pvcti  their  whole  na-
tion," (Malachi  iii,

The  Lord  has  szid  unto  us,  very
emphatically,  if  we  do  not  sanctify
this  land  and  make  it  holy  unto  Him
by  keeping  this  and  all  oilier  of  His
commandments  that  it  shall  not  be
a  laud  of  Ziou  onto  us.  Let  us
hearken  to  it,  take  it  to  heart,  think
of  it,  study  it  prayerfully,  and  learn
what  it  means.

Says  one,  **  Here  is  a  poor  widow
that  does  not  owe  any  tithing  ;  there
is  a  poor  brother  who  is  lame  and
cannot  work  who  does  not  owe  any
tithing,"  Don't  theyl  Let  us  see.
The  paying  of  tithing,  like  every
other  ordinance,  has  its  peculiar
blessings,  and  what  are  theyl  la
the  receipt  which  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith  gave  to  me  in  Nauvoo,  signed
by  himself  and  the  tithing  clerk,  he
stated  that  having  paid  my  tithing
in  full  to  date,  I  was  entitled  to  the
benefits  of  the  baptismal  font,  which
had  just  been  dedicated  in  the  base»
ment  of  that  Temple.  Do  not  this
poor  widow  and  that  lame,  unfortu-
nate brother  need  the  benefits  of  the
baptismal  font  for  their  deceased


THE  LAW  OF  TITHING


29$


kindred  just  as  much  as  the  rich,
the  sound  and  the  fortunate  1  I  think
they  do. How  then  can  they  obtain
a  right  and  title  to  their  blessings  1
The  Lord  has  instituted  a  means  by
which  they  may  receive  their  bless-
ings by  the  pay  me?  it  of  their  tithing,
The  first  Thursday  of  every  month
is  a  Fast  day,  fur  the  Saints  to  gather
together  in  prayer  and  fasting,  and
to'bring  their  offerings  for  the  poor,
that  the  afflicted  and  unfortunate
may  not  lack  tor  food  or  clothing,
and  the  comforts  of  life. Now,  if  a
poor  man received one  hundred
pounds  of  flour  or  any  other  gift,  it
is  his  privilege  to  pay  one-tenth  of
it  as  tithing,  and  have  it  credited  to
him  on  the  book  as  a  tithing  payer,
and  in  this  way  he  pays  just  as
much  as  the  man  who  pays  <me  hun-
dred  dollars. The  same  with  the
poor  sister  who  receives  her  aid  from
the  Relief  Society, She  can  pay
her  tithing  in  the  same  way— have
her  name  recorded  ou  the  books,
and  thus  acquire  the  right  to  be
baptized for her dead  kindred.
These  rights  and  privileges  are  not
confined  to  the  rich. They  are  for
people  of  all  conditions  in  life,  pro-
vided they  comply  with  the  require-
ments  of  the  Lord The  Savior
said*  that  the  widow,  with  her  two
mites,  paid  in  more  than  the  rich
out  of  their  abundance. Some  have
been  inclined  to  practice  this  principle
on  a  kind of  sliding scale.  If
they donate  an amount to  the
building  of  a  Tabernacle  or  a  Tem-
ple, they  must  take  that  out  of  their
tithing This  is  not  the  correct  way.

God  has  given  us  commandments
concerning  the  law  of  tithing  :  He
has  also  given  us  instructions  in  re-
gard to  our  offerings  for  the  poor,  as
follows  :

14  Therefore,  if  any  man  shall  take
of  the  abundance  which  I  have  made,
and  impart  not  his  portion,  according


to  the  law  of  ray  Gospel,  unto  the
poor  and  the  needy,  he  shall,  with
the  wicked,  lift  up  his  eyes  in  hell ^
being  in  torment/1 — (Doc,  &  Gov.,
Section  104,  par  18.)

He  directs  all  these  things.  If
we  learn  His  way  and  walk  in  it,  we
shall  be  abundantly  blessed,  and
those  who  are  too  poor  to  walk  in  the
right  way  of  the  Lord,  will  become
so  poor  that  they  will  perish  from
the  land  by  and  by.

What  has  brought  vou  here  from
distant  lauds] It  is  the  potency  of
those  principles  you  have  embraced.
What  has  inspired  you  to  labor  and
make  this  part  of  the  wilderness  so
beautiful  i I  recollect, , when  I  first
came  to  Provo  ou  the  4  th  July,
1849,  we  had  a  sort  of  celebration  ;
some  of  the  authorities  of  the  Church
were  here,  and  arrangements  wem
then  made  and  directions  given  for
the  location of this  city.  Sincec
then,  see  what  has  been  accom-
plished ! See  this  meeting  house,
court  house,  bank  building,  your
woolen factory — the  greatest  one
of  the  Territory,  and  one  that  would
be  a  credit  to  any  part  of  the  conti-
nent— what  has  done  all  this  ]  It
is  the  potency  of  those  principles
God  has  revealed  to  you. It  is  1 1  lis
that  induced  you to  leave  your
native  lauds  and  come  to  this  coun-
try, strangers  in  a  strange  land,  as
Abraham  was  when he left  his
home  and  went  down  to  Canaan.
These  principles  are  known  by  yon*
my  brethren and  sisters.  They,
however,  are  principles  the  world  do
not  know  anything  about,  especially
this  principle  of  tithing.  They  have
their  own  way  of  making  contribu-
tions, etc.,  but  they  do  not  under-
stand tithing  as  a  law  of  God.  We,
who  do  comprehend  these  things,
must  follow  out  heaven's  require-
ments, that  the  favor  and  strength
of  the  heavens  may  be  with  us.


300


JOURNAL  OF  DISOUUKSEs,


While  we  have  been  in  this  land
what  else  have  we  been  doing!  We
have  been  sending  away  missionaries
by  scores  and  hundreds,  year  bj  yeart
to  inform  and  if  possible  to  convince
the  people  of  the  truth  of  the  Gos-
pel They  will  not,  however,  re-
ceive it  It  seems  as  though  man*
kind  now,  as  in  the  days  of  Jesus,
have  ears  to  hear,  but  they  will  not
hear;  eyes  to  see,  but  they  will  not
fiee  ;  hearts  to  understand,  but  they
will  not  understand.  When  we  tell
them  that  certain  principles  and
views  we  hold  are  our  religions  con-
victions, or  our  conscientious  under-
standing of  the  wurd  of  the  Lord,
we  are  told  at  once  that  there  is  no
religion  about  it,  as  if  others  had  a
better  right  to  know  what  our  relig-
ions  convictions  should  be  than
ourselves.

We  have  a  great  and  marvelous
work  laid  upon  us,  and  its  more
marvelous  features  are  still  to  be
developed  and  made  manifest.  We
yet  see  but  a  small  part  of  it.  The
Lord  has  shown  us  all  we  can  bear ;
all  we  can,  in  our  pres*?nt  state  of
development,  comprehend  and
apply.

The  Savior  said,  when  He  was
upon  the  earth,  "  I  am  the  way,  the
trirth,  and  the  life/1  Now,  if  we
can  find  out  sufficiently  about  our
Savior,  His  views  and  doings,  we
shall  be  able  to  understand  generally
the  principles  of  the  glorious  Gos-
pel, which  has  been  revealed  and
something  of  its  outcome.  We
learn  that  our  Savior  was  horn  of  a
woman,  and  He  was  named  Jesus
the  Christ.  His  name  when  He
was  a  spiritual  being,  during  the
first  half  of  the  existence  of  the
earth,  before  He  was  made  flesh  and
blood,  was  Jehovah,  He  was  in  the
beginning  of  the  creation,  and  He
had  to  do  and  has  had  to  do  contin-
ually with  the  creation  and  govern-


ment of  this  heaven  and  this
earth.

But  up  to  the  time  that  He  came
and  dwelt  in  the  flesh  and  was  bora
of  Mary,  His  Mother,  He  dwelt  in
the  spirit  life.  He  was  the  spirit
Being  that  directed,  governed  and
gave  the  law  on  Mount  Sinai,  where
Moses  was  permitted  to  see  Him  in
part.  He  is  the  Being  that  appeared
unto  the  brother  of  Jared,  when  he
brought  the  stones  that  were  to  be
put  into  the  barges,  and  asked  the
Lord  to  touch  them  with  His  finger
that  they  might  receive  and  emit
light.  When  the  Lord  drew  near
and  touched  the  stones  with  His
finger,  the  brother  of  Jared's  eyes
were  opened,  and  he  saw  the  finger
of  the  Lord,  He  was  afraid  and
fell  down  before  the  Lord.  The
Lord  asked  him,  "Why  hast  thou
fallen  T  Arise  f  And  he  said  that
he  was  afraid,  for  he  beheld  the
finger  of  the  Lord,  and  he  did  nut
know  that  the  Lord  had  flesh  and
blood.  Jehovah  then  showed  him
His  whole  person,  saying,  "This  is
the  body  of  my  spirit" — He  that
should  come  in  the  meridian  of  time
and  take  upon  Himself  a  body  of  flesh
and  blood.  When  that  time  arrived,
and  he  attained  the  age  of  thirty  years,
He  began  to  officiate  in  the  ministry,
after  He  had  been  baptized  by  John
the  Baptist.

Without  stopping  to  detail  as
much  as  I  would  like,  I  want  to  call
attention  to  two  or  three  leading
features  of  His  work.  The  Savior
commenced  to  labor  in  the  ministry,
and  found  men  here  and  there  of
the  right  spirit,  whom  He  com-
manded to  follow  Him.  To  one
of  these  he  said,  u  Before  Philip
called  thee,  I  saw  thee."  So  He  con-
tinued to  find  and  select  choice  spirits
whom  He  knew  before  the  founda-
tion of  the  world.  He  ordained
twelve  of  them  to  be  His  ministers,


PREACHING  TO  THE  SPIRITS  IN  PRISON.


301


and  then  He  sent  4 them  abroad.
But  did  He  send  them  all  over  the
world?  No.  He  first  told  them
to  go  only  unto  the  lost  sheep  of  the
house  of  Israel,  and  they  went.
They  worked  with  great  success,
healing  the  sick,  casting  out  devils,
etc.  They  neither  lacked  food  nor
raiment ;  freely  they  received,  freely
they  gave.  Thus  they  reported
their  mission.  The  Savior  not  only
sent  the  Twelve  Apostles,  but  other
seventy  also,  missionary  men,  send-
ing them  forth  to  teach  Israel  that
the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  at  hand.
During  His  mission  and  long  before
He  was  crucified  He  taught  them
that  He  would  be  crucified,  and  on
the  third  day  he  arose  from  the  dead,
but  they  did  not  seem  to  under-
stand it.

After  His  resurrection  He  said  to
them,  hitherto  you  have  asked
nothing  of  the  Father  in  my  name,
but  now,  said  He,  whatsoever  you
shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  name  it
shall  be  granted  unto  you.  Now  is
all  power  given  into  my  hands  both
in  heaven  and  on  earth.  After  His
resurrection  He  called  His  Apostles
together  and  commissioned  them,
saying,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,
4nd  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  crea-
ture. He  that  belie  vet  h  and  is
baptized  shall  be  saved,  but  he  that
believeth  not  shall  be  damned.11
That  was  another  feature  of  the  work
wherein  He  sends  the  Gospel —
now  that  Israel  had  proved  them-
selves unworthy  of  it — to  all  the
world.  We  see,  then,  that  the  great
work  of  the  brethren  was  to  carry
the  Gospel  to  the  whole  human  fam-
ily first  But  the  Savior  told  them
that  if  He  went  away,  they  should
do  greater  works  than  He  had  done,
because  He  went  to  the  Father.
What  did  He  do  t  After  He  was
crucified  He  went  and  preached  to
the  spirits  in  prison,  even  to  that


great  multitude  that  were  destroyed
through  disobedience  before  the  flood
and  by  the  flood.  He  unlocked  the
prison  doors  to  those  that  were
bound.  While  upon  the  earth  the
Savior  and  His  brethren  of  the
Twelve  labored  to  impart  the  Gospel
to  those  that  were  living.  The
Savior  set  the  Priesthood  in  order
and  offered  the  Gospel  to  the  people,
but  they  would  not  receive  it.
Still  this  was  the  great  work  that
had  to  be  performed.  The  Gospel
had  to  be  preached  to  mortals  first,
and  next  to  those  in  the  spirit
world.

What  are  our  condition  and  labor
;  now  1  In  this  hist  dispensation  the
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  in  the  year
1820,  first  received  revelations  from
the  heavens,  and  it  was  only  until  1844
that  he  was  permitted  to  live.  By
1830,  the  Book  of  Mormon  was
brought  forth  from  the  mountain
Cumorah,  was  translated  and  printed,
and  fourteen  years  from  that  time
the  Prophet  Joseph  was  taken  from
us.  i

When  he  went  away  he  went  with
the  keys  of  this  last  dispensation  to
the  prison  house  of  the  dead,  who  had
died  in  times  that  were  past ;  and
he,  his  brother  Hyrum,  the  breth-
ren of  the  Twelve  Apostles — for
there  are  now  nearly  a  quorum  of
the  Twelve  Apostles  with  them —
constitute  a  great  and  migh  ty  church
I  in  the  spirit  world,  laboring  and
preaching  the  Gospel  to  the  spirits
of  our  fathers  who  are  in  prison.
They  are  called  upon  to  do  the  work
Brother  Smith  has  been  speaking
about  this  afternoon.  The  prophet
I  Elijah  came  and  delivered  his  mes-
sage on  the  6th  March,  1836,  in  the
Temple  in  K inland,  and  he  has
been  at  work,  ever  since  then,  turn-
ing the  hearts  of  the  children  to  the
fathers  and  the  hearts  of  the  fathers
to  the  children,


302


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Referring  to  this  work  the  Apos-
tle Paul  makes  this  declaration  :
4*  For  to  this  end  Christ  both  died
and  rose,  and  revived  again,  that  he
might  be  Lord  both  of  the  dead  and

11V
mil".

So  it  is  with  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith.  He  has  gone  before  with
the  keys,  of  this  dispensation,  after
having  lived  and  conferred  them
upon  the  authorities  of  the  Church,
€ven  all  that  was  necessary  until  he
shall  come  again  to  build  up  this
kingdom  preparatory  to  the  coming
•of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  with
others  are  helping  to  carry  out  the
great  work  of  the  redemption  of  the
dead*  And ,  this  part  of  the  work
we  are  called  upon  to  perform  in  the
temples.  To  be  baptized  for  them,
to  be  confirmed  for  them,  and  to
perform  all  those  holy  ordinances
for  your  righteous  dead,  for  your
worthy  ancestry,  which  you  have
<lone  or  shall  do  for  *  yourselves,
makes  you  to  become  saviors  upon
Mount  Zion.  The  responsibility
resting  upon  the  Saints  in  regard  to
these  matters  is  very  great.  1  heard
the  Prophet  Joseph  say,  in  a  sermon
he  preached  before  he  was  killed,
that  no  greater  responsibility  rested
upon  the  Saints  than  the  work  of
attending  to  ordinances  for  their
dead.  This,  then,  ought  to  be  taken
into  serious  consideration.  Brethren
who  cannot  go  abroad  and  preach  the
Gospel,  may  labor  in  the  temples,
and  thus  bring  to  pass  the  purposes
of  God,

When  we  contemplate  this  great
work,  shall  we  wince  at  persecution  ?
Though  we  are  persecuted,  though
our  enemies  are  hunting  and  harass-
ing and  breaking  up  our  families,
shall  we  be  frightened  and  be  any
less  wise  and  discreet,  or  adopt  un-
worthy measures  to  keep  out  of
prison  1  Certainly  not.  Let  us  be
true  to  the  truth.  Let  us  be  true
to  what  God  has  committed  to  us,  in


every  iota,

In  conclusion  I  would  say  a  word
of  encouragement  to  the  brethren
who  are  engaged  in  the  ministry.
In  the  early  times  of  the  Church  in
foreign  lands  the  work  of  the  Lord
spread  rapidly  when  tli*  Elders  la-
bored with  unity  of  purpose  and
faith,  and  a  great  many  were  added
to  the  Church,  Many  were  brought
to  this  land.  Now  we  have  come  to
a  time  when  hut  few  come  into  the
Church.  Some  of  the  doctrines  that
have  been  revealed  are  a  stumbling
block  to  the  people.  It  was  so  in
the  days  of  Jesus  and  His  Apostles.
He  taught  the  doctrine  of  the  cross
and  of  the  resurrection,  which  was
a  great  stumbling  block  to  them — a
rock  of  offence,  as  is  the  doctrine
of  eternal  and  plural  marriage.
Through  the  opposition  that  the
Elders  have  to  meet,  owing  to  that
doctrine,  they  sometimes  feel  that
their  labors  are  very  trifling  when
they  baptize  but  few,  I  want  to
say  to  the  brethren,  that  you  do  a
great  deal  of  good,  he  not  discour-
aged, nor  of  a  doubtful  heart.  You
do  a  vast  deal  oi  good  you  cannot
see.  Your  testimonies  to  the  world
are  a  savor  of  life  unto  life  or  of
death  unto  death — life  unto  life  to
those  who  receive  and  render  obedi-
ence to  the  Gospel  ;  death  unto
death  to  those  who  reject  it.  The
world  is  filled  with  lies  concerning
Gods  people  and  the  truths  they
teach.  The  influences  of  the  press
and  pulpit  seem  concentrated  for
the  publication  of  lies  in  reference
to  the  Latter-day  Saints.  The  world
seems  inclined  to  believe  lies  and
be  damned  rather  thau  receive  the
truth,  A  painful  thought.  Still,
there  is  this  good  you  may  do  :  you
should  be  assiduous  in  your  labors
to  correct  the  errors  and  lies  that
are  circulating  among  the  people  ;
you  may  soften  the  people's  suscepti-
bilities and  prejudices  ;  and  perhaps


NECESSITY  OF  INSPIRATION  TO  A  SPEAKER.


303


you  maybe  the  means  of  preventing
a  great  many  men  and  women,  who
might  otherwise  be  guilty  of  the
shedding  of  innocent  blood ,  from
entering  into  anything  of  that
kind,  or  consenting  to  it  in  their
hearts,  and  though  they  may  not  he
Mulling  and  ready  to  receive  the
Gospel  in  this  life,  yet,  by  not  im-
bruing their  hands  in  blood,  may  be


they  will  have  the  privilege  at  id  be
willing  to  receive  the  Gospel  in  the
fl pint  world.  You  know  not,  there-
fore, the  good  that  you  may  do  in
this  respect,

I  pray  God  to  bless  every  interest
of  this  Stake  of  Zion,  temporal  and
spiritual,  present  and  future,  in  the
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
Amen*


DISCOURSE  BY  APOSTLE  MOSES  THATCHER,
Deliver §d  in  the  Tabernacle^  Logan,  Sunday \  Avg.  QS \  1885

REPORTED  BY  P.  E.  BARKER.


the  speaker's  dependence  upon  the  inspiration  of  the  holy
ghost — comprehensive  anp  exalted  nature  of  the  plan  of
salvation — satan's  coercive  scheme — the  sons  of  perdition

" the  testimony  of  jesus —  physical  and  moral  courage —

true  religion  is  practical — one  straight  and  narrow  way
to  eternal  life — true  religion  compared  to  genuine  coin
— true  faith  is  inseparably  connected  with  works— bap-
tism of  water  and  of  fire — apostles,  prophets,  etc.,  placed
in  the  church— god's  impartiality  to  his  children— testi-
MONY OBTAINED  BY  OBEDIENCE — ALL  WILL  BE  SAVED  EXCEPT  THE
SONS  OF  PERDITION — GOD  HAS  PREPARED  A  PLACE  FOR  ALL —
PARADISE — SALVATION  BEYOND  THE  GRAVE — THE  SAINTS  WILL
HAVE  TO  ENDURE  PERSECUTION— PATRIARCHAL  MARRIAGE — CON-
CLUSION. H;

In  seeking  to  address  the  audience  J  the  guidance  and  inspiration  of  the
this  afternoon  I  feel  a  degree  of  Holy  Ghost  to  direct  me  what  to
weakness  and  of  dependence  upon  say,  I  desire  an  interest  in  your  faith
the  Holy  Spirit,  known  to  the  EU  and  prayers.  Nothing  to  my  mind
ders  of  Israel;  and  that  I  may  secure  can  be  greater  sacrilege  in  the  sight


304


JOURNAL OK  DISCOURSES.


of  the  Almighty  than  to  undertake
to  speak  in  His  name  without  the
inspiration  of  His  spirit.  We  may
talk  upon  the  branches  of  human
learning  and  knowledge,  speaking
after  the  manner  of  men  with  but
little  of  this  feeling  of  timidity,  but
Dot  when  we  undertake  to  speak  of
the  principles  of  life  and  salvation,  of
the  plan  of  human  redemption
as  it  has  always  existed — as  it  ex-
isted before  the  foundations  of  the
world  were  laid,  as  it  will  continue
to  exist  until  every  child  of  God
except  the  sons  of  perdition  shall  be
brought  back  ami  exalted  in  a  de-
gree of  glory  far  beyond  the  compre-
hension of  the  finite  mind.  It  has
sometimes  been  said  that  Mor mon-
ism, so  calU  :L  i>  narrow,  proscrip-
tive  and  selfish  ;  yet  those  who  com-
prehend it,  even  in  part,  haven**ver
made  such  an  assertion,

God  so  loved  the  humau  family
that  He  gave  His  only  Begotten  Son
to  die  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  and
in  all  the  dealings  of  God  with  the
human  family,  the  careful  student
will  find  that  the  deepest,  the
strongest,  the  chord  that  gives  forth
the  sweetest  music,  is  that  which
vibrates  under  the  touch  of  this
infinite,  almost  incomprehensible,
love  of  the  Almighty.  The  chief
corner  stone,  the  foundation  of  our
faith  is  built  upon  the  doctrine  of
vicarious  salvation,  founded  in  the
deepest  philosophy  of  love*  The
doing  by  others  the  things  that  we
are  not  able  to  do  for  oursel  ves,  is  a
divine  principle  the  practice  of
which  saps  the  very  foundations  of
human  selfishness,  and  it  exalts,
glorifies,  and  so  far  as  understood
and  practiced,  brings  those  who  obey
it  into  a  nearness  with  God.  The
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  in  no  sense
narrow.  It  is  broader  than  eternity,
deeper  than  earth,  higher  than  the
heavens. Note  the  affection  of


earthly  parents.  Their  child  may
stumble  and  fall,  his  feet  may  trav-
erse bye  and  forbidden  paths,  he  may
do  ten  thousand  wrong  things,  but
in  the  midst  of  all  the  love  of  father
and  mother  reaches  out  and  yearns
for  the  reclamation  and  redemption
of  tiie  wayward  one.  This  love,
implanted  in  the  human  heart,  is  of
divine  origin.  It  is  the  mainspring
that  prompts  saving  efforts.  The
plan  of  salvation  being  permeated
with  it,  strikes  unerringly  at  human
selfishness,  and  bidding  us  do  unto
others  as  we  would  have  others  do
unto  us,  cannot  possibly  be  nar-
row.

Whatever  may  have  been  the
efforts  of  Satan  and  the  hosts  that
follow,  whatever  they  may  do  in  the
future  to  destroy,  a  merciful  and
loving  heavenly  Father's  plan  is
broad  enough  to  save  and  will  save,
in  some  degree  of  glory,  every  hu-
mau being  that  lias  or  ever  will
breathe  the  breath  of  mortal  life
except  the  sons  of  perdition  who,
sinning  against  light,  put  Jesus  to
an  open  shame  by  denying  the  effi-
cacy of  His  atoning  blood  after
knowing  of  its  power.  Thank  God
these  will  be  few  in  number.  What-
ever may  be  the  views  of  uninspired
sectarians  as  to  the  utter  condemna-
tion of  the  heathen,  and  of  the  uq-
sprinkled  infant  wTho  dies  before  the
dawning  of  reason  upon  its  intellect,
none  but  those  mentioned  will  be
consigned  to  eternal  condemnation
and  to  the  misery  and  torments  of
what  is  called  hell.  Men  will  be
judged  by  the  deeds  done  in  the
body.  If,  therefore,  a  man,  in  full
possession  of  intellectual  faculties
sins  against  light  as  the  son  of  the
morning,  Satan,  sinned  against
light,  no  power  on  earth  or  in
heaven  can  save  him.  For  he  has
deliberately,  while  freely  exercising
his  own  agency, elected  to  be


THE  SONS  OF  PERDITION.


305


damned.  To  such  the  sealing
powers,  the  keys  of  which  were
restored  to  the  Prophet  Joseph  by
Elijah,  are  of  no  more  avail  than
were  they  when  Satan,  followed  by
a  third  part  of  the  hosts  of  heaven,
song  lit  to  enforce  against  the  decree
of  God  and  His  Son  Jesus,  his
coercive  scheme  of  human  redemp-
tion, which  scheme  in  its  very  na-
ture was  calculated  utterly  to  destroy
the  agency  of  man,  thus  denying
him  the  means  of  growth  and  final
intelligent  exaltation.  Satan  knew
of  the  existence  of  God  and  of  His
Christ,  His  first  born,  and  he  knew
of  their  power,  honor,  glory  and
dominion.  But  being  envious  and
full  of  ambitious  pride  was  anxious
to  supplant  all  for  his  own  advance-
ment. He  fell,  and  was  cast  down
as  those  will  be  who  follow  him  and
do  the  works  of  their  master,  sin-
ning against  knowledge  and  the
light  of  heaven.

The  coercive,  agency,  destroying
plan  of  Satan,  having  been  rejected
by  the  councils  of  heaven,  a  better,
more  noble  plan,  one  founded  in
unselfish  love  that  distills  the  mer-
cies of  God  in  the  human  heart,  as
the  dews  of  heaven  moisten  and
gladden  the  parched  earth,  was
adopted.  This  plan,  while  holding
the  keys  of  the  Godhead  in  the
authority  of  His  priestuood,  is  yet
simple  and  easily  understood — so
plain  is  it  that  a  wayfaring  man  need
not  err.  There  is  a  spirit  in  man
and  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty
giveth  it  understanding ;  the  sinful
who  listen  and  obey  are  led  to  re-
pentance, and,  through  the  doors
of  baptism  of  the  water  and  spirit
are  brought  out  of  wickedness  to
the  enlightenment  of  pure  knowl-
edge, until  in  obedience  to  heavenly
law  they  secure  the  keys  of  power
authorizing  them  to  pass  by  the
angels,  inherit  glory,  become  heirs

No.  20,


of  God,  joint  heirs  with  Christ ;
and,  having  abiding  in  them  eternal
lives  shall  beget,  throughout  the
endless  ages  of  eternity,  the  souls
of  the  children  of  men  to  the  honor
and  glory  of  God,  and  create  and
have  dominion  over  worlds.

Such  is  the  high  destiny  of  obedi-
ent man.  But  Satan  was  au  accuser
of  his  brethren  from  the  beginning,
hence  the  rejoicing  of  angels  when
he  and  his  kind  were  cast  down  to
ear tli  bodiless,  estateless  and  power-
less, except  for  evil  Wandering
spirits  in  the  realms  of  darkness,
seeking  everywhere  and  under  all
circumstances  to  enter,  defile  and
destroy  the  souls  and  bodies  of  men.
Where  God  is  he  can  never  abide,
nor  cm  those  having  received  the
testimony  of  Jesus  who  deny  it.
Such  can  never,  if  they  reject  the
truth,  sin  against  the  light  and  put
Jesus  again  to  an  open  shame,  abide
the  presence  of  God.  When  through
the  atoning  blood  of  Christ  their
spirits  and  bodies  are  brought
together  in  the  resurrection  of  the
wicked  aad  are  judged  according  to
the  deeds  done  in  the  body,  the
second  death  will  pass  upon  them.
The  first  death  resulted  in  a  tem-
I  porary  separation  of  body  and  spirit,
but  the  second  will  result  in  eternal
separation.  As  the  rebellious  in
heaven  lost  their  first,  so  these  will
lose  their  second  estate  and  become
like  the  first.

How  many  people  in  this  world
to  day  are  capable  of  becoming  the
sous  of  perdition  %  And  those  are
the  only  ones  of  the  human  family
who  will  not  be  saved  in  some  de-
gree of  glory.  Are  there  two
hundred  thousand  mature,  intelligent
human  beings  throughout  the
Christian  world  to-day  who  have
knowledge  enough  to  enable  them
to  become  the  sons  of  perdition  %
How  many  in  the  Christian  world

VoL  XXVL


306


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES*


have  that  testimony  of  Jesus  which
the  Apostle  declared  was  the  spirit
of  prophecy! Such  a  testimony  is
stronger  than  can  be  the  testimony
of  the  existence  of  (toy  earthly  thing
as  evidenced  by  the five  senses.
As  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the
earth,  so  is  the  testimony  of  Jesus
above earthly  information for  it  !
penetrates  every  fibre  of  the  human
organism. A  slight  degree  of  in-
spiration without  such  a  testimony
enabled  the  Waldenses  about  whom
Brother  Lehman  has  been  speaking,
to  endure,  while  singing  songs  of1
joy  and  rejoicing,  the  horrors  of  |
fagot,  wheel  and  rack. A  compre-
hension of  the  testimony  that  re-
waids,  in  time  and  eternity,  enabled
the  Apostle  Peter  to  meet  undis-
mayed  the death of  crucifixion.
It  caused  the  disciples  of  Jesus  to
take  gladly  the  spoiling  of  their
goods  and  bear  patiently  the  con-
tumely heaped  upon  them.  How
few  can  comprehend  it !  Physical
courage  is  common  enough  even  in
this  degenerate  age.  Exhibitions
of  brute  force  can  be  witnessed  on
every  hand. The  crawling  worm
as  it  drags  its  slimy  ionn,  will  turn
and  light  lor  existence,  and  the  low-
est of  God's  creatures  struggle  for
Hie. A  sensitive,  refined  human
being,  made  in  the  image  of  God,
may  face  physical  danger  in  every
form,  meeting  without  fear  the  wild
savage,  while  the  dark  messengers
of  death  whistle  by  his  heedless  ears.
Without  a  tremor,  he  may  listen  to
the  whir  of  grape  and  canister,  and
the  shriek  of  shell,  as  they  scatter
desolation  and  ruin  all  around  ;  but
a  sneer  of  contempt  from  the  lips  of  ■
the  scornful,  or  envious  hate  ex-
pressed in  fierce  sarcasm,  may  dull
the  very  marrow  of  his  bones,  caus-
ing him  to  quake  like  an  aspen  leaf*
Thus  the  physically  brave  may  quail, ,
falter  and  fall  under  the  attack  of  the


scornful  egotist,  whose  sneer  to  many
is  like  the  poison  of  asps.  But  ho
who  has  the  testimony  of  Jeeus
springing  up  in  his  heart  like  a  well
of  living  water  hath  that  higher
courage  which  tends  upward*,  step
by  step,  to  a  comprehension  of  the
inspiration  that  enabled  the  Savior
while  suffering  the  aironies  of  death
to  utter  tiie  heaven-born  sentiment
of  divine  love  expressed  in  the  words,
"O,  God  forgive  them  for  they
know  rot  what  they  do."

No  man  without  the  Holy  Ghost
can  testify  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ;
neither  could  any  men  under  similar
circumstances  utter  from  the  heart
such  sentiments  of  forgiveness  with-
out the  direct  inspiration  of  the
Almighty.  Christians  may  assimilate,
preach  about,  and  praise  a  love  that
passe th  the  comprehension  of  the
finite  mind,  but  no  mortal  can  love
his  enemies  and  pray  for  the  forgive-
ness of  those  who  despite  fully  use
and  would  kill  him,  without  the
testimony  of  Jesus,  and  the  knowl-
edge accompanying  it.

God  will  forgive  whom  He  will
forgive,  but  for  us  it  is  required  that
we  forgive  all  men.  Whether  they
ask  forgiveness  or  not  ]  Yes,  whether
they  ask  it  or  not !  This  doctrine
is  founded  in  the  deepest  philosophy
and  leads  up  to  final  victory  for  all
who  through  obedience  to  the  com-
mandments, have  gained  for  the
spirit  ascendancy  over  the  passions
uf  the  body  and  are  thus  enabled  to
love  even  their  enemies.  Scribes,
Pharisees  and  hypocrites  love  each
other.  The  distinguishing  charac-
teristic of  a  Saint  is  that  he  can  do
more.  And  his  ability  to  do  more
comes  of  the  knowledge  that  the
love  of  God  abides  not  in  the  heart
that  harbors  hatred  of  a  single  hu-
man being.  He  who  preaches
and  practices  the  doctrine  of
hate knows not  God, As  we


BUT  ONE  WAY  TO  ETERNAL  LIFE.


307


judge  of  the  quality  of  a  tree  by  the
fruit  it  bears,  so  also  may  we  judge
of  the  quality  of  a  religion  bj  the
fruit  it  bears  and  not  by  the  profes-
sions of  ics  adherents,

I  say  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  if
the  religion  you  have  received  fails
to  prevent  you  from  bearing  false
witness,  it  is  either  untrue  and  not
the  religion  of  Christ,  or  it  is  not
grounded  in  your  hearts.  True
religion  is  bound  to  be  practical
religion,  teaching  the  merchant  to
give  sixteen  ounces  to  the  pound,
thirty-six  inches  to  the  yard,  and
in  every  way  to  be  honest  and
truthful.  It  will  teach  the  laborer
to  do  honest  work  and  the  employer
to  give  honest  and  fair  wages  for
the  work.  It  will  unveil  hypocrisy
and  place  a  premium  ou  the  ex-
ecution of  equity  and  justice  ;
it  will  supplant  malice  with  charity,
hatred  with  love,  distrust  with  confi-
dence. It  will  silence  the  voice  of
-envy  and  remove  the  foot  of  oppres-
sion from  the  neck  of  the  poor.  Its
church  steeples  will  cast  no  shadows
over  the  homeless,  starving,  shiver-
ing child  of  God,  left  miserably  to
perish  under  the  very  droppings  of
the  sanctuary.  True  religion  will
do  these  and  ten  thousand  kindred
deeds  of  .charity,  whenever  and
wherever  practiced.  The  fearful
wrongs  everywhere  seen
Christian  world  wore  not
dained,  nor  are  they  any
heaven's  economy,  but  are  the  fruits
of  the  acts  of  sinful  man,  the  results
-of  God's  laws  broken  and  trodden
under  feet  of  men  whose  wicked
injustice  blotch  and  mar  the  har-
mony and  peace  of  the  universe.

True  religion  refreshes  the  heart
as  gentle  rains  the  parched  and
thirsting  soil  The  law  and  proph-
ets hang  upon  perfection, — the
doing  unto  others  as  we  would  that
others  should  do  to  us,  under  the


in  the
fore-or-
part  of


practice  of  which  the  grinding
monopolies,  cruel  wrongs  and  awful
sacrifices  known  throughout  the
Christian  world  would  melt  away
as  snow  before  the  ravs  of  the  sun.
Millions  may  profess  to  follow  the
meek  and  lowly  Jesus,  but  if  the
misery  and  sorrow  of  Christians  is
the  fruit  they  produce,  their  religion
is  lifeless,  untrue,  or  has  failed
to  act  upon  their  hearts.  Strait
is  the  gate  and  narrow  is  the  way,
and  few  there  be  that  find  it.
Simple,  unmistakable,  yet  how  few,
how  few  indeed,  seem  to  understand
that  unchangeable  declaration  of
Christ.

Ministers  claiming  to  speak  in
His  name  daily  contradict  and  seek
to  nullify  its  force.  Some  years
since  I  remember  to  have  read  a
sermon  preached  bf  the  Brooklyn
divine,  the  lie  v.  Henry  Ward
Beecher,  in  which  his  mighty  intel-
lect,— he  is  conceded  to  be  one  of
the  foremost  thinkers  of  the  age, —
seemed  to  grasp  miterivl  with  which
to  bridge  the  yu!f  separating  the
vario  us  Christian  deuo  m  i  u  a  t  i  o  n  s,
by  comparing  the  kingdom  of  heaven
tu  the  City  of  Philadelphia,  leading
into  which  were  many  railways,  over
each  of  which  many  train*,  with
many  cars  containing  many  people,
passed  daily.  All  starting  from
different  points,  traversing  different
roads,  but  all  going  to  Philadelphia
— that  is,  heaven.  How  generous,
how  charitable,  how  humane!  but
however  pleasing  the  doctrine  it
lacks  one  important  ingredient,  it  is
not  true.  Beecher  says  there  are
many  ways.  Christ  said,  straight
is  the  gate,  not  gates,  and  narrow  is
the  way,  not  ways,  etc.  As  they
separate,  and  disagree,  let  us  leave
Beecher  and  follow  Christ.  One  is
an  authority,  the  other  is  not.
Jesus,  the  Mediator  of  the  Coven-
ant, the  Captain  of  our  salvation,


308  JOURNAL  OK

through  whose  atoning  hlood  our
sins  are  washed  away,  and  by  whose
merits  and  our  faithfulness  we  shall
be  1m  ought  again  into  the  presence
of  Cod  the  Father,  has  declared
that  a  man  cannot  enter  the  King-
dom of  God  except  he  be  born  of  the
water  and  of  the  Spirit ;  and  yet
think  of  the  audacity,  the  blasphemy
of  those  claiming  to  act  in  His  name
and  for  Him,  while  denying  His
statements  and  rendering  His  laws,
in  the  estimation  of  tiio.se  whom
they  teach,  nugatory.  And  yet  these
same  people  are  quick  to  brand  as
nulliiiers  all  who  seek  to  test  in  a
peaceful  way  the  special,  prescriptive
laws  of  mam  These  things  indicate
that  which  is  genuine  and  detect
that  which  is  spurious.  Let  us  obey
the  laws  of  God,  the  laws  of  no
Christian  nation  should  conflict
therewith.

As  ihe  value  of  a  coin  is  largely
determined  by  its  purchasing  power,
so  the  value  of  a  religion  may  be
partly  determined  by  its  cost  and
largely  by  the  blessings  it  will  bring.
Becoming  familiar  with  the  coin
issues  of  our  country  the  careful,
prudent  man  is  able  in  many  ways
to  detect  counterfeits.  Note  for  in-
stance the  authorized  issue  of  gold
twenties.  Above  the  eagle,  the
nation's  emblematic  coat  of  arms,
and  surrounded  by  stars  and  rays  of
light  are  the  words,  "  In  God  we
trust around  the  face  margin
"United  States  of  America"  and
*4  Twenty  Dollars*"  On  right  and
left  scroll  connecting  at  top  of  shield
we  find  the  words,  "E  pluribus
Unum  ;"  in  its  left  talon  the  eagle
grasps  a  bundle  of  three  arrows.
On  the  reverse  side  we  find  the  im-
press of  the  head  of  the  "  Goddess
ot  Liberty"  surrounded  by  thirteen
stars  representing  the  thirteen  origin-
al States,  Across  t  he  dim  I  em  on
her  head,  is  the  word  "  Liberty,"


DISCOUKSKK.

(on  certain  silver  coins  of  tr* ore-
modern  issue  "  Liberty"  is  printed
on  the  shield  upon  which  the  God-
dess sits).  These,  with  date  of
issue  and  a  small  letter  indicating
the  mint  that  coined  the  issue  are
the  distinctive  features  of  the  coin
alluded  to.  Now  supposing  any
person,  high  or  low,  ignorant  or  wise,
should  offer  you  a  coin  in  exchange
for  twenty  dollars  value  lacking  any
of  these  distinctive  features,  would
not  your  suspicions  be  aroused  ?  If

I  so,  what  would  you  think  of  a  person
offering  vou  a  coin  as  genuine  bear-
ing  none  of  the  distinctive  features

|  named  except  the  words,  "  In  God
we  trust?"  And  what  would  you
think  of  any  one  who  would  receive
it,  as  an  authorized  coin  ?  Do  you
think  our  Government  would  ac-
knowledge such  as  genuine  1  What
would  be  the  penalty  for  issuing  and
attempting  to  circulate  such  an
authorized  and  genuine  coin  t  Let
the  thoughtful  reflect  upon  these
questions.

Now  examine  the  genuine  plau  of
human  redemption  impressed  by  the

|  die  of  inspiration,  issued  by  the
Almighty  and  endorsed  by  His  Son  ;
Faith,  a  principle  of  power,  Repent-
ance, turning  away  from  sin  j  Bap*
tism,  being  buried  in  the  water,  and
the  Gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  conferred
under  the  hands  of  those  having
the  authority  of  the  Hoi}"  Priesthood
to  officiate  in  the  ordinances  of  the
Gospel,  are  distinctive  features  of
that  plan,  obedience  to  which  shows
its  value  in  signs  following,  casting
out  devils,  healing  the  sick,  speaking
in  tongues,  testimony  of  Jesus,  the
spirit  of  prophecy,  the  sealing
powers,  keys  and  tokens  of  endless
lives,  thrones,  dominions,  all  hights,,
all  depths,  heir  with  God,  joint  heir-
wit  h  Christ-
Think  now  of  an  offer  as  genuine

i  of  a  plan  having  none  of  these  ex-


BAPTISM  OF  WATER,  AND  OF  THE  SPIRIT.


309


<3ept,  M  Believe  in  Christ  and  you  j
shall  be  fiaved."  Accept  it,  try  it,
and  see  if  it  will  purchase  those  gifts
and  blessings  mentioned,  or  any  of
them.  Failing  in  this  it  would  not
be  genuine  though  the  form,  in
every  particular,  corresponded  with
the  authoritative  plan.  Hence  none
need  be  deceived.

Brother  Leishman  indicated  by
his  remarks  that  salvation  predicated
alone  on  belief  was  nowhere  taught
in  the  Scriptures,  This  needs  qual-
ification for  it  is  written  :  i

11  For  God  so  loved  the  world  that
He  gave  His  only  begotten  Sou,  that  j
whosoever  believe th  in  him  should
not perish, but  have  everlasting
life."

This  being  in  the  same  chapter
and  in  connection  with  the  same
subject,  it  is  clearly  seen  that  the
belief  spoken  of  contemplated  wort  a,
Kow  what  is  faith  or  belief)  It  is
a  principle  of  power  by  the  exercise
of  which  worlds  were  made.  Christ
Himself  declared  that  he  that  said
he  believed  in  Him  and  kept  not  His
commandments  had  not  the  truth
in  him.  True  faith,  then,  merges
into,  and  i3  inseparably  connected
with  works.  The  Apostle  Jam^s
testifies  that  faith  without  works  is
dead.  In  the  sense  that  ;  faith
leads  to  true  works,  we  undo; stand
the  sayings  above  quoteii.  And
that,  I  presume,  is  what  Brother
Leishman  meant.  Now  I  believed
that  I  would  come  to  this  Tabernacle
to-day.  In  this  respect  I  had  a
living  faith  and  it  prompted  to  the
work  necessary  to  bring  me  here,
hence  I  am  in  your  presence*  Had
my  faith  been  dead,  how  long  do  you
1  suppose  I  would  have  remained
absent  1

If  you  believe  in  Jesus  you  will
keep  llis  commandments,  and  the
assertions  of  man  or  any  number  of
men  can  never  change  this  divine


decree.  Again  He  said  :  **  Verily,
verily  I  say  unto  you  (speaking  to
Xicodemus)  except  a  man  be  bora
again  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of
heaven."  How  forcibly  can  thous-
ands realize  this  truth  among  this
people.  How  true,  how  potent,
ami  yet  how  little  comprehended  is
that  saying  Christ  further  declared
to  Nicodemus  that,  except  a  man
be  born  of  the  water  and  of  the  Spirit
he  could  not  enter  the  kingdom  of
heaveu.

It  would  seem  that  not  only  man
but  other  creations  of  God  respond
to  this  law.  The  earth  upon  which
we  dwell  had  its  birth  out  of  the
waters.  And,  when  the  debasiug,
corrupting  sins  of  man  defiled  the
face  thereof,  they  were  remitted —
swept  away  by  immersion.  The
windows  of  heaven  being  opened
and  the  fountains  of  the  iltsep  broken
up,  the  earth  was  literally  baptized
iu  water,  as  hereafter,  abiding  the
law  of  its  creation  it  will  be  literally
baptized  iu  fire  and  the  Holy  Ghost.
Thus,  though  men  may  lightly
consider  the  foundation  upon
which  rests  the  plan  of  human
redemption,  heaven  and  earth  testify
of  it,

God  dwells  in  eternal  fire,  and  no
human  being  who  has  not  been  bap-
tized in  water  and  Spirit  can  abide
that  which  will  come,  when  the  earth
is  immersed  in  flames,  mouutains
melt  with  fervent  heat  and  run  down
like  wax.  To  prepare  humanity  for
the  great  day  of  the  Lord  Almighty,
He  placed  in  his  Church  Apostles,
Prophets,  Evangelists,  Teachers ;
that  they  might  do  the  work  of  the
ministry  and  bring  us  to  a  oneness
of  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  Any  church
with  less  than  these  should  show  the
command  authorizing  the  change.
If  the  Savior  has  made  such  change,
or  any  change,  it  is  important  for  us
to  know  it. But  if  He  has  made  no


310  JOURNAL  OJf

change,  He  will  purely  hold  us  re-
fponsible  for  accepting  any  tljat  men
have  Triage.  Can  a  church  not  even
hearing  the  name  of  the  Itedeetner,
and  having  neither  Apostles  nor
Prophet?,  bear  the  fruits  enjoyed  by
the  disciples  of  our  Lord  in  the  days
of  and  subsequent  to  His  ministry?
Do  any  of  them  ever  claim  to  have
such  fruits  1  Who  among  them
have  the  endowments  of  the  Com-
forter, whose  mission  it  was  and  is
to  briny  the  teachings  of  Jesus  to
the  memory,  show  things  to  come
and  lead  into  all  truth  1  God  neither
changes  nor  is  he  a  respector  of  per-
sons ;  the  causes,  therefore,  which
He  ordained  to  pro* luce  certain
results  in  one  age  will  produce  them
in  another.  What  would  we  think
of  an  earthly  father  who,  having
bestowed  every  care  in  the  education,
advancement  and  exaltation  of  his
first  born  j  giving  instruction,  en-
couragement, sympathy  and  love,
but  to  children  born  later  only  the
history  of  his  doings  with  their  older
brother  !  Quick  to  hear  and  answer
the  prajers  of  the  first,  deaf  to  the
supplications  of  others,  A  living
testimony  to  one,  doubt  and  despaii
to  the  rest.  The  fruits  of  knowl-
edge to  one,  dead  forms  to  the  others.
Could  such  a  fat  Iter  be  considered
impartial,  generous  or  just?  fro.
And  yet  men  would  have  us  believe
that  God  deals  with  His  children  in
just  this  way,  I  bear  my  testimony
that  it  is  not  true*  The  Apostle
James  declared  that  "if  any  of  you
lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  who
giveth  to  all  men  liberally  and  up-
braideth  not,  and  it  shall  be  given
him,"  Men  tell  us  that  He  has  ceased
to  communicate  with  His  children.
Thus  Joseph,  the  unlettered  boy,
was  confused,  perplexed  and  made
most  miserable.  The  Methodist,
with  good  intentions  no  doubt,  said  ;
to  him,  "  Lo,  here  is  Christ11 The  i


discourses.

Presbyterian,  with  equal  sincerity,
bade  him  follow  them,  while  the
Baptist  called  on  him  to  seek  Jesus
in  their  way.  In  the  midst  of  all
this  confusion  and  conflict,  obeying
the  injunction  of  James,  he  sought
wisdom  direct  from  God,  and  got  it;
receiving  in  time  authority  to  organ-
ize the  Church  cf  Jesus  Christ,
perfect  in  all  its  parts,  as  it  existed
anciently.  By  the  knowledge  of
the  things  of  God  revealed  to  him,
and  by  the  authority  of  the  Aarouic
Priesthood  received  from  John  the
Baptist,  and  of  the  Melchisedec
Priesthood  received  from  Peter,
James  and  John,  and  not  by  the
learning  of  man,  he  did  this  great
work  which  is  genuine — the  Gospel
of  Christ  with  all  its  gifts  and  bless-
ings. And,  as  Jesus  testified,  so
we  testify,  if  any  will  do  the
works  of  the  Father  he  shall  know
whether  the  doctrine  be  of  man  or
of  God,

In  the  things  of  this  world  men
are  on  the  testimony  of  their  fellow-
men,  adjudgei I  innocent  or  guilty;
and  if  the  inducements  of  wealth
are  offered  as  a  reward  for  testing
the  statements  of  men  few  refuse,
but  when  eternal  life  through  a
knowledge  of  the  plan  of  human
redemption  is  promised  on  simple
conditions,  how  few  are  willing  to
test  it.  Thus  are  the  words  of  the
Savior  verified,  **  many  are  called
but  few  are  chosen."

When  less  than  fifteen  years  of
age  an  humble,  unlearned  (in  the
knowledge  of  the  world)  Elder
promised  me  in  the  name  of  the
Lord  that  if  I  would  obey  the  first
principles  of  the  Gospel  as  taught
and  administered  in  the  days  of
Jesus,  I  should  know  whether  the
doctrine  was  of  God.  I  obeyed  and
proved  his  words  true.  I  received
a  testimony  and  the  spirit  of  proph-
ecy. Not  from  Joseph  Smith  or


ALL  WILL  BE  JUDGED  BY  THE  DEEDS  DONE  IN  THE  BODY.  311


Brigham  Young  or  John  Taylor,  but
from  God.  Unhappy  is  the  condi-
tion of  the  Saint  who  has  not  re-
ceived it,  for  in  the  midst  of  scorn,
hatred,  ostracism  and  persecutions
of  the  world,  it  is  the  lamp  that
shines  along  the  narrow  way  that
leads  to  the  presence  of  the  Creator.
It  is  the  well  of  living  water  spri tid-
ing up  unto  eternal  life,  the  inspira-
tion that  testifies  of  a  love  stronger
than  death  ;  willing  to  endure  all
things  while  pleading  with  humanity
to  receive  the  message  of  a  merciful,
long-suffering  and  loving  Father.
For  this  reason  the  Elders  of  Israel
gladly  take  the  spoiling  of  their
goods,  and,  as  it  were,  their  lives  in
their  hands  and  go  to  the  ends  of  the
earth  delivering  their  message  while
patiently  enduring  the  whips  and
scorns,  derision  and  insults  of  those
whom  to  save  they  would  perish.
With  such  love  as  this  in  their
hearts,  how  many  have  wandered
withont  sympathy,  friendless  and
alone  save  the  companionship  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  in  the  streets  of  Lon-
don, Liverpool,  Paris,  New  York,
and  other  large  cities  and  densely
populated  regions  of  the  world !
And  how  truly  have  they  verified
the  words :  M  If  they  hated  the
Master  so  also  will  they  hate
you."

Read  the  fierce  resolutions  and
burning  expressions  of  late  issuing
from  religious  and  other  societies
and  organizations. Do  they  inspire
you  with  feelings  of  bitterness  in
return,  or  with  profound  feelings
of  sorrow  1 Can  you  mourn  fur
those  who  do  these  things  ignoratitly  1
Can  you  think  of  Paul  as  lie  perse^
ccted  the  early  Saints  in  the  belief
that  he  was  doing  God's  service,
and  pray  for  these  too  1  Thousands
who  have  been  deceived  by  those
who  love  and  make  lies,  honestly
believe  that  it  would  be  God's  ser*


f  vice  to  drive  the  11  Mormons'  from
the  land.

Let  us  remembur  that  all  these,
and  those  also  who  judge  us
wrongfully,  harshly,  cruelly  and  with
malice  aforethought,  having  knowl-
edge of  their  injustice,  were  true  to
God  ia  heaven  when  Satan  and  a
third  of  the  hosts  there  fought
against  Christ  and  Michael.  They
kept  their  first  estate,  and  whatever
in  their  blind  wickedness  they  may
be  led  by  the  power  of  dark  ties  i  to
do  here,  let  us  pray  for  tlwm,  and,
as  far  a*  possible  returning  |foO  I  fur
evil,  treat  them  with  kiad.ie^,  for
they  are  the  children  of  our  God,
Deceived  now  and  inspired  by  the
Prince  of  Darkness,  h  it  they  will
he  saved  hereafter  if  they  sin  not
against  the  Holy  Ghost  in  shedding
innocent  blood.  Ignorant,  low  and
wicket! ,  they  may  be  drunken,
blasphemous,  bearers  of  take- witness
whose  testimony  may  lead  to  the
imprisonment  of  the  innocent ;  de-
filers  of  men  and  women  and  the
workers  of  all  manner  of  iniquity;
if  they  shed  not  innocent  blood  God
will  save  them,  though  in  the  fitness
of  things,  many  will  be  outside  the
walls  of  the  beautiful  city  among
that  class  in  whose  society  alone
they  are  prepared  to  go.

When  persecuted,  driven,  and
many  killed,  the  Saints  implored
the  President  of  this  great  nation
for  redress  :  He  answered  :  "Your
cause  is  just,  but  I  can  do  nothing  for
you,"  Another  President  ordered,  on
misrepresentations,  an  army  to
Utah.  How  will  the  Almighty  deal
with  these  1  They  will  be  judged
as  you  and  I  will  be  judged,  accord-
ing to  the  deeds  doue  in  the  body.
According  to  the  light  they  had,  will
they  be  held  responsible.

To  an  extent  our  history  as  a
people  is  but  a  repetition  of  the
history  of the early  Christians.


312


JOURNAL  OK  DISCO UKSKS.


Paulines,  Waldenses  and  Huguenots
knew  the  cost  nf  being  true  to  their
convictions.  We  speak  of  them
now  as  reformers,  brave,  valiant,
God-fearing  men  and  women.
They  were  not  so  regarded  by
those  who  delighted  in  killing
them.

God  lias  prepared  a  place  for  all.
Outside  the  gates  will  be*  sorcerers,
adulterers,  the  lover  and  maker  of
lies,  and  those  that  lay  in  the  gate
making  men  offenders  for  a  word  will
be  theie  among  dogs,  but  the  means
of  increased  knowledge  and  a  power
will  be  within  their  reach.  Thous-
ands of  honest  men  are  anxiously
watch  int:  the  issues  of  our  daw  and
while  they  have  rot  nmrrd  courage
to  express  interest  in  our  sympathy
for  the  Saints  in  their  hearts,  they
feel  loth.  The  Lord  will  reward
such  according  to  their  merit,  for  He
if  just.  But  those  al'Uie  who  have
obeyed  or  wit]  hereafter  nUey  the
Gospel  in  its  fullness,  can  pass  into
the  pre  wee  of  G«'»d,  and  dwell  for-
ever in  the  celestial  kingdnui.

The  d^ct?i;iH  i*f  fcjdvatirui  by  faith
go  extensively  taught  and  believed
is  founded  on  a  misunderstanding  of
the  saving  of  the  Savior  u%  the  thief
who  veque-tcd  Chnst  to  remember
him  when  He  came  into  His  kingdom
and  was  answered,  **  Verily  I  say
unto  thee,  To-day  abaft  thou  be
with  n ie  in  Paradise."  (Luke,
23  :  43.)

The  expression  nf  t  h  e  th  i  e  fl  >n  >  u  gh  t
lio  promise  that  he  should  behave  !.
Where  rind  what  is  paradise  are  im-
portant <iite^lu>ii.«>A  It  is  not  heaven,
nor  in  it  where  God  dwells,  tor  mi
the  third  day  after  the  crucifixion,
Christ,  declared  toMarvthat  He  had

gr

not  vet  ascended  to  J  J  is  God  and  her
God.  Where  then  did  He  go  on
that  day  in  which  He  promised  to
meet  the  thief  in  paradise!  The
ApnMie  Peter  ^ays  thai  heii  g  put


to  death  in  the  flesh  He  was  quick*
ened  in  the  spirit  by  which  He  went
and  preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison
that  were  disobedient  in  the  days
of  Noah.  Thus  it  would  seem  that
paradise  is  a  place  where  the  spirits
of  the  disobedient  are  imprisoned,
and  as  Christ  preached  His  Gospel
to  them,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to
suppose  that  the  thief  also  heard
there,  the  conditions  upon  which  he
could  be  saved,  for,  says  Peter  3t  6,
"for  this  came  was  the  Gospel
preached  also  to  them  that  are  dead,
that  they  might  be  judged  according
to  men  in  the  flesh,  but  live  according
to  God  in  the  spirit  Now  in  con
nection  with  this  clear  and  compre-
hensive doctrine,  which  plainly
shows  tli at  there  is  salvation  beyond
the  grave,  how  easily  understood  is
the  saying  of  Paul  on  the  same  sub-
ject,— "  If  the  dead  rise  not  at  all,
then  why  are  they  baptized  tor  the
dead,1*  Tims  verifying  and  testify-
ing to  the  unmistakable  declaration
of  the  Master  that  no  man,  whether
alive  or  dead,  can  enter  the  kingdom
of  God  without  the  baptism  of  water
and  of  the  .spirit.  Baptism  of  the
living  for  and  in  behalf  of  the  dead
is  founded  in  the  doctrine  of  vicari-
ous salvation— the  doing  for  us
that  which  we  cannot,  under  certain
conditions,  do  for  ourselves.  So
also  is  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  with-
out effort  of  ours,  the  vicarious
means  by  which  our  bodies  and
-t|iiri*s  shall  be  re-united  after
death.  ^t;;^>1

The  opinions  of  men  as  to  where
and  what  paradise  is,  are  of  but
little  value.  It  is  at  least  the
abode  of  spirits,  good  and  bad,
A  place  of  peace  and  rest  for
the  good,  of  imprisonment  and
punishment  for  the  barb  Re-
ferring to  the  Territory  we  might
say  we  are  in  Utah,  yet  those  who
are  here  in  Logan  are  not  in  Salt


WE  SHOULD  NOT

Lake  City,  nor  are  any  of  you  in
prison  though  you  are  in  Utah,

If  every  human  being  who  has,
or  ever  will  live  is  to  be  judged  by
the  law  of  redemption  as  Christ-
ians believe,  and  there  be  no  repent-
ance beyond  the  grave,  how  then
shall  intuits  and  heathens  who  never
heard  of  Christ  or  his  law  be  re-
deemed? To  sav  nothing  about  the
dead  what  is  to  become  of  the  four
hundred  millions  of  Chinese  now  in-
habiting the  empire  of  China,  who
do  not,  and  in  all  probability  will  not
in  this  life,  know  anything  about  the
Gospel  I  What  about  the  two  hun-
dred and  eighty  million  followers  of
Mohammed,  who,  like  the  Chinese,
have  never  heard  of  water  and  spirit
baptism  1  Then  think  of  the  billions
-who  have  died  equally  or  more
ignorant  of  these  vital  questions,
and  tell  me  that  God  intends  to  nvx
them  up  with  infants  a  span  long,
who  died  without  being  sprinkled
by  some  poor,  narrow-minded  priest
without  authority  from  heaven,  and
I  will  tell  you  that  I  don't  worship
thai  kind  of  a  God.  Christians
may  do  so,  and  speak  of  him  as
bodiless  and  passionless;  hecertainly
would  have  no  passion  either  of  jus-
tice or  affection.  The  God  we  wor-
ship is  full  of  compassion,  justice
and  love.  Hence  tin*  broad  scope
of  His  plan  of  human  redemption,
reaching  the  living  and  the  dead,  in
time  and  in  eternity,  lean  compre-
hend liow  a  demon  might  want  to
consign  to  eternal  punishment
without  a  hearing,  without  law,
His  creatures,  but  how  men
can  pretend  to  worship  a  God  pos-
sessor! of  such  attributes  is  a  mys-
tery.

The  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac  and
Jacob. — He  who  created  the  heaven
and  earth  and  is  the  lather  of  all
-spirits,  will  not  thus  condemn*  He
will  judge  men  by  the  light  they


FEAR  PERSECUTION,  31 S

have  had  and  by  the  deeds  done  in
their  bodies ;  and  His  judgments
will  be  full  of  mercy  for  those  who  have
isjnomntly  erred.  As  forinuocent  chil-
dren Christ  has  fixed  their  status  :
they  are  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.
Wicked  and  foolish  men  may  teach
to  the  contrary,  but  they  cannot  ef-
fect the  result.  Mortals  entrusted
with  a  little  brief  authority,  as  they
suppose,  may  exercise  unrighteous
dominion  over  the  bodies  and  souls
of  men,  imprisoning  many,  killing
some*  Many  a  saint  may  hereafter
he  commanded  to  worship  the  golden
image  or  perish  in  the  fiery  furnace,
deny  his  faith  or  be  cast  down  into
the  lion's  den.  You  have  among
you  Latter-day  Saints  some  who
would,  if  necessary,  give  their  lives
for  you  and  the  cause  which  they
have  espoused.  They  are  willing  to
die  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus.  It
would  seem  from  prophecy  that  such
an  event  is  foreshadowed.  For  when
the  souls  of  those  whom  the  Revel-
ator  John  saw  under  the  altar  of
God,  and  who  had  been  slain  for  the
testimony  which  they  held,  cried  :
C£  How  long,  O  Lord,  holy  and  true,
dost  thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our
blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the
earth  T  they  were  answered,  "  until
their  ftdlow  servants  also  and  their
brethren,  that  should  Jm  killed  as
they  were,  should  be  fulfilled/'

If  violent  death  conies  to  some —
and  it  will — can  they  meet  it  as
others  have,  rejoicing  in  the  truth.
Can  those  in  whose  hands  the  scales
of  judgment  balance  unevenly,
change  the  color  of  your  hair,  add
one  cubic  to  your  height,  slow
or  quicken  your  pulse  1  Can
they  remove  pain,  rebuke  death  and
increase  your  years  ?  No.  What
can  you  do  for  them  ?  You  can't
change  the  decrees  of  God  who  has
:  written  on  the  archives  of  heaven
l  that  with  what  judgment  we  judge


3H


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


others  so  shall  we  be  judged,  and
that  we  shall  receive  the  measure
that  \ve  have  measured  to  others,
but  we  may  pray  Him  to  defer  the
day  when  this  shall  be,  in  hopes  that
nie:i  may  repent  and  make  restitu-
tion here.  How  little  did  those  who
caused  the  enactment  of  the  special
decree  that  entrapped  the  Prophet
Daniel,  think  of  the  consequences  !
How  little  did  they  think  of  the
fasting,  sleepless  king  whom  they
ha<l  deceived  and  made  the  instru-
ment of  betrayal.  How  gladly  did
that  king,  who  dreaded  the  weight
of  innocent  blood,  hear  the  voice  of
the  Prophet  testifying  of  the  tem-
poral salvation  which  God  had
wrought  in  subduing  and  rendering
haimle^s  the  lions.  How  sorrowful,
how  pitiable  on  the  other  hand,  the
condition  of  Daniel's  accusers  when
the  decree,  the  passage  of  which
they  had  caused,  was  turned  on
them.  They,  their  wives  and  chil-
dren being  cast  into  the  den,  the
touch  of  God  removed  f  rom  the  fierce
beatts.  the  bones  of  the  hapless  vic-
tims oft  heir  own  works,  were  crushed
and  broken  even  before  their  bodies
reached  the  bottom  of  the  den.  So
shall  it  be  with  all  such*  God  hath
decreet!  it,  man  cannot  change  it.

Well,  says  one,  "these  doctrines
are  scriptural  and  all  right,  but  the
Mormon  church  is  nothing  but  a
Polygamic  Theocracy,  alien  to  the
Government  that  permits  its  exist-
ence," Under  certain  conditions,
and  regulated  by  revelation,  we  be-
lieve it  is  true,  in  plural  marriage,
and  so  far  as  the  word  theocracy  con-
veys the  idea  of  the  government  of
God  in  the  affairs  of  men,  we  are
willing  to  be  called  theocratic,  and
we  confess  that  we  prefer  the  motto,
**Yox  Dei  vox  Populi"  to  "  Vox
Populi  vox  I>eV  for  we  think  that
the  voice  of  God  should  be  the  voice  of
the  people,  but  we  very  well  know


that  the  voice  of  the  people  is  very
often  far  from  being  the  voice  of
God-
As  to  patriarchal  marriage  its
results  are  said  to  be  bad  and  that
there  are,  in  consequence,  many
breaking  hearts  in  Utah,  In  reply
to  these  assertions  I  have  to  say,  in
reference  to  results  it  is  not  true,
fur  its  fruits  are  good.  The  mental
anil  physical  condition  of  the  issue
of  such  marriages  hear  this  out
unmistakably*  M  If,  however,  the
cry  of  a  single  "  Mormon"  wife  in
Utah  or  elsehere,  whether  in  the
monogamic  or  polygamic  relation,
falls  upon  deaf  ears  and  unrespon-
sive hearts,  God  will  hold  the
responsible  parties  answerable.
Should  the  day  ever  come  when  the
cries  of  the  daughters  of  Ziou  pass
their  husbands  unheeded  and  reach
the  ears  of  the  God  of  Abraham,  it
will  be  a  sorrowful  day  for  the  elders
of  Israel.  And  further  let  ine  say,
I  know  of  no  Mormon  husb;ind
whose  wife's  body  or  soul  is  subject
to  him  except  in  love,  as  he,  id  like
manner,  is  bound  to  be  subject  to
Cbiibt  and  His  laws*  Nowhere  in
the  world  are  women  freer  than  in
Utah.  As  God  hates  putting  away,
husbands  among  this  people  can  put
their  wives  away  only  for  causes
mentioned  in  the  holy  writ  :  but
wives,  on  the  other  hand  may  claim
freedom  and  support  on  other  and
more  numerous  grounds.  Here,
man  regards  his  wife  as  a  helpmeet,
companion  and  part  of  himself,  with
whose  assistance  alone  lie  can  pass
by  the  angels  and  inherit  eternal,
celestial  glory.  She  is  not  to  rule
over  him  nor  be  trampled  upon,  or
abused  by  him,  hut,  having  been
takeu  out  of  his  side  her  place  is
near  his  heart,  to  be  loved,  cherished*
protected.  Husbands,  be  ye  there-
fore kind  to  your  wives.  When  they
ask  for  bread  give  not  a  stone,  for  lo  ve


WE  MUST  FORGIVE  ALL  MEN.


315-


give  not  hate,  for  as  God  lives,  if  you
are  harsh  and  cruel  to  them  so  shall
you,  in  return,  receive  harsh  and
cruel  treatment  until  the  utmost
farthing  be  paid.

We  were  not  sent  here  to  mani-
fest the  fruits  of  the  flesh  but  those
of  the  spirit ;  and  if  the  hearts  of
any  of  the  wives  of  the  elders  of
Israel  are  breaking,  by  reason  of  their
husbands'  conduct,  may  God  have
mercy  on  such  husbands,  for  know-
ing better,  they  sin  against  light  in
transgressing  their  covenants.  The
allegiance  of  a  wife  in  this  Church  is
not  due  to  an  unfaithful,  deceiving
or  cruel  husband.  And  he  who
regards  his  wife  as  the  creature  of
his  sinful  pleasure,  made  and  given
to  gratify  his  fallen  nature  is  un-
worthy of  a  wife  or  to  be  the  father
of  children.  Were  I  to  seek  to  find
happiness  in  the  marriage  relation,
I  should  expect  tc  find  it  most  abund-
ant, perfect  and  pure  in  Utah,  not-
withstanding all  that  is  said  to  the
contrary.  And  this  conclusion  is
reached  after  years  of  observation
here  and  abroad.  Nowhere  exists
so  great  confidence  between  husbands
ami  wives  as  in  Utah.  Nowhere  is
sexual  t  impurity  regarded  with
greater  disgust,  or  chastity  esteemed
more  highly.  Philosophers,  preach-
ers and  moralists  may  insist  on  the
enforcement  of  Roman  instituted
monogamy,  but  its  practice  through-
out the  Christian  world  is  fraught
with  all  manner  of  deceivableuess,
of  iniquity  and sexual  abomina-


tions. Better  practice-  what  we
preach  and  preach  what  we  practice,
leaving  no  room  for  distrust  ;  for,
as  between  man  and  wife,  where
confidence  dies,  there  you  may  dig
the  grave  of  love.  Destroy  one  and
the  other  cannot  exist.

In  conclusion,  let  us  be  consider-
ate of  others,  kind  and  courteous  to
alb  By  your  fruits  shall  ye  be-
kuown.  A  number  belonging  to
different  Christian  organizations
have,  I  understand,  been  and  are
holding  conference  meetings  in
Logan.  Every  facility  for  their
peaceful  enjoyment  while  here,
should  be  extended,  and  those
having  an  inclination  to  hear  should
hear  them,  conforming,  in  a  re-
spectful manner  to  the  rules  that
govern  their  gatherings.  Whatever
truth  they  have  is  of  God,  and  be-
longs to  the  Gospel,  which  is  a  per-
fect law  of  liberty.

Note  carefully  the  predictions  of
the  Prophets,  watch  the  signs  of  the
times,  remembering  that  the  end
will  not  come  until  the  Gospel  is
preached  as  a  witness  to  every  nation
and  people.  Without  apprehensions
as  to  the  final  result,  let  us  not  for-
get that  while  God  will  forgive
whom  He  will  forgive  of  us,  He  has
required  that  we  shall  forgive  all
men.  In  the  knowledge  of  the  use
of  this  kry,  there  is  happiness  here,
and  exaltation  hereafter.  May  a
full  comprehension  of  its  meaning
be  granted  to  every  honest  heart,  is
my  prayer.  Amen~


316


JOURNAL  Oh  DISCOURSES,


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT GEORGE Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the  Meeting  House,  Heber  City,  Sunday  Morning,  August

26tht  18  S3.


(REPORTED  BY JOHN  IE  VINE. )


*  GROWTH  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS — NECESSITY  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OF
REVELATION — CONDITIONAL  PROMISES — THE  LORD  DESIGNED  ISRAEL
TO  BE  A  PECULIAR  AND  HOLY  PEOPLE, — AND  HE  HAS  THE  SAME
DESIGN  CONCERNING  US — WE  WILL  HAVE  TO  PASS  THROUGH  THE
SAME  ORDEALS  AS  THEY— WE  SHOULD  NOT  INTERMARRY  WITH
THOSE  NOT  OF  OUR  FAITH  -WE  SHOULD  BUILD  UP  NOTHING  THAT
IS  OPPOSED  TO  ZION — THE  FAVOR  OF  GOD  IS  BETTER  THAN
EARTHLY  RICHES — EXHORTATIONS  TO  FAITHFULNESS,


AVe  are  becoming  a  great  people —
that  is,  compared  with  what  we  have
been— not  very  great  compared  with
4he  world;  hut,  nevertheless,  we  are
increasing  very  rapidly  ;  the  rising
generation  is  very  numerous  ;  and
it  requires  exceeding  diligence  and
watchfulness  on  the  part  of  those
who  have  the  people  in  charge  as
shepherds  to  see  that  the  means  of
instruction  and  counsel  are  in  pro-
portion to  the  growth  of  the  people.
If  this  were  nut  the  case  we  should
soon  have  a  generation  of  young
men  and  you  tig  women  ignorant  of
the  principles  of  life  and  salvation,
and  of  the  policy  and  polity  of  the
work  of  God  that  He  has  established
on  the  earth.

It  is  very  necessary  that  as  a  peo-
ple we  should  have  with  us  the  spirit
of  revelation  from  God,  and  not
only  should  we  have  it  ourselves,
but  it  is  also  necessary  that  we
should  be  taught  by  those  whom
God  has  called  to  preside  over  His
Church  and  to  lead  in  the  affairs
;  thereof.


Our  position  is  in  many  respects
critical,  We  are  surrounded  by
enemies  'who  are  constantly  on  the
alert,  and  who  are  doing  all  in  their
power  to  thwart  the  work  of  God,
and  to  destroy  its  influence  on  the
earth.  This  being  the  case  it  is  ex-
ceedingly necessary  that  every  meaus
which  God  has  placed  within  our
reach  for  our  improvement  and  for
the  advancement  of  His  work  should
be  used  by  us.

The  prophecies  concerning  Ziou
which  are  on  record  are*  full  of
promises  concerning  the  future
growth  of  this  people,  concerning
the  glory  that  shall  rest  upon  Zion.
But  tiiese  predictions  and  promised
are  all  conditional.  They  will  be
fulfilled  if  we  place  ourselves  in  a
position  to  merit  their  fulfillment,
or  to  bring  them  about.  If  Zicu
fails  to  come  up  to  the  requirements
which  God  has  made  of  us,  then
the  fulfillment  of  these  glorious
promises  will  undoubtedly  be  defer-
red. It  is  therefore  of  importance
that  the  Latter-day  Saints  should


GOD  DESIGN'S  US  TO  BE  A  DISTINCT  PEOPLE,


317


come  up  to  the  standard  that  God
has  given  unto  us — that  is,  fulfill
the  requirements  which  He  lias  made
of  us.

Now,  there  are  many  points  upon
which  we  need  correction.  We  are
guilty  of  many  things  that  are  not
in  accordance  with  the  mind  and  will
of  God.  There  is  a  certain  policy —
if  I  may  use  that  phrase  ■  I  us*  it
to  convey  the  idea  to  your  minds —
connected  with  the  building  up  of
Zion,  a  policy  which  God  has  sought
to  enforce  upon  us  from  the  begin-
ning until  the  present  time.  It  is
to  a  great  extent  the  same  policy
that  He  urged  upon  and  endeavored
to  enforce  in  the  midst  of  Israel,
■when  He  led  Israel  out  of  Egypt
When  He  inspired  Moses  to  take
the  steps  that  He  did  towards  the
emancipation  of  the  children  of  Israel
from  the  thraldom  of  the  Egyptians,
He  had  a  definite  purpose  in  view,
and  that  was  to  make  them  a  nation
of  His  own,  a  people  who  should
acknowledge  Him  as  their  God,  and
He  wished  to  make  a  distinct  race
of  them.  For  forty  years  He  led
them  through  the  wilderness  teach-
ing them,  counseling  them,  pleading
with  them,  training  them,  in  order
ta  relieve  them  as  far  as  possible
from  the  old  traditions  with  which
they  were  burdened.  There  was
no  other  object  in  view  than  this —
that  is,  I  may  say  this  was  the  prin-
ciple object  He  wished  to  separate
them  entirely  from  all  the  nations
of  the  earth  by  whom  they  had  been
surrounded,  and  to  make  them  a
peculiar  people,  a  people  who  would
look  upon  Him  as  their  law  giver,
and  who  should  look  to  Him  for  all
the  instructions  and  counsels  ami
directions  that  they  needed ;  but
because  of  their  rebellions,  and  their
unwillingness  to  be  thus  submissive,
He  caused  every  man  over  20  years
of  age  who  left  Egypt,  to  die  in


the  wilderness  except  two.  You
remember,  doubtless,  the  circum-
stances which  brought  about  the
preservation  of  the  lives  of  these
two.  The  rest  over  20  years  of  age
all  perished  in  the  wilderness,  they
not  having  faith  sufficient  to  receive
the  promises  and  to  gain  the  end
that  they  started  out  for  when  they
left  Egypt.  A  new  generation  grew
up  during  the  40  years  of  travel  in
the  wilderness — a  generation  that
had  to  a  great  extent  forgotten  the
traditions  of  Egypt,  that  had  forgot-
ten the  idolatry  of  Egypt  and  the
evil  practices  ot  Egypt,  and  then
when  this  was  brought  about,  God
led  them  unto  the  promised  land,
and  He  made  of  them  a  nation,  a
peculiar  people.  They  became  His
people.  He  placed  His  name  upon
them,  although  they  failed  as  a
generation  to  come  up  to  the  full-
ness of  power  that  He  designed  they
should  have.  In  other  words,  they
failed  to  come  up  to  the  possession
and  exercise  of  the  Melchisedec
Priesthood.

Now,  God  in  like  manner  has  de-
signed in  these  days  in  laying  the
foundation  of  Ziou  to  establish  a
new  order  of  things  on  the  earth  ;
to  gather  us  out  from  the  nations  of
the  earth ;  to  make  us  a  peculiar
people;  to  make  us  a  holy  and  a  pure
people  upon  whom  He  could  place
His  name  and  through  whom  Ha
can  accomplish  His  great  designs  and
purposes  on  the  earth  ;  to  make  us
a  distinct  people  from  every  other
|  people  that  lives  upon  the  face  of
|  the  earth,  and  through  us  to  estab-
lish and  perpetuate  a  new  order  of
i  things  on  the  earth  which  shall  be
!  preparatory  to  the  ushering  in  of
the  full reign of  righteousness
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It
is  for  this  that  the  heavens  have
1  been  opened. It  is  for  this  that  God
the  Father  and  Jesus  the  Son  have-


31S


JOUKNU,  OK  DISCOURSES.


descended.  It  is  for  this  that  angels
liavecome  and  ministered  unto  men,
It  is  for  this  that  the  Gospel  has  been
restored  ;  that  the  Priesthood  has
been  given  to  men ;  that  the  author-
ity to  administer  the  ordinances  of
life  and  salvation  has  been  restored
from  the  heavens. It  is  for  this
that  the  spirit  of  gathering  has  been
poured  out  upon  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  who  have  received  the  Gos-
pel, which  has  impelled  them  to  do
as  we  hsrve  done,  to  gather  together
as  we  are  gathered  together  at  this
time  in  these  valleys,  and  it  is  for
this  that  all  that  you  witness  con-
nected with  this  work,  the  power
that  is  manifested,  the  deliverances
that  have  been  wrought  out — it  is
for  this  that  these  have  all  been
accomplished. God  has  chosen  this
people  and  has  given  unto  them  a
mission. But  I  ask  myself,  who  of
us  comprehend  it  ? Who  of  us  rise
to  the  full  conception  of  its  import-
ance, and  who  understand  the  mind
and  will  of  God  in  these  mighty
works  of  which  wo  are  the  witnesses
.and  connected  with  which  we  are
actors  ?  We  have  been  pleaded  with
all  the  day  long  by  the  voice  of
Prophets,  by  the  voice  of  inspira-
tion, 1  may  say  by  the  voice  of  God
through  His  servants. We  have
been  told  with  the  greatest  plain-
ness, the  mind  and  will  of  God  con-
cerning us  and  the  objects  that  He
has  had  in  view  in  gathering  us  out
and  placing  us  in  the  position  which
we  occupy. But,  like  the  Israelites
of  old,  the  flesh  pots  of  Egypt  have
been  sweet  to  us ;  the  leeks  and  the
onions  of  Babylon  we  have  hankered
after. We  have  lusted  after  these
things. We  have  lusted  after  that
which  God  has  commanded  us  to
forsake,  and  we  have  not  become
♦emancipated  from  the  love  of  Baby-
lon. It  has  been  in  our  hearts.  It
lias  influenced  us  in  our  actions.  It


has  governed  us  in  our  policy,  and
it  has  been  the  ijreat  labor  of  the
leaders  of  this  Church  to  endeavor
to  uproot  this  accursed  lust  that  lias
been  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  are
called  Latter-day  Saints  for  that
which  they  have  been  commanded
to  forsake.  God  has  commanded
us  to  forsake  Babylon.  He  has
called  us  out  from  Babylon  ;  but
though  we  have  come  out  fro  in
Babylon  we  have  brought  to  a  great
extent  Babylon  with  us,  the  love  of
Babylon,  the  love  of  that  which  God
abhors,  and  which  He  commands  us
to  forsake.  We  have  brought  it  with
us,  and  to  a  great  extent  we  cherish
it,  And  this  is  the  great  obstacle
in  the  way  of  building  up  Zion.  At
the  same  time  I  do  not  wish  to  speak
discouraging!)'  to  my  brethren  and
sisters  upon  this  point,  I  know  that
there  are  many,  very  many  in  this
Church,  who  have  sought  with  all
the  faith  and  diligence  of  which
they  are  capable  to  love  the
Lord,  to  love  Zion,  and  to  do
everything  they  could  to  build  it  up
in  the  earth,  I  know  this.  We
have  constant  testimonies  of  this  in
looking  at  the  Saints,  in  mingling
with  them,  and  in  witnessing  the
spirit  they  possess.  But,  my  breth-
ren and  sisters,  I  sometimes  feel  that
it  is  with  us  as  it  was  with  our  fa-
thers whom  God  led  out  of  Egypt,
for  we  are  the  descendants  of  that
people.  Like  our  fathers  we  shall
have  to  undergo  the  same  ordeals —
that  is,  ordeals  that  shall  have  for
their  object  the  accomplishment  of
the  same  ends,  and  I  do  not  believe
that  He  will  allow  a  generation  of
people  to  grow  up  and  witness  the
accomplishment  of  all  that  He  has
spoken  concerning  Zion  who  are  not
perfectly  willing  to  do  that  which  He
requires  at  their  hands.  I  believe
the  old  generation  will  pass  away,
I  believe  that  like  our  fathers  the


WE  SHOULD  NOT  MARRY  UNBELIEVERS


319


bodies  of  the  Saints  of  God  will  be
laid  by  the  wayside  in  the  various
places  where  they  live  if  tliey  do  not
exercise  faith  to  receive  the  blessings
that  God  designs  to  bestow  upon  us
as  a  people,  and  that  He  will  raise
up  a  generation  as  He  did  in  the
case  of  our  fathers,  which  shall  have
the  necessary  faith,  which  shall  be
divorced  from  the  old  order  of  things
sufficiently  to  go  forward  and  accom-
plish the  mind  and  will  of  God  con-


□2  Zion


To-day  look  over  the  entire  field
that  we  occupy.  Examine  the
condition  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
from  the  far  north  to  the  extreme
south ;  examine  the  evils  which
surround  us  and  with  which  we  have
to  contend,  and  that  threaten  the
perpetuity  of  the  institutions  of
Zion.  Examine  our  condition  in  its
true  tight,  in  all  its  aspects  and  in
all  its  particulars,  and  what  will  be
the  ecu  elusion  that  will  be  reached
respecting  our  circumstances  ?  It
will  be  this  :  that  there  is  no  evil
to  day  that  menaces  Zion  that  we
feel  it  difficult  to  cope  with,  that
threatens  the  supremacy  of  our  rule
in  this  land  to  which  God  has  led
us,  that  is  not  traceable  to  ourselves
an]  that  does  not  have  its  origin  in
the  reluctance  of  the  people  to  com-
prehend and  to  obey  the  counsel
which  God  has  given  through  His
servants  ever  since  we  came  to  these
valleys,  I  leave  it  to  every  one  of
you  to  decide  for  yourselves  un-
der the  spirit  of  God  if  this  state-
ment which  I  make  is  not  abund-
antly true  and  sustained  by  facts.
It  is  a  sorrowful  statement  to  make,
but  it  is  nevertheless  a  true  state-
ment We  have  no  dangerous  or
threatening  evils  to  contend  with
that  have  not  had  their  origin  in  the
disobedience  of  some  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  to  the  counsel  which  God
has  given  them.


God  i n tended  when  He  led  Israel
out  of  Egypt,  that  there  should  be
no  intermarriages  between  Israel
and  the  nations  which  surrounded
them,  and  a  great  many  of  the  evils
that  came  upon  Israel  were  due  to
this.  I  may  say,  however,  for  the  men  *
|  of  this  Church,  that  there  have  been
but comparatively  few  instances
(probably  because  there  have  not  been
so  many  temptations  for  tliem)  of
their  taking  wives  who  were  not  of
the  Saints. They  have  not  married
strange  women  as  did  many  of  the
Israelites,  as  did  Solomon  the  wise
king,  which  God  gave  to  Israel.  He
married  strange  wives,  and  through
these  marriages  he  was  led  away
into  idolatry  in  his  old  age,  and  the
anger  of  God  was  brought  upon
him  and  his  house  because  of  this,
Many  of  the  evils  that  fell  upon
Israel  were  due  to  intermarriage  on
their  part  with  women  who  were  not
of  their  faith,  and  who  were  from
nations  who  did  not  have  the  same
worship  that  Israel  had.  Marriages
of  this  nature  are  contrary  to  the
command  of  God. We  are  com-
manded not  to  marry  with  those
who  are  not  of  our  faith,  and  no
woman  ever  did  it,  no  girl  ever  did
it  that  has  not  sooner  or  later  had
sorrow  because  of  this. God  is  not
pleased  with  such  marriages,  and  it
is  not  in  the  nature  of  things  to  ex-
pect blessings  to  follow  such  inter-


marriages.


I  have  not  time  to  dwell  upon  the
many  points  wherein  we  have  failed.
To  build  up  Zion  should  be  tha
thought  of  every  heart — to  labor
to  establish  the  cause  of  God  in  the
earth,  to  be  a  compact  people.  But
we  have  violated  this  counsel,  until
to-day,  in  some  places,  it  is  question-
able who  shall  rule — the  Latter-day
Saints  or  those  opposed  to  them.
Now,  you  all  know  that  the  policy
of  this* organization  which  God  ha


320


JOURNAL  OF  niSCOUKSKS


given  us  is  not  one  that  is  hostile
to  strangers.  I  would  not  be  under-
stood in  making  the  remarks  that
I  do  on  this  occasion  as  having  any
disposition  to  excite  hostility  in  the
minds  of  my  brethren  and  sisters
against  those  who  are  not  of  us.
\Ve  never  have  had  that  feeling.
No  man  who  has  any  of  the  spirit
of  God  within  him, ami  comprehends
the  nature  of  God's  work,  will  have
that  spirit  But  there  is  a  great
difference,  remember,  between  hos-
tility to  those  who  are  not  of  our
faith,  and  our  sustaining  and  uphold-
ing and  taking  them  in  our  arms
and  caressing  them  and  bestowing
favors  upon  them  that  should  only
be  bestowed  upon  the  household  of
faith.  For  instance,  if  there  were
two  stores  in  this  town,  one  occupied
by  a  man  who  is  not  of  our  faith,
and  another  occupied  by  a  man
who  is  of  our  faith,  a  man  whose
whole  interests  were  identified
with  Zion,  whose  whole  thought
was  to  build  up  Zion  and  to  advance
the  cause  thereof  on  the  earth,
would  I  be  an  enemy  of  the  man  not
of  us  because  I  did  not  patronize
him,  but  patronized  and  sustained
the  man  who  is  of  us  1  Certainly
not ;  it  would  be  no  mark  of  enmity
on  my  part  to  him*  I  might  have
and  would  have  a  preference  for  my
brother,  for  the  man  who  was  iden-
tified with  me  and  who  was  laboring
for  the  same  end ;  and  this  is  the
spirit  we  should  have.  There  are
a  great  many  Latter-day  Saints  who
have  not  been  able  to  discriminate
sufficiently  between  these  two  spirits.
Tiiey  have  imagined  that  because
we  are  not  hostile  we  must  therefore
be  very  loving,  and  they  do  not  see
the  line  of  demarcation  which  God
has  drawn  and  which  He  wishes  us
to  observe,  There  is  a  line  and  that
line  ought  to  be  observed  by  us,
Joseph  said  in  the  beginning  that  it


was  the  duty  of  the  Elders  of  this
Church  to  labor  constantly  to  build
up  Zion  and  not  to  build  up  that
which  is  opposed  to  Zion.  That
embodies  in  these  few  words  the
policy  that  we  should  observe.  It  is
not  my  business  j  God  has  not  re-
quired  it  of  me  that  I  should  build
up  anything  that  is  opposed  to  Zion,
but  on  the  contrary  that  I  should
always  keep  in  my  thoughts  and  be
influenced  by  it  in  my  actions  that
winch  will  advance  the  causeof  Zion,
and  that  which  will  not  retard  it  or
operate  against  it  in  any  manner.
\Ve  have  erred  in  this  direction  in
the  past*  There  is  a  class  of  people
among  us  who  have  thought  more
of  money  than  they  have  about  Zion,
They  have  gone  where  they  could  get
the  best  bargains  regardless  of  the
effect  it  would  have  on  the  public
weal.  They  only  looked  to  their
individual  benefit  and  aefirrandize-
ment.  There  are  many  such  among
us  throughout  our  settlements,  and
particularly  in  Salt  Lake  City.  They
have  bought  and  sold,  they  have
traded,  they  have  done  that  which
seemed  right  in  their  eyes,  that
would  promote  their  own  personal
benefits  regardless  of  the  effect  it
would  have  upon  the  public,  and  I
believe  that  that  is  a  sin  in  the  sight
of  God  with  the  light  and  knowledge
that  we  have.  I  believe  that  the
man  who  does  that  grieves  the  spirit
of  God,  whether  he  does  it  on  a  large
scale  or  on  a  small  scale.  I  believe
that  such  a  man,  unless  he  repents,
will  not  live  to  reap  the  blessings
and  benefits  that  (iod  will  bestow
upon  those  who  labor  for  the  build-
ing up  of  Zion.  I  believe  he  will
perish  just  as  our  fathers  perished
in  the  wilderness,  and  will  not  live
to  enjoy  the  blessings  God  has  in
store  for  the  faithful.  I  would  rather
my  brethren  and  sisters,  stand  before*
you  clothed  as  these  Indians  are  who


CONCLUDING  EXHORTATIONS.


321


wander  through  our  settlements ;  I
would  rather  be  clothed  in  deerskins
or  in  goat  skins  ;  I  wuuld  rather  be
destitute  of  those  things  that  men
place  so  high  a  value  upon  and  be
sure  that  I  had  the  blessing  of  my
God,  be  sure  that  I  would  secure,
by  continuing  faithful,  exaltation  in
His  kingdom,  than  to  have  all  the
wealth  that  this  world  can  furnish.
I  would  rather  have  the  peace  of
God  in  my  heart ;  I  would  rather
have  the  blessing  of  God  and  His
Holy  Spirit  resting  upon  me  than
to  have  a  thousand  things,  however
grand  they  might  be,  bestowed  upon
me  and  be  destitute  of  the  favor  of
our  God.  That  is  the  feeling  I  have.
I  know  it  is  pleasant  to  have  good
things  :  I  know  it  is  pleasant  to  have
beautiful  surroundings  ;  I  know  it
is  a  sweet  thing  for  us  to  be  able  to
supply  our  families1  wants,  and  when
they  ask  to  have  it  in  our  power  to
give;  but  there  is  something  higher,
something  noMer,  something  better
than  this,  and  that  is  the  favor  of
our  God.  We  should  labor  so  as  to
have  this,  ami  at  the  same  time  if
we  do,  we  may  reat  assured  that  all
the  rest  will  bo  added  to  us.  He  will
not  leave  us  destitute.  He  will  not
deprive  us  of  the  blessings  of  the
earth.  On  the  contrary  he  will  im-
part those  blessings  to  us,  and  not
only  to  us  but  to  our  children  after
us.  For  we  live  not  for  ourselves
alone,  but  we  live  for  our  posterity,
We  hope  to  be  faithful  so  as  to  gain
the  favor  of  God,  that  our  posterity
after  us  will  be  remembered  in  the
days  of  trial  and  in  the  days  of  trib-
ulation and  of  calamity  that  are  to
corae  upon  the  earth,  a  desire  that
every  faithful  man  connected  with  this
Church  must  have  if  he  understands
the  promises  and  blessings  of  God.
His  desire  must  be  that,  bo  long  as


the  earth  shall  stand,  so  long  as  time
shall  endure,  he  will  never  be  desti-
tute in  any  generation  of  a  man  who
will  bear  the  Holy  Priesthood ;  that
he  will  have  a  representative  in  all
the  generations  to  come,  the  gener-
ations from  now  until  time  shall  cease.
In  order  to  obtain  this  promise  and
this  blessing  men  must  be  faithful
unto  God;  men  must  labor  and
struggle  as  our  fathers  did  through
whose  faithfulness  we  have  received
those  promises,  and  through  whose
faithfulness,  also,  we  have  received
the  Holy  Ghost  that  we  now  enjoy
this  day  ;  that  we,  like  them,  shall
gain  the  favor*  of  God  so  effectually
tti fit  he  will  confirm  upon  us  and
our  posterity  after  us  the  blessings
he  confirmed  upon  Abraham  our
father,  those  blessings  that  shall  be
felt  throughout  all  the  generations  to
come  as  long  as  time  shall  endure.
That  is  our  privilege  as  Latter-day
Saints,  and  we  should  live  for  it,
and  God  will  help  us  to  obtain  it,  if
we  are  faithful,  if  we  do  that  which
is  right  before  Him.

In  conclusion,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  I  entreat  you  as  a  servant  of
God,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  and
Master,  to  love  Ziou  with  all  your
hearts,  and  not  allow  any  other  love
to  enter  therein.  Love  this  work.
Devote  yourselves  to  it-  Love  our
God.  Love  Him  supremely  and  He
will  never  desert  you.  Keep  His
commandments,  no  matter  what  the
sacrifice  may  be.  Keep  every  com*
m  and  me  nt  of  God,  and  stand  before
the  Lord  blameless,  so  that  you  will
not  be  condemned,  and  if  you  will
do  so  He  will  lead  you  and  all  of  us
back  into  His  celestial  presence  and
crown  us  with  glory,  immortality
and  endless  lives,  which  I  pray  may
be  our  happy  lot,  in  the  name  of
Jesus  Christ  Amen.


No,  21.


Vol  XXVL


Z22


JOURNAL  UK  DISCOURSE*


REMARKS BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle*  Ogdenf  Sunday  Jfternoon,  July

1884^


(SEPOETED  BY JOHN  IBVINE. !


NATURE  OF  THE  GOSPEL, AND OF OUR POSITION AND CALLING — RE-
SPONSIBILITIES OF THE LATTERDAY  SAINTS — THE RIGHT OF  ALL
MEN TO  RELIGIOUS  FREEDOM— HONORABLE  MEN  OF  THE  EARTH —
WE AIM AT A HIGHER EXALTATION THAN THE REST OF  THE
.  WORLD.  *


We  are  occupying  a  very  peculiar
position  in  the  world,  and  in  many
respects  different  from  the  position
that  is  occupied  by  any  people  that
at  present  live  upon  the  earth,
Our  ideas,  and  views,  theories  and
doctrines ;  our  principle**  and  our
mode  of  life  generally  are  very  dis-
tinct from  that  of  other  people.  We
look  at  things  from  another  stand-
point to  that  which  the  world  gener-
ally do  Our  ideas  are  predicated
upon  the  work  that  God  has  com-
menced, by  the  ministration  of  holy
angels,  by  the  opening  of  the  heavens,
by  the  voice  of  God,  and  by  the
revelation  of  His  will  to  the  human
family;  in  which  all  mankind, whether
they  comprehend  it  or  not,  are  very
much  interested.  The  Lord  has  been
pleased  to  make  known  unto  us
certain  things  of  which  we  were  ignor-
ant; and  certain  things  of  which
also  the  world  of  mankind  are
ignorant ;  and  of  which  we  know
nothing,  and  could  know  nothing,
only  through  the  revelation  of  God
*  to  man*


The  Gospel,  we  are  told,  brings
u  life  and  immortality  to  light" —
life  for  ourselves,  life  for  our  families,
for  our  wives  and  children,  life  for
our  progenitor?,  and  life  for  our
posterity  -}  and  consequently  it  is
pregnant  with  greater  events  than
anything  that  has  yet  transpired
upon  the  earth.  It  goes  back,  back,
back  into  the  eternities  that  were,
it  unfolds  things  that  now  exist,
and  are  on  the  eve  of  fulfillment,
and  it  develops  things  which  are  to
come.  Consequently,  as  1  said
before,  we  are  in  a  different  position
from  that  of  other  people.  We  do
not  look  at  things  from  the  same
standpoint  which  they  do.  We  have
other  ideas  and  feelings  and  anticipa-
tions, and  are  in  possession  of  anoth-
er spirit  and  principle  of  intelligence
other  than  that  which  is  generally
diffused  in  the  world.  Men  in  the
world  talk  about  the  Gospel,  but
they  do  not  comprehend  it.  We  as
Latter-day  Saints  talk  about  the  Gos-
pel, yet  we  understand  only  very  lit-
tle about  it Just  in  proportion  as


OUR  DUTIES  AND  RESPONSIBILITIES.


323


we  live  our  religion  and  possess  the
Holy  Spirit,  do  we  comprehend  the
position  that  we  occupy  and  no
more.

We  read,  in  the  Scriptures,  of  a
dispensation  of  the  fullness  of  times,
when  God  would  gather  together  all
things  in  heaven  and  ali  things  in
the  earth — that  is,  a  certain  dispen-
sation which  would  include  every-
thing that  has  existed  in  other  times,
and  in  other  dispensations,  and  would
embrace  in  one  dispensation  what  has
been  scattered  tl  in  mahout  the  world
in  different  dispensations,  from  the
commencement  of  time  until  the
present.  Hence  this  is  a  matter
that  affects  the  earth  and  the  heav-
ens }  it  is  a  matter  in  which  tho*e
whoare  in  the  heavens  are  concerned,
and  also  those  that  are  upon  the
ear tli.  It  reaches  back  to  the  com-
meticetneut  of  time  and  goes  forth
to  the  final  winding-up  scene  of  all
things  pertaining  to  this  earth
whereon  we  dwell.  Hence,  as  I
said,  we  occupy  a  very  peculiar  posi-
tion before  God,  and  also  before  the
world.  The  world  do  not  comprehend
our  position,  ami  hence  they  reason
very  strangely  and  very  vaguely
about  us,  aud  they  get  some  very
strange  notions  pertaining  to  us.
TJmt  is  nut  surprising.  It  is  as
much  as  we  can  do  ourselves  to
comprehend  our  position.  It  is  as
much  as  the  Elders  of  this  Church
can  do  to  magnify  their  callings.
It  is  as  much  as  the  Apostles  or  the
Presidency  of  the  Church  can  do  to
comprehend  their  positions,  and  it
needs  continual  watchfulness,  aud
prayer,  and  sel  fab  negation,  and
devotion  to  God,  aud  the  continual
guidance  of  His  Spirit,  that  we  may
comprehend  the  relationship  which
we  sustain  to  each  other,  to  our
heavenly  Fath.er,  to  the  world  in
which  we  live,  to  the  nation  with
which  we  are  associated,  to  the  world
of  mankind generally, aud  the


•  duties  and  responsibilities  that  de-
volve upon  us  per  taming  to  all  of
these  matters,  both  to  the  living  and
the  dead.

|  We  have  a  fight  to  fight.  We
have  a  faith  to  contend  for.  We
have  principle  to  learn,  and  to  develop
to  others.  \\  e  have  our  relation-
ship to  God,  and  to  holy  angels,
and  to  the  world  to  maintain.  We
have  duties  and  responsibilities
devolving  upon  us  that  mankind,
and  that  we  ourselves  comprehend
only  very  little.  It  has  been  thought
generally  that  if  men  could  secure
in  some  way  or  other  their  salvation,
and  get  to  heaven,  as  it  is  called,
tli  at  they  were  doing  a  great  work.
W  e  have,  however,  got  a  great  deal
more  than  that  to  do.  We  have
first  to  learn  ourselves  the  way  of
life;  aud  then  to  teach  others  that
way*  Hence,  what  mean  our  Seven-
ties and  our  High  Priests,  our  Klders
and  our  Apostles  and  men  holding
the  Priesthood  of  God  1  What  mean
those  various  missions  they  take  to
the  nations  of  the  earth?  What
mean  our  gathering  together  here,
and  the  efforts  that  we  make  for  that
purpose)  What  mean  the  building
of  Temples  aud  the  administering
therein  1  What  mean  some  of  those
things  that  we  begin  to  have  a  slight
glimpse  of  regarding  certain  duties
and  responsibilities  resting  upon  us,
pertaining  to  the  dead  as  well  as  tiie
living  1  What  mean  those  Scriptures
that  speak  about  saviors  upon  Mount
Ziou  ?  What  mean  our  dedications
to  God,  aud  the  ordinances  that  we
administer  in  His  house?  What
means  tiie  development  of  those
great  principles  pertaining  to  eternal
lives  that  begin  to  enter  iuto  our
minds  partially  ?

Man  is  a  dual  being.  He  possesses
a  body  and  a  spirit.  He  is  connected
with  eternity  as  well  as  time.  He
existed  before  he  came  here.  He
exists  here* He  will  exist  after  he


324


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


leaves  here.  Before  he  came  here  j
he  had  to  do  with  intelligences  ;  he
has  here,  if  he  will  only  fulfill  his
part ;  and  he  will  have  to  do  with
tl  em  hereafter.  We  are  here  on  a
mission.  What  does  that  consist
of]  That  is  the  question.  Some
of  us  have  to  go  to  the  ends  of  the
earth  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every
creature  under  the  heavens.  That
is  something  which  God  requires  at
our  hands.  Some  of  ns  have  to  as-
sist in  establishing  the  Kingdom  of
God  upon  the  earth.  Some  of  us  ;
have  to  aid  in  purifying  the  Church  j
of  God.  We  have  the  same  kind  j
of  material  now  that  they  had  in  ;
former  ages  for  this  very  purpose.
In  former  times  God  placed  in  His
Chinch  Apostles,  Prophets,  Pastors,
Teachers  and  Evangelists  for  the
perfecting  of  the  Saints.  These  \
officers  were  requisite  to  the  Church
then,  and  they  are  requisite  now.
We  all  have  our  follies  and  weakness.
We  all  need  the  assistance  of  the
power  and  Spirit  of  God.
#  We  talk  sometimes  about  the  world,
we  Latter-day  Saints,  and  we  are
very  flippant  in  referring  to  their
follies  and  foibles*  We  have  enough
follies  df  our  own  ;  and  I  often  very
much  question  whether  they  do  not
live  ns  near  to  their  religion  as  we
do  to  oin g.  "How  is  that/'  says
one  :  11  we  are  a  much  more  moral
people  than  they  ai el"  We  ought
to  Be*  We  make  greater  professions
than  they  do.  They  do  not  talk
about  having  revelation.  They  do
not  talk  about  having  any  special
mission  io  the  nations  of  the  earth,
and  we  do.  They  do  not  talk  about
any  celestial  glory,  and  know  nothing
about  it.  We  profess  to  know*a
little  about  it.  They  do  not  aim  at
a  celestial  glory,  for  they  do  not
know  what  it  is ;  and  we  understand
a  very  little  about  it.  One  thing  we
do  know;  one  thing  is  clearly  told  us,  j


]  and  that  is  if  we  are  not  governed
!  by  the  celestial  law  and  cannot  abide
a  celestial  law,  we  cannot  inherit  a
celestial  kingdom.  What  is  it  to
obey  a  celestial  law  ?  Where  does
the  celestial  law  come  from  to  begin
with  ?  From  the  heavens.  Very  well.
What  have  the  people  here  to  do  with
it  generally — that  is,  outsiders  t
Nothing.  They  do  not  say  they
have  had  any  revelation.  They  have
had  no  principle  of  that  kind  un-
folded to  them,  They  are  living
under  what  might  be  termed  a
terrestrial  law  ;  and  many  of  them,
I  think,  under  the  circumstances,  do
quite  as  well  as  we  do  under  our
circumstances.  We  profess  to  be
moving  on  a  more  ;  elevated  plane
than  they  are.  We  profess  to  have
come  out  from  the  world  ;  to  have
separated  from  the  ungodly.  We
profess  to  be  under  the  guidance  of
Apostles  and  Prophets,  Pastors  and
Teachers,  etc.,  and  to  be  living  under
the  inspiration  of  the  Most  High.
They  do  not  profess  anything  of  the
kind.

These  are  some  of  the  things  we
profess  to  believe  in;  and  some  of
the  things  that  the  world  do  not  be-
lieve in.  We  have,  however,  enough
to  do  in  attending  to  the  duties  of
j  our  Priesthood  and  calling  without
troubling  ourselves  with  the  follies
and  foibles  of  those  who  are  not  of
us.  As  I  have  already  said  they  do
not  profess  what  we  do.  We  profess
to  be  governed  by  higher  principles
and  nobler  motives,  and  by  more
exalted  ideas.  Let  us  try  and  live
up  to  our  profession.  So  far  as  the
people  of  the  world  are  concerned,  I
look  upon  them  very  charitably,  my-
self. I  do  not  entertain  any  vin-
dictive feelings  toward  them,  "Well,
say  you,  "have  they  not  got  curious
ideas  pertaining  to  religious  mat-
ters r  Yes,  they  have  ;  but  they
have  as  much  right  to  their  ideas  as


HONORABLE  MEN  OF  THE  EARTH.


325


1  have  to  mine.  I  have  no  right  to
interfere  with  them.  They  have  a  right
to  worship  whatever  kind  of  a  God
they  please,  or  in  any  form  that  suits
them  If  a  man  hi  a  mind  to  wor-  !
-ship  a  red  dog  it  is  none  of  my  busi-
ness. It  is  for  me  and  for  my  breth-
ren to  fulfill  the  duties  that  God  has
placed  upon  us.  He  has  revealed
certain  principles  to  us  from  the
heavens  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole
human  family,  and  we  will  do  that
which  God  has  commanded  us*  Will
they  persecute  us?  No  matter
about  that.  God  has  told  us  to  do
certain  things,  and  we  will  carry  them
out,  persecuted  or  not  persecuted.
We  must  perform  our  duty.  At  the
same  time  we  have  rights  and  privil-
eges that  belong  to  us  in  common
with  everybody  that  lives  in  the
United  States.  We  have  as  many
rights  in  these  United  States  as  any
other  people  have,  and  no  #man  has
the  right  to  deprive  us  of  them*
They  are  trying  to  deprive  us  of
them  all  the  time.  That  makes  no
difference.  The  principle  is  still
the  same,  and  it  is  for  us  to  look
after  our  rights.  God  has  given  us
a  goodly  land  here,  and  we,  have  paid
for  it  It  is  ours  by  right  of  pur-
-chase  and  possession.  If  we  have
got  farms,  or  city  lots,  or  inheritances
of  any  kind,  we  have  paid  for  them
according  to  the  laws  of  the  United
States.  We  have  complied  with  all
the  requisitions  of  the  United  States
that  are  constitutional,  and  meau  to
do  that  all  the  time.  We  simply
contend  for  our  rights.  We  simply
contend  for  the  principles  of  human
liberty,  not  only  in  behalf  of  our-
selves, but  in  behalf  of  thousands
who  are  in  these  United  States.
There  are  thousands  ef  honorable
men  in  these  United  States — in  the
Senate  and  House  of  Representa-
tives, and  all  through  the  land —
who  are  quite  willing  men  should


have  the  rights  and  privileges  of
free  men,  and  then  there  are  thous-
ands, and  ten  of  thousands,  and
millions  of  others  who  want  to
trample  the  principles  of  freedom
under  their  feet  and  deprive  men  of
their  liberties.  In  relation  to  the
people  of  the  United  States,  I  have
nothing  myself  but  kindly  feelings.
I  feel  sorry  for  them.  I  am  sorry
to  see  people  act  under  wrong  influ-
ences, influences  that  will  lead  them
to  destruction.  The  people  of  the
world  are  placed  under  influences
that  they  do  not  comprehend.  What
is  the  matter  with  them?  1  have
numbers  of  prominent  men  call  upon
me  from  the  United  States,  and  from
all  parts  of  Europe,  prominent  men
of  alt  classes  and  grades,  and  when
we  meet  together  they  talk  very
kit  idly  and  very  pleasantly.  They
admire  our  beautiful  city  and  im-
provements, and  they  do  not  believe
one-hundredth  part  ot  the  stories
that  are  circulated  about  us  broad-
cast throughout  the  earth.  They
say,  u  We  know  better  than  that,"
There  area  great  many  honorable  men
among  the  peoples  of  the  earth,  and
we  do  not  want  to  get  a  spirit  of
enmity  and  hatred  against  anybody
because  of  the  infamous  acts  of  a  few
unprincipled  men.  We  are  here  as
saviors  upon  Mount  Zion  ;  and  the
time  will  come,  and  it  is  not  very  far
distant,  when,  in  consequence  of  the
evils,  the  corruptions,  the  adulteries
and  licentiousness  that  prevail
throughout  the  laud,  that  God  will
bring  the  people  to  judgment.  Then
the  time  will  come,  and  it  is  not  very
i  far  distant,  when  the  sinners  in  Zion
will  be  afraid,  when  fearfulness  will
l  surprise  the  hypocrites.

We  are  here  to  build  up  the  Zion
of  God,  anil  not  to  build  up  our-
selves. We  are  here  to  establish
righteousness,  and  to  establish  it
[  first  within  ourselves ;  to  feel  that


32G


JOUKNAL  OK  DESCOURSKS


"  as  for  rue  ami  my  house  we  will  1
fear  God." We  should  prepare  our-  I
selves  forglorj  and  for  eternal  lives,
that  we  it  ay  a&bociate  with  the  Gods
in  the  eternal  worlds. We  are  the  '
eons  of  God ;  but  we  occupy  a  differ-
ent position  in  many  respects  to  the
rest  of  the  world,  because  we  have
obeyed  the  new  and  everlasting  cove-
nant; been  baptized  in  the  name
of  Jesus  Christ  tor  the  remission  of
sins,  and  had  hands  laid  upon  us  for
the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  have  lived  up  to  our  privileges,
many  of  us. Consequently  we  are


aiming,  as  I  »aid  before,  at  a  higher
exaltation  and  a  greater  glory  than
the  world  know  anything  about,  and
that  we  ourselves  at  present  compre-
hend, but  very  little.  But  we  shall
improve  from  time  to  time  and  be-
come better  instructed  in  the  laws
of  life  and  in  the  principles  of  eter-
nal truth.  We  are  gathered  together
for  that  purpose*

Well,  brethren  and  sisters,  God
bless  you  and  lead  you  in  the  paths
of  life,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,
Amen,


THE  FAITHFUL  SAINTS  ENJOY  REVELATION.


32^


DISCOURSE BY APOSTLE MOSES  THATCHER,.

Delivered  in  Ike  Tabernacle,  Logan,  Cache  County,  (Semi- Annual  Confer-

ence,)  Thursday  Afternoon;  October  8th}  188o.


BEPORTED  BY  SOWS  IRVIHE,


THE  LORD  IS  TEACHING  US  V  ALU  AISLE  LESSONS  IX  OUR  PRKSKNT  EXPE-
RIENCE— HS  IS  TEACHING  US  TO  RELY  UPON  HIM  AND  TO  EXER-
CISE THE  FACULTIES  HE  HAS  GIVEN  US  —  NATURE  OF  THE
GOVERNMENT  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES  —THE  ELEMENTS  OF  A  VARIETY
OF  GOVERNMENTS  ENTER  INTO  IT — PHYSICAL  AND  MORAL  COURAGE

 THE  JUDGE  OF  THE  THIRD  DISTRICT  COURT  NOT  A  CHRISTIAN —

A  CONCUBINE  WAS  A  WIFE  AND  IT  SHOULD  NOT  BE  A  TERM  OF
REPROACH— THE  CHARACTER  OF  ABRAHAM  VINDf GATED — SYMPATHY
FOR  OUR  ENEMIES — WHEN  THE  SAINTS  LEARN  To  BE  STRICTLY
IMPARTIAL,  JUDGMENT  AND  RULE  WILL  BE  GIVEN  THEM — NOT  ALL
IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  ARE  ARRAYED  AGAINST  US — WEAKNESS  OF
THE  AMERICAN  GOVERNMENT— POWER  OF  SECRET  SOCIETIES—
ZION  TO  BE  A  PLACE  OF  REFUGE  AND  SAFETY — PRESIDENT  CLEVE-
LAND'S OPPORTUNITY  TO  BE  JUST  AND  GREAT — WE  MUST  PURIFY
OURSELVES  THAT  LIBERTY  MAY  COMF.


There  have  been  a  great  many  very
excellent  things  said  at  this  confer-
ence, ami  in  attempting  to  add  there-
to* I  desire  the  assistance  and  aid
which  come  through  the  faith  and
prayers  of  the  Saints — that  I  may
be  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to
utter  such  things  as  may  tend  to
our  edification  and  good.  It  will
doubtless  be  Somewhat  difficult  to
make  all  hear  unless  a  goodly  degree
of  order  is  maintained.  Of  course
I  am  aware  that  it  is  not  an  easy
task  for  mothers  to  keep  their  nurs-
ing babes  quiet  in  a  crowded  ltfmse
like  this  and  upon  a  warm  day ;  but
we  hope  to  have  a*  good  onler
as  possible  under  the  circumstan-
ces.

I  have  rejoiced  very  much  in  the
testimonies  which  have  been  borne


during  the  meeting  of  this  Confer-
ence, and  they  find  in  my  heart  a
responsive  chord.  1  do  not  feel  that
we  are  living  in  unprofitable  times,
and  notwithstanding  the  trials
temptations  and  injustice  with
which  we  are  surrounded,  I  view
the  present  as  times  in  which  the
Lord  is  teaching  to  His  people  very
valuable  lessons.  It  has  often  been
asserted,  by  our  outside  friends,  that
the  union  of  this  people  was  main-
tained by  reason  of  the  influence
which  their  leaders  hold  over  their
mind?.  If  thi*  statement  wnre  true,
and  the  influence  exercise  1  is  un-
righteous the  leaders  of  the  people
slmnl  1  be  removed.  Ru'  if  the
influence  which  they  exercise  over
the  minds  of  the  people  U  for  ijnod,
it  ought  to  be  maintained. As  an


Elder  in  Israel,  I  hold  that  the  influ-
ence which  binds  together  this  people
to  be  the  spirit  of  God,  and  that  the
Almighty,  the  creator  of  the  heavens
and  the  earth,  is  not  dependent  upon
one  man  or  many  men,  ami  thai  the
Lord  will  demonstrate  to  all  the
Christian  world,  that  the  religion
which  is  called  Mormon  ism  is  the
religion  of  the  heart  for  the  masses
of  the  people  who  have  espoused  its
cause ;  and  if,  in  the  experiences  of
the  past  few  months,  and  that  which
is  yet  in  the  future,  the  Latter-day
Saints  learn  to  rely  on  God,  learn  to
receive  for  themselves  heavenly  com-
munications for  thu  {ruidanceof  their
feet,  though  it  may  cost  the  exile  of
our  leaders  or  the  imprisonment  of
those  who  have  worked  as  their  ser-
vants, they  will  have  received  that
which  is  of  much  value ;  ami  although
it  cost  much,  it  will  be  worth  more
than  the  cost*  We  can  see  now
that  a  few  who  have  relied  upon
others,  who  have  sought  the  counsel
of  theirflle  leaders  and  have  depend-
ed upon  that  counsel  when  they  can
no  longer  reach  those  leaders,  falter
and  iall  by  t lie  wayside.  I  believe
that  God  intends  that  every  man
and  every  woman  in  Hia Church  and
kingdom  shall  exercise  the  faculties
which  He  has  given  them,  that  in
the  exercise  of  their  agency  He  de-
signs to  exalt  them  in  eternal  glory.
So  long  therefore  as  the  people  rely
upon  their  leaders  they  are  not  man-
ifesting that  degree  of  faith,  they  are
not  in  a  position  to  think  and  reflect
for  themselves  as  they  should.  I
have  known  the  time  of  the  Presi-
dency of  the  Church  and  of  the
Apostles  taken  up  in  frivolous  mat-
ters that  ought  never  to  have  gone
beyond  the  family  circle,  at  least
ought  not  to  have  gone  beyond  the
confines  of  the  Ward  organization.
But  times  have  changed.  We  ap-
proach not  now  so  easily  the  Presi-


dency of  the  Church.  We  receive
not  their  counsels  with  that  facility
that  we  have  done  in  the  past.
And  although  we  miss  their  presence
much — for  this  people  love  their
leaders — in  their  absence  the  chan-
nel of  communication  between  the
heavens  and  the  earth  is  open  to
this  people  as  it  never  could  have
been  under  former  circumstances.
Men  and  women  are  now  learning
that  their  prayers  can  be  heard,
and  that  if  they  are  not  able  to  re-
ceive the  counsels  of  their  brethren,
they  can  in  all  place*  and  under  all
ci  r  cu  instances,  receive  the  coun-
sels of  God,  their  Heavenly
Father.

Men,  communities  of  men,  govern*
meuts,  nations,  powers,  and  princi-
palities have  never  yet  been  able  to
build  will  Is  so  strong,  or  make  iron
doors  so  thick  as  to  prevent  the
prayers  of  a  righteous  man  ascend-
ing unto  his  God,  hence  every  man
and  every  woman  who  keep  the
commandments  of  the  Lord  can
have  a  li^ht  and  a  lamp  for  their
feet,  and  those  who  have  oil  in  their
lamps  will  not  be  uncertain  as  to  the
course  thej should  pursue.  The  reve-
lations of  the  Lord  will  inspire  them
and  direct  them  in  the  ways  of  truth
and  right.

When  we  reflect  on  the  growth
of  governments,  civilization,  the
rights  of  men  and  the  liberties
which  we  so  much  enjoy,  to  what
source  do  we  look  as  the  one  from
whence  they  camel  The  great
government  of  which  we  form  a  part
— the  most  liberal,  the  broadest  and
the  deepest  in  its  foundation,  the
greatest  government  which  God  has
ever  smiled  upon — except  when  he
lias  administered  according  to  His
own  will  in  the  affairs  of  men— to
whom  is  due  its  birth  and  expansion.
To  men  who  were  willing  to  bow  in
obedience  to  the  mandates  of  kingly


MANY  ELEMENTS  IN  THE  AMERICAN  GOVERNMENT


329


governments  1  No !  But  rather
to  men  who  were  inspired  by  God,
their  heavenly  Father,  to  reach
-  forward  to  a  higher  and  a  grander
civilization  and  liberty.  Had  the
Pil  2rim  Fathers  and  others  who
were  unwilling  to  bow  to  the  man-
dates of  European  powers  not  fled
to  the  land  of  America,  we  should
have  had  no  government  like  this.
It  was  founded  as  a  refuge  In  which
the  oppressed  of  every  land  and
clime  should  find  a  resting  place.
Not  Republican  altogether,  not
Democratic  wholly,  not  theocratic,
not  aristocratic,  not  monarchical,
but  a  combination  of  them  all.
For  this  government,  in  the  strictest
sense,  is  not  a  republic,  as  I  under-
stand it  The  laws  of  a  republican
government  are  enacted  by  a  central
power.  Were  the  United  States
such  a  government,  the  laws  which
govern  the  citizens  of  all  the  States
and  Territories  would  lie  enacted  by
Congress,  instead  of  by  their  several
Legislature?.  In  the  purest  sense,
democracy  consists  of  a  government
iu  which  the  people  are  governed
by  laws  enacted  with  their  mutual
consent  and  by  their  direct  vote.  We
cannot  consistently  call  the  govern-
ment cf  the  United  States  theocratic
oiHy  in  so  far  as  the  people  acknowl-
edge the  rule  of  God*  If  we  pick
up  a  coin,  a  $20  gold  piece,  we  can
see  impressed  upon  its  face  the
words,  "In  God  we  trust/'  and  in
so  far  as  this  is  true,  and  expresses
the  sense  and  feelings  of  the  people,
this  government  is  theocratic,  but
in  no  sense  beyond  that.  A  Terri-
torial government  may  be  said  to  be
in  a  large  sense  monarchial,  in  that
the  governor  of  the  Territory  has
conferred  upon  him  by  act  of  Con-
gress absolute  veto  power,  and  the
legislators  who  are  chosen  by  the
people,  may  labor  for  sixty  days,
unite  their  profoundest  thought  in


expressing  the  wishes  and  wants  of
the  people,  and  they  may  frame  laws
by  which  the  people  might  be  gov-
erned according  to  their  choice,  but
by  a  single  stroke  of  the  pen  the
Governor  of  the  Territory  of  Utah
can  veto  every  act  of  the  Territorial
Legislature.  Is  not  thi.%  then,
monarchialj  and  is  it  not  in  a  very
strong  sense  a  one-man  power  ]  It
would  seem  to  be  at  least  autocratic.
And  in  the  sense  that  the  people  of
the  Territories  have  no  choice  in  the
governor  or  in  the  judges  who  ad-
minister the  laws,  or  in  the  marshals
who  enforce  the  process  of  the  courts
and  in  eveiy  other  way  wherein  the
government  takes  upon  itself  the  gov-
ernment of  the  people,  without  the
consent  of  the  people,  is  it  not  an
aristocratic  government — the  govern-
ment of  the  many  by  the  few  ]  Thus,
if  my  conclusions  are  correct,  the
government  of  the  United  States  is
theocratic  in  so  far  Ms  the  people
trust  in  and  obey  the  laws  of  God;
it  is  republican  in  a  partial  sense  ;
it  is  democratic  in  another  sense  ;
audit  is  certainly,  so  far  as  the  Ter-
ritories are  concerned,  monarchial
;  and  aristocratical.  Thus  we  have
a  combination  of  the  elements  of  a
variety  of  govern  men ts  entering
:  into  tli is  great  Union.  But,  as  was
:  clearly  shown  this  morning  by
Brother  F.  I).  Richards,  in  the  dispo-
sition of  the  people  to  have  Congress
enact  certain  piwcriptive  laws,  we
as  a  people  are  being  deprived  of
many  of  the  rights  and  privileges
for  which  our  forefathers  contended,
for  which  they  pledged  their  sacred
honor,  and  for  which  many  of  them
devoted  their  lives*  But,  knowing
the  manner  in  which  public  opinion
is  manufactured  in  this  great  land
\  of  ours,  I  have  personally  a  degree
of  charityaud  of  sympathy,  not  only
for  Congress,  but  for  the  President,
J  his  Cabinet,  and  for  the  supreme


330


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


judiciary  of  our  nation.  It  is  no
unusual  thing  to  see  men  manifest
physical  courage.  You  can  see  it  in
all  nature.  Tread  upon  a  worm  and
it  will  turn  and  sting  you  if  it  can.
Men,  for  the  love  of  tin*  things  of
this  world,  will  often  face  physical
danger  in  every  form.  They  will
dig  down  into  the  bowels  Of  the
earth,  navigate  the  raging  seas,  and
penetrate,  as  it  were,  to  the  North
Pole— they  will  face  the  cannon's
mouth  when  it  belches  forth  death
and  desolation  in  all  its  horrid
forms;  they  will  face  death  and
destruction  in  all  its  horrid  forms  ;
they  will  lace  death  and  desolation
in  every  shape  ;  but  when  you  call
upon  tli  em  to  manifest  m  oral  courage,
when  you  call  upon  them  to  stand  up
and  maintain  the  right  because  it  is
right,  when  that  right  is  unpopular,
you  appeal  to  something  that  gives
but  weak  response.  I  have  seen
men  that  would  face  danger  in  al-
most every  conceivable  form,  shrink
and  cower  before  one  breath  of  scorn.
They  could  not  bear  it,  and  hence
you  see  them  make  promises  and
apologies  because  of  the  influences
that  surround  them.  Now,  this  is
a  popular  government,  and  it  would
take  a  very  courageous  President  to
do  justice  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
Why?  Because  the  great  majority
of  the  nation  are  prejudiced  against
us.  Not  that  they  are  aware  of  any
harm  or  wickedness  having  been
done  by  this  people,  but  because  of
falsehoods  that  have  been  circulated
against  the  Latter-day  Saints.
Therefore,  I  say  that  were  Mr.
Cleveland  to  administer,  or  cause  to
be  administered  all  the  laws  in  Utah
impartially,  he  would  be  manifesting
a  degree  of  hardihood,  a  degree  of
moral  courage  that  certainly  has  not
been  exhibited  by  any  recent  Presi-
dent of  the  United  States*
This  country  has  produced  few  men


like  Charles  Sumner,  who  stood
up  in  the  Senate  of  the  United  States
and  fought  slavery.  He  stood  there
singly  and  alone,  but  he  espoused  a
righteous  cause,  and  by  degrees  he
made  adherents  until  this  nation
was  converted  and  the  Supreme
Court  of  the  United  States  that
declared  that  a  black  man  had  no
rights  which  a  white  man  was  bound
to  respect,  was  overturned  at  the
point  of  the  bayonet  and  the  sword.
Such  men  as  Washington,  Jefferson
and  Adams — such  men  as  Cromwell,
Knox,  Luther,  Wycliffe,  Huss  and
Jerome,  stand  along  the  shores  of
time  as  beacons  that  have  lighted
the  way  to  the  higher  liberty  we
ought  to  enjoy  in  this  glorious  land  to-
day. When  I  say  we,  I  refer  to  the
nation  as  a  whole,  and  not  to  the
Latter-day  Saints  as  a  community.
If  we  could  enjoy  our  constitutional
rights,  we  would  be  of  all  people  upou
this  earth  the  most  happy  ;  because,
with  all  our  faults  and  failing*,  God
smiles  upon  no  people  upou  the
ear  tli  as  pure  as  are  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  happiness  consists  iu
purity — the  living  of  a  holy  life  be*
fore  the  Lord,

I  was  very  forcibly  struck,  a  few
days  ago,  with  the  remarks  made  by
the  Judge  of  the  Thin  I  Judicial
District,  I  don't  think  him  to  be  a
Christian  ;  if  he  is,  he  does  not  un-
derstand the  Scriptures  as  I  under-
stand them.  In  referring  to  remarks
which  had  been  made  by  an  individ-
ual who  had  been  convicted  by  the
jury,  the  judge  remarked  that  he
did  not  wish  to  hear  any  more  hypo-
critical cant,  and  in  referring  to  the
wives  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  on
one  occasion  he  mentioned  them  as
concubines  ;aml  some  of  our  brethren
have  looked  upon  that  as  beingja  re-
proach. Well,  of  course,  you  can  con-
veycontempt  iu  the  mannerin  which
a  word  is  uttered*  But  I  do  not  look


THE  RICH  MAS AND  LAZARUS,


upon  the  word  concubine  as  being
a  con  tern]) tuous  term  by  any  means
All  concubines,  anciently,  were  con-
sidered wives,  but  nil  wives  were  not
concubines,  A  concubine,  then,  was
a  maid  servant  married  to  a  free  man ;
and  although  her  mistress  still  main-
tained  some  jurisdiction  over  her
actions,  the  fact  that  she  was  a  wife
gave  her  an  honorable  position —
made  her  a  legal  wife  in  the  sight
of  God.

Aiain,  the  judge,  in  referring  to
what  father  Abraham  did,  said,
"  Abraham  not  only  lived  with  his
wives,  but  also  with  Ids  wife's  hand-
maids; in  other  words,"  said  the
judge,  11  the  same  as  though  you
were  to  live  with  your  hired  girls.
Now.  while  that  miudit  do  for  Abra-
ham,  said  Ire,  44  it  will  not  do  fur  this
enlightened  age,1*  Now  I  desire  to
show  by  these  remarks  that  the  judge
of  the  Third  District  Court  is  not  a
Christian,  and  that  if  he  has  any
hopes  of  eternal  life  he  does  not
understand  the  plan  and  the  prom-
ises of  the  great  Jehovah;  for
Abraham  was  a  friend  of  God  ;
Abraham  talked  with  God  face  to
face,  and  although  it  may  be  thought
that  he  lived  in  the  dark  ages,  would
to  God  that  the  Christian  world  would
walk  in  such  darkness  to-day  !  If,
then,  the  acts  of  Abraham  would
not  do  for  the  Chief  Justice  of  the
Territory  of  Utah,  neither  would
the  city  in  which  Abraham  dwells
do  for  that  judge  ;  and  when  he
passes  into  eternity  and  beholds  the
names  of  the  twelve  apostles  written
upon  the  twelve  foundations  of  the
Eternal  City  he  may  admire  their
beauty  and  grandeur,  but  when  his
attention  is  drawn  to  the  twelve
pearly  gates,  he  will  find  engraven
thereon  the  names  of  the  twelve  sons
of  Jacob  by  his  four  wive*,  and  their
great  grant  [father  Abraham  will  be
within  that  city.  Without  its  walls


1  shall  be  sorcerers,  adulterers,  liars  and
whoremongers,  and  those  who  love
to  make  a  lie.  Jesus  bore  testimony
to  the  virtues  of  Abraham.  He
proclaimed  himself  to  be  a  literal
descendant  from  him,  tracing  back
his  lineage  to  the  loins  of  David,
another  polygamist;  and  when  he,
Jesus,  spoke  of  Lazarus,  who  picked
up  the  crumbs  that  fell  from  the
rich  man's  table,  and  who  was  so

I  poor  and  wretched,  whose  sores  the
dogs  licked  to  his  ease,  delight  and
comfort — when  Jesus  spoke  of  this
Lazarus,  he  spoke  of  him  as  being
in  the  bosom  of  Father  Abraham.
But  the  rich  man,  who  perhaps  had
had  control  of  him,  and  who  had
kicked  and  cuffed  him,  and  looked
upon  him  with  scorn  as  he  picked
up  the  crumbs — as  we  pick  up  the
crumbs  of  liberty  grudgingly  drop-
ped from  the  table  winch  our  fathers
made  in  the  day  of  oppression  and
dread — I  say,  when  that  rich  man
looked  upon  Lazarus  in  his  degrada-
tion, he  was  then  but  his  serf  and
slave  5  but  when  he  looked  upon
him  over  that  wide  gulf  that  sepa-
rated tli em,  he  saw  him  in  the  bosom
of  Abraham,  and  he  pleaded  that

;  Lazarus  might  be  sent  to  dip  his
finger  in  one  drop  of  cold  water,
that  the  thirst  mi^ht  be  slaked  in
his  throat,  and  that  his  burning
tongue  might  be  relieved.  The
answer  ws?s,  "  Lazarus  had  his  ill

I  tilings  while  upon  the  earth  and  thou

|  hadst  thy  good  things.  Now,  be-
hold Lazarus  lias  the  good  things

1  and  thou  hast  thine  "evil  things
"Well,  said  the  rich  man,  if  he  comes
not  to  me  send  him  to  tell  my  friends
and  my  neighbors  of  the  condition
of  affairs  here."  The  answer  was
made,  "  They  have  Moses  and  the
prophets,  and  if  they  heed  not  these,
neither  would  they  listen  to  ona
though  he  rose  from  the  dead."  If

|  the  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  of


332  JOURNAL OF  DISCOURSES.


the  Territory  of  Utah  is  a  Christian,
Ijovv  will  he  feel  when  he  conies  into
the  presence  of  Father  Abraham,
whom  he  has  sought  to  cast  reflec-
tions upon  ?  Will  not  the  blush  of
shame  be  upon  his  cheek  1  And  if
there  is  an  eternal  God,  and  if  that
eternal  God  is  the  creator  of  the
heavens  and  the  earth  and  all  our
spirits ;  and  is  the  friend  of  Abra-
ham, how  can  that  Judge  bear  his
presence!  I  would  rather  be  the
poorest  Latter-day  Saint  on  earth
and  bear  chains  and  fetters  upon
my  limbs  until  my  flesh  dropped
from  my  bones  than  to  be  in  the
attitude  of  the  man  who  must  bear,
without  the  spirit  of  God,  the  meas-
ure of  unjust  judgment  which  he
has  measured  to  uthers.  For  this
reason,  my  brethren  ami  sisters,  I
say  I  have  the  most  profound  sym-
pathy for  all  those  whom  we  some-
times denominate  our  enemies,  and
I  am  not  able  to  forget  the  fact  that
whatever  their  condition  in  this  life
may  be,  they  fought  not  on  the  side
of  Satan  in  the  eternal  worlds  when
Satan  rebelled  against  God  because
the  Almighty  was  unwilling  to
adopt  his  coercive  plan  of  human
redemption  :  God  was  determined
that  every  man,  woman  and  child
born  into  the  world  should  be  free.
I  say,  because  Uod  would  not  adopt
his  coercive  measures  lie  rebelled
against  Christ,  and  one- third  part
of  heaven  followed  him,  and  he
fought  against  Michael  and  the
hosts  of  heaven,  and  was  cast
down  to  ear tli  with  the  hosts  that
followed  him.  But  you  can  find  no
living  man  or  woman  that  ever
breathed  the  breath  of  life  that
fought  on  his  side  :  for  the  condem-
nation that  came  upon  them  was  a
loss  of  opportunity  to  take  a  body,
Therefore,  those  people  who  seem
to  be  our  enemies  are  such  only  by
reason  of  their  blindness,  and  because


'  their  eyes  are  closed  against  the
things  of  God,  and  if  the  judgments
of  God  are  to  come  upon  them  ac-
cording to  the  predictions  of  the
prophets,  we  can  well  afford  to  have
charity  and  sympathy  for  them,
and  we  do  as  a  people,  I  tell
you  that  I  can  pray  for  my  ene-
mies ;  I  can  pray  that  God  may
lead  them  away  from  darkness,
that  He  may  touch  the  eyes
of  their  understanding  that  they
may  see,  and  in  their  hearts  re-
pent

It  is  awful  to  think  for  a  moment
of  the  terrible  condemnation  that
will  surely  come  upon  men  who
endorse  the  shedding  of  innocent
blood  ;  but  we  must  at  last  come  to
love  our  enemies  and  pray  for  them
who  despitef ully  use  us.  And  when
we  are  prepared  to  do  this  from  the
heart,  we  are  prepared  to  say  to  this
world,  "  1  am  not  afraid  of  anything
you  can  do."  The  power  of  the  Spirit
lifts  the  body  out  of  the  reac  i  of
harm,  the  spirit  of  Christ  has  gained
the  victory,  and  we  can  say  when
under  the  influence  of  that  spirit,
44  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ]  0
grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ?"  I  can
pray  for  the  President  of  the  United
States,  with  a  desire  in  my  heart  that
God  will  diiect  him  aright,  that  he
may  have  mural  courage  sufficient  to
do  that  which  is  just;  because,  un-
less the  rulers  of  this  nation  are
actuated  by  the  spirit  of  justice,  they
cannot  be  sustained  h>  the  Almighty.
And  although  we  may  find  prejudice
on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left,
we  shall  never  have  given  unto  us
the  victory  until  we  learn  how  to
govern  upon  principle.  When  men
are  tested,  when  they  are  brought
before  the  courts,  cases  should  be
tried,  not  men.  Whenever  the
Latter-day  Saints  shall  have  reached
that  high  degree  of  excellence  in
the  administration  of  the  laws  of


WEAKNESS  OF  OUR  GOVERNMENT.


33?


God  as  to  judge  impartially  between
the  Saint  and  sinner,  when  they  shall
be  willing  to  give  Satan  his  rights  as
quickly  as  a  Saint  or  a  brother,  then
will  judgment  and  rule  be  placed
within  their  reach,  and  I  pray
that  it  will  never  come  before  that
time*  I

Whether  a  man  is  a  heathen  or  a
Christian,  when  the  kingdom  of  God
is  established,  he  will  have  his  rights
and  liberties  extended  to  him.
There  wll  be  no  bias,  no  prejudice,
every  thing  will  be  done  according
to  the  laws  of  justice  and  equity.
Have  we  always,  as  a  people,  I  may
ask,  manifested  a  disposition  to  act
upon  the  basis  of  principle  ]  You
can  answer  the  question  for  your-
selves. Have  you  been  willing,  as
Latter-day  Saints  to  extend  to  the
Gentile  as  readily  his  rights,  under
your  municipal,  your  county  or  your
Territorial  government  as  you  would
extend  them  to  a  Latter-day  Saint  ?
If  you  have,  then  have  we  admin-
istered upon  the  basis  of  principle  ;
but  if  we  have  not,  then  have  we
not  come  to  an  understanding  of
that  which  the  Lord  has  revealed  ;
for  when  His  kingdom  beats  sway
there  will  be  thousands  and  millions
of  people  who  do  not  subscribe  to
our  religious  views,  who  will  be  gladly
governed  by  the  laws  of  God's  king-
dom; and  the  Chinese  in  the  empire
of  China,  the  Hindoo  in  Hindoostan,
or  the  Christian  in  Europe,  may  read
the  laws  that  govern  Zion,  and,  with
mathematical  accuracy,  figure  out
the  liberties  they  can  enjoy  under
the  laws  of  the  kingdom  of  God.
There  will  be  no  prejudice  or  packed
juries  in  the  kingdom  of  God  that
will  bind  the  innocent  and  set  the
guilty  free.  God  will  govern  His
Kingdom  as  He  governs  throughout
His  universe,  by  the  laws  of  justice
and  equity.

What  I  say  to  the  Latter-day


Saints  is,  let  us  be  of  good  cheer.
I  never  have  seen  a  better  day  than
this.  The  kingdom  will  come  off
victorious,  and  those  who  have  hated
us  will  see  the  day  when  much  woe
and  affliction  will  come  upon
them.

We  hear  talk  about  55,000,000
of  people  being  opposed  to  the
Latter-day  Saints,  I  offer  to  you  this
afternoon  my  testimony  that  this  is
not  true.  There  are  not  55t000,O0O
in  this  glorious  government  of  ours
who  are  opposed  to  the  Latter-day
Saints  ;  it  is  a  great  mistake  ;  there
are  thousands  in  the  United  States
to-day,  who  are  anxiously  waiting
for  the  solution  of  the  "  Mormon**
problem,  who  are  praying  for  the
deliverance  of  tins  people.  It  is  a
great  mistake  to  suppose  that  every
man, woman  and  child  in  this  nation
are  opposed  to  this  people  ;  there
are  scores  that,  while  they  have  not
courage  to  come  out  and  speak  a
word  for  them,  have  a  warm  throb-
bing in  their  hearts  for  the  victory
of  this  people  and  their  cause,  and
they  are  not  blind  to  their  surround*
in  us  either.  As  an  American  citizen
I  deplore  it,  but  I  tell  the  Latter-
Saints  this  afternoon  that  this  great
government  is  not  strong,  and  the
reason  is.  they  have  torn  up  the
foundations  of  the  structure  that  was
built  by  our  fathers.  They  have
ripped  up  the  moorings  of  the  great
ship. They  have  allowed  mob  rule

i  to  get  power  in  this  land,  and  like  a
dark cloud, secret  societies  are

,  gathering aro end.  And  while  it  may
be  smiled  at,  yet  I  tell  you  this  na-

I  tion  stands  as  it  were  upon  a  mine*
When  the  Knights  of  Labor  and

I  the  different  brotherhoods  can  say
in  calm  language  that  within  thirty
minutes  they  can  stop  the  motion  of
every  car  wheel  between  Omaha,
Nebraska,  and  Butte,  Montana,  I
say  to  you  there  is  power  there.


JOURNAL  OF


MSCOUUSKS


More  than  five  years  ago,  certain
secret  societies  instituted  what  were
called  the  Pittsburg  riots.  The
State  militia  was  called  out  to  quell
them,  and  they  were  not  able  to  do
it.  The  army  of  the  national  gov-
ernment was  appealed  to,  and  a
United  States  officer  told  me  that
when  he  led  his  soldiers  to  Pittsburg
he  feared  to  give  the  word  of  com-
mand to  fire  upon  those  in  surge  utsg
*'  tor,1*  said  he,"  "I  did  not  know
whether  they  would  obey  or  turn
round  and  fire  upon  their  officers.11
I  have  heard  merchants  of  Chicago
and  New  York  declare  that  they  had
private  arms  stacked  away  in  their
business  houses  because  they  could
not  trust  the  municipal,  the  county,
the  State,  or  the  national  means  of
protection  ;  will  you  tell  me  that  a
nation  is  strong  thus  situated  1  It
is  not  The  iron  heel  of  the  monop-  ,
olist  has  long  been  upon  the  neck  of
labor,  and  the  great  question  which
is  looming  up  in  this  nation  to-day
is  that  of  labor  and  capital  >  Would  \
to  God  we  had  statesmen  with  eyes
clear  enough  to  see  !+  Would  to  God
that  they  would  pull  out  of  their  eyes
tlte  "Mormon*1  mote  and  behold
the  beam  that  threatens  the  nut  ion.
The  occurrence  at  Rock  Springs,
and  the  mutterings  we  hear  from
the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific  ought
to  be  a  warning  that  the  day  is  not
far  distant,  unless  the  Democratic  |
and  Republican  parties  open  their
eyes  to  the  situation,  when  desola-
tion and  war  will  be  in  this  govern-
ment. When  men  who  live  in  San
Francisco,  Chicago  and  New  York,
have  said  to  me,  "  Mr*  Thatcher,
why  don't  you  renounce  this  objec-
tionable feature  of  your  religion,
the  nation  is  opposed  to  it,  the  civil-
isation of  the  aj*e  does  not  want  to
permit  it — why  don't  you  renounce
it  and  live  in  peace  T  I  have  said
to  them,  "I  thank  yoi  for  your  kind


(sentiments;  I  thank  jou  for  the
kindly  feeling*  that  you  entertain,"
and  as  an  evidence  that  1  feel  it,  I
will  say  when  this  nation,  having
sown  to  the  wind,  reaps  the  whirl-
wind j  when  brother  takes  up  sword
against  brother  ;  when  father  con-
tends against  son,  ami  son  against
father;  when  he  who  will  not  take
up  his  sword  against  his  neighbor
must  needs  flee  to  Ziou  for  safety —
then  I  would  say  to  my  friend*  come
to  Utah  ;  for  the  judgments  of  God,
commencing  at  the  house  of  the
Lord,  will  have  passed  away,  and
Utah,  undisturbed,  will  be  the  most
delightful  place  in  all  the  Union.
When  war  and  desolation  and  blood-
shed, and  the  ripping  up  of  society
come  upon  the  nation,  1  have  said
to  such,  11  Come  to  Utah  ami  we  will
divide  our  morsel  of  food  with  you,
we  will  divide  our  clothing  with  you,
and  we  will  offer  you  protection."  I
will  tell  you,  my  brethren  arid  sis-
ters, the  day  will  come,  ami  it  is  not
tar  distant,  when  he  who  will  not
take  up  his  sword  against  his  neigh-
bor, will  have  to  tlee  to  Ziou  for  safe-
ty ;  ami  it  is  presupposed  in  this
prediction  that  Ziou  will  have  power
to  give  them  protection.  We  are
not  going  to  do  it  outside  of  the
government,  either;  we  are  going
to  do  it  inside  the  government.
There  is  no  power  in  thus  Jam  I
to  turn  this  people  against  the
government  of  the  United  States,
They  will  maintain  the  Constitution
of  this  country  inviolate,  and
although  it  may  have  been  torn  to
shreds  they  will  tie  it  together  again,
and  maintain  every  principle  of  it,
holding  it  up  to  the  downtrodden
of  every  nation,  kindred,  tongue
and  people,  and  they  will  do  it,  too,
under  the  Stars  and  Stripes.  They
will  stand  with  their  feet  firmly  upon
the  backbone  of  the  American  conti-
:  nent  and  maintain  the  principles


WE  MUST  PURIFY  OURSELVES


335


which  cost  their  fathers  so  much,  I
and  those  principles  cannot  be  taken
away  by  men  who  violate  their
oath  of  office,  and  betray  their
trust.  ]
I  tell  yuu  that  there  are  boys
growing  up  in  these  mountains  who
have  the  principles  of  human  liberty
grounded  deep  in  their  hearts,  and
they  will  maintain  them,  not  only
for  themselves,  but  for  others,  God
speed  the  day  I  -say — if  the  nation
pursues  its  downward  course  and
tears  up  these  fundamental  princi-
ples of  government  which  have  made
thenistrong — when  the  Constitution
may  be  rescued  and  all  men  and
women  shall  be  free  again.  I  pray
that  G rover  Cleveland  may  stand  up
as  I  he  chief  executive  of  the  greatest
nation  that  there  is  on  God's  foot-
stool to-day  and  say  to  the  waves
of  public  opinion  and  public  pressure
that  the  nation  must  be  ruled  upon
tin*  principles  of  righteousness  and
justice.  If  he  would  do  that,  he
would  make  himself  a  name  that
would  be  embalmed  for  ever  upon
the  pages  of  history.  But  if  he  will
not  do  it — if  he  is  not  morally
st  rong  enough  to  doit,  and  if  Congress
will  not  come  forward  and  help  him
do  !tf  we  will  say,  M  0,  God,  we  put
ou i  dependence  in  Thee/*  and  where
Thou  leadest  we  will  follow,  and  we
will  seek  to  maintain  our  rights,


until  the  Almighty  grants  them
unto  ug.  May  the  spirit  of  tho
testimony  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
be  in  your  hearts,  for  above  all
things  it  is  the  most  precious  ;  and
when  you  come  before  the  judges
take  no  heed  of  what  you  shall  say
or  the  answers  you  shall  give,  but
trust  in  God,  and  if  you  go  before
the  judges  silent  as  did  your  Lord
and  master,  if  they  choose  to  nail
you  upon  the  cross  or  stretch  you
upon  the  wheel  or  the  rack,  or  if
they  thrust  you  into  duugeons  or
prisons,  it  is  nothing  more  than  was
done  to  your  Master  before  you.
Let  us  trust  in  God.  I  tell  you
nothing  of  importance  has  ever
been  attained  in  tliis  world  without
a  hard  struggle  against  the  opinions
and  prejudices  of  men.

God  grant  that  we  may  soon  re-
gain and  forever  maintain  our  liberty.
But  may  it  not  come  as  long  as  we
have  an  adulterer,  a  fornicator,  or
wlioremaster  who  professes  to  be  a
Latter-day  Saint.  As  long  as  such
as  these  partake  of  the  Holy  Sacra-
ment with  this  people,  let  bondage
continue.  But  let  us  purge  out
these  things,  let  us  be  pure  and  holy
before  God,  cherishing  the  principles
of  justice  in  our  hearts,  and  the  day
of  liberty  will  surely  come,  which
may  God  grant,  is  my  prayer.
Amen.


336


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE BY APOSTLT3 R D.  RICHARDS,


Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  at  Logan,  hdd  in  October,

"V"  V, - '  '-.v 1 885.  fJ.l  '/I


REPORTED  BY  JOHH  IK  VINE,


OUR  EFFORTS  TO  INFORM  THE  WORLD  OF  OUR  DOCTRINES — WE  MUST
EXPECT.  PERSECUTION — MAN  HAS 'NO  RIGHT  TO  MAKE  LAWS  CON*
TRARY  TO  THE  LAW  OF  GOD — PLURAL  MARRIAGE  IS  NO  CRIME—
BIGAMY  A  CRIME — THERE  ARE  MORE  FOR  US  THAN  AGAINST  US —
THE  WORK  OF  GOD  NOT  UPHELD  BY  NUMBERS — THE  BLOOD  OF
THE  PROPHETS  IS  UPON  THE  AMERICAN NATION — GOD  WILL  TEST


Providence  seems  to  smile  upon
our  gathering  together  for  a  confer-
ence at  this  time.  Indeed,  as  a
people,  if  we  take  into  consideration
all  of  the  blessings  of  our  common
salvation,  we  are  to-day  highly  favored
of  the  Lord,  in  every  general  respect.
I  think  our  hearts  ought  to  be  moved
by  a  sense  of  gratitude  for  all  of  His
many  blessings  to  us,  both  temporal
and  spiritual.  Our  brethren  here
have  gone  to  and  improved  the  con-
dition of  their  tabernacle,  so  that
we  are  very  comfortably  situated.
The  singers.  I  think,  feel  that  they
have  got  into  the  right  place;  a  good
table  is  also  provided  for^the  report-
ers. I  take  this  opportunity  to  in-
vite reporters  of  any  and  all  news-
papers that  may  be  present,  who  wish
to  do  so,  to  come  forward,  take  a
seat  at  this  table  and  report  the  pro-
ceedings of  our  conference.  The
only  favors  we  ask  at  their  hands  ir
that  they  will  please  report  us  cor-
rectly.

We  have  been  striving  half  a  cen-
tury to  inform  the  world  of  the  prin-
ciples of  our  faith,  and  we  have  not


tired  at  it  yet ;  we  are  still  sending
missionaries  to  the  four  quarters  of
the  earth*  We  have  sent  them
without  stint  of  numbers  to  the
people  of  this  great  nation,  the
United  States  ;  have  endeavored  to
hi  form  them  ever  since  the  year
1830,  and  especially  since  the  en-
dowment at  Kirtland  in  1836,  when
the  Apostles,  High  Priests  and
Elders  went  forth  into  all  parts  of
4his  nation,  as  far  as  permitted,  and
as  fast  as  .they  had  opportunity,  to
inform  the  people  of  the  principles
of  our  faith.  But  it  seems  almost
impossible  to  get  to  their  ears,  and
much  less  likely  to  reach  their
hearts.  It  appears  to  have  been
easier  for  us  in  an  early  day  to  receive
that  measure  which  the  Lord  had
revealed  for  our  benefit  than  it  is
now  when  He  is  giving  us  so  much
that  the  new  wine  cannot  be  received
into  the  old  vessels,  and  if  it  could
we  do  not  know  what  the  results
would  be.  In  these  our  times,  some
of  the  feeble  and  faint-hearted,  will
no  doubt  think  that  because  of  the
efforts  at  persecution  against  us  we


OPPOSITION  IS  TO EX  I'  EXITED,


337


have  reason  to  Ve  very  sail,  to  pull
lotiLT  f;itv.s  ami  be  cast  ilown  because
we  are  oppressed.  Brethren,  not
so.  Do  nut  think  of  ifc  a  minute.
So  long  as  we  are  dealt  with  in  a
milder  manner  Mian  our  Master  was,
we  have  reason  to  be  thankful  and
ought  to  go  on  our  Way  rej Dicing,
So  long  as  we  are  notMealt  with  more
harshly  titan  our  brethren  have  been
in  former  periods  of  time  and  in  this
dispensation  in  which  we  live,  we
have  reason  to  be  thankful.

We  lament  the  absence  of  our
brethren  of  the  First  Presidency,
and  several  of  the  Council  of  the
Twelve  Apostles.  We  would  be  glad
and  thankful  if  we  could  haveUheni
all  with  us,  but  we  are  pleased  that
so  many  of  us  can  be  with  you  as
are  here*  We  hope  that  the  confer-
ence will  result  in  the  strengthening
the  good  resolutions  of  every  Latter-
day  Saint — in  invigorating  the
energies  of  all  who  are  in  anywise
afflicted,  or  oppressed  with  tempta-
tions aud  trials  of  any  kind.  The
Lord  told  the* brethren  in  his  day —

those  whom  lie  appointed,  laid  His
ham  Is  upon  aud  ordained  to  the
Apostleship — that  this  would  he
their  heritage ;  that  they  would  be
vilified  and  hailed  to.  prison,  and
that  men  would  think  they  wore
doing  God  service  in  taking  their
lives  from  the  earth.  And, said  He,
is  the  servant  greater  than  His  mas-
ter ?  K  o.  He  told  them  that  when
they  experienced  these  things,
they  were  to  lift  up  their  heads  and
rejoice ;  for  great  was  their  reward
in  heaven.  Therefore,  we  have  the
assurance  that  if  we  are  true  and
faithful  we  shall  suffer  trials  and
temptations  as  they  did  in  former
days,  and  as  Joseph  aud  Ilyrum,
and  the  brethren  of  the  A  path's,
with  a  host  of  Elders,  have  done
in  these  latter-days  for  the  princi-
ples of  the  Gospel.
No.  22,


These  things,  however,  should
not  move  us,  or  they  should  only,
if  they  move  us  at  all,  strengthen  us
to  stand  irue  to  the  holy  faith  of  the
Gospel,  to  the  principles,  ordinances
and  institutions  which  the  Lord  has
revealed  unto  us.  We  may  expect
to  nieat  opposition  on  every  hand,
but  our  opposition  may  come  in  a
different  form  from  what  our  breth-
ren have  formerly  had  to  endure ;
we  should,  however,  be  armed  with
the  spirit  of  divine  truth,  so  that  we
may  comprehend  oik  duty  under
every  circumstance  and  every  condi-
tion in  life,  I  know  some  of  the
brethren  feel  that  it  is  a  very  serious
thing  to  he  cast  into  prison.  Why,
there  Ms  many  a  thing  worse  than
that,  It  is  a  thousand  times  hotter
to  go  to  prison  than  to  deny  the
|  principles  of  the  Gospel,  aud  to  be
forsaken  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  What
did  Brother  Brigham  say  before  he
left  us1!  When  Congress  passed
the  l:iw  of  18(5:2,  I  heard  him  make
this  remark — rather  startling  at  the
time — that  a  man  who  would  not  be
willing  to  pay  Ids  fine  and  take  a
term  of  imprisonment  for  a  real  good,
virtuous  woman  was  not  worthy  of  a
wife  at  all.  Well,  let  us  learn  to
look  at  these  things  in  a  proper
manner,  aud  be  thankful  that  our
conditions  are  no  worse.  Lit  us
look  to  Gou  continually;  He  will
guide  and  control  all  things  for  the
good  of  His  people.

There  is  a  portion  of  the  writings
of  the  Apostle  Paul  to  the  Ephesiaa*,
I  hat  seems  so  appropriate  to  our
condition,  that  I  propose  to  read
in  the  hearing  of  the  congregation
a  part  of  the  6th  chapter,  com-
mencing at  the  10th  verse  :

"Finally,  my  brethren,  be  strong
in  the  Lord,  aud  in  the  power  of  his
might.

j "Put  on  the  whole  armor  of  God,
that  ye  may  be  able to  stand

Vol  XXYL


338


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


against the wiles of  the  devil.

"  For  we  wrestle  not  against  flesh
and  blood,  hut  against  principalities,
against  powers,  against  the  rulers
of  the  darkness  of  this  world,
against  spiritual  wickedness  in  high
places.

"Wherefore  take  unto  you  the
whole  jii  111  or  of  God,  that  ye  may
be  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day,
and  having  done  all,  to  stand.

"Stand  therefore,  having  your
loins  girt  about  with  truth,  and
having  on  the  breast  plata  of  right-
eousness.

"  And  your  feet  shod  with  the
preparaiiun  of  the  Gospel  of  peace.

u  Above  all,  taking  the  shield  of
faith,  wherewith  ye  shall  he  able  to
quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the
wicked.

"And  take  the  helmet  of  salva-
tion, and  the  sword  of  the  spirit,
which  is  the  word  ol  God.

"  Praying  always  with  all  prayer
and  supplication  in  the  spirit,  and
watching  thereunto  with  all  perse-
verance and  supplication  for  all
Saints;1

I  have  read  these  words  because
of  their  remarkable  adaptation  to
our  present  condition  and  circum-
stances.

I  feel,  in  attempting  to  address
the  Saints,  a  very  great  degree  of
helplessness,  and  of  dependence
upon  the  enlightenment  and  aid  of
the  Holy  Spirit  in  order  that  I  may
speak  to  you  a  short  time  unto  edifi-
cation \  tor  without  the  spirit  of  the
Gospel,  the  Holy  Spirit  of  <  livine  truth
which  is  sent  forth  to  testify  of  God
and  of  the  truth  to  the  hearts  of  the
honett  in  the  earth,  our  labors  will
be  of  very  trifling  account.  But  if
we  have  the  aid  and  help  of  that
Spirit,  then  we  may  be  edified  and
rejoice  together  as  the  children  of
God — both  he  that  speaketh  and  he
that  heareth.


It  would  seem  that  after  the  very

elaborate  and  comprehensive  epistle
that  has  heen  communicated  to  us
by  our  brethren  of  t lie  First  Presi-
dency, in  which  they  seem  to  cover
many  of  the  circumstances  which
now  attend  upon  God's  peopie,  and
in  which  they  also  give  to  us  such
words  of  exhortation  and  instruction
as,  if  followed  by  us,  must  not  only
make  us  understand  better  our  con-
dition, but  know  better  how  to  oc-
cupy our  positions  with  credit  to
ourselves  and  to  the  acceptance  of
God  our  heavenly  Father — I  say  it
would  seem,  after  l  eading  that  epist  le,
and  having  it  impressed  upon  our
minds,  as  I  am  sure  it  must  be  upon
all  who  listened  in  spirit  and  ia
truth,  as  if  it  w  ere  scarcely  necessary
that  anything  more  should  be  said
to  put  us  right  in  regard  to  our  du-
tie-  and  give  us  understanding  con-
cerning them,  or -strength  in  the  per-
formance of  them.  But  we  each  of
us  have  a  testimony  of  the  truth  of
the  Gospel  and  of  the  work  of  God
to  bear  to  our  brethren  and  sisters,
and  I  feel  a  desire  myself,  in  com-
mon  with  my  brethren,  to  commu-
nicate such  things  as  may  be  given
to  me,  so  that  we  may  be  encouraged
in  the  work  in  which  we  are  engaged;
that  we  may  feel  our  good  resolutions
strengthened  within  us,  that  we  may
be  led  to  realize  in  whose  name  we
trust,  in  whose  strength  we  stand,
and  that  we  may  be  able  also  to
realize,  as  the  Apostle  Paul  did,
when  he  wrote,  "  We  wrestle  not
against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against
principalities  and  powers,  against
the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this
world,  against  spiritual  wickedness
iu  high  places.*'

Our  condition  is  a  very  peculiar
one  in  regard  to  this  nation,  and  yet
it  is  no  more  strange  or  peculiar
thau  has  been  the  condition  of  God's
people  in  other  ages  which  are  re-


LAWS  OF  THE  LAND  MUST  NOT  CONFLICT  WITH  THE  LAW  OF  GOD.  339


corded  in  history  for  our  comfort,
encouragement  anil  consolation.
Therefore,  I  feel  this  morning  like
speaking  a  little  about  the  nature
of  that  which  is  called  crime,  which
is  charged  upon  us.

We  are  told  by  men  in  high  places
that  it  is  the  highest  duty  of  good
citizens  to  render  obedience  to  the
laws  of  the  land  in  which  we  live.
Now  I  can  scarcely  believe  that  any
professor  of  religion — any  honest
religious  professor  of  any  Christian
denomination  in  these  United  States
— can  honestly  and  solidly  endorse
that  sentiment,  much  less  any  one
who  is  clothed  with  the  ermine  and
is  honored  with  a  seat  upon  the
judicial  bench;  yet  it  is  from  judges
that  we  hear  this. A  great  apostle
of  the law, the greatest,  the
ablest  and  most  popular  delineator
of  the  law  from  the  days  of  Justinian
of  ancient  Rome  down  until  Ins  day,
was  the  renowned  Mr.  Black  stone
himself. When  portions  of  various
nations  had  settled  together  in  the
island  of  Great  Britain — some  from
the  northern  states  of  Scandinavia,
others  from  Brittany,  and  the  differ-
ent parts  of  the  German  or  Saxon
nations  and  had  collected  the  laws
those  countries  for  the  purpose
of  having  them  assimilated,  so  that
those  people  who  came  from  their
various  countries  should  have  one
established  usage  of  law  for  the
regulation  of  all  their  civil  and  crim-
inal procedures  in  the  adjudication
of  their  difficulties  with  each  other,
the  learned  Chancellor  liiackstone
undertook  this  great  task,  and  from
the  alembic  of  his  intelligent  and
powerful  mind  brought  forth  and
enunciated  his  views  of  the  law.
These  views  have  been  held  to  be
the  basis  of  all  legal  administration;
the  fundamental  principles  of  juris-
prudence among all  Christian
nations  ever  since he  published
them.


This  celebrated  gentleman  who  is
considered  to  this  present  day  as
one  of  the  greatest,  if  not  the  very
greatest  legal  li^ht  of  the  age,  laid
it  down  plainly  and  emphatically,
that  man  had  no  right  to  make  any
laws  contrary  to  or  in  conflict  with
the  law  of  God.  I  wish  every  law-
ver  throughout  the  nation  would
read  it  and  understand  it;  for  when
they  depart  from  that  rule  they  be-
come apostate  from  the  faith  of  true
legal  jurisprudence  as  laid  down  by
this  distinguished  apostle  of  the
law;  and  furthermore,  he  held  that
the  laws  which  should  regulate  or
constitute  the  jurisprudence  of  every
nation  were  derived  from  and  based
upon  the  laws  revealed  by  God,
through  the  Prophet  Moses.  This
gentleman  stated  and  laid  down
as  a  fact  that  the  Ten  Com-
mandments the  ancient  law  of  God,
were  held  by  him  to  be  the  basis,
and  fundamental  principle  of  all
law,  justice  and  administration
that  should  be  had  among  the  hu-
man family.  He  claims  that  as
the  basis  of  his  work.  Then  no
man  who  is  a  true  lawyer,  after  the
order  of  the  celebrated  Blackstone,
can  say  in  truth  that  it  is  the  high-
est duty  of  a  good  citizen  that  he
should  observe  in  all  things  the
laws  of  the  land,  unless  it
be  tirst  established  that  those  laws
are  consistent  with  the  laws  of
God.

Now,  then,  wherein  are  we  trans-
gressors I  I  wish  to  call  your  atten-
tiou  to  this  a  few  minutes,  because
I  desire  my  brethren  and  sisters  to
understand  whenever  they  are  called
in  question  before  the  tribunals  of
this  nation  —  I  want  our  boys  and
girls  that  are  growing  up  around
us  to  understand  what  is  the  nature
of  that  which  is  called  crime,  which
is  allege  1  against  their  fathers,  and
in  which  their  mothers  are  partici-
pants. It  was  never  alleged  against


L.


310  JOURNAL  OF

us  as  men  of  Israel,  as  "Mormons,"
if  you  please,  that  we  were  vio-
lators or  had  been,  violators  of
the  law  of  the  land  until  July,
1SG2.  It  was  never  proven  and  can-
not Dow  be  shown  that  we,  as  a  peo
1  lie  were  violators  of  any  law  of  the
land  whatever  In  1862,  a  law  was
enacted  again  st  bigamy,  or  polygamy.
The  term  bigamy  had  always  been
used  before,  but  now  it  was  coupled
with  polygamy  in  order  that  it  might
be  made  to  reach,  and  be  tm tiers tood
by  everybody  as  intended  for,  the
Latter-day  Saints.

Now,  then,  to  come  at  the  matter
in  question,  what  is  the  crime,  if  any
there  is,  in  this  doctrine  of  heavenly
marriage  as  we  hold  it,  the  doctrine
of  the  eternal  covenant  of  marriage,
incident  to  which  is  plurality  of
wives  ?  When  we  married  our  wives
at  the  first, — we  were  NewEugland-
crs,  Britons,  Scandinavians,  <ic., —
we  were  married  until  death  should
EH  part.  That  was  the  period  for
which  we  made  contract,  whether
Ave  went  into  the  church  and  had
the  ordinance  solemnized  by  an
ecclesiastic,  or  whether  it  was  done
before  a  justice  of  the  peace,  judge,
or  any  civil  magistrate.  When  the
law  of  God  came,  before  the  doctrine
of  the  eternity  and  plurality  of  mar-
riage was  taught  to  us,  the  Lord  !
cave  us  a  revelation,  in  a  very  early
day,  in  regard  to  members  of  other
churches  beinc;  rebaptizeil.  Some
of  them  doubted  the  need  of  being  j
re* baptized.  Thev  said  we  were
baptized  into  the  Baptist  church;
we  were  sprinkled  in  the  Metho-
dist churchy  in  the  Presbyterian,
in  l lie  Congregational  :  why  be
baptized  again?  The  Lord  in
arswer  to  this  question  tol  l  His  1
people  that  all  old  covenants  He  ,
had  caused  to  be  done  away;  but
"behold!*  lie  said,  "  I  give  unto  |
)ou  a  new  and  everlasting  cove-i


DISCOURSED.

nant.11  Therefore,  all  had  to  go  forth,
who  had  been  baptized  by  men
having  no  authority  to  administer,
and  he  baptized  by  one  who  had

j  authority,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  for
the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  for  ad-
mission into  the  Church  of  Christ.
By  and  by,  when  we  had  walked
before  the  Lord  for  a  number  of
years,  He  revealed  to  us  the  laws

i  of  marriage.  Well-regulated  parents

■  do  not  teach  their  children  when
they  are  dandling  them  on  their  laps
the  nature  of  the  covenant,  or  the
ordinance,  or  the  duties  of  marriage.

!  They  wait  until  they  grow  up.  It

i  is  proper  that  they  should  wait  until
their  children  have  attained  to  years

j  of  judgment,  understanding,  and
perhaps  to  the  age  of  puberty.  So

|  the  Lord,  in  dealing  with  his  chil-
dren did  not  reveal  this  eternal
covenant  of  marriage  until  his  peo-
ple had  lived  a  while  in  keeping  the
tirst  laws  and  ordinances  of  the
Church,  and  learned  to  walk  in  the
light  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  to
purify  themselves  from  the  various
beset  meats  with  which  they  were
attended  when  they  went  into  the
waters  of  baptism,  and  become  bet-
ter prepared  fur  more  exalted  princi-
ples and  truths.  One  of  the  last
great  principles  that  the  Prophet
Joseph  was  commanded  of  God  to
teach  us,  was  the  law  regulating  the
eternity  of  marriage  ;  that  whereas,
we  had  taken  our  wives  only  until
death  should  us  part,  we  should
now  understand  that  we  were,  while
in  the  flesh,  laying  the  foundation
for  eternal  dominions,  crowns  and
exaltations  ;  that  our  wives  and  our
children  were  given  to  us  of  Go  I
for  the  purpose  of  laying  the  foun-
dation of  a  kingdom  ;  that  we  shall
have,  if  we  are  faithful  and  obedient,
the  covenant  of  eternal  life  orr-
selves  and  the  power  to  seal  the
same  upon  our  generations,  that  they


NO  FRAUD  PRACTICED  IN  POLY*  AM  V.


3*1


may  become,  as  Abrahams^  like  the
sands  of  the  seashore  for  num-
ber, ,  ■ \  ' /l;  t*p  I

The  Latter-day  Saints  claim  to  bo
the  children  of  Abraham,  and  if
they  are  the  children  of  Abraham,
they  will  do  the  works  of  Abraham.
It  was  difficult  for  men  and  women
from  all  parts  of  the  world,  who  had
lived  in  the  monojnunic  order  all
their  lives  to  accept  this  doctrine  of
the  eternity  and  plurality  of  nnr-
riage.  It  was  i£a  new  and  ever-
listing  covenant ;  and  if  ye  abide
got  that  covenant,  then  are  ye
damned,  saith  the  Lord/  This  was
the  obligation  that  was  laid  upon
the  Prophet  Joseph,  and  through
him,  upon  the  true  believers  of  the
Church,  even  all  who  were  worthy
to  accept  of  these  obligations.  It
was  herein  that  the  Elders  and  their
wives  extends  I  their  faith,  enlarged
their  obedience,  and  accepted  the
terms  of  the  new  and  everlasting
covenant  extending  not  through
time  only,  but  eternity  also.

Now,  I  a>k,  who  is  injured  by  a
man  taking  a  second  wife,  when  the
wile  he  now  has  is  agreeable  and  it
i<  mutually  understood  between  her
and  him  and  the  newly  affianced;  it
being  entered  into  with  a  mutual  un-
derstanding and  a  mutual  agreement
according  to  the  law  of  God — I  ask,
who  is  injured  ?

Wherein  consists  the  crime  of
bigamy]  It  is  this.  When  a  man
takes  one  wife  he  covenants  to  ad-
here to  her  until  death  do  them  part
He  violates  that  covenant  when  he
takes  another  woman,  unknown  to
his  wife  ;  he  thus  practices  fraud
upon  her*  This  is  where  the  crime
conies  iti.  Fraud  is  perpetrated
upon  his  own  family*  I  want  the
old  and  the  young  to  understand  it;
want  to  come  down  to  the  root  of
the  matter,  and  find  out  and  show
up  what  the  crime  is,  if  any,  that


is  charge!  upon  us*  Tiiis  crime  of-
taking  another  wife  when  a  man  has
one  is  called  bigamy;  and  there  are
laws  and  penalties  against  it.  With
the  Latter-day  Saints  there  is  no
fraud  practiced,  the  second  wife
being  accented  with  the  mutual  con*
sent  of  the  first,  and  in  accordance
witli  the  revelations  of  God,  There
is  in  that  no  crime  at  all,  unless
some  law  of  Go  I  is  violated,  or  'some-
body is  injured  in  the  matter.  If
this  transaction  that  I  have  just
named  violates  the  law  of  God,  or  if
it  injures  or  infringes  upon  the  rights
of  a  brother  or  a  sister,  then  there
may  be  soma  ground  for  pronounc-
ing it  a  crime,  but  belief  in,  and
practice  of,  the  eternity  and  plurality
of  the  marriage  covenant  do  not
violate  the  law  of  God,  because  He
has  commanded  His  people  to  accept
and  obey  it.  Neither  is  it  an  in-
fringement upon  ;  the  rights  of
others,  neither  men  nor  women,  but
gives  all  women  an  opportunity  to
become  honorable  wives  and
mothers,  and  thus  to  shutout  what
is  politely  called  the  social  evil,  with
all  its  horrid  concomitants  of  seduc-
tion, foeticide,  infanticide  and  all
the  train  of  sexual  monogamic  evils
which  haunt  and  infest  Christendom,
If,  then,  we  violate  no  law  of  God
nor  right  of  our  fellows,  wherein,  I
ask  again,  consists  the  crime  of  our
religious  faith  i  It  is  in  this  :  that
Congress  forbids  it;  juntas  Darius
forbade  Daniel  praying  to  God,  and
because  he  persisted,  cast  him  into
the  den  of  lions ;  the  same  as  Herod
caused  all  the  male  children  to  be
slain,  hoping  to  kill  Christ  our  Sa-
vior in  his  infancy ;  the  same  also
as  Nebuchadnezzar  cat  the  Hebrew
children  into  the  flames  because
they  worshiped  the  living  God
rather  than  his  idol.  W herein
consists  the  crime  of  Daniel  praying
to  the  God  of  UiwA  I Simply  be-


cause  King  Darius  forbade  him
doing  it

What  constituted  the  crime  of  the
Hebrew  children  in  worshiping  the
God  of  Heaven  I  Solely  because
Nebuchadnezzar  commanded  them
to  worship  the  golden  image,  which
they  would  not  do,  AY  hat  is  the
intrinsic  nature  of  our  crime  in  be-
lieving and  practicing  the  eternal
covenant  of  plural  marriage  as
revealed  by  the  Almighty,  and  as  we
are  commanded  to  do]  Simply  anil
solely  this:  Congress  passed  a  law
making  it  a  penal  offence  to  do  so.
This  is  all  the  criminality  there  is
about  it ;  and  the  question  remains
for  each  one  to  answer,  Shall  we
obey  God  or  man  ?

What  is  liberty — the  liberty  that
yon  and  1  and  all  men  are  entitled
to  enjoy  ?  It  is  that  we  do  not  vio-
late the  law  of  God,  or  that  we  do
not  infringe  upon  the  rights  and
liberties  of  our  fellow  creatures.
That  is  true  liberty.  Upon  that
hang  also  the  law  and  the  proph-
ets.

In  the  establishment  of  this  prin-
ciple of  the  Gospel,  the  marriage
covenant,  it  is  intended  only  for
God's  people,  and  not  for  the  people
of  the  world.  They  do  not  want  it
They  would  like  to  have  that  liberty
which  is  not  liberty  but  license — by
which  they  can  continue  and  per-
petuate seduction  and  adultery
among  them— keep  up  their  houses
of  prostitution  and  their  places  of
assignation.  It  is  a  part  of  the
business  of  both  high  and  low  to
keep  going  this  degradation  and
destruction  of  the  female  portion  of
the  race,  and  it  is  because  the  peo
pie  of  God  have  taken  a  course  that
every  righteous  woman  may  have  an
honorable  husband,  become  an
honorable  wife  and  have  a  position
in  the  family  and  household,  that  our
brethren  are  hailed  to  prison;  be-


cause they  are  and  faithful  to  their
families;  because  they  have  taken
wives  in  order  that  they  may  rear  up
children,  have  a  generation  to  bear
their  names  and  their  priesthood,
and  to  become  a  people  devoted  to
the  living  God.

I  want  to  say  in  this  connection,
as  I  wish  all  to  understand  it,  that
when  we  adopted  this  principle  by
the  revelations  of  God,  there  was  no
law  in  the  land  against  it  Under-
stand it,  brethren  and  sisters.  But
it  is  now  as  in  ancient  times,  when
the  captives  of  Judea  were  carried
into  Babylon.  Their  captors  found
excellent  qualities  in  them,  a*  some
say  now  they  like  our  industry,  our
enterprise  and  our  virtue  "outside
the  marriage  relation,"  but  Ave  want
yon  to  put  away  this  commandment
of  the  Lord  and  "  become  like  us,11
"be  as  we  are,"  then  we  will  like
you,  and  we  will  be  hail  fellows
well  met.

The  representatives  of  the  coun-
try at  Washington  have  discovered
something  or  other  in  these  moun-
tains that  is  displeasing  to  them  ;
that  we  are  increasing ;  that  we  de-
light in  our  children,  and  do  not  take
measures  to  prevent  their  coming
forth,  as  is  very  frequently  done  in
the  world ;  that  we  are  willing  to
take  wives  and  support  thorn  rather
than  to  indulge  in  whoredom  and
the  like  ;  and  they  said,  "This  won't
do,"  Hence  they  went  to  work  and
passed  a  law  against  us,  that  would
prevent  us  carrying  out  the  principles
of  our  religion.  1  want  these  young
boys  aud  girls,  as  well  as  the  older
ones,  to  know  that  God  has  never
given  us  a  law  that  was  in  conflict
with  any  law  of  the  land  ;  but  that
Congress  has  enacted  laws  to  make
us  criminals.  There  is  no  crime  in
that  which  we  practice,  inasmuch
as  no  man  is  injured,  no  woman  in-
jured, and  no  person's  rights  are


WE  ARE  VIOLATING  NO  LAW


313


in  vailed  ;  on  the  contrary,  our  people
are  called  upon  to  exercise  a  great
amount  of  self  denial  and  self-
abnegation,  that  all  may  be  blessed,
and  that  the  charity  of  the  Gospel
may  be  extended  to  all  the  human
family,  as  God  has  designed  and
ordained.  Tims,  we  are  not  violators  1
of  the  law  of  the  land,  but  the  law-
makers  of  the  nation  make  us  trans-
gressors. God  commands  us  to
keep  His  law.  The  people  through
their  representatives  say  we  shall
not.  That  is  all  there  is  in  it.  They
undertake  to  say  tiiat  we  shall  not
observe  the  law  of  plural  marriage,  ,
and  in  consequence  of  this  they  are
hailing  us  to  prison.  Our  outgoings
and  incomings  are  watched  by  mar-
shals, so  as  to  find  something  upon
which  to  bring  us  before  a  commis-  j
siouer  or  before  a  grand  jury  ;  not
for  any  crime  we  have  done,  but
because  we  have  obeyed  God,
which  Congress  has  said  we  must
not  do- — making  a  law  against
us — whereas  we  are  violating  no
law.

I  do  not  love  to  talk  against  my
fellow  men  \  I  simply  present  these
things  to  you  to  show  up  the  real
state  of  I  he  case.  It  is  unpleasant
for  me  to  say  that  the  men  of  the
Congress  of  1862,  and  that  of  1882,
were  not  men  of  the  most  immac-
ulate virtue.  It  is  understood
throughout  the  land  that  nowhere
on  this  continent  is  the  practice  of
whoredom  and  of  the  seduction  of
women  carried  on  to  a  greater  extent
than  in  the  city  of  Washington,  and
by  those  men  who  go  there  to  make
laws  against  this  people.  What
attitude  does  it  place  the  people  of
this  nation  in,  and  the  Congress  of
the  country,  in  relation  to  us  and
this  law  we  are  undertaking  to  keep!
Why,  as  soon  as  the  Lord  has  estab-
lished His  Gospel  and  covenant,  the
spirits  of  the  other  world  are  seeking


to  come  and  dwell  among  us  ;  they
desire  a  parentage  among  the  Saints
of  the  living  God,  where  they  can
be  welcomed  with  filial  love  and  not
repulsed  by  foeticide,  where  they  can
be  brought  up  in  the  fear  of  Go  1,
with  a  hope  of  returning  pure  to
the  Father's  presence,  without  being
lost  by  bio  ad  guiltiness  or  other
crimes  while  in  mortality.

How  do  you  think  the  spirits
contemplate  the  necessity  of  a  birth
in  the  nations  of  the  earth  where  so
much  harlotry  and  whoredom  exist!
I  tell  you  this  very  presumption  of
the  country  in  which  we  live,  that
we  shall  not  have  these  children  to
dwell  in  our  midst  and  bear  the
name  of  Christ  in  the  eaitb,  is  a
presumption  against  the  very  heav-
ens, and  against  those  spirits  of  the
just  who  are  waiting  to  be  made
perfect  through  their  sufferings  in
the  flesh*

Ah  |  says  one,  you  folks  in  the
mountains,  numbering  only  one
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  to
two  hundred  thousand,  need
not  talk  in  that  kind  of  way  ;  for
here  is  a  great  nation  of  fifty  five
millions  of  people  who  say  you  shall
not  do  this  tiling,  or,  if  you  do,  you
cannot  have  a  home  with  us.  Well,
we  will  admit  that  about  two  hun-
dred people  of  the  United  States  say
to  everyone  of  the  Latter-day  Saints
that  we  must  put  away  this
I  doctrine,  or  we  cannot  dwell  in  this
land.  Well,  that  is  a  terrible  majority
against  us :  but  let  us  look  at  this  a
little.  I  do  not  think  that  we  need
be  very  badly  scare:!.  You  recollect
at  one  time  a  young  man  was  with
El  is  ha  the  Prophet,  when  a  large  host
compassed  the  city,  both  with  horses
1  and  chariots,  and  a  battle  was  immi-
nent. It  was  turbulent  times  with
i  Israel  then,  worse  than  it  is  with  us
now.  The  defending  army  was  a
very  small  one,  and  the  heart  of  the


34t


J  0 11  IN  A  L OK  [>ISC0UUKKS.


young  man  began  to  falter.  He
could  not  see  Low  the  few  of
Israel  were  going  to  prevail  against
t !  i  ei  r  n  u  m  e  r o  u  s  e  1 1  em  i  es. ;  W 1 1  e  re  u  po  i )
Elisha  prayed,  and  said,  "  Lord,  1
pray  thee,  open  his  eyes,  that  lie  "
the  young  man  u  may  eee/*  And
the  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  the
young  man;  and  he  saw:  and  be-
hold, the  mountain  was  full  of  horses
and  chariots  of  fire  round  about
Elisha.  Fear  not,  said  the  Prophet,
"for  they  that  be  with  us  are  more
than  they  that  be  with  them/'

Now,  it  is  so  with  us  exactly;  All
the  fathers  who  have  gone  before,
the  Prophet  Joseph,  and  Hyrura,  the
Apostles  and  Patriarchs,  the  Elders,
High  Priests,  and  hosts  of  others,  say
nothing  of  the  lathers  of  our  gener-
ation hundreds  of  years  back,  are
all  around^us,  waiting  mid  watching
and  anxious  to  see  us  go  forward
and  triumph  ;  so  that  we  have  really
more  for  us  than  against  us,  the  fifty-
five  millions  to  the  contrary  notwith-
standing. Therefore,  we  have  no
occasion  to  let  our  hands  hang  down
from  fear,  or  our  knees  to  tremble;
not  a  bit  of  it.  On  the  contrary,
I  tell  yon,  my  brethren  and  sisters,
that  one  of  the  greatest  evils  exist-
ing in  our  midst  to-day  is  that  there
are  too  many  of  us.  You  may  think
that  is  a  hard  saying;  but  there  are
decidedly  too  many  of  us.  There
are  people  among  us  who  are  com-
mitting all  manlier  of  sin  and  trans-
gression— people  who  drink  with
the  drunken  and  spend  their  sub*
stance  with  harlots  and  in  riotous
living,  AH  t 1  tcli  should  be  severed
from  the  Chut  eh,  unless  they  repent
speedily.  The  numbers  should  be
reduced,  like  unto  the  army  of  Gid-
eon. The  Lord  told  Gideon  that
he  had  too  big  an  army,  and  it  Mas
reduced,  (in  the  manner  related  in
the  seventh  chapter  of  the  Book  of
Judges)  from  two  and  thirty  t lions-


!  ami  to  three  hundred,  which  was  all
the  Lord  wanted.  The  others  were
told  logo  home,  ami  Gideon,  by  fol-
lowing the  instructions  of  tne  Lord,
put  all  the  hosts  of  the  Midianites
ami  Amalekitcs,  who  were  said  to  be
44  like  grasshoppers  for  multitude,"
to  flight.

That  is*  just'  what  is  the  matter
with  us. There  are  too  many  w  ith

*  us  who  are  not  living  as  Latter-day
Saints  ought  to  live.  Again,  there
are  mau\  who  walk  in  other  men's
light. If  they  whose  duty  it  is  will

:  only  put  away  from  us  those  who
will  not  tcrvc  God,  we  shall  find
ourselves  strengthened  in  the  work
in  which  we  are  engf&ecl. If  we  will

'  but  do  what  is  right,  we  need  not  fear
what  our  enemies  can  do.  The  Lord
only  wants  the  honest,  the  obedient,
the  faithful,  and  He  will  "  turn  the
world  upside  down, waste  the  inhab-
itants thereof,"  and  glorify  Himself
by  His  people.

I  have  referred  to  the  instance  of
Gideon  on  purpose  to  remind  you
that  the  work  of  the  Lord  is  not
upheld  by  strength  of  numbers,  but
i  t  is  by  the  Spirit  of  God — the  spirit

j  of  obedience,  which  is  better  than
sacrifice  or  the  fat  of  ranis,  and
that  the  wisdom  of  God  is  better
than  strength  or  weapons  of  war.

!  Men  of  intelligence — politicians
from  European  countries  as  well  as
our  own — have  visited  this  country,
and  1  have  heard  them  tell  President
Young  that  we  had  a  very  strong
government  in  this  Territory.  We
all  know  that :  but  it  is  good  to  have
wise  men  visit  Utah  from  abroad
and  see  the  excellence  and  strength

1  of  its  government.  3

I  would  say  to  the  people  of  the
laud—  inasmuch  as  they  are  making
tins  bugaboo  about  polygamy — not
to  be  deceived.  The  Governor  has
told  men  upon  the  streets  that  he
'did  not  care  anything  about  poly-


m/iOP  OF  THE  PROPHETS  UPON  THE  NATION,


345


gamy;  (we  knew  very  well  tliat  lie
aid  nob  by  his  conduct  :)  but  it  was
the  power  of  the  Church  that  must
be  broken.  Must  it?  This  is  the
work  of  the  Lord,  and  there  need
not  anybody  mistake  it.  The  order
of  (iu  i\s  dm  roll  ami  kingdom  is  the

strongest  government  ever  known

-'mm

on  this  earth,  and  if  the  people  of
tins  great  nation  entertain  any  fears
of  the  consequence  or  effect*  of  such
a  government,  why,  I  ask,  don't  you
of  the  nation,  you  of  Congress,  you
of  the  Cabinet,  if  you  please,  em-
brace this  order  of  government  and
establish  it  over  the  nation  !  You
can  do  it  You  can  repent  of  your
sins,  every  one  of  you,  and  be  bap-
tized for  a  remission  of  them.  You
can  adopt  and  extend  this  strong
government  which  God  has  estab
lished  in  these  mountains,  ami  it
you  will  do  it,  God  will  establish
you  and  the  government  and  this
i ration  never  to  depart  from  before
His  face;  and  you  shall  be  male
the  means  of  helping  to  bring  ever-
lasting t iiruteousuess, — the  milieu-
ium — upon  this  land,  and  of  enuring
the  Spirit  of  God  to  rest  down  upon
all  ties  Ik  Is  it  net  worth  your
while  to  engage  in  a  thing  of  this

khidi

But,  ah  !  the  terrible  fact  exists
that  the  blood  of  the  prophets  is
upon  this  nation,  although  the
nation  has  not  shed  their  blood,  yet
a  sovereign  state  permitted  it,  and
the  nation  have  not  washed  their
hands  from  it.  This  accounts  for
the  terrible  hardness  of  heart
that  is  to  be  found  iu  this  coun-

fry- .  -

Weic  it  not  for  a  lying  pies-  and
a  corrupt  people  in  our  midst,  who
incite  ignorant  people  to  send  peti-
tions  against  the  "  Mormons,1'  to
Congress  by  the  bushel,  the  nation
could  not  be  wrought  up  to  such
frenzy,  nor  to  make  such  laws  as  the


Edmunds  law  against  us.  But  they
do  these  things  because  their  hearts
are  hard,  and  because  the  blood  of
innocence  rests  upon  them  Thin
nation  have  yet  to  rise  up  and  rid
themselves  of  this  blood,  and  place
the  responsibility  where  it  belongs,
or  they  will  have  to  suffer  as  accom-
plices after  the  fact  for  these  terrible
things  done  iu  their  midst — this  peo-
ple driven  from  city  to  city,  de-spoiled
of  their  goods  ;  driven  into  the
wilderness  to  this  country,  to  find
a  home  in  which  they  could  dwell
in  peace.  Blessed  be  God  for  en-
abling in  to  find  it  out !  We  have
had  a  home  of  peace  and  rejoicing,
and  we  have  been  blessed  in  all
things.  Have  we  need  to  day  to  be
terrified]  Do  cur  hearts  need  to
palpitate  for  feirl  We  have  had
a  United  States  army  camp  in  our
midst  already,  and  we  have  no  occa-
sion to  fear  now  ;  God  will  work
out  the  deliverance  of  His  peo-
ple.

The  Lord  never  more  thoroughly
frustrated  the  desig  i  of  an  army
than  in  the  instance  of  that  which
came  out  here,  and  never  was  there
a  time  when  He  cause  1  the  gain  of
the  Gentiles  to  be  scat: ere  I  anion  ^
His  people  more  effectually  than  He
did  with  the  goods  the  army  brought
to  this  country*

Shall  we  fear  to-day  ?  Let  us  look
back  to  Israel  and  see  their  deliver-
ance— as  related  iu  the  Bible  and
Book  of  Mormon — see  what  He
diil  in  former  times.  The  secret
of  success  is  obedience  to  the
commandments  of  God,  and  to  the
covenants  we  have  made  with
Him.  ^ ;  1

It  does  not  become  me  to  say
what  I  will  do  when  I  am  brought
to  the  judgment  seat  to  be  tried  and
sentenced.  A  man  don't  know  what
lie  will  do.  Let  us  recollect  the
instance  of  Peter,  who  walker  1  with


34G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Jesus  by  day  and  by  night.  In  the
light  of  these  things  it  does  not  do
to  boast  what  we  will  do  ;  but  I  hope
by  the  blessing  of  God  to  remain
firm  and  i  in  movable  when  these
things  look  me  in  the  face.  I  ask
God  to  give  me  grace  sufficient  that
I  may  keep  His  commandments,
honor  every  law  He  has  given,  or
shall  give,  and  stand  firm  to  the
truth  under  every  circumstance
in  life.

I  pray  that  the  blessing  of  God
may  be  upon  you.  Be  true  and
faithful  to  Gcd.  Let  the  brethren
attend  to  those  things  which  the
First  Presidency  have  pointed  out
in  their  epistle  in  regard  to  trans-
gressors, and  they  that  fear  not  God
neither  regard  His  precepts  and
laws. Keep  the  commandments  of


i  God,  and  let  us  teach  our  families
to  do  so  also,  that  we  may  grow

!  strong  in  His  righteousness  ;  then
we  shall  find  it  is  no  matter  how

;  many  there  are  against  us,  we  shall
know  that  there  are  more  for  us
than  against  u&  He  will  bring  us
all  right  up  to  the  test,  ami  will  find
out  what  is  in  every  man  and  what
every  man  is  aide  to  endure,  Our
sisters  think  that  they  had  all  the
hurt  of  this  matter,  that  the  men
had  it  nice  and  fine  ;  but  I  tell  you
the  men  will  get  their  full  share,
and  you  sisters  will  get  even  with
them,  if  you  will  only  abide  true
and  faithful.

May  the  Lord  grant  His  blessing

!  upon  each  as  we  have  need  ;  I  ask
ii  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,
Amen.


REMARKS BY PRESIDENT JOHN  TAYLOR,


Before  the  High  Council  of  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Ziont  February  20th7

1884.


[REPORTED  BY JOHN  IRVINE.)


The  case  of  the  officers  of  the
Deseret  Hospital  rersm  Dr.  Ellen
B.  Ferguson  was  heard  before  the
High  Council  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake
of  Zion,  on  the  20th  of  February,
1884,  and  a  decision  was  rendered
therein  by  President  Angus  M.


Cannon,  President  John  Taylor
on  that  occasion,  made  lengthy  re-
marks which  were  applicable  to  the
case  in  question,  and  upon  the  gen-
eral principles  of  justice.  The  re-
quest has  been  made  that  they
should  be  published,  as  they  would


REASON  OF  INVESTIGATION


347


be  of  benefit  for  the  guidance  of
other  High  Councils,  For  this  rea-
son, his  remarks  an  J  the  proceed-
ings in  the  case  are  now  published.
Mr.  P trident  and  Members  of  lh>
II hjh  Council ;

I  listened  with  a  good  deal  of
interest  to  a  trial  that  you  had  be-
fore  you,  yesterday  and  the  day  be-
fore, in  which  there  were  certain
principles  developed  that  I  thought
it  might  he  necessary  anil  advantage-
Mis  to  reflect  upon,  and  to  give  you
some  of  my  views  thereon,

I  should  have  been  pleased  to  have
done  this  had  there  been  time  when
the  High  Council  was  before  in  ses-
sion ;  but  I  thong] it  as  I  had  not
then  an  opportunity  I  would  take
the  opportunity  to-night,  this
meeting  having  been  convened  for
that  purpose.

There  are  a  great  many  principles
underlying  the  subject  that  was  pre
sen  ted  before  you,  and  acting  as  you
are  in  the  capacity  of  a  High  Coun-
cil, and  having  many  cases  to  adjust,
I  thought  it  might  be  proper  to  j
touch  upon  some  of  the  leading
principles  pertaining  to  government,
rule,  authority,  dominion,  die  con-
flict of  opinion,  the  necessity  of
bring  prepared  to  act  wisely,  pru-
dently and  intelligently,  and  to  dis-
criminate  between  right  and  wrong:  ;
so  that  upon  general  principles  we
might  be  able  to  comprehend  things
that  would  be  calculated,  in  many
instances,  to  help  m  to  avoid  a  great
deal  oi  difficulty.  I  have  been  very
much  hurried  fur  time  to  day,  or  I
would  have  liked  to  have  had  some
of  my  views  prepared.  As  it  is,  1
have  had  a  few  items  put  down  very
hastily,  and  I  will  get  Brother
George  Key  nobis  to  read  what  I
h?ve  stated  on  this  subject.

I  made  a  few  remarks  at  the  con-
elusion  of  the  investigation  you
have  had  here. I  call  it  an  investi-


gation; for  I  think  it  was  more  an

investigation  than  a  trial.

The  investigation  was  instituted
to  find  out  the  true  status  of  certain
things  whereby  injury  had  been  re-
ceived by  certain  parties,  and,  on
reflecting  further  upon  the  subject,
I  have  had  some  leading  items  put
down,  which,  as  I  have  said,  Brother
Key  nobis  will  read,  after  which  I  will
make  some  remarks.

I  speak  of  these  things  before
Brother  Reynolds  reads  my  views,
otherwise  the  attitude  that  I  take
might  seem  strange  to  you,

In  the  few  remarks  1  made  before
the  High  Council,  at  the  conclusion
of  the  investigation,  I  stated  that
I  was  pleased  to  see  the  harmony
and  unity,  the  kindly  feelings,  care
and  anxiety  that  you  manifested  to
all  parties,  both  for  and  against,
with  a  view  to  arriving  at  a  just
conclusion  in  relation  to  this  matter.
I  also  spoke  of  the  Board^of  Direct-
ors of  the  Hospital,  stating  that
they  also  had  done  as  near  right  as
they  knew  how.  Then  I  spoke  of
the  accusers  of  the  party  in  ques-
tion —  Sister  Ferguson  —  and  I
thought  that  although  there  were
some  errors  associated  with  the  ac-
tion taken,  that  they  were  quite
sincere  in  their  intention  to  correct
a  supposed  evil,  and  I  would  not
except  Sister  Ferguson  from  the
same  rule,  and  the  question  is,  with
such  a  diversity  of  opinion,  with  so
much  commotion  in  existence,  with
so  many  severe  charges  being  made,
how  it  is  possible  for  all  to  be  right,
and  yet  all  acted  upon  principles
that  they  conceived  to  be  right ;
but  which  were  in  many  respects  in-
correct. This  I  may  explain  more
fully  hereafter  ;  and  it  is  for  this
purpose  that  I  wish  to  talk  a  little
to  lay  my  views  more  fully  before  you.

Brother  George  Re)nolds  then
read  as  follows  ;


I.  The  care,  justice,  equity  ami
proper  deference  to  all  manifested
by  t lie  High  Council.

J  L  The  care  and  zeal  manifested
by  the  Directors,  the  President  ami
associates  in  the  interests  of  the
Institution- -the Deseret  Hospital

III.  The  zeal,  energy  and  compe-
te ncy  of  the  resident  surgeon,  as
vouched  for  by  the  testimony  of  other
eminent  physicians.

IV,  The  diligence  and  zeal  man-
ifested by  the  matron  and  the  assist-
ants. '  •

Whence  then  originates  this  diffi-
culty ;  these  hard  feeling*,  sayings
ami  doings,  this  bitterness,  acrimony
and  ostracism?

These  arise  partly  from  misunder-
standing, partly  from  ignorance,  and
partly  from  a  misconception  of  law,
order,  precedence  and  jurisdiction,
with  piobablv  the  best  possible  mo-
tives. It  will  he  found  on  a  careful
examination  of  this  subject  I  hat
theie  is  a  great  principle  involved
that  affects  in  some  respects  all  in-
stitutions, associations  and  na-
tions.

Among  the  nations  of  the  earth
there  are  various  forms  of  govern-
ment. There  are  what  are  called
absolute  monarchies  —  such  as
Russia,  Turkey,  China,  Persia,
Morocco  and  others  ;  then  there
are  limited  monarchies,  such  as
England,  Denmark,  Sweden,  Italy,
Greece,  Portugal  and  others  ;  these
are  governments  which  are  called
representative,  having  a  monarchy,
but  that  monarchy  partially  under
the  power  of  the  representative  of
the  people.  There  is  another  spe-
cies of  government  which  is  called
oligarchical,  which  is  under  the  di-
rection of  notables,  who  manipu-
late the  affairs  of  the  country  for
the  benefit  of  the  people.  Then
there  is  what  is  called  the  re-
publican form  of  government,  such


as  the  United  Slates,  Fiance,  Swit*
zerlaud,  Mexico,  and  the  South
American  Republics  and  others.
These  are  supposed  to  be  governed
by  the  people?  and  are  sai  l  to  bo
li  governments  of  the  people,  for  the
people  and  by  the  people,"  their
general  motto  being  lrnx  populi,  vox
Jh'i,  or  the  voice  of  the  people  is
the  voice  of  God.  These  govern-
ments assume  different  phases  accord*
ing  to  the  nature  of  the  govern-
ment, varying  from  absolute  despot-
ism wherein  the  will  of  one  man
governs  the  whole,  to  that  ot  the
freest  and  fullest  and  most  unre-
stricted will  of  the  people  ;  ami  to
prevent  usurpations  in  the  republi-
can 'forms  of  government,  as  well
as  in  some  of  the  linrite  1  monarchies,
constitutions  are  introduced  and
subscribed  to,  which  are  an  agree-
ment or  compact  between  the  rulers
and  the  people,  or  the  governors  ami
the  governed,  and  such  governments
whether  monarchical  or  republican
arc  called  constitutional  go  vet  u-
uicnts*  These  constitutions  pre-
scribe the  powers  and  authority  of
the  various  officers  in  the  govern-
ment, and  how  ami  in  what  manner
the  several  officers  of  the  govern-
ment shall  be  selected,  elected  and
qualified.  In  our  government,
whether  in  a  National,  State,  or
Territorial  form,  all  officers,  of  every
grade,  are  requested  to  take  a  solemn
oath  to  sustain  and  maintain  the
constitution  of  the  United  States,
and  of  the  State,  or  if  a  Territory,
the  organic  act  of  the  Territory  as
the  case  may  be.  If  these  tilings
are  not  a  fiction  all  these  officers  and
authorities  throughout  the  land  in
every  department  of  National,  State
or  Territorial  government,  are  as
much  bound  by  the;r  obligations
and  oaths  as  the  people  are  bound
to  be  subject  to  all  constitutional
laws,  and  the  people  are  not  one


VAKIUUS  BRANCHES  OF  GOVERNMENT.


whit  more  bound  to  the  observance
of  the  law  than  these  men  are
bound  to  the  observance  of  the
sacred  ami  solemn  covenants  which
they  have  entered  into.  And  if  the
people  have  given  up  to  governor*,
legislatures,  the  judiciary  and  to  the
officers  of  the  law  certain  powers,
rights  ami  privileges,  this  authority
coming  of  or  from  the  people,  it
is  expected  that  they  shall  act  for
and  in  the  interests  of  the  people  ;
an  !  furthermore,  that  while  they
possess  those  rights  ceded  to  them
by  the  people,  whatever  is  not  thus
ceiled  and  placed  in  the  hands  of
their  rulers  is  emphatically  stated  to
be  reserve-1  to  the  several  States  or
to  the  people.

There  are  again  other  branches  of
government  among  tlie  several  na-
tions, or  States  in  the  nations,  as
well  as  in  this  nation  ;  there  is  mar-
tial law  and  civil  law  ;  also  the
governments  of  cities  acting  under
the  directions  of  the  authorities  or
legislators  of  the  nations  or  of  this
nation  ;  to  whom  certain  rights,
immunities  and  privileges  are  given
in  tlie  shape  of  municipal  regulations
or  of  charters.  But  it  must  be  un-
derstood here  in  matters  pertaining
to  our  government,  that  no  charters
or  grants  of  any  kind  can  be  given
by  any -parlies,  in  excess  of  the
rights  which  they  themselves  pos-
sess, and  that  tlie  same  obligations
which  vest  in  regard  to  constitution-
al  lights  ami  guarantees  must  be
observed  in  ail  those  municipal  regu-
lations by  the  recipients  as
of  the grantees  of  those  chart-


ers.

These  rights  and  privileges  in  our
government  are  formulated  upon  the
idea  that  our  government  is  "of
the  people,  by  the  people  and  for
the  people,"  There  are  other  insti-
tutions which  receive  more  or  les^
the  patronage  and  sustenance  of  the
general,  the  State,  and  Territorial


I  governments,  such  as  educational
1  institutions,  hospitals,  infirmaries,
asylums,  railroads,  canals,  steam
boat  lines,  etc,  all  of  which  are
more  or  less  sanctioned  by  law,  and
are  more  or  less  of  a  quasi  public
character.  These  institutions  gen-
erally have  usages  of  t heir  own,  and
operate  under  certain  stipulations
specified  in  charters  granted  to
them,  each  having  their  own  regu-
lations and  by-laws,  as  their  direct-
ors,  boards  of  management,  or
other  officers  may  dictate.  These
are  all  subject  to  the  common  lawa
of  nations  and  the  usages  of  the
people.  Then  there  are  other  laws,
there  are  laws  that  pertain  to  the
physical  world  in  which  we  live,  and
those  that  govern  the  sun,  the  moon,
and  the  countless  stars  that  shine
in  the  dome  of  heaven*  With  all
these  man  has  nothing  to  do.  He
never  has  been  and  in  the  nature  of
things  never  can  be  able  to  change
what  are  called  the  laws  of  nature.
If  any  congress,  parliament,  or  con-
vocation was  to  pass  a  law  changing
the  period  of  the  earth's  revolution,
or  the  phases  of  tlie  moon,  or  the
rising  or  selling  of  the  sun,  or  if  all
the  congresses,  parliaments,  or  legis-
lative bodies  in  the  world  were  to
unite  to  pass  such  a  law,  it  would
be  of  none  effect,  or  utterly  useless,
for  the  simple  reason  that  these  laws
are  entirely  independent  of  man  s
action  and  outside  of  his  control.
So  with  the  laws  governing  man's
physical  being  or  that  of  the  -brute,
or  those  natural  to  the  animal,  vege-
table and  mineral  kingdoms,  all
these  arc  irrevocably  fixed  and  un-
changeable so  far  as  man  is  con-
cerned. All  beings,  a!l  things,
from  the  Ureal  Creator  to  tlie
minutest  form  of  life  are  governed
by  the  law  of  their  existence.  The
laws  by  which  all  created  things  fill
the  measure  of  their  existence  wece
placed  there  by  a  superior  power  to


350


JOURNAL  01  DISCO C USES


that  of  man,  and  he  is  impotent  to
change  or  annul  them.  All  these
are  called  natural  laws.  Then  there
are  celestial  laws,  adapted  and
suited  to  celestial  beings;  terrestrial
laws  adapted  to  things  of  the  earth,
and  other  lower  laws  called  teles  tial.
As  we  are  taught  in  the  Doctrine
and  Covenants;  in  all  the  universe
there  is  no  space  where  there  is  no
kingdom,  and  where  there  is  no  king-
dom, there  is  no  law  ;  and  all  tilings
that  are  governed  by  law  are  pre-
served by  law,  and  sanctioned  by
law  ;  also  even  the  law  or  laws  of
the  state  of  existence  to  which  they
belong,  be  it  higher  or  lower,  much
or  less.

There  are  again  celestial  lawrs  as
before  referred  to,  an* I  terrestrial
laws,  and  the  question  arises,  what
is  the  meaning  of  a  celestial  law  ;
and  what  again  is  the  meaning  of  a
terrestrial  law;  a  celestial  law  per-
tains to  the  law  of  heaven  :  and  is  a
principle  by  which  the  intelligences
in  the  celestial  world  are  governed,
TheGospel  in  its  fulness  places  those
who  obey  it,  under  its  influences,
while  at  the  same  time  it  does  not
relieve  them  from  other  obligations
of  a  terrestrial  nature.  It  is  said
in  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  that
he  that  keepetli  the  laws  of  God,
hath  no  need  to  break  the  laws  i
of  the  land.  It  is  further  explained
in  section  98,  what  is  meant  in  rela-
tion to  this.  That  all  laws  which  are
constitutional  must  be  obeyed,  as

follows ;

"And  now,  verily  I  say  unto  you
concerning  the  laws  of  the  land,  it
is  my  will  that  my  people  should  ob-
serve to  do  all  things  whatsoever  I
command  them.

"And  that  the  law  of  the  land
which  is  constitutional,  supporting
that  principle  of  freedom  in  main-
taining rights  and  privileges,  be


longs  to  all  mankind,  and  is  justifi-
able before  me  ;

i  **Therefore  I  the  Lord  justify  you
and  your  brethren  of  the  Church  in
befriending  that  law  which  is  the
!  constitutional  law  of  the  land.  And
as  pertaining  to  laws  of  man,  whatso-
ever is  more  or  less  than  these
comet  li  of  evil."

That  is  taking  this  nation  as  an
example,  all  laws  that  are  proper
and  correct,  ami  all  obligations
entered  into  which  are  not  violative
of  the  constitution  should  be  kept
inviolate.  But  if  they  arn  violative
of  the  constitution,  then  the  com-
pact between  the  rulers  and  the  ruled
is  broken  and  the  obligation  ceases
to  be  binding.  Just  as  a  person
agreeing  to  purchase  anything  and
to  pay  a  certain  amount  for  it,  if  he
receives  the  article  bargained  for,
and  does  not  pay  its  price,  he  violates
his  contract;  but  if  he  dues  nut
receive  the  article  he  is  not  required
to  pay  for  it.  Again  we  ask,  what  is
this  celestial  law?  The  celestial
law  above  referred  tu  is  absolute
submission  and  obedience  to  the  law
of  God.  It  is  exemplified  in  the
words  of  Jesus,  who,  when  He  came
to  introduce  the  Gospel  said,  "I
came  not  to  do  my  will  but  the  will
of  the  Father  that  sent  me  ;TI  and
His  mission  was  to  do  the  will
of  the  Father  who  sent  him,  or  to
fulfill  a  celestial  law.  And  when
His  disciples  asked  Him  to  teach
them  how  to  pray,  He  said,  "When
ye  piay,  say:  Our  Father,  who  art
in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy  name,
thy  kingdom c  come,  thy  will  be
done  on  earth  as  it  is  dune  in  hea-
ven," This  it  would  seem  was  the
celestial  law,  or  the  law  of  the  Gospel.

Thy  kingdom  come.  AY  hat  king-
dom ?  The  kingdom  of  God,  or  the
government  of  God,  or  the  rule  and
dominion  of  God,  the  will  of  God —
thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is


AUTHORITY  OF  OFFICERS,


351


in  heaven.  This  seems  to  be  the
grand  leading  feature  of  that  celes-
tial law.  Connected  with  this  are
all  the  blessings,  rights,  privileges,
immunities,  promises  of  exaltations,
promises  of  blessings  in  this  world,
and  of  exaltations,  thrones  and
powers  in  the  eternal  worlds  ;  being
heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with
Jesus  Christ.  While  such  persons
do  not  neglect  the  lesser  duties  as-
sociated with  the  responsibilities  of
life,  and  do  not  violate  any  correct
principle  or  law,  they  still  feel  a
responsibility  resting  upon  them  to
yield  obedience  to  the  mandates  of
Jehovah  ;  and  thus  as  good  citizens,
loyal  and  patriotic  to  the  country
and  its  institutions,  fulfilling  all
just  and  equitable  requirements,
whether  civil  or  political  They
have  at  the  same  time  the  same
inalienable  right  as  men,  to  worship
their  Creator,  and  yield  an  obedience
to  His  laws,  without  infringing  in
any  wise  on  the  rights  and  privileges
of  others,  and  Unit  right  is  guaran-
teed to  them  also  by  the  constitu-
tion of  the  United  States,

I  have  before  spoken  of  certain
associations,  such  as  educational
establishments,  co-operative  institu-
tions, hospitals,  ami  other  organiza-
tions, which  legislatures,  private
bodies  of  men,  or  individuals  may
establish.  These  institutions  must
be  governed  by  their  constitutions
and  by  daws  as  shall  be  agreed
upon  among  themselves.  And  any
parties  entering  into  those  compacts,
take  upon  themselves  the  responsi-
bilities of  the  conditions  associated
t here wi th.  But  as  in  National  or
State  affairs,  these  duties  and
responsibilities  are  often  very  irn per-
fectly understood ;  and  hence  in
consequence  of  the  weakness  and
imperfections  of  men,  many  misun-
derstandings and  difficulties  are
liable  to  occur.


The  case  that  you  have  had  here
before  the  High  Council  is  one  of
these  cases,

Thequestiou  is,  how  far  shall  rule,
dominion,  authority  and  power  be
used,  and  how  far  shall  mortal  sua-
sion, individual  and  special  rights,
and  a  judicious  and  intelligent
policy  obtain.

It  is  rather  a  peculiar  case  and
requires  an  understanding  of  the
position  occupied  by  the  various
parties.  It  will  be  observed  that
there  are  two  usages  or  laws  in  exist-
ence— one  of  these  would  be  the  gen-
eral law,  regulating  an  institution
of  that  kind,  which  would  be  ap-
plicable to  a  university,  a  co-opera*
tive  institution,  a  shoe  establish-
meu,  such  as  we  have,  or  any  other
well  regulated  institution.  In  our
co-operative  institution  here  in  the
city,  there  is  a  President  and  Board
of  Directors ;  they  appoint  the
Superintendent.  He  has  the  charge
of  the  buying,  selling,  engaging,
or  dismissing  men,  making  contracts,
and  generally  supervising  and  man-
ipulating all  the  affairs  of  the  institu-
tion. The  Directors  would  be
empowered  to  remove  him(  if
thought  advisable.  In  the  University
the  Board  of  Regency  stands  in  the
place  of  the  Directors,  and  they
appoint  Dr.  Park  as  President,  and
he  has  general  control  of  the  studies
and  the  internal  management  of  its
affairs,  in  like  manner,  Mrs,  Fer-
guson held  the  position  of  resident
surgeon,  and  is  supposed  to  manip-
ulate the  affairs  of  her  department
in  the  hospital  subject  to  the  hospi-
tal physicians  and  the  directory.
Of  course  Sisters  Van  Schoonhoven
and  Beck  would  be  under  her  direc-
tion us  they  belong  to  the  medical
department ;  while  Sister  McLean,
being  matron,  would  have  charge
and  control  of  the  domestic  arrange-
ments. It  does  not  appear  that  any


JOURNAL  OF  IiJSUUlKSKH


one  of  them  was  direlect  in  her  sev-
eral duties;  but  that  a  mminder-
8  tan  ding  had  arisen  between  Dr.
Ferguson  and  these  officers  of  the
hospital ?  she  being  charged  with
being  austere  and  dictatorial  in  her
intercourse  with  I  hem,  and  she  on
the  other  hand  charges  them  with
insubordination  and  plotting  against
her.  Bitter  feelings  and  acrimonious
remarks  passed  between  them,  crim-
ination and  recrimination!  until  it
culminated  in  those  three  ladies
drawing  upspecific  charges  of  a  most
serious  character  against  the  resi-
dent  surgeon.  These  charges,  it
would  seem,  were  credited  by  the
directory  and  she  was  requested  to
resign.  It  is  evident  that  the  direct-
ors did  this  sincerely  for  the  benefit
of  the  institution  ;  and  to  prevent  a
person  whom  they  considered  incom-
petent, as  an  opium  eater,  a  drn nkard
and  a  thief,  (for these  were  the  charge.*
made  according  to  their  ideas)
to  officiate  any  longer  in  that  insti-
tution,

But  here  arises  another  phase  of
the  matter  which  is  this  ;  that  while
they  had  authority  to  dismiss  her
from  the  institution  on  these  alleged
charges,  they  had  no  right  to  malign
her  private  character  and  reputation
which  it  does  not  appear  that  they
desired  to  do,  but  to  avoid,  as  far
as  possible.  Yet  tlie.se  things  hav-
ing taken  place,  and  these  allega-
tions having  been  made  on  paper,
and  she  having  been  dismissed  from
the  hospital,  they  leaked  out  with-
out her  having  any  opportunity  to
defend  herself  against  these  state-
ments, and  her  reputation  has  been
seriously  injured ;  hence  comes  in
another  law — the  law  of  the  Gospel,
above  referred  to,  or  under  other
circumstances,  the  celestial  law,  or
what  is  sometimes  substituted  for  it
here,  the  law  of  equity.

President  Taylor  resumed  :  There


are  very  many  nice  points  of  tli>eri ru-
ination associated  with  a  subject  of
this  kind.  When  we  talk  of  law
it  is  a  very  comprehensive  subject,
and  enters  into  all  the  ramifications
of  human  life,  and,  as  has  been  re-
marked, through  all  nations.  Gen-
erally among  the  governments  of
the  world — and  also  among  many  of
the  institutions  referred  to,  there  is
a  kind  uf  neutral  ground,  a  sort  of
neutral  zone,  something  similar  to
that  which  sometimes  exists  between
one  State  and  another  in  order  to
prevent  collision  and  difficulty,  and
it  is  upon  this  ground  that  a  great
many  troubles  and  difficulties  fre-
quently exist  0:1  various  mat-
ters. The  people  on  their  pari:  oc-
casionally claim  things  that  they
have  no  right  to  claim,  and  those
wdio  govern  sometimes  go  beyond
the  bounds  allotted  to  them.  And
hence  arises  difficulty  and  trouble.
Courts  are  appointed  generally  for

adjudication  of  these  matters,  an  1

sometimes  it  is  very  difficult  for  these
courts  to  decide  correctly,  justly  and
equitably  the  cases  that  come  before
them,  Among  the  nations  they  are
very  frequently  submitted  to  what
is  termed  the  £i  arbitrament  of
the  sword."  That,  however,  is  a
very  poor  thing  when  put  into  the
scales  of  justice.  I  have  heard  it
said,  for  instance,  when  certain
questions  have  arisen  in  the  United
States — that  is,  in  regard  to  States
rights  and  in  reirard  to  the  rights
of  the  people,  and  in  regard  to  how
far  they  should  be  sustained  in  their
privileges,  rights,  etc.  I  have  heard
some  people  very  flippantly  say,
"  Oh,  that  has  been  decided  by  the
sword."  A  very  singular  piece  of
justice  is  a  sword  with  which  to  ad-
minister one's  social,  political,  or
national  affairs.  When  we  come
to  put  it  in  the  balance  of  the  god-
dess of  justice—  who  is  supposed  to


NATURE  OF  ORGANIZATION.


353


the  blind  and  to  hold  the  scales
evenly — it  will  not  stand  the  test.
Hence  when  people  make  this  re-
mark it  shows  that  they  are  very
ignorant  of  the  principles  of  juris-
prudence, of  the  rights  of  man,
of  the  obligations  that  the  nation
sustains  to  its  people,  or  the  people
to  the  nation.

But  what  I  wanted  particularly
to  arrive  at  are  the  principles  asso-
ciate! I  with  this  case  that  has  come
up  before  you,  and  1  will  try  and
show  you  why  and  how  these  difficul-
ties have  occurred  between  these
parties.

Sister  Ferguson — who  according
to  the  evidence  we  have  had,  and
from  questions  presented,  and  re-
marks made — evidently  is  a  lady  of
intelligence  and  very  well  acquainted
with  medical  affairs,  and  as  such  she
was  appointed  House  Surgeon  of  the
Deseret  Hospital  From  this  posi-
tion she  was  removed.  And  here
comes  in  a  principle  that  I  wish  to

speak  upon.

In  this  city  we  have  a  co-opera-
tive institution,  I  refer  to  it  be-
cause it  is  an  institution  with
which  we  are  all  familiar.  I  have
already  referred,  in  what  has  been
read,  to  the  nature  of  its  organiza-
tion, ami  the  kind  of  government
by  which  it  is  carried  on*  There
are  quite  a  nurnher  of  employees  in
the  institution — some  150  or  200.
There  is  a  Board  of  Directors,  and
there  is  a  presi  dent  and  a  superintend  -
ent.  The  superintendent  seems
to  be  the  man  upon  whom  rests  the
greatest  responsibility,  and  he  is
responsible  to  the  directors  for  all
his  acts.  As  stated  already,  he
makes  the  purchases  or  orders  them
made  j  he  disposes  of  the  goods,  or
orders  them  disposed  of.  He
makes  arrangements  for  all  its
business  transactions,  and  he  reports
to  the  directors,  monthly,  the  status

No.  2*.


of  the  institution.  In  his  hands
is  placed  the  power  to  manipulate
and  regulate  the  affairs  thereof.
If  some  pel  son  in  that  institution
— he  may  be  a  good  man — is  incom-
petent, he  uses  his  discretion  in
removing  that  man.  He  requires
men  that  are  acquainted  with  the
business  that  he  is  associated  with  :
and  although  this  may  be  a  very
good  man,  the  superintendent  may
think  it  proper,  in  the  interests  of
the  institution  to  have  him  removed.
He  uses  his  authority  and  has  him
removed  because  of  his  incompe-
tency. The  man  who  is  dismissed
may  feel  aggrieved.  He  may  think
he  is  competent :  and  it  is  difficult
in  all  such  circumstances  to  meet
the  wishes  and  views  of  all  these
people.  Hence  the  necessity  of  a
wise  discretion.  "But,"  says  the
man,  "  I  am  a  good  Latter-day
Saint "  "Very  well,  that  may  be  ;
but,  then,  because  you  are  a  good
Latter-day  Saint,  you  may  not  be
a  good  blacksmith,  a  good  carpenter,
or  a  good  shoemaker,  or  you  may
not  be — to  come  to  their  terms  —a
good  salesman,  one  who  compre-
hends the  value  of  goods  and  the
wants  and  interests  of  the  busi-
ness. "

Now,  a  great  many  questions  arise
out  of  these  things,  and  how  far  they
shall  go  and  how  far  they  shall  not,
On  the  other  hand  there  may  be  a
man  who  is  very  competent.  I
could  refer  to  some  of  these  and  yet
they  j? re  not  good  men.  "  Well,"
says  one,  "  we  don't  want  such  per-
sons as  these  in  our  institution.  Al-
though they  are  competent  men  and
well  acquainted  with  the  business,  I
am  afraid  their  example  and  influ-
ence would  be  pernicious,  and  we
don't  want  them ;  and  we  think
we  would  have  a  right  to  act  in
such  a  case."  So  they  would  think
anywhere.  The  same  thing  would

Vol  XXVI.


apply  to  the  institution  I  have  men-
tioned

Then  another  question  arises
associated  wslh  these  matters,  and
it  has  come  up  before  you  here.  We
have  a  hospital.  There  is  an  Exec-
utive Board,  which  amounts  to  the
same  thing  as  the  Board  of  Directors
in  the  other  institution.  Then  there
is  a  resident  surgeon  or  phjsician,
and  it  becomes  her  duty  to  attend
to  certain  rules  and  principles  that
are  laid  down  to  use  medical  talent
and  ability  for  the  benefit  of  the  pa-
tients and  the  hospital, and  lo  manip-
ulate certain  things  committed  to
her  charge.  I  suppose  they  have
some  rules  associated  with  these
ina Iters,  although  I  cannot  state
them  definitely.  Sister  Ferguson,
it  would  seem,  got  up  a  set  of  rules.
They  might  be  very  good  ;  1  do  not
know,  but  it  would  seem  they  were
not  adopted  by  the  Board,  and  it
would  also  seem  that  the  Board
held  the  power  in  its  own  hands  to
manipulate  these  affairs.  So  that,
although  the  rules  drawn  up  by
Sister  Ferguson  might  have  been
very  good  and  very  advantageous
if  adopted,  it  appears  they  were
not.

Let  me  refer  to  another  thing.
Sister  Ferguson  received  her  medical
education  in  some  medical  college  in
the  east All  such  institutions,  it
was stated yesterday, both  in
England  and  this  country  are  gov-
erned by  certain  rules  and  the  gen-
eral usage  is  that  the  resident  phy-  I
sician  takes  charge  of  and  manip-
ulates the  general  affairs  of  the  in-
stitution j  and  what  are  termed  by
some  the  inferior  officers — I  merely  |
make  use  of  that  term  for  want  of  a
better  one—  are  under  the  direction  [
of  the  resident  physician  or  sur-  !
geon  as  the  case may  be.  This
was  Sister  Ferguson's  experience.
Those  acting  in  one  department  had  1


no  right  to  interfere  with  the  privil*
eges  belonging  to  others.  If  these
things  had  been  specifically  defined
by  the  Board  in  tins  Hospital,  and
each  had  known  tier  proper  duties,
ami  each  fulfilled  them,  difficulty
might  have  been  averted  ;  although
according  to  the  evidence  we  had.
all  were  very  diligent  and  sincere  in
ca  rry  i  ng  o  u  6,  t he  i  r  se  veral  d  u  ties.  I  f
a  set  of  rules  had  been  adopted  and
lived  up  to,  a  great  amount  of  diffi-
culty arising  out  of  this  subject
would  have  been  avoided  between
the  parties,  and  winch  has  more  or
less  involved  you  and  I  and  others,
and  caused  us  to  look  into  these
matters-  Well,  was  there  anything
wrong  in  that?  No.  At  the  college
in  which  Sister  Ferguson  obtained
her  medical  knowledge — and  a  dip-
loma as  a  mark  of  that  knowledge
or  education — she  also  obtained  a
knowlege  of  the  rules  and  usages  of
that  kind  of  an  institution  ;  conse-
quently it  became  almost  p-irfc  of
her  system.  Is  not  that  so,  Doctor?
That  is  the  way  I  understand  it
Well,  now,  Sister  Ferguson  comes
here  and  she  gets  among  a  lot  of  us
novices.  At  least  I  should  call  my-
self a  novice  ;  for  I  have  never  been
in  any  of  these  establishments;  I
have  never  attended  medical  lectures,
etc.,  consequently  I  should  consider
myself  a  novice  in  these  things.
At  the  same  time,  independent  of
this,  there  is  a  principle  of  rule  and
propriety  that  ought  to  exist  every-
where, that  does  exist  among  all
the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  that
does  exist  among  all  those  various
institutions  of  which  I  have  spoken.
But  fur  want  of  a  better  knowledge
of  these  things,  I  am  not  surprised
if,  with  her  superior  knowledge,  Sis-
ter Ferguson  did  assume  a  dictatorial
air  and  said,  when  interfered  with,
(C  I  do  not  know  that  that  is  any  of
your  business.  I  think  that  is  mine/1


bELF  ASSUMED  AUTHORITY*


355


And  then,  again,  those  other  sisters
have  got  their  feelings  on  the  same
question,  ami  no  law  being  laid  down
in  relation  to  those  matters,  they
carry  out  their  ideas  according  to
their  theories,  and  they  do  not  think
it  is  proper  for  any  kind  of  airs  to
be  put  oo  by  anybody  whether  right-
fully or  assumed.  They  do  not  com-
prehend that,  and  neither  do  we,
generally,  in  our  republican  institu-
tions. It  is  a  good  deal  the  same
in  our  Church  affairs.  We  are  apt
to  think  that  "Jack  is  as  good  as
his  master/'  and  a  little  better.
That  is  about  the  feeling  that  exists.
And  if  people  should  sometimes  see
their  authority  interfere  i  with,  it
creatt-8  feel  in  us  of  irritation.  To
a  person  accustomed  to  be  governed
by  correct  rules,  and  to  see  things
carried  out  intelligently,  it  is  pain-
ful to  their  feelings  to  see  them  car-
ried out  otherwise;  they  feel  as
though  something  was  wrong  and
wanted  putting  right.

I  will  relate  a  little  circumstance
of  that  kind  ;  for  we  have  all  kinds
of  things  among  us  Mormons.  We
had  a  war  here  a  while  ago.  Brother
Wells  here  was  appointed  a  Lieut.
General,  and  then  myself  and  George
A".  Smith  were  appointed  his  coun-
selors— (laugh  tei),  if  any  body  knows
what  that  is  in  a  military  capacity.
I  never  was  able  to  Hud  out.  Well,
we  went  out  and  did  the  best  we
could,  and  1  must  say  that  General
Wells  displayed  a  good  deal  of
knowledge,  tact,  vim,  life  and  fidel-
ity, ami  we  tried  to  step  up  to  him
as  near  as  we  could — being  his  coun-
selors, (laughter.)  There  was  a
little  difficulty  arose  about  Brother
Nathaniel  Jones — or  Colonel  Jones
— a  very  excellent,  good  man,  and
a  thorough  disciplinarian  ;  and  he
had  not  been  rubbing  his  back
against  that  medical  college  wall  and
become  familiar  with  all  its  usages,


but  he  had  been  in  the  Nauvoo
legion  ami  an  officer  in  the  Mormon
Battalion,  and  there  he  had  got  a
smattering  of  military  tactics,  mil-
tary  ideas,  military  rule  and  author-
ity, and  when  he  saw  all  kinds  of
curious  doings  among  the  boys —
as  they  called  themselves — who  were
not  strictly  under  military  rule,  etc.,
he  wanted  to  straighten  them  out.
But  they,  like  the  associates  of
Sister  Ferguson,  felt  that  "  Jack
was  as  good  as  his  master,"  They
didn't  want  too  much  military  rule  ;
they  wanted. a  great  amount  of  lati-
tude, that  they  might  be  able  to
carry  out  their  ideas  and  enjoy  them-
selves and  kick  up  their  heels  and
feel  like  a  lot  of  wild  colts.  Well,
General  Wells  wanted  me  to  go
down,  as  his  counselor,  and  see  if
the  difficulty  could  not  be  put  right.
I  was  not  even  a  corporal ;  I  don't
know  what  office  I  did  hold  ;  but  he
wanted  me  to  go  down  and  adjust
matters.  So  I  went.  I  examined
into  things  generally  ;  talked  with
the  officers,  and  mixed  up  with  the
men,  and  found  out  how  things  were
exactly.  There  were  Captains,  and
Colonels,  and  Generals,  and  all
kinds  of  big  men  there,  anil  they
each  had  men  in  command ;  but
Colonel  Jones,  whenever  he  saw  any-
thing wrong  anywhere,  wanted  to  go
to  work  himself  and  put  it  right.  I
soon  found  out  the  feeling  that  was
against  him.  The  men  considered
him  too  straight  laced,  and  as  they
expressed  it,  "  had  too  many
epaulets  on  his  shoulders,"  because
they  saw  in  him  a  disposition  to
exercise  authority,  and  the  officers
of  the  several  companies  did  not  ob-
ject to  that  because  it  relieved  them
from  responsibility.  4*  Now,  Brother
Jone*"  (said  I)  I  called  him  brother;
I  hail  not  got  the  length  of  calling
him  colonel,  I  called  him  plain
Brother  Jones— 4;  let  me  tell  you


356


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


bow  to  fix  these  mat  t  ars.  Such
and  such  a  man  is  a  captain,  is  he
not  f  *4  Yes."  (£  Another,  there,
is  a  lieutenant  T  Yes."  "And
another  is  major  V  f  1  Yes/1  u  And
you  are  in  command  here  V  "Yes."
"Well,  now,  instead  of  going  to  work
to  regulate  all  these  matters  your*
self,  why  do  you  not  detail  lieutenant
so  and  so,  captain  so  ami  so,  and  ma-
jor so  and  so,  to  look  after  the  men
who  are  acting  improperly?1  He
thought  the  advice  was  good,  and
followed  it,  and  order  and  harmony
were  restored.

Now,  this  would  apply  to  Sister
Ferguson.  There  was  nothing  par-
ticularly wrong  about  her;  there
was  nothing  particularly  wrong
with  the  Board  ;  the  directors
did  not  wish  to  harm  Sister  Fer-
guson ;  they  were  simply  seek-
ing  to  remedy  what  they  thought
was  an  evil

Now  we  come  to  another  principle
which  is  this  :  if  in  an  institution
like  that,  without  any  regulations
pertaining  to  these  matters,  there
was  any  kind  of — shall  we  call  it
arbitrary  feeling  ?  I  do  not  know
that  much  ot  that  feeling  was  dis-
played. There  may  have  been  a
little  of  it ;  I  do  not  know  ;  but
when  we  come  down  to  the  Gospel,
which  we  profess  to  be  governed  by,
it  places  us  in  another  position.  This
Hospital  was  started,  I  believe,  as
an  institution  for  the  benefit  of  the
members  of  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints.  These
sisiers,  I  suppose,  were  selected
because  they  were  considered  com-
petent, and  then,  on  the  other  hand,
because  they  were  considered  good
Latter-day  Saints.  Now,  I  believe
that  about  them,  and  they  desired
to  do  right,  and  then  sister  Ferguson
desired  to  do  right  too.  But  then
there  were  these  discrepencies  exhib-
ited. But  when  we  come  down  to  the


law  of  the  Gospel,  that  places  us  alto-
gether in  another  position.  And  tire
law  of  the  Gospel  and  the  law  of  the
needs  of  the  world  do  not  always
altogether  harmonize.  Sometimes
we  require  to  exercise  a  good  deal
of  forbearance,  a  good  deal  of  kind-
ness, and  a  good  deal  of  that  kind
of  feeling  expressed  by  the  poet  in
speaking  of  his  wife  :

"  Be  to  her  faults*  a  little  blind,
;  Be  to  her  virtues  very  kind."

I  have  had  a  good  deal  of  experi-
ence of  this  nature.  I  have  to  meet
with  all  kinds  of  men  ami  all  kinds
jj  of  women.  We  are  all  surrounded
with  a  good  many  infirmities,  and  I
feel  as  the  old  lady  said,  "we  are  all
poor,  miserable,  independent  sin-
ners." We  all  make  egregious  mis-
takes sometimes  when  we  think
we  are  acting  for  the  very  best
There  is  nothing  new  about  that.
The  same  thing  exists  in  the  nations.
The  same  thing  exists  among  the
leading  men  of  this  government
and  in  other  governments.

Let  me  here  refer  you  to  a  case
tli at  took  place  in  New  Orleans*
General  Jackson  when  he  was  in
command  had  some  difficulty  with
the  mayor  of  that  city.  To  make
defensive  works  he  called  for  cotton.
One  man,  1  think  objected, and  said,
11  General,  that  is  my  cotton,  ami  I
don't  choose  that  you  shall  use  it  in
this  public  way."  "Well,"  said  the
General,  *'  if  it  is  yours  why  don't
you  take  your  gun  ami  help  defend
it  T'  He  ordered  the  cotton  bales
to  be  rolled  up,  and  it  was  necessary,
as  he  thought,  under  the  necessities
of  the  case,  that  military  authority
should  be  obeyed  ;  in  other  words,
that  martial  law  should  be  exercised.
He  got  the  cotton.  He  drove  back
tiie  British.  He  accomplished  his
object  And  after  he  was  done  he
was  fined,  I  believe,  §1,000  for  in-
terfering with  the  civil  authorities,


VIOLATION  OF  RULES


357


and  resisting  the  writ  of  habeas
corpus.  He  thought  he  had  a  right
to  do  what  he  did,  avid  he  assumed
the  responsibility.  But  they  Suet)
hira  for  it,  and  that  fine  stood  against
him  until  pretty  near  his  death.  He
had  transgressed  the  civil  taws  of
the  land,  and  if  he  could  do  that
with  impunity,  it  was  considered
that  others  could  do  the  same,  ami
they  did  not  want  to  set  sac!i  a  bad
example.  In  this  we  see  a  conflict
between  military  a  id  civil  authority.
The  mayor  thought  he  was  doing  hi*
duty;  the  general  thought  he  was
doing  his  ;  but  when  it  was  brought
before  the  courts  the  general  was  fined.
He  paid  the  fine,  bur.  it  was  remitted
some  little  time  before  his  death.

Then  there  is  a  case  of  a  similar
nature  right  before  this  nation  at
the  present  tima,  I  refer  to  the
case  of  Fitz  John  Porter.  I  am
not  competent  to  enter  into  the  full
details  of  it.  However,  suffix  it
to  say,  that  his  superior  officer,
General  Pope,  had  ordered  him  to
make  a  certain  movement,  and,  it  is
alleged,  he  disobeyed  the  order,
thinking  that  if  he  did  obey  the
result  would  be  injurious.  In  this
he  committed  a  breach  of  military
etiquette  and  military  law.  They
had  the  law  there — not  like  tins
hospital — ami  he  violated  it,  For
this  he  was  censured,

I  merely  want  to  show  that  there
is  nothing  in  these  kinds  of  misun-
derstanding tor  they  exist  every-
where and  have  existed  from  time
immemorial.  And  it  is  nut  uncom
mou  for  parties  when  their  dignity
is  unsulted  to  settle  the  matter  by
pistols  or  swords,  as  the  case  may
be,  and  frequently  one  or  the  other
is  killed,  and  <(  I  hi  nor  is  satisfied."
I  merely  introduce  this  to  show  how
such  tilings  operate,  and  that  you
make  the  very  best  rules  yuu  cm,
and  the  very  best  laws,  and  there  U


a  danger  of  their  being  violated.  I
might  mention  other  instances,  but
I  do  not  wish  to  occupy  too  much
rime  in  relation  to  these  matters.
From  what  I  have  said  it  will  he  seeu
that  these  folks,  to  whom  I  have
alluded,  were  pretty  dncent  people.
I  do  not  know  but  the  Miyorof  New
Orleans  was  a  pretty  good  m  in,  and
General  Jackson  ha  1  a  pretty  good
reputation,  and  was  afterwards
Preside-it  of  the  United  S:ates.  I
expect  Firz  John  Porter  U  a  pretty
good  man  ;  L  expect  that  General
Pope  is  a  pretty  goo  1  man  ;  yet  they
have  disturbed  tin*  nation  and  Con-
gress with  the  difficulties  that  have
exited  between  them  in  soite  of  all
those  laws.  As  I  said  before  there
is  a  kind  of  neutral  zone,  and  yet
men  come  in  conflict.

I  We  as  member*  of  the  Church
of  Je^  us  Christ  of  L -it  ten  lay  Saints,
we  profess  to  be  governed  hy  a  law
that  i$  different  from  others.  I  have
mentioue  I  it  already.  It  is  the  law
of  the  Gospel.  Then,  as  has  been
stated,  we  have  our  institutions
separate  and  distinct  from  the
States,  the  same  as  others  have.
Other  religious  bodies  have  the  same.
We  have  our  religious  usages,  our
ideas,  and  our  theories,  We  be-
lieve— and  hardly  I  was  going  to  say
we  beheve  in  a  celestial  law,  Hardly.
What  u  it  1  11  Thy  will  be  done  on
earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven."  That
is  the  way  I  understand  it.  As  I
have  said  before,  Jesus  came  not  to
do  hiis  own  will,  but  the  will  of  His
Father  th.it  sent  Him.  And  when
He  told  HU  disciples  to  pray,  as  I
have  stared,  He  said,  say,  "Our
Father  which  art  in  heaven,  hal-
lowed be  thy  name,  thy  kingdom
come,"  what  !  thy  king  lorn  !  whose
kingdom!  the  kingdom  of  God.
What !  The  kingdom  of  God  come
upon  the  earth  ]  yes,  that  U  what
it  says — the  rule  of  Go  J,  the  govern-


merit  of  God,  the  dominion  of  Go* I
"Thy  kingdom  come,  thy  will  be
done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven."
When  that  is  done  we  shall  have  a
celestial  law  here.  We  have  not  got
it  yet  quite,  and  we  are  not  prepared
for  it  quite  ;  but  we  are  trying  to
introduce  those  things,  and  the
Gospel  lias  been  restored  fur  that
purpose,  and  revelation  has  been
given  for  that  purpose,  and  the  heav-
ens have  been  opened  for  that  pur-
pose, and  tlie  Priesthood  of  God
has  been  organized  for  that  purpose
in  all  its  various  forms  and  ramifica-
tions, and  predicated  upon  that  prin-
ciple, the  High  Council  has  been
organized,  and  other  officers  and
peoples  associated  with  the  Church
and  kingdom  of  Goth

Now,  then,  as  has  been  stated
here,  the  Executive  Board  of  this
hospital  were  desirous  to  be  set  apart
by  the  Priesthood  that  they  might
act  under  the  blessing  of  God.  They
came  to  consult  me  about  the  hospi
tal  in  general,  and  wanted  to  know
if  something  could  not  be  done  in
the  interest  of  the  sick  and  afflicted
of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
Latter-day  Saints.  They  were  de-
sirous of  having  a  house  that  was
dedicated  to  God,  a  house  where  the
Elders  could  go  in  and  administer
to  those  who  were  afflicted  as  well  as
the  physicians,  and  that  all  these
things  should  be  conducted  under
the  direction  of  the  Almighty.
Now,  while  I  am  a  strict  believer  in
discipline  and  rule,  yet  I  could  not
but  believe,  on  the  other  hand,  in
the  feelings  that  were  exhibited  by
Sister  Eliza  Snow  and  others,  in  re-
lation to  these  matters.  It  has  ap-
peared in  this  investigation  that
some  difficulty  arose  among  those  in
charge  of  the  hospital,  and  Sister
Eliza  and  others  tried  to  get  them  to
harmonize  and  act  as  Latter  day
Saints, That  was  very  good  counsel


to  give,  and  it  would  have  been  well
if  it  had  been  obeyed,  bur  it  was  not,
and  things  have  resulted  as  they
have  done.

Now,  what  would  you  do?  These
sisters  prayed,  etc.  I  presume  they
did,  and  certainly  I  do  not  want  to
set  them  down  as  hypocutes.  They
ha  1  seen  Sister  Ferguson  take  opium
once  or  twice.  She  alleged  that  she
took  it  for  neuralgia  of  the  heart.
Being  afflicted  with  a  disease  of  that
kind  she  had  consulted  some  emi-
nent physicians,  ami  they  had  ad-
vised her  to  take  morphine  for  an
affliction  of  that  sort  It  was  sup-
posed to  be  a  proper  thing  to  take
under  the  circumstances.  Now,  while
the  taking  of  this  morphine  might
look  a  little  suspicious,  yet  if  they
had  had  that  same  neuralgia,  would
it  not  have  been  the  proper  thing  to
have  said,  11  Oh,  my  sUurs,  won't
you  be  merciful  to  me.  And  while
I  am  sick  don't  attribute  my  sickness
to  any  wrong  or  any  evil,  but  won't
you  come  and  pray  for  me  ami  be  my
good,  kind  sisters  and  friends  and
help  me  in  my  affliction."  That
would  have  been  the  right  thing  to
have  done  instead  of  trying  to  find
out  something  bad.  There  was
nothing  that  could  be  brought
against  Sister  Feryuson  here.  She
hud  to  stand  the  fire  of  all  kinds  of
witnesses,  ami  not  one  solitary  thing
could  be  proven  either  against  her
moral  conduct  or  against  h*r  actions,
or  against  her  reputation  in  regard
to  these  things — either  as  a  brandy
ill  inker  or  as  a  morphine  taker
under  those  peculiar  circuital  an-
ces. .  ,  j  v«

Well,  now,  it  would  look  natu-
rally cruel  to  me  to  throw  out  iv flec-
tions, especially  when  a  person  was
laboiiug  under  extreme  pain,  and  we
ought  not  to  give  way  to  that  kind
of  feelings  any  of  us.  Why,  if  I
were  to  see  the  lowest  and  most  de-


DISCERNMENT  OF  SPIRIT*.


359


praved  suffering  under  an  influence
of  that  kind,  [  would  want  to  lollow
the  teaching  given  by  Jesus  in  re-
gard to  the  man  that  had  fallen
among  thieves  and  had  been  abused
and  robbed,  The  Priest  passe  1  by
on  the  other  side  of  the  road,  think-
ing doubtless  it  was  only  some
poor  devil  Then  came  a  Levite,
and  he  passed  by,  thinking  no
doubt,  "he  is  only  a  poor  outcast ;
let  him  die  and  be  damned  of  any-
thing else"  But  a  certain  Samar-
itan came  along,  and  his  feelings
seemed  to  be  this :  "  You  have
fallen  among  thieves.  Won't  you
allow  me  to  administer  to  you."
That  would  be  proper.  That  is  the
way  I  look  at  it,  I  would  do  the
same  thing  to  anybody  that  I  saw
in  distress.  I  would  not  seek  to
injure  tlteir  reputation  or  to  malign
their  character.

Now,  I  suppose  that  these  sisters
were  mis  take  n  in  their  ideas*  I  do
not  think  that  they  have  bad  hearts;
but  sometimes  when  people  allow
their  prejudices  to  run  against  a  per-
son, they  carry  thes^  tilings  too  far.
While  we  are  desirous  to  put  down
iniquity  we  must  not  goto  work  and
act  a  cruel  part  toward  any  hotly.
God  does  not  do  it.  He  sends  His
rain  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good.
He  causes  His  sun  to  shine  on  the
just  and  on  the  unjust  A  wicked
man's  field  may  lay  alongside  a
righteous  man's  field,  lie  don't
tak*  His  sun  off  the  field  of  the
wicked  man,  He  makes  no  distinc-
tions of  that  sort.  He  pours  bless-
ings upon  all,  and  He  has  to  be
merciful  to  us  all,  otherwise  we
would  not  be  as  we  are  to-day,  sur-
rounded with  the  blessings  we  enjoy.

In  regard  to  all  these  matters,  it
requires  great  care  and  great  dis-
crimination. When  those  listers
came  to  me  and  reported  that  Sister
Fergusou  had  got  out  of  the  way,


and  read  those  charges,  I  felt  asham-
e-L  I  could  hardly  believe  it  at  first
I  sail  to  them:  41  These  are  grave
charges  you  are  miking.  Do  you
know  that  these  things  are  so?1
They  answer  e  I  they  thought  they  did*
"Well/  said  L  "If  tije.se  tilings  are
tni*\  Sister  Ferguson  is  not  fit  to
hold  that  positio  i,  mr  to  be  a  mem-
ber of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ
of  Latter  day  Saints/1  For  she
was  accused,  you  know,  of  being
false — in  other  words,  a  liar.  Some
things,  too,  were  sai  I  to  be  s'rang*dy
dis  ippearing,  so  Mi  it  she  was  ac-
cuse I  of  being  a  thief;  but  when
we  come  to  inquire  into  the^e  tilings
we  fin  !  there  was  no  foundation  for
the  charges.  Tuey  seem  to  have
arisen  from  unworthy  jeilousies.
We  should  not  be  too  ready  in  har-
boring such  feelings.

Now,  1  will  ted  you  of  a  principle
taught  by  Joseph  Smith.  It  may
be  of  u*e  to  you  as  a  Hi^h  Council,
and  it  will  not  hurt  anybo  ly  else,
In  speaking  of  the  discernment  of
spirits,  said  he,  a  man  may  have  the
gift  of  the  discernment  of  spirits;
he  may  see  what  is  in  the  heart ;
but  because  that  has  been  revealed
to  him  he  has  no  business  to  bring
that  as  a  charge  against  any  person.
The  man  s  acts  must  be  proved  by
evidence  ami  by  witnesses*

I  speak  of  these  things  for  your
information,  and  I  do  not  know  but
I  have  talked  long  enough.

Suffice  it  to  say  that  as  Latter-day
Saints  we  ought  to  he  under  the  law
of  love,  of  kindness,  and  of  mercy.
And  yet  at  the  same  time  we  cannot
overlook  the  wrong.  It  is  right  to
probe  certain  things  to  the  bottom
as  you  have  done  this  thing.  I  was
pleased  to  see  the  energy  displayed
all  the  way  through  on  both  sides,
and  I  think  this  is  the  general  feel-
ing that  prevails — a  determination
to  ferret  out  wrong  and  to  correct


360


JOURNAL  01  DISCOURSES.


evil  One  thing  is  just  as  necessary
as  the  other*

I  havo  already  published  a  state-
ment about  a  woman  who  had  com-
mitted an  act  of  adultery  while  her
husband  was  away  from  home,  I
was  written  to  about  it.  Why,  taid
I,  cut  her  off  from  the  Church.  We
cannot  have  such  people  in  the
Church.  Ultimately  I  requested  the
husband  of  the  woman  to  come  and
see  me,  but  instead  of  coming  him-
self he  brought  along  the  seducer
of  his  wife  and  three  beautiful  chil-
dren— three  as  beautiful  children  as
I  had  seen  anywhere  and  as  promis-
ing. It  made  my  heart  ache  to  see
the  position  that  that  woman  had
placed  her  family  in.  But  I  could
not  help  it  She  had  entered  into
covenants  which  were  sacred.  She
had  violated  those  covenants.  The
Book  of  Covenants  says  that  such
people  shall  be  destroyed.  1  could
not  change  it.  I  did  not  make  that  law.
When  they  told  me  that  the  seducer
was  there,  I  said,  I  do  not  want  to
see  him.  I  can't  have  anything  to
do  with  such  a  wretch — a  man  that
would  enter  into  a  family  and  de-
bauch another  man's  wire  while  he
was  away,  thus  taking  advantage  of
the  circumstances  in  which  she  was
placed.  I  do  not  know  who  the  man
was ;  and  I  don't  care.  I  don't  want
to  see  him.  The  woman  wept.
"  Can  I  stay  in  the  Church,"  she
asked.  "  No,  madam,  you  can't."  I
could  not  assume  the  responsibility,
the  Bishop  could  not  assume  the  re
sponsibility,  the  High  Council  could
not  assume  the  responsibility  without
becoming  partakers  of  the  crime.  I
have  seen  other  things  of  a  similar
kind  and  have  had  to  deal  with
them.  This  High  Council  has  no
right  to  condone  sin.  This  is  an
error  that  people  fall  into.  If  men
transgress  and  violate  the  laws  of
God,  they  have  no  right  but  to  deal


with  them  according  to  the  law  of
God.  Treat  them  kindly  ;  do  the
best  you  can  for  them,  but  do  not
condone  their  crimes.  Apostles,
Prophets,  Pastors,  Teachers,  Dea-
cons, and  High  Councils  are  placed
in  the  Church  as  they  formerly  were,
for  the  perfecting  of  the  Saints ;
not  to  pass  over  iniquity  because  of
certain  influences,  Ko  influence  of
any  kind  ought  to  control  you,  only
the  pure  principles  of  eternal  truth
as  laid  down  in  the  law  of  God,  No
man  can  inherit  a  celestial  kingdom
who  does  not  keep  a  celestial  law.
No  man  can  inherit  a  terrestial  king-
dom unless  he  abides  a  terrestial  law,
and  no  man  can  inherit  a  teles tial
kingdom  unless  he  abides  a  telestiai
law.  And  it  is  for  us  to  see  that
these  laws  are  executed.  We  must
purge  ourselves  fro  in  sin.

Then,  in  regard  to  this  affair.  As
I  have  already  said,  1  think  there
was  a  little  weakness  in  Sister  Fergu*
son  and  in  those  sisters.  Ami  is
there  not  a  little  weakness  in  all  of
usl  I  have  many  weaknesses  and
infirmities.  Shall  we  condemn  uiie
another?  No*  But  1  wanted  to
point  out  some  of  thes«  things  for
the  benefit  ol  tins  Board  of  Directors,
of  Sister  Ferguson,  of  this  High
Council,  and  of  all  concerned,  that
we  may  be  enabled  to  look  carefully,
dispassionately  and  intelligently  into
all  of  these  matters,  and  seek  for  the
Spirit  of  the  living  God.  It  is  your
privilege  as  a  High  Council  always
to  know  the  ri»ht,  if  you  are  living
your  religion  and  keeping  the  com-
mandments ot  God,  an»l  to  have  the
inspiration  of  the  Most  High  to
guide  you  in  your  acts,  and  it  you
have  that  and  st*ek  unto  the  Lord,
He  will  bless  you  and  guide  you  in
all  of  your  doings.  Ami  so  fits  will
all  men  who  seek  unto  Him,  for  as
many  as  are  led  by  i he  Spirit  ol  God
they  are  the  sons  of  God. And  we


DECISION  OF  THE  COUNCIL  SUSTAINED


have  to  discriminate  between  the
laws  of  the  world  and  the  laws  of
God.  We  have  no  need  to  break
any  just  and  equitable  laws,  and
never  mean  to.

Now  in  regard  to  the  position  of
the  United  States  to-day.  What  a
pitiful  example  we  have  when  we
come  to  look  at  it.  They  talk  about
our  debauchery  and  corruption.
Why  they  have  twenty  criminals
right  among  us  to  our  one,  and  more
than  that,  I  have  read  that  in
Springville,  out  of  the  outsiders
there,  45  per  cent,  of  them  are  in
some  way  or  other,  some  lesser  and
some  greater,  violators  of  the  law.
Yes,  according  to  statistics  that  are
clear,  pointed  and  plain  they  have
from  20  to  SO  violators  of  the  law
to  the  Latter  day  Saints  one.  Well
that  is  not  much  for  us  to  boast  of,
for  we  ought  not  to  have  any.  But,
then,  the  idea  of  our  being  accused
of  licentiousness  and  crime,  and
these  pure  people  being  sent  out
here  to  correct  our  morals  !

But  it  is  all  right  We  will  try
to  do  right,  maintain  the  law  ami
sustain  all  correct  principles  We
put  up  with  a  good  deal  of  indig-
nity. Still  we  will  do  rinht  and
leave  ourselves  in  the  hands  of  God ;
tor  if  we  do  right  and  cleave  unto
Him,  He  will  take  care  of  us ;  He
will  avenge  the  cause  of  Zion,  and
jmlge  the  men  who  are  fighting
against  her;  and  1  say  now,  as  I
have  before,  over  and  over  again,
Woe !  to  them  that  light  against
Zion,  forGod  will  fight  against  them.
We  will  pursue  our  course  ami  ob-
serve the  law  of  God,  and  keep  His
command  meiits.

And  1  say  God  bless  this  High
Council  with  the  Pi&rident  ami  his
councilors;  God  bless  the  brethren
and  sisters  associate  I  with  the  Hos-
pital ;  and  those  sisters  who  may
have  unwittingly  done  wrong ;  they


will  try  and  do  better;  and  Sister
Ferguson,  if  she  has  walked  a  little
too  strait,  she  will  try  to  be  a  little
more  pliable ;  and  we  will  all  try  to
move  along  and  feel  that  we  are  liv-
ing among  the  Saints  of  God,  and  that
we  are  of  one  family  and  one  house*
hold.

God  bless  you  all  and  lead  you  in
the  paths  of  life,  in  the  name  of  Je-
sus, Amen.

Brother  Angus  M*  Cannon  asks  :
Do  we  understand  you  to  sustain  the
decision  of  the  Couneill  Certainly
I  do.  I  feel  always  like  sustaining
such  things.  And  I  will  say,  more-
over, that  it  is  very  seldom  I  find
it  necessary  to  change  what  has
taken  place  and  been  decided  by  the
High  Councils,  among  all  the  High
Councils  there  are  in  the  Church.
And  why  should  they  not  do
right  1— men  that  are  disinter-
ested, men  who  are  working  for
nothing,  men  who  are  seeking  to
adjust  difficulties  among  their  breth-
ren, and  who  meet  together  from
time  to  time  and  spend  hours  and
days  and  weeks  in  adjusting  these
difficulties,  simply  for  the  love  of
God  and  humanity  and  to  correct
error  and  establish  the  principles  of
righteousness,  etc*

In  regard  to  Sister  Ferguson,  I
give  you  my  right  hand  of  fellowship
and  say  God  bless  you,  and  try  and
be  a  little  more  humble.  And  I  will
do  the  same  to  those  other  sisters.
God  bless  you  all.  Try  to  ameliorate
the  wants  and  sufferings  of  humanity,
and  seek  to  do  all  the  good  that  lays
iti  your  power;  for  as  you  do  good
to  others  God  will  be  good  to  you.
God  blrss  you  all  in  the  name  of
Jesus  Cnrist,  Amen.


The  following  are  the  remarks
made  at  the  investigation,  or  trial,
by  President  Angus  M.  Cannon,
ana  the  decUion of the  .  Hiim


JOURNAL  OK  DISCOURSES


Council  in  the  case  above  refer-
red to :

President  Angus  M,  Cannon  pro-
ceeded to  review  the  evidence  which
had  been  adduced  in  the  invest  i"a~
tion.  He  took  the  charges  seriafitnh
With  respect  to  the  first  charge —
that  of  taking  morphine  to  excess
— he  held  that  there  was  no  evidence
to  support  the  allegation.  It  was
admitted  by  Sister  Ferguson  that
she  had  been  accustomed  to  take
morphine  to  relieve  her  from  pain
induced  by  neuralgia  of  the  heart ;
but  never,  except  upon  one  occasion,
was  she  rendered  incapable  of  at-
tending to  her  duties  by  the  taking  ot
this  drug,  and  it  was  very  supposaUe
that  severe  pain  was  the  cause  of
her  administering  what  appeared  to
be  an  overdose.  But  was  she  to  be
denounced  as  a  con  tinned  morphine,
taker  because  upon  this  one  occasion
idte  bad  administered  an  overdose  of
this  drug!  Was  that  circumstance
to  be  used  as  a  means  to  destroy  her
communion  with  the  Church,  to
destroy  her  reputation,  and  to  brand
her  as  being  an  habitual  slave  to
this  terrible  medicine?  By  no
means.

With  regard  to  the  second  charge
— that  of  being  false — President
Cannon  said  he  bad  not  discovered
anything  in  the  evidence  to  substan-
tiate that  Sister  Ferguson  was  false.
She  might  have  appeared  to  be  arbi-
trary, com  ma  tiding,  in  her  desire  to
have  respect  and  obediei.ce  from
those  under  her  charge  j  but  a  good
deal  of  this  kind  of  feeling  appeared
to  have  arisen  from  jealousy  and
from  watching  for  faults,  and  when
found,  magnifying  thein  to  a  great
extent.

In  reference  to  the  third  charge
— that  of  stealing  medicine  from
the  Hospital — it  had  been  proved
that  Sister  Ferguson  took  some  pills
once,  and  they  were  administered  to
an  outside  patient  of  the  Hospital*


she  took  this  medicine  as  was  her
right,  for  the  use  of  outside  patients.
And  as  to  the  taking  ot  brandy —
about  which  so  much  had  been  made
— all  the  evidence  upon  that  point
was  that  Sister  Ferguson  had  asked
the  nurse  once  for  a  **  sling"  of
brandy  to  be  brought  to  her  room,
and  she  felt  that  she  had  need  of  it.
Was  it  criminal  for  her  to  take  a
little  brandy  under  those  circum-
stances ?  Was  she  to  be  proclaimed
as  a  drunkard  ?  Not  by  any
means.

Fourth  charge  that  of  malpractice
in  the  case  of  an  old  woman  by  the
alleged  administration  of  morphine —
was  held  to  be  entirely  unfounded.
The  old  woman  referred  to  was  in  a
bad  state  of  dropsy,  and  in  a  dying
condition  when  brought  to  the  hospi-
tal ;  she  suffered  great  pain  ;  and
doubtless,  as  a  doctor,  arid  consider-
ing it  th«  ri  "lit  thin  ".sister  Fenmnon
did  administer  morphine  for  the
purpose  of  relieving  the  patient
from  pain  ami  getting  her  to  sleep.
The  patient  subsequently  died.  But
because  of  this,  was  sister  Ferguson
to  be  accused  of  causing  her  death  1
No.

The  very  fact  of  the  sisters  hav-
ing signed  those  charges  showed
that  they  conceived  them  to  be  right.
They  expected  this  matter  to  be
investigated.  They  expected  to
meet  Sister  Ferguson  face  to  face.
The  question  had  been  asked,  did
Sister  Snow  prompt  the  sisters  to
write  1 1 mse  charges.  The  reply  was
elicited  that  Sister  Van  Schoouhoven
made  a  draft  of  the  complaints  anil
that  Sister  McLean  copied  it.  Sis-
ter Snow  took  it  lor  granted  that  the
charges  were  true,  not  thinking,
probably,  the  damaging  effect  they
would  have  upon  the  character  of
Sifter  Ferguson.  Tliis  belli"  the
case  it  was  concluded  that  it  would
not  do  for  Sis'er  Ferguson  to  be  al-
lowed to  continue  in  her  position.


CHARGES  NOT  SUSTAINED


He  (President  Cannon)  had  no
doubt  that  Sister  Snow  believed
every  word  of  the  charges,  and  after
considering  the  easiest  mode  of  let-
ting Ferguson  down,  the  Executive
Board  asked  her,  finally,  to  resign.
They  did  not  see,  apparently,  that
this  would  come  out  and  damage,  as
it  had  done,  the  reputation  of  Sis-
ter Ferguson  ;  but  having  become  a
party  to  this  thing,  they  shouldered
the  responsibility.  On  the  other
hand,  while  he  maintained  that
these  charges  hail  not  been  sustained,
still,  under  the  circumstances,  he
thought  the  wisest  thing  the  Board
could  do  was  to  ask  Sister  Ferguson
to  resign  herposition  iu  the  hospital.
Her  resignation  was  not  asked  with
the  intention  to  hurt  her  But  the
devil  took  advantage  of  the  position
and  used  it  to  the  injury  of  Sister
Ferguson,  He  would  say,  however,
that  if  Sister  Ferguson  would  live
humbly  before  the  Lord  an  I  take
what  had  transpired  for  good,  and
listen  to  counsel,  the  Lord  would


bless  her,  and  the  Lord  would  bless
those  sisters  who  had  erred  in  this
matter  unwittingly,  if  they  would
take  hold  of  Sister  Ferguson  and
help  her  along,  and  thus  promote
union  and  fellowship  in  our  midst
as  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Go. I
upon  the  earth.

The  decision  therefore  in  this
case  will  bu  :  That  these  charges
are  not  sustained  against  Sister
Ferguson  before  this  council  ;  but  I
do  think  the  sisters  acied  widely
under  the  circumstances  iu  asking
her  tc  resign.  That  is  my  judg-
ment. But  that  the  evil  one  has
magnified  t lie se  charges  to  the  injury
of  Sister  Ferguson  iu  that  investi-
gation was  riot  had  at  the  time.  And

■  I  would  my  to  these  sisters,  take
hold  of  Sister  Ferguson  by  the  hand
and  help  her  to  sustain  her  reputa-
tion an  I  practice  befoffc  this  peopte,
and  as  you  seek  to  build  her  up  so

I  the  Lord  will  build  yoti  u;>  a  id  bless
you  by  increasing  your  influence  for
good.  %u  *•


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE BY APOSTLE LORENZO  SNOW,;

Delivered  in  Brigkam  City  Tabernacle,  on  Sunday,  previous  to  his  sentence

by  Judge  Powers  in  ike  First  District  Court,

Jan.  10th,  1886.


REPORTED  BY JOHN  BURROWS,


NO  PROMINENT  LATTER-DAY  SAINT  WHO  LIVES  HIS  RELIGION  NEED
EXPECT  JUSTICE  IN  THE  COURTS— THE  SAME  SACRIFICES  MAY  BE
REQUIRED  OF  MODERN  AS  OF  ANCIENT  APOSTLKS — THE  CHURCH
OF  JESUS  CHRIST  OF  LATTER  DAY  SAINTS  ESTABLISHED  BY  DIVINE
REVELATION  —  WE  WILL  BE  MADE  PERFKCT  BY  SUFFERING — OUR
CHARACTER  AS  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS  MUST  BE  PRESERVED  INVIO-
LATE— VISIT  OF  JESUS  TO  KIRTLAND  TEMPLE — FAREWELL*


I  am  thankful  for  the  opportunity
of  addressing  this  large  audience,
most  of  whom,  I  recognize  as  my
intimate  friends  and  associates,  lor
whose  spiritual,  mora!,  and  intellec-
tual advancement  and  temporal
prosperity,  1  have  labored  diligently
through  a  period  of  over  thirty
years,  ever  since  the  establishment
of  its  first  dwelling  or  hamlet.

This,  1  presume,  will  prove  my
last  opportunity,  for  some  length  of
time  for  addressing  you,  being  now
under  bonds  of  six  thousand  dollars,
to  appear  next  Saturday,  the  16th
ins*.,  at  Ogden,  to  receive  sentence
for  cohabiting  with  my  wives —
having  been  pronounced  guilty  for
the  same  offense,  under  three  in-
dictments. Undoubtedly  my  sen-
tence will  embrace  the  extreme  limit
the  law  allows — eighteeu  months
imprisonment,  nine  hundred  dol-
lars fine,  witlr»costs  of  prosecution
added.

I  do  not  now  propose  to  enter
into  details  respecting  the  three
trials,  under  those  indictments,  re-j


suiting  in  verdicts  of  guilty,  without
one  particle  of  evidence  by  which
to  justify  such  verdicts — the  very
singular  and  extraordinary  charge
to  the  jury  by  Judge  Powers —
the  urgent  appeal  of  the  Prosecuting
Attorney,  for  the  jury  to  assist  in
convicting  the  defendant — the  elo-
quent ami  forcible  arguments  of  my
counsel — the  intense  anxiety  of
Judge  Powers  and  the  prosecution
to  impress  the  jury  that  it  was  their
imperative  duty  to  convict  the  de-
fendant, as  (in  the  language  of
the  attorney),  "  He  was  a  high
official  in  the  Mormon  Church,  and
therefore  it  was  expedient  in  the
warfare  against  that  Church,  that
he  should  be  made  a  victim/'  All
these  matters  and  proceedings  will
be  recorded,  and  published  to  the
world  ;  they  will  be  preserved  and
handed  down  as  items  of  history  for
the  consideration  and  judgment
of  future  geueia  ions.

In  passing,  1  will  observe,  how-
ever, that  in  the  progress  of  my  trial,
aad  in  the  outcome,  this  fact  was


ANIMUS  01  THE  PROSECUTION,


365


demonstrated — it  is  needless  for  a  I
Latter-day  Saint,  occupying  any
position  of  prominence,  ami  living
his  religion,  to  expect  justice  in  the
tribunals  of  this  once  boasted  land
of  civil  rights  and  religious  lib-
erty j  but  ?ioti%  under  the  blighting,
merciless  influence  of  religious
bigotry  and  sectarian  fanaticism
of  an  apostate  Christianity,  It
is  even  better  to  look  for  justice
in  courts  under  the  ruling  powers
of  a  moral  and  honest  in  fidelity.

I  was  pronounced  guilty  of  violat-
ing the  Edmunds  law.  Previous,
however,  to  its  enactment,  my  wives
(except  the  one  with  whom  I  was
living)  having  passed  the  period
of  maternity,  by  mutual  consent,
we  were  living  in  accordance  with
the  requirements  of  that  law,  and
this,  too,  without  violating  any
principle  or  object  embraced  in  the
law  of  celestial  marriage.

To  "  multiply/'  was  the  lirst
commandment  given  to  our  first
parents.  Purity  in  matrimonial
in  terco  urse,  I  al  ways  believed ,
should  accompany  that  command,
and  I  have  always  endeavored  to
observe  faithfully  its  practice.  I
married  because  it  was  commanded
of-Gcd,  and  commenced  in  plural


Attorney,  when  addressing  the  jury,
said  :  "  This  case  of  a  prominent
leader  of  the  Mormon  Church  is
under  investigation — he  is  one  of
the  most  scholarly  and  brightest
lights,  aud  we  require  your  encour-
agement and  assistance.  The  eyes
of  the  nation  are  now  upon  you,
and  as  loyal  citizens,  from  you  a  ver-
dict of  guilty  will  be  expected  j  and
if  you  heed  this  appeal,  I  can  assure
you,  and  predict  emphatically,  if  the
defendant,  Mr,  Snow,  with  a  few
other  Mormon  leaders  can  be  se-
cured, it  will  not  be  long  before  a
new  revelation  will  follow,  calling
for  a  change  in  the  law  of  patriarchal


marriage.


marriage.


I contracted  marriage


with  four  women  about  the
same  time,  aud  with  a  mutual
understanding  with  each  that  they
were  to  be  equal — neither  was  to
take  or  assume  the  status  of  a  first
or  legal  wife.  Two  of  them  were
united  to  me  iu  the  sacred  bonds  of
matrimony  at  oue  and  the  same
time,  by  the  same  ceremony.  The
other  two  shortly  alter,  also  at  oue
and  the  same  time  and  in  like  man-
ner.

Of  all  the  witnesses  introduced
by  the  prosecution,  the  testimony  of
each  tended  directly  to  establish
my innocence. The  Prosecuting


Last  year  one  thousand  sectarian
ministers  petitioned  Congress  to
legislate  more  severely  against  the
M  Mormons,1*  aud  punish  them  with
greater  cruelty]  and  this  has  been
the  cry  and  watchword  of  priest
aud  jieople  throughout  the  length
aud  breadth  of  our  unhappy  coun-
try, arousing  and  fostering  a  popular
feeling  and  sentiment  that  it  would
be  right,  and  doing  the  will  of  God,
to  overthrow  and  destroy  this  king-
dom which  the  Prophet  Daniel  fore-
saw, and  which  God  has  now  estab-
lished.

For  many  years  past,  my  heart
and  fee  lings  have  been  devoted  to
the  promotion  of  your  interests —
your  welfare  and  happiness  ;  with
what  success,  you,  my  friends,  are
the  proper  judges.  I  shall  soon
depart  from  your  presence,  apd
submit  myself  to  the  officers  of
the  law,  and  whether  I  may  be
permitted  again  to  address  you
from  this  stand,  I  cannot  say —
a  matter,  however,  about  which
none  need  have  the  least  anx-
iety.

I  go  to  prison  with  the  full  assur*
ance  that  I  cau  serve  God  and  His
purposes — magnify  my  calling,  and


366


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


prove  to  the  world,  my  faith  and
sincerity  in  the  principle*  I  have
taught,  during  fifty  year.*,  among
many  nations— that  Jesus  is  the
Son  of  God — that  lie  has  revealed
His  Priesthood,  and  the  fulness  of
the  ancient  Gospel,  and  established
His  Church  by  revelation.

When  I  received  the  Apostleship,
I  well  remember  saying  to  my  breth-
ren, who  were  present,  that  very
possibly  the  same  sacrifices  wouli  be
required  of  the  modern  AposUesas
were  experienced  by  the  Apostles
anciently,  inclu  ling  their  persecu-
tions and  martyrdoms!  I  said,  in
receiving  this  sacred  calling,  I  felt
as  though  it  were  ascending  an  altar
where,  perhaps,  life  itself  would  be
offered.  The  Lord  has  said  :  "7
have  decreed  in  my  heart  that  I  will
prove  you  in  all  things,  whether
you  icill  abide  in  my  Covenant  even
unto  death  ;  for,  if  ye  wilt  not  abide
in  my  Covenant,  ye  ore  not  worthy  of
me  "  Seriously  considering  all  this,
1  asked  myself:  Am  1  willing  tn  ac-
cept thebe  conditions — to  so  deny
myself  and  sutler  for  the  glory  of
God,  and  to  honor  and  magnify  tins
Apostleship  ]

God  is  now  feeling  after  us,  and
will  disclose  our  secret  thoughts.
It  would  be  well  to  purify  and  pre-
pare ourselves,  and  in  the  language
of  the  Paalmist,  call  upon  God,
saying,  "  Search  me,  0  God,  and  know
my  heart;  fry  me  and  know  my  thoughts;
and  see  if  there  he  any  wicked  way  in
me,  md  lead  me  in  the  way  everlasting.1'

If  we  succeed  in  passing  through
the  approaching  fiery  ordeals  with
our  fidelity  and  integrity  unim-
peached,  we  may  expect  at  the  close
of  our  trials,  a  great  and  mighty
outpouring  of  the  Spirit  and  power
of  God — a  great  endowment  upon
all  who  shall  have  remained  true  to
their  covenants.  We  must  be  more
eager  to  cultivate  friendly  relations


with  our  neighbors,  together  with
love  and  affection  for  our  wives  and
children  that  peace  may  dwell  in
our  households,  and  confidence  in
the  midst  of  the  people.

"Fifty  millions  of  people"  are
said  to  be  calling  loudly  for  the  ex-
termination of  the  "  Mormons/'
If  it  be  a  FACT  that  our  religion  is
divine,  established  of  God,  there  is
no  cau*e  for  alarm,  nor  even  anx-
iety or  uneasiness.  Tens  of  thou-
sands, through  obedience  to  the
.sacred  Gospel,  know  it  to  be  true —
a  fact,  by  immediate  levelation  to
themselves,  Therefore,  these  "Fifty
millions  of  people,"  ar*  not  fighting
the  "  Mormons,"  or  their  religion,
but  they  are  fighting  God  and  His
purposes.

Israel,  on  the  banks  of  the  Red
Sea,  were  God's  people — a  fact  per-
fectly known  to  Moses ;  and  he  knew,
also,  w  hat  were  the  purposes  of  God
concerning  them.  Hence,  there
was  no  occasion  for  alarm  or  anxiety
in  view  of  the  over  whelming  forces
of  Pharaoh's  army,  threatening
immediate  annihilation,  God's  eye
was  upon  Israel — they  were  there
by  His  direction — a  pact — a  re-
vealed fact,  known  to  Moses  and
Aaron,  and  doubtless  to  many
others,  by  direct  communication
from  God*  It  is  true,  they  were
placed  iu  a  frightful  situation — na-
turally, a  hopeless  one.  from  which
no  human  power  or  ability  could
extricate  them.

Israel  was  there,  not  from  choice,
but  by  the  command  of  God  j  ami
He  had  arranged  His  own  pro-
gramme j  yet  Pharaoh  with  his
armed  hosts,  sought  to  thwart  His
purposes,  and  in  the  end  was
overthrown  and  destroyed  ;  and
the  result  of  this  ignorance  and
folly  stands  recorded  on  the  page
of  history  as  a  lesson  to  all  gen-
orations.


DISFRANCHISEMENT

God  established  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter  day  Saints,
by  direct  revelation  ;  this  is  a  fact,
clearly  and  distinctly  revealed  to
thousands.  The  so  called  44  Mor-
mon" people,  in  these  valleys,  are
the  acknowledged  people  of  God,
and  are  here,  not  by  their  own  choice,  !
but  by  immediate  command  of  God.
The  work  and  management  is  the
Lord's — not  the  peoples — they  do  ;
His  bidding,  and  He,  alone,  is  re-
sponsible for  the  result.

We  have  no  occasion  for  fear  or
cause  for  trembling — the  purpose  of
God  ivill  be  accomplished — what  H<i
has  recommenced  will  be  consumated
though  the  combined  armies  of  the
earth  should  ri*e  up  and  oppose.
It  is  a  FACT  that  God  has  spoken,
and  called  latter  day  Israel  from
among  the  nations,  and  planted
them  in  these  valleys;  therefore  this
work  is  His,  and  although  He  m  *y
lead  us  as  He  did  Israel  of  old,
into  seemingly  desperate  situations,
requiring  serious  sacrifices — the
despoiling  of  homes — incarceration
in  prison,  and  even  jeaporduing
our  very  existence;  and  yet,  it  will
be  but  lor  a  moment,  as  it  were,
and  then  those  trials  will  terminate
as*  did  Job1*,  in  an  increase  of  pos-
sessions ;  and  as  ancient  Israel's,  in
a  kingdom  and  country — honor,
glory  and  dominion.

Some  of  our  brethren  have  que-
ried whether  hereafter,  they  could
feel  themselves  worthy  of  full  fellow-
ship with  Prophets  and  Saints  of
old,  who  endured  trials  and  persecu-
tion* j  and  with  Saints  of  our  own
times  who  suffered  in  Kirtland,  in
Missouri  and  Illinois.  The  brethren
referred  to  have  expressed  regrets
that  they  had  not  been  associated
in  those  scenes  of  suffering.  If
any  of  these  are  present,  1  will  say,
for  the  consolation  of  such,  you
have  to  wait  but  a  short  time  and


FOR  MERE  BELIEF.  367

you  will  have  similar  opportunities,
to  your  heart's  content.  You  and
I  cannot  be  made  perfect  except
through  suffering  :  Jesus  could  not.
In  His  prayer  and  agony  in  the
Garden  of  Gethsemane,  He  fore-
shadowed the  purifying  process
necessary  in  the  lives  of  those  whose
ambition  prompts  them  to  secure
the  glory  of  a  celestial  king  lorn.
None  should  try  to  escape  by  re-
sorting to  any  compromising  meas-
ure*. \  \.  0 1  j&am jifjl ;  u4|

All  who  journey  soon  or  late,
Musi  em  no  within  the  garden  gate.
Anil  knesl  alon**  in  darkness  there.
And  battle  hard,  yet  not  despair,  •

It  is  now  proposed  to  enact  laws
to  govern  the  w  Mormons'*  in  Utah,
similar  to  those  passed  in  Id  alio  to
afftiet  our  people,  viz  :  "  Whoever
claims  membership  in  a  church  or
onianiz  ition,  teaching  or  practicing
j  the  principles  of  Patriarchal  Mar-
riage, shall  be  deprived  the  right
to  vote  or  hold  office/'  Thus  we  un-
'  deratand  t he  tinm  U  at  hand  when,
whosoever  admits  he  u  a  Latter-day
Saint,  must  feel  the  oppressive  grasp
\  of  persecution.  How  many  now
here,  are  ready — having  oil  in  their
vessels,  and  lamps  trimmed,  and
prepared  for  coming  events  ?

I  am  not  sorry,  nor  do  I  regret
on  account  of  the  near  approach  of
the.se  fiery  ordeals;  the  Church,  no
doubt,  needs  purifying — we  have
hypocrites  among  us — milk-and-
water  Saints — those  professing  to
be  Saints,  but  doing  nothing  to
■  render  themselves  worthy  of  mem-  ;
bership  ;  and  too  many  of  us  have
been  pursuing  worldly  gains,  rather
than  spiritual  improvements — have
not  sou  ir  lit  the  things  of  God  with
that  earnestness  which  becomes  our
profession.  Trials  and  afflictions
will  cause  our  hearts  to  turn  towards
j  our  Father  who  has  so  marvelous!)
wrought  out  our  redemption  and


366


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSE.


deliverance  from  Babylon.

I  wish  to  offer  a  word  of  caution
to  my  brethren  that  you  may  he-
ware,  and  commit  no  grave  error*
when  brought  into  positions  of  trial
and  temptation.  Some,  unfortu
nately,  have  disregarded  this  injunc-
tion/ and  have  imprinted  a  stain
upon  their  character,  and  a  blot
upon  their  record  which  cannot  be
erased  in  time — perhaps  not  in  eter-
nity. These  are  fearful  mistakes.
Better  suffer  a  thousand  deaths  than
succumb  to  the  force  of  persecution
by  promising  to  discard  a  sifigle
principle  which  God  has  revealed
for  our  glory  and  exaltation.  Our
character,  as  Latter-day  Saints,
should  be  preserved  inviolate,  at
whatever  cost  or  sacrifice.  Charac-
ter, approve  I  of  God  is  worth  secur-
ing, even  at  the  expense  of  a  life-
time of  constant  self-denial.

While  thus  living  we  may  lonk
forward  far  away  into  the  spirit*
land,  with  full  assurance  that  when
reaching  that  happy  clime,  we  shall
be  crowned  with  the  sons  and  daugh-
ters of  God,  and  possess  the  wealth
and  glory  of  a  Celestial  kingdom.

Apostle  Paul  in  his  time,  taught
the  Saints  to  have  the  same  mind
in  them  as  was  in  Christ  Jesus,  who,
finding  Himself  in  the  form  of  God,
thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal
with  God.  Apostle  John,  on  the
same  subject  says,  u  When  Jesus
appears  we  shall  be  like  Him."
"  Every  one  that  hath  this  hope  in
him,  purifieth  himself  even  as  God
is  pure."

As  man  now  is,  God  once  was —
even  the  babe  of  Bethlehem,  ad-
vancing to  childhood — thence  to
boyhood,  manhood,  then  to  the
Godhead.  This,  then,  is  the  "  mark
of  the  prize  of  man's  high  calling
in  Christ  Jesus."

We  are  the  offspring  of  God,
begotten  by  Him  in  the  spirit  world,


where  we  partook  of  His  nature  as
children  here  partake  of  the  likeness
of  their  parents.  Our  trials  and
sufferings  give  ns  experience,  and
establish  within  us  principles  of
godliness.

Jesus  lias,  in  our  day,  visited  this
world,  and  been  seen  of  men  on
■(liferent  occasions.  He  appeared
on  the  3rd  day  of  April,  18-J6,
to  the  Pro j! let  Joseph  Smith,
and  Oliver  Cowdery,  in  the  Tem-
ple at  Kirtland,  Ohio,  Tins  im-
portant visitation  is  described  as
follows  :

"  The  veil  was  taken  from  our
minds,  and  the  eyes  of  our  under-
standing were  opened.'*

"  We  saw  the  Lord  standing  upon
the  breastwork  of  the  pulpit  before
us,  au  l  under  His  feet  was  a  paved
work  of  pure  gold  in  color  like
umber.*

(l  His  eyes  were  a  flame  of  fire,
the  hair  of  His  head  was  white  like
the  pure  snow,  His  countenance
shone  above  the  brightness  of  the
sun,  and  His  voice  was  m  the  sound
of  rushing  waters,  even  the  voice
of  Jehovah,  saying:"

"  /  am  the  first  and  the  last,  I  am
He  tvho  liveth,  I  am  He  who  was  slain,
I  am  your  advocate  with  the  Father,
Behold  your  sins  are  forgiven  you,  you
are  clean  before  me,  therefore  lift  up
your  heads  and  rejoice"

*'  Let  the*  hearts  of  your  brethren
rejoice,  and  let  the  hearts  of  all  my
people  rejoice,  who  have,  with  their
might,  built  this  Jmtse  to  my  n*me"

I  now  will  bring  my  remarks  to
a  close.  In  a  few  days  I  must  leave
family,  kind  friends  and  associates
with  whom  I  have  spent  so  many
pleasant  hours  in  "  The  City  I  love
so  well'* — proceed  to  Ogden — re-
ceive my  sentence,  then  retire  to
private  life,  within  my  prison  walls,
for  "  The  word  of  God  and  testi-
mony of  Jesus."


THE  GOSPEL


369


I  hope  to  address  you  again,
many  times  in  this  life,  though  this
may  be  my  last  : — however  this  will
be,  I  shall  expect  to  meet  you  in
yonder  world  clothed  in  robes  of
celestial  beauty,  amid  the  glory  of
the  Sous  ot  God,  where  grief  and


suffering  shall  have  ceased — when
tears  will  no  longer  moisten  your
cheeks,  and  sighs  and  moans  no
more  be  heard;  but  where,  peace
and  joy  forever  reign,  in  those
realms  of  glory,  honor  and  im-
mortality.


A


DISCOURSE BY APOSTLE LORENZO  SNOW,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City.


[From  Deseret  News  of  March  6,  1886.]

THE  GOSPEL — IT  BRINGS  TEMPORAL  AS  WELL  AS  SPIRITUAL  SALVATION
— THE  PROPHET  JOSEPH  SMITH— PERSECUTION  —  OUR  RELIGION
CANNOT  BE  DESTROYED,


In  addressing  an  assembly  of  Saints
I  expect  the  benefit  of  their  prayers,
without  the  ceremony  of  asking  ;
being  assured  they  are  aware,  as
well  as  I  am,  that  our  teachings  and
administrations  in  the  Gospel  of  life
are  blest  according  to  our  faith  and
prayers,  and  the  diligence  and  pa*
tience  we  bestow.

I  propose  to  make  some  general
observations  upon  the  Gospel  and
its  administrations,  and  in  relation
to  its  effects  when  received,  and  the
important  blessings  derived  by  this
community,  through  its  divine  power
and  virtue.  This  Gospel,  which  God
has  commanded  us  to  offer  to  the
world,  is  an  order  or  system  of
things,  simple,  plain,  and  may  easily
be  understood. In  regard  to  its

No.  2L


principles,  the  nature  of  its  require-
ments, and  the  precise  kind  and  char-
acter of  its  blessings  and  promises,
no  one,  however  ignorant  or  un-
learned, needs  to  be  left  in  the  dark;
but  may  discover  its  golden  truths,
and  the  emblazoned  mark  of  divin-
ity in  its  arrangements  as  distinctly
and  as  speedily  as  Naaman,  the
captain  of  the  Assyrian  host,  found
divine  virtue  and  the  hand  of  Divin-
ity in  the  order  prescribed  to  him  by
Elijah,  through  which  his  leprosy
was  removed.  In  his  case,  the
order  of  obtaining  a  miraculous
blessing,  viz :  to  immerse  seven
times  in  Jordan,  as  prescribed  by
Elijah,  was  so  simple,  so  plain,  ami
in  regard  to  its  divine  efficacy  su
easy  of ascertainment,  that  the

Vol.  XXVL


370


JOURNAL  Oi"  DISCOURSES.


great  captain  at  first,  was  exceed-
ingly wrathy  at  the  idea  that  God
should  propose  to  work  upon  him
through  such  easy  and  simple  forms;
but  the  order  through  which  he
could  be  healed  of  his  leprosy  was
prescribed  of  (rod,  through  the
Prophet,  and  finally  the  Assyrian
officer,  through  the  plain,  common  -
sense  reasoning  of  his  servant,  con-
cluded to  waive  his  objections  and
comply  with  the  requirements  ;  and
having  done  so  received  the  prom-
ised blessing.

The  first  principles  of  the  Gospel
which  we  offer,  and  which  put  men
in  possession  of  the  revelations  of
God ,  and  a  knowledge  of  this  work,
are  precisely  as  simple,  plain,  and  as
easy  of  understanding  as  the  order
before  alluded  to,  through  which
the  heavens  were  opened  to  Xaa-
man.

The  Gospel  was  brought  to  our
respective  locations,  far  remote  from
these  mountain  vales.  It  found
its  citizens  of  various  nation*,  speak-
iug  our  respective  languages,  each
possessing  his  peculiar  notions  and
prejudices,  with  his  associations,
and  a  strong  attachment  to  kindred,
friends  and  country*  However
unpleasant,  unkind,  unjust,  and
inconsistent  it  might  appear  at  first,
we  clearly  foresaw  that  in  receiving
the  Gospel  we  should  be  com  pel  led
to  break  off  those  associations,  and
sever  those  attachments,  leaving
the  lands  of  our  nativity,  and  l:u
forth  with  our  wives  and  our  chil-
dren to  a  distant  laud  of  which  we
had  but  little  knowledge.  Yet,  a
similar  requisition  was  made  upon
the  House  of  Israel,  in  the  land  of
Egypt ;  also  upon  Noah  aud  his
family,  and  upon  Abraham,  and
the  family  of  Lot  in  the  city  of
Sodom,  and  upon  the  families  of
Lelii  and  Ishmael,  as  mentioned  in
the  Book  of  Mormon.


But,  in  the  provisions  of  the
Gospel  which  was  offered  to  us,  there
were  fairness  and  safety  j  it  pro-
posed to  give,  through  obedience  to
its  requirements,  a  perfect  knowl-
edge of  its  divine  authenticity  ;
so  that,  in  leaving  our  kindred,
breaking  up  our  social  relations,
and  going  forth  from  our  native
lands,  we  should  first  become  per-
fectly assured  that  it  was  no  human
contrivance — something  gotten  up
to  effect  a  political  purpose  or  satisfy
so  me  worldly  ambition,  or  to  achieve
some  private  end  through  human
cunning  or  craftiness.

The  Gospel  was  pla;n  and  simple
in  its  requirements,  and  there  could
be  no  mistaking  the  precise  nature
of  its  blessings  and  promises,  nor
the  manner  and  time  in  which  they
Were  to  be  secured.

The  first  feature,  in  this  system,
which  struck  us  with  surprise  and
arrested  our  attention,  was  its  per-
fect similarity,  in  all  its  parts,  with
the  Gospel  as  recorded  in  the  New
Testament.  It  required  repentance,
and  a  forsaking  of  sins,  immersion
in  water  tor  the  remission  of  sins,
with  a  promise  that,  through  the
laying  on  of  hands  by  those  having
authority,  people  should  receive  the
Holy  Ghost,  by  which  the  knowl-
edge would  be  obtained  of  the  truth
of  the  doctrine.  Another  remark-
able featufe,  which  called  into  exer-
cise our  most  serious  consideration,
was  the  solemn  testimony  of  the
Elders,  that  they  possessed  the  right
to  administer  t  hese  sacred  ordinances,
by  virtue  of  the  Holy  Priesthood
committed  to  Joseph  Smith,  through
the  ministration  of  the  Apostles,
Peter,  James  and  John.  And  fur-
thermore, that  this  solemn  and  most
important  tact  should  be  revealed
to  every  man,  upon  his  faithful  obe-
dience to  the  Gospel  requirements.

In  the*e  proposition*,  though  at


TEMPORAL  AND  SPIRITUAL  SALVATION.


37i


first  seemingly  strange,  we^savv  that
everything  was  plain,  fair  and  hon-
orable. In  doing  what  they  required,
we  should  only  do,  in  fact,  what,  as
true-hearced  believers  in  the  ancient
Gospel,  we  ought  to  do  ;  and  if  we

failed  to  receive  the  promised  bless-
ing, and  thereby  proved  the  Elders'
testimony  false,  our  religious  condi-
tion would,  nevertheless,  be  then  as
good  as  other  Christians,  and  a  little  :
better,  perhaps,  because  we  should
have  iipproached  a  little  nearer  to
the  doctrine  of  the  Scriptures,  so  far
as  their  true  forms  and  ceremonies
were  concerned.  Of  course,  in  this  j
case,  having  proven  to  our  satibfac- 1
tion,  that  there  was  no  Holy  Ghost,
no  supernatural  manifestations,  no
knowledge,  no  revelations  accom-
panying the  Elders'  administrations
of  the  Gospel  ;  no  human  per  sua*
sion,  no  cunning  sophistry  could
have  induced  us  to  leave  our  homes
and  friends  to  embark  in  a  scheme
which  our  common  sense  taught  us
would  eventuate  in  bitter  disappoint-
ment and  inevitable  ruin  ;  but,  like
other  Christians,  we  should  have
continued  in  the  enjoyment  of
friends  and  home,  still  groping  our
way  through  religious  darkness,  ex-
pecting nothing,  hoping  nothing,  |
and  receiving  nothing.

But  the  fact  that  I  am  now  speak-  i
ing  to  assembled  thousands  of  intel-
ligent and  enlightened  people,  who
received  this  Gospel  with  the  afore-
mentioned fond  considerations  and  1
lively  expectations,  gathered  here
by  their  own  free  will  and  choice,
out  of  almost  every  nation,  de-
monstrates most  clearly,  most  forci-
bly and  most  solemnly,  that  this
*y 0 tern  of  life,  this  Gospel  as  pro-
claimed by  Joseph  Smith,  has  been
made  known  to  us  by  the  revelations
of  the  Almighty, — that  it  is  unde-
niably His  will,  His  word  and  His
message :  not  only  this,  but  we


find  within  ourselves  a  fixed  purpose,
an  unalterable  resolution  to  do,  if
need  be,  what  many  of  us  have
already  done,  viz :  show  the  sin-
cerity of  our  convictions  of  these
solemn  truths,  through  sacrificing
all  we  possess — not  even  holding
ourselves  so  dear  to  us  as  this  re-
ligion.

There  was  yet  another  prominent
feature  embraced  in  this  order  of
things,  vi? '  where  it  found  the
people  in  poverty,  misery,  in  a  con-
dition but  a  little  above  starvation ;
it  spoke  in  positive  terms  of  future
relief,  and  effectual  deliverance.
It  did  not  simply  say  :"Be  ye  warmed,
and  be  ye  clothed,"  but  it  declared
plainly,  and  in  distinct  terms,  that
the  Lord  had  seen  their  bondage
and  oppression,  and  heard  their
cries  of  sorrow  and  affliction,  and
now  had  sent  His  Gospel  for  their
deliverance,  and  would  lead  them
into  circumstances  of  independence.
There,  again,  was  something  consis-
tent, and  worthy  of  admiration,  and
characteristic  of  our  Great  Parent,
discoverable  in  all  His  dispensations,
when  in  actual  working  order,  as
they  were  in  the  case  of  Noah,  and
in  the  calling  of  Israel,  making  them
an  independent  people  ;  likewise
in  calling  Lehi  to  establish  a  people
upon  this  continent,  as  well  as  in
many  other  instances.

A  religious  system  is  of  but  little
account  when  it  possesses  no  virtue
nor  power  to  better  the  condition
of  people,  spiritually,  intellectually,
morally  and  physically.  Enoch's
order  of  the  Gospel,  did  for  his
people  all  this,  and  it  has  done  the
same  in  every  instance  when  preached
in  its  purity,  and  obeyed  in  sincerity*
Many  thousands  of  the  persons  in
these  beautiful  valleys,  who  formerly
were  compelled,  with  their  wives
and  children,  to  subsist  in  a  half-
starved  condition — not  owning  a


372


JOl'KNAL  Ul<  DISCOURSES.


habitation,  or  a  foot  of  land,  a  horse,
a  cow,  pig  or  chicken — nothing  they
could  call  their  own  ;  subject  at  any
moment,  through  the  whim  of  their
employer,  to  be  turned  into  the
streets,  miserable  beggars  ;  now
own  cabinet  shops,  factories,  mills,
flocks  and  herds,  beautiful  gardens
and  orchards,  and  productive  farms,
wagons  and  carriages,  dwelling  in
their  own  houses,  in  comfortable
and  easy  circumstances.  No  one
has  any  apprehension  of  starvation
within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints.

The  Gospel  proposed  these  bless-
ings at  its  announcement,  and  they
have  been  most  miraculously  accom-
plished. No  other  religious  system
could  have  achieved  such  things,
nor  dared  any  other  Christian  de-
nomination venture  to  send  out  its
missionaries  "without  purse  or  scrip,"
and  without  a  college  education,  to
declare  to  the  people  that  they  had
authority  from  God  to  administer
the  sacred  ortli nances  of  the  Gospel,
through  which  .should  be  revealed
tangible  evidence  and  knowledge  of
its  divinity  and  of  their  authority
to  administer  it  ;  and  to  take  people
from  a  state  of  poverty,  and  lead
them  thousands  of  miles,  and,
despite  every  obstacle,  establish
them  a  comparatively  independent
people  in  the  midst  of  a  wild,  desert
country.  Had  they  found  them
poor,  friendless,  without  the  means
of  living,  and  in  servitude  little
better  than  Egyptian  bondage,  as
we  found  many  of  them ;  they
would  have  imparted  no  cheering
news  of  an  approaching  salvation
from  the  God  of  heaven  ;  but  could
only  have  exhorted  them  to  be  con-
tented and  reconciled  with  their
unhappy  lot,  and  in  no  case  must
they  look  for  any  new  revelation,
or  miraculous  interposition.

What  philanthropists  have  wished


to  accomplish,  and  often  attempted,
the  Lord  is  now  doing  on  a  magnifi-
cent scale  in  this  American  Desert.
Flourishing  settlements,  towns  and
cities  have  sprung  into  existence,
extending  over  a  distance  of  five
hundred  miles  in  length,  and  hun-
dreds of  miles  in  width,  through
t  he  untiring  energy  and  perseverance
of  a  people,  formerly  totally  ignor-
ant of  such  labors.  In  these  cities
people  live  in  harmony ;  and  poor-
louses,  grog-shops,  gambling-hells,
houses  of  ill- fame  and  prostitution
are  not  known  in  any  of  our  numer-
ous towns  and  cities,  except  in  some
instances,  where  Christians,  (so-
called)  possess  a  footing  and  influ-
ence.

No  one,  however  prejudiced  he
may  be,  can  scarcely  avoid  acknowl-
edging the  palpable  fact,  that  this
system  has  conferred  miraculous
blessings  upon  thousands  and  tens
of  thousands,  in  the  way  of  putting
them  in  possession  of  the  means  for
sustaining  themselves,  after  having
delivered  them  from  oppression  and
tyranny,  little  better  than  African
slavery  ;  and,  no  doubt,  our  legisla-
tors at  Washington,  one  and  all?
would  give  us  credit  for  our  inde-
fatigable and  successful  labors,  in
establishing  an  extensive  and  flour-
ishing colony,  on  a  portion  of  our
Government  domain,  formerly  in-
habited by  savages  and  wild  beasts  ;
provided  we  would  admit  this  work
to  be  the  work  of  man,  and  nut  of
God — that  it  had  been  accomplished
through  the  artifice  and  wisdom  of
man,  and  not  by  the  power,  wisdom
and  revelations  of  God.

Joseph  Smith,  whom  God  chose
to  establish  this  work,  was  poor  and
uneducated,  and  belonged  to  no
popular  denomination  of  Chris-
tians, He  was  a  mere  boy,  honest,
full  of  integrity,  un acquainted  with
the  trickery,  cunning  and  sophistry


DIVINE  TESTIMONY  TO  THE  TRUTH  OF  THE  GOSPEL.


373


employed  by  politicians  and  religious
hypocrites,  to  accomplish  their  ends.
Like  Moses  of  old,  he  felt  incom-
petent and  unqualified  for  the  task,
to  stand  forth  as  a  religious  reformer,
in  a  position  the  most  unpopular —
to  battle  against  opinions  and  creeds
which  have  stood  for  ages  having
the  sanction  and  support  of  men,
the  most  profound  in  theological
lore;  but  God  had  called  him  to
deliver  the  poor  and  honest-hearted
of  all  nations  from  their  spiritual
and  temporal  thralldom.  And  God
promised  him  that  whosoever  should
receive  and  obey  His  message — be
baptized  for  the  remission  of  sins,
with  honesty  of  purpose — might
receive  divine  manifestations,  should
receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  same
Gospel  blessings  which  were  prom-
ised and  obtained  through  the  Gos-
pel, when  preached  by  the  ancient
apostles.  And  this  message,  this
promise,  was  to  be  in  force  wherever
and  to  whomsoever  it  should  be
carried  by  the  Elders,  God's  author-
ized messengers.  So  said,  Joseph
Smith,  the  uneducated,  the  unso-
phisticated, the  plain,  simple,  hon-
est boy.

It  is  through  the  virtue  and  force
of- this  boy's  statement,  that  I  speak
this  afternoon,  to  assembled  thou-
sands*

In  the  integrity  of  my  heart,  with
honesty  of  purpose  to  know  the
truth,  I  received  this  message — I
obeyed  this  form  of  doctrine  and  I
received,  in  the  most  tangible  and
satisfactory  manner,  a  divine  mani-
festation—the promised  blessing —
a  knowledge  of  this  work.  Am
I  the  only  witness  ?  How  is  it
with  the  experience  of  thousands
whom  I  now  address  I  Are  you
also  witnesses  ?  If  you  are  not,  I
ask  you  in  the  name  of  common
sense,  why  are  you  here  t  Why  did
you  leave  your  homes  and  country,


giving  your  sanction  to  the  truth
of  a  system  which  promised  you
divine  manifestations,  but  which
you  failed  in  experiencing  1  Being
honest  ourselves,  if  we  can  not  bear
a  truthful  testimony  of  having  re-
ceived divine  manifestations  that
God,  Himself,  has  founded  this  order
of  things,  then  it  becomes  a  serious
fact,  that  we  are  witnesses,  and  in
truth  the  only  proper  witnesses,
that  this  whole  plan  and  pretention
of  Joseph  Smith  is  a  sheer  falsehood,
a  miserable  fabrication.

It  will  be  recollected  that  this
Gospel  message  proposed  to  give  us
divine  manifestations  through  our
doing  certain  specified  acts;  we  have
performed  those  acts  in  precisely
the  manner  indicated.  None  but
ourselves  have  attempted  to  conform
to  this  arrangement ;  consequently,
no  other  people  are  prepared  to  be
witnesses  either  for  or  against  this
system. * * * *  ::"

When  the  Gospel,  or  order  of
things  which  we  have  received,  was
presented  to  us,  we  carefully  com-
pared it  with  the  Gospel  recorded
in  the  Scriptures,  and  found  it  alike
in  every  particular,  as  regards  its
forms,  ordinances,  and  the  authority
to  administer  them  ;  its  promise  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  signs  that
should  follow,  together  with  the
promise  of  a  knowledge  of  its  divine
origin.  In  many  instances  it  was
brought  to  us  by  men  with  whose
character  we  were  familiar,  and  fur
whose  honesty  and  integrity  we
could  vouch,  who  solemnly  stated
that,  through  an  obedience  to  its
requirements,  they  had  obtained
a  knowledge  of  its  heaven-born
principles,

Tli is  was  my  experience,  and
after  having  complied  with  its  de-
mands, and  thereupon  received  a
knowledge  of  its  genuineness,  and
having  obtained  authority  to  preach


374


JOURNAL  O*  DiSCuUKSKS


and  administer  its  ordinances,  I
commenced  forthwith  to  proclaim  it
to  the  world  ;  and  undoubtedly
there  are  persons  in  this  congrega-
tion, out  of  different  nations,  to
whom  I  have  administered  this  (  Jos-
pel,  who  can  witness  to  its  virtue
and  efficacy.  Many  years  I  have
been  engaged  in  forwarding  the  in-
terests of  this  order  of  things,  and
you  are  the  proper  judges  whether
it  be  of  God  or  of  man.

We  have  the  same  Gospel  the
primitive  churches  had,  and  the  like
knowledge  and  evidence  they  had
of  its  divine  authority  j  and  we  have
just  as  brave  and  honest  Elders  to
preach  it  -  men  who  have  proven
their  integrity  through  sacrifice  as
great  as  the  Elders  of  the  primitive
churches  ever  made.  The  testimony
of  our  Elders  is  as  valid  and  worthy
of  credit  as  the  testimony  of  their
Elders.  Our  present  Apostles  are
as  hoi  rust  as  the  Apostles  ot  the
New  Testament,  and  our  testimony
is  as  worthy  of  credit,  so  far  as  we
live  and  speak  according  to  the
Scriptural  law  and  testimony.  If
this  order  of  things  which  we  have
obeyed  is  not  the  Gospel — if  these
evidences,  these  manifestations,  this
knowledge,  this  Holy  Ghost,  these
deliverances  from  misery  and  bond-
age, and  being  placed  in  comfortable
and  happy  circumstances,  living
together  in  peace  and  harmony,
building  beautiful  towns  and  cities,
free  from  demoralizing  institutions,
be  not  the  legitimate  fruits  of  the
working  of  the  pure  and  holy  system
established  by  God,  through  Joseph
Smith,  we  shall  he  compelled  to
question  the  genuineness  of  the
Gospel  of  the  funnel- day  Saints,
as  recorded  in  the  New  Testa-
ment.

By  some,  it  has  been  argued,  that
Joseph  Smith  and  the  prominent
Elder*  were  the  most  corrupt,  wicked


and  infamous  of  impostors,  but
his  followers,  the  Latter-day  Saints,
in  general,  though  deceived,  were
very  good  people,  and  scrupulously
honest  in  their  religious  opinions.

From  what  I  have  already  said  in
regard  to  the  operations  and  effects
of  this  work,  it  may  readily  be  seen
that,  if  it  he  an  imposition,  it  is  not
confined  exclusively  to  the  leaders
of  tliis  people,  but  this  whole  com-
munity are  actively,  and  knowingly
engaged  in  a  stupendous  scheme  of
deception  and  hypocrisy;  and,  by  the
way,  as  I  before  hinted,  if  this  could
be  proven  to  be  the  case,  we  should
be  driven  to  the  belief  that  the
former-day  Saints,  also,  had  been
engaged  in  the  same  disgraceful
imposition.

More  than  one  hundred  thousand
people  now  dwell  in  these  valleys,
many  of  them  having  come  from
distant  climes  and  nations*  In  this
great  fact  they  willingly  and  under-
standingly  exhibit  tu  the  world  a
powerful  testimony  more  expres-
sive than  any  language  could  cum-
mand,  that  they  did,  undeniably  and
positively  receive,  through  the  ordi-
nances of  this  Gospel,  administered
unto  them  by  our  Elders,  a  knowl-
edge of  this  work,  through  divine
manifestations.

But  it  may  be  objected  that,
whereas,  members  of  our  community
were  found  by  our  missionaries  in
great  poverty  and  distress,  therefore,
tliey  obeyed  the  Gospel  ami  migrated
here,  to  better  their  circumstances
financially,  without  regard  to  its
truth  or  falsity  as  a  divine  system.
Although  this  might  be  true  in  iso-
lated instances,  it  is  impossible  as
regards  its  application  to  our  people
as  a  community.  Those  persons
who  received  this  work  without
religious  motives,  and  without  an
honest  conviction  of  its  divine  re-
quirements, but  solely  for  the  "loaves


PERSECUTION  PROMISED  THE  SAINTS.


375


and  fishes"  can  not  possibly  abide
the  test  to  which  every  one's  faith,
sooner  or  later,  must  be  brought,
but  will  have  his  dishonesty  and  hy-
pocrisy exposed,  ami  will  sooner  or
later  apostatize.

Hundreds  of  our  Elders,  full  of
Godly  zeal,  animated  with  the  purest
motives,  having  obtained  a  knowl-
edge of  the  will  of  God,  have  left
their  wives  and  children,  whatever
the  heart  holds  most  dear,  and  gone
forth  to  the  nations  without  worldly
compensation,  calling  on  all  to  re-
pent and  turn  their  hear  to  to  the
Lcrd — obey  the  Gospel,  with  a  pro-
mise that  they  should  receive  the
Holy  Ghost,  which  would  '*  lead
unto  all  truth  and  show  things  to
come,  and  would  he  their  guide  and
monitor — a  principle  of  revelation,
remaining  with  them  through  life,
inasmuch  as  they  preserved  their
honesty  and  integrity,  continuing
faithful  in  keeping  the  command-
ments of  Gud,  and  devoting  their
time,  their  means,  their  talents,
their  all  in  building  up  the  Kingdom
of  God,  These  duties  were  required,
these  blessings  promised  by  our  El-
ders in  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.
To  obtain  light — a  knowledge  of  the
will  of  God,  to  secure  the  true  reli-
gion— divine  manifestations  regard-
ing the  truth  of  the  doctrine  as
taught  by  Joseph  Smith,  was  the
first,  and  all-absorbing  proposition
presented  to  the  people.

Now,  whether  these  Elders  and
missionaries  were  base  impostors,
promulgating  sheer  falsehoods,  or
not,  is  of  course  a  question  of  grave
consideration ;  yet  it  is  a  matter  of
far  greater  importance,  and  of  more
serious  inquiry,  whether  our  people,
as  a  community,  having  failed  to
receive  those  divine  testimonies,
keep  silent  as  to  that  most  vital
and  important  question,  and  come
here  to  practice  fraud  and  deception


in  religion,  and  thus  fasten  irresist-
ibly  upon  the  minds  of  our  children
and  future  generations  a  system
of falsehoods, for  a  divine  reli-


gion.


Joseph  Smith  affirmed  that  Peter,
James  and  John  visited  him,  and
conferred  on  him  authority  to  ad-
minister the  holy  ordinances  of  the
Gospel  through  which  every  honest-
hearted  man  and  woman  was  pro-
mised the  Holy  Ghost,  and  a  perfect
knowledge  of  the  doctrine.

I  had  been  a  member  of  this
Church  but  a  short  time  when  T  ob-
tained, by  a  divine  manifestation,  a
clear,  explicit  and  tangible  demon-
stration of  the  truth  of  this  work.
Thousands  and  tens  of  thousands
of  Latter-day  Saints,  men  and  wo-
men, in  private  life,  can  testify  to
the  same  experience ;  and  though
I  may  know  many  principles  in  re-
gard to  this  doctrine,  winch  in  their
limited  experience,  they  may  not
understand,  yet  in  that  one  fiwf,
they  are  equal  to  me  in  knowledge,
equal  to  the  messengers  who  have
administered  to  them  this  Gospel.

1  now  wish  to  examine  another
prominent  feature  of  our  religion.
An  important  item  which  was  promi-
nently held  forth  wherever  this  Gos-
pel was  proclaimed,  was,  that  its
followers  should  have  an  abundance
of  persecutions,  and  probably,  in
the  progress  of  this  new  life,  be  com-
pelled to  suffer  the  most  trying  sac-
rifices, as  wife,  children,  houses  and
lands,  despoiling  of  goods,  and
perhaps  even,  of  life  itself.  No
persons  are  properly  prepared  to
enter  upon  this  new  life,  until  they
have  formed,  within  themselves,  a
fixed  resolution  to  abide  this
ordeal

Tiie  Savior,  the  Apostles,  Joseph
Smith,  and  the  Latter-day  Elders,
when  ottering  this  system  to  the
people,  told  them  clearly  and  em-


37G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUKSES


phabically,  that  it  required  sacrifices
of  the  most  serious  character —
that  it  would  bring  persecutions,
change  our  warmest  friends  into
bitter  and  relentless  enemies,  and
tli at  instances  would  occur  when  the
world  in  the  confused  ideas  of  right
and  wrong,  would  even  conceive
they  were  doing  God's  service  in
taking  our  lives.  These  wen?  dark
and  forbidding  prospects  to  a  rational
person  in  allowing  himself  to  be
proselyted  to  a  system  whose  truths
he  could  not  know,  but  only  guess
at  by  what  lie  was  told,  or  of  which
he  had  read*  Every  man  and  every
woman,  before  receiving  a  system
that  called  for  such  sacrifices,  would
require  a  positive  assurance  that
submission  to  its  requirements  would
bring  indisputable  knowledge  of  its
true  divinity,  so  that,  after  having
obtained  a  divine  witness  of  its
genuineness,  they  could'  willingly,
cheerfully  and  with  a  resolution,
inspired  by  the  Almighty,  move
forward  along  the  pathway  of
persecution  and  sacrifice,  traversed
in  all  ages  by  martyred  Saints  and
Prophets.

On  this  point  permit  me  again  to
quote  what  Jesus  promised,  viz  :
"  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  Barjona:
for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed
it  unto  thee,  but  my  Father  which  is
in  heaven.  And  upon  this  rock  I  will
build  my  Church;  and  the  gates  of
hell  shed  I  not  prevail  against  it."
Peter  had  obtained  a  revelatio?i
which  Jesus  called  a  Hack,  which
every  man  might  receive  individu-
ally lor  himself  to  build  upon,  with
perfect  assurance  and  safety — on
which  he  could  anchor  his  hopes  and
prospects  of  salvation.  Peter,  on
the  day  of  Pentecost,  promised  the
Holy  Ghost  to  those  who  would  re-
pent and  receive  baptism.  That
principle  imparts  the  knowledge  or
the  rock  of  revelation  upon  which
the  Savior  declared His  people


should  be  established  ;  and  we  eon*
sfcitute  the  only  religious  community
which  flares  assume  this  Scriptural
position ;  and  our  realization  of
the  Savior  s  promise,  H  that  hell
shall  not  prevail  against"  a  people
thus  established,  affords  us  peace,
tranquility,  unshaken  confidence,
and  a  cheering  and  happy  assurance
of  security  in  the  midst  of  all  kinds
of  threatened  ruin  and  overthrow.
It  is  the  people,  the  masses — not
exclusively  their  leaders,  who  pos-
sess this  knowledge,  and  boldly
testify  to  its  possession.

The  astronomer  may  know  of
many  laws  and  phenomena  relating
to  the  sun  and  its  movements
through  ethereal  space ;  but  as  re-
gards the  simple  fact  that  it  exists,
and  shines  upon  the  earth,  millions
know  as  well  as  himself.  President
Brighani  Young  and  even  Joseph
Smith,  so  far  as  respects  the  fact,
that  this  Gospel  which  we  preach
as  a  divine  institution,  inn  er  "pro-
fessed to  have  a  knowledge  more
convincing  and  satisfactory  than  tens
of  thousands  in  these  valleys  who
never  arose  to  address  a  public
audience.

This  system  of  religion,  in  its  na-
ture, iu  the  character  of  its  origin,
the  manner  of  its  operations,  and
in  the  purposes  for  which  it  was
designed,  coupled  with  the  fact,  that
people  of  honest  hearts,  can  and
will  appreciate  divine  truth,  is  such
that  it  cannot  be  destroyed.  A  man
who  is  honest,  full  of  integrity  and
love  for  the  interest  and  happiness
of  mankind,  having  explored  this
long  untrodden  path,  and  made  this
glorious  discovery,  will  not  and  can-
not keep  silent,  but  despite  of
threats  and  opposition,  howevei
tierce  and  terrific,  will  boldly  declare
the  glorious  fact,  spreading  and
multiplying  this  divine  intelligence,
and  if  so  required,  heal  this  testi-
mony with  his  own  life's  blood.
