JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES
PRESIDENT BRIG  II  AM  YOUNG,
HIS  COUNSELORS,
THE TWELVE APOSTLES, AM)  OTHERS.
BE POUTER  By
D.  W.  EVANS,  JAMES  TAYLOH,  AND  J,  Q.  CANN03T,
AND R  EfcPKrTF  ULLY  DEDICATE  I!  TO  Tfll  LATTER-  DAY  SAINTS  ttf  ALL  Till  WORLD.
VOL.  XVI.
LIVERPOOL:
FEINTED  AND  PUBLISHED  BY  JOSEPH  ft  SMITH,  42,  ISLINGTON,
LONDON;
J  A  TIER 'DAT  SAINTS*  B  OK  I>£FOTT  20,  BISHOP*  GROVE,  IttUliGTQ^
I'll  KFAt'i..
We  now  present  to  the  ^attor-diiy  Saints,  ami  all  1ov<t.-$  t»f  truth,
the  Sixteenth  Volume  of  the  Journal  of  Disco urses  of  Presideufc
Brigham  Young,  hi*  Counselors,  the  TVHvr  Apostles,  a:iri  others;
continent  that  all  who  U-A  ati  interest  in  tin*  advancement  of  the
pvaL  Latter-day  AYork,  :md  the  spread  of  truth  upon  the  earth,  will
peruse  its  pages  with  joy  and  profit  unto  themselves,  smtl  preserve  it
as  containing  sacred  writings  of  inspired  mem
THE  PUBLISHER.
INDEX.
Date.  J\v.e.
Establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  God — Permanent  equality
shout  .J  be  maintained  among  the  flftntn rmrt  mijiH
Tithing— Consecration~l>istinct  ions,  O,  Pratr April 7,  1
The  Order  of  Enoch— Study  of  Law— How  to  become  i  rich.
K  VoLMit April 7, ||  IS
Testimony — Sickness  in  Sanpete  Comity  — Increase  of  crime  in
the  world— The  ujlyiLiW  overthrow  of  the  wicked.
O.  Hvnt April 7, it  VZ
Assistance  of  the  Ladies  of  the  Relief  Societies  required  in
promoting  the  manufacture  of  paper  and  the  printing  of
school  books— Ligh:  and  easy  laW  ii"w  performed  by  men
mere  adapted  to  women — Should  be  self -sustaining— Frivol-
ities ami  fashions  of  Babylon  should  be  discarded  by  the
Sisters — Poverty  of  those  who  follow  alter  Mining.
B,  Young* Apnl 7, „  15
Friends  and  enemies — objivt  of  gathering-  Babylon  to  be  for-
saken—Prayer— Personality  of  the  Godhead* B,  VouSO, April Gf t,  23
Home  Manufacture— Uffeiices  must  needs  emm*— Z ion  is ■  grow-
ing i  lpnrtauce  en  the  earth — The  kingdom  of  God  is
now  established— Second  coming  of  Christ — Unpopularity  of
our  religion — The  Holy  Ghost  if  <h«  infallible  icstiiiiony  to
the  believer— The  tiu>'pcl  embraces  all  truth.

W,  Wgodsikf. April 7. „  32

Unbelief— The  Saints  require  constant  instruction- -Contrast
between  the  Gospel  of  Christ  and  the  religions  of  men —
Km  I  would  ">':ise  among  *he  Saints  if  tliey  would  live  their
religion— Gathering  the  paor— Tithing— Kuuwledgs  of  God
— Progress!  the  work  is  due  to  the  o^>era  ions  of  the  Spirit.

li.  Y'ol'mj. May IS, „  40

Meeting  of  Adam  with  his  p  svri  v  in  the  Valley  of  Adam-
ondi-ahman — Location  of  the  Valley — The  covenant  with
Knot  h — Kceor.ls  of  (iod^s  dealings  with  men  from  the  period
of  the  creation— Method  of  preserving  (he  records  of  an-
cient Prophets — Christ's  advent  among  the  Xepliites— Ful-
fillment of  God's  purposes  and  the  fullness  ot  Times.

O*  Pratt. May 18, lt  47

Improved  circumstances  of  the  Saints  iu  Utah—  Potency  of  the

law  of  Tuning.  F.  D,  Uiciiahi>sl June 58, ,T  5»

Extension  of  the  Utah  Northern  Ilailroad — The  building  of  the
meeting  house  and  other  public  improvements  urged  on  the
people— Faith  made  manitest  by  works — Unity  in  labor  and
oo- operation  in  all  things  pert  lining  to  the  kingdom  -iium-
tier  of  those  in  the  congregation  acqeaioted  with  the  Prophet
Joseph — Early  experience  in  the  Church— BewanU  will
follow  obedience— Ubjeet  of  the  la*  of  Tithing — Serves  the

Lord  because  of  the  parity of  lie veulmL  truth , B.  Y o u ng, J  u n e 2 8, , ,  63


VI


INDEX.


May

25,

15,

June

22,

..  87

I3  nor auce  o  f  t .  o  wo  td  eo tic e  n i n g  o  lr  .ait h — Oh  rac ter  r » f  r h ri *  t a
teachings — Organization  of  the  Church  «f  Jesus  Christ  of
La! ter -day  SainK  inm  lar  bo  'hat  of  fuillff  days — Belief
alone  insufficient — fclxhor  atiou  to  the  Sa  nts  to  live  then
religion  and  to  ucqui  e  all  useful  knowledge, B  Young.

The  ilse  of  Ziou  in  the  last  days,  0.  Piutx

An  account  of  bis  jou  ney  to  FJestiue,  CL  A*  8^  ^h.

Obedience — By  reaM.ni  ui  their  disobedience,  ancient  Israel  and
Jn*  land  of  Palestine  veie  vim  led  with  run!  si  til  it-mai-1
u  i  liter  the  car*e i ■! rithin^  »  Hesvi  ily  n  [iiirement.

U.  A,  >,rijji. Juiit ^i, ,.  102

Contim  ed  obedience  to  the  lews  ot  God  is  necessary  to  insure  i
complete  salvation  to  the  Latirr-day  Saints — The  Disobe-
dience of  aneien  Israel  is  shown  warning  to  the  pro-
sent  gone  at  ion  of  :  ■■  peojae — The  nature  and  necessity  of
ihe  'aw  of  Tit  hi  n  "—Tie  fewm  ss  of  those  who  faithfully
observe  that  law.  B.  You  NO, June? 37,  10S

Altered  circumstances  of  pa'ueretl  h.uel — Allurements  f-f^ara
at  work — Selli  buess  nd  avarice  should  be  cast  aside — De-
votion to  the  work  of  God —The  Order  of  Enoch,  the  Cleans
of  establishing  an  equality  ti  temporal  things  HenvenJy

a^enru's  eo  i ►  ev:ititJ^  villi  the  Saints. &  ^Cissos, June  tf  115

The  Order  o*  Enoch.  Ii.  Vn,  m:. June *2l\ lt  1**2

l\j  ; •  if  i  ioti  in  creat t.  j;  Man  —  Man's  aMney—Daties  of  those
Who  have  entered  into  cove  'ant  v,ith  tiod— Reward  ot  faith
t'ul  in1  s — Wo  k  tu  be  accomplished  bofuio  tbo  second  coming

of  Jesus — Avoid  evd  ssociatious*  £ JrJ*  W  c  .» Auj, $t  ,,123

Necessity  jf  Miracles — Belief  of  the  Latter-day  Sainti*.

0,  Pra-r. July Ut „  135

The  authority  to  preach— It  is  tivd  who  ha*  guided  the  work—
tiL  rti'iiji  proyets  t-.-t«MV  he  fail  111 ul lV.cM:ul  marriage
Mlssio  i  to  Arizona—  Increasing  negligence  of  t  ie  Saints  in
atte  ding  meeting* — Consequences  ot'  unviituous  ae  iona.

0  Q.  Cannon. Aug* 10 „  140

The  ma  hi  festal  ious  of  God1  power,  in  behalf  of  hi  a  people  in
modern  limes,  are  dihVrcut  from  these  of  former  ages —
Consecration-— Order  of  Enoch — Tithi  n^—ike  wardships—
Kedemptiou  of  Ziou.  O.  JV  \tt. Auj. 10t  I4<>

The  Gospel  incorporates  all  truth- -mode  of  admin  uterine  the
$a  ragout... Al>. dine  counsel...  Heavenly  bUmug*  are  eon-
ditioiuil  I'ri^it  x.siverteseof  the  Work  ,  .Plural  marriage...
Ttthillf  Tifninr  ti  of  tht>  Saint*  m  observing  practical
duties...  Co-operation.  Ii,  Young.

Marriage,  *\  Vu  \  it.

Ordinances  that  can  only  be  ad  mini  lered  in  the  Temple.-.
E ii m * w u i en t *P  etc,  I \.  Vorx ■  ■

Visit  of  the  riLSjih  vr>  m N  u  tle  t  n  SettUmeiils.

O.  A,  Hl1Y%

John  T*tjOH.

Ancient  Prophfey.  ...Kclating  to  the  time  of  the  ltestitution  uf
nil  t  lungs  to  )je  1 1  Lillet  I.  Kl:astus  Snow.

Kfidenees,  relating  tu  th,  l*ivnn:  Autheitticity  of  the  hilde  ami
lloiAa  of  Mormon  t  roaapai'etL  O.  "rait,

A  Wipi-iI  i4  M+\hortetkm.  A.  Smith.


:n.

it

hiO

Aug.

si.

If

171

Sept.

*»

Sept.

-*

7,

ri

190

Sept.

H

►^-ri'..

11

ti

Sept.

ii

tie  ..

1 1

2^

IN  HEX


Tin .i| I :i "•.*'•  of  i  \  -ii  • i  ■  Ifir  knowlwlflfi-  |irt^oiHPit  In il Ui  1

tho  mpim  -il  fs  in/nil*  nfk  I  lie  Lntrei  *-ijfty  Saint**,  through

the  living  <  moles  of  God.  i>  Mi-k  f-a/m-. (VL tjl »  US

Affair*  in  Sanpete  f ".%iunt-\*.--s  -  On©  Man  power"...  Unify  iwtiro.l

mio  isr  tlie  lVnpk.H  (i.  Hvuir, Oct* fi. „  i!2S

Tlw  Word  of  Wisdom KJ.viiiiau.  <;.  A.  Mi.n. o.  t, 7, TP  237

Th<^ inir  Ordinances  of  the  <  lo^ol.  D.  H,  Welu. Oct, fi, ,,  239

The  eh after  of  tin*  rhitivh  of  Christ.,. Testimony  is  given  by
tins  Spirit.  Trials  to  l>o  encountered  and  ^uriiirVs  to  be
runile  in  oi-ilor  1  ■  ■*  prove  the  faith  of  the  Saints., .The  love  of
wmlth,  Q.  Q+  Ca:inon, il  t. ii. „  £41

T]ir  Instructions  given  are  intendi-d  for  nil  the  Saint*  Tho

Latter  flay  work  i&  individual  work. ..men  nm]  w*nrnTi  aro
responsible  for  their  own  arta...  Obedience  is  essential  to
solvation...  The  present,  sinful  condition  of  the  world  llio
rrsi.lr  of  disobedience. .»( .''oiinecl  lo  tloi  Saint*  on  1  ho  nnvs-
■Ity  of  living  exclusively  for  I  he  building  up  of  the  kingdom
ofYiod.  Jos.  F,  Smith. Oct* 7 „  i46

Temples  to  be  Hutlt  to  the  name  of  the  Lord.., The  location  if
llierr  cmrtion,  and  ilir  pni'juwrH  torwliHil hoy  shall  ho  built,

0,  Pratt. Oct, 7* „  251

UnehaniieAUeness  of  the  Gospel... God  has  chosen  the  weak
ihiti^K  of  the  world  lo  confound  the  wrso  Prophecies  iv-
1a  ting  Lo  the  Latter-day  work...  Joseph  Smith's  minis  try ...
Zitui  to  be  Im  ||  irv>«>Hiiprism  fnr  the  dead,,/! he  Order  of

i.rktieh...  Baby  Ion  ish  fashions.  v\"  i  i.|.\nm  Woutjrltvk Oct 8, .  203

Our  temporal  interests  to  b*1  ilirt'CtfHl  for  the  work  of  the  Lord
.  Co-operation  and  home  manufacture  in  Boa  Elder  County*

1(ORe«zo  Snow. Oct 7,  273

Means  required  to  build  the  ""em pies. . .1* he  word  of  wfsdom,..
Tnity  needed  in  building  up  Zion. .Sabbath  schools,  .Jon. -

neyings  in  the  holy  land,  G,  A*  Surra. Oct* S. tt  279

D  i  1  t  i  r  i  gu  i  sb  i  i  i  it  oh  a  i  iu te  rist  ics  bet  wee  u  t  he  La  tte  r  -d  a v  Sai  n  U  and
the  various  religious  denominations  of  Christendom.

U  Pit  vi-r. Nov,  „  2S4

Honesty  of  purpose  should  actuate  a1!  true  helievors..  Views  of
nimfuiul  in  relation  to  Cod. ..The  existing  modes  of  EMM
worship... Ancient  Christianity  compared  with  modern  so-
called  Christianity** -The  principles  of  the  Gospel

John  T  a  v  iu  a, Nov, 16, „  301

The  Creation... The  Seventh  tlunisnnd  years,  and  events  which

Are  to  follow  t  .e  nci'ind  of  tho  Millennium, O.  FfiATT* Nov, 52,  ,,312

Revelation  on  the  judgements  of  the  r^ord... First  fruits  of  the
resu  rrection...  What  heco  met  j  of  the  souls  of  men.,.  Redemp-
tion universal.  0-  Pkatt, Dec* J8, ti  326

The  stick  of  Joseph  unci  of  Judah,., Times  of  the  Gentiles...
Apostasy  from  the  ancient  Cider.  „Kesteration  of  the  ever-
last  ii£  Gospel  o.  Vratl Jan, 25  18^4,339

The  incrcasud  powers  ami  capacities  of  man  in  his  future  state,

0.  FaAtT. Jan. 27.  353

What  the  Gosjicl  teaches  ..Kevelataou  from  God  necessary...
The  faith  and  doctrines  of  the  Latter-dsv  Saint*,

John  Taylor, Feb, 1  369


■


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.

K  ■


JWAIIKS BY  YAAmi ORSON  PRATT,

Deliv; at  rirr,  Okxhkai.  i'oxpk&IInCH,  lit  T»S  Nkw  Tahrrn"  ai'Lie^  Saxt

Lakh  City,  Monday  Mors  ma,  A  i-ntL  7,  1873,

(Rcpoti'  if  hit  ho  rid  fK  istoam)


VS'V\\W.\&HtBSSCt  OF  TH K  KINGDOM
BHOtTLB  BK  MAINTAIN El>  AMONG
TITII  r NG  — 1X)N  S  K<  11 A  J

It  is  a  pleasure  to  me  to  b&arieat1-
mony  to  the  great  work  which  God  !
has  revealed,  and  which  he  is  esta-  •
blishing  on  the  earth.  It.  has  been
a  pleasure  for  mp  to  do  bo  for  nearly  |
forty*  three  ve  irs.  In  the  early  rise
of  this  Church,  when  1  was  but  a
yonth  uf  nineteen,  God  wealed  to
me  the  troth  conoerning  this  great
latter-day  work,  and  I  have  felt  from
that  day  until  the  present  time  to
bear  my  testimony  to  the  same,
being  commanded  so  to  do,  I  have
esteemed  it  above  all  other  thiugs
The  things  of  this  world  have  been
nothing  to  me,  when  com  pared  wit  Si
the  ministry,  or  declaring  the  truth
to  mankind.  We  have  one  of  the
most  important  messages  to  deliver
to  the  children  of  men  that  has  ever
been  communicated  to  mortals — a
dispensation  of  the  same  Grospel  as
was  committed  to  men  in  the  early
agwa  of  the  world,  and  in  the  differ-
ent dispensations  down  io  the  coming

No.  I.


01?  c;01> —  PERMANENT  KQUAMTY
THB  SAINTS—  COVETOUSNESS —

now — DiSTracrri0!*s»

of  t's'T-i In  addition  to  this,  which
renders  our  message  of  still  more
importance  to  the  human  family,  is
iho  'net  that  wo  are  living  in  the
last  dispensation  that  will  be  given
tn  mankind,  called  tli  dispensation
of  the  fullness  of  times.  All  prece-
ding dispensations  have  come  to  an
end,app*n'Titly,  and  those  who  have
embrac  ed  tlut  rioetrines  or  principles
oornmiinicuteri  to  (Ucm  have  pawed
nway,  and  darkness  has  intervened.
But  in  this  lust,  dispensation  which
God  has  given  to  man,  there  will  be
no  uprooting  and  destruction  of  his
kingdom  from  the  earth — it  is  est  a
blished  never  more  to  be  thrown
down,  in  fulfill  nap  t  of  ancient  pro-
phecy. This  is  w-kat  makes  this
dispensation  of  greater  importance
thai i  all  which  have  preceded  it.

[fere  in  these  mountains  is  eat a-
hlished  a  kingdom,  not  earth I v  or
transient  in  its  nature,  with  officers:
who  are  called  by  uninspired  men

Vol  XVI


2  JOURNAL  OF

but  a  kingdom  that  is  divine,  and
which  acknowledges  the  Great  Re-
deemer  and  Savior  as  its  King  and
Lawgiver. It  must  endure  torever.

I  look  back  with  great  pleasure
upon  the  history  of  this  people  from
the  commencement  down  to  the  pre*
sent  time.  I  see  what  God  has
wrought  in  their  behalf;  I  see  what
he  has  accomplished  among  the  na-
tions. It  is  true  that  we  have  not
continued  as  faithful  in  all  things  as
we  should.  We  have  not  made  that
progression  in  this  kiugdom  that  we
ought.  We  have  been  perhaps  slow
to  hearken  in  all  things  to  the  coun-
sels which  God  has  given,  and  the
order  which  he  has  revealed,  and
which  was  intended  to  be  of  the
greatest  advantage  to,  and  to  produce
the  greatest  amount  of  happiness
among  the  Saints  of  the  Most  High.
I  say  that,  in  some  respects,  we  have
been  slow  to  obey  the  order  of  Hea-
ven. In  many  tilings  we  have  done
well  When  the  doctrines  of  faith,
repentance  and  baptism  for  the  re-
mission of  sins,  the  baptism  of  fire
and  the  Holy  Ghost  through  the
laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  servants
of  God,  were  taught  to  us,  we  laid
hold  of  them  with  full  purpose  of
heart.  We  covenanted  before  high
heaven  that  we  would  keep  the  com-
mandments of  the  Lord  according  to
the  best  of  the  ability  which  we  had,
We  did  well  in  embracing  these
heavenly  principles.

When  God  spake  to  us  some  forty-
two  or  forty- three  years  ago,  and
command td  us — then  scattered  about
in  the  State  of  New  York — to  gather
up  to  Ohio,  we  did  well  in  hearken-
ing to  that  commandment,  and  com-
ing together  in  Kirtland — then  in
Geauga  County.  Again,  when  God
gave  a  commandment  through  his
servant,  the  Prophet  Joseph,  to  ga-
ther up  from  all  parts  of  the  United
States  and  form  a  nucleus  in  Jackson


DISCOURSE.

County,  in  the  St'ite  of  Missouri,  we
did  well  in  obeying  that  command-
ment. When  God,  by  the  mouth  of
his  servant,  commanded  thit  we
should  go  forth  and  officiate  and  be
baptized  for  and  in  behalf  of  oar
deid  kindred,  we  did  well  in  per-
form in  g  that  which  we  were  com-
manded to  do.  When  he  commanded
his  Saints,  scattered  abroad  in  foreign
countries,  to  gather  to  this  continent,
all  who  gathered  in  obedience  to  that
requirement,  with  full  purpose  of
heart  to  do  his  will,  dii  well.  When
we  were  driven  from  our  inheritances
in  Jackson  County,  Missouri,  and
our  lands  and  houses  and  goods  were
spoiled,  we  did  well  in  bem^  faithful
to  God.  When  our  enemies,  a  few
years  after,  rose  en  masse  and  drove
ns  from  our  beautiful  city  of  Nau-
voo  into  these  inhospitable  western
wilds,  where  to  all  human  appear-
ance we  must  perish  of  starvation,
we  did  well  to  brave  the  dangers
of  the  desert,  and  the  difficulties
we  had  to  encounter  in  coming  to
these  mountains.  In  many  other
things,  too,  we  have  done  well.
There  are  some  few  things,  however*
which  I  wish  to  name,  wherein  I
think  a  great  reformation  is  needed
among  the  people  of  God.  I  read  in
this  book,  called  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, of  a  certain  order,  in  regard  to
temporal  things,  which  existed  soon
after  the  days  of  Christ,  which  was
revealed  and  established  by  him  for
the  benefit  of  the  Saints  who  lived
on  this  Western  Hemisphere*  It
was  the  highest  order  and  law  of  the
kingdom  of  God  in  regard  to  tempo
ral  things.  I  read  that  the  ancient
Saints  upon  this  continent  entered
into  that  order  with  all  their  hearts.
They  were  not  a  small  handful  of
people  like  the  Latter-day  Saints,
bat  they  were  spread  over  tbe  whole
of  North  and  South  America.  Mil
liout  on  millions  of  people  dwelt  in


ESTABLISHMENT  OF  THE  KINDOM  OF  GOD,  ETC


3


larsfe  ami  populous  cities  in  tlie  four
quarters  of  this  great  Western  Hemi-
sphere, and  they  all  entered  into  this
heavenly  order  which  God  had  esta-
blished on  this  continent  and  con-
tinued therein  for  167  years.

What  was  that  order  ?  They  had
all  things  in  common*  Not  an  iso-
lated few  where  Jesus  ministered  to
them;  not  a  few  individuals  who
dwelt  in  a  certain  region  ot  country,
bat  the  Savior  having  chosen  twelve
disciples  from  among  the  ni altitude
to  who  ni  he  appeared,  they  were
sent  forth  upon  all  the  face  of  the
land,  and  so  great  were  the  evidences
given,  concerning  the  appearance  of  ;
Jesus,  that  the  whole  people  were
converted  unto  the  Lord,  and  they
were  willing  to  be  guided  by  those
servants  who  were  called  and  ordained
to  administer  in  their  midst.

Prior  to  that  time  there  were  rich
and  poor  among  the  people,  and,
from  the  history  given,  no  doubt  an
order  of  things  existed  on  this  con-
tinent in  those  days  resembling  that
which  now  exists  among  all  the  na-
tions and  kingdoms  of  the  earth —
some  lifted  np  in  pride  and  popu-
larity because  of  their  great  wealth,
others  bowed  down  in  the  dust  be-
cause of  their  poverty,  and  class  dis-
tinctions prevailed  until  this  new
order  of  things  was  established.
What  a  blessed  people  !  How  happy
they  must  have  been !  No  poor
either  in  North  or  South  America.
No  beggars  in  the  streets  of  their
great  cities,  but  all  the  property —
the  gul  l  and  silver,  the  flocks  and
herds,  and  everything  that  was  cal-
culated to  make  life  happy  in  the
possession  of  and  enjoy ed,  as  stew-
ards, by  the  whole  people.  No  ine-
quality, so  far  as  this  was  concerned,
for  the  pattern  was  after  the  order  of
heavenly  things.

Now  let  us  ask  the  question — has
God  ever  revealed  to  the  Latter-day


Saints  the  necessity  of  entering  into
this  heavenly  order  in  regard  to
their  wealth  ?  He  has.  When  ?
Wi  len  we  gathered  up  to  Jackson
County  in  the  State  of  Missouri.  In
the  year  1831,  the  land  was  conse-
crated and  set  apart  by  revtdati  m
for  the  erection  thereon  of  a  great
and  heavenly  city  unto  the  Most
High  God.  Not  the  old  Jeru^alrin,
but  a  new  Jerusalem,  a  city  of  Ziun,
God,  by  the  month  of  his  servant
Joseph,  who  for  a  short  space  of
time  dwelt  in  the  midst  of  the  peo-
ple there,  revealed  the  law  of  con-
secration, not  the  law  of  tubing,
but  the  law  of  consecration.  Let
me  repeat  that  law,  [fetter- day
Saints,  for  as  it  is  a  law  which  will
come  in  force  at  some  future  period
of  our  history,  it  will  not  be  amiss
for  us  to  understand  its  nature  and
to  prepare  to  approximate  to  its
requirements,  so  that  when  it  is
introduced  amongst  us  we  tnay
t  *ke  hold  of  it  with  all  our  hearts.
When  we  went  up  to  that  country
in  1831,  the  commandment  of  the
Most  Hi^li  to  the  Saints  was  that
they  should  consecrate  all  that  they
had.  Not  one-tenth  merely,  not
the  surplus  of  their  property,  but
all  that  they  had,  whether  it  was
gold,  silver,  household  furniture,
wearing  apparel,  jewelry,  horses,
cattle,  wagons,  mechanical  tools,
machinery,  or  whatever  wealth  or
property  they  possessed,  they  were
to  consecrate  the  whole  and  de-
liver it  unto  the  Lord's  judge  in  the
midst  of  Zion.  Who  was  he  ?  The
Bishop.  In  those  days  we  had  not
the  necessity  of  so  many  Bishops  as
now.  We  were  a  small  people  then,
and  the  Bishop  in  Zion,  under  the
direction  of  the  highest  authorities
of  the  Church,  he  being  guided  and
inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  was
to  take  charge  of  all  the  consecra-
tions of  the  people  of  the  Mcst


4


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


High.  This  made  them  al!  eqnal,
every  person  stood  upon  the  same
platform,  possessing  no  thing  to  be-
gin with.  All  was  consecrated  and
became  the  common  property  of  the
Chureh.

Now  how  was  this  common  pro-
perty to  bo  i^ed  ?  First,  the  Saints
needed  land,  they  needed  means  to

buill  habitaiions  ;  tht*y  needed  farm-
ing utensils  ;  they  needed  flocks  Hiid
herds;  they  needed  manufacturing
establishments:  (hev  needed  rner-
eautile  at  d  all  kinds  of  mechanical
business  to  be  introduced  into  their
midst,  j^fit  as  Cast  as  they  procured
means  sufficient.  By  whom  were  the
stewardships  ot  (he  Saints  laid  off  ?
The  Lord's  judge  or  bishop  in  Zion
purchased  land  from  the  United
Stales,  and  then  laid  off  to  each  man
his  stewardship  according  to  the
runnier  of  his  family.  Those  who
were  mechanics  received  the  tools
pepeasary  to  work  with;  those  who
were  railed  upon  to  engage  in  some
business  wherein  a  greater  amount
of  capital  was  needed  had  a  capital
acroi'dinirly* That  is,  that  was  the

intention  ;tts  tike  common  property  of
the  Ci lurch  should  increase.

Perhaps  the  question  maybe  asked,
c  ul  i  this  equality  be  maintained
from  that  time,  henceforth  and
forever  ?  If  theie  had  been  no  law
given  instructing  us  how  this  equal-
ity could  be  maintained  the  people,
before  twelve  mouths  had  passed
away,  would  have  been  unequal
again.  Why?  Because  a  man,  per-
haps of  small  talent  or  ability,  might
mismanage  his  stewardship  or  in-
heritance, and  instead  of  gaining
anything  he  would  lose*  Another
man,  having  a  little  more  talent  and
industry,  and  |>erhaps  a  little  more
wisdom,  would  gain  a  lit  lie.  Another
man*s  business  tact  and  knowledge
were  perhaps  such  that  he  could  carry
on  a  large  manufacturing  establish-


ment, and  in  a  short  time  he  would
gain  his  thousands,  and  thus  in  the
course  ot  a  year  we  would  a^ain  have
had  rich  and  poor  if  God  had  not
provided  against  it

What  provisions  did  the  Lord
make  in  order  to  maintain  this  equal-
ity among  his  Saints  permanently?
He  made  this  arrangement  by  law —
that  every  in  an  should  be  considered
a  steward  tir.st ,  and  prove  himself
a  wise  steward  before  he  could  be  en-
titled to  an  everlasting  inheritance.
These  stewards  were  to  render  an
account  to  the  judge  in  Zion  of  their
stewardships,  or  in  oilier  words,  as
it  is  written  in  the  Book  ot  Doctrine
and  Covenants — "  It  is  required  of
©very  steward  to  render  an  account
of  his  stewardship,  b  th  in  time  and
eternity  "  (Dogs,  and  Co  v.,  Sue.  x  c  :
Par.  1.)

To  whom  does  he  render  this  n  port
or  account  ?  To  the  Lord's  bishop  or
bishops,  as  the  case  may  be;  he  re-
ports what  he  has  done  with  the
means  entrusted  to  his  care.  If  a
man  has  been  entrusted  with  fifty  or
with  a  thousand  dollars,  or  with  a
million,  to  cany  on  some  bra.  i  eh  of
business  he  must,  at  the  end  of  the
year,  render  an  account  of  that  stew-
arrfship.  If  a  man  is  only  ent ru^  ud
with  a  small  farm,  he  renders  an
account  of  his  stewardship  at  the  end
of  the  year,  and  thus  all  those  who
are  occupied  in  these  different
branches  of  trade,  render  accounts
of  their  stewardships,  consecrating,
at  the  end  of  the  year,  all  that  they
have  gained,  excepting  what  it  has
cost  to  feed  and  clothe  them.  Are
they  not  equal  ?  Yes,  and  this
maintains  a  permanent  equality ;  for
the  man  who  has  gained  a  hundred
thousand  in  his  stewardship  conse-
crates all  that  he  has  not  used;  aud
the  man  with  a  smaller  stewardship
who  in  the  whole  year,  had  only
gained  fifty  dollars  over  and  above


ESTABLISHMENT  OF  THE


KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  ETC


5


what  he  has  used,  consecrates  that
fifty.  The  man  who  has  gained  most
consecrates  most,  the  man  who  has
gained  least  consecrates  the  least.
Tliis  r -duces  them  yearly  to  the
same  position  and  condition  as  they
were  in  when  they  commenced  this
heavenly  order,

Did  the  people  carry  out  this  law  ?
No.  Why  ?  Because  they  had  im-
bibed the  notions  which  had  pre-
vailed  among  the  people  of  the
whole  earth,  and  these  notions  were
in  direct  opposition  to  the  order  of
heaven.  The  notions  and  traditions
of  the  world  were  that  every  man
must  be  for  himself,  every  family  for
themselves,  and  they  must  labor
with  their  might,  mind  and  strength  j
to  gain  all  they  possibly  could  train,
and  use  it  only  for  themselves  and
their  generations  after  them,  car  in/  !
nor bin^  at  all  about  their  neighbors.
These  traditions  had  been  instilled
into  our  minds,  and  <ve  were  too  full
of  eovetousuess  and  of  false  notions
about  property  to  carry  oat  the  law
of  Clod,  an  I  hencft  many,  when  they
came  up  to  Ziori,  looked  abroad  upon
that  beautiful,  rich  soil,  and  the  ex-
cellent proves  of  timber,  and  the  fine
prairies  and  meadows,  with  springs
breaking  forth  in  numerous  places,
as  they  do  in  Jacks* m  County,  and
their  souls  lusted  after  these  things,
and  the  rich  man  said,  "  No,  I  will
not  consecrate  all  my  property,  I  will
go  to  the  General  Land  Office  and
purchase  for  myself,  and  I  will  bay
largely  in  order  that  I  may  sell  to  my
poor  brethren  when  they  come  up  her  e.
I  will  buy  land  and  speculate  upon  it,
and  make  my  fortune/*  That  was
the  feeling  which  existed  in  the
hearts  of  some  of  the  Litter-day
Saints.  God  saw  this,  and  reproved
us  by  revelation,  and  he  said  to  the
people  in  Jackson  County,  by  the
mouth  of  his  servant  Joseph,  that
if  they  did  not  repent  of  this  covet-


oasness  he  would  pluck  them  up  and
send  them  out  of  Zion,  for  said  h^,
M  The  rebellious  are  no^  of  the  blood
of  Ephrairn,  wherefore  they  shall  he
plucked  up,  and  sent  nwuy  out  of  the
land/'  God  fulfilled  this  revelation
— he  did  pluck  up  the  people;  he
did  ca*t  them  away  out  of  that  hnd
in  the  year  1833.  tiome  two  years
and  a  few  months  after  we  first  beg  in
to  sett  le  that  conn  try  we  were  cast
out  of  the  land — plucked  up,  just  as
the  Lord  had  predicted,  and  we  were
told  that  it  was  because  of  our  sins
and  covetousness  that  we  were  sent
away.

Did  the  Lord  forsake  us?  No;
he  had  compassion  upon  us,  as  he
had  upon  ancient  Israel,  when  they
were  cast  away  out  ot  their  land  from
time  to  time.  In  what  respect  did
he  have  compassion  upon  us  ?  When
he  saw  the  hold  that  the  trad  it  ion  a
in  which  we  had  been  trained  had
upon  our  hearts,  he  revoked,  tor  the
tine  being,  the  law  of  full  consecra-
tion. Says  one,  **  What !  God  re-
voke a  commandment  ?"  Ye<?  that
is  the  way  he  did  in  ancient  times,
and  he  is  the  same  God  yet.  He  did
it  for  our  good;  for  if  that  law  had
been  in  full  force  this  people  vvuuld
not  have  been  in  these  mountains
this  day.  Our  selfishness  and  covet-
ous n  ess  are  so  great  that,  as  a  people,
we  never  would  have  complied  with
it  A  few  amongst  us  might  have
done  so,  but  as  a  people  we  should
have  been  overcome  and  ruined  ;  but
bw:iig  to  that  law  being  revoked,
many  of  us  will  now,  perhaps,  be
saved  J  '£

In  the  year  1834,  a  few  months
af  l er,  we  were  driven  out  frum  that
goodly  laud,  God  said  unto  us  in  a
revelation,  given  on  Fishing  River,
u  Let  those  laws  and  commandments
which  I  have  given  concerning  Zion
arid  her  properties,  be  executed  and
fulfilled  after  her  redemption."  ThuB


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


you  see,  Latter-day  Saints,  that  we
are  not  under  the  law  of  fall  conse-
cration, and  if  not  under  the  law  we
are  not  under  the  penalty  thereof.
Where  then*  is  a  law  there  is  a  pe-
nalty, and  when  we  transgress  the
law  we  incur  the  penalty;  but  having
been  relieved,  for  a  period,  from  the
execution  of  that  law,  we  were
placed  under  another  law,  which,  in
some  respects,  may  be  considered  an
inferior  law.  When  whs  that  law
given  ?  In  1 838,  some  five  years
after  we  were  driven  forth  trom  our
stewardships.  What  is  that  law?
It  is  called  the  law  of  tithing.  What
is  the  law  of  tithing?  Part  of  that
law  enjoin 9  it  upon  the  Saints  as  a
duty  to  pay  into  the  Lord's  store-
house one-tenth  of  all  their  anuual
income*  But  let  me  refer  vou  to  the
fnlltiess  of  the  law  of  tithing,  for,
although  an  inferior  law,  I  fear  that,
as  a  people  we  have  not  kept  it,  The
first  part  of  that  law  requires  every
man,  when  he  comes  into  the  midst
of  (lie  people  of  God,  to  consecrate
all  hi*  surplus  property,  reserving  to
hims  If  a  certain  portion.  This  is
not  a  lull  consecration  like  the  higher
law.  Latter-day  Saints,  have  we
kept  this  inferior  law  ?  Has  the
man  who  possessed  great  riches,
when  he  came  to  these  mountains,
and  numbered  himself  with  the  peo-
ple of  God,  consecrated  all  his  sur-
plus property,  and  afterwards  paid  a
tenth  of  all  his  annual  income?  I
will  tell  you  what  we  have  done — as
a  general  thing  we,  rich  and  poor,
have  kept  all  the  property  we  had
when  we  came  here,  and  some  have
consecrated  one- tenth  part  of  their
income,  and  so  far  as  this  is  concern,
ed  the  people  have  no  doubt  done
Tery  well,  with  some  few  exceptions;
and  1  am  happy  to  be  able  to  state,
from  information  I  have  obtained
from  some  of  the  Bishops  of  the
Church*  that  the  Latter-day  Saints,


now,  are  showing  more  determina
tion  to  pay  their  tithing,  than  they
ever  have  done  heretofore.

But  let  us  come  back  to  the  other
portion  of  this  inferior  law.  Have
we  felt  a  disposition  to  consecrate
our  surplus  property  ?  Go  east,  west,
north  and  south,  into  all  our  settle-
ments, and  you  will  find  that  the
men  are  few  and  far  between  who
consecrated  their  surplus  property,
when  they  came  here-  In  the  first
place,  there  have  been  but  few
wealthy  persons  who  have  come
amongst  us,  and  the  people  have
been  their  own  judges.  Every  man
thought  that  he  had  no  surplus,  when
he  came  here.  If  he  had  a  hundred
thousand  dollars  on  his  arrival  he
has  said  or  thought,  ifc  O,  I  have
made  such  and  such  calculations.  I
wish  to  become  a  merchant  in  the
midst  of  the  people,  and  1  need  thou-
sands arid  thousands  of  dollars  to  set
ine  up.  I  wish  to  make  thirty,  forty,
fifty  or  a  hundred  per  cent,  out  of
these  poor  people,  and  to  enable  me
to  do  so  I  do  not  think  that  any  of
this  hundred  thousand  dollars  can  be
called  surplus  property.  I  need  it
all,  I  can  not  carry  on  my  merchand-
ising unless  I  have  it  all  to  set  me
op.

Another  man  who  wishes  to  start
some  other  branch  of  business  makes
his  calculations  so  as  to  cover  up  all
hit  property,  for  he  thinks  he  will
need  it  all  to  enable  him  to  carry  uut
the  particular  branch  of  business
which  he  wishes  to  introduce  into
these  mountains,  for  he  wants  to  get
exceedingly  rich  before  the  law  of
full  consecration  comes.  When  they
are  thus  left  to  be  their  own  judges,
where  is  the  man  who  is  honest
enough  in  his  feelings  to  say,  M I
think  I  can  spare  fifty,  twenty,  ten,
five  or  one  thousand  dollars  as  sur-
plus property  ?"  This  in  my  opinion
is  wrong. They  should  not  be  their


ESTABLISHMENT  OF  THE


KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  ETC.


7


own  judges:  Who  should  be  the1
judges  in  this  matter?  The  Bish-
ops whom  the  Lord  hns  appointed  in
Zion,  under  the  counsel  of  the  First
Presidency  of  his  Church  and  the
counsels  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which
rest  upon  them  to  guide  their  minds.
The  people  should  be  honest  enough
when  they  come  up  here  with  means,
to  say  to  the  Bishops — "  Here,  I
have  so  much  means,  judge  ye,  how
much  of  this  shall  be  surplus,  and
how  much  I  s hull  retain."  !

The  reasou  I  make  these  remarks
is  that  I  waiit  this  people  to  fully  un-
derstand that  there  is  a  law  given,  a
law  inferior  to  that  of  full  consecra-
tion, and  for  every  man  to  enquire
whether  he  has  carried  out  this  law
according  to  the  letter  thereof.  Per-
haps the  time  has  not  come  even  for
this  law  to  be  fulfilled  in  all  its  ex-
actness. At  anv  rate  we  are  drifting
along  in  about  the  same  channel  that
the  world  does,  so  far  as  our  property
is  concerned,  with  the  exception  of
paying  one-tenth  of  our  annual  in-
come into  the  Lord's  store-house,  and
the  consequence  is,  there  have  be*
come  rich  and  poor  in  Zion,  some  '
possessing  their  hundreds  of  thou-
sands,  and  others  digging,  in  the  dust,
as  it  were,  from  year's  end  to  year's
end.

How  shall  this  be  remedied  ?  Is
the  time  come  for  us  to  execute  the
higher  law  of  consecration  ?  In  un-
dertakincj  to  do  so  in  the  settlement  a
of  this  Territory,  what  a  revolution
it  would  produce  ?  How  many  would
apostatize  and  go  away  from  the
Church  ?  How  many  of  those  who
aie  comparatively  wheat  would  be
plucked  up  with  the  tares  if  we  were
to  undertake  to  enforce  the  higher
law  of  consecration,  or  the  law  of
tithing  in  all  its  fullness.  And  it
would  produce  the  same  revolutionary
results  in  most  of  the  old  settlements,
because  we  are  not  piepared  for  it.


I  do  not  see,  for  my  part,  how  we
can  be^in  to  approximate  to  that  law
of  oneness  in  regard  to  our  property
unless  we  commence  in  some  new
place,  where  the  Church  and  the  set-
tlers might  be  gathered  together  and
set  a  pattern  for  all  the  rest,  I  do
not  know  but  we  might  accomplish  it
in  that  way.  I  hope  that  we  shall
see  something  that  will  do  away  with
these  distinctions  of  classes.  I  hate
to  see  them  in  the  niidsb  of  the  peo-
ple of  God,

There  are  many  men  of  wealth,
good,  honest,  upright  men  who  would
be  wilt  ng  to  do  anything  that  the
Lord  required  at  their  hands;  whde
there  are  others  who  hug  their  pro-
perty close  to  their  hearts,  as  though
it  were  dearer  to  them  than  any*
thing  either  in  this  world  or  in  the
world  to  come.  There  are  certainly
existing  now  among  us  distinctions  of
classes  which  if  not  checked,  may
prove  the  overthrow  of  many.  For
instance  the  rich  can  educate  their
sous  and  daughters  in  the  best
schools,  academies  and  universities  ;
others  can  not  do  this,  because  of
their  poverty.  This  makes  the
children  of  the  rich  feel  themselves
above  the  children  of  the  poor.  Hav*
we  not  seen  in  our  gatherings  for
amusement  these  distinctions  mani-
fested ?  I  have.  I  have  seen  those
who  were  poorly  dressed  come  into
our  parties  and  take  a  b:»ck  seat,  and
there  they  would  sit,  as  the  old  say-
ing is,  like  **  wallflowers,"  during
the  whole  party.  Who  would  be  out
on  the  floor  enjoying  themselves?
The  rich.  But  in  many  instances
there  are  parties  of  pleasure  and
amusement  got  up  among  the  Saiuts,
to  which  the  poor  are  never  invited  ;
they  are  got  up  only  for  those  who
can  dress  in  fine  style,  who  can  sweep
the  floor  of  the  ball  room  with  two
or  three  yards  of  their  dresses  drag-
ging after  them.


8


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


With  the  feelings  engendered  by
these  distinctions  of  classes,  there  is
not  that  fellowship  that  should  exist
among  the  Saints  of  the  living  God,
If  we  wish,  brethren  and  sisters,  to
go  back  and  build  up  the  waste  places
of  Zion,  and  to  see  the  New  Jerusa-
lem erected  upon  the  consecrated
spot,  let  us  endeavor  to  approximate
more  neatly  to  the  celestial  luw,  that
when  we  do  get  buck  there,  and  that
law  more  fully  comes  in  force,  we
may  be  able  to  enter  into  it;  fur  thus
saith  the  Lord,  in  this  Book  of
Covenants,  "  Zion  cannot  be  built  up
only  according;  to  the  law  of  the
celeatial  kingdom, otherwise  I  cannot
receive  her  unto  mvself."  "We  have


got  to  come  to  that,  and  it  is  well  for
us  in  my  opinion,  that  we  begin  to
approximate  as  fast  as  possible,  that
when  the  time  shall  come,  we  shall
be  prepared  for  full  consecration.

How  long  oo r  President  has  la-
bored iu  the  midst  of  the  people  here
to  get  them  (o  introduce  home  manu-
factures? How  long  and  loud  he
has  lilted  his  voice,  iu  connection
with  his  counselors,  and  the  Twelve
Apustles,  to  bring  about  this  thing;
itui  the  people,  instead  of  hearkening
to  their  counsel,  have  imported  from
abroad  almost  everything  they
needed.  The  President  is  willing,
but  some  of  the  people  are  not
Amen.


REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  BKIGHAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  at  tiik  General  Conference,  in  the  New  Taukrnacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Monday  Morning,  April  7,  1873.


(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)


THE  OiiDElt  OF  ENOCH — STUDY  OF  LAW — HOW  TO  BECOME


There  are  a  few  minutes  to  spare,
and  I  wish  to  lay  some  matters  before
you.  I  will  say,  first,  that  the  Loid
Almighty  has  not  the  least  objection
in  the  world  to  our  entering  into  the
Order  of  Enoch.  1  will  stand  be-
tween the  people  and  al!  harm  in
this.  He  has  not  the  least  objection
to  any  man,  every  man,  all  mankind
on  the  face  of  the  earth  turning  from
evil  and  loving  and  serving  him  with
all  their  hearts.  With  regard  to  all
those  orders  that  the  Lord  has  re*


sealed,  it  depends  upon  the  will  and
doings  of  the  people,  and  we  are  at
liberty,  from  this  Conference,  to  go
and  build  up  a  settlement,  or  we  can
join  ourselves  together  in  this  city,
do  it  legally — according  to  the  laws
of  the  land — and  enter  into  covenant
with  each  other  by  a  firm  agreement
that,  we  will  live  as  a  family,  that  we
will  put  our  property  into  the  hands
of  a  committee  of  trustees,  who  shall
dictate  U:e  a  flairs  of  this  society.  If
'any  man  can  bring  up  anything  to


THE  ORDER  OF  ENOCH,  ETC.


9


prove  to  the  contrary  I  am  wil  l  inn;
to  hear  it. But  no  man  can  do  it*

Brother  Pratt  has  told  vou,  in  his
explanations  this  morning,  what  the
L"nl  has  revealed  and  bow  hi?  has
been  merciful  to  the  people;  and
when  we  have  nut  been  wilting  to  be
Latter-day  Saints  altogether,  but
only  in  part,  he  has  said,  "  Well,  you
are  the  oest  there  is,  and  I  will  ac-
cept of  you.  I  cm  not  get  anybody
else  who  is  willing  to  be*  part  Saints,
and  I  will  lead  you,  my  people,  as
Ion j-  as  you  will  Jet  me,  and  I  will
forgive  you  your  sins  this  time,  and
I  will  accept  part  of  your  property  if
you  will  not  give  it  all,"  etc.,  all
showing  the  kindness  and  forbear-
ance of  our  Rither  in  heaven  ;  but
be  has  not  the  least  objection  in  the
world  to  our  being  periect  Saints,

I  have  a  few  things  to  lay  before
the  Conference,  one  of  which  is —
and  I  think  my  biethren  will  agree
with  me  that  this  is  u  ise  and  practi-
cable— for  from  one  to  five  thousand
of  our  young  <>nd  uiidd  la-aged  men
to  turn  their  attention  to  the  study
of  law,  I  would  not  speak  lightly  in
the  least  of  law,  wc  are  sustained  by
it ;  but  what  is  called  the  practice  or
law  is  not  always  the  a  i ministration
of  justice,  and  would  not  be  so  con-
sidered in  many  courts.  How  many
lawyers  are  there  who  spend  their
time  from  morning  till  night  in
thinking  and  planning  how  they  can  :
get  up  a  lawsuit  against  this  or  that
man,  and  get  Ins  property  into  their
possession  ?  Men  of  this  class  are
land  sharks,  and  they  are  no  better,
than  highway  robbers,  for  their
practice  is  to  deceive  and  take  ad-  i
vantage  of  all  they  can.  I  do  not
say  that  this  is  the  law.  but  this  is
tin*  practice  of  some  of  its  professors.
The  effort  of  t^uch  lawyers,  if  they
are  paid  well,  is  to  clear  and  turn  ]
loo>e  on  society  the  thief,  perjurer
and  murderer. They  say  to  the  dis-


honest and  those  who  are  disposed  to
do  evil,  "  Go  and  lay  claim  to  your
neighbor's  property,  or  to  that  which
is  not  your  own,  or  commit  some
other  act  of  injustice,  and  pay  us,
and  we  will  clear  you  and  make  your
claim  appear  just  in  the  eye  of  the
law;"  and  officers  and  judges  too
often  join  in  the  unrighteous  crusades
for  the  lawyers  to  wrong  the  just.
I  have  been  in  Courts  and  have  heard
lawyers  quote  lawa  that  had  been  re-
pealed for  years,  and  the  judge  was
so  igteirant  that  he  did  not  know  it,
and  the  lawyer  would  make  him  give
a  decision  according  to  laws  which
no  longer  existed.  Now,  [  req  uest
our  brethren  to  go  and  staly  law,
so  that  when  they  meet  any  of  this
kind  of  lawyers  they  will  be  able  to
tnwart  their  viie  plans.  I  do  n  *t  hy
any  means  sa\  these  things  of  all
lawyers  for  we  have  good  and  just
men  who  are  lawyers,  and  we  would
like  to  have  a  great  many  more.
You  go  to  one  of  the  pettifogging
class  of  lawyers,  and  get  him  to  write
a  deed  for  you,  a nd  he  will  <!u  it  so
that  it  can  be  picked  to  pieces  hy
other  lawyers.  Employ  such  a  man
to  wine  a  deed,  bond,  mortgage  or
any  instrument  of  writing,  and  his
study  will  be  to  do  it  so  that  it  will
confound  i  Use  If.  This  is  the  way
that  such  men  make  business  /or
their  class.  We  want  from  one  to
five  thousand  of  our  brethren  to  go
and  study  law.

If  I  could  get  my  own  feelings
answered  i  would  have  taw  in  our
school  books,  and  have  our  youth
study  law  at  school.  Then  lead
their  minds  to  study  the  decisions
and  compels  of  the  just  and  I  he  wise,
and  not  lorever  be  studying  how  to
get  the  advantage  of  their  neighbor.
This  is  wisdom-  />  \

My  mind  is  so  led  upon  the  sub-
ject brother  Pratt  has  been  speaking
upon  with  regard  to  the  orders  that


10  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


God  has  revealed  that  I  can  hardly  J
let  it  alone  when  I  am  talking  to  the
people.  He  said  there  are  many  rich
men  who  are  willing  to  do  anything
that  the  Lord  requires  of  them,  I
believe  this,  and  there  is  quite  a
number  of  poor  rnen,  likewise,  who
would  like  to  do  anything  if  they
Could  only  know  that  it  was  the  will
of  the  Lord.  I  am  about  to  make
an  application  of  my  femarks  with
regard  to  the  willingness  of  men.
But  in  thiw  i  shall  except  brother
Pratt,  for  the  simple  reason  that  I
do  not  know  a  man  who  is  more  wil-  i
ling  to  do  what  he  is  told  than  he  is.
If  he  is  told  to  teach  mathematics,
he  is  willing  to  do  it;  if  he  is  told
to  make  books,  preach  the  Gospel,
work  in  a  garden  or  tend  cattle,  he
is  willing  to  do  it,  and  I  know  of  no
man  more  willing  to  do  anything
and  every  tiling  required  of  him  than
he  is.  But  I  want  to  say  to  our  wil-
ling, kind,  good  brethren  that,  so  far
as  obeying  the  orders  which  God  has  ;
revealed ,  1  can  bring  the  rich  into
line  quicker  than  I  can  get  many
puor  men  who  are  not  worth  a  dollar,
and  who  do  not  know  how  to  raise  a
breakfast  to-morrow  morning.  I  have
tried  both,  and  know.  Who  is  there
among  us  who  came  here  rich  ?  It
was  alluded  to  by  brother  Pratt.
Look  over  our  rich  men,  where  are
they  ?  Who  is  there  among  the  I
Latter-day  Saints  that  is  wealthy  ?1
When  I  came  to  this  vallev  I  was  a
thousand  dollars  in  debt.  1  left  every
thing.  I  think  I  got  about  three
hundred  dollars,  a  span  of  horses,
and  a  liitle  carriage,  for  all  my  pro-  >
perty  I  left  in  Nauvoo.  But  I  bought
cattle,  horses  and  wagons,  and  traded
and  burrowed  and  got  the  poor  here
by  scores  myself;  and  I  have  paid
for  these  teams  since  I  have  been
here.

When  I  got  here  I  was  in  debt
only  about  a  thousand  dollars  for


[  myself  and  family  to  a  merchant  in
Winter  Quarters,  but  I  whs  in  debt
for  others,  and  I  have  p:tid  the  last
di  me  that  I  know  any  tiling  about.
When  I  reached  here  I  could  not  pay
one- tenth — I  could  not  pay  my  sur-
plus— I  could  not  give  my  all — for
!  I  had  nothing.

Here  is  Horace  S.  Eldred**e,  he  is
one  of  our  wealthy  men.  What  did
he  have  when  he  came  here  ?  No-
thing that  I  know  of,  except  just
enough  to  get  here  with  his  family.
William  Jennings  has  been  called  a
millionaire.  What  was  he  worth
when  he  came  here  ?  He  had
comparatively  little.  Now  he  is  one
of  onr  wealthy  men,  William  H.
Hooper  is  another  of  our  wealthy
men.  He  is  worth  hundreds  of  thou-
sands of  dollars.  How  much  had
he  to  pay  as  surplus  when  he  came
here.  He  could  pay  no  sir  pi  us,  for
he  was  worth  nothing;  but  he  is  now
j  wealthy.  If  he  had  gone  to  Cali-
'  fornia  I  believe  he  would  have  been
poor  to-day.

There  is  any  amount  of  property,
and  gold  and  silver  in  the  earth  and
on  the  earth,  and  the  Lord  gives  to
this  one  and  that  one — the  wicked
as  well  as  the  righteous — to  see  what
they  will  do  with  it,  but  it  all  belongs
to  him.  He  has  handed  over  a
!  goodly  portion  to  this  people,  and,
!  tli rough  our  faith,  patience  and  in-
dustry, we  have  made  us  good,  com-
fortable homes  here,  and  there  are
many  who  are  tolerably  well  off,  and
if  they  were  in  many  purls  of  the
world  they  would  be  called  wealthy.
But  it  is  not  ours,  and  all  we  have
to  do  is  to  try  and  find  out  what  the
Lord  wants  us  to  do  with  what  we
have  in  our  possession,  and  then  go
and  do  it.  If  we  step  beyond  this,
or  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  we  step
into  an  illegitimate  train  of  business.
Our  legitimate  business  is  to  do  what
the  Lord  wants  us  to  do  with  that


THE  ORDER  OF  ENOCH,  ETC.


which  he  bestows  upon  us,  and  d  is-
pose  of  it  jast  as  he  dictates,  whether
it  is  to  give  all,  one-tenth,  or  the
surplus.  I  was  present  at  the  time
the  revelation  came  for  the  brethren
to  give  their  surplus  property  into
the  hands  of  the  Bishops  for  the
building  up  of  Zion,  but  I  never
knew  m  man  jet  who  hud  a  dollar  of
surplus  property.  No  matter  how
much  one  might  have  he  wanted  all
he  had  for  himself,  for  his  children,
his  grand-children,  and  so  forth,

If  we  are  disposed  to  enter  into
covenant one with another,  mid
have  an  agreement  made  according
to  the  laws  of  our  land,  and  we  are
disposed to put  our  property  into
the  frauds  of  trustees,  and  work  as
we  are  directed — eat, drink,  sleep,
ride,  walk,  talk,  study,  school  our
children,  our  middle-aged  and  our
aged,  and I  earn  the  arts  and  sei-
ences,  the  laws  of  the  Priesthood,
the  laws  of  life,  anatomy,  physic
and  anything  and  everything  useful
upon  the  earth,  the  Lord  has  not  the
least  objection  in the  world,  and
would  be  perfectly
do  it,  and  I  should
for  ds  to  try  it,
start  such  a  society,  right  in  this
city,  and  how  to  make  its  members
rich. I  would  go  to  now,  and  buy
out  the  poorest  ward  in  this  city,
and  then  commence  with  men  a  id
women  who  have  not  a  dollar  in  the
world. Bring  them  here  from  Eng-
land, or  any  part  of  the  earth,  set
them  down  in  this  ward  and  put
them  to  work,  an  1  in  five  years  we
would begin  to  enter  other  wards,
and  we  would  buv  this  house  and
that  house,  and  the  next  house,  and
we  would  add ward  to  ward  until
we  owned the  whole city,  every
dollars  worth  of  property  there  is
in  it. We  could do  this,  and  let
the  rich  go  to  California  to  get  gold,
and  we  would  buy  their  property.


willing  for  ns  to
It  ice,  right  well,
1  know  how  to


Would  you  like  to  know  how  to  do
this  ?  1  can  tell  you  in  a  very  few
words — never  want  a  thing  you  can
not  get,  live  within  your  means,
manufacture  that  which  you  wear,
and  raise  that  which  you  eat.  Raise
every  calf  and  lamb;  raise  the  chick-
ens, and  have  your  eggs,  make  your
butter  and  cheese,  and  always  have  a
little  to  spare.  The  first  year  we
raise  a  crop,1  and  we  have  more  than
we  want.  We  buy  nothing,  we  sell
a  little.  Tbe  next  year  we  raise
more;  we  buy  nothing,  and  we  sell
more.  In  this  way  we  could  pile  up
t lie  gold  and  silver  and  in  twenty
years  a  hundred  families  working  like
this  could  buy  out  their  neighbors.
I  see  men  who  earn  four,  five,  ten  or
fifteen  dollars  a  day  and  spend  every
dime  of  it.  Such  men  spend  their
means  foolishly,  they  waste  it  instead
of  taking  care  of  it.  They  do  not
know  what  to  do  with  it,  and  t'  ey
seem  to  fear  that  it  will  burn  their
pockets,  and  they  get  rid  of  it  If
you  get  a  dollar,  sovereign,  half-eagle
or  eagle,  and  are  afraid  it,  will  burn
your  pockets,  put  it  into  a  safe.  It
will  not  burn  anything  there,  and
you  will  not  be  forced  to  spend,
spend,  spend  ns  you  do  now*  See
our  boys  here,  why  if  my  boy*,  by
the  time  they  are  twenty,  have  not  a
horse  and  carriage  to  drive  of  their
own,  they  think  they  are  very  badly
used,  and  say,  M  Well.  1  do  not  think
father  thinks  much  of  me."  A
great  many  things  might  be  said  on
this  subject  that  I  do  not  want  to
say,  i it  V\

Brethren,  we  want  you  to  turn  in
and  study  the  laws  of  the  Territory
of  Utah,  of  this  city  and  other  cities,
and  then  the  statutes  of  the  United
Stares,  and  the  Constitution  of  the
United  States.  Then  read  the  deci-
sions of  the  Supreme  Court,  I  do
not  mean the  self-styled **  United

if

♦States  Supreme  Court  for  the  Ter


12


JOURNAL  or  DISCOURSES


ritory  of  Utah*"  but  the  United
States  Supreme  Court  that  sits  at
Washington — the  seat  of  govern-
ment. Read  up  their  decisions,  and
the  decisions  of  the  English  judges
and  the  laws  of  England  and  of  other
countries,  and  learn  what  they  knot?,
ami  then  if  you  draw  up  a  will,  deed,
mortgage  or  contract,  do  not  study
to  deceive  the  man  who  pays  you  for
this,  but  make  out  a  writing  or  in-
strument us  strong  and  finn  :*s  the
hills,  that  no  man  can  tear  to  pieces,


and  do  your  business  honestly  and
uprightly,  in  the  fear  of  God  and
with  the  love  of  truth  in  your  heart.
The  lawyer  that  will  take  tins  course
will  live  and  swim,  while  the*  poor,
miserable,  dishonest  schemers  will
sink  and  go  down.  We  live  by  law,
and  I  only  condemn  those  amo-  g  thtt
lawyers  who  are  eternally  seeking  10
take  advantage  of  their  neighbors.

Now  we  will  close,  and  adjourn
until  2  o'clock  this  afrern<>on,


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT ORSOX  HYDE,


Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  Monday  Morn  in  u, *pril  7,  1873.


(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)


TESTIMONY — SICKNESS IN SANPETE COUNTY— INCREASE  OF CRIME  IN
THE  WORLD — THE  INEVITABLE  OVERTHROW  OF  THE  WICKED.


It  is  very  gratifying  to  my  feelings
this  morning,  my  brethren  and  si,*-
teis,  to  have  the  privilege  of  meeting
with  you  in  the  capacity  of  a  Gene-
ral Conference.  I  have  not  spoken
much  in  public  of  late,  in  conse-
quence of  being,  for  the  list  six
weeks,  considerably  afflicted,  and  ;
confined  to  my  room,  and  a  good
portion  of  the  time  to  my  bed*  I  do  s
not  feel  like  entering  into  any  special
or  particular  subject;  but  I  rejoice
in  the  opportunity  of  mingling  mix
associating  with  my  friends*  We
ate  separated  for  tome  six  months  in
the  year,  and  when  we  come  toge-


ther and  meet  with  our  Co- laborers,
is  juyful  to  look  upon  their  coun-
ts nances.  I  rejoice  in  I h is  opp* »rt  u-
nity  of  meeting  with  my  brethren  of
the  Twelve  and  the  f  irst  Presidency,
and  beholding  them  mostly  in  t he
enjoyment  of  good  health.

We  have  been  endeavoring  now,
for  more  than  forty  years,  to  esta-
blish the  kingdom  of  (iod  :md  bear-
ing our  testimony  to  the  nations  of
the  earth,  I,  for  one,  do  not  know
how  much  longer  my  voice  may  be
heard  among  the  living,  but  I  re-
joice in  the  opportunity  of  bearing
testimony to the  truth  whenever


TESTIMONY — SICKNESS IN  SAKPETK  COUNTY,  ETC


13


stn'ngih  will  permit  mid  opportunity
offer,  I  take  occasion  to  guy  to  my
brethren  and  sisters,  this  morning,
that  as  the  time  is  drawing  near  the
cause  seems  more  and  more  precious
to  me.  It  is  part  of  myself,  and
myself,  I  trust,  a  part  of  it.  I  re-
j  'ice  in  saying  that  I  know  this  is
the  ever  his  ting  Gospel,  the  truth  nf
Heaven.  [Living  experienced  it  for
more  than  forty  years,  I  know  it  is
true  and  faithful,  and  no  man  can
impeach  my  testimony.  Not  because
there  is  so  much  sterling  worth  in
nie,  as  there  is  in  the  cause  thnt  I
feebly  advocate.  It  is  ttue  I  lived  in
the  days  of  the  i>  arty  red  Prophet.
I  was  u  sociated  with  him,  and  bore
my  testimony  with  him,  and  I  feel
no  less  like  bearing  my  testimony
tliis  morning,

I  want  to  say  a  few  words  in  rela-
tion to  the  place  whence  I  came,  and
where  I  mostly  labor.  We  have  had
some  affliction  there,  in  the  shape  of
small  pox.  There  have  been  many
cases  of  that  disease,  but  it  was  of  a
mild  type,  and  I  am  happy  to  say
that  it  has  nearly  left  us,  and  we  are
again  comparatively  free.  But  we
have  been  afflicted  with  a  disease
that  is  much  more  to  be  dreaded
than  the  small  p  x,  and  which  we
have  generally  called  "spotted  fever/5
The  small  pox  is  uo  more  to  be  com*
pared  to  that  disease  than  the  bite  of
a  flea  or  mosquito  is  to  the  bite  of  a
rattle-snake.  There  have  been  about
sixteen  deaths,  mostly  children,  irusn
spotted  fever,  and  there  are  some
half  dozen  cases  yet  remaining,  but
no  new  ones.  They  have  lingered
for  ten  or  twelve  weeks,  and  they,
apparently,  can  neither  live  nor  die,
and  are  mere  skeletons.  I  feel  sorry
to  see  children,  who  should  grow  up
and  develop  an  intellect  and  a  power
equal  if  not  superior  to  any  that  now
live,  thus  afflicted ;  and  to  see  them
cut  down  iu  the  morning  of  their  ex-


1  istence  grieves  me  very  much.  But
the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  us  has

■  dechired  that  scourges  in  the  shape
of  sickness  shall  be  sent  forth,  begin-
ning tirst  at  his  house,  and  from
thence  they  shall  spread  and  make
the  nations  quake.

We  are  living,  my  brethren  and
!  si-ters,  in  an  important  period  of
time,  and  when  I  read  over  the  testi-
mony of  the  martyred  Prophet,  and
the  word  of  the  Lord  through  him,
it  seems  that  in  comparing  the  signs
of  the  times  at  prpsent  with  his  testi-
mony, there  would  be  ample  evidence
to  convince  any  rational  being  that
God,  our  heavenly  Father,  sent  him.
I  read  of  disasteis  by  sea  and  by
land.  1  read  of  a  receding  from  the
principles  of  honestv,  and  that  great
men  go  into  wild  speculatiuns  and
dishonesty,  and  involve  the  country
in  ruin  unless  there  be  a  speedy  ar-
resting of  their  comm  The  murders
that  are  committed  at  the  present
time,  show  to  me  that  the  word  of
the  Lord  is  true  where  he  declares
through  the  Prophet,  "My  Spirit
shall  not  always  strive  with  mam"
I  As  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  forsakes
the  people,  bloodshed,  corruption,
confusion  and  anarchy  must  follow,
and  all  these  are  increasing  in  our
country.  I  can  not  take  up  a  paper
without  seeing  the  fulfillment  of  some
of  the  sayings  of  our  martyred
Prophet,  and  of  our  brethren  who
are  sitting  behind  me,  on  this  htand*
And  what  power  is  there  that  can
arrest  the  course  of  evil  ?  There  is
nothing  but  genuine  repentance
and  obeying  the  everlasting  Gospel.

■  That  is  the  only  remedy  that
Heaven  has  provided ;  the  only
fountain  of  life  and  salvation  for  the
nations  exists  among  these  poor,
despised  Mormons,  and  I  know  it.
Brethren  and  sisters,  I  rejoice  in
the  Lord  our  God, that he  ha3

;  moved  graciously  in  favor  of  the


14


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Latter-day  Saints;  and  inasmuch  as
we  will  forsake  all  evil  and  cleave
unto  him we  shall find thit  his
words unto us will be  fulfilled,
where he  declares, "  I  will  fight
your  battles/' I  would  ra  her  live
near  to  God  and  serve  him  with  all
my  heart  and soul,  might,  mind
and  strength,  than  fight  my  own
battled* If  the  Lord  will  fight  onr
battles  there  can  be  no  treason  in
that,  he  is  loo  high  for  treason  to
attach  to  hirn. He  is  beyond  the
reach  of  the power  of  this  world,
and he  can  hurl his  storms  and
blast  the  prospects  of  the  most  san-
guine, and  accomplish  wonders,  and
none  can  stay  his  hand  or  say —
*  What  doest  thou  ?" The  increase,
in  a  thousand  forms,  of  evils,  acci-
dents, and  calamities  through  our
land  and  the  nations  of  the  earth
should  admonish  us  to  live  near  to
the  Lord  our  God,  to  remember  our
prayers,  and  the  obligations  we  are
under  to  the  Most  High,  and  to
seek  with  all  onr  hearts  to  discharge
them  with  fidelity. Those  who  have
held  last  to  the  iron  rod,  and  have
remembered  their  God,  Savior  and
prayers,  feel  to  thank  God,  and  to
praise  his  holy  name  that  they  have
endured, Let  that  feeling  ever  fill
your  hearts,  and  may  the  peace  of
God  rest  upon  Israel,  and  confusion
come  npon  them  that  seek  to  de-
stroy the  best  and  choicest  princi-
ples that  heaven  ever  revealed  to
man.

I  was  thankful  to  hear  the  defini-
tion and  distinction,  given  yester*
day  by  the  President,  of  the  words
"  enemies"  and  "  friends"  of  man-
kind. It  was  true  and  faithful.  He  \
is  my  triend  who  is  the  friend  of
truth  and  humanity;  he  is  my  ene-
my  who  seeks  to  trample  under  foot
the  truth  of  heaven  and  those  who
are  striving  earnestly  to  serve  the
Lord.  Brethren  and  sisters,  be  faith- 1


ful  to  him  who  has  called  you  and
from  whom  you  have  derived  every
blessing  you possess to-day.  Re-
member our  brethren  and  sisters  who
are  scattered  and  are  anxious  for
deliverance. Strikes  have  been  in-
augurated  in various portions  of
the  old  world, and thousands  of
people  are  out  of  employment  in
consequence  thereof* Similar  opera-
tions  are threatened in  our  own
country,  and  they  are  likely  to  seri-
ously affect  the  welfare  and  interest
of  the  nation. In  what  shape  trou-
bles may  come  I  do  not  know,  but
it  will  be  a  wonder  to  me  if  blood-
shed does  not  result* Well  did  the
an^el say, forty-five years  ago,
"  Come  out  of  her,  my  people,  that
ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sins,  and
that  ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues."
This  is  the  reason  why  the  Saints
are  gathering  from  the  countries  of
their  nativity. Yet  when  the  people
see  the  Saints  gathering  they  fre-
quently say, **  What folly,  what
folly  ! " Go  to  the  fowls  of  heaven
and  learn  a  lesson. When  you  see
the  fowls,  in  the  fall  of  the  year,
going  to  the  south,  crooping  as  they
go,  you  say  that  winter  is  nigh  ;  so
when  you  see  the  Saints  gathering
together, remember that  disaster
awaits  the  countries  they  are  leaving,
God  has  declared  it,  and  his  arm
is  sufficiently  potent  to  fulfill  his
words,

I  rejoice  in  the  truth,  and  I  bear
my  testimony,  to-day,  before  you,
that  Joseph  Smith  was  a  Prophet
of  the  true  and  living  God.  I  bear
my  testimony  that  brother  Brigham
Young,  the  President  of  the  Church
here  in  Zion,  is  a  man  of  God,  and
that  he  is  carrying  on  the  work  that
Joseph  Smith  began.  When  we
came  here  how  was  it  with  us  ?  We
had  nothing  but  a  few  worn -down
teams  and  a  few  old  wagons,  very
much  demoralized. They  were  so  in


ASSISTANCE  OF  THE  LADIES,  ETC


15


the  start,  because  we  could  not  get
any  other  kind.  But  when  we  got
through  here,  having  brought  seed,
provisions,  and  implements  such  as
we  could  command,  our  Cfise  was  a
pitiful  one.  But  the  Lord  has  had
mercy  on  us  and  he  has  blessed  us,
and  no*  we  arc  beyond  the  reach  of
present  want,  I  am  thankful  thut
all  this  has  been  brought  about  under
the  administration  of  our  present
honored  President,  and  the  world  is  1
trying  to  kill  him  and  those  who
sustain  and  uphold  him.  It  is  a
great  warfare,  it  is  a  great  wrestling;
but  I  am  aware  how  it  will  come  ;
out.  It  will  he  with  the  enemies
and  opposers  of  God  arid  truth  as  it
was  with  the  Irishman  who,  as  he
was  crossing  over  a  bridge,  saw  the
moon  in  the  stream,  and  belie?ing  it  |


to  be  a  cheese,  he  said  to  his  com-
panion— "  Let  us  go  down  and  get
that  cheese."  Well,  one  held  on  to
the  railing  of  the  bridge  and  the
other  slipped  down  and  bung  to
his  heels,  thinking  that  he  would
re^ch  down  and  obtain  the  cheese.
By  and  by,  say  a  the  one  that  was
holding  to  the  bridge  to  his  friend
below — "  Pat,  hold  fast  below  till
I  spit  in  my  hands  above,"  and
down  they  went  That  is  the  way
the  contest  between  the  world  and
u  Mormon  ism  "  will  terminate  —
while  they  are  saying,  "  Hold  last
below  till  I  spit  iu  my  bands
above,"  crash  goes  the  whole  con-
cern.

Brethren  and  sisters,  God  bless
you,  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,

dli  liver  ed  at  the  general  conference,  ik  the  new  tabernacle,  salt

Lake  City,  Monday  Afternoon,  April  7,  1873.


(Reported  hy  David  Wt  Evanc.)


ASSISTANCE  OF  THE  LADIES  OF  TJIE  RELIEF  SOCIETIES  REQUIRED  IN
PROMOTING  THE  MANUFACTURE  OF  PAPER  AND  THE  PRINTING  OF
SCHOOL  BOOKS — LIGHT  AND  EASY  LABOR  NOW  PERFORMED  BY  MEN
MORE  ADAPTED  TO  WOMEN — SHOULD  BE  SELF-SUSTAINING — FRIVO-
LITIES AND  FASHIONS  OF  BABYLON  SHOULD  BE  DISCARDED  BY  THE
SISTERS — POVERTY  OF  THOSE  WHO  FOLLOW  AFTER  MINING.


I  will  make  a  few  remarks  to  the
ladies  of  the  Relief  Societies,  First
of  all  I  can  say  of  a  truth  that,  in
sustaining  the  poor  and  ministering
to  the  sick  and  afflicted,  much  credit


is  doe  to  them  for  the  good  they
hare  done;  bat  I  wish  to  add  a  little
to  their  labors.  If  these  societies
will  take  into  consideration  the  fur-
ther duties  and  obligations  that  we


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


are  under  in  each  other,  and  the*  im-
portance of  becoming  st*]f-snst:;i:ifflflff
we  wish  to  enlist  their  interest  to  ait!
us  in  making  paper,  by  biking  steps
to  collect  the  rags.  We  h  sve  an  ex-
cellent paper  mill  here,  and  cm
make  our  own  paper,  as  well  as  to
send  abroad  and  pay  out  our  money
for  it,  and  then  bring  it  here.  We
•hould  cease  importing  paper,  fur
paper- making  is  a  branch  of  manu-
faetuie  for  which  we  have  all  the
necessary  facilities,  and  if  we  carry
it  on  it  will  benefit  us.  We  want  the
ladies  of  the  Relief  Societies  to  enlist
the  sympathies  of  the  children,  in
their  respective  Wards  throughout
the  Territory,  to  save  the  pager  rags;
we  want  mothers  to  do  this,  and  also
to  show  their  children  bow  to  do  it.
When  you  see  them  throwing  them
out  of  doors,  say,  "Stop,  my  child,
put  that  into  the  basket;*  or  other
place  designated.  **  We  will  wash
these. rags,  and  when  we  get  enough
of  them  we  will  sell  them  and  buy
some  books  for  you  to  read/'  If  we
can  only  enlist  the  feelings  of  the
sisters  on  behalf  of  this  great  inter-
est, it  will  lay  the  foundation  for
printing  the  bra  that  we  need  in  our
own  community,  and  then  we  can  save
this  expense  also.  This  is  the  first
step*  We  want  these  cart  bads  of
cloth  saved  that  we  now  see  kicked
aronnd  the  streets  and  lying  around
the  yards.  Go  to  the  poorest  family
in  this  community,  and  I  will  venture
to  sav  that  tltev  waste  rnes  enough
every  year  to  buy  the  school  books
that  are  needed  for  their  children,
and  do  even  more.  This  is  sloth  ful-
ness and  neglect,  and  produces  wick-
edness. To  be  prudent  and  saving,
and  to  use  the  elements  in  our  pos-
session for  our  benefit  and  the  benefit
of  our  fellow  beings  is  wise  and
righteous;  but  fo  be  slothful,  waste-
ful, lazy  and  indolent,  to  spend  our
time  and  means  for  naught,  is  nn-


!  righteous;  and  iri  might  think  of
this,  and  contemplate  the  facts  in  the
case  until  our  feelings  and  interests
are  s 3  tar  enlisted  that  we  will  save
our  paper  rags,  and  take  them  to  the
paper  mill*  ^ H  r

When  tins  is  done  I  want  the
sisf,*rs  to  so  far  use  the  abilities
which  God  has  given  them  as  to
learn  to  set  type,  and  have  your
printing  office  and  carry  it  0:1.  ft
looks  very  unbecoming  to  me  to  see
a  great,  big  six-footer  stand  and
pick  Uf)  little  type  and  put  it  in  its
place  to  make  a  word  or  a  sentence,
a  book  or  a  paper;  and  when  lie  has
got  his  stickful!,  taking  the  type  out
of  the  stick  and  setting  it  on  the  gal-
ley. To  see  a  great  six-footer  doing
this,  and  measuring  off  tape,  which
is  about  the  sa-ise,  has  always  ap*.
paired  to  me*,  according  to  that  which
I  understand,  as  if  men  were  out  of

1  their  place.  I  have  thought  so  all
my  days.  I  have  occasionally  seen
ivomeu  in  the  harvest  field,  plough-
ing, raking  and  *  making  hay,  and
sometimes,  though  very  seldom,  I
have  seen  them  pitch  and  load  hay.

( I  think  this  is  very  unbecoming,  this

I  hard,  laborious  work  belongs  to  men.
Bat  when  you  come  to  picking  up
type,  and  making  a  book  of  it,  that
belongs  to  the  women.  I  know  that
many  arguments  are  used  against
this,  and  we  are  told  that  a  woman
cannot  make  a  coat,  vest  or  a  pair  of
pantaloons,  I  dispute  this.  It  is
said  that  a  man  is  stronger  and  that
he  pulls  his  thread  stronger  than  a
woman  does.  I  will  take  any  of
these  ladies  to  n  tailor's  shop  and
they  will  snap  every  thread  a  tailor
sews  with,  Tell  me  they  can  not
pull  a  thread  tight  enough,  and  that
they  can  not  press  hard  enough  to
press  a  coat,  it  is  all  folly  and  non-

!  sense.  The  difficulty  is  the  tailors
do  not  want  them  to  do  it,  and  they
try  to  shame  them  out  of  it  or  to


t


K  OF  TIIE  LADIES,  ETC.


17


make  them  believe  tbey  can  not  sew
a  seam,  press  a  collar,  wristband,
sleeve  or  body  of  a  coat,  and  if  wo-
men do  it  ever  so  nice  the  tailors  will
say  it  is  good  for  nothing,  and  so  the
great,  big  six-footer  bits  there  cross-
legged  sewing.  This  is  not  the  order
of  pru'Ui.ce  and  economy;  neither
is  i?  according  to  the  nature  of  the
calling  and  the  ability  that  God  has
given  us  as  men  and  women,  to  see  a
man  measuring  tape,  arid  such  light
work,  it  is  far  more  suitable  for  wo-
men. "  Well  but,"  say  some,  "  a
woman  can  not  do  press  work/1  I
recollect  what  was  said  to  me  in  my
youth  by  a  journeyman  printer.
We  were  working  off  Ball's  Arith-
metic together  and  we  boarded  toge-
ther.  I  did  not  eat  meat  at  that
time,  and  he  was  very  fond  of  it
We  went  into  the  office  one  day  from
dinner  and  he  said  to  the  workmen,
*'  Young  never  eats  any  meat and
said  he,  "  I  can  just  throw  any  man
that  don't  eat  meat.**  I  said  to  him,
"Mr,  Pratt,  if  you  will  step  here
into  the  middle  of  the  floor  1  will
show  you  how  to  dirty  coats,1*  But
he  dared  not  try  it.1  They  say  ladies
do  not  eat  enough  to  make  them
strong — why  I  ha?e  seen  scores  and
scores  of  them  that  could  pull  a
hand  press,  and  we  do  not  use  them
now ;  they  would  have  nothing  in  the
world  to  do  only  to  take  the  paper
and  lay  it  down,  "  But  donrt  you
let  a  woman  know  she  can  do  this,
don't  say  to  a  woman  that  she  is  ca-
pable of  setting  type,  or  of  setting
a  stick  of  type  ou  a  galley,  and  mak-
ing up  a  form  and  locking  it  up  with
a  little  mallet  that  weighs  eight  or
ten  ounces.  Do  not  tell  a  woman
she  can  do  this — no,  no,  it  would
spoil  our  trade/'

Suffice  it  to  say  we  want  to  enlist
the  real  understanding  and  good
sense  of  these  women,  and  to  tell
them  what  their  duty  is- We  want

No.  2.


to  make  our  own  school  books.  We
are  paying  now  from  thirty  thousand
to  sixty  thousand  dollars  a  year  for
school  books  that  can  be  made  here
just  as  well  as  to  send  and  buy  them
abroad.  This  is  carrying  out  the
plan  and  principles  of  building  up
Zion,  whether  you  know  it  or  not.
We  may  preach  until  D.tomsday,  and
tell  how  Zion  will  look,  bow  wide
her  streets  will  be,  what  kind  of
dwellings  her  people  will  have,  what
kind  of  carriages  and  what  fine,
horses  they  will  have,  and  what  a
beautiful  looking  set  of  people  they
will  be,  but  it  is  all  nonsense  to  talk
about  that  we  will  never  reach  if  wo
do  not  stop  our  folly  and  wickedness.
We  have  the  privilege  of  building  up
and  i '"joying  Zion,  and  I  am  telling
you  how  to  do  it.  We  want  the  wo-
men, from  this  time  forth,  to  go  to
work  and  sa^e  the  paper  rags,  and
we  will  make  the  paper  for  them.
And  they  caa  learn  to  make  type.
1  can  pick  hundreds  and  hundreds
of  women  out  of  this  congregation
that  could  go  into  a  shop  and  make
type  just  as  well  as  men,  it  is  a
trifling  thing.  And  they  can  learn
to  set  type,  and  they  can  learn  how
to  write  for  our  school  books.  We
have  plenty  of  men  and  women  that
know  how  to  write  books,  and  how
to  teach  too.  We  have  just  as  good
school  teachers  here  as  any  in  the
world.

While  ou  this  subject  I  will  say
that  I  am  ashamed  of  our  Bishops,
who  can  not  have  anybody  but  a
stranger  for  a  school  teacher.  Let  a
"  Mormon"  come  along,  who  can
read  all  around  and  over  anil  under
him,  and  who,  as  far  as  learning  is
concerned,  is  his  superior  in  every
way,  but  because  he,  the  "  Mormon,"
does  not  come  in  the  guise  of  a  stran-
ger, the  Bishop  will  not  hear  him.
Bishops,  I  wish  you  would  just  resign
your  offices  if  you  can  not  learn  auv

VoL  XVL


JOURNAL  01''  DISCOURSES.


18

better  than  to  uet  such  characters
into  your  school  houses*  Not  but
what  there  is  ouee  in  a  while  a  good
man  comes  along  as  a  school  teacher
who  is  not  a  14  Mormon  ;M  but,  us  a
general  thing,  what  have  these  men
done  ?  They  have  planted  the  seeds
of  infidelity  in  the  hearts  of  the
children,  decoyed  the  hearts  of  their
female  pupils  and  led  them  to  ruin,
and  they  have  turned  round  and
cursed  us+  That  is  the  character  of
same  of  the  men  our  Bishops  gel  into  :
their  school  houses.  There  are  many
of  our  Bishops  not  fit  to  set  type,
measure  tape  or  to  teach  a  scholar.
That  is  saying  a  good  deal  for  the
Bishops,  is  it  not  ?  but  it  is  a  fact.
In  many  instances  they  have  not
wisdom  enough  to  guide  themselves
one  day  without  getting  into  error.
They  do  not  know  'truth  from  error,
they  do  not  know  a  Saint  from  u*
sinner,  or  righteousness  from  un
righteousness.

Will  you,  Kulief  Societies,  devote  I
your  time  and  talents  and  take  hold
of  this  business  ?  We  want  you  to
commence  forthwith.  Say  we  take
thirty  thousand  dollars,  and  that  is
only  a  portion  of  what  we  will  pay
out  lor  school  books  in  IS 73,  and
devote  that  to  making  paper  and  for
payiug  brethren  and  sisters  for
making  books,  and  then  distribute
them  among  our  own  people.  If
this  work  is  done  by  us  there  is  so
much  saved.  Will  my  sisters  enlist
themselves  and  endeavor  to  make
this  movement  successful  ?

We  have  no  societies  or  persons  to
assist  us  in  our  efforts  to  school  our-
selves and  our  children  ;  we  never  |
have  had,  and  the  feeling  that  is  now
exhibited,  and  which  has  always  been
shown  towards  us  since  the  organiza-
tion of  the  kingdom  of  God  upon
the  earth,  is  that  those  who  are  our
enemies  would  rather  spend  ten,  yea,
a  hundred  dollars  to  deprive  us  of


the  least  privilege  in  Hie  world,  than
give  us  one  cent  towards  schooling
our  children.  When  we  were  leaving
Nauvoo,  in  our  poverty,  we  sent  our
Elders  hither  and  i hither  to  the
principal  cities  of  the  United  States,
to  a^k  the  people  if  they  would  assist
the  Saints.  Our  brethren  told  them
that  we  were  leaving  the  confines  of
the  United  States,  having  been
driven  by  the  violence  of  mobs  from
our  homes,  and  how  much  do  you
think  we  got  in  the  cities  of  New
York,  Boston*  Philadelphia  and  a
few  smaller  towns  ?  Their  hear  Is  and
hands  were  closed  against  us.  From
the  whole  people  of  the  United
States,  after  making  an  appeal  to
them  in  our  deep  distress  and  poverty,
we  got  but  a  few  dollars,  and  we  were
then  star  Ling  into  the  wilderness,
and  how  we  were  going  to  live  God
only  knew.  Well,  we  have  got  to
help  ourselves,  we  have  to  school  our-
selves. Has  Government  given  us
the  privilege  of  one  acre  of  land  to
educate  our  children  here  ?  No.
The  school  laud  is  kept  from  us,  and
we  pet  no  benefit  therefrom*

I  want  to  say  a  word  or  two  here
with  regard  to  our  schools.  There
are  many  of  our  people  who  believe
that  the  whole  Territory  ought  to
be  taxed  for  our  schools.  When  we
have  means,  that  come  in  the  proper
way,  we  can  make  a  fund  to  help  the
poor  to  school  their  children,  and  I
would  say  amen  to  it  But  where
are  our  poor  ?  Where  is  the  man  or
the  woman  in  this  community  who
has  children  and  wishes  to  send  them
to  school,  that  cannot  do  it  ?  There
is  not  one.  When  the  poor  complain
and  say,  "  My  children  ought  to  be
schooled  and  clothed  and  fed,"  I  say,
no  sir,  not  so,  you  ought  to  yield
your  time  and  talents  to  the  kind
providences  of  our  Father  in  the
heavens  according  to  the  dictation
of  his  servants,  and  he  will  tell  each


ASSISTANCE  OF  THE  LADIES,  ETC


19


and  Qvevy  one  of  you  what  to  do  to
earn  your  bread,  meat,  clothing,
schooling,  and  how  to  be  self-sustain-
ing in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word.
To  give  to  the  idler  is  as  wicked  as
anything  else.  Never  give  anything
to  the  idler.  u  The  idler  in  Zion
shall  not  eat  the  bread  of  the
laborer."  Well,  they  do  eat  it ;  but
it  is  a  commandment  and  a  revela-
tion as  much  as  any  other,  that  the
idler  shall  not  eat  the  bread  of  the
laborer  in  Zion,  No,  let  evety  one
spend  every  hour,  day,  week  and
month  in  some  useful  and  profitable
employment,  and  then  all  wilt  have
their  meat  and  clothing,  and  means
to  pay  teachers,  and  pay  them  well
Nut  rhat  they  should  receive  more
pay  than  others.  If  men  have  learn-
ing, and  they  have  the  faculty  of  im-
parting it  to  others,  and  can  teach
childien  to  read  and  write,  and  gram-
mar and  arithmetic,  and  all  the  ordi-
nary branches  of  a  common  school
education,  what  better  arc  thcv  than
the  man  that  plows,  hoes,  shoves  the
plane,  handles  the  trowel  and  the
axe,  and  hews  the  stone  ?  Are  they
any  better?  I  do  not  know  that
they  are.  What  better  is  the  man
that  can  dress  himself  nicely  and
labor  in  a  school  house  six  hoars  a
day,  than  the  man  who  works  ten  or
twelve  hours  a  day  hewing  rock  r
Is  he  any  better  ?  No,  he  is  not.
Are  you  going  to  pay  him  for  his
good  looks  Y  That  is  what  some  of
our  Bishops  want  to  do.  If  they  c  m
get  a  man,  no  matter  what  his  moral
qualities  may  be,  whose  shirt  front  is
well  starched  and  ironed,  they  will
say — u  Bless  me,  you  are  a  delight*
ful  little  man !  What  a  smooth
shirt  you  have  got,  and  you  have  a
ring  on  your  finger — you  are  going
to  teach  our  school  for  us/1  And
along  comes  a  stalwart  man,  axe  in
hand,  going  to  chop  wood,  and,  if
he asks,  "  Do  you  want  a  school


teacher  ?"  though  he  may  know  five
times  more  than  the  dandy,  he  is
told,  "  No,  no,  we  have  one  engaged,**
I  want  to  cuff  you  Bishops  back  and
forth  until  you  get  your  brains  turned
right  side  up.

Here  I  am  talking  to  thousands
of  men  and  women  who  know  that
if  we  are  ever  helped  we  have  to
help  ourselves,  with  what  God  does
for  us.  We  have  heard  considerable
from  some  parties  in  this  city  about
what  they  cali  free  schools,  which
they  say  they  have  established  here.
I  say,  now,  come  out,  and  be  as  libe-
ral as  you  say  you  are,  and  teach  our
children  for  nothing.  If  they  knew
the "Mormons"  were  willing  to  accept
of  their  charity  and  send  their  child*
ren  to  these  so-called  free  schools,
their  charity  would  not  weigh  much.
Their  charity  is  to  decoy  away  the
innocent  Send  your  children  to
their  schools  and  see  how  far  their
charity  would  extend.  We  sent  to
them  when  we  were  in  the  wilderness
without  bread,  without  shoes,  with-
out coats,  and  ploughing  our  way
through  to  get  away  from  our  mur-
derers, and  asked  them  for  help.
No,  they  would  not  give  us  anything
to  save  the  lives  of  women  and  child-
ren in  the  wilderness.  When  we
were  right  in  the  midst  of  Indians,
who  were  said  to  be  hostile,  five  hun-
dred men  were  called  to  go  to  Mex-
ico to  fight  the  Mexicans,  and  said
Mr.  Benton — **  If  you  do  not  send
them  we  will  cover  you  up,  and  there
will  be  no  more  of  you/*  I  do  not
want  to  think  of  these  things,  their
authors  belong  to  the  class  I  referred
to  yesterday — the  enemies  of  man-
kind, those  who  would  destroy  inno-
cence, truth,  righteousness  and  the
kingdom  of  G  d  from  the  earth.
We  sent  these  five  hundred  men  to
6ght  the  Mexicans,  and  those  of  as
who  remained  behind  labored  and
raised  all  that  we  needed  to  feed  our-


2"


-inrusAL  OF  Dls:  ontSES,


selves  in  the  wilderness.  We  had
to  pay  our  own  school  teachers,  raise
our  own  bread  and  earn  our  own
cloth  in or  go  without  there  was  no
other  choice.  We  did  it  then,  and
we  are  able  to  do  the  same  to-day.  I
want  to  enlist  the  sympathies  of  the

ladies  amomr  the  Latter-day  H  lints,
to  see  what  we  can  do  for  ourselves
with  regaul  to  schooling  our  child-
ren.  Do  not  say  you  cannot  school
them,  for  you  can.  There  is  not  a
family  in  tins  community  but  what
we  will  take  and  school  their  children
if  they  are  not  able  to  do  it  them-
selves; and  we  do  not  do  it  through
begging  in  the  East  and  telling  what
others  have  told  there  about  this
people,  and  about  their  own  efforts  to
establish  free  schools  here,  1  under-
stand that  the  other  night  there  was
a  school  meeting  in  one  of  the  wards
of  this  city,  and  a  party  there — a
poor  miserable  apostate — said,  "  We
want  a  free  school,  and  we  want  to
have  the  name  of  establishing  the
first  free  school  in  Utah."  To  call  a
person  a  poor  miserable  apostate  may
seem  like  a  harsh  word  ;  but  what
shall  we  call  a  man  who  talks  about
free  schools  and  who  would  have  all
the  people  taxed  to  support  them,
and  yet  would  take  his  rifle  and
threaten  to  shoot  the  man  who  had
the  collection  of  the  ordinary  light
taxes  levied  in  this  Territory — taxes
which  are  lighter  than  any  levied  in
any  other  portion  of  the  country  ?
We  have  no  other  schools  but  free
schools!  here — our  schools  are  all  free*
Our  meetings  arc  free,  our  teachings
are  free.  We  labor  ior  ourselves
and  the  kingdom  of  God.  But,  how
is  it  with  others  ?  Have  they  a
meeting  without  a  plate,  basket,  box
or  hat  passed  round  ?  And,  u  Have
you  got  a  sixpence  for  us  ?  Put  in
your  sixpences,  your  half  dollars,
your  dollars,  or  your  five  dollars."
No,  it  is  beg,  beg,  beg  from  one  year  s


|  end  to  another.  Ever  see  this  in  a
"  Mormon"  meeting?  I  don't  think
j  you  have  in  this  city,  if  you  ever  did
J  any  where  else.  Are  rhe  ^Mormons"
eternally  begging  and  ending  round
the  bat  and  the  plate,  and  asking
every  stranger,  c*Have  you  a  six-
pence for  me  ?M  No,  we  do  not  want
your  money,  we  have  enough  of  our
own,  and  we  earned  it  and  got  it
honestly,  we  have  not  stolen  it  nor
lied  for  it  either.  Now  that  I  am
upon  free  schools  I  say,  put  a  com-
munity in  possession  of  knowledge
r  by  means  of  which  they  can  obtain
what  they  need  by  the  labor  of  their
bodies  and  their  brains,  then,  instead
of  being  piupers  they  will  be  free,
independent  and  happy,  and  thnse
j  distinctions  of  classes  will  cease,  and
there  will  be  but  one  class,  one  grade,
one  great  family.

Now,  sisters,  what  do  you  say  ?
Will  you  give  your  attention  to  this?
We  want  to  erect  a  house  for  you  to
do  printing  in.  Some  one,  perhaps,
will  use  dome  litile  argument  against
women  doing  anything  of  this  kind.
But  the  truth  is  women  can  set  type,
and  read  and  correct  proof  as  well
as  any  man  in  the  world,  if  they  learn
how.  Men  have  to  learn  it  before
they  can  do  it,  and  when  they  tell
you  that  that  is  not  a  woman's  busi-
ness, you  tell  them  they  do  not  know
what  they  were  born  for.  They  were
not  born  to  wash  dishes,  to  dress  the
babies,  nor  to  have  babies,  they  were
born  to  go  into  the  field  and  do  the
work  that  the  women  cannot  do,  and
should  not  do  for  fear  of  exposing
themselves.  Keep  the  ladies  in  their
proper  places,  selling  tape  and  calico,
setting  type,  working  the  telegraph,
keeping  books,  &c.

See  a  great  big  six-footer  working
the  telegraph.  One  of  them  will  eat
as  much  as  three  or  four  women,  and
they  stuff'  themselves  until  they  are
almost  too  lazy  to  touch  the  wire.


ASSISTANCE  OF  THE  LADIES,  ETC


21


There  they  sit.  What  work  is  there
about  that  that  a  woman  cannot  do?
She  can  write  as  well  as  a  man,  and
spell  as  well  as  a  man,  and  better,
and  1  leave  it  to  every  man  and  wo-
man of  learning  if  the  girls  are  not
quicker  and  more  apt  at  learning  in
school  than  the  boys*  It  is  only  oc*
easionally  that  a  boy  is  met  with  who
will  keep  up  with  the  girls  in  learning
reading,  writing,  spelling  and  gram-
mar; as  a  general  thin?  the  «j;irls
will  go  ahead  of  the  boys  in  these
branches,  and  yet  we  are  told  they
are  not  capable  of  doing  these  light
kindi  of  work,  such  as  I  have  men-
tioned. Shame  on  the  boys,  and
shame  on  the  great  big,  tat  lazy
men  !  Let  these  women  go  to  work;
and  let  those  who  have  children
teach  them  to  handle  the  needle  and
sew,  to  make  lace,  to  raise  silk-
worms and  the  mulberry  tree,  to  pick
the  leaves  and  feed  the  worms,  and
then  to  wind  and  weave  the  silk,  that
they  may  make  themselves  good,
nice  silk  dresses,  I  saw  a  very
pretty  piece  of  nilk  made  into  a  gar-
ment in  St.  George,  that  a/fromau
had  made  from  the  si  Ik- worms.  She
tended  them,  reeled  their  silk,  wove
it  and  made  some  beautiful  cloth.
This  is  far  better  than  tearing  the
husband  or  father  to  get  you  tine
dresses  and  then  drag  them  after  you
in  the  street.  Learn  some  good,
solid  sense*  Learn  how  to  raise  silk,
how  to  make  the  silk  into  dresses,
and  make  it  as  neat  and  beautiful  as
you  possibly  can.  Then  another
thing — may  I  say  it  r — gids,  learn
to  comb  your  hair  in  the  morning,
and  tix  up  your  head  dress.  "  Well,
but,  pa  will  not  buy  me  a  chignon."
Well,  then,  tix  your  own  hair,  that  is
all  you  ought  to  have.  Wash  your
face  nice  and  clean,  and  your  neck,
and  cornb  your  hair  neat  and  nice  ;
put  on  your  dress  comely,  and  make
it  look  neat  and nice- I  do  not


mean  protruding  out  behind  like  a
two-bushel  basket,  And  when  you
come  dowrn  stairs  look  as  if  you
were  wide-awake,  and  not  as  if
your  eyes  needed  a  dish  of  water
to  wash  them  clear  and  clean.
Young  ladies,  learn  to  be  near  and
nice.  Do  not  dress  after  the  fashions
of  Babylon,  but  after  the  fashions
of  the  Saints.  Suppose  that  a  fe-
male angel  were  to  come  into  your
house  and  you  had  the  privilege  of
seeing  her,  how  would  she  be  dressed  ?
Do  you  think  she  would  have  a  great,
big  peck  measure  of  flax  done  up  like
hair  on  the  back  of  the  head  ?
Nothing  of  the  kind.  Would  she
have  a  dross  dragging  two  ur  three
yards  behind  ?  Nothing  of  the  kind.
Would  she  have  on  a  great,  big —
what  is  it  yon  call  it?  A  Grecian
or  Dutch — Well,  no  matter  what
you  call  it,  you  know  what  1  mean.
Do  you  think  she  would  have  on
anything  of  that  kind?  Not  at  all.
No  person  in  the  world  would  ex-
pect to  see  an  angel  dressed  in  such
a  giddy,  frivolous,  nonsensical  style.
She  would  be  neat  and  nice,  her
countenance  full  of  glory,  brilliant,
bright,  and  perfectly  beautiful,  and
in  every  act  her  gracefulness  would
charm  the  heart  of  every  tjehoider.
There  is  nothing  needless  about  her.
None  of  ray  sisters  believe  that  these
useless,  foolish  fashions  are  fol-
lowed in  heaven.  Well,  then,  pat-
tern  after  good  and  heavenly  things,
and  let  the  beauty  of  your  garments
be  the  workmanship  of  your  own
hands, that which adorns  your

bodies.  "  4

Now,  sisters,  will  you  go  to  wurk

and  help  us  to  get  up  our  school

books  ? Whether  you  do  or  do  not

belong  to  t  !  e  Relief  Societies,  we  want

you  to  join  in  and  help  u^,  and  save

your  rags  to  make  paper,  and  then

go  and  set  type  and  make  the  books*

Yqu  who  feel  like  doing  this,  hold


22


JOURNAL  OF  nisCOURSES


up  your  bands.  (Hands  up.)  There
is  a  pretty  good  showing,  enough  to
carry  an  influence — the  day  is  ours.
If  you  will  only  carry  this  out  we
will  make  our  own  school- hooks,  and
keep  the  money  in  the  Territory  that
we  now  send  out  for  them.

Elders  of  Israel,  1  want  to  tell  y<m
how  to  have  a  little. You  want  to
get  rich* Go  to  the  mines  and  you
will  be  so  poor  that  you  never  can
pay  any  tithing. This  is  proved.  I
want  to  tell  you  now,  how  you  can
pay  your  tithing. You trade  oil
your  horses  and  run  leg  and  harness,
just  as  quick  as  circumstances  will
let  yon. Raise  the  calves  that  will
make  oxen,  break  them and  work
with  them  ;  and  let  this  community
take  this  course,  using  oxen  instead
of  horses,  and  mules  for  all  their
farming  and  .teaming,  and  in  one
year  they  will  .save  one  million  dol-
lars, and  this  will  increase  year  by
year,  and  that  will  enable  you  to  give
a  little  to  emigrate  the  poor  Saints
from  the  old  country. I  want  you
to  swell  this  Perpetual  Emigrating
Fund  so  that  we  can  send  lor  a  good
many  of  the  poor  this  year.  What
have  you  to  give  ? Some  will  say,
14 1  have  not  anything,  brother  Brig-
ham."  "What  have  you  been  doing?"
"Oh,  1  have  been mining,  and  it
lakes  all  my  time  and  labor  to  sup-
port my  family. I  have  a  splendid
claim — I  am  just  going  to  have  a
hundred  thousand dollars for  it."
We  have  plenty  of  this  class  around,
and  whenever  I  see  a  man  going
aluug  with  an  old mule  that  can
hardly  stand  up,  and  a  frying  pan
and  an  old  quilt,  I  say,  There  goes
a  millionaire  in  prospect ! He  is
after  a  million,  he  calculates  lo  find
a  mine  that  he  can  get  a  million  tor
next summer. These  millionaires
are  all  over  our  country  ;  they  are  in
the  mountains,  on  our  highways  and
in  our  streets. But  ask  them,  "Can


you  give  me  a  sixpence  to  buy  me  a
morsel oi meat?" 41  No, 1  have
not  got  it,  I  am  just  going  to  have
plenty  of  money,  hut  1  have  not  got
it  now. Cannot  you  lend  me  a  little
to  keep  me  from  need,  I  have  no
bread  for  my  family,  but  I  am  going
to  have  a  fortune  in  a  little  while,"
Theie  are  numbers  of  the  Elders  of
Israel  in  this  position. Ask  tbem  if
they  can  pay  a  little  tithing  ? "  No,
not  a  dollar/* "Give  anything  to
help  the  poor  ?" "  No,  I  have  not
any,  will  you  lend  me  a  little  to  buy
some  flour  for  my  family  ?"  and  so
they  go  on  year  after  year. Why  ?
Because  they  will  not  take  the  coun-
sel of  the  wise. When  you  hear  a
man,  outside  or  inside  of  the  king-
dom of  God,  finding  fault,  complain-
ing or  easting  reflections,  tint  Presi-
dent Young  has  got  so  much  influ-
ence over  the  people  called  L -itter-d ay-
Saints  that  they  (the  grumblers)  are
afraid  of  him,  you  just  tell  them
that  he  has  not  a  hundredth  part  of
the  influence  he  ought  to  have.  He
ought  to  have  all  the  influence  imag-
inable  with  thorn,  he  is  deserving  of
it,  tie  earns  it,  and  he  knows  what  to
du  with  it,  and  he  directs  and  guides
for  the  advancement  of  the  kingdom
of  God  on  the  earth. Just  think  of
these  men,  trailing  through  these
canons, running after shadows —
jack-o'lan  terns — all  over  creation  for
something  in  prospect! They  are
just  like  some  business  men  I  have
seen  in  my  lite — they  have  got  their
eye  on  a  picayune,  away  off  yonder
in  the  distance,  and  they  starr  after
that  and  stub  their  toe  against  a
twenty  dollar  gold  piece ;  but  they
kick  that  out  of  the  way,  they  do  not
see  it. By  and  by  they  start  again,
and  they  pass  titty  dollars  in  their
path,  and  so  they  keep  on,  passing
right  by  ten,  twenty  or  fifty  dollais.
"Oh,  that  picayune  does  so  dazzle
my  eye,  for  God's  sake  let  me  get


FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES,  ETC.


23


it!"  They  are  fools,  they  know
nothing  about  life,  nor  sustaining
themselves,  they  are  worse  than
children.  Well,  now,  brother  Brig-
ham  ought  to  have  influence  enough
over  these  Elders  of  Israel  to  keep
them  from  deceiving  themselves  as  1
much  as  they  do;  and  when  they  run
after  this  shadow  and  tire  themselves
out  and  fall  in  the  mud,  they  lose
the  spirit  of  their  religion,  find  out
that  u  Mormonism"  is  not  true  and
away  they  go  to  the  devil.


I  am  going  to  stop  talking  to  the
sisters,  and  will  conclude  by  asking
them,  Will  you  be  printers  or  clerks
in  stores  ?  The  brethren  will  keep
every  one  of  yon  out  if  they  c*n,  and
1  do  nut  know  but  I  shall  have  to  go
and  keep  store  myself  independent  of
every  other  institution,  and  hire
hidies  to  tend  it.  I  want  them  also
to  Telegraph  for  us,  set  our  type,
write  our  books,  and  save  the  rugs
to  make  the  paper.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  April  6,  1873.


(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)


FRIENDS  A\!>  EN  EMI  MS — OBJECT  OF  ^VTflERLVU — BABYLON  TO  BE
FORSAKEN— Pit  AY  KB — PERSONALITY  OF  THE  (JOI>HEAD.


In  my  remarks  to  yon  I  want  your
eyes,  ears,  attention  und  faith.  This
is  the  Forty-third  Annual  Conference
of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
Latter-day  Saints,  and  we  have  as-
sembled together  for  the  purpose  of
being  benefited.  We  like  to  see  and
hear  each  other,  we  like  to  give  and
leceive  counsel,  and  we  like,  above
all  things,  to  enjoy  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord.  In  singing,  praying,  shak-
ing and  hearing,  and  in  all  duties
devolving  upon  us  upon  such  occa-
sions a,s  this,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
is  the  best  of  all.

I  have  a  great  manv  reflections
with  regard  to  the  Latter-day  Saints


and  the  work  in  which  they  are  en-
gaged. 1  have  many  reflections  in
regard  to  the  world  of  mankind.
We  all  enjoy  the  power  of  sight,  but
how  differently  we  look  at  and  com-
prehend things!  And  we  are  very
much  like  the  people  who  have  lived
before  us.  We  are  a  strange  and
curious  composition — no  two  alike.
Of  all  the  faces  before  uie  this  after-
noon there  are  no  two  alike.  We
might  possibly  find  those  whose
judgment  would  be  pretty  much  alike
on  various  sul  gects,  still  there  are  uo
two  whose  judgments  are  precisely
the  same*  Human  life  is  a  great
stage,  and  it  contains  a  very  great


2i


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


variety  of  scenes  and  scenery,  of
thought  and  of  action.  Some  are
not  very  beautiful,  others  are,  and
tli cy  are  painted  with  fine  colors.
We  see  all  this  before  us,  and  each
and  every  person  has  t lie  privilege
of  judging  tor  himself,  and  upon  each
different  impressions  are  produced.

I  see  a  large  eoi  gregation  before
me  this  afternoon  of  pen  pie  called
Latter  day  Saints.  If  the  world  of
mankind  were  to  give  their  opinion
concerning  us  they  would  use  terms
I  heard  frequently  this  morning —
"  enemy,"  "  enemies,"  £*  ouf  ene-
mies/' These  expressions  would  be
frequently  beard  from  tin*  inhabit-
ants of  the  earth  about  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  fin?  the  impression  has
existed  and  lias  been  growing  strong-
er for  years  pa>t,  that  this  strange
people — the  Latter-day  Saints — are
the  enemies  of  mankind,  I  do  not
wish  to  convey  the  idea  that  all  t he
inhabitants  of  the  earth  consider  this
people  their  enemies,  but  there  are
those  who  wish  to  have  ihis  impres-
sion or  belief  prevail  I  hear  many
of  the  Elders  of  Israel  refer  to  the
outside  world  as  enemies.  I  do  it
myself  at  certain  times  and  on  cer.
tain  occasions,  for  certain  deeds
wrought  by  those  who  wish  to  destroy
the  truth  from  the  earth,  for  every
person  who  would  uproot  the  truth
of  God  is  mine  enemy,  he  would  de-
stroy me  if  he  had  the  power.  What
shall  we  sav  of  those  who  desire
peace  and  whose  hearts  are  filled
with  good  will  towards  their  fel law-
men f  We  say  peace  to  such  per-
sons, and  give  them  ours  and  God's
blessing*

Who  is  the  enemy  of  mankind  ?
He  who  wishes  to  change  truth  for
error  and  light  for  darkness  ;  he
who  wishes  to  take  peace  from  a

family,  city,  state  or  nation  and  give
t lie  sword  in  return.  He  is  my
enemy,  he  is  your  enemy  and  the


enemy  of  mankind.  Who  is  the
friend  of  mankind  ?  He  who  makes
peace  between  those  who  are  at
enmity,  who  brings  together  those
who,  perhaps,  through  some  mis-
understanding, have  been  at  variance
with  and  lost  friendship  and  fellow-
ship for  each  other,  and  shows  them
that  their  ill-will  is  without  founda-
tion  and  existed  simpl}"  because  they
did  not  understand  each  other.  To
illustrate  we  will  suppose  that  two
men  come  in  the  same  car  to  this
city.  One  of  them  is  full  of  decep-
tion find  carries  false  colors.  If  he
speaks  a  word  that  would  hi  come  a
gentleman,  it  is  not  because  be  feels
it,  for  in  his  heart  he  is  cursing  and
damning,  and  his  purpose  is  to  sow
discord  and  enmity  among  the  people
in  a  neighborhood.  He  delights  to
set  the  members  of  one  family  jar-
ring with  each  other.  He  will  teach
the  youth  to  believe  that  such  or
such  persons  are  their  enemies  and
it  is  no  harm  to  burn  their  houses
down,  to  take  their  horses,  cut  their
carriages  to  pieces,  to  open  the  gate
of  their  garden  or  field  and  let  some*
body's  cattle  in.  Such  a  person  is
an  enemv  of  mankind.  But  the
other  one  is  a  friend.  If  he  sees  his
neighbor's  gate  open,  he  shuts  it;  if
cattle  are  in  a  neighbor's  field,,  he
tells  him  of  the  mischief  that  is
being  done. If  he  fenoe  down*

and  there  is  none  of  the  family  to
come  and  put  it  up,  he  gets  ont  of
his  carriage,  or  off  his  horse,  or  if
he  is  afoot,  he  steps  to  the  fence,
turns  the  cattle  out,  puts  up  the
fence  or  shuts  the  gate  and  prevents
further  mischief  on  his  neighbor's
premises.  Who  is  your  enemy  and
mine?  He  that  teaches  language
that  is  unbecoming,  that  presents
falsehood  for  truth,  that  furnishes
false  premises  to  build  upon  instead
of  true,  or  that  is  full  of  anger  and
mischief  to  his  fellow  beings. I  call


FRIENDS  AND

no  others  enemies,  except  such  char-
acters as  I  have  named.  There  Is
no  question  that  many  have  done
much  mischief  while  in  ignorance  of
what  they  were  doing,  I  have  no
doubt  that  the  soldiers  who  were
commanded  to  nail  the  Savior  to  the
cross  did  not  realize  what  they  were
doing.  They  treated  him  as  they
did  the  thieves,  whom  they  knew  to
be  worthy  of  death ;  but  through
prejudice,  over- persuasion  and  much
talk  by  the  priests,  Scribes,  Phari-
sees and  people,  they  perhaps  sup-
posed they  were  doing  God's  service
when  they  crucified  Jesus.  Hut  it
waS  an  enemy  that  did  it,  it  was  a
bad  act,  a  very  heinous  crime,  it —
but  I  pause.  The  question  may  be
asked,  What  would  have  been  the
consequence  suppose  the  Savior  had
not  been  crucified  ?  I  can  only  an-
swer by  saying  that  be  was.  The
Scriptures  say  that  offences  must
needs  come,  but  woe  to  him  by  whom
they  come.  But  we  will  resume  oar
subject.  Who  is  the  man  that  is  an
enemy  to  his  nation  ?  The  one  that
breeds  mischief,  prompts  strife,  and
brings  sorrow  among  tiie  people.

Now  to  the  Latter-day  Saints —
What  are  you  here  for  ?  Can  you
answer  this  question  ?  Many  of  you
can.  One  brother  says,  "  Why,  I
came  here  to  join  the  Saints."  "  Where
did  you  come  from  ?"  u  I  lived  in
Scotland.  I  worked  in  the  mines,  or
in  the  factory,  or  in  iron  works."
**  What  did  you  come  here  for  ?"  .
"  When  I  heard  the  Gospel  preached
I  believed  it,  and  I  received  a  desire
to  leave  my  neighbors.  I  believed
the  Bible  and  the  Book  of  Mormon ;
I  believed  that  Joseph  Smith  was  a
Prophet.  lly  neighbors  said,  '  Oh
folly,  oh  fool.  There  goes  a  Mor-
mon/ and  they  pointed  the  finger  of
scorn  at  me."  This  is  the  spirit  of
the  world,  but  if  there  had  been  no
persecution  whatever  in  the  feelings


ENEMIES,  ETC*  25

of  his  neighbors  he  would  have  had
a  desire  to  leave  his  home  and  old
associates  to  join  the  Saints,  for  the
Spirit  he  received  prompted  him  to
do  this.  Ask  a  sister,  "  What  are
you  here  for  ?"  "  Why,  I  came  here
so  that  I  could  live  my  religion  a
little  better  than  I  could  in  Scot-
land, England,  Ireland,  Wales,France,
Scandinavia,"  or  wherever  it  might
be  that  she  came  from.  Ask  ano-
ther man,  "What  did  you  gather  to
these  mountains  for?"  "Wed,  I
think  I  came  here  because  of  my
religion.  I  used  to  think  I  wanted
to  gather  up  with  the  Saints.  I
liked  their  society,  and  when  I  came
up  here  I  really  delighted  to  be  with
them,"  "  What  are  you  doing  now,
brother?"  "Well,  I  am  trying  to
do  about  the  best  I  possibly  can.
Here  are  a  few  dollars  I  want  to  pay
on  Tithing."  m  Have  you  paid  your
Tithing  this  year  ?"  "  No  "  11  Did
you  pay  it  last  year?"  uNo."
u  Have  you  not  paid  Tithing  lately?*
"No."  "What  is  the  reason?"
u  Why,  I  am  after  gold  and  silver,
and  the  riches  in  these  mountains,
in  this  trade,  I  am  after  the  world,
I  am  after  Babylon,"  This  is  the
conduct.  I  do  not  ask  for  words,  I
do  not  ask  anybody  to  get  up  and
declare  that  their  affections  are  turned
away  from  the  holy  Gospel  of  life
and  salvation,  and  turned  to  the
world.  Let  me  see  their  daily  walk
and  know  their  life,  and  I  know
what  their  thoughts  and  feelings
are.  And  the  sister  that  comes  here
for  the  Gospels  sake,  her  mind  is  so
frivolous  and  easily  wrought  upon
that  she  is  led  by  every  wind  and
breeze  of  fashion  that  blows  through
the  streets  here.  "Oh,  don't  you
see  that  lady's  dress?"  "  Here,  look
here,  did  you  see  that  lady  walking
down  the  street  ?"  "  Yes."  "  What
a  beautiful  dress  she  has  got  on  !  Oh
dear,  how  I  want  such  a  dress !"  Go


r


26


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSE.

I


down  (lie  street  and  you  can  see  it; take  it  with  you,  and  you  will  &o

tin  fTi^  Zi I  J x i m *  *  o


go  up  the  Btreet  and  you  can  see  it  w
go  into  the  workshops,  and  even  into
the  kanyons,  and  you  cm see  it
What of  it? Latter-day  Saints,
what  of  it  ? «  Oh,  I  do  love  Baby-
lon s>  well." 11 1  do  want  a  new
dress," "I  do  want  to  go  into  the
mines  and  dig" "  I  have  a  claim,
and  I  am  just  going  into  the  moun-
tains to  dig,"  says  a  brother,  Ano-
ther one  says,  "  I  have  served  t lie
Lord  about  long  enough,  and  I  ara
going  to  serve  myself  now/'  This
is  the  way  with  one  here  and  another
there,  and  if  they  have  not  got  Baby.
Ion  they  want  to  get  it. And  here
comes  along  a  man  who  professes  to
be  a  Latter-day  Saint,  and  the  first
you  know  he  is  using  the  name  of
the  Deity  in  vain,  and  it  is  a  curse"
this, and "curse" that,  with  the
name  of  onr  Father  in  heaven  at-
tached to  it, Ls  that  according  to
the  faith  that  we  have  embraced?
Mingle  with  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  see  them  playing  on  the  stage
of  life,  and  watch  how  some  of  them
will  change  their  colors  and  their
coats,  and  some  come out.  in  one
fashion  and  some  in  another,  accord-
ing io  the  circumstances  in  which
they  are  placed.

Here  we  are  assembled  in  (he
capacity  of  a  general  Conference*
Babylon  is  in  the  hearts  of  the  peo-
ple, that  is  to  say,  there  is  too  much
of  it.  What  did  you  come  here  for  ?
"  Why,"  says  one,  "  I  understood
they  were  getting  rich  in  Utah,  and
I  thought  I  would  gather  up  with
the  Latter-day  Saints  and  get  rich
also"  Without  making  many  re-
marks on  this  subject,  I  waut  to  say
to  every  one  of  those  who  come  up
here,  their  minds  filled  with  Babylon,
and  longing  for  the  fashions  and
wealth  of  the  world,  you  may  heap
up  gold  and  silver,  but  it  will  leave
you,  or  you  will  leave  it,  you  cannot


down  to  hell.

Perhaps  I  may  be  considered  their
enemy  by  some  of  those  called  Latter-
day  Saints,  and  by  outsiders,  for
telling  them  these  things.  That  is
no  matter,  it  is  for  their  life  and  sal-
vation that  I  tell  them.  If  I  should
see  men  and  women  going  blind-
folded to  an  awful  precipice,  and  not
hail  them  and  warn  them  of  their
danger,  I  should  be  guilty,  and  per-
haps their  blood  would  be  found  on
my  skirts.  I  will  say,  at  once,  not
prolonging  my  remarks  or  multi-
plying words,  that  if  my  brethren
and  sisters  do  not  walk  np  to  the
principles  of  the  holy  Gospel  of  life
and  salvation,  they  will  be  removed
out  of  their  places,  and  others  will
be  caller!  to  occupy  them.  Elders
Of  Israel,  High  Priests,  Seventies,
High  c  ounci!or*s,  Presidents,  bre-
thren and  sisters,  no  matter  wh  «,  if
you  have  an  idea  that  you  are  going
to  take  Babylon — I  use  this  term,
because  it  is  well  understood  that
Babylon  means  confusion,  discord,
strife,  folly  and  all  the  vanities  the
world  po!


:'S'


if  you  have  the  idea
that  you  are  going  to  take  Babylon
in  one  hand,  and  with  the  other
cling  to  the  Savior  and  drag  your-
selves into  his  presence,  you*  will
find  yourselves  mistaken,  for  he  will
drop  you,  and  you  will  sink.  You
may  just  as  well  believe  this  to-day  f
and  shape  your  lives  accordingly,  as
to  betray  yourselves.

There  are  a  great  many  who  say,
"  Why,  yes,  I'  say  my  prayers,  I  do
not  use  the  name  of  the  Lord  in
vain,  I  do  not  injure  iny  neighbor."
That  is  true.  How  many  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  live  like  this  ?  I
am  pretty  well  acquainted  with
them.  I  see  and  understand  their
feelings  by  their  works,  and  I  cau
say  that  a  large  majority  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  are  a  good,  obedi-


FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES,  ETC.


27


ent,  faithful,  God-fearing,  God-Jo v-  I
ing  people,  and  yet  we  fellowship
those  who  are  fall  of  iniquity  and
evil,  individuals  who  are  fall  of
the  spirit  of  anti-Christ,  I  talk
and  tell  the  truth  to  the  good  and
to  the  evil,  and  I  wish  to  compre-
hend the  whole;  and  I  tell  you  to-
day that  if  our  minds  are  not  made
up  to  serve  God,  if  we  are  not  for
Christ,  and  for  his  kingdom  upon
the  earth;  if  we  are  not  willing
to  devote  our  time,  talents,  means,
influence  and  everything  that  he
has  given  into  our  possession,  we
are  not  in  the  way  we  should  walk.
I  know  that  it  may  be  said,  and
with  great  propriety,  "  Why,  my
brother,  we  can  not  be  sanctified
in  one  day,  we  cannot  overcome
every  evil  and  every  passion  in  one
day."  That  is  true,  but  this  holy
desire  can  dwell  in  the  heart  of
every  individual  from  the  time
that  he  or  she  is  convinced  that
God  reigns,  that  he  is  establishing
his  kingdom  on  the  earth,  that
Jesus  is  our  Savior,  that  the  holy
Gospel  has  presented  to  us  the  way
of  life  and  .salvation,  and  we  be-
lieve it  and  can  receive  it  with  our
whole  hearts — I  say  we  can  Slave
that  holy  and  pure  desire  from  that
moment  to  the  end  of  our  lives,
and  in  possessing  this  we  have  faith
and  favor  before  the  Lord,  and  his
gram  is  with  us  by  the  power  of
his  Holy  Spirit,  and  by  this  we
can  overcome  temptations  as  we
meet  them.  This  is  my  experience,
that  is  pretty  goo  I  proof,  is  it  not  ?
And  I  have  more  evidence  than
this — this  is  the  experience  and  tes-
timony of  every  Latter-day  Saint
who  has  lived  his  or  her  religion
since  obeying  the  Gospel.  Their
testimony  will  corroborate  mine,  and
strengthen  the  faith  of  all

1  have  not  preached  much  to  yon
this  winter,  and  I  pause  and  think.


I  wrjs  in  the  stone  quarry  the  other
day,  and  saw  the  men  breaking  a
large  granite  rock.  They  first  drilled
the  holes  so  as  to  break  the  rock
in  a  direct  line.  I  saw  one  man
take  up  his  hammer  and  give  a
blow, It  was  too  hard. Kait]  L

r

"My  father  taught  me  in  my  youth
that  light  knocks  would  split  great
blocks.  Tap  light  next  time,"  The
quarry  man  did  this  and  pretty  soon
the  rock  divided  almost  as  evenly
as  though  it  had  been  jointed.  I  wish
to  make  an  application  of  this  to  this
people  assembled  here.  If  I  and  my
brethren  had  strength,  we  would
meet  together  here  about  one  week,
to  hegin  with,  then  go  to  our  work
for  a  few  week*,  and  then  we  would
come  together  again.  By  continuing
this  coarse,  I  expect  that  in  about
three  months  we  could  get  the  feel-
ings of  this  people  warmed  up  like
wax  before  the  flame,  so  that  we
could  get  at  their  judgment  and
affections  and  we  could  actually  mould
them  over,  and  make  them  realize
tlie  work  that  they  are  engaged  in.
But  to  do  it  in  one  day  would  lie  like
driving  the  wedges  so  fast  that  you
would  split  the  rock  where  you  would
not  want  it  split.  Still,  many  who
want  to  receive  the  word  can,  and  I
say  to  all,  you  and  I  must  be  Latter-
day  Saints  or  we  are  not  walking  in
the  path  that  God  has  marked  out
for  us.  "  What  do  you  mean  by
that,  brother  Brigharn  ?  I  want
to  know  what  you  mean  by  that,  I
can  not  understand  it."  This  is  the
difficulty,  but  thank  kind  heaven,
I  have  found  out  in  my  experience,
that  learning  a,  b,  c,  d,  does  not
binder  me  learning  e,  f,  g*  I  thank
my  Creator  that  the  principle  is  im-
planted within  us,  that  we  can  learn,
if  it  takes  a  long  time,  and  by  a
close  application  of  the  ability  that
God  has  given  us,  we  can  improve
and  in  time  become  Saints  in  very


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


deed.  Were  it  not  for  this  I  should
have  been  discouraged  long  ago.  But
I  know  that  wo  can  learn  to  be  Saints
if  we  are  disposed  to.  Practice  your
religion  to-day,  and  say  your  prayers
faithfully.

Says  a  brother,  "  I  pray  in  my
family  sometimes,  and  sometimes  I
do  not  feel  like  it,  and  I  do  not
pray  in  my  family.  Sometimes  I
am  in  a  hurry,  my  work  is  driving
me,  my  cattle  are  in  mischief,  and  I
do  not  feel  like  praying,"

If  I  did  not  feel  like  praying,  and
asking  my  Father  in  heaven  to  give
me  a  morning  blessing,  and  to  pre-
serve me  and  my  family  and  the
good  upon  the  earth  through  the
day,  J  should  say,  "  Brigham,  get
down  here,  on  your  knees,  bow  your
body  down  before  the  throne  of
Him  who  rules  in  the  heavens,  and
stay  there  until  you  can  feel  to  sup-
plicate at  that  throne  of  grace  erected
for  sinners/*

"Well,  but  I  am  in  a  hurry,  and
my  cattle,  perhaps,  are  in  mischief
and  my  work  is  driving  me,"  I
should  s;iy,  if  the  cattle  are  in  the
corn,  "Eat  away ;  "  if  thev  are  in
the  wheat,  "  Eat  away,  eat  the
wheat,  we  have  more  than  we  can
use  any  how;"  and  if  the  children
are  in  mischief  and  this  wants  seeing
to,  and  that  wants  seeing  to,  I  say,
"  Kneel  down  before  the  Lord  and
there  stay  until  this  body  learns  obe-
dience, until  my  tongue  learns  to
praise  his  name,  and  to  ask  for  the
blessings  J  need."

u  Well,  but  are  you  not  afraid  you
will  come  to  want  ?"  Bless  me,  if
I  had  all  the  gold  and  si  Iyer  on  the
earth  and  no  prayers,  I  should  be  in
greater  want  than  I  should  be  with
the  prayers  and  without  the  gold
and  silver.  I  will  make  an  applica-
tion of  this  with  regard  to  the  feel-
ings of  the  people.  It  is  true  that
you  and  I  can  not  learn  every  thing


at  once,  but  we  can  learn  one  thing
at  once  and  the  one  thing  above  all
others  that  we  should  make  it  oar
business  to  learn  is  to  yield  strict
obedience  to  the  requirements  of
heaven,  and  we  can  learn  that  to-day
just  as  well  as  any  other  time,  and
just  as  well  as  to  spend  a  lifetime  in
doing  it

Now,  Latter-day  Saints,  do  you
know  what  you  are  here  for  ?  You
know  there  is  a  field  opens  before
us  in  talking  about  what  we  are  here
for,  why  the  Lord  suffers  what  we
now  behold,  a:.d  why  he  permits
this  and  permits  that*  It  is  all  per-
fectly reasonable  and  rational,  all
according  to  his  providences  and  his
den  lings  with  the  children  of  men.  I
can  say  to  all  that  you  have  got  to
learn  this  one  fact — the  Lord  will
have  a  tried  people,  and  if  my  wife
or  my  daughter  can  not  see  and  p;iss
by,  as  things  of  naught,  the  follies
of  fashion,  she  has  not  learned  her
duty,  she  has  not  learned  the  spirit
of  her  religion,  and  is  not  in  (he  full
enjoyment  of  the  Spirit  of  God.
Fashions  are  nothing  to  me,  one
way  or  the  other.  How*  long  is  it
since  ladies  wore  bonnets  into  which
you  would  have  to  look  with  a  spy-
glass if  you  wished  to  see  their
faces,  and  then  from  their  face*  to
the  crown  of  the  head.  Prom  this
fashion  they  got  to  one  in  which  one
flower  or  leaf  and  five  yards  of  rib-
bon made  a  complete  head  dress.
What  of  these  fashions  ?  They  are
n  tiling  here  nor  there,  and  by  trying
we  can  learn  to  pass  by  every  need-
less fashion,  and  to  stop  the  use  of
every  needless  word,  and  to  carry
ourselves  correctly  before  the  Lord.

Now  let  us  consider,  are  we  for
the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?  "  01 1  yes,"
"Oh  yes/'  everybody  says,  "cer-
tainly we  are."  Are  we  for  happi-
ness ?  Yes,  certainly,  the  whole
world  is  with  us  them There  is  no


person  but  what  would  say,  Give '
me  power,  give  me  influence,  give
me  wealth,  o^ive  me  gold  and  silver,
houses  and  lands,  goods  and  chattels,
tenements,  horses,  carriages,  friends,
families,  associations,  &o.  The  whole  '
world  will  join  in  saying,  Give  us
heaven  and  happiness;  but  talk  to
them  about  "  Mformonism,"  an:l
they  will  say,  "  your  doctrine  is
a  speculation."  The  cry  with  re-
gard to  brother  Joseph  was,  "  He  is
a  money  diggerv  he  is  a  speculator."
Well,  how  long  was  it  before  the
whole  world  was  on  his  track  dig-
gin-  money  ?  It  was  no  disgrace
just  a?  soon  as  the  world  commenced
digging  money,  but  when  there
were  only  a  few  accused  of  it,  it
was  a  disgrace.  How  things  are
changed  !  How  differently  we  look
upon  our  bonnets  now!  If  a  lady
were  to  enter  this  building  wearing
an  old-fashioned  head-dress  every-
body would  be  looking  at  her.  If  a
lady  were  to  come  into  this  assem-
bly with  sixteen  yards  of  cloth — I
am  talking  extravagantly  now  to
itlutrate — in  her  two  fclee^es,  and
only  four  in  the  waist  and  skirt  of
her  dress,  how  ridiculous  it  would
appear,  %vou!d  it  not  ?  And  yet
something  very  much  like  that  was
once  the  fashion.

I  look  at  this  and  make  the  appli-  i
cation  .  The  world  would  say,  "  Yes,
if  you  are  going  to  have  happiness,
we  want  some;  if  you  are  going  to
have  gold  and  silver,  look  here,  we
shall  come  in  for  a  share,"  Very
good,  all  right.  I  used  to  tell  the
people — bless  your  heart,  you  accuse
me  of  being  in  a  speculation,  and
so  I  am.  You  cry  out  that  the  "Mor-
mon91 leaders  are  for  speculation,  for
money  making.  We  go  in  for  wealth.
I  used  to  tell  the  people,  and  I  tell
them  the  same  now,  I  do  not  go  in
for  a  fe  w  millions,  I  go  in  for  the  pile, !
and  I  calculate  to  have  it. "  How


are  you  going  to  got  it  ?  "  By  serv-
ing God  with  all  my  heart  and  being
a  Saint  indeed,  and  when  the  earth
and  its  fullness  are  given  into  the
hands  of  the  Saints,  I  shall  go  in
for  my  share — the  whole  pile.  I  used
to  say,  "  Why,  brother  Joseph  is  the
greatest  speculator  I  have  heard  of
in  modern  times — he  is  going  to  have
the  whole  earth.  Jesus  is  coming  to
earth  to  reign  King  of  nations,  and
he  is  going  to  .share  the  gold  and  sil-
ver with  his  brethren.  That  is  not
all — all  things  are  yours  for  time
and  eternity — the  heights  and  depths,
the  lengths  and  breadths,  crowns  of
glory  and  immortality  and  eternal
lives  are  yours."  Well,  I  go  in  for
the  pile*  y  P

I  want  to  ask,  Am  I  an  enemy  of
mankind  ?  Is  a  Latter-day  Saint  an
enemy  of  mankind  ?  No.  I  say  to
the  intelligent  world,  if  they  did  but
know  it,  we  in  connection  with  God,
Jesus  the  Mediator,  angels,  the  good
that  an*  on  the  earth  and  the  good
that  have  been,  are  the  only  friends
of  mi  an  kind  upon  the  face  of  the
earth.  That  is  a  great  word  to  say,
and  some  may  think  it  is  extravagant.
They  say,  "  See  what  our  benevolent
societies,  our  ministers,  our  kings
and  our  rich  people  are  doing  for  the
poor,  and  then  say  that  the  Latter-
day  Saints  are  the  only  friends  of
mankind."  I  want  to  say  to  all  the
world  that  no  good  or  benevolent  act,
no  act  that  sustains  innocence,  virtue
and  truth  and  does  good  to  the  hu-
man family  will  go  unrewarded  of
the  Creator.  Do  not  be  discouraged.
Have  they  done  any  good  ?  Yes,  a
great  deal  of  it  The  christian  world
have  sent  forth  their  missionaries
and  they  have  done  a  great  deal  of
good,  hut  they  could  do  a  great  deal
more  if  they  had  a  mind  to.  They
hedge  up  the  way  and  try  to  destroy
the  little  good  they  have  done  by  in-
stilling into  the  hearts  of  the  people


JuUKXAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


the  necessity  of  dwelling  in  darkness
and  remaining'  in  ignorance,  and  pre-
venting them  from  receiving  the
Gospel,  This  is  their  practice,  and
in  tins  they  are  doing  injury,  bnt  they
have  done  a  great  deal  of  good.

What  are  we  hated  for?  What
do  men  lie  about  us  for,  and  send
forth  their  lies  to  the  world  liirht
from  this  place  ?  Are  they  who  do
this  the  friends  of  mankind  ?  No,
they  are  their  enemies.  They  plant
falsehood  in  the  hearts  of  thousands
of  people.  One  liar  is  like  a  had
king,  A  corrupt  and  wicked  king
can  corrupt  a  whole  nation.  One
liar  can  deceive  thousands.  They
are  not  the  friends  of  mankind.  Why
are  we  hated  ?  Is  oar  religion  ob*
noxious  ? Why  ?

"  Because  of  this  one  man  power,
because  of  the  great  influence  there
is  in  the  midst  of  the  people  to  unite
them  together."

Do  you  not  read  in  your  Bibles
that  except  ye  are  one  ye  arc  not  the
Lord's  ?  Do  you  not  read  in  the
LSible,  that  you  have  had  all  your
lives,  that  yon  must  love  God  with  all
your  hearts,  that  you  must  be  united,
that  you  must  receive  the  Gospel  of
Christ?  Do  you  not  read  that  there
is  but  one  faith,  one  Lord,  one  bap-
tism, one  God  and  Father  of  hll,  &c.  r
Certainly  you  do.  Well,  we  believe
these  things,  but  does  that  prove
that  we  are  the  enemies  of  mankind?
No,  it  proves  that  we  are  their
friends.  Why  do  we  differ  from
them,  and  why  do  they  differ  from
us?  I  can  tell  it  in  a  few  words — it
is  simply  because  we  are  disposed  to
believe  the  truth,  and  they  are  dis-


to  live  and  drink  water,  if  they  can
get  it,  from  cisterns  that  will  bold  no
water.  Is  tberu  anybody,  do  you
think,  who  has  transgressed  the  laws
of  God  ?  Haa  anybody  ever  changed
the  ordinances  ot  the  house  of  God  ?


Was  there  ever  any  such  thine:  done
as  to  destroy  the  principles  pertain-
ing to  the  ordinances  of  the  house  of
God  ? Why,  yes,  in  ancient  days.

Well,  we  know  the  reason  why,  we
know  why  they  did  it — they  hewed
to  themselves  cisterns  that  would
hold  no  water  ?  Do  we,  as  Chris*
tians,  teach  the  Gospel  according  to
S  unt  Mark,  St.  John,  St,  Luke,
Matthew,  Paul,  Peter  and  James
and  the  rest  of  the  apostles  and  the
disciples  of  the  Lord  ?  Do  we  teach
the  same  doctrine  as  the  Christian
world  ?  No,  we  do  not.  Do  we
tiaeh  the  same  doctrine  as  Jesus  and
his  Apostles?  Yes,  we  preach  the
same  Gospel.  How  many  modes  of
baptism  have  the  so-called  Christian
world  ?  I  do  not  know  how  many.
One  is  by  immersion,  or  being  buried
in  the  water.  Another  is  to  get  down
on  your  knees  and  have  water  poured
on  the  head;  another  is  to  stand  up
and  have  water  poured  on  the  head ;
another  is  to  have  somebody  dip  his
finders  in  water  and  touch  the  fore-
head with  it;  another  is  to  plunge
face  foremost,  and  how  many  mor*
modes  of  baptism  there  are  I  do  not
know.  How  many  there  are  who  say
say  that  all  these  are  outward  ordi-
nances and  that  they  are  non-essen-
tial ?  Did  God  ever  say  this  ?  No.
Jesus  ?  No.  Any  of  the  Apostles
ever  say  anything  of  the  kind  ?  No,
they  did  not.  Has  any  man  in  mo-
dern times  received  a  revelation  from
heaven,  doing  away  with  the  ordi-
nances of  the  house  of  God  ?  No,
only  false  revelations ;  and  we  ask
the  simple  question,  If  our  doctrine
is  not  true,  and  if  there  is  no  ueces*
sity  for  the  ordinances  of  the  house
of  God,  will  you  not  be  pleased  to  tell
us  the  name  of  the  man  who  received ,
and  the  place  where  he  received  a
revelation  from  God  doing  away  with
his  own  ordinances,  and  declaring
that  all  miracles  were  to  cease  ?  &c


FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES,  ETC,


31


It  is  true  that  we  differ  from  the  I
Christian  world  in  our  faith  in  regard
to  thes  -  things.  Does  this  prove  that  I
we  are  their  enemies  ?  No,  it  proves
that  we  are  their  friends.  We  be-
1 1  o  in  doctrines  that  the)*  do  nor
be]  leve  in,  and  we  disbelieve  in  some
fanciful  ideas  that  they  profess  to
h<> M  as  doctrine.  For  instance  they
hold  that  God  is  an  imaginary  being,
I  'nvy  can  not  tell  where  nor  hiw  ho
lives,  nor  anything  concerning  his
character,  whether  lie  is  material  or
immaterial ;  but,  like  many  of  the
most  eminent  divines,  who  have
spread  it  through  their  pages  for  the
people  to  read,  they  have  come  to  the
conclusion  thai  i  he  centre  of  God  is
everywhere  and  his  circumference
i,  > where — one  of  the  most  vain  ideas
tii  t  could  be  conceived  by  any  intel-
ligent, being.  Then  what  is  their  idea
ot  the  soul  of  man  ?  That  it  is  an
immaterial  substance.  Who  ever
heard  of  such  a  thing  ?  Ask  any
true  philosopher  if  he  can  explain
the  meaning  of  an  lm  immaterial  .sub-
strince."  It  is  like  the  centre  of  a
being  everywhere  and  his  circum-
ference nowhere,  or  like  being  seated
on  the  top  of  a  topless  throne.  These
are  self- con  founding  expressions,  and
there  is  no  meaning  to  any  of  them.
We  differ  from  them  in  our  ideas  ot
God*  We  know  that  he  is  a  Being
— a  man — with  all  the  component
parts  of  an  intelligent  being — head,
hair,  eyes,  ears,  nose,  mouth,  cheek
bones,  forehead,  chin,  body,  lower
limbs;  that  he  eats,  drinks,  talks,
lives  and  has  a  being,  and  has  a  resi-
dence, and  his  presence  tills  immen-
sity as  far  as  you  and  I  know.  We
differ  with  them,  for  we  know  that
the  Lord  has  sent  forth  his  laws,
commandments  and  ordinances  to  the
children  of  men,  and  requires  them
to  be  strictly  obeyed,  and  we  do  not
wish  to  transgress  those  laws,  but  to
keep  them. We  do  not  wish  to


chance  his  ordinances,  but  to  observe
them ;  we  do  nut  wish  to  break  the
everlasting  covenant,  but  to  keep
that  with  our  fathers,  with  Jesus,  with
qui  Father  in  heaven,  with  holy  an-
gels, and  to  live  according  to  them.
We  differ  with  them  in  the  tenets  of
our  religion,  we  cannot  help  it.  We
would  not  believe  "  Mormonism,"  as
it  is  called,  if  it  were  not  for  one
thing  1  never  would  have  believed
it  if  it  had  not  been  for  one  simple
thing.  What  do  you  think  that  is  ?
It  is  true.  I  believed  it  because  of
that.  What  a  strange  idea!  If  it
had  not  been  true  I  would  not  have
believed  it,  but  being  true  I  happen-
ed to  believe  it.

Now  there  is  quite  a  difference
between  me  and  the  man  who  stands
up  to  te;ich  the  people  what  he  says
is  the  way  of  life  and  salvation,  and
who  has  transgressed  every  law  that
God  ever  gave,  who  lias  changed
every  one  of  the  ordinances  of  his
house,  and  broken  every  covenant
that  he  has  made  with  the  children
of  men,  What  do  you  know,  Mr.
Divine,  about  glory,  exaltation,  hap-
piness and  eternal  lives?  I  will
answer  for  him,  and  say,  nothing  at
all.  What  do  you  know  about  God?
Nothing  at  all.  What  do  you  know
about  his  dwelling  place  ?  Nothing
at  all.  What  about  his  person?
Nothing  at  all.  Pardon  me  for
making  these  expressions,  but  look
on  this  stage  which  I  brought  belbre
the  congregation — the  human  family
acting  and  bringing  out  what  they
have  behind  the  scenes.  What  a
spectacle  it  pieseuts  !

Are  we  the  enemies  of  mankind  ?
,  No,  we  are  their  only  friends,  and
,  we  calculate  to  hang  ou  until  we  save
the  last  son  and  daughter  of  Adam
and  Eve  that  can  receive  salvation.
We  calculate  to  be  co-workers  with
I  Jesus,  our  Savior,  until  the  last  man
and  woman that  can  be  saved  i|


32


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


placed  in  the  kingdom  or  mansion
prepared  for  them,  and  none  will  be
lost  or  turned  away  except  those  who
sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  What
do  yon  think  of  it?  An  enemy  of
mankind  !  Shame  on  the  expres-
sion !  and  shame  on  those  who  give
utterance  to  it  when  speaking  of  the
Latter-day  Saints,  We  have  the
oracles,  tlie  law  and  the  command-
ments ;  we  have  all  the  laws  or  ordi-
nances necessary  to  reach  and  take
hold  of  our  fathers,  mothers,  grand-
fathers and  those  who  have  lived
before  ust  and  to  bring  them  up  to
eternal  life.  What  divine  teaches
this  doctrine  ?  If  there  is  no  resur-
rection, says  Paul,  why  then  are  ye
baptized  for  the  dead?  It  is  the
only  expression  that  alludes  to  the
doctrine  of  baptism  for  the  dead  in
the  New  Testament,  but  it  is  true.
We  have  this  law,  we  have  the  ordi-


nances. We  have  a  knowledge  of
the  covenants  necessary  to  reach  and
pick  up  the  last  man  and  woman
that  has  lived  on  the  earth,  and  we
calculate  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  the
living  until  the  line  is  drawn  and
Jesus  comes  to  reign  King  of  nations
as  he  does  King  of  Saints,  and  the
separation  is  made.  But  until  then
the  wheat  and  the  tares  will  grow
together.  We  are  together  now,  the
wheat  and  the  tares  are  here.

Now  let  us  see  your  wheat  heads
bow  down  as  though  you  were  fully
ripe,  or  preparing  to  be  so,  your
whole  hearts  and  labors  for  the  king-
dom of  God.  The  wicked  may  flou-
rish for  awhile  like  a  green  bay  tree,
but  by  and  by  they  will  be  cut  down,
and  the  righteous  will  go  forth  and
inherit  the  kingdom,  which  may  God
grant  to  be  our  happy  lot  for  Jesus*
sake.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER WILFORD  WOODRUFF,

Delivered  at  the  General  Conference,  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt

Lake  City,  April  7,  1873.


(Reported  hj  David W.  Evan$.\


HOME  MANUFACTURE — OFFENCES  MUST  NEEDS  COME— ZION  IS  GROWING
IN  IMPORTANCE  ON  THE  EARTH — THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  IS  NOW
ESTABLISHED — SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST — UNPOPULARITY  OF  OUR
RELIGION— THE  HOLY  GHOST  IS  THE  INFALLIBLE  TESTIMONY  TO  THE
BEL  IE  VER — TH  E  GOSPEL  EMBRACES  ALL  TURTH.


One  of  the  proverbs  common  among
the  Saints  ot  God  in  the  dispensa*
tion  in  which  we  live — the  dispensa-


tion of  the  fullness  of  times,  is,  "  The
kingdom  of  God  or  nothing/'  Pre-
sident Yoong  has  been  trying  to  get


us  to  labor  to  build  up  the  kingdom
of  God.  This  kingdom  has  been
given  into  the  hands  of  the  Litter-
day  Saints  to  establish  on  the  earth,
and  unless  we  labor  for  its  advance-
ment we  shall  certainly  fall  short  of
salvation,  for  all  the  salvation  there
is,  whether  for  Jew,  Gentilet  Saint  or
sinner,  is  in  connection  with  this
kingdom.

We  have  had  a  great  many  pl-rin
truths  presented  before  this  Confe-
rence, and  if  we  will  observe  the
counsels  that  have  been  given  we
shall  be  led  to  salvation*  Every  one
of  the  propositions  made  by  President
Young  has  this  tendency.  It  is  our
duty  as  Latter-day  Saints  to  sustain
the  Zion  of  Odd  on  the  earth.  What
he  has  said  to  us  is  true.  We  have
heard  it  thousands  of  times.  We
have  been  counseled  for  many  years
to  try  to  lay  a  foundation  for  our  own
independence  in  these  mountains.  It
Is  a  well  known  principle  in  political
economy,  that  any  nation  or  people
that  expend  more  than  they  produce,
or  bny  from  other  nations  more  than
they  sell  in  return,  will  grow  poor.
We  should  produce  what  we  use — -
what  we  eat  and  wear,  and  as  for
what  we  drink,  why  the  mountain
streams  supply  that  of  the  purest
quality.

There  are  several  items  to  which  I
would  like  to  call  your  attention.
President  Young  has  taken  the  lead
in  establishing  woolen  factories  in
this  Territory.  Others  have  assisted
in  this  work,  but  he  has  done  much
more  than  any  other  man,  and  now
wo  have  several  good  mills  for  the
manufacture  of  cloth  and  other  fabrics
owned  and  run  by  the  Saints  in
Utah.  Still  we  send  many  large
quantities  of  wool  abroad  instead  of
using  it  in  our  own  mills,  and  im-
port goods  of  outside  manufacture
instead  of  making  them  at  home.
How  long  will  it  be  before  we  are

No.  a


poor,  and  our  Territory  drained  of
all  the  money  we  can  raise,  if  we
continue  this  ?  We  should  not  send
our  wool  to  be  manufactured  in  the
States,  and  then  pay  our  money  for
cloth  brought  from  there  here.
Where  are  our  wool  growers  ?  What
sue  they  thinking  about  when  they
do  this  ?  This  is  an  item  which  I
consider  of  vital  importance  to  the
Latter-day  Saints.  We  should  keep
our  wool  at  home,  and  we  should
manufacture  tins  wool  into  cloth,  and
we  shook!  buy  and  pay  for  that  cloth,
and  support  home  manufactures.
This  is  a  principle  which  we  have
neglected  in  a  great  degree  ;  but  we
have  got  to  come  to  it  sometime.
We  have  got  either  to  make  our-
selves self-sustaining,  or  we  shall
have  to  go  without  a  good  many
things  that  we  now  regard  as  almost
indispensable  for  our  welfare  and
comfort,  for  there  is  not  a  man  who
believes  in  the  revelations  of  God  but
what  believes  the  day  is  at  hand
when  there  will  be  trouble  among
the  nations  of  the  earth,  when  great
Babylon  will  cot  no  in  remembrance
before  God,  and  his  judgments  will
visit  the  nations.  When  that  day
comes,  if  Zion  has  food  and  raiment
and  the  comforts  of  life  she  must
produce  them,  and  there  must  be  a
beginning  to  these  things,

Tli is  is  the  Zion  of  God,  this  is
the  work  of  God.  The  servants  of
God  have  borne  record  and  testimony
to  this  now  for  more  than  forty  years,
and  the  Lord  has  bricked  up  their
testimony,  fulfilling  his  word  in  the
events  which  have  transpired  in  the
earth.  The  Lord  says,  "  I  am  angry
with  none  except  those  who  acknow-
ledge not  my  hand  in  all  things,"
As  a  people,  we  have  been  obliged  to
acknowledge  the  hand  of  God  in  our
salvation  and  guidance.  Some  of
the  speakers  have  referred  to  the
drivings  and persecutions of  the

Vol  XVI.


Saints  un  the  Past*  The  Lord  says,
u  Offences  ^^st  needs  come,  bat  woe
to  him  by  wL  om  ^ej  come"  If  we
had  not  been  Jriven  from  Jackson,
Caldwell  and  CWV  Counties,  and
from  Eirtland  and  Nauvoo,  Utah,
to-day,  would  have  hi^  a  barren
desert,  there  would  ha*"e  been  no
railroad  from  the  Atlantic  to  the
Paciric,  and  we  should  not  have  fol-


forty  years  to  the  nations  of  the  earth
in  its  plainness,  truth  and  simplicity
as  it  was  anciently  by  Jesus  and  his
Apostles?  It  has,  and  thousands
who  are  in  this  Territory  to-day  can
bear  testimony  to  its  trmth.  The
example  is  before  the  world.  Zion
is  like  a  city  set  on  a  hill  that  cannot
be  hid.  She  is  a  beacon  to  the  na-
tions of  the  earth. The  Saints  of


filled,  I  may  say,  thousands  of  the  )  God  are  fulfilling  the  revelations  of
revelations  of  God  as  wc  have  done.
The-  hand  of  the  Lord  has  been  mani-
iest  in. all  these  matters. He  has


watched  I his  people,  and  over  this
work  from  its  foundation  until  to*
day,  and  he  will  continue  to  do  so.
But  it  is  certainly  true  that,  as  a
people,  we  must  heed  the  counsels  ot
the  Lord  through  his  servants,  for
tbese  counsels,  if  observed,  will  secure
U9  salvation,  and  lead  us  to  prospe-
rity, union  and  happiness.

President  Young,  as  an  instrument
in  the  hands  of  God,  has  brought  his
tens  of  thousands  from  the  old  world
who  never  were  worth,  I  may  say,  a
farthing,  who  never  owned  a  horse,
carriage,  wagon,  cow,  pig  or  chickeu,
and  hardly  had  bread  enough  to  keep
soul  and  body  together.  There  are
thousands  upon  thousands  now  in
these  valleys  of  the  mountains  who
were  brought  here  by  the  donations
of  the  Saints  of  God,  and  the  mercies
of  God  unto  them.  They  are  now
settled  through  this  valley  for  six
hundred  miles.  They  have  enough
to  eat,  drink  and  wear,  houses  and
lands  of  their  own,  and  plenty  of  this
world's  goods  to  make  them  comfort-
ble,

Everything  that  leads  to  good  and
to  do  good  is  of  God,  and  everything
that  leads  to  evil  and  to  do  evil  is  of
the  wicked  one,  I  will  ask,  Has  not
good  grown  out  of  the  whole  work  of
God  from  the  organization  of  this
Church  until  to-day  ?  Has  not  this
Gospel  been  offered  for  more  than


2


;  God;  they  are  fulfilling  the  prophe-
cies and  sayings  of  the  ancient  Patri-
archs


and  Prophets,  who  spoke  as
they  were  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  no  prophecy  m  of  private
interpretation.  It  these  holy  men  of
God  spoke  the  word  of  God,  what
they  said  will  have  its  fulfillment,
and  no  power  can  stay  this  work.

The  set  time  has  come  fur  the
Lord  to  establish  big  kingdom  of
which  Daniel  spoke,  that  Zion  which
Isaiah  saw  and  portrayed,  and  about
which  he  and  many  other  Prophets
have  left  so  many  sayings  in  their
prophecies.  The  history  of  the  pro-
gress of  this  Church  is  before  the
world.  It  is  the  work  of  God,  and
not  a  saying  ever  made  about  it  by
an  inspired  man,  whether  in  the
Bible,  Book  of  Mormon,  or  in  the*
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  will  fail  of
its  fulfillment.  No  matter  whether-
these  words  came  by  the  voice  if
God  out  of  the  heavens,  by  the  mini*
titration  of  angels,  or  by  the  voice  af
the  servants  of  God  in  the  flesh,  ii  is
the  same  ;  although  the  heavens  and
the  earth  may  pass  away,  they  will
not  go  unfulfilled.

This  is  the  foundation  upon  which
the  Latter-day  Saints  labor,  and  upon
which  they  have  labored  from  the
beginning  of  this  Church,  Joseph
Smith  has  often  been  termed  an  illi-
terate, unlearned  man.  He  was  a
farmer's  son,  and  had  very  small
chance  of  education.  What  primer
had  he  to  reveal  the  fullness  of  the


Gospel  to  the  world  ?  None  at  all,
only  as  he  was  taught  by  the  admi-
nistration of  angels  from  heaven,  by
the  voice  of  God  and  by  the  inspira-
tion and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
The  principles  which  have  been  re-
vealed to  the  world  through  him  are
true  as  the  throne  of  God.  Their
influence  is  already  felt  in  the  earth,
and  will  continue  to  increase  until
the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  ;  and
the  blood  of  the  Prophets  which  has
been  shed  in  testimony  thereof  will
remain  in  force  upon  all  the  world
nntil  the  scene  is  wound  up.

What  other  people  on  the  face  of
the  earth  are  preparing  for  Jesus
Christ  ?  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is
coming  to  reign  on  earth.  The
world  may  say  that  he  delays  his
coming  until  the  end  of  the  earth,
But  they  know  neither  the  thoughts
nor  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  The
Lord  will  not  delay  his  coming  be-
cause of  their  unbelief,  and  the  signs
both  in  heaven  and  earth  indicate
that  it  is  mw.  The  fisr  trees  arc
leafing  in  sight  of  all  the  nations  of
the  earth,  and  if  they  had  the  Spirit
of  God  they  coold  see  and  understand
them.

The  Latter  day  Saints  can  not
stand  Atill ;  we  can  not  become
stereotyped.  God  has  decreed  that
his  Zion  must  progress.  We  can
not  remain  in  one  groove  or  position*
This  kingdom  has  continued  to  pro-
gress from  the  beginning,  and  the
little  one  is  now  more  than  a  thou-
sand, and  it  will  hasten  to  become  a
strong  nation,  for  it  is  God's  work,
and  it*  destiny  is  in  his  hands.  It
becomes  us,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  to
realize  tluse  things  as  they  are,  and
also  our  position  and  calling  before
God,  We  must  build  up  the  Zion
and  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth,  or
fail  in  the  object  of  our  calling  and
receiving  the  Priesthood  of  God  in
these  latter  days. The  full  set  time


has  come,  which  the  Lord  decreed
before  the  foundation  of  the  world, —
the  great  dispensation  of  the  last
days,  and  a  people  must  be  prepared
for  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.
How  can  they  do  it?  By  being
gathered  out  from  Babylon.  Haw
often  has  the  question  been  asked,
*  Why  can  not  the  Latter-day  Saint*
live  abroad  in  the  world  and  enjoy
their  religion?"  We  cm  hardly
enjoy  it  as  we  are  to-day — gathered
together,  the  wicked  will  follow  us
up;  and  then  we  are  overwhelmed
like  a  mountain  with  tradition.  But
we  have  gathered  together  that  we
may  be  taught  by  Prophets,  Patri-
archs and  inspired  men,  and  we  are
endeavoring,  under  their  instructions,
to  throw  off  the  trammels  with  which
and  our  forefathers  have  been


sve


bound  for  generations.  We  are  not
prepared  for  the  coming  of  the  Sou
of  Man,  and  if  he  were  to  come  to-
da)7  we  could  not  endure  it.  There
is  no  people  on  the  earth  prepared
for  that.  But  the  Lord  is  laboring
with  us,  he  has  carried  us  through  a
school  of  experience  now  for  forty
years,  and  we  should  certainly  have
been  dull  scholars  if  we  had  not
learned  some  wisdom.  The  Lord
intends  that  we  shall  unite  ourselves
together,  and  in  building  up  the
Zion  of  God,  if  we  can  not  attain  to
all  that  is  required  of  us  to-day,  we
will  do  what  we  can,  and  progress  as
fast  as  we  can,  that  the  way  may  be
prepared  for  the  fulfilment  of  the
words  of  the  Lord*

Here  is  the  Bible,  the  record  of
the  Jews,  given  by  the  inspiration
of  the  Lord  through  Hoses  and  the
ancient  Patriarchs  and  Prophets.
Is  it  an  imposture,  and  as  the  in-
fidels say,  the  work  of  man  ?  No,  it
is  not  in  the  power  of  any  man  who
ever  breathed  the  breath  of  life  to
make  such  a  book  without  the  in*
spiration of  the Al  mighty • It  is


3G  JOURNAL  OF

just  so  with  the  Bonk  of  Mormon —  ;
all  the  ingenuity  of  all  the  men  j
Hurler  heawn  could  not  compose
and  present  to  the  world  1  boqk
like  the  Iliok  of  Mormon.  Its  prin-
ciples are  divine — they  are  from  God*
They  could  never  emanate  from  the
mind  of  an  impostor,  or  from  the
mind  of  a  person  writing  u  novel.
Why  r  Because  the  promises  and
prophecies  it  contains  are  being
fulfilled  in  tlie  slight  of  all  the  earth.
So  with  the  revelations  given  through
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  contained
iu  tlu*  Book  of  Doctrine  aud  Cove-
nants— they  are  being  fulfilled.

We,  the  Latter-day  Saints,  have
this  great  almighty  work  laid  upon
us,  and  our  hearts  should  nut  be  set
upon  the  things  of  the  world,  for  if
they  are  we  si  i  all  forget  God  aud
lose  sight  of  his  kingdom.  The
counsels,  exhortations  and  instruc-
tions which  we  receive  from  tlie
servants  of  God  are  just  and  title.
As  a  people  if  we  will  do  the  will
of  God  we  have  the  power  to  build
up  Zion  in  beauty,  power  and  glory,
as  the  Lord  lias  revealed  it  through
the  mouth  of  the  Prophet.  It  rests
with  us,  the  Lord  working  with  us.
We  are  called  upon  to  work  with
the  Lord  just  as  fast  as  we  are  pre-
pared to  receive  the  things  of  his
kingdom.  But  I  am  satisfied  there
has  got  to  be  a  great  change  with
us  in  many  respects  before  we  are
prepared  tor  the  redemption  of  Zion
and  the  building  up  of  the  New
Jerusalem.  I  believe  the  only  way
for  us  is  to  get  enough  of  the  Spirit
of  God  that  we  may  see  and  under-
stand our  duties  and  comprehend  the
will  of  the  Lord.

This  is  a  great  day,  an  important
time — a  time  in  which  great  events
await  the  world — Zion,  Babylon,
Jew,  Gentile,  saint  and  sinner*  high
and  low,  rich  and  poor.  Great  and
important  events  "will  follow  each


DISCOURSES.

other  in  quick  succession  before  the

eyes  of  this  generation.  No  genera-
tion that  ever  lived  on  the  earth,
lived  in  a  more  interesting  period
than  the  one  in  which  we  live;  and
when  we  consider  that  our  eternal
destiny  depends  upon  the  few  short
years  that  we  spend  here,  what
manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be?
Men  spend  their  lives  for  what  they
call  wealth  or  happiness,  but  they
seek  not  after  the  way  of  life,  and
in  a  few  years  they  lie  down  and
die  aud  open  their  eyes  in  the  spirit
world,  aud  thev  will  come  forth  at
some  time  and  be  judged  according
to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body.

A  jjreat  deal  has  been  said  with
regard  to  "  Mor monism"  and  the
strange  people  who  dwell  in  these
mountains.  Many  strangers  have
I  come  to  visit  this  city,  thinking  that
their  lives  were  hardly  safe  because
of  the  horrid  stories  they  had  heard
about  these  terrible  "Mormons/*
when  the  fact  is,  if  they  had  only
known  it,  they  were  a  great  deal
safer  here,  than  in  any  of  the  great
cities  of  the  world.

The  Lord  has  been  working,  and
this  people  have  been  working,  and
the  object  of  their  labor  Iras  been
and  is  to  establish  the  Gospel,  of
Jesus  Christ  and  to  spread  truth
and  righteousness.  We  came  here,
I  a  few  pioneers,  on  the  24th  of  July,
I  1347,  and  we  found  a  desert.  It
looked  as  though  no  white  man
could  live  here.  We  have  to  ac-
knowledge the  hand  of  God  in  all  the
blessings  we  have  to-day.  This
Territory  is  now  filled  with  cities,
towns,  villages  and  gardens.  The
,  earth  has  blossomed  like  a  rose,  and
the  desert  has  brought  forth  streams
of  water  from  dry  places.  The  Lord
has  blessed  the  people,  we  have  to
acknowledge  his  hands  in  this.  This
is  only  a  beginning.  The  world  have
j  opposed  us  from  the  beginning,  even


HOME  MANUFACTURE,  ETC,


37


very  many  honest-hearted  men,  ig-
norant of  the  nature  and  object  of
"  Alor  monism,"  have  opposed  us.  If
the  vail  were  lifted  one  minute  from
the  eyes  of  the  world,  and  they  could
'  see  the  things  of  eternity  as  they  are,
there  is  not  a  man  living,  not  ex-
cepting our  friend  brother  Newman,
or  President  Grant,  or  any  other
man  that  breathes,  who  would  not
bow  down  before  God  and  pray  for
Brigham  Young  and  the  prosperity
of  this  work.  But  there  is  a  vail
over  men's  minds.  Darkness  covers
the  earth  and  gross  darkness  the
minds  of  the  nations,  and  this  is  to  j
prove  whether  they  will  or  will  not
walk  in  the  covenant  of  the  Lord.
There  are  a  few  who  have  had  suf-
ficient independence  of  mind  and
Stability  of  character  to  obey  the
celestial  law.  But  haw  few  friends
the  Almighty  and  his  servants
have  had  in  this  age  of  the  world  ?
As  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah  and
Lot,  so  it  will  be  in  the  days  of  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.  The
numbers  of  the  servants  of  God  are
few.  Let  the  Lord  Almighty  send
a  message  to  the  world  now  as  he
did  in  the  days  of  Noah,  Enoch,
Lot,  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Apostles, ,
and  few  among  the  nations  of  the
earth  would  be  willing  to  receive  it
In  the  days  of  Jus  us  the  High
Priests,  Saddncecs,  Essences,  Stoics,
and  every  sect  and  party  then
known  in  the  Jewish  nation  cried —
"  Crucify  him  !  Crucify  him ! "  So
it  was  with  Joseph  Smith.  From
the  day  that  he  laid  the  foundation
of  t&is  work,  Priest  and  people,
doctors  and  lawyers,  high  and  low,
rich  and  poor,  with  but  few  excep-
tions, have  been  ready  to  crash  it  to
the  earth.  Why  ?  Because,  ignorant
of  its  character  and  mission^  they
have  believed  that  it  interfered  witrh
their  religion.  Joseph  Smith  had  to
walk  in  deep  water,  he  had  to  row  1


np  hill  or  up  stream  all  the  days  of
his  life  in  order  to  try  and  plant  the
Gospel  in  the  midst  of  the  sons  of
men.  A  few  here  and  there  heard
and  were  disposed  to  receive  that
Gospel,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  bore
record  unto  them  of  its  truth,  and
they  went  before  the  Lord  and  asked
him  if  it  was  true,  and  the  Lord
revealed  it  unto  them  and  they  era-
braced  it  From  that  day  until  the
present  this  message  has  gone  to  the
world.  I  have  preached  it  to  mil-
lions of  my  fellow-men,  so  has  Pre*
sident  Young,  ami  I  may  say  the
same  of  hand  reds  of  the  Elders  of
this  Church ;  and  I  do  not  believe
that  ever  a  man,  with  his  ears  open,
stopped  a  moment  to  listen  to  the
testimony  of  the  servants  of  God
about  the  truth  of  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, Joseph  Smith  being  a  Prophet
of  God,  and  the  restoration  of  the
fullness  of  the  Gospel,  but  what  a
measure  of  the  Spirit  of  God  has
backed  up  that  testimony  to  him.
Wiien  men  have  rejected  these  tes-
timonies they  have  done  so  against
light  and  truth,  and  herein  is  where
condemnation  rests  upon  this  genera-
tion— Light  lias  come  into  the  world
and  men  love  darkness  rather  than
light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil,

u  Mormonism"  is  not  popular,  and
few,  comparatively  speakiug,  have
embraced  it.  Jesus  Christ  was
never  popular  in  bis  day.  The  old
Patriarchs  and  Prophets  had  but
few  friends,  yet  they  were  called
and  inspired  by  God,  and  held  in
their  hands  the  issues  of  life  and
death,  the  keys  of  salvation  on
earth  and  in  heaven.  What  they
bound  on  earth  was  bound  in  hea-
ven. Whosesoever  sins  they  remit-
ted were  remitted,  and  whosesoever
sins  they  retained  were  retained*
Yet  the  world  was  ready  to  destroy
them.  It  is  so  to-day.  But  the
unbelief  of  this  generation  will  not


38


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


make  the  truth  of  God  without  ef-
fect to-day  any  more  than  it  did  in
any  other  period  of  the  world.
Therefore  I  say  to  my  brethren  and
sisters,  let  us  try  and  prepare  our
minds  and  hearts  by  prayer  before
tin?  L..rd,  that  wo  may  obtain  enough
of  the  li^iif  of  tin*  Spirit  and  of  the
influent?  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  see
and  be  preserved  in  the  path  of  life,
and  when  we  receive  the  teachings
and  counsels  of  the  servants  of  God,
that  we  may  be  disposed  to  treasure
them  up  in  our  hearts  and  practice
them  in  our  lives.

We  shall  soon  pass  away;  in  a
little  while  we  shall  be  on  the  other
side  of  the  vail,  There  is  no  man
or  woman  who  has  ever  lived  on  tin?
earth  and  kept  the  commandments
of  God  who  will  be  ashamed  of,  or
sorry  for  it,  when  they  go  into  the
presence  of  God.  Oar  eyes  have
not  seen,  our  ears  have  not  heard,
it  has  not  entered  into  the  heart  of
man  to  conceive  the  joy,  glory  and
blessings  which  God  has  in  store  for
his  faithful  Saints.  As  President
Young  told  us  yesterday,  whether
men  believe  or  disbelieve,  the  Lord
Almighty  has  wrought  out  salva-
tion for  the  world.  We  are  laboring
iorthis;  the  Prophet?  and  Patriarchs
in  days  past  and  gone  did  the  same.
In  these  latter  days  Saviors  have
come  up  on  Mount  Zion,  and  they
are  laboring  to  save  the  world — the
living  and  the  dead.  The  Lord  re-
quires this  at  our  hands,  and  if  we
do  not  labor  to  promote  this  cause
and  to  build  it  up,  we  shall  be  under
condemnation  before  him,

The  Gospel  is  the  same  to-day  as
it  was  in  the  days  of  Jesus  Christ,
The  word  to  his  disciples  was — "Go
ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the
Gospel  to  every  creature,  he  that
believetli  and  is  baptized  shall  be
saved,  and  he  that  believeth  not
shall  be  damned." That  is  a  very


plain  and  simple  declaration,  yet  it
involved  the  destiny  of  the  whole
human  family.  It  is  just  so  to-day.
The  Gospel  has  been  offered  to  the
world  now  for  over  forty  yeans,  in
its  purity,  plainness  and  clearness,
according  to  the  ancient  order  of
things,  and  the  Elders  of  Israel  have
promised  the  world  that  if  they
would  receive  their  testimony  aud
be  baptized  for  the  remission  of
their  sins,  they  should  receive  the
Holy  Gho.st.  When  a  man  receives
the  Holy  Ghost  he  has  a  testimony
(hat  can  not  deceive  him  or  any-
body else.  In  the  days  of  Moses
and  Pharaoh  the  magicians  could
work  as  many  miracles  as  Moses,
almost ;  and  you  may  go  into  our
theatre  here,  or  any  other,  and  you
may  see  aud  hear  that  which  will
deceive  your  eyes  and  ears,  and  all
the  senses  you  have;  but  get  the
Holy  Ghost  and  you  have  a  testi-
mony that  cannot  deceive  you*  It
never  deceived  any  man,  and  it
never  will.  It  is  by  this  power  and
principle  that  the  Kldcr.s  of  Israel-
have  been  sustained  from  the  first
day  they  commenced  their  labors
until  to-day.  It  was  this  power
which  sustained  Joseph  Smith  from
his  boyhood  up,  in  all  his  labors. un-
til he  planted  the  kingdom  of  God
on  the  earth  to  be  thrown  down  no
more  for  ever.  He  lived  until  he
accomplished  all  that  God  raised
him  up  to  do  here  in  the  flesh,  then
he  went  to  the  other  side  of  the
vail  to  till  his  place  and  mission
there.  His  works  will  follow  him
there,  and  he  and  his  brethren  will
labor  for  the  accomplishment  of  the
purposes  of  God  there,  as  we  are
doing  here,  The  Lord  raised  up
President  Young  to  be  our  leader
and  lawgiver,  and  lie  has  been  so
from  the  day  that  Joseph  was  taken
away.  His  works  are  before  the
world  and  before  the  heavens;  they


HOME  MANUFACTURE,  ETC


39


show  for  themselves.  The  tree  is
known  by  the  fruit  it  brings  forth.
The  Lord  has  revealed  in  this  day
every  key  that  was  ever  held  by
any  Patriarch  or  Prophet  from  the
days  of  Father  Adam,  in  the
Garden  of  Eden,  down  to  the  days
of  Joseph  Smith,  that  was  neces-
sary for  the  salvation  of  the  sons
of  men.  They  have  been  sealed  on
the  head  of  Bright  in  Young  and
other  servants  of  God,  and  they  will
be  held  on  the  earth  until  this
scene  is  wound  up.  What  a  glori-
ous thing  it  is  that  we,  like  the  an-
cient Saints,  can  be  baptized  for
the  dead,  and  thus  open  the  prison
doors  and  set  the  prisoners  free !
The  Lord  is  no  respecter  of  persons,
and  the  fifty  thousand  millions  of
human  beings  who  are  supposed  to
have  lived  on  the  earth  from  the
dr:\\s  the  ancient  servants  of  God
were  put  to  death,  to  the  restora-
tion of  the  Gospel  through  Joseph
Smith,  never  having  bad  the  privi-
lege of  hearing  the  Gospel,  are  not
going  tb  remain  in  the  eternal
world  without  the  privilege  of  hear-
ing the  Gospel;  but  they  will  be
preached  to  by  Joseph  Smith  and
the  Prophets,  Patriarchs  and  Elders
who  have  received  the  Priesthood
on  the  earth  in  these  latter  days.
Many  of  them  will  receive  their
testimony,  bvi  somebody  must  ad-
minister for  thorn  in  the  flesh,  that
they  may  be  judged  according  to
men  in  the  spirit,  and  have  part  in
the  first  resurrection,  just  the  same
as  though  they  had  heard  the  Gospel
in  the  flesh.  The  Lord  has  revealed
this  to  us,  and  commanded  us  to  at-
tend to  this  duty,  the  same  as  Jesus,
while  his  body  was  in  the  grave,
preached  three  days  and  nights  to
the  spirits  in  prison  who  were  rebel-
lion, during  the  long-suffering  of  God
in  the  days  of  Noah.  They  lay  in
prison  until  Jesus  went  and  preached


to  them.

This  and  every  other  principle
which  the  Elders  of  this  Church
preach  and  teach  are  from  heaven —
the  Lord  has  revealed  them*  They
are  before  the  world,  and  all  who
hear  them  will  investigate  it  they
are  wise*  If  there  is  a  man  on  the
face  of  the  earth  who  has  got  a  true
principle  that  we  have  not,  will  he
please  let  us  have  it  ?  As  President
Young  has  said  many  a  time,  we
will  change  a  dozen  errors  for  one
truth,  and  thank  God  tor  it.  We
are  after  light  and  truth.  We
are  not  afraid  of  the  doctrines  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  being  pre-
sented before  us  or  our  children.
We  have  truth,  we  have  been  called
to  present  it  to  the  world.  We  have
dune  it.  If  they  have  truths  that
wo  have  not  we  would  like  to  obtain
them*

I  will  say  by  way  of  conclusion
that  1  thank  God  for  the  privilege
of  attending  these  Conferences  for
so  many  years,  and  tor  seeing  the
increase  and  progress  of  his  work.
Here  we  meet  from  every  nation
under  heaven,  just  as  the  Prophets
said.  We  have  been  gathered  by
the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  had
the  privilege,  last  night  and  this
morning,  of  meeting  with  Father
Kington,  the  old  patriarch  whom  I
met  with  over  in  Herefordshire,
England,  where,  like  John  the
Baptist,  he  was  a  fore-runner  of  the
Gospel  of  Christ.  Through  his  ad-
ministrations the  people  in  that
county  had  been  prepared  t>  receive
the  Gospel,  and  when  we  went  and
preached  to  them,  he  and  all  his
flock  but  one,  numbering  six  hun-
dred, entered  into  the  kingdom,
and  that  opened  a  door  which
enabled  us  to  baptize  eighteen
hundred  in  about  seven  months'
labor,  I  never  expected  to  see  him
again  in  this  city,  but  he  came  to


40  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


my  house  last  night,  and  he  came
to  meeting  to-day,  and  I  felt  more
pride  and  joy  in  rneeticg  him  than
I  should  if  it  had  been  the  Emperor
of  Russia*  I  thank  God  that  I  have
the  privilege  of  meeting  with  the
Saints  with  whom  I  ate  and  drank
in  foreign  lands,  who  have  listened
to  the  voices  of  the  Elders  of  Israel,
have received their  testimonies,


have  been  baptized  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins,  and  received  the  testi-
mony of  the  Holy  Ghost,

Brethren  and  sisters,  we  are  in
the  school  of  the  Saints.  Let  us
progress,  and  try  to  improve  and
set  our  hearts  on  the  things  of  God
and  truth,  and  curry  out  and  do  the
work  of  righteousness  for  Jesas'  sake*
Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,

Deli v eked  in  the  Tabernacle,  Ogdfk,  Sunday  Afternoon,

May  18,  J  873.


UNBELIEF — TIUI  SAINTS  REQUIRE  CONSTANT  INSTRUCTION — CONTRAST
BETWEEN  THE  GOSPEL  OF  CHRIST  AND  THE  RELIGIONS  OF  MEN —
EVIL  WOULD  CEASE  AMONG  THE  SAINTS  IF  THEY  WOULD  LIVE  THEIR
RELIGION — GATHERING  THE  POOR — TITHING  —  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD
— PROGRESS  OF  1  THE  WORK  IS  DUE  TO  THE  OPERATIONS  OF  THE
SPIRIT.


The  teaching  of  grown  people  is
the  same  as  teaching  the  children.
We  receive  impressions  when  very
young,  and  grow  up  to  further  know-
ledge; it  is  the  same  in  receiving
the  Gospel.  When  we  talk  to  per-
sons who  have  not  previously  heard


the


we  have  to  reason  with


them  mi  the  propriety  of  receiving
the  truth.  We  also  have  to  reason
with  and  persuade  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  it  is  to  them  I  wish
principally  to  talk  this  afternoon.
When  tilt  Gospel  is  preached  to  the
honest  in  heart  they  receive  it  by
faith,  but  when  they  obey  it  labor  is
equired. Tu  practice  the  Gospel


requires  time,  faith,  the  heart's  affec-
tions and  a  great  deal  of  labor.  Here
many  stop.  They  hear  and  believe,
but  before  they  go  oil  to  practice
they  begin  to  think  that  they  were
mistaken,  and  unbelief  enters  intu
their  hearts.  There  has*  been  un-
belief since  the  beginning  of  the
world.  Have  you  not  read  the  say-
ings of  Moses  in  regard  to  our' mother
Eve  ?  She  had  heard  the  voice  of
the  Lord  and  understood  it,  saying
concerning  the  fruit  bf  a  certain  tree,
"  m  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof
thou  shalt  surely  die,"  When  her
husband  was  in  another  part  of  the
garden, a certaiu  character  came


UNBELIEF,  ETC


41


along  and  commenced  to  reason  with
her.  "  That  is  very  fine  fruit :  I
under  stand  the  Lord  says  you  must
not  partake  of  it."  "  Yes,  for  in  the
day  we  eat  of  it  he  says  we  shall
die."  *  Well/'  says  he,  "  that  is  not
so.  You  must  not  believe  all  that  is
told  you,  but  think  for  yourself.
Now  I  will  tell  you  something.  If
you  eat  of  that  fruit  your  eyes  will
be  opened,  and  you  will  see  as  the
Gods/*  He  hands  her  a  little  of  the
fruit,  just  to  try, — no  matter  whether
it  was  an  apple,  a  grape,  or  what  it
wns, — she  tastes  of  it,  and  does  not
die,  and  likes  it  so  well  that  when
Adam  comes  along  she  says,  u  Hus-
band, this  fruit  is  delightful ;  I  have
tasted  it,  and  it  is  desirable  to  make
one  wise ;  take  some."  "  No,"  says
he,  *'  I  shall  not,  the  Lord  has  com-
manded us  not  to  eat  of  it."  But
just  as  it  is  with  other  husbands,
she  coaxes  and  persuades,  and  finally
he  gives  way  and  partakes  of  the  for-
bidden fruit.  Now  do  you  see  how
unbelief  entered  into  the  world  in  the
beginning  ?  We  have  to  reason  with
mankind  to  persuade  them  to  receive
the  truth  of  God*  A  declaratory
statement  is  suificient  for  those  who
are  prepared  to  receive  the  spirit  of
revelation  for  themselves,  but  with
the  most  of  the  human  family  we
have  to  reason  and  explain.  A  really
pure  person  is  very  scarce  ;  but  when
the  heart  is  truly  pure,  the  Lord  can
write  upon  it,  and  the  truth  is  re-
ceived without  argument,  or  doubt,
or  disputation.  If  we  talk  with  the
Latter-day  Saints,  we  have  to  reason
with  them,  particularly  on  temporal
matters.  Now  I  could  show,  by
sound  argument  and  logic,  the  ne-
cessity for  the  people  to  live  and
labor  for  the  good  of  all*  Anybody
ought  to  be  able  to  see  that  when
one  member  of  a  family  is  pulling
away  from  the  others,  and  living  for
sell  alone,  it  injures  himself  or  tier-


self  as  well  as  the  whole  family.  The
necessity  and  beauty  of  union  cannot
be  better  illustrated  than  by  the  ex-
ample of  the  chief  who  called  his  sons
together  just  previous  to  his  death,
and,  taking  a  bundle  of  arrows,  asked
them  each  to  break  it.  This  they
were  unable  to  do,  11  Now,"  said  he,
"  unloose  the  bundle,"  They  did  so,
and  could  take  the  arrows  singly,  one
by  one,  and  break  them  with  ease.
This  will  give  us  as  good  a  proof  as
we  can  desire,  that  when  we  are
bound  together  as  a  unit,  we  are
strong  and  powerful,  but  when  we
are  divided  we  are  weak,  and  our
enemies  can  obtain  power  over  us.
Take  our  financial  affairs,  and  they
will  show  the  same  principle.  But
we  are  prune  to  unbelief,  and  have  to
learn  by  the  childish  principle — a
little  to-day  and  a  little  more  to-
morrow, and  after  a  while  perhaps
we  will  become  truly  Latter-day
Saints.  We  profess  to  be  so  now.
But  to  be  a  Saint  in  the  f  ull  sense  of
the  word,  is  to  be  something  vi  ry
nearly  perfect.  If,  however,  we  are
striving  to  the  utmost  of  the  ability
God  has  given  us  to  prove  that  we
are  willing  to  serve  him  anil  perform
our  duties,  we  aie  justified.  We
have  the  kingdom  of  God  to  build
up,  Zion  to  redeem;  we  have  to
sanctify  ourselves  so  that  we  may  be
prepared  to  be  caught  up  with  the
Church  of  the  First  Born,  and  if  we
improve  every  day  and  hour,  then  if
we  die  we  shall  be  found  justified.
But  if  we  continue  to  live,  we  must
become  Saints  in  very  deed,  or  come
short  of  the  fullness  of  the  glory  of
God  that  is  to  be  revealed.  To  lead
the  Saints  in  this  direction  we  have
to  reason  with  them,  and  show  the
necessity  for  their  observing  this  pre-
cept and  that  law,  this  doctrine  and
that  principle,  that  they  may  be  per-
suaded to  do  the  will  ol  God.

When  Joseph  Smith  first  learn* d


12


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSE


from  God  the  principle  of  baptism
fur  the  remission  of  sins,  he  undoubt-
edly thought  that  he  had  learned
something  great  and  wonderful ;  so,
aho,  when  he  received  his  ordination
to  the  Aaron ic  Priesthood  under  the
hands  of  John  the  Baptist. But  he
did  not  fly  off  at  a  tangent,  and  think
he  had  it  all,  but  was  willing  and
anxious  to  be  taught  further.  After
receiving  this  authority,  he  baptized
bis  friends- When  he  organized  the
Church,  he  received  the  higher  Priest-
hood, alter  the  order  of  Melchisedec,
which  gave  him  authority  not  only
to  baptize  for  the  remission  of  sins,
but  to  confirm  by  the  laying  on  of
bands  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost. The Aaron  ie  Priesthood
holds  power  to  baptize,  but  nut  to
lay  on  iiands  to  confer  the  Holy
Ghopt When  Joseph  Smith  received
this  higher  power,  he  did  not  throw
away  the  first,  but  received  additions
to  it. He  learned  of  and  admini-
stered the  Sacrament,  then  went  to
preaching  a  year  or  two,  and  received
the  High  Priesthood,  which  he  im-
parted to  others,  and  then  obtained
other  communications  and  powers,
until  he  received  the  full  pattern  and
authority  to  build  up  the  kingdom
of  God,  preparatory  to  the  coming  of  '
the  Sen  of  Man,  which  also  he  im-
parted to  others. There  aiv  men
here  who  heard  him  say ;  4t  We  have
added  to  our  faith  and  knowledge,
and  have  received  keys  and  autho-
rity, until  I  do  not  know  of  anything
necessary  to  build  up  and  establish
the  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth,
but  what  I  have  received  and  be-
stowed  upon  you.'* He  received  his
knowledge  of  the  things  of  God  by
degrees,  until  he  obtained  the  last
blessing  needful  to  bestow on  his
brethren.

The  Latter-day  Saints  need  talk-
rig  to  a  great  deal — Lhey  need  con-
iimial  preaching  and  instruction  upon


almost  everything. I  am  happy  to
say  there  is  an  improvement,  still  I
hear  of  strife,  brother  going  to  law
with  brother,  contention  in  families
and  in  the  community. This  should
not  be. Have  we  not  learned  yet  to
be  meek  and  lowly  ? Are  we  not
willing  to  receive  and  abide  the  pro-
vidences of  God  with  patience?  How
many  are  willing  to  do  this  as  they
should  ? But  very  few. That  dis-
position that  came  from  the  fall  is
planted  in  our  hearts,  and  will  occa-
sionally arise  in  the  bosom, Will  we
ever  get  experience  enough  so  that
we  can  overcome  these  temptations
that  arise  in  the  heart,  so  that  we  can
say  good-bye  to  the  fashions  and  fol-
lies of  the  world,  and  instead  of
them  imbibe  good  and  wholesome
principles  ? Certainly  we  will ;  this
is  what  we  are  alter. The  Latter-
day  Saints  must  learn  to  be  one  in
Christ We  are  one  in  the  ordinan-
ces and  doctrines;  one  in  the  ordi-
nances of  baptism,  the  laying  on  of
hands,  the administration  of  the
sacrament,  the  blessing  of  children,
the  ordinations  of  the  Priesthood,
the  endowment ;  ako  in  the  baptism
for  the  dead,  though  this  was  a  trial
for  some  at  the  first. When  God
revealed  to  Joseph  Smith  and  Sidney
Rigdon  that  there  was  a  place  pre-
pared fbr  all,  according  to  the  light
they  had  received  and  their  itjection
of  evil  and  practice  of  good,  it  was
a  great  trial  to  many,  and  some  apos-
tatized because  God  was  not  going  to
send  to  everlasting  punishment  hea-
thens and  infants,  but  had  a  place
of  salvation,  in  due  time,  for  all,
and  would  bless  the  honest  and  vir-
tuous and  truthful, whether  they  ever
belonged  to  any  church  or  not  It
was  a  new  doctrine  to  this  genera-
tion, and  many  stumbled  at  it,  but
Joseph  continued  to  receive  revela-
tion upon  revelation,  ordinance  upon
ordi nance,  truth  upon  truth,  until  he


UNBELIEF,  ETC*


43


obtained  all  that  was  necessary  for
the  salvation  of  the  human  family.
All  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are
called  of  God;  they  are  called  to
repent  and  lr  baptized  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins.  When  I  first  came
ioto  the  church  it  was  a  subject  of
considerable  thought  to  me  why
people  whom  I  knew  to  be  as  pood
and  moral  as  they  could  be,  should
have  to  repent.  But  I  could  see
afterwards  that  if  they  had  nothing
else  to  repent  of  they  could  and
ought  to  repent  of  their"  false  reli-
gions, of  their  narrow,  contracted
creeds  in  which  they  were  bound,  of
the  ordinances  of  men,  and  get
something  better.  These  narrow,
contracted  religions  have  spread  infi-
delity in  the  world.  They  should
repent  of  these  and  take  hold  of  the
things  of  God  and  receive  the  truths
of  heaven,  "  Well,"  say  the  minis-
ters, 44  we  have  lived  according  to
the  hVht  we  have  received,"  We  say,
are  you  willing  to  receive  more  ?  if
so,  here  is  more  for  you.  So  far  as
your  taith  in  Christ  goes,  and  your
morality,  we  say,  amen.  But  here
is  something  more.  "  Ah/*  say  they,
"  we  have  got  enough,  we  don't  want
any  of  your  Mormonism."  Well,
now  they  do,  if  they  only  knew  it.
I  had  a  conversation  recently  with  a
prominent  minister  of  a  church  in  the
East  and  he  said,  I  do  not  a^ree
with  you  in  your  peculiar  views.
I  answered,  are  yon  not  for  the  troth,
the  whole  troth  and  nothing  but  the
truth  ?  If  you  are,  so  am  I.  How
is  it  possible  to  get  up  an  argument?
I  will  make  a  bargain.  I  will  com-
pare my  religion  with  yours.  We
will  start  out  with  the  Bible  alone,
taking  it  as  the  standard.  All  that
the  Bible  teaches  for  doctrine  and
practice  we  will  take  for  our  guide.
If  1  have  an  error  I  will  part  with
it.  Will  you  do  the  same  ?  If  you
can  find  that  you  have  a  truth  that  I


have  not,  and  that  I  have  an  error,  I
will  trade  ten  errors  if  I  have  them
for  one  truth.  Take  the  religion  of
Christ  from  the  foundation  up,  and
it  is  all  true  and  for  the  benefit  of
mankind.  Take  the  whole  world
with  their  contentions  and  strife,  the
kings  and  potentates  who  make  war
and  murder  the  people  by  thousands,
those  who  shoot  and  kill,  who  rob  the
poor,  who  set  at  naught  the  counsel
of  God,  bring  them  together,  read
to  them  the  precepts  of  Jesus,  the
principles  of  the  everlasting  Gospel
and  see  if  there  is  one  principle  that
would  injure  them  or  the  world  of
mankind  in  the  least.  Will  ihey
injure  a  person,  a  family,  a  neighbor-
hood ?  All  would  join,  if  they
spoke  the  truth,  in  saying  no,  not
one;  but  if  we  lived  up  to  tliem,
they  would  make  the  best  condition
of  society  possible.  Let  the  whole
world  take  the  Bible,  the  Book  of
Mormon,  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants
and  the  writings  and  counsels  of  this
Church,  and  see  if  there  is  any-
thing calculated  in  the  least  degree,
in  any  of  their  requirements,  to  in-
jure one  individual  on  earth.  I  will
say  to  rhese  few  Latter-day  Saints,
and  if  all  were  here  1  would  say  the
same,  you,  brethren  and  sisters,  take
counsel  of  your  Presidents,  those  who
are  set  to  give  you  counsel  j  and  so
far  as  your  President  is  concerned  as
an  individual,  if  you  would  flay  in
your  hearts,  "  we  will  take  his  coun-
sel,"— and  I  can  say  before  God  ho
desires  this  people  would  live  their
religion, — there  would  be  no  conten-
tions, no  stealing,  no  cheating,  no
drunkenness,  no  lying;  wrong-doing  -
would  cease,  the  hand  of  mercy  would
bo  extended  to  the  pour,  kindness
and  love  would  be  spread  abroad,
and  you  would  never  hear  another
jar  in  the  land.  I  can  say  that  I
deserve  more  obedience  to  counsel
than I  get. Can any man,  wo-


a  JOURNAL  OF  I) J H COURSES.


man  or  child  bring  up  one  thing  that
I  have  counseled  that  would  injure
anybody  or  bring  the  least  .stain  upon
the  kingdom  of  God  upon  the  earth  ?
No,  tliey  cannot.  Why  can't  we  be
of  one  heart  and  of  one  mind  ?  Why
is  it  that  my  brethren  allow  them-
selves to  be  stirred  up  to  strife  vviih
their  neighbors  ?  Perhaps  some
neighbor  has  let  down  your  bars,
and  the  cattle  have  got  in,  and  you
are  injured  in  your  feelings  and
allow  anger  to  enter  into  your  hearts.
Perhaps  some  neighbor  has  borrowed
your  plow  and  bioken  it,  or  done
something  else  in  which  you  are
aggrieved  ■  you  set  it  down  that  that
person  is  no  Saint.  Perhaps  if  your
own  faults  were  portrayed  you  would
show  as  many  as  he  has,  but  you  set
it  down  fur  a  fact  that  he  is  no  Saint,
or  he  would  not  do  thus  and  so.  Now
cease  this*  When  you  think  your
brother  has  injured  you,  go  straight
and  learn  the  intention  of  his  heart,
and  judge  according  to  that,  and  not
according  to  the  outward  appear-
ances.

Do  you  say  your  prayers  ?  How
many  houses  of  High  Priests,  if  I
crept  into  them  like  n  mouse,  could
I  find  where  they  do  not  pray  with
their  families,  do  not  ask  God  to  bless
their  labors,  to  bless  their  fields  and
farms,  their  brethren  and  the  king-
dom of  God  on  the  earth  ?  How
many  Elders,  Seventies  and  Bishops
would  1  fiud  iu  the  same  condition  ?
The  Bishops  should  be  a  perfect  ex-
ample to  their  wards  in  all  things.
How  many  are  there  who  are  strictly
honest  and  fair  in  their  deal?  I  have
experienced  so  much  on  that  subject
that  I  had  better  say  little  upon  it
But  1  say  to  you,  deal  justly,  act
mercif  ully  and  eschew  evil.  Do  good
to  all  men.  We  say  sometimes,  Ah  1
will  not  do  any  favor  for  that  man,
he  is  unworthy  of  assistance."  I
will  give  you  a  piece  of  eounsel.  Do


good  to  all.  It  is  better  to  feed  nine
unworthy  persons  than  to  let  one
worthy  person — the  tenth,  go  hun-
gry. Follow  this  rule  and  you  will
be  apt  to  be  found  on  the  right  side
of  doing  good.

Suppose  we  look  around  here  ?
How  many  of  you  sisters  have
donated  fifty  cents  to  help  gather
the  poor  this  season  ?  Don't  say
you  have  no  money.  Have  you  not
had  fifty  cents  to  buy  a  ribbon  ?
How  about  that  ten  dollars  to  buy
hair  from  somebody  else's  head  when
you  have  plenty  on  your  own  ?  Take
the  brethren,  too,  who  wear  needless
clothing,  smoke  cigars,  &c.  Take
all  the  money  that  is  spent  for  tea
and  coflee  and  squandered  in  waste
and  hjw  much  could  we  get  ?  Why
enough  to  send  for  the  poor,  who  are
begging  and  pleading  to  come,  by
the  scores  of  thousands.  We  got  a
purse  of  some  four  thousand  dollars
at  the  late  Conference.  I  put  in  one
thousand  dollars,  brother  Hooper  put
in  one  thousand  dollars.  That  makes
about  half  the  amount  1  sp  >ke
when  I  was  here,  about  two  years
ago,  about  Elders  who  had  borrowed
money  of  poor  Saints  in  the  old  coun-
try and  never  paid  them.  I  said  then
such  men  should  be  cut  off  from  the
Church.

How  much  tithing  do  yon  pay  ?
The  professing  Christians,  apostates
and  others  have  a  great  deal  to  say
about  the  Saints  paying  tithing.
Now  let  us  compare  notes.  The  El-
ders of  this  Church  travel  and  preach
without  purse  or  scrip,  and  labor  at
home  as  Bishops,  Presidents,  High
Counselors,  and  Ministers,  free  of
charge.  Now  take  the  Christians,
how  many  of  their  Miuisters  preach
without  pay?  Go  to  their  meetings,
in  their  churches,  halls,  schoolhouses,
or  any  of  their  public  gatherings,
and  you  have  a  box,  a  plate,  or  a  hat
put  under  your  tace,  and  it  is,  *  Give


UNBELIEF,  E'Yi\


45


rue  a  sixpence,  give  me  a  sixpence,
give  rae  a  sixpence !  "  Show  me  the
Elder  of  this  Church  that  does  this?
We  preach  the  Gospel  without  purse
or  scrip  and  work  for  our  own  bread
and  batter.  Yet  the  Christian  world
whine  about  oor  paying  tithing.
The  Saints  should  pay  the  tenth  of
their  income  with  glad  and  thankful
hearts,  and  help  to  bring  home  the
poor.  We  have  supported  and  helped
the  poor  to  the  amount  of  millions.
We  have  picked  up  those  who  were
poor  and  brought  them  here  and
taught  them  how  to  work  and  take
care  of  themselves,  and  same  of  them
ride  in  their  carriages  as  proud  as
the  lords  of  the  old  world  from
whence  they  came.

In  regard  to  this  whining  of  the
world  about  Brigham's  handling  the
tithing,  I  can  say  that  he  has  put  in
ten  dollars  where  he  has  taken  one
out  of  the  treasury,  and  he  has  paid
more  tithing  than  any  other  man  in
the  Church.  Everybody  should  pay
their  tenth.  A  poor  woman  ought
to  pay  her  tenth  chicken,  if  she  has  ,
to  draw  out  ten  times  its  value  for
her  support.  It  is  all  the  Lord's  and
we  are  only  his  stewards.

The  Litter-day  Saints  want  per-
suading. What  for?  Their  own
good*  Some  people  talk  of  how  long
they  have  served  the  Lord,  and  now
they  want  to  do  something  for  them-
selves. The  moment  they  begin  to
feel  and  act  like  this,  they  commence
to  serve  the  devil  There  are  two
powers  on  earth,  God  and  Satan,  and
we  must  serve  one  or  the  other.  God
requires  obedience  to  his  laws.  It  I
do  this  I  do  nothing  more  than  I  do
to  the  United  States.  We  have
enlisted  to  serve  the  King  of  Kings;
He  has  laws,  rules,  regulations,  &c.
Why  should  we  not  be  as  willing  to  j
pay  taxes  to  Him  as  to  the  United
States.  We  believe  in  obeying  the
laws  of  the  land,  we  should  also  obey


the  laws  of  (rod.

[^People  have  found  out  that  wo
believe  in  a  plurality  of  wives.  The
people  of  this  Government  say  we
shall  not  have  a  plurality  of  wives.
Why  not  say :  u  a  plurality  of  wo-
men/' and  we  shan't  have  any  objec-
tion to  it.  Bemuse  this  would  strike
at  men  in  high  places*  Their  idea
is,  "  If  you  want  women,  illegally,
and  then  thrust  them  into  the  street
when  you  have  done  with  them,  we
care  nothing  about  it;  but  if  God
has  revealed  anything  about  plurality
of  wives,  to  marry  and  provide  for
them,  as  he  did  in  the  days  of  the
;  Patriarchs,  we  don't  want  any  of  it/*
If  I  have  wives  given  to  me  of  the
Lord,  I  do  not  break  any  constitu-
tional law  of  the  land.  But  enough
ot  that.  •

I  want  to  persuade  the  Latter-day
Saints  to  be  Latter-day  Saints.  Bro.
WoodrutF  was  talking  about  the  ne-
cessity of  making  our  own  clothing,
I  say  if  we  go  on  as  we  have  been
doini^  and  calculate  to  continue  to
purchase  from  abroad  most  of  what
we  wear,  and  a  great  deal  of  what  -
i  we  eat,  we  shall  be  left  without.  Do
i  you  know  that  Babylou  is  going  to
fall  t  Her  merchants  will  cry  out,
u  there  is  no  one  to  buy  our  merchan-
dise" And  if  you  and  I  do  not
learn  how  to  take  care  ot  ourselves,
and  raise  and  manufacture  vyhat  we
consume,  we  shall  have  to  go  with-
out. If  you  do  not  know  how,  go  to
work  and  learn  how  to  knit,  sew,
weave,  make  ribbons,  raise  silk  and
make  up  and  manufacture  your  own
wearing  apparel  and  all  you  need.

Now,  on  another  subject  There
is  a  ("rod  Who  lives,  and  who  framed
and  fashioned  this  earth,  and  who
brought  forth  that  which  is  on  the
face  thereof.  He  has  laws,  Every-
thing is  controlled  by  law.  The
actions  of  men,  however,  are  left
free;  they  are  agents  to  themselves


an  J  must  act  freely  on  that  agency,
or  else  how  could  they  be  judged  for
their  actions? But God  reserves
the  right  to  himself  to  control  the
results  of  their  acts*  and  this  do  man
can  hinder. Who  of  the  Christian
divines  know  anything  about  the
God  we  serve  ?  I  never  saw  any  one,
until  I  met  Joseph  Smith,  who  could
tell  me  anything  about  the  character,
personality and dwelling-place  of
God,  or  anything  satisfactory  al>out
angels,  or  the  relationship  of  man  to
his  Maker. Yet  I  was  as  diligent  as
any  man  need  to  be  to  try  and  find
out  these  things. We  know  more
about  God  and  the  heavens  than  we
care  to  tell. And  if  we  introduce  a
principle  and  try  to  i educe  it  to  the
corn  prehension  of  the  people,  there
will  be  some  even  among  the  Latter-
day  Saints  who  would  be  hard  to
understand. Where  is  the  divine
who  knows  the  least  thing  about  that
Being who  is  the  Father  of  oar
Spirits  and  the  author  of  our  bodies  ?
If  we  know  something  about  him  is
there  any  harm  in  it  ? Not  a  bit.
The  world  of  mankind  are  infidels.
We  should  all  he  infidel  to  every  false
principle. I  am  infidel  in  regard  to
many  things,  but  to  the  truth,  wher-
ever found,  X  am  no  infidel.  The
Christian  world  is  infidel  to  the  truth
in  a  great  degree. Why  ?  Because
they  know  so  little  of  the  mind  and
will  of  God. Step  outside  of  this
kingdom,  and  who  e;m  tell  us  the
first  process  towards  covering  the
earth  with  the  knowledge  of  God  ?
Who  is  there  that  can  tell  us  anything
about  that  angel  whom  John  saw
coming  with  the  everlasting  Gospel
as  recorded  in  John's  Revelations  ?
1  never  found  any  one  who  could  till
I  saw  Joseph  Smith. He  could  tell
me  what  I  had  so  much  desired  to
learn. What  do  the  Christian  di-
vines know  about  it  even  at  the  pre-
sent day  ? If  they  do  know  any.


thing  about  it  I  wish  they  would  tell
us.  But  if  they  do  not  know,  and
will  not  teceive  the  things  of  God
from  those  who  do  know,  does  not
this  make  them  infidels  to  the  truth  ?

My  testimony  is  the  positive.  I
know  that  1 1  sere  are  such  cities  a3
|  London,  Paris,  and  New  York— from
j  my  own  experience  or  from  that  of
others;  I  know  that  the  sun  shines,
I  know  that  I  exist  and  have  a  being,
and  I  testify  that  there  is  a  God,
and  that  Jesus  Christ  lives,  and  that
he  is  the  Savior  of  the  world, J  lave
you  been  to  heaven  and  learned  to
the  contrary  ? I  know  that  Joseph
Smith  was  a  Prophet  of  God,  and
that  lie  had  many  revelations.  Who
can  disprove  this  testimony  ?  Any
one  may  dispute  it,  but  there  is  no
one  in  the  world  who  can  disprove  it.
I  have  had  mauy  revelations;  I  have
seen  and  heard  for  myself,  and  know
these  things  are  true,  and  nobody  on
earth  can  disprove  them. The  eye,
the  ear,  the  hand,  all  the  senses  may
be  deceived,  but  the  Spirit  of  God
cannot  be  deceived; and  when  in-
spired with  that  Spirit,  the  whole
man  is  tilled  with  knowledge,  he  can
see  with  a  spiritual  eye,  and  he  knows
that  which  is  beyond  the  power  of  man
to  controvert. What  I  know  concern-
ing God,  concerning  the  earth,  con-
cerning  government,  I  have  received
from  the  heavens,  not  alone  through
my  natural  ability,  and  I  give  God
the  glory  and  the  praise. Men  talk
about  what  ha;-  been  accomplished
under  my  direction,  and  attribute  it
to  my  wisdom  and  ability;  but  it  is
all  by  the  poiyer  of  God,  and  by  in-
telligence  received  from  him. I  say
to  the  whole  world,  receive  the  truth,
no  matter  who  presents  it  to  you*

Take  up  the  Bible,  compare  the
religion  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  with
it,  and  see  if  it  will  stand  the  test.

We  preach  the  Gospel,  gather  the
people  of  God from  all  nations


MEETING  OF  ADAM  Wll

tongues  and  people,  and  build  up  the  I
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth,  and
this  calls  for  manual  labor,  the  aftec-


S  HIS  POSTERITY,  ETC.  47

lions  of  the  heart,  and  the  demotion
of  all  oar  powers.  God  bless  you.
Amen*


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Ooden,  Sunday  Morning,

May  18,  1873.


(Reported  foj  James  Taylor. J)


MEETING  OF  ADAM  WITH  HIS  POSTERITY  IX  THE  VALLEY  OF  AD  Ail*
ONDI-AHMAN — LOCATION  OF  TEE  VALLEY  —  THE  COVENANT  WITH
ENOCH — RECORDS  OF  GOD'S  DEALINGS  WITH  MEN  FROM  THE  PERIOD
OF  THE  CREATION — METHOD  OF  PRESERVING  THE  RECORDS  OF  ANCI-
ENT PROPHETS — CHRIST'S  ADVENT  AMONG  THE  NJSPHTTES — FULFILL-
MENT OF  GOD*S  PURPOSES  AND  THE  FULLNESS  OF  TIMES.


Having  been  requested  to  speak
this  forenoon,  and  to  continue  the
subject  upon  which  we  were  addres-
sed yesterday  afternoon,  I  cheerfully
do  so,  hoping1  that  I  may  have  the
attention  of  the  congregation,  as  far
as  possible,  that  I  may  be  able  to
make  all  hear.

The  subject  upon  which  brother
Taylor  addressed  the  congregation
yesterday  afternoon,  and  upon  which
a  few  words  were  said  by  those  who
followed  him,  is  one  of  very  great
importance  in  its  bearings  upon  the
present  generation;  for  all  things
that  have  once  been  revealed,  and
which  are  now  lost,  will  be  revealed
anew,  in  order  to  fulfill  that  passage
of  Scripture  recorded  in  the  11th
chap,  of  Isaiah  and  9th  verse,  "  The
knowledge  of  God  shall  cover  the


ear tli  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea,"
Things  of  all/ormer  dispensations  will
be  made  manifest  and  revealed  anew
in  the  great  dispensation  of  the  full-
ness of  t iiues.  And  in  order  to  un-
derstand more  clearly  the  things  that
are  to  be  revealed  and  made  manifest
again  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,
it  mav  not  be  amiss  for  me  to  refer
to  some  of  the  past  records  of  anti-
quity that  were  revealed  from  hea-
ven for  the  benefit  of  past  genera-
tions. The  first  one  that  occurs  to
ray  mind  will  be  found  in  the  Book
of  Covenants,  page  79,  paragraph  2(J:
"  And  Adam  stood  up  in  the  midst
of  the  congregation,  and  notwith-
standing he  was  bowed  down  with
age,  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
predicted  whatsoever  should  befall
his  posterity  unto  the  latest  genera*


tion,  These  things  were  nil  written
in  the  Book  of  Enoch,  and  are  to*  be
testified  of  in  due  time."  1

Adam  was  the  first  personage
placed  on  the  earth,  in  the  Garden  of
Eden,  and  having  transgressed,  and
having  been  cast  out  of  the  Garden
of  Eden,  and  having  fulfilled  a  Ion?
probation,  amounting  to  almost  a
thousand  years,  he  concluded  to  ga-
ther together  his  children,  which  he
did  three  yea  is  previously  to  his
death.  As  recorded  on  the  same
page,  he  gathered  Seth,En08,Cainaan,
Mahalaleel,  Jared,  Enoch  and  Methu-  1
selah,  who  were  successive  descend-  I
ants,  making  eight  generations  in  j
all,  including  himself,  into  the  valley
of  Adam-ondiahman.  This  was
•  nearly  a  thousand  years  after  Adam
was  placed  in  the  Garden  of  Eden,
seven  generations  of  his  children,  or
the  righteous  portion  thereof,  were
gathered  together  in  that  valley.
And  here  it  may  not  be  amiss  for  me
to  sav  a  few  words  hi  relation  to  the
location  of  that  interesting  meeting
or  conference,  '

The  valley  of  Adam-ondi-ahman,
according  to  the  views  and  belief  of
the  Latter-dav  S  ants,  was  located  on
the  western  hemisphere  of  our  globe.
(1  would  here  say  ,  that  as  the  greater
portion  of  this  congregation  are  Lat-
ter-day, Saints,  the  proofs  and  evi-  I
dences  which  I  shall  bring  forth,  in  1
relation  to  the  matters  before  me,  j
will  be  selected  from  those  books
which  are  believed  by  4hem,  which
may  not  be  particular  evidence  to
stranger**,  but  to  the  Latter-day
Saints  they  will  be  undisputed  evi-
dence.)  Adam-ondi-ahman,  the  Val-
ley of  God,  where  Adam  dwelt,  was
located  about  fifty  miles  north  of
Jackson  County,  in  the  State  of
Missouri,  The  Lord  has  revealed  to
us  that  Adam  dwelt  there  towards
the  latter  period  of  his  probation.
Whether  he  had  lived  in  that  region


of  country  from  the  earliest  period  of
bia  existence  on  the  eprth,  we  know
not.  He  might  have  lived  thousands
of  miles  distant,  in  his  early  days.
It  might  have  been  upon  what  we
now  term  the  great  eastern  hemi-
sphere, for  in  those  days  the  eastern
and  western  hemispheres  were  one,
and  were  not  divided  asunder  till  the
days  of  Peleg.  Adam  might  have
migrated  from  the  great  east,  gather-
ed up  with  the  people  of  God  in  con-
nection with  the  Church  of  Enoch,
and  formed  a  location  in  the  western
boundaries  of  Missouri.  This  is  not
revealed.

The  object  of  this  grand  meeting
of  our  great  ancestors,  was  that  Adam
might  bestow  a  great  Patriarchal
blessing  upon  his  descendants.  Hence
the  righteous  of  his  posterity  were
gathered  on  that  occasion.  He  pro-
nounced upon  them  his  last  blessing.
They  were  favored  on  that  occasion,
for  the  Lord  appeared  onto  them.
This  meeting  was  very  interesting  in
its  nature,  and  the  Lord  was  very
much  interested,  as  well  as  the  people.
He  appeared  to  this  vast  congrega-
tion, and  imparted  comfort  to  Adam
in  his  old  age.  And  Adam  was  tilled
with  the  Holy  Ghost.  Notwith-
standing he  was  bowed  down  with
age,  being  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,
lie  predicted  what  should  come  to
pass  among  his  posterity  to  the
latest  generations.  Hence  he  must
have  spoken  concerning  all  the  fol-
lowing dispensations,  that  were  to  be
revealed  from  time  to  time  to  the
children  of  men.  He  must  have
spoken  concerning  the  spreading  of
his  posterity  after  the  days  of  Noah,
and  of  the  great  work  of  God  being
established  on  the  earth  in  the  latter  ■
days,  and  concerning  the  second  ad-
vent of  the  Son  of  God,  concerning
the  great  day  of  rest,  the  period  when
Satan  should  be  bound.  All  these
things  were  written  in  the  Book


MEETIXO  OF  ADAM  WITH  UlH  POSTERITY,  ETC-.


49


of  Enoch,  who  wag  present  on  that
occasion.  And  this  book  is  to  bo
testified  of,  in  due  time,  to  the  Saints
of  the  last  davs.  This  will  be  one
of  the  means  by  which  God  will  ful-
fill the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  that  *?  the
knowledge  of  God  will  cover  the
earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  great
deep."  i>  •  i

Saying  nothing  about  the  prophe-
cies of  Seth,  Enos,  Cainan,  Mahala-
leel  and  Jared,  we  will  next  come
down  to  the  days  of  Enoch.  Enoch
prophecied  of  all  things,  as  well  as
his  great  ancestor,  Adam,  A  few  of
his  words  are  translated,  and  brought
to  light  by  the  Prophet  Joseph
Smith,  and  published  in  the  various
publications  of  this  Church — in  the
"Evening  and  Morning  Star,"  the
41  Pearl  of  Great  Price/1  etc.  This
prophecy,  though  very  short,  as  far
as  it  has  been  revealed,  unfolds  mar-
velous principles,  showing  that  his
eyes  were  opened  to  see  things  that
were  past,  an; I  tilings  in  the  future,
all  ot  which  were  recorded  in  the
Book  of  Knoch,  which  is  to  be  brought
to  light  and  revealed  in  the  hitter
times.  Among  the  things  revealed
to  Enoch  was  tbe  knowledge  of  the
flood,  which  was  to  take  place.  And
the  Lord  made  a  covenant  with
Enoch,  that  He  would  set  His  bow
in  the  clouds — just  as  it  afterwards
was  given  to  Noah — not  as  a  mere
token  alone  that  the  Lord  would  no
more  drown  the  world,  but  as  a  token
of  the  new  and  everlasting  covenant
that  the  Lord  made  with  Enoch.
The  words  of  this  covenant  I  will
repeat,  as  far  as  my  memory  will
serve :  "  I  will  set  my  bow  in  the
clouds,  and  I  will  look  upon  it,  and
remember  the  everlasting  covenant  I
have  made  with  you,  That  in  the
latter  days,  when  men  shall  keep  all
my  commandments,  Zjon  shall  look
upwards  and  the  Heavens  shall  look
downwards,"  etc. The  bow  that  was

No.  4.


set  in  the  clouds  was  to  be  a  token,
between  God  and  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth,  of  the  bringing  again  of
Zion,  and  of  the  assembling  of  the
Saints  of  all  dispensations.  There-
fore, when  I  have  seen  the  bow  in
tbe  clouds,  it  causes  me  to  remember
the  covenant  that  God  made  in  those
early  a^es,  and  which  is  soon  to  be
fulfilled  in  the  last  dispensation  of
the  fulness  of  times.  How  great
and  how  important  is  this  covenant
with  the  Zion  which  was  built  up  by
Enoch,  which  was  to  be  taken  up
into  heaven  and  remain  sanctified  as
a  place  of  the  Lord's  abode  forever !
where  he  should  dwell  in  the  midst
of  his  people,  and  where  he  should
behold  their  faces,  and  they  should
behold  his  face.  That  this  ancient
Zion,  and  ail  the  inhabitants  thereof,
should  come  from  heaven  and  reign
on  the  earth,  and  that  Jesus  should
come  with  them.  And  for  fear  that
the  Saints  should  forget  Ihis,  a
beautiful  bow  was  placed  in  the
clouds,  that  they  might  remember
that  the  Lord  was  looking  upon
them,  aud  that  he  would  remember
his  covenant  with  Enoch  in  regard
to  bringing  his  Zion  again.  This
we  find  in  the  periodicals  of  the
Church.  When  this  time  shall  come
that  the  Lord  will  bring  again  ancient
Zion,  this  will  assist  in  filling  the
earth  with  the  knowledge  of  God  as
the  waters  cover  the  great  deep ;  and
will  serve  to  put  us  in  possession  of
the  history  of  Zion,  of  the  order  of
that  ancient  people,  when  they  walked
in  righteousness  three  hundred  and
sixty- five  years  before  they  were  pre-
pared for  a  translation  to  heaven.

When  we  come  to  converse  with
Enoch  and  his  city  face  to  face,  and
hear  from  their  own  mouths  the  de-
claration of  their  own  history,  and
the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  in  that
age  of  the  world,  it  will  unfold
a  vast amount  of  knowledge  in

Vol,  XVI.


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


regard  to  the  events  before  the
flood.

We  come  down  to  the  days  of
Noah.  He  was  a  righteous  man,  and
called  of  God  to  preach  the  Gospel
among  the  nations  as  it  vvafi  revealed
to  his  forefathers,  and  before  the
days  of  the  flood,  so  great  was  the
faith  of  many  of  the  people,  after  the
days  that  Enoch's  city  was  caught
up,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  upon
them,  and  they  were  caught  up  by
the  power  of  heaven  into  the  midst
of  Zion — the  Zion  of  Enoch,  Thus
we  have  further  knowledge  revealed
to  us.  ,;  j

Noah,  after  having  preached  the
Gospel  and  published  glad  tidings
among  the  nations,  was  commanded
to  build  an  ark.  He  had  a  Urim
and  Thuraniim  by  which  he  was
enabled  to  discern  all  things  pertain-
ing to  the  ark,  and  its  pattern.  He
was  a  great  Prophet,  and  predicted
many  things,  and  his  records,  no
doubt,  were  hidden  up,  and  will  come
forth  in  due  time,  when  the  Lord
shall  cover  the  earth  with  his  know-
ledge as  the  waters  cover  the  great


Many  people  have  supposed  that
Moses  was  the  first  man,  and  the
people  of  his  day  "the  first  generation
that  knew  anything  about  written
characters,  and  that  all  the  people,
from  the  days  of  Adam  down  to
Moses,  did  not  know  how  to  pat
their  thoughts  in  the  form  of  writing;
but  let  me  inform  you  how  writing
commenced.  We  read  in  the  Book
of  Enoch,  in  the  "  Pearl  of  Great
Price,"  that  the  Lord  taught  Adam
how  to  write  records  by  the  inspira-
tion of  his  Spirit  And  it  was  given
him  concerning  the  mode  of  placing
his  thoughts  iu  the  form  of  writing.
This  is  recorded  in  the  Book  of
Enoch,  and  the  "  Pearl  of  Great
Price."

The  people  before  the  flood  did


not  lose  the  art  of  writing,  but  they
wrote  their  revelations,  visions,  etc  ,
in  the  language  of  Adam — the  first
language  given  to  man. This  know-
ledge was  retained  through  the  flood.
We  come  down  to  the  days  of  the
building  of  the  Tower  of  Babel,  soon
after  the  flood. About  the  time  of
Abraham  tiie  Tower  of  Babel  was
built. The people  being  uf  one
language,  gathered  together  to  build
a  tower  to  reach,  as  they  supposed,
the  crystal  ized  heavens.  They  thought
that  the  City  of  Enoch  was  caught
up  a  little  ways  from  the  earth,  and
that  the  city  was  within the  first
sphere  above  the  earth  ;  and  that  if
they  could  get  a  tower  high  enough,
|  they  might  get  to  heaven,  where  the
City  of  Enoch  and  the  inhabitants
thereof  were  located. They  went  to
work  and  built  a  tower. They  had
this  tradition,  that  there  had  been  a
translation  of  people  from  the  earth,
and  they  were  anxious  to  become
acquainted  with  them;  but  the  Lord
saw  that  they  were  one,  and  that
they  all  had  one  language,  and  that
nothing would  be  restrained  from
them  which  they  imagined  to  do ;
and,  as  a  curse,  he  sent  a  variety  of
tongues — took  from  them  their  own
mother-tongue. The  language  of
Adam  was  all  forgotten  in  a  moment;
and  independently  of  taking  away
from  them  the  knowledge  of  their
own  tongue,  he  gave  them  a  multi-
tude of  other  tongues,  so  that  they
could  not  understand  one  another.
In  those  days  there  were* a  few  righte-
ous individuals  living  at  the  Towert
among  whom  was  Jared,  a  very  good
man,  and  his  brother. When  they
understood,  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy,
that  the  Lord  was  about  to  scatter
the  people  to  the  four  corners  of  the
earth,  the  brother  of  Jared  called
upon  the  Lord,  by  the  request  of
Jared,  that  the  Lord  might  lead  them
to  a  choice  land. Did  they  come


MEKTING  OF  ADAM  WITH  HIS  POSTERITY,  ETC,


upon  this  great  western  hemisphere
without  a  knowledge  of  God  ?  No.
Without  any  written  record  ?  No.
Read  the  Book  of  Mormon,  page
530,  or,  in  other  words,  the  Book  of
Ether,  and  you  will  find  there  re-
corded, several  generations  after  the
Israelites  came  from  the  Tower  of
Babel  and  landed  upon  this  conti-
nent, that  there  was  a  certain  woman,
the  daughter  of  one  of  the  ancient
men  of  note,  that  referred  her  father
to  those  records  which  their  fathers
brought  from  the  Tower  of  Babel ;
told  her  father  what  was  recorded  in
them. "  Hath  my  father  not  read
the  record  which  our  fathers  brought
across  the  great  deep? Behold,  is
there  not  an  account  concerning  them
of  old ; that  they,  by  their  secret
plans  did  obtain  kingdoms  and  great
glory." She  put  it  in  the  heart  of
her  father, Jared, to  follow  those
wicked  acts  which  were  entered  into
by  Cain. It  shows  that  the  Jared-
ites did not  come  here  without  a
record  of  the  things  from  the  days
of  Adam,  down  ;  they  had  it  with
them. They  kept  it  with  them,  and
multiplied  copies  in  the  midst  of
their  nation. But  you  may  ask,  how
do  we  know  about  this  first  colony
that  came  to  thin  continent  ?  How
came  we  in  possession  of  this  know-
ledge ? It  was  by  the  records  which
they  themselves  kept The  Jared-
ites, acquainted with the art  of
writing,  kept their  recorda  And
among  the  host  uf  records  kept  by
them,  were twenty- four plates  of
pure  gold,  which  were  kept  by  the
Prophet  Ether,  some  1600  or  1800
years  after  their  colony  came  to  this
land,  from  the  Tower  of  Babel.  He
kept  a  record* These  records  were
carried  by  Ether  from  the  hill  Ra-
mah,  afterwards  called  Camorah,
where  the  Jaredites  were  destroyed,
as  well  as  the  Nephites. He  carried
them  forth  towards  South  America,


and  placed  them  in  a  position  north
of  the  Isthmus,  where  a  portion  of
the  people  of  King  Limhi,  about  one
hundred  years  before  Christ,  found
them.  I  will  read  you  a  little  des~
motion  of  their  being  found.  On
page  161,  Book  of  Mormon,  it  ap-
pears that  the  people  of  Limhi  were
a  certain  colony  that  had  left  the
main  body  of  the  Nephites,  and  had
settled  in  the  land  where  Nephi  built
and  located  his  little  col 0113%  soon
after  their  landing  on  the  western
coast  of  South  America.  After  land-
ing, and  after  the  death  of  his  father
Lehi,  Nephi  was  commanded  of  God
to  take  those  who  would  believe  in
the  Most  High,  and  flee  out  from  his
brethren.  And  they  traveled  many
days'  journey  to  the  northward,  and
located  in  a  land  which  they  called
the  Land  of  Nephi,  and  dwelt  there
pome  four  hundred  years.  And  then
because  of  the  wickedness  of  the  peo-
ple they  were  threatened  with  a  great
destruction*  The  Lord  led  Mosiah
out  of  the  Land  of  -Nephi,  and  led
him  still  further  north,  some  twenty
days'  journey,  and  they  located  on
the  River  Sidon,  now  called  Magda-
lena,  which  runs  from  the  south  to
the  north.  And  there  they  found  a
people  called  the  people  of  Zara-
hemla.  And  some  of  the  Nephites
desired  to  return  to  the  Land  of
Nephi,  which  they  did.  In  about  a
century  afterwards,  there  being  no
communication  between  the  colonies,
they  sent  out  a  number  of  men  to
see  if  they  could  find  the  people  of
Zaruhemla.  And  they  were  lost,
and  came  to  a  part  of  a  country
covered  with  bones.  This  is  what  I
am  going  to  read.  And  as  a  testi-
mony that  these  things  were  true
they  brought  twenty-four  plates  of
gold,  and  breast-plates  of  brass  and
copper,  and  swords,  <fcc.

Book  of  Mormon,  page  161 :

"  And  it  came  to  pass  that  after


52


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


King  Linda  had  made  an  end  of
speaking  to  his  people,  for  be  gpake
many  things  unto  them,  Jind  only  a
few  of  them  have  I  written  in  this
Bo'ik,  he  told  his  people  all  the  things
concerning  their  brethren  who  were
in  the  land  of  Zarahemla,  and  he
caused  that  Ammon  should  stand  up
before  the  multitude,  and  rehearse
unto  them  all  that  had  happened
unto  their  brethren  from  the  time
that  Zen  iff  vent  up  out  of  the  land.
And  he  also  rehearsed  unto  them  the
last  words  which  King  Benjamin  had
taught  them,  and  explained  them  to
the  people  of  King  Limhi,  so  that
they  might  understand  all  the  words
which  he  spake.  And  it  came  to
pass  that  after  he  had  done  all  this,
that  King  Limhi  dismissed  t  he  multi-
tude, and  cause'!  that  they  should
return,  every  one  unto  his  own
house,**  f

14  And  it  dime  to  pass  that  he
caused  that  the  plates  which  con-
tained t  he  record  of  his  people,  from
the  time  Unit  they  left  the  land  of
Zarahemla  should  be  brought  before
Amnion,  that  he  might  read  them.
Now,  as  Boon  as  Ammon  had  read
the  record,  the  king  inquired  of  him
to  know  if  he  could  interpret  lan-
guages, and  Ammon  told  him  that  he
could  not.  And  the  king  said  unto
him s  being  grieved  for  the  afflictions
of  my  people,  I  caused  that  forty
and  three  of  my  people  should  take
a  journey  in  o  the  wilderness,  that
thereby  they  might  find  the  land  of
Zarahemla,  that  we  might  appeal
unto  our  brethren  to  deliver  us  out  of
bondage;  and  they  were  lost  in  the
wilderness  for  the  space  of  many
days,  yet  they  were  diligent,  and
found  not  the  land  of  Zarahemla,  but
returned  to  this  land,  having  tra-
veled in  a  land  among  many  waters ;
having  discovered  a  land  which  was
covered  with  bones  of  men,  and  of
beasts,  &C.,  and  was  also  coverei


with  the  ruins  of  buildings  of  every
kind ;  having  discovered  a  land
which  had  been  peopled  with  a  people
who  were  as  numerous  as  the  hosts
of  Israel.  And  for  a  testimony  that
the  things  that  "hey  have  said  are
true,  they  have  brought  twenty  four
plates  which  are  filled  with  engrav-
ings, and  they  are  of  pure  gold.
And  behold,  also,  they  have  brought
breast  plates,  which  are  large,  and
they  are  of  brass  and  of  copper,  and
are  perfectly  sound.  And  again,
they  have  brought  swords,  the  hilts
thereof  have  perished,  and  the  blades
thereof  were  cankered  with  rust;
and  there  is  no  one  in  the  land  that
is  able  to  interpret  the  language  or
the  engravings  that  are  on  the  plates.
Therefore  I  said  unto  thee  canst  thou
translate  ?  And  I  say  unto  thee
again,  k  no  west  thou  of  any  one
that  can  translate?  for  I  am  desirous
that  these  records  should  he  tra:  -
lated  into  our  language;  for,  per*
haps,  they  will  give  us  a  knowledge
of  a  remnant  of  the  people,  who
have  been  destroyed,  from  whence
these  records  came ;  or  perhaps  they
will  give  us  a  knowledge  of  this  very
people  who  have  been  destroyed;  and
I  a  in  desirous  to  know  the  cause  of
their  destruction,"

"Now  Ammon  said  unto  him,  I
can  assuredly  tell  thee,  O  king,  of  a
man  that  can  translate  the  records;
for  he  has  wherewith  that  he  can  look,
and  translate  all  records  that  are  of
ancient  date;  and  it  is  a  gift  from
God.  And  the  things  are  called  in-
terpreters, and  no  man  can  look  in
them  except  he  be  commanded  lest
he  should  look  for  that  he  ought  not,
and  he  should  perish.  And  whoso-
ever is  commanded  to  look  in  them
is  called  seer.  And  behold,  the  king
of  the  people,  who  is  in  the  land  of
Zarahemla  is  the  man  who  is  com-
manded to  do  these  things,  and  who
has  this  high  gift  from  God."


*


MEETING  OF  ADAM  WITH  HIS  POSTERITY,  ETO*


53


I  have  read  this  to  give  you  an
idea  how  the  Israelites  that  inhabited
this  continent ?  before  the  days  of
Christ,  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the
first  colony  that  came  from  the  Tower
of  Babel  This  company,  that  was
lost  in  the  wilderness,  brought  these
plates,  with  breast  plates  and  swords,
the  hilts  thereof  having  perished,
and  the  blades  thereof  having  can*
kered  with  rust.

Now  Mosiah,  the  king,  that  dwelt
in  the  land  of  Zarahemla,  was  the
man  that  was  called  of  God  to  trans-
late. He  had  the  gift  and  power
given  to  him  to  translate  these  twen-
ty-four plates.  We  have  an  account,
on  another  page  of  the  Book  of
Mormon,  of  his  translating  these
plates ;  and  that  it  gave  an  account
of  the  people  from  the  days  of  Adam
down  to  the  flood, — to  the  days  of
the  Tower  of  Babel,  and  down  to  the
days  they  were  destroyed.

Now  will  this  record  ever  be
brought  to  light  to  help  fill  the  earth
with  the  knowledge  of  God  ?  Let
me  refer  you  to  what  is  recorded  in
the  Book  of  Ether,  pige  516  : —

u  And  now  I,  Moroni,  proceed  to
give  an  account  of  those  ancient  in-
habitants who  were  destroyed  by  the
hand  of  the  Lord  upon  the  face  of
this  north  country*  And  I  take
mine  account  from  the  twenty  and
four  plates  which  were  found  by  the
people  of  L  mhi,  which  is  called  the
Book  of  Ether.  And  as  I  suppose
that  the  first  part  of  this  record,
which  speaks  concerning  the  creation
of  the  world,  and  also  of  Adam,  and
an  account  from  that  time  even  to  the
great  Tower,  and  whatsoever  things
transpired  among  the  children  of
men  until  that  time,  is  had  among
the  Jews,  therefore  I  do  not  write
those  things  which  transpired  from
the  days  of  Adam  until  that  time; 99
(Now  notice  the  next  sent  nee ;  )
**  but  they  are  had  upon  the  plates  ;


and  whoso  findeth  them,  the  same
will  have  power  that -he  may  get  the
full  account,"

They  are  not  yet  found.  We  have
the  Book  of  Ether,  that  is  not  one-
hundredth  part  of  the  contents  of
those  twenty-four  plates.  But  a  very
short  account.  Whoso  findeth  these
twenty-four  plates  will  have  power  to
get  the  full  account;  for  they  give  a
history  from  the  days  of  Adam
through  the  various  generations  to
the  days  of  the  flood,  from  the  days
of  the  flood  down  to  the  days  of
Peleg,  and  from  the  days  of  Peleg
to  the  Tower,  which  was  very  nearly
cotemporary  with  Peleg.  And  from
that  time  for  some  sixteen  or  eighteen
centuries  after  they  landed  on  this
continent.  The  prophecies  of  their
Prophets  in  different  generations,
who  published  glad  tidings  of  joy
upon  the  fact?  of  all  the  northern
portion  of  this  continent-  Their
records  and  doings  are  all  to  come
to  light,  and  these  will  help  to  fulfill
the  words  of  onr  text  that  the  know-
ledge of  God  will  eover  the  earth
as  the  waters  cover  the  great  deep.

But  we  will  pass  along  and  come
to  the  second  colony,  that  the  Lord
1  brought  out  of  Jerusalem,  six  hun-
dred years  before  Christ.  Did  they
bring  any  records  with  them  ?  Had
1  they  the  art  of  writing  V  Yes.  When
they  lived  among  the  Jews  the  art  of
writing  was  extensively  known  among
the  Jews.  It  was  their  art  to  write
in  the  Egyptian  language,  as  Nephi
testifies  on  the  first  page  of  the  Book
of  Mormon.  u  Therefore  1  make  a
record  of  my  proceedings  in  my  days;
yea,  I  make  a  record  in  the  language
of  my  lather,  which  consists  of  the
learning  of  the  Jews  and  the  lan-
guage of  the  Egyptians."  A  Ian-
guage  which  their  forefathers  learned,
while  they  dwelt  in  Egypt,  and  which
they  were  familiar  with,  but  probably
1  lost  it  in  some  measure,  but  still  re-


54  JOURNAL  OF

tained  a  portion  of  it,  and  wrote
their  records  in  the. same.

Now  if  you  will  appeal  to  Biblical
history  you  will  find  that  the  Israel
ites  did  write  their  records,  in  ancient
times,  upon  metallic  plates,  and  that
these  plates  were  connected  together,
with  rings,  passing  through  the
leaves*  Through  the  whole  a  stick
was  placed  for  currying  the  record.
This  description  we  have  given  by
those  who  have  deeply  studied  con-
cerning the  Scriptures  and  the  ancient
doings  of  the  Israelites.  When  Lehi
left  Jerusalem,  there  was  a  certain
man  that  lived  in  Jerusalem,  that
had  kept  records  upon  brass  plates.
And  these  records,  we  are  informed
had  been  handed  down  from  the  early
ages  of  the  Israelites,  until  Lehi  left
Jerusalem.  They  contained  a  copy
of  the  genealogy  ot  the  tribe  of
Joseph  in  the  land  of  Palestine.
Laban  being  a  descendent  of  Joseph,
the  records  had  fallen  into  his  hands,
Lehi  was  commanded  to  send  his  sons
to  obtain  these  records;  for  he  had
pitched  his  tent  on  the  eastern  bor-
ders of  the  Red  Sea.  The  history
of  his  obtaining  them  yon  will  find
recorded  in  the  Book  of  Mormon,
On  the  10th  page  it  reads — u  And  it
came  to  pass,  that  they  di  I  rejoice
exceedingly,  md  did  offer  sacrifice
and  burnt  offerings  unto  the  Lord  ;
and  they  gave  thanks  unto  the  God
of  Israel.  And  after  they  had  given
thanks  unto  the  God  of  Israel  ray
father  Lehi  took  the  records  which
were  engraven  upon  the  plates  of
brass,  and  he  did  search  them  from
the  beginning.  And  he  beheld  that
they  did  contain  the  five  books  of
Moses,  which  gave  an  account  of  the
creation  of  the  world,  and  also  of
Adam  and  Eve,  who  were  our  first
parents ;  and  also  a  record  of  the
Jews  from  the  beginning,  even
down  to  the  commencement  of  the
reign  of  Zedekiah,  king  of  Judah ;


DISCOURSE.

and  also  the  prophecies  of  the  holy
Prophets,  from  the  beginning,  even
down  to  the  commencement  of  the
reign  of  Zedekiah,  and  also  many
prophecies  which  have  been  spoken
by  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah."

"  And  it  came  to  pass  that  my
father  Lehi  also  found  upon  the  plates
of  brass,  a  genealogy  of  his  fathers;
wherefore  he  knew  that  he  was  a  de-
scendant of  Joseph  ;  yea,  even  that
Joseph  who  was  the  Son  of  Jacob,
who  was  sold  into  Egypt,  and  who
was  preserved  by  the  hand  of  the
Lord,  that  he  might  preserve  his
father  Jacob  and  all  his  household
from  perishing  with  famine.  And
they  were  also  led  out  of  captivity
and  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  by
that  same  God  who  had  preserved
them.  And  thus  my  father  Lehi  did
discover  the  genealogy  of  his  fathers.
And  Laban  also  was  a  descendant  of
Joseph,  wherefore  he  and  his  fathers
had  kept  the  records**

"And  now  when  my  father  saw  all
these  things,  he  was  filled  with  the
spirit,  and  began  to  prophecy  con-
cerning his  seed;  that  The-e  plates
of  brass  should  go  fonh  unto  all
j  nations,  kindreds,  tongues  and  peo-
ple who  were  of  his  seed.  Where-
fore he  said  that  these  plates  of  brass
should  never  perish,  neither  should
they  be  dimmed  any  more  by  time*
And  he  propheeied  man}'  things  con-
cerning his  seed."

I  have  read  this  in  order  to  ome
to  another  thing  that  has  a  bearing
upon  our  text.  These  plates  of  brass,
contained  the  prophecies  of  all  the
holy  Prophets  from  the  beginning —
from  the  days  of  Adam  ;  hence  they
must  have  contained  the  prophecies
of  Enoch,  Adam,  Noah,  Abraham,
Isaac,  Jacob,  and  Joseph  in  Egypt*
The  prophecies  of  Isaiah  and  many
others  of  the  holy  Prophets  were
contained  upon  these  plates  of  brass.

Notwithstanding  brass  is  a  metal li


MEETING  OF  ADAM  WITH  IUH  POSTERITY,  ETC.


55


substance  capable  of  being  dissolved
and  crumbling  back,  in  a  few  years
to  the  elements,  yet  there  was  a
miracle  wrought  upon  these  plates  ot
brass.  The  Prophet  said  that  these
plates  of  brass  should  not  be  dimmed
by  time,  that  God  would  preserve
them  to  the  latest  generations*  What
for  ?  In  order  that  they  might
come  forth  and  their  contents  be
translated  hv  the  Urim  and  Thum-
mim,  that  these  contents  might  be
declared  to  all  nations,  and  kindreds,
and  tongues,  and  people,  who  were
the  descendant*  of  Lehi  upon  the
face  of  all  this  continent,  from  the
frozen  regions  of  the  north  to  the
very  utmost  extremities  of  South
America.  That  all  these  nations
should  come  to  a  knowledge  of  the
things  contained  ou,  those  plates  of

brass.  4^

Now  the  Lord  did  many  things
of  this  kind  in  ancient  days.  If
there  should  be  any  strangers  present
let  me  show  you  how  the  Lord  can
do  many  wonderful  things.  Let  me
refer  you  to  the  pot  of  manna  the
substance  of  which  would  not  keep
over  twenty- four  hours,  except  on
Sunday,  and  then  it  was  preserved
from  becoming  nauseous.  But  on  a
certain  occasion  the  children  of  Israel
were  to  collect  a  pot  of  this  manna,
and  it  was  placed  in  the  Tabernacle
of  the  congregation,  and  instead  of
becoming  nauseous,  it  remained  just
as  fresh  in  future  generations,  as  on
the  morning  it  was  gleaned  up.

Certain  rods  were  gathered  up  to
represent  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,
and  Aaron's  rod  budded  and  blos-
somed in  one  night;  and  that  was
handed  duwu  from  generation  to
generation.  And  hence  we  see  tnat
God  did  work  miracles  for  his  people
on  the  eastern  continent.  Is  it  any
more  marvelous  that  he  should  pre-
serve the  brass  plates  from  being
dimmed  by  time? No. They  exist,


and  in  the  own  due  time  of  the  Lord,
he  will  inspire  a  mighty  seer,  and
give  him  the  Urtm  and  Thummirn,
and  enable  him  to  bring  forth  these
sacred  scriptures.

Now,  to  show  you  the  value  of
the  scripture  of  the  brass  plates,  over
the  Jewish  records,  translated  by
King  James,  let  mo  refer  you  to  the
Book  of  Mormon,  On  the  2-ith
page,  speaking  of  the  coming  forth
of  these  records,  the  angel  said  to
Nephi,  "  The  book  that  thou  behold-
est  is  a  record  of  the  Jews,  which
contains  the  covenants  of  the  Lord,
which  he  hath  made  unto  the  house
of  Israel ;  and  it  also  containeth
many  of  the  prophecies  of  the  holy
Prophets;  and  it  is  a  record  like  unto
the  engravings  which  are  upon  the
plates  of  brass,  save  there  are  not  so
many.'*  That  is,  there  arc  not  so
many  prophecies  and  revelations  con-
tained in  the  Jewish  Bible  of  our
day  as  there  were  upon  the  plates  of
brass.  Nevertheless  they  contained
the  covenants  of  the  Lord,  which  he
has  made  with  the  House  of  Israel ;
therefore  they  are  of  great  worth
unto  the  children  of  ineu.

If  you  will  turn  to  the  Book  of
Jacob  in  the  Book  of  Mormon,  page
122,  you  will  find  a  lengthy  prophecy,
or  parable  of  the  olive  tree,  quoted
from  the  brass  plates,  by  which  the
house  of  Israel  is  represented — a
parable  of  their  being  planted  in  the
Lord's  vineyard ;  a  parable  of  the
great  work  of  th-*  Lord  in  the  last
days,  when  his  servants  should  be
called  to  labor  and  gather  these
young  branches  and  graft  them  into
their  own  olive  tree.  Tins  parable
was  revealed  to ,  the  Prophet  Zenos,
and  gives  great  instruction.  We
could  also  refer  you  to  some  four  or
tive  other  places  where  Zenos  and
Zenock  propheeied  concerning  the
restoration  of  all  the  house  of  Israel
!  in  the  latter  days;  and  concerning


66


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  descendants  of  Joseph.  And
Lehi,  being  of  the  seed  of  Joseph,
was  interested  in  relation  to  his  fu-
ture generations,  and  therefore  un-
derstood the  whole  history  of  these
remnants  of  Joseph,  and  prophecied
concerning  them  ;  a  few  quotations
being  given  in  the  Book  of  Mormon.
They  understood  concerning  the
coming  ot  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the
flesh,  his  crucifixion  and  resurrection
from  the  dead  ;  and  the  signs  shown
forth  to  the  remnants  of  Israel  scat-
tered to  the  four  corners  of  the  earth
and  the  islands  of  the  sea;  and  the
great  destruction  which  should  c  jme
npon  the  people  because  of  their
wickedness.

I  will  refer  yon  to  the  prophecies
of  Joseph  in  Egypt,  In  order  to
show  you  what  is  said  concerning
hi  in,  as  a  Prophet  I  will  refer  you  to
page  Gl\  Hock  of  Mormon.  "And
now,  I,  Nephi,  speak  concerning  the
prophecies  of  which  my  father  hath
spoken,  concerning  Joseph,  who  was
carried  into  Egypt.  For  behold  he
truly  prophecied  concerning  all  his
Seed,  and  the  prophecies  which  he
wrote,  there  are  not  man}  greater.
And  he  prophecied  concerning  us,
and  our  future  generations ;  and  they
are  written  upon  the  plates  of
brass."

Search  all  the  records  you  can  find,
and  you  will  find  that  Joseph  has  pro-
phecied concerning  as  great  things
as  any  other  prophet  that  ever  lived.
Now  tiiese  plates  of  brats  were
handed  down.  We  have  an  account
of  them  by  Alma,  the  Prophet  And
concerning  the  Urim  and  Thummim,
they  were  also  handed  down.

But  we  will  now  come  down  to  the
days  of  Jesus,  Prom  the  time  that
Lehi  left  Jerusalem  to  the  days  of
Jesus,  there  were  a  great  many  re-
cords  kept  by  the  remnant  of  Joseph,
npon  this  land.  The  book  of  Mor-
mon does  not  contain  one  hundredth


part  of  the  records  of  these  prophets.
Now  did  they  keep  all  of  them  on
plates,  or  did  they  multiply  them  by
thousands  of  copies  on  this  land  ?
Let  me  refer  you  to  page  388,  of  the
Book  of  Mormon.  "  And  now  he-
boid all  those  engravings  which  were
in  the  possession  of  Helaman,  were
written  and  sent  forth  among  the
children  of  men  throughout  all  the
land,  save  it  were  those  parts  which
had  been  commanded  by  Alma  should
not  go  forth.  Nevertheless  these
things  were  to  be  kept  sacred,  and
handed  down  from  one  generation  to
another.11  What  period  of  time  was
this  ?  Only  fifty- two  years  before
the  birth  of  Christ.  Fifty-four  years
before  Christ  as  we  find  on  page  387,
(Book  of  Mormon),  there  was  a  large
company  of  men,  5,400  with  their
wives  and  children,  went  out  of  the
land  of  Zarahemla,  to  the  land
northward,  and  in  a  few  years  after-*
wards,  as  you  will  find  on  pages  393
and  3D  4,  they  went  forth  by  thou-
sands, and  also  sent  forth  colonies
by  sea,  and  timber  to  build  cities;
and  they  built  houses  of  cement;  and
many  cities  of  timber.  And  the
people  became  very  numerous.  Now
to  confine  the  sacred  records  in  one
place,  and  to  keep  the  people  in
ignorance  in  regard  to  their  contents,
would  not  be  reason jble.  Hence  wo
are  informed  that  they  were  written
and  sent  forth  throughout  all  the
land,  and  tin's  will  account  for  the
extracts  from  the  Scriptures  written
in  ancient  Hebrew,  discovered  in  the
mounds  that  have  been  opened  in
Ohio,  among  which  were  the  ten
commandments.  The  people  of  this
land  were  well  acquainted  with  the
Scriptures.

Go  to  the  City  of  A  mo  ni  hah  in
the  northern  part  of  South  America.
They  had  become  wicked,  yer  they
had  the  Holy  Scriptures;  and  they
brought  them  forth  and  burned  them


MEETING  OF  ADAM  WITH  HIS  POSTERITY,  ETC,


57


with  fire,  and  all  that  believed  in  I
them  were  burned  in  the  fire,  (See
Book  of  Mormon,  page  240.)  Show-
ing that  the  people  had  many  copies
of  the  Scriptures,  And,  again  we
find  that  the  Nepbite  missionaries
who  went  among  the  Lamanites,  car-
ried with  them  copies  of  the  Scrip-
tures;  and  that  by  tue  means  of
these  copies  they  convinced  the  La-
manites of  the  incorrectness  of  the
traditions  of  their  fathers*

When  Jesus  came  to  this  continent
he  taught  the  people  several  days.
And  these  things  were  written  npon
the  plates  of  Nephi. But  Mormon
made  an  abridgement  of  these  writ-
ings,  and  he;  states,  on  page  48-4:
ff  And  now  there  cannot  be  written
in  this  book  even  a  hundredth  part
of  the  things  which  Jesus  did  truly
teach  unto  the  people  ;  but  behold  |
the  plates  of  Nephi,  do  contain  the
more  part  of  the  things  which  he
taught  the  people;  and  these  things
have  t  written,  which  are  a  lesser
part  of  the  tilings  which  Vie  taught
the  people,  and  1  have  written  them
to  the  intent  that  they  may  be  brought
again  unto  this  people,  from the  |
Gentiles, according to the  words
which Jesus hath spoken.  And
when  they  shall  have  received  this,
which  is  expedient  that  they  should
have  first,  to  try  their  fai  th,  and  if  it  j
so  be  that  they  shall  believe  these
things,  then  shall  the  greater  things
be  made  manifest  unto  them.  And
if  it  so  be  that  they  will  not  believe  |
these  things,  then  shall  the  greater
things  be  withheld  from  them,  unto
their  condemnation. Behold  I  were
about  tu  write  them  all  which  wire
engraven  upon  the  plates  of  Nephi,
but  the  Lord  forbid  it,  saying,  1  will
try  the  faith  of  my  people;  therefore
I,  Mormon,  do  write  the  things  which
have  been  commanded  me  of  the  |
Lord. And  now  I,  Mormon,  make
an  end  of  my  sayings,  and  proceed


to  write  the  things  that  have  been
commanded  me;  therefore  I  would
that  ye  should  behold  that  the  Lord
did  truly  teach  the  people,  for  the
space  of  three  days;  and  after  that,
he  did  show  himself  unto  them  oft,
and  did  break  bread  oft,  and  bless  it,
and  give  it  unto  them."

Thus  we  perceive  that  we  have  not
the  one-humlreth  part  of  the  teach-
ings of  the  greatest  of  all  prophets,
even  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus
Christ, — the  words  that  he  delivered
to  the  ancient  Nephites.  The  Ne-
phites  understood  all  these  marvelous
things.  No  doubt  there  were  many
instructions — a  vast  amount  of  in-
structions— in  regard  to  their  pro-
perty ;  for  they  had  all  things  com-
mon, both  in  North  and  South
America,  among  the  millions  of  this
land,  for  one  hundred  and  sixty-
seveii  years.  After  which,  in  the
year  two  hundred  and  one  after  the
birth  of  Christ,  they  began  to  with-
draw from  this  order,  and  began  to
be  divided  into  different  classes,  &c.
Now,  if  we  had  all  the  teachings  of
Jesus,  we  would  find  the  order  of
tilings  that  preserved  equality  upon
tliis  continent  during  all  that  period
of  time;  which  would  give  us  a  vast
amount  of  knowledge  concerning  the
things  which  we  must  enter  into.

But  will  these  things  be  brought
to  light  ?  Yes.  The  records,  now
slumbering  in  the  hill  Cumorali,
will  be  brought  forth  by  the  power
of  God,  to  fulfill  the  words  of  our
text,  that  "the  knowledge  of  God
shall  cover  the  earth,  as  the  waters
cover  the  great  deep/'

Again,  Jesus,  on  the  last  visit  to
the  Nephi tes,  called  up  his  twelve
disciples  and  pronounced  a  certain
blessing  upon  them,  and  especially
upon  three  of  them,  Mormon  says,
concerning  these  three  that  were  to
tarry,  that  great  works  shall  be
!  wrought  by  them  before  the  great


*


JOURNAL  OF  DISCQUR*


58

day  of  the  Lord  shall  come.  Then
he  says,  that  if  you  had  all  the  Scrip-
tures, you  would  know  that  these
things  would  be  fulfilled.  We  would
know  a  great  many  things  if  we  only
had  these  Scriptures  and  revelations.
They  are  to  be  revealed  to  fill  our
ear tli  with  the  knowledge  of  God,  as
the  waters  cover  the  great  deep.

Not  only  the  records  of  the  ancient
inhabitants  of  this  land  are  to  come
forth,  bat  the  records  of  those  who
slept  on  the  eastern  hemisphere.  The
records  of  John,  him  who  baptized
the  Lamb  of  God,  are  yet  to  be  re*
veah-tl  We  are  informed  in  the  book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  page
245,  that  the  fullness  of  the  record
of  John,  is  to  be  revealed  to  the  Lat-
ter-day  Saints,

But  shall  we  stop  with  these  re-
cords ?  No.  Let  me  repeat  to  you
the  words  of  the  Lord.  The  Lord
said  to  Nephi,  speaking  of  the  latter
day?,  that  the  Nephites  shall  have
the  words  of  the  Jews,  and  the  Jews
shall  have  the  words  of  the  Nephites;
and  the  lost  tribes  of  Israel  shall  have
the  words  of  the  Nephites  and  the
Jews;  and  I  will  gather  the  people
from  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth  ;
and  my  words  shall  be  gathered  in
one,  (See  Book  of  Mormon,  page
108),  the  records  of  the  Nephites
upon  this  laud.  And  the  numerous
people  th:i t  have  been  planted  on  the
islands  of  the  sea,  are  to  be  gath-
ered in  one;  for  they  were  righteous
in  some  or  their  earlier  generations;
and  t  hat  knowledge  is  yet  to  be
brought  forth;  and  when  these
islands  shall  deliver  up  their  people,
their  records  shall  be  gathered  iu

one*  ' '

And  again,  concerning  what  the
people  say,  "  we  have  got  a  Bible,
and  we  need  no  more  Bible."  "  Know
ye  nut  that  I  am  the  .same  God,  yes-
terday and  forever;  and  it  shall  come
to  pass,  that  I  shall  speak  to  the


Jews,  and  they  shall  write  it,  I  shall
speak  to  the  lost  tribes  of  Israel,  and
they  shall  write  it.  I  will  speak  to
all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  they
shall  write  it.  And  by  my  words
that  are  spoken,  shall  the  children
of  men  be  judged  according  to  their
deeds.  All  these  things  shall  come
forth  to  till  the  earth  with  the  know-
ledge of  God*

We  go  to  the  book  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  where  we  find  that  the
Lord  is  to  reveal  many  of  his  great
and  marvelous  purposes,  that  have
been  kept  hid  from  the  foundation  of
the  world  ;  and  things  that  have  not
been  revealed  to  any  former  genera-
tion. It  is  not  enough  that  these
different  records  referred  to  should  be
revealed,  and  that  the  islands  of  the
sea  should  deliver  up  their  knowledge,
but  it  is  necessary  that  the  heavens
should  give  the  knowledge  which  was
before  our  earth  was  created.  And
you  are  students  in  this  great  univer-
sity, which  God  has  established,  to
study  concerning  God,  and  get  a
knowledge  of  things  in  the  heavens
and  things  that  are  past  and  present,
and  things  that  are  to  come — a
knowledge  that  comes  through  the
power  and  inspiiaiion  of  the  Holy
Ghost.

But  this  is  not  all;  God  has  said
that  he  "  will  pour  out  his  Spirit
upon  all  flesh;  and  your  sons  and
your  daughters  shall  prophecy,  and
your  young  men  shall  see  visions,
and  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams;
and  on  my  servants  and  on  my  hand-
maidens 1  will  pour  out  in  those  days
of  my  Spirit;  and  they  shall  pro-
phecy." Young  men  and  old  men
shall  receive  knowledge  from  the
heavens.  Again,  it  is  written  in
Isaiah  :  "  All  thy  children  shall  be
taught  of  the  Lord,"  It  will  not  be
necessary  for  one  man  to  say  to  his
neighbor,  know  ye  the  Lord,  for  all
shall  know  him. Then  it  will  not  be


IMPROVED  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  THE  SAINTS  IN  UTAH,  ETC*


necessary  for  us  to  preach  so  much,
because  the  Lord  our  God  will  teach
them  from  on  high*  Old  and  young,
male  and  female,  will  receive  know-
ledge; and  our  little  children  will


utter  forth  their  voices,  and  speak
forth  that  which  is  not  now  lawful
to  utter,  but  it  will  be  uttered  to  the
human  family  by  the  mouths  of
babes  and  sucklings.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  FRANKLIN  D.  RICHARDS,


Delivered  at  Logan,  Cache  County,  Saturday  Morning,  June  28,  1873,


(Reported  by  David  Evans.)


IMPROVED  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  THE  SAINTS  IN  UTAH — POTENCY  OF  THE

LAW  OF  TITIIIXU.


We  used  lo  sing  and  hear  a  song
entitled:  "There  is  a  good  time
coming,  wait  a  little  longer."  It
appears  to  me  that  we  are  now  en-
joying one  of  the  good  times  in  these
meetings.  I  realize  that  it  is  so,  for
one,  and  I  doubt  not  that  the  good
Saints  of  Cache  Valley  also  appreci-
ate the  same.  If  we  can  only  pre-
serve in  ourselves  that  freedom  of
spirit  which  will  enable  us  to  com-
prehend the  present,  as  it  really  is,
we  may  rejoice  indeed  in  knowing
that  the  good  time  has  overtaken  us.
It  is  net  with  us  now  as  it  has  been,
when  scantiness  and  even  hunger
have  been  in  our  habitations.  At
present,  bo  far  as  the  comforts  of  life
are  concerned,  the  people  are  enjoy-
ing a  competency  of  food  and  rai-
ment, house  and  home,  kindred  and
friends.  While  these  tilings  have
come  forward  to  ias,  the  means  of
advancement  in  every  sphere  of  use-
fulness are in reach. The  imple-


ments to  accomplish  more  labor  are
in  our  hands.  They  have  overtaken
us  and  are  overtaking  us,  and  will
continue  to  do  so,  by  means  of  which
the  amount  of  good  which  the  Saints
have  been  enabled  to  do  in  any  given
time  in  th^  past,  is  very  small  com-
pared with  the  measure  of  good  which
they  will  be  enabled  to  accomplish
in  the  future.  A  little  while  ago  it
was  not  oftener  than  once  in  six
months  that  we  heard  from  the
States.  It  is  only  a  little  while  since
it  took  us  three  and  four  months  to
travel  from  the  States  to  this  place,
now  it  is  only  a  matter  of  as  many
days.  Once  it  took  all  of  six  months
to  be;tr  from  the  old  countries,  say
London;  now  we  hear  that  "yester-
day, President  George  A,  Smith
attended  Conference  with  the  Saints
in  London/*

By  these  things  we  can  see  that
we  have  corne  upon  times  when,  if
we  are  up  to  the  scratch,  we  live


60


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


very  fast.  It  is  no  vain,  untrue  or  -
humorous  saying  that  we  are  living
in  a  fast,  age,  In  matters  of  intelli-
gence and  business  transactions  we
live  weeks  in  a  day,  if  we  wisely
diiect  our  time  and  energy,  when
compared  with  those  who  have  pre-
ceded us.

When  we  contemplate  this,  and  j
the  rapidity  with  which  Divine  Pro*
vidence  is  rolling  on  the  events  of
the  latter  dispensation,  crowding
upon  our  attention  the  great  labors
and  considerations  of  this  latter-day
work,  it  certainly  does  seem  neces-
sary that  we  preserve  iu  ourselves
that  life  and  activity  that  we  can
come  up  to  the  standard  of  his  readi-
ness to  direct  and  dispose  of  us,  that
we  may  be  able  to  receive  his  word
and  the  counsels  of  his  servants  and
execute  and  carry  them  out,  I  am  j
very  sure  that  the  good  people  of
til  is  county  do  not  think  they  are
likely  to  get  out  of  business  since
President  Young  told  them,  yester-
day, that  they  might  soon  see  a
Temple  close  by  here  on  the  bench.
The  good  work  seems  to  be  advancing
upon  the  hands  of  the  Saints,  mills,
railroads  and  telegraphs,  are  coming
to  our  relief  and  aid.

I  should  like  to  say  a  few  words
upon  the  subject  of  Tithing,  and  I
believe  I  will  just  touch  upon  it  It
is  a  subject  that  was  talked  about
yesterday  with  some  emphasis  and
importance,  and  one  that  lias  seemed
to  present  features  of  more  than
ordinary  interest  to  my  mind  for
some  time  back.  People  of  all  de-
nominations are  very  ready  to  say
that  the  *'  earth  is  the  Lord's  and
the  fullness  thereof, 51  and  1  do  not
suppose  we  could  find  a  Saint  in  all
Israel,  or  in  these  valleys  of  the
mountains  at  any  rate,  but  what  would
utter  that  sentiment  and  think  he
did  it  with  real  good  Christian  cor-
diality. But  when  we  come  to  con-


sider  the  matter  as  it  really  is,  we
find  that  our  feelings  and  actions
do  not  after  all  exactly  coincide  with
this  expression.  I  heard  a  man  say,
but  a  few  days  ago,  "  I  bought  such
a  piece  of  land — I  paid  for  it — and
it  is  mine."  I  wonder  if  that  man,
just  then,  thought  the  earth  was  the
Lord's  r  I  do  not  think  lie  thought
that  particular  patch  was.  It  is  one
thing  for  us  to  acknowledge  with  oar
lips  and  to  consider  in  our  hearts,
that  the  earth  is  tke  Lord's  and  the
fullness  thereof,  but  it  is  quite  ano-
ther thing  for  us  to  realize  it,  and  to
place  ourselves  in  a  true  and  proper
attitude  on  that  question,  dealing
with  the  Lord  our  God  in  relation  to
it  with  the  justice,  sincerity  and  pro-
priety that  we  would  with  each  oilier
here  on  the  earth.

If  a  man  has  obtained  possession
of  a  piece  of  land  and  put  up  a
house  thereon,  and  he  rents  that  to
another  person,  he  actually  does  ex-
pect that  thai  person  will  pay  htm
the  rent  due  for  the  use  of  it.  It  is
one  of  the  plainest  business  trans-
actions of  life;  and  the  man  who
occupies  that  house  and  land  can
hardly  feel  to  say, — "  The  earth  is
the  Lord's  and  the  fullness  thereof; "
instead  of  saving  that,  he  says
— "This  house  and  piece  of  land
belong  to  that  man,  and  I  have  to
pay  him  rent  for  it"  These  things
make  ns  realize  our  bearing  and  posi-
tion one  with  the  other  in  regard  to
business  transactions.

Bat  who  is  it  that  has  placed  the
earth  and  its  surrounding  elements
subject  to  the  powers,  governments
and  inhabitants  of  the  earth  ?  It  is
he  who  created  tbem,  aud  he  it  is
who  says  that  the  earth  and  its  full-
ness are  his;  and  when  we  look  at
this  matter  and  consider  it  carefully
there  is  something  about  the  sul  ject
of  Tithing  that  commends  itself
strongly  to  our  attention ;  and  if  we


IMPROVED  C


;taxces  of  THE  SAINTS  IX  UTAH,  etc.


61


will  be  honest  with  ourselves  and
honest  with  our  God  we  must  look  at
it  in  a  very  differnt  light  from  what
many  do.

When  the  Bishop  or  his  clerk  £069
round  to  settle  up  Tithing,  he  finds  a
class  of  persons  who  act  as  though
they  felt  it  their  bounctaa  duty  to  get
the  figure  of  their  Tithing  down  to
the  lowest  possible  scratch;  an  i
when  they  have  done  this  they  feel
thankful  that  they  have  got  off  with
paying  so  little,  without  any  regard
whatever  to  the  figure  they  should
have  paid.  Well,  it  is  not  given  to
the  Bishops  exactly  to  tei)  a  man
— "You  must  pay  so  much/'  There
is  the  greatest  possible  liberality
manifested,  so  as  to  give  every  man
an  opportunity  to  act  upon  his  own
agency  in  spying  what  he  has  made
and  what  he  has  done  with  the  means
which  have  been  placed  in  his  hands,
and  what  he  ought  to  pay  as  interest
or  Tithing,  so  that  when  the  L  »rd
brings  these  matters  to  adjudication,
we  shall  be  judged  out  of  our  own
mouths.

The  matter  of  Tithing  is  one
that  the  churches  of  the  world  have
taken  up  as  well  as  the  Saints,  even
the  Church  ot  England  has  an  idea
that  its  members  should  pay  Tithing.
They  have  learned  this  from  the
Church  of  the  living  God.  The
institution  of  Tit  hi  ug  is  one  which
is  emphatically  binding  upon  us,
and  is  as  essential  to  our  salvation
and  exaltation  in  the  kingdom  of
God,  so  far  as  temporal  things  are
concerned,  as  the  ordinance  of  bap-
tism for  the  remission  of  sins,  and
the  laying  on  of  hands  for  the  gift
of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  iu  the  spiritual
part  of  the  Gospel  Take  it  into
account  and  consider  it  when  and
how  you  may,  and  you  will  iind  that
the  man  or  men,  who  consider  Tith-
ing of  no  moment,  and  who  think
they  have obtained  a  blessing  in


shirking  the  payment  thereof,  will
dry  up  and  taper  off  in  their  faith,
ami  before  they  know  ir  they  and
their  household  will  be  suffering  in
the  darkness  of  the  world,  in  sin  and
transgression*

The  law  of  Tithing  is  an  obliga-
tion laid  upon  ail  the  people  of  God.
It  has  been  so  in  every  age,  and  we
have  no  account  of  the  prosperity
and  progress  of  God's  people  with-
out Tithing  being  a  standing  law
in  their  midst,  which  they  contin-
ually observed.  That  is  not  all,  my
brethren.  The  Church  of  the  Lord
had  this  among  them  before  ever
the  Gentiles  knew  what  it  was  to
assess  and  collect  t:ix?s,  and  it  is
from  this  that  they  learned  to  do  so.

if

The  law  of  Tithing  was  in  the
household  of  faith,  the  Church  of
God  on  the  earth,  before  the  old
Babylonish  nations  were  founded,
and  they  as  well  as  the  sectarians
have  learned  pretty  much  all  they
know  from  the  people  of  God  at
one  time  or  another.  Ti tiling  is  an
institution  which  has  prevailed  from
the  beginning,  and  it  looks  to  me
as  though  it  was  the  consideration
required  by  the  Lord — the  Creator
of  the  earth,  from  men  who  dwell
upon  it,  as  a  material  something  by
which  they  may  acknowledge  to  him,
in  deed  and  in  truth,  that  the  earth
is  the  Lord's  and  the  fullness  thereof,
and  by  means  of  which  they  can
restore  to  him,  in  the  order  of  his
appointment  that  which  is  his.

The  brethren  sometimes  say — "  I
pay  my  Tithing,  This  is  mine,  I
have  given  so  much,"  Yours,  is
it  ?  How  is  it  yours  ?  Was  it  not
read  here  to  us  yesterday — "  Will  a
man  rob  God  ?  Yet  ye  have  robbed
me.  But  ye  say,  Wherein  have  we
robbed  thee  ?  In  tithes  and  offer-
ings." If  we  have  witthheld  and
kept  back  any  portion  of  our
,  Tithing,  then  have  we  robbed  God,


■


02


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


for  that  full  tenth  is  not  ours  in  any
sense  of  the  word,  it  is  the  Lord's,
and  if  vve  keep  it  from  him  we  rob
him  of  that  which  is  his*  We
should  keep  correctly  in  our  minds
and  understandings  that  which  is
ours  and  that  which  is  the  Lord's.
When  the  suns  of  God  shouted,  and
the  morning  stars  sang  together  for
joy  at  having  the  earth  prepared  to
come  and  dwell  upon,  to  pass  through
this  state  of  existence,  did  we  not
then  realize  that  it  was  being  pre-
pared for  us,  but  that  it  was  his,
ant!  that  we  were  coming  to  dwell
upon  it  as  his  ?  Shall  we  forget  this
obligation  and  position  ?  Let  us  be
careful  not  to  do  so.

President  Smith  alluded  to  the
potency  of  this  law  of  Tithing,  and
the  terrible  consequences  of  diso-
beying it  as  illustrated  in  the  pre-
sent condition  of  scattered  Israel,
who  prospered  as  a  nation  when
they  brought  their  tithes  and  offer-
ings into  the  storehouse  of  the
Lord.  And  how  terribly  and  em-
phatically did  President  Young
portray  the  readiness  with  which,
at  his  will  and  pleasure,  the  Lord
could  turn  these  streams,  for  the
watering  of  our  beautiful  valleys,
into  the  earth,  and  cause  these  de-
lightful hills  and  plains  to  become
as  barren  as  Judea.  I  think  we
ought  to  look  at  this  subject  more
carefully,  and  if  possible  in  its  true
light.  The  more  I  see  and  think  of
it  the  more  there  is  about  it  new  to
me,  and  the  more  there  is  to  make
me  feel  that  therein  lies  an  obligation
between  us  and  our  God  that  we
should  consider  and  be  careful  to
discharge*

If  there  is  any  man  amongst  you
who  wants  to  take  a  wife,  does  be
not  have  to  obtain  a  certificate  from
his  Bishop  that  he  pays  his  Tithing  ?
If  any  of  you  want  to  be  baptized
in  the  font  in  the house  of  the


Lord  for  the  generations  of  yomr
dead,  do  you  not  need  a  certificate
from  your  Bishop  that  you  pay  your
Tithing  ?  And  if  we  'want  any
of  the  blessings  necessary,  for  our
exaltation  we  shall  find  it  so,  and
more  so  as  we  advance  in  the  future,
We  fathers  in  Israel,  we  heads  of
families,  looking  towards  the  patri-
archal office  and  desiring  to  stand
fit  the  head  of  oar  generations  for-
j  ever,  ought  to  think,  not  only  about
ourselves,  but  about  those  who  will
c  irae  after  us.  If  our  record  shews
that  we  have  been  faithful  in  all
things,  and  have  never  forgotten  to
pay  our  Tithing,  our  posterity  can
come  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  and
ask,  as  a  right,  for  the  blessings
they  need  for  themselves  or  their
dead.  #

I  think  if  we  will  all  consider
this  matter  in  the  light  in  which
the  Scriptures,  the  revelations  of
divine  truth  hold  it,  and  the  light
in  which  modern  revelation  and
the  teachings  of  the  Priesthood
hold  itf  we  shall  discover  in  the  law
of  Tithing  an  immense  and  eternal
weight  of  blessing  and  glory,  and
instead  of  wishing  to  avoid,  shirk
and  narrow  it  down  to  the  least
admissible  figure,  we  shall  desire  to
add  to  and  enlarge  it,  that  it  may
be  for  us  and  our  children  a  source
of  honor,  exaltation  and  blessing
forever.

Brethren  and  sisters  I  rejoice
with  you,  more  and  more,  all  the
day  long  in  the  principles  of  the
Gospel.  I  desire  to  be  more  and
more  useful  in  helping  to  promul-
gate them  in  the  earth,  I  have
pleasure  in  the  labors  of  the  Church.
I  rejoice  exceedingly  in  the  advance-
ment of  the  cause  of  truth,  and
realize  that  we  have  to  be  wide
awake  in  order  to  keep  track  of,
and  along  with,  the  purposes,  plans,
devices  and  providences  of  God,


EXTENSION  OF  THE  UTAH  NORTHERN  RAILROAD,  ETC


63


that  we  may  work  with  him,  that
lie  may  work  with  and  through  u&
in  bringing  to  pass  his  purposes,
and  the  great  and  glorious  events
connected  with  his  work  in  the  last
days.

That  we  may  so  live  as  to  be  able
and  pliant  instruments  in  his  hands,


ready  to  do  every  good  word  and
work,  in  bringing  again  Zion,  estab-
lishing righteousness  and  truth  in
the  earth,  and  hastening  the  day  for
the  return  thereto  of  the  presence
and  glory  of  God,  is  my  desire  in  the
name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  in  the  Bowery,  Logan  City,  Saturday  Afteknoon,

June  28,  1873.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


EXTENSION  OF  THE  UTAH  NORTHERN  RAILROAD — THE  BUILDING  OF
THE  MEETING  HOUSE  AND  OTHER  PUBLIC  IMPROVEMENTS  URGED  ON
THE  PEOPLE— FAITH  MADE  MANIFEST  BY  WORKS— UNITY  IN  LABOR
AND  GO  OPERATION  IN  ALL  THINGS  PERTAINING  TO  THE  KINGDOM —
LABOR  BUILDS  UP  THE  KINGDOM — NUMBER  OF  THOSE  IN  THE  CON-
GREGATION ACQUAINTED  WITH  THE  PROPHET  JOSEPH — EARLY  EXPE-
RIENCE IN  THE  CHURCH— REWARDS  WILL  FOLLOW  OBEDIENCE —
OBJECT  OF  THE  LAW  OF  TITHING — SERVES  THE  LORD  BECAUSE  OF
THE  PURITY  OF  REVEALED  TRUTH,


I  have  a  little  temporal  matter
which  I  wish  to  lay  before  the  bre-
thren— something  pertaining  to  our
work  here  for  the  benefit  of  the  in-
habitants of  this  valley  and  other
places*  It  is  concerning  this  rail-
road. I  wish  to  speak  of  this  to-day.
We  should  pass  it  over,  probably,  if
it  were  left  till  to-morrow.  I  wish
the  brethren  to  take  into  considera-
tion the  benefits  that  are  now  and
which  will  be  derived  by  the  build-
ing of  this  railroad. Another  item  I


wish  to  lay  before  the  brethren  is
the  putting  a  road  through  what  is
called  Bear  River  Kanyon,  this  side
of  Cottonwood,  where  the  railroad
will  go.  If  this  could  be  crowded
through,  I  am  told  it  would  be  a
saving  of  about  fifteen  miles  of  travel
and  climbing  some  very  severe  points
of  the  mountains.  If  the  brethren
will  take  hold,  under  the  direction  of
some  one  who  may  be  appointed  or
who  is  already  appointed,  of  the  gra-
ding of  the  road,  it  would  be  qnite


an  accommodation  to  the  travel  from
here to Soda Springs. Get-  the
railroad  graded  as  for  and  as  fast  as
possible  to  carry  us  on* We  wonld
like  very  much  to  bold  some  meet-
ings north,  and  we  would  rather  get
into  a  car  and  go  where  we  wish  than
to  be  traveling  along  through  (he
dust  day  after  day,  consequently  we
wish  to  hurry  up  this matter  as
speedily  as  possible* The  arrange-
ments will  be  entered  intobytboae.
who  have  the  railroad  in  charge,  but
I  thought  I  would  ask  the  brethren,
inasmuch  as they  wish to  travel
north, occasionally, to  do  them-
selves find  the  rest  of  us  the  kind-
ness to  get  a  ride  upon  a  pretty
good  track. We  wish  to  go  to  Bear
Lake  Valley,  over  into  Rich  County,
but  bow  shall  we  go  ? I  understand
that  this  road  op  the  Logan  is  im-
passable, and  that  the  dugway  road
is  very  bad* We  have  some  settle-
ments already  on  the  Soda  Springs  i
route,  and  shall  probably  have  more,
and  if  we  could  have  the  accommo-
dation of  traveling  on  a  pretty  fair  |
level  road  we  should  be  very  thank-
ful. I  shall  leave  this  and  other
matters  with  you,  but  I  wonld  urge
the  necessity  of  building  the  rail-
road as  far  north  as  the  iron  can  be
obtained, I understand there  is
enough  now  corning  to  go  from  here
to  Franklin,  and  perhaps  a  few  miles
beyond. When  this  is  completed,
the  traveling  and  freighting  to  the
north  will  probably  go  over  this  line,
and  the  business  of  the  people  here
will  be  increased  nnd  the  value  of!
the  property  wll  be  enhanced,  and
you  will  advance  in  proportion  to
the abundance of  your  improve-
ment, "  *v* 7  . '\  '

Another  item  which  I  wish  to
urge  upon  the  people  is  the  building
of  this  meeting  house.  We  have
a  bowery  here,  which  is  very  com*
fort  able  to  meet  in  this  warm  wea-


ther, hut  when  it  is  windy,  stormy,
cold  or  wet,  the  people  should  cer-
tain! v  have  n  house  to  meet  in,  in-
stead  of  being  ont  of  doors,  Thist
of  course,  will  require  labor. If  ws
were  to  ero  into  details  with  regard
to  labor  I  think  we  could  show  very
clearly  that  the  time  that  is  given
to  us  here  is  not  altogether  well
spent. We  might make a  great
many  improvements  to  benefit  our-
selves, and  be  none  the  poorer,  but
it  would increase our wealth.  I
think  this  is  apparent  to  every  re-
fleeting  mind. Every  improvement
that  we  make  not  only  adds  to  our
comfort  but  to  our  wealth. I  wish
the  brethren  to  consider  this.  Not
that  I  wish  to  take  anything  from
the  minds  of  the people of  the
good  things that  we  have  heard
since  we  have  been  together,  and
especially  from  brother  Taylor,  who
has  just  spoken, I  would  not  like
to  take  a  thought  or  reflection  from
the  minds  of  the  people  concerning
those  good  things  pertaining  to  the
kingdom of God, But  recollect
flint  brother  Taylor,  in  his  remarks,
brought  the  spiritual  and  the  tem-
poral together. They  always  have
been  mid  always  will  be  together,
and  by  our  labor  we  show  to  the
heavens  that  we are willing  and
obedient  servants and  handmaids.
This  gives  us  a  claim  to  the  bless-
ings which  our  Father  in  heaven
delights  to  bestow  upon  the  faithful.
Bv  our  works  onr  faith  is  made  mani-
fest,  and  by  them  shall  we  be  judged,
and  justified  or  condemned.  Then
let  our  works  be  such  as  will  justify
us  and  tend  to  the  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven  upon  the  earth.
If  we  do  this,  brethren  and  sisters,
we  shall  prosper  and  increase.

We  were  talking  yesterday  about
the  blessings  of  the  people*  It  ap-
pears to  me  that  they  have  little
idea  of  the  blessings  which  are  in


EXTENSION  OF  THE  UTAH  NORTHERN  RAILROAD,  ETC.


65


their  possession.  Still  I  am  sensible
that  a  great  many  realize  and  are
very  thankful  for  them,  and  they
wish  to  improve  their  time  to  the
best  ad  van t a ge.  Bat  take  113  as  a
people  and  how  strange  is  the  course
we  pursue  !  How  inconsistent,  in  con-
siderate  and  vain  are  the  acts  of  the
Elders  of  Israel.  Is  this  the  fact  ?
Yes,  co-operation  was  referred  to  by
brother  Taylor.  The  man  or  woman
whd  is  opposed  to  this  ts  opposed  to
God,  So  said  brother  Taylor-  I  say
that  they  who  are  opposed  to  co-ope-
ration are  opposed  to  heaven,  to  their
own  welfare,  to  the  welfare  of  their
neighbors,  to  truth  and  to  every-
thing that  is  good  The  least  thought
or  art  of  an  individual  who  is  or
can  be  called  a  Saint,  that  militates
against  a  oneness  of  feeling  and  ac-
tion amongst  the  Saints  is  opposed
to  everything  that  is  heavenly  and
good.  We  do  not  wish  to  co-operate
in  mercantile  affairs  only,  bat  we
wish  to  bring  the  minds  of  the  peo-
ple to  consider  the  benefit  of  uniting
and  laboring  together,  to  make  this
long  and  strong  pull  all  together,  of
which  brother  Taylor  spoke.  This
is  an  expression  that  Brother  Joseph
Smith  frequently  used  concerning
the  oneness  of  the  people.  If  the
Latter-day  Saints  were  to  take  a  course
to  alienate  their  fellowship  and  feel-
ings one  from  another,  each  one
saying,  "This  is  my  pile,  and  I  am
working  to  increase  it,"  we  should
then  be  in  the  position,  referred  to
by  brother  Franklin  D#  Richards,  this
morning,  of  the  man  who  said  that
all  the  world  belonged  to  the  Lord,
excepting  the  little  piece  of  land  he
had  bought  and  paid  for.  How  in-
considerate, inconsistent  and  unwise,
is  such  a  course  as  this !  If  we  are
not  one,  we  are  not  the  Lord's,  We
can  not  do  his  will,  nor  be  bis  disci-
ples unless  we  are  one,  We  must
have  the  same  faith  and  feelings  for

No.  5.


the  building  np  of  the  kingdom  of
God,  and  for  the  salvation  of  ouiv
selves  and  others,  jointly,  together,
or  we  shall  tail  in  our  attempts  to
accomplish  the  work  which  the  L  )rd
has  given  us  to  do.  We  should  con-
sider all  these  matters.  Now  take
hold  with  union  and  bring  the  rock,
lumber,  and  all  other  material  that  is
necessary,  and  1st  the  mechanics  go
to  work  and  put  up  this  meeting
house.  *' n "  * .  1

I  do  not  know  who  has  charge  of
the  building  of  this  store  here,  but  I
am  very  sorry  it  does  not  loom  up  a
little  faster.  I  would  like  to  see  this
afore  finished,  the  meeting  housa
built,  the  railroad  completed  through
here,  our  roads  built  through  the
mountains;  I  would  like  to  see  your
farms  fenced  up,  and  to  see  good
building*  in  this  and  other  towns.
Improvement  belongs  to  the  spirit
and  plan  of  the  heavens.  To  im-
prove in  our  minds,  to  increase  in
wisdom,  knowledge  and  iiiiderstad&i
ing,  to  gather  every  item  of  know-
ledge  that  we  can  in  mechanism  and
in  science  of  every  description,  re-
specting the  earth,  the  object  of  the
organization  of  the  earth,  the  hea-
vens, the  heavenly  bodies — all  this
is  of  Heaven,  it  is  from  God;  but
when  a  person  or  a  people  begin  to
dwindle,  to  lessen  and  to  take  the
downward  coarse,  they  are  going
from  heaven  and  heavenly  things.
You  have  seen  this  illustrated  in
those  who  leave  this  Church.  You
have  known  men  who,  while  in  the
Church,  were  active,  quick  and  fall
of  intelligence ;  but  after  they  have
left  the  Chorch,  they  have  become
contracted  in  their  understandings,
they  have  become  darkened  in  their
minds,  and  everything  has  become  a
mystery  to  them,  and  in  regard  to
the  things  of  God,  they  have  become
like  the  rest  of  the  world,  who  think,
hope  and  pray  that  such  and  such

Vol.  XVI.


6<;


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


things  may  be  so,  but  they  do  not
know  the  least  about  it  This  is
precisely  the  position  of  those  who
leave  this  Church  :  they  go  into  the
dark,  they  are  not  able  to  judge,  con-
ceive or  comprehend  things  as  they
are.  They  are  like  the  drunken  man
— he  thinks  that  everybody  is  the
worse  for  liquor  but  himself,  and  he
is  the  only  sober  man  in  the  neigh-
borhood. The  apostates  think  that
everbody  is  wrong  but  themselves.

Follow  the  spirit  of  improvement
and  labor. All  the  capital  there  is
upon  the  earth  is  the  bone  and  sinew
of  working  men  and  women.  Were
it  not  for  that,  the  gold  and  the  sil-
ver and  the  precious stones  would
remain  in  the  mountains,  upon  the
plains  and  in  the  valleys,  and  never
would  be  gathered  or  brought  into
use. The  timber  would  continue  to
grow,  but  none  of  it  would  be  brought
into  service,  and  the  earth  would
remain  as  it  is ;  but  it  is  the  activity
and  labor  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth  that  bring  forth  the  wealth.
Labor builds  our meeting  houses,
temples,  court  houses,  fiue  halls  for
music  and  fine  school  bouses;  it  is
labor  that  teaches  our  children,  and
makes  them acquainted with  the
various  branches  of  education,  that
makes  thera  proficient  in  their  own
language  and  in  other  languages,  and
in  every  branch  of  knowledge  under-
stood by  the  children  of  men  ;  and
all  this  enhances  the  wealth  and  the
glory  and  the  comfort  of  any  people
on  the  earth. But  take  the  other
course,  and they  become  like  our
savages — they  soon  forget  what  they
have  learned,  have  no  taste  for  ac-
quiring knowledge,  and  lose  all  their
ambition  and  desire  for  improve-
ment For  instance,  look  at  the  Jew-
ish nation* Here  are  the  tribe  of
Judah  in  our  midst. Do  you  ever
recollect  any  of  them  building  a
house  ? Think  of  it,  look  around


now,  and  try  if  you  can  find  any  of
the  sons  of  Judah  so  lost  to  them-
selves as  to  be  guilty  of  making  any
improvements, I  speak  ironically.
They  will  bring-  something  to  you
and  sell  it  to  you,  and  get  your  money
if  they  can,  for  they  are  every  one  of
them  merchants; but  can  you  find
one  of  them  that  tills  an  acre  of
ground  ? Search  the  world  over,
and  you  will  find  but  few  Jewish
agriculturists,  although  there  are  mil-
lions of  Jews  scattered  through  the
earth,  and  many  of  them  occupying
important  positions  in  the  learned
world  ; but  they  are  not  producers,
they  are  all  consumers. The  land  of
Judea  has  fallen  into  dispute,  and
it  has  become  a  desert,  just  through
the  apostacy  of  those  who  once  inha-
bited it,  who  had  the  oracles  of  God
among  them. This  is  the  fact.  Let
the  Latter-day  Saints  neglect  their
labor,  and  they  will  soon  find  that
they  are  declining  in  their  feelings,
tastes  and  judgment  for  improving
the  elements  of  the  earth  ;  hence  we
say,  improve,  be  industrious,  prudent,
faithful,  make  good  farms,  gardens
and  orchards,  good  public  and  private
buildings,  have  the  best  schools,  &a
The  world  give  us the  credit  of
being  the  most  industrious  people  on
the  face  of  the  earth ;  they  say  that
the  Latter-day  Saints  in  Utah  have
done  more  than any  other  people
ever  were  known  to  do  in  the  same
time. It  is  the  little  union  that  we
have  in  our  midst  that  has  given  tbia
impetus  to  our  prosperity. But  we
have  not  enough  union,  we  have  not
enough  of  the  spirit  of  improvement
I  amongst  us. Yoo  will  see  men  occa-
'  sionally  here  who,  so  far  as  the  spirit
of  improvement  goes,  are  like  some
old  "Mormons"  who  lived  in  the
days  of  Joseph, That  is,  their  bodies
breathe,  and  they  move  and  have  a
being;  but  they  died  when  Joseph
died. There  has  been  no  spirit  of


i


EXTENSION  OF  THE  UTAH

progress  or  improvement  in  them
since*  As  far  as  regards  gather  ing
and  organizing  the  elements,  and
making  the  earth  beautiful,  the^e  old
"Mormons"  have  no  taste  for  it,  and
they  see  nothing,  hear  nothing,  and
know  nothing,  only  they  knew  Joseph.
Say  they,  "  Oh,  I  was  acquainted
with  Joseph,  I  knew  brother  Joseph/'
Ask  them,  "Are  you  going  to  build  a
honse?"  "Well,  I  don't  know;  I
don't  know  as  I  care  anything  about
having  any  better  house/'  "Well,
bat  your  house  is  full  of  bed  bugs."
"I  know  it  is  pretty  had,  but  still  it
is  as  good  as  I  am,  and  I  don't  think
I  shall  try  to  build/'  They  died
when  Joseph  died,

I  heard  it  mentioned  here,  I  think,
this  morning,  that  we  all  knew  the
character  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  the  difficulties  and  persecutions
they  have  passed  through.  It  came
into  my  mind  at  that  moment  to  ask
this  congregation  how  many  of  them
knew  Joseph  Smith,  the  Prophet,
just  to  show  what  "  Mormon  ism"  has
accomplished  in  twenty-eight  years.
I  believe  I  will  do  myself  the  favor,
and  gratify  myself  so  far  as  to  ask
those  of  my  brethren  and  sisters  now
present,  who  were  personally  ac-
quainted with  Joseph  Smith,  to  raise
their  right  hands.  (A  very  few
hands  up.)  There  is  a  few,  hut  very
few,  not  above  one  to  twenty,  and
perhaps  not  more  than  one  to  fifty
in  this  congregation  who  ever  saw
Joseph  Smith.  Now  if  I  were  to
ask  the  boys  and  girts,  and  all  the
young  folks  present,  although  your
Sunday  schools  are  not  here,  who
were  born  in  these  valleys,  to  raise
their  right  hands,  I  will  venture  to
say  that  we  should  find  that  more
than  half  this  congregation  have
been  born  in  these  mountains.  What
do  they  know  about  what  wo  passed
through  in  Illinois,  Missouri,  Kirt-
Jand,  or  New  York  State? I  will


NORTHERN  RAILROAD,  ETC.  67

give  yen  one  item.  I  lived  close  by
where  these  plates  were  found.  I
knew  that  Joseph  found  them,  from
out  wan!  circumstances  that  transpired
at  the  time.  I  shall  not  take  time  to
relate  but  a  little  of  the  delicate,
kind,  benevolent,  Christian- like,  I
will  say  anti-Godlike  feelings  of  the
priests  and  of  the  people  who  pro-
fessed Christianity  at  the  time  that
Joseph  organized  this  Church.  The
very  first  thing  that  was  circulated

1  was  this — "  Did  you  bear  that  Joe
Smith  and  his  followers  got  together
last  night,  blew  out  the  light,  strip-
ped themselves  stark  naked,  and  there
they  had  the  holy  roll?"  This  was
the  story  started  by  the  priests  in
the  neighborhood  where  the  plates
were  found.  In  the  Branch  where  I
lived,  we  had  not  met  together  three
times  before  our  beloved,  kind,  anti-
Godlike  Baptist  priests  and  people
declared  that  we  made  a  practice  of

I  meeting  together,  stripping  stark
naked,  and  there  having  the  "  holy
roll,"  A  great  many  of  you  do  not
understand  this  term.  It  came  from
the  shaking  Quakers.  I  shall  n^t
attempt  to  relate  here  the  conduct
attributed  to  them,  but  from  tl;ft',
sprang  the  peculiar  phrase  I  have
mentioned  in  your  hearing  this  after-
noon* In  a  very  short  time  we  were
all  thieves  in  the  estimation  of  our
so-called  Christian  neighbors.  Said
the  priest  to  a  beloved  sister — "  Sis-
ter, did  you  hear  of  such  a  man,  he
was  a  member  of  our  church  a  few
days  since,  but  he  has  joined  old  Joe
Smith?"  Joseph  was  then  twenty
one  or  twenty-two  years  of  age,  but
it  was  "old  Joe  Smith."  "Sister,
did  yon  hear  that  such  a  brother
stole  a  lot  of  chickens  last  night  ?"
Says  the  sister,  "  No,  can  it  be  possi-
ble ?"  "  Well,  they  say  so/1  says  the
priest,  and  he  himself  had  fabricated
the  entire  story.  This  sister  would
tell  it  to  another,  and  it  would  go  all


through  the  neighborhood  that  such
a  mm  u  who  only  fi  few  days  before
had  bpui  considered  by  them  as  good
a  brother  as  they  hfcfl  in  their  church,
bad  become  a  chicken  thief.  But
yon  cannot  mention  any  crime  that
this  people  called  Latter-day  Saints
have  not  been  accused  of  committing
by  their  so-called  Christian  neigh-
bors;  and  these  stories  would  gene-
rally  commence  by  the  priests  whis-
pering to  some  sister — "  Did  you
hear  of  such  and  such  a  thing?"
That  was  enough,  all  that  was  wanted,
it  became  a  solemn  fact  by  the  time
it  passed  the  third  mouth  Now
what  do  the  great  majority  of  Saints
know  of  these  things  ?  Nothing,  for
they  have  been  born  since  oar  arrival
here.  I  need  not  relate  much  of  my
experience  in  this  work,  although  I
have  had  a  pretty  large  one.  But  it
is  not  particularly  profitable  to  me  or
to  anybody  else  to  relate  it.  Some-
times it  is  very  well  to  relate  circum-
stances that  have  transpired,  to  show
to  the  rising  generation  what  we  have
pissed  through  and  what  we  have
ha  1  to  contend  with.

Now,  if  the  brethren  will  take
hold  and  perform  the  labors  devolv-
ing upon  them,  they  shall  be  blessed
in  them.  They  will  increase  in
health  and  in  wealth.  The  Lord
will  bless  the  people  in  proportion
as  they  bless  themselves.  If  they
are  faithful  in  following  every  re-  .
quirement,  they  will  be  blessed  in
their  families,  and  no  other  people
on  the  earth  that  we  know  anything
about  are  blessed  in  their  families
and  posterity  as  the  Latter-day
Saints  are  now.  Visit  town  after
town  in  this  Territory  and  let  the
Saints  turn  out  their  children  neat
and  clean  and  what  can  be  said  of
them  ?  The  Lord  blesses  them  in
their  families.  Let  them  drive  up
their  flocks,  and  what  will  be  said  of
t  l  e  u  ?  The  Lord  blesses  their  flocks


in  their  folds.  See  them  upon  the
plains,  they  are  blessed  there  more
than  any  other  people.  Then  look
at  their  harvests  and  their  gardens
and  orchards,  and  they  are  blessed
therein  more  than  any  people  we
know  anything  about.  They  are
blessed  in  everything  they  put  their
hand  to.  The  climate  of  these
valleys  has  been  modified  and  molli-
find  for  their  sakes.  When  we  first
came  here,  neither  an  apple  nor  an
ear  of  wheat  could  have  been  raised
in  this  valley.  But  is  there  a  finer
valley  than  this  now  in  these  inoun.
tains  ?  No,  Is  there  a  finer  place
for  people  to  live  in  on  this  conti-
nent ? No.  v  There  is  not.

If  the  people  take  ■  course  to
bring  the  blessings  of  heaven  upon
them,  they  will  increase  in  every,
thing.  If  they  refuse  obedience  to
the  holy  Priesthood,  they  will  dwin-
dle and  go  into  unbelief  and  apos-
taey ;  they  will  be  contracted  in
their  views  and  feelings;  the  fruit
trees  will  begin  to  refuse  to  bear
fruit;  our  flocks  will  begin  to  refuse
their  increase,  and  our  fields  will
refuse  to  bring  forth  their  crops.  I
will  just  make  this  statement  with
regard  to  the  country  the  plates
were  taken  from,  from  which  the
Book  of  Mormon  was  translated.  I
have  helped  to  harvest  wheat  there,
that  yielded  fifty  bushels  to  the  acre,
or  from  twenty-five  to  sixty  bushels.
For  thirty  years  past,  they  have  not
raised  twenty  bushels  to  the  acre;
for  twenty  years  past  they  have  not
raised  fifteen  bushels  to  the  acre,  and
now,  in  that  country,  which  once
was  not  surpassed  by  any  portion  of
the  globe  for  raising  fruit  and  wheat,
not  an  apple  is  raised  without  a
worm  in  the  centre.  They  have
been  so  for  twenty  or  thirty  years.
Their  apples  are  good  for  nothing.
Send  them  to  England  as  they  did
forty  or  fifty  years  ago,  and  they


EXTENSION  OF  THE  UTAH  NORTHERN  RAILROAD,  ETC


09


are  not  marketable;  they  will  bear
do  price  in  comparison  to  good
fruit.  Five  to  ten  bushels  of  wheat
to  an  acre  now.  Their  peaches
have  gone,  their  apples  have  gone,
their  plums  and  their  pears  have
pone,  and  that  land  eventually,  un-
less this  government  and  the  people
of  the  government  take  a  different
course  towards  the  -  Gospel,  that  the
Lord  has  revealed  in  the  latter  days,
will  become  desolate,  forlorn  and
forsaken*  That  is  the  country  I  was
brought  up  in,  and  with  regard  to  its
products,  I  know  about  as  much  as
any  man  that  lives.

Now,  brethren  and  sisters,  if  we
wish  the  blessings  of  heaven  upon
us,  let  us  be  faithful  to  our  cove-
nants and  callings,  faithful  in  pay-
ing Tithing,  in  keeping  the  word  of
wisdom  and  in  building  Temples.
The  Tithing  is  for  the  building  of
Temples.  Suppose  we  build  this
meeting  house  here  with  Tithing.
If  the  people  will  give  us  one- tenth
part  of  that  which  is  due  on  their
Tithing,  we  shall  have  all  we  need
to  build  their  meeting- houses,  school-
houses,  and  Temples,  This  may
seem  strange  to  s^me,  and  perhaps
I  look  at  Tithing  different  from
others,  and  consider  the  law  of  Tith-
ing different  from  what  others  would
loak  at  and  construe  the  meaning
of  the  words  concerning  the  Tithing
that  the  Lord  requires  in  the  latter
days.  I  will  sum  it  up  and  tell  yuu
what  my  views  are.  Here  is  a
character — a  man — that  God  lias
c  rea  t  ed ,  orga  n  i  zed ,  fash  i  oned  and
made,- — every  part  and  partible  of
my  sy stein  from  the  top  of  my
head  to  the  soles  of  my  feet,  lias
been  produced  by  my  Father  in
heaven ;  and  lie  requires  one- tenth
part  of  my  brain,  heart,  nerve,  mns-
cle,  sinew,  fle^h,  bone,  and  uf  my
whole  system,  for  the  building  of
Temples,  for  the  ministry,  for  sus-


taining missionaries  and  mission-
aries' families,  for  feeding  the  poor,
the  aged,  the  halt  and  blind,  and
for  gathering  them  home  from  the
nations  and  taking  care  of  them  af-
ter they  are  gathered.  He  has  said,
"My  son,  devote  one-tenth  of  your-
self to  the  good  and  wholesotUB?
work  of  taking  care  of  your  tellow-
beings,  preaching  the  Gospel,  bring-
ing people  into  the  kingdom;  lay
your  plans  to  take  care  of  those  who
can  not  take  care  of  themselves;
direct  the  labors  of  those  who  are
able  to  labor;  and  one- tenth  partis
all-st) Qioiont  if  it  is  devoted  properly,
carefully  and  judiciously  for  the  ad-
vancement of  my  kingdom  on  the
earth,"

What  little  wealth  I  have  *jot,  I
have  obtained  since  I  have  been
in  this  Church.  What  I  had  when
I  came  into  the  Church  I  gave  away
to  my  friends.  I  had  no  family  ex-
cept two  children.  I  can  hardly  say
that  either,  for  when  I  came  into  the
Church  1  hid  a  wife,  but  in  a  very
few  mouths  after  I  was  baptized  I
lost  her,  and  she  left  me  two  little
girls.  I  gave  away  what  I  had,  and
I  started  to  preach  the  Gospel.  I  was
obliged  to  do  it,  for  I  felt  as  though
my  bones  would  eon  sumo  within
me  if  I  did  not,  consequently  1  de-
voted my  time  to  preaching,  I  tra-
veled, toiled,  labored  and  preached
continually.  My  own  brother  Jo-
seph, and  myself,  were  together  a
good  deal  of  the  time,  until  we  went
to  Kirtland,  to  see  the  Prophet,  and
the  next  year  moved  up.  This  is
the  way  1  commenced,  and  when
I  gathered  with  the  Saints  I  was
about  as  destitute  as  any  man  that
ever  gathered  to  the  gathering  place  ;
and  that  summer  brother  Joseph
called  the  Elders  together  and  gave
them  the  word  of  the  L>rd  never
to  do  another  day's  work  to  build
up  a  Gentile  city. I  have  never


done  a  day's  work,  nor  an  hour's
work,  from  that  time  to  this,  to
build  up  a  Gentile  city,  but  I  have
labored  continually  to  build  up  the
cities  of  Zion,  God  has  blessed  me
with  means,  and  he  has  blessed  me
with  a  family,  I  made  a  statement
yesterday,  which  I  can  make  again
with  all  propriety — that  in  my  judg-
ment it  would  take  mure  than  I
have  pot  to  pay  my  back  Tithing,
and  I  have  got  as  much,  probably,  as
any  man  in  the  Church,  The  Lord
has  blessed  me;  he  has  always
blessed  me;  from  the  time  I  com-
menced to  build  up  Zion,  I  have
been  extremely  blessed,  I  could
relate  circumstances  of  so  extraor-
dinary a  character  in  regard  to  the
providences  of  God  to  me,  that
my  brethren  and  sisters  would  say
in  their  hearts,  "I  can  hardly  give
credence  to  this."  But  my  heart
hag  been  set  in  me  to  do  the  will  of
God,  to  build  up  his  kingdom  on
--the  earth,  to  establish  Zion  and  its
laws,  and  to  save  the  people ;  and  I
can  say  truly  and  honestly  that  the
thought  never  came  into  my  mind,
in  all  my  labors,  what  my  reward
will  be,  or  whether  rny  crown
would  be  large  or  small,  or  any
crown  at  all,  a  small  possession,  a
large  possession,  or  no  possession.
I  do  not  know  that  1  shall  have  a
wife  or  child  in  the  resurrection.  I
have  never  had  any  thoughts  or
reflections  upon  this,  or  cared  the
fir^t  thing  about  it  All  that  I
have  had  in  my  mind  has  been
that  it  was  my  duty  to  do  the  will
of  God,  and  to  labor  to  establish  his
kingdom  on  the  earth.  I  do  not
love,  serve  or  fear  the  Lord  for  the
sake  of  getting  rid  of  being  damned,
nor  lor  the  sake  of  getting  some
great  gift  or  blessing  in  eternity,
but  purely  bt  cause  the  principles
which  God  has  revealed  lor  the  sal-
vation  of the  inhabitants  of  the


earth  are  pure,  holy  and  exalting
in  their  nature*  In  them  there  is
honor  and  eternal  increase,  they
lead  on  from  light  to  litfht,  strength
to  strength,  glory  to  glory,  know-
ledge to  knowledge,  and  power  to
power;  and  the  opposite  reduces
any  individual  or  any  nation  on  the
earth  to  imbecility,  ignorance,  sloth-
fulness,  and  to  the  loathsome  state
of  degradation  in  which  we  see
some  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
now.  It  is  purely  for  the  love  of
holy  principles,  that  will  exalt  the
people,  that  we  may  receive  and  gain
more  and  more,  and  keep  receiving
for  ever  and  ever,  that  I  serve  the
Lord,  and  try  to  build  up  his  king-
dom.

And  when  we  get  through  this
state  of  being,  to  the  next  room,  I
may  call  it,  we  are  not  going  to  stop
there.  We  shall  still  go  on,  doing
all  the  good  we  can,  administering
and  officiating  for  all  whom  we  are
permitted  to  administer  and  officiate
for,  and  then  go  on  to  the  next,
and  to  the  next,  until  the  Lord  shall
crown  all  who  have  been  faithful  an
this  earth,  and  the  work  pertaining
to  the  earth  is  finished,  and  the
Savior,  whom  we  have  been  helping,
has  completed  his  task,  and  the
earth,  with  all  things  pertaining  to
it,  is  presented  to  the  Father,  Then
these  faithful  ones  will  receive  their
blessings  and  crowns,  and  their  in-
heritances will  be  set  off*  to  them
and  be  given  to  them,  and  they  will
then  go  on,  worlds  upon  worlds,  in-
creasing for  ever  and  even

Now,  brethren,  what  do  you  say,
will  \  ou  do  as  I  want  you  to  ?  Will
you  take  hold  and  build  this  meet-
ing-house, get  this  road  th rough
and  make  a  little  more  improve-
ment, and  say  we  will  have  no
idlers  in  our  midst,  but  that  every
day,  every  week,  every  month,  shall
be devoted to  something  that  is


useful  to  ourselves  and  to  others  ?
If  this  is  our  feeling  and  our  deter-
mination we  shall  be  blessed.  I
feel  to  bless  you.  I  pray  for  you
continually,  I  never  cease  to  pray
for  tlie  Saints.  I  pray  the  Lord  to
inspire  the  hearts  of  his  people,  so
that  the  good  may  not  fall  awuy,
bat  that  they  may  be  preserved  in
the  truth,  and  that  they  may  learn
and  understand  it  more  and  more,
until  their  affections  are  so  wedded


to  God  and  his  kingdom  on  the
earth,  that  the  revelations  of  Jesus
Christ  may  be  in  them  like  a  well
of  water  springing  up  to  everlasting
life.

Now,  I  can  say,  God  bless  yon,
and  I  pray  that  you  may  be  blessed ;
but  I  pray  you  to  bless  yourselves*
Brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  blesa
ourselves,  by  doing  the  will  of  God,
then  we  are  right*


REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,

Delivered  is  the  New  Tabervacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  May  255  1873.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

IGNORANCE  OF  THE  WORLD  CONCERNING  OUR  FAITH— CHARACTER  OF
([MUST'S  TEACHINGS — ORGANIZATION  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  JESUS
CHRIST  OF  LATTER-1'AY  SAINTS  IS  SIMILAR  TO  THAT  OF  FORMER-
DAYS — BELIEF  ALONE  INSUFFICIENT — EXHORTATION  TO  THE  SAINTS
TO  LIVE  THEIR  RELIGION  AND  TO  ACQUIRE  ALL  USEFUL  KNOWLEDGE.


r  f


I  have  a  few  remarks  to  make  to
those  who  do  not  understand  the
doctrine  of  the  Latter  day  Saints.
Forty- three  years  have  passed  away
since  this  Church  was  organized  in
Fayette,  Seneca  County,  in  the  State
of  New  York;  and  for  over  one
forty  years,  according  to  the  ability
which  God  has  given  me,  I  have  tra-
veled and  preached  enough  to  extend
this  Gospel  to  the  door  of  every  ham-
let  on  this  continent  if  the  people  had


been  willing  to  receive  it ;  yea  more
— I  have  taught  the  Gospel  of  life
and  salvation  to  the  human  family
sufficiently,  if  all  had  been  honest^to
receive  it  and  willing  to  curry  it  to
their  neighbors,  to  evangelize  the
whole  earth,  and  there  need  not  have
been,  to-day,  one  person,  heathen  or
Christian,  ignorant  of  its  principles.
But  now,  I  learn  from  day  to  day,
from  week  to  w^ek  and  from  time  to
time,  that  very  many  people  in  out


72


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


own  land  do  not  understand  our  doc-
trines, and  I  am  frequently  asked  the
question,  while  conversing  with  peo-
ple, "  Do  you  believe  the  Bible  ?"
u  Do  you  receive  the  Bible  as  the
word  of  the  Lord  ?"  u  Then,  you
acknowledge  the  Bible  ?"  &e.  This
astonishes  me,  and  the  cause  of  such
questions  being  asked  I  leave  every
person  to  judge  for  himself,  just  as  I
do  with  regard  to  the  course  of  the
children  of  men  in  other  matters,
such  as  truth,  error,  religion,  politics,
&q.  If  wc  were  to  inquire  of  stran-
gers, who  have  lived  twenty,  thirty,
forty,  fifty  or  sixty  years  on  the  con-
tinent of  America,  and  even  in  the
United  States,  how  it  is  that  they  do
not  know  better  than  to  suppose  that
the  Latter-day  Saints  reject  and  do
not  believe  in  the  Bible,  they  would
reply,  "  We  do  not  know,  only  we
have  heard  so."  If  you  go  to  the
professed  infidel,  of  any  class,  and
ask  him,  "  Do  the  '  Mormons'  believe
in  the  Bible  Why  yes,  I  have
heard  them  preach,  and  they  believe
the  Bible  more  than  the  whole  Chris-
tian world  do/1  Well,  where  and
through  whom  does  this  influence
come,  which  leads  people  to  believe
to  the  coutmry  ?  I  will  not  spend
time  to  answer  this,  but  I  will  say,
that  the  Lutier-day  Saints  believe
more  of  the  Bible  than  any  other  peo-
ple that  live  on  the  face  of  the  earth
that  we  have  any  knowledge  of.

What  docs  the  Bible  teach  us  with
regard  to  the  Christian  religion,  faith
in  God,  and  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,
who  was  sent  in  the  meridian  of  time
to  redeem  the  earth,  and  all  things
pertaining  to  it?  I  will  not  take
up  the  negative  side  of  the  question,
or  tell  what  others  believe;  but  let
me  tell  what  we  believe.  In  the
first  place,  I  will  take  up  the  sayings
of  Jesus  to  his  disciples  on  a  certain
occasion.  Said  he,  4t  Go  ye  there-
fore into  all  the  world  and  preach


the  Gospel  to  every  creature ;  he
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall
be  saved ;  he  that  believeth  not  shall
be  damned." I  shall  not  attempt  to
go  into  the  meaning  of  this  saying  in
every  particular — time  will  not  per-
mit— but  suffice  it  to  say  that  he
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  will  be
saved,  and  he  that  believeth  not  will
be  cast  off What  promise  did  Jesus
give  to  his  disciples  when  he  sent
them  out  two  by  two,  to  preach  ?
What  inducement  was  there,  when
the  Savior  was  upon  the  earth,  to
believe  in  him  and Ins  doctrine?
We  can  all  read  ;  it  would  take  too
much  time  to  tell. His  disciples
went  out  and  preached  without  purse
mid  scrip,  and  wheu  they  returned,
they  testified  to  Jesus  that  they  had
lacked  for  nothing. Jesus  promised,
to  those  who  believed,  powers  and
advantages  which  unbelievers  could
not  enjoy. We  read  of  certain  men
and  women  in  Samaria,  who  had
been  taught  the  Gospel  under  the
authority  of  John  the  Baptist,  but
they  had  not  received  the  Holy  Gtiost;
and  we  are  told  that  certain  Apostles
went  down  from  Jerusalem  to  lay
their  hands  on  these  Sarnarirm  be-
lievers. There  was  a  man  called
Simon,  a  sorcerer,  who  had  bewitched
the  people,  and  seeing  that  the  power
which  the  Apostles  bestowed  upon
them,  by  the  laying  on  of  hands,  was
far  above  his  power — although  he
could deceive,  betray  and  frighten
the  people,  and  do  many  things  just
as  the  magicians  of  Phuroah's  court
did  when  Moses  went  tu  deliver  the
children  of  Israel ;  said  he,  u  I  will
give  ycu  money  if  you  will  bestow
that  power  on  me," The  Apostles
said  to  him,  "  You.  and  your  money
perish  together." The  Apostles  laid
their  hands  upon  those  persons  who
had  been  baptized  to  John's  baptism,
and  they  received  the  Holy  Ghost,
Believers  in those  days  had  the


IGNORANCE  OF  THE  WORLD,  ETC.


73


power  which  Jesus  promised.  They
might  take  up  serpents,  and  they
would  not  bite  them  ;  if  they  drank
any  deadly  tiling  it  would  not  hurt
them;  if  they  laid  hands  on  the  sick,
the  sick  would  recover.  They  spake
with  tongues,  they  prophee^ed,  they
had  the  discernment  of  spirits,  and
all  the  various  gifts  of  the  Gospel  of
Christ;  and  all  of  these  were  beyond
the  reach  of  the  sorcerer,  yet  he  was
far  in  advance  of  the  common  people
in  powers  of  deception.  But  Jesus
promised  his  disciples  more  than  any
man  could  possess  by  the  spirit  of
divination.  When  we  consider  this
and  realize,  if  we  can  realize,  that,
through  the  restoration  of  the  Gospel
in  our  day>  all  these  gifts  can  be  again
enjoyed,  it  is  worthy  the  attention
of  every  person  on  the  face  of  the
earth  who  is  capable  of  receiving
truth  for  truth,  light  for  light,  and
intelligence  upon  intelligence.

Let* me  hasten  along,  and  refer  to
the  organization  of  the  ancient
Church.  According  to  the  testi-
mony of  the  Apostle,  God  set  in  the
Church,  firstly,  Apostles,  secondly
Prophets,  thirdly  Teachers,  then
Pastors,  and  so  forth.  You  stran-
gers may  ask  your  divines,  when  you
return  home,  what  they  believe  about
God  setting  in  the  Church  Apostles,  I
Prophets,  Pastors,  Teachers,  Helps,  '
gift: ,  divers  kinds  of  tongues,  and  so
on,  for  the  perfecting  of  the  Saints,
and  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of
Christ,  until  all  come  to  a  unity  of
faith  and  knowledge  in  Christ  Jesus
our  Lord ;  and  let  them  answer  the
question,  then  you  can  judge  who  it
is  that  throws  dost  into  the  eyes  of
the  people,  and  is  continually  telling
them  that  u  the  Latter-day  Saints
deny  the  Bible f  "the  Latter-day
Saints  are  a  bad  people  j"  "  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  are  aliens  to  the  gov-
ernment;" "the  Latter-day  Saints
are rebellious." Ask  the  divines,


"  Do  you  believe  in  prophecy ingf  do
you  believe  in  Apostles,  in  baptism
by  immersion  for  the  remission  of
sins,  and  in  the  laying  on  of  hands
for  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?
Do  you  believe  in  breaking  bread
Continually,  as  Jesus  commanded  his
disciples  at  the  last  supper,  when  he
brake  the  bread  and  blessed  it,  and
blessed  the  wine  and  gave  it  to  all  to
eat  and  drink,  saying,  4  Do  this  until
I  come  again,  for  I  will  drink  no
more  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine  until  I
drink  it  anew  with  you  in  my  Father's
kingdom  P"  What  do  the  world —
Christian,  Jew  and  Pagan — believe
about  these  things?  Inquire  tor
yourselves.  We  Latter-day  Saints
believe  in  Apostles  and  Prophets.
We  believe  in  the  Melcliisedec  Priest-
hood and  in  the  Aaronic  Priesthood,
which  God  bestowed  upon  his  ser-
vants long  ago.  Moses  had  all  these
doctiines  and  both  these  Priesthoods
in  his  possession,  and  a!*o  the  orga-
nization of  the  Church;  and  with  all
his  power  he  strove  to  bring  the
children  of  Israel  to  a  knowledge  of
the  Gospel,  but  they  would  not  have
Christ.

I  pause  here.  I  was  brought  up
a  Christian,  very  strictly,  and  was
taught  to  read  the  Bible,  consequent-
ly it  is  natural  for  me  to  believe  it —
it  is  according  to  my  traditions,  and
also  from  the  spirit  of  revelation
from  God  nuto  myself.  In  all  my
teachings,  I  have  taught  the  Gospel
from  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,
I  found  therein  every  doctrine,  and
the  proof  of  every  doctrine,  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  believe  in,  as  far  as  I
know,  theiefore  1  do  not  refer  to  the
Book  of  Mormon  as  often  as  I  other-
wise should.  There  may  be  some
doctrines  about  which  little  is  said  in
the  Bible,  but  they  are  all  couched
therein,  and  I  believe  the  doctrines
because  they  are  true,  and  I  have
taught them because they  are


74


JOURNAL  OF  DISCO URS3


calculated  to  save  the  children  of
men.

It  is  said  by  the  Christian  world,
by  governments,  philosophers,  states-
men, politicians  and  ministers,  that
there  is  no  harm  in  believing  any-
thing if  we  do  not  practice  it,  Bat
let  me  ask  how  can  we  believe  in
Jesus  Christ — taking  his  own  words
for  \i — unless  we  do  the  works  that
he  did  ?  Go  and  read  his  words  for
yourselves — 11  He  that  believeth  in
me  will  do  the  works  that  I  do."
Did  he  not  say  this  ?  How  then  can
we  believe  in  him  without  doing  his
works  ?  Did  he  inspire  his  Apostles?
Did  he  inspire  him  whom  we  call
St.  Paul?  Did  he  inspire  John
upon  the  Isle  of  Fatmos  ?  The
Christian  world  will  not  deny  that  he
did.  While  John  was  upon  Patmos,
he  had  many  visions  and  revelations.
He  compiled  these  after  he  returned
from  the  island,  and  left  them  in  the
possession  of  his  friends;  and  the
Council  which  compiled  this  book —
the  Bible — brought  his  revelations
into  the  catalogue  of  sacred  books.
It  you  will  road  the  Bi>ok  of  Reve-
lations, you  will  find  that  John  pre-
diets  many  things  regarding  these
latter  days.  He  saw  the  conduct
and  doings  of  the  seven  angels;  and
then  he  says,  "  I  saw  another  angel
flying  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  having
the  everlasting  Gospel  to  preach  to
them  that  dwell  upon  the  earth,  say-
ing, 1  Fear  God  and  give  glory  to
hi  in  who  made  the  heavens,  the  earth,
the  seas  and  the  fountains  of  water.1"

By  reading  the  Bible  we  find  that
the  Gospel  is  contained  not  only  in
the  New  Testament,  but  also  in  the
Old.  Mo^es  and  the  Prophets  saw
and  predicted  the  apostacy  of  the
Church.  They  saw  that  the  Lord
would  strive  with  the  children  of
men  from  time  to  time,  that  he  would
deliver  to  them  the  truth  and  the
Piiesthood ; they also saw  that


through  the  wickedness  of  the  peo-
ple they  would  change  his  ordinan-
ceSt  break  the  covenants,  and  trans-
gress his  laws,  until  the  Priesthood
would  be  taken  from  the  enrth,  and
its  inhabitants  be  left  in  apostacy  and

darkness*

But  how  are  we  to  understand  this
angel  referred  to  by  John,  when  he
comes  along  ?  This  is  an  important
question.  How,  in  the  language  of
Scripture,  are  we  to  know  the  voice
of  the  Good  Shepherd  from  the  voice
of  a  stranger  ?  Can  any  person
answer  this  question  ?  I  can,  it  is
very  easy.  To  every  philosopher
npon  the  earth,  I  say,  "  Your  eye
can  be  deceived,  so  can  mine;  your
ear  can  be  deceived,  so  can  mine;
the  touch  of  your  band  can  be  de-
ceived, so  can  mine ;  but  the  Spirit
of  God  filling  the  creature  with  reve-
lation and  the  light  of  eternity,  can-
not be  mistaken  —  the  revelation
which  comes  from  God  is  never  mis-
taken. It  is  the  spirit  of  truth,  and
it  testifies  of  Jesus,  of  his  Father,
of  the  things  which  God  bns  done
for  the  children  of  men,  and  that
which  he  is  now  doing.  No  man
upon  the  earth  c  m  be  mistaken  when
he  sees  by  the  eye  of*  revelation,
when  Jesus  shines  upon  his  under-
standing by  the  light  of  his  Spirit.
Now,  then,  how  ate  wu  going  to
know  the  voice  of  the  Good  Shepherd
from  the  voice  of  a  stranger  ?  Take
the  words  of  Jesus.  He  says,  "  My
sheep  hear  my  voice  and  they  follow
me,  a  stranger  they  will  not  follow/'
Why  ?  Because  they  know  not  the
voice  of  a  stranger.  When  an  in-
dividual, filled  with  the  Spirit  of
God,  declares  the  troth  of  heaven,
the  sheep  hear  that,  the  Spirit  of
the  Lord  pierces  their  inmost  souls
and  sinks  deep  into  their  hearts ;  by
the  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost
light  springs  up  within  them,  and
they  see  aud  understand  for  them-


IGNORANCE  OF  THE  WORLD,  ETC


selves.  This  is  the  way  the  Gospel
should  be  preached  by  every  Elder
in  Israel,  and  by  this  power  every
hearer  should  hear ;  and  if  we  woo  Id
know  the  voice  of  the  Good  Shep-
herd, we  must  live  so  that  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord  can  find  its  way  to  our
hearts.  I  have  said  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  many  and  many  a  time,
and  I  say  to  them  now,  live  your
religion,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  may
be  within  jou  like  a  well  of  water
springing  up  to  everlasting  life.
Suppose  I  were  to  give  way  to  the
spirit  of  the  enemy  and  leave  the
spirit  of  the  Gospel,  then,  if  you
were  not  prepared  to  judge  between
the  voice  of  the  Good  Shepherd  and
the  voice  of  the  stranger,  I  could
lead  jou  to  ruin.  Be  prepared  that
you  may  know  the  voice  when  it
comes  through  the  servants  of  God,
then  you  can  declare  for  yourselves.
"  This  is  the  word  of  the  Lord."  My
caution  and  counsel  to  the  Latter-day
Saints,  and  to  all  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  is — "Live  so  that  you  will
know  truth  from  error,

But  do  all  the  Latter-day  Saints
live  bo  ?  Oh  no,  they  do  not*  Many
fall  into  error  and  tin  ally  leave  the
Church.  They  are  led  away  far
from  the  truth.  They  become  sub-
ject to  the  ten  thousand  spirits  that
have  gone  forth  into  the  world,  and
they  are  deceived  in  this,  that  and
the  o titer  thing,  and  like  the  rest  of
the  world,  they  do  not  know  how  to
govern  themselves.  They  are  de-
ceived in  their  own  organization  and
with  regard  to  themselves;  and  there
is  no  man  that  can  know  himself
unless  he  knows  God,  and  he  can  not
know  God  unless  he  knQws  himself.
The  children  of  men  give  heed  to
the  deceiving  spirits  that  are  abroad,
and  that  is  the  cause  of  the  ten  thou-
sand errors,  wrongs,  sins  and  divi-
sions which  are  in  the  world,  and  for
this  reason  the  multitude  are  unable


to  distinguish  between  the  voice  of
the  Good  Shepherd  and  the  voice  of
the  stranger.  But  I  will  say  that  if
the  Lord  has  not  sent  that  angel  of
which  John  speaks,  he  will  send  him
as  surely  as  we  live.

Let  me  refer  to  another  saying  of
John  :  After  telling  about  the  angel
flying  through  the  midst  of  heaven
with  the  everlasting  Gospel  to  be
restored  to  the  children  of  men,  he
tells  us  in  his  eighteenth  chnpterand
4th  verse — "And  I  heard  another
voice  from  heaven  saying,  *  Come
out  of  her,  rny  people,  that  ye  be  not
partakers  of  her  sins,  and  that  ye
receive  Dot  of  her  plagues."  "  This
was  a  proclamation  to  God's  people*
Israel  is  dispersed  among  all  the  na-
tions of  the  earth ;  the  bluod  of
Ephraim  is  mixed  with  the  blood  of
all  the  earth.  Abraham's  seed  is
mingled  with  the  rebellious  seed
throagh  the  whole  world  of  mankind,
and  John  saw  that  a  com  maud  would
go  forth  warning  the  righteous  to  flee
from  Babylon,  and  that  command
was,  a  Come  out  of  her,  my  people,
that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sins,
that  ye  receive  not  other  phigues,  for
her  sins  have  reached  to  heaven,"
and  so  forth.  This  is  a  stumbling
block  to  the  religious  world  of  Chris-
tendom. They  cannot  see  the  ne-
cessity of  the  gathering,  they  claim
that  believers  in  Jesus  can  live  their
religion  and  serve  the  I^ord  as  well
scattered  as  gathered,  and  that,  in
time,  by  the  preaching  ot  the  vari-
ous sects,  the  world  will  be  evangel-
ized. The  Latter-day  Saints  believe
that  all  their  efforts  in  this  direction,
in  the  future,  will  be  as  they  have
been  in  the  past— useless;  and  that
the  so-culled  Christian  religion  is  a
failure,  so  far  as  evangelizing  the
world  is  concerned.  Let  the  world
of  mankind  luok  at  Jerusalem  for  an
illustration  of  its  effects.  In  that
city  various Christian sects  have


+


7G  JOURNAL  OF

their  places  of  worship,  and  many
make  yearly  pilgrimages  to  the  places
made  sacred  by  the  life,  death  and
burial  of  the  Redeemer.  Da  these
Christians  in  Jerusalem  manifest  that
love,  meekness  and  for  ben  ranee  to.
ward  each  other  which  a  Ways  char*
acterize  the  true  servants  and  fol-
lowers of  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  No,  for
if  it  were  not  for  the  Turkish  sol-
diers they  would  massacre  each  other
every  day.  That  is  the  effect  the
principles  which  they  profess  have
upon  them.  And  everywhere,  through-
out the  Christian  world,  it  amounts
to  little  more.  Its  leaders  and  pro-
fessors cry,  u  Come  to  Jesus,  Come
to  the  Lord,**  and  do  this  and  do  that,
but  where  do  we  find  such  things
taught  in  the  New  Testament  ?  -
They  are  not  there.  Who  among
the  writers  of  the  Scriptures  de-
clares that  God  has  taken  Apostles
and  Prophets,  evangelists,  pastors,
teachers,  governments  and  helps 1
from  his  Church  ?  Not  one,  is
there  any  declaration  or  revelation  in
modern  times  to  the  effect  that  God
has  taken  the  gilts  out  of  his  Church  ?  1
No*  Men  have  left  them,  they  have
wandered  from  and  forsaken  the  fold
of  Christ,  they  have  transgressed  the
laws  and  they  have  changed  the  or-
dinance- of  his  kingdom  fur  the  laws  i
and  ordinances  of  men  ;  and  they
have  broken  the  everlasting  covenant
which  God,  in  early  ages,  made  with
his  creatures.

Let  me  say  to  my  hearers,  uot  that
I  wish  to  take  up  the  subject  of  Ce-
lestial Marriage,  that  if  you  will
search  the  Scriptures,  you  will  find
that  the  first  curse  which  c.itne  upon
the  children  of  Israel,  as  recorded  in
the  writings  of  Moses,  was  for  mar-
rying out  of  their  own  families;  and
then  the  Lord,  after  seeing  the  hard-
ness at  their  hearts  in  despising  his
law  and  his  covenants,  gave  to  them
a  law  of  carnal  com ra a nd merits,  and


DISCOURSES.

told  them  whom  they  might  not
marry.  By  reading  the  Scriptures
you  will  find  that  the  Lord  com-
manded the  children  of  Israel  to  live
by  themselves,  and  not  to  mix  their
seed  with  the  unholy,  ungovernable
and  rebellious  seed  of  the  world.
The  Lord  used  to  give  wives  to  the
children  of  men,  but  the  people  say,
"  We  do  not  know  about  that  now,
we  hardly  think  it  will  answer.'*

How  are  wTe  tfoing  to  build  up  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.  Do
you  think  it  is  a  manual  labor?  Do
you  think  it  will  become  a  political
kingdom  ?  Ask  the  kings  on  their
thrones,  ask  potentates  and  states-
men if  they  believe  the  Bible.  If
they  do,  they  must  believe  that  the
day  will  come  in  which  God  will  re-
volutionize  the  earth,  to  that  degree
that  the  "  kingdoms  of  this  world
will  become  the  kingdoms  of  our
God  and  his  Christ"  If  they  ever
do,  there  must  be  a  heavy  labor  to
perform,  and  that  labor  is  upon  I  he
Saints  of  God,  and  they  must  enter
into  it  with  heart  and  soul.  It  will
he  both  a  manual  and  a  political
labor,  for  all  will  be  brought  into
sulgection  to  the  law  of  Christ,  that
he  may  come  and  reign  on  the  earth,
king  of  nations,  as  he  does  king  of
Saints.

These  subjects  could  be  taken  up
one  by  one,  and  it  could  be  shown
tiotn  the  Scriptures,  precisely  the
position  that  will  be  taken  and  the
course  that  must  be  pursued,  I  have
labared  faithfully  over  forty  years  to
convince  the  children  nf  men  that
God  rules  in  the  heavens  and  that  he
will  rule  upon  the  earth.  Suppose
tiiat  he  ruled  to-day,  would  society
be  the  worse  for  it  r  What  think
ye  ?  I-.  there  a  heaven  ?  Is  there
a  heaven  of  heavens  ?  Is  there  a
dwelling  place  for  the  Gods  and  the
angels  ?  Do  you  think  they  have
their  political  quarrels  there  ?  Do


IGNORANCE  OF  THF  WORLD,  ETC*.


77


you  think  they  get  up  different  ones
whom  they  will  run  for  their  king,
governor,  or  president  ?  Do  you
think  there  is  an  opposition  ticket
there  ?  What  do  the  political,  finan-
cial and  Christian  world  think  aboot
these  things  ?  Do  you  think  that  a
few  capitalists  lock  up  all  the  means
there  and  make  hard  times,  so  that
the  people  cannot  get  a  dollar  ?  Do
you  think  there  is  any  backbiting
and  false  swearing  there  r  Do  you
think  they  have  courts  with  unjust
judges  and  packed  juries  there  ?
No,"  every  person  who  believes  in  the
Old  and  New  Testaments,  will  say
that  it  is  a  place  of  perfection,  a
place  where  all  have  their  rights;  a
place  where  there  is  perfect  peace
and  happiness,  and  all  join  with  one
heart  and  voice  in  ascribing  honor,
praise  and  glory  to  him  who  sits  on
the  throne,  and  the  Larnb.  This  is
the  effect  of  God's  rule  and  govern-
ment. Would  the  inhabitants  of  the
world  be  in  a  worse  condition  than
they  are  now  if  the  Lord  were  ruler
of  all  the  earth  ?  Oh,  no.  All  will
join  in  wishing  for  perfection,  and  in
desiring  a  state  of  society  in  which
there  would  be  no  jars,  no  conten-
tions, no  poverty,  no  poor,  but  all
prepared  to  go  into  the  highest  and


most  refined  society.  This  is  the
belief  and  doctrine  of  the  Litter-
day  Saints.  Learn  everything  that
the  children  of  men  know,  and  be
prepared  for  the  most  retiued  society
upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  then  im-
prove upon  this  until  we  are  prepared
and  permitted  to  enter  the  society  of
the  blessed — the  holy  angels  that
1  dwell  in  the  presence  of  God,  for  our
I  God,  because  of  his  purity,  is  a
consuming  fire.

I  have  spoken  longer  than  the
;  time  allotted  to  me.  I  can  say  God
bless  you.  I  pray  the  people —
Saints  and  sinners  upon  the  face  of
the  whole  earth — to  hearken  to  the
truth.  Open  your  hearts  to  the  con-
viction of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  you.
I  pray  that  you  who  have  received
the  truth  m^y  live  in  it  and  abide  by
it,  that  you  may  enjoy  the  blessings
of  it  and  be  prepared  for  the  fullness
of  the  glory  of  God,  that  will  yet
be  revealed,  I  exhort  those  who  do
not  believe,  to  listen  to  and  receive,
little  by  little,  the  instructions  which
God  will  give,  until  all  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  earth  are  prepared  for
Jesus  to  come  and  reign  iu  their
midst.
God  bless  yon,  Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Junk  15,  1873.

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


THE  RISK  OF  ZION  IN  TUE  LAST  DAYS.


I  will  call  your  attention  to  the
first  two  lines  in  the  firat  hymn  that
waa  sung  this  afternoon, —

**  Arise,  0  glorious  Zinn,
Thou  joy  of  latter  days.

In  connection  with  these  two  lines,
I  will  cite  the  attention  of  the  con-
gregation to  the  first  verse  of  the
60th  chapter  of  Isaiah, —

"Arise,  shine,  for  thy  li<?ht  it  come,  and
the  glory  of  the  Lord  has  ris^n  upon  thee/*

The  passage  which  I  have  quoted
from  Isaiah  has  reference  to  the  lat-
ter-day Zion,  about  which  the  choir
sang  at  the  opening  of  the  meeting.
That  there  may  be  no  mj^und  stand-
ing about  the  people  to  whom  the
Prophet  had  reference,  I  will  read
some  other  passages  connected  with
it, — "  And  the  Redeemer  shall  come
to  Zion,  and  unto  them  that  torn
from  transgression  in  Jacob,  saith
the  Lord."  The  Zion  that  is  here
spoken  of  is  called  upon  to  '"arise
and  shine,  for  the  glory  of  the  Lord
is  risen  upon  thee."  There  is  no  one
thing  more  fully  revealed  in  the
Scriptures  of  eternal  truth,  than  the
rise  of  the  Zion  of  our  God  in  the
latter  days,  clothed  upon  with  the
glory  of  God  from  the  heavens — a
Zion  that  will  attract  the  attention  of
all  the  nations  and  kindreds  of  the
whole  earth.  It  will  not  be  some-
thing that  takes  place  in  a  corner  on


4k

some  distant  island  of  the  sea,  or
away  among  some  obscure people  ;
but  it  will  be  something  that  will
call  forth  the  attention  of  all  people
and  nations  upon  the  face  of  the
whole  earth. The  rise  of  Zion,  the
latter-day  Zion. What  are  we  to
understand  by  the  meaning  of  Zion  ?
What  I  understand,  and  what  the
Scriptures  have  portrayed  in  regard
to  the  meaning  of  Zion  is,  a  people
who  shall  receive  the  law  of  God,
and  who  shall  be  acknowledged  of
the  Lord  as  his  people — a  people  who
shall  be  gathered  together  from  the
nations  of  the  earth,  and build  a
house  to  the  name  of  the  Lord  in  the
Utter-days. A  people  who  shall  hare
their  abiding  place  in  the  mountains,
and  who  shall  build  a  city  that  shall
be  called  Zion. AH  these  things  are
clearly  portrayed  in  prophecy.  The
people  of  God  must  be  a  people  who
give  the  most  diligent  heed  to  his
word ;  they  will  be  guided  by  reve-
lation from  him,  and  among  them
his  power  will  be  made  conspicuously
manifest. These  are  characteristics
concerning this latter-day  Zion,
spoken  of  by  the  ancient  Prophets,
which,  if  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  will
enable  me  to  clearly  comprehend  the
subject,  I  will  endeavor,  this  after-
noon, in  my  simple  language  and  in


THE  RISE  OF  Z ION


IN  THE  LAST  DAYS


79


my  simple  manner,  to  lay  before  this
congregation.

We  find,  in  the  40th  chapter  of
the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  that  the
people  of  Zion  are  to  be  raised  up
preparatory  to  the  second  advent
of  the  Son  of  God.  Isaiah  uses  an
exclamation  something  like  this —
**0  Zion,  that  bringest  good  tidings,
get  thee  up  into  the  high  moan-
tain/'  It  seems  by  this,  that  the
people  called  Zion,  wherever  they
mierht  be,  were  to  be  removed  from
the  regions  they  originally  inhab-
ited, and  were  to  be  located  in  a
high  mountain,  or  in  a  very  eleva-
ted region.  If  you  wish  to  know
the  time  which  tins  prophetic  ex-
hortation to  the  people  of  Zion  had
reference  to,  read  the  whole  of  the
40th  chapter  of  Isaiah,  and  you  will
find  that,  at  that  period,  the  glory
of  God  is  to  be  revealed  and  ail
flesh  is  to  see  it  together,  evidently
referring  to  the  great  day  when  the
Son  of  God  shall  come  in  his  glory,
when  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and
they  also  who  pierced  him,  and  all
people,  nations  and  tongues  under
heaven,  who  are  spared  unto  that
day,  shall  behold  him  descend  in
power  and  majesty  to  this  earth.
In  his  40th  chapter,  the  Prophet
Isaiah  has  told  us  that  then  the
mountains  shall  be  broken  down,
the  valleys  exalted,  the  rough
places  made  smooth,  the  glory  of
the  Lord  revealed  and  all  flesh  see
it  together.  Then  the  iniqiuties  of
ancient  Israel  will  have  been  suffi-
ciently punished,  for  the  Lord  will
have  rewarded  them  double  for  all
their  sins.  When  that  time  arrives
the  people  called  Zion  will  be  re-
quired to  go  into  the  high  moun-
tains, and  they  shall  bring  good
tidings  unto  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth.

Those  who  have  heard  the  procla-
mation of  the  Latter-day  Saints,


,  can  judge  whether  we  have  brought
fcfood  tidings  to  this  generation  or
not  We  were  called  upon  by  the
Almighty  and  bis  holy  angels  to  go
forth  and  declare  to  the  nations  of
the  earth,  that  God  had  again
spoken  from  the  heavens,  and  that
by  holy  angels  sent  down  from  hea-
ven, he  had  again  revealed  the  ever-
lusting  Gospel  in  all  its  fullness,  and
for  forty  years  past  we  have  declared
this  to  the  world.  We  have  also  tes-
tified that  many  of  the  servants  of
God  have  been  ordained  by  holy
angels  and  sent  forth  to  publish  these
tidings  among  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth,  and  that  others  have  been  or-
dained by  those  who  received  their
ordination  from  heavenly  messen-
gers.

What  greater  or  more  glorious
tidings  could  be  proclaimed  to  the
fallen  sons  and  daughters  of  men
than  the  everlasting  Gospel  —  the
same  Gospel  that  was  proclaimed
anciently  by  Jesus  and  his  Apostles?
In  the  sixth  verse  of  the  14th  chap-
ter of  the  revelations  of  St.  John,
we  read  of  the  Gospel  being  revealed
by  an  angel,  and  that,  after  it  was
revealed,  it  should  be  published  to  all
people,  nations  and  tongues  under
the  whole  heavens,  saying  that  the
hour  of  God's  judgment  was  come,
showing  clearly  that  the  day  in  which
the  angel  should  be  sent  forth  with
the  everlasting  Gospel,  should  be
specially  characterized  by  terrible
judgments  poured  out  upon  the  na-
tions of  the  wicked.

When  the  Prophet  said,  0  Zion,
thou  that  bringest  good  tidings,  get
thee  up  into  the  high  mountain,  he
no  doubt  beheld  in  vision  the  great
work  of  gathering  the  children  of
Zion,  from  the  various  nations  of  the
earth,  into  a  mountainous  or  elevated
region  upon  our  globe.

Prior  to  the  death  of  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith,  the  Lord  predicted


80


JOFRNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


through  him  that  this  people  should
be  gathered  out  from  all  the  nations
under  heaven,  and  should  be  estab-
lished in  the  mountains,  or  elevated
regions  of  this  continent  ;  and  two
or  three  years  after  his  death — tweii*
ty-six  years  a^o,  this  coming  season
— this  prediction  began  to  be  ful-
filled, for  in  the  year  184?,  the  pio-
neers made  a  journey  uf  1,400  miles
from  the  Mississippi  river,  and,  by
the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  of  the
living  God,  they  rested  upon  this
mountainous,  and  then  wild  and  de-
solate region. They  commenced  a
settlement  where  the  site  of  this  city
now  stands,  and  since  that  time  this
people,  gathered  from  every  nation
by  the  preaching  of  the  everlasting
Gospel,  revealed  in  these  latter  days
through  the  Prophet  Joseph,  have
extended  their  borders, and  have
built  towns  and  cities  over  an  area
many  hundred  miles  in  extent.  In
obedience  to  the  command  of  the
Almighty,  this  people  left  their  na-
tive countries  and  the  graves  of  their
nncestois,  and  came  forth  by  thou-
sands each  succeeding  year,  and  peo-
pled this  high  and  elevated  region  of
our  country. We came here  be-
cause modern  Prophets  opened  their
mouths  by  the  spirit  of  revelation
aud  declared  these  mountains  to  be
the  abiding  place  of  the  latter-day
Zion. We  came  to  fulfill  modern
prophecies  as  well  as  the  predictions
of  the  ancient  Prophets. Have  you
not read, Latter-day Saints  and
strangers,  in  this  good  old  book,  a
prediction, uttered some  twenty-
five  hundred years ago, by  the
mouth of  Isaiah, concerning  the
house  of  the  Lord  that  was  to  be
built  in  the  latter  days  in  the  tops
of  the  mountains  ? I  presume  that
you  have  read  it  many  a  time ;  in-
deed I  have  heard  Christian  deno-
minations of  almost  every  sect,  in
their  psalms  and  anthems,  refer  to


this  prophecy.  They  have  spoken
of  the  mountain  of  the  house  of
the  Lord,  that  should  be  established
in  the  latter  days  upon  the  mountains.

Let  me  now  refer  you  to  that
prophecy,  which  is  recorded  in  the
sceoud  chapter  of  Isaiah,  and  which
reads  thus — "And  it  shall  come  to
pass  in  the  last  days  that  the  moun-
tain of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be
established  in  the  top  of  the  moun-
tains and  shall  be  exhalted  above
the  hills,  and  all  nations  shall  flow
unto  it;  and  many  people  shall  go
and  s?iy,  'Come  ye,  and  let  us  go
up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord
mid  to  the  houee  of  the  God  of
I  Jacob,  and  he  will  teaeh  us  of  his
ways,  and  we  will  walk  in  his  paths,
for  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the
law,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from
Jerusalem.*  *

It  stems,  then,  that  the  people
who  would  build  this  house  of  Uod
in  the  latter  days  in  the  mountains,
are  called  Zion,  and  from  them
should  go  forth  the  law.  What
law  ?  Does  this  mean  the  civil  law
of  the  country,  to  govern  all  people  ?
No.  The  people  of  this  American
republic,  by  their  representatives  in
Congress,  have  enacted  civil  laws
and  formed  a  great  and  free  gov-
ernment upon  the  face  of  this  con-
tinent, by  which  the  people  in  a  civil
capacity  are  governed.  This,  there-
fore, must  have  reference  to  the  law
of  the  Gospel,  that  God  would  reveal
in  the  latter  days  unto  Zion.  Prom
Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  says  the
Prophet,  aud  then,  to  show  more
fully  the  nature  of  this  great  latter-
day  work,  he  exclaims  in  the  next
verse — "And  he  shall  judge  the  na-
tions, and  shall  rebuke  many  people,
and  they  shall  beat  their  swords  into
ploughshares  and  their  spears  into
pruning  hooks;  nation  shall  not  lift
up  sword  against  nation,  neither
shall  they  learn  war  any  more."


THE  RISE  01*  ZION


IN  THE  LAST  DAYS.


SI


It,  is  very  evident  from  this  last

if

prediction  which  I  have  mid,  that  a
very  great  and  important  work
should  he  done  in  the  last,  dnys  upon
the  mountains.  The  Lord  has  to
prepare  or  build  a  house  in  the  moun-
tains. Will  it  not  be  a  marvelorts
work  and  a  wonder  for  the  Lord  to
have  a  house  in  the  latter  days  upon
the  earth  ?  I  think  it  will,  especi-
ally when  we  remember  that  the
earth  has  been  without  a  house  of
God  for  a  great  many  tfenemtkms.
If  there  had  always  been  a  house  of
God  on  the  earth,  the  Prophet  would  ,
never  have  uttererl  this  prophecy;
but  for  the  last  i  ,fiO0  years  we  might
have  gone  from  e^st  to  west,  and
from  north  to  south,  in  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth,  and  then  into
the  islands  of  the  tea,  seeking  for  a
house  of  God,  and  we  could  n  have
found  one.  What  I  mean  by  a  house
of  God,  is  one  winch  God  himself
commanded  to  be  built."  I  know  that
there  are  many  houses  built  in  all  the
great  cities  of  this  Republic,  as  well
as  in  Europe,  by  the  different  reli-
gions sects,  many  of  them  snpurb
buildings,  and  you  will  find  written
upon  them  generally,  "  The  house  of
the  Lrjrd,"  "The  house  of  God/'
"The  church  of  Jesas,"  the  hou.se  of
God  called  "St,  Pauls  church;'  the
house  of  God  called  "  St  Peter's
church/'  or  "  St..  John's  church."
We  can  find  plenty  of  them  in  New
York,  and  in  all  the  great  cities  and
towns  of  our  nation,  also  in  Great
Britain,  and  all  the  Christian  nations
of  Europe,  very  grand,  superb  edi-
fices, which  have  cost  an  immense
amount  of  money*  Did  God  com-
mand the  building  of  any  of  these
houses?  If  he  did  not,  then  they  '
are  not  his  houses,  and  they  are  nick-
named houses  of  the  Lord  by  the
builders  or  proprietors,  while  he,
really,  has  nothing  to  do  with  them.
Did  he  ever  send  an  angel  into  any
No.  C.


of  these  houses  ? No. When  did
he  ever  appear  in  his  glory  in  these
houses  ? Never. Did  he  ever  say
to  the  people,  "  You  have  built,  them
according  to  the  pattern  which  I
gave  unto  yon,  and  I  now  accept
them." No  such  declaration  was
ever  heard  among  all  these  Christian
nations, The  Lord  has  had  no  house
on  the  earth  for  a  great  many  cen-
turies, and  for  that  very  reason  the
Prophet  Isaiah  was  wrought  upon  by
the  Spirit  of  revelation  to  declare
that  such  a  great  event  as  the  Lord
baring  a  house  on  the  earth  in  the
hitter  days  should  be  accomplished,
and  its  location should be  in  the
mountains- From  this  we  may  draw
the  Conclusion  that  it  must  be  in  a
very  elevated  region,  when  compared
with  the  general  level  or  surface  of
the  country  whereon  it  will  be  built
There  is  one  thing  that  will  char-
acterize the  Zion  of  the  latter  days:
its people will  not  only  be  com-
manded to  get up into  the  high
mountain,  but  they  will  also  be  com-
manded to  bnild  unto  the  Lord  a
house  in  the  mountains,  the  pattern
of  that  house  being  given  by  inspira-
tion,  everything pertaining to  it
being  dictated  by  the  power  of  pro-
phecy by  the  servants  of  the  Most
High  God ;  and  when  the  house  is
built,  if  no  unclean  thing  is  suffered
to  enter  therein  to  defile  it,  God  will
come  into  his  tabernacle ;  but  if  there
be  any  unclean  thing  come  into  that
house  and  defile  it,  he  will  not  enter,
for  he  dwells  not  in  unholy  temples,
and  he  will  not  accept  such  a  house
as  an  offering  at  the  bands  of  hia
Saints. But  we  read  that  in  the
latter  days  God  will  accept  the  house
that  shall  be  built,  and  not  only  the
house  erected  to  his  name,  but  also
the  dwelling-houses  of  his  people,
showing  that  they  must  be  a  very
pure  people,  or  he  would  not  accept
of  their  private  dwell  ings.

Vol  XVI,


j


S2


JOURNAL  UF  DISCOURSES,


In  order  to  prove  this,  I  will  refer
you  now  to  the  4  Hi  chapter  of  Isaiah.
There  we  read — **  And  the  Lord
will  create  upon  every  dwelling-place
in  Mount  Zion,  and  upon  her  assem-
blies, a  cloud  and  smoke  by  ''ay,  and
the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by  night,  ,
and  upon  all  the  glory  shall  be  (or  a
defence.  And  there  shall  be  a  taber-
nacle in  the  day  time  for  a  shade
from  the  heat  and  for  a  place  of  re-
fuge, and  for  a  covert  from  storm
and  from  rain."  I  believe  this  build-
ing  is  culled  a  Tabernacle,  and  it  will
accommodate  from  twelve  thonsind
to  fifteen  thousand  pet  sons,  and  it  is
a  tolerably  cool  place  for  the  people
in  the  heat  of  summer,  especially  to
be  a  shade  in  the  day  time  from  the
heat,  and  for  a  place  of  refuge  and  a
covert  from  storm  and  from  rain  and
tempest.  I  do  not  think  that  storms
or  tempests  would  affect  a  congrega-
tion that  might  be  assembled  in  the
Lord's  Tabernacle;  but  1  wish  parti-
cularly to  call  your  attention  to  the
preceding  verse — "  The  Lord  shall
create  upon  every  dwelling-place  of
Mount  Zion,  and  upon  all  her  assem-
blies, a  cloud  and  smoke  by  day,
and  the  shining  of  a  flame  or  pillar
of  fire  by  night*"  I  do  not  see  any
cloud  covering  this  house,  or  the  con-
gregation that  is  before  me-  What
is  the  reason  ?  The  time  has  not
yet  come.  The  time  is  to  come
when  God  will  meet  with  all  the
congregation  of  his  Saints,  and  to
show  his  approval,  and  that  he  does
love  them,  he  will  work  a  miracle  by
covering  them  in  the  cloud  of  his
glory,  1  do  not  mean  something
that  is  invisible,  bat  I  mean  that
■ame  order  of  things  which  once
existed  on  the  earth  so  far  as  the
tabernacle  of  Moses  was  concerned,
which  was  carried  in  the  midst  of
the  children  of  Israel  as  they  jour-
meyed  in  the  wilderness.  Did  God
manifest  himself  in  that  tabernacle


that  was  built  according  to  the  pat*
tern  which  he  gave  unto  his  servant
Moses? He  did. In  what  way?
In  the  day  time  a  cloud  filled  that
tabernacle. The  Lord  intended  his
people  to  be  covered  with  the  cloud
continually,  and  he  intended  to  re-
veal himself  unto  them,  and  to  show
forth  his  glory  more  fully  amongst
them ;  but  they  sinned  so  much  in
his  sight  that he declared — 4fc  My
presence  shall  not  go  up  with  this
people,  lest  I  should  break  forth  upon
!  them  in  my  fury  and  consume  them
in a  moment." Because of  their
wickedness  he  withdrew  his  presence,
and  his  glory  in  a  great  measure  was
taken  from  them; but  ^1  ill  Moses
was  permitted  to  enter  the  taber-
nacle, and  to  behold the  glory  of
God,  and  it  is  said  that  he  talked
with  the  Lord  face  to  face— a  bles-
sing which  God  did  intend  to  bestow
upon  all  Israel  had  they  kept  his  law
and  had  not  hardened  their  hearts
against  him. But  in  the  latter  days
there  will  he  a  people  so  pure  in
Mount  Zion,  with  a  house  established
upon  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  that
God  will  manifest  himself,  not  only
:  in  their  Temple  and  upon  all  their
assemblies,  with  a  visible  cloud  du-
ring the  day,  but  when  the  night
shall  come,  if  they  shall  be  assem-
bled f  >r  worship,  God  will  meet  with
them  by  his  pillar  of  fire;  and  when
they  retire  to  their  habitations,  be-
hold each  habitation  will  be  lighted
up  by  the  glory  of  God, — a  pillar  of
flaming  fire  by  night.

Did  you  ever  hear  of  any  city  that
was  thus  favored  and  blessed  since
the  day  that  Isaiah  delivered  this
prophecy  ?  No,  it  is  a  latter-day
work,  one  that  God  must  consum-
mate in  the  latter  times  when  he
begins  to  reveal  himself,  and  show
forth  his  power  among  the  nations.
I  This  is  what  the  words  of  onr  text
5  mean,  the  first  verse  of  the  60  th


THE  RISK  OF  ZION  IN"  THE  LAST  DAYS,


it .»


chapter  of  Isaiah — "  Arise  and  shine,
for  thy  light  is  come,  and  the  glory
of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon  thee."

Now,  to  sbow  you  that  this  is  not
some  spiritual  thing,  something  that
will  be  invisible  to  and  not  discerned
by  the  Saints  of  the  latter  days,  or
by  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  gene-
rally,  let  me  refer  yon  fun  her  to  the
60  th  chapter  of  Isaiah.  The  Pro
phei  in  the  first  verse,  uses  the  words
of  onr  text,  "  Arise,  shine,  for  thy
light  is  come  and  the  priory  of  ttie
Lord  is  risen  upon  thee;  and  in  the
following  verse  he  says— "  For,  he-
hold,  the  darkness-  shall  cover  the
earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  people;
but  the  Lord  shall -arise  upon  thee,
and  his  glory  shall  be  s^en  upon  thee."
It  will  be  something  that  will  be
discernible.  And  now,  to  show  that
it  will  be  discernible  by  all  people  on
the  earth,  when  they  come  to  visit
Zion,  read  the  next  verse — "  And  the
Gentiles  shall  come  to  thy  light,
and  kinirs  to  the  brightness  of  thy
rising;"  showing  clearly  and  plainly
that  the  Gentiles,  and  even  the  kings
of  the  earth,  will  in  that  day  be  ex-
cited by  the  glory  of  God,  that  will
ihine  forth  upon  Zion,  which  will  be
as  a  city  set  on  a  hill  whose  light
cannot  be  hid.

We  will  go  bnck  again  to  the  se-
cond verse  of  the  second  chapter  of
Isaiah.  When  the  Lord  shall  fulfill
the  words  that  the  Prophet  Ins  spo-
ken, by  musing  a  house  to  he  built
to  his  name  in  the  tops  of  the  moun-
tains, he  says,  4i  Many  people  shall
go  and  say, 4  Come  ye  Jet  us  go  up  into
the  mountains  of  the  Lord,  to  the
house  of  the  God  of  Jacob,  that
he  may  teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  we
will  walk  in  his  paths !'"  What
causes  this  great  excitement  among
the  nations  of  the  earth  of  that  day  ?
They  will  hear  of  the  glory  and
power  of  God,  as  manifested  among
his  Saints  in  Zion, The  Lord  for  a


score  or  two  of  years  has  been  work-
ing in  order  to  establish  among  men,
facilities  for  conveying  knowledge  to
the  uttermost  corners  of  the  earth.
Within  the  memory  of  many  now
living,  the  discovery  of  the  electric
telegraph  lias  been  made,  by  means
of  which  news  of  the  doings  of  men
in  any  country  can  be  sent  round  the
earth  in  less  than  twenty-four  hours,
and,  if  there  was  no  intervention  the
electric  fluid  would  carrv  news  from

MP

any  one  point  to  the  most  distant
nations  in  one  second  of  time,  and
now,  the  earth  is  almost  covered  with
a  great  network  of  wire  to  facilitate
e  x  ped  i  \  ions  com  r  n  u  n  ica  t  i  on  among
the  various  nations.  What  is  all
this  for  ?  Js  it  simply  to  satisfy  the
greed  of  men  in  their  commercial
affairs  ?  No,  the  Lord  had  a  grander
object  in  view.  Men  use  the  tele-
graph  for  the  purpose  I  have  named,
and  in  many  respects  it  is  used  to
good  advantage,  and  it  has  been  the
menus  of  bringing  the  nations  into
much  closer  relationship  than  for-
merly, and  of  extending  among  them
a  knowledge  of  the  aits  and  sciences;
but  the  great  object  which  the  Lord
had  in  view  when  this  great  inven-
tion or  discovery  wns  brought  forth,
was  to  enable  knowledge  to  be  sent
from  the  mountain  tops,  from  the
midst  of  Zion,  when  his  glory  should
begin  to  be  manifested  in  the  midst
of  his  people  in  the  latter  days.  The
inquiry,  will  then  be,  among  the  dis-
tant nations, "What news  from


Ciion;"  "What  is  the  Lord  doing
among  that  people  ?  "  Do  you  sup-
pose  they  will  hear  with  unconcern
about  a  city  which,  with  every  dwell-
ing-place it  contains,  will  be  lighted
up  with  a  supernatural  light  ?  No  ;
this  is  oue  of  the  things  which  will
make  the  people  afar  off,  and  their
kings,  say,  "  Let  ui  go  up  to  ZioD,,f
**  let  us  go  op  to  the  mountain  of  the
Lord,  to  the  house  of  the  God  of


K4


Jul  UN AL  OF  I


3w>b*  What  for?  "That  he  may
teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  that  we
may  walk  in  his  paths/1  They  will
begin  to  discern  the  difference  then
between  God's  house  and  houses
made  by  men,  between  that  which
God  is  doing  in  the  earth  and  that
which  will  be  done  by  the  wisdom
of  men.

Some  people  have  supposed  that
the  manifestation  of  th*k  glory  of  God
in  the  latter-days  would  not  take
place  until  Je^us  comes  in  the  clouds
of  heaven ;  but  that  is  a  mistake,  it
will  take  place  before  that  time*
Before  the  second  advent  of  the  Re-
deemer, the  people  of  Zion  will  be
acknowledged  by  God,  as  the  great
latter-day  Church,  that  will  he  pre-
pared for  his  coming,  and  they  will
hold  the  keys  of  power  to  teach  man-
kind in  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  What
will  the  rest  of  the  people  be  doing  ?
Says  Isaiah,  "  Behold  the  darkness
shall  cover  the  earth,  and  pros*  dark-
ness the  people/1  That  will  be  the
distinction  between  Zion  and  the  rest
of  the  nations.  The  Lord  will  arise
upon  Zion,  and  his  glory  shall  be  seen
in  her  midst,  and  Isaiah  says — "  The
Gentiles  shall  come  to  thy  light  and
kings  to  the  brightness  of  thy  rising.
Lift  up  thine  eyes  around  about  and
see :  all  they  gather  themselves,  they
come  tu  thee:  thy  sons  shall  come
from  far,  and  thy- daughters  shall  be
nursed  at  thy  side,1'  "  Why  are  these
that  fly  as  a  cloud,  and  as  doves  to
their  windows  Sure  enough  we
come  with  great  speed.  As  Isaiah
has  said  in  the  fifth  chapter — the
Lord  should  hiss  unto  thee  from  the
ends  of  the  earth,  he  should  lift  up
an  ensign  for  the  nations,  and  they
should  come  with  speed  swiftly ;  just
as  yon  emigrants  do  when  you  get  on
board  of  these  railroads,  when,  in-
stead of  being  ninety  or  a  hundred
days  coming  to  this  elevated  region,
as  was  the  case  for  several  years,  you


eonu'  in  two  or  three  days-  "They
shall  come  with  speed  swiftly,  and  he
shall  lift  up  an  ensign  from  afar."
Not  in  Palestine,  where  the  Prophet
was  delivering  his  prediction,  that
would  have  been  near  by.  Not  an
ensign  that  was  to  be  raised  up  in
Jerusalem,  or  anywhere  in  that  land;
but  God  was  to  begin  the  great  lat-
ter-day work  afar  off  from  Jerusalem.
This  ensign  U  spoken  of  in  the  18th
chapter  of  Isaiah,  which  I  will  now
refer  to.  The  third  verse  of  that
chapter  says  :  "  All  ye  inhabitants  of
the  world  and  dwellers  on  the  earth,
see  ye  when  he  lifts  up  an  ensign  on
the  mountains,  and  when  he  bluweth
a  trumpet,  hear  ye."  That  was  not
a  proclamation  to  a  few  thousand
people  assembled  on  some  small  tract
of  country,  but  all  ye  inhabitants  of
the  earth.  Nobody  escapes  this  pro-
clamation, but  all  ye  inhabitants  of
the  earth,  see  ye  when  he  lifts  up  an
ensign,  Where  ?  Upon  the  moun-
tains There  is  the  place  where
Zion  is  to  be  reared  when  the  stand-
ard of  truth  is  revealed  from  heaven
in  the  last  days*

As  this  ensign  was  to  be  lifted
from  afar,  as  is  predicted  in  the  5th
chapter  of  Isaiah  s  prophecy,  let  us
inquire  now  where  it  is  to  be  located,
and  what  kind  of  a  country  it  is  in
which  it  is  to  be  reared.  It  is  aland
afar  off  from  Jerusalem  recollect,  and
in  order  to  ascertain  something  about
the  character  of  the  country,  we  will
read  the  first  verse  of  the  18th  chap-
ter— "  Woe  to  the  land  shadowing
with  wings  which  is  beyond  the  rivers
of  Ethiopia."  Where  are  the  rivers
of  Ethiopia  ?  South-west  of  Pales-
tine, where  Isaiah  delivered  this  pro-
phecy. Supposing  that  you  had  the
map  of  North  and  South  America,
and  of  the  whole  world  spread  out
before  you,  and  then  imagine  your-
self alongside  the  Prophet,  in  Pales*
tine,  when  he  said,  "Woe  to  the


THE  RISE  OF  2I0N


IN  THE  LAST  DAYS.


85


land  shadow ing  with  wings,  which  is
beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,"  and
you  should  cast  your  eyes,  if  you  had
power  to  do  so,  beyond  the  rivers  of
.Ethiopia,  what  kind  of  a  land  would
you  behold,  if  you  could  grasp  in
your  vision  the  land  of  North  and
South  America  ?  You  would  see  a
land  that  looked  like  the  two  winga
,  of  a  bird.  I  seldom  look  at  it,  as
laid  down  on  our  maps,  without  being  !
reminded  of  the  two  wings  of  a  great
bird,  A  land  shadowing  with  wings
- — in  other  words,  having  the  appear-
ance of  wings*  A  land  afar  off,  1
aw;ty  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,
there,  in  that  lan J,  shall  the  ensign
be  raised  for  the  nations;  not  for  a
few  individuals,  bat  for  all  nations.
No  wonder  that  the  Prophet  said  the
proclamation  should  be  universal —
**  All  ye  inhabitants  of  the  world,  all  ;
ye  dwellers  upon  the  earth,  see  ye
when  helifteth  up  this  ensign,"

That  the  Lord  intends  it  to  be  for
the  benefit  of  the  Gentiles  as  well  as
of  Israel,  let  me  refer  yon  to  the
22nd  verse  of  the  49th  chapter  of
Isaiah.  **  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  be-
hold, I  will  lift  up  mine  hand  to  the
Gentiles,  aud  I  will  set  up  my  stand-
ard to  the  people,  and  they  shall
bring  thy  sons  in  their  arms  aud  their
daughters  shall  be  carried  on  their
shoulders,  and  kings  shall  be  thy
nursing  fathers,  arid  their  queens  thy
nursing  mothers/*  &c.  1

This  is  a  great  latter-day  work  also
for  the  gathering  of  the  house  of
Israel — a  work  which  shall  commence
among  the  Gentiles.  In  ancient  days
the  Lord  commenced  his  work  among
Israel  The  kingdom  of  heaven  was
preached  among  the  Jews,  bat  they
proved  themselves  unworthy,  and
gays  Paul,  "  Lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gen-
tiles/1 and  the  kingdom  was  taken
from  the  Jews  and  given  to  a  nation
bringing  forth  the  fruits  thereof.
The  natural  branches  of  Israel  were


broken  off,  and  the  branches  of  the
wild  olive  tree — the  Genides — were
grafted  in.  But  the  Gentiles,  since
they  were  grafted  in,  1800  years  ago,
have  fallen  after  the  same  example
ot  unbelief  that  the  ancient ,  Jews
did,  and  they  have  lost  the  power
and  authority  which  they  once  pos-
sessed ;  and  for  many  centuries  they
have  had  no  apostles,  no  prophets,  no
angels  from  heaven,  no  power  of
godliness  made  manifest  among  them,
and  nothing  but  the  teachings  and
precepts  of  uninspired  men.  But  in
the  great  latter-day  work,  the  Lord
begins  where  he  left  off — "the  first
shall  be  last,  and  the  last  shall  be
first."  As  the  Jews,  in  ancient  days
were  first,  and  the  Gentiles  last,  so
in  the  great  latter-day  work,  the
Gentiles  will  be  first  and  Israel  will
be  last.  Hence  the  Prophet  says,
"Behold,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,
I  will  lift  up  mine  hand  to  the  Gen-
tiles, and  they  shall  bring  thy  sons
in  their  arms,  and  thy  daughters  upon
their  shoulders,  and  I  will  lift  up  my
standard  to  the  Gentiles/'

W  nut  is  a  standard  Y  The  same
as  an  ensign — an  ensign  that  is  to  be
lifted  up  upon  the  mountains,  upon
a  1  Hid  afar  off.  It  is  the  standard  of
the  Almighty,  the  same  standard
that  was  spoken  of  in  connection  with
the  great  highway  that  was  to  be  cast
up  over  this  continent  I  will  not
turn  to  it,  but  I  will  endeavor  to
repeat  the  substance  of  the  prophecy
in  relation  to  it.  Isaiah  in  speaking
of  this  great  highway,  or  railway,
says,  M  Go  through,  go  through  the
gates,  prepare  the  way  of  the  people.

Cast  up,  cast  up  a  highway,  gather
oat  the  stones,  lift  up  a  standard  for
the  people."  The  same  work  that
God  intended  to  perform  in  the
mountains,  and  he  wanted  a  highway
cast  up,  that  the  people  might  go
with  speed  swiftly  to  that  land*
But  says  one,  w  what  does  the  Pro-


phet  mean  when  he  says,  'go  through
the  gates  ?"  I  think  if  I  had  been
Isrmih,  and  had  had  the  vision  of  tny
mind  opened  to  see  the  railroad  and
the  great  trains  of  cars  without  any
apparent  animal  life  attached  to  them,
going:  with  speed  swiftly,  if  I  had
seen  them  dart  into  the  mountain
and,  after  watching  a  few  minutes,
had  seen  them  come  out  on  the  or  her
side,  and  then  wished  to  describe
w  1 1 ut  I  had  seen  in  words,  I  do  not
think  I  could  have  found  any  more
applicable  than  those  used  by  the
ancient  Prophet — u  Go  through,  go
through  the  gates,  cast  up,  cast  up  a
highway,  gather  out  the  stones,  and
lilt  up  a  standard  for  the  people.''
Then,  to  show  that  this  standard  and
highway  were  connected,  the  Prophet  ,
in  the  very  next  verse,  says:  u  Be-
hold, the  Lord  hath  proclaimed  to
the  ends  of  the  world,  say  ye  to  the
daughter  of  Zion,  behold,  thy  salva-
tion Cometh,  and  his  reward  is  with
him.  -  Behold,  they  shall  be  called  a
holy  jKiople,  the  redeemed  of  the
Lord;  and  they  shall  be  called,
sought  out,  a  city  not  forsaken."
The  people  of  Zion  will  not  be  an
unholy  people*  The  world  look  upon
the  Latter-day  Saints  as  the  most
corrupt  of  all  people  on  the  fmce  of
the  earth.  Bat  according  to  the
words  of  the  Prophet,  the  people  who
dwell  in  the  mountains  where  the
standard  is  to  be  raised,  are  to  be  a
holy  people.  "Behold,  thy  Redeemer
cometh,  behold,  the  Lord  shall  come/'
Tli is  has  been  the  proclamation  of
the  people  of  Zion,  ever  since  we
commenced,  aljout  forty  years  ago,
to  declare  that  God  was  about  to
come  in  his  glory,  power  and  ma-
jesty, in  the  greatness  of  his  strength,
with  all  his  holy  angels  with  him,  in
the  elouds  of  heaven,  to  reign  upon
the  tarth.  This  proclamation  will
go  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  all  people
will  be  invited  up  to  these  mountains,


and  they  will  flock  here  as  clouds,
and  as  doves  to  their  windows.

This  will  fulfill  Daniel's  prophecy.
Bead  the  second  chapter  of  Daniel  if
you  want  to  know  about  the  latter-
day  kingdom.  Study  it  thoroughly.
I  do  not  know  that  1  have  time  to
dwell  upon  it,  but  I  will  refer  you  to
some  few  things  in  relation  to  the
latter-day  kingdom.  Daniel,  in  in-
terpreting the  dream  of  Nebuchad-
nezzar, King  of  Babylon,  describes
the  various  kingdoms  of  the  earth
from  his  day  down,  as  long  as  there
should  bt*  any  human  kingdoms  on
rhe  earth,  under  the  form  of  a  great
image,  with  the  head  of  gold,  breast
and  arms  ol  silver,  bully  and  thighs
of  brass,  le^s  of  iron,  feet  part  iron
and  part  of  putters  clay.  They  re-
presented the  several  kingdoms  of
the  world,  and  more  especially  the
four  great  kingdoms  that  should  hold
universal  dominion.  After  seeing
this  image  in  all  its  completeness,
from  the  gold  dawn  to  the  last  rem-
nants of  the  nations  of  the  earth,
represented  by  the  feet  and  toes  of
the  image,  lit*  then  sees  a  kingdom
and  a  government  entirely  distinct
from  and  forming  no  part  or  portion
ot  the  image,  but  it  was  entirely
feeparate  therefrom.  It  was  repre-
sented as  a  stone  cut  out  of  the
mountain  without  hands,  and  it  rolled
forth,  and  before  the  power  of  this
new  kingdom  all  the  kingdoms  of  the
earth  were  brokeu  in  pieces  by  the
power  of  the  Almighty,  What  be-
came of  them  ?  They  were  to  be
as  the  chaff  of  t  he  summer  threshing
floor — the  wind  carried  them  away
and  there  was  no  place  found  for
them.  *  ;  r

You  can  draw  your  own  conclusions
about  all  human  governments.  Daniel
says  this  kingdom  that  was  to  come
out  of  the  mountain,  should  be  the
kingdom  of  God,  which  God  himself
should  set  up  in  the  latter  days,  and


AX  ACCOUNT  OF  HIS  JOURNEY  TO  PALESTINE


87


it  should  stnnd  for  ever  and  ever,  it
should  never  be  broken  in  pieces,
neither  should  it  be  given  to  any
other  people,  while  all  the-e  earthly
kingdoms  should  pass  away  and  be
forgotten  like  the  chaff  blown  away
before  a  tremendous  tempest,  and  no
plaee  found  for  them.

The  former-day  kingdom  of  God,
set  up  in  the  days  of  the  Apostles,
was  overcome,  in  fulfillment  of  Dan-
iel's prophecy.  He  saw  that  the
po*vers  of  this  world  would  make  war
upon  and  overcome  the  kingdom  that
v  ;ls  set  up  then,  John,  the  Reve-
lator,  also  predicted  that  a  certain
power  should  arise  and  make  war
with  the  Saints  and  overcome  them.
That  is  the  reason  that  kingdom  did
not  continue  on  the  earth :  it  was
overcome  and  every  vestige  of  it  de-
stroyed. No  prophets,  revelatory  or
inspired  apostles  were  left  to  build  up
the  kingdom ;  not  an  inspired  man


[  among  all  the  nations,  bat  after  a
j  long  time  had  passed  away,  God
would  send  an  angel  from  heaven
with  the  everlasting  Gospel,  What
for  ?  To  organize  his  kingdom  again
on  the  earth;  aud  when  God  should
set  it  tip  in  the  latter  days,  after  the
toes  and  feet  of  the  great  image  were
formed,  then  there  should  be  no
breaking  in  pieces  of  that  little  stone,
but  as  it  rolled  it  should  gather
strength  and  become  greater  and
greater,  as  Daniel  has  said,  until  it
became  a  great  mountain  and  tilled
the  whole  earth.  And  the  kingdom
and  the  greatness  of  the  kingdom
under  the  whole  heavens  should  be
given  into  the  hands  of  the  Saints
of  the  Most  High  God.

That  kingdom  is  called  Zion — the
latter-day  Zion,  about  which  oar  choir
sang  in  their  tirst  hymn  this  after-
noon* Amen.


REMARKS BY PRESIDENT GEORGE A.  SMITH,

Delivered  is  the  New  Tabekxacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  June  22,  1873.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


AN  ACCOUNT  OF  HIS


UN  EY  TO  PA  LEST  INK.


Brethren  and  sisters,  I  am  exceed-
ingly thankful,  through  the  blessings
of  the  Lord  and  your  faith  and
prayers,  that  I  have  been  permitted
to  perform  a  lengthy  journey  au  l  to
return  and  associate  with  you  again,


to  behold  your  faces,  and  to  lift  my
voice  and  bear  testimony  to  the  things
of  the  kingdom  of  God  in  this
Tabernacle.  I  feel  exceedingly  thank-
ful to  iny  heavenly  Father  for  his  pre-
serving mercy,  and  to  my  brethren


and  sisters  for  their  prayers  and
faith,  and  for  their  kind  assistance,
which  was  bountifully  rendered  to
me,  enabling  me  to  bear  the  cost  of  a
lengthy  and  expensive  journey.  The
principal  object  of  that  journey  was
to  visit  the  lands  in  which  the
events  recorded  in  the  Bible  trans-
pired. Incidentally  we  visited  many
countries,  and  had  an  opportunity
of  acquiring  information  and  ex-
tending acquaintances  into  lands
which  heretofore  have  been  barred
against  visits  from  our  Elders,  as  the
Elders,  when  they  went  abroad  went
expressly  to  preach,  and  were  fre-
quently prohibited  from  entering
these  countries,  or  if  permitted  to
enter  were  not  allowed  to  speak  of
the  Gospel.  We,  having  means  to
travel,  of  course  passed  along  as
other  travelers,  for  not  being  on  a
Tniesion  for  preaching  we  were  not
interrupted,  and  this  enabled  us  to
acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  laws
and  customs  of  the  various  coun-
tries we  visit*  d,  and  a  variety  of
information  that  we  had  heretofore
only  got  by  reading:;  acid  I  under-
stand very  clearly  that  a  person
may  read  almost  any  subject  and
yet  a  personal  inspection  will  give
better  and  perhaps  more  extended
or  different  ideas  from  those  gleaned
solely  from  rear  ling,  in  reading
books,  you  learn  the  views,  thoughts
and  reflections  of  the  individuals
who  wrote  them,  modified  more  or
less  by  a  great  desire  in  the  human
heart  to  make  books  readable,  in
order  that  they  may  sell  It  is  really
true  that  a  great  share  of  the  books
in  the  world  arc  written  more  to  be
*ead  than  to  communicate  facts.  It
is  said  thai  when  Henry  the  Fourth
was  on  his  sick  bed,  his  son,  knowing
his  father  had  always  been  very  fond
of  history,  proposed  to  read  a  little  j
history  to  him.  "Oh,"  said  the,
dying  king,  "  I  am  too  far  gone  to  l


bother  my  brains  with  romance,"
That  sliowed  his  opinion  of  history.

As  soon  as  we  reached  Rome  we
began  to  find  the  localities  referred
to  in  Scripture.  It  was  in  the  reign
of  Augustus  Ccesar,  that  Christ  was
,  born.  At  that  time  Judea  was
ja  tributary  kingdom  to  Rome,  its
king  being  Herod,  The  decree
which  went  forth  from  Augustus
Caesar,  that  all  the  world  should  be
taxed,  of  course  included  Jerusalem
and  the  entire  kiugdom  of  Judea,
which  at  that  time  was  of  consider-
able extent  Joseph  and  Mary  went
to  Bethlehem  to  be  taxed  with  the
house  of  David,  and  there  being  no
room  in  the  inn,  they  took  up  their
quarters  in  a  stable,  and  there  the
Savior  wTas  born.

Some  years  after  the  ascension  of
Jesus,  St.  Paul  went  to  Rome,  in
order  to  eet  a  hearing  before  Caesar,
on  an  appeal  c;lsp,  which  had  been
adjourned  from  time  to  time  before
the  authorities  in  Cesarea  Phillippi,
in  consequence  of  his  refusal,  it
seems  from  the  reading  of  the  Book
of  Acts  to  furnish  the  "  backsheesh."
Thinking  that  Pauls  friends  would
!  pay  liberally  for  his  relief  his  judges
hud  kept  him  bound  in  prison  ;  but
as  the  expected  bribe  was  not  forth-
corning  he  was  eventually  sent  to
Rome  on  his  own  appeal ;  and  while
we  were  at  Rome  we  were  shown
places  where  he  was  said  to  have
been  imprisoned,  and  one  room  where
they  said  lie  used  to  hold  meetings,
and  a  variety  of  places  and  incidents
connected  either  directly  ur  indirectly
with  the  mission  of  the  Apostles  in
the  first  century.

In  the  cathedrals  of  almost  all
the  countries  which  we  visited  we
were  shown  relics  that  had  been
brought  from  Palestine,  At  Pisa
there  is  a  burying  yard,  probably
au  acre  and  a  quarter  in  extent,  nine
Icet  of  earth  having  been  brought


AN  ACCOUNT  OF  HIS  JOURNEY  TO  PALESTINE.


89


from  Palestine  as  a  covering  for  this  j
burial place. It takes a  permit
from  tbc  Pope  to  be  buried  in  that
sacred  soil. In  the  cathedral  of  San
Lorenzo,  in  Genoa,  they  showed  us
the  chain  with  which  John  the  Bap-
tist was  hound,  and  the  casket  which
they  said  contained  his  head,  and  a
variety  of  other  relics.  In  the  church
of  St  Mark,  in  Venice,  they  showed
ns  the  coffin  of  St  Mark,  and  while
there  they  showed  us  a  casket  said  to
contain  the  remains  of  Sr.  John  the
Baptist,  also the  marble slab  on
which his  head  fell  when  he  was
executed, I  ascertained,  however,
to  my  satisfaction,  that  this  was  a
local saint, carried  by  the  Vene-
tians, seven  or  eight  hundred  years
ago,  from Marsaba, in  Palestine,
where  he was  recognized as  St,
John  of  Damascus. There  is  so
much relic warship, that it  has
been  overdone;  but  we  commenced,
when  we  got  to  Rome,  to  tread  the
ground  where  the  Apostles  labored.
We  visited  a  prison  in  which  it  is
said  >St«  Peter  was  imprisoned.  We
saw  the  spot  where  he  is  said  to  have
escaped  from  his  enemies,  and  was
about  to  flee,  but  the  Savior  called
to  him  and  asked  him  if  he  was
afraid to die, so says  tradition.
They  show  the  print  that  Peter's
foot  made  when  he  heard the  Sa-
vior's voice. That  is  on  a  spot  out*
side  of  Rotne. They  built  a  church
on  that  place  and  it  contains  a  sta-
tue of  St  Peter,  the  toes  of  one  of
the  feet  have  been  worn  off,  we  were
told,  by  kissing,  and  their  place  sup-
plied with  bronze. Tfiey  showed  us
the  stairs,  brought  from  Jerusalem,
which  they  say  led  up  to  Pilate's
judgment  seat We  saw  a  great
many  people  crawling  up  and  down
them  on  their  knees,  weeping  and
wailing  and  kissing  every  step.

As  we  steamed  towards  the  east,
we  passed  the  Isle  of  Candia,  the


crete  of  Scripture,  and  were  reminded
by  various  places  that  we  saw,  of
the  incidents  of St. Paul's  ship-
wreck.

Before  leaving  London  we  made
arrangements  with  the  firm  of  Tho-
mas Cook  &  Son,  to  supply  us  with
railroad facilities, hotel  coupons,
steamboat conveyance and  trans-
port at  ion  from  London  to  Palestine,
for  one  hundred and thirty  days,
terminating  at  Trieste,  in  Austria,
via  Constantinople  and  Athens.  By
this  means  much  of  the  annoyance
of  traveling  in  countries  where  we
,  did  not  understand  the  languages  and
manners  and  customs  was  avoided.
| We  reached  Egypt  and  landed  at
Alexandria  on  February  6th.  Wo
were  met  on  board  our  steamer  by
Mr.  Alexander  Howard,  a  dragoman
of  Messrs.  Cooke  &  Co. He  took
charge  of  our  effects,  assisted  us  in
passing  the  custom  house,  and  con-
ducted us  to  the  Hotel  d'Europe,
giving  ns  choice  rooms,  where  we
had  a  magnificent  view,  and  furnish-
ing  ns  all  the  information  necessary
to  make  our  sojourn  in  Egypt  plea-
I  sanfc  and  profitable.
, In  Egypt  we  were  still  on  Scrip-
tural ground. Eirypt,  after  the  days
of  Constantino,  until  those  of  the
|  Saracens,  was  a  Christian  country.
In  the  seventh  century  it  was  con-
quered by  the  Saracens  or  Mahotn-
edans. Alexandria  is  supposed  to
have  contained  600,000  inhabitants
when it  was  conquered  by  Amru.
All  the  world  has  been  horrified  by
i  the  decision of  Omar, Caliph  of
Medina,  that  the  library  of  Alex-
andria— said  to  be  the  largest  col-
lection of  books  and  manuscripts  in
the  world — should  be  consigned  to
the  flames.

u  After  a  siege  of  fourteen  months
Amru,  also  called  Amer,  took  it,
and  in  his  letter  to  the  Caliph
Omar,  he  informed  him  of  the  con-


quest  he  had  made,  saying  that  he
had  iuund  there  4,000  palaces,  a
like  number  of  baths,  4U0  places  of
amusement,  and  12,000  gardens,
and  that  one  quarter  alone  was  00*
Copied  by  4U,0U0  Jews."  It  is  said
that  the  books  and  manuscripts  of
that  library  furnished  fuel  for  warm-
ing those  baths  for  some  four
months.

There  is  in  Egypt  a  sect  of  Chris-
tians called  Copts,  or  the  Coptic
church,  They  are  descendants  of
the  in  habitants  of  Egypt  that  were
conquered  by  the  Saracens,  At
Cairo we visited one of  their


and  were  shown  t)


where  they  said  the  Savior,  his
mother  and  Joseph  resided  during
their  stay  there,  when  they  tied
from  the  wrath  of  Herod,  and  the
basin  they  washed  in,  and  we  saw
many  persons  who  had  come  there
to  be  healed  in  consequence  of  the
holiness  ot  this  place.  This  class  of
Christians — the  Copts — have  main-
tained their  identity  through  the
reign  of  Mahommetun  power,  Turk-
ish and  Arabic,  dowu  to  the  present
tune,  There  is  probably  a  million
of  thcin,  perhaps  ruoie,  in  Egypt
and  Abyssinia.  There  is  also  the
Oriental  Greek  Church  in  Egypt  ;
they  showed  us  some  traditionary
holy  places.

We  went  to  visit  Heliopolis,  or
the  City  of  On.  I  have  taken  a
great  interest  in  family  matters,
believing  in  the  doctrine  of  bap-
tism for  the  dead,  and  I  went  to
Heliopolis  because  1  had  good  rea-
son to  believe  that  Joseph  who  was
sold  into  Egypt,  married  his  wite
there,  Asenatb,  daughter  of  Poti-
phar,  priest  of  On.  Heliopolis  is
believed  to  be  the  On  of  that  day,
and  was  the  great  college  at  which
all  the  leading  men  of  Egypt  were
educated.  Probably  Hose*  received
hi*  education  thtre. Ther*  i«  a


needle  or  obelisk,  some  sixty  feet  ont
of  the  ground,  at  Heliopolis,  con-
taining inscriptions  from  top  to
bottom.  How  tar  it  goes  into  the
ground  I  know  not,  but  the  inscrip-
tions on  that  needle,  if  rightly  in-
terpreted  by  Egyptian  scholars,  in-
dicate that  it  was  probably  there
when  Joseph  went  to  Egypt.  The
city  and  all  its  temples  have  gone
to  decay.  Other  needles  of  tho
same  kind,  which  were  there,  have
been  carried  awn  v.  one  of  thern  stands
in  Constantinople.  The  ground  is
in  a  state  of  cultivation  though  the
ruins  of  the  city  of  On  are  to  be  seen
scattered  about,  and  when  we  were
there,  there  was  on  the  ground  a
luxuriant  crop  of  sugar  cane,  show-
ing that  the  soil  was  very  rich.

Everything  that  grows  in  Egypt
has  to  be  urinated  from  the  river
Nile.  There  is  little,  in  fact  no
other,  water,  except  that  which
comes  from  the  Nile.  I  say  there
is  no  other  water,  but  a  little  below
the  city  of  On,  there  is  a  very  old
tree — a  sycamore  I  believe,  under
which  the  Copts  believe  that  Joseph,
Mary  and  Jesus  camped  while  they
remained  in  Egypt,  during  their
flight  from  Herod.  A  great  num-
ber of  the  branches  have  been  car-
ried away,  and  portions  of  the  tree,
but  its  boughs  aie  .still  very  wide
spread.  The  owner  of  the  tree  has
put  around  it  a  very  decent  picket
fence  of  pine  lumber, — I  do  not
know  where  he  got  it, — and  any
man  who  will  give  him  a  franc,  he
will  lend  him  a  knife  and  he  may
cut  his  name  on  the  fence,  bnt  if  he
will  not  give  him  a  franc,  he  must
not  do  that,  and  he  must  not  carry
away  any  of  the  tree.  I  did  not
care  about  cutting  my  name  on  the
fence,  so  1  saved  my  franc.  But
there  was  a  spring  or  well  close  by,
and  the  water-  was  drawn  up  by
&  niuLe  on  a  kind  of  rudely  con-


AN  ACCOUNT  UF  HIS  JOURNEY  TO  PALESTINE,


91


structed  wheel,  with  a  number  of
earthen  vessels  tied  to  the  ends  of
its  arms-  They  told  me  that  the
spring  was  in  ancient  times  brack-
ish and  unfit  to  drink,  bat  when
Mary  came  there  she  bathed  in  it
and  it  became  sweet  and  good.  I
drank  some  of  the  water  and  found
it  so,  tasting  very  much  like  the
big  spring  at  St.  George,  I  remark-
ed to  the  man  1  really  wished  she
had  made  it  cold  while  she  was
about  it,  for  a  drink  of  cold  water
would  have  been  very  refreshing
just  then* This  cost  me  one  franc.

I  am  not  designing,  however,  to
follow  the  incidents  of  my  journey
any  fur t bur  than  they  relate,  more
or  less,  to  the  history  of  those  coun-
tries mentioned  either  directly  or  by
tradition  in  the  Bible, In  Cairo  we
were  shown  Joseph's  well,  and  we
were  told  by  our  guides  that  it  was
made  by  and  called  after  Joseph  who
was  sold  into  Egypt. But  on  in-
vestigation we  found  that  when  Sala-
din,  Caliph  of  Egypt,  undertook  to
select  a  place  for  a  citadel  in  his  new
city  of  Cairo,  he  hung  up  meat  in
different  parts  around,  ami  lie  found
that  fresh  meat  would  keep  longer  at
that  point  than  any other  in  the
neighborhood,  and  ne  came  to  the
conclusion  that  tha't  was  the  healthi-
est place,  and  he  had the  ground  j
cleared  for  a  citadel,  and  in  doing
that  tliey  discovered  a  well  filled  with
sand. The  sand  was cleared  out,
and  as  one  of  the  names  of  the  Ca-
liphs was  Yoosef,  it  was  called  Jo-
seph's well,  so  it  may  be  that  Joseph
who  was  sold  into  Egypt  made  it,
and  it  may  not. Its  present  name,
however,  1  believe,  comes  from  the
Suit  an  Yoosef  Salah-ed-deen,  Caliph  j1
of  Egypt  in  the  12th  century,  a  man
known  to  fame. The  water  of  the
well  is  brackish,  and  is  chiefly  used
for  laying  the  dust  |
We  all  felt  more  or  less  interest


I  in  the  locality  anciently  called  the
land  of  Goshen,  but  as  nobody  could
tell  precisely  whero  the  land  of  Go-
shen was,  it  was  necessarily  a  matter
of  guess-work.  But  the  streams  of
water  must  run  now  somewhere  near
the  same  as  they  did  then,  and  we
followed  the  course  of  a  fresh  water
canal,  which  has  recently  been  tinned
from  the  Nile,  and  which  is  some  one
I  hundred  and  fifty  miles  in  length,  to
Suez  and  the  Red  Sea.  This  canal
passes  near  Zagazig,  which  is  pro-
bably in  the  vicinity  of  the  land  of
Goshen  ;  and  when  the  children  of
Israel  started  for  Canaan,  they  had  to
follow  this  route  in  order  to  secure
themselves  the  necessary  amount  of
water  from  that  old  fresh  water  canal,
which  is  now  known  and  identified
;  as  having  run  very  nearly  on  the
same  ground  as  the  present  one,
[  which  has  been  made  within  a  few
years,  and  which  the  railroad  follows.
I  There  is  a  good  deal  of  specula-
tion as  to  where  the  children  of  Is-
rael crossed  the  Reel  Sea,  but  the
most  reasonable  conclusion  I  can  ar-
rive at,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to
investigate  the  matter,  is  that  they
followed  this  fresh  water  canal,  and
that  they  camped  near  its  terminus
on  the  Red  Sea,  and  crossed  over  to
i  the  peninsula  of  Sinai,  after  which
they  were  miraculously  supplied  with
water,  food  and  clothing  through  the
deserts  of  Arabia.

We  passed  over  that  portion  of
the  Suez  canal,  between  Is  mail  a  and
Port  Said.  The  Suez  canal  is  cer-
1  tainly  a  very  grand  enterprise.  Port
Said  receives  its  fresh  water  from  the
Nile.  It  has  gut  pipes  over  fifty
miles  in  length  to  bring  that  water
from  the  canal  at  Ismaila  to  supply
the  town.  Port  Said  is  considerable
of  a  place,  and  there  is  a  good  deal  of
enterprise  there.

On  the  eveniug  of  February  22nd  %
we  tailed  from  Port  Said  on  the


JOURNAL  OF


DISCOURSES


Yeitat  one  of  the  steamers  belonging
to  the  Austrian  Lloyd's.  The  next
morning  we  came  in  sight  of  Jaffa,
the  Joppa  of  the  Scriptures.  Jaffa
is  a  kind  of  promontory  or  headland,
projecting  into  the  sea*  The  anchor-  ;
age  is  gimp ly  an  open  roadstead,  and
landing  is  sometimes  very  difficult
If  we  had  had  an  unfavorable  wind
and  been  carried  by  that  port,  it
would  have  cost  us  considerable  time
■pel  expense;  but  when  we  reached
there  the  day  was  pleasant  and  the
sea  smooth,  a  lid  we  landed  without
difficulty.

At  J;jffa  wo  were  met  by  the  be-
fore-named Sir.  Howard,  who  coru
dueled  ns  to  the  Turkish  custom-
house officer,  who,  I  believe,  exa-
mined only  one  passport,  and  passed
ns,  and  we  went  directly  to  our  tents,
which  were  pitehed  not  far  from  the
seaside,  near  the  burial-place.  They
were  very  nice  wall  tent%-  Well  ear-  !
pa  ted,  with  all  the  outfit  necessary
ready  lor  use,  and  we  at  once  com-
menced  keeping  house.

This  Joppa  is  the  place  where
King  Solomon  landed  the  cedars
that  he  got  from  Hiram,  King  of
Tyre,  for  the  building  of  Ins  Temple.
I  am  of  the  opinion  that  the  place
has  undergone  some  physical  changes
since  that  time,  although  I,  of  course,
could  not  determine  to  what  extent.
Jn  the  vicinity  of  this  city  is  a  colony
of  about  six  hundred  Germaus,  under
the  presidency  of  D.  V,  Christopher
Hoffman,  who  consider  themselves
the  spiritual  temple  of  Christ  They
have  bought  some  land  and  have  put
it  under  cultivation,  and  they  say
the  rains  have  increased  there  very  !
much  within  the  last  few  years,  and
the  lands  are  very  productive.  They
raise  wheat  and  a  variety  of  grains
without  irrigation.  They  say  their
gardens  and  orange  groves  require
irrigation.  I  think  the  olives  do
not* The most beautiful orange '


groves  that  we  saw,  perhaps,  on  our
entire  journey,  were  at  Jaffa,  We
visited  this  German  colony.  The
American  vice-consul,  Mr,  Harding,
rqet  us  and  treated  ns  with  courtesy,
j  He  is  a  German  by  birth,  never  was
in  America,  speaks  English,  We
:  also  saw  a  number  of  persons  who
were  connected  with  the  scheme  of
one  George  J.  Adams,  and  who,  after
its  failure,  were  left  in  that  country,
one  of  whom,  Mr.  Floyd,  is  now  a
dragoman.  They  built,  some  houses,
but  they  have  been  purchased  by  this
German  colony.  We  attended  a
meeting  of  a  missionary,  and  heard  a
Methodist  sermon.  It  seemed  to  be
a  very  difficult  thing  to  get  together
people  enough  to  have  a  meeting.

I  believe  the  only  place  of  parti-
cular Scriptural  import  which  they
pretend  to  have  intientiried  in  Joppa
is  ihe  house  of  Simon  the  tanner,  by
the  seaside.  Some  were  so  critical
as  to  doubt  whether  it  was  the  iden*
tical  house  in  which  Peter  lodged
when  the  messengers  of  Cornelias
came;  but  then,  there  are  the  tan
vats,  and  it  is  right  by  the  seaside,
and  the  Bible  says  that  Simon  was  a
tanner,  and  that  he  lived  by  the  sea-
side. They  showed  us  the  fhd  roof
on  which  they  say  Peter  was  sleeping.
In  one  end  of  the  house — the  end
towards  Mecca — there  was  a  recess,
such  a*  the  Mahometans  have  in
their  mosques  to  pray  in.  We  in-
quired of  the  man  in  charge  of  the
house  whether  Kjimon  was  a  Mussul-
man ?  He  said,  "  Yes,  and  there  was
where  he  prayed."

It  is  not  important,  of  course,  whe-
ther that  building  is  the  identical
one  or  not,  yet  it  has  been  visited  by
thousands,  and  is  a  source  of  nr.  tmue.
It  was  in  this  neighborhood  f  at  the
|  Lord  revealed  to  Peter  that  what
God  hath  cleansed  should  not  be
cailed  common  or  unclean,  and  that
it  wad  proper  for  hirn  to  preach  the


AX  ACCOUNT  01-  HIS  JOUKXr.Y  TO  PALESTINE


'  93


I1Q-


Gospel  tt  the  Gentiles,  and  from
that  place  he  went  to  visit  Cornelius,
and  ad  ministered  the  Gospel  to  those
not  of  the  seed  of  Israel.

Having  obtained  our  horses  and
saddles,  Monday  morning,  Feb.
we  started  for  Jerusalem.  I  could
not  obtain  a  Syrian  saddle  large
pnoagh  for  nie  to  ride  un,  and  I  was
compelled  to  ride  on  an  English
sa^l die.  Tins  made  a  great  differ-
ence" in  ray  comfort  If  I  hud  carried
a  Spanish  saddle  from  home,  I  should
have  been  much  more  comfortable
on  my  journey.  I  was  constantly
afraid  that  the  fastenings  of  my  Eng-
lish saddle  would  give  way.  I  did
not  think  they  were  strong  enough,
and  then  its  construction  and  shape
were  not  comfortable  and  co
and  in  those  particulars  it
thing  to  he  compared  with  a  Spanish,
or  even  with  a  Syrian  saddle.  I  am
pretty  heavy,  and  had  not  been  on
horseback  for  fifteen  years.

Travelers  in  Palestine  suffer  gi  t  atly
from  the  sun,  but  we  were  early  in
the  season — two  weeks  earlier  than
travelers  generally  set  out  for  Jeru-
salem. Mr.  Cook  was  fitting  out
several  parties ;  but  they  were  two
weeks  after  us,  and  we  were  compa-
ratively alone,  though  some  few  tra-
Telers  fell  in  with  us  incidental  I  v.

if

At  noon,  we  halted  at  what  was
culled  the  Martyr's  Tower,  in  liain-
leh.  Kamleh  has  a  history  relating
particularly  to  the  crusades.  It  is
in  the  vicinity  of  the  country  anci-
ently occupied  by  the  Philistines,
and  from  its  tower,  which  we  climbed,
and  which  is  probably  a  hundred  feet
high,  we  could  see  a  portion  of  their
country.  There  is  at  this  place  a
monastery  of  monks,  who,  it  is  said,
feed  travelers  of  all  denominations,
and  they  are  spoken  of  by  all  tra-
velers as  being  very  kind.  They
arc  Roman  Catholics.  Of  coarse  we
had  no  need  to  test  their  hospitality,


I  for  we  had  everything  within  our
reach  that  was  necessary  to  supply
O0T  wants,  carrying  it  right  along
with  us.

Iti  the  evening  wo  camped  on  a
very  nice  stream  at  the  eu  trance  of
the  Valley  of  Ajalon.  Oar  Sunday
school  children  will  recollect  this
very  well,  from  the  fact  that  Joshua
said  to  the  sun,  u  Stand  thou  still
upon  Gibeon,  and  thou,  moon,  in  the
Valley  of  Ajilon."  I  ought  to  ex-
plain that  in  Palestine  what  we  call  a
ravine  is  called  a  valley,  and  wider
volleys  they  call  plains.

Before  reaching  Ramleh  we  passed
through  the  plains  of  Sharon,  where
a  kind  of  red  flower,  culled  the  rose
of  Sharon,  grows  abundantly,  and
the  land  appears  to  he  very  fertile.
We  were  rather  surprised,  having
heard  such  accounts  of  the  sterility
of  Palestine,  to  find  on  our  entrance
into  it  that  the  land  w  as  apparently
fruitful;  though  we  were  told  that
if  we  had  come  later  it  would  have
looked  more  barren.

Miss  E,  R.  Snosv  and  Miss  Clara
Little  had  a  tent;  Elder  Paul  A.
Se  bet  tier  and  myself  occupied  ano-
ther, over  which  floated  the  "  Stars
find  Stripes."  Elders  Lorenzo  Snow,
Albert  Carriugton,  Feramorz  Little
and  Thoa.  Jennings  occupied  another.
My  tent  was  used  as  our  dining-room.
Our  dragoman  and  cook  had  each  his
tent,  and  we  had  another  for  conve-
nience sake.  We  were  supplied  with
good  camp  stools  j  we  had  irun-fraraed
bedsteads,  with  good  mattresses,  and
good,  clean  nice  blankets  and  sheets.
All  the  difficulty  about  it  with  mo
was  that  my  bedstead  was  too  small
for  me.  I  have  always  had  a  horror
of  being  buried  in  a  coffin  not  big
enough,  and  I  have  always  desired
that  my  friends — whoever  might  live
to  put  me  in  a  coffin,  would  have  it
at  least  two  inches  bigger  every  way
than  I  was. I  have  always  felt  an-


noyed  at  the  idea  of  being  baried  in
a  cramped-up  coffin.  It  often  made
me  tli ink  of  it  when  stretched  out
upon  that  bedstead,  or  in  the  berths
of  the  whips  which  I  have  had  to  stay
in  so  many  days  on  this  journey,  for
generally  they  have  been  too  small
for  rue.  Our  dragoman,  Aushomiy
Makloof,  of  Boy  rout,  supplied  us
very  well  with  provisions.  We  had
our  Arab  cook  and  our  Turkish  mule-
teers. Only  one  of  them  all  could
speak  a  little  Knglish,  and  really,
to  this  day,  I  never  could  tell  how
manv  there  were,  although  on  some
days  we  had  more  and  some  less,  for
as  we  passed  through  the  conn  try  we
sometime*  hired  a  sheik  and  one  or
two  attendants,  to  go  along  with  us,
paying  them  for  it,  so  that  he  need
not  help  himself  to  our  movables
without  our  consent.  Our  muleteers
took  down  our  tents  and  tent  poles,
and  tied  up  tents,  baggage  and  every-
thing and  put  it  all  on  to  the  hacks
of  the  mules.  We  had  to  ride  out,
or  spend  our  time  someway,  looking
at  the  country  or  waiting,  as  we  chose,
in  the  evening  for  these  tents  all  to
be  pitched  ;  but  it  was  generally  so
arranged  that,  in  our  seeing  the  coun-
try, our  muleteers  would  get  on  the
ground  and  get  the  tents  pitched  and
everything  ready,  so  that  when  we
went  there  we  could  go  right  in  and
sit  down  to  the  tables  or  do  anything
we  pleased.

The  second  day  we  had  our  noon
halt  on  the  brook,  which  they  told
us  King  David  got  the  stones  out  of,
with  one  of  which  he  killed  the  giant
of  Gath,  and  that  the  battle  between
the  Philistines  and  King  Saul  took
place  along  the  .two  sides  of  this
atream.  It  is  called  a  valley,  but
it  was  simply  a  ravine.  We  saw  a
considerable  number  of  sheep  of
various  colors  there,  and  some  boys
lending  them,  which,  of  course  re-
minded us  of  the  fact  that  King


lye  king,
the  one,

hoys,


on


David  was  tending  his  fcther's  sheep
when  Samuel  went  to  his  father's
house  to  anoint  one  of  the  sons  of
Jesse  to  be  king.  King  David,  it
will  he  remembered,  was  the  junior
of  the  boys,  and  he  was  s mail  o
atature  compared  with  the  others.
He  was  sent  out  to  look  after  the
sheep.  When  Samuel  came  to  the
house  of  Jesse  and  told  him  that
one  of  his  sons  had  to
and  he  wanted  to  pick
Jesse  brought  in  six  tall
at  a  time,  to  each  of  which  Samuel
said,  "That  is  not  the  one/1  Whe
the  sixth  had  been  refused,  said  Jesse,
I  believe  that  is  all.'*  (i  Have  yoa
not  another?"  "  O  yes,  little  David,
he  is  out  with  the  sheep."  They  sent
for  him  and  he  was  anointed  king,
and  it  was  he  who  slew  the  giao
Goliath;  and  I  suppose  if  I  h
enquired  of  the  monks  I  might  have
brought  home  the  identical  stone
with  which  he  did  it,  but  I  did  not
take  the  trouble.  The  place  whe
we  had  our  meal  was  not  far  from
Kirjath-Jearim  where  the  ark  is  said
to  have  rested,  not  the  ark  of  Noah,
but  the  ark  of  the  Lord,  for  a  con-
siderable time  after  it  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  Philistines.

We  again  got  into  the  saddle  and
started  for  Jerusalem  across  the
mountain,  for  that  country  is  one
immense  limestone  quarry.  If  there
ever  was  any  soil  it  has  blown  away
until  very  little  remains.  What
there  is  left  is  evidently  very  rich
where  they  can  get  the  water  to  it:
but  as  we  crossed  over  and  got  a  view
of  Jerusalem,  a  feeling  of  disap-
pointment was  evident  on  the  coun-
tenances of  every  one  of  the  partyf
or  else  I  was  disappointed  and  they
were  not,  one  or  the  other.  But  tht
whole  thing  presented  itself  to  us  ia
a  different  light  from  what  we  had
anticipated,  and  I  then  understood
why  Dr.  Burns,  in  his  "  Guide,"  re-


AX  ACCOUNT  OF  HIS  JOl'KNKY  TO  PALESTINE


95


commeruls  people  to  pass  round  Jeru-
salem by  another  route,  antl  come  in
from  the  east  and  get  a  first  view
from  the  eastern  side.  It  is  because
the  view  from  the  .Mount  of  Olives
— on  the  eastern  side — is  a  very  threat
deal  better  than  when  yon  go  from
the  west.  It  is  said  that  there  is  a
great  deal  in  first  impressions.

The  Russians  have built  some
monasteries  in  and  about  Jerusalem,
and  the  Latins  have  got  some,  and
within  the  last  few  years  there  have
been  a  number  of  good  new  buildings
put  up. Sir  Moses  Monteilore  has
built  a  block  outside,  and  not  far  from
the  wall. The  venerable  Abraham
Askenasi,  the  chief  rabbi  of  Jeru-
salem, with  the  contributions  of  his
friends  throughout the  world,  has
erected a considerable number  of
rooms  as  a  home  for  widows  and  or-
phans. At  first  view  we  could  pick
out  the  mosque  of  Omar — the  place
where  Solomon's  temple  stood  ;  we
could  also  see  the  church  of  the  Holy
Sepulchre — the place where  the
Savior  was  crucified. We  pitched
our  tent  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom,
near  the  Jaffa  gate — the  gate  at
which  most  of  the  business  in  Jeru-
salem is  done. While  our  tents  were
pitching  we  passed  in  at  the  gate,
and  saw  a  good  many  beggars,  some
of  them  lepers,  also  quite  a  number
of  women  dressed  in  white,  some  of
whom  were  hired  mourners  and  were
wailing. As  we  p:»s*ed  along  we
found,  not  far  from  the  gate,  an  old
man  lying  in  the  street,  almost  naked
and  moaning  piteousiy. He  begged
of  us  to  give  him  something.  When
we  got  in  we  called  at  the  banker's  in
Jerusalem,  and  were  told  that  the
did  man  who  lay  there  in  the  street
begging,  whom  we  had  probably  no-
ticed, owned  six  hundred  olive  trees,
a  garden  containing  quite  a  number
©f  fig  trees,  and  an  orange  grove, —
that  the  banker  had  known  him  for


ye  ^rs,  and  he  came  every  year  to
Jerusalem,  and  lay  on  the  street
almost  naked,  howling  and  moaning
piteousiy,  bagging  from  the  pilgrims,
while  lie  was  in  reality  one  of  the
wealthy  men  of  the  country.

It  is  not  easy  to  describe  that  city,
I  nor,  so  far  as  L  have  seen,  any  of
those  Asiatic  cities.  The  streets,  if
they  can  be  called  streets,  are  very
narrow,  and  many  of  them  are  so
crowded  with  camels,  donkeys  and
pick-horses,  that  they  can  only  pass
each  other  at  certain  places.  The
houses  are  rudely  built,  of  a  kind  of
concrete,  or  of  rock  and  mortar.  They
are  low  and  smalt  and  the  roof  Oat,
generally  covered  with  cement;  There
nre  many  buildings  in  Jerusalem  that
go  to  show  it  off — mosques  and
churches,  with  their  minarets,  towers
and  rotundas.  The  principal  business
street  in  Jerusalem  is  Christian
street,  which  is  fifteen  feet  wide.  It
leads  up  from  the  street  that  we  enter
from  Jaffa's  gate,  and  has  an  avenue
that  leads  off  to  the  entrance  of  the
church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre*  In
tro.it  of  that  church  is  a  little  open
space  filled  with  beggars,  and  men
with  articles  for  sale — beads,  photo-
1  graphs,  jewelry  of  different  kinds,
and  relics  of  all  kinds.  We  could
get  almost  anything  in  the  way  of
relics  we  wanted  there,  and  be  as-
sured that  they  were  genuine.

President  Carrington  remained  at
Jerusalem  while  we  went  to  the  Dead
Sea.  He  wanted  to  do  some  business
connected  with  the  Liverpool  office ;
and  he  is  not  very  fond  of  horseback
riding.  As  you  are  aware  he  has  been
afflicted  with  rheumatism  consider-
ably, so  he  remained  in  the  Mediter-
ranean Hotel  while  we  went  to  the
Dead  Sea  and  the  Jordan.  That
gave  him  more  time  to  pass  around,
and  through  and  over  Jerusalem,
than  any  of  us.  He  had  several  days,
and  he  declared  that  he  could  never


JOURNAL  OF


make  up  his  mind  as  to  what  induced
King  David  to  locate  his  capital
there.  The  chief  rabbi  fold  me  that,
ancientl}^  Jerusalem  was  well  sup-
plied with  water;  hat  nfc  the  present
time  there  was  really  no  living  water
there.  The  pool  of  Hezekiah,  and
other  pools  were  filled  in  the  rainy
season,  but  in  a  month  from  the  time
we  were  there  a  quart  bottle  of  water
would  cost  a  farthing,  raid  sometimes
pretty  hard  to  get  If  the  aqueducts
from  the  pools  of  Solomon  were  re-
paired, they  would  not  bring  in  suffi-
cient water  to  supply  the  city,  but
in  the  days  of  Israel's  prosperity,
the- re  was  abundance  of  water  there,
and  he  believed  there  would  be
again.  f

I  had  a  letter  of  introduction,  pro-
cured by  Mr*  James  Lin  forth,  from
the  Rabbi  of  the  Jewish  congregation
at  San  Francisco,  to  Rabbi  Askenasi.
He  is  a  very  venerahledooking  man
— tall,  heavy  set  and  a  good  supply
of  beard,  like  the  Apostles  in  the
picture.  He  seemed  very  much
pleased  with  my  visit,  treated  me
with  courtesy,  showed  nie  their  sy-
nagogue and  the  building  they  were
erecting,  and  returned  the  visit,  ac-
companied by  several  of  the  Jewish
elders,  at  my  tent,  where  we  had  a
very  pleasant  interview.  But  there
is  no  infidel  on  the  face  of  the  earth
who  can  disbelieve  the  mission  of  the
Savior  more  than  they  do.  He  says
the  condition  of  the  Jews  is  much
improved  of  late  years.  Now  they
can  purchase,  and  if  they  have  only
the  money  to  do  it  with,  and  the
amount  they  can  bay  is  only  limited
by  their  want  of  money.  They  have
also  a  title  from  the  Turkish  gov-
ernment for  the  ground  npon  which
they  are  erecting  their  home  for
widows  and  orphans.  This  gentle-
man told  me  that  no  Jew  had  been
inside  the  enclosure  of  the  Mosque
of  Omar,  although  he  believed  it


!  stands  on  the  Fight  of  Solomon's  tem-
ple, thongrh  not  in  the  centre  of  it.

| In  looking  around  Jerusalem,  I  did

1  not  regard  it  in  the  ^arne  light  as
President  Carrington  did.  King-
doms, in  those  days,  were  small  and
densely  populated,  and  it  was  neces-
sary for  a  ruler,  in  locating  a  capital,
to  have  it  so  that  it  could  be  easily
defended  ;  and  until  the  time  when
modern  arms  were  invented,  Jeru-
salem could  Ijc  easily  defended.  Its
siege  and  capture  by  the  Romans
proved,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,
that  it  was  a  very  difficult  city  to  take,
for  though  it  was  surrounded  by  seve-
ral walls,  fortified  with  strong  towers,
and  naturally  defended  by  its  moun-
tainous position  and  the  ravines
around  it,  each  one  of  these  walls
was  occupied  by  rival  parties,  for  it
will  be  remembered  by  readers  of  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  that  there
were  three  separate  leaders,  and  that
when  the  Jews  were  not  fighting  the
Romans,  they  were  fighting  each
other  ;  and  it  is  even  doubtful  to  this
day  that,  if  either  John  or  Simon
had  had  absolute  command  in  their
city  and  the  confidence  of  the  peo-
ple, whether  the  Romans  could  have
taken  the  place  at  all  or  not.  An  old
proverb  says  that  whom  the  Gods
would  destroy  they  first  make  mad.
It  was  so  with  these  Jews.  They
had  slain  the  Savior,  they  had  vio-
lated the  commands  of  God,  and  they
had  brought  upon  their  heads  the
curses  pronounced  upon  them  in  the
27th  chapter  of  Deuteronomy  and  in
a  great  many  other  places,  if  they
did  not  abide  in  the  law  of  the  Lord;
and  notwithstanding  their  strong  city
and  their  numbers,  they  were  so
divided  among  themselves  that  they
could  not  make  a  successful  defence.

,  Speaking  of  this  destruction  of  Jeru-
salem carries  me  back  to  Rome  and
the  Arch  of  Titus,  erected  to  com-
memorate his  victories,  on  which  is


AN  AOCOrXT  OF  HIS  JOURXKY  TO  PALESTINE.


97


engraved n representation of  the
seven  branched  .candlestick,  and  a
great  variety  of  the  treasures  brought  ,
by  him  trom  Jerusalem,

King .  David  had  learned  the
strength  ot  Jerusalem  by  the  diffi-
culty he  encountered  in  hiking  it
from  the  Jebusites  j  and  it  is  more
than  probable  that  God  commanded
him  to  locate  the  city  there.  j

Rabbi  Askenasi,  speaking  of  the
ten  tribes,  said  he  had  no  idea  where
they  were,  but  he  believed  they  were
preserved,  and  that  their  posterity
would  return,  and  the  time  would
come  when  God  would  bless  Israel,
and  when  water  would  be  abundant
in  Jerusalem*  We  read  in  the  47th
chap,  of  Ezekiel,  that  living  waters
were  to  come  out  from  Jerusalem,
and  that  they  should  run  toward  the
east ;  and  that  the  Prophet  saw  a
man  with  a  nieausnritig  line  in  his
hand.  He  measured  a  thousand
cubits,  and  the  water  was  to  his
ankles;  he  measured  another  thou-
sand, and  it  was  to  his  knees  ;  ano-
ther thousand,  and  it  was  to  his
loins;  another  thousand,  and  it  was
a  river  with  waters  to  swim  in,  that
could  not  be  passed  over.  He  goes
on  and  describes  this  as  something
that  should  take  place  at  Jerusalem*
I  could  but  reflect,  when  standing  on
the  M'jimb  bf  Olives,  on  the  saying
concerning  it  in  the  last  chapter  of
Zechariah,  where,  in  speaking  of  the
coming  of  the  Savior,  it  says  his  feet
shall  stand  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,
which  is  before  Jerusalem  to  the
east,  and  the  mount  shall  cleave  in
the  midst  thereof,  half  going  toward
the  north,  and  half  toward  the  south.
There  shall  be  a  very  great  valley,
and  the  land  shall  be  turned  into  a
plaiu  from  Geba  to  Rimmon,  south
of  Jerusalem,  and  shall  be  lifted  up,
and  men  shall  dwell  on  it.  The
same  Prophet  tells  ns  that  living
waters  shall  come  out  of  Jerusalem,

No.  7.


half  toward  the  former  sea,  and  half
toward  the  hinder  sea,  and  that  in
summer  and  in  winter  shall  it  be.

The  convent  at  Mar  Saba  is  situa-
ted on  the  eanou,  which  is  the  outlet
of  the  brook  Kedroo  ;  but  it  was  per-
fectly dry  when  we  were  there,  not  a
drop  of  water  running  in  it.  There
,  are  seasons  of  the  year,  I  suppose,
when  waters  run  there,  but  these
prophecies  declare  that  living  waters  H
shall  run  out  of  Jerusalem  in  summer
and  winter,  and  I  arn  foolish  enough
to  believe  that  they  will  be  literally
fulfilled.  I  agreed  with  Rabbi  As-
kenasi  in  the  belief  that  God  would
restore  that  land  to  Israel,  and  that
Jerusalem  would  again  be  supplied
with  abundance  of  water  and  be  a
1  glorious  and  happy  city.  I  saw  many
Christians  of  different  denominations
there  who  had  no  such  faith.  One
man  came  into  our  tent,  and  assured
us  that  baptism  by  immersion  was
impossible,  there  never  had  been
water  enough  in  that  country  to  im-
merse people.  He  had  believed  ia
immersion,  he  said,  but  since  he  had
traveled  through  the  country  and  had
seen  so  little  water,  he  was  satisfied
that  they  would  all  have  to  go  to
Jordan  to  be  baptized.  This  is  the
way  people  look  at  it.  The  country
is  dry  and  barren,  the  rains  have
ceased  upon  it  for  many  generations,
though  they  have  had  occasional
rains*  *  r •>

In  going  to  the  Dead  Sea  from
Jerusalem,  we  visited  a  number  of
points  of  interest  One  was  the
tomb  of  Rachel,  another  the  pools  of
Solomon— three  immense  pools  con-
structed to  receive  the  waters  of  a
spring  and  hold  them  in  reserve,  and
the  old  aqueduct  is  still  in  repair
almost  to  Bethlehem,  We  visited
Bethlehem,  and  were  shown  the
caves — called  stables — in  which  the
Savior  was  born,  and  the  churches
and  ornaments. There  was  a  great

Vol.  XVI,


variety  of  people  there,  many  bogging
and  many  trying  to  sell  you  relics.
The  country  is  without  fences.  There
are  a  good  many  spots  where  there
is  an  opportunity  for  the  Bedouins  to
come  along  and  scratch  the  ground
with  a  kind  of  shovel  plough  they
have,  hitch  some  calves  or  very  small
cattle,  and  raise  some  barley*  We
purchased  barley  all  the  time  for
feeding  our  animals.

At  the  place  which  we  supposed  is
called  in  Scripture  the  wilderness,  or
the  border  of  the  wilderness  next  to
the  Dead  Sea,  where  John  the  Bap-
tist commenced  his  preaching,  is  an
immense  convent  It  was  founded
by  a  man  named  Saba,  u  liar"  in
the  Syrian  langunge  means  saint,  and
when  we  speak  of  Mar  Saba,  it  means
saint  Saba*  This  is  the  name  of  the
convent.  This  man  lived  to  be  some
ninety-four  years  old.  He  concealed
himself  from  his  enemies  a  consider-
able time  in  caves,  but  his  power  in-
creased with  the  number  of  his
friends,  for  he  gathered  around  him  a
good  many  thousand  monks,  and
they  built  this  immense  convent,
which  was  strongly  fortified  for  those
times.  They  allow  no  women  to
enter,  and  no  person  can  go  into
their  building  without  a  permit  from
the  Greek  Patriarch  at  Jerusalem.
We  had  a  permit  to  enter  that  con*
vent,  but  sister  Snow  and  sister
Little,  of  course,  had  to  go  to  the
camp.  It  would  probably  have  been
considered  an  outrage  for  them  to
have  come  in  sight  of  the  gates.
Having  sent  up  our  permit,  we  were
admitted  and  passed  through  the
building.  There  were  sixty-five
monks  there,  some  ot  whom  had
been  there  thirty-seven  years,  A
man  has  to  be  Exceedingly  holy  to  be
permitted  to  go  there.  I  looked  at
them,'  and  wondered  what  could  in-
duce men  to  adopt  such  a  life.  They
showed  us  one  room  filled  with  skulls.


They  said  there  were  fifteen  hundred
of  them,  and  they  were  the  skulls  of
their  brethren  who  had  been  killed
by  the  Saracens  at  different  times.
They  had  taken  great  pains  to  pre-
serve the  skulls,  with  their  names
and  registers.  They  have  a  spring
of  water  which  has  a  miraculous  his-
tory, and  they  have  one  palm  tree
growing,  which  they  say  was  planted
by  Saint  Saba  himself.  They  seem
to  have  an  eye  to  business.  They
had  canes  for  sale,  made  from  willows
which  they  get  the  Arabs  to  bring
from  the  Jordan.  None  of  them  are
allowed  to  go  out,  and  they  are  com-
pelled to  have  everything  brought  to
them.  They  had  a  number  of  fancy
articles  of  their  own  manufacture  for
sale.  I  bought  a  small  string  of
shells,  which  they  said  were  brought
from  thfe  Dead  Sea.  They  gather  a
few  francs  from  every  party  of  tra-
velers in  this  way.  There  was  ano-
ther party  of  Americans  near  by  who
wanted  to  visit  the  monastery,  but
they  had  no  permit ;  and  a  message
was  sent  to  us  by  them,  saying,  that
it  we  would  delay  a  little  while  we
could  all  pass  in  with  our  permit.
We  had  met  the  party  and  knew
them  to  be  nice,  intelligent  gentle-
men. We  stayed  about  an  hour  to
accommodate  these  friends,  and  they
passed  in  with  us,  otherwise  they
would  have  had  to  go  clear  back  to
Jerusalem  for  a  permit*  These  per-
sons^—four  gentlemen  and  two  ladies
— finding  that  we  were  going  down
to  the  Dead  Sea,  went  along  with  us,
and  made  the  journey  safe  and  plea-
sant We  went  down  to  the  Dead
Sea  the  day  following  our  visit  to  the
monastery.  I  have  seen  a  good  many
rough  roads  in  Utah  in  the  moan-
tains,  bat  of  all  the  rough  horseback
riding  I  ever  did  see,  I  think  that
Palestine  has  the  premium.  Being
pretty  heavy,  it  was  difficult  for  me
to  get  on  and  off  my  horse,  but


AN  ACCOUNT  OF  HIS  JOURNEY  TO  PAL  EST  LYE


99


because  of  the  rough  roads  in  some  j
places,  I  dismounted  and  led  my  ani
maL  I  found,  however,  that  he
could  stand  better  than  I  could,  so  I
rode  him,  and  I  believe  that  some  of
the  Saints  here  at  home  must  have
had  faith  to  hold  that  animal  up,  or
he  would  have  stumbled.  I  rode  him
four  hundred  miles,  three  hundred  of
which  there  was  no  road  with  any
right  to  the  name,  and  he  never
slipped  or  stumbled*

Some  of  the  party  went  into  the
Dead  Sea  and  had  a  swim, I  did
not. Some of  them  inquired  for
Lot's  wife — the  M  pillar  of  salt"  I
expect  she  was  at  the  other  end  of
the  sea,  tor  we  did  not  see  hen  The
Dead  Sea  is  a  remarkable  body  of
water* According  to  scientific  ob-
servations, as  read  in  the  report  of
Lieutenant  Lynch  and  others,  it  is
1350  feet  lower  than  the  Mediterra-
nean. It is probably  one  of  the
deepest  holes  in  the  world. It  is
perhaps  eight  or  ten  miles  wide  and
about  forty  long. It  occupies  the
site  of  the  cities  of  the  plain — Sodom
and Gomorrah, and  Admah  and
Zeboim,  upon  which,  in  consequence
of  their  wickedness,  we  are  told  that
God  rained  tire  and  brimstone  and
destroyed  them. The  probability  is
that  tbey  were  buried  by  a  volcanic  I
eruption,  and  that  they  and  most  of
the  valley  of  the  Jordan  were  sunk
at  the  same  time. The  probability
is  that  that  the  Jordan  ran  through
these  cities,  and  that  this  deep  basin  !
being  formed,  the  Jordan  forms  the
Dead  Sea,  which  has  no  outlet,  much
like  our  Salt  Lake. There  is  a  won*
derful  similari  ty  between  that  country
and  this,  only  this,  of  course,  is  on  a
grander  scale. Our  Salt  Lake  an-
swers  very  well  to  the  Dead  Sea;
our  Utah  Lake  answers  very  well  to
the  Sea  of  Galilee,  and  some  of  the
streams  that  run  into  Utah  Lake
answer  very  well  to  the  upper  streams


of  the  Jordan.  It  hardly  seems  cre-
dible to  me,  but  all  the  guide  books
assert  that  the  Sea  of  Galilee  is  d50
feet  below  the  level  of  the  Mediterra-
nean. The  country  is  subject  #  to
earthquakes,  and  bears  the  ev ideal;
marks  of  many  of  thera.  In  IS  37,
Tiberi  uin,  the  Tiberias  of  ancient
times,  was  very  severely  damaged  by
an  earthquake,  the  effects  of  which  are
visible  to  any  one  who  visits  it  I
have  wondered  how  the  Lord  would
restore  that  country.  I  thought  he
had  got  to  have  some  kind  of  a  pro-
cess to  hoist  the  waters  of  the  Dead
Sea  above  the  level  of  the  ocean,  so
that  a  stream  could  run  out  of  it  in
order  for  it  to  be  healed.  Prophecy
says  that  the  waters  that  should  run
out  of  Jerusalem  should  run  down  to
the  east  sea,  and  the  waters  of  the
east  sea  were  to  be  healed,  and  there
was  to  be  a  multitude  of  fishes,  but
now  no  living  thing  can  exists  in  the
Dead  Sea.  But  if  these  prophecies
are  fulfilled,  and  I  have  not  any
doubt  that  they  will  be,  these  waters
are  to  be  healed,  and  I  believe  that
the  Lord  will  use  natural  means  to
bring  it  about

We  returned  by  way  of  Jordan.
The  stream  is  not  so  large  as  our
Jordan  here,  but  quite  a  nice  riven
The  Arabs  were  very  much  afraid
when  we  went  into  it,  that  we  would
go  beyond  our  depth.  It  was  sale  to
go  as  far  as  certain  rapids,  but  it  was
not  safe  to  go  beyond  them.  They
said  that  some  zealous  fellows  got  in
so  far  that  they  could  not  get  out,
and  one  or  two  were  lost,  and  they
had  some  difficulty  to  fish  the  others
out.  Some  willows  and  different
kinds  of  timber  grow  along  its  banks.

We  were  supposed  to  be  at  the
place  where  the  Savior  was  baptized,
and  also  at  the  place  where  Elijah
smote  the  waters  with  his  mantle,
and  he  and  Elisha  crossed  over  dry-
shod,  and  Elijah  then  went  to  heaven


in  a  chariot  of  fire,  after  which
Elisha  passed  back  in  the  same  man-
lier. We  saw  the  plow  where  it  is
supposed  the  children  of  Israel,  under
Joshua*  crossed  over  the  river  drv-
shod.  There  is  good  reason  to  sup-
pose that  they  crossed  in  harvest
time,  and  that  the  waters  were  high.
They  say  the  waters  of  the  Jordan
are  highest  in  harvest  time.  We
had  a  ride  across  the  plain  probably
seven  or  eight  miles  That  plain
could  be  watered  by  irrigation,  I
was  often  asked  if  we  were  going  to
settle  in  Palestine*  I  replied  that
we  were  not,  but  I  could  take  a
thousand  u  Mormons,"  go  up  the
Jordan,  put  in  a  dam  to  take  out  the
water,  and  irrigate  several  thousand
acres.  But  there  is  little,  however,
at  present  inviting  about  the  country,
but  it  wan  Id  no  doubt  bn  productive
if  irrigated.  The  valleys  near  the
source  of  the  Jordan  would  be  much
the  best  for  cultivation,  and  the  cli-
m  ite  would  be  more  agreeable.

Jericho,  or  rather  the  old  site  of
that  city,  has  a  good  many  mounds.
Men  have  dug  into  many  of  them,
but  we  were  told  that  no  valuables
had  been  found.  We  camped  that
night  at.  Ain-es-Sultain,  generally
called  the  fountain  of  Elishn,  because
tradition  says  that,  on  his  return
after  Elijah  had  ascended  to  heaven,
he  healed  the  waters  of  this  fountain.
Before  then  they  were  salt,  but  by  a
miracle  he  made  them  sweet*  They
are  now  delicious,  and  after  our  hard
day's  ride  in  the  heat  and  dust,  we
found  the  waters  of  the  fountain  of
Elisha  very  palatable.

That  night  there  was  a  company
of  Bedouins  came  and  danced  and
sang  for  us.  They  had  a  sham  fight,
and  I  think  it  requires  a  man  of
pretty  good  nerve  to  sit  and  look  at
them  and  not  be  afraid  that  they
would  whip  some  of  their  crooked
sci  meters  through  his  body.  Each


one  of  our  party  paid  them  some-
thin?  like  two  francs,  which  satisfied
them.  I  believe  a  ticket  at  our
theatre  here  in  Salt  Lake  would  cost
more  than  that,  and  take  it  as  a
whole  their  performance  wan  not  very
expensive.  They  went  off  in  a  very
fine  humor.  I  could  not  understand
their  songs,  bat  our  dragoman  inter-
preted the  chorus  of  one  of  them  to
he,  "  May  the  ladies*  eyes  be  like  the
moon."

From  that  place  to  Jerusalem  the
route  is  very  rough.  Some  years
ago  a  Russian  lady,  a  very  pious  wo-
man, went  on  a  pilgrimage  to  the
Jordan,  and  while  riding  over  some
of  these  rough  ways  she  was  thrown
from  tier  horse  and  had  her  arm
broken  and  was  badly  hurt  She
expended  her  money  in  improving
a  portion  of  the  way,  and  on  this
account  one  of  the  kanyons  was
much  easier  to  go  through  than  be-
fore that  time.

Wc  passed  by  other  ancient  sites,
spoken  of  in  the  Bible  as  having
been  large  cities,  and  no  doubt  they
were;  but  we  must  bear  always  in
mind  that  that  was  an  nge  when
Israel  paid  their  tithes  and  offerings,
and  God  blessed  the  land.  At  noon
we  stopped  at  a  place  called  Christ's
Hotel,  all  of  us  very  much  fatigued*
Our  luggage  train  went  ahead.  In
the  afternoon  we  passed  by  Bethany,
where  Christ  raised  Lazarus,  and  saw
what  was  pointed  out  to  us  as  the
house  of  Mary  and  Martha,  and  also
the  tomb  of  Lazarus.  Iu  the  evening
we  camped  again  at  Jaffa's  gate  afc
Jerusalem,  finding  our  tents  pitched
and  everything  comfortable.  We
used  to  sing  about  the  flowery  banks
of  Jordan,  but  it  takes  off  the  romance
to  go  and  see  them  \  yet  when  irriga-
tion and  industry  and  the  blessing  of
the  Lord  prevailed  along  them,  I
have  no  doubt  they  were  as  beautiful
as  any  places  in  the  world.


AN  ACCOUNT  OF  HIS  JOURNEY  TO  PALESTINE.


I  made  two  careful  visits  to  the
Church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  and
one  to  the  Mosque  of  Omar  and  the
grounds  connected  with  it,  I  also
visited  many  other  places  of  interest
about  Jerusalem,  but  in  giving  you  a
detailed  account  of  what  we  saw  and
passed  through,  in  such  a  scattering
way,  I  caii not  communicate  to  so
large  au  audience,  to  any  extent,  the
impressions  I  felt  at  the  time.  I  had
do  doubt  that  1  passed  over  the
grounds  where  the  Savior  and  his
Apostles,  and  the  Prophets,  kings
and  nobles  of  Israel  had  lived,  al-
though 1  did  not  believe  a  great  deal
about  the  identical  spots  set  down  by
the  monks,  yet  1  was  satisfied  that  I
was  in  the  localities  in  which  the
great  events  recorded  in  Scripture
took  place.  But  now  little  remains
on  the  top  of  the  ground  that  can  be
identified  beyond  the  period  of  the
occupation  ot  the  Crusaders  or  the
Romans*  We  certainly  saw  the  top
of  Mount  Mori. ih,  on  which  stands
the  Mosque  of  Omar,  There  are  the
rocks  and  the  caves  in  them.  The
rocks  have  not  been  made  by  men.
The  Valley  of  Jehosophat  is  there.
Learned  men  have  dug  deeply  under
Jerusalem  in  search  of  evidence  to
determine  its  original  site,  but  an
alarm  was  created  that  the  monkery
of  the  place  might  be  spoiled  by  de-
termining that  certain  localities  were
not  where  they  are  now  represented,
and  the  Turkish  government  was
moved,  so  I  was  informed  by  so>ne
gentlemen,  to  stop  the  investigations
and  to  close  up  the  excavations,  and
We  were  not  permitted  to  enter  them.

President  Lorenzo  Snow's  corres-
pondence to  the  Deserei  Neios,  Elder
Paul  A.  Schettlers  correspondence
to  the  Salt  Lake  Herald,  and  Miss  E,
R.  Snow's  communications  and  poems
to  the  Woman's  Exponent,  with  oilier
published  letters,  all  composed  under
circumstances  of  great  labor  and


fatigue,  give  a  very  correct  idea  of
our  visit  to  Jerusalem  and  journey-
ing^ generally.  Elder  Paul  A.  Sehet*
tier  speaks  six  languages,  and  in
attending  to  the  financial  business  of
the  party,  he  had  to  make  exchanges
and  was  compelled  to  keep  accounts
in  the  currency  of  a  dozen  different
nations,  and  even  among  tin*  Arabs
he  could  generally  find  some  one  who
could  speak  in  some  one  of  the  lan-
guages  with  which  he  was  acquainted.

God  has  preserved  me.  Our  party
of  eight  went  through  the  entire
journey  without  an  accident  We
never  missed  a  connection  that
amounted  to  any  difficulty.  We
were  in  no  manner  injured  ;  we  had
no  sickness,  except,  peradventure,  a
little  cold  or  a  pinch  of  rheumatism
now  and  again  for  a  day  or  two.  Our
minds  were  clear,  we  saw  more,  I
believe,  in  the  eight  months,  than
ordinary  travelers  see  in  two  years.
We  visited  a  number  of  places  in
Holland,  Belgium  and  France.  We
crossed  three  times  over  Italy,  We
visited  the  Ionian  isles,  Egypt,  Pales-
tine and  Syr  hi,  Turkey  in  Europe,
Greece,  Bavaria,  Austria  and  Prussia,
and  other  parts  of  Germany.  We
*=pent  eleven  days  in  examining  the
mysteries  of  Rome,  I  paid  four
Italians  to  carry  me  to  the  crater  of
Mount  Vesuvius.  I  think  they
earned  their  money,  at  any  rate  I
was  well  satisfied  with  them.  I  had
an  idea  in  my  own  mind  of  how  the
crater  looked,  but  I  am  now  satisfied
that  I  could  form  no  correct  opinion
without  seeing  it.  To  reach  the
crater  vou  have  to  mount  about  1,500

■I

feet  perpendicular  in  height  above
where  we  could  ride  on  horseback,
in  loose  volcanic  sand,  and  every
time  a  man's  foot  was  placed  in  it,
it  would  slip  back  about  twice  the
length  of  his  foot.  I  could  not  stand
the  walk,  these  Italians  w  a  need  tho
contract,  and  I  gave  it  to  them.


2


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


My  time  is  exhausted,  I  thank
God  for  the  privilege  of  seeing  you.
When  on  the  Mount  uf  Olives,  with
our  faces  bowed  toward  Jerusalem,
we  lifted  our  prayers  to  God  that  he
would  preserve  you  and  confound
your  enemies.  We  felt  in  our  hearts
that  Zion  was  onward  and  upward,
and  that  no  power  could  stay  her
progress;  that  the  day  was  not  far
distant  when  Israel  would  gather,  and
those  lands  would  begin  to  teem  with
a  people  who would  worship  God


and  keep  his  commandments;  that
plenty  and  the  blessings  of  eternity
would  be  poured  out  bounteously
upon  that  desert  land,  and  that  all
the  prophecies  concerning  the  resto-
ration of  the  house  of  Israel  would
be  fulBlled.  God  Iiels  commenced  his
work  by  revealing  the  everlasting
Gospel  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  and
may  we  all  be  faithful  and  fulfill  our
part  is  my  prayer  io  the  name  of
Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY PRESIDENT GEORGE A.  SMITH,


Delivered  in  the  Bowery,  Logajs  City,  Friday  Morning,

June  27,  1873,


(Reported  hj  David  W.  Evans.)


OBEDIENCE —  BY  REASON  OF  THEIR  DISOBEDIENCE,  ANCIENT  ISRAEL
AND  THE  LAND  OF  PALESTINE  WERE  VISITED  WITH  AND  STILL  RE-
MAIN UNDER  THE  CURSE  OF  GOD — TITHING A HEAVENLY  KE^UIKE-

1 KENT.  m  •


Goad  morning,  (brethren  and  sis-
ters !  I  am  very  happy  to  meet  with
you.  We  have  the  privilege  of
coming  here  occasionally  and  seeing
you.  We  would  like  to  give  every
one  of  you  a  hearty  shake  of  the
hand,  but  we  desire  to  do  it  in  a
wholesale  way,  and  we  wish  you  to
consider  yourselves  heartily  shaken
hands  with  (and  suiting  the  aotion
to  the  word) ;  God  bless  you  all
for  ever.  We  have  come  here  to
bear  testimony  of  the  things  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  and  to  stir  you


up  to  diligence  in  performing  your
duties,  and  to  perform  the  duties  of
our  callings  as  ministers  of  the  Gos-
pel of  Peace,  We  feel  a  little  an-
noyed, necessarily,  at  the  slow  pro-
gress which  is  being  made,  yet  we
have  a  great  many  things  to  be
thankful  for,  and  a  great  many  rea-
sons to  rejoice*  We  have  very  little
reason  to  fear  our  enemies,  pro-
vided that  Latter-day  Saints,
do  our  duty,  but  if  we  fall  to  obey
the  commandments  of  God,  and  the
revelations  which  lie  has  given  for


If


OBEDIENCE,  ETC.


103


our  salvation  and  guidance  we  have
reason  to  fear,  for  unless  we  take
such  a  course  as  to  make  God  our
friend  and  protector  we  are  likely
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  our  ene-
mies. King  David  was  requested,
once  to  take  his  choice  of  three
years'  famine,  three  days'  pestilence,
or  be  driven  three  months  before
his  enemies.  David  said  he  prefer-
red to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Lord;
and  when  the  scourge  came  David
plead  with  the  Lord  to  let  the  blow
fall  upon  him  and  his  house,  and  to
spare  Jerusalem,  God  heard  his
prayer  and  turned  away  the  scourge,
though  it  is  written  seventy  thou-
sand persons  fell  with  the  plague  be-
tween Dan  and  Beersheba.  In  all
ages  of  the  world  in  which  the  Lord
reveals  himself  to  the  children  of
men,  lie  requires  obedience,  and  pro-
mises thera  great  blessings  ou  ren-
dering the  same ;  but  if  they  are
not  obedient  he  has  invariably  pro-
mised  and  poured  out  curses  upon
them.

Since  I  was  here  last,  I  have  visit*
ed  the  Land  of  Palestine,  on  which
God  revealed  himself  to  Abraham,
Isaac  and  Jacob.  He  promised  that
land  to  them  and  their  seed  for
ever.  It  was  to  this  land  that
Moses  led  the  children  of  Israel,
and  upon  which  God  promised  them
very  great  blessings  if  they  would
live  in  obedience  to  his  laws  and
commandments,  Any  one  who  will
attentively  read  the  27th,  28th,  20th
and  30th  chapters  ot  Deuteronomy,
will  see  foreshadowed,  in  plain  lan-
guage, the  entire  history  of  the  child-
ren of  Israel  from  the  days  of  Moses
to  the  present  time;  >md  in  Palestine
he  will  see  the  fulfillment  of  many
of  the  prophecies  contained  in  those
chapters,  with  a  minutiae  that  is  really
astonishing.  Some  men  say  they
are  infidels  because  that  country  is
barren,  sterile,  rocky — a  vast  lime-


stone quarry,  and  could  never  have
sustained  such  a  population  as  the
Bible  represents  it  to  have  done.
Others  are  infidel  because  they  be-
lieve that  so  many  kingdoms  that
are  said  to  have  once  existed  on
that  land  could  not  have  existed  in
so  small  a  compass.  But  these  que-
rists and  unbelievers  do  not  realize
that  the  barrenness,  desolation,
scanty  population  and  condition  of
affairs  which  now  exist  there  is  a
fulfillment,  to  the  very  letter,  of
the  prophecies  of  Moses,  the  holy
Prophets  and  of  Jesus  and  the
Apostles.  God  required  certain
things  of  Israel.  If  they  complied
it  was  all  right  with  them;  if  they
failed  the  catalogue  of  curses  con-
tained in  the  chapters  I  hare  refer-
red to  was  pronounced  upon  their
heads.  Read  tlte  Bible  and  you
will  find  that  when  they  were  obe-
dient they  were  blessed,  their  hinds
were  blessed,  their  armies  were
blessed,  they  were  a  great  nation,
they  were  able  to  resist  the  power
of  neighboring  nations,  they  were
courted,  they  were  looked  up  to,
neighboring  nations  paid  them  tri-
bute. Bur  when  they  refused  to
do  that  which  the  law  of  God  re-
quired at  their  hands  they  lost  this
power — they  fell  into  the  hands  of
t  heir  enemies,  they  quarrelled  among
themselves,  they  fell  into  darkness,
married  the  daughters  of  aliens,
worshiped  strange  gods,  and  they
were  finally  broken  up,  Many  of
them  were  sold  as  slaves,  some  of
them  were  compelled  to  eat  their
own  children  to  save  them  from
starvation,  in  the  midst  of  the
straits  and  sieges  to  which  they
were  forced  by  their  enemies-  Th«y
were  scattered  to  the  four  winds  of
heaven,  they  were  sold  in  the  slave
market  of  Egypt,  until  they  could
not  be  bought,  that  is,  there  was
no  man  to  buy  them. All  these


terrible  judgments  fell  upon  the
Jewish  nation,  yet  they  were  not
utterly  destroyed,  a  remnant  was
all  the  time  preserved,  and  to-day,
in  every  nation  under  heaven  is
found  a  remnant  of  the  seed  of
Israel,  retaining  the  Hebrew  Ian*
guage,  Eiany  of  their  ancient  man-
ners and  customs,  their  old  law
written  on  parchment,  which  is
read  in  their  synagogues  every  Sab-
bath day.  In  nearly  all  the  coun-
tries in  which  they  have  been
scattered  they  have  been  subject  to
the  most  extreme  abuse.  They
have  been  in  constant  fear,  they
have  b  en  permitted  to  reside  only
in  certain  quarters,  and  have  had
imposed  upon  them  the  most  fear-
ful exactions.  You  take  for  in-
stance, the  persecution  of  the  Jews
in  Spain,  under  Ferdinand  and  Isa-
bella— a  very  pious  couple.  Pro*
bably  half  a  million  of  Jews  were
either  banished  from  their  homes,
put  to  death,  or  compelled  to  accept
the  Catholic  religion,  and  great  num-
bers of  their  children  were  taken
from  them  and  placed  under  the
charge  of  the  Catholics,  that,  as  the
Queen  believed,  their  souls  might  be
saved.  The  Crusaders,  while  on  their
way  to  Jerusalem,  plundered  and
killed  thousands  of  the  Hebrew  race
and  yet,  notwithstanding  all  the  op-
pression that  has  been  heaped  upon
them  continuously  from  generation
to  generation,  they  .still  maintain
their  identity  as  the  seed  of  Abra-
ham. •  4.-. #vAv-.  '','f.- .  V:  L

Wis  ere  arc  the  inhabitants  of
Babylon  and  Nineveh  ?  The  city
of  Babylon  was  fifteen  miles  square,
sixty  in  circuit.  According  to  He-
rodotus,  it  was  surrounded  with  a
wall  three  hundred  and  fifty  feet
high,  and  eighty-seven  thick,  flank-
ed with  over  two  hundred  towers,
and  contained  palaces  and  hang-
ing gardens  that  were  the  wonder  of


the  world.  It  is  almost  doubtful
now,  where  this  once  famous  city
stood,  and  the  vicinity  in  which  it  is
believed  to  have  stood,  is  a  vast
marsh,  rendering  it  difficult  of  access
to  any  who  may  wish  to  visit  it.  And
the  Babylonians,  where  are  they  ?
Their  descendants  are  so  mixed  up
with  the  rest  of  the  world,  that  none
of  them  can  be  identified.  You  may
trace  other  great  nations  of  antiquity,
and  they  have  gone  in  tiie  same  way.
But  the  Jews  are  still  a  distinct  race,
and  they  are  a  living  record  of  the
truth  of  the  revelations  of  God.

There  are  a  few  thousand  Jews  in
Jerusalem.  They  have  synagogues*
and  they  are  permitted  to  go  to  a
portion  of  the  old  wall,  which  they
suppose  to  be  a  remnant  of  the  out-
side enclosure  of  Solomon's  temple,
and  wail.  A  great  many  people  who
visit  Jerusalem,  go  to  witness  their
wailing.  These  Jews  are  graciously
accorded  the  privilege,  by  the  rulers
of  that  country — the  Turks — to  wail
over  the  desolation  of  Israel,  pro-
vided they  do  not  make  so  much
noise  as  to  disturb  the  neighbor-


There  are  several  other  places,
such  as  Mount  Gerizim,  a  place  in
Samaria,  considered  holy,  where  a
small  sect  of  the  ancient  Samari-
tans meet  annually,  And  in  Tibe-
rius, on  the  Lake  of  Galilee,  two
or  ihree  thou  sat  id  Jews  live.  It  is
the  Tiberias  of  Heiod  the  Tetrarch;
they  consider  that  a  holy  place.
The  Jews  are  broken  up  in!  o  sects
and  parties,  and  in  almost  every
town  in  Palestine,  you  find  a  few  of
them,  oppressed,  poor  and  despised,
there,  as  elsewhere,  living  monu-
ments of  the  fulfillment  of  pro-
phecy.

At  the  last  General  Conference  of
the  Church,  during  my  absence,  I
was  elected  Trustee-in-Trust  It
co  sequent ly  became my duty  to


return  home  and  look  after  the  in- 1
terests  of  the  Church,  directing  the  j
means  fur  the  building  of  Temples
and  other  public  works.  This  was
certainly  very  unexpected  to  me;
but  the  General  Conference  saw
proper  to  confer  this  duty  upon
me,  and  as  soon  as  I  got  the  Confer-
ence minutes  at  Berlin,  I  started  for
home.  !

While  I  was  passing  through  Pal-
estine, I  had  some  very  serious  re-
flections as  to  the  causes  which  had
operated  to  reduce  the  country  to
its  present  barren  condition,  and
why  the  descendants  of  Jacob  were
bo  oppressed,  and,  as  an  indepen-
dent nation,  blotted  out  In  an
interview  with  the  venerable  Chief
Rabbi,  Abrara  Askenasi,  I  enquired
for  the  ten  tribes.  Said  he,  46  Wo
have  no  idea  where  they  are,  but
we  believe  they  will  be  found,  and
will  return  and  inherit  their  land."
While  traveling  in  Palestine  I  re-
flected a  good  deal  on  the  fate  of
Israel  I  asked  myself,  why  they
were  persecuted,  scattered,  peeled
and  hidden  from  the  face  of  men,
and  why  were  the  tribes  of  Jmlah
and  Benjamin  still  scattered?  Some
of  them  can  go  to  Jerusalem  occa-
sionally and  visit,  but  only  a  very  few
thousand  live,  in  a  scattered  con-
dition, in  the  land  of  their  fathers,
and  they  are  in  bondage,  under  tu-
tors, governors,  and  rulers,  and  have
in  reality  no  power  of  themselves.
R-ibbi  Askenasi  said  they  had  more
liberty  than  heretofore.  The  Chris-
tian Powers  have  recently  taken  a
course  which  has  modified  the  ac-
tion of  the  Turks  toward  them.
They  were  now  permitted  to  buy
land"  but  they  were  poor  and  eonkl
bay  but  little,  and  he  wished  the
Jews  of  all  nations  to  contribute  to
enable  the  Jews  of  Jerusalem  to
extend  the  area  of  their  possessions.
They  had  purchased  a  piece  of  land


in  Jerusalem,  and  were  building  on
it  a  home  for  widows  and  orphans.

Now  I  saw  this  degradation  with
which  Israel  are  visited.  Where
did  it  begin  ?  It  was  simply  be*
cause  the  children  of  Israel  failed
to  obey  the  law  of  God.  If  we
search  the  Bible,  we  shall  find
many  references  by  the  Prophets
to  this  subject,  which  are  very  plain
and  clear.  In  the  third  chapter  of
Malachi,  and  eighth  verse,  the  Pro-
phet, speaking  of  the  condition
of  Israel  in  his  day,  uses  this  sin-
gular language,  or  rather  the  Lord,
speaking?  through  the  Prophet,  says
—  "Will  a  man  rob  God?  Yet
ye  have  robbed  me.  But  ye  say,
Wherein  have  we  robbed  thee  ?  In
tithes  and  offerings.  Ye  are  cursed
with  a  curse :  for  ve  have  robbed
me,  even  this  whole  natipfluf,

Now,  God  required  of  Israel  Tithes
and  offerings.  He  blessed  them  with
land  and  with  abundant  rains*  He
made  their  land  exceedingly  fertile;
he  blessed  them  with  flocks,  with
herds,  and  with  everything  on  the
!  face  of  the  earth  seemingly  that  they
could  desire.  He  gave  them  wealth
in  every  direction;  he  gave  them
power  over  their  neighbors, — they
were  the  head  and  not  the  tail.  In
letnrnfbrall  this,  what  did  he  re-
quire ot  them  ?  He  required  tbein
to  pay  Tithes  and  make  offerings.
Tithes  meant  one- tenth  of  all  their
increase.  One-tenth  of  all  this  the
Lord  required  them  to  place  in  the
hands  of  the  Levi  tea  and  those
whom  he  had  selected  to  look  after
the  general  welfare.  In  addition
[  to  this  tenth  he  also  required  cer-
tain offerings.  You  may  trace  the
history  of  the  Jewish  nation  through
and  you  will  find  that  when  the  peo-
ple paid  their  Tithes  and  offerings,
and  thereby  acknowledged  their  de-
pendence upon  and  allegiance  to  the
I  God  of  heaven,  they  were  prospered


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


and  blessed  continually. While  they
did  this  they  were  not  running  after
other  gods,  making  golden  calves,
setting  up  idols,  or  worshiping  the
gods  of  their  heathen  neighbors.

What  does  the  Lord  want  with
Tithes  and  offerings  ?  He  has
plenty,  And  he  has  shown  that
he  could  do  without  them  from
that  day  to  the  present;  but  he
promised  his  people  blessings  on
certain  conditions.  Some  of  those
conditions  were  that  they  should  pay
Tithes  and  make  offerings.  The
Pharisees  paid  Tithes  of  mint,  anise
and  cumin,  but  omitted  their  money.
uYe  pay  tithes  of  mint,  anise  and
cumin,  but  omit  the  weightier  mut-
ters of  the  law — -judgment,  mercy
and  faith-  These  things  ye  ought  to
have  done  and  not  left  the  others  un-
done." This  was  the  principle.

I  rode  over  the  plains  and  hills  of
Palestine  and  saw  their  desolation.
What  is  the  reason  of  it  ?  God  gave
that  country  to  Israel;  he  blessed  it
and  sent  rains  upon  it,  and  made  it
fruitful  above  all  lands,  and  in  re-
turn  he  required  of  them  one- tenth
of  their  increase  and  some  offerings ;
but  I  hey  would  not  give  him  Titties,
they  robbed  him  of  Tithes  and  offer-
ings, hence  he  cursed  the  whole
nation  with  a  curse.  Alter  seeing
the  condition  of  that  country,  I
came  home  with  a  determination
to  preach  the  law  of  Ti tiling,  for
God  has  required  of  us,  as  he  did  of
ancient  Israel,  obedience  to  that
law,  and  he  also  requires  that  we
should  pay  in  our  offerings ;  and  he
will  do  with  us  precisely  as  he  did
with  Israel,  if  we  fait  to  observe  the
law  of  Tithing  and  offerings,  of
course  remembering  the  principles
of  judgment,  mercy  and  faith,  for
these  things  we  ought  to  do  and
not  leave  the  other  undone.  My
traveling  over  that  country  was  not
without  its  moral  lesson  to  us  at


borne.  God  has  given  us  a  good
country.  The  world  hate  us.  "  Mar-
vel not,"  says  the  Savior,  "  if  the
world  hate  you."  The  world  will
speak  evil  of  us.  Marvel  not  at
that,  we  have  nothing  to  fear  from
men  in  authority.  We  have  nothing
to  fear  from  any  source  on  the  face
of  the  earth,  but  from  our  own
neglect  God  himself  is  our  protec-
tor and  our  ruler,  and  if  we  observe
faithfully  and  truly,  with  all  our
hearts,  the  law  that  is  required  of
us,  we  have  nothing  to  fear  from
any  other  source ;  but  if  we  neglect,
if  we  have  the  effrontery  to  be  bap-
tized for  the  remission  of  cur  sins,
and  to  step  forward  and  receive  the
ordinances  of  the  house  ot  God,  and
then  coolly  and  deliberately  rob
God  of  what  is  required  of  us,  we
may  expect  that  he,  in  leturn,  will
send  upon  us  in  their  time  and  sea-
son a  long  list  of  curses  and  atliio
tions,  annoyance  and  distress,  just
as  he  sent  them  upon  the  nations  of
antiquity  to  whom  he  revealed  him-
self and  who  refused  to  obey  His  law.

The  Prophet  Malachi,  wished  to
reclaim  Israel  from  the  condition
into  which  their  unfaithfulness  had
reduced  them,  or  rather  the  L  rd
wished  to  da  so,  and  he  used  this
exhortation-- "  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes
into  the  storehouse,  that  there  may
be  meat  in  mine  house,  and  prove
me  now  herewith,  saith  the  Lord
of  hosts,  if  I  will  not  open  you  the
windows  of  heaven,  and  pour  you
out  a  blessing,  that  there  shall  not
be  room  enough  to  receive  it.  And
I  will  rebuke  the  devourer  tor  your
sakes,  and  he  shall  not  destroy  the
fruits  of  your  ground  ;  neither  shall
your  vine  cast  her  fruit  before  the
time  in  the  field,  saith  the  Liord  of
hosts.  And  all  nations  shall  call
you  blessed  :  for  ye  shall  be  a  de-
lightsome land,  saith  the  Lord  of
hosts."


OBEDIENCE,  ETC*


107


We  profess  to  believe  a  great  deal,
but  do  our  acts  correspond  with  our
belief?  Are  we  as  critical,  careful,
fixed  and  determined  in  obeying  this
law  of  Tithing  as  we  ought  to  be  ?
Or  do  we  feel  that  it  is  a  burden  ?
God  does  not  want  onr  Tithes  at  all
unless  we  want  to  pay  them,  but
we  have  no  right  to  ask  his  favors,
blessings  and  protection  and  the
ordinances  of  the  Priesthood,  unless
we  render  our  acknowledgement
The  conditions  are  before  us.  In
every  age  of  the  world  when  any
people  have  received  revelation  from
God,  directly  or  indirectly,  if  they
did  abide  this  law  they  were  prosper-
ed, blessed  and  protected ;  they  were
powerful  and  strong.  God  watched
over  thera,  If  they  neglected  it,
he  cursed  them  with  a  curse,  even
the  whole  nation.  We  have  nothing
to  expect  but  the  very  same  justice
from  the  hand  of  God,  if  we,  to  use
his  expression,  "rob"  him.  Now,  I
have  just  that  kind  of  faith,  if  a
man  has  a  sum  of  money  come  into
his  possession,  whether  by  the  manu-
facture of  lumber,  or  the  selling  of
merchandise,  or  by  any  other  means,
if  he  will  pay  his  tenth  strictly,  ac-
cording to  the  law,  he  has  the  bless-
ing of  God  upon  the  balance,  and  if
he  will  keep  a  strict,  straightforward
account  with  all  his  increase,  what*
ever  it  may  be,  and  strictly  observe
the  law  ot  Tithing,  he  will  have
blessings  upon  his  bead,  upon  his
property,  upon  his  wives,  children


and  posterity.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
he  pursues  the  opposite  policy,  the
Prophet  says,  "  Ye  are  cursed  with  a
curse/'

|  Now,  brethren  and  sisters,  think
of  these  things.  If  we  have  the
truth — the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,
which  a  great  many  of  you  testify
you  have,  and  I  know  we  have,  do
not  let  a  little  neglect,  folly  and
covetousness,  and  a  little  disposi-
tion to  rob  our  Father  of  what  he
has  justly  claimed  at  our  hands  as
his  Saints,  place  us  in  darkness.  It
is  the  very  stepping  stone  to  and
I  beginning  of  apostacy,  it  is  the
foundation  of  wickedness  and  cor-
ruption. I  see  the  results,  I  have
realized  them.  I  have  wandered
over  hills  and  valleys  that  once
teemed  with  their  millions  of  inhab-
itants, and  now  they  are  a  desert.
God  has  cursed  them.  He  has  for
many  generations  made  "  the  rain
of  their  land  powder  and  dust,"  the
sun  has  smitten  them  and  the  water
has  dried  up.  Rabbi  Askenasi
told  me  in  Jerusalem  there  really
was  no  living  water.  The  time  was
when  there  was  an  abundance.  They
preserve  it  in  the  rainy  season  in
1  tanks,  but  we  were  told  that  in  about
a  month  from  the  time  we  were  there
they  would  have  to  purchase  it ;  and
,  I  really  felt  relieved  when  I  got  from
Jerusalem,  for  the  water  I  drank
while  there  was  not  very  good,  it  did
not  seem  to  be  very  clean*


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIG  HAM  YOUNG,


Delivered  in  the  Bowery,  Logan  City,  Friday  Aft*:

June  27,  1873.


DUN


(Repotted  hy  David  W*  Exam.)


CONTINUED  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  LAWS  OF  GOD  IS  NECESSARY  TO  IN-
SURE A  COMPLETE  SALVATION  TO  >  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS — THE
DISOBEDIENCE  OF  ANCIENT  ISRAEL  IS  SHOWN  AS  A  WARNING  TO  THE
PRESENT  GENERATION  OF  HIS  PEOPLE— THE  NATURE  AND  NECESSITY
OF  THE  LAW  OF  TITHING — THE  FEWNESS  OF  THOSE  WHO  FAITHFULLY
OBSERVE  THAT  LAW.


I  am  very  much  gratified  for  the
privilege  of  coming  to  tills  place  to
see  the  faces  of  the  Saints,  to  speak
to  them  and  to  greet  them  as  a
brother  and  a  friend.  If  we  could
see  and  understand  things  as  they
are,  if  we  conld  have  the  vail  with-
drawn from  our  eyes  and  behold
the  things  of  eternity,  and  the  con-
nection and  relationship  that  we
sustain  to  the  eternal  worlds,  and
to  heavenly  things,  our  minds  would
be  very  much  inspired  to  speak,  smic,
pray,  listen  attentively,  meditate
upon  and  contemplate  the  wonderful
things  of  God.  A  great  deal  is  said
to  the  Latter-day  Saints  concerning
our  religion,  which  does  -in  reality
incorporate  and  circumscribe  the
whole  life  of  man*  We  need  teach-
ing. We  are  like  children  with
regard  to  learning.  If  we  could  un-
derstand the  effects  of  the  fall  or  of
sin  upon  intelligence,  wc  would  see
that  its  tendency  is  downward,  that
it  is  retrograde  in  its  nature.  The
things  pertaining  to  life  are  of  the
opposite  character — they  are  exalt-
ing, increasing,  multiplying,  gain-
ing, receiving  a  little  here  and  a
little  there — our  minds  and  under-


standings expanding  by  that  which
we  learn  by  reading,  by  the  seeing
of  the  eye  and  the  hearing  of  the
ear. J^gj^T^  '^wP^  ^

The  Bible,  the  Book  of  Mormon,
and  the  revelations  which  the  Lord
lias  given  to  his  people  in  the  latter
days,  contain  a  great  deal  about  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.  We
have  also  histories  ot  the  kingdoms
established  by  the  children  of  men.
From  these  we  learn  that  a  great
many  changes  have  taken  place
owing  to  the  revolutions  that  have
occurred  in  the  past  and  which  are
still  in  progress.  From  odr  own
conclusions  on  these  matters  there  is
one  fact  of  which  we  are  sensible,
and  understand  to  a  certainty- —
namely,  that  purity  preserves,  sus-
tains and  increases,  while  sin  and
ignorance,  in  all  their  horrid  forms,
have  just  the  opposite  effect.  We
need  only  look  at  the  nations  of
the  earth  for  confirmation  of  these
ideas.  We  need  not  go  far ;  we
may  look  at  the  aborigines  of  our
own  country.  Why  are  they  in  their
present  condition  ?  There  aro  rea-
sons for  this.  They,  just  as  much
as  we,  belong  to  the  human  family —


CONTINUED  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  LAWS  OF  GOD,  ETC


109


the  highest  class  of  intelligence  there
is  <i poti  the  face  of  the  earth.  Why
they  tu  their  present  degrada-
tion ?  We  see  tbein  as  they  are,
we  .  see  the  nations  as  they  are.
Take  the  Jewish  nation,  why  are
they  as  they  are  ?  Is  there  a  cause
for  it?  There  eerlainly  is.  We
have  had  a  short  account  from
brother  George  A.  Smith  about  the
land  of  their  fathers;  we  can  draw
our  o,vn  conclusions  as  to  the  causes
which  have  brought  about  the  pre-
sent condition  of  that  land  and  of
the  descendants  of  the  ancient  wor-
thies to  whom  it  was  #iven.  In  the
nations  of  the  earth  at  the  present  !
day  we  see  imbecility,  blothfulness,
and  I  will  say  ignorance  with  all
its  attendant  crimes  and  debauch-
ery, prevailing  among  the  masses
of  the  people*  There  is  a  reason  for
all  this.  The  time  was  when  na-
tions, now  unknown,  which  once
flourished  upon  the  eastern  conti-
nent, were  intelligent  and  full  of
the  spirit  of  thrift  and  industry.
Who  can  tell  ns  why  they  have
passed  away  and  are  forgotten.
Brother  George  A.  told  us.  this  morn-
ing, that  the  place  where  the  great
city  of  Babylon  stood,  or  where  it  is
supposed  to  have  stood,  is  now  an
inaccessible  swamp  and  a  desert.
Where  is  the  Babylonish  nation?
We  know  nothing  about  it.  Where
are  the  nations  of  Israel  ?  We
hardly  know  anything  about  them,
with  the  exception  of  the  tribe  of
Jndah  and  the  half  tribe  ol  Benja-
min, which  remain  scattered  among
the  nations  of  the  earth,  desolate  and
forlorn.  They  have  been  hunted  down
with  dogs,  and  the  time  has  been  when
it  was  perfectly  lawful  in  some  na-
tions for  every  Christian  child  who
was  disposed  to  do  so  to  stone  a  Jew
while  passing  through  the  streets;
and  it  is  not  long  since  they  weie
not  permitted  to  own  a  foot  of  land


in  any  of  the  Gentile  nations.  This
is  not  so  now.  But  what  was  the
cause  of  all  this  ?  Their  history  ia
not  lost,  neither  are  they,  and  the
-simple  reason  they  are  nut  is  be-
cause they  were  the  chosen  of  .the
Lord,  they  were  to  be  held  in  re-
membrance by  our  heavenly  Father.
A  remnant  of  the  people  of  Israel
are  to  be  saved,  and  they  will  yet
be  gathered  together.  But  other  na-
tions that  existed  before  the  flood,
and  many  before  the  days  of  Jesus,
where  are  they  ?  Who  knows  any-
thing about  them  ?  They  are  lost
as  far  as  history  is  concerned  ;  and
many  people  since  the  days  of  the
Savior  have  been  blotted  from  the
lemembrance  of  man.

Here  are  a  people  dwelling  in  these
mountains  who  profess  to  be  the
Saints  of  the  Most  High,  the  be-
loved of  the  Lord.  They  have  re-
ceived his  Priesthood  and  its  keys,
the  keys  of  Government,  and  the
plan  of  the  government  of  the  hea-
venly hosts,  as  far  as  man  is  capable
of  receiving  this  divine,  celestial
and  holy  law.  When  we  contem-
plate the  course  of  the  Latter-day
S  lints,  we  are  almost  led  to  inquire
what  will  be  their  future  history.
It  is  true  that  we  have  hopes  dif-
ferent from  those  who  have  lived
before  ns,  but  let  this  people,  called
Latter  day  Saints,  be  blessed  for
twenty  years  to  come  as  they  have
been  for  twenty  years  past,  and  the
Lord  not  take  them  in  hand,  but
let  them  take  their  own  coure  as
they  have  done,  and  as  they  are
now  doing,  although  we  consider
ourselves  quite  obedient  and  willing,
and  we  like  to  know  the  mind  and
will  of  the  Lord,  but  let  us,  I  say,
go  on  for  twenty  years  to  come,
in  the  same  ratio  as  for  twenty  years
past,  and  who  among  us  would  hearken
to  the  counsel  of  God  ?  Let  the  old
stock  —  those  who have  lived  in


110


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Babylon  and  who  have  had  their
trials  in  the  wicked  world,  pass  away,
let  them  be  taken  out  of  the  midst
of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  and  the
young  growth  that  know  nothing  of
the  world  be  left  to  themselves,  to
follow  the  promptings  of  their  own
wills,  and  what  would  be  their  con-
dition ?  Would  we  not  see  Babylon
to  perfection  ?  Would  we  not  have
all  that  the  wicked  world  could  de-
sire in  our  midst,  and  we  delighting
therein  ?  Thijik  of  this,  and  draw
your  own  conclusions.  Still  we  say,
without  boasting  a  bit,  that  wre  are
the  best  people  there  is*  This  is  my
decision*  I  say  that  we  are  the  best
people  there  is  upon  the  earth,  and
we  have  nothing  to  boast  of,  not  the
least  in  the  world.  Who  is  there
that  hearkens  to  the  will  of  God,  or
heeds  his  voice  ?  Who  is  there,  on
the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  outside
of  this  people,  who  know  the  mind
and  will  of  God,  or  that  seek  to  do
his  will  ?  It  may  be  said  that  the
whole  Christian  world  are  trying  to
serve  Ahe  Lord.  It  is  true  that  many
of  them  confess  hira  with  their
mouths,  and  draw  near  to  him
with  their  lips,  but  what  is  their
true  condition  ?  Are  their  hearts
bent  on  doing  the  will  of  the  Lord,
or  are  they  far  from  him  ?  Suppose
that  Peter,  whom  the  Christian
world  think  so  much  of,  and  whose
history  is  contained  in  the  Bible;  or
James,  or  John,  or  either  one  of  the
eight  who  have  written  and  testified
to  the  New  Testament,  or  either
one  of  the  twelve  Apostles  chosen
by  the  Savior,  or  Jesus  himself,  were
to  come  to  the  Christian  world,  and
were  to  go  into  their  synagogues,  or
into  the  places  of  worship  they  have
erected,  and  which  they  call  after  St.
James,  St  Mark,  St.  Paul  or  St.  Pe-
ter, do  you  think  that  any  of  these
personages  would  be  permitted  to


proclaim  their  doctrines  in  those
buildings  ?  No,  not  onq,  and  if
there  were  a  priest  or  divide  who,
after  hearing  the  doctrine  of  Jesus
I  proclaimed,  should  say,  "  I  see  no
harm  in  this  doctrine,  it  is  Bible  doc-
trine,1* the  majority  of  the  people
would  say,  "  We  do  not  want  you  for
our  public  servant  if  you  permit  this
man  to  enter  the  pulpit  and  proclaim
his  doctrine."  This  is  all  the  proof
necessary  that  they  would  not  re-
ceive Jesus  and  his  Apostles  in  this
day,  with  all  their  boasted  professions
of  love  for  his  name  and  doctrine.
If  they  would  receive  Jesus  they
would  receive  an  Elder  of  this  Church
when  sent  to  preach  the  Gospel  to
them;  if  they  had  been  willing  to
receive  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,
they  would  have  received  your  hum-
ble servant.  But  this  we  need  not
talk  about.

■  What  will  be  the  history  of  the
nations  of  the  earth  now  existing  ?
Just  as  fast  as  time  and  circum-
stances will  permit  they  will  be
blotted  out  of  existence,  and  will
be  forgotten  and  known  no  more
on  the  face  of  the  earth.  This
would  be  the  fate  of  the  Latter-day
Saints  if  they  were  to  persist  in
following  the  inclinations  of  their
own  hearts,  for  according  to  that
which  they  now  make  manifest,  pride,
arrogance  and  covetousness  are  in-
creasing in  their  midst ;  and  any  peo-
ple or  nation  that  gives  way  to  these
evils  curtails  the  measure  of  its  exist-
ence, and  will  soon  be  blotted  out,
and  will  be  known  no  more  for  ever,
Can  we  believe  all  this  ?  Read  the
history  of  the  world  and  you  will
find  that  when  God  has  blessed  a
people  and  placed  his  name  upon
them,  and  they  afterwards  became
disobedient,  the  whole  catalogue  of
curses  pronounced  by  him  upon
his  unworthy  children,  have  come


CONTINUED  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  LAWS  OF  GOD,  ETC*


111


upon  them  and  they  have  been
blotted  out  Those  who  do  not  pro*
fess  to  know  anything  of  the  Lord
are  far  better  off  than  we  are,  un-
less we  live  our  religion,  for  we
who  know  our  Master's  will  and
do  it  not,  will  be  beaten  with  many
stripes;  while  they  who  do  not
knou  the  Master's  will  and  do  it
not  will  be  beaten  with  few  stripes.
This  is  perfectly  reasonable.  We
cannot  chastise  a  child  for  doing  that
which  is  contrary  to  our  wills,  if  he
knows  no  better;  bat  when  our  child-
ren are  taught  better  and  know  what
is  required  of  them,  if  they  then
rebel,  of  course,  they  expect  to  be
chastised,  and  it  is  perfectly  right
that  they  should  be.

Brother  George  A.  gave  us  a  lit-
tle this  morning  with  regard  to  the
law  of  Tithing.  What  was  the
cause  of  the  first,  or  one  of  the
first,  curses  that  came  upon  Israel  ?
I  will  tell  you.  One  of  the  first
transgressions  of  the  family  called
Israel,  was  their  going  to  other
families  or  other  nations  to  select
partners.  This  was  one  of  the  great
mistakes  made  by  the  children  of
Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  for  they
would  go  and  marry  with  other  fam-
ilies, although  the  Lord  had  forbid-
den them  to  do  so,  and  had  given
them  a  very  strict  and  stringent  law
on  the  subject.  He  commanded  them
not  to  marry  among  the  Gentiles,  but
they  did  and  would  do  it  Inasmuch
as  they  would  not  do  what  he  required
of  them,  then  he  gave  them  what
I  call  a  portion  of  the  law  of
carnal  commandments.  This  law
told  them  what  they  might  acd
whom  they  might  not  marry.  It
was  referred  to  by  the  Savior  and  his
Apostles,  and  it  was  a  grievous  yoke
to  place  on  the  necks  of  any  people;
but  as  the  children  of  this  family
would  run  after  Babylon,  and  after
the  pride  and  the  vanity  and  evils  of


the  world,  and  seek  to  introduce
them  into  Israel,  the  Lord  saw  fit  to
place  this  burden  upon  them.  And
another  great  neglect  and  infringe-
ment of  the  law  of  God  by  the  child-
ren of  Israel  was  in  relation  to  their
Tithes  and  offerings.  The  law  of
Tith  ing  was  revealed  in  very  early
times  to  the  people  of  God  ;  but  they
failed  to  observe  it,  and  the  Prophet*
wh'>m  God  sent  to  lerael  declared  that
they  had  transgressed  tSelaws,changed
the  ordinances,  and  broken  the  ever-
lasting covenant.  Covenants  were
made  with  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacobf
but  their  descendants  broke  them.
They  would  not  observe  but  they
would  transgress  the  laws  which  God
gave  unto  them,  and  they  continued
to  do  so  down  to  the  days  of  Malachi.
The  Lord,  through  this  Prophet,  de-
clared— "This  whole  nation  have
robbed  me."  I  also  declare  that  this
whole  people,  called  the  Latter-day
Saints,  are  guilty  of  the  same  sin —
they  have  robbed  the  Lord  in  their
Tithes  and  in  their  offerings.  What
would  the  people  like  ?  Do  they
want  to  know  what  is  done  with  the
Tithing.  If  the  Lord  requires  one-
tenth  of  my  ability  to  be  devoted  to
building  temples,  meeting  -  houses,
school- houses,  to  schooling  our  child-
ren, gathering  the  poor  from  the  na-
tions of  the  earth,  bringing  home  the
aged,  lame,  halt  and  blind,  and  build-
ing houses  for  them  to  live  in,  that
they  may  be  comfortable  when  they
reach  Ziou,  and  to  sustaining  the
Priesthood,  it  is  not  my  prerogative
to  question  the  authority  of  the
Almighty  in  this,  nor  of  his  servants
who  have  charge  of  it.  If  I  am  re-
quired to  pay  my  Tithing,  it  is  my
duty  to  pay  it.  If  the  question  is
asked — "Brother  Brigham,  do  you
pay  your  Tithing  ?"  I  can  answer
with  all  propriety  in  the  negative.
I  have  never  paid  my  Tithing,  and
if  I  turn  to  the  right,  left,  front  and


112


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


rear,  I  shall  seek  in  vain  for  a  man
in  this  Church  who  has  pan!  his
Tithing  strictly.  There  is  no  man
who  has  paid  his  Tsthinffe I  have


U1U


thin


closely,  and  ac-
cording to  my  understanding  of  the
literal  meaning,  spirit  and  intent  of
the  terra,,  I  am  compelled  to  come  to
the  conclusion  that  there  is  not  a
man  or  woman  in  this  Church  who
hm  paid  his  or  her  Tithing;  audi
do  not  know  of  an  individual  in  this
Church  who  ha#:  means  enough:  to
pay  his  back  Tithing  if  it  were  re*
quired  of  him,  I  have  not ;  it  would
require  more  means  than  I  have  now
in  nay  possession  tor  me  to  do  it
Perhaps  I  may  he  asked  what  is  nay
excuse.  I  do  not  4c now  that  I  have
any,  I  can  say,  that  in  the  days  of
Joseph,  when  my  circumstances  were
very  straitened,  I  never  had  $500,
$100,  one  dollar,  fifty  cents  or
twenty- five  cents,  kufc  what,  if  it
were  wanted,  it  went  as  free  as  a  cup
of  water  from  a  well — Joseph  was
welcome  to  it.  Was  I  tried  in  this  ?
Yes,  for  many  and  -many  has  been
the  time  in  my  poverty,  when  if  I
had  a  dollar  or  fifty  cents  in  my
possession  I  have  thought,  "  I  can
boy  a  pint  or  a  half  pint  of  molasses
for  my  children  to  sop  their  bread
in,"  but  it  was  called  for,  and  it, went
as  free  as  the  water  of  the  river  here
would  he  to  a  thirsty  person.  And
as  for  my  time,  from  the  day  that  I
entered  this  Church  until  now,  1  have
paid  no  attention  to  any  business  ex-
cept that  of  building  up  this  king-  I
dom.  The  question  may  be  asked,
"  Do  you  not  attend  to  your  own
private  affairs  and  business  ?"  Yes,
when  1  can,  but  I  do  not  know  ihat
I  have  ever  spent  one  minute  in  at-
tending to  business  belonging  to
Brigham  Young,  when  the  business
of  the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God
on  tne  earth  required  his  attention,
Yet  I  would  not  say  that  this  is  any


esxmgd  for  not  strictly  paying  my
Tithing.  I  have  paid  a  great  deal
of  Tithing,  more  perhaps  than  any
other  man,  of  any  other  ten  men  who
were  ever  in  the  Church,  and  yet  my
Tithing  is  not  paid,,  But  I  pay
Tithing,  and  when  the  grain  upon
my  fargi  is  ripened,  or  the  cattle
upon  it  are  matured,  )!  say  to  my
men,  "  Be  sure  and  pay  the  Tithing
on  whatever  we  have  raised."  But
in  some  instances  I  have  found  that
it  was  neglected.  «  -  "  V,  kv

Suppose  we  were  to  say  to  this
people,  "  Will  you  pay  a  little  Tith-
ing r"  11  Yes,  we  will  pay  a  little
Tithing."  How  much  Would  you
be  willing  to  pay  ?  Will  you  pny
one  dollar  to  a  thousand  that  you
owe  of  back  Tithing  ?  If  you  will,
we  shall  almost  have  morq  than  we
know  what  to  do  with.  Jf  you  pay
up  a  little  of  this  back  Tithing,  I
am  going  to  make  a  proposition.
Take  the  people  of  this  one  valleyf
and  they  are  far  bet  ter  able  to  build  a
Temple  than  the  whole  of  the  Saints
were  when  they  lived  in  the  Eastern
States,  The  Saints  did  not  begin  to
be  as  able  to  build  a  Temple  then  as
tho  people  of  this  single  valley  are
now.  My  proposition  is,  if  you  will
go  t-j  work  and  pay  up  some  of  your
back  Tithing,  we  will  build  a  Temple
up  here  on  the  hill;  we  can  select  a
beautiful  site  for  one  there.  Wo
calculate  to  build  many  Temples,  and
we  will  have  one  Wo'ifyoa  Veto
my  proposition.

If  we  had  a  few  score  thousands  of
dollars  now,  we  should  like  to  send
for  the  poor.  I  am  sent  to  from  this
town,  Mendon,  Hyrum,  Wellsville,
and  from  almost  every  settlement  in
these  mountains,  by  parties  who  have
friends  in  the  old  country,  sayingf
"  Brother  Brigham,  can  you  send  for
my  friends  ?  I  will  send  a  hundred
dollars ;  will  you  put  four  hundred  to
ihat  and  send  for  my  friends,  there


CONTINUED  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  LAWS  OF  GOD,  ETC,


113


are  only  five  of  them  ?"  This  may
appear  stmnge,  but  people  dwelling
in  almost  every  town  in  this  Terri-
tory, are  beseeching  me  continually
to  send  for  their  friends.  I  tell  them
I  will  send  for  all  I  can.  My  gene-
ral practice  has  been  to  oav  two
th  ousand  dollars  a  year  to  help  the
poor.  I  gave  only  one  thousand  this
year  ;  but  if  the  people,  every  year,
will  give  in  proportion  to  what  I
give,  we  can  bring  the  scattered
Saints  here  by  scores  of  thousands.
I  do  not  ask  the  Latter-day  Saints
to  do  that  which  I  do  not  do,  I  never
did,  and  as  old  as  I  am  now,  I  ex-
pect that  if  I  should  see  a  wagon  in
the  mud,  my  shoulder  would  be  first
to  the  wheel  to  lift  it  out.  When
money,  goods  or  time  has  been  want-
ed to  help  to  roll  forth  the  work,  I
have  taken  the  lead  all  the  time  and
said,  M  Come,  brethren,  do  as  I  do,"

But  with  regard  to  Tithing,  this
people  will  be  cursed  unless  they
stop  their  nonsense,  unless  they  cease
running  after  the  fashions  and  folly
of  Babylon,  and  put  as  Tithing  that
means  which  is  uselessly  spent.  How
long  would  it  take  the  Lord  to  cause
the  waters  of  every  stream  that  runs
into  this  valley  to  sink  down  into  the
earth,  and  to  make  the  valley  as  dry
as  the  Holy  Land  is  to-day,  it
would  take  him  but  a  very  short  time.
He  could  open  up  the  veins  of  the
earth — the  earth  is  full  of  them,  and
it  would  want  only  a  little  change  to
open  them,  and  cause  the  water  of
every  stream  in  this  valley  to  sink
deep  into  the  bowels  of  the  earth.
How  long  would  it  take  him  to  pass
his  word,  and  for  his  angels  to  come
here  and  say  to  the  clouds — "  Gather
no  more  moisture  to  shed  forth  the
dews  and  the  rains  on  the  face  of  the
earth  ?"  AH  he  would  have  to  do
would  be  to  send  an  angel  to  perform
a  little  meteorological  and  chemical
change,  and  the  clouds  would  gather

No.  8,


no  moro  moisture,  and  no  more  rain
would fall on the  earth.  Where
would  your  trees  be  then?  What
would bec  ame of your gardens  ?
What  would  become  of  the  forage  on
the  mountains  that  onr  cattle  and
sheep  feed  upon  ? It  would  be  dried
up,  become  dust,  and  be  blown  into
some  other  country,  and  the  rocks
would  be  left  bare,  as  they  are  in
some  of  the  eastern  lands. All  this
e  mid  be  done  very  easily, Now  we
ate  in  plenty,  in  the  very  heart  of
the  luxuries  of  the  world. There  ia
no  place  in  the  world  where  they  art
enjoyed  in greater profusion  than
they  are  here. Go into  boasted
France, with  its  forty  millions  of
people,  and  out  of  this  large  number
not  more  than  eight  millions  enjoy
the  luxury  of  eating  meat  j  thirty-
two  millions  out  of  the  forty,  it  is
said,  never  taste  it  from  year's  end
to  year's  end. Go  into  Italy,  and
the  proportion  of  those  who  never
taste  meat  is  far  greater  than  it  is  in
France* Compare  the  condition  of
the  people  in  some  of  the  German
States,  and  in  any  nation  on  the  face
ot  the  earth  that  we  know  anything
about,  with that  of  the  people  in
this  Territory,  and  I  will  say  that  the
people  of  these  mountains  wallow  and
revel  in  luxury,  wealth  and  independ-
ence more  than  any  other  people  on
the  face  of  the  earth,  and  yet  we
have  not  a  dollar  to  pay  Tithing!
We  have  to  pay  the  public  hands
now  a  certain  proportion  ot  money,
and  store  pay,  which  is  money,  but
ask  the  people  to  pay  us  a  little
money Tithing, and they  tell  us,
"We  haven't  got  any." The  cry
from  Cache  Valley  is,  "  We  have  no
money/* It  is  not  so. I  will  ven-
ture to  say  that  if  a  fine  circus  were
to  come  into  this  town,  and  stay  four
nights,  they  would  take  away  from
five  to  ten  thousand  dollars  in  cash,
and  go  to  the  next  town  it  would  be

Vol  XVI,


114


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOUHSES.


+


the  same.  I  am  now  telling  the  hard
Ride  of  the  question,  painting  the  evil
side  of  the  Latter  day  Saints*  1
recollect,  a  few  years  ago,  there  was
a  fine  circa «  came  to  Salt  Lake  City,
I  took  it  into  my  head,  a  few  days
before  it  arrived,  to  say  to  some  of
the  Bishops — "  Can  you  raise  us  ao
much  money  on  Tithing  ?  Can  nut
you  pay  something,  Bishop?"  Said
one,  "  I  have  not  a  dollar  in  the
world,"  I  would  meet  another,  and
ask  him  the  same  question,  and  I
asked  them  in  a  way  that  they  would
not  mistrust  me,  but  they  could  not
raise  a  dollar,  and  I  suppose  that
they  would  have  been  willing  to  have
laid  their  hands  on  the  BibJe  and
sworn  that  they  had  not  a  dollar  in
the  world.  On  the  day  when  the
circus  came  on  to  the  Eighth  Ward
square,  I  took  the  liberty  of  going
there,  and  I  watched  who  came,  and
I  found  that  some  of  these  very  men
who  88 id  that  they  had  not  a  dollar
in  the  world,  paid  out  ten,  fifteen,
twenty,  and  twenty- five  dollars  to  let
their  families  into  that  circus.  They
lied  before  God,  holy  angels  and  the
whole  heavens,  before  the  servants  of
God,  and  unless  they  repent  they
will  have  their  portion  in  hell.  You
need  not  wonder  to  see  men  aposta-
tizing  who  have  been  in  the  Church
thirty  or  thirty-five  years.  They
have  been  in  the  habit  of  lying  to
God,  to  angels,  to  themselves,  and  to
their  holy  religion.  Ask  them  for  a
little  Tithing,  and  their  answer  is —
"  No,  we  have  not  anything."  What
do  you  suppose  the  Lord  thinks  about
such  men  ?  He  thinks  they  will
have  their  portion  wiih  the  disobedi-
ent. This  is  the  unfavorable  side  of
the  picture.  Not  but  what  there  is
a  great  many,  and  in  fact,  the  greater
portion  of  this  people,  if  they  can
know  the  mind  and  will  of  God,  will
do  it.  They  are  told  it  from  day  to
day  and  from  time  to  time  on  a  great


many  subjects.  Both  here  and
throughout  all  the  settlements  of  the
Saints  we  have  preached  the  Word
of  Wisdom,  and  the  necessity  of  let-
ting the  fashions  of  the  world  alone.
We  give  you  the  truth  of  heaven  on
the  subject — we  give  it  to  you  just
as  it  is  in  heaven,  or  as  it  is  written
there  concerning  the  Saints  on  earth.
With  regard  to  Tithing,  we  give  you
the  truth  just  as  it  is  written  in  hea-
ven, and  just  us  you  will  find  it  by
and  by.  What  object  have  1  in  say-
ing to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  do  this,
that  or  the  other  r  It  is  for  my  own
benefit,  it  ia  for  your  benefit ;  it  is
for  my  own  wealth  and  happiness,
and  for  your  wealth  and  happiness
that  we  pay  Tithing  and  rentier  obe*
dience  to  any  requirement  of  Heaven,
We  can  not  add  anything  to  the
Lord  by  doing  these  things.  Tell
about  making  sacrifices  for  the  king-
dom of  heaven.  There  is  no  man
who  ever  made  a  sacrifice  on  this
earth  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
that  I  know  anything  about,  except
the  Savior,  He  drank  the  bitter  cup
to  the  dregs,  and  tasted  for  every
man  and  for  every  woman,  and  re-
deemed the  earth  and  all  things  upon
it*  But  he  was  God  iu  the  flesh,  or
he  c  iuld  not  have  endured  it.  "But
we  suffer,  we  sacrifice,  we  give  some-
thing, we  have  preached  so  loner-"
What  tor  ?  "  Why,  for  the  Lord."
I  would  not  give  the  ashes  of  a  rye
straw  for  the  man  who  feels  that  he
is  making  sacrifices  for  God.  We
are  doing  this  for  our  own  happiness,
welfare  and  exaltation,  and  for  no-
body else's.  This  is  the  fact,  and
what  we  do  we  do  for  the  salvation
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  not
for  the  salvation  of  the  heavens,  the
angels,  or  the  Gods.

These  are  a  few  of  my  thoughts,
and  a  few  items  for  the  people  to
receive  and  hearken  to.  We  have
come  here  to  talk  to  and  instruct


*


ALTERED  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  GATHERED  ISRAEL,  ETC.  115


you,  and  to  put  our  faith  and  our
work  with  yours.  Our  united  pur-
pose is  to  labor  to  build  up  the  king-
dom of  heaven  on  the  earth,  and  to


overcome  every  sin,  all  wickedness,
and  the  power  of  Satan,  until  the
earth  is  renovated,  purified,  sanctified
and  glorified.  Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,

Delivered  in  the  Bowery,  Lou  ax  City,  Sunday  Morning,

Jvxb  29,  1873.


(Reported  by  David  W*  Evans.)


ALTERED  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  GATHERED  ISRAEL— ALLUREMENTS  OF
SATAN  AT  WORK— SELFISHNESS  AND  AVARICE  SHOULD  BE  CAST
ASIDE— DEVOTION  TO  THE  WORK  OF  GOD— THE  ORDER  OF  ENOCH
THE  MEANS  OF  ESTABLISHING  AN  EQUALITY  IN  TEMPORAL  THINGS-
HEAVENLY  AGENCIES  CO-OPERATING  WITH  THE  SAINTS.


The  instructions  which  we  have
had  in  these  meetings,  I  look  upon
as  most  important  I  think  they
will  be  attended  with  most  excellent
results  to  those  who  have  heard  them,
and  that  these  meetings  should  be
attended  is  also  exceedingly  important
to  the  Latter-day  Saints.  Probably
there  never  has  been  a  time  since  the
organization  of  this  Church  when
the  Latter-day  Saints  needed  pointed,
plain,  emphatic  instruction  more  than
they  do  to-day.  We  have  reached
a  point  in  our  history  when  an  in-
crease  of  power  seems  to  be  requir-
ed by  ua  as  Elders  and  Saints  in  all
the  relationships  of  life,  to  enable
as  to  endure  and  resist  the  trials
with  which  we  are  brought  in  con-
tact. For  myself,  I  can  bear  testi-
mony that  I  never  felt  as  I  do  to-


day and  as  I  have  done  of  late,  the
exceeding  necessity  of  being  alive
to  the  work  of  God,  and  of  having
the  spirit  and  power  of  the  religion
of  Jesus  Christ  resting  down  upon
me.  I  look  around  and  see  the  cir-
cumstances which  surround  my
brethren  and  sisters,  I  see  the
great  change  which  has  taken
place  within  the  past  two  or  three
years.  These  valleys,  that  were
once  so  secluded  and  isolated,  and
so  seldom  visited  by  the  stranger,
but  were  almost  wholly  occupied  by
the  Saints  of  God,  have  changed  in
many  respects.  We  are  no  longer
the  secluded  people  that  we  were  five
years  ago.  Railroads  have  penetrated
oun  valleys,  so-called  civilization  as-
sails ns  in  all  our  settlements  and
cities,  vice  stalks  through  our  streets,


116


JOURNAL  OF  DISC


USKK.


and  injustice  and  wrong  are  to  bp
found  in  places  where  justite  and  !
righteousness  should  n  ign  supreme,
and  in  many  respects  we  have  things
to  encounter  which  we  never  before
had  to  contend  with  since  our  organ-
ization as  a  people.

We  are  now  becoming  a  numerous
people.  Since  our  arrival  in  these
valleys,  thousands  of  children  have
grown  from  childhood  to  youth,  and
from  youth  to  manhood  and  woman-
hood, who  are  unacquainted  with  the
ways  of  the  world,  and  who  are  un-
familiar with  the  temptations,  trials
and  evils  which  abound  in  society
outside  of  our  mountain  home.  This
numerors  class  of  our  community
is  now  brought  face  to  face  with  1
new  order  of  things.  Wealth  is
increasing  around  us,  and  those  who
resisted  its  influence  in  former  days,
perhaps  weakened  by  some  cause,  are
exposed  anew  to  its  temptations,  and
in  Home  instances,  those  thus  weak-
ened, fall  victims  to  its  power.
These  circumstances  inspire  serious
reflections.  No  man  or  woman  of
thought  can  contemplate  the  present
condition  of  Zion  without  having  se-
rious thoughts,  and  without  feeling
that  if  u Mornionism"  and  "Mor-
mon" institutions  never  have  bet  u
upon  their  trial  before,  they  certainly
are  now.  However,  they  have  al-
ways been  upon  their  trial  and  we,  as
a  people,  have  been  upon  our  trial
too.  But,  the  thought  arises,  How
shall  we  best  fortify  ourselves
against  the  encroachments  of  the
wicked  ?  How  shall  we  best  en-
trench ourselves  so  that  wickedness
shall  not  prevail  over  us,  that  our
posterity  may  be  preserved  in  the
purity  of  the  holy  faith,  and  that
through  them  we  may  be  able  to
transmit  to  future  generations  the
priceless  heritage  of  truth  which  God
has  given  unto  us.

Tins  is  a  question  which  presents


itself  to  all  oar  minds,  and,  if  we
do  as  we  should,  the  first  thought
wkh  each  of  us  is,  what  course  shall
we  pursue  to  enable  us  most  effi-
ciently to  discharge  the  duties  de-
volving upon  us  ?  The  .servants
of  God  have  pointed  out,  during
these  meetings,  in  exceeding  great
plainness,  the  path  which  lies  be-
fore us*  If  we  allow  ourselves  to
be  overcome  by  the  love  of  the
world,  then  farewell  to  our  future, —
farewell  to  the  glorious  prospect
afforded  us  in  the  revelat  ions  of  Jesus
Christ.  But  I  entertain  different
thoughts,  feelings  and  hopes  con-
cerning the  future  of  this  people.
Doubtless,  as  in  the  past,  there  will
be  those  who  will  deny  the  faith,
rebel  against  the  Priesthood,  be  over-
come h\  the  deceitful ness  of  riches,
and  who  will  transgress  the  laws  of
God,  and  fall  victims  to  apostacy;
but  1  feel  assuied,  and  can  bear  testi-
mony this  morning,  that  the  bulk  of
this  people  will  stand  firm  and  stead-
fast, and  maintain  their  integrity  till
Zion  is  fully  established  and  redeemed
upon  the  earth.  But  there  is  needed
on  our  part  a  devotion  to  the  princi-
ples of  the  Gospel.  We  must  truly
and  sincerely  repent  of  every  thought
and  feeling  that  are  contrary  to  the
mind  and  will  of  God  our  heavenly
Father.  We  must  obey  the  holy
Priesthood,  which  he  has  placed
in  our  midst,  at  the  cost  of  every-
thing if  it  be  required,  and  not  al-
low any  sordid  or  self-aggrandizing
feeling  to  enter  into  our  hearts  or
to  have  place  therein.  I  cannot  con-
ceive of  any  man  being  able  to  attain
unto  celestial  glory  who  is  not  wil-
ling to  sacrifice  everything  that  he
has  for  the  cause  of  God-  If  I  have
a  piece  of  land,  house,  money,  cattle,
horses,  carriages,  or  powers  of  mind
and  body,  and  am  not  willing  to  de-
vote any  or  all  of  these  to  the  rolling
forth  of  the  work  of  God,  as  they


ALTERED  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  GATHERED  ISRAEL,  ETC.  117


may  bo  required  by  him,  I  can  not
conceive  that  it  will  be  possible  for
me  to  enter  into  the  celestial  king-
dom of  God  our  heavenly  Father.

Do  you  understand,  do  you  com-
prehend, that  every  tiling  we  have
is  required  by  God  our  Father,  to
be  laid  upon  the  altar  ? Is  there
anything  that  is  nearer  your  heart
than  the  Gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  ? Is there anything  that
stands  between  you  and  obedience,
perfect obedience, to  the  wilt  of
God,  as  revealed  unto  you  through
the  Holy  Priesthood  ? If  there  is,
you  must  get  rid  of  it. We  must
humble  ourselves  before the  Lord
to  that  extent  that  we  shall  have  a
greater  love  of  his  work,  a  greater
degree  of  obedience  in  our  hearts
to  the  Holy  Priesthood  than  we  now
have  for  the  things  we  so  highly
value. In  no  other  way  can  we
expect to  become  the  people  that
God  designs we  shall  be.  Every
day,  it  seems  to  me,  the  circum-
stances of  the  people make  more
and more  apparent the  necessity
for  a  complete  change  in  our  tem-
poral  circumstances. We res  id  in
the  Book of  Mormon  that  when
the  ancient  Nephites  began  fo  in-
crease in  means  and  become  rich,  as
we  are  now  increasing,  the  Spirit  of
God began to decrease in  their
midst. There  were  some  who  had
property  and  could  clothe  and  edu-
cate their  children  better  than  their
neigh  bora. The  wealthy  could  have
carriages,  horses  and  fine  raiment  and
other  comforts  and  advantages  which
their  poorer  brethren  and  sisters  could
not  have. In  consequence  of  these
things they became divided  into
classes. The  rich  were  raised  up  iu
their  feelings  above  the  poor.  Tiie
poor  were  humble and meek  and
sought  unto  the  Lord,  in  many  in-
stances at  least. Divisions  into  elasses
prevailed ,  and  all  the  attendant  evils


connected  therewith.  They  became
puffed  up  in  pride,  and  the  Lord
suffered  the  Lamanites  to  come  upon
and  scourge  them,  aud  after  wars
had  wasted  away  their  strength  and
the  magnitude  of  the  destructions
which  overtook  them  had  abased
them,  they  would  begin  again  to  feel
after  and  to  humble  themselves  be-
fore the  Lord,  and  to  seek  for  his
Holy  Spirit  to  dwell  in  their
hearts.

We  are  now  exposed  to  precisely
the  same  influences  as  they  were.
We  are  increasing  in  wealth,  and  if
we  allow  our  hearts  to  be  placed
upon  it,  we  shall  have  to  undergo
or  to  pass  through  difficulties  simi-
lar in  character  to  those  which
they  had  to  endure.  The  Lord  will
not  suffer  us  to  become  alienated
from  his  work  without  scourging  us,
I  He  will  let  our  enemies  upon  us,
or  do  something  else  to  punish  us,
to  bring  us  down  and  make  us
humble  before  him.  He  has  pro-
vided a  way  by  which  we  can  escape
all  these  evils,  and  I  wish  this  morn-
ing, in  the  few  remarks  I  may  make,
to  call  your  attention  to  this  subject,
because  it  rests  upon  my  mind,  and
seems  to  be  the  uppermost  thought
in  ray  heart,  j

In  the  early  days  of  this  Church
God  revealed  unto  his  people  a
system  for  them  to  live  in  accord-
ance with.  It  is  known  hy  us  as
the  Order  of  Enoch;  and  it  see  ns
to  me,  every  day,  that  events  are  so
crowding  upon  us  as  to  compel  us  to
reflect  upon  and  to  prepare  our  hearts
to  enter  upon  the  practice  of  this
order;  and  that,  unless  we  do  enter
upon  it,  sooner  or  later,  as  God  shall
direct  through  his  servant  Brigharn,
we  shall  be  subjected  to  all  the  dis-
asters and  evil  consequences  which
have  attended  the  present  system  of
things,  under  which  all  men  seem  to
live  and  labor  for  self  only,  and  few,


118


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


very  few,  think  about  the  good  of  the
whole,  |  [  i

In  the  Book  of  Mormon  we  read
that  after  Jesus  came,  the  Nephites
had  all  things  in  common,  or,  to
use  the  language  of  the  book,  that
"they  had  all  things  in  common
among  them,  therefore  they  were
not  rich  and  poor/*  regulated,  of
course,  by  the  revelations  he  gave
unto  them.  They  entered  upon  the
practice  ot  this  order,  according  to
the  account,  in  the  thirty-sixth
year  of  our  era,  that  is,  within  two
years  after  the  appearance  of  Jesus.
It  is  probable,  however,  from  the
reading,  that  they  entered  upon  it
immediately  after  the  appearance
of  Jesus  in  their  midst  They  were
then  in  good  circumstances  to  enter
upon  it.  The  wicked  had  been
killed  off,  and  the  land  cleansed  of
their  presence.  Cities  had  been
sunk,  and  water  had  risen  in  the
place  thereof  Mountains  had  fallen
upon  other  cities,  and  great  des-
tructions had  been  accomplished  in
the  land,  and  the  remnant  that  were
left  were  a  comparatively  pure  peo-
ple. For  165  years  afterwards,  or
nntil  167  years  after  the  appear-
ance of  Christ,  that  is,  until  about
the  year  201  of  our  era,  the  Nephites
dwelt  under  this  order.  They  spread
abroad  throughout  all  the  land  of
North  and  South  America,  They
dwelt  in  righteousness,  so  much  so
that  Jesus,  in  speaking  about  them
by  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  said  that  not
one  soul  of  those  generations  should
be  lost  It  was  a  millennium,  so  far
as  peace  and  truth  and  virtue  and
righteousness  and  brotherly  kindness
were  concerned.  Of  course  it  was
not  a  thousand  years,  but  they
dwelt  together  as  one  family  for  167
years*  No  divisions,  no  strife,  no
enmity,  no  classification,  no  rich  and
no  poor,  but  all  partaking  of  the
heavenly  gift  alike,  and  God  has  said


in  his  revelations  unto  us,  "  If  ye
would  be  equal  in  heavenly  things,
ye  must  be  equal  in  earthly  things."
They  were  equa!  in  earthly  things,
Jiud  thfey  were  equal  also  in  heavenly
things,  ,

■  To  read  about  that  period,  brief
as  is  the  account  that  is  given  to  us,
makes  one  almost  wish  that  he  could
have  lived  in  such  a  day  and  dwelt
among  such  a  people.  The  Lord
foresaw  and  predicted  through  his
servants  the  Prophets,  that  there
would  be  a  time  in  the  fourth  gene-
ration when  the  adversary  would
again  regain  his  power  over  the
hearts  of  the  children  of  men,  and
they  would  he  led  astray  and  go
into  evil  And  what  was  the  first
thing  they  did  to  prepare  the  way
for  the  fulfillment  ot  this  terrible
prediction  ?  It  was  to  reject  this
system  or  order,  and  begin  again  to
classify  themselves  into  rich  and
poor.  They  began  to  build  churches
to  themselves,  they  began  to  separate
themselves  from  their  brethren,  and
to  em&te  distinctions  of  classes,  and
this  prepared  the  way  for  the  final
destruction  of  the  Nephite  nation.

I  doubt  not,  my  brethren  and  sis-
ters, that  this  will  be  the  way  in
which  Satan  will  regain  his  power
over  the  hearts  of  the  children  of
men  at  the  end  of  the  thousand
years  of  which  we  read.  I  believe
that  the  thousand  years  of  millen-
nial glory  will  be  ushered  in  by  the
practice  of  this  system  by  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  When  that  sys-
tem is  practiced  the  hearts  of  the
children  of  men  can  be  devoted  to
God  to  an  extent  that  would  be  im-
possible under  the  present  organiza-
tion of  affairs*  Now  we  are  tempted
and  tried  and  exposed  to  evils  which
we  should  know  nothing  about  if  we
lived  under  the  order  I  have  referred
to,  I  do  not  believe  that,  if  we  were
to  live  as  we  now  are  for  a  thousand


ALTERED  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  GATHERED  ISRAEL,  ETC.  119


years,  Satan  could  ever  he  bound  in
our  midst  so  that  he  could  not.  have
power  over  our  hearts.  There  must
be  a  change  in  our  temporal  uffairs,
there  must  be  a  foundation  laid
which  will  knit  us  together  and  make
us  one.  How  is  it  with  us  now  ?  [£
a  man  have  a  horse  and  he  .should
want  to  sell  it  to  his  brother,  he  tries
to  get  the  most  lie  possibly  can  for  it.
If  he  have  a  wagon  or  any  other  piece
of  property,  and  he  wants  to  sell  it,
does  he  consult  his  brother's  interest?
Perhaps  he  may  do  so,  but  it  is  not
always  that  men  do  so;  he  gets  the
best  price  he  can  for  that  article,
regardless  of  his  brother's  welfare
and  benefit.  There  is  a  constant
appeal  to  selfishness  under  the  pre-
sent system,  there  is  a  constant
temptation  for  a  man  to  do  the  best
lie  can  for  himself  at  the  expense  of
his  fellow  men,  and  there  is  no  reme-
dying it  to  its  full  bxtent;  in  fact
there  is  a  constant  struggle  as  we  are
at  the  present  time  to  keep  down
within  us  Hie  desire  to  profit  at  the
expense  of  our  fellow-men.

There  is  something  unnatural  in
this  condition  of  affairs,  something
opposed  to  God,  Why  should  we
be  subjected  to  these  things,  and
have  to  struggle  with  them  continu-
ally? Many  Latter-day  Saints  have
refrained  from  taking  hold  of  mer-
chandising and  other  branches,  be-
cause by  so  doing  they  would  have
exposed  themselves  to  hazards  that
were  very  dangerous  for  them  to
encounter.  There  was  the  tempta-
tion to  make  immense  profits  out  of
the  necessities  of  their  brethren  and
sisters.  Under  the  Order  of  Enoch
men  would  not  be  thus  tempted.
Individual  benefit  would  not  then
be  the  aim  and  object  of  men's  lives
and  labors,  God  did  not  create  us
for  the  purpose  of  striving  for  self
alone;  and  when  we  are  rightly  situ-
ated, under a proper  system,  our


desires  will  flow  naturally  along,  and
we  will  find  room  tor  the  exercise  of

,  every  faculty  of  mind  and  body  with*
out  endangering  the  salvation  of  our*
souls.  We  can  then  trade  and  ex-
change, sell  and  buy,  and  enter  upon
business  without  being  surrounded
with  these  evils  we  now  have  to  con-
tend with.

God  has  revealed  the  plan,  and  it
is  a  very  simple  one  ;  but  it  will  re-
quire faith  on  the  part  of  the  Saints
to  enter  upon  it.  There  are  a  great
many  evils  which  would  be  stricken
out  of  existence  were  that  system
practiced.  Why  are  men  tempted  to
be  thieves  ?  Why  do  they  steal — •
take  property  that  does  not.  belong  to
them  ?  Would  they  do  this  if  so-
ciety was  properly  constituted  ?  No,
they  would  not  be  tempted  to  do  it.
The  temptations  that  we  are  ex-
posed to  are  the  result,  in  a  great
degree,  of  the  false  organization  of
society,  I  believe  there  are  thou-
sands of  men  in  the  Christian  world,
who  are  adulterers  to-day,  who  would
not  be  adulterers  if  they  knew  more
and  could  practice  the  system  of
marriage  which  God  has  revealed.
They  are  adulterers  because  of  the
false  state  of  things  that  exists  in  the
world.  And  when  I  speak  of  this
practice,  1  might  extend  it  to  a  great

i  many  more.  The  devil  has  set  up
every  means  in  his  power  to  hamper
the  children  of  men,  to  throw  around

f  them  barriers  to  prevent  their  carry-
ing out  the  will  of  God.  And  when
we  obey  the  commandments  of  God,
we  will  defeat  the  adversary  of  oor
souls.  When  we  carry  out  the  pur-
poses and  the  revelations  which  God
has  given  and  made  known  unto  us,
we  gain  immensely.  We  gain  power
and  strength,  and  in  a  little  while

I  the  adversary  will  be  bound  in  our
midst,  so  that  he  will  not  have  power
to  tempt  us,  and  this  will  be  brought
about  by  our  obeying  the  command-


120


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


men  Is  of  God  and  the  revelations  of
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I  also  be-
lieve that  when  Satan  is  loosed  again
for  a  little  while,  when  the  thousand
yeans  shall  be  ended,  it  will  be
through  mankind  departing  from  the
practice  of  those  principles  which
God  has  revealed,  and  this  Order  of
Enoch  probably  among  the  rest.  He
can,  in  no  better  way,  obtain  power
over  the  hearts  of  the  children  of
men,  than  by  appealing  to  their  cupi-
dity, avarice,  and  low,  selfish  desires.
This  is  a  fruitful  cause  of  difficulty.
You  can  handle  men  better  in  any
other  way  than  when  you  come  to
their  money,  and  all  these  temporal
things  they  are  surrounded  with.  I
hope  to  see  a  change  in  this  respect,
I  pray  for  it,  I  am  willing  to  labor
for  it  I  hope  you  will  give  this
subject  your  attention,  and  seek  by
ail  the  faith  in  your  power  to  pre-
pare yourselves  for  it,  and  to  prepare
your  children  for  it,  so  that  when  it
is  deemed  wisdom  by  the  servants  of
God  to  enter  upon  this  system,  we
shall  be  prepared.

There  has  been  some  allusion,
which  you  have  heard,  to  the  setting
apart  of  a  district  of  land  in  this
valley  for  that  purpose.  If  I  lived
here  I  should  hail  such  an  enterprise
with  joy,  while  I  might  fear  and
tremble  on  my  own  account  lest
through  some  weakness  I  might  not
be  able  to  bear  or  pass  through  or
practice  it  as  it  should  be-  Never-
theless I  should  hail  it,  if  I  lived
here,  with  joy,  for  it  matters  not
what  may  become  of  me,  it  matters
not  what  may  become  of  any  of  us
individually,  only  so  for  as  we,  indi-
vidually, are  concerned,  if  the  work
of  God  is  only  rolled  forth,  if  his
purposes  are  only  consummated,  and
the  salvation  of  the  earth  and  its
inhabitants  is  brought  about.  I  feel
that  it  matters  not  what  my  fate  may
be  if  this  is  only  accomplished  and


God*s  glory  brought  to  pass  on  the  '
earth,  and  the  reign  of  righteousness
and  truth  be  u*bered  in.

I  expect  that  God  will  do  a  greater
work  in  our  midst,  when  that  shall
be  brought  to  pass,  than  we  can  yet
conceive  of  We  have  thought  that
the  Lord  God  delays  Ins  coming.
We  have  now  been  forty- three  years
organized  as  a  Church,  and  some-
tin)  es  we  feel  as  if  the  Work  of  God
is  not  making  that  progress  which  it
should.  There  ate  reasons  for  it.  It
is  not  stopped  or  delayed;  on  the
contrary,  it  is  progressing,  although
probably  not  with  the  rapidity  that
it  will  progress  when  we  get  more
faith,  and  are  more  perfect  in  our
practices.  1  have  hud  my  thoughts
attracted,  in  consequence  of  a  visit
which  brother  Brigbam,  jum,  and
myself  made  to  the  hill  Cu moral i
about  three  weeks  ago,  to  the  three
Nephites  who  have  been  upon  this
land,  and  I  have  been  greatly  com-
forted at  reading  the  promises  of
God  concerning  their  labors  and  the
work  that  should  be  accomplished
by  t be tn  among  the  Gentiles  and
among  the  Jews,  also  before  the
corning  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  I  doubt
not  that  they  are  laboring  to-day  in
the  great  cause  on  the  earth.  There
are  agencies  laboring  for  the  accom-
plish rnent  of  the  purposes  of  God
and  for  the  fulfillment  of  the  predic-
tions of  the  holy  Prophets,  of  which
we  have  but  little  conception  at
the  present  time.  We  are  engrossed
by  our  own  labors.  You  in  Cache
Valley  have  your  thoughts  centred
on  the  labors  that  devolve  upon
you.  We  in  Salt  Lake  and  else-
where have  ours  upon  the  work  that
immediately  attracts  our  attention;
and  while  we,  or  all  amongst  us  who
are  faithful,  shall  no  doubt  be  in-
strumental in  the  hands  of  God,  in
bringing  to  pass  his  purposes  and
accomplishing  the  work  he  has  pre-


ALTERED  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  GATHERED  ISRAEL,  ETC


121


dieted  in  connect  ion  with  the  ten
tribes,  the  Lamanites,  the  Jews,
and  the  Gentile  nations,  we  need
Dot  think  that  these  things  depend
upon  us  alone.  There  are  powers
engaged  in  preparing  the  earth  for
the  events  that  await  it  and  fulfilling
all  the  great  predictions  concerning
it,  which  we  know  nothing  of,  and
we  need  not  think  that  it  depends
npon  us  Latter-day  Saints  alone,  and
that  we  are  the  only  agents  in  the
hands  of  God  in  bringing  these  things
to  pass  The  powets  of  heaven  are
engaged  with  us  in  this  work.

This  earth  is  the  heritage  of  the
children  of  God.  It  has  been  given
to  the  faithful  who  have  li^ed  be-
fore us,  as  well  as  to  us,  they  are
watching  our  labors  with  intense
anxiety,  and  they  are  laboring  in
their  sphere  for  the  accomplishment
of  the  same  great  and  glorious  re-
sults. They  have  dwelt  here,  and
they  are  singing  the  song  mentioned
by  John  the  Revelator  — "  Thou
hast  made  us  Kiu^s  and  Priests
unto  God,  and  we  shall  reign  on  the
earth,"  and  the  souls  of  them  who
have  suffered  martyrdom  are  crying
from  beneath  the  altar,  "  How  long,
Oh  God,  wilt  thou  not  avenge  our
blood  upon  them  that  dwell  un  the
earth  r"  They  are  eager  for  the  re-
demption of  Zion,  the  accomplish-
ment of  God's  purposes,  and  the  es-
tablishment of  his  universal  king-
dom upon  the  face  of  this  earth  of
ours.  But  if  we  do  not  our  duty,  ;
God  will  take  away  from  us  that  in-
heritance which  he  has  promised
onto  12??,  and  the  crowns  that  we
would  otherwise  have  will  !  t:  taken
and  given  to  others. We  shall  lose


these  unless  we  do  that  which  God
requires  at  our  hands  with  perfect
willingness  and  joy,  for  there  is  no
joy  that  any  human  being  expe-
riences that  approaches  the  joy  of
serving  God  and  keeping  his  com-
mandments, lfc  is  sweeter  than  the
sweetest  honey,  and  it  is  more  de-
sirable than  all  the  joy  of  the  earth
besides.  Von  Latter-day  Saints
know  this  by  the  outpouring  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  by  the  gift  of
the  precious  Spirit  which  yon  have
received,  that  has  rested  down  upon
you  by  eight  and  by  day,  and  that
has  caused  your  hearts  to  be  softened
and  your  eyes  to  weep  tears  of
joy  fur  the  goodness  of  God  unto
you.  And  yet  wo  are  indolent,  and
yet  we  think  about  a  little  property,
and  yet  we  would  risk  our  salvation
because  we  are  afraid  to  do  somet  hing
which  God  requires  at  our  hands.  Oh
foolish  people  !  Huw  shall  we  stand
before  the  bar  of  our  God  and  answer
for  the  use  we  have  made  of  the  ines-
timable blessings  which  he  has  be-
stowed upon  us  ?  How  shall  we
stand  before  that  terrible  bar,  if  we
are  not  faithful  ?  How  can  we  justify
ourselves  for  our  unfaithfulness  ?  We
cannot  do  it,  but  we  shall  feel  to
shrink  from  the  presence  of  our  Al-
mighty Judge  when  we  are  thus
brought  face  to  face  with  him.

That  wo  may  be  faithful  to  the
end,  that  we  may  love  the  Lord
better  than  we  love  everything  else
on  the  earth,  that  wo  may  devote
ourselves  to  his  service  all  our  days,
and  bequeath  truth  as  a  precious
legacy  to  our  children  after  us,  is  my
prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen,


REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,


Delivered  in  the  Bowktiy,  Logan  City,  Sunday  Morxino,

Juse  29?  1873.  > ;  >


(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)


THE  ORDER  OF  ENOCH.


I  say  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
that  the  only  reason  why  we  do  not
take  up  the  subject  and  enter  into  the
organization  of  Enoch,  or  a  city  of
Enoch,  is  simply  because  we  have
not  yet  been  able  to  6 rid  every  item
of  law  bearing  upon  this  matter,  so
as  to  organize  in  a  way  that  apostates
cannot  trouble  us.  This  is  the  only
reason.  It  is  a  matter  that  I  am
paying  particular  attention  to,  with
some  of  my  brethren,  to  sec  if  we
have  skill  enough  to  get  up  an  orga-
nization and  chaw  up  papers  to  bind
ourselves  together  under  the  laws  of


the  United  St;


so  that  we  can


put  our  means  and  labor  together
and  join  as  one  family.  As  soon  as
we  can  accomplish  this,  and  get  an
instrument  that  lawyers  cannot  pick
to  pieces  and  destroy,  and  apostates
cannot  afflict  us,  we  expect  to  get  up
this  institution,  and  enter  most  firmly
into  itTJ

Yesterday  and  the  day  before  I
tad  considerable  to  say  to  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  reading  the  dark  side
of  the  page,  I  will  say  here,  I  am
not  discouraged  with  regard  to  this
latter-day  work,  I  am  not  discou-
raged with  regard  to  the  Latter-day
Saints*  If  we  were  to  pick  and
choose  to-da3T,  we  should  find  a  large
majority  of  the  people  called  Latter-
day  Saints,  who  are  ready  and  will-
ing, w  ith  open  hands  and  pure  hearts,


to  enter  into  the  Order  of  Enoch,
and  to  live  and  die  in  this  Order,
This  is  my  faith  concerning  the  peo-
ple at  large,  consequently  I  am  not
discouraged.  But  there  are  sonic
who  need  chasteninLT.  We  cannot
call  names,  this  will  not  answer.  We
cannot  tell  a  man  that  he  is  going  to
apostatize,  but  we  can  chasten  him
as  a  member  of  the  Church,  not  as
an  individual,  In  this  capacity,
while  in  public,  we  do  not  take  the
liberty  of  chastening  an  individual.
But  we  can  say  to  the  brethren  and
sisters,  we  are  encouraged.  **  Mor-
mon ism"  is  onward  and  upward,  the
Gospel  that  the  Lord  Jesus  has  in-
troduced in  the  latter  (Jays  is  enjoyed
by  many,  and  ir  is  our  life,  our  joy,
our  peace,  our  glory,  our  happiness,
our  all ;  and  when  wre  come  to  the
trying  scene,  as  some  call  it,  of  sacri-
licitig  our  property,  and  putting  it
together  for  the  good  of  the  commu-
nity, I  do  not  expect  the  brethren
will  receive  any  more  trials  than  they
have  heretofore,  I  do  know  whether
the  sisters  will.

Brother  George  Q.  Cannon  says
the  sisters  have  borne  a  great  deal.
So  they  have,  but  if  they  could  only
stand  in  the  shoes  of  their  husbands
who  are  good,  true  and  faithful,  they
would  know  that  they  are  by  no
means  free  from  perplexities.  Just
fancy  a  man  with  two,  three,  or  half


PURPOSE  OF

a  doztin  of  his  beloved  wives  catching
hiiiv  on  one  side,  and  before  he  can
take  three  steps  more,  catching  him
on  the  other,  and  "  I  want  this,"  u  I
want  that,"  and  "  this  is  not  right,"
and  "  that  is  not  right,"  and  so  on  ;
their  minds  just  pulled  to  pieces.  I
say  if  the  hair  is  spare  1  on  their
heads  they  may  consider  that  they
hnyje  got  blessed  good  wives,  I  have
as  many  wives  as  many  other  men,
and  I  keep  my  hair  yet.  J  But  as  to
trials,  why  bless  your  hearts,  the
m-AU  or  woman  who  enjoys  the  spirit
of  our  religion  has  no  trials;  but  the
man  or  woman  who  tries  to  live  ac-
cording to  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God,  and  at  the  same  time  clings  to
the  spirit  of  the  world,  has  trials  and
sorrows  acute  and  keen,  and  that,  too,
continually.


GOD,  ETC,  123

This  is  the  deciding  point,  the
dividing  line.  They  who  love  and
serve  God  with  all  their  hearts  re*
joice  evermore,  pray  without  ceasing,
and  in  everything  give  thanks  ;  but
they  w  ho  try  to  serve  God  and  still
cling  to  the  spirit  of  the  world,  have
got  on  two  yokes — the  yoke  of  Jeans
and  the  yoke  of  the  devil,  and  they
will  have  plenty  to  do.  They  will
have  a  warfare  inside  and  outside,
and  the  labor  will  be  very  galling,
for  they  are  directly  in  opposition
one  to  the  other.  Cast  off  the  yoke
of  the  enemy,  and  put  on  the  yoke  of
Christ,  and  you  will  say  that  his
yoke  is  easy  and  his  burden  is  light.
This  t  know  by  experience.

God  bless  you.


DISCOURSE liY PRESIDENT DANIEL B.  WELLS,

Delivered  in  tue  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lakk  City,  Saturday

Aftbenoos,  August  9,  1873*


(Reported  by  David  IF.  Evans.)


PURPOSE  OF  GOD  IN  CREATING  MAN — MAN'S  AGENCY — DUTIES  OF
THOSE  WHO  HAVE  ENTERED  INTO  COVENANT  WITH  GOD — REWARD
OF  FAITHFULNESS — WORK  TO  BE  ACCOMPLISHED  BEFORE  THE  SE-
COND COMING  OF  JESUS — AVOID  EVIL  ASSOCIATIONS,


1  feel  to  bear  toy  testimony,  my
brethren  and  sisters,  to  the  doc-
trines and  principles  of  the  holy
Gospel  of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus
Christ,  which,  we  read  in  the  Scrip-


tures, is  the  power  of  God  unto  sal-
vation to  all  who  believe  and  obey  the
same.  It  has  teen  stated  here  that
we  are  a  peculiar  people,  and  that  we
have*  a  mission  to  perform  on  the


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


earth.  This  is  true.  Our  Father  in
heaven  has  a  work  to  perform  on  the
earth,  and  we  have  been  called  to  be
co-workers  with  him  in  bringing  to
pass  his  purposes  among  the  children
of  men.  This  is  a  blessed  privilege
for  us.  If  his  purposes  could  have
been  advanced  and  established  upon
the  earth  without  his  having  revealed
himself,  we  would  not  have  been
called,  and  the  angel  would  not  have
come  and  restored  the  everlasting
Gospel  in  our  day.  We  may  go  fur-
ther back,  and  s:iy,  that  if  it  would
have  been  as  well  for  us  to  remain
vnth  our  Father  in  the  spirit  world,
and  not  to  come  forth  into  this  world,
to  pass  through  the  ordeals  which
await  us,  we  should  not  have  been
sent.  But  we  have  been  sent  for  a
purpose,  and  that  purpose  is,  that  we
may  accomplish  the  f  ull  measure  of
our  creations  which  we  could  not
do  without  an  earthly  probation. —
This  was  necessary  to  our  ndvanre-
ment,  as  intelligent  beings,  and  for
the  progress  of  the  kingdom  and
glory  of  God.  We  had  a  pre-exis-
tence  in  the  spirit  world,  and  we
kept  our  first  estate  there,  or  we
should  not  have  been  privileged  to
come  and  take  bodies  and,  by  living
according  to  the  principles  of  the
holy  Gospel,  prepare  our  selves  for
salvation  and  exaltation,  and  to
return  again  into  the  presence  of
our  Father  and  partake  of  his  glory.
In  this  connection  come  in  the  prin-
ciples of  redemption  and  of  the  re-
surrection, through  the  power  of
which  uur  bodies  and  spirits,  after
they  have  passed  the  ordeal  of  death,
will  be  reunited  and  clothed  with
immortality  and  endowed  with  eter-
nal life,  I  say,  if  it  would  have  been
as  well  for  us  to  remain  in  the  spirit  I
world,  we  should  not  have  been  sent
forth  to  be  tested  with  the  misery,  woe,
sorrow,  corruptions,  evils  and  death
so  prevalent  on  earth  ;  but  it  was  in


kindness  to  us,  his  children,  that  our
Father  sent  us  to  this  earth,  that  we
may  show  whether  we  will  be  faithful
in  all  respects  to  the  principles  of
fruth  and  righteousness,  and  to  the
commandments  of  God  when  in  the
midst  of  evil.  All  the  require-
ments of  our  Father  conduce  to  the
blessing  and  benefit  of  those  who
observe  them  while  they  live  here,  as
well  as  ensuring  to  them  the  blessings
at  the  end  of  the  race.

The  Lord  our  God  never  did,  and
he  never  will,  reveal  a  principle,
give  a  commandment,  or  make  a
requirement  of  his  children  on  the
earth,  but  what  if  it  is  carried  out
will  prove  a  blessing  to  every  one,
for  it  will  enable  us  to  work  out  our
salvation  and  exaltation  by  estab-
lishing the  principles  of  truth,  vir-
tue and  honor  upon  the  earth,  and
these  principles,  in  the  very  nature
of  things,  must  purify  and  elevate
those  who  live  and  govern  their
actions  by  them.  These  are  the
only  principles  which  will  endure
ami  stand  for  ever;  while  that
which  is  of  an  opposite  character
will  pass  away.  Herein  is  the  war-
fare in  which  we  are  engaged,  and
which  we  shall  continue  to  wage,  as
long  as  we  live  on  the  earth.  Fur  the
evil  one  is  ready,  if  we  will  listen  to
him,  to  lead  us  astray  and  to  cause  us
to  make  shipwreck  of  our  most  holy
faith;  he  will  cause  light  to  appear
as  darkness,  and  darkness  as  light,
and  he  will  lead  us  down  to  destruc-
tion if  we  are  not  continually  on
our  guard  against  his  wiles  and  sug-
gestions. Bui  if  we  observe  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  and  the
commandments  of  the  Lord  our
Gpd,  they  will  bring  us  peace  in  the
lite  that  now  is  as  well  as  in  that
which  is  to  come.  Some  people
seem  to  think  that  the  pursuits  so
pjevalent  in  the  world  are  all  that
are  worth  living  for,  and  that  they


mVOSE  OF  GHl>,  ETC


125


will  find  joy  and  happiness  there-
in. Bat  such  pleasures  are  neither
solid  nor  lasting,  and  there  is  no-
thing that  can  be  considered  real,
genuine  joy  find  pleasure  within
the  reach  of  the  human  family,  bat
what  is  to  be  found  within  the  pur-
view of  the  everlasting  Gospel.  The
Gospel  m  ikes  men  and  women  free
—  free  from  sin  —  the  greatest  of
all  tyrants;  and  there  is  no  greater
slave  on  the  earth  than  the  man
who  is  under  the  control  of  his  own
passions,  and  who  is  subject  to  the
dictation  of  the  spirit  of  evil  which
is  so  prevalent  in  the  world.  The
acts  of  all  such  persons  bring:  their
own  punishment,  and  it  is  swift  and
certain;  while  those  who  are  con-
trolled by  the  principles  of  the  Gos-
pel have  a  joy  and  peace,  under  what-
ever circumstances  in  life  they  may
he  placed,  which  the  world  knows
nothing  of,  and  which  it  can  neither
give  nor  take  away,  for  they  have  an
inward  consciousness  that  their  course
secures  to  them  the  confidence  of  the
Lord  our  God.

We  are  placed  here  on  the  earth
that  we  may  be  tested.  We  are
very  independent  beings,  we  have
our  agency,  and  can  choose  the  road
to  life  or  the  road  to  death,  just  as
we  please.  If  we  would  secure  eter-
oal  life  we  shall  have  to  take  a  course
to  command  the  confidence  of  our
Father  in  heaven,  and  to  accomplish
this,  we  must  not  be  weary  in  well
doing,  for  it  is  said  that  only  they
who  endure  will  receive  the  reward.
Endure  what  ?  Why,  the  trials,
temptations  and  difficulties  that  we
may  have  to  encounter  in  the  path
which  the  Gospel  marks  out.  Our
path,  as  followers  of  the  Savior,  is
beset  with  evil  on  every  side,  and
with  influences  which,  if  yielded
to,  will  bring  us  under  the  power  of
the  oppressor.  They  may  seem  al-
luring, to  a  greater  or  less  extent,


and  m  thry  are,  for  the  power  of
I  evil  1ms  great  influence  in  the  earth.
The  wealth  of  the  earth  has  long  been
I  control  e  l  by  the  evil  one,  and  ho  has
bestowed  it  upon  whomsoever  he  has
seen  tit  Perhaps  this  has  been  or-
dered so  in  the  economy  of  onr  Fa-
ther fur  the  benefit  of  his  children.
We  must  learn  to  trust  in  God.  As
was  said  here  this  morning,  we  must
live  by  faith.  What  is  a  man  good
for  who,  just  as  soon  as  an  obstacle
presents  itself  before  him,  flies  the
track  and  savs,  "  I  will  have  no  more
to  do  «  ith  this  or  with  that.  It  is
true  it  purports  to  come  from  our
Father  in  heaven,  bu}  I  can  not  see
the  benefit  that  will  accrue  to  me
in  observing  it,  and  I  will  seize
that  which  offers  present  benefit,
regardless  of  the  consequences." —
That  man  proves  to  all  that  he  is
not  worthy  to  receive  eternal  riches.
A  Latter-day  Saint  should  live  so
that  he  can  bear  the  scrutinizing
eye  of  the  Almighty,  in  secret  as
well  as  in  public.  This  should  be
his  coarse  all  the  days  of  his  life,
then  when  the  day  comes  in  which
the  wicked  will  call  upon  the  rocks
to  hide  them  from  the  face  of  the
Lord,  he  will  rejoice  in  meeting  his
Father,  and  will  join  in  rendering
praise  and  thanksgiving  to  his  name,
for  the  privilege  of  again  beholding
him*  This  will  be  the  lot  of  the
righteous — those  who  have  served
God  in  their  actions  as  well  as  with
their  lips;  but  sad  indeed  will  be  the
fate  of  those  who  have  been  hypo-
critical, who  have  professed  with
their  lips,  but  have  not  possessed  ia
their  hearts.  They  will  dread  to
meet  the  face  of  the  Lord,  they  have
a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  the
fiery  indignation  of  the  Father.

Now,  it  is  true,  that  while  in  the
flesh  we  are  subjected  to  many  trials
and  temptations;  but  we  are  not  like
those  without  hope. The  Apostle


120


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


says  we  are  subjected  in  hope.  In
hope  of  what  ?  Latter-day  Saints
who  faithfully  live  their  religion  have
the  hope  of  a  glorious  resurrection
and  eternal  life-  It  is  part  of  the
experience  of  Latter-day  Saints  to
be  subjected  to  trial,  in  some  things
perhaps  more  than  the  wicked,  that
they  may  gain  the  ascendency  over
their  own  passions  and  all  the  evils
which  beset  them.  Our  passions  are
given  us  for  a  good  and  wise  purpose.
They  underlie  our  existence.  They
give  us  nerve  and  energy,  and  power
to  execute  and  carry  out;  but  tbey
are  not  given  to  be  our  masters.
Those  heaven-given  gifts  —  reason
and  intellect,  should  reign  and  bring
passion  into  complete  subjection,  and
they  will  do  so  if  inspired  and  di-
rected by  the  Spirit  of  God.

We  have  been  gathered  from  the
nations  of  the  earth  that  we  may
be  taught  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  It
was  remarked  here  this  morning
that  there  was  need  of  a  reforma-
tion in  the  world.  If  it  were  not  so
the  Lord  would  not  have  under-
taken it,  and  things  would  have
been  permitted  to  go  along  as  usual.
But  the  Lord  saw  the  necessity  for  a
change-  All  had  departed  from  the
path  of  life.  The  authority  of  the
Holy  Priesthood  had  teen  taken
back  into  the  heavens  for  a  wise
purpose,  and  also  for  the  advantage
of  the  children  of  men  upon  the
earth.  Better  for  them  to  be  with-
out it,  than  to  possess  and  not  to
obey  its  high  behests;  but  when  the
set  time  was  come  for  the  Lord  to
establish  his  kingdom,  he  again  sent
forth  the  Gospel  to  the  children  of
men,  knowing  that  it  would  find
many  honest- hearted  people  who
would  be  willing  to  receive  instruc-
tion from  heaven,  and  stand  in  the
day  of  his  power.  The  Gospel  is
to  go  forth  to  all  nations  and
tongues  on  the  earth,  that  all  may


have  an  opportunity  of  being  co-
workers with  God  in  establishing
his  kingdom  on  the  earth,  which  is
destined  to  stand  for  ever  and  to
absorb  all  other  kingdoms.  This  is
inevitable  and  will  come  to  pass  in
the  Lord's  own  due  time.  The  El-
ders of  Israel  are  going  to  the  na-
tions and  gathering  therefrom  the
honest  in  heart,  and  through  them
the  Lord  is  revealing  his  purposes
to  the  children  of  men,  and  the  insti-
tutions of  high  heaven.

This  is  the  mission  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  and  every  one  of  them
who  is  faithful  to  his  calling  is  a
co-worker  with  the  Lord  in  the
establishment  of  his  purposes,  and
he  will  find  Ins  reward  here  and
hereafter.  Is  it  not  glorious  to  know
that  we  are  engaged  with  our  Father
and  God,  and  with  holy  beings  who
have  gone  behind  the  vail,  in  carrying
on  this  great  reformation  which  the
Lord  has  commenced  on  the  earth  ?
I  say  it  will  never  be  confounded,
never,  no  never.  The  principles  of
the  holy  Gospel  will  last  for  ever,
and  they  will  exalt  all  whose  lives
and  actions  are  controlled  thereby,
and  who  will  live  by  every  word
which  proceeds  from  the  mouth  of
God.  Such  persons  will  never  be
prevailed  against  in  time  and  in
eternity.  There  is  nothing  surer
than  this,  because  this  Gospel  will
go  on  from  conquering  to  conquer,
until  all  nations,  kindreds,  tongues
and  people  will  come  under  the
sceptre  of  Irnmanuel,  and  every
knee  shall  bow  and  every  tongue
confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ.
Evil  will  work  out  its  own  over-
throw. The  wicked  will  prey  upon
each  other  to  their  own  destruction,
and  in  the  Lord's  own  due  time  the
earth  will  be  rid  of  evil-doers,  where-
as those  who  are  based  upon  the
Rock  of  Ages  will  endure  for  ever.
This  is  just  as  natural  as  any  prin-


PURPOSE  OF  GOD,  ETC,


127


ciple  of  philosophy  that  exists,  and
it  is  bound  to  come  to  pass.  Oar
Father  has  passed  through  these
ordeals,  and  has  trodden  the  paths
we  are  treading.  He  kept  his  second
estate,  and  has  attained  to  his  exal-
tation. We  have  the  privilege  of
following  in  his  footsteps.  It  has
been  revealed  in  our  day  who  we  are,
and  the  relationship  we  hold  to  God.
We  have  learned  that  God  is  our
Father,  and  that  we  arc  his  children,
bona  jide  his  children.  Not  in  a
spiritual  sense  alone,  but  when  we
say,  "Our  Father  who  art  in  hea-
ven," we  mean  just  what  we  say.

We  have  not  only  learned  who
we  are, bat the  purpose  of  our
creation  and  our  future  destiny,  I
have  not  given  myself  a  great  deal
of  uneasiness  about  the  future.  I
have  felt  that,  if  I  could  act  my
part  properly  as  1  pass  along  through
life,  whether  I  attained  to  anything
hereafter  or  not  I  should  be  con-
tent The peace and  happiness
which  I  have  day  by  day  in  my  in-
most soul  is  its  own  reward  ;  and  I
have  long  been  satisfied  that  there
is nothing worth having  outside
the  purview  of  the  holy  Gospel,  and
the peace, satisfaction and  joy
which  it  brings  me  I  would  not  ex-
change for  all  that  this  world  can
bestow. As  for  the  future,  I  am
satisfied  that  it  will  be  altogether
satisfactory  and  will  bring  all  that
I  can  ask  for  and  more  than  I  can
now  comprehend,  if  my  course  day
by  day  now  is  what  it  should  be.
I  have  no  fears  that  my  exaltation
will  not  be  as  full  and  complete  as
I  shall  be  capacitated  to  enjoy.  And
whether  it  is  or  not  I  have  an  inward
peace  through  taking  this  course  that,
of  itself,  is  a  continual  feast,  which
sustains  and  buoys  me  up  under  every
difficulty  and  obstacle  which  presents
itself  before  ma

I  think  this  should  be  attraction


enough to entice every  son  and
daughter  of  Adam. I  think  that
the  children  of  our  Father  can  not
afford  to  throw  away  these  bless-
ings. I  tli ink  that  we  can  not  afford
to  take  the  name  of  God  in  vain.
We  can  not  afford  to  drown  our
reason  in  ardent  spirits. We  can
not  afford  to  sin  against  God  and  to
violate  his  commandments.  These
practices  cost  too  much. No  man
or  woman  can  afford  to  walk  in  the
paths  that  lead  to  death. They  are
beset  with  misery,  envy,  jealousy,
and  with  everything  that  pro  luces
discomfort,  and  at  the  end  thereof
death,  and  misery  both  before  and
after  death. Said  Jesus, — Fear  not
hi  in  who  has  power  only  to  destroy
this  body,  but  fear  Him  who  can  cast
both  soul  and  body  into  hell.  Let
us  take  the  course,  then,  that  will
save  us  here  and  hereafter. Let  the
body  go,  if  necessary,  if  it  intervenes
between  us  and  the  iaith  of  the  holy
Gospel  and  our  duly  to  God. If  we
are  brought  into  a  position  in  which
the life  of  the  body imperils  our
faith  in  the  Gospel,  let  the  body  go
cheerfully  and  willingly. We  should
pour  out  our  blood  as  freely  as  the
water  that  runs,  rather  than  violate
our  fidelity  to  the  principles  of  eter-
nal life,  or  our  most  holy  coven  ants
before  the  Lord,  or  rather  than  deny
the word after  having  tasted  the
powers  of  the  world  to  come.  To
kuow  God  and  Jesus  whom  he  has
sent  is  eternal  life,  and  rather  than
deny  them  and  turn again  to  the
things  of  the  world,  like  a  sow  that
is  washed  to  her  wallowing  in  the
mire,  let  this  poor  body  go* It  will
go  sooner  or  later  anyhow,  and  we
should  esteem  it  a  privilege  to  lay
down  our  lives  in  defence  of  the  prin-
ciples of  the  everlasting  Gospel.  We
should  not  rashly  run  into  danger,
hut  we  should  take  a wise  course
and,  at  any  cost,  determine  to  rise


128


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


above  the  evils  that  are  in  the  world
and  be  faithful  to  the  truth,  holding
on  to  the  iron  rod,  without  swerving
to  (he  right  hand  or  to  the  left;  and
if  there  is  no  other  alternative,  rather
than  swerve,  let  the  body  go.  Ifc
will  be  a  happy  exchange,  and  we
will  receive  it  again  crowned  with
glory,  im mortality  and  eternal  life.

Now  Latter-day  Saints,  are  you
willing  to  do  this  ?  Oh  yes,  hun-
dreds and  thousands  would,  if  neces-
sary, walk  up  to  the  cannon's  mouth,
in  defence  of  the  truth  and  Priest-
hood, who  will  not  live  their  reli-
gion. Such  persons  will  suffer  loss
if  they  are  not  careful  We  cannot
afford  to  neglect  our  duties.  We
want  to  attain  to  celestial  glory,  We
do  not  feel  as  though  we  could  be
gatistied  with  anything  short  of  that*
No  Latter-day  Saint,  who  has  ever
reflected  upon  these  things,  feels  that
he  can  be  satisfied  short  of  celestial
glory.  We  could  not  be  satisfied
with  a  telestial  nor  even  with  a  ter-
restial  glory.  We  want  to  attain  to
the  highest  of  all.  We  have  set  out
for  that,  it  is  the  goal  for  which  we
are  bound,  and  we  feel  that  nothing
short  of  that  will  satisfy  us.  How
many  will  come  short  of  it  I  do  not
know,  but  I  know  that  in  order  to
attain  to  it  we  must  be  careful  to  ob-
serve all  the  duties  which  are  incum-
bent upon  us.  We  have  no  promise
of  that  glory  unless  we  do.  The  re-
velations of  the  Lord,  through  his
servant  Joseph,  tell  us  that  whoso-
ever can  not  abide  a  celestial  law
will  not  inherit  the  glory  of  the  celes-
tial kingdom.  There  are  many
called  Latter-day  Saints  who  are
anxious  to  obtain  their  endowments,
washings,  sealings  and  anointings,
and  baptisms  for  themselves  and
their  dead,  and  who  would  think
they  were  deprived  of  very  great
blessings  if  they  could  not  have  these
privileges; and yet  they  act  as


though  if  they  could  only  sn:iteh
these  blessings  from  the  hands  of  the
servants  of  the  Lord  they  would  be
ail  right,  and  they  could  do  in  other
respects  just  as  they  please.  They
could  neglect  to  pay  their  Tithing
and  the  observance  of  the  commands
of  the  Lord  generally,  and  walk  after
their  own  vain  imaginations  all  the
days  of  their  lives.  What  a  fatal
mistake  is  here!  By  your  own
works  ye  shall  ba  judged,  whether
they  be  good  or  evil.  A  man  may
attain  to  all  these  ordinances,  he  may
keep  his  plith  hidden  in  iniquity  for
a  season,  but  the  time  will  come
when  every  evil  doer  will  stand  be-
fore the  Lord  in  his  own  naked  de-
formity, he  will  be  stripped  of  his
hypocrisy  and!  subterfuge  of  lies.
The  gigantic  superstructure  of  Satan,
that  lias  so  long  wielded  influence  in
the  earth,  will  be  swept  away,  and  in
t hat  day  all  who  stand  will  do  so  by
their  own  virtue  and  integrity.  No
man  can  afford  to  do  an  evil  act  If
it  is  unseen  by  his  fellows,  he  him-
self knows  it,  and  the  Lord  knows  it,
and  that  is  two  too  many — two  wit-
nesses to  establish  his  guilt,  and  he
can  not  dodge  it,  it  will  be  known,
as  it  were,  on  the  housetops.  There-
fore, brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  be
diligent  in  all  things,  even  in  what
are  considered  the  small  things,
though  there  are  no  small  things
connected  with  our  duties  and  call-
ings as  Saints.  We  can  not  afford
to  Jive  .without  paying  our  Tithing,
because  it  is  a  law  of  heaven,  one  of
the  requirements  the  Lord  has  made
at  our  hands  for  our  own  benefit.
Covctousness  is  idolatry.  We  can
not  afford  to  have  anything  inter-
vening between  ns  and  the  Lord  our
God.  We  must  serve  the  Lord  with
a  perfect  heart  and  a  willing  mind*
If  we  are  so  covetous  that  we  cannot
pay  our  Tithing,  there  is  au  obstacle
in  the  way,  and  we  have  become


PURPOSE  OF  GOD,  ETC.


129


lukewarm  and  indifferent  in  the  cause
of  God,  It  is  no  matter  how  poor
we  may  be,  if  we  have  ever  done  any-
thin?  in  the  line  of  our  duty  in  the
kingdom  of  God,  it  has  brought
with  it  peace  and  salvation.  We
are  never  sorry  for  it  afterwards,
unless  we  turn  away  from  the  truth.
If  we  neglect  any  duty,  Tithing  or
any  other,  we  feel  under  condemna-
tion. No  matter  how  poor  we  may
be  we  should  pay  our  Tithing,  if  we
have  to  receive  it  back  again  at  the
bands  of  the  Bishops,  it  is  a  blessing;
and  a  benefit  to  us.  As  Joseph  F,
Smith  remarked  at  Tooele,  that  poor
widow  who  pays  her  Tithing,  will  re-
ceive from  one  to  five  hundredfold.
She  is  sure  to  do  it,  and  so  with
every  individual,  *  j

But  it  is  not  the  poor,  as  a  gene-
ral thing,  who  neglect  their  Tithing.
It  is  oftener  the  wealthy  than  the
poor.  The  man  who  has  a  hundred
dollars  can  give  his  ten.  If  lie  has
only  ten,  he  cau  give  one  easier  than
another  man  can  give  ten.  If  he  has
ten  thousand,  it  is  harder  for  him  to
give  a  thousand,  and  the  more  he
has  the  more  difficult  it  is  for  him  to
pay  his  Tithing.  It  has  always  been
so,  I  apprehend;  anyhow,  it  is  so  at
the  present  time,  We  can  not  afford
this-  If  we  expect  to  attain  to
celestial  glory,  we  must  abide  the
law  of  the  celestial  kingdom*  There
is  no  obstacle  in  onr  path  that  w.e
can  not  overcome.  If  we  are  deter-
mined the  Lord  will  help  us*  He
does  and  has  done  so  all  the  time,
and  he  will  continue  to  do  so.

How  manv  times  have  we  been
benefited  by  pursuing  the  course
which  the  God  of  heaven  has  marked
out  for  U3  to  walk  in  ?  How  often
has  he  delivered  his  Saints  in  times
past  ?  How  many  times  has  he  re-
buked, under  the  administration  of
his  servant^  the  sickness  01  a  child
or  the  member  of  a  family  ?  Should


we  not  then  have  an  increased  confi-
dence to  come  again,  and  to  put  our
dependence  in  him,  knowing  and
realizing  that  he  is  faithful  in  per-
forming that  which  he  has  promised?
Having  paid  our  Tithing  once,  and
received  the  blessing,  should  we  not
approach  the  altar  again  with  re-
newed confidence  and  zeal,  relying
and  trusting  in  God  for  the  future,
without  fearing  any  disaster  coming
np>n  us?  I  think  this  is  good
philosophy,  it  brings  its  own  reward
in  the  very  nature  of  tilings.  Then
why  not  feel  encouraged  in  going  to
meeting  and  in  attending1  to  the
duties  required  at  onr  hands,  partake
of  the  sacrament,  put  away  evil  feel-
ings one  against  another,  and  come
to  the  table  of  the  Lord  with  pure
hearts  and  clean  hands,  to  comme-
morate the  sufferings  and  death  of
our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ  ?
One  great  reason  why  the  Sacra-
ment was  instituted  was,  th;*t  we
might  not  forget  him,  nor  our  Father
in  heaven,  who  sent  him.  Said
Jesus,  "  Do  this  until  I  coma"  He
will  come  again,  most  assuredly,  in
power  and  great  glory.  Who  will  be
prepared  to  receive  him  ?  Where
are  the  people  who  will  be  able  to
stand  at  his  second  coming,  when  he
will  take  the  reins  of  power  into  his
own  hands? \_  ^

Is  it  reasonable  to  suppose  that
Jesus  will  send  his  messengers  to
warn  the  world,  that  all  people  may
have  an  opportunity  to  obey  the  Gos-
pel und  to  be  prepared  for  his  coming?
I  think  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose
that  he  will  commence  a  preparatory
work  on  the  earth  before  be  makes
Ins  descent,  This  is  the  work,  bre-
thren and  sisters,  in  which  we  are
engaged — preparing  for  the  second
coming  of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus
Christ,  that  when  he  comes  he  may
have  a  people  zealous  of  good  works,
ready  to  do  his  bidding,  instead  of

Vol  XVI.


crucifying  him  as  they  did  before,
Then  let  us  go  to  with  our  might,
devoting  ourselves,  and  whatever  the
Lord  gives  unto  us,  to  him  and  his
kingdom.  Let  us  nut  sift  our  ways
to  strangers,  but  let  m  be  diligent
and  faithful  in  sustaining  every
righteous  principle.  This  is  our
duty  and  privilege.  Let  us  divest
ourselves  at  the  evils  so  prevalent  in
the  world,  otherwise  we  are  not  ga-
thered out  from  the  world.  The
Apostle  suid — "Come  out  of  her,  O
my  people,  that  ye  be  not  partakers
of  her  sins,  that  ye  receive  not  of  her
plagues/*5  If  we,  after  being  gathered
to  Zion,  still  practice  the  vices  arid
follies  of  the  world,  we  might  as  well
have  stayed  there,  for  these  sins
bring  with  them  their  punishment.
The  judgments  of  the  Almighty  fol-
low sin  as  naturally  as  cause  and
effect  in  anything  else,  and  the  wicked
nations  of  the  world  will  feel  retri-
bution for  the  sins  they  commit,  just
as  certain  as  they  have  an  existence
on  the  earth.  There  is  no  escape,
except  by  fursaking  their  sins  and,
obeying  the  commands  of  the  Lord.
We  can  not  escape  the  plagues
threatened  to  the  sinner,  even  here
in  Zion,  unless  we  refrain  from  sin
and  walk  in  the  paths  that  the  Lord
marks  out  for  ua  to  walk  in.

The  Lard  foreknew  that  many  of
the  spirits  which  were  reserved  to
come  forth  in  our  day  and  genera-
tion would  receive  his  Gospel,  and
stand  faithful.  All  have  the  privi-
lege of  doing  so.  The  Lord  has  ex-
tended the  invitation  to  all  his  child,
ren  here  on  the  earth.  Says  he —
"  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,  from  your  evil
ways,  for  why  will  ye  die  ?" "  Take


Lord,  who  do  not  go  forth  proclaim-
ing it  fur  hire,  but  because  they  have
received  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  and
can  foretell  that  the  evils  which  are
so  prevalent  among  men  are  bound
to  bring  destruction  upon  them.  Tb<S
earth  is  defiled  by  the  sins  of  its  in-
habitants, and  destruction  will  cer-
tainly overtake  thorn  unless  thev
forsake  their  evil  ways,  tor  the  Lord
will  not  suffer  this  thing  to  continue
forever.  This  is  not  in  the  economy
of  heaven — none  would  be  saved  if
it  wera  permitted  to  be  so,  Satan
would  gain  the  ascpudency,  and
would  dethrone  the  Almighty,  if  it
could  be  buffered  to  go  on.  There
must  be  a  turning  point- — that  has
arrived,  and  the  way  of  escape  is
made  phi  in  to  the  children  of  men.
The  God  of  heaven  has  revealed  it
in  our  day.  We  are  the  recipients
of  his  mercy  and  of  the  principles
of  truth,  and  by  complying  strictly
with  the  principles  of  the  everlasting
Gospel,  which  is  the  power  of  God
unto  salvation,  we  shall  be  preserved
in  the  day  of  God's  power ;  but  we
must  observe  the  law  uf  high  heaven.
If  a  man  will  persistently  walk  in
the  path  of  danger,  or  into  the  fire,
he  will  be  burned  and  he  knows  it.
Then  why  not  take  a  different  path  ?
When  the  Lord  points  out  the  path
of  safety,  his  Saints  must  walk
therein,  or  they  will  suffer  the  con-
sequences. Some  of  us  are  cap  fives
to  our  own  passions.  We  think  we
know  best,  and  we  often time&iina-
gine  that  the  Lord  is  far  away,  and
that  we  are  left  to  govern  ourselves,
and  we  yield  to  this  and  to  that  for
the  sake  of  a  little  transient  pleasure,
and  we  think  that  all  will  he  well


upon  you  my  yoke,  for  it  is  eaay,  and  hereafter. We  do  not  care  particu-

my  harden,  for  it  is  light/* "  Come,  kt  ly  about  the  future,  if  we  can  only

drink  of  the  waters  of  life  freely,  take  care  of  ourselves  to-day.  We

without  money  and  without  price."  perhaps  give  way  to  some  alluring

Thiti  is  the  invitation  which  is  given  spirit,  in  some  quiet  nook  or  corner,

to  all  nations,  by  the  servants  of  the  thinking  we  will  be  shielded  if  we  do


give  way  to  some  evil  once  in  a  while.
There  is  a  way  to  be  shielded,  but  it
is  not  by  persisting  in  evil  doing.
We  must  torn  from  every  evil  way,
then  we  have  the  assurance  that  God
will  forgive  us.  Men  and  women
may  do  evil,  bat  if  they  repeat  they
can  be  forgiven  and  receive  the  a d mi-
nistration of  the  ordinances  of  the
house  of  God,  for  the  authority  has
been  restored  to  ad  minister  all  the
ordinances  of  salvation.  Men  may
have  their  sins  remitted  by  having
the  ordinance  of  baptism  admini-
stered. Is  there  any  other  way  by
which  that  blessing  can  be  obtained?
Not  that  we  know  of ;  if  there  is,
the  Lord  lias  nut  revealed  it,  and
that  is  sufficient.  All  we  have  to  do
to  secure  the  remission  of  sins,  is  to
repent  and  to  comply  with  the  ordi-
nance of  baptism.

We  have  been  called  from  Babylon
by  the  command  of  high  heaven,  and
our  duty  now  is  to  stand  shoulder  to
shoulder  for  God  and  his  kingdom,
and  for  every  holy  and  righteous
principle,  no  matter  what  opposition
we  may  meet  with.  What  could  a
man  do,  isolated,  in  the  midst  of  a
wicked  nation  ?  He  could  live  for
God  if  he  had  a  mind  to;  but  what
influence  could  he  wield  under  such
circumstances  for  the  kingdom  of
God  ?  None  thin  would  be  ackno  v-
ledgcd.  lb*  might  bear  his  testi-
mony, and  tell  those  around  him  of
their  evils,  and  that  would  condemn
those  who  heard  him,  if  they  <lid  not
heed  his  sayings.  But  when  there
is  a  concentration  of  such  faith  and
power  by  the  uiiiriug  together  of
people  in  communities,  as  we  see
here  in  the  valleys  of  the  mountains,
a more formidable barrier  is  pre


sen  ted  to  the


and  advance


of  evil,  and  such  unity  and  concen.
tration  will  bring  down  to  the  earth
an  increase  of  power  from  the  Lord
in  favor  of  virtue  and  truth*


What  does  the  so-called  Christi-
anity of  the  day  do  to  check  the  tor-
rent of  corruption  that  is  now  sweep-
ing over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth  ?
Comparatively  nothing.  I  say  this
in  all  charity,  because  there  are  a
great  many  who  *re  doing  their  ut-
most to  check  the  progress  of  evil ;
but  it  still  grows,  and  so-calle  1
Christianity  is  powerless  to  check  it:
It  is  greater  to-day  than  it  was  yes-
terday, greater  yesterday  than  last
week,  and  greater  last  week  than  a
month  ago,  and  it  is  incalculably
greater  now  than  it  was  a  hundred
years  ago.

It  is  time  the  Lord  set  his  hand
to  gather  his  people,  that  he  may
secure  a  foothold  on  the  earth,  where
righteousness  may  predominate,  and.
where  the  majority  of  the  people
will  be  for  him  and  his  kingdom.
The  Lord  has  set  his  hand  and  com-
menced his  work  to  bring  about  his
greal  purposes.

Let  me  bear  my  testimony  to  my
brethren  and  sisters  and  all  good
friends.  The  Lord  has  spoken  from
the  heavens,  and  has  commenced
this  work  in  which  we  are  now  en-
gaged in  the  tops  of  the  mountains.
The  Prophet,  in  looking  forward,  saw
that  the  work  of  God  would  be  in  the
tops  of  the  mountains  in  the  latter
days.  We  testify  that  this  is  what
he  saw,  here  in  the  vales  of  Utah,
Idaho,  Arizona  and  all  the  surround-
ing Territories,  The  kingdom  of
God  is  with  us  to-day,  not  in  its  full-
ness, but  it  is  growing.  It  is  here
to  test  the  children  of  men,  to  see
what  they  will  do  with  it  Brother
Heber  used  to  say  this  was  the
threshing  floor.  We  go  out  to  the
nations  of  the  earth  and  preach  the
Gospel,  a  good  many  receive  it  and
gather  to  Zion.  But  their  trials
begin  when  they  get  here,  fur  this  is
the  threshing  floor.  Here  a  people
will  be  prepared  for  the  coming  of


132


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


Jesus,  that  when  he  does  come  he  |
may  find  a  place  whereon  to  lay  his
head,  and  some,  at  least,  who  sustain
heavenly  principles.  If  we  are  not
the  people,  some  others  will  be  gath-
ered for  that  purpose.  We  bear  tes-
timony that  we  are  that  people*  True,
we  are  in  a  very  imperfect  state,  but
we  hope  we  are  progressing,  that
we  are  a  little  better  than  we  have
been.  Many  Latter-day  Saints  can
look  back  on  their  past  lives  and
conscientiously  bear  testimony  be-
fore heaven  that  they  are  better  men
and  women  to-day  than  they  were
one,  two,  or  ten  years  ago.  This  is
a  guarantee  that  the  work  is  onward
ami  upward.  It  must  have  its  com*
men  cement  in  the  souls  and  hearts
of  men  and  women,  or  its  fruits  will
not  appear.  But  this  work  is  bring-
ing forth  its  fruits,  the}'  can  be  seen
by  all.  None  are  so  blind  bat  what
they  can  see  them  if  they  will  divest
themselves  of  prejudice*  The  work
now  commenced  here  will  extend,  and
just  as  fast  as  the  people  prepare
themselves  to  receive  it,  they  may
participate  therein,  for  it  will  increase
and  spread  until  in  its  greatness,
power  and  glory,  it  absorbs  all  kin-
dreds, nations  and  tongues,  and  all
will  bow  to  King  Immanuel's  sway,
and  he  will  rule  king  of  nations  as
he  does  King  of  Saints,  Prophets
have  foretold  this,  and  wc  believe
it,  and  we  bear  testimony  that  we
are  that  people,  and  that  the  Lord
did  reveal  himself  to  Joseph  Smith,
and  called  him  to  commence  this
work.  In  calling  him  the  Lord
made  no  mistake.  He  knew  that
Joseph  would  rather  swap  his  life
away,  than  quail  under  persecution
or  deny  the  faith.  Joseph  did  this,
he  proved  that  sooner  than  swerve
from  his  integrity  to  God  he  would
die.  -Who  can  gainsay  this?  No
man,  in  time  or  eternity,  Joseph's
martyrdom is a monument  that


will  endure  forever,  that  he  preferred
death  to  forsaking  the  principles  of
the  holy  Gospel  and  the  institutions
of  hi  aven.  They  killed  him  tot  that,
and  nothing  else.  His  death  is  a
testimony  against  this  wicked  and
adulterous  generation,  that  they  will
have  to  meet,  We  as  a  community,
are  his  witnesses,  and  a  monument
that  all  people  may  look  upon  and,
if  they  have  a  mind  to,  they  can
comprehend  that  God  has  commenced
his  latter-day  work.

These  are  the  last  days,  and  God
will  surely  bring  his  purposes  to  pass.
His  work  is  established,  and  all  are
invited  to  help  to  build  it  up.  We
have  received  the  principles  of  eternal
life  and  we  offer  them  to  all.  We
are  none  of  your  hirelings.  Freely
we  have  received,  freely  we  give,  and
ask  nothing  for  it.  We  bear  the
glad  tidings  of  salvation  across  the
plains,  rivers  and  oceans,  and  pro-
claim them  on  all  suitable  occasions
ai  home  and  in  distant  climes.  So
day  or  hour  passes  without  this  tes-
timony being  borne  by  the  servants
cif  the  Lord,  and  this  has  been  so
now  for  more  than  forty  years,  and
during  that  time  the  work  of  the
Lord  has  been  continually  inert  us-
ing and  gaining  strength,  taking
root  downward  and  bearing  fruit
upward.  It  is  greater  to-day  than
it  was  yesterday,  and  will  be  greater
to-morrow  than  to-day,  and  it  will
continue  so,  no  matter  what  may  be
brought  to  bear  against  it.  We
may  be  driven  again  as  we  have
been  in  the  past,  but  that  would
only  increase  our  significance,  our
power,  numbers  and  influence.  It
is  vain  to  undertake  to  stop  this
work.  Latter-day  Saints  may  apos-
tatize, their  leading  men  may  go
overboard,  but  it  will  make  no  dif-
ference—  the  Lord  is  at  the  helm,
and  his  work  is  upward  and  onward
continually. Some  may  stop  by  the


PURPOSE  OF  GOD,  ETC


133


way  side,  but  the  cars  will  roll  over
and  crush  them.  It  is  our  interest
to  keep  aboard  the  ship  Zion,  and
to  continue  our  efforts  to  bring  our-
selves  into  subjection  to  the  law  of
the  Lord,  that  we  may  be  the  hon-
ored instruments  in  his  hands  of
aiding  to  build  up  his  kingdom  on
the  earth.  We  can  only  do  this  by
being  faithful  to  the  counsels  of  the
servants  of  the  Lord  who  are  in-
spired to  teach  and  lead  us.  He
has  placed  them  in  his  Church  and
kingdom  to  guide  and  direct  us.
We  have  not  chosen  these  men —  He
has  chosen  them.  They  may  be
our  selection  too,  it  is  very  true,
but  the  Lord  has  chosen  them,  and
he  is  responsible.  But  we  need  not
pin  our  faith  to  any  mans  sleeVe.
No,  we  can  go  to  the  Bible,  to  the
revelations  of  Jesus  given  in  our
day,  and  listen  to  the  whisperings  ot
the  Spirit  in  our  own  hearts  for  the
testimony  of  this  being  the  work  of
God.  The  Lord  will  reveal  to  any
faithful  individual  all  that  is  neces-
sary to  convince  him  that  this  work
is  true.  None  need  depend  for  that
testimony  upon  others;  all  can  have
it  for  themselves,  and  that  will  he  like
a  well  of  wafer  within  them,  spring-
ing up  to  everlasting  life,  revealing
to  them  the  things  of  God,  and  all
that  is  needful  to  make  them  wise
unto  salvation.  They  need  not  de-
pend upon  my  testimony,  or  upon
that  of  President  Young  or  President
Smith,  nor  upon  anybody  but  God.
He  will  direct  the  course  of  all  who
try  to  serve  him  with  full  purpose
of  heart.  He  will  show  them  whether
we  are  placed  here  properly,  or
whether  any  mistake  was  made
concerning  the  calling  of  Joseph
Smith.  The  testimony  of  the  Lord
will  tell  whether  we  teach  tilings
of  ourselves  or  of  the  Lord;  that
testimony  will  tell  its  possessors
whether  the  servants  of  God  who


stand  here  tell  the  truth  about  this
work  or  not.  They  need  be  depen-
dent upon  none  but  themselves  and
the  Lord  for  this  knowledge,  for  the
Lord  is  willing  to  give  liberally  to  all,
and  he  upbraids  not  All  the  world
may  learn  to  know  the  Lord  our  Fa-
ther, who  is  in  heaven,  and  Jesua
Christ,  whom  he  has  sent,  if  they  will
but  take  the  course  the  Lord  has
marked  out.

Latter-day  Saints,  as  I  said  be-
fore, we  cannot  afford  to  do  wickedly.
That  young  man,  or  that  old  man,
who  goes  into  the  kanyon,  can  not
afford  to  take  the  name  of  the
Lord  in  vain,  neither  jn  the  streets
nor  saloons  of  the  city,  and  for  that
matter  Latter-day  Saints  cau  not
afford  to  go  to  saloons  at  all,  be-
cause the  associations  are  evil.  We
would  to  God  we  could  entirely
abolish  every  such  place,  for  there
vice  is  seen  in  its  most  alluring
colors.  Drinking  saloons  and  gam-
insr  tables  should  be  banished  from
the  face  of  the  earth,  because  they
engender  vice.  They  lead  the  young,
middle-aged  and  old  into  the  prac-
tice of  those  things  that  are  evil.  The
L:  i  tier -day  Saints  cannot  afford  to
patronize  them.  They  had  better
keep  away  from  them.  They  bad'
better  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord
in  vain,  they  can  not  atFord  to  offend
the  Loi  d.  They  had  better  keep  his
commandments  and  not  do  anything
that  is  offensive  in  his  sight.  The
Lord  will  not  make  a  man  an  of-
fender for  a  word,  by  any  manner  of
means.  He  looks  with  compassion
on  all  his  children,  and  overlooks  a
great  many  of  their  weaknesses  and
follies  if  he  finds  that  they  have  a
desire  to  serve  him.  But  still,  the
Latter-day  Saint  who  lias  had  the
whisperings  of  the  Spirit,  and  yet
becomes  so  negligent  as  to  indulge
in  these  things,  proves  to  the  Lord
that  he  has  not  learned  his  lesson


134  JOURNAL  OF

well,  —  that  be  has  not  learned  to
honor  the  Lord  as  he  should  do,
and  in  consequence  thereof  he  is
not  so  much  the  recipient  of  his
grace  as  he  might  be,  and  if  he  per-
sists in  evil  the  time  will  come  when
the  issues  will  be  barred  so  that  the
Spirit  will  not  flow  to  him,  and  he  j
will  be  darkened  in  the  counsel  of  his
mind,  and  there  will  be  ten  chances
to  one  that  he  makes  shipwieck  of  i
his  most  holy  faith.

No  man  can  afford  to  set  an  ex-
ample of  this  kind  before  his  child-
ren, and  no  young  man  can  afford
to  luse  the  good  influence  that  he
otherwise  might  retain  from  his
youth  tu  manhood  and  old  age,  it  is
too  expensive.  Blessed  is  the  boy
or  girl  who  has  the  privilege,  as  ail
have  in  Zion,  of  growing  up  with-
out sin  unto  salvation.  They  can  do
it  if  they  have  a  mind  to,  if  they
will  be  governed  by  the  principles  of
the  everlasting  Gospel,  and  will
make  them  their  text-bouk  and
guide  by  day  and  by  night  and  al-
ways  be  afraid  of  sin  and  fear  to
walk  in the  paths  of  degradation,  1


DISCOURSES.

r  All  have  this  privilege  in  the  valleys
■  of  the  mountains.  We  are  here  that
we  may  be  saved  from  the  sins  of  the
world,  and  the  children  of  Ziori  may
come  up  without  sin  unto  salvation.
Oh,  that  they  would  consider  and  feel
a  greater  responsibility,  and  never
lose  the  purity  of  their  childhood  !
If  they  could  do  this  what  an  in-
fluence  they  could  exercise  before
the  heavens  !  What  power  might
they  not  bring  down  for  the  salvation
of  Israel  in  the  tiay  of  trial,  tribula-
tion and  difficulty  !  The  faith  of  an
army  of  young  men  of  this  kind
would  be  enough  to  withstand  every
foe,  and  I  expect  the  time  will  come
when  it  will  do  so.

May  God  help  us  to  continue  faith-
fui,  and  to  be  more  diligent  and
heedful  to  the  teachings  that,  we  re-"
ceive.  We  are  taught  in  his  ways
that  we  may  walk  in  his  paths.  Then
i  why  not  be  diligent  and  faithful  in
walking  therein  ?  They  are  the
paths  of  peace  and  joy,  and  lead  to
eternal  life  hereafter.  That  we  may
all  attain  to  thar,  I  pray  in  the  name
of  Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  La&b  City,  Sunday

Morning,  July  13,  1873,


(ILepwUd  by  David  W.  Evans.)


NECE:


V  OF  MIRACLES— BELIEF  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS.


Wc  have  heard,  this  forenoon,  some
excellent  instructions  in  regard  to
the  plan  of  life  and  salvation — -in-
structions which  agree  in  every  re-
spect with  that  plan  as  it  was
revealed  in  times  of  old.  It  has  truly
bin  remarked  by  the  speaker  who
has  addressed  you,  that  the  same
causes  will  produce  the  same  effects,
that  is,  when  they  operate  under
like  circumstances.  I  can  see  no
difference,  in  my  own  mind,  be-
tween the  circumstances  which  sur-
round us  and  the  circumstances
which  surrounded  the  p^uple  in  the
days  of  our  Savior  and  his  Apostles.
We  are  fallen  creatures,  so  were
they;  we  are  very  imperfect  beings
and  have  need  to  h*  saved:  the
same  was  true  with  regard  to  them.
We  have  sick  among  us  in  this  day,
and  so  had  they,  God  then  ordain-
ed the  laying  on  of  ha  add  for  t:ie
benefit  of  the  sick.  Why  not  or-
dain the  same  principle  for  the  same
reason  in  our  day  ?  Would  it  not
benefit  the  sick  to  be  healed  by  the
laying  on  of  hands  now  just  as
much  as  in  those  days  ?  What
is  the  difference  ?  Are  there  not  as
many  sick  now  as  there  were  then  ?
Would  it  not  be  as  great  a  blessing
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  to
be  healed  now  through  this  simple
ordinance  as  it  was  then  ?  When
the circumstances and  conditions


of  the  people  now  and  then  are
compared,  no  reason  can  be  assigned
why  this  gift  should  be  withheld
from  the  people  now.  The  world
sav  that  in  those  days  it  was  neces-
sary  for  (.tod  to  manifest  his  power
in  healing  the  sick  and  in  various
other  ways,  in  order  to  convince  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  concerning
the  plan  of  salvation  that  was  offered
to  thern.  Why  not  convince  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth  in  our  day  ?
Is  there  not  as  much  necessity  now
as  there  was  then  ?  Is  not  a  soul
just  as  precious  in  the  sight  of  God
now  as  then  ?  If  it  was  needful  for
unbelief  to  be  dune  away  by  miracles
then,  why  not  now  ?  Or  were  mira-
cles given  to  do  away  unbelief  ?
This  is  a  question  worthy  of  investi-
gation. We  find  that  miiacles  were
wrought  in  ancient  times  according
to  the  faith  arid  belief  uf  tiie  child-
ren of  mem  We  might  suppose,  to
hear  some  of  the  learned  divines  of
our  day  converse,  that  the  greater  the
unbelief  the  greater  must  be  the
miracles  in  order  to  do  it  away.  But
let  us  see  how  the  Lord  did  operate
and  perform  miracles  in  ancient
times.

We  read  that  he  went  to  his  own
native  country,  where  he  was  horn,
among  his  neighbors  and  acquaint,
ances  on  a  certain  occasion,  and
that  he  could  not  do  many  mighty


13G


JOUKNAL  OF  DISCOUK!


miracles  there  because  of  their  un-
belief. What  a  great  pity  it  was  that
Jesus  had  not  some  of  the  learned
divines  of  the  present  day  to  in-
struct him  !  They  would  do  doubt
have  told  Jesus  that  because  of  the
greatness  of  the  unbelief  in  his  own
neighborhood  and  among  bis  ac-
quaintances be  must  perform  some
greater  miracles  among  them  than
be  did  anywhere  else.  That  would
have  been  consistent  with  the  pre-
sent ideas  of  theologians.  But  in
those  days  Jesus  operated  among  the
people  according  to  their  faith,  and
the  greater  the  unbelief,  the  less  the
miracles.

We  find  the  same  principle  exist-
ing long  before  Jesns  came  to  the
earth.  Jesus  himself  testifies  that
in  the  days  of  Elisha  the  Prophet,
there  were  a  great  many  lepers  in
Israel.  You  know  that  is  a  very
loathsome  disease,  and  that  people
would  naturally  be  very  glad  to  be
healed.  But  none  of  them  were
healed  in  Elisha's  day,  says  Jesus,
except  a  man,  not  of  Israel,  but  a
foreigner  —  Naaman  the  Syrian.
What  was  the  reason?  Their  un-
belief. How  came  this  Naaman  the
Syrian  to  have  faith  ?  He  believed
in  the  testimony  of  a  Jewish  maiden,
who  bad  been  taken  captive  by
the  Syrian  army  .and  carried  into  a
far  country,  and  while  conversing
with  the  people  there  she  told  them
about  a  great  Prophet  in  Israel,  Elisha
by  name,  "  Would  to  God/1  said
she,  "that  my  master  could  see  this
Prophet  and  be  healed  !  n  She  seem-
ed to  have  faith,  and  when  the  report
of  her  conversation  came  to  her  mas-
ter's ear*  he  took  great  riches  and
started  out  for  the  express  purpose  of
going  to  visit  this  Prophet  in  Israel.
When  he  reached  the  region  of
Palestine  in  which  the  Prophet  lived
he  presented  himself  first  before
the  king;  but  he  being  filled  to  a


great  extent  with  the  spirit  of  un-
belief, thought  that  Naaman  had
come  to  seek  some  occasion  for
war.  "  Am  I  God,"  said  the  king,
"  that  I  should  perform  this  work  ?  "
The  Lord  revealed  to  his  servant
the  Prophet,  that  this  man  had
come,  and  the  purpose  of  his  visit,
and  Naaman  and  his  servant  found
out  Elisha  and  went  to  his  dwelling-
place.  But  Elisha,  instead  of  being
very  polite,  and  welcoming  Naaman
into  his  house,  sent  a  message  to  him,
telling  bira  to  go  and  dip  himself
seven  times  in  Jordan  and  he  should
be  healed.  This  did  not  seem  to  be
in  accordance  with  the  mind  of  Naa-
man. He  perhaps  thought  that,  as
he  had  come  a  long  journey  in  great
grandeur  and  with  great  gifts,  the
Prophet  would  be  exceedingly  re-
spectful to  him,  and  he  was  very
wrathy  in  his  mind,  and  said  —
"  Are  not  the  waters  of  Syria  just
as  good  as  the  \vaters  of  your  Jor-
don  ? "  and  he  turned  away  in  a
great  rage,  Finally,  one  of  his  ser-
vants said  unto  him — "  If  the  Pro-
phet had  required  thee  to  do  some
great  thing,  wouldst  thou  not  have
done  it  ?  how  much  rather  then,
when  he  said  to  thee,  4  Wash  and  be
clean  ?  *  "  "  Yes,"  said  Naaman,  "I
expected  he  would  come  out  to  me,
place  his  hand  upon  my  head  and
rebuke  the  leprosy,  and  I  should
be  healed  ;  but  he  has  told  me  to  go
and  dip  myself  seven  times  in  Jor-
dan, and  lie  sent  this  message  by  a
servant  instead  of  coming  to  see
me  himself/1  But  he  was  finally
prevailed  upon  by  his  servant  to  go
and  do  as  the  Prophet  said,  and  he
went  and  dipped  himself  seven
times  in  Jordan  and  immediately
his  flesh  came  anew  upon  him  like  the
flesh  of  a  little  child.  All  the  rest
of  the  lepers,  throughout  Israel,  re-
mained unhealed,  but  this  foreigner
was  cleansed  and  made  whole,


NECESSITY  OF  MIRACLES,  ETC.  137


i^ow,  why  this  partiality  ?  Why
Dot  do  some  wonderful  miracles  in
healing  all  the  lepers  in  Israel?
It  was  because  of  their  unbelief.
But  says  the  divine  of  to-day — u  The
greater  the  unbelief  the  more  ne-
cessity for  the  miracle,  and  conse-
quently, in  order  to  do  away  with
this  unbelief,  the  Prophet  ought  to
have  healed  all  the  lepers  in  Israel."  1
The  Lord,  however,  has  his  own
way,  and  when  he  finds  a  very  un-
believing generation,  he  does  not
satisfy  their  carnal  curiosity,  nor
manifest  his  power  to  any  great
extent  in  the  midst  of  t he  wicked;
but  he  always  shows  forth  his  power
to  those  who  are  humble  and  meek,
and  lowly  in  heart.  He  has  done
that  in  all  dispensations,  not  only  in
the  days  of  Jesus  and  the  Apostles,
but  in  every  dispensation,  and  the
power  manifested  has  been  in  ac-
cordance with  the  faith  of  the  people.

In  regard  to  the  gift  of  prophecy,
a  great  many  suppose  that  it  was
necessary  in  former  times,  in  the
dark  ages  ;  but  when  the  Gospel  was
fully  established  on  the  earth,  and
great  power  and  signs  were  made
manifest,  there  was  no  more  need  i
of  prophecy,  revelations,  etc.,  and  j
they  quote  a  passage  from  Paul's
writings,  or  rather  a  part  of  a  pas-
sage, instead  of  the  whole,  in  order
to  prove  their  position.  In  the  liith
chapter  of  the  first  epistle  to  the
Corinthians,  Paul  says — "  Whether
there  be  prophecies,  they  shall  fail;
whether  there  be  tongue*,  they  shall
cease  ;  whether  there  be  knowledge,  it
shall  vanish  away,"  Propheeying  and
tongues,  were  to  cease  :  "  Now,"  says
the  learned  divine,  of  the  present
day,  "  here  is  a  plain  and  pointed
testimony  that  these  gifts*  were  only
intended  for  the  early  ages  of  the
world,  and  were  to  he  done  away
and  cease,"  But  why  not  quote 1
the  following  verses? Why  quote


half  a  sentence  or  idea  and  then

■

leave  it  ?  Why  not  give  the  whole,
and  find  out  the  time  when  these
miracles,  such  as  prophecy,  healing
the  *sick,  speaking  with  tongues,
etc.,  were  to  cease  ?  If  the  divines
of  this  day  would  road  a  little  fur-
ther, they  would  know  the  time
and  the  circumstances  that  were  to
transpire,  when  these  things  should
be  done  awav.  Says  Paul,  in  the
following  verses— "  For  we  know  in
part,  and  we  prophecy  in  part.  But
when  that  which  is  perfect  is  come,
then  that  which  is  in  part  shall  be
done  away."  M  For  now,  we  see
through  a  glftss,  darkly;  but  t lien,
face  to  face;  now  I  know  in  part  ;
but  then  shall  I  know  even  as  also
I  am  known."  Here,  then,  it  is
clearly  foretold  that  when  there  will
be  no  more  need  of  prophecy,  heal-
ing, speaking  in  tongues,  etc.,  the
day  of  perfection  will  have  ar-
rived ;  in  other  words,  when  the
Church  of  God  shall  have  overcome
and  be  perfected,  when  the  Church
of  God  shall  need  no  more  Pro-
phets, when  it  shall  have  no  more
sick,  (for  if  all  its  members  become
.  immortal,  there  will  be  no  sick  to  bo
healed,  hence  healing  will  be  done
away,  when  the  Church  of  God  all
speak  one  language — the  pure  lan-
guage, the  language  spoken  by  angels,
restored  to  the  earth  by  the  Lord),
there  will  be  no  need  of  speaking
with  tongues.  But  until  that  day  of
perfection  comes,  all  these  gifts  will
be  necessary.

This  agrees  with  what  Paul  has
,J  said  in  his  first  chapter  to  the  Ephe-
siuns.  He  there  informs  us  that  these
miraculous  powers  and  gifts,  which
Jesus  gave  when  he  ascended  up  oil
high  and  led  captivity  captive,  were
given  for  a  special  purpose.  He  gave
some  Apostles,  some  Prophets,  evan-
gel is ts,  pastors,  teachers,  gifts,  heal-
ing; all  were  given  for  a  special


138


JOURNAL  OF  D;


purpose.  What  was  that  purpose  ?
The  perfecting  of  the  Saints.

I  would  ask  the  learned  divines
of  the  present  day,  have  the  Saints
neer],  in  this  age,  of  anything  to
perfect  them  ?  Or  are  they  already
sufficiently  perfected  to  enter  into
the  presence  of  the  Father  ?  If
they  need  perfecting,  and  none  can
deny  that  they  do,  then  Apostles
are  needed  now,  Prophets  are  needed
now,  evangelists,  pastors,  and  teach-
ers are  needed  now,  "  Well."  says
one,  t4  we  will  allow  that  evan-
gelists, payors  and  teachers  are
needed  now;  we  have  not  done
them  away,  we  have  abundance  of
teachers  and  pastors,  bat  we  do  not
believe  in  Apostles  and  Prophets
now*"  Why  not  ?  Did  not  the  same
Apostle  tell  us  in  the  same  verse,
that  Apostles  and  Prophets,  aa  well  as
evangelists,  pastors  and  teachers,
were  given,  when  Jesus  ascended  on
high,  for  the  perfecting  of  the
Saints  ?  Why,  then,  do  you  separate
them,  and  say,  that  the  two  first-
named  are  not  now  necessary,  and
that  the  other  three  are  so  ?  Why
do  you  do  this  ?  In  order  to  be
consistent  with  the  unreasonable-
ness of  this  generation,  and  to  com-
ply with  their  traditions*  You
have  not  got  Apostles,  yoo  have
not  got  Prophets,  and  you  must
have  some  excuse  in  order  to  do
them  away,  and  your  excuse  is,
that  they  are  not  needed  now.
Prove  it,  you  cannot,  it  is  beyond
your  power,  You  have  no  evidence,
no  testimony  whatever  by  which
you  cm  prove  it.  With  all  the  tes-
timony in  favor  of  your  position
which  you  can  bring  forward,  1  can
prove  that  pastors,  evangelists,  teach-
ers, Bishops,  deacons,  Elders  and
every  other  officer  of  the  Church
of  Christ,  which  you  believe  in  are
not  needed  now,  as  easily  as  you
can  prove  that  Apostles  and  Pro-


phets are  not  needed  now,  Just
as  much  evidence  can  be  adduced  in
favor  of  one  position  as  the  other;
and  the  fact  is,  there  is  no  evidence .
for  cither.  They  were  all  given  for
the  perfecting  of  the  Saints  and  the
work  of  the  ministry,  and  they
were  to  continue  until  the  day  of
perfection  arrived;  and  the  moment
you  say  they  are  not  necessary,  you
virtually  say  the  work  of  the  min-
istry is  not  necessary ;  and  why,
then,  do  yon  administer  ?  They
were  given  not  only  for  the  perfect-
ing of  the  Saints  and  the  wort  of  the
ministry,  but  for  the  edifying  of  the
body  of  Christ,  which  is  the  Church.
Take  away  Apostles,  inspired  of  God,
take  away  Prophets  who  foretell
future  events,  and  you  take  away
the  means  which  God  has  ordained
for  the  edification  of  his  body — his
Church,  and  that  body  or  Church  can
not  be  perfected.

Another  object,  Paul  informs  us,
for  which  these  gifts  were  given,
was  that  the  Saints  might  come  to
the  unity  of  the  faith,  unto  a  per-
fect man,  unto  the  measure  of  the
stature  of  the  fullness  of  Christ.
Take  away  these  gifts,  and  what  is
your  condition  ?  You  are  in  the
same  condition  which  Paul  speaks
of  in  the  very  next  verse — 11  carried
about  by  every  wind  of  doctrine,  by
the  sleight  of  man,  by  cunning
craftiness,  whereby  tbey  lie  in  wait
to  deceive."  The  gifts  were  given
to  prevent  the  people  from  being
carried  about  by  every  wind  of  doc-
trine. Take  away  these  gifts  —
the  gift  of  revelation,  prophecy  and
miracles,  which  were  enjoyed  by
the  Sainta  in  ancient  days,  and
the  people  are  liable  to  be  tossed
to  and  fro"  by  every  wind  of  doc-
trine that  may  be  sounded  in  their
ears.  Why  r  Because  they  are
entirely  governed  by  the  opinions  of
men. One  man  has  his  opinion,


NECESSITY  OF  MIRACLES,  ETC.


and  he  tries  to  substantiate  it  by
hia  learning  j  another  man  has  an
opposite  opinion  and  he  tries  to
substantiate  it,  and  as  neither  of
them  is  inspired  by  the  power  of
the  Holy  Gbost,  neither  having  the
gift  of  prophecy  or  revel  at  ion,  each,
so  far  as  he  can,  gains  influence
and  power  over  his  neighbors,  and
gathers  together  a  body  of  people
and  pronounces  them  the  Church
of  Christ,  Bat  God  has  nothing
to  do  with  them.  He  never  called
them  the  Church  of  Christ,  he
never  spoke  to  them,  never  sent  an
angel  to  them,  never  gave  them  a
vision,  never  sent  a  Prophet  or  an
Apostle  to  them, — he  has  nothing  to
do  with  them, — they  are  not  his
Churchy  never  were  nor  ever  can  be,
only  by  repentance  and  turning  to
the  Lord,  and  receiving  the  Holy
(J host,  which  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy.
He  that  has  the  testimony  of  Jesus,
has  the  fcpirit  of  prophecy.  Paul  has
declared  to  us  that  no  man  can  sav
that  Jesos  is  the  Lord  but  by  the
Holy  Gbost.  A  man  may  have  the
tradition  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but
he  does  not  know  the  fact  except  by
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit
of  prophecy — it  makes  a  Prophet:  of
him  who  bus  it

This  is  what  the  Letter- day  Saints
believe*  We  have  no  new  gospel  to
offer  to  the  world*  We  have  come
forth,  sent  by  the  Almighty,  to  testi-
fy against  the  new  gospels  that  have  :
been  introduced,  which  have  only
the  form  of  godliness,  and  deny  the
power  that  was  manifested  in  the
ancient  Church.  We  have  come  to
testify  against  false  doctrines;  we
are  sent  for  this  express  purpose,  and
also  to  testify  boldly  against  the
wickedness  and  abominations  of  the
professed  Christian  world,  as  well  as
of  those  who  make  no  profession.
God  has  commanded  us  to  lift  up  our


voices  and  spare  not,  to  bear  testi
mony  against  all  their  wickedness
and  their  false  doctrines,  which  we
have  endeavored  to  do,  without  ask-
ing any  favor  of  the  children  of  men.
God  has  not  sent  us  to  bow  and
cringe  to  the  trad  it  ions  and  false
ideas  of  the  children  of  men,  he  sent
us  to  bear  down,  in  plain  testimony,
against  their  wickedness  and  the  cor-
motions  which  they  are  all  the  time
practicing,  and  have  been  for  genera-
tions, before  high  heaven  and  the
whole  world.

We  then  say,  to  all  the  world,
that  if  they  will  repent  of  their  sins,
bumble  themselves,  become  as  little
cbillren  in  the  si^ht  of  God  ;  if  they
will  turn  away  from  their  false  doc-
trines, and  believe  in  Jesus,  who  was
crucified  in  ancient  days,  with  all
their  hearts,  and  receive  his  Gospel,
they  shall  not  only  receive  the  re-
mission of  their  sins,  but  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  signs,
anciently  promised  to  the  believers,
shall  follow  thena.  Every  creature
in  all  the  world  who  will  obey  the
Gospel,  will  enjoy  more  or  less  of
the  gifts  which  God  has  promised.
If  all  do  not  enjoy  them,  they  may
know  that  they  are  unbelievers,  for
J casus  has  said  that  these  signs  shall
follow  them  that  believe,  and  he  did
not  mean  the  Apostles  alone.  Let
us  quote  the  language,  that  you  may
see  that  he  meant  every  believer  in
all  the  world.  He  said  to  the  eleven
Apostles — "Go  ye  into  all  the  world
and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  crea-
ture,"—every  creature,  recollect,—
"lie  that  believeth/* — that  is,  every
creature,  in  oil  the  world,  that  be-
lieveth,  "and  is  baptized  shall  be
saved,  and  he  that  believeth  not  shall
be  damned."

Here  was  the  division  line.  Mark
the  next  promise  — "  These  signs
shall  follow  them  that  believe/1  They
were  not  to  follow  a  few  individuals


140


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


in  Jerusalem,  not  the  Apostles  to
whom  he  was  then  speaking  alone,
but  them  that  believe  in  all  the
world.  "I  give  unto  them  a  pro-
mise that  thcv  shall  be  saved  :  and
I  nut  only  promise  them  salvation,
but  certain  signs  shall  follow  them —
in  my  name  they" — these  believers —
"shall  cast  out  devils,  they  shall
gpeak  with  new  tongues,  they  shall
take  up  serpents,  and  if  they  drink
any  deadly  thing  it  shall  not  hurt
theni,  they  shall  lay  hands  on  the
sick  and  they  shall  recover."  ,
Here  is  the  way  by  which  every
person  may  find  out  whether  be  is  a
believer  in  Christ  or  not.  The  whole
Christian  world  can  test  themselves,  II
and  Hud  out  whether  thev  are  he-
lievers  in  Christ  or  not.  If  these
signs  follow,  they  are  believers ;  if


these  signs  do  not  follow,  they  are
not  believers,  neither  arc  the  I  fitter-
day  Saints.  None  of  hs  are  believers
unless  these  signs  follow  us ;  for
Jesus  promised  them  to  every  crea-
ture in  all  the  world  who  believes;
hence  the  promise  includes  people
now  alive,  as  well  as  those  who  lived
in  former  ages.  And  woe  be  to  all
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  because
of  their  unbelief ;  because  they  have
done  away  the  poorer  of  godliness;
because  they  have  done  away  the
power  of  the  ancient  Gospel,  and
have  turned  aside  after  the  doctrines
of  men;  and  yet  hypocritically —
perhaps  some  of  them  sincerely — call
;  themselves  the  Church  of  Christ,
and  believers.  Shame  on  the  world !
Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON,


Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sl  nhay

Afternoon,  August  10,  1873,


(Reported  by  David  W>  Evans.)


THE  AUTHORITY  TO  PREACH — IT  IS  GOD  WHO  HAS  GUIDED  THE  WORK
— GLORIOUS  PROSPECTS  BEFORE  THE  FAITHFUL— CELESTIAL  MARRIAGE
— MISSION  TO  ARIZONA — INCREASING  NEGLIGENCE  OF  THE  SAINTS  IN
ATTENDING  MEETINGS — CONSEQUENCES  OF  UNVIRTUOUS  ACTIONS*


A  great  many  duties  del  vol  ve  upon
us,  of  which  we  have  to  be  constantly
reminded.  There  are  no  people
within  the  range  of  my  acquaintance,
to  whom  so  much  instruction  has


been  imparted  concerning  the  various
duties  devolving  upon  them,  as  to
the  Latter-day  Saints.  The  best
talent  of  the  community  is  at  their
service. AH  the  wisdom  which  God


T1U-:  AUTHORITY


TO  PREACH,  ETC*


has  given  has  been  freely  bestowed
up  *n  the  people  without  money  ami
without  price ;  and,  as  has  been  re-
marked upon  this  Stand  repeatedly,
there  is  an  independence  about  the
Elders  of  this  Charch  in  preaching
the  Gospel  unto  the  Saints  and  unto
the  world,  that  is  not  to.be  witnessed
among  the  ministers  of  any  other
denomination.  The  reason  of  this
is,  that  the  ministers  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints  do  not  live  upon  t he
people,  and  are  not  dependent  upon
their  favor  for  salaries  to  sustain
thera,  and  there  is  a  consequent  free-
dom in  discussing  measures  of  a
monetary  character,  for  the  general
good,  when,  under  other  circum-
stances, a  delicacy  mi<zht  be  felt.

We  read  in  the  Scriptures  that
Jesus  Christ,  in  speaking  with  his
disciples,  asked  them  whom  he,  the
Son  of  Mm,  was,  Peter  answered
him  that  he  was  the  Christ,  the  Son
of  the  living  God.  Jesus  then  said
to  Peter,  "  Blessed  art  thon,  Simon
Bar  jona ;  flesh  and  blood  hath  not
revealed  this  unto  thee,  but  my  Fa-
ther, who  is  in  heaven.  And  I  say
also  onto  thee  that  thou  art  Peter,
and  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my
church,  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall
not  prevail  against  it,  and  I  will  give
unto  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom
of  heaven,  and  whatsoever  thou  shah
bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in
heaven,  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt
loose  on  <  arth  shall  be  loosed  in  hea-
ven." Here  was  great  power  and
authority  given  unto  a  man.  It
might  be  said  that  this  was  one-man
power,  Peter  having  the  authority
to  bind  on  earth  and  it  should  be
bound  in  heaven,  to  loose  on  earth
and  it  should  he  loosed  in  heaven ;
but  yet,  these  are  the  words  of  the
Son  of  God  unto  one  of  his  Apostles,

Now,  whatrdid  this  authority  con-
sist  of?  Can  anybody  tell  outside
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  Can


anybody  outside  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Litter- day  Saints  under-
stand the  saying  of  Malachi,  where
he  predicts  that,  u  The  Lord  whom
ye  s-^ek  shall  suddenly  come  to  his
temple  ¥*  Do  they  understand  why
Temples  are  built  now,  or  for  what
purpose  they  were  built  in  ancient
days?  Can  they  tell  how  the  au-
thority, which  was  conferred  upon
Peter,  was  exercised  by  him,  or  in
what  jvay  it  could  be  exercised  by
any  man  who  might  possess  it  ?  All
these  things  are  mysteries  to  the  so-
called  Christian  world,  but  God,  in
his  mercy  and  condescension,  has
revealed  them  aiyain,  and  as  we  fre-
quently pay  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
and  not  to  them  alone,  for  this  is  no
monopoly  of  knowledge,  God  has  not
created  a  monopoly  in  organizing
this  Church,  he  is  willing  to  extend
this  knowledge  unto  all  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  earth,  without  money
and  without  price,  It  is  this  which
causes  the  Latter-day  Saints  to  be  so
firmly  united,  and  which  makes  them
willing,  if  necessary,  to  suffer  perse-
cution when  it  overtakes  them.  It
was  this  knowledge  which  bound
the  ancient  Saints  together,  and
which  caused  them  to  endure  mar-
tyrdom gladly  and  joyfully  in  view
of  the  blessings  which  they  knew
were  in  store  for  the  faithful.

While  brother  George  A.  Smith
was  speaking,  I  could  not  help  but
think  of  the  wonderful  work  that  is
being  wrought  in  this  generation
among  the  children  of  men,  in  con-
sequence of  the  power  that  has  been
wielded  through  the  erection  and
completion  of  Temples  and  the  ad-
I  ministration  of  ordinances  therein.
Men  wonder  how  it  is  that  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  are  so  united.  They
say  this  is  a  most  Wonderful  pheno-
menon. They  attribute  it  all  to
President  Young.  They  say  that
he  has  a  wonderful  intellect,  that  he


is  a  good  organizer,  that  he  possesses
great  executive  ability  and  admini-
strative power,  and  that  through  the
gifts  and  endowments  which  he  pos-
sesses, the  works  which  we  see  and
the;  union  that  is  everywhere  mani-
fest among  the  Latter-day  Saints  are  1
produced.  But  we  who  are  con-
nected with  the  Church,  while  we  do
not  wish  to  detract  in  the  least  from
the  merit  which  is  due  to  hira  as  a
servant  of  God  and  a  faithful  laborer
in  his  cause  through  #  all  the 'years  of
his  life  si  net*  he  first  became  acquaint-
ed  with  the  truth  j  while  we  do  not
wish  to  lessen  the  merit  of  these
labors,  or  to  detract  in  the  least  de-
gree from  them,  we  understand  prin-
ciple better  than  to  give  the  glory  to
man.  It  is  God  who  originated  and
who  has  preserved  this  work,  and
who  has  built  it  up,  and  developed
in  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  men
this  long  dormant  and  long  lost  prin-
ciple which  binds  thera  one  to  ano-
ther as  we  sire  bound  together ;  and
there  is  no  people  on  the  face  of  the
earth  before  whom  there  is  so  bright
and  glorious  a  prospect  for  this  life
and  also  for  the  life  which  is  to  come,  j
as  the  Latter-day  Saints,  through
the  blessings  of  the  Gospel  which
God  has  revealed.

We  live  in  a  different  day  to  the
ancients.  They  had  before  them  the
prospect  of  martyrdom  and  the  over-
throw of  the  work  with  which  they
were  connected.  Bat  in  these  days  God
has  given  unto  us  ditferenl  promises.
These  are  the  last  days,  and  he  has
said  that  his  kingdom  shall  triumph
in  the  last  days  ;  it  shall  not  be  over-
thrown or  go  into  the  bauds  of  ano-
ther people.  Our  Prophets  have
been  shun,  the  blood  of  Saints  has
been  shed,  but  these  scenes  shall  not
long  continue,  There  may  be  other
blood  shed  ;  there  may  be  other  sacri-
fices offered,  and  other  requirements
of  this  kind  made,  or  rather  the  Ad-


versary may  have  power  to  effect
bloody  results  of  this  character,  but
they  will  be  short-lived,  The  days
of  the  triumph  of  the  wicked  are
numbered.  They  can  not  prevail
over  this  work  for  any  length  of  time.
It  will  grow  and  increase  and  spread
abroad  until  it  fills  the  whole  earth,
and  we  and  our  children  after  us  will
enjoy  the  earth  and  all  the  blessings
thereof,  according  to  the  predictions
of  the  holy  Prophets,
j  The  prospect,  then,  before  us,
concerning  this  life  is  a  different
one  from  that  which  presented
itself  before  others  who  have  pre-
ceded us,  And  the  prospects  for
eternity  are  as  bright  and  glorious
as  any  that  were  ever  presented  to
any  of  the  children  of  men.  We
are  sent  here,  for  what  purpose  ?
To  eat  and  drink,  to  clothe  our-
selves and  to  build  houses,  and  to
live  and  die  like  the  beasts  ?  Is
that  the  object  for  which  God  has
sent  us  here  ?  By  no  means.  This
is  a  low  view  to  take  of  existence,
God  has  revealed  to  us,  to  a  certain
extent,  the  object  of  our  existence. —
We  are  his  children — the  children
of  Deity,  with  deity  and  godlike
aspirations  within  us.  We  have
these  aspirations  in  common  with
all  his  children,  and  it  is  right  and
proper  that  we  should  have  them.
Every  man  has  a  desire  to  rule,
govern  and  control;  some  men,  to
gratify  their  ambition  in  this  re-
spect, have  trod  bloody  paths  and
have  trampled  down  their  follow
men  in  their  march  to  power,  and
when  attained  it  has  been  of  short
continuance,  But  God  has  revealed
to  us  a  principle  by  which  we  csn
attain  to  dominion  and  power  with-
out having  to  do  as  they  have  done.
He  has  revealed  to  us  the  Gospel,
!  which  tells  us  that  if  we  are  faithful
;  here  over  a  few  things  he  will  make
'  us  ruler  over  many.


THE  AUTHORITY  TO  PREACH,  ETC


43


i  #>Many  men  wonder  bow  it  is  thai:
We  cnu  believe  i:i  celestial  marriage.
We  believe  in  it  because  it  lies  at  the
foundation  of  all  future  greatness.
If  a  'man  rule  in  heaven  lie  will  rule
over  his  own  posterity.  The  Apostle
John,  t>aid  that  they  sang  a  new  song
in  heaven — "  And  hast  made  us  unto
our  God  kings  and  Priests  :  and  we


gu  on
Over  1
Over
r  fam-
wives
ernity
by


shall  reign  on  the  earth.1'  Re
the  earth  !  "  This  was  the  song,
whom  were  they  to  reign  ?
whom  more  properly  than  the
iliea  ?  Tfte  authority  to  seal
to  husbands  for  time  and  all  e
is  the  authotity  that  is  resto
the  everlasting  Priesthood,  and  this
is  the  authority  that  was  given  to
Peter,  by  which  children  can  be
sealed  and  joined  to  their  parents
for  time  and  for  all  eternity  until
they  realize  the  blessing  that  was
pronounced  upon  Abraham,  when
the  Lord  said  unto  him  that,  as  the
stars  of  heaven  were  countless  for
multitude,  or  the  sands  ou  the  sea
shore  could  not  be  numbered,  so  his
seed  should  bo  and*  he  should  rule
over  them.  This  was  the  blessing
which  was  pronounced  upon  him,
and  it  is  the  blessing  that  h  is  been
pronounced  upon  every  faithful  man
who  has  lived  in  a  day  when  the
Priesthood  was  upon  the  earth.  Why
wonder,  then,  at  Latter-day  Saints
having  this  view,  this  anticipation  ?
Why  should  they  hesitate  one  moment
to  contribute  ail  their  means  to  build
Temples,  and  to  accomplish  the  work
of  God  ?  We  should  be  thankful  all
the  day  long  for  the  blessings  which
God  has  bestowed  upon  us,  and  should
be  willing  to  use  all  our  menus  for  the
accomplishment  of  bis  work  upun
the  earth,  no  matter  what  enter-
prises we  may  be  called  upon  to
support,  whether  it  be  to  build  Tem-
ples, send  for  the  poor,  or  any  thing
else.  >

Arizona  has  been  mentioned.  The


President,  in  his  remarks  this  morn*
mgi  alluded  to  Arizona,  and  to  the
labors  of  our  pioneering  brethren
in  that  Territory,  vl  was  very  much
pleased  to  hear  what  he  said  in  rela-
tion to  that.  I  am  thankful  to  see
that,  in  his  remarks,  there  was  no
disposition  to  let  up,  or  to  say,  "I
am  in  years  now,  and  I  will  lay
back  and  take  my  ease  and  leave  the
burden  of  this  work  to  younger
men,  who  ought  to  slep  forward  and
shoulder  it."  He  has  the  spirit  of
the  pioneer  in  him  as  much  to-day,
probably,  as  he  ever  had*  I  am
thankful  that  God  fills  hi  in  with
this  zeai  and  strength.  I  believe  it
was  a  true  remark,  that  if  he  had
been  in  Arizona,  th^re  would  have
been  good  places  found  for  settle-
ment I  have  no  doubt  there  will
be  yet.  But  there  is  one  thing  that
we  must  understand,  that  with  our
present  surrounding*,  and  at  least
while  in  the  circumstances  in  which
we  are  at  present  placed,  good  coun-
tries are  not  for  us.  The  worst
places  in  the  land  we  c-ui  probably
get,  and  we  most  develop  them.  If
we  were  to  find  a  good  country,  how
long  would  it  be  before  the  wicked
would  want  it,  and  seek  to  si. rip  us
of  our  possessions  ?  If  there  be
deserts  in  Ariz  ma,  thank  God  for
the  deserts.  If  there  be  a  wilder*
neas,  there,  thank  God  for  the  wil-
derness, as  we  thti liked  him  lor
tije.se  mighty  ram  pari  s  and  those
extensive  plains  which  wo  had  to
cross  when  we  came  here.  We
thanked  him  for  them,  because  a
mob  could  not  come,  as  they  did
from  Carthage,  and  take  away  our
Prophet  and  the  Saints  and  hail
them  to  prison  and  destroy  them  as
they  did  then.  When  we  came  here
I  thanked  God  for  the  isolation  of
these  mountains;  I  thanked  htm
for  the  grandeur  of  the  hills  and
bulwarks  which  he  had  reared  around


JOURNAL  OF  Disc


us.  I  thanked  him  fnr  tTio  Resorts
and  waste  places  of  this  land  :  and
we  have  all,  doubtless,  thanked
Him  many  times  therefor,  and  when
we  go  hence  to  extend  our  borders,
z  we  mutt  not  expect  to  find  a  laud  of
orange  or  lemon  groves,  a  land  where
walnut  trees  and  hard  timber  abound  ;
where*  bees  are  wild  and  turkeys  can
be  had  for  the  shooting.  It  is  vain
for  us  to  expect  to  settle  in  such  a
land  at  the  present  time. Hut  if  we


find  a  little


in  the  dc


art- where

a  few  can  settle,  thank  God  for  the
oasis,  and  thank  him  for  the  almost
interminable  road  that  lies  between
that  oasis  and  so-called  civilization.

We  expect  there  will  be  settle*
ments  made  through  all  that  conn-
try.  The  time  most  conic  when  the
Latter  day  Saints,  and  when  I  say
Latter-day  Saints,  I  include  all  the
honest  who  will  yet  embrace  the
Gospel,  when  the  Latter-day  Saints
will  extend  throughout  all  North
and  South  America,  and  we  shall
establish  the  rule  of  righteousness
and  good  order  throughout  all  these
new  countries.

The  President  is  desirous  that  a
bundled  men,  supplied  with  pro-
visions sufficient  to  last  the  winter,
should  go  down  to  the  southern
country,  and  bestow  their  labors  on
building  the  Temple  at  St,  George.
If  there  could  not  be  good  places
found  in  Arizona  for  settlements,
there  was  a  good  opportunity  to  stay
and  help  to  build  that  Temple;  and  it
is  to  be  regretted  that  the  brethren,
although  so  eager  to  come  back,
did  not  stay  until  word  could  have
been  sent  that  they  might  stop  and
help  the  people  of  the  South.  If
they  had  done  this  they  might  have
done  a  good  work,  they  would  have
been  on  hand  for  anything  further
that  might  have  been  required  of
them.  Suppose  we  all  were  to  allow
ourselves  to  be  de terred  from  accom-


plishing mission!;  hy  apparent,  diffi,
culties,  how  long  would  it  be  before
the  influence and prestige  which
ought  to  attend  the  efforts  of  the
Elders  would  be  1  >st  ? We  have
had  a  reputation,  heretofore,  of  ac-
complishing everything of  this
kind  that  we  undertook. But  let
us  be  faint* hearted  and  we  lo^e  our
influence  and  power  both  with  God
and  man. All  our  labors  have  to
be  works  of  faith. When  we  are
told  to  do  a  thing,  we  should  go  to
work believing, as Nephi  says,
that  God 'never  gives  a  command-
ment unto the children of  men
save  he  prepares a way  whereby
they shall fulfill that  command-
ment. He  never  yet  sent  a  man  to
do  a  work  without  giving  hiru  power
to  accomplish  it. We  can  do  these
things  if  we  will. We  can  build  up
the  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth,
and  we  can  train  our  children  in  the
love  of  this  work,  and  we  can  sur-
round them  by  a  wall  that  no  power
I  can  surmount  or  break  down. I  am
thankful  that*  we  are  thus  situated,
although  to  some  the  prospects  ap-
pear gloomy. Many  of  our  enemies
say  that  "  Mor monism"  is  in  its  las^
ditch,  and  it  will  soon  bo  overthrown
I  am  willing  that  every  one  should
have  that  opinion  who  wishes  to  en-
tertain it. If  they  wish  to  delude
themselves  with  such  ideas,  all  right
But  I  say  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
wc  have  not  yet  reached  the  last
ditch  ;  neither  shall  we  if  we  will  do
what  we  ought  to  do,  and  obey  the
counsel  that  has  been  given  unto  us
during  these  two  day's  meetings,  and
that  is  given  to  us  every  Sunday  and
at  all  our  meetings. There  is  no
power  on  the  face  of  the  earth  that
can  withstand  our  efforts,  or  that  can
prevail  against  us. We  have  truth,
unity,  temperance and  virtue;  we
have  the  power  of  God;  we  have
the  promises  of  the  Almighty  in


THE  AUTHORITY  TO  PREACH,  ETC.


143


oar  behalf,  and  there  is  no  power
that  can  prevail  against  a  people  who
will  practice  the  principles  which  are
taught  unto  us.  >

Bat  I  will  tell  you  what  causes
me,  as  an  individual,  to  fear — when
I  see  fifty,  a  h united  or  two  hundred
persons  come  to  meeting;  when  I
see  men  who  onght  to  be  at  meeting
attending  to  their  duties,  going  off
into  the  country  on  excursions ;
when  I  hear  of  their  doing  something
that  will  detain  them  from  meeting,
and  see  the  meetings  neglected,  and
the  idea  growing  up — "  Well,  it  is  a
day  of  rest,  I  am  tired  and  weary"*  —
as  though  they  could  not  obtain  rest
in  coming  to  the  house  of  the  Lord
and  serving  him  on  the  Lord's  day.
These  acts,  this  negligence,  causes
fear  sometimes  to  come  into  my
heart,  and  I  expect  it  has  the  same
effect  on  our  brethren.  I  deplored,
in  my  feelings,  the  suspension  of  our
forenoon  meeting.?.  I  think  it  is  a
bad  sign.  We  had  a  School  of  the
Prophets  her*1,  to  which  most  of  the
Elders  were  invited,  and  which  they
attended.  That  had  to  be  suspended.
These  meetings  on  the  Sunday  morn-
ing had  to  he  suspended.  What  more
will  have  to  be  suspended  or  with-
drawn ?  I  have  thought,  unless  the
people  of  this  city  arouse  themselves,
change  their  course  and  are  more
diligent,  that  it  might  not  be  long
until  the  presiding  Priesthood  would
be  prompted  to  movo  from  this  city;
not  that  the  authority  of  the  Priest-
hood will  be  withdrawn.  These
things  are  painful  in  the  chief  city
of  Zion,  and  they  are  not  sucli  in-
dications as  I  like  to  witness.  Yes-
terday there  was  a  meeting  appoint-
ed ;  but  instead  of  attending  it,  the
brethren  were  engaged  in  haying
and  every  kind  of  labor.  They  can
do  this,  of  coarse,  if  they  wish  ;  but
it  does  not  look  very  well  when  a
meeting  is  appointed,  and  the  Apos-

Fa  10.  .  •


ties  suspend  their  labors  and  come
here  to  teach  you,  for  j'ou  to  stay
away,  thinking  your  employments
;ire  ot  such  importance  that  you  can-
not spend  time  at  meeting.  Men
and  women  who  entertain  this  feel-
in?  and  take  this  course  on?! it  to  be
ashamed  of  themselves  !  It  is  treat-
ing the  men  who  preside  over  you
with  disrespect,  for  which,  if  you
could  realize,  you  would  be  ready
to  apologize*  "  '  • i  .  !

You  cannot  be  too  careful  in  rela-
tion to  our  duties.  This  is  a  day
when  every  one  should  be  diligent
in  the  performance  of  duties,  and
should  attend  to  them  strictly.  You
should  invoke  the  blessing  of  God
upon  your  habitation,  and  upon  your
children,  that  they  may  grow  up  in
the  fear  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.
Every  boy  in  this  community  should
feel  that  he  would  rather  lay  down
his  life  than  sacrifice  his  virtue  or
indulge -in  unvirtuous  actions.  We
have  to  guard  against  the  bad  ex*
am  pies  seen  around  us.  Mothers,
teach  your  girls  the  value  of  virtue
and  chastity.  Inquire  into  their
movements,  and  guard  them  as  you
would  the  most  precious  jewels  which
God  could  give  unto  you.  Fathers,
talk  with  your  sons,  and  fortify  them
against  temptation.  Let  them  flee
lust,  for  I  tell  you  that,  as  true  as
we  live,  the  words  of  God  will  be
fulfilled,  that  he  that  looks  upon  a
woman  to  lust  after  her  shall  deny
the  faith  unless  he  repents.  We
know  that  this  is  so,  1  know  it  by
seeing  young  men  grow  up  from  boy-
hood in  this  Church  until  the  present
time.  I  think  about  numbers  I  was
acquainted  with  in  my  boyhood.
Where  are  they  ?  They  have  lost
the  faith.  Elders  have  lost  the  faith
who  have  taken  a  course  of  this  kind.
It  is  a  damning  sin,  and  wherever
indulged  in  it  banishes  the  Spirit  of
God. No  man  can  retain  the  faith

Vol  XVI.


■


no


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


without  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  no  man
can  retain  the  Holy  Ghost  who  takes
a  course  of  this  kin  J.  Be  warned  of
these  things,  if  you  wish  to  hold  on
iu  the  faith  and  to  sit  down  with  the
fathers  in  the  kingdom  of  God.

Then  abstain  from  hijsf,  and  every-
thing which  would  lead  thereto.  No
matter  how  wild  and  rowdy  our  boy  a
may  be,  and  many  of  the  in  ate  so,
I  do  not  care  for  such  rowdiness  and
wildue&s,  if  it  is  not  associated  with
unvirtuous  actions,  A  man  may  be
as  nice,  to  all  appearance,  as  a  human
being  can  be,  so  far  as  externals  are
concerned,  and  yet,  if  lie  lack  virtue,
lie  is  like  a  w  hi  ted  sepulchre*,  God


is  not  with  such  a  man,  and  God  will
damn  this  generation  for  the  course
they  take  in  relation  to  women.  That
is  their  crying,  damning  sin.

Let  us  guard  against  it.  Lei  us
watch  our  children.  L  t  us  prevent
the  ingress  of  crime.  Let  us  guard
our  owu  hearts,  and  endeavor  to
secure  the  portals  of  the  hearts  of
our  children  that  evil  suggestions,
from  whatever  source,  may  neve
take  root  therein.

That  God  may  bless  and  preserve
us,  and  deliver  Zion  from  all  her
enemies,  is  my  prayer  in  the  name
of  Jesus.  Amen,


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  Tabernacle,  Ogden,  Saturday  Morning,

August  16,  ]873.


(Reported  hy  James  Taylor.)

THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD*S  POWER,  IN  BEHALF  OF JUS PEOPLE  IS
MODERN  TIMES, ARE  DIFFERENT FROM THOSE OF FORMER  .  ACiKS-
CO  NS  EC  RATI  ON —  ORDER  OF  ENOCH  — TITHING  —  STEWARDSHIPS  —  RE*
DEMPTION  OF  ZION.


I  have  been  called  upon,  but  a  few
minutes  ago,  to  address  the  congre*
gation  who  are  here  assembled,  which
I  desire  to  do  through  your  united
faith  and  prayers  in  my  behalf
Without  the  assistance  of  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord  it  is  impossible  for  any
person,  in  a  religious  capacity,  to
edify  and  instruct  his  fellow-beings.


But,  if  we  have  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord,  however  imperfect  our  abilities
may  be,  we  are  sure  to  edify  and  en-
lighten the  people,  and  the  person
also  who  speaks  will  be  edified ;  for
it  is  written  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants,  "  He  that  speaketh,
as  well  as  those  who  hear,  will  be
I  mutually  edified together/'  if  the


■


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD'S  POWER,  ETC,


147


Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  poured  out  from
on  high  upon  us.  It  is  said  in  ano-
ther revelation  that  u  the  Spirit  of
the  Lord  is  given  by  the  prayer  of
faith."  Faith  is  required  on  the  part
of  the  people  to  obtain  all  blessings
of  a  spiritual  nature.  And  in  order
to  have  faith  it  is  important  that  we
should  do  the  will  of  God,  otherwise
our  faith  will  be  very  weak  indeed*
He  that  doeth  his  masters  will,  and
has  within  him  the  desire  to  work
righteousness,  can  approach  the  Lord
in  faith;  but  if  we  do  not  keep  his
commandments,  and  have  not  this
desire,  and  do  not  do  his  will,  our
faith  becomes  exceedingly  small  in-
deed.

It  is,  in  my  estimation,  very  simi-
lar to  what  we  see  transpire  here  on
the  earth,  between  parents  and  child-
ren. When  children  become  rebel-
lious, and  do  not  perform  the  will  of
their  parents,  it  is  with  ;\  very  small
degree  <>f  confidence  that  they  come
before  their  parents  and  seek  for  any
kind  of  favor  or  blessing.  They
eome#  trembling,  doubting.  They
know  that  their  conduct  has  been
such  as  to  prevent  them  from  re-
ceiving favors  which  they  especially
desire.  Sometimes,  perhaps,  the
father  will  grant  the  petition  of  a
rebellious  son,  when  he  has  sufficient
confidence  to  offer  up  a  petition  to
his  parent..  But  if  that  rebellious
son  has  so  far  strayed  from  the
parent  that  he  has*  no  confidence  to
approach  him,  and  does  not  offer  up
any  petition  to  the  parent,  it  ts  very
doubtful  about  the  parent's  taking
into  consideration  his  wants,  in  some
respects,  and  bestowing  the  favors
which  he  really  desires.  So  it  is
between  us  and  our  heavenly  Father,

Sometimes  people,  through  their
transgressions, through their  diso-
bedience, through  their  rebellion  to  1
the  principles  that  God  has  revealed,
may  have  lost  their faith  to  that


decree  that  they  will  not  go  before
their  Father,  will  not  pretend  to  ask
him  for  a  favor,  thinking  that  their
transgressions  are  too  great,  and
that  the  Lord  will  not  favor  them.
In  this  condition  it  is  doubtful  indeed
if  the  Lord  takes  into  consideration
their  peculiar  wants,  and  the  especial
blessings  which  they  would  be  glad
to  receive.

How many are the  command-
ments  and  instructions  which  God
has  given  to  this  people  ? We  have
been  blest  in  this  generation  with
an  abundance  of  the  manifestations
of  the  spiritual  blessings  of  the  kingb
do m. Perhaps  there  never  was  a
people  since  the  world began  that
have  had  as  much  information,  in  so
short  a  period  of  time, from  their
organization,  as  what  the  Church  of
the  Latter-day Saints have  had.
When  we take  into  consideration
this  one  book,  the  Book  of  Mormon,
which  God  has,  in  mercy,  brought
forth,  and  the information  that  is
contained  therein,  and  combine  this
information  with  the  Jewish  record
of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  and
tlfen  in  connection  with  these  two
books,  the  revelations  that  are  con-
tained in  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants ;  nil  the  information  that
is,  and  that  has  been  given  from  time
to  time  in  that  book. Then,  in  ad-
dition to  these  three  books,  all  fhc
revelations  that  God  has  delivered  to
us  by  the  mouths  of  his  ser-aofs
from  time  to  time,  some  of  which
have  been  published,  others  have  not
been  published,  but  are  still  consi-
dered by  this  people  as  sacred  as  the
things  that  are  published. I  say
when  we  take  into  consideration  this
flood  of  light  and  intelligence  that
has  burst  forth  upon  the  world,  in
the  period  of  about  forty  years,  we
may  say  that  we  have  been  blest  so
far  as  light  and  information  are  con-
cerned, far  beyond  any  other  people


+


with  whom  we  arc  acquainted.  It  is
trnr  we  have  not  I  ho  full  history  of
all  the  various  dispensations,  and  all
the  manifestations  of  the  merely  and
goodness  and  power  of  God  among
those  different  peoples  and  nations
in  apes  past.  We  could  not  say  of  a
certainty  how  much  information  God
may  have  imparted  in  those  dispen-
sations. We  read  in  some  Revela-
tions what  God  has  given  about  the
organization  of  ancient  Zion.  In  the  i
seventh  generation  from  the  creation
— from  the  days  of  Adam — we  read
about  the  preaching  of  Enoch,  How
he  went  forth  and  prophesied  to  the
nations.  How  he  built  up  the
Church  among  the  various  nations.
How  they  built  up  Zion.  In  the
history  of  this  ancient  Zion,  we  find
that  Enoch  continued  his  preaching
in  righteousness,  three  hundred  and
sixty-five  years,  before  Zion  was  pre-
pared for  a  translation.  How  much
was  revealed  daring  that  time  we  do
not  know,  no  doubt  much  was  given;
but  I  doubt  whether  there  was  one  ;
hundrethpart  of  the  information  com-
municated, during  the  first  forty
vears  of  the  existence  of  ancient
Zion,  which  has  been  communicated
to  us,  as  a  people,  in  our  day.

Sometimes  we  find  it  to  be  the
case,  that  God  manifests  his  good-
ness and  mercy  to  a  people,  not  in
the  way  of  revelation,  but  in  the  way
of  power,  without  much  information.
We  find  this  to  be  the  case  among
ancient  Israel.  They  had  been  slaves
in  Egypt  for  a  long  period.  They
had  been  taught,  from  their  child-
hood up,  to  work  mortar  and  make
brick,  and  toil  and  labor  for  the
Egyptians — their  taskmasters.  Du-
ring this  period  of  time  they  had  not
the  opportunity  of  learning  much.
There  must  be  a  little  leisure  granted
that  the  mind  may  be  taught,  in-
structed and  educated ;  but  it  seems
that  their  whole  education  for  two  or


three  generations,  or  for  a  long  time
after  they  were  brought  into  bondage,
was  given  to  them  by  their  task-
masters —  how  to  form  bricks  or
adobies,  or  whatever  it  might  be-
hard  labor.  ff  they  had  ;i  little
leisure,  instead  of  using  it  in  trea-
suring up  the  knowledge  of  God,
they  needed  it  to  recuperate  their
physical  systems,  that  they  might
rest  from  their  labors,  and  go  again
and  drudge  on  the  morrow.

Tins  seems  to  have  been  the  con-
dition of  Israel  in  the  land  of  Goshen, .
in  Egypt.  Consequently,  when
Moses  went  down  to  Egypt,  he  found
an  ignorant  people.  It  is  true  they
kept  up  the  form  of  the  Priesthood
among  them.  Before  the  Priesthood
of  Aaron  was  confined  to  that  parti-
cular tribe,  we  have  an  account  of
this  Priesthood  being  in  existence*
After  they  were  led  through  the  Red
Sea,  before  the  Lord  set  apai  t  Aaron
and  his  sons,  before  he  confined  the
Priesthood  to  Levi,  when  the  child-
ren of  Israel  came  and  camped  before
Mount  Sinai,  we  recollect  that  ihere
was  a  strict  law  given.  TRe  Lord
told  them  that  he  was  about  to  des-
l  cend  on  Mount  Sinai,  and  he  charged
the  people  that  they  sh  <uld  not
break  over  certain  bounds  lest  they
should  perish,  for  if  any  person  or
beast  should  touch  the  Mount,  they
should  be  stoned  to  death.  The  peo-
ple, being  ignorant  and  not  fully  ac-
quainted with*  the  strictness  of  the
commandments  of  the  Most  High,  a
|  curiosity  was  excited,  and  some  of
the  congregation,  when  Moses  went
up  to  Mount  Sinai,  wanted  to  draw
near,  and  the  Lord  sent  Moses  down
to  charge  the  people  again  a  second
time.  And  the  Priests  were  com-
manded that  they  should  not  break
through  lest  they  should  perish.
What  Priesthood?  Not  a  Priest-
hood that  was  confined  to  Levi,  or  to
the  descendants  of  Aaron,  or  to  Aaron


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD'S  TOWER,  ETC.


149


himself; but  it  was  a  Priesthood
that  existed  among Israel.  That
same  Priesthood  that  is  mentioned
in one of the  revelations  in  the
Book  of  Doctrine  jind  Covenants,
^here  in  speaking  of  the  two  Priest-
hoods, it  says  that  they  continue
together  in  the  Church  of  God,  in
all generations,  when God  has  a
people  upon  the  face  of  the  earth;
not  confined  to  any  special  lineage,
so  far  as  the  Priesthood  is  concerned.
Go  down  and  charge  the  Pkiests,
that  they  do not break  through.
This  organization  may  have  exist*
ed  through  all  the  period of  the
slavery  of  the  children  of  Israel,
for several ge Derations,  although
we  cannot  suppose  that  they  had
been  fully  instructed. They  had
no printed records as we  have.
They  had  not  a  large  collection  of
books,  in  the  form  of  Jewish  Bible?,
to  which  to  refer  for  information.
They  had  not  a  large  collection  of
books  similar  to  the  Book  ol  Mormon,
for  printing  was  not  then  known.  If
any  of  their  scribes  found  a  little
leisure  to  write  off  some  of  the  reve-
lations, it  would  be  only  a  stray  copy
or  two  that  would  be  in  the  hands  of
the  children of  Israel. We  can
therefore  see  the  difference  between
them and the Latter-day  Saints.
They  were  permitted  to  enjoy,  in  a
special  manner, the  power  of  the
Almighty in their midst.  This
shows  that  in  some  of  the  dealings
of  God,  he  manifests  his  power,  if


short  a  time,  send  forth  such  swift
judgments  upon  the  heads  of  the
children  of  Israel.  They  had  seen
the  manifestations  of  his  power  while
tbey  were  in  Egypt;  they  passed
through  the  Red  Sea,  and  then  be-
held the  glory  of  God  upon  Mount
Sinai.  If  they  would  sfiffer  them-
selves to  reject  this  power  thus  made
manifest,  it  brought  speedy  destruc-
tion upon  them.

When  Moses  was  on  the  Mount,
they  made  a  golden  calf.  We  no
doubt  are  led  to  wonder  why  it  was,
while  the  glory  of  God  rested  on
the  Mount,  and  while  the  Lord  was
thus  showing  forth  his  omnipotent
power — we  are  led  to  wonder  why
it Was  —  that they  should  build

and  fall  down  and
It  was  because  of
This  glory  appeared
to  them  oii  the  Mount  like  a  natural
phenomenon*  Some  natural  cause,
perhaps,  was  assigned.  They  saw
the  clouds  as  we  see  clouds  upon  our
mountains.  They  might  have  thought
that  there  was  a  volcanic  eruption  on
the  Mount,  and  concluded  there  was
no  God  in  it ;  and  therefore,  that
they  needed  to  make  gods  of  their
own  finger  rings,  and  fall  down  and
worship  them.

The  consequence  was  that  the  Lord
bent  Moses  down  .out  of  the  Mount
again.  And  he  threatened  that  he
would  destroy  the  whole  nation,  and
make  of  Moses  a  great  nation.  But
Moses  quoted  the  promises  that  the


golden  calves,
worship  them,
their  ignorance.


he  does  not  manifest  his  revelations.  '  Lord  had  made  to  their  fathers,  and


There  is  a  great  deal  of  danger
when  the  people  see  a  great  deal  of
power  existing  in  their  midst.  For
the  want  of  experience  and  informa-
tion, for  the  want  of  more  knowledge,
there  U  a  liability  to  sin  against  all
of  this  power  that  may  be  made  mani-
fest in  their  midst;  and  this  would
bring  sudden  destruction. This  is  no


the  Lord  concluded  to  hearken  to  the
words  of  Moses  and  spare  the  people.
Moses  went  down,  and  as  he  drew
near,  he  heard  a  great  noise,  and  he
saw  them  dancing  around  a  golden
calf,  and  they  were  stripped  naked.
And  thus  they  had  turned  their
hearts  away  from  the  Lord.

Now  instead  of  bearing  all  this,


doubt  the  reason  why  God  did,  in  so  !  the  Lord  inspired  Moses  to  say  to


JUL  1INAL  OF  DISCO LTi;?5KS.


the  people,  let  those  who  are  on  the
Lord's  side  come  forth;  put  every
man  his  sword  hy  his  side,  and  go
io  and  out  from  pate  to  gate  through-
out the  camp,  and  slay  every  man  his
brother,  and  every  man  his  compa-
nion, and  every  man  his  neighbor.
And  there  fell  of  the  people  that  day
ahoiit  three  thousand  men. On  this
occasion  great  destruction  came  on
them,  because  of  their  transgression.
It  was  among  a  people  that  had  been
enlightened  only  by  miracles,  signs
and  wonders* We  find  this  to  be
the  case  throughout  all  the  sojourn
of the children  of  Israel  in  the
wilderness. They would  become
rebellious;  and  the  Lord  had  to  send
forth  judgments,  miraculous  judg-
ments upon  them  from  time  to  time.
Their  carcasses  fell  in  the  wilderness.
Sometimes  a  terrible  plague  would
break  out,  and  the  only  way  that
Aaron  could  stay  the  plague  was  to
get:  between  them  and  the  pi  gue,
ai;d  offer  up  sacrifices. The  flying
serpents  that  infested  that  great  wil-
derness would  destroy  them,  and  the
only  way  there  was  to  he  healed,  was
to  look  upon  a  brazen  Ker  pel  it.  And,
alter  all,  what  was their  informa-
tion r What  was  their  knowledge
concerning  the  tilings  of  the  kingdom
of  God  r The  very  knowledge  that
thev  bad  when  thev  came  forth  out
of  Egypt,  the  knowledge  of  the  Gos-
pel, of  its  first  principles — even  that
knowledge  seems  to  have  been  taken
from  them,  and  a  law  of  carnal  com-
mundinents  given  to  them  instead,

The  Lord,  in  this  dispensation,  is
beginning  to  operate  a  little  differ-
ently from  what  he  has  done  in  for-
mer ages.  In  the  first  place  he  per-
forms some  small  miracles,  such
as  unstopping  the  ears  of  the  deaf,
and  causing  the  lame  to  walk,  the
dumb  to  speak,  some  fevers  to  be
rebuked,  some  plagues  to  be  stayed,
and  devils  and  unclean  spirits  to  be


cast  out.  Instead  of  coming  down
upon  a  mountain,  and  causing  the
earth  to  shake  by  his  power;  and
instead  of  showing  forth  a  pillar  of
fire  by  night,  and  a  cloud  by  day,
he  has  taken  a  different  course:
u  Firgt,  give  the  people  knowledge,
pive  them  understanding,  show  unto
them  the  principles  of  my  Gospel,
the  principles  of  my  law,  make
them  strong  in  the  knowledge  of
God,  and  show  forth  but  very  little
power  in  their  midst;'  This  seems
to  be  wisdom,  that  we  may  have
knowledge  proportionate  to  the  power
that  is  made  manifest,  that  when
he  does  show  forth  his  power,  we
may  turn  not  our  hearts  away  from
him.  In  the  beginning  of  this  work
it  seemed  to  be  necessary  that  cer-
tain persons  should  be  raised  up  to
bear  witness  to  the  Book  of  Mormon
—  of  its  divinity,  that  the  work
might  he  commenced.  But  did  the
Lord  continue  to  send  forth  his  an-
gels ?  Oh,  no.  After  he  had  raised
up  three  witnesses  in  1829,  angels*
visits  became  more  scarce,  because
the  people  were  not  preparecf  for
them.  Even  these  three  witnesses
were  not  prepared  for  a  day  of  trial  ;
for  they  turned  from  the  Lord,  and
fell  into  transgression,  and  did  not
keep  the  commandments  of  God.
What  was  the  matter  with  them  ?
They  hadgreati  r  power  made  manifest
in  their  midst,  than  they  had  know-
ledge to  keep  them  in  the  faith.  If
they  had  had  more  knowledge,  it
would  not  have  overthrown  them.
We  find  that  Oliver  Cow  defy,  David
Whitmer,  and  Martin  Harris  heboid
the  plates  that  were  translated,  and
heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  oat  of
heaven,  proclaiming  in  their  ears  that
the  translation  bad  been  performed
by  the  gift  and  power  of  God,  And
they  put  their  testimony  in  writing,
and  it  went  forth.  But  this  was
too  great  a  power for  the  little


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  COD's  POWER,  ETC


151


knowledge  that  they  had. And  the

consequences  were  that  they  had
trials,  and  these  trials  overpowered
them.  But  we  never  hare  heard
that  these  witnesses  have  denied
their  testimony,  Because  they  were
not  all  the  time  beholding  the  power
of  God  made  manifest,  they  fell
away.  No  v  this  should  be  a  les-
son to  the  Latter-day  Saints,  that
when  we  do  see  some  small  mira-
cles wrought,  we  should  strive  to
strengthen  ourselves  up  in  the  spirit
of  our  religion,  with  light  and
knowledge  and  information  —  to  gain
all  that  we  possibly  can,  that  we  may
be  spiritually  strengthened ;  a  miracle
is  external  to  the  senses,  and  has  only
an  exciting  effect  upon  the  mind.
Unless  it  is  accompanied  by  the  Spirit
of  the  living  God  in  the  heart,  wh  it
are  we  bene  lit  ted  ?  We  are  able  to
bear  testimony  to  what  onr  eyes  have
seen,  but  where  are  we  ben  fitted,  un-
less the  Holy  Ghost  is  shed  forth  in
our  hearts  ?

Moreover,  God  has  determined
that  in  our  day  he  will  manifest  his
power  again.  When  I  say  our  day,
I  ought  to  say  in  the  days  of  this  last
dispensation  of  the  fullness  of  times.
Before  it  closes  up,  it  will  turn  out
to  be  one  of  the  most  magnificent
eras  ever  manifested  to  the  world,
so  far  as  power  is  concerned.  The
Lord  has  taken  this  method  for  forty
years  past,  to  prepare  us  for  what
is  coming.  And  if  we  will  treasure
up  what  the  Lord  has  given,  and  suf-
fer Ids  will  to  be  written  in  our  hearts,
and  printed  on  our  thoughts,  and  give
heed  to  the  teachings  and  counsel  of
the  living  oracles  in  our  own  midst,
we  will  be  prepared,  t bat  when  the
day  of  power  does  come,  we  shall  not
be  overthrown,

Now,  that  there  is  a  day  of  power
coming,  every  Latter-day  Saint,  who
is  acquainted  with  the  predictions
of  the  Prophets,  is  certain. He  is


expecting  that  it  will  come  in  the
time  specified  in  those  revelations.
God  has  said  to  us,  in  the  Book  of
D  octrine  aud  Covenants,  that  when
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  ful-
filled, then  cometh  the  day  of  myt
power.  **Thy  people  will  be  willing,'*
says  one  of  the  ancient  Prophets,
w  in  the  day  of  thy  power."  The
Elders  of this  Church  have  gone
forth  among  mauy  nations.  They
rejoice  in  the  power  that  is  made
manifest,  in  some  measure. God  has
said  that  they  should  go  and  preach
the  Gospel  to  all  nations  of  the  earth  ;
and  that  signs  should  follow  them
that  believe. In  ray  name  they  shall
do  many  wonderful  works. In  my
name  they  shall  cast  out  devils,  speak
in  ot  her  tongues  ;  and  the  eyes  of  the
blind  shall  be  opened. The  Elders
have  found  this  to  be  true. As  far
as  the  people  have  had  faith,  they
have  seen  this  power,  in  some  measure,
displayed. But  this  can  not  be  said,
comparatively,  to  be  the  day  of  his
pow-r. When  the  day  of  the  power
of  the  Lord  shall  come,  then  will  be
a  time  when  not  only  the  sick,  the
lame  and  the  blind,  but  also  the
very  elements  will  be  wrought  upon
by  the  power  oi  God,  as  the  Lord
has  spoken,  and  be  subservient  to
the commands,  of his  servants.
Will  the  waters  be  divided  ?  Qyes.
We  are  told,  in  the  prophecies  of
Isaiah,  that  when  the  house  of  Israel
shall  morn  to  their  own  country,  be
will  strike  the  river  Nile,  in  the  seven
great  channels,  by  which  it  enters
into  the  Mediteraaean  Sea.  Instead
of  taking  them  above  these  seven
different  channels,  he  will  make  a  road
through  the  seven  channels  of  the
river  Nile;  and  the  people  of  Israel
will  go  again  dry  shod,  as  they  did
anciently. In  the  eleventh  chapter
of  Isaiah, and the  15th  verse,  we
read  that  '*  the  Lord  shall  utterly
1  destroy  the  tongue  of'  the  Egyptian


U2


JOUHNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Sea,"  not  the  main  body  of  the  sea*
Those  who  are  acquainted  with  the
north  portion  ot  the  Red  Sea  know
there  are  two  prongs,  one  is  called
the  tongue  of  the  Egyptian  Sea;
and  the  children  of  Israel  shall  go
through  dry  shod,  and  through  the
seven  channels  of  the  river  Nile,  as
did  Israel  in  the  cay  that  they  came
up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt

Here  will  be  a  miracle  wrought
greater  than  that  of  speaking  in
tongues  or  the  healing  of  the  sick-
more  convincing  in  its  nature.
When  this  is  done  together  with
many  other  things,  the  children  of
Israel  will  no  longer  feel  themselves
under  the  necessity  of  referring  to
the  day  when  the  Lord  wrought
wonders  as  they  cm  me  up  out  of  the
land  of  Egypt.  You  know  it  lias
been  a  saying  with  the  Jews  some
thousands  of  years,  that  the  God  of
Israel  lives.  "  We  do  not  worship
the  kind  of  god  which  yon  heathens
worship.  We  worship  that  God  that
divided  the  waters,  that  came  down
on  Mount  Sinai."  They  always  refer
back  to  miracles  four  thousand  years
old,  that  their  God  is  a  God  of  mira-
cles. This  ancient  proverb  is  to  be
done  away,  in  modern  Israel.  Instead
of  rei erring  back  to  ancient  mira-
cles, it  will  be  said,  "The  Lord  liveth
that  brought  the  children  of  Israel
from  the  land  of  the  north,  and  from
the  countries  he  has  driven  ih^m  to
the  land  of  their  fathers."  That  will
be  the  time  when  Israel  will  be  wil-
ling. All  Israel  will  be  willing  to
acknowledge  the  power  and  glory
of  that  God  whom  tbey  serve.  It
seems  that  the  Lord  is  going  to
enact  over  again,  a  thing  that  he  did
after  they  came  through  the  Red
Sea*  After  they  came  through  the
Red  Sea,  the  Lord  brought  the
children  of  Israel  into  the  wilder*
ness,  a:;d  kept  them  there  forty
years,  so  that  all  the  people  perished


except  Joshua  and  Caleb.  When
the  Lord  brings  the  people  of  the
House  of  Israel,  in  the  latter-days,
instead  of  taking  them  direct  to  the
land  of  Palestine,  he  brings  the  n
forth  into  the  wilderness  again,
which  you  will  find  recorded  in  the
20th  chap,  Ezekiel.  '  I  will  bring
you  into  the  wilderness,'  and  plead
with  you  face  to  face/'  Now  if  tho
Lord  did  plead  with  them  face  to
face  in  the  wilderness  of  the  land  of
Egypt,  and  gave  them  revelations
there,  if  his  presence,  at  first  was
with  them,  and  was  not  taken  from
them  at  the  first,  so  will  he  do  agidn
— he  will  plead  with  them  face  to
face*  ,V

I  do  not  think,  however,  that  they
will,  in  the  latter  days,  so  far  trans-
gress, as  to  bring  upon  themselves
the  curse  that  came  on  their  fathers,
in  ancient  times;  for  then  he  took
from  them  the  glories  of  the  cove*
nant  of  the  Gospel,  and  introduced
another  covenant,  the  covenant  of
the  law.  The  first  tables  of  stone,
we  are  informed  by  the  inspired
translator,  contained,  not  only
ninny  instructions  for  the  govern-
ment of  the  people,  but  revelations
containing  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of
God;  the  principles  of  the  higher
law,  that  were  calculated  to  cause
all  who  obeyed  the  same,  to  enter
into  his  rest,  which  rest  was  the
fullness  of  his  glory.  These  tables
were  broken  to  pieces,  because  of
the  worship  of  a  golden  calf:  The
first  covenant  was  broken*  And
when  Moses  went  into  the  mount  a
second  time,  the  ten  commandments
were  the  only  things  that  were  con-
tained on  the  second  tables,  that
were  on  the  first.  But  in  addition
to  that,  was  added  the  law  of  carnal
commandments.  Hence  the  Gospel
was  taken  away.  Its  higher  ordi-
nances were  withheld.  The  higher
Priesthood  was  withheld. The  sys-


THE  MANIFESTATIONS


OF  GOD'S  POWER,  ETC,


tern  that  was  intended  to  make  them
a  kingdom  of  Priests  was  withheld.
And  they  were  J  eft  with  the  law  6  f  car-
nal commandments.  A  law  by  which
they  could  not  live.  Statutes  which
were  not  good,  and  judgments  where-
by they  could  not  live.  But  in  the
latter  days  we  have  reason  to  believe
that  the  children  of  Israel  will  never
experience  such  a  curse  as  this.
That  the  presence  of  the  Lord  will
not  be  withdrawn  from  them  as  it
was  then.  But  coming  again  to
the  20th  chapter  of  Ezekiel,  we  find
that  after  the  Lord  has  brought  them
into  the  wilderness,  we  are  in  fanned
that  "  he  will  bring  them  into
the  bonds  of  the  covenant,  not  the
law  of  carnal  commandments,  but
into  the  bonds  of  the  new  and
everlasting  covenant'*  that  will  be
renewed  for  them.  That  will  be
something  binding.  "I  will  bring
them  into  the  covenant,  and  purge
out  the  rebellious  that  shall  be  among
yon*  They  shall  not  enter  into  the
land  of  promise,  he  will  not  let  them
get  in.  God  did  these  things  in  an-
cient times,  and  foretold  what  he
would  do  in  the  latter  days.

We  have  been  brought  here  as  the
beginning  of  the  great  latter-day
kingdom — brought  from  the  nations
— established  in  these  lofty  regions
of  our  continent — in  these  mountain
valleys.  We  have  been  brought
here,  and  instructed,  and  taught  ior
many  ytars.  In  what  ?  Not  in  a
law  of  carnal  commandments.  I
think  I  will  take  a  portion  of  that
back.  I  will  say  thab  we  have  been
instructed  in  the  law,  the  principles
of  the  new  and  everlasting  cove-
nant, which  has  not  as  yet  been
taken  from  us;  but  in  addition  to
that,  because  of  the  hardness  of  our
hearts,  we  are  deprived  of  some
blessings  that  pertain  to  this  new
and  everlasting  covenant.  Do  you
wish  to  know  what  blessings  have


been  withheld  from  us,  that  pertain
to  the  higher  law  ?  I  will  tell  yoti.
In  the  year  1831,  soon  after  God
first  established  this  Church,  when
he  took  his  servant,  Joseph,  the
Prophet,  and  many  of  the  first  El-
ders of  this  Church,  aud  brought
them  together  in  the  western  boun-
daries of  the  State  of  Missouri,  and
pointed  out  to  them  where  the  city
,  of  the  New  Jerusalem  should  be
built,  and  when  the  Temple  should
be  located,  certain  laws  were  reveal-
ed. These  laws,  if  adopted,  were
calculated  to  make  this  people  of  one
heart  and  mind,  not  in  doctrine
alone,  not  in  some  spiritual  things
alone,  not  in  a  few  outward  ordi-
nances alone,  hut  to  make  them  one
in  regard  to  their  property.  God
pointed  out  certain  laws  in  1831,
and  which  were  more  fully  revealed
in  1S32,  and  in  1833,  he  told  us
what  the  order  of  the  kingdom  was,
in  regard  to  our  property.  Now
what  was  the  law  ?  The  Lord  or-
dained that  every  man  who  came
up  from  the  churches  abroad  to
that  choice  land,  where  the  Zion  of
God  is  to  be  built  in  the  latter  days
♦should  consecrate  all  his  properties.
In  what  way  ?  How  consecrate  it  ?
In  what  form  ?  Now  in  this  Territory
we  have  lmd  a  form  of  consecration,
some  have  complied  with  that  form,
but  where  is  there  a  man  who  has
been  called  upon  to  comply  with  it
in  reality.  The  law  was,  consecrate
all  of  your  properties,  whether  it  be
gold,  or  silver,  or  mules,  or  wagons,
or  carriages,  or  store  goods,  or  any-
thing that  hud  any  wealth  in  it — all
was  to  be  cousecrated,  to  come  to
the  Lord's  .store  house.  Agents
were  appointed  to  receive  these  con-
secrations. Not  eoiiseciate  to  any
man,  or  to  these  agents,  bat  conse-
crate to  the  Lord,  fur  his  storehouse.
Now,  I  ask,  did  not  that  make  us  all
equal  ? Supposing  that  a  man  came


154


JOTltJs AL  OF  Di;


to  Jackson  County,  with  five  hun-
dred thousand  dollars,  and  another
came  with  five  dollars.  If  both  of
these  persons  consecrated  all  that
they  had,  would  they  D0fc  stand  on
a  platform  of  equality  ?  Both  of
them  worth  nothing  at  all.  So  far
as  property  is  concerned  they  were
equal.  Now  after  this  consecra-
tion, what  then  ?  We  were  not
counted  really  worthy  to  receive
bona  tide  inheritances  immediately,
but  I  will  tell  yoa  what  we  were
counted  worthy  of,  we  were  worthy
of  being  the  Lord's  stewards,  as  you
will  read  in  many  places  in  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants.
What  is  a  steward  ?  Is  he  a  bona-
fide  owner  of  property?  No.  If  I
were  called  upon  to  be  a  steward
over  a  certain  farm  or  factory,  the
business  is  not  rny  own,  I  am  only
as  an  agent  or  steward  to  take
charge  of  the  concern,  and  wet  upon
it,  as  a  wise  steward,  and  to  render
up  my  account  to  someh<uh\  The
Book  of  Covenants  informs  us  that
it  is  required  at  the  hand  of  every
steward  to  render  an  account  of  his
stewardship,  both  in  time  and  in
eternity.  To  whom  ?  To  those*
whom  God  selects  and  appoints,  It

■  r

it  be  the  first  (  presidency  of  the
Church  in  connection  with  the  Bish-
op, then  these  are  the  proper  agents
to  whom  a  strict  account  of  flint
stewardship  most  be  rendered.  I>ut
how  do  we  become  stewards  ?  Let
us  inquire  into  this.  How  were
the  people,  after  they  have  conse-
crated as  the  law  required, — how
were  they  to  become  stewards  ?  The  !
Lord's  agents,  the  Bishops,  that  had
a  knowledge  ,  of  the  things  of  God,
were  to  purchase  lands  by  this  con-
secrated  property,  from  the  General
Government,  or  from  individuals,  as
the  Citse  might  be*  They  were  to
purchase  wagons,  mules,  and  all  that
was  requisite  to  carry  on  mechanical


business,  and  stores,  according  to  the
amount  of  property  consecrated  and
put  into  their  hands.  This  was  to  be
done  by  the  Lord's  agents,  and  those
whom,  they  should  call  upon  to  assist
When  all  this  hind,  and  tools  and
machinery,  and  horses,  and  sheep,
nnd  so  forth,  are  procured  out  of  the
LoriTs  money ;  what  then  ?  Does
every  man  receive  an  exact  equality,
or  amount  of  this  property  ?  No.
Why  not  ?  Because  some  men  have
more  ability  for  managing  a  steward-
ship than  other  men.  Some  men
perhaps  all  their  lifetime  have  been
accustomed  to  carrying  on  great  es-
tablishments and  know  how  to  con-
duct great  establishments.  Is  it  to
be  supposed  that  such  a  man  would  be
limited  to  the  r.ame  amount  of  stew-
ardship as  the  man  who  has  fifty  acres
of  land  ?  It  may  require  twenty,  or
a  hundred  times  the  amount  of  stew-
ardship to  be  placed  in  the  hands  of
such  a  man,  than  what  is  required  of
other  stewards  who  manage  farming
onl v.  Does  not  that  make  them  un-
equnl  ?  No.  They  are  all  stewards.
The  property  belongs  to  the  Lord.
But,  inquires  one,  does  not  this  man
of  great  capability  have  more  of  the
luxuries  of  life  ?  No.  Because  he
has  to  give  an  account  of  his  steward-
ship to  the  Bishop,  and  if  this  man  of
high  capability  has  made  at  the  end
of  the  year  a  hundred  thousand  dol-
lars, he  is  required  to  hand  in  an  ac-
count to  the  Bishop,  at  thy  end  of
the  year,  and  it  there  have  been  made
a  hundred  thousand  dollars,  clear
gain,  does  the  ruau  own  it?  No.
It  is  brought  to  the  Lord's  store
house.  The  poor  man  that  has
gained  fifty  dollars  extra  from  his
farm  hands  in  his  fifty  dollars  and
an  account  of  his  stewardship.  If
the  man  that  has  handled  a  five  hun-
dred thousand  dollar  stewardship  has
used  it  improperly,  the  account  will
show, "  I  have  done  thus  and  so.  I


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD*S  POWER,  ETC.


have  purchased  such  and  such  ma-
chinery/' If  he  has  laid  out  his
stewardship  for  self-aggrandizement
b^unwise  purposes,  another  man  is
placed  in  his  stead.  And  the  pour
man  who  lias  gained  his  fifty  dollars,
if  he  has  purchased  any  thing  that  is
unwise  and  unnecessary,  and  he  has
limited  himself  to  that  fifty  dollars
as  clear  gain,  he  will  be  moved  oat
of  his  stewardship.  At  the  end  of
the  first  year  all  these  stewardships
are  made  equal  again ;  it  is  all  conse-
crated unto  the  Lord's  storehouse,
they  are  all  on  an  equal  footing  again.
Then,  again,  during  the  year  before
these  accounts  are  rendered  up,  if
they  are  wise  stewards  there  will  be
no  advantage,  each  one  will  be  on  his
'  guard  all  the  time  lest  his  steward-
ship is  not  approved  of.

That  is  the  order  of  heaven.  That
i*  the  ancient  order,  and  it  was  the
order  instituted  in  the  year  1831.
'What  did  the  Lord  say  about  those
who  woald  not  comply  with  his  or-
der ?  Some  of  our  eastern  farmers,
when  they  left  their  homes  in  Ver-
mont, or  in  the  State  of  \ew  York,
and  came  up  and  saw  the  beauty  of
that  land,  and  the  depth  of  the  suil,
and  the  beautiful  timber  in  Jackson
County,  they  forgot  than  they  were
to  be  the  Lord's  stewards,  and  began
to  think  that  they  could  use  their
own  property,  instead  of  complying
with  the  law  of  consecration.  "  What
a  blessing  it  will  be,  said  they,  if
I  can  buy  up  this?  land  at  a  dollar
and  a  quarter,  per  acre;  for  I  can
sell  it  out  fur  a  hundred  times  as
much  and  make  myself  a  rich  man;
I  will  not  sacrifice  my  property/'
These  were  some  of  the  feelings  that
filled  the  hearts  of  some.  But  the
Lord  sent  up  a  revelation,  given
through  his  servant  Joseph,  in  Kirt-
land,  warning  the  Saints  against  their
receiving  their  stewardship  without
complying  with  this  law  of  consecra-


tion. That  if  they  would  not  com*
ply  with  it,  their  names  should  be
blotted  out,  and  the  names  of  their
children  ;  their  names  should  not  be
had  on  the  book  of  the  law  of  the
Lord.  That  they  should  perish,  Ac*
We  find  that  the  people  did  not  com-
ply, and  hence  the  Lord,  in  about
two  years  and  four  or  five  months,
suffered  our  enemies  to  be  stirred  up
against  us,  and  the  Saints  were  driven
from  the  land.  They  were  driven
forth,  in  the  bleak  cold  month  of
November,  to  wander  whithersoever
they  could  for  protection.  What  was
the  reason  ?  The  Lord  tells  us,  he
suffered  this,  because  of  our  trans-
gressions. The  Lord  informed  us,
that  there  was  covetousness  in  our
midst,  and  "for  this  reason  1  have
suffered  them  to  be  removed,"  The
Lord  commanded  us  to  purchase  all
of  that  land,  but  instead  of  doing
this,  many  were  holding  fast  to  their
dollars,  and  thought  that  the  Lord
intended  to  cheat  them  out  of  their
property,  and  they  said,  —  u  We'll
see  what  the  Lord  will  do  for  his
people.  If  he  will  show  forth  his
power,  by  and  by,  when  al!  gets  to
lie  pleasant,  we  will  take  our  pro-
perty a! id  go  and  settle  down  among
the  Saints."  Thev  did  not  believe
what:  rhe  Lord  required,  hence  they
were  scattered  from  synagogue  to
synagogue.  In  one  of  the  revela-
tions, says  the  Lord,  "I  will  remem-
ber them  in  the  day  of  my  power,
when  the  time  shall  come,  but  they
shall  suffer  tribulation  for  a  little
season.  And  when  they  hare  been
sufficiently  chastened,  they  who  re-
main shall  return  with  their  chil-
dren to  build  up  the  waste  places
of  Zion  "

I  have  related  these  things  that
we  may  understand  wherein  we  have
once  had  the  privilege  of  complying
with  the  celestial  law  in  regard  to  our
property,  and  wherein  a  great  princi-


■


136


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


pie  has  been  put  out  in  our  midst.  In
all  of  our  wanderings  the  celestial  law
has  never  been  put  in  practice,  as
regards  our  property.  Bat  the  Lord
has  not  left  us  any  more  than  he  did
the  children  of  Israel,  when  they
were  rebellious.  Instead  of  entirely
casting  them  away,  and  denouncing
them  and  rejecting  them  as  his  pea*
pie,  he  still  gave  ancient  Israel  a
law.  Instead  of  entirely  rejecting
ns,  he  gave  us  another  law.  One
inferior  to  the  celestial  law,  called
the  law  of  Enoch.  The  law  of
Enoch  is  so  named  in  the  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  but  in
other  words,  it  is  the  law  given  by
Joseph  Smith,  Jr.  The  word  Enoch
did  not  exist  in  the  original  copy ;
neither  did  some  other  names.  The
names  that  were  incorporated  when
it  was  printed,  did  not  exist  there
when  the  manuscript  revelations
were  given,  for  I  saw  them  myself"
Some  of  them  I  copied.  And  when
the  Lord  was  about  to  have  the
Book  of  Covenants  given  to  the
world  it  was  thought  wisdom,  in
consequence  of  the  persecutions  of
oar  enemies  in  Kirtland  and  some
of  the  regions  around,  that  some  of
the  names  should  be  changed,  and  j
Joseph  was  called  Banruk  Ale,
which  was  a  Hebrew  word,  meaning
God  bless  you.  He  was  also  called
Gazelum,  being  a  person  to  whom
the  Lord  had  given  the  Urirn  and
Thummim.  He  was  also  called
Enoch.  Sidney  Rigdon  was  called
Baneemy.  And  the  revelation  where
it  read  so  many  dollars  into  the  trea-
sury was  changed  to  talmts*  And
the  City  of  New  York  was  changed
to  GriLhaniiOpb,  Therefore  when  I
speak  of  the  Order  of  Enoch,  I  du
not  mean  the  order  of  imeient  Enoch,
I  mean  the  Order  that  was  given  to
Joseph  Smith  in  1832-3-4,  which  is
a  law  inferior  to,  the  celestial  law,
because  the  celestial  law  required  the


consecration  of  nil  that  a  man  had.
The  law  of  Enoch  only  requited  a
part.  The  law  of  consecration  in  full
■required  that  all  the  people  should
consecrate  everything  that  they  had  ;
and  none  were  exempt  The  law  of
Enoch  called  upon  certain  men  only
to  consecrate.

Now  did  the  people  keep  this
second  law — inferior  to  the  first  ?
The  Lord  picked  out  some  of  the
best  men  in  the  Church,  and  tried
them  if  they  would  keep  it,  "  Now
I  will,"  says  he,  "  try  the  best  men
I  have  in  the  Church,  not  with^he
celestial  law,  but  they  shall  conse-
crate in  part,  and  have  a  common
stock  property  among  them."  And
in  order  to  stir  them  up  to  diligence,
he  fixed  certain  penalties  to  this  law,
such  as,  He  shall  be  delivered  up
to  the  buffeting  of  Satan ;  sins  that  -
have  been  remitted  .shall  return  to
him  and  he  answered  upon  his  head.
How  did  they  get  along  then  ?  The
Lord  tells  us  that  the  covenant  had
been  broken.  And  consequently  it
remained  with  him  to  do  with  them
h$  seemed  to  him  good*  Many  have
apostatized  since  that  day,  Sidney
Rigdon  for  one,  Oliver  Cowdery  for
another,  and  John  Johnson  for  ano-
ther^ Why  have  they  apostatized  ?
They  did  not  comply  with  the  cove-
nant that  they  made  in  regard  to  the
law  given  to  Joseph  Smith,  that  way
afterwards  called  the  law  of  Em  >ch.

Did  the  L»ord  forsake  us  then  ?
No,  he  had  compassion  upon  us"—
still  looked  upon  us  as  the  latter-day
kingdom — did  not  take  the  kingdom
from  onr  midst,  but  continued  to
plead  with  us  and  bear  with  the  infir-
mities of  the  people,  **  Now  I  willf
says  he,  "  try  them  with  another  law/*
So  in  the  year  183i>,  he  gave  us  ano-
ther law,  called  the  law  of  Tithing,
Let  me  name  now  some  of  the  condi.
tions  of  Tithing,  according  to  that
law.  The  Lord  gave  a  commandment


THE  MAN  I FKS  TAT  IONS


or  god's  power,  etc.


137


that  the  people  that  crime  up — gnth-  [
ered  with  the  Saints — should  eons  -
crate,  not  all  their  property,  but  :tll  1
their  surplus  property,  and  after  tney
had  consecrated  all  their  surpl us  pro-
perty, there  should  I >e  a  certain  por-
tion, not  called  surplus,  which  they
should  retain  ;  and- out  of  this  that  is
not  called  surplus  property,  they
should  try  to  make  an  income,  and  if
they  could  make  an  income,  they
should  consecrate  one-tenth  part  of
that  income.

Now  of  you  who  have  heen  in  this
Territory  for  twenty  or  twenty-six
years,  how  many  have  complied  with
this  law  of  Tithing?  How  many!
have  had  surplus  property,  over  and
above  one-tenth  part  :  How  many
would  come  here  with  fifteen  or  twen-
ty thousand  dollars'  worth  of  property,
and  pay  one- tenth,  us  though  this
was  surplus.  Is  that  the  law  of
Tithing  t  If  it  is,  I  do  not  under-
st'ind  it.  If  I  understand  the  law  of
Tithing,  it  requires  a  man  who  has
fifteen,  or  twenty,  or  fifty  thousand
dollars,  whin  he  comes  up  to  Zion,
to  £u  up  to  the  Lord's  agent,  the
Bishop,  and  say,  "I  have  so  much
money,  and  so  much  of  a  family;
now  tell  me,  Bishop,  how  much  of
this  is  surplus  properly?  Oh,  says
one,  that  ought  to  be  left  to  our  own  1
judgment.  Our  own  judgment  !
Who  in  the  world- among  all  the  Lafc-  ]
ter-day  Saints  would  have  any  surplus
property  if  it  is  left  to  his  own  judg-
ment ?  How  many  in  Oyd en  have
given  surplus  property  to-day  ?  (lo
throughout  all  this  town  and  ask
them  if  they  have  surplus  property,
*  u  Oh,  no,  I  have  not  quite  enough  to
carry  on  my  business  according  to  my
own  mind.  I  have  a  manufacturing
establishment  here,  I  wish  1  had  a
few  thousand  dollars  more  than  I
have  to  put  in  it.  I  want  twenty
thousand  dollars  mora.  I  have  no
surplus  property/' Some  man  starts


[  another  business,  and  lie  has  no  sur-
plus property.  And  you  may  gi>
through  all  the  towns  and  villages
and  not  find  a  man  who  has  surplus
property.  He  could  not  he  found.
Then  I  should  judge,  that  the  men
I  to  determine  what  is  surplus  property,
and  what  is  not,  are  those  men  whom
God  has  ordained  to  this  power,
;  namely,  the  Bishops,  who  have  a
knowledge  of  these  tilings  by  the
I  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  by  vir-
tue of  their  calling.  Tlie  President
of  this  Church  will  bn  prep  ired  to
say  whether  a  man  has  surplus  pro*  *  *
perty  or  not,  and  let  him  specify,  and
the  man  be  satisfied.  This  is  the
law  of  Tithing,  inferior  to  the  full
law  of  consecration,  and  also  inferior
to  the  law  of  Enoch,  /

Wow  for  the  other  portion  of  the
law  of  Tithing.  Say  a  man  comes
here  with  fifty  thousand  dollars  and
it  is  judged  by  proper  authority  that
forty  thousand  is  surplus.  He  goes
to  work  with  the  remaining  ten  thou-
sand and  gets  him  a  farm  and  home,
and  enters  into  some  other  business,
and  makes  not  only  a  sufficiency  for
support,  but  finds  at  the  year's  end
that  he  has  made  a  thousand  dollars:
he  has  to  pny  one^tenth  of  that,  that
is  a  hundred  dollars.  This  is  really
the  meaning  of  the  word  Tithing.
But  the  surplus  property,  the  forty
I  thousand  dollars,  are  consecrated  as
is  required  in  the  former  part  of  the
first  paragraph  of  the  revelation  on

I  Tithing^  >

How  many  of  the  Latter-day  Saints

have  complied  with  even  Hie  least

I  thing  that  God  has  given  in  property  ,

I  matters? Perhaps  a  few,  and  no

doubt  many  have  done  well ;  and

others  have  been  careless  ;  not  feeling

to  rebel  against  God,  but  a  little  too

careless  or  indifferent  about  paying

one-tenth  of  their  income. Now  is

this  right  ? Can  we  be  prospered  as

j  a  people  ? Ought  we  not  to  be


►


#


1)8


JOURNAL  OF  DIS(X>URSES.


ash am ed  if  we  cannot  comply  with
one  of  the  lesser  laws  ?  It  seems  to
be  the  last  law,  in  regard  to  property,
that  God  has  given  to  save  this  peo-
ple. We  ought  to  ask  ourselves,  "Am
I  fulfilling  this  law?  Am  I  prepar-
ing myself  for  the  day  when  God
shall  require  me  to  enter  into  the
higher  law  V"  1  will  say  that  the
day  will  come,  and  is  not  far  distant,
when  this  higher  law  will  bo  carried
into  effect,  not  only  in  theory  but  in
practice.  At  present,  God  has  eased
up  on  the  law  in  part,  that  is  there
is  a  revelation  given  in  the  year  1N3-1,
on  Fishing  River,  in  which  the  Lord
says,  "  Let  those  commandments
which  I  have  given,  concerning  Zion
and  her  law,  be  executed  and  fulfil  led
after  her  redemption/'  That  is  as
much  as  to  say,  M  Yon  are  not  pre-
pared to  keep  them.  If  I  do  not
now  relieve  you  in  some  measure,
from  the  responsibility,  they  will
bring  you  under  great  condemnation."
The  revelation  does  not  say  that  we
shall  not  enter  into  that  order,  but  we
are  not  bound  by  penalties  so  to  do.
Now  I  believe  that  before  the  redemp-
tion of  Zion,  there  will  be  a  vol  tin-
tary  feeling  to  carry  out  the  celestial
law.  I  found  my  belief  on  the  pro-
phecies that  are  given  in  the  Book  of
Doctrine  and  Covenants.  The  Lonl
has  said  that  before  Zion  is  redeemed
she  shall  be  as  fair  as  the  sun,  clear
as  the  moon,  and  her  banners  shall
be  a  terror  to  all  nation??.  And  thai
it  is  needful  that  Zion  should  be  built
up  according  to  the  law  of  the  celes-
tial kingdom,  or  I  cannot  receive  her
unto  myself.  He  cannot  receive  her
only  as  she  is  built  up  according  to
the  foil  law  of  consecration.  All
the  Zions  that  have  ever  been  re-
deemed, from  all  the  creations  that
God  has  made,  have  been  redeemed
upon  that  principle*  And  God  has
told  us  in  the  revelation  given  to  an-
cient Enoch,  "I  have  taken  Zion  to


mine  own  bosom  out  of  all  the  crea-
tions that  I  have  made/1  Now  if  he
has  done  this — if  he  has  selected
Zions,  he  has  done  it  from  the  dif-
ferent worlds,  by  the  celestial  law;
and  they  are  sanctified  by  the  same
law,  and  they  dwell  in  his  bosom —
that  is  under  his  council  and  watch
care,  in  the  presence  of  his  glory,
exalted  before  him,  all  redeemed  by
the  same  law,  hence  partakers  of
the  glory,  the  same  exaltation,  the
same  fullness  in  the  eternal  worlds.
Therefore  if  the  latter-day  Zion
would  be  counted  worthy  to  mingle
with  the  ancient  Zion  of  Enoch,
ea tight  up  before  the  Hood,  if  they
would  be  counted  worthy,  when  the
Zion  of  Enoch  comes,  to  be  caught
up  to  meet  them,  and  to  fall  upon
their  necks  and  they  to  fall  upon  the
necks  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  and
if  they  would  enjoy  the  same  glory,
the  same  exaltation  with  ancient
Zion,  they  must  comply  with  the
same  law.  **  I  can  not  receive  Zion
to  myself,"  saith  the  Lord,  n  unless
built  up  by  this  law/'

There  will  be  a  gteat  preparation
before  the  redemption  of  Zion.  Sup-
posing we  should  all  be  returned,  say
this  fall,  or  next  year,  to  Jackson
County.  Say  a  large  majority  should
be  returned  to  the  land  of  our  in-
heritances, in  Missouri,  and  in  the
regions  round  about,  and  it  should  be
said  to  us,  "  Go  ye  my  sons  and  build
11  p  Zion  according  to  the  celestial  law,
through  the  consecration  of  the  pro-
perty of  my  Church,  as  I  have  com-
manded," would  you  be  prepared  to
do  this  work  ?  Have  you  an  experi-
ence in  it  ?  Have  you  learned  the
lesson  by  experience  ?  No,  no;  years
after  years  have  passed  away  since
that  law  was  given,  the  then  middle-
aged  are  now  tottering  to  their  graves;
the  youth  have  grown  to  be  men,  and
the  law  lias  not  been  practiced  in  our
midst We  have  the  mere  letter  of


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OP  GOD'S  POWER,  ETC


159


the  Jaw. The  theory  has  been  in  ex-
istence, but  who  has  practiced  upon
it  ? Will  yoa  take  us  in  our  ignorant
state  ? While  wc  have  been  every
man  for  himself,  and  accumulating  all
that  he  could  grasp,  and  almost  neg-
lecting the  lesser  law of  Tithing
coald  it  be  expected  that  the  Lord
would  say  to  a  people  thus  situated,
and without experience in  these
things,  go  back  to  Jackson  County  f
There  must  be  a  preparation  here;
and  it  would  not  surprise  me,  if  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  should  come  upon
the  Presidency  of  this  people,  and
we  should  be  told  to  enter  into  the
higher  law  pertaining  to  our  pro-
perty. The  Lord  wishes  to  pat  it
out  of  the  power  of  every  man  to
be  lifted  up  above  his  brother  or  his
sister,  so  far  as  wealth  or  property  is
concerned, by  making his  people
equal,  keeping  them  equal ;  not  by  a
division  of  property,  but  upon  the
principle  of  stewardships.  That  keeps
them  equal. There  is  no  chance  of
their  becoming  unequal. It  is  out  of
their  power  to  be  unequal If  a  man
loses  all  that  he  has  by  fire,  and  all
his  stock  should  die,  the  fact  is,  he  is
just  as  rich  as  all  the  others,  been  use
he  is  a  steward. He  owns  nothing,
neither  do  they. "But/1  inquires
one,  "shall  we  never  become  bona
fide  possessors  r15 Yes. As  we  now
see,  children  may  be  acting  for  their
father,  but  still  they  are  considered  in
the  mind  of  the  father  as  being  the
inheritors  of  his  property  :it  a  certain
time;  so  with  the  Latter-day  Saints.
They  may  be  made  stewards,  but  the


time  will  come  when  they  shall  be
bona  fide  inheritors.  The  revelation
tells  us  when  that  time  shall  eortie.
That  when  the  seventh  angel  sounds
his  trumpet,  and  after  the  people
have  proved  themselves  in  their
stewardships,  and  when  Jesus  cornea
in  bis  glory,  they  shall  be  made
possessors,  and  be  madB  equid  with
him.  Consequently,  when  the  Lord
promised  to  Abraham,  Isaac  and
Jacob,  the  land  of  Canaan,  it  was  no
testimony  that  they  should  eater  in
possession  of  that  land  the  next  day
alter  the  promise  was  made.  They
had  to  wander  about  in  it,  and  prove
their  worthiness  until  the  time  should
come  when  they  should  come  forth
from  their  graves,  and  the  earth
should  be  transfigured  and  cleansed
from  the  curse,  then  they  should  be
made  possessors.  So  with  the  Latter-
day  Saints*  The  Lord  said  on  the
2nd  of  January,  lS'U,  "I  design  to
give  to  you  a  hn  d  of  promise  upon
which  there  shall  be  no  curse,  when
the  Lord  shall  come:  behold  this  is
my  covenant  with  you,  that  you  shall
receive  it  tor  an  inheritance,  while  the
earth  shall  stand,  and  possess  it  again
in  eternity,  no  more  to  pass  away/1
This  did  not  mc.tn  that  we  should
come  in  possession  at  that  time,  or
in  1^-il;  hut  when  we  had  proved
ourselves  as  wise  stewards,  and  had
rendered  up  the  account  of  our  stew-
ardship, and  had  been  accepted,  then
we  should  receive  an  inheritance,  not
only  in  time,  but  while  eternity
should  endure.  Amen,


1G0


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,


DELIVERED


the  Bowery,  at  Paris,  Oneida  County,  Idaho,
Sunday,  August  31>  1873.


hy  John  Q*  Cannon.)


THE  GOSPEL  INCORPORATES  ALL  TILL
SACRAMENT— ABIDING  COUXSEL-
' TIONAL —  FROGKESS1VEN  ESS  OF
TITHING  —  TARDINESS OF  THE
DUTIES — <  ;0-OPEI  I ATION.

The  Gospel  of  life  and  salvation
that  we  have  embraced  in  our  faith,
and  that  we  profess  to  carry  out  in
oar  lives,  incorporates  all  truth.  We
frequently  testify  to  each  other  that
we  know  that  this  Gospel  is  true;
and  as  I  hare  a  great  many  times
said  to  those  that  listen  to  my  con-
versation, upon  the  principles  of  life
and  salvation,  I  believe  this  work,  I
believe  this  Gospel,  I  believe  this
doctrine,  that  is  brought  to  us  through
the  Prophet  Joseph,  in  these  the  lat-
ter days,  in  this  our  time,  for  the
simplest,  plainest  and  most  palpable
reason  that  can  be  given.  "What  is
it  ?  "  Why,  because  it  is  true.  The
*Gospel  that  I  have  embraced  compre-
hends nil  truth.  4i  How  much  of  it
is  true?"  All  of  it.  "How  much
does  it  embrace  ? "  All  the  truth
that  there  is  iu  the  heavens,  on  the
earth,  under  the  earth  ;  and  if  there
is  any  truth  iu  hells  this  doctrine
claims  it.  It  is  all  the  truth  of  hea-
ven, the  truth  of  God,  the  life  of
those  that  live  forever,  the  law  by
which  worlds  were,  aie,  and  will  be
brought  into  existence,  and  BUS  from
one  degree  or  one  state  of  being  to  ano-
ther, pertaining  to  the  exaltation  of
intelligence  from  the  lowest  to  the


mode  of  admin


a  THE


HEAVENLY BLESSINGS  ARE  CONDI-

^HE WORK  —  PLURAL  CARRIAGE

SAINTS IN OBSERVING  PRACTICAL


should  use:


highest  state.  This  is  the  doctrine
that  the  Latter-day  Saints  believe,
whether  they  realize  it  or  not.  Well,
now,  upon  apostacy.  What  have  the
Latter-day  Saints  got  to  apostatizo
from  ?  Everything  that  there  is
good,  pure,  holy,  god-like,  exalting,
ennobling,  extending  the  ideas,  the
capacities  of  the  intelligent  beings
that  our  heavenly  Father  has  brought
forth  upon  this  earth.  What  will
they  receive  in  exchange  ?  I  can
comprehend  it  in  a  very  few  words.
These  would  be  the  words  that  I

death,  hell  and  the
is  what  they  will  get
We  may  go  into  the
particulars  of  that  which  they  expe-
rience. They  experience  darkness,
ignorance,  doubt,  pain,  sorrow,  grief,
mourning,  un  happiness ;  no  person
to  e  mdole  with  in  the  hour  of  trou-
ble, no  arm  to  lean  upon  in  the  day
of  calamity,  no  eye  to  pity  when
they  are  forlorn  and  cast  down;  and
I  comprehend  it  by  saying  :  death,
hell  and  the  grave.  This  is  what
they  will  get  in  exchange  for  their
upostacy  from  the  Gospel  of  the  Son
of  God.  This  is  their-  reward,  and
it  is  foolishness,  not  merely  nonsense;
a  person  can  have  a  little  nonsenie


grave.

in  exchange.


THE  GOSPEL  IXCORPOR


AXES  ALL  TRUTH,  ETC


and  pass  it  over;  hot  this  is  foolish-
ly ness. There  is  not  a  particle  of
good  sense  about  it ;  no  light,  no  in-
telligence, nothing  that  is  ennobling,
\ elevating,  cheering,  comforting,  con-
soling, that  produces  friends,  or  any-  \
thitiiT  of  this  kind, I  call  it  fool  ism;
I  do  it  this  time,  consequently  we
will  not  talk  anything  about  apostacy.
When  people  receive  this  Gospel,
\ what  do  they  sacrifice  ? Why,  death
for  life Tiiis  is  what  they  give  :
I darkness  for  light,  error  for  truth,
doubt  and  unbelief  for  knowledge  and
the  certainty  of  the  things  of  God,
consequently  I  consider  it  to  be  the
biggest  piece  of  foolisrn  that  can  be
hatched  up,  imagined  or  entertained,
.  or  followed  out  by  any  human  being,
to  leave  this  Gospel  for  what  they
will  receive  in  exchange. So  much
for  apostacy.

Now  a  few  words,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  with  regard  to  our  position.
There  are  many  in  this  Church  who
have  been  with  it  a  Ion?  time.  This
Church  has  been  traveling  for  many
years.  The  time  that  this  Church
has  been  traveling  exceeds  the  time  ]
of  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  wil-
derness.

[At  this  point  the  water  for  the
Sacrament  was  blessed.]

I  will  give  you  a  word  of  counsel
here  with  regard  to  consecrating  the
bread  and  the  water,  which  I  want
the  Saints  to  remember.  When  you
[addressing  the  Bishops  and  Elders]
administer  the  Sacrament,  take  this
book  [the  Book  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants]  and  read  this  prayer.
Take  the  opportunity  to  read  this
prayer  antil  you  can  remember  it
You  cannot  get  up  anything  that  is
better,  and  not  even  equal  to  it ;  and
|  when  you  read  it,  read  it  so  that  the
#  people  can  hear  you.  This  is  what
I  wish  of  you ;  it  is  what  is  right,
i  and  that  which  the  Spirit  will  mani-
fest to  you  if  you  inquire;  and  if  you


cannot  commit  this  prayer  to  me*
mory,  the  one  that  is  given  by  reve-
lation expressly  for  consecrating  the
bread  and  the  wine,  or  water,  if  the
latter  be  used,  take  the  book  and
rend  until  you  can  remember.  If  I
were  to  come  here  next  Sabbath,  and
see  vou  breaking  bread,  would  this,
that  I  am  now  mentioning, bethought
of?  The  people  have  various  ideas
with  regard  to  this  prayer.  They
sometimes  cm  not  hear  six  feet  from
the  one  who  is  praying,  and  in  whoso
prayer,  perhaps,  there  are  not  three
words  of  the  prayer  that  is  in  this
book,  that  the  Lord  tells  us  that  we
should  use.  This  is  pretty  hard  on
the  Elders,  is  it  not  ?  If  they  could
remember  one  thousandth  part  of  that
which  they  have  heard,  it  would  have
sanctified  them  years  and  years  ago ;
but  it  goes  in  at  one  ear  and  out  ab
the  other — it  is  like  the  weaver's
shuttle  passing  through  the  web.

Now  I  arn  going  to  tell  you  some
more  things,  and  how  long  .vill  you
remember  them?  Until  you  get
hame?  Perhaps  there  are  a  few  who
will  remember  a  few  words  of  counsel
that  I  shall  give  to  you,  I  am  here
to  give  this  people,  called  Latter-day
Suints,  counsel  to  direct  them  in  the
path  of  life.  I  am  here  to  answer;  I
shall  be  on  hand  to  answer  when  I
am  called  upon,  for  all  the  counsel
and  tor  all  the  instruction  that  I  have
given  to  this  people.  If  there  is  an
Elder  here,  or  any  member  of  this
Church,  called  the  Church  of  Jesus
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  who  can
bring  up  the  first  idea,  the  Brst  sen-
tence that  I  have  delivered  to  the
people  as  counsel  that  is  wrong,  I
really  wish  they  would  do  it;  but
they  cannot  do  it,  for  the  simple
reason  that  I  have  never  given  counf-
sei  that  is  wrong ;  this  is  the  reason,
This  people,  called  Latter-day  Sainta,
have  been  lahoring  now  over  forty
years. Forty-three  years  last  April,

Vol.  XVI.


162


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  sixth  day,  this  Church  was  orga-
nized. People  have  been  coming
into  it,  many  have  gone  out  of  it,
many  have  died  in  the  faith  ;  but
there  is  quite  a  number  in  it  that
are  now  living  who  have  held  on  to
it  fro  in  the  beginning,  and  they  have
been  striving  to  increase  in  their
knowledge,  to  enlarge  their  faith  and
their  comprehension  of  the  principles
of  eternal  life;  but  it  is  slow  pro-
gress. I  wonder  if  there  are  any
particular  sisters  here  who  have
lived  humble  and  faithful,  to  whom
the  Spirit  lias  manifested  that  their
progress  and  advancement  are  slow  :
u  That  by  the  Spirit  that  I  receive
from  the  Laid,  the  Spirit  that  is
given  to  me  at  timed,  I  can  see  that
we  are  far  in  the  rear  of  what  we
should  be,  and  we  have  not  come  up
to  that  status  of  perfection  and  purity
that  the  Latter-day  Saints  should
reach."  Are  there  any  sisters  who
have  experienced  auy  such  thing?
Are  there  any  Elders  who  can  bear
witness  to  these  things  ?  I  expect
there  are,  I  expect  there  is  any
number  of  sisters  in  this  Church  who
can  bear  witness  to  this,  and  testify
that  the  people  called  Latter-day
Saints  are  very  tardy  in  the  practice
of  the  things  of  God,

Now  with  regard  to  the  blessings.
There  are  blessings  that  the  Lord
proffers  to  his  people.  Has  he  any
conditions?  This  is  the  question.
The  blessings  that  the  Lord  wishes
to  bestow  upon  his  people  in  the
latter  days,  as  he  did  upon  them  in
former  days,  are  they  proffered  to
the  people  on  auy  conditions  what-
ever, or  is  it  the  voluntary  act  upon
the  involuntary  people  ?  Are  they
given  to  us  whether  we  want  them
or  not  ?  whether  we  will  enjoy  them
or  not  ?  or  whether  we  will  profit  by
them  or  not  ?  How  ii  this,  Latter-
day  Saints?  Is  this  the  way  the
Lord  does  ? You  and  I  understand


this.  Every  blessing  the  Lard  prof-
fers to  his  people  is  on  conditions.
These  conditions  are:  "Obey  my
law,  keep  my  commandments,  walk
in  my  ordinances,  observe  my  sta-
tutes, love  mercy,  preserve  the  law
that  I  have  given  to  you  inviolate,
keep  yourselves  pure  in  the  law,  and
then  von  are  entitled  to  these  bles-
sings, and  not  until  then*'  Now,
is  this  not  the  fact  ?  I  leave  it  to
you.  You  have  the  Old  and  the
New  Testament,  from  which  we  can
learn  doctrine.  Yon  have  the  Book
of  Mormon  to  read,  from  which  we
can  learn  doctrine.  You  have  the
Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,
which  is  more  especially  necessary
to  this  generation.  It  does  not  con-
tain different  doctrine  to  the  Book
ot  Mormon  and  Testament*.  It  is
explanatory  of  these  three  booka,  cor-
ro borates  the  doctrine  that  is  taught
in  them,  and  points  out  the  path  for
this  people  to  walk  in  to-day,  so
that  wc  may  not  err,  but  know  how
to  order  our  lives  from  morning  till
evening,  from  evening  till  morning,
from  Sunday  morning  till  Sunday
morning  again,  from  New  Year  to
New  Year,  and  every  day  of  our  lives.
The  doctrine  that  the  Lord  has
taught  us  and  given  to  us  through
his  servant  Joseph,  points  out  the
path  for  us  to  walk  in,  and,  while
walking  in  this  path,  we  do  not  lo^o
sight  of  one  iota  of  the  Gospel,  but
you  must  hold  it  secure,  and  always
keep  it  before  you  by  preserving
those  laws  and  ordinances,  and  con-
tinuing to  hold  them  precious.  If
the  Saints  will  do  this,  the  Holy
Ghost,  the  Comforter,  the  Spirit  of
our  Father  and  God  will  enlighten
their  minds  and  bring  to  their  re*
membrance  things  that  transpired
in  the  past,  and  things  to  come  to
pass  in  the  future,  and  they  may
lay  a  foundation  for  everlasting  life
and  eternal lives in  the  celestial


THE  GOSPEL  INCORPORATES  ALL  TRUTH,  ETC*


163


kingdom  of  our  God,  You  may  ob-
tain these  blessings  by  keeping  in
mind  find  observing  the  principles,
doctrine,  and  the  laws  and  statutes
that  are  delivered  to  the  people  of
God  for  their  edification,  for  their
perfection,  for  their  comfort  and
consolation,  to  prepare  them  for  en-
tering into  the  celestial  kingdom*  If
any  profess  to  live  in  the  observance
of  these  principles,  and  do  not  enjoy
the  spirit  of  revelation,  they  deceive
themselves.  No  person  deceives  the
Lard.  Every  individual  that  lives
according  to  the  laws  that  the  Lord
has  given  to  ins  people,  and  has  re-
ceived the  blessings  that  he  has  in
store  for  the  faithful,  should  be  able
to  know  the  things  of  God  from  the
things  which  are  not  of  God,  the
light  from  the  darkness,  that  which
comes  from  heaven  and  that  which
comes  from  somewhere  else.  This  is
the  satisfaction  and  the  consolation
that  the  Latter-day  Saints  enjoy  by
living  their  religion ;  this  is  the
knowledge  which  every  one  who  thus
lives  possesses.

These  are  the  books,  the  Old  and
New  Testament,  the -Book  of  Mor-
mon and  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  and  we  take  all  that  has
been  said  to  us  by  the  Spirit  of
Truth,  bring  it  together,  live  to  it,
and  this  brings  us  into  a  condition
that  we  have  fellowship  with  the
Father  and  with  his  Son  aVsus
Christ,  and  the  people  of  Christ  are
cleansed  from  all  sin,  walk  in  the
light  and  no  more  in  darkness.  We
have  received  in  the  first  place  the
first  ordinances  pertaining  to  the
Gospel  that  Jesus  introduced,  that
have  been  sent  to  the  earth  for  the
salvation  of  the  children  of  men*
Before  the  ordinances  are  performed,
however,  the  people  hear  the  name
of  Christ  declared  ;  Jesus  is  preached
to  the  people;  faith  springs  up  in
the  hearts  of  the  people. We  the


"  Do  you
you  wish


people  believe.  The  Spirit  of  Troth
bears  witness  to  our  spirits  that  this
is  correct  This  is  the  Christ ;  he  is
the  Savior  of  the  world;  and  we
begin  to  have  faith  in  him ;  and
when  we  begin  to  have  faith  in  him,
and  believe  on  him,  and  the  Father
who  sent  him,  we  begin  to  look
around  ourselves  and  say  :  "  Why  is
it  that  we  saw  nothing  so  familiar
and  perfect  years  ago?  All  this  is
so  familiar  and  plain  and  simple.
How  is  this?  They  that  declare
Christ  to  us,  are  they  ready  to  teach
us."  "  Yes,  certainly."
believe  f*  "  Yes/'  "  Do
to  be  a  disciple  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ?"  "Yes."  "Do  you  wish
to  enter  into  his  family  ?"  "  Yes,"
"  Do  you  wish  to  belong  to  this  quo-
rum  of  disciples  ?"  "Yes."  "Is
there  anything  for  me  to  do  to  get
there  ?  '  says  the  candidate.  "  Yes,
certainly,"  says  the  Elder.  "  Well,
what  is  it  ?"  "  To  go  down  into  the
waters  of  baptism,  this  is  the  first
ordinance,  and  be  baptized  by  one
having  authority."

Well,  now,  this  people  have  re-
ceived all  this.  They  have  been
convicted  of  the  truth,  they  have
believed  the  truth,  they  have  repent-
ed of  their  sins,  they  have  received
bnptism  for  the  remission  of  their
sins,  and  the  next  ordinance  or  bles-
sing— the  laying  on  of  hands,  so
that  they  may  receive  the  Holy
Ghost.  What  accompanies  this
il*\y  Ghost  ?  I  have  been  telling
you:  it  brings  to  our  remembrance
tilings  past,  present,  and  future,  and
dwells  upon  the  things  of  God,  Here
are  the  ordinances,  and  we  have  com-
menced to  obey  them.  We  have
the  promise  of  receiving  blessings  if
we  hold  on  to  the  faith,  and  not  turn
away  from  this  principle;  and  al-
though temptation  may  present  it-
I  self  to  us,  we  will  resist  it,  and  we
I  will  cling  to  the  things  of  God,  and


r


X


1G4


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


believe  on  his  promises,  and  will
ask  the  Father  in  the  name  of  Jesus
to  heTp  us  to  overcome  these  tempta-
tions, and  we  will  free  ourselves
trotn  this  darkness;  we  will  break
the  chain  of  doubt  and  unbelief,
and  we  will  emerge  into  the  full  faith
of  the  Loid  Jesus.  When  tempta-
tions come  to  you,  he  humble  and
faithful,  and  determined  that  you
will  overcome,  and  you  will  receive
u  deliverance,  and  continue  faithful,
having  the  promise  of  receiving  bles-
sings. What  are  these  blessings?

There  is  a  variety  of  blessings  ;  a
different  blessing  being  probably
given  to  one,  two,  three  or  four  of
this  congregation.  Thus,  one  will
have  faith  to  lay  hands  upon  the
sick  and  rebuke  disease,  and  drive  it
from  the  person  afflicted.  Many
may  receive  this  blessing  of  faith,
the  gift  of  healing.  Some  may  re-
ceive faith  to  the  discerning  of  spi-
rits; they  can  discern  the  spirit  of  a
person,  whether  it  is  good  or  evil.
They  have  such  power,  that  when  a
person  enters  this  congregation  they
can  tell  the  spirit  of  such  person;
then  they  have  received  the  gift  of
discerning  of  spirits.  Some  may  re-
ceive the  gift  of  tongues,  that  they
will  get  up  and  speak  in  tongues,
and  speak  in  many  other  languages
beside  their  mother  tongue,  the  lan-
guage that  they  were  brought  up  in,
that  they  were  first  taught,  and  be
able  to  proclaim  the  Gospel  of  life
and  salvation  that  all  men  could  un-
derhand it  These  are  the  blessings;
but  others  might  receive  the  gift  of
prophecy,  get  up  and  prophecy  what
is  to  befall  this  nation,  what  will  be-
fall this  or  that  individual,  and  what
will  befall  the  different  nations  of  the
earth,  etc.  Now,  after  naming  some
of  the  blessings,  I  want  to  come  to
something  else,  and  draw  a  line  for
the  Latter. day  Saints  to  walk  up  to.

Suppose  that  we  hear  the  name  of


the  Savior  declared  to  us,  that  he
is  the  Savior  of  the  world,  arid  by
his  death  atoned  for  (he  sins  of  every
man,  and  we  believe  that  this  is  the
fact;  but  instead  of  inquiring,  *'  Is
there  anything  for  me  to  do  ?  is  there
any  labor  for  me  to  perform  r  "  when
we  get  home  we  sing  and  we  say,
"I  thank  God,  and  I  am  satisfied/*
When  the  Elder  says,  "You  must  be
baptized  for  the  remission  of  sins,"
and  we  say,  u  Oh  no,  we  have  re-
ceived the  Spirit  of  Truth,  there  is
no  need  of  baptism.  We  have  re-
ceived all  that  is  necessary.  The
Spirit  of  Truth  is  given  to  us;  we
acknowledge  the  Savior,  and  we  re-
joice in  him,  and  we  will  not  be  bap*
tized  for  the  remission  of  sins,"  are
we  entitled  to  have  hands  laid  upon
us  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost  ?  No;  every  one  comes  to
this  conclusion*  Suppose  that  we
make  ourselves  satisfied  with  what
we  have  received,  and  we  an  say
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ — "  Yes,  I
believe  he  is  the  Christ ;  but  I  don't
see  the  use  of  any  of  these  ordinan-
ces," are  we  entitled  to  the  Holy
Ghost  ?  No.  Are  we  entitled  to
faith  to  heal  the  sick?  No.  Are
we  entitled  to  receive  the  spirit  of
prophecy?  No.  Are  we  entitled  to
the  gift  of  speaking  in,  or  the  gift
of  the  interpretation  of,  tongues  ?
No.  Are  we  entitled  to  the  gift  of
the  discerning  of  spirits  ?  No.  Are
we  entitled  to  any  power  or  blessing
that  the  Lord  has  promised  to  his
disciples :  that  if  anybody  admini-
stered poison  to  them,  it  should  not
Ijarm  them,  and  if  their  pathway
were  marked  In  the  midst  of  serpents,
they  could  take  up  serpents  and  they
should  not  hurt  them  ?  Are  we  en-
titled to  this  protection  ?  What  is
the  answer  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  ?
My  brethren  and  sisters,  answer  this
question  in  your  own  minds.  Are
we  entitled  to  the  blessings  of  the


THE  GOSPEL  INCORPORATES  ALL  TRUTH,  ETC.


165


holy  Gospel  unless  we  obey  the  ordi-
nances thereof,  and  all  the  command-  |
ments  and  laws  and  requirements
that  are  laid  down  for  us  to  obey  ?
Now  I  know  that  every  Latter-day
Saint  will  come  to  the  same  conclu-
sion that  I  do — that  if  we  did  not
obey,  we  would  not  beentiiled  to  any
of  these  blessings  from  our  Father,
There  is  not  a  Latter-day  Saint  but
who  comes  to  the  same  conclusion
as  myself — that  we  would  not  merit,
we  w^ould  not  be  entitled  to,  we  could
not  claim  at  the  haud  of  our  God
those  blessings  that  he  has  promised
through  obedience  to  his  Word,
Could  we  be  called  the  people  of !
God  ?  We  would  be  in  the  path  of
disobedience.  We  would  be  in  the
ath  that  leads  to  death.  We  would  |
e  in  the  broad  road  that  millions  are
walking  in  to  death.  Now,  every
one  of  us  comes  to  this  conclusion*  I
This  people  I  say  are  very  tardy*  |
I  will  \\<k  you  a  question,  and  I  will
let  you  answer  it  in  your  own  minds,  j
fur  you  know,  and  I  am  satisfied  that
the  answer  I  shall  give  will  satisfy
the  Saints.  Can  we  stand  still,  re-
ceive so  much  pertaining  to  the
blessings  of  the  kingdom  of  God,
receive  so  much  knowledge,  just  so
much  wisdom,  just  so  niuch  power,
and  then  stop  and  receive  no  more  ?
How  is  this,  Latter-day  Saints  ?
Your  answer  will  be  precisely  like
mine — 1  can  answer  with  you  all.
This  people  must  go  forward,  or  they,
will  go  backward.  Will  all  answer  I
this  question  the  same  way  ?  Will
the  same  conclusion  be  in  the  mind
of  every  Latter-day  Saint,  that  this
work  is  a  progressive  work,  this  doc-
trine that  is  taught  the  Latter-day
Saints  in  its  nature  is  exalting,  in-
creasing, expanding  and  extending
broader  and  broader  until  we  can
know  as  we  are  known,  see  as  we  are
seen  ?  That  is  the  answer  of  the
Latter-day  Saints.


We  will  say  we  have  received  a
great  deal ;  very  much  instruction
have  we  received.  But  there  are  keys
to  open  up  other  ordinances  which  I
will  mention.  Do  you  recollect  that
in  about  the  year  1840-41,  Joseph
had  a  revelation  concerning  the  dead  ?
He  had  been  asked  the  question  a  good
many  times;  14  What  is  the  condition
of  the  dead,  those  that  lived  and  died
without  the  Gospel  ?  "  It  was  a  matter
of  inquiry  with  him.  He  considered
this  question  not  only  for  himself,
but  for  the  brethren  and  the  Church.
"  What  is  the  condition  of  the  dea  l  ?
What  will  be  their  fate  ?  Is  there
no  way  to-day  by  which  they  can
receive  their  blessings  as  there  was
in  the  days  of  the  Apostles,  and
when  the  Gospel  was  preached  upon
the  earth  in  ancient  days  ?  "  When
Joseph  received  the  revelation  that
we  have  in  our  possession  concern-
ing the  dead,  the  subject  was  open-
ed to  him,  not  in  full  but  in  part,
and  he  kept  on  receiving.  When  he
had  first  received  the  knowledge  by
the  spirit  of  revelation  how  the  dead
could  be  officiated  for,  there  are
brethren  and  sisters  here,  I  can  see
quite  a  number  here  who  were  in
Nauvoo,  and  you  recollect  that  when
this  doctrine  was  first  revealed,  and
in  hurrying  in  the  administration  of
baptism  for  the  dead,  that  sisters  were
baptized  for  their  male  friends,  were
were  baptised  for  their  fathers,  their
grandfathers,  their  mothers  and  their
grandmothers,  &e.  I  just  mention
this  so  that  you  will  come  to  under-
standing, that  as  we  knew  nothing
about  this  matter  at  first,  the  old
Saints  recollect,  there  whs  little  by
little  given,  and  the  subject  was  made
plain,  but  little  was  given  at  once.
Consequently,  in  the  first  pluca  peo-
ple were  baptized  for  their  friends  and
no  record  was  kept.  Joseph  after-
wards kept  a  record,  &c.  Then
women  were  baptized  for  men  and


106


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


men  for  women,  &c.  It  would  be
very  strange,  you  know,  to  the  eyes
of  the  wise  and  they  that  under-
stood the  things  pertaining  to  eter-
nity,  if  we  were  called  upon  to
commence  a  work  that  we  could
not  finish.  This,  therefore,  was  regu-
lated and  all  set  in  order;  for  it  was
revealed  that  if  a  woman  was  bap-
tized for  a  man,  she  could  not  be  or-
dained for  him,  neither  could  she  be
made  an  Apostle  or  a  Patriarch  for
the  man,  consequently  the  sisters  are
to  be  baptized  for  their  owu  sex
only.  '  v  ;

This  doctrine  of  baptism  for  the
dead  is  a  great  doctrine,  one  of  the
most  glorious  doctrines  that  was
ever  revealed  to  the  human  family ;
and  there  are  light,  power,  glory,
honor  and  immortality  in  it  After
this  doctrine  was  received,  Joseph
received  a  revelation  on  celestial
marriage.  You  will  recollect,  breth-
ren and  sisters,  that  it  was  in  July,
that  he  received  this  revela-
tion concerning  celestial  marriage.
This  doctrine  was  explained  and
many  received  it  as  far  as  they
could  understand  it.  Some  apos-
tatized ch\  account  of  it  ;  but  others
did  not,  and  received  it  in  their  faith.
This,  also,  is  si  great  and  noble  doc-
trine, I  have  not  time  t  >  give  you
many  items  upon  the  subject,  but
there  are  a  few  hints  that  I  can
throw  in  here  that  perhaps  may  be
interesting.  As  far  as  this  pertains
to  our  natural  lives  here,  there  are
some  who  say  it  is  very  hard.  They
say,  "  This  is  rather  a  hard  business;
I  don't  like  my  husband  to  take  a
plurality  of  wives  in  the  flesh."
Just  a  few  words  upon  this.  We
would  believe  this  doctrine  entirely
different  from  what  it  is  presented
to  us,  if  we  could  do  so.  If  we  could
make  every  man  upon  the  earth  get
him  a  wife,  live  righteously  and
serve  God.  we  would  not  be  under


the  necessity,  perhaps,  of  taking
more  than  one  wife.  But  they  will
not  do  this;  the  people  of  God,
therefore,  have  been  commanded  to
take  more  wives.  The  women  are
entitled  to  salvation  if  they  live  ac-
cording to  the  word  that  is  given  to
them  ;  and  if  their  husbands  are  good
men,  and  they  are  obedient  to  them,
they  are  entitled  to  certain  blessings,
and  they  will  have  the  privilege  of
receiving  certain  blessings  that  they
cannot  receive  unless  they  are  sealed
to  men  who  will  be  exalted.  Now,
where  a  man  in  this  Church  says,
"  I  don't  want  but  one  wife,  1  will
live  my  religion  with  one,"  he  will
perhaps  be  saved  in  the  celestial
kingdom ;  but  when  he  gets  there
he  will  not  find  himself  in  posses-
sion of  any  wife  at  all.  He  has  had
a  talent  that  he  has  hid  up.  He
will  come  forward  and  say,  44  Here  is
that  which  thou  gavest  me,  I  have
not  wasted  it,  and  here  is  the  one
talent,"  and  he  will  not  enjoy  it,
but  it  will  be  taken  and  given  to
those  who  have  improved  the  tal-
ents they  received,  and  he  will
find  himself  without  any  wife,  and
he  will  remain  single  for  ever  and
even  But  if  the  woman  is  deter-
mined not  to  enter  into  a  plural
marriage,  that  woman  when  she
comes  forth  will  have  the  privilege
of  living  in  single  blessedness
through  all  eternity.  Well,  that  is
very  good,  a  very  nice  place  to  be  a
minister  to  the  wants  of  others.  I
recollect  a  sister  conversing  with
Joseph  Smith  on  this  subject.  She
told  him:  "Now,  don't  talk  to  me;
when  I  get  into  the  celestial  king-
dom, if  I  ever  do  get  there,  1  shall
request  the  privilege  of  being  a  min-
istering angel ;  that  is  the  labor  that
I  wish  to  perform.  I  don't  want  any
companion  in  that  world ;  and  if  the
Lord  will  make  me  a  ministering  an-
gel, it  is  all  I  want." Joseph  said,


THE  GOSPEL  INCORPORATES  ALL  TRUTH,  ETC


u  Sister,  you  talk  very  foolishly,  you
do  not  know  what  you  will  want,"
He  then  said  to  me:  "Here,  brother
Bright m,  yon  seal  this  lady  to  me"
I  sealed  her  to  him.  This  was  my
own  sister  according  to  the  flesh.
Now,  sisters,  do  not  say,  f  I  do  not
want  a  husband  when  I  get  up  in  the
resurrection."  You  do  not  know
what 'you  will  want,  I  tell  this  so
that  you  can  get  the  idea.  If  in  the
resurrection  you  really  want  to  be
single  and  alone,  and  live  so  for-
ever and  ever,  and  be  made  ser-
vants, while  others  receive  the  high-
est order  of  intelligence  and  are
bringing  worlds  into  existence,  you
can  have  the  privilege.  They  who
will  be  exalted  cannot  perform  all  the
labor,  they  must  have  servants  and
you  can  be  servants  to  them.

The  female  portion  of  the  human
family  have  blessings  promised  to
them  if  they  are  faithful.  I  do  not
know  what  the  Lord  could  have  pat
upon  women  worse  than  he  did  upon
Mother  Eve,  where  he  told  her:  "Thy
desire  shall  be  to  thy  husband/1
Continually  wanting  the  husband.
"If  you  go  to  work,  my  eyes  follow
you  ;  if  you  go  away  in  the  carriage,
my  eyes  follow  yon,  and  I  like  you
and  I  love  you ;  I  delight  in  you,
and  I  das  ire  you  should  have  no-
body else."  I  do  not  know  that
the  Lord  could  have  put  upon
women  anything  worse  than  this,
I  do  not  blame  them  for  having
these  feelings.  I  would  be  glad  if
it  were  otherwise.  Says  a  woman  of
faith  and  knowledge,  "  I  will  make
the  best  ot  it;  it  is  a  law  that  man
shall  rule  over  me;  his  word  is  my
law,  and  I  must  obey  him;  he  must
rule  over  me ;  this  is  upon  me  and  I
will  submit  to  it,*1  and  by  so  doing
she  has  promises  that  others  do  not
have.

The  world  of  mankind,  the  world
of  man,  not  of  woman,  is  full  of


iniquity.  What  are  they  doing  ?
They  ara  destroying  every  truth
that  they  can ;  they  are  destroying
all  innocence  that  they  can.  Priest
and  people,  governors,  magistrates,
kings,  potentates,  presidents,  the
political  world  and  the  religious
world,  are  on  the  highroad  to  eter-
nal misery.  There  are  exceptions*
There  are  honest  persons  wherever
there  is  an  honest  principle.  If  the
men  of  the  world  would  be  honest
and  full  of  good  works,  you  would
not  see  them  living  as  they  do.  And
the  women  are  entitled  to  the  king-
dom, they  are  entitled  to  the  glory,
they  are  entitled  to  exaltation  if  they
are  obedient  to  the  Priesthood,  and
they  will  be  crowned  with  those  that
are  crowned.

When  Father  Adam  came  to  as-
sist in  organizing  the  earth  out  of
the  crude  material  that  was  found,
an  earth  was  made  upon  which  the
children  of  men  could  live.  After
the  earth  was  prepared  Father
Adam  came  and  stayed  here,  and
there, was  a  woman  brought  to  him.
Now  I  am  telling  you  something
thut  many  of  you  know,  it  has
been  told  to  you,  and  the  brethren
and  sisters  should  understand  it.
There  was  a  certain  woman  brought
to  Father  Adam  whose  name  was
Eve,  because  she  was  the  first  wo-
man, and  she  was  given  to  him  to
be  his  wife;  I  arn  not  disposed  to
give  any  farther  knowledge  eon cer fl-
ing her  at  present  There  is  no  doubt
but  that  he  left  many  companions.
The  great  and  glorious  doctrine  that
pertains  to  this  1  have  not  time  to
dwell  upon ;  neither  should  I  at
present  if  I  had  time.  He  under-
stood this  whole  machinery  or  sys-
tem before  he  came  to  this  earth;
and  I  hope  my  brethren  and  sis-
ters will  profit  by  what  I  have  told

them.  7

Now  we  have  been  administering


168


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


I)


the  sacrament  here  to  the  people,
the  bread  and  the  water.  It  is  to
refresh  our  minds  and  bring  to  our
understand ing  the  death  and  suffer-
ings of  our  Savior.  Is  there  any
command  men  t  with  regard  to  this
matter  ?  Yes,  there  are  laws  con-
cerning it.  You  take  this  Bwk
[the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants] and  you  will  read  here  that
the  Saints  are  to  meet  together  on
the  Sabbath  day.  It  is  what  we
call  the  first  day  of  the  week.  No
matter  whether  it  is  the  Jewish
Sabbath  or  not.  I  do  not  think
there  is  anybody  who  can  bring
facts  to  prove  which  is  the  seventh
day,  or  when  Adam  was  put  in  the
garden,  or  the  day  about  which  the
Lord  spoke  to  Moses.  This  matter
is  not  very  well  known,  so  we  call
the  day  on  which  we  rest  and  wor-
ship God,  the  first  day  of  the  week.
This  people  called  Latter-day  Saints,
are  required  by  the  revelations  that
the  Lord  has  given,  to  assemble
themselves  together  on  this  day.
How  Ti;any  go  riding  or  visiting,
or  go  anywhere  but  to  meeting,  on
the  Sabbat  h  day.  Jt  is  probably  not
so  here,  but  in  Salt  Lake  City,  as
a  general  thing,  Sunday  is  made
a  holiday  for  riding  and  visiting,
Ac.  Iri  this  commandment  we  are
required  to  come  together  and  re-
pent of  our  sins  and  confess  our
sins  and  paitake  of  the  bread  and
of  the  wine,  or  water,  in  com  ru  em-
igration of  the  death  and  suffer-
ings of  our  Lord  and  Savior.  I
will  ask  the  Latter-day  Saints  if  you
are  entitled  to  these  blessings  un-
less you  keep  the  Sabbath  day.
Now,  what  do  you  say  r  Why,
every  Latter-day  Saint  would  an-
swer we  are  not  entitled  to  the
blessing  of  partaking  of  the  em-
blems, or  symbols,  of  the  body  and-
the  blood  of  Christ  unless  we  ob-
serve his  law. All  the  Latter-day


Saints  will  answer  this  question  with
me,  just  as  I  do,  because  it  is  right.
There  is  a  great  deal  delivered  to  this
people;  they  have  received  a  great
deal — those  blessings  pertaining  to
being  baptized  for  the  dead,  celestial
marriage  and  many  others,  and  they
should  value  them,  and  live  so  as  to
enjoy  them* 1  *  "

There  has  been  considerable  said
here  with  regard  to  the  law  of  Tith-
ing that  we  received  years  and  years
ago.  Now,  I  venture  to  say,  that
if  we  except  some  very  poor  men  and
very  poor  women  in  the  Church,  who
think  they  have  paid  their  mites
promptly  and  punctually,  there  is
not  a  man  that  bus  paid  his  Tith-
ing. Now,  this  may  sound  strange;
for  some  think  they  have  paid  pretty
well.  To  draw  this  matter  out  and
show  you  iiow  I  feel  upon  the  subject
of  Tithing,  J  have  not  time*  But  1  will
say  a  few  words  about  .some  things  that
have  been  alluded  to  by  my  brethren
who  have  spoken  to  you.  The  Lord
requires  one- tenth  of  that  which  he
has  given  me;  it  is  fpr  me  to  pay
the  one- tenth  of  the  increase  of  my
flocks  and  of  all  that  I  have,  and
all  the  people  should  do  the  same.
The  question  may  arise,  "  What  is
to  be  done  with  the  Tithing  ?  "  It  is
tor  the  building  of  Temples  to  God ;
for  the  enlarging  of  the  borders  of
Zion;  sending  Elders  oo  missions  to
preach  the  Gospel  and  taking  care
of  their  families.  By  and  by  we
shall  have  some  Tern  pies  to  go  into,
and  we  will  receive  uur  blessings,
the  blesbings  of  heaven,  by  obedi-
ence to  the  doctrine  of  Tithing.  We
shall  have  Temples  built  throughout
these  mountains  in  t lie  valleys  of
this  Territory  and  the  valleys  of  the
next  Territory,  and  (in  ally,  all
through  these  mountains.  We  expect
to  build  Temples  in  a  great  many
valleysT?  We  go  to  the  endowment
house,  and  before  going,  we  get  a  re-


-


THE  GOSPEL  INCORPORATES  ALL  TRUTH,  ETC.


169


commendation  from  our  Bishop  that
we  have  paid  oar  Tithing-  We  wish
it  was  so.  I  do  not  want  to  accuse
the  brethren  ;  bat  if  your  consciences
and  my  conscience  does  not  accuse


to  build  up  this  kingdom  ;  that  ig
that  we  are  to  submit  ourselves  to
the  direction  of  our  Bishops,  or  men
who  shall  be  appointed,  who  shall
dictate  them  in  the  things  pertain-


ns, why,  I  will not accuse  you.  ,  ing  to  life,  so  that  they  may  be  the

m  m  I  1  ■  j »  jT*  j  1 i  A  ^ 1 iL  A L  «^  v.  rl ^«  4  It  A  I ./V>i/'1 ^  f


When  you  give  a  tertificate  or  letter
for  a  man  to  have  a  woman  sealed
to  him,  and  he  fall  of  sin  and  iniquity,
is  not  such  a  certificate  false  f  If  we
inquire  of  such,  "  Do  you  want  to
have  another  wife  sealed  to  you  ?  n
"Yes."  "Where  is  your  wife?"
«  Why,  she  has  left  me."  "  Why  ?
Because  you  are  so  full  of  the  devil
that  she  c;innot  live  with  you,  and
the  Bishop  will  give  a  certiiicate  for
you  to  get  another.  They  also  want
to  be  baptized  for  their  dead  friends
when  they  have  not  paid  their  Tith-
ing. I  do  not  want  to  accuse  any-
body;  hnt  I  do  not  think  this  to  be
rurht If  the  Lord  will  receive  the


means  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord  of
accomplishing  the  work  that  he  re-
quires at  our  hands.  I  had  it  in
my  mind  to  ask  if  we  are  not  a  slow,
tardy  people ;  but  I  would  like  to  see
the  order  of  Knoch  introduced.  If
I  had  the  privilege  that  was  legal,
the  legal  right,  I  should  have  had
some  of  the  brethren  and  sisters  or-
ganized together  and  bound  with
.  bonds  that  cannot  be  broken ;  but
I  cannot  do  this  at  present;  for  we
desire  to  commence  this  on  a  founda-
tion that  cannot  be  broken  up  and
destroyed.

Brethren,  if  you  will  start  here
and  operate  together  in  farming,  in


people,  if  the  Lord  will  accept  of  making cheese, in herding  sheep


their  labors,  and  wilt  honor  and  bless
them,  and  say  that  their  officiating
for  their  dead  friends  shall  be  sealed
in  the  heavens  and  it  shall  he  recorded
by  his  angel,  and  in  the  day  of  tiie
resurrection  it  shall  be  accounted
unto  them  for  righteousness,  I  am
willing,  I  have  not.  a  word  to  say
against  it

Now,  then,  we  have  received  these
ordinances,  the  doctrine  the  Lord
has  revealed  for  the  salvation  ot  the
dead ;  the  doctrine  that  we  have
received  for  the  exaltation  of  men
and  women,  which  I  could  tell  you  a
great  deal  about  if  I  had  time;  but
there  is  only  a  little  time  and  1  want
to  say  a  few  things  to  bring  your
minds  directly  to  our  present  condi-
tion. You  read  in  the  Doctrine  and
Covenants  with  regard  to  the  build-
ing up  of  the  kingdom  uf  God,  the
order  of  Enoch,  &c,  I  am  anxious
in  my  feelings  to  get  the  Latter-day
Saints  to  begin  where  the  Lord  wanted


and  cattle  and  every  other  kind  of
work,  and  get  a  factory  here  and  a
co-operative  store — I  have  been  told
there  is  no  co-operative  store  here —
get  a  good  co-operative  store,  and
operate together in  sheep-raising,
store- keep  ing, manufacturing  and
everything  else,  no  matter  what  it  is,
by  and  by,  when  we  can  plant  our-
selves  upon  a  foundation  that  we
cannot  be  broken  up,  we  shall  then
proceed  to  arrange  a  family  organi-
zation for  which  we  are  not  yet  quite
prepared.  You  now,  right  here  in  this
place,  coinmence  to  carry  on  your  busi-
ness in  a  co-operative  capacity.  In
every  instance  I  could  show  every  one
of  you  what  a  great  advantage  would
he  gained  in  working  together;  I
could  reason  it  out  here  just  how
much advantage there is in  co-
operation in  your  lumbering  and  in
your  herding. You  have  men  here,
1 h appose,  who  have  had  an  arm
shot  off;  they  cannot  go  into  the


them  to  begin,  when  be  commenced canyons  and  get  out  wood.  Auo


170


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


ther,  peril aps,  has  had  a  leg  cut  off ;
he  cannot  run  here  and  there  like
some  of  you;  but  he  can  do  some-
thing; he  will  make  a  first-rate
shopman,  and  at  keeping  books,
perhaps,  he  will  be  one  of  the  best.
He  cannot  take  the  scythe  and  mow;
he  cannot  attend  to  a  threshing
machine;  he  cannot  go  into  the
woods  lumbering;  he  could  not  herd
well, — but  he  could  go  into  the
factory,  and  he  can  do  many  tilings*
Well,  we  can  do  this  and  keep  up
co-operation,  and,  by  and  by,  when
we  can,  we  will  build  up  a  city  after
the  order  of  Enoch.  And  I  will  tell
you,  women  will  not  be  let  into  that
city  with  Babylon  upon  their  backs,
nor  men  either.  But  we  will  make
our  own  clothing,  we  will  make  onr
own  fashions,  we  will  do  our  own
work.  I  can  take  fifty  men  who  have
not  a  cent,  and  if  they  would  do  as  I
would  wish  them  to  do,  they  would
soon  be  worth  their  thousands,  every
one  of  them.  We  desire  to  go  into
this  order.  In  it  we  would  not  lack
means,  we  would  always  have  some-
thing to  sell,  but  seldom  want  to  buy.
This  will  be  the  case  if  we  make  our
own  clothes,  ifce.

Another  thing  I  want  you  to  ob-
serve in  all  these  settlements,  and
it  is  one  of  the  simplest  things  in
nature;  I  want  you  to  be  united.
If  we  should  build  up  and  organize
a  community,  we  would  have  to  do
it  on  the  principle  of  oneness,  and
it  is  one  of  the  simplest  things  I
know  of.  A  city  of  one  hundred
thousand  or  a  million  of  people  could
be  united  into  a  perfect  family,  and
they  would  work  together  as  beauti-
fully as  the  different  parts  of  the  card-
ing machine  work  together.  Why,  we
could  organize  millions  into  a  family
under  the  order  of  Enoch.  Will  you
go  into  the  cooperative  system?
Will  you  pay  your  Tithes  ?  Will  you
take  care  of  your  hay?  Bishops,


will  you  take  eare  of  the  Tithes  ?  I
hare  scarcely  seen  a  good  stack  of
Tithing  hay  until  within  the  last  two
years.  Is  this  right,  to  let  hay  that
is  brought  in  as  Tithing  go  to  waste  ?
"  Well,  but,"  says  one,  11  I  don't  know
what  to  do  with  it.**  Go  to  work,
and  put  it  into  a  shape  that  it  will
last  one  year,  five  years,  ten  years ;
it  will  be  wanted  by  and  by.  There
is  about  sixteen  thousand  dollars,  I
learn  from  the  trustees,  of  unpaid
Tithing,  in  this  valley.  Go  to  work
and  build  a  meeting-house,  and  then
school- houses.  Go  to  work  and  start
some  schools,  and  instead  of  going  to
parties  to  dance  and  indulge  in  this
nonsense,  go  to  school  and  study;
have  the  girls  go,  and  teach  them
chemistry,  so  that  they  can  take  any
of  these  rocks  and  analyze  them, —
tell  the  properties  and  what  they  are,
I  don't  suppose  there  is  a  man  here
who  can  tell  these  properties.  The
sciences  can  be  learned  without  much
difficulty.  Instead  of  going  "right
and  left,  balance  all,  promenade/'  go
to  work  and  teach  yourselves  some-
thing. Instead  of  having  this  follyf
I  want  to  have  schools  and  enter-
tain the  minds  of  the  people  and
draw  them  out  to  learn  the  arts  and
sciences.  Send  the  old  children  to
school  and  the  young  ones  also ;
there  is  nothing  1  would  like  better
than  to  learn  chemistry,  botany,
geology,  and  mineralogy,  so  that  I
could  tell  what  I  walk  on,  the  pro-
perties of  the  air  I  breathe,  what  I
drink,  <fcc.

I  will  say  to  yon,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  I  bless  you.  I  bless  you  ac-
cording to  the  Priesthood  that  I  hold
and  the  keys  thereof;  I  bless  you
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.  Now  will
you  live  your  religion  ?  We  had  some
talk  yesterday  about  your  President;
I  pray  you,  Mr.  President,  under
brother  Rich,  to  live  your  religion ;
and  1  pray  the  Saints  to  live  their


religion,  and  I  do  ask  from  day  to  their  religion,  and  I  pray  you  in
day,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  Christ's  stead  to  live  your  religion  so
I  direct  the  Latter-day  Saints,  to  live  as  to  enjoy  the  spirit  of  it, —  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Deliveked  o*  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  August  31,  1873.


(Report$d  by  David  W,  Evans.)


MARRIAGE,


I  will  read  a  portion  of  the  Word
of  God  found  in  the  19th  chapter  of
the  Gospel  of  St,  Matthew,  com-
mencing at  the  3rd  verse : —

The  Pharisees  also  came  unt^  him,  tempt*
ing  him,  and  saying  unto  him,  Is  it  lawful
for  a  man  to  put  away  his  wife  for  every
cause?

And  he  answered  and  said  unto  them,
Have  ye  not  read,  that  he  which  madi.'  them
at  the  beginning,  made  them  male  and  fe-
male,

And  said,  For  this  cause  shall  a  man
leave  father  and  mother,  and  shall  cleave  to
his  wife  :  and  they  twain  shall  be  one  flesh 't

Wherefore  they  ar*  no  more  twain,  but
one  fleah.  What  therefore  God  hath  joined
together,  let  not  man  put  asunder*

That  portion  of  these  sayings  o^
Jesus  to  which  I  wish  more  especi-
ally to  call  your  attention,  is  con-
tained in  the  6th  verse — "Where-
fore they  are  no  more  twain,  but  one
flesh.  What  therefore  God  hath
joined  together,  let  no  man  put
asunder."  There  are  some  few
things  which  transpire  in  our  world
in  which  the  hand  of  God  is  specially
manifest. We  might  name  some


things  ordained  of  God,  and  which  he
himself  has  given  to  the  children  of
men  for  their  observance.  Such  are
the  ordinance  of  baptism,  the  Lord's
Supper,  no*v  being  administered  to
the  Saints  in  this  congregation,  and
the  ordinance  of  confirmation  by  the
laying  on  of  hands  for  the  baptism
of  fire  a  nil  of  the  Holy  Ghost  These
ordinances  have  been  ordained  of
God  ;  he  is  their  Author,  and  he  con-
fers authority  upon  his  servants  to
officiate  therein,  and  without  autho-
rity from  God  to  do  so,  all  such  ad-
ministrations are  illegal.  In  addf-
tion  to  these  we  might  name  a
variety  of  other  ordinances,  such  ag
ordinations  to  the  ministry — ordain-
ing a  person  to  officiate  in  the  office
and  calling  of  an  Apostle,  and  in  the
offices  and  callings  of  Elders,  Priests,
Teachers,  Ac.,  without  which  no  man
can  perform  the  duties  of  these  seve-
ral offices  so  as  to  be  acceptable  in
the  sight  of  God,

But,  to  be  brief,  we  will  come  to


172


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


the  point  more  fully.  God  has  ap-
pelated marriage,  and  it  is  as  much
a  sacred  and  religious  ordinance  *as
baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins,
confirmation,  ordination  to  the  mini-
stry, or  the  administration  of  the
Lord's  Supper.  There  is  no  dis-
tinction with  regard  to  the  divinity
of  these  ordinances — one  is  just  as
much  divine  as  the  other,  one  is  a
religious  ordinance  as  much  as  the
other,  and,  therefore,  people  of  all
sects  and  parties  in  this  great  Re-
public, should  be  left  free  to  admini-
ster them  according  to  the  dictates
of  their  own  consciences.  In  other
words,  Congress  should  not  assume  to
be  the  dictator  of  my  conscience  nor
of  yours.  What  I  mean  by  this  is,
that  if  I  am  a  minister,  Congress,  or
the  President  of  the  United  States,
has  no  right,  by  virtue  ot  the  Consti-
tution, to  say  how  I  shall  administer
the  ordinance  of  mariiage  to  any
couple  who  may  come  to  me  for  that
pin  pose ;  because  I  have  a  conscience
in  regard  to  this  matter.  It  is  an
ordinance  appointed  of  God ;  it  is  a
religious  ordinance;  hence  Congress
should  not  enact  a  law  prescribing,
for  the  people  in  any  part  of  the  Re-
public, a  certain  form  in  which  the
ordinance  of  marriage  shall  be  admi-
nistered. Why  should  they  not  do
this?  Because  it  is  a  violation  of
religious  principles,  and  of  that  great
fundamental  principle  in  the  Consti-
tution of  our  country  which  provides
that  Congress  shall  make  nt)  law  in
regard  to  religious  matters  that
would,  in  the  least  degree,  infringe
upon  the  rights  of  any  man  or  wo-
man in  this  Republic  in  regard  to
the  form  of  their  religion.

Perhaps  some  may  make  the  in-
quiry— "  What  shall  we  do  with
those  who  make  no  profession  of  re-
igion,  some  of  whom  arc  infidels,  or
what  may  be  termed  '  nothingarians,'
believing  in  no  particular  religious


principle  or  creed  ?  They  want  to
enter  the  state  of  matrimony,  and,  in
addition  to  religions  authority,  should
there  not  be  a  civil  authority  for  the
solemnization  of  marriage  among
these  n/n-religionisl^  ?"  Yes;  we
will  admit  that,  inasmuch  as  marriage
is  an  important  institution,  it  is  Hie
right  and  privilege  of  the  Legisla-
tures of  States  and  Territories  to
frame  certain  laws,  so  that  all  peo-
ple may  have  the  privi liege  of  select-
ing civil  or  religious  authority,  ac-
cording to  the  dictates  of  their  con-
sciences. If  a  Methodist  wishes  to
be  married  according  to  the  Method-
ist creed  and  institutions,  Congress
should  make  no  law  infringing  upon
the  rights  of  that  body  of  religionists,
but  they  should  have  the  privilege  of
officiating  just  as  their  consciences
dictate.  The  same  -argument  will
apply  to  the  Presbyterians,  Quakers,
Bfiptists,  and  every  religious  deno-
mination to  be  found  in  this  Rep  ib-
lic,  not  excepting  the  Latter-day
Saints,  Then,  as  regards  the  non-
religionist,  if  he  wishes  to  become  a
married  person,  and  does  not  wish  to
have  his  marriage  solemnized  ac-
cording to  the  form  used  by  any  re-
ligious denomination,  it  should  be
lei t  open  to  him  to  comply  with  such
forms  as  the  Legislature  may  pre-
scribe. This  is  leaving  it  to  the
choice  of  the  individual,  and  this  is
as  it  ought  to  be,  and  as  it  is  guaran-
teed to  us,  so  far  as  other  ordinances
are  concerned.  For  instance,  Con-
gress would  never  think  of  making  a
law  in  regard  to  the  form  of  baptism,
or  of  appointing  a  Federal  officer  to
go  into  one  of  the  Territories  of  this
Union,  and  decree  that  lie  only  should
be  authorized  to  administer  the  ordi-
nance of  baptism.  Do  we  not  know
that  the  whole  people  of  this  Repub-
lic would  cry  out  against  such  an  in-
fringement of  the  Constitution  of  our
country  ? Every man  and  every


p


MARK!  AGE


173


woman  who  knows  the  least  about
tin'  ijreat  principles  of  religions  lib*
erty  would  at  once  say,  "  Let  the
various  religious  bodies  of  the  Terri-
tory choose  for  themselves  in  regard
to  the  mode  of  bapHsm  ;  a  Federal
officer  not  the  person  to  prescribe
the  mode  or  to  administer  the  ordi-
nance of  baptism,"

Why  not  this  reasoning  apply  to
marriage  as  well  as  to  baptism  ?
Can  yon  make  a  distinction  so  far
as  the  divinity  of  the  two  ordinances
is  concerned  ?  I  can  not.  I  read
here  in  the  last  verse  of  my  test
"What  God  has  joined  together,
let  not  man  put  asunder,"  It  will
be  perceived  from  this  sentence,  that
God  has  something  to  do  in  the
joining  together  of  male  and  female;
that  is,  when  it  is  done  according  to
His  mind  and  will  \  we  will  make
that  a  condition.  But  we  will  say
that,  in  all  cases  under  'the  whole
heavens,  where  a  couple  are  joined
together,  and  God  has  anything  to  do
with  it,  he  does  not  ask  Congress  to
make  a  law,  nor  the  President  of  the
United  States  to  appoint  a  form,  and
he  will  sanction  it.  No,  he  claims
the  ri^ht,  and  his  children  claim  that
God  has  the  privilege,  to  prescribe
the  form  or  ceremony,  and  the  word*
to  be  used ;  and  when  that  ceremony
is  performed  by  divine  authority,  we
may  then  say,  in  the  fullest  sense  of
the  term,  that  tliey  are  joined  toge-
ther divinely,  and  not  by  some  civil
law.  j

The  union  of  male  and  female  I
consider  to  be  one  of  the  most  im-
portant ordinances  which  God  has
established ;  and  if  its  solemnization
had  been  left  entirely  to  the  whims
and  notions  of  men,  wo  might  have
had  as  many  different  ways  of  per-
forming the  matrimonial  rite,  as
we  have  of  administering  the  ordi-
nance of  baptism.  You  know  that
in  the  performance  of  the  baptismal


rite,  some  believe  in  sprinkling,  and
some  in  pouring;  some  societies  ba-
lk, ve  in  immersion  after  they  have
obtained  the  remission  of  sins;  others,
like  Alexander  Campbell  and  his  fol-
lowers, believe  that  immersion  is  to
be  administered  for  the  remission  of
sins.  Another  class  believe,  in  being
immersed  face  foremost;  others,
again,  believe  in  being  immersed
three  times — once  in  the  name  of  the
Father,  once  in  the  name  of  the  Son,
and  once  in  the  name  of  the  Holy
Ghost.  Taking  all  these  classes  as
churches,  they  are  no  doubt  sincere;
they  have  been  instructed  by  their
teachers,  until  they  sincerely  believe
in  these  several  forms  of  baptism.

Now*,  if  Congress,  or  the  legisla-
tive assemblies  in  the  different
►States  and  Territories,  were  per-
mitted to  make  laws  regulating  thii
they  would  perhaps  have  many
other  forms  besides  those  I  have
named,  which  they  would  force  the
people  under  heavy  penalties  to
comply  with.  And  so  in  regard  to
marriage.  If  Congress  should  un-
der take  to  make  a  law  to  govern
the  Methodists,  for  instance,  in  the
solemnization  of  marriage,  they  would
not  like  it,  neither  would  the  Pres-
byterians, nor  Baptists.  A  man
belonging  to  either  of  these  denomi-
nations would  say,  "  Here  is  a  law
which  prohibits  me  from  exercising
my  religious  faith,  and  compels  me
to  be  married  by  a  justice  of  the
peace,  or  a  federal  officer,  or  some
person  who,  per  I  mps,  does  not  be-
lieve in  God,  and  who  has  no  respect
for  the  ordinances  of  heaven.  I  am
compelled  by  the  laws  of  the  land
to  have  him  officiate  and  pronounce
me  and  my  *  intended/  husband
and  wife,  or  to  remain  unmarried,'*
The  Constitution  does  not  contem-
plate this  forcing  of  the  human
mind  in  regard  to  that  which  is  or-
dained of  God. If  I,  believing  in


174


JOURNAL  OF  DISCU UK


God  and  in  the  ordinances  which
he  has  instituted,  am  forced  to  be
married  by  an  unbeliever,  perhaps
a  drunkard  and  an  immoral  man,  or
I  do  not  care  if  he  is  a  believer  in
some  kind  of  a  creed,  if  I  am  satis-
fied that  he  has  not  authority  to
officiate  in  the  union  of  the  sexes,
and  I  am  compelled  to  be  married
by  him,  would  it  answer  my  con-
science ?  Could  I  consider  myself
joined  together  by  the  Lord  ?  It  is
inconsistent  to  suppose  that  I  could
feel  so,  and  in  the  very  nature  of
things  the  solemnization  of  the
marriage  ceremony,  as  well  as  all
other  religious  ordinances,  are  mat-
ters which  should  be  left  for  all
persons  to  act  in  as  they  feel  dis-
posed.

But  we  will  pass  on  ;  we  must  not
dwell  too  long  on  this  subject  My
reason,  however,  for  m  iking  these
few  remarks  is  to  prove  that  the
ordinance  of  marriage  is  divine —
that  God  has  ordained  it  I  want
it  particularly  understood  by  this
congregation  that,  in  order  to  be
joined  together  of  the  Lord,  so  that
no  man  has  the  right  to  put  you  as-
under, the  Lord  must  have  a  hand
in  relation  to  the  marriage,  the
same  as  he  has  in  relation  to  bap-
tism.

Now  I  inquire  if  any  of  the  reli-
gious  societies  on  the  earth,  with
the  exception  of  the  Latter-day
Saints,  have  received  any  special
form  in  relation  to  the  marriage
ceremony  ?  If  they  have,  from
what  source  have  they  received  it  ?
Did  they  invent  it  themselves  ?
Did  a  learned  body  of  priests  get
together  in  conference  and,  by  their
own  wisdom,  without  any  revelation
from  heaven,  make  up  a  certain  form
by  which  the  male  and  the  female
should  be  joined  in  marriage?  Or
how  they  have  come  in  possession  of
it  ? They  have  invented  it  them-


selves, as  you  can  find  by  reading  the
disciplines,  creeds  and  articles  of  faith,
which  almost  every  religious  society
possesses,  and  which  some  of  them
have  possessed  for  a  long  period  of
time.  If  we  go  back  for  several
hundred  years,  we  shall  find  some
of  these  forms  in  existence.  In  the
Roman  Catholic  church  the  ritual
of  marriage  has  existed  for  many
generations.  The  same  is  true  with
the  Greek  churchy  a  numerous  branch
of  the  Catholics  who  broke  off  from
the  church  established  at  Rome,  a
few  centuries  after  Christ.  Martin
Luther  also  had  his  views  in  relation
to  the  marriage  ordinance*  He  was
a  poly ga mist  in  principle,  as  you  will
find  in  his  published  writings.  We
have  an  account  of  him,  in  connec-
tion with  six  or  seven  others,  min-
isters of  his  faith,  advising  a  cer-
tain prince  in  Europe  to  take  unto
himself  a  second  wife,  his  first  wife
being  still  alive,  Luther  and  these
ministers  saying  that  it  was  not
contrary  to  the  Scriptures.  John
Calvin  had  his  notions  on  the  sub-
ject, but  each  and  all  of  the  cere-
monies of  marriage  in  use  among
the  various  Christian  churches,  the
Catholics  as  well  as  Protestants,
from  the  davs  of  the  first  Reforma-
tion,  several  hundred  in  number,
down  to  our  own  day,  are  the  in-
ventions of  men ;  for,  amongst  them
all,  where  can  you  find  one  which
claims  that  God  has  said  anything
to  them  about  marriage,  or  any-
thing else  pertaining  to  their  o  filia-
tions as  ministers  in  his  cause  ?
Not  one  j  the  whole  of  them  claim
that  the  Bible  contains  the  last  re-
velation that  was  ever  given  from
heaven.  Hence,  if,  their  claim  be
true,  God  never  said  a  word  to  Mar-
tin Luther,  John  Calvin,  John  Wes-
ley, or  any  other  reformer,  about  their
ministry,  the  order  of  marriage,
baptism,  or  anything  else. If  their


MARRIAGE,


175


claim  be  trne — that  the  last  revela-
tion God  ever  gave  was  to  John  on  the
Isle  of  Pat  mow,  what  conclusion  must
we  come  to  in  regard  to  them  ?  We
must  conclude  that  all  their  adminis-
trations are  illegal  If  I  have  been
baptized  by  the  Presbyterians, Church
of  England,  Roman  Catholics,  Greek
church,  Wesleyans,  or  by  any  other
religious  denomination  which  denies
auy  later  revelation  than  the  Bible,
my  baptism  is  good  for  nothing,  (rod
lias  had  nothing  to  do  with  it,  never
having  spoken  to  or  called  the  minis-
ter who  officiated,  as  Aaron  was  called,
that  is,  by  new  revelation.  !

"  Well,"  says  one,  "  that  is  un-
christianiziug  the  world,"  I  know,
according  to  the  views  contained
in  the  Bible,  that  it  is  unchristian-
izing  it  in  one  of  the  most  funda-
mental points  —  it  shows  that  all
the  ordinances  and  ceremonies  of
the  Christian  world,  being  admin-
istered in  the  name  of  the  Trinity,
without  new  revelation,  are  illegal
and  of  none  effect,  a^d  that  God  does
not  record  them  in  the  heavens,  though
they  may  be  recorded  by  man  on  the
earth.  But  when  a  man  is  called  by
new  revelation,  it  alters  the  case.
When  God  speaks  or  sends  an  angel,
and  a  man  is  called  and  ordained,  not
by  uninspired  men  who  deny  new
revelation,  but  by  divine  authority,
when  he  administers  baptism,  or
any  other  ordinance  of  the  Gospel,
it  is  leg;il,  and  what  is  legal  and
sealed  on  earth  is  legal  and  sealed
in  heaven,  and  when  such  an  ad-
ministration is  recorded  here  on  the
earth,  it  is  also  recorded  in  the  ar-
chives of  heaven :  and  in  the  great
judgment  day,  when  mankind  are
brought  before  the  bar  of  Jehovah,
the  Great  Judge  of  the  quick  and
dead,  to  give  an  account  of  the  deeds
donein  the  body,  it  will  then  be  known
whether  an  individual  has  officiated
in  or  received  ordinances  by  divine  |


appointment :  and  if  not,  such  ad-
ministration being  illegal,  will  be
rejected  of  God.

"  Oh  bat,"  says  one,  u  such  a  per-
son, officiating  or  being  administered
to,  may  have  been  sincere."  Yes,
I  admit  that-  Sincerity  is  a  good
thing,  and  without  it  there  ean  be  no
real  Christians;  but  sincerity  does
not  make  a  person  a  true  child  of
God ;  it  requires  something  more
than  that.  If  sincerity  alone  where
sufficient  to  make  a  person  a  child  of
God,  then  the  heathens,  when  they
wash  in  the  Ganges,  worship  croco-
diles, the  sun,  moon,  stars,  or  graven
images,  or  when  they  fall  down  and
are  crushed  beneath  the  cars  of
Juggernaut,  would  be  children  of
God  ;  for  in  these  various  acts,  they
certainly  give  proof  of  their  sincerity,
and  if,  according  to  the  ideas  of
some  persons,  that  only  were  neces-
sary to  make  them  God*s  children,
they  would  certainly  be  right.  But
it  is  not  so*  Sincerity  undoubtedly
shows  the  existence  of  a  good  prin-
ciple in  the  heart  of  either  heathen
or  sectarian,  but  it  does  not  show
that  its  possessor  is  right,  or  that
he  has  received  the  true  doctrine;  it
only  shows  that  he  is  siucere.

Let  na  come  back  again  to  the
subject  of  the  administration  of  or-
dinances by  divine  appointment.  I
said  their  baptisms  are  illegal  Now
le*t  me  go  a  little  further,  and  say
that  the  ordinance  of  marriage  is
illegal  among  all  people,  nations
and  tongues,  nnless  administered  by
a  man  appointed  by  new  revela-
tion from  God  to  join  the  male  and
female  as  husband  and  wife.  Says
one — "  Yuii  do  not  mean  to  say  that
all  our  marriages  are  also  illegal,  as
well  as  our  baptisms  ?  "  Yes,  I  do,
so  far  as  God  is  concerned.  That  is
taking  a  very  broad  standpoint ;  but
I  am  telling  you  that  which  is  my
belief ;  and  I  presume,  so  far  as  I  am


acquainted,  it  is  the  belief  of  f lie
Latter-day  Saints  throughout  the
world,  that  all  the  marriages  of  our
forefathers,  for  pinny  long  genera-
tions past,  have  been  illegal  in  the
sinfht  of  Goth  They  have  been  legal
in  the  light  of  men  ;  for  men  have
framed  the  laws  regulating  marriage,
not  by  revelation,  but  by  their  own
judgment.;  and  oar  progenitors  were
married  accord in^  to  these  laws,  and
hence  their  marriages  were  legal,  and
their  children  weie  legitimate,  so  far
as  the  civil  law  was  concerned  ;  and
this  is  as  true  of  oar  own  day  as  of
the  past;  but  in  the  sight  oi  heaven
these  marriages  are  illegal,  and  the
children  illegitimate.

"  Well,"  says  one,  u  how  are  yon
going  to  make  these  marriages  leg
Here  are  a  man  and  woman,  who
were  married,  according  to  the
civil  law,  before  they  ever  heard  of
your  doctrines;  but  they  have  nome
to  an  uud>r  standing  of  them,
and  now  is  there  any  possible  way
to  make  their  marriage  legitimate,
in  the  sight  of  heaven  ?,f  Yes,
How  ?  By  having  them  re-married
by  a  man  who  has  authority  from  God
to  do  it  This  has  been  done  in  almost
numberless  instances;  and  it  is  the
same  with  baptism.  Has  any  person,
baptized  by  the  Methodists,  Church
of  England,  Baptists  or  Presbyte-
rians, been  admitted  into  U19  Church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
on  his  old  baptism  ?  Never,  Not
one  among  the  hundreds  of  thous-
ands who  have  joined  this  Church,
since  its  rise  in  1830,  has  been  ad-
mitted on  his  or  her  old  baptism.
Why  not  ?  Because  we  do  not  be-
lieve in  their  old  baptisjns.  The
Lord  has  commanded  his  servants
to  go  forth  and  preach  the  Gospel,
and  to  baptize  all  who  come  unto
them  for  baptism*  If  we  find  a  sin*
cere  man,*  who  has  gone  through  a
correct  form  of  baptism — and  many


have,  such  as  the  Campbellites  and
the  Baptists — w«  tell  him  that,  if
he  believes  iff  our  doctrine,  he  must
lie  baptized  over  again,  because  his
former  baptism  was  ad  ;n  mistered  by
a  man  who  denied  new  revelation,  and
who  did  not  believe  that  any  had  been
given,  luter  than  that  contained  in
the  New  Testament  It  is  the  same
in  regard  to  marriages*  '

The  people  are  very  anxious  that
their  children  should  he  legitimate,


and  that


r  marriages  should  be


so  solemnized  that  God  will  recog-
nize them  in  the  eternal  worlds;  and
hence  we  say  to  all  the  thousands
and  scores  of  thousands  who  come
here  from  foreign  lands — "  Come  for-
ward  and  be  married  according  to
divine  appointment,  that  yon  may  be
legally  husband  and  wife  in  the  sight
of  heaven,"  »
Now  let  us  go  a  little  further*
Having  explained  to  you  the  au-
thority necessary  to  join  mob  and
women  in  the  Lord,  we  will  now
explain  the  nature  of  marriage  it-
self— whether  it  is  a  limited  condi-
tion, to  terminate  with  what  we
call  <4time;"  or  whether  it  in  a
union  which  will  exist  throughout
all  the  ages  of  eternity.  This  is  an
important  question.  So  far  as  the
ordinance  of  baptism  is  concerned t
we  know  that  does  not  relate  to
time  alone;  It  must  be  adminis-
tered in  time,  or  during  our  exist-
ence in  mortal  life;  but  its  results
reach  beyond  death,  and  the  burial
in,  and  coming  forth  out  ,  of,  the
water  are  typical  of  the  death  and
resurrection  of  our  Savior.  When
we  come  forth  out  of  the  water,  we
rise  to  a  newness  of  life,  and  it  is
declared  to  ail  people  who  witness
the  performance  of  the  ordinance,
that  the  candidates  thus  receiving
baptism,  expect  to  come  forth  from
the  tomb,  that  their  bodies  will  be
resurrected,  bone  coming  to  its  bone,


flesh  and  skin  coming  upon  them,
and  the  skin  covering  them ;  that
if  they  are  faithful  to  the  end  they
will  come  forth  immortal  beings^  and
will  inherit  celestial  glory,  Thus
you  sec  that  baptism  points  forward
to  eternity,  its  effects  reaching  be-
yond the  grave.  So  in  regard  to
marriage.

Marriage,  when  God  has  a  hand
in  it,  extends  to  all  the  future  ages
of  eternity.  The  batter-day  Saints
never  marry  a  man  and  a  woman
for  time  alone,  unless  under  certain
circumstances.  Certain  circumstan-
ces  would  permit  this,  as  in  a  case
where  a  woman,  for  instance,  is
married  to  all  eternity  to  a  husband,
a  good  faithful  man,  and  he  dies.  Af-
ter his  death,  she  may  be  married  to  a
living  man,  for  time  alone,  that  is  un-
til death  shall  separate  her  from  her
second  husband.  Under  such  cir-
cumstances, marriage  for  time  is  legal.
But  when  it  comes  to  marriage  per-
taining to  a  couple,  neither  of  whom
has  ever  been  married  before,  the
Lord  has  ordained  that  that  mar-
riage, if  performed  according  to  his
law,  by  divine  authority  and  ap-
pointment, shall  have  effect  after
the  resurrection  from  the  dead,  and
shall  continue  in  force  from  that
time  throughout  all  the  ages  of  eter.

Says  one — "What  are  you  going
to  do  with  that  Scripture  which
gays  that  in  the  resurrection,  they
neither  marry  nor  are  given  in
marriage?"  I  am  going  to  let  it
stand^  precisely  as  it  is,  without  the
least  alteration.  A  man  who  is  so
foolish  as  to  neglect  the  divine  or-
dinance of  marriage  for  eternity,
here  in  this  world,  and  does  not  se-
cure to  himself  a  wife  for  all  eter-
nity, will  not  have  the  opportunity
of  doing  in  the  resurrection ;  for
Jesus  says,  that  after  the  resurrec-
tion there  is  neither  marrying  nor
giving  in  marriage. It  is  an  ordi-

No.  12.


nance  that  pertains  to  this  world,
and  here  it  must  be  attended  to;
and  parties  neglecting  it  wilfully,
here  in  this  life,  deprive  themselves
of  the  blessings  of  that  uniou  for
ever  in  the  world  to  come.  It  is  so
with  regard  to  baptism.  We  are
bringing  up  these  two  divine  ordi-
nances to  show  yon  how  they  har-
monize. A  man  whr>,  in  this  life,
hears  the  Gospel  and  knows  that  it
is  his  duty  to  be  baptized  in  order
that  he  may  come  forth  hi  the
morning  of  the  resurrection  with  a
celestial,  glorified  body,  like  unto
that  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and
neglects  baptism  and  dies  without
attending  to  the  ordinance,  can  not
be  baptized  himself  after  the  resur-
rection of  the  dead,  any  more  than
he  can  be  married  after  the  resur-
rect ion  of  the  dead,  Why  not  ?  Be-
cause God  has  appointed  that  both
marriage  and  baptism  shall  be  at-
tended to  in  the  flesh,  and  if  neg-
lected here,  the  blessings  are  for-
feited. /  ;y!

We  read,  in  our  text,  something
about  the  first  marriage  which  took
place  on  our  earth. Much  has  been
said  in relation  to  this  event,  and
inasmuch  as  God  ordained  this  sa-
cred rite,  I  feel  disposed  to  bring
it  up  as  a  type  of  all  future  marria-
ges. The  first  pair  of  whose  mar-
riage we  have  any  account,  on  this
earth,  were  immortal  beings.  "What!
you  do  not  mean  to  say  that  immortal
beings  marry,  do  you  ?" Yes,  that  is
the  first  example  we  have  on  record*
Inquires  one — 14  Do  you  mean  to  say
that  Adam  was  an  immortal  being?"
What  is  the  nature  of  an  immortal
being  ? It  is  one  who  has  not  had
the  curse  of  death  pronounced  upon
him. Had  Adam  the  curse  of  death
pronounced upon him,  when  the
Lord  brought  Eve  —  the  woman  —
and  gave  hef  to  hira  ? No,  he  had
not. Had  the  Lord  pronounced  the
curse of  death  upon  Eve  at  the

Vol  XVI.


178


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


ve


time  he  brought  her  to  Adam  ?  He
Lad  not Why  not  ? Because  nei-
ther of  them  had  transgressed.  It
is  said  in  the  New  Tpstaraent  that
death  entered  into  this  world  by
transgression,  mid  in  no  other  way.
If  Adam  and  Eve  had  never  trans-
gressed the  law  of  Gud,  would  they
not  be  living  now  ? They  certainly
would  ;  and  they  would  continue  to
* 'ive  on  millions  of  years  hence.  Can
*u,  *by  stretching your  thoughts
?  k >  the  ages  of  futurity,  imagine  a
t  of  time,  wherein  Adam  and
would  have been  mortal  and
«  to  death  if  it  had  not  been

for  then  '  transgression  ?  No,  you  can
w  then,  were  they  not  im-
™™.f«l*  A  hey  were  to  all  intents
and  purpos  ~s  two  immortal  beings,
male  and  fe.  oalle'  Jolued  .together  in
marriage  in  th/  beginning.  Was
that  marriage  for  eternity,  or  until
death  should  se,  oarate  them  ?  I  re-
member attendL^? »me  weddings

T  «,  a  /  vrm  th>  and  tlni  sen-
woen  1  was  a

V ,  li'v  incorpora-

tes* has  generW .-remonies  I
ted  in  all  the  marriage •  Ijj0^™  1
have  seen  performed  by  cu  1  a  ^  °~
rity  — "I  pronounce  jou  hu,st>and
and  wife,  until  death  shall  yon  fc^'
rate." A  very  short  contract,  is  iv
not? Only  lasts  for  a  little  time,
perhaps  death  might  come  to-mor-
row or  next  day,  and  that  would  be
a  very  short  period  to  be  married,
Tery  different  from  the  marriage  in-
stituted in  the  beginning;  between
the  two  immortal  beings.  Death
was  not  taken  into  consideration  in
their  case;  it  had  never  been  pro-
nounced. The  Lord  had  said  nothing
about  death,  but  he  had  united  tbem
together,  with  the  intention  of  that
union  continuing  through  all  the  ages

of  eternity.

Inquires  one,t  "  Did .  they  not  for-
•  feit  this  by  eating  the  forbidden
fruit  ?" We  have  no  account  that
they  did;  but  supposing  they  did,


can  you  show  me  one  thin*  that
our  first  parents  forfeited  by  the
Fall  that  was  nut  restored  by  the
atonement  of  Jesus  ?  Not  a  thing.
If  they  forfeited  the  life  of  their
bodies,  the  atonement  of  Christ
and  his  victory  over  the  grnve  by
the  resurrection  restored  to  Adam
and  Eve  that  immortality  they
p  assessed  beforo  they  tratiHErressed ;
and  whatever  they  lost  or  forfeited
by  the  Fall  was  restored  by  Jesus
Christ  But  we  have  no  account
that  Adam  and  Eve  forfeited  the
privilege  of  their  eternal  union  by
their  transgression ;  hence,  when
they,  by  virtue  of  the  atonement
of  Christ,  come  forth  from  the
grave  (if  they  did  not  come  forth  at
the  resort  ectiou  of  Christ),  they
will  have  immortal  bodies,  and  they
will  have  all  the  characteristics,  so  far
as  their  bodies  are  concerned,  that  they
possessed  before  the  Fall,  They  will
rise  from  the  grave*  male  and  female,
immortal  in  their  natures,  and  the
union  which  was  instituted  between
them  before  they  became  mortal  will
be  restored,  and,  as  they  were  mar-
ried when  immortal  beings,  they
will  continue  to  be  hnsbaud  and
wife  throughout  all  the  future  ages
0/  eternity,

it  may  be  inquired,  "  What  is  the
object  of  that  ?  Marriage,  we  sup-
posed, was  instituted  principally,  that
this  world  might  be  filled  with  in-
habitants, and  if  that  was  the  object,
when  the  earth  has  received  its  full
measure  of  creation,  what  is  the  u?e
of  this  eternal  union  in  marriage,
continuing  after  the  resurrection  ?  "

Have  you  never  read  the  first  great
commandment  given  in  the  Bible  ?
God  said,  *'  Be  fruitful  and  multi-
ply,*' Did  he  give  this  command
ment  to  mortal  beings  ?  No,  he
gave  it  to  two  immortal  "beings,
*  What !  do  you  mean  to  say  that
immortal  beings  can  multiply,  as


MARK  I  AG  R


179


well  as  be  married  for  all  eternity  ?  "  I
I  do.  God  gave  the  com  maud  to
these  two  immortal  personages,  be-
fore (lie  Fall,  show  tug  clearly  and
plainly  that  immortal  beings  had
that  capacity,  or  else  God  wouid
never  have  given  it  to  them,  I
will  admit  that  they  had  no  power
to  beget  children  of  mortality;  it
required  a  fall  to  enable  them  to  do
that,  and  Without  that  no  mortal
beings  could  have  been  produced*
But  we  see  what  has  been  entailed
upon  the  children  of  Adam,  by  the
Fall.  Instead  of  his  offspring  being1
immortal,  they  come  forth  into  this
world  and  partake  of  all  that  fallen
nature  that  Adam  and  Eve  had
after  they  fell ;  and  they  have  also
inherited  the  death  of  the  body.  If
we  are  to  be  restored  to  immortality
with  them,  we  must  be  restored  to
that  heavenly  union  of  marriage,  or
else  we  lose  something.  If  they,
had  the  power  to  multiply  children
of  immortality,  and  if  the  com-
mand was  given  to  them  to  do  so
before  they  became  mortal,  if  their
children  are  ever  restored  to  what
was  lost  by  the  Fall,  they  must  be
restored  to  that  also.  Here  then  is
a  sufficient  object  why  multiplication
should  continue  after  the  resurrec-
tion,

"  But,"  inquires  some  one,  "  will
not  this  world  be  sufficiently  full,
without  resurrected  beings  bringing
forth  children  through  all  ages  of
eternity  ?"  We  Boust  recollect  that
this  world  is  not  the  only  one  that
God  has  made.  He  has  been  en-
gaged from  all  eternity  in  the  for-
mation of  worlds;  that  is,  there  have
been  worlds  upon  worlds  created  by
those  who  have  held  the  power,  and
authority,  and  the  right  to  create;
and  an  endless  chain  of  worlds  has
thus  been  created,  and  there  never
was  a  period  in  past  duration,  but
what  there  were  worlds. The  idea


of  a  first  world  is  out  of  the  ques-
tion, just  as  much  as  the  idea  of  a
first  foot  of  space,  or  the  first  foot
in  endless  line.  Take  an  endless
line  and  undertake  to  find  r lie  first
foot,  yard  or  mile  of  it.  It  can  not
be  done,  any  more  than  y-  u  can
find  out  the  first  minute,  hoar  or
year  of  endless  duration.  There  is
no  first  minute,  hour  or  year  in  end-
less duration,  and  there  is  no  first  in
an  endless  chain  of  worWs,  and  God
ha*  been  at  work  from  all  eternity  in
their  formation.  What  fur  ?  Is  it
merely  to  see  his  power  exercised  ?
No  :  it  is  that  they  might  be  peopled.
Peopled  by  whom  ?  By  those  who
have  the  power  to  multiply  their
species.  There  never  will  br  a  time
that  there  will  be  a  final  stop  to  the
making  of  worlds;  their  increase
will  continue  from  this  time  hence-
forth and  for  ever  ;  and  as  the  num-
ber of  worlds  will  be  endless,  so
will  be  the  number  of  the  offspring
of  each  faithful  pair.  They  will  be
like  the  stars  in  the  sky  or  the  sands
upon  the  sea  shore;  and  worlds  will
be  filled  up  by  the  posterity  of  those
who  are  counted  worthy  to  come
forth,  united  with  that  heavenly  and
eternal  form  of  marriage  which  was
administered  to  Adam  and  Eve  in
the  beginning.

"But  you  told  us  a  little  while
ago,  that  our  marriages  were  illegal,
and  now  how  can  our  species  be
multiplied  alter  the  resurrection  ?
It  cannot  be,  there  is  no  marrying
uur  giving  in  marriage  then.  What
then  will  become  of  the  people,
unless  there  is  some  provision,  or-
dained by  the  Lord,  whereby  the
living  can  act  for  the  dead  Take
away  that  principle,  and  amen  to
all  those  who  have  not  been  married
for  eternity,  as  well  as  time,  so  far
as  the  multiplication  of  their  species
is  concerned ;  for  you  cannot  get  mar*
ried  there; But  if  there  is  a  provi-


180  JOURNAL  OF

sinn,  by  which  those  who  are  living
here  in  the  flesh,  may  officiate  in  sa-
cred and  holy  ordinances,  for  and  in
behalf  of  the  dead,  then  the  question
will  ii rise,  How  fur  do  these  ordinan-
ces extend  f

Some  may  say,  "Perhaps  they
only  extend  to  baptism.  We  believe
that  baptism  for  the  dead  is  true,
because  the  Scriptures  speak  very
plainly  about  that  in  the  15th  chap-
ter of  Paul's  first  epistle  to  the  Cor-
inthians, "in  which,  in  arguing  about
the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the
Apostle  says — '  Klse  what  shall  they
do  who  are  baptized  for  the  dead  ?  if
the  dertd  rise  not  at  all,  why  then
arc  they  baptized  for  the  dead  ?'  "
Sure  enough,  it  would  have  been
useh-ss  for  those  Corinthians  to  have
been  baptized  for  the  dead,  if  there
had  been  no  resurrection.  But  Paul
very  well  knew  that  the  Corinthians
understood  that  they  should  be  bap-  ■
tized  for  their  dead  ;  and  that  they
were  actually  practicing  that  ordi-
nance,  that  their  ancestors,  who  had
been  (lend  for  generations,  might
have  the  privilege  of  coming  forth
in  the  resurrection.  Baptism  was
typical  of  their  burial  and  resurrec-
tion, and  hence  Paul,  in  writing  to
the  Corinthians,  u^ed  it  as  an  argu-
ment  in  support  of  the  principle  of
the  resurrection.

But  is  there  any  inconsistency,  in
supposing  that  other  ordinances  may
be  officiated  in,  for,  and  in  -  behalf  of
the  dead?  Or  shall  we  say,  that
God  hm  merely  selected  the  one  or-
dinance of  baptism,  and  told  the
living  to  officiate  in  that  for  the  dead,
and  to  neglect  all  others  ?  If,  how-
ever, we  believe  that  God  is  a  God  of
order  and  of  justice,  it  is  reasonable
to  suppose  that  if,  by  his  permission
and  ordination,  the  living  can  do
anything  for  the  dead,  tbey  can  do
everything  for  them,  so  far  as  ordi
nances  are  concerned. That  is,  if


DISCOURSES.

they  can  be  baptized  for  and  in  be*
half  of  the  dead,  thev  can  be  confir-
med,  and  can  also  officiate  in  the  or-
dinance of  marriage  for  them.  ^  hy
be  so  inconsistent.,  as  to  suppose  that
God  should  ordain  a  law  by  which

|  the  living  can  be  baptized  for  the
dead,  and  do  no  more  for  them  ?  God
is  more. merciful  and  consistent  than
that ;  and  when  he  spoke  in  our  day
and  revealed  the  plan  of  salvation,
he,  as  far  as  we  were  ready  to  receive
it,  gave  us  a  system,  by  which  the
dead  who  have  died  without  the  op-

'  port  unity  of  hearing  and  obeying  the
Gospel,  may  be  officiated  for  in  all  re-
spects, and  redeemed  to  the  uttermost
and  saved  with  a  full  salvation  ;  and
hence,  Latter-day  Saints,  there  is
hope  for  our  generations  who  have
lived  on  the  earth,  from  our  day
back  to  the  falling  away  of  the
church—  some  sixteen  or  seventeen
centuries  ago.  You  can  reach  back
to  that  day  and  pick  up  all  your
generations — the  hearts  of  the  child-
ren searching  after  the  fathers  from
generation  to  generation ;  and  the
ancient  fathers  looking  down  to  their
children,  to  do  something  for  thera,
just  as  the  Lord  promised  in  the  last
chapter  of  Malaehi.  There  is  a  pro-
mise that  before  the  great  day  of  the
Lord  should  come,  it  should  burn  as
an  oven,  and  all  the  proud  and  they
that  do  wickedly  should  become  as
stubble.  But  before  that  terrible
day  should  come  God  would  send
Elijah  the  Prophet  to  turn  the  hearts

I  of  the  children  to  the  fathers,  and
the  hiearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  child-
ren, lest  the  Lord  should  come  and
smite  the  earth  with  a  curse.  Aa
much  as  to  say,  that  the  children
would  perish  as  well  as  the  fathers,  if
this  turning  of  their  hearts  towards
each  other  did  not  take  place.
Paul,  in  speaking  about  their  fore-
fathers, to  those  who  lived  in  his  day,

;  sai(j — «  They  without  ns  can  not  be


MARRIAGE.


181


made  perfect,  neither  can  we  be  made
perfect  without  them."  There  must
be  a  union  between  ancient  and  mo-
dern generations,  between  us  and  our
ancestry.  To  say  that  God  would
be  kind  and  merciful  to  a  certain
generation,  and  reveal  his  Gospel
through  a  holy  angel  for  their  special
benefit,  and  leave  all  other  genera-
tions without  hope,  is  inconsistent.
When  God  begins  a  work,  it  is  worthy
of  himself — God-like  in  its  nature,
soaring  into  high  heaven,  and  pene-
trating the  regions  of  darkness,  for
those  who  are  shut  up  in  their  prison
house,  that  liberty  may  be  proclaimed
to  the  captives ;  a  plan  that  not  only
pertains  to  the  present,  but  reaches
back  into  the  past,  and  saves  to  the
uttermost  all  who  are  entitled  to,  and
are  willing  to  receive  his  proferred
mercy.  But  these  ordinances  must
be  attended  to  here,  in  this  world  and
probation*  This  is  the  law  of  the
Great  Jehovah.  In  the  resurrection
these  things  can  not  be  done.
-  Having  explained  marriage  for
eternity,  let  me  explain  another  por.
tion  of  my  text — **  Wherefore  they
are  no  more  twain,  but  one  flesh.
What  God  hath  joined  together,  let
not  man  put  asunder.'1

There  seems  to  have  been,  in  the
beginning,  so  far  as  we  have  any  ac-
count in  the  Bible,  two  personages,
one  man  and  one  woman — Adam  and
Eve,  united  for  all  eternity.  They
had  power  to  multiply  their  species,
and  their  posterity  will  become  so
numerous  that,  in  the  coming  ages  of
eternity,  they  will  be  innumerable.
Some,  perhaps,  may  argue  that,  in-
asmuch as  in  the  beginning  of  this
creation  God  saw  proper  to  place
only  one  pair  to  begin  the  work  of
peopling  the  world,  there  could  not
be  such  a  thing,  divinely  ordained
and  appointed,  as  a  man  having  two
wives  living  at  the  same  time.  In
answer  to  this  let  me  ask,  Was  there


no  man  of  God  in  ancient  days,  to
whom  the  Lord  revealed  himself,  who
had  two  or  more  wives  living  with
him  at  the  same  time?  Without
devoting  much  time  to  the  discussion
of  this  subject,  I  will  refer  to  the
special instance, recorded in  the
Book of  Genesis,  of  Jacob,  after-
wards  surnamed  Israel,  because  of
his  mighty  faith  in,  and  power  with
God. He  had  four  living  wives.
Was his  practice in  this  respect
sanctioned  by  the  Almighty?  Read
about  Jacob,  when  he  was  a  youth,
before  he  was  married  at  all,  and  see
what  peculiar  favors  the  Lord  be-
stowed  upon  him. He,  upon  -one
occasion,  fled  from  the  country  where
his  forefathers,  Abraham  and  Isaac,
had  sojourned,  to  escape  from  his
brother  Esau,  and  he  laid  himself
down  on  the  earth,  having  a  rock  for
his  pillow. He  prayed  to  the  Lord,
and  the  Lord  heard  his  prayer,  and
the  visions  of  heaven  were  opened  to
his  mind. He  saw  a  ladder  ascend-
ing from  the  place where  he  was
sleeping,  that  reached  into  the  hea-
vens ;  he  saw  the  angels  of  God  as-
cending and  descending  upon  that
ladder; he  heard  the  voice  of  the
Lord  proclaiming to him  what  a
great  and  powerful  man  he  should
become,  that  the  Lord  would  multiply
him,  &c,  and  his  seed  should  be  as
numerous  as  the  stars  of  heaven,  and
Jacob  worshiped  the  Lord  from  that
time forth. He  went  down  into
Syria,  and  there  he  entered  the  ser-
vice of  one  Laban,  as  a  herder  of
sheep. In  process  of  time  he  mar-
ried one  of  the  daughters  of  Laban,
whose  name was  Leah,  Shortly
afterwards he married a  second
daughter  of  this  Laban,  whose  name
was  Rachel. In  a  very  short  period
of  time  he  married  another  woman,
who  lived  in  the  household  of  Laban,
named  Jiilhah,  and  in  a  little  time
i  after  that  he  married  a  fourth  woman,


n


182


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


whose  name  was  Zilpah.  Here  were
four  women  married  to  Jacob,  and
in  the  hook  of  Genesis  they  are  called
his  wives.  Now,  did  the  Lord
sanction,  or  did  lie  not  sane' ion  the
marriage  of  Jacob  with  these  four
wives?  And  did  he,  after  Jacob
had  married  them,  condescend  to
hear  Jacob's  prayers  ?  We  find
Jacob  continually  receiving  revela-
tion after  this,  and  that  is  pretty  coin
elusive  proof  that  he  was  not  rejected
of  the  Lord  because  of  his  having
more  than  one  wife.

When  ti  e  children  of  Jacob  and
his  lour  wives  became  numerous,  he
resolved  to  leave  that  foreign  con n try ,
and  returned  to  the  land  where  Abra-
ham, and  his  father,  Isaac,  had  lived.
He  reached  the  brook  Jabbok,  and
then  sent  his  company  on  before  him,
and  he  begun  to  wrestle  in  prayer
with  God.  He  felt  some  alarm  in
consequence  of  the  enmity  of  his  bro-
ther E<  m,  who  lived  in  the  country
to  which  he  was  going,  and  he
wrestled  and  plead  with  the  Lord,
The  Lord  sent  an  angel  down  in


order  to  trv  the  faith  of  J;


and


to  £ee  whether  he  would  give  up
wrestling  and  praying  or  not.  The
angel  undertook  to  get  away  from
him,  but  Jacob  caught  hold  of  him
and  Ktid,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go
until  thou  bless  me."  The  angel,  of
course,  did  not  exercise  supernatural
power  al!  at  once,  but  he  continued
to  wrestle  with  Jacob  as  though  he
desired  to  get  away  from  him,  and
they  struggled  there  all  night  long,
and  at  Jast,  finding  that  the  only  way
he  could  overpower  him  was  to  per-
form a  miracle,  the  angel  touched  the
hollow  oT  Jacob's  thigh,  and  caused
the  sinew  to  shrink,  producing  lame-
ness. Here,  then,  was  a  man  with
mighty  faith.  He  wrestled  all  night
with  one  whom  he  had  reason  to
believe  was  a  divine  personage,  and
he  would  not  let  him  go  without  re-


ceiving a  blessing  from  him.  The
Lord  finally  blessed  him,  and  said
that,  as  a  man  who  would  lake  no
denial,  as  a  prince,  he  had  prevailed
with  God,  and  received  blessings  at
his  hands.

Some  people  suppose  that  this  was
Jacob's  first  conversion,  and  that  he
got  his  wives  before  his  conversion.
But  we  will  trace  the  history  of
Jacob  a  little  further.  The  day  after
he  had  *w  res  tied  with  the  angel,  he
went  across  the  brook,  and  expecting
Esau  to  meet  him  with  a  great  army
of  men,  ho  felt  a  little  fearful,  So
he  took  one  wile  with  her  children,
and  sent  them  ahead;  behind  her  he
set  another  wife  with  her  children;
still  behind  her  he  set  the  third  wife
and  her  children,  and,  last  of  all,  the
fourth  wife  an  t  her  children.  By
and  by  Esau  came  along,  having
passed  by  the  flocks  and  herds  which
Jacob  had  sent  ahead  as  a  present  to
him,  aud  he  meets  the  wife  and
children  placed  first  in  the  row.
Probably  he  looked  at  them,  and
wondered  who  they  could  all  be.  He
passed  the  second  and  third  com-
pany, and  finally  he  came  tu  Jacob
and  the  fourth  company,  and,  said  he,
"Jacob,  who  arc  all  these  r"  The
answer  was — u  These  are  they  whom
the  Lord  my  Cud  lias  graciously
given  to  thy  servant7'  What !  a
man  who,  according  to  Dr.  Newman,
was  converted  only  the  night  pre-
vious, telling  his  brother  that  the
Lord  had  given  him  four  wives  and  a

■  T

great  many  children  ?  Yes,  and  it
was  all  right,  too.

"But,"  suys  one,  "How  are  you
going  to  reconcile  this  with  that
portion  of  your  text,  also  a  quotation
from  the  forepart  of  Genesis,  which
says- — *  and  they  twain  shall  be  one
flesh  ?'  "  Are  they  one  flesh,  or  at
least  are  they  one  personage  ?  No,
the  Lord  did  not  say  that  they  should
be,  but  they  twain  should  be  one


flesh.  In  what  inspect  ?  Says  one,  I
At  I  suppose  in  respect  to  their  child-
ren, as  the  flesh  of  both  man  and
wife  is  incorporated  in  their  children,
and  they  thus  become  one  flesh."
Let  ns  look  at  it  in  this  light  When
the  first  child  of  Jacob's  first  wife
was  born,  if  it  hud  reference  to  the
children,  they  twain  were  one  flesh
then.  By  and  by  Rachel  brings
forth  a  son,  and  if  the  44  one  flesh"
hud  reference  to  the  children,  Jacob
and  Rachel  were  one  flesh  in  that
child.  By  and  by  Jacob  and  Bilhah
become  parents,  and  they  are  also
one  flesh  in  the  child  born  unto
them;  and  lastly  Zilpah  has  a  'child,
and  she  and  Jacob  are  also  one  fle-b
therein."  r  i

tfc  Well,"  says  one,  "  If  it  does  not
refer  to  the  children,  pet  haps  it  may
refer  to  that  oneness  of  mind  which
should  exist  between  husband  and
wite."  Very  well,  let  us  look  at  it
in  this  light*  Can  there  be  a  union
between  two  individuals  so  far  as  the
mii.d  is  concerned  ?  Let  us  see  what
Jesus  said.  "Father,  I  pray  not  for
these  alone" — meaning  the  Twelve
Apostles — "whom  thou  hast  given
me  ont  of  the  world,  bat  I  pi  ay  for
all  them  that,  shall  believe  on  me
through  their  words,  that  they  all
may  be  one  as  thou,  Father,  art  in
n ^  and  I  in  thee,  that  they  may  be
one  in  us.'1  What !  more  than  two
be  in  one  ?  Yes.  It  matters  not  if
there  were  two  thousand  that  believed
on  Jesus  through  the  Apostles'  w  ords,
they  were  to  be  one  in  their  aflec-
tiuns,  desires,  &c+J  and  it  might  in-
clude and  would  include  all  the  mem-
bers of  the  Church  of  God  that  ever
did  live  in  any  dispensation,  and  re.  1
mained  faithful  to  the  end,  for  they
all  will  be  one  as  Je*us  and  the
Father  are  one.  !

They  twain  shall  he  one  flesh."
If  it  means  in  regard  to  mental
qualities  and  faculties  it  may  incor-


I  porate  the  four  wives  of  Jacob,  as  well
as  one.  Take  it  any  way.  you  please
and  we  find  that  God  did  acknowledge
I  it,  for  he  blessed  these  four  wives  and
all  their  children.  Look  at  their
posterity,  for  instance.  God  so  hon-
ored the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob's  four
wives,  that  he  made  them  the  heads,
the  patriarchs  of  the  whole  twelve
tribes  of  Israel.  The  land  was  named
after  them — the  land  Reuben,  the
land  Si  meon,  the  laud  Judah,  etc. ;
and  these  tribes  acknowledged  these
polygarnist  children  as  their  fathers
and  patriarchs.

We  m ay  go  beyond  this  life,  to  the
next,  and  wo  shall  find  that  the  hon-
ors conferred  by  God  upon  these
twelve  sons  are  continued  there.
Christians  believe  that  there  will  be
a  holy  Jerusalem  come  down  from
Hod  out  of  heaven,  which  will  be
prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her
husband.  This  holy  city  which  will
descend  from  God  out  of  heaven,  will
have  a  wall  round  it,  and  in  this  wall
there  will  be  a  certain  number  of
the  most  beautiful  gates — tine  a  on
the  north,  three  on  the  south,  three
on  the  eaat  and  three  on  the  west.
Each  ot  these  gates  will  be  made  of
:  one  pearl — a  precious  stone  most
beautiful  to  look  upon.  Oo  each  of
>  these  gates  there  will  be  a  certain
name—one  will  have  inscribed  upon
it  the  name  of  Judah,  another  Levi,
another  Simeon,  and  so  on  until  the
whole  twelve  gates  will  be  named  af-
ter the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob  and  his
four  polygamic  wives;  thus  we  see
that,  instead  of  the  Lord  calling
them  bastard*-,  and  forbidding  them
to  enter  the  congregation  of  the  Lord
until  the  tenth  generation,  he  honor.*
them  above  all  people,  making  them
the  most  conspicuous  in  the  holy  city,
having  their  names  written  on  its
very  gates.

Of  coarse,  everybody  who  enters
therein  must  be  very  holy,  or  the  city


*


184


JOURNAL  OF  DLSCOUR!


•ould  not  be  holy,  for  without  the
city,  we  are  told,  there  will  be  dogs,
sorcerers,  whoremongers,  adulterers,
murderers  and  whosoever  loveth  and
maketh  a  lie,  but  all  within  will  be
holy  and  righteous  —  such  men  as
Abraham  and  a  great  many  others,
who  have  had  more  than  one  wife.
If  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob  are  to  be
saved  in  the  kingdom  of  God  in  that
holy  city,  will  cot  monogamists,  who
only  believe  in  having  one  wife,  be
honored  if  they  have  the  privilege  of
entering  there?  We  are  told  that
many  shall  come  from  the  east  and
from  the  west,  and  shall  sit  down  with
Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob,  an-
cient polygamists,  the  latter  with  his
four  wives,  and  will  be  counted  wor-
thy to  be  saved  therein ;  while  many
who  profess  to  be  the  Ghildren  of  the
kingdom,  will  be  cast  into  outer
darkness,  where  there  is  weeping  and
wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  This
is  what  Jesus  says,  consequently  I  do
not  think  that  those  who  have  formed
the  idea  that  only  the  monogamic
system  of  marriage  is  accepted  of  the
Almighty,  will  feel  in  those  days  as
they  do  now.  I  do  not  think  that
class  of  persons  will  be  ashamed,  if
they  have  the  privilege  of  coming
forth  in  the  morning  of  the  first  re-
surrection, of  entering  into  that  holy
city,  even  if  they  see  the  names  of
Jacobs  polygamic  children  upon  its
gites.  There  may  be  some  so  deli-
cate in  their  feelings  as  to  say — "O,
no,  Lord,  I 'don't  want  to  go  in  at
that  gate,  the  people  are  polygamists,
I  would  like  you  to  take  me  to  some
other  place/*  They  go  to  the  next
gate,  and  the  next,  until  they  have
been  to  each  one,  and  they  all  are
polygamic.  Then  the  inquiry  may
be — "  Is  there  not  some  other  city
where  the  people  are  not  polyga-
mists ?"  "  Oh  yes,  there  are  plenty
of  places,  but  outside  of  this  city
there  are dogs, sorcerers,  whore-


mongers, adulterers,  and  whoso ver
loveth  and  maketh  a  lie.  Do  you
want  to  associate  with  them  ?"
"Well,  I  think  their  society  will  be
a  little  more  pleasant,  than  that  of
those  old  polygamists  ?"

Will  this  be  the  way  people  will
reason,  when  they  come  before  this
holy  city  ?  No,  I  think  they  will  be
very  glad  to  get  into  Abraham's
bosom  if  he  has  more  than  one  wife.
You  remember  poor  Lazarus  the  beg*
gar,  who  died  seeking  a  crumb  from
the  rich  man's  table.  After  his  death
he  was  carried  by  argels  to  Abra-
ham's bosom.  By  and  by  the  rich
man  died,  and  he,  being  in  torment,
lifted  up  his  eyes  and  saw  Lazarus
afar  off  in  Abraham's  bosom,  that
is,  assuciatinsf  with  the  polygamisfc
Abraham.  How  this  rich  man  did
plead  !  "  Oh,  father  Abraham,  send
Lazarus  to  me  I"  "What  do  you
want?"  "Let  him  come  and  dip
the  tip  of  bis  finger  in  water  and
touch  my  burning  tongue,  for  I  am
tormented  in  ibis  flame."  "Oh,  no,"
says  Abraham,  "  there  is  a  great  gulf
between  you  and  me,  you  must  wtuy
where  you  are.  Lazarus  is  in  my
bosom,  and  he  can't  be  sent  on  such
an  errand  as  that."  "Well,  then,
father  Abraham,  if  you  cannot  send
Lazarus  to  perform  this  act  of  mercy
on  my  behalf,  do  send  him  to  my
brethren  who  are  living  on  the  earth,
and  warn  them,  that  they  come  not
to  this  place,"  He  did  not  want  any-
body else  to  go  there,  he  was  so  tor*
men  ted  himself.  "No,"  Said  Abra-
ham, <£  they  have  Modes  and  the
Prophets  ;  they  have  the  revelations
of  God  before  them  ;  if  they  will  not
believe  them,  they  would  not  though
Lazarus  or  anybody  else  should  be
sent  to  them  from  the  dead,"

That  is  the  case  with  this  genera-
tion also.  If  tlity  will  not  believe
what  is  testified  to  and  spoken  of  in
the  Bible,  in  regard  to  marriage,  tha


ORDINANCES,  ETC.


185


holy  ordinance  ordained  of  God,  they
would  not  believe  thopgh  Lazarus  or
anybody  else  were  sent  trom  the  eter-
nal worlds  to  preach  these  things
mvto  them.  They  would  ridicule
then  as  they  do  now,  and  their  cry,
then  as  now,  would  be,  "  Congress,
oh  Congress,  can1^  you  do  something
to  stop  that  awful  corruption  with
which  we  are  afflicted  away  up  in  the
mountains  ?  Can't  you  pass  some
laws  that  shall  restrict  those  '  Mor-
mons'  and  compel  them  to  be  mar-
ried by  some  Federal  officer  who  shall
be  sent  into  their  Territory,  and  do
away  with  that  part  of  their  religion  ?
Oh  Congress,  do  something  to  destroy
this  corruption  out  of  our  land.
There  is  a  people  up  in  yonder  moun-


tains, who  profess  to  believe  just  as
the  Bible  teaches  in  many  places,  and
we  can't  endure  it.  They  believe  in
the  Old  Testament  as  well  as  the
New,  and  it  must  be  blasphemy,"

Who  said  so  ?  Did  our  fore-
fathers, when  they  framed  the  Con-
stitution, say  that  all  who  believed
in  the  New  Testament  should  have
religions  liberty,  and  that  all  who
undertook  to  believe  in  the.  Old  Tes-
tament should  be  turned  out  of  this
government,  and  be  afflicted  with
some  terrible  penalty  and  law  that
should  be  passed  by  Congress  ?  I
think  we  have  the  privilege  of  be-
iieving  in  the  Old  Testament  as  well
as  the  New.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  BRIGHAM  YOUNG,

#* *  »

Delivered  at  Franklin,  Cache  County,  Thursday  Evening,
f  * September  4,  1873,  .  #

(Reported  btj  John  Q.  Cannon,)

ORDINANCES  THAT  CAN  ONLY  RE  ADMINISTERED  IN  THE  TEMPLE-

ENDOWMENTS,  ETC* "  ;  '


We  have  taken  you  a  little  by
surprise,  brethren  and  sisters,  in
coming  in  to  your  town  to-day.  This
is  in  consequence  of  its  being  so
stormy  where  we  have  been,  and  we
thought  we  would  not  venture  to
drive  from  Soda  Springs  through  to
Logan  in  two  days.  By  taking  more
time,  we  thought  we  would  have  an


opportunity  of  stopping  in  the  settle-
ments and  having  meetings.  I  will
talk  to  you  a  few  moments,  then  I
will  retire  to  my  rest,  and  not  stay
here  during  the  meeting  I  feel  very
wearied ;  but  I  was  quite  unwell
when  I  left  home,  and  our  journey
has  been  quite  fatiguing.

The  remarks  that  I  shall  make  to


186


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


you  this  evening  will  be  upon  the
salvation  of  the  people.  There  are
a  few  ideas  that  1  will  relate  to  you,
that  the  brethren  and  sisters  should
understand,  TjTherc  are  many  of  the
ordinances  ofthe  house  of  God  that
must  be  performed  in  a  Temple  thai
is  erected  expressly  for  rhe  purpose.
There  are  other  ordinances  that  we
can  administer  without  a  Temple.
You  know  that  there  are  some  which
yoa  have  receivad — baptism,  the  lay-
ing on  of  hands,  the  gifts  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  sueli  as  the  speaking  in  and
interpretation  of  tongues,  propheey-
ing,  healing,  discerning  of  spirits,
etc.,  and  many  blessings  bestowed
upon  the  people,  we  have  the  privi-
lege of  receiving  without  a  Temple.
There  are  other  blessings  that  will
not  be  received,  and  ordinances  that
will  not  be  performed  according  to
the  law  that  the  Lord  has  revealed,
without  their  being  done  in  a  Temple
prepared  for  that  purpose.  We  can,
at  the  present  time,  go  into  the  En-
dowment House  and  be  baptized  for
the  dead,  receive  our  washings  and
anointing,  etc.,  for  there  we  have  a
font  that  has  been  erected,  dedicated
expressly  for  baptizing  people  for
the  remission  of  sins,  for  their  health
and  for  their  dead  friends;  in  this
the  Saints  have  the  privilege  of  being
baptized  for  their  friends  We  also
have  the  privilege  of  sealing  women
to  men,  without  a  Temple.  This  we
can  do  in  the  Endowment  House;
but  when  we  come  to  other  sealing
ordinances,  ordinances  pertaining  to
the  holy  Priesthood,  to  connect  the
chain  of  the  Priesthood  from  father
Adam  until  now,  by  sealing  children
to  their  parents,  being  sealed  tor  oiir
forefathers,  etc.,  they  cannot  be  done
without  a  Temple.  But  we  can  seal
women  to  men,  but  not  men  to  men,
without  a  Temple.  When  the  ordi-
nances are  carried  out  in  the  Temples
that  will  be  erected,  men  will  be


sealed  to  their  fathers,  and  those  who
hfive  slept  clear  up  to  father  Adam,
This  will  have  to  be  done,  because  of
the  chain  of  the  Priesthood  being
broken  upon  the  earth.  The  Priest-
hood has  left  the  people,  but  in  the
first  place  the  people  left  <he  Priest-
hood. They  transgressed  the  laws,
changed  the  ordinance,  and  broke
!  the  everlasting  covenant,  and  the
Priesthood  left  them  ;  but  not  until
they  had  left  the  Priesthood.  This
Priesthood  has  been  restored  again,
and  by  its  authority  we  shall  be  con-
nected with  our  fathers,  by  the  ordi-
nance of  sealing,  until  we  .shall  form
a  perfect  chain  from  father  Adam
down  to  the  closing  up  suene.  This
ordinance  will  not  be  performed  any-
where bat  in  a  Temple  ;  neither  will
children  be  sealed  to  their  living
parents  in  any  other  place  than  a
Temple.  For  instance,  a  man  and
his  wife  come  into  the  Church,  and
they  have  a  family  of  children.
These  children  have  been  begotten
out  of- the  covenant,  because  the  mar-
riages of  their  parents  are  not  recog-
nized by  the  Lord  as  performed  by
his  authority  ;  they  have,  therefore,
to  be  sealed  to  their  parents,  or  else
they  cauuot  claim  them  in  eternity  ;
they  will  be  distributed  according  to
the  wis  lorn  ot  the  Lord,  who  does
all  things  right.  When  we  had  a
Temple  prepared  in  Nauvoo,  many
of  the  brethren  had  their  children
who  were  out  of  the  covenant  sealed
to  them,  and  endowments  were
given.  Then  parents,  after  receiving
their  endowments,  and  being  sealed
for  time  and  all  eternity,  and  they
have  other  children,  they  arc  begot-
ten and  born  under  the  covenant,  and
they  are  the  right  fill  heirs  to  the
kingdom,  they  possess  the  keys  of
the  kingdom.  Children  born  unto
parents  betbre  the  latter  enter  into
l  the  fullness  of  the  covenants,  have  to
{  be  sealed  to  them  in  a  Temple  to


ORDINANCES,  ETC


1ST


become  legal  heirs  of  the  Priesthood*
It  is  true  they  can  receive  the  ordi-
nances, they  can  receive  their  endow-
ments and  be  blessed  in  common
with  their'  parents;  but  still  the
parents  cannot  claim  them  legally
and  lawfully  in  eternity  unless  they
are  sealed  to  them,  Yefc  the  chain
would  not  be  complete  without  this
seeding  ordinance  being  performed.

Now,  to  illustrate  this,  I  will  re-
fer to  my  own  father's  family.  My
father  died  before  the  endowments
were  «iven.  None  of  his  children
have  been  sealed  to  him.  If  you
recollect,  you  that  were  in  Nauvuo,
we  were  very  much  harried  in  the
little  time  we  spent  there  after  the
Temple  was  built.  The  mob  was
there  ready  to  destroy  us ;  they  were  i
ready  to  burn  our  houses,  they  had
been  doing  it  for  a  long  time ;  but
we  finished  the  Temple  according
to  the  commandment  that  was
given  to  Joseph,  and  then  took  our
departure.  Our  time,  therefore,  was
short,  and  we  had  no  time  to  attend
to  this.  My  father's  children,  con-
sequently, have  not  been  sealed  to
bim.  Perhaps  all  of  his  Sons  may
go  into  eu  rnity,  into  the  spirit  world,
before  this  can  be  attended  to;  but
this  will  make,  no  difference;  the
heirs  of  the  family  will  attend  to
this  it  it  is  not  for  a  hundred
years.

It  will  have  to  be  done  sometime.
If,  however,  we  get  a  Temple  pre-
pared before  the  sons  of  my  father
shall  all  have  gone  into  the  spirit
world,  if  there  are  any  of  them  re-
maining, they  will  attend  to  this,
and  as  heirs  be  permitted  to  receive
the  ordinances  for  our  father  and
mother.  This  is  only  one  case,  and,
to  illustrate  this  subject  perfectly,  I
might  have  to  refer  to  hundreds  of
examples  for  each  case.

With  regard  to  the  heirship,  I  can
not  enter  into  oil  the  matter  to-


night. .  The  subject  would  require
a  good  deal  of  explaining  to  the
people,  consequently,  I  will  pass  over
it  at  present.  I  can  merely  say
this,  however,  that  we  see  that  the
Lord  makes  his  selection  according
to  his  own  mind  and  will  with
regard  to  his  ministers.  Brother
Joseph  Smith,  instead  of  being  the
first  horn,  was  the  third  son  of  his
father's  family  who  came  to  matu-
rity, yet  he  is  actually  the  heir  of
the  family ;  he  is  the  heir  of  his
father's  house.  It  seems  to  us  that
the  oldest  son  would  be  the  natural
heir;  hut  we  see  that  the  Lord
makes  his  own  selection.  There
are  some  inquiries  now  with  regard
to  officiating  in  ordinances,  which
[  wish  to  answer.  Some  brethren
here  are  anxious  to  know  whether
they  can  receive  endowments  for
their  sons  or  for  their  daughters.
No,  they  cannot  until  we  have  ft
Temple;  but  they  can  officiate  in
the  ordinances  so  far  as  baptism
and  sealing  are  concerned.  A  man
can  be  baptized  for  a  son  who  died
before  hearing  the  Gospel.  A  wo-
man can  be  baptized  for  her  daugh-
ter, who  died  ^without  the  Gospel.
Suppose  that  the  father  of  a  dead
son  wishes  to  have  a  wife  sealed  to
his  son;  if  the  young  woman  de-
sired as  a  wife  is  dead  and  have  a
mother  or  other  female  relative  in
the  Church,  sueh  mother  is  the  heir,
and  she  can  act  in  the  sealing  ordi-
nances in  the  stead  of  her  daughter.
But  if  the  young  woman  desired
as  a  wife  have  no  relative  in  the
Church,  to  act  in  her  behalf,  then
the  mother  of  the  young  man  can
be  baptized  for  her,  and  act  as  proxy
for  her  in  the  sealing  ordinances.  We
can  attend  to  these  ordinances  now
before  the  Temple  is  built  here  ;  but
no  one  can  receive  endowments  for
another,  until  a  Temple  is  prepared
in  which  to  administer  them.  We


ad  tni  uister  just  so  far  as  the  law  per-
mits us  to  do.  In  reality  we  should
have  performed  all  these  ordinances
long  ago,  if  we  had  been  obedient ;
we  should  have  had  Temples  in  which
we  could  attend  to  all  th  ordi-
nances. Now,  the  brethren  have
the  privilege  of  being  baptized  for
their  dead  friends — when  I  say  the
brethren,  I  mean  the  brethren  and
sisters  —  and  these  friends  can  be
sealed.

For  instance,  a  man  and  his  wife
come  into  the  Church;  he  says,
u  My  father  and  mother  were  good
people;  I  would  like  to  officiate  for
them,"  "  Well,  have  you  any  other
friends  in  the  Church  ?"  "  Nobody
but  myself  and  my  wife/'  Well,
now,  the  wife  is  not  a  blood  relation,
consequently  she  is  not  in  reality  the
proper  person,  but  she  can  be  ap-
pointed the  heir  if  there  are  no  other
relatives — if  there  are  no  sisters,  this
wife  of  his  can  officiate  for  the  mo-
ther; but  if  the  man  has  a  sister  in
the  Church,  it  is  the  privilege  and  -
place  of  the  sister  of  this  man,  the
daughter  of  those  parents  that  are
dead,  to  go  and  officiate — be  baptized,
to  go  and  be  sealed  with  her  brother
for  her  fattier  and  mother.  If  this
man  and  woman  have  a  daughter  old
enough  to  officiate  for  her  grand-
mother, she  is  a  blood  relation,  and  is
the  beir,  and  can  act ;  but  if  there  is
no  daughter  the  man's  wife  can  be
appointed  as  the  heir.

I  want  to  say  a  few  words  with
regard  to  other  operations*  In  the
law  that  the  Lord  has  revealed  he
requires  obedience.  I  do  not  know
of  one  ordinance  but  what  there  are
laws  connected  with  it,  and  they
cannot  be  disregarded  by  the  Saints
and  they  be  blessed  as  though  the
laws  were  observed.  We  are  re-
quired  to  believe  in  God  the  Father
and  the  Loid  Jesus  Christ  as  our
Savior;  we  are  required  to  repent


of  our  sin* ;  then  we  have  the  pri-
vilege of  entering  in  through  the
door  of  baptism  and  goinj;  into  the
house  of  God.  There  is  another
commandment  that  the  Lord  has
given— it  is  that  they  must  have
hands  laid  on  them  that  they  may
receive  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the
gifts  and  graces  that  the  Lord  has
for  his -children ;  but  if  we  are  not
baptized,  we  are. not  entitled  to  the
other  blessings.  If  we  do  not  be-
lieve in  the  first  ordinance  we  can-
not receive  the  second.  If  we  do
not  go  forth  and  be  baptized  for
the  rt mission  of  sins,  we  are  not
entitled  to  the  Holy  Ghost  and  its
blessings  through  the  law,  or  the
requirements  of  heaven  to  the  child-
ren of  our  Father*  ffow,  as  to  the
requirements,  we  will  ask,  H  Do  you
know  the  law  ?  Should  you  keep
the  law  ?"  Yes,  certainly  you  do
know  by  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and
Covenants,  which  is  for  us,  and  the
New  and  Old  Testament ;  these  are
a  foundation  and  contain  the  first
laws  that  have  been  given.  We
have  them  now  in  our  possession.
Then  the  Book  of  Mormon  contains
the  same.  The  Book  of  Mormon
contains  the  same  plan  of  salvation
that  the  Lord  requires  the  world  to
listen  to,  and  the  Book  of  Doc-
trine and  Covenants  is  given  for
the  Latter-day  Saints  expressly  for
their  everyday  walk  and  actions.
Now,  for  instance,  the  Latter-day
Saints  are  required  to  go  to  meet-
ing on  Sunday.  How  many  are
there  that  come  to  these  meetings
a  ad  repent  of  their  sins,  confess  their
sins  and  partake  of  the  Sacrament
of  our  Savior  and  testify  by  these
acts  that  they  are  actual  believers  ?
Do  we  keep  the  Sabbath,  brethren
and  sisters  ?  Do  we  deal  justly  one
with  another  ?  Those  things  are
required  of  us.  Do  we  walk  hum-
bly before  our  God  f Do  we  permit


ORDINANCES,  ETC.


189


ourselves  to  speak  evil  of  the  an-
ointed of  the  Lord.  Do  we  permit
ourselves,  brethren,  to  hike  the  name
of  the  Lord  in  vain  ?  It  is  cer-
tainly  written  that  we  should  not
do  it;  that  we  should  not  falsify,
He,  cheat,  etc.  Now  all  these  re-
quirements are  made  of  us.  We
are  required  to  pny  Tithing,  we  are
required  to  deal  justly  one  with
another  and  be  honest  in  our  deal-
ing ;  and  all  these  requirements  which
I  need  not  repeat  over  to  yon,  you
read  and  you  understand  them.  Now
are  we  entitled  to  the  blessings  of  the
house  of  God  if  we  keep  the  com-
mandments he  has  f>iven  to  us  ?  Yes.
If  we  observe  his  precepts  and  do
thern,  are  we  entitled  to  these  bless-
ings ?  Yes,  Are  we  entitled  to
them  if  we  do  not  keep  the  command-
ments? No,  we  are  not  Brethren
go  ami  pet  their  endowments,  and
they  get  a  recommendation  so  as  to
go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord.
Now  you  go  to  the  Bishop  and
.enquire  strictly  as  to  some  of  these
brethren :  "  Does  such  a  brother
pay  his  Tithing?  Is  he  faithful  and
industrious  ?"  "  Well,  no/1  "  Is  be
honest  in  his  dealings  ?"  "  Well,  I
guess  he  means  to  do  right/*  "  D  >es
he  always  speak  the  truth  ?"  "Well,
I  cannot  say  that  he  does  exactly."
"  Does  he  drink  liquor  ?  "  "  Well,
yes,  sometimes  he  does.  Yes,  I
think  he  does,  although  I  never
saw  him  drunk,"  "  Does  he  take
the  name  of  the  Lord  in  vain  ? "
"  Well,  I  don't  know,  I  have  heard
that  he  does  swear  sometimes."
"Does  he  quarrel  with  his  wife?"
"  I  don't  know ;  I  understand,  how-


ever, they  do  not  live  very  happily
together."  [/This  man  probably  wants
another  wife.  Is  he  entitled  to  these
blessings?  He  pays  a  little  Tithing,
perhaps,  but  he  says  he  is  going  to
pay  it  in  full ;  and  the  Bishop  says  :
^  He  has  been  teasing  me  a  long  time
for  a  recommendation."  "  But  why
did  you  give  it  to  him  ?"  I  will  an-
swer this,  "  I  had  to  give  it  to  him
to  get  rid  of  hitn,  so  that  he  won't
tease  me  any  more."  This  is  the
answer.  Now  ask  yourselves,  my
brethren  and  sisters,  is  he  entitled  to
the  blessings  that  the  Lord  has  for  his
faithful  children  ?

Be  faithful  and  obedient  to  the
few  words  that  I  have  said  to  you,
with  regard  to  the  ordinances,  etc.,
and  what  we  can  do  and  what  we
cannot  do.  I  said  but  a  few  words,
but  they  are  enough.

I  will  say  to  you,  may  the  Lord
bless  you — peace  be  to  you.  I  am
glad  that  I  am  able  to  be  here ;  there
are  others  here  who  will  speak  to
you.  I  will  tell  you  honestly  I  do
not  feel  well;  I  do  not  feel  pleased;
it  is  not  gratifying  to  me  when  I  bear
of  those  who  profess  to  be  Latter-day
Saints,  living  short  of  their  privileges
and  duties ;  bat  when  I  hear  of  men
and  women  living  up  to  the  privi-
leges that  the  Lord  has  for  them,  it
endears  them  to  trie,  and  I  delight  in
them;  and  I  can  say  that  I  continu-
ally pray  for  the  Latter-day  Saints,
that  the  Lord  will  bles&and  preserve
us,  that  we  may  be  saved  in  the  king-
dom of  God.  This  is  my  constant
prayer,  and  I  say  God  bless  yoi.
Amen,


■


REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  GEORGE  A,  SMITH,


Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Sept.  7,  1873.

(BeporUd  by  David  W.  Evans.)


VISIT  OF  THE  PRESIDENCY  TO  THE  NORTHERN  SETTLEMENTS.


For  the  past  two  weeks  it  hns  been
my  privilege,  in  company  with  Pre
sident  Young,  and  Elders  John  Tay-
lor, Cannon,  and  Woodruff  and
others,  to  travel  among  and  visit  the
Saints  in  some  of  the  settlements  in
the  northern  valleys  of  this  Terri-
tory and  the  southern  portions  of
Idaho.  Considering  the  short  time
since  the  settlements  north  of  Ogden
were  formed,  especially  those  of
Cache  Valley  and  Rear  Lake,  it  seems
that  great  progress  has  been  made  in
building  towns  and  villages,  pre-
paring places  of  worship,  providing
the  necessaries  of  life,  and  const  met-
ing mills,  roads  and  bridges,  so  that
in  a  very  few  years  the  country  Iirs
been  turned  from  a  desert,  uninhabit-
ed region,  to  one  of  thrift  and  plenty,
t  While  at  Logan,  a  two  days*  meet-
ing was  held,  on  Saturday  and  Sun-
day, two  weeks  ago  to-day.  1  The
people  of  the  valley  were  in  the  midst
of  a  very  abundant  harvest,  and  their
grain  had  so  ripened  that  the  harvest
came  upon  thera  all  at  once ;  yet  the
attendance  at  our  meetings  was  very
large,  larger,  in  fact,  than  it  had
ever  been  my  pleasure  to  witness  in
that  place  before.  The  Spirit  of  the
Almighty  seemed  to  be  striving  with
the  people,  and  though  they  were
pressed  with  the  labors  of  an  abun-
dant harvest,  they  were  on  hand,


alive  and  awake,  to  attend  meetings
and  to  perform  their  duties.

The  changes  which  have  come  over
this  land,  since  we  first  settled  in  it,
seem  wonderful  The  first  visitors
to  Cache  Valley  pronounced  it  too
cold  a  country  for  the  cultivation  of
grain.  Frost  occurred  almost  everj
week  during  the  summer,  and  the
winters  were  very  severe.  Early
explorers  of  that  valley  found  the
thermometer  so  low  in  the  summer
as  to  deprive  us  even  of  a  hope  of
successful  cultivation.  But  settle-
ments were  commenced  and  farming
was  attempted,  and  finally  it  was
concluded  that  wheat  could  be  grown
there,  It  seems,  however,  that  the
brooding  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
over  that  land  has  softened  the  cli-
mate, and  large  crops  of  many  varie-
ties of  fruit,  including  the  apricot
and  peach,  are  raised  there  now.

I  believe  it  is  the  case  universally
where  the  Latter-day  Saints  have
settled  in  these  valleys,  and  com-
menced their  work  with  faith,  trust-
ing in  the  Lord,  that  he  has  softened
the  elements  and  tempered  the  cli-
mate, until  they*  are  now  favorable,
and  year  after  year  more  tender
vegetation  has  been  introduced.  I
have  noticed  this  in  the  settlements
in  the  Sevier  Valley  and  in  Iron
Couaty. I  commenced  a  settlement


VISIT  OF  THE  PRESIDENCY,  KTC.


191


in  Iron  County  in  January,  1S51.
For  nine  years  I  attempted  to  raise
peaches  in  Farowan,  bat  they  were
killed  to  the  ground  every  year,  Now
Iron  County  has  become  quite  a
peach  growing  country.  I  attribute
this  to  the  blessings  of  the  Almighty
upon  the  elements,  and  from  this
cause  the  cultivation  of  grain  and
fruits  has  progressed  from  year  to
yea?  in  greater  altitudes,  until  now
it  is  successful  in  many  localities  in
the  Territory  where  it  was  formerly
impossible.

Two  years  ago  I  visited  the  valley
of  Bear  River,  The  Bear  Lake
country  had  then  been  devastated
by  grasshoppers,  and  it  presented  a
scene  of  utter  desolation.  The
grain  and  grass  crops  and  all  the
produce  of  the  vegetable  kingdom
had  been  destroyed  within  a  few
days  by  an  arrival  of  grasshoppers.
This  season  we  passed  into  Bear
Lake,  going  part  of  the  way  by  the
new  road  recently  constructed  at  a
cost  of  §7,000,  by  the  enterprise  of
Bishop  Q.  J.  Liljenquist  and  the
citizens  of  Hyrum,  by  the  stream
known  as  Blacksmith's  Fork;  We
followed  op  this  road  until  at-
tained an  altitude  of  5,400  feet  above
the  level  of  the  sea*  Then  we
struck  the  old  Husitsville  road  aud
went  by  that  to  Lake  town,  at  the
head  of  Bear  Lake.  This  place  is
probably  as  delightfully  and  roman-
tically situated  as  any  in  the  Terri-
tory, It  is  very  near  the  Territorial
line,  and  contains  about  sixty  fam-
ilies. The  waters  of  the  lake  are
clear  and  contain  abundance  of  fish  ;
and  the  meadows  around  the  head  of
the  lake  and  in  its  vicinity  are  very
fine.  The  summits  of  the  mountains
are  well  covered  with  timber,  which
is  not  very  difficult  of  access.  We
had  two  meetings  at  that  place  and
found  the  people  enjoying  themselves
well.


We  then  followed  alon?  the  west
shores  of  Bear  Lake,  some  thirty
miles,  visiting  some  small  places  and
making  a  stop  at  the  fine  settlement
of  St,  Charles,  where  we  also  had
two  meetings.  The  purity  of  the
water  there;  the  great  altitude  and
the  cool  climate  will,  when  more
known,  render  that  locality  a  favo-
rite place  of  resort  to  travelers  and
pleasure  seekers  in  the  short  sum-
mer season.  The  settlers  there  raise
excellent  wheat,  rye,  barley,  oats,
and  heavy  crops  of  potatoes  and
garden  vegetables.  They  have  to
watch  pretty  clpsely  to  get  their
crops  in  between  the  spring  and  tall
frost  ft.  The  country  is  covered  with
a  heavy  growth  of  rich  grasses.  #The
winters  are  cold  there.  The  settle-
ment forms  part  of  Oneicbi  County,
Idaho,  the  survey  of  the  Territorial
line  having  cut  it  otf  from  Utah,
in  which  it  was  formerly  included,

St.  Charles  has  sixty  or  seventy
families,  and  wants  more  settlers.
It  is  watered  by  a  stream  called
Big  Creek,  the  largest  affluent  of
Bear  Lake,  a  very  fine  stream,
something  larger  than  our  Big  Cot-
tonwood, and  furnishing  abundance
of  water  to  the  settlement.  The
grazing  and  farming  facilities  are
excellent  there,  and  the  people
seemed  to  be  enjoying  themselves
exceedingly  well,  and  had  all  they
could  do  to  take  care  of  the  crops
ant]  other  temporal  comforts  with
which  they  were  surrounded.

Bear  Lake  is  about  twenty- sis
miles  long  and  about  tea  miles  wide-
It  is,  in  a  manner,  two  lakes,  the
north  end  of  it,  about  six  miles,  being
cut  off  by  a  kind  of  embankment  or
beach,  the  two  lakes  being  connected
by  a  small  stream  only  a  few  yards
in  width.  The  sooth  part  of  the
lake  is  very  deep  and  the  water  pure.
It  has  many  streams  entering  into  it,
and  many  springs  about  it,  and  is  a


192


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


nursery  for  an  immense  amount  of
fish;  large  quantities  of  which,  very
fine  trout  and  other  choice  varieties,
are  caught  in  their  seasons.  "  \

The  stream  which  leads  out  of
Bear  Lake,  I  think,  is  nine  or  ten
miles  long,  to  where  it  empties  into
Bear  River.  The  lake  has  generally
been  called  Bear  Rivpr  Lake,  from
the  supposition  that  Bear  River  ran
through  it;  but  this  is  not  the  case.
In  this  respect  Bear  Lake  is  unlike
the  Sea  of  Galilee  and  the  River  Jor-
dan. The  Jordan  runs  into  one  end
of  the  Sea  of  Galilee  and  out  at  the
other,  passing  right  through  it;  but
Bear  Lake  is  at  the  head  of  a  short
stream  which  empties  into  Bear
River.  Along  this  stream  and  along
Bear  River,  is  a  large  tract  of  fine
grazing  country,  excellent  mead  aw
land,  which  our  people  are  turning  to
good  account*

There  is  a  very  fine  town  called
Bloomington,  on  Twin  Creeks,  con-
taining probably  a  hundred  fam-
ilies ;  and  about  two  or  two  and  a
half  miles  from  Bloomington  is  the
principal  town  in  the  valley,  called
Paris.  At  Paris  we  held  three  days*
meetings,  in  a  shade  or  grove,  which
had  been  prepared  for  that  purpose.
A  large  congregation  assembled  there
and  gave  strict  attention,  and  we
enjoyed  ourselves  exceedingly  well,
all  seeming  very  glad  to  see  us.

After  spending  these  three  days
at  Paris,  we  visited  some  of  the
neighboring  settlements.  We  had
meeting  at  Montpelier,  and  passing
through  Bennington,  Georgetown,
Ovid,  and  some  other  small  settle-
ments, we  visited  Soda  Springs,
where  we*remained  a  day  and  a  half,
having  two  meetings  with  the  people.
We  then  resumed  our  journey,  fol-
lowing down  Bear  River,  camping
out  on  our  route,  until  we  reached  the
settlement  of  Franklin,  and  thence
on  to  Richmond,  Smithfield  and  Hyde


Park,  holding  meetings  in  each*
Yesterday,  started  from  Logan^
and  reached  home  in  four  hours  and
twelve  minutes  in  special  trains.
We  had  been  gone  two  weeks  and
one  day,  having  traveled  two  hundred
miles  by  carriages  through  the  moun-
tains, and  two  hand  red  miles  by
railroad.  The  Elders  of  our  party
scattered  among  the  settlements  and
held  twenty- six  meetings.  We  vis-
ited the  Sunday  schools  and  different
organizations,  and  found  them  all
alive  to  their  several  duties

In  almost  every  town  we  visited  wi
were  saluted  on  our  arrival  by  a  body
of  Sunday  school  children,  who  turn*
ed  out by  hundreds. It  almost

ml

seemed  impossible  that  there  could
so  many  children  in  the  country
dame  uut  to  meet  us.

President  Young  was  suffering  on
this  journey  from  an  attack  of  rheu-
matism, which  rendered  him  uncom-
fortable. But  still  he  preached  a
number  of  long  and  excellent  ser-
mons, sometimes  speaking  an  hour
and  twenty  minutes.  He  addressed
all  the  large  meetings,  and  did  it  in
more  than  his  usual  energetic,  elo-
quent  and  interesting  style,  and
returned  from  the  journey  in  a  better
state  of  health'  than  when  he  went
away,  for  then  many  of  his  friends
thought  it  very  doubtful  whether  he
would  be  able  to  proceed  on  his
journey ;  g  but  he  accomplished  itf
and  returned  improved.  For  a  man
of  his  years,  performing  continually,
as  he  does,  a  vast  amount  of  labor  of
both  mind  and  body,  it  seems  almost
miraculous  that  he  could  take  this
journey,  attend  so  many  meetings
and  council?,  and  endure  the  riding
over  a  country  as  rough  as  the  one
we  passed  over*  We  were  sometimes
seven  or  eight  thousand  feet  above
the  level  of  the  sea,  frequently  six
thousand,  and  then  down  to  four
thousand  five  hundred,  and  so  on,


VISIT  OF  THE  P

up  fend  down,  through  valleys  and
hills,  the  roads  sidling  in  many
places,  rendering  traveling  difficult
and  unpleasant!  Though  after  I  had
traveled  through  Palestine,  where
*  there  are  really  no  roads,  I  thought
the  country  we  had  just  passed  over
remarkable  for  its  fine  roads.

We  bore  testimony  to  the  Saints
of  the  everlasting  Gospel,  the  plan  of
salvation  which  was  revealed,  through
Joseph  Smith,  to  this  generation.
We  found  them  generally  living  in
obedience  to  the  principles  of  the
Gospel,  and  rejoicing  in  the  truth*
There  was  a  marked  improvement,
since  I  traveled  through  those  north-
ern regions  before,  in  the  condition
f  of  the  roads,  bridges,  and  private
residences,  and  in  some  settlements  a
large  number  of  barns  have  been
erected,  It  seems,  in  the  making  of
the  settlements  in  these  valleys,  that
it  has  been  a  difficult  matter  for  the
,  farmers  to  provide  themselves  with
sufficient  barns  and  store-houses,  they
are  wanting  almost  everywhere,  but
«ome  .of  these  northern  settlements
are  becoming  very  well  supplied  with
these  outdoor  conveniences.
■  I  am  pleased  to  have  the  privilege
of  meeting  with  you  again,  I  wish
to  bear  my  testimony  to  the  inter-
esting discourse  which  has  been  deli-
vered to  you-Jhis  afternoon  by  Elder
John  Taylor,  and  I  pray  that  the

-X


RESIDENCY,  ETC.  193

blessing  of  the  Almighty  may  be
upon  us  all  I  feel  that  his  blessing
is  over  all  the  valleys  where  the
Saints  dwell,  and  inasmuch  as  they
will  abide  in  their  holy  faith,  the
faith  of  the  holy  Gospel,  live  in  ac-
cordance with  the  principles  of  truth
and  the  law  which  God  has  revealed
for  their  salvation,  the  Lord  will  be
their  protector.

From  the  time  that  Joseph  Smith
took  the  plates  of  Mormon  from  the
hill  Cumorah,  to  the  present  moment,
the  enemy  of  all  righteousness  has
been  howling,  and  exercising  every
means  in  his  power  to  destroy  those
1  who  believe  in  the  Book  of  Mormon,
and  who  are  willing  to  follow  the  in-
structions and  counsels  which  God
has  given  for  the  upbuilding  of  his
kingdom  in  the  last  days.  But  they
who  have  been  humble,  and  have
walked  in  accordance  with  their  pro-
fessions, have  been  upheld  and  pro-
tected, and  the  blessing  of  the  Al-
mighty has  been  continually  upon
them*

I  pray  the  Lord  that  his  blessings
may  rest  upon  you,  and  that  you  may
rejoice  therein,  that  we  may  all  be
able  to  walk  humbly  before  himt
keep  his  commandments,  have  power
to  overcome,  and  with  the  faithful  be
prepared  to  dwell  in  his  kingdom,
through  Jesus  our  Redeemer,  Amen.


No,  13


Vol  XVI.


VH


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  is  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Sept.  7,  1873.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD  AND  MODE  OF  WORSHIPING  IIIM,


I  always  take  pleasure  in  speaking
of  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom
of  Gnd,  and  to  the  interest  and  hap-
piness of  my  fellow-men,  if  I  think
that  I  can  be  of  service  or  advantage
to  those  to  whom  I  address  myself
la  meeting  together,  as  we  are  met
to-day,  from  time  to  time,  we  do  so
•  to  reverence  and  worship,  according
to  the  intelligence  and  understanding
we  possess,  Almighty  God,  the  giver
of  our  lives  and  the  supporter  of  all
things.  A  feeling  of  reverence  and
respect  for  Deity  prevails  in  some
form  or  other  amongst  all  the  human
family.  It  assumes,  it  is  true,  a
variety  of  forms,  and  there  are  many
different  ideas  and  opinions  among
men  as  to  the  proper  mode  of  wor-
shiping and  rendering  ourselves  ac-
ceptable to  our  heavenly  Father,
All  mankind  believe,  more  or  less,  in
a  Being  who  rules  and  governs  the
universe,  and  controls  the  destinies
of  the  human  family ;  and  whatever
form  of  worship  may  be  followed,  it
is  accompanied  by  feelings  of  reve-
rence and  respect  for  God.  There  is
something  very  singular  about  this,
and  it  is  different  from  anything  else
that  exists  on  the  face  of  the  earth.
We  have  our  theories  about  science  ;
we  have  principles  and  laws  which
govern  mechanism  ;  there  are  certain
known  Jaws  which  govern  the  ele-


ments by  which  we  are  surrounded  ;
there  are  certain  sciences  which  men
can  master  by  studying  the  laws
which  govern  them ;  but  in  regard
to  the  worship  of  God,  it  seems  to
differ  materially  from  anything  else
that  we  have  cognizance  of.  He  is  a
Being  that  mankind  generally  do
not  have  a  knowledge  of,  they  do  not
have  access  to  his  presence,  and  un-
less he  communicates  it,  there  is  no
known  law  by  which  we  can  approach
unto  him.

The  ideas  of  men  seem  to  be  vague
and  uncertain  in  relation  to  the  wor-
ship of  the  Almighty,  and  they  have
always  been  more  or  less  so,  When
Paul  stood  up  in  Athens,  some
eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  in  speak-
ing upon  God,  he  says,  "  I  saw  an
altar  on  which  was  inscribed — ;  To
the  unknown  God/  "  The  Athen-
ians had  a  variety  of  gods  which
they  professed  to  know,  or  that  re-
presented certain  ideas,  theories  and
principles  which  obtained  among
them  ;  but  there  was  one  whom  they
described  as  the  **  Unknown  God."
Paul  makes  a  most  remarkable  state-
ment concerning  this  matter.  He
says  —  "Him,  therefore,  whom  ye
ignorantly  worship,  declare  I  onto
you;"  the  God  who  made  the  hea-
vens, the  earth,  the*  seas  and  the
fountains  of  waters.


THE  K  OWL  EDGE  OF  GOD,  ETC


195


The  id  ok  tors  who  lived  long  prior
"to  the time  when  Paul  preached
Christ  and  him  crucified  to  the  peo-
ple of  A tli ens,  had  some  idea  of  the
**  unknown  God." We  read  that  a
dream  was  given  to  Nebuchadnezzar,
unfolding  to  him  certain  things  that
were  to  take  place  in  the  future;  and
he  called together the  magicians,
astrologers and soothsayers  —  t  he
men  of  science  of  those  days,  and
who  professed  to  have  a  knowledge
of  the  future,  and  he  told  them  he
wanted  them  to  reveal  unto  him  his
dream,  and  then  to give  him  the
interpretation. They  told  him  that
his  request  was  very  unreasonable ;
it  was  beyond  their  power  to  com-
ply with,  and  was  a  thing  not  com-
monly asked  or  required  of  men  of
their  profession ; but  if  he  would
give  them  the  dream,  they  had  rules
and  principles  whereby  they  could
interpret  it. He  still  insisted  upon
the  dream  and the  interpretation.
They then  told  the  king  that  no
being  but  the  "  unknown  God,"  who
dwelt  in  the  heavens,  was  able  to  re-
veal such  a  secret  as  he  demanded  at
their  hands. We  find  that,  among
the  Babylonians  and  Chaldeans,  be-
hind their  ideas,  theories  and  myth-
ology,  they  had  ideas  of  a  Supreme
Being  who  governed  the  universe,
who alone could  reveal  the  secret
acts  of  men,  and  who  held  their  des-
tinies in  his  hands;  and  unless  there
is  some  plan  or  law  by  which  men
can  have  access to him who,  in
Scriptures  as  well  as  by  men  at  the
present  time,  is  terry  ed  the  unknown
God,  we  must  remain  ignorant* of
him,  his  attributes,  designs  and  pur-
poses, and  of  our  relationship  to  him.

Paul  also  tells  us  that  life  and  im-
mortality are  brought  to  light  by  the
Gospel ;  hence  it  would  seem  that
that  is  a  principle  whereby  men  can
be  brought  into  communication  with
God. There are  other  Scriptures


that  are  rather  remarkable  on  this
point  The  Apostle  tells  us — "  Now
fire  we  the  sons  of  God,  but  it  does
not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be;
but  when  he  who  is  our  life  shall  ap-
pear, then  shall  we  be  like  unto  him,
for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is!"

It  would  seem  from  this,  and  other
Scriptures  of  a  similar  kind,  that
man  did  once  possess  a  knowledge  of
Go  1  and  the  future,  and  a  certainty
in  relation  to  the  mode  of  worship-
ing him. Paul  says  that  life  and
immorality  are  brought  to  light  by
the  Gospel. The  question  necessa-
rily arises  in  our  minds,  how  and  by
what  means  are  these  things  accom-
plished ? In  what  way  are  men  to
be  put  in  possession  of  this  light  and
this  immortality  ? And  then,  men
who  have  not  been  in  the  habit  of
reflecting,  or  if  of  reflecting,  not  of
judging  correctly,  not  being  in  pos-
session of  true  principles,  think,  and
their  thoughts  go  back,  and  they  say
— "Well,  what  of  those  who  lived
before  there  was  a  Gospel  p"  For
my  part,  I  do  not  know  of  any  such
time,  i  do  not  read  of  any  such  time,
and  I  am  not  in  possession  of  any  in-
formation in  relation  to  any  such
time. I  should  as  soon  think  of  ask-
ing— What  of  the  people  who  lived
before  there  was  a  sun,  moon,  slara
or  earth,  or  before  there  was  any-
thing to  eat  or  drink,  or  any  other
impossible  tiling  that  we  could  re-
flect upon. Thoughts  and  ideas  of
this  kind  can  not  have  foundation  in
fact ; they  never  did  exist If  life
and  immortality  are  brought  to  light
by  the  Gospel,  then,  whenever  and
wherever  men  had  a  knowledge  of
life  and  im mortality,  whenever  and
wherever  God  revealed  himself  to  the
human  family,  he  made  known  unto
them  his  will,  and  drew  aside  the
curtain  of  futurity,  unfolded  his  pur-
poses, and  developed  those  principles
which  we  find  recorded  in  Sacred


196  JOURNAL  OF

Writ  Wherever  men  had  a  know-
ledge of  these  things,  they  had  a  1
knowledge  of  the  Gospel ;  hence  it  is
called  in  Scripture,  ** the  everlasting
Gospel  ;"  and  hence  John,  while  on
the  Isle  of  Patinas,  wrapped  in  pro-
phetic vision,  beholding  a  (succession
of  marvelous  events  that  should  tran-
spire in  after  ages,  declared,  among
other  things — "I  saw  another  angel
flying  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  having
the  everlasting  Gospel  to  proclaim  to
those  who  dwell  on  the  earth,  to
every  nation,  kindred,  tongue  and
people,  crying  with  a  loud  voice,  *  fear
God  and  give  glory  to  him,  for  the
hour  of  his  judgment  is  come.1  "

The  Gospel,  then,  in  its  nature
and  in  its  principles,  is  everlasting;
in  other  words,  it  is  God's  method  of
saving  the  human  family;  and  hence,
Christ,  of  whom  we  hear  and  read  so
much  in  the  Scriptures  of  divine
truth,  was  "  the  Lamb  slain  from  he-
fore  the  foundation  of  the  world,"
He  was  believed  in,  long  before  he
made  his  appearance,  both  on  the
Asiatic  and  American  continent,  and
God  gave  unto  his  ancient  Prophets
many  visions,  manifestations  and
revelations  of  his  coming  to  take
away  the  sins  of  the  world  by  the
sacrifice  of  himself.

In  speaking  of  the  Gospel,  Paul
talks  of  it  being  known  as  far  back
as  the  days  of  Abraham,  for  he  tells
us  that  "  God,  foreseeing  that  he
would  justify  the  heathen  through
faith,  preached  before,  the  Gospel
unto  Abraham."  The  same  Apostle
tells  us  concerning  Moses  and  the
children  of  Israel  having  the  Gos-
pel  Says  he — l£  We  have  the  Gospel
preached  unto  us  as  well  as  they ;
but  the  word  preached  unto  them
did  not  profit,  not  being  mixed  with
faith  in  those  who  heard  itj  where-
fore the  law  was  added  because  of
t ransgression ; "  and  when  Jesqs
Christ  came,  he  came  to  do  away


DISCOURSES.

J  with  the  law  and  to  re- in  state  the
I  Gospel  as  it  had  heretofore  existed ;
the  everlasting  Gospel;  that  (Jos pel
which  brings  life  and  immortality  to
light,  and  wherever  and  whenever  a
a  knowledge  of  God  was  had  among
the  human  family,  it  was  through  the
instrumentality  of  the  (JospeL

When  Jesus  was  upon  the  earth,
he  made  this  principle  vety  plain  to
the  people  on  the  Asiatic  continent;
and,  as  recorded  in  the  Book  of
Mormon,  he  made  it  plain  to  the
people  on  the  American  continent,
revealing  to  them  the  same  princi-
ples, truth,  light  and  intelligence;
organized  the  churches  in  the  same
way;  implanted  his  Spirit  among
them,  and  imparted  to  all  who  were
obedient  to  his  law  a  knowledge  of
God  and  of  their  own  future  destiny,
and  this  result  always  followed  a
knowledge  of  the  Gospel  among
men.

The  reason  there  is  so  much  con-
fusion and  disorder  among  men,  to*
day,  in  the  Christian  world  is, —
"  they  have  forsaken  God,  the  foun-
tain of  living  waters,  they  hare
hewn  out  to  themselves  cisterns,
broken  cisterns  that  will  hold  no
water."  There  were  certain  princi-
ples laid  down  by  Jesus  and  his  dis-
ciples, and  also  by  Moses,  and  by
Nephi,  Alma  and  others  on  this
continent,  in  a  very  plain,  clear  and
pointed  manner,  in  fact,  although  a
mystery  to  men  of  the  world,  to  be-
lievers they  are  as  the  Scriptures
say — so  plain  that  a  wayfaring  man
though  a  fool  need  not  err  therein ;
and  they  are  strictly  logical,  and
philosophical  and  easy  of  compre-
hension.

I  There  are  laws  which  govern u  a-
ture,  and  the  principles  of  matter
with  which  we  are  surrounded,  with
which  many  of  us  are  familiar.
These  laws  are  as  unchangeable  as
the  revolution  of  the  earth  upon  its


THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD,  ETC


197


axis,  or  as  the  rising  and  setting  of
the  sun.  These  laws  are  perfectly
reliable;  they  cannot  be  disregarded
with  impunity,  for  if  disregarded,
the  results  desired  will  not  follow*
The  truths  of  the  Gospel,  and  the
principles  of  the  plan  of  salvation  are
as  immutable  as  the  laws  of  nature.
Men  of  God  in  different  ages  hare
been  in  possession  of  certain  philoso-
phical truth  in  relation  to  God,  the
heavens,  the  past;  the  present  and
the  future.  This  has  been  the  case
not  only  with  men  of  God  on  the
Asiatic  continent;  but  idso  on  this
continent;  and  however  men  of  the
present  day  may  affect  to  despise  re-
velation, as  many  do,  as  visionary,
wild  and  fanatical,  it  is  to  that  we
are  indebted  for  all  the  knowledge
we  have  of  God,  our  own  destiny,
and  of  rewards  and  punishments,
exaltations  or  degradations  hereafter,
Lay  aside  this  revelation,  do  away
with  this  principle,  and  the  world
to-day  is  a  blank  in  regard  to  God,
heaven  and  eternity ;  they  know
nothing  about  them.

I  have  heard  some  people  say —
"If  God  revealed  himself  to  men  in
other  days,  why  not  reveal  himself
to  us?"  I  say,  why  not,  indeed,  to
us  f  Why  should  not  men  in  this
day  be  put  in  possession  of  the  same
light,  truth  and  intelligence,  and
the  same  means  of  acquiring  a  know-
ledge of  God  as  men  in  other  ages
and  eras  '  have  enjoyed  ?  Why
should  they  not  ?  Who  em  answer
the  question  ?  Who  can  solve  the
problem  ?  Who  can  tell  why  these
things  should  not  exist  to-day.  as
much  as  in  any  other  day  ?  It  God
is  God  and  men  are  men,  if  God  has
a  design  in  relation  to  the  earth  on
which  we  live,  and  in  relation  to  the
eternities  that  are  to  come;  if  men
have  had  a  knowledge  of  God  in  clays
past,  why  not  in  this  day  ?  What
good  reason  is  there  why  it  should


not  be  so?  Say  some — "Oh,  we
are  so  enlightened  and  intelligent
now.  In  former  ages,  when  the
people  were  degraded  and  in  dark-
ness, it  was  necessary  that  he  should
communicate  intelligence  to  the
human  family ;  but  we  live  in  the
blaze  of  Gospel  day,  in  an  age  of
light  and  intelligence."  Perhaps
we  do;  I  rather  doubt  it  I  hfivo
a  great  many  misgivings  about  the
intelligence  that  men  boast  so  much
of  in  this  enlightened  day.  There
were  men  in  those  dark  ages  who
could  commune  with  God,  and
who,  by  the  power  of  faith,  could
draw  aside  the  curtain  of  eternity
and  gaze  upon  the  invisible  world.
There  were  men  who  could  tell  the
destiny  of  the  human  family,  and
the  events  which  would  transpire
throughout  every  subsequent  period
of  time  until  the  final  winding-up
scene.  There  were  men  who  could
gaze  upon  the  face  of  Go  1,  have  the
ministering  of  angels,  and  unfold
the  future  destinies  of  the  world.
If  those  were  dark  ages  I  pray  God
to  give  me  a  little  darkness,  and  de-
liver me  from  the  light  and  intelli-
gence that  prevail  in  our  day;  for
i\H  a  rational,  intelligent,  immortal
being  who  has  to  do  with  time  and
eternity,  1  consider  it  one  of  the
greatest  acquirements  for  men  to  be-
come acquainted  with  their  God  and
with  their  f  uture  destiny*  These  are
my  thoughts  and  reflections  in  rela-
tion to  these  matters.

Life  and  immortality,  we  are
told,  were  brought  to  light  by  the
Gospel.  And  how  is  that?  4  Why,
it  is  a  very  simple  thing,  a  very
simple  thing  indeed.  When  Jesus
was  upon  the  earth  he,  we  are  tuld,
came  to  introduce  the  Gospel  He
appeared  on  this  continent  as  on
the  continent  .of  Asia  for  that  pur-
pose; and  in  so  doing  he  made
known  unto  men  certain  principles


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


pertaining  to  their  being  and  origin,
and  their  relationship  to  God ;  per-
taining to  the  earth  on  which  we  live,
and  to  the  heavens  with  which  we
expect  to  be  associated;  pertaining  to
the  beings  who  have  existed  and  those
who  will  exist;  pertaining  to  the
resurrection  of  the  dead  and  the  life
and  glory  of  the  world  to  come.  This
is  what  the  Gospel  unfolds.  It  is  not
taught  in  any  of  our  schools  of  phi-
losophy, they  do  not  comprehend  it.
It  is  a  hiw  and  a  principle  laid  down
by  the  Almighty  ;  and  although  a
yery  simple  one  it  is  more  subtle  in
its  operations  than  any  of  the  prin-
ciples of  nature  with  which  we  are
acquainted ;  and  many  of  them
have,  for  generations,  being  unknown
in  their  action  and  properties  to  the
human  family.  It  is  not  long  since
we  became  acquainted  with  the  power
of  steam.  That  power  has  always
existed ,  but  why  did  not  men  make  \
it  available  for  useful  purposes  ?
Because  they  were  unacquainted  with
its  principles.  It  is  not  long  since
men  became  acquainted  with  the
properties  of  gas*  I  can  remi  inber,
in  ray  young  days,  walking  along  the
streets  when  they  were  lighted  with  oil
lamps;  and  the  light  was  so  dim
that  it  only  made  darkness  visible.
It  is  not  long  since  the  laws  of  elec-
tricity were  discovered,  and  now
they  are  made  available  for  tele-
graphy and  other  purposes.  These
principles  always  existed;  but  they
eluded  the  research  and  intelligence
of  men  for  ages;  but  finally  they
were  made  known.  Doubtless  there
are  thousands  of  other  principles  in  j
Nature,  with  which  we  are  unac-
quainted to-day,  formed  by  the  Great
I  Am,  the  Great  Ruler  and  Governor
of  the  universe,  and  placed  under
certain  laws,  just  as  much  as  the  |
principles  with  which  we  have  alrea-
dy been  made  acquainted  by  the
operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  on  the


spirit  of  man.

We  read  a  good  deal  about  the
soul  of  man,  and  the  body  of  man.
Will  anybody  tell  me  where  the
body  commences  and  where  the
spirit  le  ives  off,  and  how  they  are
united,  and  what  forms  the  com-
pact ?  Can  anybody  tell  about  the
principle  of  life  in  man  ?  We  have
had  philosopher  after  philosopher  in
j  all  the  various  European  as  well
as  American  schools,  trying  to  solve
this  problem.  They  can  not  do  it,
it  is  yet  a  mystery.  But  because  a
thing  is  a  mystery,  are  we  to  say  that
it  does  not  exist  ?  We  see  man,
perfect  in  his  form,  in  possession  of
his  faculties  and  clothed  with  intel-
ligence. One  day  he  is  walking
around,  and  the  next  he  lies  a  life-
less corpse;  with  the  same  body,  the
same  bones,  nerves  and  muscles  and
every  faculty  of  his  body,  appa-
rently, as  complete  as  the  day  before,
but  he  is  dead,  inanimate,  inactive,
without  a  spirit  or  soul,  if  you  please,
What  brings  about  this  change,  or
who  possesses  the  power  to  resusci-
tate that  man  and  implant,  in  him.
again  the  principle  of  life  ?  Where
is  the  man,  the  intelligence  or  the
science  that  can  do  it  ?  We  do  not
find  it  among  mortals.  If  some
of  these  things  are  mysteries  why  not
o  tilers?

God  says  that  no  man  knows  the
things  of  man,  but  by  the  spirit  of
man  that  is  in  him;  so  no  man
knows  the  things  of  God  but  by  the
Spirit  of  God.  How  is  that  Spirit
imparted  and  to  whom  ?  Through
what  medium  are  we  to  get  in  pos-
session of  these  principles  ?  Will
any  of  our  savants  answer  ?  Will
our  philosophers  tell  us  upon  what
principle  these  things  can  be  com-
muuicatcd  to  man,  so  as  to  brinsT
him  into  relationship  to  God,  and  to
enable  him  to  comprehend  things
which  men  in  former  times  compre-


■


THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD,  ETC*  199


hended?  There  are  unquestionably
certain  laws  and  principles  govern  -
ing  these  matters,  as  legitimate  as
those  governing  any  other  bianch
of  science  or  knowledge,  It*  man
knows  the  things  of  God  only  by
the  Spirit  of  God,  how  are  we  to
obtain  that  Spirit?  One  of  the  old
Apostles,  in  talking  on  this  subject
in  former  times,  told  the  people  to
repent  and  be  baptized  in  the  name
of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  remission  of
their  sins,  and  they  should  receive
the  Holy  Ghost,  What  should  that
Spirit  do  ?  It  should  take  .of  the
things  of  God,  and  show  them  to
those  who  received  it.  Says  the
Apostle — "  Ye  have  received  an  unc-
tion from  the  Holy  One,  whereby
ye  are  enabled  to  know  all  things;
and  ye  need  not  that  any  man
should  teach  you  save  the  anointing
that  is  within  you,  which  is  true  and
no  lie.  Ye  are  our  witnesses,  as  also
is  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  bears  wit-
ness of  us/'  Another  one  says —
4t  Ye  are  in  possession  of  a  hope  that
has  entered  within  the  vail,  whither
Christ,  our  fore-runner,  has  gone,  and  ,
where  he  ever  lives  tu  make  interces-
sion for  us,"  •  t  I
This  light  and  intelligence  was
communicated  to  men  in  the  dark
ages.  Tit  is  treasure,  says  the  Apos-
tle, we  have  in  earthen  vessels.
This  was  what  Jesus  referred  to
when  he  said  to  the  woman  of  Sa- 1
rnaria — l*  If  thou  hadst  asked  of  me
I  would  have  given  thee  water  which  ,
would  have  been  in  thee  a  well
springing  up  to  everlasting  life,"
There  was  a  principle  of  that  kind


among  men  in  those  days,  and  it
bloomed  with  immortality,  and  pat
its  possessors  in  possession  of  cer-
tainty, intelligence,  and  knowledge,
in  relation  to  God,  whereby  they
were  enabled  to  cry — *'  Abba,  Fa-
ther," and  to  approach  him  in  the
name  of  his  Son,  and  receive  from
him  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
which  Jesus  said  would  impart  a
knowledge  of  God  and  his  purposes,
and  whereby  they  eventually  might
be  exalted  in  his  celestial  kingdom.

This  is  the  kind  of  thing  that  they
had  in  that  day.  This  is  the  Gospel
that  we  have  to  proclaim  to  you,  Its
laws  are  just,  strict  and  equitable  to
those  who  embrace  it  Those  who
do  not,  of  course,  they  cannot  un-
derstand it.  Why  ?  Jesus  said  to
Nicodemus  —  "  Except  a  man  be
born  of  water,  he  cannot  see  the
kingdom  of  God;  and  except  he  be
born  of  the  water  and  of  the  spirit
he  cannot  enter  the  kingdom  of
God,"  that  is,  he  cannot  know  any-
thing about  it  unless  he  obeys  its
initiatory  ordinances.  Then,  to  the
Saints,  if  they  do  not  live  their  reli-
gion and  keep  their  covenants,  the
light  that  is  within  them  will  become
dark,  and  how  great  will  be  that  d;irk-
ness.  This  light,  truth  and  intelli-
gence can  only  be  obtained,  in  the
first  place,  by  obedience  to  the  laws
of  God  ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  it
can  only  be  ietained,  by  continued
faithfulness,  purity,  virtue  and  holi-
ness*

I  pray  that  God  may,  by  his  Spirit,
lead  us  in  the  way  of  peace,  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  Amen.


200


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ERASTUS  SNOW,


Delivered  ik  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afterxoox,  Sept.  ]  4,  1873.


(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans,)

JLNCIENT  PROPHECY,  RELATING  TO  THE  TIME  OF THE  RESTITUTION  OF

ALL  THINGS,  TO  BE  FULFILLED,


"  But  in  the  last  days  it  shall  come
to  pass,  that  the  mountain  of  the
house  of  the  Lord  .shall  be  established
in  the  top  of  the  mountains,  and  it
shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills;  and
people  shall  flow  unto  it.

"  And  many  nations  shall  come,
and  say,  Come,  and  let  us  go  up  to
4be  mountain  of  the  Lord,  and  to  the
house  of  the  God  of  Jacob ;  and  he
will  teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  we  will
walk  in  his  paths:  for  the  law  shall
go  forth  from  Zion,  and  the  word  of
the  Lord  from  Jerusalem.

"And  he  shall  judge  among  many
people,  and  rebuke  strong  nations
afar  off;  and  they  shall  beat  their
swords  into  ploughshares,  and  their
spears  into  pruning-hooks ;  nation
shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  na-
tion, neither  shall  they  learn  war
any  more,

"But  they  shall  sit  every  man
under  his  vine  and  under  his  fig  tree;
and  none  shall  make  them  afraid:
for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  of  hosts
hath  spoken  it.

"For  all  people  will  walk  every
one  in  the  name  of  bis  god,  and  we
will  walk  ia  the  name  of  the  Lord
our  God  forever  and  ever.
X  "  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  will
I  assemble  her  that  halteth,  and  I


■

will  gather  her  that  is  driven  out,
and  her  that  I  have  afflicted.

"  And  I  will  make  her  that  halted
a  remnant,  and  her  that  was  cast  far
off  a  strong  nation :  and  the  Lord
shall  reign  over  them  in  mount  Zion
from  henceforth,  even  forever." —
Micah  iv,  1— 7.

I  have  read  this  Scripture  in  the
hearing  of  the  congregation,  believ-
ing, as  I  do,  that  it  is  a  prophecy
having  direct  reference  to  the  latter
times,  and  to  the  day  and  age  now
ushered  in  upon  the  earth.  There
are  many  things  in  the  Jewish  Scrip-
tures, the  fulfillment  of  which  has
become  a  matter  of  history.  There
are  many  other  things  which  have
been  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  God
through  his  servants  the  Prophets,
which  remain  yet  to  be  fulfilled.  It
is  a  matter  of  great  importance,  to
my  mind,  to  be  able  to  discern  those
things pertaining to the  future,
which  God  has  revealed,  which  have
yet  to  come  to  pass. He  revealed,
beforehand,  to  the  antediluvian  world,
the  approach  of  the  deluge,  and  gave,
them  a  timely  warning,  sending  his
servants  amongst  them,  calling  upon
them  to  repent  of  their  sins  and  to
prepare  for  that  which  was  coming
upon the  earth. He  foretold  to


ANCIENT  PROPHECY,  ETC


301


Abraham  the  bondage  which  his  seed
would  Jiave  to  endure  in  the  land  of
Egypt,  their  final  deliverance  by  the
hand  of  Moses,  and  their  establish-
ment in  the  promised  land  of  Canaan*
Moses,  and  other  Prophets  raised  up
after  him,  foretold  the  blessings
which,  through  faith  and  obedience,
should  be  poured  upon  Israel,  and
the  scourges  and  judgments  which
should  fall  upon  t  he  in  through  un-
belief and  disobedience  Whoever
will  read  the  prophecies  of  Moses
contained  in  Deuteronomy,  from  the
28th  to  the  33rd  chapter,  will  per-
cceive  there  clearly  foreshadowed  the
great  events  in  the  history  of  the
seed  of  Abraham,  from  that  time
until  the  time  of  their  restoration  to
their  promised  inheritance,  which  is
referred  to  in  the  chapter  from  which
I  have  quoted  in  Micah.  All  these
great  events  have  been  the  subjects
of  prophecy,  and  have  been  very
clearly  pointed  out,  and  perhaps  by
none  more  plainly  and  clearly  than
by  Moses  himself,  while  he  was  the
leader  of  Israel,

The  dealings  of  God  with  the  hu-
man family  have  been  the  subjects
of  prophecy  and  revelation,  and  more
especially  with  the  descendants  of
Shem,  the  offspring  of  Abraham,
Isaac  and  *  Jacob,  and  not  only  the
Chosen  People,  but  the  nations  with
which  they  were  identified,  and  with
whom  they  were  more  or  less  con-
nected and  allied  in  a  national  capa-
city. All  these  things  have  been  the
subjects  of  prophecy  ;  but  the  burden
of  prophicy,  from  the  beginning  of
the  world  down  to  the  present  time,
seems  to  centre  upon  our  day — the
time  ot  the  restitution  of  all  things
spoken  of  so  frequently  by  the  Pro-
phets of  God,  iiy  reference  to  the
«5rd  chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the"  Apos-
tles, we  find  that  the  Apostle  Peter,
talking  to  the  wondering  Jews  as-
sembled together  gazing  upon  him


and  his  bro titer  John,  at  the  time
he  healed  the  lame  man  at  the  beau-
tiful gate  of  the  Temple,  and  told
them  concerning  Jesus,  whom  they
had  crucified,  and  whom  the  Father
had  raised  from  the  dead,  of  which
they  were  his  witnesses,  told  them
that  this  same  Jesus  had  been  taken
np  into  heaven,  and  would  remain  at
the  right  hand  of  God  until  the  time
of  the  restitution  of  all  things  spoken
of  by  all  the  Prophets  since  the
world  began.  Then  he,  Jesus,  will
descend  again.  From  this  Scripture
we  understand  that  Peter  and  his
brother  Apostles  comprehended  the
doctrine  of  the  restitution  "of  all
things,  and  that  it  should  take  place
in  the  latter  days  preparatory  to  the
second  advent  of  the  Savior.

This  was  also  a  theme  for  angels
as  well  as  Prophets.  We  read  in
the  first  cliRpter  of  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  that  Jesus  led  his  disciples
out  to  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  there
lifted  up  his  hands  and  blessed  them;
and  while  in  ihe  act  of  giving  them
their  last  commission — to  go  into  all
the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to
every  creature,  baptizing  them  in  the
name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy
Ghost,  a  cloud  overshadowed  him,
and  he  ascended  from  their  sight  ;
and  as  they  stood  gazing  up  into
heaven  after  him,  two  angels  stood
by  them,  clothed  in  white  apparel,
and  they  said  unto  them — "  Ye  men
of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  thus  gazing
up  into  heaven  ?  Behold,  this  same
Jesus,  which  you  now  see  go  up  into
heaven,  shall  so  come  again  in  like
manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into*
heaven,"

The  time  of  the  restitution  of  all
things  has  not  only  been  the  theme
of  angels,  Prophets  and  Apostles,
.but  of  all  Saints  whose  undeistaud-
;  iugs  have  been  enlightened  by  the
;  Spirit  of  revelation  from  on  high.
)  The  chapter  which  I  have  read  from,


202


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


■

in  Micah,  brings  it  down  to  the  last
days,  and  is  perhaps  a  little  more
explicit  than  some  other  prophecies,
It  says  that  "  in  the  last  days  the
mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall
be  established  in  the  tops  of  the
mountains,  and  shall  be  exalted  above
the  hills,  and  people  shall  flow  onto
it."  "The  mountain  of  the  Lord's
house" — this  is  a  peculiar  phrase,
and  was  probably  used  by  the  Pro-
phet because  it  was  a  common  mode
of  expression  in  Israel  in  the  days  of
David  and  many  of  the  Prophets
several  hundred  years  after  him,  for,
in  speaking  of  Mount  Moriah,  on
which  the  Temple  of  Solomon  was
built,  they  spoke  of  it  as  the  moun-
tain of  the  Lord's  house-  Moriah  is
a  hill  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  on
which  David  located  the  site  of  the
Temple,  and  on  which  his  son  Solo-
mon built  it,  and  it  was  called  the
mountain  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,
This  Temple  suffered  spoliation  at
the  hands  uf  the  Gentiles,  who  made
inroads  on  Israel  from  time  to  time,
but  it  was  repaired  and  kept  intact
until  the  days  of  the  Savior*  While
he  was  on  the  earth  he  predicted  its
total  destruction,  because  of  the  un-
belief of  the  people.  He  said,  Mat*
thew  xxiv,  2,  the  time  should  come
when  not  one  stone  of  that  Temple
should  be  left  on  another.  The  Pro-
phet Micah  predicted  the  same  in  the
chapter  preceding  the  one  which  I
have  read  from.  He  says — "Hear
this,  I  pray  you,  ye  heads  of  the
house  of  Jacob,  and  princes  of  the
house  of  Israel,  you  that  abhor  judg-
ment and  pervert  all  equity.  They
build  up  Zion  with  blood,  and  Jeru-
salem with  iniquity.  The  heads
thereof  judge  for  reward,  and  the
priests  thereof  teach  for  hire,  and  the
prophets  thereof  divine  for  money ;
yet  will  they  lean  upon  the  Lord,
and  say,  Is  not  the  Lord  among  us,
none  evil  can  come  upon  us  ?  There-


fore shall  Zion  .  for  your  sake  be
ploughed  as  a  field,  and  Jerusalem
shall  become  heaps,  and  the  moun-
tain of  the  house  as  the  high  places
of  the  forest/*

This  last  prediction  has  been  lite-
rally fulfilled.  It  has  become  a  mat-
ter of  history  that  Jerusalem  has  be-
come heaps  of  ruins,  and  the  moun-
tain of  the  house  of  the  Lord  has  be-
come as  the  high  places  of  the  forest,
and  has  been  ploughed  as  a- field.  It
is  a  matter  of  history  that  the  very
site  of  that  wonderful  Temple  was
ploughed  as  a  field,  and  its  destruc-
tion was  rendered  so  complete  that
every  foundation  stone  was  raised ;
and  that  there  might  be  no  vestige
of  it  left,  around  which  the  Jews
might  cling,  the  Roman  Emperor
caused  that  it  should  be  ploughed  up
as  a  field,  thus  literally  fulfilling  the
words  of  the  Prophet  and  the  words
of  the  Savior,  This  woe  and  des-
truction was  predicted  and  overtook
that  people,  and  they  were  eventually
scattered,  because  of  their  wicked-
ness, and  because  of  the  corruptions
of  their  princes,  judges  and  rulers.
But  it  shall  come  to  puss  in  the  last
days,  saith  the  Lord  through  Micah,
that  the  mountain  of  the  bouse  of  the
Lord  shall  bv  established  in  the  tops
of  the  mountains,  and  shall  be  exalted
above  the  hills,  and  people  shall  tlow
unto  it  Here  is  a  promise  around
which  the  house  of  Israel  may  cling,
and  to  which  they  may  fasten  their
faith,  for  God  will  not  forever  hide
his  face  from  his  people  ;  but  he  will
make  choice  of  a.  place  or  places
named,  and  there  he  will  build  his
house,  and  people  from  all  nations
will  flow  unto  it*

This  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house,
which  is  to  be  established  in  the  tops
of  the  mountains,  seems  to  be,  in  the
mind  of  the  Prophet,  located  in  a
diflerent  place  from  the  former  house,
which  was  located  upon  that  hill  in


Jerusalem.  This,  in  the  latter  days,
the  Prophet  says,  "  shall  be  in  the
tops  of  the  mountains/*  Mark  the
expression,  not  on  the  top  of  a  moun-
tain, nor  in  the  tops  of  the  highest
mountain,  but  in  the  "tops  of  the
mountains" — the  plural  number  is
used  ;  in  other  words,  in  the  midst  of
the  high  places  of  the  earth.  Not  on
the  borders-  of  the  'sea  shore,  for  the
only  reason  that  we  speak  of  moun-
tains on  the  surface  of  the  earth  is
been  use  of  their  elevation  above  the
general  level  of  the  ocean.

The  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house
shall  be  established  in  the  tops  of  the
mountains  in  the  last  days,  and  peo-
ple from  all  nations  shall  flow  unto
it.  And  w  herefore  ?  What  will  be
their  object  and  purpose  in  fleeing

They  will  say —
us  go  up  to  the
Lord,  and  to  the


from  all  nations  ?
"  Come  and  let
mountain  of  the


house  of  the  God  of  Jacob,  and  he
will  teach  us  of  his  ways  find  we  will
walk  in  his  paths,  for  the  law  shall  go
forth  of  Zion,  and  the  word  of  the
Lord  from  Jerusalem."  Here  we
learn  the  object  of  the  people  in  flee-
ing from  all  nations  to  the  mountain
of  the  Lord's  house :  it  is  that  they
may  learn  of  his  ways  and  walk  in
his  paths.  "The  Lord  shall  judge
among  many  people,"  says  Micah,
"  and  rebuke  strong  nations  afar  off,
and  they  shall  beat  their  swords  into
ploughshares,  and  their  spears  into
pruning-hooks;  nation  shall  not  lift
up  sword  against  nation,  neither  shall
they  learn  war  any  more,  I  will
assemble  her  that  halteth,  gather  her
that  is  driven  out,  her  that  I  have
afflicted,  even  the  chosen  seed  of
Abraham,  the  house  of  Israel  that
has  been  scattered  and  peeled  and
driven.  I  will  gather  her  that  was
scattered,  and  her  that  was  cast  afar
otf  I  will  make  a  strong  nation, and  the
Lord  shall  reign  over  them  in  Mount
Zion,  from  henceforth,  even  forever."


Isaiah  has  used  nearly  the  same
language  in  the  second  chapter  of
his  prophecies.  Ezekiel,  in  the  37th
chapter  has  used  similar  language,
predicting  the  time  ol  the  restoration
of  the  house  of  Israel  and  the  gath-
ering together  of  the  people  of  God,
and  that  the  Lord  shall  reign  over
them  and  that  a  reign  of  peace  shall
be  established  on  the  earth.

That  this  and  other  prophecies
of  a  similar  character  remain  yet  to
be  fulfilled,  must  appear  evident  to
every  reflecting  mind,  for  since  these
prophecies  were  delivered  there  has
never  been  a  time  in  which  the  na-
tions have  beaten  their  swords  into
ploughshares,  their  spears  into  prun-
ing hooks,  lived  at  perfect  peace  -with
each  other,  and  walked  in  the  ways
of  the  Lord.  But  it  has  been  pre-
dicted by  the  Prophets  that  such  a
period  will  arrive.  The  same  thing
was  also  foretold  by  the  Savior,  and
by  the  angels  who  promised  his  se-
cond coming,  Mark  the  object  of
the  gathering — the  nations  shall  say,
"Let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of
the  Lord,  to  the  house  of  the  God  of
Jacob,  for  he  will  teach  us  of  his
ways  and  we  will  learn  to  walk  in
his  paths/'  How  will  this  be  brought
about  ?  Because  the  law  shall  go
forth  out  ot  Zion,  and  the  word  of
the  Lord  from  Jerusalem.  How  can
this  be  unless  God  shall  begin  to
reveal  himself  to  his  people  and
minister  in  their  midst  as  in  ancient
days,  by  his  own  voice,  the  voice  of
Prophets,  the  spirit  of  revelation  and
the  ministration  of  angels  ?

I  am  aware  that  many  people  of
our  time  attempt  to  place  some  mys-
tical and  illusive  construction  upon
the  prophecies  in  the  Bible,  and
there  is  a  disposition  to  ignore  the
plain  and  obvious  meaning  of  the
declarations  of  the  Prophets,  and  to
give  to  them  some  private  inter-
pretation. But  the  Apostle  Peter,


204  *  JOUENAL  OF

in  the  first  chapter  of  his  second
epistle,  in  writing  to  his  brethren
on  this  subject,  says  that  no  pro-
phecy of  Scripture  is  of  any  private
interpretation,  bat  holy  men  of  old
spoke  as  they  were  moved  upon  by
the  Holy  Ghost  In  order  that  they
might  be  able  to  understand  these
prophecies,  the  Apostle  counseled  his
brethren  to  gire  heed  unto  them  as
unto  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place
until  the  day  dawn  and  tire  day  star
arose  in  their  hearts.

It  is  true  that  the  Prophets  have
told  us  of  dreams  and  visions  which
they  have  had,  and  in  some  in-
stances the  Lord  has  explained  or ,
interpreted  them,  and  as  such  we
are  to  receive  them.  But  where  he
has  not  deigned  to  give  the  inter-
pretation we  must  wait  until  he
does,  for  it  does  not  belong  to  men
to  give  their  own  private  interpre-
tation' thereto.  It  is  written,  "  In-
terpretations  belong  to  God,"  and
where  it  has  pleased  him  to  inter-
pret it  behooves  us  to  accept  it,  and
where  it  hc*s  not  pleased  him  to  do
go  it  becomes  us  to  wait  until  he  dues,
and  not  attempt  to  obtrude  upon
mankind  our  private  interpretation  of
what  God  has  revealed.  Where
plain  predictions  are  uttered,  we  are
to  receive  them  as  we  would  the  writ-
ings of  any  other  author — according
to  the  plain  and  obvious  meaning  of
the  language.

How  then,  I  ask,  can  these  pro-
phecies be  fulfilled  in  the  last  days,
except  God  shall  again  speak  from  '
heaven  ?  Where  shall  the  moun-
tain of  the  Lord's  house  be  esta-  ■
Wished  in  the  tops  of  the  mountains,
except  God  shall  make  manifest
where  he  will  build  his  house  and
establish  his  Zion  in  the  last  days  ?
How  shall  the  Jaw  go  forth  of  Zion
and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Je-
rusalem in  the  last  days,,  inducing
people  to  flow  unto  it  from  all  na-


DISCOURSESk

!  tions,  unless  God  shall  speak  again
from  heaven,  as  he  did  in  ancient
days  ?

As  Latter-day  Saints  we  accept
the  words  of  the  ancient  Prophets
and  believe  that  they  will  be  fulfilled
literally.  Has  Jerusalem  hecome  a
heap  of  ruins  literally  ?  Were  the
seed  of  Abraham  in  bondage  and
oppressed  by  the  Egyptians  literally?
Were  they  delivered  and  brought  out
of  that  land  with  a  high  hand  and
with  great  power  literally?  Did  God
bring  them  literally  into  the  land  of
Canaan,  which  he  promised  to  Abra-
ham ?  Have  they  been  broken  up
and  scattered  from  that  laud  liter-
ally ?  Did  the  Savior  come,  born  of
a  virgin,  as  the  Prophets  predicted,
literally  ?  Did  he  suffer  for  our  sins
and  endure  all  that  the  Prophets
had  spoken  of  him  literally  ?  Did
his  enemies  cast  lots  for  his  vesture
and  divide  his  garments  among
themselves  literally  ?  Were  u  the
shepherd  smitten  and  the  sheep
scattered"  when  Jesus  was  crucified
literally?  Yes,  in  all  these  particu-
lars, history  records,  with  the  great-
est miuutiee,  the  literal  fulfillment
of  prophecy.  Was  the  house  of  the
Lord  thrown  down  and  the  very
foundation  thereof  ploughed  as  a
field,  literally  ?  Yes,  then  what  rea-
son have  we  to  expect  other  than
a  literal  fulfillment  of  the  next  part
of  the  same  piophecy,  which  fore-
tells the  establish toent  of  the  Lord's
house  in  the  tops  of  the  mountains,
the  gathering  of  people  from  all
nations  thereunto,  that  the  Lord  will
rebuke  strong  nations  afar  off,  and
that  the  nations  will  beat  their
swords  into  ploughshares,  their  spears
into  pruning  hooks,  that  they  will
live  at  peace  and  learn  war  no  more,
and  the  Lord  will  reign  over  them,
from  henceforth,  even  forever  ?

Such  a  mighty revolution  as  is
here  indicated  by  the  Prophet  can


ANCIENT  PROPHECY,  KTC,


205


never  be  effected  upon  the  earth
without  the  voice  of  God,  without
Prophets  and  Apostles,  and  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  working
mightily  among  the  sons  of  men  ;
and  when  that  period  arrives  it  will
be  the  one  referred  to  by  the  Pro*
phet  Joe? I,  who  says — "  It  shall  come
to  pass  in  the  last  days,  saith  God,
that  I  will  pour  out  my  spirit  upon
all  flesh,  and  then  your  sons  and
your  daughters  shall  prophecy ;
your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams,
your  young  men  shall  see  visions,
and  upon  ruy  servants  and  hand-
maidens  will  I  pour  out  my  spirit
in  those  day  a,  snith  God/'  Thus
will  Hoses  realize  the  wish  that  be
expressed  at  the  time  God  took  the
spirit  that  was  upon  him  anil  placed
it  upon  the  seventy  Elders  of  Israel
and  they  all  began  to  prophecy.
When  two  of  these  seventy  'who  re-
mained in  the  congregation  felt  the
same  spirit  resting  upon  them  and
began  to  prophecy,  Moses1  servant
came  running  to  him  at  the  taberna-
cle and  said — "  Eldad  and  Med  ad  do
prophecy  in  the  camp,  my  lord  Moses,
forbid  them.  And  Moses  said  unto
him,  "  Enviest  thou  for  my  sake  ?
Would  God  that  all  the  Lord's  people
were  prophets,  and  that  the  Lord
would  put  his  Spirit  upon  them."

Joel  predicts  the  coming  of  a  time
when  the  Lord's  people  will  all  be-
come Prophets,  even  the  servants
and  handmaids  will  receive  the
Spirit  and  they  will  prophecy.
Jeremiah  speaks  of  a  similar  time,
but  he  uses  a  little  different  lan-
guage. He  says, — "  I  will  pour  out
my  spirit  upon  all  flesh,  and  then
no  one  shall  say  unto  his  neighbor,
Know  ye  the  Lord,  for  all  shall
know  him,  from  the  lea^t  unto
the  greatest,  and  they  shall  see  eye
to  eye  when  the  Lord  hhall  bring
again  Zion."  Here  the  Prophet
Jeremiah  predicts,  as  does  Micah,  a


time  when  the  Lord  shall  bring
a^ain  Zion,  and  says  that  when  he
brings  again  Zion  they  shall  see  eye
to  eyo  and  they  shall  no  mure  use
the  proverb  that  the  fathers  have
eaten  sour  grapes  and  the  children's
"teeth  are  set  on  edge,  but  every  man
shall  die  for  his  own  iniquity,  and  the
teeth  of  him  that  eatelh  sour  grapes
shall  be  set  on  edge,  and  every  man
will  have  the  opportunity  of  knowing
I  the  Lord,  learning  his  ways,  and  walk-
ing in  his  paths.

Are  we  to  understand  by  these
sayings  of  Scripture,  that  God  will
pour  out  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  the
ungodly,  the  workers  of  iniquity-
murderers,  sorcerers,  whoremongers,
adulterers,  false  swearers,  deceivers
arid  liars  ?  I  do  not  so  understand
the  Prophets,  the  Savior  and  his
Apostles.  I  understand  in  the  lan-
guage of  the  Apostle,  that  the  Holy
Ghost  dwelleth  not  in  unholy  Tem-
ples ;  and  that  if  his  Spirit  is  poured
out  upon  the  people  so  generally,  it
will  be  because  their  hearts  are  pre-
parer! to  receive  it,  because  their  ears
have  been  opened  to  the  word  of  God,
and  faith  has  b.  en  begotten  in  ihem.
They  have  listened  to  the  call  of
the  Almighty,  and  have  received
the  message  of  salvation  sent  unto
them.  : ;  1

But  shall  all  people  be  thus  con-
verted unto  the  Lord  ?  Shall  the
king  upon  the  throne,  the  judges
who  have  judged  for  reward,  the
Prophets  who  have  divined  for
money,  the  priests  who  have  taught
for  hire,  the  murderer,  the  idolater,
the  abominable,  those  who  have  op-
pressed and  ruled  mankind  with  a
rod  of  iron ,  who  have  said  to  the
souls  of  men,  "  Bow  down,  that  we
may  walk  over  you?"  Shall  all
these  be  converted  unto  the  Lord  of
hosts  and  receive  of  these  blessings  ?
Would  to  God  that  it  were  possible !
But  the  Prophets  have  not  so  pre-


206


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


dieted-  They  and  the  Savior  and
the  Apostles  have  all  predicted  that
"  he  will  punish  the  kings  of  the
earth  upon  the  earth,  and  the  frosts
of  high  ones  that  are  on  high,  and
they  si  ml!  be  gathered  together  into
the  pit"  They  have  predicted  that
judgments  shall  fall  fast  upon  the
ungodly  who  will  not  repent,  and
they  shall  be  cut  off  and  shall  perish
out  of  the  land ;  and  sore  and  ter-
rible judgments  shall  come  upon
the  nations  who  repent  not,  and
who  will  not  listen  to  the  voice  of
God.  ' \ £  •  *

Malachi,  in  his  last  chapter,  says,
u  But  the  day  comet h  that  shall
burn  as  an  oven,  and  the  proud  and
they  who  do  wickedly  shall  be  stub-
ble. The  dav  that  cometh  shall  burn

-

them  up,  Biith  the  Lord  of  hosts,
that  shall  leave  them  neither  root
nor  branch.  But  unto  you  who  fear
my  name,  saith  the  Lord,  shall
the  sun  of  righteousness  arise  with
healing  in  his  wings,  and  ye  shall
go  forth  and  grow  up  as  calves  of
the  stall,  and  shall  tread  down  the
wicked,  for  they  shall  be  ashes  un-
der the  soles  of  your  feet  in  the  day
that  I  do  this,  saith  the  Lord  of
hosts."

Thus  we  learn,  my  friends,  that
the  warning  voice  of  God  will  go
forth  among  the  nations,  and  he
will  warn  them  by  his  servants;
and  by  thunder,  by  lightning,  by
earthquake,  by  great  hailstorms  and
by  devouring  fire ;  by  the  voice
of  judgment  and  by  the  voice  of
mercy ;  by  the  voice  of  angels  and
by  the  voice  of  his  servants  the
Prophets;  he  will  warn  them  by
gathering  out  the  righteous  from
among  the  wicked,  and  those  who
will  not  heed  these  warnings  will
be  visited  with  sore  judgments  until
the  earth  is  swept  as  with  the  besom
of  destruction;  and  those  who  re-
main, in  all  the  nations,  tongues


and  kingdoms  of  the  world,  will
heed  the  voice  of  warning  and  will
accept  the  salvation  sent  unto  them
by  the  Lord  through  his  servants.
The  law  of  the  Lord  will  go  forth
to  all  such  from  Zion,  and  judges
will  go  forth  among  them  from
Zion  ;  and  all  who  are  willing  will
be  taught  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  and
they  will  be  baptized  for  the  remis-
sion of  their  sins  and  they  will  re-
ceive the  Holy  Ghost  by  the  laying
on  of  the  hands  of  the  servants  of
God,  Great  and  glorious  will  be
that  day.  The  old  men  will  dream
dreams,  the  young  men  will  see
visions,  and  even  the  servants  and
handmaids  will  prophecy,  and  out
of  the  mouths  of  babes  and  suck-
lings will  the  Lord  perfect  his
praise;

We  are  not  the  only  people  who
lielieve  in  these  things,  and  look
forward  with  anxious  expectation
for  the  glorious  reign  of  righteous-
ness and  peace  upon  the  earth.  Ifc
has  been  the  faith  and  the  hope  of
all  the  righteous  upon  the  earth,
the  theme  of  their  prophecies  and
of  the  songs  of  the  inspired  song-
sters of  Israel.  It  is  the  hope
of  these  things,  and  the  faith  which
is  begotten  in  our  hearts,  that  the
Lord  has  set  his  hand  a  second  time
to  recover  the  remnants  of  the  house
of  Israel,  and  to  fulfill  the  glorious
things  which  he  has  foretold  through
the  mouths  of  his  Prophets,  that  has
brought  us  together  in  these  moun-
tains. It  was  the  faith  and  hope  that
induced  the  pioneers,  twenty -six  years
ago,  to  face  the  savages  and  to  pene-
trate through  a  trackless,  howling
desert  To  make  the  roads  through
the  mountains,  to  bridge  the  streams,
and  to  endure  all  the  perils  of  esta-
blishing the  people  of  Zion  in  the
Rocky  Mountains,  when  there  were
no  human  beings  but  the  untutored
savage  for  a  thousand  miles  or  more


ANCIENT  PROPHKCY,  ETC.


207


from  them,  when  it  was  a  thousand
miles  on  the  west,  a  thousand  on
the  north,  a  thousand  to  the  south,
and  thirteen  hundred  to  the  east  to
the  nearest  settlement.  It  was  this
faith  in  the  latter-day  work,  the
assurance  we  had  received  that  God
had  spoken  from  the  heavens,  which
prompted  us  to  this  great  work.  It
was  becaose  God  had  spoken  from
the  heavens  by  his  own  voice  to  his
servant  Joseph  Smith,  by  the  voice
of  his  Son,  and  by  the  voice  of  an-
gels, calling  his  people  to  gather  from
the  nations  into  the  heart  of  the
mountains,  that  we  are  here  to-day.
I  can  place  my  eyes  upon  many , in
this  congregation,  and  I  know  of
many  more  throughout  this  Territory,
who  heard  these  things  from  the
month  of  the  ProphoJ  Joseph  Smith.

When  the  pioneers  left  the  con-
fines of  civilization,  we  were  not
seeking  a  country  ou  the  Pacific
Coast,  neither  a  country  to  the
north  or  south ;  we  were  seeking  a
country  which  had  been  pointed
out  by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  in
the  midst  of  the  Rocky  Mountains,

in  the  interior  of  the  great  North parties,  one  to  go  south,  another


The  prayers  of  that  band  of  pioneers,
offered  up  day  and  night,  continu*
ally  unto  God,  was  to  lead  us,  as
he  had  promised,  unto  a  land  which,
by  the  mouth  of  his  servant  Joseph,
he  had  declared  he  would  give  us
tor  an  inheritance.  Said  the  Pro-
phet Brigham- — "I  have  seen  it,
I  have  seen  it,  in  vision,  and  when
my  natural  eyes  behold  it,  I  shall
know  it"  They,  therefore,  like
Abrarn  of  old,  journeying  by  faith,
knowing  not  whither  they  went,
only  they  knew  that  God  had
called  them  to  go  out  from  among
their  brethren,  who  had  hated,  des-
pised and  persecuted  them,  and
driven  them  from  their  possessions,
and  would  not  that  they  should
dwell  among  them.  And  when
they  reached  this  bind  the  Prophet
Brigham  said — "  This  is  the  place
where  I,  in  vision,  saw  the  ark  of
the  Lord  resting;  this  is  tin!  place
whereon  we  will  plant  the  soles  of
our  feet,  and  where  the  Lord  will
place  his  name  amongst  his  people/'
And  ho  said  to  that  band  of  pio~
u  Organize your  exploring


neers


American  continent  When  the
leader  of  that  noble  band  of  pio-
neers set  out  with  his  little  company
from  the  Missouri  River,  they
went,  as  did  Abram,  when  he  left
his  father's  house  —  knowing  not
whither  he  went  —  only  God  had
said,  Go  out  from  your  father's
house  unto  a  land  which  I  will  show
you.  That  band  of  pioneers  went
out,  not  knowing  whither  they  went,
only  they  knew  that  God  had  com-
manded them  to  go  into  a  laud
which  he  would  show  them.  And
whenever  the  Prophet  Brigharu
Young,  the  leader  of  that  band  of
pioneers,  was  asked  the  question —
"  Whither  goest  thou  r"  the  only
answer  he  could  give  was — "  I  will
show  you  when  we come  to  it"


north,  and  another  to  go  to  the  west,
and  search  out  the  laud,  in  the
length  and  the  breadth  thereof,
learn  the  facilities  for  settlement,
for  grazing,  water,  timber,  soil  and
climate,  that  we  may  be  able  to  re-
port to  our  brethren  when  we  re-
turn;"  and  when  the  parties  were
organized,  said  he  unto  them — "You
will  find  many  excellent  places  for
settlement.  On  every  hand  in  these
mountains  are  locations  where  the
people  of  God  may  dwell,  but  when
you  return  from  the  south,  west  and
north  to  this  place,  you  will  say  with
me,  w  this  is  the  place  which  the  Lord
has  chosen  for  us  to  commence  our
settlements,  and  from  this  place  we
shall  spread  abroad  and  possess  tbi
land/  "


208


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


It  is  this  faith  which  has  brought
the  multitude  who  h-ivo  followed  to
this  land,  year  after  year,  from  then
until  the  present  time.  This  is  the
work  and  the  mission  that  is  upon
the  Latter-day  Saints.  "C<jme  out
of  Babylon,  O  my  people,  that  ye
be  not  partakers  of  her  sins,  that  ye
receive  not  of  her  plagues,  Gather
yourselves  into  the  midst  of  the
mountains,  where  the  Lord  will  es-
tablish his  house  and  place  his
name,  and  teach  you  his  ways,  and
where  you  will  learn  to  walk  in  his
paths/*  We  are  not  called  to  be  of
the  world,  to  partake  of  the  spirit
and  follow  after  the  fashions  of  the
world,  the  losts  of  the  eye  and  the
pride  of  life.  We  are  not  called  to
set  our  hearts  upon  the  world  and
the  things  thereof — upon  the  gold,
upon  the  silver  in  the  mountains,
upon  the  precious  things  that  are
in  the  earih,  the  cattle  upon  a
thousand  hills,  nor  upon  houses  or
lands,  or  aught  else  that  pertains  to
the  earth.  We  are  called  to  set  our
hearts  upon  the  living  God,  who  has
called  us  to  be  his  people,  and  to
worship  him  with  full  purpose  of
heart.  If  he  gives  us  houses  and
lands,  goods  and  chattels,  gold  And
silver  and  the  precious  things  of  the
earth,  receive  them  with  thanks-
giving, and  hallow  and  sanctify
them  and  dedicate  and  consecrate
them  to  the  building  up  of  Zion,
the  house  of  our  God,  the  gathering
together  of  his  Saints,  the  preaching
of  his  Gospel  to  the  ends  of  the
earth,  and  the  accomplishment  of  the
great  work,  whereunto  God  has  called
us  in  the  latter  davs.

Blessed  are  all  those  who  remem-
ber the  high  calling  of  God  where-
unto they  are  called,  Blessed  are
those  who  seek  to  learn  the  ways  of
the  Lord  and  walk  in  his  paths.


Blessed  are  those  who  seek  to  mag-
nify the  high  calling  of  God  which
is  upon  them  as  Elders  of  Israel,  to
bear  witness  of  the  truth,  and  ex-
en  ip I ify  it  in  their  lives  and  con-
duct; who  deal  justly,  love  mercy,
walk  humbly  before  their  God,  visit
the  fatherless  and  the  widow  in
their  affliction,  and  keep  themselves
unspotted  from  the  world.  Blessed
are  all  such  of  the  sons  and  daugh-
ters of  Zion,  for  they  shall  prosper
and  their  children  after  them.  They
shall  become  saviors  upon  Mount
Zion,  and  they  shall  be  found  worthy
to  stand  when  he  appears,  and  their
names  and  their  generations  after
them  shall  be  had  in  honorable  re-
membrance in  the  Temples  of  the
Lord  our  God.  But  woe  unto  the
hypocrites  in  Zkm,  and  to  the  proud
and  haujrhtv*  and  those  who  lov:e  the
world,  set  their  hearts  upon  itt  and
worship  iftuses  and  lands,  gold  and
silver,  goods  and  chattels  and  the
th  in^s  of  t  h  is  world  !  Woe  unto  those
who  refuse  to  tithe  themselves  and
thus  to  sanctity  unto  the  Lord  this
land,  which  he  has  given  them  for  an
inheritance!  Woe  unto  those  who
pollute  the  land  of  Zion  by  their
whoredoms,  murders,  thefts  and
working  of  iniquity,  who  refuse  to
consecrate  of  their  substance  unto
the  God  of  the  whole  earth t  and  to
render  to  him  the  tenth  which  ha
requires  as  the  interest  of  their
stewardship !

May  the  peace  of  God  rest  upon
the  righteous !  May  the  ignorant
come  to  understanding!  May  the
foolish  learn  wisdom !  May  the
power  of  God  rest  upon  those  who
have  assumed  the  high  callings  of
ministers  and  judges  in  Israel  !
May  grace  abound  unto  all  the  Israel
of  God,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ*
Amen.


+


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Afternoon,  Sept.  28,  1873.

(BepoHm.1  hj  David  W.  Evans.)

EVIDENCES,  RELATING  TO  THE  DIVINE  AUTHENTICITY  OF  THE  BIBLE

AND  BOOK  OF  MORMON,  COMPARED.


It  is  written  somewhere  in  this
book  —  the  Bible  —  that  "  in  the
mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses  every
word  shall  be  established,"  These
words  were  recorded  lu^  the  law  of
Moses,  and  referred  to  by  onr  Sivior,
but  in  what  part  of  the  Evangelists
they  are  recorded  I  do  not  remember.
They  occurred  to  my  mind  just  as  I
rose  to  my  feet.  It  seems  to  have
been  the  method  in  which  God  hns
dealt  with  the  children  of  men,  ever
since  they  have  had  an  existence  on
the  earth,  to  reveal  certain  pnncipl^s,
and  to  confirm  them  by  as  many
witnesses  as  seemed  proper  to  him.

Our  Father,  the  Creator  of  this
earth,  has  power,  if  he  saw  proper  to
do  so,  to  give  a  vast  amount  of  evi-
dence to  the  children  of  men,  con*
cernin^  the  divinity  of  a  message
which  he  might  at  any  time  offer  to
them.  It  would  be  a  very  easy  mat*
ter,  if  he  saw  proper  to  do  so,  to  in-
scribe, in  the  very  heavens,  in  letters
of  light,  testimony  and  evidence
which  would  be  so  conspicuous,  and
powerful,  and  plain,  and  easy  to  be
understood,  that  all  the  nations,  lan-
guages, kindreds  and  tongues  upon
our  globe  would  know  the  truth  at
once,  and  have  no  misgivings  about
the  matter.  But  the  L  >rd  has  not
seen  proper  thas  to  deal  with  the  hu-

No.  14


man  family.  He  seems  to  require,
in  the  first  place,  faith  on  good,  sound,
substantial  evidence,  instead  of  im-
parting knowledge  at  once.

There  is  a  great  difference  between
faith  and  knowledge.  I  am  told
that  there  is  such  a  country  as  China
on  the  eastern  borders  of  Asia;  but  I
never  have  been  there;  1,  never  have
seen  that  country ;  I  cannot  say^
most  positively,  that  such  a  country
exists,  only  on  the  testimony  of
others  I  am  informed  that  snch  is
the  case.  I  believe  that  testimony,
but  it  is  not  a  perfect  knowledge  to
my  own  mind,  obtained  by  my  own
experience.  And  so  in  regard  to  ten
thousand  other  tacts  or  events.  We
are  in  many,  indeed  in  almost  all,  in-
stances required  to  believe  without  a
knowledge.  The  judge  who  sits  in  &
court  of  justice  to  decide  upon  the
liberties  and  lives  of  his  fellow. beings,
does  not  decide  from  a  knowledge;
but  from  the  testimony  and  evidence
presented  before  him  he  pronounces
sentence  of  imprisonment  or  deitb,
because  the  evidence  is  sufficient  to
bear  him  out  in  passing  such  a  sen-
tence.

A  person  can  not  be  a  witness  to
that  which  he  merely  believes.  God
requires  mankind,  or  certain  indivi-
duals among  mankind,  to  be  wit*

Vol  XVI.


■


210  JOURNAL  or

nesses  fnr  him — witne  sses  of  Ins  ex-
istence— so  thgt  they  can  bear  testi-
mony to  others.  It  is  in  j  port  ant  and
necessary  that  they  should  have  a
knowledge  of  the  things  whereof  this
testimony  is  given  ;  hence,  in  some
few  cases  among  the  inhabitants,  of
our  globe,  there  have  been  men
raised  up  to  whom  there  has  been  a
knowledge  imparted  almost  immedi-
ately, and  they  knew,  most  perfectly,
concerning  the  things  which  they
were  to  comma tiicate  to  their  fellow-
bein<£S.  They  were  true  witnesses,
and  on  their  evidence  and  testimony  ,
the  world  have  been  condemned,  and
will  he  judged  in  the  great  judgment
d;iv.  For  instance,  the  Lord  our
God  has  revealed  a  system  or  plan  ot
salvation  to.  the  human  family,  re-
quiring all  men  to  repent  of  their
sins,  tarn  ftWay  from  everything  ihat
is  evil,  reform  their  lives,  and  to
believe  in  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Savior
of  the  world,  who  died  to  atone  for
the  sins  of  mankind  ;  to  believe  in
his  Father  as  the  great  Supreme
Being,  the  Creator  of  all  things;  to  I
believe  in  that  which  God  has  or*
dained,  pertaining  to  the  Gospel,  that
is  intended  fur  the  salvation  of  man-
kind, such  as  the  ordinances  of  bap-
tism, and  eon  fir  in  at  ion  by  the  laying
on  of  hands,  and  the  administration
,  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  All  these  are
principles  and  ordinances  which  God
has  revealed  to  the  children  of  men,
making  known  to  certain  individuals
that  these  are  divine,  and  command-
ing them  to  go  and  bear  testimony
thereof  unto  others*  Now,  when  a
man  stands  up  before  an  audience
and  says,  with  all  boldness  and  with
mil  humility,  that  God  exists,  the  I
question  might  arise — (i  How  do  you
know  that  he  exists  ?"  In  reply,  he
says  to  his  audience,  "  He  exists  be-
cause the  Bible  speaks  of  it,  the
works  of  Nature  declare  that  there
mast  be  a  Supreme  Being,  the  wisdom


DISCOURSES,

that  is  manifested  in  the  works  of
creation  show  forth  his  attributes —
his  goodness,  his  wisdom,  and  the
adaptation  of  the  various  principles
in  nature  to  other  principles,  show
that  there  must  have  been  an  all- wise
Designer/*  "But,1'  inquires  an  in-
dividual,  of  the  speaker,  udo  you
know  anything  about  this  being  of
whom  you  say  the  works  of  nature
declare  his  attributes,  and  can  you
tell  us  whether  he  is  a  personal  be-
ing, or  a  widely  diffused  spirit  that
exists  throughout  all  nature?"  If
he  can  not  bear  any  oilier  testimony
than  this,  merely  referring  to  the
Bible  or  the  works  of  Nature,  his
hearers  can  say,  w  We  have  the  same
evidence  ourselves,  and  your  testi-
mony is  no  better  than  ours,"  But
if  he  stands  forth  as  a  servant  of  the
Most  High  God,  and  declares  that  be
know 4  God  exists,  because  he  has
received  a  revelation  to  that  effect,
God  has  spoken  to  him,  and  his  eyes
have  been  opened  to  behold  his  per-
son and  his  glory,  and  that  he  has
I  heard  his  voice,  then  that  man's  testi-
mony is  greater  than  the  testimony
of  those  who  depend  merely  upon
what  God  has  said  in  past  ages,  writ-
ten in  the  Bible,  and  greater  than
that  which  arises  from  beholding  the
beauty,  glory,  simplicity  and  wisdom
that  characterize  the  works  of  Na-
ture. Such  a  testimony,  as  I  have
named,  where  a  person  can  bear  testi-
mony to  what  his  eyes  have  seen,  and
to  what  his  ears  have  heard,  concern-
ing the  Almighty,  to  what  God  has
revealed  to  him,  will  condemn  the
world.  Pei sons  may  pretend  to  be
God's  witnesses,  and  preach  fifty,
I  sixty,  or  four  score  years  in  the  ears
of  the  people ;  but  if  they  have  never
received  this  testimony,  their  evi
dence  will  be  of  no  effect  in  the  day
J  of  judgment.  I  have  heard,  in  the
course  of  my  life,  a  great  many
Christian  ministers  of  different  deno-


EVIDENCES,  ETC.


211


initiations,  many  of  them  no  doubt
sincere,  say  to  their  c  on**  relations,
"I  will  be  a  swift,  witness  against
you  in  the  day  of  judgment."  A-k
these  Christian  ministers,  "  Have
you  ever  received  a  revelation  from
God  jpnoreclf?"  41  Oh  no,"  "Has
God  ever  spoken  to  you?"  ."Oh
no."  "Have  you  ever  had  a  hea-
venly vision  p" "  Oil  no." "  Hhs


the  Holy  Ghost  given  yon  a  new  re-
velation"?" "Not  at  »||.,f  "When
did  God  last  speak  to  the  human
family  ?"  Says  the  Christ iau  mini-
ster, M  He  has  said  nothing  for  about
eighteen  hundred  years;  the  last  he
said  or  spoke  to  the  human  family  \»
recorded  in  the  New  Testament."
Such  n  minister  rai^ht  preach  all  the
days  of  his  life,  and  so  far  as  his  evi-
dence or  testimony  is  concerned,  it
would  not  condemn  a  solittiry  iudi-
vidua!*  Such  men  are  not  witnesses
for  God.  He  never  sent  them,  he
never  spoke  to  or  revealed  anything


mony  of?"  And  that  will  condemn
the  people.  i  :  5?

In  order  to  apply  this  to  one  parti,
cular  sulgect,  which  now  occurs  to
my  mind,  I  will  take  the  Book  of
Mormon,  for  instance.  This  book
protease*  to  be  a  divine  revelation;
it  professes  to  be  the  writings  of  a
succession  of  ancient  Prophets,  the
s»rme  as  the  Bible  contains  the. reve-
lations and  writings  given  in  differ-
ent aires  to  inspired  men;  and  while
the  Bible  e> itains  the  writings  of
inspired  men  who  lived  on  the  east-
ern hemisphere,  the  Book  of  Mormon
professes  to  be  the  writings  of  in-
spired men  who  lived  in  ancient  times
on  ihe  western  hemisphere.  One  is
railed,  if  we  may  so  speak,  the  Bible
ot  the  East  ;  the  other  rnav  bo  term-
ed,  wirh  great  propriety,  the  Bible  of
the  West,  both  of  them  being  of  the
highest  antiquity.

Now,  if  these  books  are  divine,
what  evidence  is  necessary  to  con-


through  them;  they  have  never  set  n  .  vince  us  of  that  fact?  If  the  Book
his  face  or  heard  his  voice,  cunse-  of  Mormon  is  realty  a  divine  revel  a-
quently  they  know  no  more  about  him  |  tion,  containing  the  writings  of  an-
than  the  people  in  the  congregation  ►  cent  Prophets  who  dwelt  on  this
to  whom  they  are  speaking. When, Amei  ican  continent  before  and  after

Christ,  it  is  important  that  every
man  and  woman  in  the  four  quarters
of  the  earth  should  understand  this  ;
for  if  it  be  the  word  of  the  Lord,  we
shall  be  judged  out  of  the  Book  of
Mormon  us  much  as  out  of  the  east-
ern Bible. If  it  \ye  not*a  divine


therefore,  we  speak,  in  the  lang
of  our  text,  that  u  in  the  month  of
two  or  three  witnesses  every  word
shall  be  established;"  when  these
witnesses  are  divine  witnesses,  sent
forth  to  hear  testimony  of  divine
things,  they  must  have  a  knowledge

of  those  things;  not  merely  a  faith,  I  record  and  not  the  word  of  the  Lord,
not  a  speculative  i  lea  or  opinion,  but  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  we
they  must  know,  just  as  well  as  they should  know  it,  in  order  that  we  may


know  concerning  their  own  exist-
ence, of  the  things  about  which  they
speak,  and  of  which  they  I  tear  tmtu
mony  to  the  people.  Then  in  the
grear  judgment  day  God  will  say  to
that  people,  "  Did  I  nut  declare  my
words  unto  you  by  my  messengers
whom  I  sent  unto  you,  to  who: a  I
revealed  myself,  and  who  had  a  know-


nyct  it,  and  reject  it  understand-
ing ly.  Take  it  either  way,  then,
whether  it  is  or  is  not  a  revelation
from  God,  it  is  equally  important
that  we  should  know  it

Now  what  evidence  have  we  that
the  Book  of  Mormon  is  a  divine  reve-
lation ?  I  will  bring  forth  some  evi-
dence upon  this  subject, Befi  re  this


ledge  of  the  things  they  bore  testi- book  was  permitted  to  be  presented


JulIlNAL  OF  DLSCOUKM>.


to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  the
Lord  raised  up  witnesses. Before  it
was  printed,  in  the  year  182H,  three
witnesses  wen:  raised  up  to  bear  tes-
timony to  it. Now,  how  could  these
witnesses  get  a  knowledge  that  thus
hook  was  d i  vine  ? Were  t hey  merely
told  that  it  was  so  by  the  Prophet
Joseph Smith, who  translated t he
book  from  the  metallic  plates  that
were  taken  out  of  a  certain  hill  in  the
State  of  New  York? Was  this  all
the  information  they  had  before  they
commenced  bearing  testimony  to  the
world  of  the  divinity  of  the  book  ?
If  this  whs  all,  then  all  who  knew
Joseph Smith might  be  witnesses.
But  we  are  told  in  the  forepart  of
the  book  the  nature  of  their  evidence
and  testimony. We  are  told  that
David  Whitmer,  Martin  Harris  and
Oliver  Cowdery,  in  the  year  1829,
before  this,  book  was  published,  .saw
an  angel  of  God  come  down  from
heaven, and take  the  plates  from
which  it  was  translated,  and  he  ex-
hibited them  before  the  eyes  of  these
three  men,  turning  them over  leaf
after  leaf* They  saw  the  angel  des-
cend; they  saw  his  glorious  pet  son-
age  ;  they  beheld  the  light  and  glory
of  his  countenance; they  sa  v  the
plates  in  his  hands,  and  they  saw  the
engravings  upon  the  pages  of  these
plates. While  the  angel  was  doing
this  before  them,  they  heard  a  voice
in  the  heavens,  declaring  unto  them
that  the  plates  had  been  translated
correctly,  and  commanding  them  to
bear  testimony  of  it  to  all  nations,
kindreds,  tongues  and  people  to  w bom
this  woik  should  be  sent. They  ac-
cordingly have  prefixed  their  testi-
mony to  this  book,  which  those  who
obtain  the  book  can  read  at  their
leisure; we  have  not  time  on  this
occasion  to  read  it.

What  greater  testimony  concern-
ing the  ministering  of  angels  has  any
person  ever  given  to  the  human  fa-


mily, than  the  one  I  have  named  ?
We  read  about  angels  ministering
in  ancient  times  on  various  occasions,
and  for  certain  purposes — sometimes
appearing  in  great  glory,  and  some-
times withholding  their  glory.  Hence
it,  is  written  by  one  of  the  Afjostles —
41  Be  not  forgetful  to  entertain  stran-
gers, for  some,  in  so  doing,  have  en-
tertained angels  nnawares,"  showing
that  angels  have  sometimes  withheld
their  glory,  and  appeared  like  com-
mon men,  and  that  they  have  been
entertained  as  such.  In  other  in-
stances their  glory  was  exhibited  be-
fore those  to  win  to  they  revealed
themselves,  and  they  l>ore  testimony
to  the  things  they  heard  from  the
mouths  of  their  divine  visitants.

A  question  arises  here,  Is  there
any  testimony  in  the  Old  or  New
Testament  any  more  worthy  of  being
received  than  that  of  these  three
modern  witnesses?  Do  angels  live  at
the  present  day  as  they  did  in  ancient
times?  Every  one  will  say  rh;*t  they
still  live*  Are  they  the  messengers
of  the  Must  HiLfh  now  as  they  were
in  ancient  times?  Yes,  Says  one,
V  We  suppose  they  are  subject  to
the  command  of  God  now  as  they
were  in  ancient  times.  Is  there
anything  in  t lie  Bible  that  indicates
that  a  period  or  day  would  come
when  the  ministration  of  angels  would
no  longer  be  necessary  ?  No,  not
one  syllable  in  all  the  Bible  that  in-
dicates any  such  thing.  To  the  con-
trary, we  find  that  the  Apostle  P*ul,
in  speaking  of  angels,  says — "Are
they  not  all  ministering  spirits  sent
forth  to  minister  for  those  who  shall
be  heirs  of  salvation  r"  Now,  if  there
beany  heirs  of  salvation  on  the  earth
in  the  19th  century,  why  not  those
ministering  spirits  be  sent  forth  to
minister  fur  them  ?  And  if  sent  forth,
why  should  they  withhold  their  glory
at  id  their  personal  presence  frotu
those  to whom  they  administer?


EVIDENCES  ETC,


213


Why  not  reveal  themselves  as  they
did in ancient times,  personally
and  bodily,  so  that  th<i  eye  of  the
individual  to  whom they  admini-
ster may  behold  them  ? We  can  see
not hing  whatsoever that  indicates,
in  the  least  detnee,  that  these  privi-
lew*  are  to  be  withheld from  the
children of men. Many, at  the
present period, believe the  testi-
mony recorded in the  Scriptures
concerning the ancient,  ministra-
tions of  beings  called  angels.  They
know  not  why  they believe  this,
only  because  it  is  popular,  and  it  is
recorded  in  the  Bible  that  they  did
appear. Ask  these  persons  if  they
believe  in  the  ministration  of  angels
at  the  present  time  and  they  will
tell  you  u  no/' JThey  cannot  give
yoa  any  reason  why  they  disbelieve
in their  ministration  now,  only  it
is  unpopular. It  is  popular  to  be-
lieve in  the  ministration  of  angels,
anciently,  but  unpopular  to  believe  in
s ncit  a  thing  in  modern  times,  con-
sequently people  go  along  with  the
popular  mind  and  believe  in  former-
day  administrations  of  those  heavenly
messengers,  but  latter-day  adminis-
trations of  the  same  nature  they
reject.

If  persons  raised  up  in  ancient  times
had  a  knowledge,  by  the  ministration
of  angels,  concerning  the  message
which  they  communicated  to  the  hu-
man family,  and  their  testimony  con-
demned the  generation  to  whom  they
were  sent,  I  ask,  wdl  not  the  same
knowledge,  co  nmunieated  in  the
same  manner,  in  our  day,  condemn
this  genera*  ion,  inasmuch  as  the  mes-
sage is  not  received  ?  Judge  this
for  yourselves.

When  the  Book  of  Mormon  whs
printed,  early  in  the  year  ISiiO,  with
these  witnesses'  names  uitached  to
it  and  presented  to  the  human  fam-
ily,  they had the testimony,  not


also  the  testimony  of  Joseph  Smith,
the  translator, to the  ministration
of  angels,  and  concerning  the  exist-
ence  ot these plates* Here  then
was the mouth of  four  witnesses,
at  least,  that  God  gave  to  this  gene-
ration.  Besides  these  four,  we  have  it
recorded  here  that  eight  other  men,
men  with  whom  I  am,  or  was,  «  ell
acquainted,  some  of  them  are  now
dead. Eight  other  persons  besides
these  four,  knew  of  the  existence  of
the  metallic  plates,  from  which  the
Book of  Mormon was  translated.
Th«  ir  testimony  is  also  prefixed  to  this
work,  their  names  given. They  tes-
tify that  they  saw  these  plates,  that
they  handled  them  with  their  own
hands,  that  they  saw  the  engravings
upon  the  plates;  that  they  took  them
in  their  hands,  and  that  they  knew  of
a  surety  of  the  existence  of  those
plates. They  did  not  bear  testimony
that  they  had  seen  an  angel,  but  they
bore  testimony  to  that  which  they  did
know,  namely,  the  existence  of  the
plates,  that  Joseph  Smith,  the  trans-
Sal  or,  was  the  person  who  exhibited
the  plates  to  them,  and  that  the
characters  or  letters  contained  upon
the  plates  had  the  appearance  of  an-
cient work  and  of  curious  workman-
ship, and  they  bear  their  testimony
in  the  most  positive  manner  to  this
tiling,  declaring  in  the  closing  sen-
tence that  they  bear  testimony  of
these  things,  and  l*  we  lie  not,  God
bearing  witness  of  it/1 Here  then  is
the  testimony  of  twelve  witnesses,
four  ot  whom  saw  an  angel  of  God,
Is  nat  tli is  sufficient  io  justify  the
children  of  men  in  having  faith  in  the
Book  of  Mormon  ? Faitti  is  not  a
knowledge,  but  faith  is  the  evidence
of  things  not  seen. Now,  I  may  not
have  seen  the  plates,  you  may  not
have  seen  the  plates,  hut  we  have
the  evidence  or  testimony  of  things
not  seen,  by  a  great  number  of  wit*


only  of  these  three  witnesses,  but  I  nesses  who  did  see  them.


114  JOURNAL  OF

"But,"  says  one,  "suppose  fled
these  witnesses  were  interested  pei-
sods,  and  they  wished  to  com  bine
together  to  deceive  the  children  of
men."  The  same  supposition  might
be  made  concerning  ancient  wit*
ncsses,  the  Twelve  Apusfles  for
instance.  They  were  chosen  by  the
Lord  to  bear  testimony  of  the  Gospel
unto  nil  nations,  and,  with  I  lie  ex-
ception of  Judas,  there  -was  nor  a
disinterested  person  among  them,
not  even  the  one  appointed  to  fill  the
place  of  Judas ;  and  these  men  bore
testimony  to  the  most  important
truths  that  were  ever  revealed  to
the  human  family.  They  did  this
with  a  perfect  knowledge.  The  in-
fidel  world  will  say  they  were  inter-
ested witnesses,  just  tUe  same  as  the
world  say  concerning  the  witnesses
of  the  Book  of  Mormon.  I  would
not  give  in cch  tor  a  witness  who
wan  not  interested;  I  would  not  give
much  for  the  testimony  of  an  indi-
vidual who  would  come  and  sa\,  "  I
have  seen  an  angel  from  G  d,  but
yet  I  am  not  interested  in  any  thing
that  he  said  to  me"  No,  let  that
man  who  receives  a  communication
from  the  Almighty,  and  who  knows
of  a  surety  of  the  things  that  he
bring-*  forth  and  bears  testimony  of
to  t he  world,  let  him  be  interested  in
his  testimony  and  show,  to  the  world
by  his  works  that  he  is  an  interested
witness.  *

Says  one,  "  We  have  so  mo  dis-
interested witnesses  with  regard  to
the  truth  of  the  Bible."  I  deny  it,
you  have  not  one.  You  have  eight
writers  in  the  .New  Testament,  but
were  they  not  all  interested  wit-
nesses ?  Yes*  "  But,"  says  one,
"were  there  not  a  great  many  not
connected  with  the  ancient  Church
who  saw  the  miracles  of  Jesus?"
If  they  did,  we  have  not  their  testi-
mony, not  one.  We  find  it  recorded
in the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  that


DISCOURSES.

when  Peter  and  John  healed  the
lame  man  who  sat  at  the  beautiful
gate  of  the  Temple,  there  was  a  great
multitude  around  about  who  saw
this  miracle,  but  have  you  the  testi-
numy  and  evidence  of  any  one  of
that  multitude?  No,  you  have  not,
no  Mich  evidence  or  testimony  has
been  handed  down  to  our  (lay,  But
we  have  the  testimony  of  the  writer
of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  that
sueb:  was  the  case.  lie  says  so,
and  we  have  to  believe  it  on  his
testimony.  So  in  regard  to  the  five
hundred  who  saw  .Jesus  alter  his
resurrection.  Paul  declares  that  ho
was  seen  of  five  hundred  of  the
brethren  at  once.  But  has  one  of
those  live  hundred  brethren  handed
down  his  testimony  to  the  19th
century  ?  Not  yne :  it  all  depends
upon  the  testimony  of  one  writer.
That  writer  says  that  five  hundred
men  saw  Jesus  after  his  resurrec-
tion. So  in  regard  to  all  the  mira-
cles that  are  recorded,  said  to  be
wrought  by  our  Lord  and  Savior ;
so  in  regard  to  all  the  miracles,
wrought  after  his  ascension  into
heaven,  by  his  servants  and  those
who  belie  veil  in  his  name.  We
h;ive  only  the  testimony of  eight

j  witnesses  for  the  tru  h  of  the  New
Testament,  and  they  were  all  inter-

I  ested,  -  >  ;«

Again.  We  know  that  there
have  been  persons  who  have  com-
bined together  to  deceive  t  heir  fel-
low men,  and  how  are  we  to  know
whether  these  witnesses  to  the  Book
of  Mormon  were  men  of  that  cla^s,
or  whether  they  were  really  wit-
uesses  of  the  things  of  God  ?  We
can  not  know  it  at  first;  it  is  im-
possible for  you  and  me  to  know
that  fact,  unless  we  obtain  our
knowledge  from  heaven.  We  can
believe  it,  or  their  testimony,  but
we  can  not  know  it,  or  their  testi-
mony. Now  the  way  1  would  do,  if


EVIDENCES,  ETC


216


I  were  an  outsider  nnd  really  de-
sired to  know  whether  the  Book  of
Mormon  was  a  divine  revelation  or
not,  I  should  examine  the  nature
of  tins  evidence  which  I  hfive  re-
ferred to,  and  then  I  should  examine
the  contents  of  the  book.  If  1
found  the  book  contradictory  in
its  history,  prophecies  or  doctrines,
I  should  set  down  rhese  twelve
\vi  tnesses, .  w h r  use  names  are  pi  e-
fixed  to  the  book,  as  impostors;  bur
if,  after  a  careful  per us d  of  this
book,  I  found  no  contradictions  or
inconsistencies  in  the  prophecies  in-
terspersed through  its  different  parls,
if  I  found  that  the  doctrine  was
plain  and  simple  and  easy  to  be
understood,  ami  not  contradictory,
then  the  next  thing  with  me  would
be  to  compare  these 'prophecies  with
those  in  the  Bible,  and  the  doctrines
of  the  Book  of  Mormon  with  those
of  Jesus  and  his  Apostles,  If  I  found
no  contradictions  bin  ween  the  two
records,  hut  that  the  same  Gospel  is
taught  in  both,  and  that  both  contain
the  same  great  chain  of  prophecy  in
regard  to  the  events  of  the  latter
days,  only  more  fully  exemplified
and  illustrated,  perhaps  in  different
language,  in  the  Book  of  Mormon
from  what  it  is  in  the  Bible,  1  should
have  no  evidence  whatever  to  con-
demn the  book,  or  the  witnesses  con-
tained in  it.  «

Furthermore,  if  I  found  certain
promises  in  thfe  Book  of  Mormon,
to  tne  effect  that  alt  persons,  iu  all
the  world,  who  would  receive  it,
and  the  message  that  God  has  sent
forth  by  the  a  Iministration  of  his
servants,  and  would  repent  ot  their
sins,  and  be  baptized  by  immersion
for  the  remission  of  their  sins,  and
have  hands  laid  upon  them  n  con-
firmation, should  receive  the  Holy
Ghost;  inasmuch  as  I  could  Hud  no
testimony  against  the  book,  but  all
these  things  iu  favor of  it,  if  1


should  repent  of  my  sins,  there
would  certainly  be  no  harm  in  it.
If  I  should  reform  my  life  from
every  evil,  according  to  the  require-
ments of  the  book,  there  would  be
no  harm  in  that ;  if  I  should  go
forth  and  be  baptized,  by  those}  hav-
ing authority,  for  the  remission  of
sins,  I  see  no  harm  in  that.  If  I
should  have  hinds  hid  upon  my
head,  by  those  messengers,  for  the
baptism  of  tire  and  the  Holy  Ghost,
1  should  see  no  harm  in  this  out-
ward performance.  If  I  did  not  re-
ceive the  forgiveness  of  my  sins,
and  did  not  receive  the  baptism  of
fire  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  I  should
think  there  was  no  divinity  in  tlie
book,  or  else  that  there  was  some
fault  on  my  parr,  one  or  the  other.
And  if  I  examined  myself  and
found  that  I  had  sincerely  repented
of  my  sins,  that  I  had  lacked  no-
thing on  my  part,  and  did  really
receive  the  manifestations  of  ihe
Holy  Ghost,  as  they  did  iu  ancient
days,  then  1  should  have  a  testi-
mony tor  myself,  independently  of
these  twelve  witnesses,  and  inde-
pendently of  the  correctness  of  the
doctrine  contained  in  the  book,  as
cimpited  with  the  Bible:  indepen-
dently of  these  external  evidences,  I
should  have  a  testimony  from  God
myself,  by  the  baptism  of  fire  and
the  Hjly  Ghost,  that  the  book  was

"  But,"  inquires  one,  w  how  are
we  to  know  when  we  receive  the
baptism  of  tire  and  the  Holy
Ghost?"  I  think  that  every  per-
son may  know  this,  lor  there  are
certain  manifestations  that  accom-
pany the  Holy  Ghost,  that  are  of
such  a  nature  that  they  can  not  be
mistaken.  I  will  mention  some  of
them.  I  do  not  mean  those  mani-
festations we  sometimes  hear  of
under  the  name  of  "spirit  raspers,
"  table  turners,"  "  writing  mediums,


JOURNAL  OF  DISCO UKS&S,


Ac.,  bat  I  mean  those  genuine,  real
manifestations,  as  recorded  in  the
Bible.  To  one  is  given,  says  Paul  to
the  Corinthians,  the  word  of  Wisdom
by  the  Spirit,  to  another  is  given  the
word  of  Knowledge  by  the  Spirit,  to
another  is  given  the  discern ing  of
spirits  by  the  same  Spirit;  to  another
is  given  the  working  of  miracles,  to
another  is  gi  ven  the  gift  of  prophecy,
to  another  is  given  the  healing  of
the  sick,  speaking  with  tongues,  the
interpretation  of  tongues,  &a  All
these  come  by  the  selfsame  Spirit,
being  given  to  every  man,  not  to
one  or  two,  not  merely  to  the  wit-
nesses, but  to  every  man  in  the
Church,  according  as  the  Spirit
will

Now  then,  if  I  receive  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  or  if  my  brethren
receive  it,  I  slum  Id  expect  that  we
would  receive  the  manifestations  of
these  gifts,  one  receiving  one  gift
and  another  another,  according  to
the  Bible  pattern.  If  we  did  not  re-
ceive these  gifts,  then  we  might  doubt
that  we  had  received  the  Holy  Spirit
are  commanded  in  t  he  Scriptures
to  try  the  spirits,  for  there  are  many
spirits  who  are  gone  abroad  into  the
world  who  are  false  spirits.  Try
them  :  by  what  rule  r  Try  them  by
the  written  word,  and  see  it  we  have
the  gifts  as  recorded  in  the  New
Testament  If,  we  have  them,  we
may  be  assured  th;it  the  Holy  Ghost
has  been  given  to  u&  For  instance,
if  a  person  receives  the  baptism  of
fire  and  tire  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  hea-
vens are  opened  to  him  he  is  not  mis-
taken. If  the  Lord  inspires  him  to
lay  hands  up  m  a  sick  child  or  a  sick
person,  and  he  commands  the  disease
tu  be  removed,  he  knows  that  God  is
with  him,  and  that  he  hearkens  to
the  supplications  and  prayers  which
be  offers  in  the  name  of  Jesus  in
behalf  of  the  sick.  If  a  person  has
the  vision  of  his mind  opened  to


behold  the  future  and  to  know  that
which  will  shortly  come  to  pass,
and  he  sees  these  things  fulfilled,
from  time  to  time,  he  has  every
reason  to  believe  that  he  has  really
received  the  Holy  Ghost  So  in  re-
gard to  speaking  in  tongues.  If  an
illiterate,  uneducated  man,  who  never
understood  any  language  but  bis
mother  tongue,  is  inspired  at  the
very  moment  to  rise  and  testify  in
an  unknown  tongue  and  to  proclaim
the  wonderful  works  of  God,  he
knows  whether  his  tongue  has  been
used  by  a  supernatural  power,  or
whether  it  is  merely  gibberish  out  of
his  own  heart.  He  knows  it  vmy
well  for  himself;  and  so  we  might
continue  thru  ugh  out  all  the  gifts
mentioned  in  the  Bible.  If  he  be-
holds angels,  and  they  descend  before
him  in  their  glory,  and  he  hears  the
sound  of  their  voices,  beholds  the
light  of  their  countenances  and  the
glory  that  radiates  from  rheir  person-
ages, he  knows  for  himself,  conse-
quently thi*  constitutes  him  a  witness
as  well  as  those  who  proclaimed  this
Gospel  before  him.

I  will  atk  the  Latter-day  Saints —
those  now  sitting  before  me  through-
out this  large  audience,  how  did  yon
know  that  Joseph  Smith  was  a  Pro-
phet of  God  when  you  dwelt  in  Eng-
land and  had  never  seen  the  man  ?
How  did  you  know  in  S we d en,  in
Denmark,  in  Norway,  Switzerland,
Italy,  Australia  and  in'  the  various
parts  of  the  earth  from  which  yuu
emigrated  ?  How  did  you  know  that
Joseph  Smith  was  a  Prophet  of  God
before  you  crossed  the  mighty  ocean
and  came  to  this  hind  ?  You  learned
this  fact  by  a  knowledge  imparted  to
you  by  the  gift  and  power  of  the  Holy
Ghost  in  your  own  native  countries.
There  you  have  befen  healed,  and
have  seen  the  manifestation  of  the
power  of  God  in  healing  the  sick
from  time  to  time. There  you  have


EVIDENCES,  ETC.


had  the  vision  of  your  raiuds  opened
to  behold  heavenly  things.  There
you  have  heard  the  voice  of  the
Almighty  speaking  to  you  by  reve-
lation and  testifying  to  you  of  the
th  ings  of  heaven.  Many  of  you
have  experienced  those  great  and
blessed  gifts,  that  are  mentioned  in
the  New  Testament,  before  you  emi-
grated to  this  land.  You  came  here
then,  not  to  obtain  a  knowledge  of
the  truth  of  this  work,  but  because
yuu  already  had  a  knowledge  of  it,
and  to  bo  more  thoroughly  perfected
in  the  ways  of  God,  and  to  be  taught
more  fully  in  the  things  pertaining
to  eternal  life  and  happiness,  than
you  could  be  in  your  own  lands.
Hence  you  are  not  dependent  now
upon  the  testimony  of  two  or  three
witnesses,  or  upon  the  twelve  wit*
nesses  in  the  Book  of  Mormon-
but  we  have  a  vast  cloud  of  wit-
Besses  raised  up  among  all  tia*
tions,  and  kindreds,  and  tongues,
and  people  to  whom  this  work  has
been  sent.  They  are  Hocking  from
the  ends  of  the  earth  to  these  moun-
tains, as  doves  to  the  windows,  all
bearing  the  same  testimony — that
God  has  spoken  and  that  the  Bonk
of  Mormon  is  true,  for  the  Lord  has
revealed  it  to  them.  Moreover,  in
the  early  rise  of  this  Church,  the
Lord  said  to  his  servants — 14 Go  forth
and  bear  testimony  to  the  Book  of
Mormon  and  the  doctrines  contained  ,
therein,  and  I  will  back  up  your
testimony  by  signs,  by  the  gitis,"  etc.
Supposing  this  promise  had  not
teen  iulfilled,  would  there  be  any
tabernacle  in  this  desert  to-day  ?
♦Not  any  at  all.  Would  this  desert
be  inhabited  now  by  a  hundred  or
a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  people?
Not  at  alb  Would  there  now  be  a
great  highway  cast  up  across  this
Continent  from  ocean  to  ocean  r
Not  at  all.  It  is  because  God  has
confirmed  the  promise  that  he  made


217

j  to  ns  in  the  early  rise  of  this  Church,
that  these  great  events  have  hten
accomplished.  No  people  would
have  had  the  fortitude,  courage  hi  id
enterprise  to  come  fourteen  hun-
dred miles  from  civilization,  so-called,
to  these  mountain  wastes  and  de-
serts, to  cultivate  the  land  and
perform  the  work  that  has  been
wrought  by  this  people,  unless  they
had  a  knowledge  from  heaven,  con-
cerning  the  truth  of  this  gre-tt
work.  God  fulfilled  his  promise
when  he  said  to  his  servants — "  In'
the  name  of  Jesus  you  shall  heal  •
the  sick,  you  shall  open  the  eyes  of
the  blind,  you  shall  unstop  the  ears
of  the  deaf;"  It  is  because  of  the
fulfillment  o(  this  promise,  that  you
have  been  gathered  and  accomplished
the  work  th  t  has  been  wrought  out
i  here  in  this  country,  and  because  of
this  stepping  stone  between  the  two
great  oceans,  a  half-way  house  as  it
were,  others  have  ventured  to  come
into  these  mountain  wilds,  and  the
Territory  and  regions  round  abi*ut
aie  beginning  to  he  sett  lei  1.  Through
these  faeiliries  no  doubt  the  railroad
has  beeu  constructed  something  like
a  quarter  of  a  century  sooner  than  it
would  have  been  otherwise*

When  we  contrast  the  eviuet.ee
which  we  have  concerning  the  di-
vinity of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  with
the  evidence  which  this  generation
have  of  the  Bible,  we  discern  that
the  Book  of  Mormon  contains  a  vast
amount  of  evidence,  thousands  and
thousands  of  witnesses  of  its  divinity
to  where  the  Christian  world  have  one
of  the  divinity  of  the  Bible.  u  How
sof"  yon  may  inquire.  These  very
Elders  and  missionaries  who  have
gone  to  the  nations  have  kept  their
journals,  and  have  recorded  the  mira-
cles which  God  Ins  wrought  by  their
hands.  These*  me  living  witnesses.
Those  who  *aw  these  miracles  are
still  alive* Now,  how many  wit-


218


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


ne<ws  have  yon  that  miracles  were
wrought  in  the  days  of  our  Snvior
or  in  the  days  of  his  Apostles  who
succeeded  him  ?  You  have  no  per-
son outside  the  Church  only  those
who,  like  Joseph  qs,  bow*  their  testi-
mony from  hearsay.  Within  the
Church  you  have  six  witnesses.
There  are  eiffht  writers  in  the  New
Testament,  but  only  six  of  these
eight,  have  borne  atfy  testimony  con.
ceruing  tin1  performing  oi  mirae-es,
but  you  believe  it  on  their  testimo-
ny. The  Book  of  Mormon,  I  pre.
suine,  has  more  ihan  six  thousand,
if  not  sixty  thousand  witnesses  to
its  divinity  and  to  the  miracles  that
have  been  wrought  in  these  latter-
day  s.  Which  is  the  greatest  ?  Has
any  one  you  have  ever  seen  at  the
present  day  had  an  angel  sent  to
hi 1 11 ,  who  held  up  before  him  the
tables  on  which  (he  law  of  Moses
was  written,  commanding  him  to
bear  testimony  to the  divinity  of


but  what  went  through  many  hun-
dreds of  transformations  before  it
fell  into  the  hands  of  Kinjy  James's
translators.  How  do  you  know  that
these  copyists  copied  correctly  ?
You  have  no  access  to  the  originals.
It  is  true  that  you  have  Hebrew
Bibles,  but  they  are  not  originals;
they  are  only  copies*  They  were
multiplied,  before  the  art  of  printing
was  invented,  for  many  generations,
and  the  copies  that  were  in  posses-
sion of  King  James's  translators
had  perhaps  been  handed  down
through  a  thousand  other  copies  of
older  date,  and  how  can  yon  be
sure  that  they  were  correct  ?  We
are  told  by  some  of  our  archbishops
and  learned  men,  who  have  spent
their  whole  lives  in  collecting  copies
of  ancient  manuscripts  from  which  to
translate  the  Bible,  that  they  at  lust
despaired  of  obtaining  a  correct  copy
of  the  work.  One  archbishop,  men-
tioned in  the  Encyclopedias,  had  col


that  law  ? No  :  no  one  in  the  Chris- lecfed  a  vast  number  of  copies  of  the

j*  1  1  I  -  n-i  I k tT i  ■


tian  world  makes  any  pretension  to
anything  of  this  kind.  Then  is  not
the  testimony  in  favor  of  thn  Book  of
Mormon  superior  to  that  which  you
possess  in  lavor  of  the  law  of  Moses  r
YYs.  We  can  show  you  witnesses,
men  still  living,  to  whom  an  angel
appeared  und  told  them  that  the
Book  of  Mormon  was  a  divine  re-
cord. The  Christian  world  have  no
such  evidence  as  this  in  favor  of
the  Bible,  and  they  can  not,  by  any
living  witness,  substantiate  the
divinity  of  the  Bible.  Moreover,
we  have  another  advantage;  the
Book  ot  Mormon  was  translated  di-
rectly from  the  original.  Now,  have
you,  either  in  the  Old  or  New  Tes-
taments, a  book  that  was  trans-
lated directly  from  the  original  ?
Not  one.  Is  there  one  that  was
translated  from  a  second-hand  copy
even  ?  Not  one,  I  presume  there
is  not  a  book  compiled  in  the  Bible


Bible  in  Hebrew,  as  ancient  as  he
could  possihly  get  hold  of  them.  Bub
when  he  came  to  compare  them  he
found  about  thirty  thousand  different
readings*  jAdmost  every  text  would
read  different  in  one  copy  from
what  it  would  in  another.  Filially,
he  gave  up  the  idea  of  making  a
translation  at  all,  none  of  his  copies
being  original;  and  consequently
when  the  translators  of  the  English
Bible  performed  that  work  they  did
it  according  to  the  best  judgment
they  had,  and  they  no  doubt  did  it
well  as  far  as  human  wisdom  could,
under  the  circumstances,.  Now,
tlienf  the  difference  between  the
Bible  of  the  West— the  Book  of
Mormon — and  the  Bible  of  the  E  ist
— the  Old  and  New  Testament,  is
that  one  was  taken  directly  from  the
original,  the  other  from  a  multitude
of  manuscripts  which  differed  at  most
in  every  text. It  would  seem,  then,


EVIDENCES,  ETC.


219


that  when  God  saw  the  human  fam-
ily in  this  great  state  of  uncert  ainty
arid  darkness  with  regard  to  divine
revelation,  it  would  be  nothing
more  than  consistent  to  suppose  that
he  would  bring  f  rtb,  by  his  own
power,  as  he  has  done,  revelation
suited  and  adapted  to  the  circumstan-
ces, revelation  on  which  we  could
depend,  bt'ing  substantiated  by  wit-
nesses raided  up  especially  to  hear
testimony  thereto,  that  in  the  mouth
of  two  or  three  witnesses  or  as  many
as  seemed  him  good,  every  word
might  be  established,  that  the  child-
ren of  men  might  have  no  excuse  in
relation  to  these  matters.

We  might  continue  this  subject
and show you the fulfillment  of
many  of  the  prophecies  in  the  Book
of  Mormon. It  has  been  printed
now fur upwards of forty,  three
years. During  this  time  very  many
of  the  prophecies  it  contains  have
been  fulfilled  ;  prophecies,  too,  that
no  hum  an  sagacity  could  have  per-
ceived beforehand. Whoever  would
have  thought  that,  in  this  very  coun-
try of  ours,  under  American  insti-
tution,^ where religious  freedom
has  prevailed  from  one  end  of  the
country  to  the  other; who  would
have  thought, when the  Bonk  of
Mormon  was  printed,  that  the  blood
of  the  Saints  would  cry  from  (he
ground  of  this  free  American  soil,
because  of  their  persecutors  ?  And
yet  it  was  all  foretold  in  the  Book
of  M  ormon Other  sects  had  risen
and  multiplied  by  hundreds  on  the
face  of  this  land,  some  of  whom  ex-
perienced a  little  persecution;  but
who  ever  heard  of  their  being  butch-
ered  in  cold  blood  as scores  and
scores  of  this  people  have  been  since
the  Book  of  Mormon  was  printed  ?
We  were  told  by  revelation,  forty*
three  years  ago,  when  this  Church
was organized, that its  members
would  be  perseauted, and  hunted


[  from  city  to  city  and  from  syna-
gogue to  synagogue,  and  that  the
blood  of  the  Saints  would  cry  from
the  ground  for  vengeance  upon  the
heads  of  their  murderers.  Has  it
come  to  pa>s  ?  It  has.  We  were  told
in  the  Book  of  Mormon,  which  was
printed  many  years  before  it  came
to  pass,  that,  if  this  nation  would
not  receive  this  divine  message
when  God  should  bring  it  forth  in
the  latter  days,  he  would  bring
the  fullness  of  his  Gospel  and  hia
Priesthood  from  among  the  nation.
We  did  not  know  how  this  would
be  fulfilled,  during  the  first  seven-
teen years  after  the  book  was  printed.
We  could  read  the  prophecy,  but
how  God  would  ever  bring  it  to
pass,  we  di  I  not  know,  until  the
time  of  its  accomplishment  I  tad  ar-
rived, then  it  was  revealed  that  this
people  should  flee  and  leave  the  na-
tion to  whom  they  had  delivered
their  testimony  for  many  years.
When  we  came  here  the  prophecy
was  literally  fulfilled.  Thus  we
might  go  on  and  relate  prophecy  after
prophecy  that  has  been  fulfilled  in
confirmation  of  the  divinity  of  this
latter-day  work.  The  same  testi.
;  mony  accompanies  the  Bible.  We
believe  it  to  be  true  because  of  the
prophecies  therein  that  have  been
fulfilled.

Many  other  prophecies  contained
in  the  Book  of  Mormon,  hereafter
to  be  fulfilled,  are  as  great  and  mar-
velous as  any  that  have  been  ful-
filled. One  of  the  prophecies  con-
tained in  the  Book  of  Mormon,
delivered  before  there  was  a  Latter-
day  Saint  Church  in  existence,  which
has  been  remarkably  fulfilled,  was
that  the  servants  of  God  should
go  forth  with  this  bojk  to  all  na-
tions, kindred*,  tongues  an  I  people,
and  gather  out  from  among  those
nations  a  great  people.  That  has
been  fulfilled,  and  the  inhabitants  of


220


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


this  Territory  are  a  witness  to  the
truth  of  tbis  prediction  or  prophe-
cy. If  Joseph  Smith  was  an  im-
postor, how  did  he  know  this  work
Would  go  beyond  his  own  neighbor-
hood ?  How  did  he  know  it  would
ever  live  to  be  proclaimed  to  the
different  parts  of  the  State  where

or  where  the  plates
How  did  he  know
be  preached  to  the
this  great  govern-
ment, and  then  cross  the  waters,  to
other  nations,  kindreds,  peoples  and
tongues. Such  a  prophecy  uttered


it  originated,
were  found  ?
that  it  would
inhabitants  of


by  an  impostor,  would  be  very  un-
likely to  come  to  pass.  Yet  such
a  prophecy  was  uttered;  such  a  pro-
phecy has  been  fulfilled,  and  the
nations  of  the  earth,  as  well  as  the
Latter-day  Saints,  are  witnesses  to
its  fulfillment  We  have  seen  this
people  come  forth  year  alter  year,
dossing  the  ocean,  first  in  sailing
vessels,  then  in  steamers,  by  hun-
dreds and  by  thousands,  until  they
are  now  almost  a  little  nation  here
in  the  tops  of  the  mountains,
Amen,


REMARKS  BY  PRESIDENT  GEORGE  A.  SMITH,

V

Delivered  in  thk  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lakh;  City,  at  the  Semi

Annual  Conference,  October  6,  1873.


(Reported  by  Dlzvid  W.  Evans,)


A  WORD  OF  EXHORTATION.


♦  Last  October  Conference  I  asked
permission  to  take  a  journey  to  v*sit
the  land  of  Palestine,  and,  some  other
portions  of  the  old  world,  expecting
that.  I  should  be  absent,  probably,
about  eleven  months.  I  was  accom-
panied on  that  journey  by  President
Lorenzo  Snow  and  several  others,
the  party  including  eight.  We
visited  Palestine  any  many  other
countries,  a  portion  ot  us  calling  at
the  Fair  in  Vienna.  But  in  con-
sequence of  my selection, by  the


Conference  last  April,  to  do  the  du-
ties of  trustee-in-trust,  I  returned
home  a  little  sooner  than  1  antici-
pated, though  we  were  all  well  satis-
tied  with  our  journey  and  visit,  and
with  every  interview  we  had  on  the
entire  journey,  and  were  very  th-nik-
ful  to  our  heavenly  Father  that  we
had  the  means  given  us,  through
his  meroy,  and  J,  individually,
through  the  kindness  of  toy  friends,
to  make  &uch  a  journey.  We  feel
that  the  -results  will  be  felt  and


A  Wuk|>  OF  KXIIOKTATIuN.


221


realized  hereafter,  as  having  done
much  good.  I  feel,  individually,
to  return  ray  thanks  and  Messing*
to  all  those  who  contributed  to  aid
mt*  on  that  journey,  and  to  all  those
who  desired  to,  but  had  not  the
means.  I  feel  that  the  blessing  of
the  Lord,  which  we  invoked  on  the
Moant  of  Olives,  will  rest  upon  his
people,  and  that  the  time  is  not
rery  far  distant  when  God  will  fulfill
his  promises  concerning  Israel ;
though,  so  far  as  we  saw  of  the  rem-
nants of  Judah,  their  hearts  are
very  hard,  and  it  will  require  the
exercise  of  great  power  on  his  part
to  soften  them.  But  as  his  word
will  not  fail,  and  his  promises  are
sure,  we  look  forward  to  their  fulfill-
ment with  regard  to  Israel.  *  In  the
meantime  we,  with  all  our  hearts,
might,  mind  and  strength,  should
take  warning  by  the  example  of
Israel,  and  not  f  11  into  the  same
snares.  They  neglected  their  Tithes
ftlld  offerings,  violated  the  Sabbath,
forgot  their  prayers  and  worshiped
other  gods,  and  for  these  things  God
cursed  them  and  scattered  them  to
the  four  winds  of  heaven,  and  the
curses  rest  on  the  land,  and,  as  was
predicted  by  the  Prophet,  the  rain
has  been  turned  into  dust

We,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  having
had  revelation  from  the  Lord,  and
the  fullness  of  the  Priesthood  re-
vealed unto  us,  should  be  exceeding
careful  that  we  do  not  neglect
the  Gospel,  turn  from  our  duties,
neglect  our  Tithes  and  offerings,  Sab-
baths and  prayers,  forsake  the  Lord
and  go  astray  after  other  gods,  lest
perad  vent  tire  the  curse  of  the  Al-
mighty fall  upon  us,  and  the  king-
dom be  rent  from  us  and  given  to
another  people. 1  feel  that  the  de-


so]  a  Hon,  waste  and  barrenness  of
Palestine,  and  the  degradation  of  its


people  should  be  a  lasting  and  per-
manent lesson  to  us  in  all  things,  to
keep  the  faith  and  obey  the  com-
mandments, to  remember  our  Tithes
and  offerings,  to  be  friends  to  the
poor,  to  remember  otir  prayers,  to
remember  the  faith  which  God  hag
re  veiled  unto  us,  and  to  contend
earnestly  tor  the  faith  once  delivered
to  the  Saints,  that  we  may  have  and
enjoy  all  its  blessings*

We  have  had  a  glorious  season,
an  abundant  harvest  and  a  good
time  to  gat  tier  it.  The  weather  has
been  fine  and  agreeable,  and  nowp
brethren  and  sisters,  let  us 'gather
together  a  few  days  to  talk  with
and  strengthen  each  other  upon  the
principles  of  the  Gospel  of  peace.
The  Elders  cau  bear  testimony,  for
I  know  that  this  is  the-  Gospel  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  that  God  has  re-
vealed it  to  us  tor  our  salvation;  and
our  covetousne^s,  and  disposition  to
make  a  display  in  the  world  should
not  interfere  in  any  way  whatever,
with  us  in  devoting  our  time,  talents,
energies  and  our  all  to  the  upbuilding
of  his  kingdom,  for  that  is  the  greats
est  interest  and  glory,  and  the  grand-
est speculation  tuere  is  on  the  face  of
the  earth*

These  are  my  sentiments  and
views,  I  wish  all  persons  in  the  con-
J  gregation,  when  they  see  a  man  rise
to  speak,  to  lift  up  their  hearts  to
the  Lord  in  prayer  that  the  Lord
will  have  mercy  upon  us  and  fill
that  man  with  the  power  of  the
Spirit,  that  he  may  speak  to  us  di-
rectly by  revelation  from  heaven,
that  every  voice  that  is  elevated
may  be  elevated  by  the  power  of
the  Almighty.


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


REMARKS  BY  ELDER  DAVID  McKENZIE,

Delivered  ix>  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  at  the  Semi

Annual  Conference,  October  7,  1873.


{It* potted  hj  David  W.  Evans.)


THE  IMPORTANCE OF LIVING YV TO THE KNOWLEDGE  POSSESSED
AND  THE  HEgi  IIIEMEMS  M  ADE  OF,  THE  LATTKIMMY  SAINTS,  THROUGH
THE  LIVING  OKACLES  OF  GOD.


I  feel  very  thankful  for  the  privi-
lege of  standing  before  this  congre-
gation this  morning,  notwithstand-
ing it  is  with  some  degree  of  diffi-
dence ;  yet,  in  common  with  my  bre-
th  ren  I  have  reason  to  rest  assured
that  when  an  Elder  stands  up  before
a  congregation  with  a  desire  to  bless
them  with  a  portion  of  the  good
news  that  emanates  from  the  eternal


addressing  a  congregation  of  Lattei
d  iy  Saints.  If  I  were  speaking  to
the  people  of  the  world,  who  know
nothing  about  our  holy  religion,  I
might  be  directed  to  admonish  them
to  be  baptized  for  the  remission  of
their  sins.  Bat  I  realize  that  I  am
talking  to  a  people  who  are  already
acquainted  with  the  first  principles
of  the  Gospel, I  see  before  me  those


throne,  I  say  I  have  reason  to  believe  who  have  left  all  that  was  near  and
that  that  Being  whom  we  serve  and  !  dear  to  them — forsaken  their  homes,
wprahip  will  not  be  unmindful  of  us, the  graves  of  their  fathers,  the  asso


inasmuch  as  we  draw  near  unto  him
with  confidence  and  with  prayerful
hearts.  I  rejoiced  exceedipgly  at  the
words  of  our  beloved  President,  Pre-
sident George  A.  Smith,  when  he
requested  the  congregation  to  lift  up
their  hearts  in  silent  piayer  to  Jeho-
vah, that  the  Eiders  might  receive
the  wards  of  life  to  ^ive  unto  the  peo-
ple* This  is  our  privilege,  brethren
and  sisters,  and  it  is  one  that  1  es-
teem of  the  greatest  value;  and  when
I  come  to  a  meeting  to  listen  to  the
words  of  truth,  I  make  it  an  invari-
able rule  to  lift  up  ray  heart  in  silent
prayer  that  the  Liord  will  administer
to  us,  for  without  his  aid  and  assist-
ance our  words  are  of  very  little
value  to  the  Saints.

I  realize,  this  morning,  that  I  am


ciations  of  their  friends,  and  have
gathered  here  to  serve  the  true  and
living  God — that  Being  who  lias  re-
vealed himself  in  this,  the  dispensa-
tion of  the  fullness  of  times,  for  the
Voiding  up  of  the  affairs  of  this  earth,
according  to  the  program  ma  that  was
made  before  the  world  was,  Inas-
much as  we  have  done  this,  and  have
covenanted  with  God,  the  External
Father,  that  we  would  serve  him  and
keep  his  commandments,  if  I  can
give  you  a  word  of  comfort,  or  of
exhortation,  I  pray  that  it  may  be  so
given  to  me  from  God  that  it  may
do  you  good.

We  have  had  some  very  excellent
instructions  given  to  us  during  the
Conference.  President  Zoung  brought
the  Gospel  before  us,  as  it  were  in  a


the  importance

-

nutsbellt  when  lie  told  us  that  If  there  I
was  any  tiling  good  or  beautiful,  any-
thing that  savored  of  virtue  and
righteousness,  anything  that  tended
to  true  happiness,  it  was  a  portion  of
the  creed  of  the  Latter-day  Saints.  I
use  the  terra  "creed."  It  is  of  itself
a  word  that  circumscribes,  a  wom!  that
limits,  but  there  is  no  limit' to  our
creed*  It* is  unbounded,  it  compre-
hends all  truth  that  is,  was  or  is  to
be.  Whatsoever  is  good  and  noble,
whatsoever  tends  to  the  salvation  of
the  children  of  men  and  to  happily
their  being  here  and  hereafter,  to
bring  up,  to  improve,  to  increase  ac-
cording to  the  order  of  the  Gods,
that  is  the  religion  of  the  Latter- day
Saints,  that  is  what,  constitutes  their
religion.

It  is  fashionable  to  designate  that
as  education  which  gives  the  young,
fin  acquaintance  with letters,  num-
bers, science  and  philosophy  ;  while
that  which  tends  to  a  future  state,
to  happily  hereafter  and  to  prep  i  re-
us for  the  presence  of  God  is  called
by  the  world  religion. With  the
Latter-day  Saints  it  is  all  education,
or  it  is  all  religion,  ju-t  as  you
please. That  which  prepares  us  to
live  and  enables  us  to  provide  for
ourselves  the  necessaries  and  com-
forts  of  life,  as  well  as  that  which
prepares  us  for  the  presence  of  God
our  heavenly  father,  that  we  may
dwell  with  him  through  ail  eternity
with  us  is  all  education  or  all  reli*
gion. We  know  not  where  to  draw
.  the  dividing  line,  bearing  this  fact
in mind, that whatsoever  is  good
comes  from  God,  and  that  whatso-
ever is evil  -comes  from an  evil
source,  :  3

I  trust  that  we  are  awake  to  these
tilings,  that  we  do  nut  let  the  time
pass  by  unimproved,  for  to  us  is
committed  a  great  and  important
work — not  only  our  own  salvation
but  the  keys  "for  the  redemption  of


OF  LIVING,  ETC*  223

the  children  of  men  from  the  earli-
est ages  tq  the  winding-up  scene.
That  is  'the  work  the  Latter-day
Saints  have  before  them.  It  is  well
to  have  this  continually  in  our
minds,  that  we  may  not  trifle  away
the  time,  but  that  we  may  bu  awake
to  the  signs  that  are  looming  up  on
every  hand,  and  pointing  u  it,  as
with  the  finger  of  Jehovah,  that  the
time  is  drawing  near  when  he
whose  right  it  is  to  reign  will  come
and  take  the  kingdom.  Men  have
had  it  a  long  time  their  own  way!
When  I  read  and  reflect  upon  the
history  of  the  past.  I  am  led  to  be-
lieve that  the  Lord  has  let  men
take  things  into  their  own  hands  to
a  certain  degree,  to  see  what  they
would  do  for  themselves  You  all
remember  the  dream  of 'Hobuchad-
nezz  at:,  which  Daniel  interpreted,
wherein  he  saw  a  great  image,  the
head  of  which  was  of  Hue  gold,  the
breast,  and  arms  of  silver,  tfej.  Ima-
ges are  the  work  of  men's  hands.
To  Nebuchadnezzar  was  given  do*
minion  over  all  the  earth,  a  king-
dom which  was  comparatively  pure,
and  w  hi  eh  was  compared  to  fine
gold;  but  in  process  of  time  the
kingdom  degenerated,  and  was  weak-
ened and  sub- divided,  as  repre-
sented by  \he  feet  of  the  image —
which  were  part  of  iron  and  part  of
miry  (day,  But  in  the  last  days  the
God  of  heaven  was  to  set  up  a
kingdom.  A  kingdom  that  was  not
a  p  u  t  of  the  image,  it  was  not  the
work  of  man,  it  was  the  work  of
God,  and  was  likened  to  a  stone
cut  out  of  the  mountain  without"
hands.  Mark  the  phrase  —  "with-
out hands,"  it  was  not  the  work  of
men,  it  was  a  stone  cut  out.  of  the
mountain  without  hands,  that  is,
a  kingdom  set  up  by  God,  which
was  to  smite  this  ima^e —  the  work
of  men,  and  an  order  of  things  was
to  be  instituted  in  accordance  with


*


224


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


the  mind  and  will  of  Jehovah.  j
I  hear  testimony  to  you  this  day,
brethren  and  sisters,  thafQod  has  j
set  np  this  kingdom  ;  that  it  has
been  revealed  to  me,  to  my  under-
standing1, to  my  most  positive  con-  '
viction,  so  that  is  is  no  longer  a  rnaf-
ter  of  doubt  nr  uncertainty  ;  but  it  is
as  substantial  and  re  d  to  me  as  the  j
assurance  that  I  am. And  there
are hundreds, yes, thousands  in
tins  congregation,  who  could  bear
the  same  testimony  were  they  called  !
upon.

Do  we  as  Latter  day  Saints  art  up
to  tliis  knowledge  ?  Do  we  bear  in
mind  that  we  have  made  certain
covenants  with  God,  and  that  we
are  responsible  whether  we  .keep
them  or  m  gleet  them  ?  I  am
afraid,  brethren  and  histers,  that,  al-
though the  majority  ot  the  Lniter-
day  Saints  are  doing  very  well,
there  are  many  men  with  talents,
gifts  find  abilities  given  them  by
God,  who  might  be  bright  and  shin-
ing instruments  in  his  hands,  who
are  negligent  and  who  are  wander-
intr  after  idols,  and  are  worshiping
idnls  jnst  as  much  as  the  heathen
who  prostrate  themselves  before
things  of  wood  and  stone.  What
are  they  doing?  Forgetful  of  the
great  aim  and  object  wlyeh  they
should  have  in  view  as  Latter-day
Saints,  they  wander  off  alter  the
things  of  this  world/  they  seek  to
heap  to  themselves  riches,  and
spend  their  time  as  if  (here  were
nothing  beyond  the  vail.  This
course  is  not  wise,  even  so  far  as
this  world  is  concerned,  for  what  is
the  condition  of  such  persons  to-
dsiy  ?  Their  ideal  does  not  give
them  that  true  lasting  happiness
that  comes  from  God.  It  brings
care  and  anxiety,  and  increases  the
lust  for  gain,  and  what  they  seek  to
obtain  flees  further  from  them.  The
acquisition  of  wealth  entails  greater


responsibility  as  to  what  use  they
will  make  of  it  to  acquire  still
more.  Looking  at  it  in  this  light  it
seems  to  me  a  self-evident  fact,  that
although,  we  are  ostensibly  engaged
in  seeking  for  and  promoting  our
happiness,  we  are  on  the  wrong  trae1
when  we  take  a  conr.se  of'  this  kind
There  is  a  proper  coorse  for  us  to
pursue  in  order  to  increase  our  hap-
piness. We  have  been  thrown  to-
gether on  this  planet,  in  pretty
much  the  same  circumstances  in
many  res  pee  t  s  -  We  ara  •  sen  si  tl  ve
to  pleasure  and  to  pain,  we  have  a
desire  to  increase  our  enjoyments,
and  there  are  many  things  I  might
mention  wherein  we  are  all  very
much  alike.  Now  don't  you  think
that  the  Being  w  ho  created  you  and
me  knew  of  a  certain  plan  which,  if
we  would  adopt,  a  certain  course
which,  if  we  would  pursue,  would
give  us  the  greatest  amount  of  hap-
piness ?  It  is  a  very  reasonable  con-
clusion* ; •  !  ;

What  course  is  that  likely  to  be  ?
The  same  course  that  our  Father  in
heaven  has  taken  before  us.  How
shall  we  get  to  know  what  that  is  ?
Let  us  read  the  revelations,  let  us
refer  to  our  beloved  Savior  when  he
was  upon  the  earth.  What  course
did  he  pursue  ?  He  went  about  do-
irg  good.  His  admonition  was  to
do  good  to  all,  to  love  your  ene-
mies, do  good  to  them  that  hate
you,  and  to  do  unto  others  as  you
would  have  them  do  lo  you.  These
were  some  of  the  principles  laid
down  hy  our  Savior  and  Redeemer.
He  said  he  came  not  to  do  his  own
will,  but  the  will  of  his  Father,
Don't  you  think,  brethren  and  sis-
ters, that  if  we  were  to  follow  these
golden  rules  we  should  see  a  very
different  state  of  things,  to  what  we
now  see  ?  What  would  be  the  re-
sult if  they  were  observed  ?  Every
man'  would  be  as  willing  to  promote


THE  IMPORTANCE


OF  LIVING,  ETC.


22$


the  welfare  and  ad vantage  of  Ins
ni'iglilmr  ns  he  would  his  own.
When  two  veril  to  tra  e  together  it
would  nut  be — *- N let  us  see  win*
will  tret  ihc  best  of  the  bargain,"  or,
**  I  don't  crre  what  yon  get,  I  want
>  get  much  rs  I  can."  Trie  is*
ei re  would  be  that  each  should  bj
BivisfieJ.  In  a  state  of  society  in
whidi  these  golden  rules  «ere  oh-
observed  by  all,  there  would  be  no
rinding  the  face  of  the  poor  that
the?  rich  mi&rht  pile  unto  themselves
wealth,  which  is  a  cmkerworm ;  no,
but-  we  would  he  able  to  enter  into
he  Order  of  Enoch,  and  live  it,  BO
that  we  might  intensify  our  both  in
Go!  ami  receive  and  understand
ni  >re  of  his  will  c  meerniu^  us,  and
%ve  should  see  a  state  of  things
which  you  and  I  have  never  dreamed
©ft  if  we  would  overcome  these
feelings  of  selfishness  winch  pro-
ceed from  a  power  that  is  evil  anil
that  is  opposed  to  our  pro**  Hi,  ami
to  the  progress  of  the  kingdom  ul

God.

Is  it  within  our  power  to  inau-
gurate arid  jbring  to  p  iss  sudi  ft  con-
dition of  things  ?  We  have  t he
priesthood  of  the  S  m  of  Ood  be-
queathed to  us  for  ibis  very  pur
p  ise.  It  is  in  ihu  mind  and  will  of
Jt'hovih  to  pour  out  biasings  upon
His  people,  to  increase  upon  them
everything  that  is  calculated  to
lmnpily  them  here  And  hereafter
He  has  designed  to  make  a  nation
ot  kings  and  priest*,  Hccordiug  to
H  s  promises  made  to  Abraham.
Tnat  proruis-e  has  yet  to  l>e  fn  I  titled,
an  I  will  as  assuredly  be  fulfilled  as
that  the  heavens  are  above  us.  He
Wptil  I  p  >ur  not  blessings  on  His
people,  but  if  they  are  not  abld  to
receive  them,  alas!  they  would
prove  curses.  He  has  given  us  lawn,
and  with  every  law  given  there  are
Conditions,  If  we  magnify  them,
blessings  are  promised,  of  which
•  No,  15.


we  are  as  sure  to  be  the  recipient*
as  that  we  live.  Why  are  we  re»
q  lired  to  pay  Tiihitij;  ?  What  does
the  L  ird  want  with  a  tenth  of  our,
substance  ?  I  will  tell  you  what
He  wants  wjrh  it.  He  wants  yon
and  me  to  mmifest  by  this  thirij{
that  we  are  His  servants,  that  we
respect  his  commandments,  that  we
do  tio^  wholly  set  our  heirts  on  Hl-
rhy  l  icre,  but  that  we  do  willingly,
cheerfully  anil  underst  mdin /ly  bring
forth  one-tenth  of  our  substance,  ami
say — 44  Here  am  1,  0  Father,  ready
an  1  willing  to  lay  dovn  what  Thou
hast  req  iired  of  m  %  that,  I  miymant-
test  to  Thee  my  integiiry  and  pr  »ve
that  I  am  fir,  to  rt  c  ive  more  of  Tnjr
blessings/*  T  iat  is  the  1  tw  of  Tith-
ing as  I  understand  it.  That  is  the
condition,  that  is  the  reward,  if  yon
I J  -ase,  which  tit  ends  a  person  who
pays  it.

Many  times  the  Saints  wonder
why  we  do  not  progress  faster  than
we  do,  and  sO'iieiime*  it  creates  a
fciding  of  regret;  but  I  realize  that
i  lit  re  is  an  abundance  of  things  !>c-
ftiw  the  people  which  Niey  do  not
live  up  tot  We  have  the  oracl  s  of
Go  l  in  our  midst  I  may  sit  down
and  read  the  Scriptures  of  the  past,
the  commandments  given  to  the
children  of  Israel  engraven  on  the
rubles  of  stone,  or  t he  Cirnal  com-
mandments, but  thev  benefit  me
comparatively  little.  Wliat  you  and
I  want  to-day  is  the  word  of  the
Lord  to  ourselves.  Are  we  not  His
children  as  much  as  were  the  child-
ren of  Israel  in  the  days  of  M  »ea  ?
Mo>t  assuredly.  We  want  the  word
of  the  Lord  io*day,  and  we  require
to  walk  up  to  it  when  we  get  it.  As
I  sod,  we  have  the  living  oracles  in
our  midst,  and  if  we  receive  from
them  admonition,  counsel,  and  com-
mandments if  you  please,  that  is  at
much  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  this
people  as  is  the  doctrine  of  bar  it  ism

Vol.  XVI*


22G


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


!by  immersion  for  the  remission  of
sin*.

We  "11  look  forward  to  Ore  time
•  iv  In  n  i  lie  On  It  r  of  Enoeh  will  be  es-
tablished on t lie earth. But  in
bur  present  condition,  with  our  feel-
|M£8  of  *»eltUhne-s,  lusting  after  the
t  lintr*  of  Ihe  world,  and  craving  nf.
ter  B  bj  Ion,  «e  caiim exj*ect  thai
the  Lord  would  have  so  linle  regard
fnr  his  people  hs  to  n  quire  us  to
live  i lii?*  law,  when  it  would  l>e  likel>
to prove our condemnation.  Bu1
the  ki  rvfinlB  of  God  who  stand  n\
the  hend  of  this  people,  with  hearts
ye*trt lit itr  for  their  prosf>erity,  with
Con-taut  prayers  ascending  to  God,
fur  the  advancement  of  bin  k intr-
dom u | inn  the  earlh,  have  seen  tit
to  propose  that  we  enter  into  a  sys-
tern  of  cooperation,  as  n  step  to-
wards PgtaWii*hin^r  this  order  that
we  contempt  «te  will  exist,  at  no  dis-
tant day. What  should  be  our  feel-
InV*  Ht  hearing  of  the  organization
of  such  a  thintj? We  should  pive
(hanks  and  prai-e  to  Almighty  G  >d
that  there  is  a  chance — i  door  open-
er— by  which  we  may  take  n  s*e  p
towards  establishing the  Order  of
Enoch. It  is  a  step  in  the  right  di-
rection, and if  we  understood  our
trhe  interests  we  would  step  forth
in that  direction,  we  w  >uld  make
every* hing bend to  it,  "we  would
Centre  our  faith  upon  it,  we  would
|(ive  o;ir  might  and  our  moans  for
tile advancement of this  insiru-
Ci1  n  Called  the  Co-operative  Institu-
tion. It  should  l>e  as  the  apple  of
our  eye. The  support  of  I hU  co-
operative syst  m  id just  as  much
W  com lunnd ti lent  of  God,  as  I  a  ii  I
b'*furet  as  ihe  doctrine  of  baptism
for  the remission  ot  sins.  What
shakes  it  so? Because  it  has  been
revealed  to  us  as  suc'i  by  the  living
oVacles. And  what  do  we  c*re  for
4fie  printed  word,  as  compared  with
ilie  living  oracles  ? Ia  it  not  of  mure


importance  to  yon  and  me  to  know:
what  we  should  do  to-day  ?  Moat
assuredly. We  live  in  the  presenht
we  live  today,  arid  if  we  live  right
to  day,  we  are  leady  for  to-mono  v.
If  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that
we  should know  how to  reuulata
our  conduct  to  day,  bee  mse  we  are
IMlt  only living oii^lvrs ti i  flay,
hut  we  hate  our  families  to  tmn(
instruct  and  eductte,  tint  they,  in
turn,  in  their  day,  may  be  enabled
to  cirrv  out  the  mind  and  will  of
God. If  we understood our  iroe
interests  as  a  people  we  would  know
that  we  had  not  a  single  individual
interest  outride  ihe  kingdom  ol  God,
If  this  fact  is  not  apparent  to  our
minds  it  is  because  we  are  more  or
less  in  ihe  dark. Whet  do  we  seem
to  possess  here  ? I  say  seem  to  pos-
sess advisedly,  lactase  we  hav«  no
con trn| in  and  of  ourselves.  Who
can  puaruri'ee  himself  tine  hour  of
existence  Y Who  is  assured  of  it  ?
Even t tie very  aliiHty  we  have  to
gadier  around  us  the  necessaries  and
comforts  of  life  cornea  from  God.  Who
of  us  h  is  an  inheritance  ? As  Presi-
dent Smith  remarked,  not  a  soul
us  on  the  earth  has  received  -an  in-
heritance tint  we  can  cdl  our  own;
and,  when  we  as  a  people  have  au
opportunity  tfiven  to  us  to  unite  our
faith  and  energies  in  any  one  given
direct  iuu,  we  should  bail  it  as  one*  of
the  greatest  blessings  that  can  be
bestowed  upon  us

It  is  in  that  lijhr  I  look  up  n  tha
Perpetual  Emigrating  Fund  for  tha
gathering  of  the  poor — it  is  a  God-
send  to  us,  because  we  are  permitted
to  concentrate  our  faith  and  ener-
gies and  means  in  one  direction  to
accomplish  a  great  and  a  pood
work.  It  is  in  that  lght  I  n  j  n  ee
in  the  establish  nug  ot  the  Oo-upera-
tivc  Institution,  because,  we  ara
privileged  to  unite  our  energies  and
iaith  as  a  people  in  one  direct  ion,


THE  IMPORTANCE ;  OF  LIVING,  ETC.


for  a  beneficial  result.  It  is  the
same  in  the  p  tying  of  Tithing;  md
what  would  we  be  today  without
the  se  institutions  ?  Hive  yon  any
idea  to  what  extent  TiMiiug  has  been
the  means  of  bringing  to  piss  Hie
many  i  nprovem'  nts  ;hat  have  grown
up  amu-id  us  ?  Mmy  ti?i ve  nor,  but
I  am  fortunate  em^n^h  to  he  thrown
into- that  position  whom  I  um  able  to
see  and  understand  mid  t<e  ae()<iainred
with  Hie  H^nres  and  I  kno  v  the  me
that  Ti'hiug  is  applied  to,  and  that  it
is  first  and  foremost  in  nit  improve-
ments f»r  the  ad  v  jueement  of  the
Cause  of  truth  upon  the  earth,  and
Setting  nn  example  fir  other*  to  fol-
low in  the  same  wake,  an!  one  of  Mie
great  sourci-a  of  the  prospt-rity  of  this
people  is  due  to  the  Met  that  r lierr
ia  at  L  a4,  a  cettdn  portion  .of  Tith-
ing paid  into  the  Lord's  stor<ditiu<ie*
It  has  been  re  narked  hi-rt*  that
Salt  Like  City  is,  as  it  were,  a  IkiI-
tle-Held  between  the  powers  of  light,
ami  the  p  iwers  of  darkness  1  never,
as  an  individual,  felt  letter  in  my
life  in  this  Church  than  I  do  to-
day* I  cire  nothing  about,  the  out-
side pressure  so  far  an  I  an  indivi* la-
ally  concerned,  and  I  notice  witli  the
Saints  who  are  awake,  that  the  greater
the  opposition  the  stronger  they  get
in  the  things  of  God.  Ir  is  very  true
the  young  are  growing  up  around
us,  and  they  have  not  hud  the  ex
peri e nee  of  those  of  riper  y  ears,  and
are  liable  to  he  led  a array.  There
it)  a  great  responsibility  rearing  upon
the  pareats  of  tl^e  young  that  tliey
set  their  children  wwe  and  prud.  tit
examples;  that  they  a  Imnnish  tbem
of  the  evils  that  are  extant  and  tha*
ire  encroaching  upon  the  people  to-
day. When  we  see.  Bihylomsli  fash-
ions corning  in  amongst  us  we  *honld
be  very  careful  that  we  avoid  setting
our  child i eu  the  example  of  pattern-
ing after  them.  If  we  titid  that  onr
young  talks  must  run  after  fash*


I  hm^  let  ns  sr  >  to  work  and  set  them
some  iru' id  €*x  i tuples,  eteate  fashions
for  nur-elves  tint  tbey  may  pittern
after.  Just  nfl^cf,  nsterg,  For  nue
moment,  who  is  it  that  inauga-
t  ito  the  fashions  which  so  ne  of
uiir  so-called  ladies  patronize  nil
the  streets  of  Sal r.  Like  City  to-lay  ?
Where  do  th  *se  f  ishions  co  ue  tVinn  ?
WnuM  you  like  to  looked
upon  in  the  light  those  p»or  crea*
t'lns  are  who  inaugurate  those  fi^h-
loih  ?  [f  you  must  partem  after
something,  partetn  after  the  good,
righteous  hii  I  pine,  and  slum  the
very  appearance  ijf  evil,  I  will  tell
voir  one  thin/  that,  we  may  pith-rn
after  pr  •fitaMy.  A  savings*  batik
has  been  opened  in  this  eiu.  Ir  is
gotten  tip  for  a  wise  purp  ise,  the
people  may  therein  throw  their
means  together,  and  perad venture
if  they  want  to  send  for  friends  and
relatives  abroad,  when  the  day  rojls
mum)  to  do  s>  they  will  have  M  ime*
thing  they  jean  use  for  this  laudable
purpose.  There  ia  something  to
patient  after,  involving  a  principle
of  siVHifcT,  husbanding  your  re-
sources By  putting  your  pen  oea
together,  by  and  by  they  become  a
pound.  It  is  like  th*  units  of  the
actions  of  this  people — when  they
are  all  aggregated  together  they
amount  to  a  mighty  effort.  Save
your  pennies  instead  of  throwing
them  aA'ay  on  these  foolish  trilling
vanities.  It.  is  the  case  with  some
of  toy  btetliren  and  sisters,  they
can  not  allow  a  dollar  to  btav  in
their  pockets  a  minute.  They  want
ro  go  to  some  of  the  stores  to  lay  it
out  on  some  trash,  for  it  is  a  taett
p  rent  to  all,  that  this  is  a  day  of
iiurnbuggery,  and  the  things  jou
get  in  the  stores  are  mote  or  less
Counterfeit  and  sham,  outside  shovr
and  gingerbread  gilt  instead  of
Sf>;nd,  substantial  things  that  we
ought  to  seek  after. For  instance,


228


JOUKNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


the  doth  that  we  wear,  yon  go  to  a
store  and  buy  an  article  i>l  wearing
apparel,  how  rare  it  is  that  you  can
get  I  he  llnnfc(  lluit  h  repieseiited.
No,  you  j>et  a  shwrn,  a  counterfeit,
an  imitation  of  the  genuine  stuff,
ami  that  is  juet  what  the  uorld  is
rapi  jJy  coming  to.  liy  J»d  by  there
will  be  tn filing  Among  them  bur
sham  ami  counterfeit.  Let  us  pre-
fer, rather,  flint  whirh  is  tf>*od  and
substantia),  that  which  we  can  use
and  uhnrh  will  be  a  henetit  to  US
rather  than  tlmt  which  is  tn*I|  for
display.  Let  lis  heek,  brethren  a  no
sisters,  liber  those  things  which
will  benefit,  and  improve  our  CM*?
d  i  i  ii  »n  to-day,  and  leave  iiahyluu
alone.

1  tell  you  that  if  we  would  keep


ourselves  to  ourselves,  you  would
sre  very  iew  of  those  institutions
flourishing  in  Salt  Like  Ciry  that
are  springing  up  around  us  that
are  now  getting  the  patronage,  I
urn  afraid,  of  some  of  the  Latter-
day  Saints.  Lrt  me  beseech  yon,
for  your  own  sakes,  and  for  the  nuke
of  Israel  abroad  to  quit  patronizing
Gentile  institutions  and  alumni  na-
tions, and  turn  your  attention  to
building  up  t he  kingdom  of  G  idf
for  therein  is  your  true  interests,
therein  are  all  the  interests  yon
have  on  the  earth  for  time  and  for
eternity,

M*y  God  bless  us  and  help  us  so
to  do  is  my  prayer  in  the  name  of
Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  ORSOS  HYDE,

Delivered  ix  the  New  Tab ernaclb,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday

Morning,  October  5,  1873.


(Rtyported  by  David  W*  Evans.)


AFFAIRS  IN  SANPETE  COUNTY — "  uNE-MAN  rOWER1*— UNITY  REQUIRED

AMONG  THE  PEOPLK.


As  this  day's  services  may  be  con-
sidered introduc  ory  to  our  Confer-
ence, which  will  commence  to-mur-
row,  I  have  been  requested  to  make
S  few  remarks.  I  cannot  say  whe-
ther i hey  will  be  few  or  many,  but
let  this  be  as  the  good  Spirit  of  the


L>rd  will,  I  am  v*ry  happy  to  meet
with  my  brethren  in  Salt  Lake  Ciiyt
and  Horn  the  adjoining  settlements,
and  1  presume,  ere  our  C- inference
shall  come  to  a  close,  all  (he  Branches
of  Zion  throughout  the  Territory
will  be  duly  represented  here.


AFFAIRS  IN  SANP

I  have  come  from  a  point  at»ont
one  h u mired  and  forty  miles  south-
east of  here. Tho  people  of  my  im-
mediate field  of  I  abor,  I  am  pleased
to  say,  nre  ije  ierally  heahhy.  Tuere
is  some  little  sickness  among  our
children,  and  some  of  them  have
been  called  away;  hut  us  a  g  »ner  I
thing,  among  1  tie  adult  papulation,
there  is  good  health. We  have  had
a  peculiar  season,  yet  very  pass  ■  hie
crops,  and  a  most  beautiful  time  to
gather  them. This  year,  so  far,  we
have  had  peace  with  the  Indians,  for
the  first  tune  for  quite  a  number  of
years,  and  I  di>  assure  yon  that  it  is
a  relief  to  us The Indians  had
an  idea  that  they  could  do  with  us
as  seemed  them  good  —  prpy  upon
our  substance  and  murder  our  men,
women  and  children  whenever  they
felt  like  it,  and  the  military  of  the  1
Govern  men  t  would  wink  at  it,  be-
cau^e  they  thought  the  Govern  men!
wanted  to  get  rid  of  us;  anyhow,
they  seeuied  to  entertain  til  tie  fear
with  regard  to  the  consequences  of
the  crimes which they  committed
amongst us. But  hist,  year,  when
General  Morrow  and  a  few  compa-
nies stationed  here  at  Camp  D  mglas,
came  and  paid  us  i  visit,  it  rather
led  the  Indians  to  think  that  it  wan
not altogether as they had  con-
sidered  it,  and though there  was
no lighting done, trom the  fact,
that  the  Indians  retreated,  and  hid
themselves,  yet  the  presence  of  the
soldiers  was  a  protection  10  us  while
we  gathered  the  most  abundant  har-
vest that  ever  crowned  the  labors  tit
our  people  in  that  section,  and  it  was
a  very  good  tiling,  and  the  Indians
begin  to  think,  perhaps,  that  the
sold  lets  would  chastise  them  if  they
did  not  behave  well. But  from  the
sudden  arid  unexpected  recall  of  the
troops  from  our county, and  the
apparently unwillingness of  the
Government  to  grant  us  any  com-


STE  COUNTY,  ETC.  229

ppna-itiou  for  years  of  military  ser-
vice rendered  in  Hie  defence  of  our
settlement  a,  in  which  time,  nearly
one  hundred  of  our  men,  women
and  children,  wt»re  mercilessly  slaia
by  1  he  red-skin*,  tasides  htm  beds
of  thousands  of  dollars*  Worth  of
stock  driven  off  by  them, — so r re  of
our  people  ivere  foolish  eimujh  to
think  that  ihe  Indians  were  more
than  half  right  in  their  views*  Be
this  as  it  may,  it  is  all  in  a  lifetime,
and  will  come  out  right  in  the  end,
I  feel  thankful  that  we  have  had
peace  with  the  red -men,  and  that  no
ptrheular  depreiatious  have  been
com  nine- 1  by  them  since,  with  the
exception  of  a  dozen  or  twenty  horses
which  th**y  have  stolen.

We  are  not  mining  in  Sinpete
County.  I  do  not  know  whether
there  are  any  mines  there  or  not;
we  do  not  trouble  ourselves  a  11  r eat
(leal  about  that,  and  emseqieu'ly
we  are  not- afflicted  with  p  ople  who
will  dabble  with  mining,  some  of
whom,  when  disappointed,  will  re-
sat  to  stealing  and  01  her  crimes.
\V«  have  not  that  class  amongst  us,
and  I  am  tflad  of  it,  yet  the  more
men  who  ciuie  amongst  us  vitli  good
an  1  honest  hearts,  the  better.  It
matters  little  whether  they  are  Jews
or  Gentiles,  if  they  possess  honest
hearts,  we  rare  apt  to  convert  them
and  bring  them  into  the  Church,
That  hiis  b,jen  the  ease  up  to  the
present  time,  and  the  const  queuce
ih,  tii ere  aie  very  few  outsiders
tliere^  ^  /  \

j  The  Co  operative  stores  estab-
lished in  our  various  settlements  are
a  great  blessing  to  us.  They  bring
whatever  we  want,  ri^ht  10  our
doors, and  although the  dividends

.are  not  very  great  in  favor  of  the
stockholders,  ttie  Ireuetits  resulting
Irom  the  establishment  of  th»  fie  in*
solutions  afford  us  am  file  remu-
neration for  the  advance  of  the  eapi-


230


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


tal  necessary  to  com  met  ice  the  bu-i-  i
ne*s.  We  do  not  increase  rapidly
in  irfabh,  but  we  it  rrea?^e  a  linle
all  Hie  lime,  especially  when  the
Lillians  let  our  stuck  atone.  Our  ,
Cooperative  Ii  6*  bin  ions  are  doin^
a  very  safe  and  yood  husines?.  I  d ...
nut  think  i lint  any  uf  them  in  San-
pete &  unity  are  wry  much  in  debt
to  ti  e  parent  institution  in  this  city.
I  ti^ive  cautioned  them  against  if,
and  ad  v  feed  them  to  pJ(y  frjrly  and
Sqnnn  ly,  wild  nnt  to  trust  I  heir  good*
out,  hut  hi  do  a  close,  stfe  arid
secure  business,  that  every  person
may  be  accommodated  with  what  he
wants;  and  if  the)'  should  not  hap-
pen to  have  what  we  need  in  every
sWe  at  the  lime,  they  vvdl  kin  ily  i
biing  08  whatever  we  send  fur,  es-
penally  when  we  give  them  the
money  lo  oper.ite  with.  This  is  nil
that  ^e  vjku  expect.  Our  bin  ks  are
open,  and  have  never  been  closed
ftyain^t  tbe  .admission  of  eapind.
Stock  is  fur  Pale  in  every  institu  inn
in  banpete  County,  from  twenty. five
cents  and  upwards,  and  our  lb  lie
boya  and  fcirls,  taking  advantage  of
the  opportunity  Hus  presented,  put  j
in  two  I  its  once  in  a  while,  and  by
and  bye  it  gets  up  to  five,  seven,  I
eight  or  ten  dollars;  and  they  cm
gw  a  share,  and  Hieie  is  quite  an
efli  ct ijm  1  door  open  fur  our  young-
sters to  lie-in  and  show  their  fiimn-
cud  ability.  'J  his  is  a  hle-sing  and
an  wvommodatiou  to  the  people  |

Will,  brethren  and  *4gters,  I  will
say  nothing  further  aliout  I  ho  pair,
ol  the  country  from  which  I  came ,
but  1  will  make  a  few  remarks  upon
the  idea  uf  our  being  a  peculiar  peo-
ple. Yon  know  that  we  are  regarded
as  such,  atid  if  we  look  upon  our.
Selves  from  a  proper  point  of  view,
we  shall  readily  admit  that  in  tins
respect  outsiders  have  given  us  an
fippropri  ite  name;  for  we  are  a  pe,
CuJiar  people  whum  God  lias  eho&eu


to  serve  and  honor  him.  But  the
form  of  govern ment  of  this  people
a  ^reat  many  have  laken  serious  ex-,
ceptions  to:  ttn-y  think  Hint  one
man  is  armed  with  too  much  power,,
and  sways  an  influence  over  so
many  that  it  becomes  a  dangerous
power  and  should  be  suppressed,  I
was  reading,  a  few  weeks  ago,  a
Statement  made  by  a  reverend  gen-
tleman living  in  Provo,  and  the  most
serious  tiling  he  l  a  i  to  comphdn  of
— a  d  he  complained  of  a  great
many  things  —  ^as  the  one-man
po  ver  which  exists,  jmd  is  tolerated
and  sustained  in  Utah.

I  wish  to  speak  a  few  words  in  re-
lation to  the  one* man  power,  atid  in
the  first,  place  I  will  say  that  it  is
what  every  spirant,  politician  and
statesman  labors  to  acquire.  1  do
believe  that  Mr.  Grant,  as  good  a
tnan  and  an  brave  a  soldier  as  he  is,
if  he  could  get  the  hearts  of  all  the
people  so  that  they  would  rally
round  Ins  standard  and  sustain  and
uphold  him,  it.  would  be  the  pride
and  joy  of  his  heart.  But  if  any
man  is  thwarted  its  t lie  desires  of
bi*  he  art  in  this  respect,  tlmt  is  no
reason  why  lie  should  oppose  others
who  may  be  more  successful  than  he
in  gaining  influence  uv&p  his  felloe-
men.  All  tneti  love  money,  yon
know,  more  or  less,  hence  they  are
diguing  here  in  the  mines  to  obtain
it.  1  have  no  fault  to  find  or  cen-
sure to  hestov  upon  them  for  this
operation;  they  are  anxious  to  ob-
tain money.  Some  only  get  a  little,
very  little,  while  otheis,  perhaps,
make  their  .millions.  Now  let  me-
ask,  Should  the  lew  who  are  fortu-
nate and  gnin  their  mi] lions  be  cast
out  anil  crushed  because  of  their
financial  jKjwer,  because  they  have
strut  k  a  good  lead  and  have  been
hUecesslul,  by  the  many  who  have  *
gained  only  a  Jew  d-dlars,  or  who,
perhaps,  have  Just  instead  of  gained  ?


AFFAIRS  IN  SANPETE  COUNTY,.  ETC.


If,  t*i£n,  this  principle  is  to  be  tole-
rated in  tin  anci  d  mi  it  tern,  why  not
when  applied  10  influence  and  p  >wer
in  general  ?

1  read  that,  in  the  betf iriiLtn^  God
created  1 1  it*  heavens  und  the  earth.
It  seemed  in  be  a  kind  of  one-man
po>ver  Mint  was  engaged  in  the  very
act  of  rolling  creation  into  existence.
1  do  not  kno  v  how  rnueh  of  D^irio
Craey  or  ol  Republicanism  there  *vas
in  the  l*egtniiing.  I  was  n  it.  there
tint  1  know  off  or  if  L  whs  it  is  so
lon^  since  that  I  have  forgot  leu  it.
Julging  by  the  accounts  we  have  of
matters  ihrn,  the  government  whs  h
kind  of  one-man  p  *wer ;  mid  if  we
Iiwnc  at  I  lungs  as  i  liey  re-illy  aie,  we
shall  find  that  Kin  entered  the  wurl  I,
and  death  by  sin,  and  I  hit  was  by
One  ..hh,  Qh,  that  was  grievous!
Tuat  drew  a  veil  of  yloom  over  the
face  ot  creation.  Tnat  vvasoane- rn  ui
power.  Hv  and  bye  we  rend!  of  an-
other one  man  power  that  came  alori^
end  counteract  d  this,  urn!  that  WW
the  L -ird  from  glory — another  kind
of  one-man  power.

Now,  while  1  c  iinpare  these  filings
Willi  tne  present  order  of  things
which  exisrs  throughout  our  world,
1  do  i j<jr.  wish  to  be  understood  a*
depreciating  our  o>vn  government,
lor  ir  is  the  l>est  earlkhj  government
in  existence  upon  Mie  luce  of  the
earth.  li  wan  ordained,  organized
anil  sutt'Cjcd  tor  a  wise  purpose  in
tiod  our  heavenly  Father,  which,
perhaps,  I  may  be  able  to  exhibit  to
you  *re  my  remarks  shall  come  to  a
close;  but  lie  this  as  the  Lord  "ill,  1
do  not  wish  to  say  one  word  against
our  government;  ir  is  a  wood  govern-
ment, it  annuel  s  I  lie  t  ines,  and  tills
a  vacuum  that  perhaps  nothing  else
could.  But  I  a  ii  looking  at  mat-
ters as  they  weie  from  the  begin-
Ding.  *  *

You  know  Jesus,  when  the  Jews
asked  bim  about  divorce  and  inar-


ri  ige,  tol  I  them  that  Moses  per-
miited  then,  lor  certain  causes,  to
pur  away  their  wives;  bul  he  also,
told  I  hem  that  it  was  because  of  the
ha  nines*  of  their  hearts  that  Moses
permitted  this,  but  t lint  from  the
beginning  it  was  not  til,  No*v  wbe-t
ther  it  vvas  because  of  I  he  hardness,
* ►f  men's  hearts,  or  because  of  the
softness  of  them,  1  a  n  not  going  to
say,*  hut  I  want  to  show  the  order
of  thing*  as  they  were  in  th^s  begin-.
ntiMf,  tfttd  hs  they  emanated  from
the  b  isoiti  of  the  Almighty-  That
which  was  first  must  be  last,  and
that,  which  was  last  must  be  first  —
a  tsimil  ir  order  of  things,  redeemed,
rescued  ami  brought  out  ot  chains,
and  ret  urned  to  the  Father  as  they
came  from  him,  for  he  will  accept
nothing  unless  it  be  what  he  give;
for,  said  the  Savior,  u  E»ary  plant
i hat  ii ly  heavenly  Father  Itarh  nut
planted,  shall  be  runted  up,"  Hence,
he  will  receive  nothing  only  what  he
gave.  He  gave  us  immortal  spirits,
he  sent  them  down  here  to  be  taber-
nacled in  the  flesh,  and  be  expects
that  they  will  return  to  him,  and
they  all  will,  in  some  grade,  return  to
him  who  give  them.

Well,  the Savior  of  the  world
came  to  counteract  the  acts  of  the
first  Adam. And what was  the
nature  of  the  work  he  hail  to  do?
Why,  to  bring  life  And  immortality
to  light,  to  resurrect  the  dead,  and
to  implant  a  hope  of  eternal  life  id
those  who  < rusted  in  him;  and  this,
be  it  known  to  you,  was  accomplish-
ed by  one-  nan  po*er. Ye  H  jmao
*  tlliers who  guard the  tomb,  ye
Jews, who had"  a temporary  tri-
umph  by  the  death  of  hi  n  whom
je  crucified,  know  tint  the  an^el
ot  tiud  descends,  the  stone  is  rolled
away  Irom  the  d  »or  of  the  sep  d-
chre,  the Lord  of  glory  rises,  die
dark  curtain  of  death  is  rolled  away
and  gives  place  to  life  and  l minor-


232


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


tfltity,  wliich  dawn  upon  the  world,
ju  the  prifcou  of  t lie  resurrected  *Sh-
Jt-  Tins  w*s  produced  by  one-
tnan  power.  Snid  ;hia  one  man  in
view  of  the  lesponsibuiiies  thai
Here  upon  dim,  a.d  smarting  nmit  r
the  janga  1 1 j m t  lie  euciureii — **  Fi-
thet,  if  it  l>e  possible,  let  this  tup
pj^s  Irofii  met  nevertheless,  not  my
Hill,  >  uf  thine  lie  done/'  Why  did
Dot  1 1 1 a t  om~inttii  power  resist  'the
mind  ot  his  Fa  i her  and  say, — 14  Do
you  think  I  atri  gnnig  to  fay  down
my  life,  to  sacriHee  my  existence
to  please  )ou  V  No,  [  haw  an  in-
dependent mind  and  wiMt  mid  I  am
tesolved  to  yratiiy  them,"  That
Would  have  been  in  accordance  wiili
the  ideas  of  our  day,  but  it  did  not
Correspond  will;  the  progiamme  of
the  Ei final  Father,  hi  il  I litt  oljiet
Ot  hi*  only  begotten  Son  in  coming
tu  t  bis  woi  Id  was  to  acc<>mpli>h  arid
Curry  out  h  s  part  of  that  pro-
gramme, 14  Not  my  will,  but  thine
be  done."  This  should  be  the  feel-
ing of  i  he  Letter -day  Saints  in  re-
lat itJii  tti  the  requirements  ul  heaven
upon  them.  Nut  my  will,  but
thite,  Oh  God,  ic  done."  It  t tie
World  reproach  j  uu  f'^r  submission
to  the  will  uf  God,  leler  them  to  (lie
Savior,  whose  motto  w>i$,  4tN  t  my
will,  but  thine  be  done."  H«»w
much  honor  and  gl**ry  does  the  Sa-
vior ot  I  lie  world  enjoy  at  the  pr««
sent  tmie  ?  It  is  beyoid  thecoi  eep-
tiun  of  mortal  man  JBut  how  much
irculd  he  have  ei  joyed,  and  who
among  us  nouki  ha\e  h-d  solvation
Lad  lie  labeled  in  his  hour  ot  dial
and  said—**!  will  not  submit  to
tl  is  sacrifice  r"  l)e^pi*e  nut  this
oi  e-nian  pi  werf  lor  be  tote  1  come  to
a  elose  i  shall  etah  avor  to  show  tu
jou  that  evtry  BufJ  and  daughter  of
Adam  will  be  compe  led  to  tiow  to  it,
bikJ  the  more  they  fight  agaiii>t  it,
the  harder  it  will  be  !ur  them  to  sub-
mit  to  it  in  the  end. Take  it  kind  ul


'moderately,  then,  and  look  at  it  in  its
true  light.

Now,  my  friends  and  brethren,  t
want  to  h  II  you  that  our  Country  ig

a  republic,  and  not  a  despotism,  al-
though some  sHy  it  is  rapidly  upr
prnachhg  to  that,  i  cannot  led  how
ibaL  is,  1  am  not  much  of  a  politi-
cian, and  do  not  give  myself  a  great
deal  of  concern  about  it..  But  I  c  om-
fort myself  with  the  idea  that  the
Loid  rules  anyhow,  am)  that  |ie  wil|f
in  tirm*,  have  all  things  as  lie  designs
to  have  them,  and  hence  1  take  In  tie
interest  in  politics.  But  one  tiling
I  Mill  say,  that  is,  Ihat  when  the
Ooveruintlit  of  the  United  Stales,
although  it  is  republican,  has  any
ve»y  difficult  ta>k  io  perform,  in
which  the  interests  of  the  country
are  largely  at  s'«ke,  it  casta  off
republicanism  and  adopts  despo-
tism Pel  haps  you  may  think  that
is  slander,  but  I  will  suppose  a  case
to  illustrate  ihe  truth  of  my  pro-
position. For  instance,  the  fate  of
the  nation  is  su  pended  upon  an  im-
portant battle  about  to  be  fought.
Now,  uhat  kind  of  a  govermm  lit
prevails  in  that  army  ?  The  most
vihd  consequences  hang  Upon  ihe
issue  of  the  batile,  and  that  i>sue
depends,  to  a  >eiy  great  extent,  upon
the  orders  of  the  commanding  (ieiie-
ml  being  earned  out.  He  issues
his  ordeis,  ami  his  suba herns  ate
itquirul  to  carry  them  out  rigidly.
The  soldiers  who  .cousin me  the
army  must  submit  in  every  respect,
they  have  not  the  light,  by  virtue
ot  their  own  opinion,  to  tile  off  and
ile v late,  in  the  least  degree,  from
the  orders  of  the  commander.  Tie
same  is  tine  of  the  subaltern  offi-
cers, anil  if  any  of  tiletu  should  adopt
Mich  a  c*  ur>e  I  hey  are  subject  to  be
ined  h\  Courc-tmo  tnd  and  pos&hJy  to
he  eXicuted,  Where  is  ihe  npub*
hcHii]>ui  or  dernoct'iey  in  this  r  I
tell  )ou  that  when  it  comes  to  a  vita


AFFAIRS  IN  SANPETE  COUNTY,  ETC*


233


point  republicanism  has  to  he  laid
aside,  and  the  one-man  power  lias  to
be  strictly  obeyed

Gi>,  if  you  please,  nn  board  the
ships  of  war  of  t he  United  Suites,
and  what  kind  of  government  will
you  find  there?  There  again  (lie
one-man  power  is  absolute.  I  recol-
lect reading  an  anecdote  of*  (Jeneral
Jackson,  when  defending  New  Orleans
against  I  lie  liririsli.  He  pur  t  he  city
under  martial  law,  and  in  so  doing
Some  *aid  he  exc<  eded  rhe  hounds  of
hi-*  authority,  I  can  tic  it  gay  wheiher
lie  dil  or  nut,  I  do  tint  care  whether
be  did  or  mil  ;  any  way  be  saved  the
city  and  obtained  a  viu'ory.  But  in
preparing  lor  defense  lie  took  cotton
bales  our  of  the  warehouses  and
made  a  breastwork  oF  them.  A  Cer-
tain planter  came  to  New  Oi  leans  at
that  tune*  arid  heating  that  his  cot-
ton hats  bad  been  taken  by  the
General,  be  made  a  teriible  ado
about  them,  an  I  finally  went  to  the
Conimander*in  ehiei  of  the  American
forces  ami  requested  that  they  be
returned.  Said  General  J»cks*iU —
u  liave  you  any  cotton  ha  lea  in  our
biea>twoiks  r"  k  Yes,  sir,  [  have  so
many,  and  they  have  been  taken
from  t lie  place  where  they  were  der-
ailed w  ithout  my  pt  rmissiou."  Tne
General  turned  to  an  officer  standi ug
by,  and  said  be — "  Sergeant,  fur  nish
this  mail  a  musket  and  an  i,uTfit,"
Tne  articles  were  brought,  u  Now,
sir/' sod  Uenetal  Jackson,  u  it  you
have  Htiy  col  tun  bile*  heie,  sh  p  into
tbe  ranks  and  defend  them,"  That
Was  one-man  power,  ami  it  was  a  no-
ble exercise  of  it,  it  showed  that  the
Commanding  general  had  the  interest
of  the  country  at  hearr.  You  see,
whenever  there  is  a  vital  question  at
Slake,  and  mutters  of  life  ami  death
are  involved,  the  one-man  pouer  hits
to  be  iniroductd  in  spile  of  every-
thing, and  that  is  all  tight.

Well,  we  txpect  thai  tbe  wutk  oi


God  in  the  last  days  will  l>e  more
irnp-irtiint  and  will  involve  m«»ie  vital
quesiions  than  any  other  that  has
ever  l>een  undertaken  ur  flCConiplish-
ed  on  the  earth,  and  consequently  rhe
one-man  power  will  be  most  loudly
called  f  r  in  connection  with  it,  and
Heaven  seeing  this  has  given  power
and  influence  to  his  servants,  Have
they  got  it  by  the  sword  or  by  op-
pression ?  Nn,  but  they  secure  it
just  as  the  sun  spires  its  votaries.
In  the  cool  or  cold  seasons  of  the
year,  the  reptiles  and  many  animals
seek  protect  ion  in  dens?  and  caves  and
retreats  of  various  kinds,  and  they
are  not  alhred  therefrom  by  tbe
lightning's  flt?*h  or  the  thunders  of
j  heaven  ;  but  when  tbe  rays  of  the
glorious  sun  again  warm  and  revivify
the  f-ice  of  nature,  these  animals  and
reptiles  again  come  fu-ith  to  bask  in
Ins  enlivening  lays*  So  it  is  wiih
the  servants  of  the  living  Gob  Tney
do  not  obtain  influence  over  the
hearts  of  1  lie  chit  ben  of  men  by  ibe
&Wfird  or  musket,  I  ait  it  is  the  b^ht
of  tiuth.  distilling  like  the  de*a  of
heaven,  and  warming  tbe  hearts  of
I  hose  who  love  trail*  that  gives  this
inflience,  and  you  and  I  like  to  be
under  it.  When  1  have  been  in  the
cold  shade  ami  chilling  winds,  I  like
to  come  out  to  the  friendly  sunshine,
it  is  just  as  natural  lor  me  as  it.  is  to
live,  and  this  is  t he  reason  why  ibe
Litur-day  Saints  rally  under  the
influence  of  the  one-man  power*
Tnere  is  the  liijht  :  there  are  the  rays
that  warm  the  heart,  cheer  the  »8*0-
tions,  open  up  prospects  lor  the  fu-
ture, and  make  lite  agreeable.

IVuw, 1 want to  ahoW  yon  that

we  have  all  g<«t  to  obey  it.  If  you
can  get  tid  of  death  and  scale  the
walls  of  eternity  without  pn^sinflf
through  ti  e  dark  valley  of  tbe  sha-
dow of  death,  t  hen  pet  baps  )ou  may
escape  this  one-man  power ;  but  if
you  Cojinut  do  that,  you  cau  not  ea-


234


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


cape  it.  I  will  quote  yon  Scripture  [
to  show  that  such  is  t lie  c*se.  In  the
last  day,  the  Lord  will  gather  t he
inhtilij iHiits  of  the  e«n bs  just  us  a
ftbepherd  gathers  his  sheep;  and  in
the  process  of  gathering  some  will  be
gathered  u  ho  may  be  likened  to 1
pouts,  while  those  who  live  10  do  the
Maker's  will  may  been  I  led  the  sheep.
A  hi  pars 'ion  will  take  place  between
the  sheep  and  the  gwtts,  the  sheep !
will  t»e  put  on  the  right  hand,  and
the  goats  on  the  lelt.  It  may  be  saiil
that  goafs  lire  very  good,  their  skins
file  ireful  and  l lit  ir  flesh  is  tit  for
food,  but  still  they  are  goats,  they  are*
nut  sheep,  they  do  not  produce  wool,
arid  tiny  are  separated  from  the
sheep.  So  the  people  of  the  whole
World  *i  I  lw  separated,  and  the
righteous,  or  the  sheep,  will  be  placed
oil  i  he  right,  and  the  w  irked,  or  the
goats,  i *r i  the  left.  When  that  sepa-
ration  time  canes,  we  will  see  who
will  obey  and  who  will  not  obey  the
one-man  power. Siys  the  Lord,  r I > e

Righteous  Judge,  to  those  on  the
rigiit.  hand — "Come  ye  blessed  of
im  Father,  and  inherit  the  kingdom
prepared  for  you  from  before  the
found  ition  of  i he  world.  Do  von
think  they  will  need  any  urging
to  obey  Y  I  do  not  think  rhey  will.
1  hope  1  shall  be  among  them,  1  shall
be  happy  to  see  )ou  there  too,  *"Come
ye  Messed  ot  my  Far  her,  inherit  the
kingdom  prepared  for  you  fro  n  !
before  the  fonndation  of  the  world/'
j oyful  invitation  !  A  heavenly
influent v  rests  ipoti  us,  and  the  light
ot  joy  bt  arris  upon  our  countenances.
He  now  turns  to  the  gouts,  and  in-
stead of  saying  to  them,  "Come,  ye
blosed  of  my  Fa»her,n  they  hear  the
dread  sentence,  **  Depart  from  me,
je  cused,  into  everlasting  puui&h-
njent,  prepared  tor  the  dev  1  and
bis  angels/'  Do  you  think  they  will
go?  I  am  inehned  to  think  they
Will  be  compelled  to  go; I  think


[  they  will  hare  to  obey  this  one- mar*
power.

Now,  do  not  be  displeased,  jealous,
J  or  angry,  because  God  has  selected
men  and  placed  them  in  the  front
rank  to  plead  the  cause  of  Zion.  Let
Got!  fm\e  his  own  way,  and  it  will
1x5  better  for  you  and  better  for  us
all.  The  old  Prophets  were  very
singular  men,  the)  liked  to  have
things  their  own  way,- been  use  they
had  their  commissions  from  heaven,
and  they  liked  to  execute  them,  and
God  bore  them  out  in  it.

The  other  day  I  sent  a  no*n,  a
friendly  warning  to  the  New  York
1  tiun.  It  was  published  and,  I  be-
lieve, copied  h  to  some  of  the  papers
published  in  tin's  city,  and  yesterday
I  was  reading  (he  objections  to  it  in
one  of  them.  I  will  tell  you  what
their  reasoning  made  me  think  of
When  I  was  between  six  and  seven
years  old,  fatherless  and  motherless,
I  was  kicked  and  cuETed  about  the
woild,  and  yrew  up  a  good  deal  like
a  wild  plant,  v\ith  very  small  oppor-
tunity for  cultivation,  except  that
which  I  have  accomplished  by  my
own  efforts.  When  1  was  a  little
fellow,  I  recollect  there  was  a  man
I  by  the  name  of  Michael  Hughes,
who  professed  that,  on  a  certain  day,
some  six  weeks  from  that  time,  the
world  would  come  to  an  end.  It  dis-
turbed me,  for  1  was  only  six  years
old,  and  i  turned  every  way  to  get
comfort  and  consolation;  there  was
ipaite  an  excitement  among  grown
people  upon  the  subject.  Thertj  was
a  certain  lady  teaching  school  in  the
neighborhood,  by  the  name  of  Miss
Pi ud i son,  and  I  remember  I  sat  do>vn
to  reckon  in  my  own  mind  whether
her  school  would  be  out  by  the  time
this  man  said  the  world  would  come
to  an  end,  and  I  came  to  the  conclu-
sion th  t  it  would  not  come  t  »  an
end  because  M;ss  P — \s  suho  •!  wotild
not  be  out. And  when  I  read  the


AFFAIRS  IN  SANPETE  COUNTY,  ETC.


•  23*


wonderful  arguments  in  this  ri'y
p-ij>  r  about  railroad  cornmiiu  c  itiotl
a  ill  T  interests  wliich  the  same.
Would  Crtl I  into  action,  aivl  the  iri-
flueuce  they  would  have  in  overturn-
ing u  Mnruiotjisiii,"  I  ccrihl  not  help
thinking  about  my  childish  conclu-
sions in  regard  tu  the  end  ot  the
world  and the  lady's  school.  The

Lend  does  not  Cire  s  ch  a  bow

railroads;  I  do  not  think  he  will  de-
lay the  accomplishment  nf  his  pur-
poses to  accommodate  any  no  I  road
institution,  bar,  he  wHl  d  «  id  I  lie  de-
aires  regardless  of  this,  that,  ur  the
other.

Now,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  in
the  midst  uf  all  the  conflicting  srenes
that  transpire  around  -s,  the  mining
operations,  speculating  and  worldly
pride  and  vanity  which  are  multiply-
ing "on  every  hand,  rememl>er  the
Words  ot  the  Sivior — "Except  ye
are  one  ye  are  not  mine/*  No  doubt
some  of  you  have  had  vess»  Is  con-
taining n  little  oil,  and  you  may  have
dropped  iti,  by  accident  i«r  deMgUV  a
few  dr^ps  of  water,  anil  ihen,#in  the
same  vessel,  you  have  had  od  and
waier,  nut  no  maMer  how  much  yn&
shook  them,  ihey  would  nor  unite.
Why  ?  Are  they  not  both  liquids'?
Yes,  but  they  will  nor  unite,  because
they  are  dissimilar  in  their  natures,
and  there  can  he  no  chemicd  union
between  them.  I  have  heard  men
say,  and  correctly  too,  no  riunbr,  that
they  were  thankful  they  had  a  name
arid  a  .standing  in  the  church  fit  the
living  (jud. I  am  thankful  for  the

Same  to  day.  lint  is  that  all  ?  I
want  to  show  you  that  here  is  a  man,
for  instance,  who  is  required  r  >  pay
his  Tithing  arid  my*  lie — "  I  will
pay  just  enough  to  save  my  hkin,
to  save  my  name  and  character,  I
will  not  pay  a  lull  Tithing,  bar.  just
enough  to  whip  the  devil  round  the
Stump/'  Here  is  another  man  who
comes  up  and  pays  a  lull  Tubing  of


everything  Jthat  he  lifts.  Let  tlmae
two  men  sit  down  and  talk  Thhingf
matters  nver  together,  and  will  their
spirits  run  together  ?  Are  tUvy  not
iti  the  same  vessel  —  the  same
Church?  Yea.  W.ll,  do  iheir
hearts,  spiri  s  and  interests  unite  ?
No,  they  are  like  (lie  nil  and  the  wa-
ter in  the  same  ves-el — they  are  dis-
tinct and  they  will  not  a  nalgamate.
This  will  serve  to  illustrate  a  oreat
many  <*ther  things  which,  for  want
of  time,  I  am  not  disposed  to  follow
out.  But  omi  tiling  I  will  na  ue.  and
that  is  in  r«'jf;:n1  to  plural  marriage.
A  gm>t  many  men  say — 14  Oh,  v>ellf
I  Citi  get  ul  *ng,  I  can  live,  and  I
believe  I  shall  oidv  have  one  wife/*

m

Well,  that  is  your  privilege,  nobody
comp  Is  you  to  t  ke  more  thin  one;
ly< i r.  with  the  commandment  of  the
L  »rd  before  us  hke  a  blaze  of  liylit,
Can  we  disregard  it  and  serve  him
aceeptahly  p  I'  we  can,  then  why
not  retain  those  laws  and  command-
ments in  heaven,  and  nut  se r i ■  i  I  hern

,  down  here  to  earth  ?  These  corn-,
inand merits  are  sent  for  our  good,  tor

!  our  s  d Vat i or i  and  exaltation.  Here

i  in  a  wtiin an  who,  in  speaking  of  cehs-
tial  marriage,  say-,  u  It  will  do  very

i  well  for  others,  but  it  will  not  do  in
rny  limine;11  ''it  may  do  very  well
for  snm*l>oty  el-e,  becau-e  her  leel-
inus  aie  not  quite  so  tine  as  none,  she
lias  been  differently  raised  In-ill  what
I  have/*  I  do  not  know  that  the
L  «rd  will  pay  any  particular  respect
as  tu  how  we  are  raised,  and  how  tine
ami  delic'fe  uur  feelings  may  l>e,  or
how  coarse  Mid  uncultivated  they
may  be.  1  believe  that  if  we  submit
to  ihe  law  of  heaven,  that  law  has
iKiwer  to  rt  Hue  us  ar.d  to  lit  us  for
immortality  and  eternal  life.  That
is  my  opinion.  Now  hear  this  £>oud
sister,  she  frays — 11  It  will  not  do  tor
n.e,  I  am  not  going  io  submit  to  if/*
Another  bister  sa)s — I  am  willing
to  submit  to the law of  Christ/1


236


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Let  these  two  sisters  come  together
Bud  talk  over  the  law  of  marriage,
mid  a  e  whether  their  spirit  will  run
together.  They  will  no  more  run
together  than  Writer  and  oil  will
tu  me.

Savs  Jesus,  "  Except,  ye  are  one,
ye  sue  nut  mine,"  Here  is  a  black
mm  and  a  white  man,  raised  in  the
Same  house,  but  is  that  any  argument
that  they  are  both  white  or  b*lh
thick  ?  No.  it  is  no  argn merit  what-
ever. Under  the  sound  of  my  voice
tn-d»y  there  may  be  the  best  men  that
ever  lived,  and  there  may  be,  for
might  I  know,  just  hk  had  as  ever
lived,  1  hope  not.  But  then,  lo-
calise we  are  within  the  walls  of  11ns
I  muse,  does  that.  siL/ni IV  that  we  are
Mended  together  in  heart  and  spirit  ?
Ko,  no  more  ihan  it  proves  that  oil
lind  water  will  unite.  If  I  under-
stand it  correctly,  we  have  to  be
blended  to^et  her,  united  to^et  her
Completely  in  heart  and  spirit.  1  re-
Colhct  once  a  man  coming  to  me  wir h
&  water  melon  in  bin  hand,  ft  looked
So  i/reen,  good  and  fine,  thought  1  —
**  We  will  have  a  least  on  ibis  water
melon."  But.  hh  he  came  near  I
caught  a  glimpse  of  it  somehow,  add
discovered  that  it  had  been  plumed
find  the  inside  taken  out,  so  that  in
B'ead  of  a  bater  melon,  he  was  bring-
ing a  mere  shell.  There  was  tire
•ppearance  of  a  water  melon,  hut,
alas!  there  was  no  meat  in  ir,  it  bad
Hit  been  dug  out  *  Now,  it  is  not  the
form  of  the  union  that  the  Savior
wants  among  bin  people;  that  will
Hut  *  suffice ;  it  is  the  marrow,  the
fatness  we  want,  and  then  we  can  be
fuelled  into  one,  and  this  is  what  the
Savior  meant  when  he  said,  4i  Except
je  ar  one  ye  are  not  mine"  But
tare;*  *  ill  grow  iu  the  same  ticlu  with


the  wheat,  yet  remember  that  tares
are  not  wheat,  neither  is  water  oil.
Come  what  will,  life  or  death,  or
whatever  it  may  be,  never  rnrtuJ,  trust
in  God,  and  be  will  bring  yuu  out  nil
right.

I  am  thankful  for  this  privilege  of
sa\ing  a  fe>v  words.  I  hope  I  have
done  no  harm,  and  (hat  l  have  not
sod  anything  that  is  contrary  to  I  he
will  i if  (i<M|,  or  to  the  feelings  oi  r  he
pure. in  heart,  lor  they  are  j<e*t  as
>acred  to  me  as  the  law  of  G«d,  nnd
I  do  not  want  to  unnecef*s  irily  offend
the  ungodly  ;  but  I  am  not  so  par*
ticular  to  spare  or  shit  Id  them.  I
want  to  tell  the  truth,  and  hear  a.
faithful  testimony.  1  have  been  in
this  Church  about  forty-three  y*  ai
— almost  from  the  beginning,  hit-  (l
was  baptized  into  the  Chinch  on  the
3lst  of  October,  Idol,  an  J  ordained
the  harne  day  and  bent  to  preach  trie
Gospel,  and  more  or  less,  most  of
the  time  since.  I  have  been  engaged
in  that  workj  I  used  to  be  veiy  ao-~"
five  and  spry,  buc  now  I  have  to
bf  old  and  clumsy,  and  1  cannot  tra-
vel about  much.  J  have  to  be  very
careful  of  myself  and  keep  rot hur
moderate  and  at  ill.  I  yet  enj  y  life,
and  have  very  good  health,  but  an
inclination  of  blood  to  the  head
causes  a  flush  on  my  countenance,
which  some  ma)  regard  as  an  imhci-
tion  of  Letter  lualth  than  I  e>  joy.
But  you  kno»v  all  men  try  to  put  Hie
ueht  side  out,  and  women  too;  and  if
nature,  iu  her  operations,  has  canned
a  Bush  of  health  to  bloom  on  my
countenance,  it  is  only  following  i  lie
hush  ions  of  the  day — putting  the  b  st
side  out  God  be  thanked  that  it  is
ha  well  as  it  is.

Heaven  bless  you,  is  my  prayei  in
the- name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  GEOR'iE  A.  SMITH,


Deuvbred  ix  this  Nbw  Tabbrxaclk,  Salt  Laks  City,  at  tub  Semi-
annual C^FhREvcK,  October  7,  1873.

(R*>pOited  by  D<to  d  W.  Evms)

THE  WORD  OF  WISDO  I — EDUCATION,


I  feel  ft  deep  interest  in  the  sub-
jects u  hit:!]  have  been  brouyM  before
lis  tins  morning  by  Hie  Elders  who
have  spoken,  as  well  as  in  every  drs-
course  that  lins  been  uttered  since
the  commencement  of  the  Confer-
ence, and  I  hope  that  thebnpressi  ais
which  h  ive  been  made  will  be  Inst-
ing.  Irt  relation  to  intemper a  nee,
we,  all  of  us,  as  L  itter-rfay  S  data,
should  observe  the  Word  of  Wisdom;
and  if  we  do  not  ohser^e  it,  we  I  *y  a
fonn  'at ion  1o  weaken  ourselves.  You
will  see  young  pt  r-vo  s  comtf  to  tlie
table  in  tlio  morning,  ad  they  want
Borne  rea  or  c  H  e,  or  a  cup  of  good,
grroiLT,  warm  drink.  A  li'ibit  of  th«>
kind  U  \st  perhaps,  already  been  ac-
quired by  them,  and  it  is  likely  to
Continue  until  tliey  b  coitie  slaves  to
it.  In  a  little  while  it  affects  the
Complexion,  it  weaken*  the  mind  and
the  body  throughout,  and  lavs  the
foundation  tor  a  weaker  general  ion
to  follow.  Of  course  it  is  uo  use  to
tatk  to  tnen  abiut  tobacco.  It  hikes
a  man  of  energy  to  q  dt  chewing  to.
bacc  »,  a  man  who  has  a  mind  and
independence  ;  boys  who  undertake
it  seld  en  aeeomplksh  it,  thoa^h  I  hey
are  very  foolish  ever  to  indulge  in
the  habit.

I  feel  like  ezhor'ing  my  brethren
an  I  sisters  to  abstiin  from  every-
thing prohibited iii the  Word  of


Wisdom,  and  to  Jive  in  accordance
with  its  principles  aa  nenr  as  our
eliui  vte  and  t he  productions  of  oup
country  will  permit  S>  f  ir  as  in.
toxic ring  drinks  are  concernel,  it
is  wojse  tli an  madness  and  f  -!K  for
men  In  intul^e  in  them,  Tneie  is
so  nethiug  c  rnp  iratirely  innocent  in
tea,  C'lff'e  or  tobacco,  when  compared
with  int  •xic-ifiiiif  drinks.  Of  Course
a  man  who  uses  tobusun  freely  tor
years  yets  an  appeMte  for  liquor  ;  he
lavs  a  foundation  ftjr  an  appetite  for
liquor,  anil  after  a  while  he  craved  it
111 1  I  must  have  it.  He  should  let
Inh  ceo  alums  in  the  start;  but  yet
tobaeo  >  d  ies  not.  make  a  man  insane
in  a  minute.  Some  of  our  most  pr  >*
misiug  business  men,  who  have  Cotne
to  S  dt  L'i^e  City  at  different  peri-
ods, liave  Carrie  I  themselves  to  un-
timely graves  by  indulging  in  in-
toxicating drinK,  Men  whose  voices
have  been  heard  in  the  Taheru  iclef
met!  w|;o  have  rendered  service  in
the  offices,  and  who  have  been  honor*
el,  hive  died  like  a  dog  in  a  ditch,
or  in  a  most  degraded  mat] tier,  in
ennseqience  of  indulging  in  intoxi*

Citing  drinks.  A  man  says  to  ano-
ther—4  Come,  take  a  drink  "  Nof
I  don't  wish  any/*  **  Oh,  dnti't  be
do  p  oin,  come  and  take  a  drink  with
us,  doii*l  t>e  a  coward  ;"  and  ho,  *nr
fear  of  being  a  coward,  he  takes  tht


t


338


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURI


drink.  Shame  on  such  a  nrnn  !  Why  !
not  quietly  rhv — lh  No,  I  do  riot  need
it  ;"  and  if  the  invitation  is  reputed,
say — *"  No  more  of  l  hat,  getii  le  i  mm,"
and  lie  main  enough  to  let  it  ahm**,
rather  than  yield  and  let  a  h « bi t
Creep  uijoti  him  that  will  destroy
hi  in.  I  have  heard  men  say — *1
can  drink,  or  let  it  alone;"  then  let
it  alone;  but  some  of*  tlmm  who  can
"drink  or  let  it  aline"  will  pet.
drunk  every  tiny.  They  have  sold
themselves  to  (he  cursed  alcohol.  Let
the  El  fers.  of  Israel  eease  this  liabit
and  learn  wisdom.  Wiien  you  no  ne
to  meet  the  presence  of  j-otir  Fa 'her
in  liepiven,  when  you  wish  far  the  re»
wards  of  your  Priesthood,  ymi  wNo
have  not  obeyed  the  W  ord  of  Wis-
don i  will  wail  at  the  Ions  you  hava
snsr ained  in  const  qaenee  of  your  folly.
Think  <  f  these  things,  continue  to
Hi  ink  cif  them,  pray  over  them,  and
fet  an  example  before  your  children
that  is  worth  v  of  i  in  if  at  ion. If  an

m

old  lady  of  seventy  comes  to  my
hou>e  Jit  Conference,  and  I  get  Iter  a
cup  of  tea,  if  there  is  a  girl  there  of
filU'eu,  she  will  want  to  drink  with
grandma,  and  she  will  think  she  must
have  it  because  grandma  dues.  This
h'tjj  been  toy  experience  in  limes
past.  I  do  nut  have  it  now  ;  I  do
not  tjet  tea  for  people,  unless  they
pretend  to  be  sick,  then  I  te  I  my
folks  to  make  them  a  tin  cup  fall  of
good,  strong  catnip  tea.  That  is  a
rule  I  have  prescribed.  I  do  not
know  how  my  folks  keep  it.  I  eer-
tainly  do  not  intend  to  place  any
restrictions  on  them  any  further  th  ni
their  own  wisdom  dictates.  But  if
they  use  these  things  they  do  it  in
violation  of  my  advice  an  1  run  their
own  risks,  ami  ho  do  all  others.

I  Hay,  brethren  and  sifters,  let  us
observe  ihe  Word  of  Wisdom.  We
ar  doing  a  great  business  in  tea,
^offeo  and  tobacco  in  the  Go-opera-
tive Store, When  we  first  esta-  j


blishod  it  we  thought  wo  would  no1
sell  tobtceo  at  all  ;  hut  pretty  noon
the  Snpei  iutetiderit.  Hike  I  ihe  Direct-
ory if  he  might  not  bring*  in  Home
poor  kind  of  tobacco  to  kill  the  ticks
on  sheep.  It  was  very  nooii  di>co-
(iovered  thaf  iinl-ss  they  sold  tobacco,
so  many  LiUer-dav  Siiuts  used  it.
that  a  success  id  opposition  could  be
run  against  them  on  the  tobacco
i ride  alone,  and  they  had  to  com-
mence it,  I  believe,  under  the  plea
that,  it  was  brought  on  to  kill  the
ticks  on  sheep.  Shame  on  such
Latter-day  Saints,  so  fur  as  tobacco
is  concerned,

I  will  say  a  word  in  relation  to
the  colleges  which  brother  Jegse  N»
Smith  spoke  Hliout.  As  he  said,  we
it  ive  struggled  against  mauv  diffi-
ca  1  ties  hs  far  as  education  is  con-
cerned, and  our  university  and  our
colleges,  so  far,  have  simply  been
schools  for  the  education  of  teaehera
in  i he  primary  branches.  We  have
sometimes  employe  1  professors  and
taught  many  different  brandies.  Bat
a  great  eff  nt  has  been  made  to  eda-
c  ite  teachers  for  primary  schools,  and
some  of  them  have  taken  preat  pains
to  inform  themselves,  Thev  have
hell  associations  and  got  up  a  nor-
dial  and  training  class,  have  jjiven
lectures,  and  this  summer  they  spent
six  weeks  voluntarily  to  instruct  each
other.

It  has  been  the  uniform  custom
of  the  General  Government  to  giva
the  di  lie  rent  S  ates  public  lands  and
money  to  a  liberal  extent  fur  c  Idea-
tional purposes.  N»hm  of  this  hat
ever  been  made  available  for  Utah;
we  have  ha  I  to  ctrry  every  tiling  by
our  own  individual  effort.  Now  that
there  aie  many  young  men  and  wo-
men among  us  who  wish  to  fetudj
more  advanced  branches  than  we
have,  as  yet,  been  able  to  organ isse,
they  would  like  to  go  to  famous  seats
of  learning  in  distant  parts  of  the


THE  SAVING  OltDIXAXCKS  OF  THE  GOSPEL


239


conn  try  for  that  purpose.  A  co  opera-
tive tffint  is  now  required  on  the
part  of  the  people,  as  a  matter  of
domestic  economy,  to  establish  schools
of  a  higher  order,  nnd  to  provide  the
professors  and  apparatus  necessary
to  impart  instruction  in  the  higher
branches  of  learning,  t hat  oar  young
people  may  be  able  to  obtain  the
education  tbey  desire  at  home;  for
while  they  would  go  away  and  spend
five  or  six  hundred  dollars  a  year
each,  the  same  amount  expended
here  would  establish  schools  for  the
higher  branches,  and  cut  off  h  lame
proportion  of  the  expense  in  all  time
to  come.  We  would  like  to  have  all
the  Wards  and  settlements  consider
these  questions,  and  make  it  a  matter
of  real  interest  to  bring  about  an
organization  and  to  supply  the  means
necessary  for  this  object.

In  the  foundation  of  a  country  it  is


necessary,  of  course,  to  look  wi  II  to
its  primary  schools;  we  have  tried
to  do  this,  we  are  still  doing  it,  andt
[  believe,  considering  their  cirtnim*

Stances,  the  p^.plu  of  Ut  ih  huvedoni
more  far  education  than  the  people
ol  any  othbr  Territory.

May  the  blessing  of  Israel's  God
lie  upon  us  in  all  otir  elf  >rts  io  guide
our  children,  in  nil  uur  efforts  to
maintain  t  he  principles  of  temperance,
to  observe  the  Word  of  Wisdom  and
keep  the  commandments  of  (Jo  l,  *md
to  establish  such  schools  and  colh  geg
hs  shall  enable  us  to  advance  in  all
branches  that  are  useful,  for  our  reli-
gion includes  every  good  and  true
principle.  There  is  no  principle  oa
tho  face  of  the  earth  or  in  heaven
that  is  true,  but  what  belongs  to
'*  Mormotiism."  M  ly  God  enable  us
to  do  these  tilings  us  we  should,  in
the  name  of  Jvsus.  Arneu,


DISCOURSE  BY  PRK3IDB.VT  DANIEL  H.  WELLS,

Dblivkrkd  is  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  at  the  Semi-

Ankual  Confer  :ncb,  Oct  6,  1873,

(Reported  by  Dttvid  Wm  Evunc.)

THE  SAVING  ORDINANCES  OF  THE  GOSPEL.


It  is  with  great  pleasure  I  rise  to
bear  testimony  to  the  great  truths
that  have  been  announced  here  this
morning.  The  President  has  given
name  reasons  for  the  testimony  that
he  hai  .  borne,  and  the  testimony


that  the  servants  of  God  bear  to  thm
truths  of  the  everlasting  Gospel.  If
too,  can  say  that  I  know  this  t  ■  bo
the  Gospel  of  the  S  >n  of  God,  wh  ch
is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation*
The  great  plart  of  Salvation,  devi&ed


210


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


by  our  heavenly  Father  before  t lie
world  was  organized,  when  it  is
said  tlie  stars  san^r  together,  and  tlie
Sons  of  God  shouted  lor  joy,  has
a^ain  been  reveled  in  accordance
with  the  prophecies  of  the  servant
of  God.  The  L-trd  made  hU|  own
selection,  lie  chose  from  Among  the
children  nf  men,  whom  he  would,
and  Joseph  Smith  was  tlie  favored
individual  who  received  the  visit  of
the  an- el  bearing*  t ci  thin  jjenera-
lion  t  e  Gospel  of  sal  vat  inn  to  be
preached  unto*  those  who  dwelt  on
eftrlh  It  was  taken  a  way  in  fulfill-
ment tif  prophecy.  lf  it  had  not
been  taken  away  what  necessity
Would  there  have  been  to  restore  it  ?
II  u  had  not  l>een  taken  away  the
Apo  tie  cnmM  not  have  seen  in  the
future  the  angel  flying  through  the

mid>l  of  heaven,  bringing  it  back
to  rarlh  <0  pi  each  to  all  nations,
kindreds,  tongues  and  people  We
bear  testimony  that,  it  has  been  re-
Stoiid.  It  is  not  a  new  Gospel — it  is
that  winch  existed  Ir^m  the  U-gin-
nintr,  and  which  was  devised  before
t\w  wui  Id  wms  made  f'nr  l he  sdvatiun
of  those  who  should  c  ane  to  dwell
upon  the  face  of  the  earth.

Ir  \s  true  that  the  terms  of  the
Gu*pe|  are  inexorable.  E  ety  son
and  dj-n^hur  of  Adam  Will  have  to
bend  the  knee  to  this  plan  of  salva-
tion, either  here  or  somewhere  else.
Tlie  ntdmauees  of  the  Gospel  p>*rtajri
to  this  existence,  and  they  have  iu  be

attended  to  in  the  fl.  sji  or  by  those
in  I  his  state  of  existence.  Except
a  nun  is  horn  of  watt  r  he  Cannot
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.
There  is  no  fjetting  around  this,  it  is
the  declination  of  the  Savior,  the
Son  of  tlie  living  G'»d,  and  I  count
that  tins  is  pretty  high  ttuthoiity.
Every  man  and  every  woman,  in-
cluding those  who  have  died  and
passed  behind  the  veil  without  hear-
ing the  Gospel,  before  they  can  enter


heaven,  will  have  to  render  obedi-
ence to  tlie  Gnfioel  ordinances,  and
as  they  cannot  he  ndruinisiere  I  to
in  tlie  spint,  those  in  the  flesh  will
have  to  administer  for  tho.^e  in  the
spirit.  YoiiCHiitnt  grapple  a  spirit
to  baptize  it,  neither  ran  you  per-
form the  sealing  ordinance  in  the
spirit,  hence  the  Savior  said  there
was  neither  marrying  nor  giving  in
marr-aire  in  the  resurrect  inn.  It  13
an  ordinance  pertaining  to  tins  s'at
of  existence,  and  by  those  dwelling
in  the  fl -sh  upon  the  earth  have  all
these  orditiamva  to  be  performed*
If  they  are  not  by  ourselves  during
this  life  they  must  be  done  by  some
one  action  for  h ml  in  our  behalf  still
existing  in  the  flesh,  and  in  the  au-
thority ol  die  holy  Priesthood,  *\  hich
has  come  down  from  heaven.

The  acts  and  ordinations  of  that
Piiesthood  are  just  as  legitimate
here  as  in  any  01  her  hi  ate  of  exis-
tence* It  is  the  same  authority  aa
exists  in  the  heavens.  Through  the
authority  of  T lie  everlasting  Priest-
hood, channels  h  ive  been  o|iei»ed  up
between  the  heavens  and  the  earth,
by  which  vte  may  senl  upon  eaiihf
and  it  is  sealed  in  heaven.  This
is  the  sane  authority  t tint  has  ttl-
wavs  existed  in  the  Church  and
kingdom  of  Go  I  when  it  has  l*eeti
upon  the  earth,  Why  ?  Because  it
is  the  s  one  authority  that  exists  in
the  heavens;  it  is  l he  authority  by
which  the  Gods  an*  governed,  anil
hy  whirl  1  the  worlds  are  ortraniz  *d
and  helil  in  existence.  It  has  been
conferred  from  time  to  time  upon  the
servants  of  God  in  the  flesh,  to  ena-
ble them  to  ]<erform  the  ordinances
which  pertain  to  this  state  of  exis-
tence, and  reach  back  again  wiiUi
the  vail.

Having  been  called  of  God  wa
stand  ready  to  administer  the  ordi-
natices  *if  the  Gospel :il)d of  the

hoobe  of  Gud  to  the  children  of  men  ;


THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE


CHURCH  OP  CHRIST,  ETC.


241


we  stand  ready  to  bear  off  this  Gos-
pel to  the  nations  of  tho  earth,  this
great  plan  of  salvation  devised  by
oor  Father  There  has  never  been
any  other,  and  there  never  will  he.
Men  have  tinkered  at  it,  and  tried
to  change  and  pervert  it ;  but  their
efforts  do  not  change  God's  pi m,  it
is  like  its  author — the  same  yester-
day, to-day  and  forever-  God  is  the
fountain  of  troth,  righteousness  and
grace.  All  troo  science  and  every
good  th\ng  emanate  from  him.  It
is  from  this  heavenly  source  we
draw  our  information  and  our  in-
spiration, and,  as  a  matter  of  conrsp,
it  Cum  prebends  everything  good
and  worth  having.  Within  the
kingdom  of  our  God  is  everything
enjoyable  that  is  lasting  If  we  do
not  boild  upon  this  basis,  then  are
we  lost,  because  it  is  the  only  foun-
dation that  will  stand.  Everything


else  will  be  swept  away  in  the  due
time  of  the  Lord.  The  people  are
suffered  to  go  their  own  way,  to
walk  after  the  imaginations  of  their
own  hearts,  to  do  this  and  do  that,
because  they  are  agents  unto  them-
selves, to  do  as  they  please,  We
can  accept  these  principles  or  reject
them  ;  it  makes  no  difference  in  re-
gard to  their  truth.  They  are  true,
whether  we  receive  or  reject  them,
and  they  are  calculated  to  save  all
the  children  of  men.  The  plan  is
ample  and  will  save  all  who  will  lefc
it;  and  if  we  are  not  saved  by  this
we  shall  be  condemned*

Now  may  God  help  as  and  all  the
nations  of  the  earth  to  aee  the  lightt
that  we  may  all  Come  to  a  knowl-
edge  of  the  troth  and  be  saved  m
his  kingdom,  is  nay  prayer  for  Jesus1
sake*  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  GEORGE  Q.  CANNON

Delivered  in  xhb  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  at  thi  Semi-
annual CONFERENCE,  OCTOBER  6,  1873.

(Reported  by  David  W*  Evam.)

THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST— TESTIMONY  IS  GIVEN  BY
THE  SPIRIT— TRIALS  TO  BE  ENCOUNTERED  AND  SACRIFICES  TO  BB
MADE  IN  ORDER  TO  PROVE  THE  FAITH  OF  THE  SAINTS— THK  LOYB
OF  WEALTH.


The  subjects  that  have  been  dwelt
upon  this  morning  are  such  as  must
interest  every  one  who  has  a  desire

No.  16.


to  comprehend  the  principles  of
sal  rat  ion,  as  believed  in  and  prao?
ticed  by  the  Latter-day  Saint*.  T»

Vol.  XVI.


142


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


my  mind  there  has  been  an  evi
dence  of  their  truth  accompanying
every  word  that  has  been  spoken.
.  Tne  Spirit  of  God  bears  testimony
to  the  things  of  God,  and  there
would  be  no  difficulty  in  convinc-
ing the  i  nimbi  Units  of  the  earth  of
thn  truth  of  the  principles  believed
in  hy  the  Latter-day  Saints,  were  it
not  tor  tradition  and  the  prejudices
which  exist  in  men's  minds  in  rela-
turn  to  Hie  truth.  Let  a  man  start
out  with  the  Bible  in  his  band,
determined  to  receive  the  truth
wherever  it  may  be  found,  and  com-
mence examining  the  various  insti-
tutions and  churches  that  exist
among  men,  and  he  would,  if  he
believed  the  Bible,  and  were  not
prejudiced  by  tradition  and  educa-
tion, expect  to  find,  when  lie  found
the  Church  of  Christ,  a  Church  or-
ganized in  every  respect  like  that
of  which  the  New  Testament  gives
us  an  account.  He  would  expect  to
find  Apostles  and  Prophets,  and  the
ordinances  of  baptism,  and  the  lay-
ing  on  of  bauds  for  the  reception  of
the  Holy  Ghost  in  that  Cuurch  ;  he
would  expect  to  tit  id  the  gifts  of
prophecy,  revelation,  tongues,  the
interpretation  of  tongues,  healing,
wisdom,  the  discernment  of  spirits,
and  all  the  gifts  that  existed  in  the
Church  of  Christ  in  ancient  days*
He  would  look  for  just  such  a  church
&s  this,  and  if  he  did  nut  find  it  he  j
would  conclude  that "  that  church
iiad  been  withdrawn  from  the  earth.
The  evidences  that  abound  in  the
.Scriptures  all  go  to  prove  that  this
was  the  character  of  the  Church  of
-Christ  in  ancient  days,  and  that
there  should  be  no  change,  for  the
.Scriptures  tell  us  that  God  is  the
sime  to-day,  yesterday  and  for  ever,
and  that  if  men,  in  this  day  do  the
oame  things — exercising  the  same
fiffth  as  they  did  in  ancient  days —
the  same  blessings  will  follow  their  |


obedience*  If  we  examine  the
Bible  there  is  nothing"  to  sustain  the
idea  that  there  should  be  any  change
in  any  of  these  things;  and  when
men  here  it  proclaimed  that  God  has
restored  the  everlasting  Gospel,  and
they  have  a  desire  in  their  hearts  to
comprehend  the  truth,  there  is  a
spirit  accompanies  the  testimony  of
the  servants  of  God  which  bears  wit-
ness to  their  spirit  that  these  things
are  true.  But  immediately  another
spirit  steps  in,  and  the  reflection
arises  in  ttie  minds  of  many — What
will  my  parents,  relatives  or  friends
say  V  what  will  the  world  s  iy  if  1  be-
lieve this  doctrine  ?  There  is  igno-
miny associated  with  belief  in  these
doctrines.  There  is  shame  to  be  en-
countered if  I  go  forward  and  join
a  people  so  despised  as  these.  What
will  men  say  of  me  ?  In  what  li^ht
shall  I  be  viewed  ?  These  reflect-
ions arise,  and  the  testimony  of  the
truth  is  extinguished  in  the  befits
of  many.  It  requires,  therefore,  on
the  part  of  people  now,  as  in  ancient
days,  great  strength  of  mind,  great
moral  courage,  and  great  love  of  the
truth,  an  overpowering  desire  to
obtain  salvation,  and  the  Spirit  of
God  to  aid  them,  in  order  to  enable
people  to  receive  the  Gospel  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Hence  it  it
that  so  tew,  comparatively  spenk-
itH£,  in  every  age  have  received  the
truth.  It  requires  courage  to  sus-
tain men  when  opposed  by  every
kind  of  treachery  and  of  violence.
It  required  courage  to  enable  men
to  go  forth  to  the  stake,  to  be  cast
into  dens  of  wild  beasts,  or  fiery  fur-
naces, to  be  crucified,  beheaded,
sawn  asunder,  or  to  be  exiled  ai
was  John  the  Revelator.  It  requir-
ed, in  ancient  days,  and  it  requires
it  in  our  days,  this  kind  of  sublime
courage  to  enable  men  and  women
to  receive  the  truth ;  and  in  view  of
all  this,  we  can  see  and  com  pre-


THE  CHARACTER,  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST,  ETC,


423


hend  the  truth  of  the  words  of  the
Savior  when  he  said — "  Strait  is  the
gate  and  narrow  is  the  way  which
leadeth  unto  life,  and  few  there  he
that  find  it,"  and  u  wide  is  tlie  Rate,
and  broad  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to
destruction,  and  many  there  be  which
go  in  thereat." It  has  been  so  easy
for  men  to  reject  the  truth  and  flow
with  the  current;  it  has  been  so  easy
for  men  to  spread  their  sails,  catch
the  popular  breeze  and  glide  before
it; and  it  has  been  so  difficult  for
men  to  stem  the  tide  of  opposition
which  they  have  always  had  to  con-
tend with  when  they  have  embraced
the  truth,  that  it  requires  on  our
part,  brethren  and  sisters,  dpvot ion  to
the  work  which  God  has  restored.
Every  man  and  woman who  has
entered  this  church,  however  ignorant
and  illiterate,  and  lias  been  humble
and  truly  repented,  hits  received  a
testimony  from  God  that  this  is  the
truth. God  bestows  his  holy  Spirit
upon  those  who  obey  his  Gospel  as
he  bestows light upon  the  earth.
There  have  not  been  a  privileged
few,  there  has  been  no  hierarchy,
there has been no monopoly  of
knowledge, for  some  exclusive  set
to  receive  while  the  rest  would  be
destitute;  but  it  has  l>een  diffused
like  the  blessing  of  air — it  has  been
to  all  who  have  believed  it,  and  ev-
ery mmn  find  woman  has  received  a
testimony for himself  and  herself
respecting  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ
as  it  has  been  revealed  and  taught
in  these  last  days, Hence  yon  tra-
vel trom  one  end  ot  this  Territory
to  the  other  and  you  find  all  the
people bearing testimony,  when
called  upon,  that  they  know  this  is
the  Gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
restored  in  its  ancient  purity  and
simplicity. You go to  foreign
lands,  and  they  bear  the  same  tes-
timony everywhere Illiterate,  hum-
ble, uneducated,  weak  men  have  gone


forth,  and  proclaimed  this  truth,
authorised  by  God,  and  God  has  con-
descended to  confirm  the  truth  of
their  testimony  and  administrations
among  the  people,  and  we  are  now
brought  together  in  this  land.  We
are  surrounded  by  peculiar  circum-
stances, we  am  in  a  place  to  be  tried
and  tested,  as  we  never  have  been  be-
fore. There  are  many  tests,  tempta-
tions and  trials  now  assailing  the
Litter- day  Saints,  with  which  they,
never  had  to  contend  before.  We
have  had  mobs,  expulsion  from  our
lands,  from  the  temple  of  God  that
we  reared,  and  from  the  pleasant
homes  which  we  had  created,  from
the  graves  of  our  friends  and  kindred
whom  we  buried  after  they  bad
fallen  victims  to  the  land  which  we
had  redeemed  from  the  condition
in  which  we  found  it.  We  have
passed  through  these  scenes  and
there  has  been  but  little  faltering
considering  the  circumstances  we
have  had  to  contend  with.  Men
have  bravely  stood  all  these  tilings,
and  fee  hie  women  have  been  tilled
with  courage  and  strength  to  piss
through  these  privations  without
their  faith  failing  them.

I  hope  that  we  shall  not  have

I  such  scenes  to  endure  again.  I  pray
that  we  may  be  delivered  from  the
violence  of  our  enemies,  that  they
may  not  have  power  over  us  again

1  as  they  have  had  in  the  p  ist.  But
we  must  make  calculations  on  hav
ing  trials  aud  difficulties  r.o  contend
with,  and  having  testa  for  our  faith
to  be  endured  and  passed  through.
We  can  not  expect  to  accomplish
the  work  that  God  has  laid  upon  ug
without  being  tested  and  proved.
Men  aud  women  need  not  expect
that  they  will  attain  unto  the  glory
which  God  has  in  store  for  the
faithful  without  being  tested  in  all
thi  ngs.  If  we  have  a  weakness,  or
anything  about us that is  not


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


24  +

thoroughly  sound,  we  may  expect
that  sooner  or  later,  that  weak  spot
in  our  nature  will  be  found,  and  we
will  he  tested  to  the  very  uttermost.
If  we  expect  to  sit  down  with  Jesus
and  the  Apostles  and  those  who
have  fought  the  good  fight  of  faith,
and  who  have  laid  down  their  lives
■  fur  Hie  truth  in  past  ages,  or  in  oar
age,  we  must  expect,  like  them,  to
be  proved  and  tried  in  all  things,
until  everything  in  our  nature  that
is  drossy  shall  be  purified,  and  we
be  cleansed  and  made  fit  to  sit  down
wi'h  them,  puie  and  holy — their,
peers.  *  I

Can  1  then,  or  can  you,  give  way
to  lust  r  Can  you  love  the  world,
and  the  things  of  the  world  more
than  you  do  the  things  of  God  ?
Here  is  the  danger  that  is  before  us
as  a  people — it  is  the  lust  of  thetiesh,
the  lust  of  the  eye,  the  lust  of  wealth,
the  fondness  for  worldly  ease  and
comfort.  We  are  being  assailed  by
these  trials.  As  a  people  we  are
increasing  in  wealth.  Wealth  is
multiplying  upon  us  on  every  hand.
I  know  of  no  people,  to-day,  who
are  prospering  as  the  Latter-day
Stints  through  fheae  valleys  are*
God  lias  blessed  our  land,  rendered
it  fertile,  and  made  it  most  produc  ■
tive.  He  lias  placed  us,  in  the  cen.
tre  of  the  continent  We  occupy
the  k*y  position,  and  may  be  termed
the  keystone  Territory  or  State  of
the  West.  Wealth  is  pouring  into
our  lap,  and  we  can  not  help  being
wealthy,  that  is,  if  we  follow  the
course  that  has  been  indicated  to  us,
We  are  as  sure  to  be  a  wealthy  peo- '
pie  as  that  the  sun  shines.  It  is  the
inevitable  consequence  of  our  posi-
tion, habits,  union,  &c.

There  are  more  dangers  in  wealth
than  in  mobocracy,  There  is  more
danger  in  having  abundance  of  money,
houses,  landsr  comforts,  carriages,
horses  and  fine  raiment,  than  in  all


the  mobg  that  ever  arrayed  them-
selves against  os  as  a  people  from
the  beginning  until  we  came  here.
We  should  realize  this,  and  there  is
only  one  way  that,  we  can  ei*ca|ie  the
evil  consequences  thereof.  Wealth
has  ruined  and  corrupted  every  peo-
ple almost  that  ever  lived  and  at-
tained unto  power  It  has  sapped
the  foundation  and  vitality  of  the
most  powerful  "peoples  and  nations
that  ever  existed  on  the  face  of  the
earth.  We  are  human  as  they  were;
we  are  exposed  to  the  same  trials  and
tempt  at  ions  as  they  were,  and  we  are
liable  to  be  overcome  as  they  were;
and  the  only  safeguard  for  us  is  to
hold  everything  that  we  have  subject
to  the  counsel  and  wil!  of  God  our
heavenly  Father,  until  a  different
order  of  things  shall  be  instituted
among  us  as  a  people.

I  see  young  men  growing  up,  and
in  their  growth  is  the  love  of  wealth,
the  love  of  ease  and  worldly  comfort,
and  the  desire  and  greed  for  money.
I  will  tell  jou  that  the  man  who  h  is
the  greed  or  hunger  for  money  within
him,  and  does  not  repress  it,  can  not
be  a  Latter-day  Saint.  A  woman
who  has  the  love  of  finery  and  of
earthly  e>*se  and  comfort  within  her,
and  that  is  the  paramount  feeling  in  her
heart,  can  not  be  a  Latter-day  Saint.
No  man  can  be  a  Latter-day  Saint  in
truth  and  in  deed  who  does  not  hun-
ger after  righteousness  and  the  things
of  God  more  than  he  does  after  every-
thing else  upon  the  face  of  the  earth;
and  whenever  you  see  or  feel  thia
money  hunger,  this  dress  hunger,
this  hunger  for  worldly  ease  and
comfort  in  yourselves  or  others,  yju
may  know  that  the  love  of  God  ta
being  withdrawn  from  you  or  themf
and  sooner  or  later  it  will  be  ex-
tinguished, and  the  love  of  the  world
will  grow  until  it  becomes  predomi-
nant I  do  not  know  anything  mora
corrupting  than  this  greed,  hunger


THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE

and  lust  for  the  things  of  this  life,  or
anything  more  degrading  and  de-
basing  iu  its  effects,  except  it  be  the
love  or  lust  for  women.  As  a  people
we  believe  that  lost  for  women  is,
Dext  to  murder,  shedding  innocent
blood,  the  most  deadly  of  all  sins.
Committing  wheredom  or  adulterv
destroys  the  man  who  indulges  in  if,
anil  next  to  that,  in  my  estimation,  is
the  love  of  wealth — the  lusting  after
the  things  of  this  life;  and  there
ought  to  be,  and  is  in  every  rightly
Constituted  nature,  a  constant  warfare
against  this  evil.  We  have  this  to
contend  with.  We  should  watch  it
in  our  children  and  in  ourselves,  and
we  should  endeavor  to  govern  and
bring  nil  our  feelings  and  desires  into
such  a  position  that  they  can  be  con-
troled  by  the  love  of  the  truth.

God  has  most  wisely  designed,  in
my  humble  view  and  opinion,  that,
as  a  people,  we  should  be  called  upon
from  timato  time  to  make  sacrifices,
in  order  that  we  may  be  weaned  from
the  love  of  the  things  of  this  life,
that  our  love  may  be  concent  rated
upon  Him  and  ujjon  the  salvation  of
our  fellow-men,  for  the  mission  that
is  enti usted  tu  us  is  to  save  the  inha-
bitants of  the  earth.  And  what  a
glorious  field  spreads  out  before  us  in
this  direction,  when  we  see  the  thou-
sands of  poor,  perishing  soul*  who
are  dying  for  the  want  of  the  bles-
sings that  we  enjoy.  We  build  Tem-
ples, we  organize  emigration  societies,
and  expend  our  means  that  we  may
be  the  instruments  in  the  hands  ot


CHURCH  OF  CHRIST,  ETC,  243

God  of  saving  and  bringing  salvation
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth — our
brethren  and  our  sisters.

God  required  Abraham  to  sacrifice
that  which  whs  most  dear  to  him,
and  he  will  also  require  at  our  hands
that  which  is  most  dear  to  us.  If
you  have  wealth,  and  are  increasing
in  wealth,  one  of  the  best  tilings,
under  sucii  circumstances,  is  to  be
always  particular  in  doing  that  which
God  requires  of  us.  He  requires  of
ns  one-tenth  of  all  that  we  have.  Let
us  be  liberal  in  this.  lie  requites
that  we  shall  pay  means  for  the  emi-
gration of  the  poor  from  the  distant
nations  of  the  earth.  Let  us  be
liberal  in  this  also.  Then,  if  he  re-
quires our  time  and  talents  and  all
that  we  have,  let  us  be  willing  to  de-
vote ourselves  to  his  Wurk,  for  he
blesses  us  with  every  tiling  that  our
hearts  desiie.  There  is  nothing  we
have  ever  desired  as  individuals  or  as
a  people,  that  has  been  good  for  us,
and  proper  that  we  should  have,  that
he  has  withheld  from  us.  On  the
contrary,  he  has  multiplid  blessings
upon  us,  and  lie  will  make  us  wealthy
it  we  will  only  be  devoted  to  him.
There  is  no  danger  that  we  shall  not
become  wealthy,  the  danger  is  that
we  shall  become  wealthy  and  not  be
willing  to  use  our  means  to  his  glory
and  for  the  advancement  of  his  king-
dom. That  is  the  danger  witli  which
we  are  threatened.

God  bless  you,  my  brethren  and
sisters,  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOSEPH  F*  SMITH,


Deliver i:i>  or  the  Nkw  Tabernaclk,  Salt  Lake  City,  at  the  Semi-
annual Conference,  October  7,  1873,


(Reported  hy  Bavld  W.  Evans.)


THE  INSTRUCTIONS  GIVEN  ARE  INTENDED  FOIL  ALL  THE  SAINTS — THE
LATT i  tt-DAY  WUKK  AN  INDIVIDUAL  WORK— MEN  AND  WOMEN  ARE
RESPONSIBLE  FOR  THEIR  OWN  ACTS — OBEDIENCE  IS  ESSENTIAL  TO
SALVATION— THE  PRESENT  SEN FUL  CONDITION  OF  THE  WORLD  THE
RESULT  OF  DISOBEDIENCE— COUNSEL  TO  THE  SAINTS  ON  THE  NECES-
SITY OF  LIVING  EXCLUSIVELY  FOR  THE  BUILDING  UP  OF  THE  KING-
DOM OF  GOD.


To  say  I  have  been  very  much  in-
terested in  the  instructions  that  we
have  had  at  this  Conference  is  but
faintly  to  express  my  feelings*  We
have  had  much  very  excellent
teaching,  which  we  will  do  well  to
give  heed  to,  I  can  nut  believe  that
the  congregations  that  have  attend-
ed this  Conference  will  cast  lightly
aside  these  teachings,  Certain  it  is
that  all  the  preaching  that  can  be
done  by  those  who  are  most  c<>mpe
tent,  Hfid  must  richly  endowed  with
the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
will  not  benefit  the  people  in  the
least,  unless  they  will  receive  it,  and
will  realize  that  the  counsels  which
are  given  are  designed  expressly  fur
the rn st  Ives.  It  is  not  for  us  to  say,
"  that  does  not  mean  me,"  and  "  that
applies  to  my  neighbor;"  or  "that
has  reference  to  the  doings  of  so
and  so."  We  should  each  feel  that
the  instructions  given  have  direct
reference  to  ourselves  individually ;
that  roundel  or  that  commandment  is
for  me,  and  it  is  tor  me,  ni^a  t  individ-
ual, ti>  put  it  into  practice.  This  is  the
only  course  that  will  benefit,  and  fit  us
fur  the  responsibilities  that  will  de-


volve upon  us  in  the  future.  It  will
not  do  for  us  to  say — "  If  brother  so
and  so,  or  sister  so  and  so,  will  ob-
serve and  carry  out  that  counsel,  I
shail  be  satisfied  to  remain  as  I  ara."
We  can  not  obtain  blessings  from
God  by  taking  this  course  ;  the  only
way  to  secure  them  is  by  diligence
on  our  own  part  When  we  are  pre*
pared,  by  ourown  works  and  diligence,
to  receive  the  blessings  that  God  has
in  store  for  the  faithful ;  I  hen,  and  not
till  then,  shall  we  receive  tbera.  It
will  not  do  for  us  to  be  satisfied  for
our  brother  to  prepare  himself  to  re^
ceive  the  blessings  God  has  promised
to  his  children,  and  to  rest  content
with  seeing  him  receive  the  light  of
truth,  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel,
and  manifest  a  willingness  to  wor
righteousness  in  the  earth.  That
will  not  reach  us,  only  so  far  as  we
adopt  bis  course  and  follow  his  ex-
am pie.

This  is  how  I  look  at  the  require-
ments which  God.  has  made  upon
his  people  collectively  and  individ-
ually, and  I  do  believe  that  I  have
no  claim  upon  G<m3  or  upon  m
brethren  for  blessing,  favor,  conE


THE  INSTRUCTIONS  GIVEN,  ETC


247


deuce  or  love,  unless,  by  my  works,  [
I  prove  that  I  am  worthy  thereof,
and  I  never  expect  to  receive  bless-
ings that  I  do  not  merit;  Who
does  ?  I  do  not  know  that  anybody
does,  jet  if  we  were  to  judg0  by  the
actions  of  some,  we  must  come  to
the  conclusion  that  they  aie  satis-
fied by  seeing  others  live  their  reli-
gion.

I  love  the  society  of  the  good,
honorable  and  pure,  of  those  who
love  virtue  and  work  righteousness.
To  associate  and  be  numbered  with
such  and  to  have  my  portion  and
my  lot  with  them  in  this  life,  and
to  live  so  that  I  can  secure  that  asso-
ciation in  the  life  to  come,  through-
out the  countless  ages  ot  eternity.
I  take  no  pleasure  in  the  society  of
the  wicked,  for  this  reason— the
pleasures  of  the  wicked  will  cease
and  be  forgotten,  and  the  wicked
will  die  and  will  not  be  regretted,
their  names  will  be  cast  out  from
the  presence  of  God  and  from  the
thnmgs  of  the  righteous  for  ever
and  ever.  I,  therefore,  want  no  part
with  them,  but  I  want  to  c^ist  rny
lot  with  those  who  are  securing  to
themselves  eternal  riches  and  hap-
piness* To  obtain  these  blessings  I
must  be  found  walking  in  their  foot-
steps and  following  their  examples,
otherwise  I  shall  come  short.

Tli is  is  how  I  understand  the  prin-
ciples oi  the  Gospel  and  the  work
we  are  engaged  in.  It  is  an  indi-
vidual work.  You  and  I  must  se-
cure the  blessings  of  eternal  lives
for  ourselves,  through  obedience  and
the  mercy  of  God.  We  have  the
Tolition  of  our  own  wills  and  we
can  choose  evil  or  good,  the  society
of  the  wicked  or  that  of  the  good  ;
we  can  enlist  under  the  banner  of
Christ,  or  under  that  of  Belial.  We
have  this  option,  and  can  do  which-
ever we  choose.  Therefore  we  must
look  well  to  our  ways,  and  see  that


we  choose  the  right  course,  and
build  upon  a  foundation  that  will
not  wash  away.  We  have  got  to
learu  to  stand  or  fall  for  ourselves,
male  and  female.  It  is  true  that  we
are  taught  in  the  principles  of  the
Gospel  that  man  is  the  head  of  the
woman,  and  Christ  is  the  head  of
the  man ;  and  according  to  the  order
that  is  established  in  the  kingdom  of
God,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  man  to  fol-
low Christ,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  the
woman  to  follow  the  man  in  Christ,
not  out  of  him.

But  has  not  a  woman  the  same
volition  that  the  man  has  ?  Can  she
not  follow  or  disobey  the  man  aw  ha
can  follow  or  disobey  Christ  ?  Cer-
tainly she  can,  she  is  responsible
for  her  acts,  and  must  answer  for
them.  She  is  endowed  with  intel-
ligence and  judgment,  and  will
stand  upon  her  own  'merits  as  much
so  as  the  man.  That  is  why  the
brethren,  during  this  Conference,
have  been  teaching  the  sisters  that
they  must  refrain'  from  the  fashions
ot  Babylon.  They  must  use  their
own  judgment  and  agency  as  to
whether  they  will  oby  this  counsel
or  not  If  they  will  not  obey  it,
they  will  be  responsible  as  much  as
the  men  are  responsible  for  their
ac*s.  The  man  is  responsible  for
the  woman  only  so  far  as  she  is  in-
fluenced by,  or  is  obedient  to,  his
counsels.  Christ  is  responsible  for
r he  man  so  far  as  the  man  walks  in
obedience  to  the  laws  and  command-
ments he  has  given,  but  no  further,
and  so  far  will  his  atoning  bluod
redeem  and  cleanse  from  sin  ;  so  far
ip  they  obey  them  will  the  princi-
ples of  eternal  life  revealed  in  the
Gospel  have  effect  upon  the  sou Is  of
men,  so  also  with  women.  So  sis-
ters, do  not  flatt  r  yourselves  that
you  have  nothing  to  answer  for  so
long  as  you  may  have  a  good  bus-
1  band. You  must  be  obedient.  Qbe-


248


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


dience  is  the  first  law  of  heaven.
Without  it  the  elements  could  not
be  controled.  Without -it  neither
the  earth  nor  those  who  dwell  upon
it  could  be  controled.  The  angels
in  heaven  would  not  be  controled
without  it,  and  in  fact  without  obe-
dience there  could  be  no  union  or  or-
der, and  clmos  and  confusion  would
prevail.  When  we  are  obedient  we
may  be  guided  to  the  accomplish-
ment of  all  tliat  is  required  of  us  by
our  heavenly  Father,  for  it  is  ou  this
principle  that  the  designs  and  pur-
poses of  God  are  accomplished
The  elements  are  obedient  to  his
word.  He  said  "  Let  there  be  light
and  there  was  light "  He  command-
ed the  land  and  the  waters  to  be
divided,  and  it  was  so.  When  Christ
commanded  the  storm  to  be  still,
and  the  sea  to  be  calm  the  elements
were  obedient  to  him.  The  earth,
and  all  the  worlds  which  God  has
made  are  obedient  to  the  laws  of
their  creation,  for  this  reason  there
are  peace,  harmony,  union,  increase,
power,  glory  and  dominion,  which
could  not  exist  without  obedience.
Fur  the  lack  of  obedience  the  whole
world  to-day  lies  in  sin,  for  except,
i}m  little  existing  among  this  peo-
ple, obedience  can  not  be  found  on
the  fa^°  of  the  earth.  Go  to  the
religions  oi  tha  day,  do  you  find  ooe-
dience  manifested  by  the  people  ?
No,  but  you  find  pan  everywhere
self-willed  a  nd  untraotabio,  there-
fore confusion  and  anarchy  reign.
It  is  said  in  the  Scriptures  that  nil
things  are  possible  with  God;  but
he  only  works  in  accordance  with
the  principles  by  which  he  himself
is  governed  ;  and  hence  he  can  not
convince  nations  of  the  truth  against
their  will. As  the  poet  says —

Know  this,  that  every  soul  is  free,
To  chouse  hia  life  and  what  he'll  be ;
For  this  eternal  truth  is  given,
That  God  will  force  no  man  to  heaven.


He'll  call,  persuade,  direct  aright,—
Bless  hiin  with  wisdom,  love  and  light, —
In  nameless  way*  be  good  and  kind,
But  never  force  the  huiaan  miuA

That  is  the  way  that  God  deals  with
man,  therefore  I  say,  he  cannot  work
with  this  generation.  They  have  set
him  aside  and  made  themselves  su-
preme. They  have  fulfilled  the  weirds
of  the  prophet  Paul,  when  he  said
that  "In  the  last  days  perilous
times  should  come,  for  men  shall
be  lovers  of  their  own  selves,  cove-
tuous,  boasters,  proud,  blasphemers,
disobedient  to  parents,  unthankful,
unholy,  without  natural  affections,
truce- breakers,  false  accusers,  in-
continent, tierce,  despisers  .of  those
that  are  good,  traitors,  heady,  high-
minded,  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than
lovers  of  God ;  having  a  form  of
Godliness,  hut  denying  the  power
thereof,"  &c.

No  one  co old  better  describe  the
condition  of  this  generation,  and  yet
light  has  come  into  the  world,  but  it
is  rejected,  und  for  this  reason  the
world  lies  in  sin,  and  under  condem-
nation. The  people  of  God  lie  under
condemnation  too,  so  far  as  they  are
disobedient  to  the  counsels  of  God's
servants.  We  talk  of  obedience,  but
do  we  require  any  man  or  woman  to
ignorantly  obey  the  counsels  that  are
given  ?  Do  the  first  Presidency
require  it  ?  Ni>,  never.  What  do  they
desire  ?  That  we  may  have  our
minds  opened  and  our  understand-
ings enlarged,  that  we  may  com-
prehend all  true  principles  for  our-
selvis;  then  we  will  be  easily
governed  thereby,  we  shall  yield
obedience  with  our  eyes  open,  and  it
will  be  a  pleasure  for  us  to  do  so.

The  Lord  does  not  accept  obedi-
ence from  men  except  that  which
they  render  cheerfully  and  gladly  in
their  hearts,  and  that  is  all  that  id
desired  by  his  servants.  That  is  the
obedience  we  ought  to  render,  and  if
we  do  nut  we  are  under  condemnation.


What  matters  what  the  world  say
in  regard  to  us  r  Nothing.  What
do  I  care  ?  Have  I  spent  thirty
years  of  life,  with  the  opportunities
that  have  been  afforded  rae,  and
am  yet  ignorant  of  the  way  of  eter-
nal life.  If  I  have,  then  I  am  to  be
pitied.  "  Why  then,"  says  the  blas-
phemer, "  do  you  yield  obedience  to
the  servants  of  God  f"  .  Because  it  is
meat  and  drink  to  me  to  do  so.
Because  it  is  for  my  safety  and  for
my  best  good.  I  ask  no  odds  of  the
world.  I  have  learned  that  it  is  the
irery  best  thing  that  1  can  do,  and  I
should  he  a  tool  indeed  not  to  do
that  which  is  for  my  best  good  I
intend  to  do  it,  and  I  do  vot  care
wi.at  the  world  say  about  ma

I  am  sorry  to  say  that  there  are
some  of  tnose  who  profess  to  be  Lat-
ter-day Saints,  who  meet  with  the
Saints  on  the  Sabbath  and  partake
of  the  Sacrament,  witnessing  'hat
they  are  willing  to  take  upon  them
the  name  of  Christ,  and  to  follow
him  through  evil  as  well  as  good
report,  and  yet  in  their  hearts  they
oppose  trie  plans  and  projects  of
those  whom  they  pretend  to  uphold
and  sustain.  I  know  and  could  call
the  names  of  some  of  these  men.
Shame  on  them  !  I  say,  in  the  mane
of  manhood,  come  out  and  show  your
colors !  Say  you  will  not  be  obe-
dient, and  cease  to  be  hypocrites,
cease  lying  in  the  presence  of  God,
and  try  ing  to  deceive  yourselves  and
your  brethren.  Tell  us  what  you  aie,
take  your  stand  where  you  belong,
and  du  not  deceive  the  unwary.  You
Can  not  deceive  those  who  have  the
Spirit  of  God,  for  they  can  discern
your  hearts.

1  love  the  cause  of  the  Gospel.
I  love  this  people,  because,  of  all
others  on  the  face  of  the  earth  they
have  enlisted  under  the  banner  of
King  Emanuel.  They  have  cove-
nan  ted  with  God  to  keep  his  com-


mandments, and  they  are  the  moat
willing  of  any  on  the  face  of  the
earth  to  hearken  to  God's  inspired
servants*  I  love  them  for  this  rea-
son, and  I  want  to  be  identified  with
them,  not  only  in  time  but  through-
out eternity.  Without  them  I  would
have  no  home,  no  friends,  I  want
none  without  them.

Let  us  keep  the  commandments
and  counsels  that  have  been  given
to  us,  let  us  not  be  hearers  of  the
word  only,  but  let  us  be  doers  of  it
as  well  as*  hearers.  Let  us  put  away
the  foolish  fashions  of  the  world,
live  up  to  the  truth,  and  seek  to
dud  out  God,  whom  to  know  is  life
eternal.  The  road  to  this  know-
ledge is  obedience  to  his  laws  and
to  the  whisperings  of  the  still  small
voice  in  our  own  hearts.  That  will
lead  us  into  truth  if  we  will  hearken,
and  do  not  blunt  the  monitor  that
is  within  us.  Let  us  do  our  duty,
and  be  for  God  and  his  kingdom.
Let  our  motto  be—"  The  kingdom
of  God  or  nothing."  Because  in
the  kingdom  there  is  everything,
and  outside  of  it  nothing  at  a!L
We  heard  here,  the  other  day,  from
L the  President,  that  the  Gospel  em-
brace* every  thing  that  is  good  and
t  true  or  desirable  to  the  pure  in  heart.
I  have  said  that  outside  the  kingdom
of  God  there  is  nothing,  but  there
is  something*  What  is  it?  Dis-
appointment, sorrow,  anguish  and
death,  and  everything  that  will  make
us  miserable;  while  every  tiling  that
is  good,  desirable  and  worth  possess-
ing eternally  is  to  be  found  only  in
the  Gospel  of  Christ.

Says  one,  44  Do  not  people  who  are
not  Latter-day  Saints  have  a  great
many  blessings  and  enjoy  a  great
many  good  things?  Certainly  they
do,  they  enjoy  gold,  silvei  and
worldly  honors — they  have  a  plenti*
tude  of  greenbacks,  houses,  lands,
carriages,  horses,  luxury  and  ease;


150


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Dives  had  all  these,  in  this  world,
while  Lazarus  crawl  id  at  his  feet
ami  begged  fur  the  crumbs  that  fell
from  his  table;  but  afterward  Dives
lifted  op  his  eyes  in  hell  and  saw
Lazarus  in  Abraham's  bosom  enjoy-
ing the  good  tltings  that  he  had
formerly  possessed  in  the  world,
and  he  begged  Abraham  to  send
Laza>us  to  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger
in  water  to  alleviate  his  parching
tongue.  But  even  this  poor  boon
was  denied  him,  he  being  informed
that  there  was  an  impassable  gulf
between  them;  and  said  Abraham
to  Dives— (in  effect,)  u  When  you
Here  in  the  flesh  you  had  Mosey
and  the  Prophets,  you  had  the  Gos-
pel preached  to  you,  but  you  reject-
ed and  refused  to  obey  it.  You  had
your  good  portion  and  your  enjoy-
ments in  the  world,  now  you  are
denied  them,  they  are  given  to  Laz-
arus,'* How  long  do  the  honors,
wealth,  and  pleasures  of  the  world-
ling last  ?  Until  death  claims  him
for  its  own,  then  he  ceases  to  enjoy
them,  because  he  has  failed  to  .secure
liis  title  to  them,  they  have  not  been
Scaled  upon  him  by  the*  authority
of  the  Piiesthood  of  the  Son  of  God,
which  has  power  to  hind  on  earth
and  it  is  bound  in  heaven.  If  they
have  wives  mid  children,  when
death  calls  them  they  are  no  longer
theirs,  because  they  have  not  been
sealed  unto  them  by  the  power  of
God,  They  do  not  obey  (he  truth,
they  do  not  receive  the  ministrations
of  the  Priesthood,  and  consequently
they  are  deprived,  nut  only  of  their
wealth,  but  of  their  wives  and  chil-
dren, f  ;  •

We  are  not  living  only  for  the
few  miserable  years  that  we  spend
on  this  earth,  but  lor  that  life  which
is  inlet  minable;  and  we  desire  to
enjoy  every  blessing  throughout
these  countless  ages  of  eternity,  but
unless  they  are  secured  to  us  by  that


sealing  power  which  was  given  to
the  Apostle  Peter  by  the  Son  of
God,  we  cannot  possess  them.  Un-
less we  secure  them  on  that  principle,
in  the  life  to  come  we  shall  have
neither  father,  mother,  brother,  sif-
ter, wife,  children,  nor  friends,  nor
wealth  nor  honor,  for  all  earthly
"  contracts,  covenants,  bonds,  ob-
lige tions,  oathsf  vows,  connections,
and  associations,*'  are  dissolved  in
the  grave,  except  those  sealed  and
ratified  by  the  power  of  God*  It  is
said  in  the  Seiiptures  that  the  earth
and  its  fullness  are  the  Lord's,  and
that  they  are  to  be  given  to  the
Saints  of  the  Most  High  God,  and
they  are  to  possess  them  for  ever  and
ever.

You  know  that  those  who  have
not  faith  in  the  Gospel  call  as  exclu-
sive and  uncharitable ;  they  say —
44  You  cast  out  all  except  those  of
your  faith,"  Then  enroll  yourselves
under  the  banner  of  King  Emanuel,
to  whom  the  earth  and  its  fullness
belong,  and  when  it  shall  be  given  to
the  Saints  of  the  Most  High  God,
you  will  come  in  for  your  share,
and  only  in  that  way  can  you  do
no.  Obedience  to  the  Gos|>el  of
Christ  is  the  only  way  to  secure
bfessings  for  the  life  that  now  is,  or
that  which  is  to  mine.  We  are  not
talking  in  parables,  neither  arc  we
ignorant ly  repeating  the  words  of
the  ancient  Apostles.  Our  declara-
tions are  founded  upon  modern  re-
velation and  inspiration,,  and  we
know  whereof  we  speak.  We  know
that  angels  have  come  to  earth  and
that  God  baa  spoken  in  our  day,
that  he  has  raised  up  Apostles  and
Prophets,  restored  the  holy  Priest-
hood, and  shown  himself  to  man
and  revealed  his  truth  to  tho.se  who
dwell  on  earth.  We  know  these
things,  it  is  this  that  makes  us  bold
to  declare  it  to  the  world.  We  are
j  not  ashamed  of  it,  because  we  know


TEMPLES  TO  BE  BUILT,  ETC.


251


it  is  tbe  power  of  God  unto  salva-
tion.

May  God  belp  ua,  and  all  who  love
the  troth,  to  keep  an  eye  single  to
his  glory  and  to  the  building  op  of
his  kingdom  on  the  earth,  that  we


may  be  among  those  who  shall  be
counted  worthy  to  possess  the  earth
and  its  fullness  fur  ever  and  ever,  is
my  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus.
Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  ix  the  New  Tabeknacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  at  the  Semi

Annual  Confer  nck,  Oct*  7\  1873.


(ReporUd  by  David  W.  Evans.)

TEMPLES  TO  BE  BUILT  TO  THE  NAME  OF  THE  LORD — THE  LOCATION  OF
THEIR  ERECTION,  AND  THE  PURPOSES  FOR  WHICH  THEY  SHALL  BE
BUILT.  ' .  .-..**


I  will  call  the  attention  of  the  con-
gregation to  a  portion  of  the  word  of
God  contained  in  the  third  chapter
of  Mdaebi— M  Behold,  I  will  send
my  messenger  and  he  shall  prepare
the  way  before  me,  and  the  Lord
whom  ye  seek  shall  suddenly  come
to  his  temple;  even  the  messenger
of  the  covenant  whom  ye  delight  in,
behold  he  shall  come,  saith  t?e  Lord
of  hosts,  but  who  may  abide  the
day  of  his  coming,  and  who  shall
stand  when  he  appeareth,  fur  he  is
like  a  refiner's  fire  and  like  fuller's
eojip.  He  shall  sit  as  a  refiner  and
purifier  of  silver,  and  he  shall  purify
the  sons  of  Levi  and  purge  them
as  gold  and  silver,  that  they  may
offer  unto  the  Lord  an  offering  in
righteousness."

I  have  read  these  words,  because
of  the  peculiar  prophecy  which  is


contained  therein,  of  what  the  Lord
will  perform  about  the  time  of  his
coming,  A  prophecy  that  the  Lord
would  come,  and  the  nature  of  that
coming  should  he  such  that  but  a
few  comparatively  will  be  prepared
to  endure  that  day  ;  that  when  he
does  come,  he  will  have  a  Temple  on
the  earth,  to  which  he  will  come-
A  part  of  the  programme  which  waa
read  yesterday  morning,  if  I  recol-
lect right,  for  the  Elders  to  speak
a pon  during  Conference,  was  in  rela-
tion to  building  Temples.  The
building  of  Temples  of  the  Lord  is
promised  in  his  word,  for  there  we
read  that  in  the  latter  days  he  would
have  a  house  built  on  the  earth.  I
know  that  in  the  ears  ot  this  gene-
ration it  will  sound  very  *t  range  ly
to  talk  about  the  L  rd  having  a
house  built  on  this  globe  of  ours;  yet


252


JOURNAL  OF  D1S0QUIU


we  have  such  a  promise,  st range  as
it  may  be,  and  that  when  the  Lord
Jesus  &hall  be  revealed  from  heaven
in  flaming  fire,  and  shall  sit  as  a  re-
finer's tire  and  as  fuller's  soap  on
the  eons  of  Levi,  to  purify  them  as
gold  and  silver,  he  will,  in  that  day,  ;
come  to  his  Temple,  and  come  very
suddenly,  That  shows,  at  once,  that
he  must  have  a  Temple  on  the  earth
in  the  latter  time.

There  are  two  other  Prophets,  be-
sides Mnlachi,  who  have  spoken  of
the  house  of  the  Lord.  Isaiah,  in
hm  second  chapter,  refers  to  the
building  of  the  Lord's  house  in  the  j
latter  days,  I  will  repeat  the  pas-
s»ge— "It  shall  come  to  pass  in  the
last  days  that  the  mountain  of  the
Lord's  house  shall  be  established  in
the  tops  of  the  mountain^,  and  shall
be  exalted  above  the  hills,  and  na-
tions » hull  flow  unto  it.  Many  na
t ions  si jatl  say,  *  Come,  let  ns  go  up
unto  the  mountain  of  the  Lotd  and
to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob,
and  he  shall  teach  ns  of  his  ways
and  we  shall  walk  in  his  paths;"
and  "  the  Lord  shall  rebuke  strong
nations  afar  off" — meaning  nations
at  u  great  distance  from  Jerusalem,
where  the  Prophet  delivered  the
prophecy-  "He  shall  reluke  strong
nation^  afar  off,  and  they  shall  beat
their  swords  into  ploughshares  and
their  spears  into  pruning  hooks,
Nation  shall  not  lift  up  swurd  against
nation,  neither  shall  they  learn  war
any  more."  The  fourth  chapter 'of
llicah  contains  a  similar  prediction,
which  it  is  not  necessary  tor  me  to
repeat,  as  it  reads,  almost  word  for
word,  like  that  in  the  second  chapter
of  Isaiah,  showing  plainly  and  clearly
that  in  the  latter  days  Gud  would
have  a  hoose  built  on  the  earth.

Perhaps  there  may  be  objections
by  our  Christian  friends  to  the  Lat-
ter-day Saints  proclaiming  in  the
midst  of  Christendom  that  the  Lord  j


intends  to  have  a  honse  built  on  the
earth.  They  will  probably  say —
"He  has  hundreds  of  them,  and  has
had  for  many  generations.  God
has  houses  scattered  here  and  there
throughout  all  the  Christian  nations,
and  there  never  has  been  a  rime  Mt.ee
the  days  of  the  Apostles  but  what
the  Lord  has  had  a  house,  either  at
Corinth,  Athens,  or  somewhere  else  j
and  vou  can  read  (he  inserip.  ions
upon  i hem  as  you  pass  through  the
tow  us  and  cities  of  Christendom/'
These  houses  are  called  the  hoti^s  of
God,  or  Jesus,  the  church  of  St,  John,
St  Peter,  St,  Paul,  St.  Mark  and
others,  and  all  of  them  are  considered
the  houses  of  God.  Would  tu  (jod
that  this  were  true!  Would  to  (iod
that  he  had  given  some  din  ci  ions
concerning  the  building  of  some  of
these  houses!  But  alas!  when  vv©
come  to  inquire  concerning  their
origin,  we  find  that  they  were  built
by  uninspired  men,  that  the  archi-
tecture aud  everything  pertaining  to
them  has  been  devised  by  the  cunning
and  wisdom  of  men.  A*k  them  if
God  commanded  them  to  select  the
particular  location  on  which  one  of
these  houses  stands?  They  will
*ay — "  No,  God  does  not  direct  now-
adays. There  was  a  time  when  the
Lord  did  direct  in  such  matters,  but
now  we  have  wise  men,  we  have
bodies  of  learned  men  who  have
studied  theology.  We  do  not  need
the  Lord  to  interfere  in  our  day  ;  he
don't  tijH'ak  anything  to  the  people
in  the  age  in  which  we  live  ;  these
houses  were  constructed  according
to  the  best  plans  and  architecture
we  were  acquainted  with  by  our  wis-
dom, without  any  commandment*  or
revelation  from  the  heavens."  Very
well,  then  the  Lord  has  nothing  ta
do  with  them,  .What  I  understand
by  the  building  of  a  house  of  God,  is
to  build  one  alter  the  pattern  that  he
shall  give, I  do  not  mean  a  pattern


that  was  given  iti  ancient  times,  but
one  given  to  the  very  people  to  whom  |
the. revelation  comes  to  build  a  house
to  liis  name.  Has  such  been  the
case  wi f  h  the  houses  of  worship
throughout  the  Christian  nations?
Not  iti  one  instance.  Yon  may  tra-
vel all  through  this  great  R  -public,
t  fiom  one  end  thereof  to  the  other,
and  among  all  the  Christian  denomi-
nations w ho  deny  new  revelation,  is
there  one  house  which  God  com-
manded to  he  built?  Indeed  these
very  proprieties  would  seem  to  imli-
cafe  that,  in  the  day  when  they
a' i' I  begin  to  be  fulfilled,  there
s'iouM  be  no  house  of  the  Lord  on
the  earth.  Is  it  not  a  peculiar  kind
of  a  saying  that  in  the  latter  days
the  mountain  of  the  hou.se  of  the
Lord  shall  be  established  in  the  tops
of  the  mountains,  and  be  exalted
above  the  hills  ?  It  shows  that  for  *i  j
]  -no*  period  prior  to  the  erection  of
tin-  house  of  God  in  the  mountains,
no  such  thing  could  lie  found  on  the
face  of  t lie  whole  earth,  and  it  was
needful  for  the  Lord,  in  the  latter
<!a\s,  to  begin  a  work*  of  that  kind.  :
No  pi  ire  for  Jesus  to  come  to*  He
is  to  come  in  tha  clouds  of  heaven,
in  flaming  fire,  in  power  and  great  I
glory,  clothed  mpon  with  all  the
brightness  of  the  celestial  heavens;1
liis  face  will  outshine  the  sun,  and
cause  it  to  withhold  its  light  in
elm  ne.  No  place  for  this  glorious
personage  to  eonie  to — uo  Temple
prepared  into  which  he  can  come.
When  he  does  come,  however,  this
work  will  have  been  accomplished —
he  will  cotne  to  his  Temple  suddenly,
]t  will  not  be  like  his  first  coming.
Then,  instead  of  coming  lo  his  Tem-
ple suddenly,  we  find  him  born  in  a
very  low  condition,  not  even  in  the
corn  uon  mansions  or  dwelling- places
of  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine,  bat
in  a  stable  or  manger.  When  he
visited  the  great  Temple  at  Jerusa-


lem, when  about  twelve  years  old,
and  also  after  lie  began  his  ministry,
when  about  thirty  years  old,  instead
of  sitting;  upon  the  sons  of  Levi  and
purifying  the  n  as  gold  and  silver  in
a  furnace  of  fire,  that  J  hey  might
offer  unto  the  Lord  an  offering  in
righteousness,  who  was  it  who  re-
jected the  Son  of  God  in  that  day  ?
The  sons  of  Levi.  They  cried  out
against  and  persecuted  him;  they
were  his  greatest  enemies  ;  they  cru-
cified him.  They  were  not  purged
and  prepared  to  offer  in  the  Temple
of  the  Lord  an  offering  in  righteous-
ness. The  glory  of  God  did  not  ap-
pear in  their  midst,  and  their  offer-
ings were  not  acceptable  in  that  Tem-
ple before  the  Lord,  but  he  found  his
house,  in  that  day,  a  den  of  thieves,
occupied  by  money-changers  and
brokers,  speculation  going  on  in  the
mil  1st,  of  the  house  of  God,  and  he
was  under  the  necessity  of  making  a
small  scourge  and  driving  them  out
by  whipping  them.  Nut  so  in  the
latter  times,  when  he  comes  to  his
Temple.  In*  that  day,  when  the
mountain  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  is
established  in  the  tops  of  the  moun-
tains, it  will  be  an  indication  of  a
great  period  of  peace,  a  period  which
is  so  often  spoken  of  by  the  mouths
of  the  ancient  Prophets,  in  which
nation  shall  no  more  lifL  up  sword
against  nation,  when  they  shall  no
longer  have  use  for  firearms  or  wea-
pons of  war,  or  anything  that  is  cal-
culated to  destroy  life ;  but  these
deadly  implements  will  be  converted
into  useful  articles  of  husbandry.
Nation  will  not  lift  up  sword  againsi
nation,  neither  will  they  learn  war
any  more.  That  time  has  not  comef
and  such  a  period  was  never  known
on  the  earth,

There  is  another  thing  connected
with  the  building  of  the  Temple  in
the  latter-days. When  it  is  built,  on


254


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


the  place,  and  according  to  the  pat-
tern that  the  Lord  shall  designate,
it  will  be  so  strange  to  the  nations,
that  they  will  actually  come  up  from
all  parts  of  our  globe.  Many  of
them  will  say  one  to  another —
41  Come,  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain
of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  to  the
house  of  the  God  of  Jacob."  "  What
do  you  want  to  go  up  there  for  ?  Why
do  vou  want  to  travel  several  thou*

i

sand  mile:*  across  land  and  sea  to  go
to  the  mountain  of  the  house  of.  the
Loid  ?"  11  That  he  may  teach  us  of
his  ways,  that  we  may  walk  in  his
p  ibs  "  "  Can  you  not  be  taught  in
his  ways  in  your  own  chape's,
which  you  have  built  in  Engl* rid,
Scandinavia,  Switzerland,  Austria,
or  wherever  you  may  have  resided  ?
Can  you  not  worship  in  your  own
chapels  ?"  uOh,  no,  there  is  no  house
of  the  Lord,  we  have  no  teachers
authorized  of  God,  no  Prophets  and
Apostles  inspired  by  and  called  of
God  to  officiate  like  the  ancient  ]
Apostles;  no  one  to  say  to  us  *  Thus
saith  the  Lord  God/  bf  new  revela-
tion; no  visions  are  manifested
among  us;  no  angels  have  honored
our  houses  of  worship  with  their  pre-
sence; no  glory,  no  fire  descending
from  heaven  to  light  up  these  cha-
pels and  sanctuaries  which  we  have  I
built,  and  we  have  lost  all  confix  I
dence  in  our  teachers,  consequently
let  us  go  up  to  yonder  mountain  on
which  God's  house  has  been  built,
and  when  we  get  there,  he  will  teach
ns  in  his  ways,  and  we  will  walk  |
in  his  paths."  "  Is  the  only  object
you  have  in  going  to  the  mountain
of  the  house  ol  the  Lord  to  receive
teachings  ?"  No,  there  are  other
things  to  be  attended  to  in  the  house
of  God  or  in  Temples  that  may  be  1
built  in  the  tops  of  the  mountains
besides  teaching.  We  have  a  great
many  important  duties  to  perform
pertaining  to  the  house  of  God,  duties  I


that  can  not  be  performed  anywhere
else  acceptably  in  his  sight.

Would  you  like  to  know  some  of
the  uses  of  these  Temples  or  houses
of  God  ?  I  will  read  a  little  from
one  of  our  modern  revelations,  ^iven
through  Joseph  Smith,  in  Nanvoo,
on  the  19th  day  of  January,  18*1,
I  have  not  time  to  read  the  whole  of
the  revelation,  but  will  select  a  few
sections.  Speaking  of  building  a
house  to  his  name,  the  Lord  says —
u  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  let  all  my
saints  come  from  afar" — this  we  have
fulfilled  so  far  as  the  gathering  is
concerned,

"  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto
you,  let  all  my  Saints  come  from
afar;  and  send  ye  swift  messenger.-?,
yea  chosen  messengers,  and  say
unto  them,  Come  ye,  with  all  your
gold  and  your  silver,  and  your  pre-
cious stones,  and  with  all  your  an-
tiquities;  and  with  all  who  have
knowledge  of  antiquities,  that  will
come,  may  come,  and  bring  the  box
tree,  and  the  fir  tree,  and  the  pine
treef  together  with  all  the  precious
trees  of  the  earth  ;  and  with  iron,
with  copper,  and  with  brass,  and
with  zinc,  and  with  all  your  pre-
cious things  of  the  earth,  and  build
a  house  to  my  name,  for  the  Most
High  to  dwell  therein  ;  for  there  is
not  a  place  found  on  earth  that  he
may  come  and  restore  again  that
which  was.  lost  unto  you,  or  which
he  hath  taken  away,  even  the  fullness
of  the  Priesthood ;  for  a  baptismal
font  there  is  not  upon  the  earth,
that  they,  my  Saints,  may  be  bap-
tized for  those  who  are  dead ;  for  this
ordinance  belongeth  to  my  house,
and  cannot  be  acceptable  to  me,
only  in  the  days  of  your  poverty,
wherein  ye  are  not  able  to  build  a
house  unto  me.  But  I  command  yon
all,  ye  my  Saints,  to  build  a  house
unto  me;  and  I  grant  unto  you  a
sufficient  time  to  build  a  house  unto


TEMPLES  TO  BE  BUILT,  ETC.


255


roe,  and  during  Hi  is  time  your  bap-
tisms shall  be  acceptable  unto  me."

I  want  this  Conference  trf  under-
stand that  it  is  not  only  the  Saints
who  are  here  assembled,  but  all  in
this  Territory,  and  wherever  our
settlements  extend,  all  who  have  en-
tered into  covenant  with  the  Lord
are  under  this  command.  I  will  read
further,

"  But  behold,  at  the  end  of  this  ap-
pointintent,  your  baptisms  for  your
dead  shall  not  be  acceptable  unto
me;  and  if  you  do  not  these  things
at  the  end  of  the  appointment,  ye
shall  be  rejected  as  a  Church,  with
yoar  dead,  saith  the  Lord  your  God,
For  verily  I  say  unto  you  that  after
you  have  had  sufficient  time  to  build
a  house  to  me,  wherein  the  ordin  ance
of  baptizing  for  the  dead  belongeth,
and  for  which  the  same  was  insti-
tuted from  before  the  foundation  of
the  world,  your  baptisms  for  your
dead  cannot  be  acceptable  unto  me,
tor  therein  are  the  keys  of  the  holy
Priesthood,  ordained  that  you  may
receive  honor  and  glory.  And  after
this  time,  your  baptisms  for  the
dead,  by  those  who  are  scattered
abroad,  are  not  acceptable  unto  me,
saith  the  Lord;  tor  it  is  ordained
that  in  Zion,  and  in  her  stakes,  and
in  Jerusalem,  those  places  which  I
have  appointed  for  refuge,  shall  be
places  for  your  baptisms  for  your
dead,

u  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,
how  shall  your  washings  be  accept-
able unto  me,  except  ye  perform
them  in  a  house  which  you  have
built  to  my  name  ?  For,  for  this
cause  I  commanded  Moses  that  he
should  build  a  tabernacle,  that  they
should  bear  it  with  them  in  the
wilderness,  and  to  build  a  house  in
the  land  of  promise,  that  those  ordi-
nances might  be  revealed  which
had  been  hid  from  before  the  world
was ; therefore  verily  ■  I  say  unto


you,  that  your  anointings,  and  your
washings,  and  your  baptisms  for
the  dead,  and  your  solemn  assem-
blies, and  your  memorials  for  your
sacrifices,  by  the  sons  of  Levi,  and
for  your  oracles  in  your  most  h-dy
places,  wherein  you  receive  conver-
sations, >md  your  statutes  and  judg-
ments, for  the  beginning  of  revela-
tions and  foundation  of  Zion,  and
for  the  glory,  honor,  and  endow-
ment of  all  her  municipals,  are  or^
dained  by  the  ordinance  of  my  holy
house  which  my  people  are  always
commanded  to  build  onto  my  holy
name.'*

It  seems  to  be  a  standing  com-
mand to  the  Saints,  wherever  they
may  be  located,  to  build  a  house
□  nto  the  Lord,  wherever  there  is  a
stronghold  pointed  out  for  the  gath-
ering of  the  Saints,  such  as  Kirtlan  I,
Nauvoo,  Jackson  County,  MoM  and
other  places  which  are  mentioned
in  revelation.  The  L  ord  has  com-
manded his  Saints  in  all  these  phees
to  do  a  work,  which  will  be  effect  a-
ally  accomplished  in  due  time.  They
are  always  commanded  to  build  a
house  unto  the  Lord,

We  have  beeu  here  twenty -six
years  and  have  only  a  foundation
and  a  few  tier  of  rock  laid  towards
a  house  of  the  Lord.  It  is  true  we
have  a  large  tabernacle  which  will
contain  some  fifteen  thousand  per-
a  >ns  when  they  are  closely  seated,
and  the  standing  room  also  occu-
pied But  this  is  not  a  Temple  of
the  Lord,  We  meet  here  to  sing
praises,  and  to  be  instructed  in  our
duties  as  Saints,  but  this  is  not  a
house  of  ordinances  ;  it  is  not  a  house
for  the  baptism  of  the  dead,  or  in
which  the  Saints  receive  their  wash
iligs  and  anointings ;  it  is  not  a
house  in  wuich  you  will  receive
statures,  and  judgments,  and  law*
pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God.
God  has  ordained  a  building  of  ft


256


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


different,  pat  tern  wherein  laws*  stat-
utes, judgments,  and  on  If  nances  are
to  be  revealed  for  the  benefit  of  his
people.  "And  verily  I  say  unto  yon,
let  tliis  house  l>e  built  unto  my  name,
that  I  may  reveal  mine  ordinances
therein  onto  my  people;  for  I  deign
to  reveal  unto  my  Church  things
which  have  been  kept  hid  from  the
foundation  of  the  world,  things  that
pertain  to  the  dispensation  of  the
fullness  of  times."

1  think  that  portion  of  this  reve-
lation which  I  have  read,  will  give
you  a  general  idea  of  the  sacred  ties*
of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  which  is  to
be  built  in  the  latter  times,  a  place
wherein  the  angels  may  come  at  id
visit,  as  they  did  in  the  ancient  Tem-
ple j  a  place  wherein  you  can  receive
fill  those  ordinances  which  the  Lord
has  revealed,  and  which  he  will,  here-
after reveal,  from  time  to  time,  pre-
paratory to  the  great  day  of  tl)e  com-
ing of  the  Lord.

Now  let  me  mention  over  some
few  things  which  should  be  admin-
istered  in  the  Temple  of  the  Most
High.  Marriage,  for  instance,  is  an
ordinance  of  God.  We  know  it  to
he  not  only  an  ordinance  ad  minis-
tered  among  the  various  nations
according  to  their  civil  laws,  but
know  also  that  it  is  a  religious  ordi-
nance, administered  by  authority
from  God.  If  any  one  wants  any
proof  on  this  point  let  hi-n  read  the
6th  verse  of  the  19th  chapter  of
Matthew,  "What  God  hath  joined
together  let  no  man  put  asunder,"
It  seems,  then,  that  in  marriage
there  is  such  a  principle  as  the  Lord
officiating  through  bis  servants,  in
joining  persons  in  this  sacred  and
holy  ordinance.  There  are  a  great
many  marriages  that  may  answer
the  requirements  of  the  civil  Jaw
of  different  countries  and  nations,
and  there  are  some  marriages  per-
formed even  in  our  Territory,  but


i  n<


the  Lord  has  not  directed  them,
neither  has  he  directed  his  servants
in  their  administration.  He  has
particularly  forbidden  these  mar-
riages, he  permits  and  suffers  them,
but  he  has  no  particular  hand  in
their  performance.  Do  you  wish
me  to  explain  this  matter  ?  I  will,
■  For  instance,  in  the  distant  settle-
ments  of  the  Territory  oftentimes  a
young  man  and  woman  desire  to  be
married.  They  go  and  find  a  jus-
tice of  the  peace,  or  an  Elder  of  the
Church,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  he
officiates  in  the  ceremony  and  mar-
ries them,  somewhat  similar  to
what  people  are  married  among  the
various  nations.  Docs  God  really
accept  of  this  marriage,  or  does  he
merely  suffer  it  to  be  so,  for  the
time  being  ?  Has  he  joined  them
together,  or  has  the  justice  of  the
peace,  by  virtue  of  his  civil  office  ?
"  How  is  it  ?  "  Says  one — "  I  sup-
pose it  must  be  a  legal  marriage/'
It  is  legal  so  far  as  the  laws  of  the
Territory  are  concerned.  If  a  young
man  and  woman  in  any  part  of  this
Territory  wish  to  be  married,  there
is  nothing  illegal  in  a  justice  of  the
peace  performing  the  ceremony,  he
has  a  right  to  do  it,  according  to
the  laws  of  the  Territory.  But  is  it
legal  in  the  sight  of  heaven  ?  No,
it  is  not.  Why  not  ?  Because  God
has  appointed  a  place  in  which  this
sacred  ordinance  should  he  admin-
istered, and  he  lias  appointed  cer-
tain authority  to  officiate  in  its
solemnization,  and  a  certain  form,
when  it  is  done  in  the  place  and  by
the  authority  he  has  ordained.  It
is  then  legal  in  the  sight  of  heaven,
then  they  are  married  or  joined  to-
gether, not  for  time  alone,  but  the
union  is  to  exist  throughout  all  the
ages  of  eternity.  This  is  the,  real
order  of  marriage,  This  is  one  of
the  purposes  for  which  God  has
commanded  us  to  build  a  house,  that


TEMPLES  TO  BE  BUILT,  ETC.


247


onr  young  people  may  have  the  pri-
vilege of  entering  into  that  sacred
union  not  only  for  time,  or  until  they
are  parted  by  death,  but  that  they
may  have  a  legal  claim,  by  virtue  of
the  marriage  covenant,  upon  each
other  after  the  resurrection.

Some  may  say — "I  think  I  will


may  say-
wait  until  after  the  resurrection  and
then  I  will  secure  me  a  wife  for  eter-
nity j  or  perhaps  I  will  merely  mar-
ry a  women  here  for  time,  and  put
off  the  eternal  part,  until  after  the
resurrection/1 What  says  Jesus  on
this  subject  ? "  In  the  resurrection
they  neither  marry  nor  are  given  in
marriage." Why  not  ?  Because
that  is  an  ordinance,  like  baptism,
that  mast  be  administered  by  those
in  the  flesh. If,  while  in  the  flesh,
we  fail  to  secure  to  ourselves  the
remission  of  our  sins,  and  the  bap-
tism of  fire  and  the  Holy  Ghost  by
going  down  into  the  water  and  be-
ing baptized for  the  remission  of
onr  sins,  by  one  having  authority  to
administer  this  ordinance,  we  can
not  attend  to  it  in  our  own  persons
after  the  resurrection. That  is  an
ordinance  that  eannot  be  adminis-
tered after  the  resurrection  ;  if  it  is
not  done  until  then,  it  must  be  done
by  some  person  still  Hying  in  the
flesh,  for  and  in  behalf  of  the  one  who
has gone  into  the  spirit  world.
Those  in  the  spirit  world  have  no
claim  upon  blessings  for  eternity,  I
unless  they  are  secured while  in
the  flesh. It  is  so  with  all  the  ordi-
nances pertaining  to  eternity,  they
must  be  performed  in  the  flesh,  and
not  in  the  next  life. Hence  if  an
individual  is  so  unfortunate  that  he
fights  against  a  principle, or  be-
comes careless  and  indifferent ;  or  if
he  goes  to  a  justice  of  the  peace,
thinking  that  he  will  secure  to  him-
self a  wife  for  eternity,  he  is  grand-
ly mistaken ;  and  if  he  dies,  having
been  married  according  to  this  form,
Ho.  17.


he  has  no  promise  whatsoever  that,
after  the  resurrection,  he  will  have  a
wife;  for  in  that  world,  this  sacred
ordinance  cannot  be  attended  to.

Another  thing  which  I  wish  to
explain  is,  that,  in  the  sight  of  hea-
ven, their  children  are  illegitimate.
Of  course  they  are  leg  it  mate  accor-
ding to  the  laws  of  the  country.
Such  children  can  claim  the  pro-
perty of  their  parents,  they  are  the
legal  heirs  to  the  property  descend-
ing from  parents  to  children  by  vir-
tue of  the  laws  of  the  country.
But  when  I  say  illegitimate  I  mean
in  the  sight  of  heaven.  Now,  all
you  young  people  who  have  been
married  in  this  Territory  or  abroad,
by  justices  of  the  peace,  or  even  by
Elders  of  the  Church  only  for  time,
when  you  have  the  opportunity  of
coming  up  here  to  the  house  of  God,
and  receiving  these  ordinances,  and
do  not,  your  children  are  illegitimate
in  the  sight  of  heaven.

Perhaps  you  may  enquire,  "  What
is  there  to  be  inherited  in  eternity
that  makes  it  really  necessary  that
our  children should  be  legitimate,
so  far  as  divine  authority  is  con-
cerned?" The  Lord  our  God  is  a
God  of  law,  his  house  is  a  house  of
order;  and  all  blessings,  and  honor,
and  glory,  and  inheritance,  that  are
to  be  received  in  the  eternal  worlds
must  be  according to  divine  law
and  divine  ordinances,  and  whoso-
ever complies  with  the  law  of  heaven
has  a  legal  claim  in  eternity.  That
which  is  performed  by  man,  with-
out divine  law,  however  perfect  hu-
man law  may  be,  has  no  bearing
upon eternity, Man's  works  are
one  thing  and  God's  works  another.
A  blessing  bestowed  upon  men,  such
as  the  legitimate  heirship  to  the  pro-
perty of  their  parents  is  one  thing,
and  a  blessing  bestowed by  the
Eternal  Fath  er  in  the  heavens  is  an-
other. He  performs  all  of  his  works

Vol.  XVI.


258


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


by  law;  and  he  bestows  blessings
upon  his  children,  by  ordinances  and
by  law.  It  must  be  secured  here  in
this  life,  if  we  Becure  it  at  all  in  our
own  persons.

It  may  be  said,  14 1  do  not  under-
stand this  principle.  What  will  be-
come of  our  pood  fathers  and  moth-
ers who  have  gathered  up  from  the
nations  that  were  married  before
they  heard  this  Gospel  ?"  "  Indeed,
were  they  married  ?"  "  Yes."
"How?"  "According  to  the  laws
of  their  respective  nations.  Their
offspring  are  legitimate,  so  far  as  the
civil  laws  of  their  native  countries
are  concerned,  but  they  are  not  hus-
bands and  wives  lor  eternity  in  the
sight  of  heaven.' *  "  How  are  you
going  to  remedy  this?"  asks  the
enquirer.  u  In  the  house  of'  God.
Temples  or  houses  of  God  must  be
built  to  remedy  this  thing."  "  How
can  it  be  remedied  there  ?"  They
must  be  married  over  again,  not  ac-
cording to  the  laws  of  men  or  na-
tions, but  according  to  the  laws  and
institutions  of  heaven."  "  Will  that
make  their  marriage  legitimate  ?,J
"Of  course."  "But  they  have  ma-
ny children  before  they  gather  up
here;  you  tell  us  they  are  illegiti-
mate :  how  are  you  going  to  reme-
dy this  ?"  „  God  has  provided  a  rem-
edy for  all  children  born  out  of  the
covenant,"  "  What  do  you  mean  by
that  F"  enquires  one.  "  I  mean  the
new  and  everlasting  covenant  of
marriage,  that  has  a  bearing  upon
eternity  as  well  as  time.  All  who
are  born  before  their  parents  enter
that  new  and  everlasting  covenant
have  to  be  made  legitimate  heirs."
"In  what  way?"  " According  to
the  ordinance  and  law  of  adoption."
I  may  be  asked — "  Is  this  impor-
tant ?"  *'  Yes,  it  matters  a  great  deal,
16  there  are  family  regulations,  to
preserve  good  order,  in  this  world,
you  will  find  that  God  is  more  strict,


in  such  regulations,  in  regard  to
the  world  to  come*  If  parents  hold
certain  authority  over  their  children
in  this  life,  you  will  find  that  such
authority,  though  in  higher  perfec-
tion, is  transferred  to  the  eternal
worlds,  and  in  that  world  there  is  a
certain  jurisdiction  which  parents
hold  over  their  children  through  all
future  ages  of  eternity.  But  in
order  that  parents  may  have  their
children  legitimately  under  their  con-
trol, it  is  necessary  that  the  ordi-
nance of  adoption  in  the  house  of
God  should  be  performed  in  regard
to  the  children  born  before  their
parents  entered  into  the  eternal  cove-
nant of  marriage.  This  shows  the
use  or  necessity  of  a  Temple.

Then  again,  we  heard  on  Sunday
afternoon  considerable  on  the  sub*
jtjct  of  baptism  for  the  dead;  it  is
not  necessary,  therefore,  that  I  should
dwell  upon  this  subject  It  is  one
thoroughly  understood  by  the  Latter-
day  Saifits,  and  has  been  long
preached  to  them,  and  they  know
that  this,  as  well  as  the  ordinance  of
marriage,  pertains  to  the  house  of
God.  To  be  acceptable  to  him  there
must  be  a  font,  the  same  as  there
was  in  the  Temple  of  Solomon.
You  recollect  there  was  a  brazen  sea,
a  large  place  in  the  basement  of  the
Temple  of  Solomon,  underneath
which  wtsre  twelve  oxen,  their  heads
pointing  to  the  four  points  of  the
compass — three  to  each  point.  This
great  brazen  sea,  standing  upon  these
oxen,  was  a  place  intended  for  bap-
tisms for  the  dead.  As  was  said
last  Sabbath,  it  was  underneath  those
courts,  where  the  living,  from  time
to  time,  assembled  to  attend  to  their
worship;  thus  representing  those
that  were  in  their  graves,  underneath
the  living.  That  was  the  reason  it
was  placed  in  that  position ;  and  as
that  was  intended  for  sacred  and
holy  purposes,  the  administration  of


TEMPLES  TO  BE  ISUILT,  KT<\


holy  ordinances,  so  Go  J  has  com-
manded, in  th^se  latter  days,  that
there  should  be  a  baptismal  font,
and  the  ordinance  of  baptism  for
the  dead  mast  be  performed  in  the
place  that  God  designates,  in  order  to
be  le^al  and  acceptable  in  his  sight.

We  are  told  in  the  revelations
which  God  has  given,  through  his
servant  Joseph  Smith,  something
about  the  pattern  of  this  sacred  and
holy  ordinance*  We  are  told  that
the  living  are  not  only  to  be  bap-
tized for  and  in  behalf  of  the  dead,  by
being  immersed  in  water  in  their
respective  names,  but  that  they  are
also  to  receive  the  ordinance  of  eon-
fi rotation  by  the  laying  on  of  hands,
not  for  themselves,  but  fur  the  dead,
as  far  back  as  they  can  trace  them.
Hundreds  of  millions  of  people  died
before  God  gave  this  revelation,  in
these  latter  times,  and  they  had  not
the  opportunity  of  being  married  for
time  and  all  eternity,  no  man  o;i  the
earth,  in  their  day,  having  the  au-
thority to  unite  theni.  Would  yon
deprive  them  of  the  blessings  of  this
eternal  union,  because  they  did  not
happen  to  live  in  a  day  when  God
revealed  and  restored  anew,  from  the
heavens,  these  ordinances?  No-
God  is  a  consistent  being,  and  to  say
that  people  w*ho  die  in  ignorance,
without  having  an  opportunity  of
attending  *o  the  ordinal  ices  of  thja
house  of  God,  should  not  be  made
partakers  of  the  blessings  thereof,
would  bts  imputing  injustice  to  the
great  Jehovah.  To  say  that  our
fathers  and  mothers,  who  were  only
married  for  time,  must  be  deprived
of  a  uniou  in  the  eternal  worlds,  be-
cause of  their  ignorance  of  these
things,  because  there  was  no  person
having  authority  to  administer  to
them,  would  be  apparently  unjust,
and  would  almost  seem  to  impeach
the  at  tributes  of  Jehovah,  if  we  coald
suppose  such  partiality  was  his  design.


But  we  cannot  suppose  that  God  is
an  inconsistent  lieing.  And  if  we
have  the  opportunity  of  attending  to
the  ordinance  of  marriage  in  rlie
house  of  the  Lord,  and  of  securing
certain  eternal  blessings  for  ourselves,
our  ancestors,  who  are  dead,  must
have  a  plan  devised,  adapted  to  their
condition,  by  which  they  also  may
be  exalted  to  the  same  blessings.
But  it  must  be  done  by  law.  No
haphazard  work,  no  work  of  chance
or  eon  fusion,  but  everything  must
be  accomplished  by  the  laws,  ordi-
nances and  commandments  of  the
Great  Jehovah ;  then,  what  is  dune
by  his  servants  here  on  the  ear'h,
being  sealed  here  is  sealed  in  the
heavens,  and  hence,  we  not  only
keep  a  record  of  all  the  names  of
the  dead,  but  of  all  the  ordinances
attended  to  for  and  in  their  behalf ;
and  in  the  great  judgment  d;iy,
'a  hen  the  books  are  opened,  it  will
be  found  that  such  and  such  parties
have  been  baptized  for,  ,  confirmed
for,  and  administered  for,  in  the
marriage  ordinance,  and  that  these
various  ordinances  were  recorded
in  the  presence  of  witnesses.

The  record*  kept  by  authority
here,  will  agree  with  the  records
kept  in  heaven,  for  they  keep  re-
cords there,  as  well  as  we;  ai.d  the
books  on  earth,  when  they  are  kept
by  divine  authority,  will  agree  with
the  records  in  houveu.  When  there
is  divine  authority  in  the  administra-
tion of  an  ordinance  here  on  the
earth,  that  ordinance  is  sacred  and
holy,  and  is  recorded  here  and  in  the
heavens,  and  the  records  of  heaven
will  agree  with  the  records  of  earth ;
and  by  these  records  and  books  will
mankind  be  judged.  The  dead  will
be  judged  according  to  men  in  the
flesh,  or,  in  other  words,  as  we  shall
be  judged  according  to  onr  works  in
the  flesh,  When  we  have  been
baptized,  and  it  is  recorded  on  the


2^0


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


earth,  it  is  for  ourselves,  and  we
will  lie  jmlged  bj  that,  and  if  we
are  faithful,  we  shall  receive  the
blessings  and  glories  which  the  Lord
has  in  store  for  those  who  are  bap-
tized here  and  are  faithful  to  the
end.  So  will  the  dead  be  judged
according  to  the  works  which  are
done  for  them ;  and  when  the  book*
are  opened,  and  it  is  found  that  they
have  been  officiated  for,  by  those
works  will  they  be  judged-  Why  f
Because  they  have  their  agency  in
the  spirit  world,  to  reject  what  has
been  done  for  them,  or  to  receive  it,
the  same  as  we  have  the  agency
while  living  here  to  reject  or  to
receive  what  Jesus  did  through  the
atonement  of  his  blood.  We  have
that  agency  here;  it  also  exists
among  those  in  the  spirit  world.  You
need  not  suppose  that  their  agency
is  destroyed  because  they  are  bap-
tized for,^and  because  ordinances  are
administered  for  and  in  their  behalf;
you  need  not  suppose  that  this  will
be  a  security  to  them  that  they  can-
not resist.  They  will  have  the  same
freedom  there  to  resist,  that  we  have
here.

If  the  Latter-day  Saints  want
some  evidence  or  proof  in  relation
to  the  agency  of  spirits  that  are  in
prison,  or  in  the  spirit  world,  let  me
refer  them  to  the  prophecy  of  Enoch,
with  which  they  are  familiar,  though
stiaagers  may  not  be  acquainted
therewith*  Enoch  saw  the  people  that
should  perish  in  the  flood  j  he  saw
that  there  was  a  prison-house  pre-
pared for  them,  and  that  they  dwelt
there  for  a  long  period  of  time,
until  the  Son  of  God  was  mani-
fested, cruciBed  and  rose  from  the
dead ;  and  he  saw,  when  that  event
should  take  plaae,  that  as  many
of  the  spirits  in  prison  of  the  ante-
diluvian world  who  perished  in  the
flood,  as  repented,  came  forth  and
stood  on  the  right  hand  of  God*"


As  many  as  repented  had  this  privi-
lege. Dues  not  this  show  that  there
were  some  who  probably  would  not
repent  ?  Indeed,  the  very  next  sen*
tence  says  that  those  who  did  not  re-
pent "were  reserved  in  chains  of
darkness  until  the  judgment  of  the
great  day/'  Hence,  the  agency  of
spirits,  as  well  as  the  agency  of  men
here  in  the  flesh.

A  Temple  is  needed  for  the  Saints
who  cjme  from  abroad,  that  their
marriages  may  be  recorded  on  the
earth  and  in  the  heavens,  that  they
may  not  only  be  for  time,  but  for
all  eternity;  that  when  they  come
forth,  male  and  female,  in  the  morn-
ing of  the  first  resurrection,  they
may  embrace  each  other  as  husband
and  wife  by  virtue  of  the  covenant
they  entered  into  in  the  Temple  of
the  Lord,  while  they  were  in  the
flesh.

Strangers  will,  perhaps,  think
that  this  is  rather  a  partial  doctrine,
on  one  account.  They  may  say,
u  Your  fathers,  whom  you  speak  of,
are  not  known ;  their  names,  in
general,  can  not  be  obtained  for  more
than  two  or  three  generations  back ;
in  a  very  few  instances,  perhaps,
they  may  be  found  eight  or  ten  gene-
rations back;  but  what  will  be  done
with  all  the  generations,  nations,
and  ages,  that  have  lived  since  the
Priesthood  of  God  was  upon  the
earth,  and  since  those  holy  ordi-
nances were  administered  in  ancient
times  ?  How  are  they  going  to  re-
ceive any  of  the  benefits  from  this
baptism  for  the  dead,  seeing  that  the
very  names  of  the  nations,  to  say
nothing  of  the  individuals,  are  lost  ?"
Here  comes  in,  again,  the  use  of  a
Temple  of  the  Lord.  The  Most
High  says  —  "I  deign  to  reveal
unto  yon  hidden  things,  things  that
have  been  kept  hid  from  the  foun-
dation of  the  world,"  Among  these
hidden  things  that  are  to  be  revealed


TEMPLES  TO  BE  BUILT,  ETC.


are  the  books  of  genealogy,  tracing
individuals  and  nations  among  all
v  people,  back  to  ancient  times.

It  may  be  inquired  —  "  How  can
all  this  be  done  r*  We  answer,  by
the  TJrim  and  Tbummim,  which
the  Lord  God  has  ordained  to  be
used  in  the  midst  of  his  holy  house,
in  his  Temple.  You  may  inquire —
*'  What  is  the  Urim  and  Thuni-
mim  We  reply,  it  is  a  divine  in-
strument, prepared  in  ancient  times,
by  which  he  who  possessed  it  could
call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and
receive  from  him  answers  to  all
matters  it  was  necessary  that  he
should  know.  Aaron,  the  chief
Priest  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  had
this  instrument  in  his  breast  plate,
in  the  midst  of  rows  of  stones  repre-
senting the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel;
and  when  he  passed  certain  judg-
ments, he  did  not  do  it  by  his  own
wisdom,  but  he  inquired  of  the
Lord  and  received  the  same,  by  this
sacred  instrument.  When  that  in-
strument is  restored  to  the  house  of
God,  to  the  Temple  of  the  Most
High,  our  ancestry,  that  is,  the  an-
cestry of  all  the  faithful  in  the  church
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,
will  be  made  manifest.  Not  all  at
once,  but  by  degrees.  Just  as  fast
as  we  are  able  to  administer  for  them,
so  will  the  Lord  God  make  manifest,
by  the  manifestation  of  holy  angels
in  his  house,  and  by  the  Urim  and
Thuuimirn,  those  names  that  are
necessary,  of  our  ancient  kindred  and
friends,  that  they  may  be  traced
back  to  the  time  when  the  Priest-
hood was  on  the  earth  in  ancient
days,  .

If  they  could  not  be  traced  back,
there  would  be  a  great  chasm,  a
broken  chain  in  the  genealogies,  and
it  Would  not  be  perfect,  but  when
the  Lord  God  amies  suddenly  to
his  Temple,  he  will  come  to  a  peo-
ple who  have  made  themselves  per-


fect by  obedience  to  his  command-
ments. They  have  sought  after  the
redemption  of  their  dead  from  gene-
ration to  generation,  until  they  can
link  on  all  those  who  were  not  offi-
ciated for  in  ancient  times,  and  thus
carry  it  back  from  one  dispensation
to  another,  until  it  reaches  to  our
father  Adam  in  the  Garden  of  Eden,
and  then,  the  saying  of  Scripture
will  be  accomplished — "  The  hearts
of  the  children  will  be  turned  to
their  fathers,'1  and  the  hearts  of  all
those  ancient  fathers,  who  lived  thou-
sands of  years  ago,  will  be  "  turned
to  their  children,  lest  the  Lord  should
come,"  as  the  Prophet  Malachi  says,
"  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse."

Why  smite  it  with  a  curse  ?  Be-
cause the  people  are  careless  and  do
not  look  after  the  salvation  of  their
dead,  do  not  let  their  hearts  be
drawu  out  after  their  ancestry,  do
not  seek  to  perform  those  ordinances
that  are  necessary  for  their  redemp-
tion, that  they  may  be  redeemed  by
law.  If  we  would  not  be  smitten
by  a  curse,  let  us  seek  after  the  re-
demption of  our  fathers,  as  well  as
of  ourselves,  for  says  the  Apostle
Paul,  "they  without  us  can  not  be
made  perfect,  neither  can  we  with-
out them  be  made  perfect."  We
may  do  all  that  we  please  for  our-
selves, and  yet  if  we,  through  our
carelessness  and  indifference,  neg-
lect to  seek  after  the  salvation  of  the
dead,  the  responsibility  will  be  upon
our  own  heads ;  and  the  sins  of  the
dead  will  be  answered  upon  us,  be-
cause we  had  the  power  to  act  for
them,  and  w«  were  careless  and  in-
different about  using  it.

Many  more  tilings  might  he  said
in  relation  to  the  dead,  aud  what  is
necessary  to  be  done  in  Temples.  It
was  asked,  by  one  of  the  speakers,
in  relation  to  inheritances,  "  What
man  or  woman  among  the  Latter-
day  Saints  has  an  inheritance  sealed


262  JOURNAL  OF  D

to  them  ?" What  man  among  all
this  people  can  determine  the  very
spot  of  ground  that  the  Lord  intends
that  he  should  inherit  for  an  ever-
lasting possession  ? Not  one  of  us.
Th»>  Lord  has  told  us  that  he  intends
to  give  a  certain  land  to  his  people,
for  an  everlasting  possession.  He
told  the  ancients, Abraham,  Isaac
and  Jacob,  the same  thing ;  but
they  wandered  as  strangers  and  pil-
grims in  their  day;  and  the  martyr
Stephen  Faid  they  had  not  as  much
as  to  set  their  foot  upon. Yet  they
had  a  promise  which  secured  it  to
them  after  the  resurrection,  and  also
to  their  seed,  and  that  personally,
for  an  everlasting  possession.  Have
you  got  any  such  promise  ?  You
have,  as  far  as  the  great  mass  is  con-
cerned, the  promise  of  a  great  region
of  country. We  know  where  it  is,
God  has  pointed  it  out. But  is  there
an  individual  among  us  who  knows
what  portion  of  that  gieat  country
he  shall  receive  for  his  future  inher-
it a nee,  to  possess  either before  or
alter  the  resurrection,  and  after  this
earth  shall  have  passed  away,  and
all  things  aie  made  new  ?  No.  Why
hrjve  we  not  got  it  ? Because  we
have  no  house  of  the  Lord  built.
W  hen  we  have  a  house  built,  whether
there  be  property,  or  inheritance,
or  union  for  eternity,  or  blessings
for  ourselves,  or  washings  or  anoint-
ing, or  anything  that pertains  to
eternity,  it  will  be  given  to  us  by
*  the  ordinances  of  God's  holy  house,
according  to  law. No  wonder  then,
that  the  nations  afar  off  will  say —
*s  L"t  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of
the  Lord,  to  the  house  of  the  God


SCOURS  KS.

of  Jacob,  that  he  may  teach  us  of
his  ways,  that  we  may  walk  in  his
paths"  He  has, a  great  many  ways
to  teach  the  people,  pertaining  to
the  salvation  of  the  dead,  many  or-
di nances,  many  principles  and  laws,
statutes  and  judgments,  and  the  law
will  go  forth  from  Zion,  and  he  will
rebuke  strong  nations  afar  off,  and
fulfill  and  accomplish  that  which
he  has  spoken ;  and  wiadotn,  and
knowledge,  and  glory  and  intelli-
gence, the  laws  of  the  Most  High,,
and  the  ministrations  of  angels  will
be  unfolded  to  the  Latter-day  Saints,
just  as  fast  as  they  are  prepared  to
receive  them.

Wake  up,  then,  Latter-day  Saints,
and  prepare  yourselves  Temples  in
the  places  that  shall  be  designated,
by  the  oracles  of  the  Most  High
God,  so  that  your  aged  fathers  that
are  in  the  southern  part  of  the  Ter-
ritory may  not  be  under  the  neces-
sity of  travel iug  some  six  hundred
miles,  back  and  forth,  to  attend  to
the  ordinance  of  baptism for  the
dead. They  must  have  a  Temple
there,  wherein  these  ordinances  may
be  administered;  another  here,  ano-
ther in  the  northern  part  of  the  Ter-
ritory, and  multiply  them  according
to  the  wants  of  the  people  ;  for  the
work  is  becoming  continually  greater
and greater, and the  Latter-day
Saints  must  wake  up  to  these  prin-
ciples, and not  have  their  minds
absorbed  with  the things  of  this
world,  forgetting  the  great  plan  of
salvation  revealed  from  heaven.

May  God  bless  the  Saints,  and
wake  up  their  minds  to  these  im-
portant duties.  Amen.


UNCHAXGE  ABLENESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL.


263


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  WILFORD  WOODRUFF,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  at  the  Semi

Annual  Conference,  October  8,  1873.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


UNCHAN<  I EABLENESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL — GOD  HAS  CHOSEN  THE  WEAK
THIXrtS  OF  THE  WORLD  TO  CONFOUND  THE  WISE — PROPHECIES  RE-
LATING TO  THE  LATTKK-DAY  WORK— JOSEPH  SMITH'S  MINISTRY —
ZION  TO  BE  BUILT  UP — HAPTISM  FOR  THE  DEAD — THE  ORDER  OF
ENOC II — Ii  ABY LON IS II  F  A S 1 1  IONS.


[  am  called  upon  to  occupy  a  little
time  this  morning,  and  I  realize  tbat
I  and  my  brethren  are  all  dependent
upon  the  Spirit  of  God  to  guide,
dictate  and  direct  us  in  all  our  public
teachings,  as  well  as  in  all  other  acts
we  are  called  upon  to  perform  in  the
kingdom  of  God,  The  Apostle  *ays
there  is  no  prophecy  of  the  Scripture
which  is  of  any  private  interpreta-
tion, but  holy  men  of  old  spoke  as
they  wero  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  The  Lord  has  told  us  in
some  of  the  revelations  which  he  has
given  in  our  day,  that  all  of  I  lis  mes-
sengers or  servants,  his  Elders  who
are  sent  fort  h  to  teach,  should  speak
as  they  are  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Ghost;  and  when  they  follow  this
counsel, what  they  say,  the  Lord

the  mind


para


is


tore,  it  is


and  will  of  the  Lord,  it  is  the  word
of  the  Lord,  and  it  is  the  power  of
God  unto  solvation.  fc*  And  this  is
an  ensample  unto  you,  even  all  tny
servants  who  go  forth  to  declare  the
words  of  life  unto  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth."

Agmw,  the  Lord  has  said  that  it
matters  not  whether  it  be  by  my
own  voice  out  of  the  heavens,  whe-
ther it  be  by  the  administering  of


angels,  or  whether  it  be  by  the  voice
of  my  Her  van  ts,  it  is  all  the  same,
and  their  words  shall  be  fulfilled
though  tlie  heavens  and  the  earth
pass  away.  This  is  the  position
which  the  Prophets,  Apostles  and
Patriarchs  have  occupied  upon  the
earth  in  every  age  and  dispensation.
They  have  had  to  be  governed  by
the  Spirit  of  God ;  and  when  men
are  sent  with  a  message,  and  they
speak  as  they  are  moved  upon  by  the
Holy  Ghost,  their  word  a  are  the
words  of  the  Lord,  and  they  will  be
fulfilled.

We  have  had  a  good  deal  of  teach-
ing daring  this  Conference  trom  the
servants  of  God,  teachings  git  en  by
the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
We  occupy  a  very  peculiar  position  on
the  earth,  a  position  differing  in  many
respects  from  any  othur  dispensation
ot  men.  Paul  says — u  Though  we
or  an  angel  from  heaven  preach  unto
you  any  other  Gospel  than  that
which  we  have  preached,  let  him
be  accursed."  All  the  teachings  of
the  Patriarchs  and  Prophets  have
shown  us  bat  one  Gospel.  There  is
but  one  Gospel,  there  never  was  bat
one  and  there  never  will  be.  The
Gospel  revealed  for  the  salvation  of


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


man  is  the  same  in  every  age  of  the
world.  Adam,  our  first  great  pro*
gem  tor  and  father,  after  the  fall,
received  this  Gospel,  and  he  received
the  holy  Priesthood  in  all  its  power,
and  its  keys  and  ordinances.  He
sealed  these  blessings  upon  his  sons
— Setb,  Enos,  Jared,  Caiuan,  Ma-
haleel,  Enoch  and  Methusaleh.  All
these  men  received  this  high  and
holy  Priesthood.  They  all  professed
to  give  revelation.  They  all  had
inspiration  and  left  their  record  on
the  earth ;  and  not  one  of  them  but
what  saw  and  prophecied  about  the
great  Zion  of  God  in  the  latter- days.
And  when  we  say  this  of  them,  we
eay  it  of  every  Apostle  and  Prophet
tv ho  ever  lived  upon  the  earth.
Their  revelations  and  prophecies  all
point  to  our  day  and  that  great  king-
dom of  God  which  was  spoken  of  by
Daniel,  that  great  Zion  of  God
gpoken  of  by  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah,
and  that  great  gathering  of  the  house
Df  Israel  spoken  of  by  Ezekiel  and
Malachi  and  many  of  the  ancient
Patriarchs  and  Prophets*

When  the  Lord  has  attempted  to
perform  a  work  on  the  earth  there
has  been  one  peculiarity  with  him,
and  that  is,  the  instruments  which
he  has  made  use  of  have  occupied
a  peculiar  position  in  the  world.
He  has  generally  chosen  the  weak
things  of  the  world  to  confound
the  wise,  and  things  that  were  nought
to  bring  to  pass  things  which  were.
When  he  wanted  a  man  to  deliver
Israel,  he  called  Moses,  who  was  in  an
ark  of  bulrushes  among  the  croco-
diles and  aligators  of  the  river  Nile,
put  there  by  his  mother,  a  Hebrew
woman*  because  Moses  WES  her  first
born,  and  all  the  first  born  of  the
Hebrews  had  to  be  slain.  The  daugh-
ter of  Pharaoh,  through  the  provi-
dence of  God,  preserved  Moses,  and
by  her  he  was  given  to  his  mother  to
raise.  When  called  to  deliver  Israel,


Moses  told  the  Lord  that  he  was  a
mac  tlow  of  speech.  He  did  not  feel
qualified  to  perform"  so  great  a  work,
yet  the  Lord  chose  him,  and  he  per-
formed the  work  the  Lord  assigned
him.

So  when  the  Lord  wanted  a  king
for  Israel  and  the  lot  fell  upon
the  family  of  Jesse.  The  Prophet
went  and  called  for  the  sons  of  Jesse
to  pick  out  this  king.  All  the  boys
were  brought  before  Lim  except
David.  He  was  the  smallest  of  the
flock,  and  was  out  taking  care  of
the  sheep.  Jesse  never  thought  of
him  at  nil  He  brought  his  other
sous,  who  had  been  trained  in  all
the  arts,  sciences  and  learning  of
the  day,  and  when  they  came  in
Samuel  could  not  the  one  he
wanted.  He  asked  Jesse  if  he  had
not  any  more  sons.  Yes,  he  had  a
boy  taking  care  of  the  sheep,  "  Let's
see  him,"  said  the  Prophet; and  when
he  cauie  he  was  anointed  king.

Jesus  himself  was  bora  in  a  stable
and  cradled  in  a  manger  and  traveled
in  poverty  all  the  way  through  his
life.  When  he  chose  his  disciples
he  did  not  take  the  great,  learned,
rich  and  noble  of  that  generation,
but  he  chose  fishermen,  the  most
illiterate  men  and,  in  one  sense  of
the  word,  we  may  say,  almost  the
lowest  calling  among  men  in  that
day.  They  were  the  ones  the  Lord
made  use  of  to  go  forth  to  preach  his
Gospel  and  to  build  up  his  kingdom
on  the  earth.

How  is  it  in  our  day,  in  tins  great
and  last  dispensation  ?  The  Lord
required  an  instrument  who  would
take  hold  and  work  with  him.  He
required  some  one  to  lay  the  founda-
tion of  this  great  Church  and  king-
dom who  would  be  willing  to  step
forth  and  be  led  in  the  channel  that
was  according  to  the  mind  and  will
of  God;  a  man  who  could  not  be
swayed  by  the  traditions  and  religions


UKCHANGEABLENESS  OF  TlIE  GOSPEL,  ETC*


265


of  the  day;  Whom  did  the  Lord
call  ?  The  Patriarchs  and  Prophets
not  only  pointed  out  the  Zion
of  God  and  the  manner  in  which
his  Church  and  kingdom  should  be
established  and  built  up,  but  they
eTen  called  the  name  of  the  man
who  should  be  called  to  establish
this  work,  and  I  do  not  know  but
the  name  of  his  father.  His  name
was  to  be  Joseph  and  he  was  to  be  a
lineal  descendant  of  ancient  Joseph,
who  was  sold  into  Egypt,  separated
from  his  brethren.  The  record  or
stick  of  Joseph  in  the  hand  of
Ephraim,  which  Ezekiel  speaks  of,
which  was  to  be  put  with  the  record  ■
of  the  Jews  in  the  last  days,  was  to
be  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of
God  of  performing  this  great  work
or  laying  the  foundation  of  this
Church,  and  the  gathering  of  the
twelve  tribes  of  the  house  of  Israel.
In  that  record  the  man's  name  was
pointed  out  as  well  as  the  work  he
was  to  do,  Joseph  Smith  knew
nothing  of  all  this  until  after  he  was
administered  to  by  the  angel  of
God  ;  he  had  no  knowledge  of  this
when  he  brought  forth  that  record  to
the  world,  and  until  he  translated
it,  by  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  into
the  English  language.  He  had  no
knowledge  whatever  of  this ;  but
here  was  that  great  band,  as  strong
as  iron,  that  surrounded  him  by  the
revelations  of  God,  for  »he  la^  six
thousand  years,  by  every  man  who
epoke  at  the  work  of  God  in  the  lust
days.  These  prophecies,  revelations,
and  decrees  of  the  Almighty,  as  it
were,  surrounded  that  man,  and  he
had  to  be  taught,  not  by  man  nor  by
the  will  of  man,  but  he  required  the
angels  of  God  to  come  forth  and
teach  him ;  it  required  the  revelations
of  God  to  teach  him,  and  he  was
taught  for  years  by  visions  and  reve-
lations, and  by  holy  angels  sent  from
God  out  of  heaven  to  teach  and  in-


struct him  and  prepare  him  to  lay
the  foundation  of  this  Church,

As  I  before  remarked,  these  pro-
phecies surrounded  him,  forming,  in
one  sense  of  the  word,  a  band  and  a
power  he  could  not  get  out  of.  Why?
Because  no  prophecy  of  Scripture  is
of  any  private  interpretation,  but
holy  men  of  old  spoke  as  they  were
moved  upon  by  the  inspiration  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  when  any  of  those
Prophets  and  Patriarchs  for  the  last
six  thousand  years  spoke,  when  wrap-
ped in  prophetic  vision,  of  the  Zion
of  God  being  established  in  the  last
dispensation,  those  decrees  had  to  be
fulfilled  to  the  very  letter.

When  Joseph  Smith  received  these
revelations  he  was  an  illiterate  boy,
like  David  among  the  sheep.  The
Lord,  in  this  day,  did  not  choose  one
from  among  the  great,  mighty,  rich
or  noble,  but  he  choose  one  prepared
from  before  the  foundation  of  the
world,  to  come  forth  in  the  last  days,
through  the  loins  of  ancient  Joseph
who,  in  tbe  hands  of  God,  was  the
savior  of  the  house  of  Israel  and  of
the  Egyptians  in  his  day.  This  man
was  raised  up  in  his  proper  time,  and
came  forth  into  the  world,  and  the
Lord  began  to  feel  after  him  and  to
prepare  him  ;  but  he,  himself,  did
not  know  even  when  he  laid  the
foundation  of  this  work.  The  Lord
told  him — "  you  will  lay  the  found-
ation of  h  great  work,  but  you  know
it  not,"  Joseph  himself  could  not
comprehend,  unless  he  was  wrapped
in  the  visions  of  eternity,  the  im
portance  of  the  werje  the  foundation
of  which  he  had  laid.  When  his
mind  was  opened  he  could  under-
stand, in  many  respects,  the  designs
of  God ;  and  these  revelations  were
around  him  and  they  guided  his
footsteps.  They  could  not  fail  of
fulfillment,  they  had  to  be  accom-
plished in  the  earth.  The  servant  of
God  came  forth  and  he  received  the


■


266


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Book  of  Mormon — the  record  or
st  ick  of  Joseph  in  the  hands  of  Eph-
raim.  He  brought  forth  that  record
according  to  the  dictation  of  Moroni,
Nephi  and  Lehi,  the  angels  of  God
who  administered  to  him,  and  he
translated  it  into  the  English  Ian-
gunge  before  lie  laid  the  foundation
of  this  Church.  Joseph  Smith  did  ,
not  call  upon  any  man  to  ordain  or  |
to  baptize  him,  but  he  waited  until
the  Loid  sent  forth  his  servant^  to
administer  unto  him.  He  was  com-
manded of  the  Lord  to  go  forth  and
be  baptized,  but  not  until  he  bad
received  the  Priesthood.  Where  did
he  get  it,  and  in  fact  what  is  the
Priesthood  ?  It  is  the  authority  of
God  in  heaven  to  the  sous  of  men  to
administer  in  any  of  the  ordinances
of  his  house.  There  never  was  a
man  and  never  will  be  a  man,  in
this  or  any  other  age  of  the  world,
who  has  power  and  authority  to  ad-
minister in  one  of  the  ordinances  of
the  house  of  God,  unless  he  is  called
of  God  as  was  Aaron,  unless  he  has
the  holy  Priesthood  and  is  admini-
stered to  by  those  holding  that  au-
thority. (  uj

There  was  no  man  on  the  face  of
the  earth,  nor  had  not  been  for  the
last  seventeen centuries, who  had
power  and  authority  from  God  to  go
forth  and  administer  in  one  of  the
ordinances of  the  house of  (rod.
What  did  he  do  then  ? Why,  the
Lord  sent  unto  him  John  the  Baptist,
who,  when  upon  the  earth,  held  the
Aaron ic  Priesthood, who  was  be-
headed for  the  word  of  God  and  the  '
testimony  of  Jesus  Christ. He  laid  !
his  hands  upon  the  head  of  Joseph
Smith and ordained him to  the
Aaronic  Priesthood,  and  lie  never
attempted  to  act  in  any  authority  of  1
the  Gospel until he  received  this  !
Priesthood. Joseph  was  then  quali-
fied to  baptize  for  the  remission  of !
ins,  but  he  had  not  the  authority


to  lay  on  hands  for  the  reception  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  he  naver  at-
tempted to  administer  in  this  ordi-
nance until  Peter,  James  and  John,
two  of  whom — Peter  and  James —
were  also  martyred  tor  the  testimony
of  Jesus  and  the  word  of  God.  These
three  men  were  the  last  who  held
the  keys  of  the  Apoxtleship  in  its
fullness  and  power  previous  to  this
dispensation. They  laid  their  hands
upon  the  head  of  Joseph  Smith,  and
sealed  upon  him  every  power,  princi-
ple, ordinance  aud  key  belonging  to
the  Apostleship, and  until  he  re-
ceived this  ordination  he  was  not
qualified  and  hud  no  right  to  admi-
nister in  the  ordinances  of  the  house
of  God,  but  he  did  this  after  he  re-
ceived the  Priesthood,  and  on  the
6th  day  of  April,  1*30,  he  organized
this  Church  with  six  members,  which
was  the  foundation  of  what  we  see
to-day  in  this  Tabernacle,  and  for  six
hundred  miles  through  this  American
desert. This  has  all  come  from  that
small  seed — the foundation  of  the
great  kingdom  of  our  God  upon  the
earth,  Q
What  did  Joseph  Smith  do  after
having  received  this  Priesthood  and
its  ord inane  s  ? I  will  tell  you  what
lie  did. He  did  that  which  seven-
teen centuties  and  fifty  generations,
that  have  passed  and  gone,  of  all  the
clergy  and  religions  of  Christendom,
aud  the  whole  world  combined  were
not  able  to  do — he,  ah  hough  an  illi-
terate youth,  presented  to  the  world
the Gospel of  Jesus  Christ  in  its
fullness,  plainness  and  simplicity,  aa
taught  by  its  Author  and  his  Apos-
tles; he  presented  the  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  and  the  kingdom  of  God
perfect  in  their  organization,  as  Paul
represents  them— with  head  and  feet,
arms  aud  bauds,  every  member  of
the  body  perfect  before  heaven  and
earth. How  could  he,  an  illiterate
boy,  do  that  wThich  the  whole  of  the


UNC HAN G EA BLEN ESS  UF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


267


learning  of  the  Christian  world  for
seventeen  centuries  foiled  to  do?
Because  he  was  moved  upon  by  the
power  of  God,  he  was  instructed  by
those  men  who,  when  in  the  flesh,
had  preached  the  same  Gospel  them*
selves,  and  in  doing  this  he  fulfilled
that  which  Fattier  Adam>  Euoch,
Moses,  Elms,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah  and
Jesus  and  his  Apostles  all  prophecied
about.  Well  might  Paul  say — "  I
am  not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel  of
Christ,  for  it  is  the  power  of  God
unto  salvation  unto  every  one  that
believes."  So  may  the  Latter-day
Saints  say — u  We  are  not  ashamed
of  the  Gospel  of  Christ."  I  nm  not
ashamed  to  say  that  Joseph  Smith
was  a  Prophet  of  God ;  I  am  not
ashamed  to  bear  record  that  he  was
called  of  God,  and  laid  the  founda-
tion of  this  Church  and  kingdom  on
the  earth,  for  this  is  true,  and  any
man  or  woman  who  is  inspired  by
the  Hol  v  Ghost  can  see  and  under-
stand  these  things.

My  brethren  and  sisters  and
friends,  here  is  laid  the  foundation
of  the  fulfillment  of  that  mighty
flood  of  prophecy  delivered  since  the
day*  ot  Father  Adam  down  to  the
last  Prop  lie  t  who  breathed  the  breath
of  life.  There  has  been  more  pro-
phecy fulfilled  in  the  last  forty- three
years  upon  the  face  ot  the  earth,
than  in  two  thousand  years  before.
These  mighty  prophecies,  as  I  said
before,  like  a  band  of  iron,  governed
and  cunt  ruled  Joseph  Smith  in  his
labors  while  he  lived  on  the  earth.
He  lived  until  he  received  every  key,
ordinance  and  law  ever  given  to  any
man  ou  the  earth,  from  Father  Adam
down,  touching  this  dispensation'.
He  received  powers  and  keys  from
under  the  hands  of  Muses  for  gather*
ing  the  house  of  Israel  in  the  last
days;  he  received  under  the  hands
of  Elias  the  keys  of  sealing  the  hearts
of  the  fathers  to  the  children,  and


the  hearts  of  the  children  to  the
fathers ;  he  received  under  the  hands
of  Peter,  James  and  John,  the  Apos-
ship,  and  everything  belonging  there-
to; he  received  under  the  hands  of
Moroni  all  the  keys  and  powers  re-
quired of  the  stick  of  Joseph  in  the
hands  of  Ephraim;  he  received  un-
der the  hand  of  John  the  Baptist  the
Aaronic  Priesthood,  with  all  its  keys
and  powers,  and  every  other  key  and
power  belonging  to  this  dispensation,
and  I  am  not  ashamed  to  say  that  he
was  a  Prophet  of  God,  and  he  laid
the  foundation  of  the  gr rates t  work
and  dispensation  that  has  ever  been
established  on  the  earth.

Joseph  Smith  lived  until  he  gave
his  testament  to  the  world,  and  when
he  hud  sealed  all  these  keys,  powers
and  blessings  upon  the  head  of  Brig-
ham  Young  and  his  brethren;  when
be  bad  planted  these  keys  on  the
ear tli  so  that  they  should  be  re-
moved no  more  forever;  when  ho
had  dune  this,  and  brought  forth  that
record,  that  book  of  revelation,  the
proclamation  of  which  involved  the
destiny  of  this  whole  generation —
Jew,  Gentile,  Zion  and  Babylon,  all
the  nations  of  the  earth,  he  sealed
that  testimony  with  his  blood  in
Cartlnge  jail,  where  his  life  and  that
of  his  brother  Hyrum  were  taken  by
the  hands  of  wicked  and  ujigodly
men.  Why  was  his  life  taken  ?
Why  were  not  John  Taylor  and
Willard  Richards,  the  only  two  of
the  Twelve  at  that  time  in  Nauvoo
and  with  him,  also  sacrificed  ?  Why
did  Wiliard  Richards,  the  largest
man  in  the  prison,  stand  in  the  midsfc
of  that  shower  qf  balls  and  escape
without  a  hole  in  his  robe  or  gar-
ment, or  clothing?  Because  these
tilings  were  all  governed  and  con-
troled  by  the  revelations  of  God  and
the  word  of  the  Lord.  The  Lord
took  whom  he  would  take,  and  he
preserved  whom  he  would  preserve,


m


268  JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.

■


and  be  has  done  this  all  the  way
through.  Why  has  Brigham  Young
been  preserved,  when  he  has  stood  as
much  chance  to  lay  down  his  life  in
defence  of  this  cause,  and  ran  as
many  dangers  in  one  position  and
another  as  anybody  else  ?  Because
the  Lord  has  had  a  hand  and  a  mean-
ing in  this,  and  he  has  preserved  him
for  a  certain  purpose,  and  other  men
have  been  preserved  by  the  same
power.  Tbe  whole  of  it  has  been  the
work  of  God  on  the  earth.  Tho
revelations  of  God  have  surrounded
Brigham  Young,  The  revelations  of
God  in  ancient  days  affect  him  and
the  Apostles,  and  the  Elders  of  Is-
rael, as  much  as  they  have  affected
any  people  in  any  generation,

I  will  speak  of  another  branch  of
this  subject.  We  have  the  kingdom
organized,  the  prophecies  have  been
fui tilled,  the  Church  has  been  plant-
ed in  the  earth,  and  now  there  are
other  portions  of  these  revelations
which  must  be  fulfilled.  We  were
settled  in  Jackson  County,  Clay  !
County,  Caldwell  County,  in  Kirtland  1
and  finally  in  Nauvoo,  We  were
driven  from  one  place  to  another
until  we  settled  Nauvoo,  and  at  last
we  were  driven  from  Nauvoo  into  the
wilderness  and  to  this  land,  led  here
by  President  Brigham  Young,  under
the  inspiration  of  Almighty  God,
Sume  felt  their  faith  tried  that  we  had
to  leave  our  lovely  Nauvoo  and  go  into
the  wilderness*  Bless  your  souls,
there  would  have  been  a  flood  of  re-
velation unfulfilled  if  th.se  things
tad  not  been  so.  Isaiah  speaks  of  ,
the  foundation  of  this  great  Zion,
and  wTrites  the  whole- of  her  historv
and  travels  up  to  the  present  day,  and
from  this  time  on  until  the  winding-  (
tip  scene.  If  we  bad  not  been  driven
from  Nauvoo  we  would  never  have
come  up  the  Platte  river,  where,
Isaiah  says,  he  saw  the  Saints  going
by  the  river  ot  water  wherein  went


no  galley  with  oars;  a  great  com-
pany of  women  with  child  and  her
that  travailed  with  ahild  would
never  have  come  here  to  the  moun-
tains of  Israel  if  we  had  not  iieen
driven  from  that  land,  and  a  whole
flood  of  prophecy  would  have  re-
mained unfulfilled,  with  regard  to
our  making  this  desert  blossom
as  the  rose,  the  waters  coming  forth
out  of  the  barren  desert,  our  building
the  house  of  God  on  the  tops  of  the
mountains,  lifting  up  a  standard
for  these  nations  to  flee  to ;  all  this
and  much  more  would  have  remained
unfulfilled  had  we  not  been  guided
and  led  by  the  strong  arm  of  Je-
hovah, whose  words  must  be  ful-
filled though  the  heavens  and  the
earth  pass  away.

Having  been  brought  to  Zion,  ano-
ther subject  presents  itself  to  our
consideration — namely,  the  position
which  President  Young  occupies  in
regard  to  us  to-day.  He  calls  upon
us  to  build  Temples,  cities,  towns
and  villages,  and  to  do  a  great  deal
of  temporal  work.  Strangers  and
the  Christian  world  marvel  at  the
"Mormons"  talking  about  temporal
things.  Bless  your  souls,  two-thirds
of  all  the  revelations  given  in  this
world  rest  upon  the  accomplishment
of  this  temporal  work,  We  have
it  to  do,  we  can't  build  up  Zion
sitting  on  a  hemlock  slab  sinking
ourselves  away  to  everlasting  bliss;
we  have  to  cultivate  the  earth,  to
take  the  rocks  and  elements  out
of  the  mountains  and  rear  Temples
to  the  Most  High  God;  and  this
temporal  work  is  demanded  at  our
hands  by  the  God  of  heaven,  as
much  as  he  required  Christ  to  die
to  redeem  the  world,  or  as  much  as
the  Savior  require]  Peter,  James
and  John  to  go  and  preach  the  Gos-
pel to  the  nations  of  the  earth.  This
is  the  great  dispensation  in  which
the  Zion  of  God  must  be  built  up,


tTtfCHAN G EA BLEN ESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.  269


and  we  as  Latter-day  Saints  have  it
to  build  People  think  it  strange
because  so  much  is  said  with  regard
to  this,  I  will  tell  you  La  tier- day
Saints,  and  the  Christian  world  too,
our  work  will  tall  short,  we  will
come  short  of  our  datics,  and  we
never  shall  perform  the  work  that
God  Almighty  has  decreed  we  shall
perform  unless  we  enter  into  these
temporal  things.  We  are  obliged  to
build  cities,  towns  and  villages, and  we
are  obliged  to  gather  the  people  from
every  nation  under  heaven  to  the  Zion
of  God,  that  they  may  be  taught  in
the  ways  of  the  Lord.  We  have
only  just  begun  to  prepare  for  the
celestial  law  when  we  are  baptized
into  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
Latter-day  Saints.

There  has  been  a  good  deal  said
here  with  regard  to  baptism  for  the
dead.  When  Joseph  Smith  had
laid  the  foundation  of  this  work  he
was  taken  away.  There  are  good
reasons  why  it  was  so.  Jesus  sealed
his  testimony  with  his  blood.  Joseph
Smith  did  the  same,  and  from  the
day  he  died  his  testimony  has  been
in  force  upon  the  whole  world.  He
has  gone  into  the  spirit  world  and
organized  this  dispensation  on  that
side  of  the  vail ;  he  is  gathering  to-
gether the  Elders  of  Israel  and  the
Saints  of  God  in  the  spirit  world,
for  they  have  a  work  to  do  there  as
well  as  here.  Joseph  and  Hyrum
Smith,  Father  Smith,  David  Patten
and  the  other  Elders  who  have  been
called  to  the  other  side  of  the  vail
have  fifty  times  as  many  people  to
preach  to  as  we  have  on  the  earth.
There  they  have  all  the  spirits  who
have  lived  on  the  earth  in  seven-
teen centuries  —  fifty  generations,
fifty  thousand  millions  of  persons
who  lived  and  died  here  without
having  seen  a  Prophet  or  Apostle,
and  without  having  the  word  of  the
Lord  sent  unto  them. They  are


shut  up  in  prison,  awaiting  the  mes-
sage of  the  Elders  of  Israel,  We
have  only  about  a  thousand  •  millions
of  people  on  the  earth,  but  in
the  spirit  world  they  have  fifty  thou-
sand millions;  and  there  is  not  a
single  revelation  which  gives  us  any
reason  to  believe  that  any  man  who
enters  the  spirit  world  preached  the
Gospel  there  to  those  who  lived  after
him;  but  they  all  preach  to  men
who  were  in  the  flesh  before  they
were.  Jesus  himself  preached  to
the  antediluvian  world,  who  had
been  in  prison  for  thousands  of
years.  So  with  Joseph  Smith  and
the  Elders — they  will  have  to  preach
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  who
have  died  during  the  last  seventeen
centuries ;  and  when  they  hear  the
testimony  of  the  Elders  and  accept
it  there  should  be  somebody  on  the
earth,  as  we  have  been  told,  to  at-
tend to  the  ordinances  of  the  house
of  God  for  them,  that  they  may  be
judged  according  to  men  in  the  flesh
and  come  forth  in  the  morning  of
the  first  resurrection  and  have  a  part
therein  with  us.

These  are  eternal  principles  of  the
Gospel  of  Christ.  We  have  been
commanded  and  have  been  under
the  necessity  of  going  forth  and  de-
claring it  to  the  sons  of  men.  I  will
ask  by  what  power  have  these  Apos-
tles and  Elders  taken  their  knapsacks
on  their  backs,  wading  swamps  and
rivers,  and  preaching  without  purse
and  scrip,  as  they  have  done  for
years  and  years  past  and  gone.
What  power  has  sustained  them  ?
As  I  hare  said  before,  these  revela-
tions of  God,  these  great  command-
ments and  prophecies  that  bava
been  given  for  the  last  six  thousand
years.  They  have  been  inspired  by
the  Spirit  and  power  of  God,  they
have  been  commanded  to  go  forth
and  warn  this  generation  by  preach-
ing the  Gospel  to  them. Here  ii


270  *  h  JOURNAL  OF

President  Brigham  Young"  has  tra-
veled, as  poor  as  any  man  could  be,
tens  of  thousand  miles,  without
purse  and  scrip,  to  preach  the  Gos-
pel to  the  sods  of  men.  So  have
his  brethren.  They  have  been  sus-
tained by  the  hand  of  the  Almighty,
and  if  they  hid  not  done  it  they
would  have  been  under  condemna-
tion. Why?  The  angel  of  God,
who  restored  the  everlasting  Gospel
to  earth,  said  it  must  be  preached  to
every  nation,  kindred,  tongue  and
people  under  the  whole  heaven,  for
the  hour  tif  God's  judgment  hnd
come.  The  hour  of  God's  judgment
is  at  the  door  of  this  nation  and  the
Christian  world.  Brother  Erastus
Snow  here,  a  week  last  Sunday,
told  us  about  preaching  to  the  dead,
and  the  judgments  that  awaited
the  nations.  Other  Elders  have  re-
ferred to  the  same  subject.  But
seventeen  hundred  years  have  passed
without  Prophets,  Apostles  ami  Pa-
triatchs.  The  judgments  of  God
did  cot  rest  upon  the  nations  of  the
earth  during  that  time  as  they  will
after  the  proclamation  of  this  Gospel*
This  message  that  Joseph  Smith
brought  to  the  world  involves  the  i
destinies  of  this  whole  generation,
not  only  of  this  nation,  but  t he
whole  Christian  and  Jewish  world,
Zion  and  Babylon,  the  whole  of  it.
They  now  stand,  as  it  Were,  warned
of  the  Lord.  The  Gospel  has  had  to
go  to  them.  We  have  been  obliged
to  go  abroad  to  preach  the  G us* pel  to
the  nations;  we  should  have  been
condemned,  and  smitten  by  the  arm
of  Jehovah,  if  we  had  failed  to  ful-
fill the  revelations  given  unto  us.

power  that  President
Young,  Joseph  Smith,  the  Twelve
Apostles,  and  the  thousands  of  El-
ders of  Israel  have  been  moved
upon  to  go  forth  and  do  the  work  of
God.

Kow  then,  my  friends,  are  we


DISCOURSES,

going  to  atop  here  ?  Are  the  rest  of
the  prophecies  not  to  be  fulfilled  ?
Is  the  Lord  fjoing  to  cut  his  work  in
two,  or  let  the  rest  ^o  unfulfilled  ?  I
tell  you  nay,  the  word  of  the  Lord
is  going  to  be  fulfilled,  and  the  Lord
is  not  going  to  give  this  kingdom  to
another  people.  The  Lord  has  raised
up  a  set  of  men  and  women,  and  he
will  inspire  and  move  upon  them  to
carry  out  this  gr^at  work,  and  we
have  got  it  to  do.  Zion  is  going  to
rise  and  shine,  and  to  put  on  her
bea  u  t  i  f  u  I  gar  men  t  a  ;  she  will  be
clothed  with  the  glory  of  God,  and
for  brass  she  will  have  gold;  for  iron
silver  and  for  stone  iron.  All  these
revelations  touching  the  last  days
have  got  to  be  fulfilled.  President
Young  is  moved  upon  to  call  upon
Zion  to  do  her  duty.  Why  is  he
thus  moved  upon  ?  Because  the
power  of  revelation  surrounds  him
and  crowds  upon  him  to  magnify
his  calling  and  do  his  duty  among
the  sons  of  men.  The  power  of
God  rests  upon  him,  and  he  will
never  hold  his  peace  until  Zion  is
built  up  and  perfected,  the  house  of
Israel  gathered  and  the  work  of  God
performed  under  his  administration
as  long  as  he  dwells  in  the  flesh.
He  is  as  much  under  the  power  of
God  and  the  revelations  of  Jesus
Christ  as  any  man  thut  ever  breathed

|  the  breath  of  life*

We  have  got  to  build  this  Temple,
The  Lord  requires  it  at  our  hands.
We  have  to  pay  our  Tithing  —  the
Lord  requires  it  at  our  hands.  The
Lord  has  never  said  by  any  revela-
tion that  Brigham  Young  should
build  a  Temple  alone,  that  his  coun-
sellors, or  that  the  Apostles  or  Bisk-,
ops  should  do  it  alone.  This  re-
sponsibility rests  upon  every  man

:,  and  woman  who  has  entered  into
covenant  with  the  Lord  in  these
latter  days;  and  if  we  do  not  dis-
charge it  we  shall  suffer,  the  Lord


UNCHANGEABLEXKSS  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  ETC.


271


will  chastise  us.  He  is  not  going  to
leave  us,  and  he  is  not  going  to  take
this  kingdom  away  from  the  Latter-
day  Saints  and  give  it  to  anybody
else,  for  they  are  the  Saints,  and
Although  mixed  like  corn  in  a  sieve
among  the  Gentile  nations  they  have
been  prepared  from  the  foundation
of  the  world  to  come  forth  as  the  ;
sons  of  Jacob  in  these  latter  days,
to  build  up  the  Zion  of  God  on  the
earth.  We  have  got  to  come  to  it.
We  must  give  our  earnest  support
to  co-operation,  for  it  is  a  step  in
advance  towards  establishing  the
Order  of  Enoch  and  the  building  up
of  the  Zion  of  God.  The  servant  of
God  is  moved  upon  to  call  upon  us
to  perform  this  work,  and  we  have  it
to  do. ; '  ;  ^  V  '  >i

There  are  some  prophecies  per-
taining to  these  Litter  days  that  are
unpleasant  to  contemplate.  Presi-
dent Young  has  been  calling  upon
the  daughters  of  Zion  day  after  day,
now,  for  years,  to  lay  aside  these
Babylonish  fashions.  I  have  been
reading  the  third  chapter  of  Isaiah,
and  I  have  be-n  hoping,  all  the  days
of  my  ministry,  that  the  sayings
contained  in  that  chapter  would
never  apply  to  the  daughters  of  Zion
in  our  day  ;  but  I  believe  they  will,
and  inasmuch  as  they  will  not  listen
to  President  Young  and  to  the  Pro-
phets, Apostles  and  Elders  of  Israel
with  regard  to  throwing  off  these
nonsensir  d  things,  I  hope  they  will
hasten  the  lengthening  oat  of  their
skirts  and  drag  them  in  the  streets  ;
that  they  will  increase  their  round
tires  like  the  moon,  increase  their
hoops,  and  their  headbands,  in-
crease  their  Grecian  bends  at  once
uud  carry  it  out  until  they  get
through  with  it,  so  that  we  can  turn
to  the  Lord  as  a  people.  Some  of
the  daughters  of  Zion  do  not  seem
willing  to  forsake  the  fashions  of
1  hi  by  Ion. I  to  such  would  say  has-


ten it,  and  let  the  woe  that,  is  threat-
ened on  this  account  come,  tliat
we  may  get  through  with  it,  then
we  can  go  on  and  build  up  the  Zion
of  God  on  the  eart]^  But  in  spite
of  the  follies  that  some  among  ns
delight  in,  we  are  going  to  build
up  Zion.  We  are  going  to  Gil  these
mountains  with  the  cities  and  people
of  God.  The  weapons  formed  against
Zion  will  he  broken,  and  the  nations
of  the  Gentiles  will  visit  her  and  their
kings  will  come  to  the  brightness  of
her  rLsiu£.  I  often  think  when  I  see
gentlemen  and  ladies  sitting  in  our
Tabernacles,  who  h;ive  come  over  this
great  highway  that  has  been  cast  up,
whether  they  realize  that  they  are
fulfilling  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah.  I
think  this  many  times  in  my  own
mind,  I  am  satisfied  that  they  do
not  realize  it,  but  they  are  fulfilling
the  revelations  of  God.  The  Gen-
tiles  ate  coming  to  the  light  of  Zion
and  king*  to  the  brightness  of  her
rising.  All  these  things  huve  been
spoken  of  and  will  be  fulfilled;  and
by  and  by,  when  we  are  sanetified
and  made  perfect,  when  we  are
chastised  and  humbled  before  the
Lord,  when  we  have  got  oar  eyes
opened,  and  our  hearts  set  upon
building  up  the  kingdom  of  God,
then  will  we  return  and  rebuild  the
waste  places  of  Zion.  Wtf  have  got
this  to  fulfill  in  our  day  and  genera-
tion. Then  think  not,  ye  Elders  of
Israel,  ye  sons  and  daughters  of
Zion,  that  we  are  going  to  live  after
the  order  of  Babylon  always.  We
are  not.  We  shall  be  chastised  and
afflicted,  and  shall  feel  the  chasten
ing  rod  of  the  Almighty,  unless  we
serve  the  Lord  our  God,  and  build
up  his  kingdom,  for  he  has  given  us
all  power;  yes,  all  power  is  given
into our hands to perform  this

work.  »  .

,  Where  is  the  man  or  the  woman
on  the  facs  of  the  earth  who  cannot


272  JOURNAL  OF

see  the  hand  of  God  in  our  deliver-
ance until  to-day  ?  ^Every  weapon
has  been  broken  that  has  ever  been
formed  against  us.  Point  me  out
an  individual  of  a  people  who  have
ever  taken  a  stand  against  Joseph
Smith  or  Brigham  Young,  the  Zion
of  God  or  the  Elders  of  Israel,  and
who  have  sought  to  overthrow  this
work,  but  what  the  curse  of  God
has  rested  upon  them.  Show  me
one  of  that  class  who  has  not
gone  down  to  the  dust,  and  as  it  has
been  in  days  past  so  it  will  be  in
days  to  come.  Woe  to  that  nation,
kindred,  tongue  and  people  under
the  whole  heavens  who  war  against
Zion  in  the  latter-days;  every  wea-
pon shall  be  broken  that  is  formed
against  her,  and  that  nation  that
will  not  serve  her  shall  be  utterly
wasted  away  saith  the  Lord  of
hosts.  These  things  are  true,  and  I
would  warn  Jew  and  Gentilet  Saint
and  sinner  and  all  the  world  to  be
careful  what  they  do  as  touching
them,

A  few  words  more  to  the  Latter-
day  Saints.  T  want  to  say  to  the
brethren  and  to  the  sisters,  let  us
cease  finding  fault  one  with  another;
let  us  not  say  that  this  man  or  this
woman  does  wrong,  this  family  does
wrong,  this  person  or  the  other  seta
a  bad  example;  let  us  realise  that
we  ourselves  are  held  responsible


DISCOURSES.

for  what  we  do.  It  will  do  me  no
pood  if  I  apostatize  because  some-
body's family  follows  the  fashions
of  Babylon,  or  because  some  man  or
woman  or  some  set  of  men  and  wo-
men do  wrong.  Let  us  cease  this
kind  of  work,  and  all  of  us  look  to
ourselves,  It  will  do  me  no  good  if
1  apostatise*  Because  I  think  some-
body else  does  not  do  right.  We
should  lay  aside  this,  there  is  too
much  of  it  in  the  Zion  of  God  to*
day,  and  has  been  a  good  while,
finding  fault  with  this,  that  and  the
other,  instead  of  looking  at  home.
Let  us  all  look  at  home,  and  each
one  try  to  govern  his  own  family  and
set  his  own  house  in  order,  and  da
that  which  is  required  of  us,  realizing
that  each  one  is  held  responsible  be*
fore  the  Lord  for  his  or  her  individual
actions  only.

I  pray  God,  my  heavenly  Father,
that  he  will  pour  out  his  Spirit  upon
the  daughters  of  Zion,  upon  the
mothers  in  Zion,  upon  the  Elders,
and  upon  all  her  inhabitants,  that
we  may  listen  to  the  counsels  of
the  servants  of  God,  that  we  may
be  justified  in  the  sight  of  God,
that  we  may  be  preserved  in  tha
faith,  that  we  may  have  power  to
build  Temples,  build  up  Zion,  re-
deem our  dead,  and  be  redeemed
ourselves,  for  Jesus'  sake.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  LORENZO  SNOW,


Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  at  the  Semi-
annual Confer  no e,  Tuesday  Afternoon,  Oct.  7,  1873,

(Reported  hy  David  W.  Emm.)


OUR  TEMPORAL  INTERESTS  TO  BE  DIRECTED FOR  THE WORK OF  THE
LORD  —  CO-OPERATION AND HOME MANUFACTURE IN POX  ELDER

COUNTY.  i!  '


The  position  we  profess  to  occupy
as  a  religious  body,  is  a  subject  Tor
profound  reflection.  We  testify  to
having  received  a  know  I  dge,  through
the  revelations  of  heaven,  concerning
the,  restoration  of  the  ancient  Gospel
and  holy  Priesthood,  whereby  we
have  been  auth  >rized  to  preach  by
inspiration,  and  administer  to  the
worl-l  tho  principles  of  life  and  sal-
vation. All  profess  to  have  ex  peri*
enced  some  understanding  or  know-
ledge of  this  wonderful  work,  through
divine  blessing  or  peculiar  maoi Testa-
tion. In  consequence  of  these  divine
intimations  which  have  followed  the
ad rninist ration  of  this  restored  Gos*
pel,  this  vast  audience,  of  over  twelve
thousand  people,  are  here  assembled,
having  gathered  from  many  climes
and  nations.  The  Latter-day  Stints
did  not  gather  to  these  valleys  for
the  purpose  of  knowing  this  Work
to  be  of  God,  but  in  consequence  of
having  previously  obtained  this  in-
spired knowledge  through  the  admi-
nistrations of  the  Gospel  in  their  na-
tive lands.  And  having  come  to  a
knowledge  of  these  important  facts,
it  certainly  becomes  us  to  be  devoted
to  the  work  in  which  we  are  en-
gaged, and  do  oar  best  to  promote
its  interest In building  np  the

No,  18.


1  kingdom  of  God,  which  is  the  woik
assigned  us,  our  whole  attention  an<i
highest  efforts  are  demanded,  that  we
may  be  qualified,  through  the  Holy
Spirit,  to  properly  magnify  our  re-
spective callings  in  the  holy  Priest-
hood,

I  I  wish  this  afternoon  to  confine
my  observations  to  the  subject  of  our
tern  pond  interests  and  obligations.
Before  we  are  prepared  to  return  to

i  Jackson  County,  to  build  up  the
centre  Stake  of  Zion,  I  believe  that
a  system  or  order  of  things  will  b&
introduced  for  oar  practice,  requiring
more  faith  and  devotion  than,  1  fear,
some  of  us  possess  at  the  present
moment.  This  will  call  forth  a  per-
fect submission  in  respect  to  our
temporal  affairs,  equal  to  that  it
which  we  now  yield  ourselves  in
spin  tail  matters.  This  principle  of
devotion  and  obedience  in  temporal
affairs,  as  being  connected  with  the
plan  of  eternal  life,  is  fully  illustra-

|  ted  in  the  conversation  between  the
Savior  and  the  young  man  who  ap-
plied for  information  on  the  subject

1  of  salvation,  recorded  in  the  New
Testament  On  being  questioned  by
this  young  man  what  was  required
of  him  in  order  to  inherit  eternal  life,
the  Savior  replied,  "Thou  shalt  do

Vol.  XVI.


271


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


no  murder,  thou  shalt  not  commit
adultery,  thou  shalt  not  steal,  thou
shalt  - not  hear  foist*  witness,  honor
thy  father  and  thy  mother,  and  thou
nhalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself  "
The  answer  was,  that  all  these  duties
had  been  performed  from  his  earliest
youth-  But,  still  one  tiling  wad
lacking  tu  make  (dm  perfect  in  the
sight  of  the  Savior,  viz.,  to  allow  his
means  and  property  to  be  controled
in  the  cause  of  God,  and  by  the  will
of  God."  "Sell  all  thou  hast,  and
give  to  the  poor,  and  thou  shalt  have
treasure  in  heaven,  and  follow  me*"
But  when  the  young  man  heard  that
saying,  he  went  away  sorrowful,  for
lie  had  gtcat  possessions.  In  all
other  duties  he  hail  been  faithful  and
blameless,  but  in  this,  his  self fishuess
and  love  of  riches  held  complete  con-
trol, which  called  forth  the  remark
of  the  Savior,  *'  It  is  easier  for  a
camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a
needle,  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter
inio  the  kingdom  of  God/1  This
saying  created  great  amazement
among  the  disciples,  who  asked,  with
astonishment,  "  Who  then  can  be
saved?"

This  principle  of  submission,  and
feeing  controled  in  propeitj  matters,
is  a  doctrine  which  belongs  to  the
Gospel  and  the  building  up  of  the
kingdom  of  God.  It  was  preached
and  practiced  in  the  Apostolic  dis-
pensation, also  by  the  Nephites  upon
this  continent,  after  the  introduction
among  them  of  the  Gospel  in  its  full*
uess,  as  recorded  in  the  Book  of
Mormon.  It  was  also  a  doctrine
introduced  to  us,  over  forty  years
ago,  which  we  find  set  forth  in  vari-
ous revelat  ions  contained  in  the  Book
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants.

This  consecration,  or  yielding  our
temporal  interests  to  be  directed  for
the  work  of  the  Lord,  as  being  a
fundamental  element  in  the  work  of
salvation,  and  in  the  anion  and  per-


footing  of  the  Saints,  is  very  clearly
shown  in  the  second  and  fourth  chap-
ters nf  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles
fc*  And  all  that  believed  were  together,
and  had  all  things  common;  and
sold  their  possessions  and  goods,  and
''parted  tlh  m  to  all  uneu,  as  every
man  had  need.  Neither  was  there
any  among  them  that  lacked,  for  as
many  ns  were  possessors  of  lands,  or
houses,  sold  them,  and  brought  t  lie
prices  of  the  things  that  were  sold,
and  laid  them  down  at  the  Apostles1
feet,  ami  distribution  was  made  unto
every  man  according *as  he  had  need."
Ananias,  and  Sapphira  his  wife,  also
gold  their  possessions,  but  fearing,
perhaps,  that  "tin*  scheme  of  tilings
might  not  operate  altogether  success-
fully, they  therefore  concealed  a  por-
tion of  their  means,  and  made  a
folse  report,  but  were  fearfully  pun-
ished tor  their  duplicity  and  hypo*
crisyT  showing  that  this  principle  of
consecration  was  acknowledged  of
the  Lord,  and  that  he  regarded  dis-
obedience with  the  utmost  displeasure*
When  the  Church  was  established,
among  the  Nephites,  as  recorded  in
the  Book  of  Mormon,  this  doctrine
was  preached  by  them,  and  practiced
nearly  two  hundred  years,  resulting
in  peace,  union,  great  prosperity,  and
mi  rac  u  1  o  u  s  bless  i  u  gs,  greate  r  than
were  ever  experienced  by  any  people
of  whom  we  have  record.  The  most
remarkable  miracles  were  constantly
wrought  among  them  ;  their  sick
were  healed,  and  in  some  instances
their  dead  restored  to  life.  These
extraordinary  manifestations  oi  the
approbation  of  God  continued  so  long
as  they  remained  one  in  their  tempo-
ral interest,  or  were  controled  iu
their  financial  matters  according  to
the  Order  of  Enoch.  At  the  close  of
two  hundred  years  they  began  to
separate  their  interests,  and  each  one
to  control  his  o<*m  financial  affairs  to
suit  his  individual  and  selfish  pur-


OUR  TEMPORAL  INTERESTS,  ETC.


25


poses.  Upon  this  change,  strife  and
divisions  arose  in  every  quarter,  wars
ensued,  mid  misery  and  total  des-
truction followed "The  first  s'artiiHT


the  Lord  says:  "  Verily  I  say  unto
you,  the  time  is  came,  and  is  now  at
hand  ;  and  behold,  and  lo,  it.  must
needs  be  that  there  be  an  organize


point  of  these  people  in  wickedness  tioii  of  my  people  in  r.'«alatinf?


and  apostaey,  appeared  to  be  a  dis-
regard of  this  heavenly  system  of
holding  property  in  common,  and  re-
fusing to  be  controled  in  temporal
matters.

In  the  first  instance  referred  to,  in
t!i«-  ease  of  the  young  man,  he  cut
himself  off  from  the  biasings  of  eter-
nal life  by  refusing  submission  to  the
Savior  a  counsels  in  reference  to  In?
pofiMSsi  nis.  In  the  case  of  Ananias
and  his  wife  Sapphira,  sudden  des-
truction visitetl  ihem,  in  eoiwquen-je
©f  d waviest y  and  hypocrisy  in  those
Hi  liters.  Also  in  the  case  of  the
N >•  phi  teg,  as  we  have  seen,  the  whole
were  destroyed  by  the  judgment  of
Go  if  after  having  ignored  these  prin-
ciples. But,  we  have  an  example  in
our  own  time,  of  the  judgments  of
God  falling  suddenly  u})0n  a  people,
because  of  refusing  to  comply  with
this  order  of  consecration


establishing  the  affairs  ot  the  store-
house tor  the  poor  of  uvy  .people,  both
in  this  place,  and  in  the  laud  of  Zion,
or,  in  other  words,  the  city  of  Euoc  i,
for  a  permanent  and  everlasting
establishment  find  order  unto  my
Church,  to  advance  the  cause  which
ye  have  espoused,  to  the  sal  vain  »n
of  rann,  and  to  the  glory  of  your
Father  who  is  in  heaven,  that  you
may  be  equal  in  the  bands  of  hea-
venly things  ;  yea,  and  earthly  things
also,  for  the  obtaining  of  heavenly
things,  for  if  ye  are  not  equal  in
eartnly  things  ye  cannot  be  equal  in
obtaining  heavenly  things;  for  ii
you  will  that  I  give  unto  you  a  place
in  the  celestial  world,  you  must  pre-
pare yourselves  by  doing  the  things
which  I  have  commanded  you,  and
required  of  you,1'  Again,  on  pa^e
288,  the  Lord  says:  44  Behold,  all
these  properties  are mine,  or  else


In  the  Book  of  I


Hants,  sec-  1H,  page  1-16,  the  Lord
says :  *  And  now  I  give  unto  you
fun  er  directions  concerning  this
ImM.  It  is  wisdom  in  me  tln.it  my
aery  nit  M  iriiu  Han  to  should  bean
©Xarnpie  unto  the  Church,  in  laying
his  money  b-fore  ihe  Bishop  of  the
Church  -  and  aNo  this  is  a  law  unto
every  mm  that  Cometh  into  this  land
to  receive  an  inheritance;  and  he
shall  do  with  his  mone\*  according
a*  the  law  directs."  Again,  the  Lord
Bays,  s  c  13,  page  12  p  :  "if  thou
lovest  me,  thou  shalt  serve  me,  and
keep  alt  iqy  commandments.  And
behold  thou  will  reuiembet  the  pupr,
and  consecrate  of  thy  pro  per  ties  for
their  support,  that  which  thou  hast
to  impart  unto  them,  with  a  cove-
nant, and  a  deed  which  cannot  be
broken/'  Ac. Again,  on  page  <J3o,


i  and  Cove* your  faith  is  vain,  and  ye  are  found

_  w  jl  4  1.4  I  I  B  1


hypocrites,  and  the  covenants  which
ye  have  made  unto  me  are  broken  ;
and  if  the  properties  are  mine,  then
ve  are  stewards,  otherwise  ye  are  no

stewards."

But  w$  learn  that  the  Saints  in
that  early  period  of  our  history,  re-
fused to  be  governed  in  those  mat-
ters. The  Lord  says,  page  2*±  :
*  Therefore,  inasmuch  as  some  of
my  servants  have  not  kept  the  com-
mandment, but  have  broken  the  cove-
nant by  co vetousness, and  with  feigned
words,  I  have  cursed  them  with  a  very
sore  and  grievous  curse;  for  I  the
Lord  have  decreed  in  my  heart  that,
inasmuch  as  man  belonging  to  the
order  shall  be  found  a  transgressor,
or  in  other  words,  shall  break  the
covenant  with  which  ye  are  bound,
he  shall  be  cursed  in  his  life,  and


*


*


276  JOURNAL  OF

shall  be  trodden  down  by  whom  I
will,  for  I  the  Lord  am  not  to  he
mocked  in  these  thing*."  Also  on
pngr  2l'5J  the  Lord  says — ''Behold,
I  s«y  unto  yon,  were  it.  not  for  the
transgressions  of  my  people,  speaking
concerning  t lie  Church  and  not  indi-
viduals, they  might  have  been  re-
deemed even  now,  but,  behold,  they
have  not  learned  to  he  obedient  to
the  things  which  I  require  at  their
■  hands,  but  are  full  of  nil  manners
of  evil,  and  do  not  impart  of  their
substance  as  becometh  Saints  to  the
poor  and  afflicted  among  them,
and  are  not  united  according  to  the
union  required  by  the  law  of  the
celestial  kingdom;  and  Zion  cannot
be  built  up  unless  it  is  by  the  prin-
ciples of  the  law  of  the  celestial
kingdom,  otherwise,  I  cannot  re-
ceive her  unto  myself,  and  my
people  must  be  chastened  until  they
learn  obedience,  if  it  must  needs  be
by  the  things  which  they  suffer.
Therefore,  in  consequence  of  the
transgression  of  my  people,  it  is  ex-
pedient in  me  that  my  Kiders  should
wait  for  a  little  season,  for  the  re-
demption of  Zion,  that  they  them-
selves may  be  prepared,  and  that  my
people  may  be  taught  more  perfectly,
and  have  experience,  and  know  more
perfectly  concerning  their  duty,  and
the  things  which  I  require  at  their
hands/*

Hence  we  learn  that  the  Saints
in  Jackson  County  and  other  locd-
ities,  refused  to  comply  with  the
order  of  consecration,  consequently
they  were  alio  we  I  to  be  driven
from  their  inheritances;  and  should
not  return  until  they  were  better
prepared  to  keep  the  law  of  God,  by
being  more  perfectly  taught  in  re-
ference to  their  duties,  and  learn
through  experience  the  necessity
of  obedience.  And  I  think  we  are
not  justified  in  anticipating  the
privilege  of  returning  to  build  up


DISCOURSES.

the  center  stake  of  Zion,  until  we
shall  have  shown  obedience  to  the
law  of  consecration.  One  thing,
however,  is  certain,  we  ahull  not  be
permitted  to  enter  the  land  from
whence  we  were  expelled,  till  our
hearts  are  prepared  to  honor  this  law,
and  we  become  sanctified  through
the  practice  of  the  truth.

The  Lord  required  that  those  lands
in  Missouri  should  be  obtained,  not
by  force,  but  by  purchase,  through
the  consecrations  of  the  properties  of
the  Stints;  and  the  manner  was
pointed  out  how  these  consecrations
should  be  made,  but  it  was  disre-
garded. I  mention  these  points,
partly  in  view  of  their  being  inti-
mately connected  with  the  principles
of  Co-operation,  which  is  now  strong-
ly recommended  by  our  President  to
the  attention  of  the  Latter- day  Saints
in  the  vaiious  settlements  of  the
Territory.

I  view  co-operation,  when  properly
understood  and  practiced,  as  being
a  stepping-  stone  to  the  Order  of
Enoch,  and  will  enable  the  Saints
who  receive  it  in  a  proper  spirit,  to
gradually  prepare  themselves  to  en-
ter, in  due  time,  more  fully  into  the
ptactiee  of  principles  necessary  to
accomplish  the  building  up  of  tLie
kingdom  of  our  God,  We  musk
have  experience  in  order  to  properly
understand  how  to  sustain  tempr  ral
institutions,  and  manage  financial
concerns,  and  wisely  me  concen-
trated means.  Co-operation  is  of
little  benefit  unless  the  people  un-
derstand, appreciate,  and  feel  dis-
posed to  sustain  it;  and  in  order  for
this  we  must  be  taught  and  instructed
in  regard  to  its  object  and  advan-
tages. 4  "  Wait  a  little  season,  for  the
redemption  of  Zion,  that  my  people
may  be  taught  more  perfectly,  and
have  experience,  and  know  more
perfectly  concerning  their  duty  and
the  things  which  I  require  at  their


OUR  TEMPORAL  INTERESTS,  ETC.


277


hands.  For  behold,  I  do  not  require
at  their  hands  to  fi^bt  the  buttles  of
Zion ;  for,  as  I  said  in  a  former  com-
mandment,  even  so  will  I  fulfill,  I
will  fight  your  battles."  But  » his
he  does  require  of  us,  that  we  attain
to  a  devotion  of  heart  and  sanctifi-
cation  of  feeling,  that  we  be  willing
that  all  our  substance  be  controled
by  counsel  for  the  ad  ranee  men  t  of
the  kingdom  of  God,  It  is  more
than  forty  years  since  the  Order  of
Enoch  was  introduced,  and  rejected*
One  would  naturally  think,  that  it
is  now  about  time  to  begin  to  honor
it,  and  that  we  hud  gained  suffi-
cient knowledge  and  experience  in
the  Lord's  dealings  with  us,  to  pre-
pare us  with  faith  and  devotion  to
cheerfully  comply  with  all  its  prin-
ciples and  requirements*  But  how
many  of  us,  upon  such  a  requisition,
would  follow  the  example  of  t tie
J0U;ig  man  referred  to — turn  away
sorrowfully  ?

I  notice  the  great  interest  which
is  now  being  taken  by  the  Saints  in
the  various  settlements  in  establish-
ing co-operative  institutions.  These
embrace  the  great  principles,  in  con-
nection with  the  Order  ot  Enoch,
which  are  intended  to  join  together
our  hearts,  feelings  and  interests,  and
effectually  build  up  the  kingdom  ot
God  and  redeem  rtie  earth.

The  people  of  Bngham  City  have
been  operating  a  number  of  ye^irs
upon  the.se  principles,  and  are  be-
ginning to  derive  therefrom  various
financial  advantages,  as  well  as  nanny


in  proclaiming  the  Gospel  or  ad-
mi  ni Pterin g  in  its  holy  ordinances.
Some  Elders  are  very  devoted  and
whole- hearted  in  going  on  missions
and  in  most  everything  that  pertains
to  the  advancement  of  the  spiritual
interests  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and
almost  blameless,  and  seemingly  wit  fl-
out fault,  but,  strange  to  say,  in  tem-
poral affairs  they  ?ire  highly  remiss,  if
not  dishonest  'When  Stints  feel  like
this  they  cannot  act  to  nd vantage
or  with  profit  in  co-operation  ;  they
cannot  inspire  confidence  nor  exer-
cise a  proper  influence.  In  tem-
poral administration,  the  same  as
in  spiritual,  one  should  exhibit  in
his  labors  a  self-sacrificing  principle
when  necessary,  that  is,  he  should
show  that  he  labors  for  the  interests
of  the  people  rather  than  for  building
up  himself.  With  this  spirit  one
will  be  very  sure  to  maintain  an  in-
fluence, and  instill  into  others  the
Same  character  of  feelings*

When  one  goes  into  co-operation
with  proper  spirit  and  proper  views,
to  superintend  or  operate  in  ;my
of  its  departments,  he  has  a  law-
ful claim  to  the  Spirit  of  inspiration,
to  aid  him  in  his  calling*  We
read  that  Jacob,  through  his  hon-
esty of  purpose,  fair-dealing,  and
freedom  from  selfishness,  wis  as-
sisted by  an  holy  Angel  with  infor-
mation how  to  increase  and  multiply
his  flocks*  It  is  far  belter  to  build
up  the  kingdom  ot  God,  in  its  tem-
poral interests,  by  the  Spirit  of  God
and  the  tvisdom  of  God,  than  by  the


spiritual  blessings. The  heartSj  and  :  spirit  of  man  and the 'wisdom  of


feelings  of  the  people  are  being  con-
siderably united  through  practicing
this  system  of  co-operating  in  our
temporal  interest.

Honesty,  ability  and  devotedness
are  required  in  order  that  co-opera-
tion may  be  successfully  carried  out,
and  the  Spirit  and  wisdom  of  the
Lord  are  necessary,  as  much  so  as


man;  on  the  latter  principle  we  shall
always  fail,  but  on  the  lonner  the
results  will  always  be  successful.

Our  Cooperative  Institui ion,  at
present,  in  Bngb.un  City,  com-
prises eight  distinct  departments,  and
is  generally  very  well  sustained  by
the  people.  It  embraces  a  mer-
cantile  depart  ment, a tannery,  a


378


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


butcher  shop,  a  boot  and  shoe  shop,
a  woolen  factory,  a  farm,  a  sheep
heid,  a  cattle  herd,  and  a  dairy.
These  branches  aid  in  sustaining
one  another.  The  profits  of  the
mercantile  department  help  to  fur-
nish the  necessary  cash  to  carry  on
other  industries — to  purchase  hides,
dve  stuffs,  cotton  warps,  &c.,  &c.
The  Tannery  supplies  our  boot  and
shoe  shop  with  whit  leather  is  re-
quired, and  oar  sheep  herd,  in  part,
with  wool  for  our  factory.  A  con-
siderable share  of  our  clothing  is
dow  furnished  at  our  factory,  and
our  bunts  and  shoes  at  the  shoe
snop,  and  a  sufficient  supply  <f  meat
at  the  botcher  shop,  all.  of  which  can
be  obtained  on  dividends,  labor,  or
exchange  of  products.  This  is  a  great
blessing  to  the  people,  especially  at
the  present  time  ot  scarcity  of  mo-
ney. Many  of  our  manufactured
articles  are  nearly  as  tine  as,  and
much  more  substantial  than,  the  earne
class  of  imported  articles,

I  engaged  a  suit  nf  clothes,  last
fall,  of  a  tailor  in  Bright m  City,
t lie*  material  of  which  was  made
at  our  woolen  factory.  I  winv  this
as  a  traveling  suit  through  Europe
and  Palestine,  and  tell  rath'  r  propd
in  exhibiting  it  as  a  specimen  of
"Mormon"  industrv ,  amid  the  vales  of
the  Great  West,  While  in  France,  we
Lad  an  interview  with  President
Thiers  and  his  cabinet  ;  this  was  at
Versailles,  and  it  so  happened  I  then
was  dressed  in  this  home-made  suit,
m\  aristocratic  one  heintr  locked  in
my  trunk  at  Paris,  twelve  utiles  dis-
tant. It  was  agreed  by  our  party
that  I  looked  sufficiently  respect-
able  in  my  home  pn>duet  hoots  and
suit,  to  appear  with  them  in  the
presence  of  the  President  ot  t lie
French  Republic.  1  respected  their
judgment  and  honored  .their  de-
cision 1  was  received  by  the  Pre-,
siticnt  us  cordially,  arid  I  believe  he


say.


that  this


not  imported
probably  irn-


shoek  hands  with  me  as  warmly
and  fervently,  as  though  I  had
been  arrayed  in  superb  broadcloth.
In  several  other  instances,  in  our
interviews  with  consuls  and  American
ministers,  and  men  of  rank  and  sta-
tion, my  reserved  suit  was  not  come*
ut-able,  so  I  had  an  opportunity  of
showing  a  specimen  of  what  we  are
doing  here  in  the  mountains,  which
was  an  occasion  of  both  surprise  and
commendation  On  my  return  to
London,  this  suit  was  nearly  as  good
as  when  I  left  Brigham  City,  I
made  a  present  of  it  to  President
Wells'  son,  one  of  our  missionaries
now  preaching  in  London.

Lest  some  of  my  friends  in  this
audience,  may  imagine  that  I  have
apostatized  horn  these  humble  prac-
tices of  sustaining  home  institu-
tions, permit  me  to
suit  I  now  wenr,  is
broadcloth,  as  son
agine,  hut  was  made  and  manufac-
tured in  Brigham  City,  and  the  ooots
I  have  on  are  those  worn  through  my
Palestine  tour,  and  nearly  as  good  as
when  hist  put  on  in  Brig  hum  City.

We  manufacture,  per  annum,  over
thirty  thousand  dollars'  worth  of
various  kinds  of  cloth,  which  is
principally  used  by  the  people  of
Bnidmm  City,  and*  in  the  adjacent
towns  and  settlements.  This  year
we  shall  manufacture  piobably  over
til  teen  thousand  dollars1  worth  of
I  toots  and  shoes,  which  will  be  used
in  the  same  localities,  arid  in  our
dairy  we  will  make  over  thirty  thou-
and  pounds  of  cheese,  equal  in  quality
to  any  that  can  be  imported.

Oar  Co-operative  cattle  herd,  to-
gether with  our  sheep  herd,  and  hogs
kept  at  the  dairy,  supply  our  butcher
shop,  and  partially  our  tannery  with
hides,  and  our  woolen  factory  with
the  raw  material  All  these,  together
with  other  branches  of  industry,
working  in  union,  afford  us  important


EANS  REQUIRED  TO  BUILD  THE  TEMPLES,  ETC.


273


advantges  in  the  present  financial
crisis,  and  supply,  in  a  great  measure,
our  real  wants  in  a  w*iy  t  at  is  easily
come-at-able  by  the  very  poorest  in
the  community.

'  Tire  Bishops  and  presiding  Elders,
nn  doubt,  many  of  them,  will  lead
out  iii  co-operation,  in  view  of  which,
I  will  Aimply  say,  much  prudence,
carefulness,  wisdom,  patience  mid
perseverance,  aided  by  the  Spirit  of
God,  will  be  necessary  in  operating
upon  these  principles.  They  need
to  enter  upon  this  business  with
their  whole  heart  and  soul,  as
upon  a  sacred  mission.  The  people
must  be  taught  and  led  in  all  kind-
ness, and  m»t  forced  into  measures
which  they  do  not  comprehend  and
hnve  no  heart  or  willingness  to  enter.
Move  gradually,  take  one  thing  at  a


time,  make  each,  at  least  partially,
success! ul,  before  i n t roduci ng  am  >-
ther,  in  order  that  the  advantages  and
object  of  what  we  are  doing  may  be
felt  and  understood.  The  difficulty
in  obtaining  means  to  establish  co-
operation is  not  so  great,  perhaps,
as  that  of  finding  men  of  ability,
wisdom  and  devoted  ness  to  man.
age  in  a  proper  manner  snch  me*n9
when  gathered,  and  get  the  people  up
to  that  standard  of  proper  feeling  and
knowledge,  to  be  com  para;  ively  satis-
fied when  their  means  are  justly  and
wisely  managed.

May  the  Lord  bless  as  with  his
Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  be  wise
and  devoted  in  all  our  thoughts  and
administration,  spiritual  aud  tem-
poral. Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  PRESIDENT  GEORGE  A  SMITH,

Delivered  in  the  New  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  at  the  Semi

Annual  OojnrfcKr:.M%  October  8t  1873.


(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


MEANS  REQUIRED  TO  BUILD  THE  TEMPLES— THE  WUKD  OK
UNITY  NEEDED  IN  WILDING  UP  ZIUN — SABBATH  SCHOOLS-
INGS  IN  THE  HOLY  LAND


WISDOM—
-JOURNEY-


Before  the  brethren  and  sisters
disperse,  we  wish  to  my  a  few  words
to  them  in  relation  to  building  the
Temples  that  are  in  progress.  1
think  it  was  in  1832  that  vve  broke
the  ground  tor  this  Temple.  We


have  met  with  a  great  many  obsta-
cles in  the  way  ot  its  progress.
Alter  the  foundation  whs  level  with
the  ground,  we  commenced  to  use
granite,  which  had  to  be  hauled  some
eighteen  miles,  and  we  hauled  it  witki


280


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


oxen  and  males.  Whenever  oppres- 1
sion  from  our  enemies  or  other  causes
did  not  prevent,  we  progressed  with
this  great  work.  The  building  is
nearly  200  feet  long  and  about  120
feet  wide.  The  foundation  of  the
side  walls  is  sixteen  feet  wide,  while
that  of  the  towers  at  each  end  has  a
proportionately  broad  footing,  Wh*»n
completed,  the  pinnacles  will  be  112
feet  high,  while  the  main  tower  will
be  225  feet  high.  The  build  ing  will
be  a  majestic  one,  and  will  creditably
compare  with  any  large  building  in
the  world*  We  have  now  gained  an
advantage  that  we  never  had  before
— that  is,  railway  communication
directly  with  the  granite  quarry.  It
it  true  that  we  have  to  change  from
narrow  to  bioad  guage,  causing  a
little  trouble;  we  bring  from  two  to
four  car-loads  a  day  of  this  yrani^e
on  to  the  Temple  Block.  There  are
some  eighty  men  cutting  these  stones,
and  there  is  a  party  of  men  now  en-
gaged in  laying  them.  I  invite  all
the  brethren  from  a  distance  to  t'o
on  to  the  ground  when  the  men  are
at  work,  and  see  how  beautifully  they
handle  these  large  stunes,  and  how
accurately  they  place  tliem  in  their
position,  for  I  hope  that  every  Lat-
ter-day Saint  feels  enough  interest  in
the  building  of  the  Temple  to  lift  his
heart  in  prayer  to  the  Must  High
that  he  will  enable"  us  to  build  the
Temples  which  we  have  commenced,
that  we  may  continue  the  work  of
salvation  for  ourselves  and  our  dead.

We  are  employing  a  considerable
force  of  men  in  the  stone  quarry,
and  have  been  increasing  the  num-
ber of  late. Our  hope  in  doing  so  is
to  get  a  quantity  of  stone  quarried  |
before  the  winttr  sets  in, that  we
may  continue  the  work  of  stone  cut- :
ting  through  the  winter. As  it  is
now,  when  only  two  ear  loads  a  day
arrive,  *ouie  of  the  stone  cutters  on  !
the  block  will  be  idle,  for  it  requires


i  nearly  three  car  loads  a  day  to  sup-
ply them.  We  are  very  glad  that
we  are  able  to  move  the  Temple  for-
ward, but  you  must  be  aware  that
all  this  takes  means.  The  mining
companies  in  the  mountains  pay,
or  promise  to  pay,  high  wages;
and  we  have  to  pay  a  pretty  libe-
ral price  in  order  to  satisfy  the
brethren  who  work  on  the  Tem-
ple. A  portion  of  this  is  paid  in
the  staple  products  of  the  coun-
try, and  the  residue  in  money,  or
merchandize,  which  is  the  same
thing  as  money  to  us,  for  we  have
to  pay  money  for  it.  We  accord-
ingly appeal  to  the  brethren,  both
here  and  throughout  the  world,  to
remeral>er  their  duties  and  their
offerings  for  the  Temple.  Remem-
b*T  that  the  ordinances  by  which  we
gain  exaltation  for  ourselves  and  our
relatives,  who  have  gone  before  us,
are  only  administered  in  a  holy  house,
which  has  been  built  in  the  name  of,
and  dedicated  to,  the  Most  High  God,
according  to  his  laws  and  command-
ments,

lb  would  seem  that  in  Salt  Lake
Ci*y  and  vicinity,  there  should  be
abundance  of  Tithes  and  offerings
to  carry  on  the  work  on  the  Temple;
yet  we  are  suffered  to  go  behind,
get  into  debt  and  incur  responsi-
bilities. It  is  the  duty  of  our  breth-
ren mid  sisters,  Bishops,  teachers
and  all,  to  wake  up  to  this  sulject,
and  remembering  what  is  required
of  them  by  the  law  of  the  Lord,  to
contribute  of  their  inites  and  uf  their
abundance,  that  when  this  great
building  shall  be  dedicated,  they
can  come  forward  knowing  it  is
their  offering  tu  the  Most  High ;
that  J  heir  tenths  have  been  ex*
p*  nried  upon  it,  and  that  they  have
the  ritfht  to  the  privilege  of  entering
its  basement  and  receiving  the  or-
dinances of  baptism  for  their  dead,
to  pass  through  the  various  ordi-


MEANS  REQUIRED  TO

nances  of  the  Priesthood,  and  have
the  necessary  sealinga  duly  recorded,
for  themselves  and  their  ancestors,
and  bequeath  to  their  posterity  the
blessings  which  are  there  sealed  upon
them  for  ever.  I  exhort  the  brethren
to  consider  these  things,

It  is  said  that  in  judging  the  con-
duct  of  others  we  should  be  merciful.
This  is  a  kind  of  proverb  or  select
sentence.  But  it  goes  on  further  to
say,  that  in  criticising  ourselves  we
should  be  exact  and  severe.  Now
when  we  come  to  judge  our  Tithing,
and  the  interests  we  invest  in  the
Temples  of  the  Lord,  let  us  do  it
conscientiously,  each  one  for  himself
or  herself.

I  spoke  here,  the  other  day,  a
little  in  relation  to  the  Word  of  Wis-
do  n,  and  I  again  appeal  to  my  bre-
thren and  my  sisters  to  observe  it,
for  I  know  that  it  they  neglect
to  do  so,  before  they  pass  behind
the  vail  they  will  mourn,  wail  and
weep  in  their  hearts,  for  it  will  have
a  tendency  to  shorten  their  days,
decrease  their  strength  and  lessen
their  glory.  To  those  brethren  who
indulge  in  intoxicating  drinks  1  say,
Cease  this  folly.  Brethren,  I  appeal
to  you  in  the  name  of  humanity,  in
mercy  to  your  wives  and  children,
in  the  name  of  my  Father  in  hea-
ven and  in  the  name  of  his  Son,  and
gay,  Waste  not  your  strength  and  your
life  with  folly  of  this  kind.  Let
intoxicating  drinks  alone,  entirely
alone.

We  are  looking  forward  to  the  day
when  we  shall  return  to  Jackson
County.  The  time  will  come  when
the  Latter-day  Saints  will  build,  in
Independence,  Mo+,  a  holy  city.  That
will  one  day  be  the  centre  .stake  of
Zion,  the  centre  spot  of  the  New
Jerusalem  which  God  is  to  build  on
this  land.  We  can  only  be  prepared
for  that  work  by  being  united.  Can
we  not  unite  a  little  in  building  a


BUILD  THE  TEMPLES,  ETC.  281

Temple,  in  contributing  a  tenth  of  all
:  our  substance  to  that  work  ?  Can  we  -
not  unite  a  little  in  erecting  a  factory,
in  establishing  a  store  ?  Can  we  not
learn,  step  by  step,  the  principles  of
unity,  which  will  enable  ns  to  be  the
!  people  of  God,  like  the  Zion  ot  Enoch,
and  prepare  us  for  a  dwelling  with
the  blest  ?  Let  us  consider  these
things,  and  sustain  with  all  our
powers  all  the  efforts  that  are  made
to  bring  about  a  unity  among  the
Saints.  Every  step  we  take  of  this
kind  is  in  the  right  direction.  Sus-
tain our  Co-operative  stores,  and  ce?*se
to  sustain  those  who  do  not  build  up
Zion,  The  Elders  of  Israel  have
traversed  the  earth  and  gathered  you
from  distant  nations,  and  you  have
come  here  to  serve  the  Lord  ;  but  if
you  expend  your  energies  and  means
in  sustaining  those  who  would  destroy
the  Saints,  you  are  only  laying  the
foundation  of  your  oun  degradation,
for  as  the  Lord  God  lives,  the  man
who  will  not  sustain  Zion  will  be  cut
off.

Remember  these  things,  brethren
and  sisters,  and  sustain  the  servant
of  God  and  the  institutions  of  heaven.
Pray  for  those  who  are  in  authority,
sustain  t he  organizations  that  are
established  for  the  welfare  of  Zion,
and  cease  to  sustain  her  enemies.
Circulate  among  the  people  our  puhlu

'  cations.  Let  the  sermons  of  the
Presidency  and  of  the  Apostles,  that

,  are  published  in  the  Deserd  News,  be
rtad  in  every  habitation.  Circulate
the  publications  of  the  Church  wher-
ever you  can,  and  supply  your
families  with  Bibles  and  Testaments.
Sustain  and  maintain  Sabbath  schools,
■jiud  encourage  all  the  children,  and
as  many  grown  people  as  may  be
necessary,  to  attend,  that  these
schools  may  prosper,  and  be  useful,

I  thought,  in  the  start,  of  a  great
many  subjects  that  I  wished  to  talk
about. In  the  Sunday  School  Uniony


2S2


JOl'KNAL  OF  DISCO  CUKES


which  met  last  evening,  eighteen
thousand  children  were  repn rented,
who  were  regular  at  umlauts  at  the
Sabbath  schools  in  this  Territory.
This  is  not  what  it  she  mid  be.  It  is
very  extensive  I  will  admit,  but  at
the  same  time  there  is  a  school  popu-
lation in  this  Teiritory  of  a  hour
thirt\-five  thousand.  The  State  of
Nevada  has  for  years  received  very
large  means  in  various  ways  from
the  United  States  for  sustaining
schools;  but  the  whole  population  of
that  State  is  probably  nut  oqual  to
the  number  of  school  children  in  this
Territory,  and  yet  they  have  had  all
the  resources  usually  given  by  the
national  government  to  States  to  sus-
tain schools*  The  State  ot  Nebraska
was  admitted  into  the  Union  when
it  had  but  a  small  population,  but  it
received  the  .saint-  liberal  school
bequest,  and  it  is  reported  that  the
Governor  stole  the  outfit,  and  was
impeached  and  dismissed  from  office
for  so  doing.  Whether  they  reco ve-
ered the  money  or  not  I  do  not  know.
At  any  rate  .they  disgraced  him.
The  idea  among  many  of  these  public
officers  is  that  if  they  can  only  steal
skillfudy  enough  not  to  be  caught
and  brought  to  justice,  it  is  nil  right
But  the  (iovernor  ot  Nebraska  was  a
little  clumsy,  and  consequently  they
impeached  him.  There  is  said  to  be
a,  great  ileal  of  swindling  among
these  public  officers,  and  in  Nebraska
it  was  the  school  fund  that  was
assailed.

We  have  never  had  in  this  Terri-
tory national  aid  for  schools  to  the
amount  of  a  dollar,  or  from  any  other
source  than  our  own  pockets,  and  1
am  proud  of  the  achievements  of  the
Territory  with  regard  to  schools.
We  should  not  relax  our  efforts.  Our
Sunday  School  Union  should  be  able
to  bring  out  more  Sunday  school
scholars than  now  attend,

I  want  to  say  to  my  brethren  that


our  journey  ings  in  the  Holy  Land
h  d  a  tendency  to  inform  us  with  re
gard  to  many  things  we  did  not  un-
derstand," and  we  now  know  much
hotter  than1  before  our  visit  how  to
establish  missions  in  those  countries,
which  will  be  done  at  a  proper  time
as  the  Lord  opens  the  way.  They
are,  ho  v ever,  fearfully  lied  up  with
ignorance,  superstition  and  oppressive
laws.  &c.  But  we  found  more
bigotry,  narrow-aiindednesa  and  dis-
position to  proscribe  eacli  other
among  those  professing  Christianity
than  among  any  other  class  of  peo-
ple in  the  Turkish  Empire.

In  Jerusalem  there  was  an  attempt
made  by  certain  men  of  science  to
>e  nefi  for  the  old  foundations  of  the
city.  They  sank  down  some  hund-
red and  seventy  feet,  and  they  found
thai  the  old  foundation  \\m  built
among  t he  mountains,  and  little  val-
leys running  between  them.  Mount
Moriah,  Mount  Zion,  Monnt  Calvary,
the  Mount  of  Olives  and  others  are
all  in  the  neighborhood,  and  there
were  anciently  deep  ravines  between,
and  the  city  w<i$  originally  uuilt  with
terraces,  one  street  rising  above  ano-
ther* It  is  said  thut  some  of  the
Christians  feared  that  this  investigate
ti« in  would  result  in  proving  that  the
holy  places,  which  are  so  much  wor-
shiped and  adored,  were  not  the  true
holy  places,  so  they,  1  was  told  by
some  respectable  Jews  who  were  anxi-
ous to  have  the  investigation  go  on>
exercised  an  influence  with  the  Turk*
ish  government  to  stop  it,  on  the
ground  that  the  excavation  weie
likely  to  undermine  Jerusalem.  At
any  rate  the  investigation  was  stop-
ped.  The  Greek,  Latin,  Coptic  and
Armenian  sects  were  said  to  have
been  principally  interested  in  this
matter.

The  American  minister  to  the
Turkish  empire  assured  me  that  he
had  greater  difficulty  in  promoting


MEANS  REQUIRED  TO  BUILD  THE  TEMPLES,  ETC.


283


peace*  among  the  different  Christian
sects  toward  each  other  than  he  had
among  the  Mohammedans  and  Chris-
tians, and  in  most  cases  the  Chris-
tians were  far  less  tolerant  towards
each  other  than  the  Mohammedans
were  towards  them. When  we  find
Elders  who  have  the  spirit  of  such  a
mission  and  wish  to  labor  in  the
work  of  the  Lord,  and  to  go  into
those  countries  and  learn  the  langu-
ages, we  shall  send  some  of  them
there  to  make  an  attempt  to  intro-
duce the  Gospel. President  Joseph
Smith  laid  lis  under  obligations  to
preach  the  Gospel  or  send  it  to  all
nations,  kindreds,  tongues  and  peo-
ple, a i id  wherever  the  #ajf  has  open-
ed we  have  exerted  ourselves  to  the
utmost  to  do  this. We  have  a  Terri-
tory here  hundreds  of  miles  in  extent,
occupied by  a  thriving  population.
Where  did  they  come  from  ?  They
have  been  gathered  from  the  nations
wherever  the  Elders  of  Israel  have
been  permitted  to  preach. A  great
many  of  the  Christian nations  are
locked  up, A  man  could  now  preach
in  It  ily,  but  the  traditions  of  the  peo-
ple are  so  strong  that  it  would  be  a
dangerous  experiment probably  to
undertake  it. While  conversing  with
Some  Greek  members  of  parliament
they  said  to  us — 4ta  We  are  Christians
already, why  not  go  among  the
heathens  and teach  them  Christ?
We  know  something  about  Christ
now,  and  that  is  enough," The  con-
st it  lit  ion  ol  Greece  provides  that  all
sects  may  be  tolerated,  but  prosely-
tism  is  prohibited  from  the  Orient ial
Greek  church,  so  you  may  think  as
y«.u  have  a  mind  to,  but  if  you  get
any  ot*  the  people  to  believe  in  the
Gospel  and  they  are  baptized  you  are
subject  to  a  penalty.


I  wish  to  bear  my  testimony  to  the
truths  of  the  Gospel,  to  express  my
gratitude  to  the  Conference  for  the
attendance  and  attention,  and  to  re-
turn my  heartfelt  thank  ro  our  breth-
ren and  sisters  who  have  made  113
mtisic.  I  am  gratified  at  the  atten-
dance of  the  singers  trom  the  various
settlements.  I  feel  that  the  blessing
of  Israel's  God  will  be  upon  them*
I  hope  the  brethren  and  sisters  will
treasure  up  what  they  heve  heard  and
profit  by  it.  Every  man  who  has
spoken  has  seemed  to  he  filled  with
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  At
the  ojiening  of  the  Conference  I  re-
quested that  the  prayer  of  faith
should  ascend  on  hi^h  that  the  Spirit
of  the  Almighty  miijht  dictate  and
control  those  who  spoke,  that  we
might  Ik*  edified  b\  t  he  power
of  the  Almighty-  Our  prayer  has
beeti  heard,  and  we  can  now  go  away
from  this  Conference  to  the  different
parts  of  the  Tenitory,  or  to  our
several  missions  abroad,  wherever  we
are  called,  with  a  united  faith  and
confidence  that  we  shall  be  better
men.  and  that  we  shall  more  trulv
and  faithfully  perform  our  duties  than
we  have  done  before.

The  blessings  of  Israel's  God  be
upon  you  ah,  and  may  we  all  lie
faithful  in  the  performance  of  our
several  duties,  exercising  faith  bet  ore
God  to  deliver  us  from  our  enemies,
and  cause  that  the  Lamanites  may  be
peaceable  in  our  midst;  for  1  will
assure  you,  brethren,  that  if  you  want
the  Lamauites  to  be  peaceable  to-
wards you,  you  must  cultivate  peace-
able feelings  in  your  hearts  towards
them,  and  never  desire  to  shed  their

blood. "  1

The  peace  of  God  be  upon  you  all,
in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Amen.


284


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


I


DISCOURSE BY ELDER ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  in  the  Thirteenth  Ward  Meeting  House,  Salt  Lake

City,  Sunday  Afternoon*  Nov  2,  1873*


{Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)


DISTINGUISHING  CHARACTERISTICS  BETWEEN  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS
AND  THE  VARIOUS  RELIGIOUS  DENOMINATIONS  OF  CHRISTENDOM,


According  to  our  usual  custon  wc
have  assembled  on  this,  the  first  day
of  the  week,  to  p  rtake  of  the  Sacra-
ment, as  a  witness  before  God  and
angels,  and  as  a  testimony  one  to
another,  that  we  are  determined  to
keep  the  commandments  of  the  Most
Hi^h,  and  to  obey  his  laws,  and  the
institutions  and  ordinances,  of  his
kingdom.  The  order  of  things  we
are  now  celebrating  we  have  endea-
vored to  observe*  from  the  organiza-
tion of  this  Church.  If  has  been  our
practice,  when  circumstances  would
permit,  to  assemble  every  Sabbath
day  tur  I  his  purpose,  and  also  to  ex*
press  one  to  another  our  desires  and
to  bar  our  test i monies  concerning
the  truth,  and  also  to  preach  when
we  felt  the  spirit  to  do  so.

I  feel,  this  after  noon,  to  investigate
before  tli is  assembly  some  of  the  dis-
tinguishing characteristics  between
this  people  and  the  various  religious
denominations  of  Christendom  I
do  not  do  tins  particularly  for  the
edification  and  benefit  of  the  Saints;
but,  as  there  are  probably  many  now
present  ho  never  have  had  the  op-
portunity of  learning  the  difference
which  exists  between  the  faith  of  the
Latter-day  Saints  and  that  ot  other
religious  denominations,  I  presume
that  it  would  be  interesting  to  thern
to  have  some  ot  these  things  spoken


of  on  the  present  occasion,  We
differ  in  our  religious  faith  and  no-
tions in  some  things  which  I  consider
to  be  of  essential  importance  to  the
salvation  of  the  children  of  men;  in
some  points  of  our  doctrine  and  faith
we  do  not  differ  so  much  wi(  h  reli-
gious people  generally  as  might  be
supposed.

To  begin,  then,  we  believe  in  the
existence  of  a  Supreme  Being,  our
heavenly  Father;  we  believe  also  in
ihe  existence  of  his  Son,  Jesus  Christ,
as  the  Savior  of  the  world,  and  that
he,  through  the  shedding  of  his
blood,  has  opened  a  way  by  which
the  fallen  sons  and  daughters  of  the
children  of  men  may  be  saved,  I
believe  that  almost  every  Christian
denomination  has  the  same  views  in
regard  to  the  atonement  of  Christ,
and  that  they,  as  well  a3  we,  believe
in  the  Fattier,  Son  and  Holy  GbosD.
We  also  believe  that  it  is  important
and  necessary  that  all  mankind  should
repent  of  and  forsake  their  sins,  and
that  they  should  forsake  everything
that  is  contrary  to  the  law  of  God,
and  that  i.s  in  violation  of  his  institu-
tions; everything  immoral  and  un*
holy  that  we  have  been  in  the  habit
of  practicing;  that  we  should  repent
of  these  things,  not  merely  in  word,
but  absolutely  repent  of  and  put  thern
away. I  believe  that  all  den  omnia-


DISTINGUISHING  VII

tions  who  believe  in  Christ  also  be-
lieve  in  repentance ;  hetice,  so  far  as
faith  in  God  the  Father,  and  in  his
Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  repentance  and
reformation  are  concerned,  there  are
few  distinguishing  characteristics  be-
tween us  and  the  outside  world.  We
also  believe  that  it  is  important  for
every  person  who  wishes  to  obtain
the  forgiveness  of  his  sins  to  be  bap-
tized in  water — immersed — in  the
name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  their  re-
mission. In  this  »ve  differ  with  most
of  the  religious  world.  I  believe
that  the  sect  which  is  generally
called  Campbell i tea  believe  in  being
baptized  in  water  for  the  remission
of  sins.  The  Church  of  England  also
believe  in  baptism  for  the  remission
of  sins,  but  they  do  not  administer
that  ordinance  by  immersion.  We
also  believe  that  when  a  person  has
repented,  and  has  been  baptized  for
the  remission  of  his  sins,  by  one
having  authority  to  administer  this
ordinance,  his  sins  will  be  forgiven.
1m ot  bat  what  the  Lord  has,  in  some
instances  on  record,  forgiven  the  sins
of  parties  before  baptism.  We  have
some  account,  in  both  ancient  and
modern  times,  of  the  Lotd  having
done  this.  The  Prophet  Joseph  ob
tained  a  forgiveness  of  his  sins,  be-
fore baptism,  and  also  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost ;  bat  the  reason,  pro-
bably ,  vs^s  that  there  was  no  Church
that  had  been  organized  after  the
ancient  pattern  at  the  time  he  re-
ceived the  administration  of  the
angels,  and  there  being  no  minister
authorized  to  administer  baptism  and
the  laying  on  of  hands,  the  Lord  in
that  instance  dispensed  with  the
forms  and  ordinances  recorded  for
that  purpose  in  the  New  Testament, ,
and  granted  unto  him  both  these
blessings — the  forgiveness  of  sins  and
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Gnost  Before
he  was  baptized  he  translated  the


LRACTERISTICS,  ETC.  285

greater  part  of  the  Book  of  Mormon
by  the  gift  and  power  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  through  the  aid  of  the  Urim
and  Th  urn  mi  in.  We  have  an  ac-
count of  at  least  one  instance,  in
ancient  times,  where  the  Holv  Ghost
was  given  before  baptism,  tlpit  is  the
case  of  Cornelius.  The  Holy  Ghost
was  poured  out  upon  him,  and  upon
his  household,  before  they  were  bap-
tized. It  was  contrary  to  the  ordi-
nance  and  the  form  that  had  been
laid  down  in  the  Gospel ;  but  on  that
occasion  it  was  evidently  given  for  a
special  purpose,  namely,  to  convince
the  brethren  who  acc  >m panted  Peter
to  the  place  where  Cornelius  lived,
that  th  ir  traditions  concerning  the
Gentiles  were  incorrect;  and  to  prove
to  rhem  that  the  Gentiles  were  hein
of  salvation  as  well  as  the  Jews,  the
Lord  condescended,  while  Peter  was
speaking  to  Cornelius  and  his  house,
to  bestow  up  >n  them  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  they  spake  with  tongues  and
prophecieil,  before  they  were  bnp-
tized.  When  Peter  saw  that  the
Holy  Ghost  had  been  bestowed  upon
(hem,  he  turned  to  the  Je* iah  bre-
thren, and  said,  "Who  can  forbid
water  that  these  should  be  baptized,
seeing  they  have  received  the  Holy
Ghost  as  well  as  we?"

On  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  when  we
are  told,  three  thousand  were  pricked
in  their  hearts,  and  desired  to  know
what  they  should  do;  the  answer
given  was  that  they  should  repent  of
their  sins.  They  already  believed,
before  they  repented,  the  testimony
of  Peter  and  the  rest  of  the  Apostles
that  Jesus  was  the  very  Christ;  they
believed  these  Old  Testament  Scrip-
tures that  related  to  him,  which  were
quoted  by  the  Apostle  Peter  on  that
occasion :  and  they  were  pricked  ill
their  hearts  If  they  had  not  be-
lieved that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  they
would  not  have  been  pricked  in  their
hearts  and  convicted  of  sin;  but


tliey  believed,  and  the  answer  of
Peter  to  their  inquiry  about  what
they  should  do  to  be  saved  was —
"Repent  and  be  baptized,  every  one
of  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ
fur  the  remission  of  your  sins,  and
you  shall  receive  * Ke  Holy  Ghost/'
Can  not  every  person,  who  reflects, a
momenl  on  this  passage,  see  that  Hie
remission  ot  sins  and  the  Holy  Ghost,
tvere  two  blessings  promised  after
repentance  ami  faith,  and  baptism  for
the  remission  of  si.s  ?  When  the
people  of  Samaria  heard  the  preach-
ing oi  Philip,  they  also  believed  and
repented,  and  they  were  baptized,
and  there  was  great  joy  in  that  city.
No  doubt  their  sins  were  then  remit-
ted, an  event  which  would  cause  joy
and  satisfaction  among  the  Samari-
tans. But  there  was  not  one  soul  of
all  those  converts  in  Samaria,  neither
man  nor  woman,  who  had  received
the  Holy  Ghost,  they  had  only  be-
lieved in  Christ  and  received  the
forgiveness  of  sins,  but  none  of  them
were  as  yet  born  of  the  Spirit.  When
the  Apostles  which  were  at  Jerusa-
lem heard  that  Sam  aria  had  received
the  word  of  God,  which  Philip  had
preached  unto  them,  they  sent  Peter
and  John,  and  they  came  down  to
Samaria  and  knelt  down  and  prayed
for  these  baptized  Samaritans,  that
they  might  receive  thft  Holy  Ghost;
*"  for  as  yet,"  says  the  Scripture,  he
had  not  fallen  upon  any  of  them,  only
they  had  been  baptized  in  the  name
of  the  Lord  Jesns  ;  and  when  they
had  prayed  for  thera,  they  laid  their
hands  upon  them  and  they  received

the  Holj  Ghost."

Now  they  must  have  received  on
that  occasion,  something  that  was
powerful  and  miraculous,  so  much  so
that  it  made  itself  manifest  even  to
byst -inders.  The  reason  which  I  have
lor  believing  this  is  in  consequence
of  what  Simon  Magus  said  and  did  j
Am  that  occasion* He  came  to  the  i


1  Apostle  Peter  and  offering  money  to
!  him,  saia — M  Give  me  also  this  power,
th.it  on  whomsoever  I  lay  my  hands
he  may  receive  the  Holy  (J host."  He
was  evidently  convinced  that  tin -re
was  a  power  made  manifest  on  that
•  occasion,  and  as  he  hud  been  a  sor-
cerer, and  had* deluded  and  deceived
the  people  in  former  times,  and  had
evidently  come  into  the  Church  w  th
a  corrupt  heart,  he  no  doubt  wished
to  obtain  this  increased  power  to  aid
him  in  his  future  operations.  But
Peter  answered — u  Let  thy  money
perish  with  thee,  I  perceive  that  thy
heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of

God/' '  "  .JV';' .

Mere  then  was  a  sacred  ordinance
which  I  wish  to  call  your  attention
to,  namely,  the  laying  on  of  hands.
The  Samaritans  had,  no  .doubt,  be-
lieved as  lirmly  as  ever  persons  could
believe;  they  had  repented  as  mnch
as  any  persons  could  repent  they
had  complied  with  the- ordinance  of
baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins,
and  were  justified  and  filled  with
great  joy  in  consequence  of  the  for-
giveness  of  their  sins;  but  with  all
this,  why  did  they  not  receive  the
Holy  Ghost  ?  Why  was  it  not  sent
down  from  heaven  as  it  was  on  Cor-
nelias ?  Because  there  were  hone
pres  ut  on  that  occasion  that  needed
to  be  convinced,  as  in  the  case  of

the  household  of  Cornelius;  no  Jew-
ish brethren  there  to  forbid  water;
no  ones  there  to  have  their  traditions
Corrected,  and  consequently  the  Lord
did  not  give  a  sign  to  them*  But
when  they  were  confirmed,  he  sent
upon  them  the  Holy  Ghost  through
the  sacted  ordinance  of  the  laying  on
of  hands.  That  is  as  much  an  ordi-
nance as  baptism.

•  Here  then  is  one  instance  wherein
we  differ  from  the  main  portions  of
the  religious  world.  It  is  true  the
Church  of  England  practices  confir-
mation— they  lay  hands  upon  those


DISTINGUISHING  CHARACTERISTICS,  ETC


287


who  are  sprinkled  ;  bat  we  have  no
account  of  the  gifts  following  this
nil  ministration  among  the*  members
of  that  church,  such  as  the  git>  of
tongues,  healing  and  the  various  ^il'fs
of  the  Spirit. Tliey  are  withheld.
We  d iifer,  then,  from  the  outside
religious  world  in  this  one  ordinance.
No  person  come into  this  Church
and  is  acknowledged  to  be  in  foil
fellowship  \\s  a  mem  her  of  the  Church,
unless  one  or  more  of  the  servants?  uf
God  have  administered  the  sacred
ordinance  of  t h laying  on  ot  hands
expressly  for  the  baptism  i  f  fire  and
the  Holy  Ghost, I  do  not  know  why
it  was  that  the  Lord  established  this
ordinance. He  seems  to  have,  in  all
a^es,  bestowed  blessings  upon  the
•children  of  men  through  simple  or-
dinances, and  lie  seldom  crave  bless-
insF,  unless  those ordinances  were
complied with. When the  an^el
•canio  to  Cornelius  and  told  htm  that
his  prayers  and  his  alms  had  ascended
up  before  God  as  a  memorial,  he  did"
not  see  proper  on  that  occasion  to  tell
exactly  what  he  should  do  in  ord. i
to  be  saved;  but  he  told  hi  mi  to  send
for  Peter,  and  he  would  tell  him
words  whereby he and  his  house
should be saved. Cornelias  had
faith  enough  in  that  angel  to  actually
send  for  Peter, There  was  some-
thing required  on  the  part  ol  Corne-
lius to  manifest  his  faith  before  God.
There  was  something  required  of  the
children  of  Israel  when  theV  were  U\
take  the  City  of  Jericho. It  would
have  been  an  easy  matter  for  God  to
have thrown down the walls  of
Jericho  in  an  instant  without  making
any  requirement  of  the  children  of
Israel ;  but  he  determined  to  try  their
faith,  so  they  were  commanded  to
pass  round  the  walls  of  the  city  once
a  day  fur  seven  days,  and  on  each
day  when  they  encompassed  the  walls
they  were  to  blow  rams'  horns.  On
the  seventh  day  they  were  to  go  round


the  walls  of  the  city  seven  times,  and
when  they  had  completed  their  last
circuit  on  the  seventh  day  they  were
to  give  a  certain  'blast  with  the  horns,
and  all  the  people  were  to  give  a
shout,  then  the  walls  were  to  fall
down,  Now,  could  not  the  Lord
have  done  lr  without  going  through
all  that  process  ?  0,  yes^  but- he  did
not  see  proper  ro  do  so,  he  wanted  to
try  the  faith  of  that  people,  to  see
whether  they  wuiild  be  obedient  to
that  which  he  required  of  them.
When  the\  had  shown  their  faith  by
their  wor  ks,  then  the  power  of  God
was  made  manifest.

It  is  so  in  relation  to  baptism.
When  we  have  shown  that  we  have
faith  in  God  and  in  the  ordinances
and  institutions  of  his  kingdom;
when  we  prove  our  belief  in  the
principle  of  baptism  by  rendering1
obedience  thereto,  we  then  obtain  the
remission  of  our  sins.  When  we
have  faith  nougli  to  have  hands  laid
upon  us  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  after  being  baptized,  the  Lord
sees  that  we  are  complying  with  tiie
institutions  o"  his  kingdom,  and  he
is  willing  to  bestow  the  blessing  of
the  Holy  Ghost.  When  we  have
faith  enough  to  no  to  the  house  of
worship  on  the  tir.st  day  of  the  week
and  offer  up  our  saerament  before  the
Lord,  -  according  to  his  command-
inents,  wo  witness  before  hint  that  wo
are  willing  to  keep  his  command-
ments; but  when,  without  excuse,  we
neglect  this  week  al  ter  week,  we  show
that  we  are  careless  and  indifferent,
and  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
which  we  would  otherwise  enjoy  as
Latter-day  Saints,  ih  withheld  trom

Let  none  experiment  on  this,  let
no  Latter-day  Saints  neglect  to  come
to  meeting,  when  it  is  their  privilege
to  do  so,  and  also  neglect  this  divine
ordinance  which  the  Lord  has  insti-
tuted in  commemoration  of  the  death


288


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


and  sufferings  of  his  Ron  ;  for  if  they
continue  to  do  this  without  any  rea-
sonable excuse,  thev  will  soon  beirin
to be darkened in their  minds.
Hence  yon  see,  that  all  these  ordi-
nances, however  simple  in  their  na-
ture, are  instituted  of  the  Lord,  and
if  we  have  not  faith  sufficient  to  com-
ply with  them,  it  proves  that  we  h;ive
rot  much  faith  in  God. The  Apostle
James  speaks  upon  the  subject  of
faith  very  plainly  :  he  savs — "  Show
me  thy  fai'h  without  thy  works,  and
I  will  show  thee  my  frith  by  my
works," Faith without works  is
dead,  being  nlone. Men  may  profess
ever  so  much  faith  in  Christ,  but  if
they  do  not.  attend  to  the  ordinances
of  heaven,  we  know  that  their  faith
is  a  dead  faith  and  will  not  obtain
the  blessings  which  the  Lord  has
promised.  We  will  piss  on,  however,
ill  taking  up  the  distinguishing  char
act  eristics,  between  the Latter  -day  !
Saints  and  other  religious  denomina-  '
tions. We  shall,  however,  have  to
dwell  briefly  on  the  different  points,
for  ihere  are  many  things  wherein
we  differ.

When  the  baptized  believer  has
received  the  pi  ft  a  fid  power  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  the  question  is,  What
will  be  its  manifestations,  Ac.,  and
how  are  we,  as  Latter- day  Saints,  to
know  that  we  have  received  the  Holy
Ghost  P  This  is  a  very  important
qucNtion  for  us  to  decide  in  our  own
minds.  How  are  believers  in  Christ
.  to  know  that  they  are  believers,  'such
as  the  Lord  will  acknowledge?  They
are  to  know  it  by  the  pouring  out  of
the  Holy  Ghost  upon  them.  How
am  I  to  know  when  the  Holy  Ghost
is  poured  out  upon  me,  or  how  are
you  to  know  ?  We  would  not  know
only  by  comparing  with  the  Scrip-
tores,  or  by  some  revel ntion  to  our
own  minds,  which  would  give  us  this
knowledge.  For  instance,  suppose
we  should  receive  a  spirit  that  would


1  cause  us  to  fall  down  on  the  ground,
i  or  cause  us  to  be  cramped  up  into  aa
ill  kind  of  a  shape,  or  that  would
take  away  our  strength  and  all  oar
memory  and  understanding,  should
we  not  know  at  once  that  no  such
spirit  was  acceptable  in  the  sight  of
God  ?  and,  after  reading  about  the
gifts  of  the*  Holy  Ghost  to  man,
should  we  not  know,  that  it.  does  not
operate  thus  ?  When  the  Holy  Ghost
rests  upon  the  servants  and  hand*
maidens  of  the  Lord,  it  imparts  a
variety  of  gilts,  not  all  to  one  man,
and  not  the  same  to  every  individual ;
but  it  gives  to  one,  one  gift,  and  to
another, another. For  instance  it
gives  to  some  the  gift  of  wisdom.
Now,  what  is  it  to  receive  the  word
of  wisdom  ?  When  a  person  receives,
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the
word  or  gift  of  wisdom,  he  receives
revelation. Herein,  then,  is  another
point  in  which  we  differ  from  the
religious  world  generally. They  do
not  believe  in  any  later  revelation
than  the  New  Testament,  that  is,
they  did  not  when  this  Church  arose;
but  of  late  years,  since  the  rise  of
this  Church,  many  of  them  have  be-
gun to  believe  in  revelation  later  than
the  New  Testament.

When  the  Holy  Ghost  falls  upon
some  it  gives  them  the  word  of  wis-
dom, that  is,  it  imparts  to  them  an
understanding  of  things  that  are
wise,  JThe  Spirit  may  whisper,  *  It
is  wise  for  you  to  do  this  thing," —
"it  is  wise  for  you  to  do  that  thing,*' —
u  it  is  wise  for  you  to  take  such  a
course,  and  to  do  thus  and  so/'  This
is  what  might  be  termed  the  word  of
wisdom.  A  person  may  have  great
wisdom  and  yet  not  have  much
knowledge;  he  may  have  great  wis-
dom given  by  revelation  to  know
how  to  exercise  that  degree  of  know-
ledge which  he  may  be  io  possession
of.  Then  again  there  are  others  who
may  receive  the  gift  of  knowledge


DISTINGUISHING  CHARACTERISTICS,  ETC.


289


from  God  and  yet  they  may  have  |
very  little  wisdom  ;  and  they  do  not
know  how  to  turn  their  knowledge
to  the  best  advantage.  Here  is  the
distinction  then  between  a  revelation
which  gives  wisdom,  and  a  revelation
which  gives  knowledge.

To  another  is  ^iven,  by  the  Spirit,
the  gift  of  healing.  Some  may  say
that  the  efift  of  healing  was  only  in-
tended for  ancient  times,  to  establish
the  Gospel ;  that  the  people  in  those
days  needed  some  miraculous  power
and  evidence  to  convince  them  of  the
truth  of  the  Gospel ;  but  I  find  that
the  gift  of  healing  was  given  for  the
1  ;neiit  of  all  who  hud  faith  to  be
healed.  This  was  the  way  that  the
•  Lord  administered  in  ancient  times,
gud  there  is  just  as  much  neces--
f  sity  in  our  day  that  the  sick
should  be  healed,  as  there  was  eight*
een  dfcnturies  ago ;  and  i\w  Lord  is
just  as  willing,  inasmuch  as  we  will
exercise  faith  in  him,  to  besLuw  the
gift,  of  healing  now  as  he  was  in
ancient  times.  This  seems  to  be  a
kind  of  common  gift,  not  limited'
altogether  to  a  few  individuals,  as  we
find  recorded  in  the  hist  chapter  of
Marks,  Jesus  said  on  that  occasion,
ispejking  to  his  Ap>stles — "Go  ye
into  all  the  world  and  preach  the
Gospel  to  every  creature,  he  that  be-
lieves"— that  is  every  creature, in  afl
the  world  who  believes — "and  in
baptized  shall  be  saved,  he  that  be-
lie vet h  not  shall  be  damned.  And
these  signs  shall  follow  them  that
believe,'7  that  is,  every  creature  in  all
the  world  that  believes,  showing  that
the  believers  generally  might  have
the  gift  of  healing,  altlioqgh,  perhaps,
to  some  it  is  given  more  fujly  than
it  is  to  others,  "  These  signs  shall
follow  them  that  believe";  in  my
name  shall  they  cast  opt  devils  ;  they
shall  speak  with  new  tongues;  they
shall  take  up  serpents;  and  if  they
drink  any  deadly  thing,  it  shall  not

No.  19.  V  i


I


■

hart  them;  they  shall  lay*^nds  on
the  sick,  and  they  shall  repover; 1

It  seems  that  the  gijfc^  here  named
are  general  gifts,  itS tended  more  or
less  for  the  whole  Church  ;  not  only
for  those  in  the  Priesthood,  but  for
those  out  of  the  Pries  fcfiood,  for  males
and  for  females.  For  instance,  child-
ren are  often  taken  sick,  and  it  is  the
privilege  of  their  parents,  whether
they  have  the  Priesthood  or  not,  by
virtne  of  this  promise,  to  lay  their
hands  on  their  sick  children,  and  ask
the  Lord,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  to
heal  them.  Suppose  that  the  father,
the  head  of  the  family,  is  absent,  has
the  mother  the  right  to  lay" her  hands
upon  ber  sick  child  ?  We  say  that,
by  virtue  of  this  promise  which  tke
L'ird  has  made,  she  may  lay  her
hands  upon  her  child  or  children,
and  ask  God  to  heal  it  or  them.
How  many  scores  and  scotm  of  cases
have  there  been  in  this  Clmrch,  every
year  since  it  was  organized,  where
the  parents,  both  brethren  and  sisters,
have  had  power  over  disease,  through
the  Spirit  of  God  being  poured  out
upon  them,  and  their  children  have
been  beakd  through  the  laying  on  of
their  hands  ?  Here,  then,  is  another
pjint  wherein  we  differ  from  the  re*
ligiaus  world.  Go  and  ask  them  if
they  will  come  and  visit  a  sick  per*
son.  uOh  yes,"  says  the  minister,
"I  will  visit  the  tick,"  When  he
arrives,  the  sick  person  or  his  friends
request  him  to  pray.  That  is  all
right  and  in  accordance  with  the
Gospel.  They  kneel  down,  and  the
miniate^  prays  that  the  Lord  will
look  in  mercy  upon  the  sick  person,
and,  if  it  please  him,  heal  and  restore
him.  But  do  they  lay  on  hands  or
anoint  with  oil  as  the  Script  area
direct  ?  The  Scriptures  say — "  If
any  one  among  you  is  sick,  let  him
send  for  the  Elders  of  the  Chtrch,
and  let  them  pray  for  him" — it  is  all
right  to  pray — "and  let  them  anoint

-Vol  XVI.


r


290


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


the  sick  in  the  name  of  the  Lord/'
Now,  when  they  do  this  they  are
comply ing  with  the  requisitions  of
the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God,  and
why  not  follow  this  ordinance  of  lay-
ing on  of  hands  on  the  sick,  and
anointing  them  with  oil,  just  as  well
as  following  the  praying  part  ?  .No  ,
wonder  that  they  do  not  have  power
over  sickness  and  disease,  for  they
only  attend  to  half  their  duties — they
pray,  but  neglect  the  other  pirt.  In-
quires one,  "  Can  not  the  Lord  hear
prayer  and  heal  the  sick  just  as  well
without  laying  on  of  hands  and
anointing  with  oil  as  with  r*  He
could  have  thrown  down  the  walls  of
Jericho  without  the  children  of  Israel
walking  around  them  and  blowing
rams*  horns;  but  the  Lord  has  a
form,  then  why  not  comply  with  it,
and  leave  the  event  with  him.  It
requires  faith  on  the  part  of  the  sick
in  order  to  be  healed ;  they  ought  to
have  faith  as  well  as  their  friends.
When  an  infant  child  is  sick,  it,  of
course,  is  not  tequired  to  exercise
faith  ;  but  its  parents  and  friends  can
exercise  faith  on  its  behalf,  as  was
done  in  ancient  times.  Sometimes
sickness  will  deprive  an  adult  person
of  his  senses,  in  that  case  his  friends
may  exercise  faith  for  him.  But
where  there  is  no  faith  in  God,  as  in
the  case  of  infants,  his  servants  may
prevail,  and  heal  the  sick,  but  this  is
Dot  always  the  case.  For  instance,
as  great  a  man  as  Paul  was,  a  person
who  had  the  gift  of  healing  to  such  a
degree  that  even  by  carrying  a  hand-
kerchief, or  some  little  article  from
him  to  those  who  were  sick,  devils
would  flee  and  the  sick  would  be
healed ;  I  say  that  as  great  a  man  as
he  was  obliged  on  a  certain  occasion
to  leave  one  of  his  fellow-laborers  in
the  ministry  sick  at  Miletus,  Why  ?
Because  he  had  not  faith.  People
may  sometimes  have  faith,  and  at
mother  timea  they  do  not  exercise  it;


sometimes  people  are  appointed  unto
death,  and  in  such  cases  the  admini-
strations of  the  Elders  are  not  likely
to  be  effectual  If  believers  e^uld
always  exercise  faith  to  be  healed  of
disease,  all  the  ancient  Saints  might
be  living  now,  eighteen  hundred
years  after  they  were  horn.  But  the
Lord  heals  the  sick  when  it  seems
good  onto  him,  and  he  gives  us,  in-


asmuch as  we  arc  not  appointed  unto
death,  the  privilege  of  calling  upon
his  name,  and  of  having  the  admini-
strations of  his  servants  in  our  be-
half. This  has  been  practiced  ever
since  this  Church  was  organized —
forty-three  years  sinct — and  if  it  had
done  no  good,  if  there  had  been  no
healings  in  that  time,  do  you  suppose
the  Latter* day  Saints  would  continue
to  be  members  of  the  Church  ?  No,
the  Church  would  have  quickly
broken  up,  it  would  not  have  lasted
more  than  two  or  three  years  it  its
members  had  not  found  the  promises
verified,  according  to  the  word  of  the
Lord;  but  they  have  found  that  the
Lord  really  does  stretch  forth  his
hand  to  heal  the  sick,  and  that  he
does  raise  them  up  from  the  very
point  ot  death,  and  restore  them,
almost  instantly,  to  health  and
strength.  Knowing  this  to  be  the
case,  the  afflcted  Saints  have  faith  in
the  ordinances,  and  they  continue
sendiug  for  the  Kid  era,  and  God
blesses  their  administrations.

Then,  if  I  received  a  spirit  by
which,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  1
was  enabled  to  rebuke  sickness,  and
that  sickness  was  rebuked,  and  the
persons  were  raised  up,  should  I  not
have  reason  to  believe  that  I  bad  re-
ceived that  true  Spirit  of  the  Gospel,
called  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  I  certainly
should.  If  I  received  a  revelation
telling  me  what  would  be  the  best
course  for  me  to  pursue  under  certain
circumstances,  should  I  not  know
that  it  was  a  revelation  from  God  ?


DISTINGUISHING  CHARACTERISTICS,  ETC.


I  think  I  should  know,  just  as  well
as  the  ancient  Prophets  knew  when
they  received  a  revelation.  If  I  re*
ceived  knowledge  by  revelation  con-
cern ins?  this,  that  or  the  uther  thing
or  principle,  would  not  that  be  a
testimony  to  me  that  I  had  received
the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Again,  if  I  was
sick  and  afflicted  and  in  great  pain,
and  I  sent  for  the  Elders  of  the
Church  to  come  and  pray  for  me  and
to  rrbnke  the  disease  which  was
afflicting  me,  and,  in  the  name  of
Jesus,  command  it  to  depart,  and  it
was  done,  would  not  this  be  a  testi-
mony unto  me  that  the  Lord  bad
heard  the  prayers  of  his  servants,
and  that  he  hud  really  and  truly
verified  his  promise?  Certainly.

To  another  is  given  the  gift  of
prophecy,  or  foretelling  future  events*
Among  the  ancient  Saints  this  was
regarded  as  a  very  important  gift,
much  more  so  than  the  gift  of  speak*
ing  in  tongues.  Paul,  in  addressing
the  Corinthians,  says— uSeek  earnest-
ly the  best  gifts,  and  forbid  not  to
speak  with  tongues,"  <fcc.  And  again,
he  says,  **  Greater  is  he  that  prophe-
cies than  he  that  speaketh  with
tongues,*'  Again,  in  the  same  chap-
ter, he  says — u  How  is  it  then,  bre-
thren ?  When  ye  come  together,
every  one  of  you  hath  a  psalm,  hath
a  doctrine,  hath  a  tongue,  hath  a
revelation,  hath  an  interpretation  ?
Let  the  prophets  spuyk,  two  or  three,  |
and  let  the  Hier  judge.  If  anything
be  revealed  to  another  thatsitteth  by,
let  the  first  hold  his  peace.  For  ye
may  all  prophecy  ono  by ,  one,  that
all  may  learn,  and  all  may  be  com-
forted, And  the  spirits  of  the  pro-
phets are  subject  to  the  prophets,"

Here,  then,  wc  see  that  the  Saints
in  ancient  times  pruphecied  by  reve-
lation. If  persons  come  together  in
a  religious  capacity,  as  this  assembly
lias  done  this  afternoon,  and  God
should  reveal  to  some  present  aome-


thing  pertaining  to  the  futurr,  it  is
not  necessary  for  them  to  rise  up
while  any  other  person  is  speaking,
and  make  confusion,  bot  let  all  the
Prophets  who  have  any  revelation,
wait  until  the  person  speaking  gets
through,  and  then  let  them  rise,  one
by  one,  and  declare  what  God  has
revealed  to  them.  This  was  the  way
the  ancient  Christians  worshiped,
and  these  were  the  gifts  by  which
they  were  distinguished  from  those
who  were  not  Christians,  and  those
also  were  the  distinguishing  charac-
teristics between  the  general  world  of
mankind  and  the  real,  true-hearted
Christians  in  ancient  times.  Why
not  have  the  same  distinguishing
characteristics  now  ?  Has  God  ever
said  that  these  gifts  should  be  un-
necessary in  the  Church  ?

We  find  a  great  many  gifts  be-
sides those  I  have  mentioned.  The
gift  of  tongues,  the  interpretation  of
tongues,  the  discerning  of  spirits,
and  the  beholding  of  angels,  were  all
given  in  ancient  times  by  the  Spirit,
and  the  Church  possessing  them  was
compared  to  the  body  of  Christ ;  and
the  Apostle  Paul,  in  order  to  show
the  necessity  of  all  these  gifts,  when
comparing  them  to  the  body  of  a
man,  says,  the  whole  system  is  neces-
sary, the  eye  cannot  say  to  the  hand
"  I  have  no  need  of  you"  in  the  body,
for  it  is  absolntely  nec&ssary  there ;
neither  can  the  head  say  to  the  feet
li  I  have  no  need  of  you  ;M  no,  the
feet  are  necessary;  and  even  the
most  imperfect,  or  simplest  member
of  the  human  system  could  not  be
dispensed  with  without  making  a
schism  in  the  body.  Says  Paul,
speaking  to  the  Church — "  You  are
the  body  of  Christ,  and  members  in
particular.  God  has  set  in  the
church,  first  apostles,  second  pro*
pheta,  after  that  teachers,  workers  of
miracles,  speakers  with  tongues,  in-
terpreters of  tongues." All  tbeie


•>M2

mm  i.  ^


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


different  ones  are  members  of  the
body  of  Christ.  Now,  have  we  any
right  to  sav  to  the  lowest  of  these
members,  "  We  have  no  need  of  you
in  the  body?"  Supposing  the  teacher
slum  Id  say  to  the  speaker  in  tongues
— 4t  I  have  no  need  of  you,  now  in
the  body,  the  Lord  has  a  different
kind  of  a  body  on  the  earth  from
what  he  had  eighteen  hundred  years
ago,  and  we  do  not  need  you  now."
Another,  says  to  the  interpreter  of
tongues — "  We  have  persons  who
have  studied  all  these  languages,  and
we  do  not  need  a  person  to  interpret
tongues,  by  the  Spirit,  now  ;  we  can
dispense  with  this  principle  from  the
body  of  Christ"  *  Another  minister
arises  and  he  says  to  the  member
possessing  the  gift  of  healing — We
do  not  need  such  a  member  in  the
chnrch  now,  we  can  do  without  it  in
the  body;  it  is  true  it  makes  a  kind
of  a  schism  in  the  body,  and  it  looks
different  from  what  the  New  Testa-
ment has  taught;  but  we  are  en-
lightened in  this  day,  we  are  living
in  such  a  blaze  of  Gospel  liberty  that
we  do  not  need  the  same  kind  of
members  now  to  compose  the  body
of  Christ  as  they  did  in  ancient
days,"  and  he  passes  him  by.  The
worker  of  miracles  comes  along,  and
another  minister  says — u  We  have
no  need  of  you  in  the  body;"  the
disccrner  of  spirits  comes  along  and
he  says — M I  have  beheld  spirits,  I
have  seen  angels/'  Says  the  modern
religionist — "  We  have  no  need  of
yon  now1  in  the  church,  we  are  suffi-
ciently enlightened  to  do  without
you."  An  Apostle  comes  along  and
declares  his  mission  and  calling,  and
he  is  greeted  with  the  customary
salutation — "  We  do  not  need  Apos-
tles now,  God  set  those  officers  in
his  church  at  first,  but  we  can  dis-
pense with  them  now."  I  say,  if
you  can  dispense  with  these  officers,
what  have  you  left  ? Says  one —


"We  have  teachers  left/*  "  Well,
why  do  you  not*  do  away  with  the
office  of  teacher  ?  Have  you  not  the
same  authority  to  do  away  with  the
member  of  the  body  of  Christ  called
a  teacher,  that  you  have  to  do  away
with  the  Apostle,  the  Prophet,  the
gift  of  healing,  the  discerning  of
spirits  ?  Yes,  you  have  the  same
right  to  do  away  with  one  officer  as
with  another.  If  you  have  only
teachers  left,  I  ask,  Does  that  con-
stitute the  Church  of  God  ?  No,  for
you  have  done  away  with  the  most
prominent  officer,  the  Apostle,  the
one  first  set  in  the  Church,  which  is
like  taking  a  man's  head  from  his
body  and  then  saying  "  Live,  live/1

Now  the  very  fact  that  all  these
officers  have  been  done  away,  shows
that  the  Church  of  God  lias  been
rooted  out  of  the  earth.  No  wonder,
then,  that  the  Lord  had  to  send  an
angel  from  heaven  with  the  ever-
lasting Gospel,  to  be  preached  to
every  nation,  kindred,  tongue  and
people,  because  there  was  no  nation,
people,  kindred  or  tongue  upon  the
face  of  the  whole  earth  that  had  that
Gospel,  and  a  Church  organized  in
accordance  with  it  The  various  sects
of  religionists  in  Christendom  have
lost  all  authority ;  they  have  neither
Apostles  nor  Prophets,  no  one  who
can  have  heavenly  visions,  who  caa
discern  spirits  or  have  the  ministra- .
tions  of  angels ;  no  one  to  heal  the
sick  or  to  speak  with  tongues.  They
have  done  away  with  all  ^ifts  and
members  and  have  blotted  out  the
ancient  Church,  having  merely  a  dead
form  left  No  wonder  then  that  tho
Lord  sent  an  angel,  in  fulfillment  of
the  revelations  of  St.  John,  to  restore
the  Gospel  to  earth,  and  to  prepare
for  the  re-organization  of  his  Church
among  men  according  to  the  ancient
pattern.  It  was  absolutely  necessary
that  the  Gospel  should  be  restored,
together  with  the  authority  to  ad—


DISTINGUISHING  CHARACTERISTIDS,  ETC,


293


minister  its  ordinances,  baptism  for
the  remission  of  sins,  and  the  laying
on  of  hands  for  the  baptism  of  fire
and  the  Holy  Ghost;  authority  to
build  up  the  Church  and  kingdom  on
the  earth,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  might
again,  be  poured  out  as  in  ancient
times,  that  the  people  might  receive
the  gifts  thereof,  and  that  they  might
know  of  a  surety,  when  they  had
received  the  Holy  Spirit*  All  this
the  Lord  has  done,  hence  you  see  the
distinguishing  characteristics,  so  far
as  the  organization  of  the  Church
and  the  administration  of  its  ordi-
nances are  concerned,  between  the
Latter-day  Saints  and  the  rest  of  the
religious  world.

But  suppose  we  speak  still  further
on  one  principle,  and  that  is  the  au-
thority to  baptize,  I  might  be  bap-
tized by  a  person  whom  the  Lord  had
neither  called  nor  sent,  and  that
baptism  would  never  be  acknowledged
in  the  eternal  worlds.  I  might  be
ever  so  sincere,  and  I  might  receive
the  ordinance  from  the  hands  of  a
man  who,  I  really  supposed,  had  the
authority  and  who  was  a  good,  moral,
upright  man,  and  yet  that  baptism
would  not  be  acceptable  in  the  sight
of  God,  unless  he  did  truly  have  di-
vine authority.

How  am  I  to  know  whether  a  man
has  divine  authority  or  not  ?  It  is
one  of  the  easiest  things  in  the
world  to  know.  I  will  tell  you  how
you  may  know  a  man  who  has  divine
authority  from  one  who  has  not.  If
you  find  a  man  who,  though  he  may
profess  to  be  a  Christian  minister,
gays  he*  does  not  believe  in  any  later
revelations  than  those  given  to  St.
John  the  Divine,  and  that  he  was
the  last  to  vi  horn  the  Lord  revealed
himself,  you  may  know  that  that*
man  has  no  authority  from  God.
Why  not  ?  Because  the  Bible  says —
**  No  man  taketh  this  honor  unto
himself" — speaking of  the  Priest-


hood— "  Save  he  be  called  of  God  as
was  Aaron/'  Now,  turn  to  the  Bible
and  see  how  Aaron  was  called,  see
if  he  was  not  called  by  name,  by  new
revelation  :  that  is,  it  was  a  new  re-
velation to  him.  See  if  he  was  not
called  through  Moses,  the  servant  of
God,  who  received  a  revelation  com-
manding him  to  set  apart  his  brother
Aaron  to  the  Priest's  office,  directing
him  what  ordinance  to  use,  how  to
set  him  apart,  and  giving  all  the  par*
ticulars  of  his  calling  and  ordination
to  the  ministry,  and  what  his  duties
were  to  be  after  ordination.  All  this
was  given  by  new  revelation.  No  man
can  rpceive  the  Priesthood,  neither
officiate  in  its  ordinances  acceptably,
unless  he  is  called  of  God  as  was
Aaron.  If  Aaron  was  called  by  new
revelation,  then  all  others  who  have
this  authority  must  be  called  in  the
same  way,  or  their  authority  is  not
valid,  and  all  ordinances  under  it  are
good  for  nothing.

This  is  the  reason  why  the  Ljrd
commanded  this  people — the  Latter-
day  Saints — to  re-baptize  all  persons
who  come  to  them  professiug  to  have
been  baptized  before.  In  the  early
days  of  this  Church  there  were  cer-
tain persons,  belonging  to  the  Baptist
denomination,  very  moral  and  no
doubt  as  good  people  as  you  could
find  anywhere,  who  came,  saying
they  believed  in  the  Book  of  Aior-
mon,  and  that  they  had  been  baptized
into  the  Baptist  Churoh,  and  they
wished  to  come  into  our  Church.
The  Prophet  Joseph  had  not,  at  that
time,  particularly  inquired  in  relation  *
to  this  matter,  but  he  did  inquire,
and  received  a  revelation  from  the
Lord  something  like  this, — that  al-
though a  man  had  been  baptized  a
hundred  times  under  these  old  insti-
tutions, it  would  avail  him  nothing;
that  this  was  the  New  and  Ever-
lasting Covenant,  even  the  same  that
was  in  the  beginning,  and  that  they


294


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


who  administered  its  ordinances  must
have  authority  from  God,  or  their
ad  min  istrations  were  illegal.  These
Baptists  had  to  be  re-baptized  :  there
was  no  other  way  to  get  into  this
Church,  There  is  not  a  person  now
in  fall  fellowship  with  this  people,
bot  what  has  come  in  by  baptism,
whether  he  formerly  belonged  to  the
Baptist  or  any  other  Church.  In-
deed it  would  be  impossible  for  a
Church  to  be  re-organized  upon  the
earth,  unless  God  had  bestowed  the
authority  upon  men  to  act  in  bis
came,  that  is,  bad  spoken  from  on
high  and  called  them  by  revelation,
I  will  come  still  closer.  Here  is
is  the  Book  of  Mormon.  When
Joseph  Smith  obtained  the  plates
from  which  this  book  was  translated,
when  he  came  to  the  history  of  how
baptism  was  administered  among  the
Israelites  of  ancient  America,  and
learned  that  it  was  by  immersion,
he  felt  very  anxious  to  be  baptized,
not  having  been  baptized  in  any
Church  iD  existence,  and  not  under-
standing fully  about  this  matter,  he
and  a  young  man,  who  was  acting  as
his  scribe,  weut  out  and  called  upon
the  Lord,  desiring  to  know  what  they
should  do  in  relation  to  their  bap-
tism. They  read  that  those  who
dwelt  on  this  Continent  eighteen,
hundred  years  ago  were  baptized  by
immersion  and  that  the  ordinance
bad  to  be  administered  by  men  bold*
ing  the  authority  to  do  so  from  God.
In  answer  to  their  prayers,  the  Lord
sent  an  angel  to  them  on  the  15  th
day  of  May,  1829,  nearly  a  year  be-
fore the  Church  was  organized,  and
this  angel  laid  bis  hands  upon  the
heads  of  these  two  individuals,  and
ordained  them  to  the  holy  Priesthood,
that  is,  the  Priesthood  which  John
the  Baptist  held,  which  had  the  right
to  baptize,  but  not  to  confirm  by  the
laying  on  of  hands;  and  when  be
had  ordained  them  he  commanded


them  to  baptize  each  other,  and  they
did  so.  Here  then  was  a  commence-
ment of  the  restoration"  of  authority
to  the  earth.  Prior  to  that  ti^e,  for
hundreds  and  hundreds  of  years,  no
man  had  authority  to  baptize,  from
the  very  fact  that  tbey  all  denied  new
revelation,  and  hence  none  of  them
could  have  been  called  as  Aaron
was.

After  Joseph  and  his  scribe  had
been  baptized  for  the  remission  of
their  sins,  they  sought  after  authority
in  order  that  they  might  have  hands
laid  upon  them  for  the  Holy  Ghost
The  lesser  Priesthood  could  not  do
this,  the  Priesthood  that  John  the
Baptist  held  was  not  authorized  to
lay  on  hands ;  he  could  only  baptize
believers  in  water.  But  John,  when
upon  the  earth,  said  there  was  one
coming  after  him  mightier  than  he,
who  held  a  greater  Priesthood  and
authority  than  he — the  Priesthood
after  the  order  of  Melchizedeck —
and  he  would  bestow  upon  them  the
higher  baptism — the  baptism  of  fire
and  the  Holy  Ghost  Joseph  Smith
and  Oliver  Cowdrey  sought  after  this
higher  authority,  and  the  Lord  gave
it  to  them,  before  the  rise  of  this
Church,  sending  to  them  Peter,
James  and  John.  What  for  ?  To
bestow  upon  them  the  Apostleship.
Now,  who  would  be  likely  to  have
better  authority  than  Peter,  James
and  John,  the  three  foremost  of  the
ancient  Apostles  when  tKey  died  ?
When  Peter  was  crucified  with  his
head  downwards,  and  James  was
martyred,  their  Priesthood  was  not
taken  from  them ;  their  Priesthood
remained  with  them  after  their  bodies
were  laid  in  the  tomb,  and  they  will
hold  it  until  their  bodies  are  resur-
rected ;  and  when  they  reign  on  the
earth,  they  will  reign  as  kings  and
Priests :  and,  as  we  read  in  the  New
Testament,  these  twelve  Apostles  will
eat  and  drink  at  the  table,  and  in  the


DISTINGUISHING  CHJ

*

presence  of,  God— and  will  rule  over
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,

Now,  who  would  be  better  qualified  '
to  administer  the  sacred  office  of  the
Apostlephip  than  the  three  men  who
held  it  while  they  were  here  on  the
earth  ?  There  are  a  great  many  in
heaven  who  have  not  the  right  to
ordain  Apostles,  a  great  many  who,
though  they  are  exalted  and  have
glory  and  great  authority,  yet  do
not  hold  the  Apostleship,  and  there-
fore they  have  no  right  to  come  as
angels  from  heaven  and  lay  their
hands  upon  any  individual  and  ordain
him  to  the  Apostleship,  It  has  to
be  a  man  who  holds  authority  in
heaven  that  can  bestow  it  here  on  the
earth ;  and  such  men  were  Peter,
James  and  John,  who  restored  that
authority  to  the  earth  in  our  day,  by
bestowing  it  upon  Joseph  Smith.
When  this  authority  was  restored,
the  Church  was  organized,  on  the
6th  day  of  April,  1830,  consisting  of
six  members,  and  then  there  was
power  in  existence,  not  only  to  bap-
tize, but  to  confirm  by  the  laying  on
of  hands  for  the  baptism  of  fire  and
the  Holy  Ghost;  and  from  the  au-
thority then  sent  down  afresh  from
heaven  has  this  Church  been  enabled
to  pass  along,  and  receive  the  great
blessings  which  the  Lord  has  be-
stowed upon  it.  But  I  will  pass
along.

I  was  saying,  a  little  while  ago,
that  there  is  nothing  in  the  New
Testament  to  prove  that  the  gifts
which  were  given  to  and  enjoyed  by
the  ancient  Saints,  should  ever  cease
from  among  the  true  people  of  God ;
and  whenever  there  has  been  a  Church
of  Christ  on  the  earth  there  have
been  all  its  members,  including  Apos-
tles, Prophets,  speakers  in  tongues,
interpreters  of  tongues,  discerners  of
spirits,  those  having  the  gift  of  heal*
ing,  &c.  *t  and  whenever  these  things
have  disappeared the  Church  of


RALTERISTICS,  ETC-  295

Christ  has  disappeared  from  the
earth,  and  then  authority,  revela-
tion, prophecy,  and  the  ministration
of  angels  have  ceased.  But  we  have
a  declaration  in  the  1 3th  chapter  of
Paul's  first  epistle  to  the  Corinthians,
that  these  gifts  should  be  continued
in  the  true  Church,  until  that  which
is  perfect  is  come.  Now  we  see,
know,  and  understand  in  part;  we
see  through  a  glass  darkly  here  in
this  world,  but  when  that  which  is
perfect  is  come  that  which  is  in  part
shall  be  done  away*  Now  we  have
certain  blessings  bestowed  upon  us,
but  the  time  will  come  when  tongues
will  cease  and  prophecy  will  fail ;
that  time  will  be,  when  the  Church
has  become  perfect  in  the  eternal
world.  After  we  pass  through  tbia
state  of  existence  and  are  exalted,  we
shall  no  longer  see  through  a  glass
darkly.  Here  while  the  Church  re-
mains in  this  world,  we  only  prophecy
in  part.  We  have  some  gifts,  but
we  do  not  possess  them  in  their  full*
ness;  but  when  we  receive  our  resur-
rected bodies,  and  that  which  is  per-
fect is  come,  we  shall  have  no  need
of  the  gift  of  healing,  because  there
will  be  none  sick,  for  all  will  be  im-
mortal. There  will  be  no  need  in
those  days  of  prophecy  in  part,  be-?
cause  everything  will  be  opeu  and
understood  by  the  minds  of  the
Saints  of  God,  and  prophecymg  in
part  will  be  done  away,  and  they  will
see  as  they  are  seen  and  know  as  they
are  known.  All  these  things  prove
to  us,  that  so  long  as  the  true  Church
remained  on  the  earth,  so  long  should
all  these  various  gifts  remain.

The  object  of  these  gifts  is  not
merely  to  convince  the  world,  bub
Paul  informs  us  in  another  chapter
that  they  were  intended  not  only  for
the  unbeliever  but  also  tor  the  be-
liever.  When  Jesus  ascended  up  on
high,  Paul  says  that  he  led  captivity
captive  and  gave  gifts  unto  men.


290


JOURNAL  OF  DI?


He  gave  some  Apostles,  some  Pro-
phets, some  evangelists,  pastors,  and
teachers,  besides  all  these  other  gifts
I  have  named.  What  for  ?  Paul
informs  us  that  he  gave  these  gifts
for  the  perfecting  of  the  Saints.  Do
you  not  see  then,  that  they  were  not
given  merely  to  convince  unbelievers
and  to  establish  the  Gospel ,  but  for
the  perfecting  of  the  Saints  ?  Now,
do  you  know,  does  any  one  know,
how  the  Saints  of  God  can  be  made
perfect  without  these  gifts  ?  How
can  the  members  of  a  Church,  which
lias  not  any  inspired  Apostles  and
inspired  Prophets,  be  made  perfect  ?
44  Oh,  but,"  says  one,  "  we  have  some
of  these  gif  ts."  "  What  are  they  ?  "
"  Why,  he  mentions  pastors  and
teachers;  we  have  them."  What
light  have  you  to  claim  them,  and  do
away  with  the  other  gifts  mentioned
in  the  same  verse  ?  Is  there  any
consistency  in  that  ?  Is  it  right,  can
we  feel  justified  before  the  heavens
in  taking  a  verse  and  claiming  one  or
two  gifts  mentioned  there,  and  doing
away  with  all  the  rest  ?  The  Scrip"
tures  say  that  he  gave  Apostles,
Prophets,  evangelists,  pastors,  and
teachers;  the  modern  Christians
-claim  two  or  three  ot  these  and  do
away  with  all  the  rest  The  Latter-
day  Saints  will  not  do  this;  they
have  been  trad itiona ted  to  do  so  in
*imes  of  old, but  now  they  have

learned  better,  and  they  now  say

"  Give  us  oil  these  gifts.  If  we  have
m  Church,  let  us  have  inspired
Apostles  and  Prophets  in  that
Church,  for  without  them  the  Saints
cannot  be  made  perfect."

They  are  given,  also  says  Paul,  not
only  for  the  perfecting  of  the  Saints,
but  for  the  work  of  the  ministry.
How  can  the  work  of  the  ministry
proceed  without  Apostles  and  Pro*
phe is  ?  It  cannot  proceed.  They
are  given  for  the  edifying  of  the  body
of  Christ,  says  the  Apostle.  How


can  the  body  of  Christ  be  edified
without  Apostles  and  Prophets,  and
the  gifts  mentioned  r And  again,
I  he  says,  They  are  given  in  order  that
the  Church  may  become  perfect,  that
is,  that  its  members  may  grow  up
f  into  perfect  men,  unto  the  measure
I  of  the  stature  of  the  fullness  of
j  Christ Without;  these gifts  the
Church  never  can  grow  up,  it  has
nothing  to  edify  or  perfect  it,  nothing
to  do  the  Saints  any  good,  bat  with
these  gilts  they  may  be  perfected,  and
grow  to  the  stature  of  the  fullness
of  Christ.

Another  grand  object  specified  in
the  giving  of  these  gifts,  as  men-
tioned in  the  next  verse,  is,,  that  we
henceforth be no more  children,
tossed  to  and  fro  by  every  wind  of
doctrine,  and  by  the  cunning  craft i*
ness  and  slight  of  men,  whereby  they
lie  in  wait  to  deceive. Now,  you  take
a  Church  that  has  no  Apostles,  no
Prophets,  no  gifts,  such  as  those  that
are  name<J  in  the  New  Testament,
and  that  Church  is  all  the  time  liable
to  be  carried  away  with  every  foolish
doctrine  that  may  come  along.  But
when  you  see  a  Churoh  organized
with  Apostles,  having  power  to  re-
ceive revelations  from  heaven,  and
having  Prophets  who  can  furetell
future  events  through  the  Holy  Ghost
resting  upon  them,  it  is  not  carried
away  with  every  conning  plan  and
device  of  false  doctrines; but  its
members  know  for  themselves,  by
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  the
gifts  that  are  given  to  them,  and  by
the  revelations  which  they  receive,
and  hence  they  are  not  carried  about
as  the  religious  world  have  been,
during  the  past  seventeen  centuries.
What  is  the  reason  of  all  the  con-
insion,  jars,  aud  discords  that  have
troubled  the  religious  world  during
that  time  ? The  grand  reason  is,
that  they  have  lost  that  which  would
have  held  them  together — the  gifts


DISTINGUISHING  CHARACTERISTICS,  ETC.


297


of  the  Spirit,  and  hence  there  are  have  upon  our  ancestors.  We  all
hundreds  and  hundreds  ol  denomina-  have  many  friends,  behind  the  vail,
tions  following  this  doctrine  and  that  1  who  lived  on  this  earth  when  thetrme


doctrine,  having  no  voice  of  God,
no  angels,  no  visions  to  guide  their
footsteps.  Not  so  with  the  Latter-
day  Saints.  Go  throughout  the
whole  of  this  Territory,  and  wherever
you  find  true-hearted  Latter-day
Saints  you  will  find  those  who  are


Gospel  was  not  known.  Many  of
them  were  just  as  good  as  we  are,
and  some  perhaps  a  little  better  j  but
they  lived  when  the  world  was  in
darkness  and  confusion.  They  had
the  history  of  the  ancient  Church  and
Gospel,  but  they  had  no  one  to  ad-


guided  by  the  Spirit  of  revelation,  \  minister  its  ordinances. The  reli-


ant! who  enjoy  those  gifts  that  were
made  manifest  in  ancient  times.

I  will  mention  some  few  more  of  the
characteristics  wherein  we  differ  from
the  world. We  believe  in  that  doc-
trine  which is  enunciated in  the
fifteenth  chapter  of  Paul's  first  epistle
to  the  Corinthians,  namely,  baptism
for  the  dead — "  Else  what  shall  they
do  which  are  baptized  for  the  dead,
if  the  dead  rise  not  at  all  ?  Why
are  they  then  baptized  for  the  dead  ?"
This  shows  plainly  and  clearly  that,
in  ancient  times,  the  people  called
Corinthians, organized into  the
Church  of  God, did practice  the
ordinance  of  baptism  for  the  dead,
They  understood  it,  Paul  wrfs  not
writing  to  them  about  a  new  doctrine,
but  about  one  which  they  understood
and  practiced,  and  he  tried  to  prove
to  them  the  nature  of  the  resurrection
and  that  such  a  principle  as  the  re-
surrection was  true,  from  the  very


gious  sects  and  ministers  were  con-
tending one  against  another,  having
neither  the  power  nor  gifts  of  the
Holy  Ghost. Under  these  conditions
our  progenitors fell asleep*  Now.
must  they  go  dowTn  to  everlasting
destruction,  be  damned  to  all  ages  of
eternity  because  they  did  not  happen
to  live  in  an  age,  when  there  were
none  authorized  by  heaven  to  admin-
ister the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  ?
No,  that  would  be  inconsistent  God
judges  men  according  to  the  circum-
stances in  which  they  are  placed,
and  he  does  not  condemn  the  people
for  not  obeying  his  message,  when  it
is  not  sent  to  them. Now,  if  a  man
comes  to  me  that  has  never  been
called  of  God,  and  pretends  to  bring
to  me  the  Gospel,  and  has  no  divine
authority  to  administer  its  ordinances,
I  am  not  bound  to  obey  his  message,
for  that  requires  a  man  that  is  autho-
rized to .  administer  it. Our  fathers


fact  that  they  were  practicing  bap- have  gone  down  to  the  grave  without


tism  for  those  who  were  dead,  in
order  that  they  might  receive  a  more
glorious  resurrection.  This  doctrine
has  been  revealed  anuw  to  this  Church.
Of  course,  in  the  first  rise  of  the
Church,  we  did  not  understand  this
any  more  than  the  sectarian  world,
but  as  soon  as  the  Lord  laid  it  open,
and  taught  us  why  he  had  instituted
it,  it  was  very  plain,

I  have  not  time  to  dwell  long  upon


having  had  such  a  man  to  administer
the  Gospel  to  them ;  the  Lord  is  no
respecter  of  persons.  It  is  written
in  the#  Scriptures,  that  except  a  man
be  born  of  water  and  of  the  spirit  he
can  in  no  wise  enter  into  the  king-
dom of  God.  If  that  is  so,  and  our
fathers  have  gone  down  to  the  grave
and  have  not  had  an  opportunity  to
be  baptized  in  water  for  the  remis-
sion of  their  sins  by  men  having


this  principle,  but  I  will  try,  briefly,  ;  authority,  must  they  be  shut  out
to  explain  to  you  its  necessity  and  \  forever  from  the  kingdom  of  God  t
consistency,  and  the  bearing  it  will Jesus  says  that  unless  they  ^re  born


J9S


JOURNAL  OF  DISCO  UKSES.


of  water,  as  well  as  of  the  spirit,
they  can  in  'no  wise  enter  into  his
kingdom.  The  purpose  then  for
which  baptism  for  the  dead  was  in-
stituted, was  that  we  might  be  bap-
tized for  our  ancestors  who  died
without  having  the  privilege  of  hear-
ing and  obeying  the  Gospel  in  the
flesh,  that,  though  in  the  spirit,  they
may  have  the  same  chance  of  eternal
life  as  we  have,  Jesus  was  very
merciful  to  the  antediluvians  who
perished  before  tie  flood.  A  host
^vho  lived  in  those  days  perished  in
the  flood  and  were  shut  up  in  prison ;
and  while  the  body  of  Jesus  was
sleeping  in  the  tomb  his  spirit  went
and  preached  to  them  that  were  dis-
obedient in  the  days  of  Noah.  They
probably  did  not  have  a  good  oppor-
tunity in  the  days  of  Noah.  There
were  only  four  persons  to  warn  them,
and  they  were  multiplied  by  millions
and  millions  in  all  parts  of  the  earth,
and  all  except  Noah  and  his  family
were  swept  off  by  the  flood  and  cust
into  prison,  and  they  were  kept  there
some  two  thousand  years,  then  Jesus
went  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  them,
as  it  is  written  in  the  fourth  chapter
of  the  first  epistle  of  i'eter — 11  Pur,
for  this  cause  was  the  Gospel  preached
to  them  that  are  dead,  that  they  might
be  judged  according  to  men  in  the
flesh,  and  live  according  to  God  in
the  Spirit."  Now,  if  the  Gospel
was  preached  to  those  who  were  dead,
to  the  old  antediluvians  who  perished
over  two  thousand  years  before  Jesus
was  put  to  death,  for  what  purpose
was.it  preached  ?  That  they  might
have  the  same  privilege  of  hearing
and  obeying  the  Gospel  that  those
have  who  are  in  the  flesh,  and  of
being  judged  thereby,  "  But,"  says
one,  **  they  cannot  obey  it  in  the
spirit  world/*  They  can  in  part,
they  can  obey  it  so  far  as  believing
in  Jesus  is  concerned,  and  repenting
of  their  sins; for  repentance  and


faith  are  both  acts  of  the  mind ;  but
when  it  comes  to  baptism,  being
born  of  or  immersed  in  water,  they
cvn  not  do  it;  God  has  ordained  that
men,  here  in  the  flesh,  shall  be  bap-
tized for  thuse  who  are  dead,  in  order
tli at  they  m  y  commemorate  the
death,  sufferings,  and  burial  of  our
Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,  that
as  he  rose  to  newness  of  lite,  so  may
they,  tor  whom  the  ordinance  of  bap-
tism is  administered,  by  those  in  the
flesh,  have  a  claim  to  a  more  glorious
resurrection.

"  But,"  says  one,  "  how  do  you
know  that  they  who  are  in  the  spirit
wprld  can  repent  and  believe  ?  "  Be-
cause agency  always  accompanies
intelligence,  and  intelligence  is  not
blotted  out  by  death.  The  spirits  of
men  and  women  who  leave  this
world  are  intelligent,  and  intelli-
gence is  founded  upon  free  agency,
and  hence,  inasmuch  as  they  who  are
in  the  spirit  world  are  agents,  they
can  exercise  that  agency  in  believing;
when  they  have  a  testimony  they  can
exercise  that  agency  in  repenting  of
sins  of  which  they  have  been  guilty.
But  they  cannot  exercise  that  agency
in  attending  to  an  ordinance  or-
dained for  the  body ;  and  therefore
God  hat  instituted  baptism  for  the
dead,  that  our  fathers  may  have  the
same  chance  that  we  have.  What
for  ?  In  order  that,  when  they  come
up  in  the  resurrection  with  us,  if
they  will  receive  what  is  done  for
them,  they  may  be  perfected  with  us,
that  there  may  be  no  broken  chain  in
the  matter,  no  links  left  out  of  the
chain,  but  that  all  persons  who  will
comply  may  be  united  in  the  grand
chain  of  genealogy,  back  even  to  the
commencement.  Therefore  the  or-
dinance of  baptism  was  ordained  by
the  Lord  from  the  beginning  of  the
world  down  until  the  days  of  Christ,
and  from  the  days  of  Christ  down  to
the  end,  that  in  the  dispensation  of


DISTINGUISHING  CHARACTERISTICS,  ETC.


299


the  Gospel,  when  the  plan  of  salva-
tion should  be  administered  to  the
human  family,  they  should  look  after
the  fathers  —  their  ancestors  ;  and
this  is  specially  spoken  of  by  the
Prophet  M^lachi,  or  rather  the  Lord
through the Prophet  says, — <s  Be-
hold I  will  send  you  Elijah  the  Pro-
phet;  he  shall  turn  the  hearts  of
the  fathers  to  the  children,  and  the
hearts  of  the  children  to  the  fathers,
lest  I  come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a
curse ; " as moch  as  to  say,  that
before  the  great  and  terrible  day  of
the  Lord  shall  come,  unless  the  chil-
dren shall  seek  after  the  salvation  of
th  eir  fathers,  who  are  dead  and  gone,
by  being  baptized  for  them,  and  at*
tending  to  every ordinance  which
God  has  ordained  for  them  and  in
their  behalf,  he  will  smite  the  whole
earth  with  a  corse,  and  no  people
would  be  prepared  to  behold  the  great
and  dreadful  day  of  the  Lord.

It  is  for  this  reason,  that  this  peo-
ple are  building  Temples. We  do
not  build  Temples  to  be  places  of
preaching  altogether ;  we  have  taber-
nacles that  will  accommodate  many
thousands,  wherein  we  preach  to  the
people; but  Temples  are  built  by
the  commandment  of  the  Most  High
God,  constructed  after  the  pattern
that  he  gives,  in  order  that  the  peo-
ple may  be  baptized  for  their  dead,
as  the  Corinthians  and  the  Christians
of  ancient  times  did,  leaving  it  with
those  in  the  eternal  worlds,  whether
they  will  receive  what  is  done  for
them  or  not,  the  same  as  Jesus,
who  died  for  all  men  and  all  women,
leaves  it  with  all  men  and  all  women
to  act  upon  their  own  agency,  and
say  whether  they  will  or  will  not
receive  that  which  he  has  purchased
for  them;  if  they  will  not,  their
condemnation  is  just. So  in  rela-
tion to  our  dead  —  if  we  officiate
for  them,  we  have  done  oar  duty ;
if  they  will  not  repent  in  the  spirit


world,  and  obey  the  principles  that
God  has  ordained  for  their  exaltation,
their  condemnation  will  rest  upon
their  own  heads,  and  not  upon  ours.
But  if  we  do  not  do  our  duty  in  rela-
tion to  the  fathers,  they  will  testify
against  os  in  the  judgment  day,  say-
ing— u  Lord,  you  sent  an  angel  from
heaven ;  you  communicated  the  ever-
lasting Gospel  after  I  was  dead  ;  you
gave  the  Apostlesbip, by  sending
Peter,  James  and  John,  and  your
servants  went  forth  armed  with  au-
thority and  power  to  preach  the  Gos-
pel to  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and
many  received  it. You  did  not  giv»
me  the  privilege,  Lord,  of  bearing
and  obeying  the  Gospel  when  I  was
upon  the  earth," Then  the  Lord
might  reply — 44  But  I  gave  the  pri-
vilege to  the  people  on  the  earth  to
be  baptized  for  their  dead,  and  I  gave
you  the  privilege  of  availing  yourself
of  their  administrations,  the  same  as
the  antediluvians  had/* Then  you
see,  if  we  have  attended  to  the  duties
devolving  upon  ns  in  their  behalf,
the  condemnation  falls  upon  them ;
if  we  neglect  this,  it  may  be  that
Epme  other  person,  not  a  blood  rela-
tion, will  be  appointed  by  the  Lord,
and  the  condemnation  will  fall  upon
the  blood  relations,  and  they  will  be
rejected,  while  those  whom  they  have
neglected  will be  saved. 44  They
without  ns  cannot  be  made  perfect/'
says  the  New  Testament,  "neither
we  without  them/' You  need  not
think  that  God  is  so  partial  that  he
is  going  to  save  the  children  in  the
latter  days,  and  reject  all  their  an-
cestors. He  is  not  going  to  do  any
such  thing. If  we  would  be  saved
we  shall  have  to  look  after  the  salva-
tion of  the  generations  which  are
past  and  gone*

44  But,"  says  one,  *4 1  can  not  trace
my  forefathers,  I  can  only  go  back  to
my  grandfather  or  great  grandfather,
what  shall  I  do  ? Were  not  my  an.


300


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


cestors,  ten  or  fifteen  generations
further  back,  as  worthy  of  salvation
as  they  were?"  "  Yes."  "Then
how  are  you  going  to  manage  that?"
That  same  God  who  has  ordained
baptism  for  the  dead,  and  who  has
commanded  the  believers  in  this
generation  to  be  baptized  for  thera,
will  in  due  time,  when  we  have  done
all  we  can  in  searching  out  our  gene-
alogies, reveal  to  us  the  chaiu  so
that  we  shall  find  our  fathers,  no
matter  how  many  generations,  until
we  get  back  to  the  time  when  the
Priesthood  and  authority  were  on
the  earth  ;  and  then,  if  they  have
not  attended  to  their  duties,  we  will
have  to  go  back  still  further,  for  the
Lord  has  determined  that,  in  the  dis-
pensation uf  the  fullness  of  times,
ever)  thing  pertaining  to  former  dis-
pensations shall  be  perfected,  whether
it  was  in  a  dispensation  before  the
flood,  in  the  days  of  Enoch,  Abra-
ham,  Moses,  or  the  Prophets,  it  mat-
ters not,  if  there  is  anything  that
has  been  left  undone  pertaining  to
the  dead  in  any  former  dispensation,
it  must  all  be  fulfilled  in  that  great
and  last  dispensation  spoken  of  by
Paul,  wherein  all  tilings  in  heaven
and  on  earth,  that  are  in  Christ
Jesus,  shall  be  gathered  in  one.
Everything  must  be  made  perfect
and  prepared  for  the  great  day  of
rest  of  a  thousand  years,  during  which
Jesus  will  reign  on  the  earth  with
all  the  resurrected  Saints.  If  we
would  have  our  fathers  and  our  an-
cient ancestry  reign  with  us,  we
must  do  that  for  them  which  the
Lord  has  required,  and  they  and  we
shall  be  blessed;  but  if  we  neglect  it,
the  whole  earth  will  be  smitten  with
a  curse  before  the  great  day  of  his
coming.

Has  the  Lord,  according  to  his
promise,  sent  the  Prophet  Elijah  ?
He  has,  you  have  the  record  of  it,
you  know  where  and  to  whom  he


appeared,  and  the  keys  that  were
given  in  relation  to  these  matters.
They  are  on  record,  and  the  Lord
has  fulfilled  his  promise,  and  now  it
is  required  of  us  to  fulfill  the  duties
devolving  upon  us.  I  feel  very  thank-
ful that  the  Lord  is  moving  upon  our
friends  in  the  New  England  States
and  in  various  parts  of  the  East  to
get  up  their  genealogies-  They  do
not  know  why  they  are  doing  so,  or
why  they  are  so  anxious  to  find  out
the  ancient  generations  who  settled
this  continent.  We  understand  itj
we  know  that.  God  is  working  with,
them,  we  know  that  many  of  those
early  settlers  who  have  gdne  down  to
their  graves,  were  just  as  pure  and
upright  as  men  could  be,  God  is
going  to  remember  them,  and  hence,
there  are  now  some  four  hundred
records  of  different  families  that
have  been  gotten  up  in  the  East,  and
they  are  still  extending  their  re-
searches, and  hunting  out  all  the
ancient  pilgrim  fathers,  and  their  an-
cestry in  the  old  countries.  The
genealogy  of  ray  forefathers  has  been
sought  out  by  them  for  some  eleven
gent1  rat  ions.  Have  I  been  baptized
for  any  of  them?  Yes.  Has  my
brother  Parley's  family  been  bap-
tized for  any  of  them  ?  Yes,  we
have  been  baptized  lor  something
like  three  thousand  of  our  ancestors,
and  we  have  been  confirmed  fo*
them,  and  have  done  for  them  that
which  they  could  not  do  for  them*
selves.

Well,  this  is  a  peculiarity  wherein
we  differ  from  the  rest  of  the  world.
I  do  not  know  but  I  am  getting  into
too  many  peculiarities.  I  think  I
have  not  time  to  follow  out  this  sub-
ject any  further  on  the  present  occa-
sion. I  would  like  to  talk  a  little
about  our  marriage  relations,  but  we
shall  have  to  defer  that  to  some  other
time.  Amen.


DISCOURSE BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,


Delivered  in  the  Fourteenth  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Sal*  Lake

City,  Sunday  Afternoon,  Nov.  16,  1873*


(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evan;;.)


HONESTY  OF  PURPOSE.  SHOULD  ACTUATE  ALL  TRUE  BELIEVERS— VIEWS
OF  MANKIND  IN  RELATION  TO  GOD— THE  EXISTING  MODES  OF  DIVINE
WORSHIP  —  ANCIENT  CHRISTIANITY  COMPARED  WIT?  MODERN  SO-
CALLED  CHRISTIANITY — THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  GOSPEL,


In  rising  to  make  a  few  remarks
this  afternoon  I  shall  not  attempt  to
take  any  text,  or  to  confine  myself
to  any  particular  subject.  My  im-
pression about  this  is,  that  both
speaker  and  hearer  ought  to  be  un-
der the  guidance  and  direction  of
the  Almighty,  for  unless  a  man
speaks  by  the  dictation  of  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord,  his  discourse  will  be  of
very  little  benefit  to  those  who  hear;
and  unless  those  who  he^r  also  hear
by  the  Spirit,  and  are  prepared  to
receive  correct  instructions,  no  matter
how  eloquent  the  discourse  may  be,
or  how  forcible  and  powerful  the
truths  which  are  enunciated,  it
amounts  to  very  little*  It  is  not  the
hearer  of  the  word,  we  are  told,  who
is  benefited,  but  he  that  doeth  it
And  Jesus  says  that  many  will  say
in  that  day,  "  Lord,  have  we  not
spoken  in  thy  name,  and  prophecied
in  thy  name,  and  in  thy  name  done
many  wonderful  works  ?"  Yet  lie
will  say  unto  them — "  Depart  from
me,  ye  workers  of  iniquity,  for  I
never  knew  you or  I  suppose,  in
other  words,  "I  never  approved  of

There  is  one  great  principle  by
which,  I  think,  we  all  of  us  ought


to  be  actuated  in  our  worship,  above
everything  else  that  we  are  associa-
ted with  in  life,  and  that  is  honesty
of  purpose.  The  Scriptures  say< —
"  Ii  the  truth  shall  make  you  free,
then  shall  you  be  free  indeed,  the
sons  of  Mod  without  rebuke,  in  the
midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse
generation/'  Wq  are  told  again  that
God  requires  truth  in  the  inward
parts,  It  is  proper  that  men  should
be  honest  with  themselves,  that  they
should  be  honest  with  each  other  in
all  their  words,  dealings,  intercourse,
intercommnnic  ition,  business  arrange*
ments  and  everything  else;  they
ought  to  be  governed  by  truthful-
ness, honesty  and  integrity,  and  that
man  is  very  foolish  indeed  who
would  not  be  true  to  himself,  true  to
his  convictions  ahd  feelings  in  fe-
gard  to  religious  matters.  We  may
deceive  one  another,  and,  in  some
circumstances,  as  counterfeit  coin
passes  for  that  which  is  considered
true  and  valuable  anions  men,  But
God  searches  the  hearts  and  tries  the
reins  of  the  children  of  men.  He
knows  our  thoughts  and '  compre-
hends our  desires  and  feelings ;  ha
knows  our  acts  and  tbe  motive*
which  prompt  us  to  perform  them.


302


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


He  is  acquainted  with  all  the  doings
and  operations  of  the  human  family,
and  all  the  secret  thoughts  and  acts
of  the  children  of  men  are  open  and
H  iked  before  him,  and  for  them  he
will  bring  them  to  judgment  These
ideas  are  believed  in  by  men  gene-
rally, who,  with  very  few  exceptions,
whatever  their  general  conduct  or
ideas  on  religious  matters  may  be,
believe  in  an  All-seeing  eye  which
penetrates  and  is  enabled  to  weigh
the  actions  and  motives  of  the  child-
ren of  men#  This  is  an  idea  that
will  not  be  disputed  by  any  race  of
men  now  existing  upon  the  earth,
nor  perhaps  hy  ahy  who  have  existed
heretofore,  for  whatever  may  have
been  the  theories  or  notions  of  men
in  former  times,  they  have  genet  ally
had  a  reverence  for,  and  a  belief  in,
an  Allwise,  Supreme,  Omnipotent
Being,  who,  they  supposed,  was
greater  than  all  of  them,  and  who
governed  and  controled  all  their
actions.  A  feeling  ot  this  kind  is
frequently  made  manifest  in  the
Scriptures,  and  it  is  nothing  new  in
our  age  to  believe  in  a  God  of  this
character.

When  Paul  was  preaching  at  Ephe-
sus  he  said,  among  other  things,  that
he  saw  an  altar  to  an  unknown  God.
Among  the  variety  of  gods  which  they
worshiped  there  was  an  altar  to  an
unknown  God,  "  Him,"  said  he,
"  whom  ye  ignorantjy  worship  declare
I  unto  you,  the  God  who  made  the
heavens,  the  earth,  .the  seas  and  the
fountains  of  water/'  -  If  we  exam-
ine the  pages,  either  of  sacred  or
profane  history,  we  find  the  same
ideas  prevailing  to  a  greater  or  less  |
extent  in  former  times*  Even
Nebuchadnezzar,  the  ruler  of  the
great  empire  of  Babylon,  had  a
knowledge,  or  an  idea  of  a  certain
Being  who  ruled  and  governed  the
a niverse,  who  was  superior  to,  and
ruled  over  all  other  influences  and


powers;  and  was  more  intelligent
than  any  of  them ;  and  when  the
magicians  and  the  soothsayers,  tba
astrologers  and  wise  men  were  called
upon  to  tell  him  the  dream  and
its  interpretation,  they  were  unable
to  do  so,  and  they  told  him  that  it
was  beyond  their  science,  and  that
there  was  not  hi  Tig  connected  with
their systems that would  unfold
anything  pertaining  to  such  things
as  those  referred  to  5  bat  they  said
that  if  he  would  tell  them  the  dream
they  had  rules  whereby  they  could
interpret  it. He  insisted  upon  the
interpretation. Said  they  —  "  that
is  unreasonable,  0  King, — there  is
no  being  but  that  God  whose  dwell-
ing is  not  with  fltjsh,  who  can  reveal
those things that thou  speakest
of*' They  had  their  gods  which
they  worshiped,  their  deities  in  whom
they  had  confidence;  but  they  de-
clared that  there  was  no  God  but  that
Being  whose  dwelling  w»s  not  with
fle*h,  who  coull  unravel  those  mys-
teries that  he  desired  them  to  make
known  to  him. Hence,  in  those  days
we  find  the  same  principle  existing,
and  you  can  trace  it  out  in  various
examples  in  holy  writ,  men  had  their
theories  and  ideas  about  God,  gene-
rally a  peaking  ;  but  very  few  of  them
understood  anything  about  the  true
God whose  dwelling  was  not  with
fle*h.

Our  Bible  purports  to  be  the  ac-
count gweu  us  of  him  by  men  who
were  inspired  by  him,  for  we  are
told  that,  11  holy  men  of  old  spake
as  they  were  moved  upon  by  the
Holy  Ghost*"  It  is  related  within
the  lids  of  this  sacred  volume  that  a
great  many  of  tbo  ancients  had
dreams,  visions,  the  ministering  of
angels  and  revelations;  and  the  ac-
counts of  those  visions,  ministra-
tions of  angels  and  manifestations
of  the  power  of  God,  together  with
a  little  history,  is  what  this  sacred


HONESTY  OF  PURPOSE,  ETC,


303


volume  is  composed  of.  Hence
Jesus  said  to  the  people  in  his  day
— "  Search  the  Scriptures,  for  in
them  \e  think  ye  have  eternal  life,
and  they  are  they  winch  testify  of
me ; "  they  are  they  which  unfold
many  things  concerning  my  mis-
sion, the  ei  re  urn  stances  with  which
I  am  surrounded,  and  events  which
will  transpire  in*  connection  with
my  rniui>try.  Holy  men  of  God  in
former  times  had  proph  ^cied  of  him.
Isaiah,  fur  instance,  had  snrd — u  Be-
hold  a  virgin  shall  conceive  and
bear  a  son,  and  they  shall  call  his
name  Immanuel,  which  being  in.
terpreted,  is  c  God  wirh  us*"  It  is
saifl  of  him  that  he  came  to  take
away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself,
and  a  great  many  things  were  said
and  written  of  him  in  the  holy  Scrip-
tures, before  he  came,  while  he  lived
upon  the  earth  and  after  he  left  it
and  ascended  up  to  his  Father  in
heaven.

There  is  very  little  difference
among  mankind  in  relation  to  many
of  these  facts ;  men,  generally,  view
these  things  alike, — I  mean  in  the
Christian  world, — especially  the  na-
tion in  which  we.  Jive,  the  British
and  French  nations,  the  empire  of  J
Austria,  Russia,  Prussia,  the  in-
habitants  of  Scandinavia  and  most
of  the  European  nations;  and  some
of  the  Asiatic  nations  also  have
faith  in  what  we  term  the  word  of
God,  and  hold  its  truths  in  reve-
rence, according  to  the  ideas  they
entertain  and  the  creeds  they  pro*
less.  There  is  little  or  no  difference
among  the  men  of  these  various  na-
tions in  regard  to  the  existence  of  a
Supreme  Being,  who  rules  and  con-
trols the  destinies  of  nations,  as  well
as  of  individuals ;  and  there  was  no
difference,  in  former  times,  between
the  magicians,  and  Daniel  and  those
associated  with  him  in  his  faith  rela-
tive to  the  true  God. They  all  be-


lieved in  him,  no  matter  what  deities
|  of  an  interior  nature  they  might
have.  But  there  were  very  few  who
knew  how  to  worship  the  true  God;
hence  th«  y  made  to  themselves  all
sorts  of  gods,  Pome  of  wood,  stone,
ivory,  gold,  silver,  brass,  iron,  <fcc.
They  had  deities  of  every  imaginable
kind,  aiid  through  these  various
forma  and  mediums  they  wished  or
thought  to  propitiate  the  Deity,  and
to  secure  fo  themselves  some  kind  of
happiness  in  the  life  hereafter*

We,  in  i  his  generation,  are  a  good
deal  like  them,  .  We  think  we  are
very  superior  in  intelligence  and  in
religion. Men,  everywhere,  are  ego-
tsiical,  they  always  think  they  are
the  smartest  and most  intelligent
that ever lived; and it must  be
confessed  that  iu  many  respects  the
generation in which we live  are
very  far  in  advance  of  many  others,
and in regard to the arts  and
sciences, and  certain branches  of
literature  and  mechanism,  but  how
vague  and  uncertain  are  the  ideas
entertained by men in  general,
about  the D-'ity  ! Are we  intel-
lectual in  this  ? I  think  not.  We
have  our bodies of  divinity,  our
schools  of theology, our  religious
seminaries,  and  places  where  min-
isters  are manufactured and  pre-
paied to perform certain  work
which  they  call  preaching  the  Gos-
pel, and  these  ministers,  as  well  as
the people, have different  ideas
about the Deity and the  proper
modes  of  worshiping him.  Does
the incongruity of  this slate  of
things  ever  strike  the  minds  of  re-
flecting men,  men  of  science,  who
ate  accustomed  to  weigh  the  force
of  an  argument  and  to  solve  knotty
problems  ? When  I  was  a  little  boy
I  used  to  wonder,  if  there  was  a  God
who  created  man,  and  who  ruled
and  dictated  the  affairs  of  heaven
and  earth,  why  he  had  pointed  ittt


i


304


JOURNAL  OF-  DISCOURSES.

trh


M


^go  many  different  modes  of  worship.
I  think  so  still.  I  know,  and  so  do
you,  accord  ins  to  the  principles  of
science,  thsit  the  laws  which  govern
the  operations  of  universal  Nature
are  true  to  themselves  nine  ►  hun-
dred and  ninety-nine  times,  and
then  the  thousandth  time;  they  are
always  true  in  all  the  various
phases  of  Nature's  works.  This  te
so  under  the  most  severe  tests  which
scientific  criticism  can  apply  ;  with
every  .known  principle  in  nature,
whether  we  refer  to  light,  heat,  the
gases,  or  any  and  all  of  the  ele-
ments of  which  the  earth  is  com-
posed or  by  wfiich  we  are  surrounded.
In  their  operations  they  are  gov-
erned and.  cnntroled  bv  .  eternal,
unchangeable  Ia.ws,  and  you  can
not  violate  any  one  of  those  laws  in
any  par  ticula  r  wt  i  thou  t  prod  B  ci  ng
the  inevitable  rank  of  such  viola

i  tion.  In  the  motions  of  the  starry
heavens,  the  sun,  moon,  earth,  day
and  night,  summer  and  winter,  and
the  various  seasons  as  they  pass
along, the wisdom,  intelligence,


* j f-u  am?

four  arras,  six  eyes,  ten  heads,  or
fifteen  feet  or  legs;  they  are  alike,
and  there  is  a  uniformity  in  relation
to  their  general  organism.  So  when
jou  come  to  examine  the  properties
of  water,  caloric  or  fire,  earth,  air,
the  different  gases,  electric  fluid,  or
any  substance  or  matter  you  please,
you  will  find  that  they  are  governed
by  certain  specific  laws,  and  those
laws  are  universal  in  their  appli-
cation ;  and  furthermore  that  all
the  elements  with  "which  we  are
surrounded  are  controled  by  cer-
tain eternal  and  unchangeable  laws
which  can  not  be  departed  from.i

Now,  what  can  God  think  of  a
people,  placed  here  on  the  earth,
the  most  intelligent  of  his  creations,
possessed  of  reasoning  faculties,  who,
in  many  instances,  have  investigated
and  under  stand  the  laws  of  Na-
*tare,  I  say,  what  can  he  think  of
men  who  .set  up  every  form,  no-
tion and  theory,  every  species  of
absurdity  that  can  be  imagined,  and
call  it  the  worship  uf  God  ?  Sup-
pose we  were  to  put  ourselves  in  his


s.


prescience  and  powier  of  a  God  are  place  for 'a  little  while,  we  should
manifested;  and  the  same  is  true  uf  |  think  there  was  sotnclhing  a  little
the  organization  and  operations  of  alt
the  myriads  of  organisms  that  exist
upon  the  earth, — symmetry,  beauty,
order  and  law  pervade  and  control  all
their  operations,  all  manifesting  the
wisdom,  intelligence  and'  power  of
God,  You  do  not  find  one  man  dif-
fering from*  another,  only  in  certain
rospects,  a  little  in  stature  or  strength.
One  is  a  little  stronger  than  another,
one  has  a  more  beautiful  face,  per-
haps ;  may  be  more  exquisitely
formed  than  another;  but  all  bear
the  same  impress;  all  are  governed
by  the  same  laws,  all  possess  the
same  properties,  powers  and  facul-
ties to  a  certain  extent,  so  far  as  the
body  is  concerned,  according  to  the
strength  or  weakness  of  the  indi-
vidual. You  do  not  find  men  with


strange  -in  rein  tion  to  these  math
He  might  reasonably  say,  these
men  exhibit  wisdom  and  intelli-
gence in  many  respects.  So  far  as
discovering  the  operations  of  Na-
ture, and  examining  and  testing  the
laws  thereof,  they  all  agree,  but  in
religious  matters  they  exhibit  im-
becility and  weakness,  in  that  there
is  no  uniou,  A  philosopher  in
America,  France,  Germany,  Eng-
land, Spain,  Italy,  Russia,  Prussia,
or  afiy  other  nation,  will  arrive  at
the  same  conclusions,  precisely,  that
all  other  men  or  scientists  of  all
other  nations  do;  that  is,  when  they
examine  the  laws  of  nature  and
operate  in  the  actual  sciences.  No
matter  where  they  ar^or  in  what
language  they  may convey  their


3


*


HONESTY  OF  PURPOSE,  ETC


305


ideas — for  wociis  are  merely  the
signs  of  ideas — whenever  correct
ideas  exist,  and  these  ideas  are  pro-
perly explained^  whenever  submitted
to  scientific  analysis  and  proper  tests,
they  all  arrive  at  the  same  conclu-
sions, no  matter  what  nation  it  is  you
are  among  or  where  you  live.

This  reasoning  is  correct,  and  in
regard  to  nature  and  its  laws,  the
world  and  the  elements  with  which
we  are  surrounded,  and the  laws
operating  in  the  world  with  which
we  are  acquainted,  all  men  arrive  at
the  same  conclusions,  and  there  is  no
difference,  unless  we  come  to  theo-
rizing, and  then  there  is  always  diffi-
culty. Well,  in  regard  to  all  these
things  we  all  think  alike,  because
our  thoughts  are  based  on  correct
principles. But  when  we  come  to
religious  matters,  we  discover  that,
though  men  aw  naturally  intelligent,
they  act  like  fools ;  they  do  not  use
their  common  judgment,  reason  or
intelligence.- "Well," say  they,
"  you  know  wa  are  governed  by  the
Bible.11 Now  that  is  exactly  what
we  do  not  "kinjw,  and  therefore  I
doubt  it. "  But  our  divines  tell  us
we  are." Ohs  do  they  ? Well,  sup*
pose  somebody  was  to  toll  you  the
result  of  some scientific  analysis,
you  would  be  very  likely  to  say —
"  I  believe  yoa  in  part,  hut  I  would
like  to  tent  it  for  myself; when  I
have  done  that  I  shall  know  it.  Yet
strange  as  it  is,  you  are  willing  to
take  anybody's  ipts  dixit  in  relation
to  religious  matters,  in  relation  to
things  of  the  most  vital  importance,
things  pertaining  to  the  immortal
part  of  man,  we  act  like  the  veriest
babies  or  cod  sum  mate  fools,  while  in
regard  to  the  affairs  of  this  life  we
act  intelligently.

Is  there  a  way  of  arriving  at  a
knowledge  of  the  things  which  per-
tain to  man's  eternal  welfare?  Why
yes,  we  are  inclined  to  think  there  is.  I

No.  20.


I  God,  we  are  told,  "  is  no  respecter  of
persons;  bat  in  every  nation  he  that
fears  God  and  works  righteousness
shall  be  accepted  of  him."  Is  that
true?  Fes.  God  "has  made  of
one  blood  all  the  families  of* the
earth,"  we  are  told.  There  seemed
to  be  an  idea  of  this  kind  prevailing
in  ancient  days,  according  to  the
sayings  of  some  of  the  inspired  men
mentioned  in  the  Scriptures.  We
are  in  the  habit  of  going  alone  like
flocks  of  sheep — following  our  leader,
no  matter  where  he  goes.  I  have
seen  sheep  sometimes,  and  perhaps
you  have,  running  along  a  road,  and
one  thought  there  was  an  obstacle —
perhaps  there  was  not  anything—
and  it  would  make  a  leap,  and  when
the  others  reached  the  same  place
they  would  all  make  the  same  leap;
if  one  leaps  they  all  leap.  It  is  so
apparently  among  men.

If  we  would  examiae  Christianity
there is  something  peculiar  aboufe
that. We  call  ourselves  Christians,
that is, we  Methodists,  Baptists,
Presbyterians,  Congregationalists,
Episcopalians  and  "Mormons,"  we
all  call  ourselves  Christians.  Well,,
perhaps  we  are,  and  then,  perhaps
we  are  not ;  it  is  a  matter  that  would
bear investigation, I think ;  and,,
then,  1  think,  too,  that  it  is  very
proper,  as  I  said  at  the  commence-
ment, that  we  should  be  honest  with
ourselves  about  all  things,  and  espe-
cially in  religion  and  the  service  and
worship  of  God. "Well,  but  my
father  was  a  Methodist,  and  I  am
one;"  "my  father  was  a  Presby*
terian,  and  I  am  one;" my  father
was  a  Mumper,"  and  I  am  one;"
u  my  father  was  a  Mohammedan,  and
I  am  one ;" "  my  lather  was  a  wor*
sbiper  of  Bhudda,  and  I  am  one;"
and among as  Christians  we  are
Episcopalians, Wesleyans,  Presby-
terians, and  members  of  the  various
professional  phases  descended  from-

Vol.  XVI.


306  JOURNAL  OF

that  remarkable  man,  Martin  Luther,
or  Catholics  or  Greeks,  Let  as  ex-
amine these  things  for  a  little  while;
or,  at  leaft,  try  to  go  to  the  founda-
tion. Believing  in  the  Bible,  we
will  not  go  at  once  into  these  outside
systems,  but  examine  our  own  for  a
little  while,  and  see  how  it  stands,
and  how  we  stand  in  relation  to  it,

Jesus,  we  are  told,  "  brought  life
and  immortality  to  light  by  the  Gos-
pel"  There  was  something  peculiar
about  it — it  gave  men  who  lived
tip  to  and  honored  its  principles  in
their  lives  and  actions,  a  knowledge
of  life  and  immortality.  They  were
not  dependent  upon  the  sayings  or
doings  of  Adam,  Noah,  Abraham,
Lot,  Moses,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Mai-
achi  or  any  of  the  Prophets;  but  the
Gospel  brought  a  knowledge  of  life
and  immortality  to  all  who  obeyed
it  and  lived  according  to  its  precepts.
It  informed  all  such  that  they  were
immortal  beings;  that  they  would
exist  after  they  had  got  through  with
time ;  if  they  died  they  should  live
again ;  if  they  were  buried  they
should  burst  the  barriers  of  the  tomb
and  come  forth  to  immortality,

Seeing,  then,  that  man  is  both  a
mortal  and  an  immortal  being,  hav-
ing to  do  with  eternity  as  well  as
time,  it  is  proper  that  he  should  be-
come acquainted  with  those  princi-
ples that  are  so  nearly  concerned
with  his  happiness  and  well  being
in  time  and  in  eternity*  We  will
let  John  Wesley,  Lather,  Calvin,
Melancthon,  Henry  the  Eighth,  and
any  other  organizer  of  religion  go,
and  we  will  come  to  the  Scriptures
®f  truth  and  see  what  they  say  about
it.  Christ,  we  are  told,  brought  life
and  immortality  to  light,  and  he  did
it  through  the  medium  of  the  Gospel.
And  what  course  did  he  pursue  in
doing  this  ?  The  Scriptures  inform
113  that  when  Jesus  commenced  to
preach  the  Gcwpel  he  called  men  from


DISCOURSES,

the  various  avocations  of  life,  among
others  from  the  occupation  of  fishing  ;
he  called  twelve  tnen,  whom  he  ordain-
ed as  Apostles*  He  inspired  these
men  with  the  gift  of  revelation  and
with  a  knowledge  of  God ;  he  placed
them  in  communication  with  God,  so
that  they  had  revelation  from  him
and  were  enabled  to  teach  the  laws
of  life;  he  breathed  upon  them  and
said — «  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost ;"
and  they  received  it,  and  that  Holy
Ghost  took  of  the  things  of  God  and
showed  them  unto  them,  it  drew
aside  the  curtains  of  futurity,  where-
by they  were  enabled  to  penetrate
into  the  invisible  world  and  compre-
hend the  things  of  God.  This  was
the  position  they  occupied  and  the
kind  of  Gospel  they  had.

Well,  how  did  they  operate  with
it  ?  Jesus  tuld  them  to  go  out  and
preach  it;  and  he  called  seventy  men
and  inspired  them  too;  and  told
them  to  go  out  and  heal  the  sick,
cast  out  devils,  and  preach  the  Gos-
pel, they  were  furthermore  to  go
without  parse  and  scrip,  he  saying
unto  them — "Freely  ye  have  received,
freely  give,"  They  went  out  in
this  kind  of  a  way,  without  parse
and  scrip,  to  preach  the  Gospel  By
and  by  a  number  of  them  returned,
and  he  asked  them  how  they  had
fared.  They  told  him  they  had  been
preaching,  and  healing  the  sick,  and
even  devils  were  subject  to  them
in  his  name.  Said  he — "  Rejoice,
not  that  devils  are  subject  to  you,
but  rather  rejoice  that  your  names
are  written  in  heaven,"  that  you
are  the  Lord's,  that  God  is  your
friend ;  rejoice  that  you  have  been
brought  into  communication  with
God,  and  that  you  have  received
the  everlasting  Gospel,  which  brings
life  and  immortality  to  light.  This
was  their  position,  and  they  listened
to  the  teachings  of  Jesus,  and  we
all, — that  is  all  these  various  parties


HONESTY  OF  PURPOSE,  ETC


of  which  I  hare  spoken, — believe  that
Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God ;  we  all
belie7e  that  he  was  the  Anointed,
elect  and  sent  of  God.  And  speak-
ing of  himself  he  said — "  I  and  the
Fattier  are  one,"  and  "  he  who  has
seen  me  has  seen  the  Father"  He
taught  them  a  great  many  things
pertaining  to  their  present  happi-
ness and  future  exaltation,  and  he
spoke  of  a  time  that  should  come
when  the  Saints  should  inherit  the
earth*  When  he  was  about  to  be
crucified,  to  be  offered  as  a  sacrifice
to  do  the  will  of  his  heavenly  Father,
and  to  open  up  the  way  of  life  and
salvation,  that  man  might  attain  to
exaltation  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  he
told  his  disciples  that  it  behooved
Christ  to  suffer,  and  to  be  raised
from  the  dead  on  the  third  day,  and
that  repentance  and  remission  of  sins
should  be  preached  in  his  name
among  ail  nations.

Now  let  us  examine  the  position  of
those  disciples,  I  believe  a  good  deal
in  first  principles.  I  want  to  exam-
ine things  candidly  and  honestly,  1
and  to  see  what  kind  of  a  position
they  occupied  in  those  days.  When
Jesus  was  about  to  leave  his  disci-
ples he  told  them  that  it  was  neces-
sary that  he  should  go  away ;  for
said  ho,  "  If  I  go  not  away  the  Com-
forter will  not  coma"  There  was
something  remarkable  about  this
express  if  hi.  **  If  I  tjo  not  away  the
Comforter  will  not  come;  but  if  I
go  a*  ay  I  will  send  you  the  Com-
forter." What  was  that  Comforter  ?
It  is  important  that  we  should  un-
derstand this.  That  Comforter  was
the  Spirit,  of  Truth.  What  should
,  it  do  to  them  ?  It  should  "  bring
things  past  to  their  remembrance,
lead  them  into  all  truth  and  show
them  things  to  come;"  in  other
words  it  should  bring  life  and  im-
mortality to  light;  it  should  open
the  heavens  to  its  possessois,  enable  I


them  to  understand  the  design  §  of
God  and  lead  them  into  all  truth,
not  into  one  little  truth  or  two  little
trsths ;  but  into  all  truth*  What  a
privilege,  what  a  blessing,  what  a
rich  legacy  to  impart  unto  his  fol-
lowers!  Only  think  of  men  being
in  possession  of  a  principle  which
should  enable  them,  under  all  cir-
cumstances, to  discriminate  between
truth  and  error,  virtue  and  vice;
between  those  principles  which  would
ennoble  and  elevate,  and  those  which
would  overthrow  and  destroy,  and
which  should  make  them  acquainted
with  God  and  the  principles  of  eter-
nal lite.

I  pause  here,  and  ask,  will  this
principle  or  spirit  lead  one  man  to
be  a  Methodist,  another  to  be  a  Pres-
byterian, another  to  be  an  Episco-
palian, another  to  be  a  "  Mormon,"
another  a Quaker, another  some-
thing else,  passing  through  all  the
various phases, notions,  theories
and  ideas  that  prevail  in  the  Chris-
tian world  ? Is  this  the  spirit  that
Jesus  promised  to  impart  unto  his
people,  or  is  it  confusion  aud  dark-
ness ? Scientifically  it  is  not  true,
philosophically  it  is  not  true,  religi-
ously it  is  not  trap. The  spirit  that
Jesns  promised  to  impart  to  his  dis-
ciples was to  lead  them  into  all
truth,  and  to  enable  them  to  com-
prehend all  correct  principles;  and
it  is  said, — u  As  many  as  are  led  by
the  Spirit  of  God  sre  the  sous  of
God,"  and  says  one,  "  Ye  have  not
received  the  spirit  of  bondage  ngain
u  i to  fear;  bat  ye  have  received  a
spirit  whereby  you  are  enabled  to  cry,
4  Abba  Father,  or  my  Father,  my  Lord
and  my  God.'  n They  had  received
a  principle  of  that  kind,  and  there
was  nothing uncertain,  conflicting
or  evanescent about  it;  nothing
tending  to  error,  confusion  or  doubt,
but  everything  tending  to  certainty,
life,  light  and  intelligence;  to  the


blessing  and  happiness  of  the  hu-
man  family,  mid  to  a  knowledge
of  all  things  necessary  for  their  wel-
fare in  time,  and  in  all  eternity.
Said  he — "  If  I  jgo  away  I  will  send
yon  the  Comforter,  which  is  the
Spirit  of  truth,  and  it  shall  bring
things  past  to  your  remembrance,  it
shall  lend  you  into  all  truth  and  show
you  things  to  come ; "  in  other  words
— "  You,  man,  who  are  made  in  the
imago  of  God,  shall  be  brought  into
your  proper  relationship  with  him.
That  spirit  of  intelligence  which
dwells  in  you  shad  be  associated
with  God — the  God  who  dwells  in
eternity,  communication  shall  be
opened  up  between  you  and  him,
you  shall  be  placed  en  rapport  with
him,  and  you  shall  realize  and  com-
prehend all  things  pertaining  to
your  well-being.  It  shall  bring
tilings  past  to  your  remembrance,  it
shall  lend  you  into  all  truth,  and
show  you  things  to  come.  If  there
is  anything  behind  the  Tail  that
is  mysterious ;  if  there  is  anything
that  the  Prophets  Raw  wken  the
visions  of  eternity  were  unfolded  to
thtir  vie  v  ;  if  there  are  principles  of
life  and  salvation  \  if  there  is  any-
thing tending  to  exalt  man  in  time
and  eternity,  anything  pertaining  to
eternal  rewards  and  everlasting  exal-
tation, you  are  now  in  possession  of
a  principle  which  will  unfold  and
develop  these  principles  to  your
mind,"

That  was  the  kind  of  Gospel  they
had  then.  And  did  they  see,  enjoy
and  possess  these  things  ?  Yea,  for
says  Paul — "  Whether  in  the  spirit
or  out  of  the  spirit  I  do  not  know  ;
but  I  was  caught  np  into  the  third
heavens,  and  I  saw  things  that
were  unlawful  to  utter/'  We  read
that  John,  while  on  the  Isle  of  Pat-
moa,  banished  for  his  faith  in  God
and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,
was  in  the  spirit  on  the  Lord's  day


and  the  visions  of  eternity  were  un-
folded, lie  gazed  upon  all  things  a*
they  existed  then,  and  as  they  would
exist  in  after  ages,  ami  until  the  final
winding-up  scene,  He  saw  and  com-
prehended the  position  of  the  various
church  as,  and  told  them  that  unless
they  repented  and  did  thtir  first
works  over  again  and  obeyed  the
behests  of  the  Almighty,  their  can-
dlestick would  be  removed  out  of
its  plaee.  He  aaw  that  Great  Mys-
tery Babylon,  who  "made  all  the
ear tli  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her
fornication."  He  saw  her  fall  like
a  millstone  that  was  cast  into  the
sea  and  rise  no  more  for  ever.  He
saw  a  great  white  throne  and  him
who  sat  upon  it,  and  from  before
whose  face  the  heavens  and  the
earth  fled  away;  he  saw  the  dead,
small  at  id  great,  arise  and  atand  be-
fore him,  brought  to  judgment;  he
saw  a  new  Jerusalem,  descending,
at  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband  ;
he  saw  events  that  should  transpire
throughout  every  subsequent  period
of  time  until  the  final  winding-up
scene,  and  comprehended  the  whole
matter.  Why  was  this  ?  He  had
the  Gospel  that  brought  life  and  im-
mortality to  light.  He  had  received
that  Comforter  that  Jesus  spoke  of,
whieh  should  bring  things  past  to
their  remembrance,  lead  them  into
all  truth  and  show  them  things  to
come.

Well,  there  was  something  inter*
esting  about  that.  It  was  not  a
kind  of  lullaby  story  that  we  hear
now-a-days  —  "  Hush -a- by- baby  on
ihe  tree  top,  when  the  wind  blows
the  cradle  will  rock" — It  was  nothing
of  that  kind.  There  was  some*
thing  intellectual  about  it,  something
tangible,  and  satisfactory  to  the  hu-
man mind,  and  calculated  to  meet
the  capacious  desires  thereof,  afid  to
make  a  man  feel  that  he  was  an  in*
heritor  of  eternal  life. It  implanted


within  him  a  hope  blooming  with
immortality  and  eternal  life.  It  pro-
duced a  certainty  in  his  mind  and
made  him  feel  that  everything  else
Y?m  as  dung  and  dross  in  comparison
with  the  life  and  light  and  power  and
intelligence  which  the  Gospel  im-
parted.

What  kind  of  ordinances  did  they
have  ? They  were  very  simple  and
straightforward. We  read  that  when
the  disciples  were  met  together,  on
a  certain  occasion  in  an  upper  room,
the  Spirit  of  God  descended  upon
them  as  a  mighty  rushing  wind,  find
rested  upon  them  as  in  cloven  tongues
of  fire ;  and  they  began  to  speak  in
other  tongues  as  the  Spirit  of  God
gave  them  utterance. There  were
people  there  from  the  surrounding
11  at ions  who  heard  the  Apostles  speak,
in  their  own  tongues,  the  wonderful
works  of  God. They  did  not  know
what it n leant  ? Said  they, —
"  These  men  are  drunk/' Peter  an-
swersd, — "Oh,  no,  that  is  a  slight
mistake  you  have  made,  they  are
not  drunk,  it  is  only  nine  o'clock,
the  third  hour  of  the  day, — people
do  not  get  drunk  so  early." "  Well,
what  is  it  then  ?* Said  Peter,—
"  This  is  that  which  was  spoken  of
by  the  Prophet  Joel, — *  It  shall  come
to  pass  in  the  last  days,  saith  God,
I  will  pour  out  ray  Spirit  upon  all
flesh. Your  old  men  shall  dream
dreams  and  your  young  men  shall
eee  visions,  and  upon  my  servants
and  hau  l  maidens  will  I  pour  out,
in  those  days,  of  my  Spirit,  and  they
shall  prophecy ; '  "  that  is  it  shall
place  them  in  communion  with  God
and  enable  them  to  have  dreams  and
visions,  to  prophecy  and  see  things
to  come ;  in  other  words,  it  will  make
them  Prophets, This  is  the  kind  of
religion  they  had  in  that  day.

I  sometimes  reflect  and  wonder
whether  the  same  effects  would  follow
if  we  had  that  religion  to-day,  or


whether  troth  has  turned  into  Bction,
or  has  falsehood  turned  into  truth.
How  is  it,  if  that  was  the  Gosptl
then,  and  God  is  the  same  yesterday,
to-day  and  forever,  and,  as  they  say
in  the  Church  of  England — **  As  it
was  in  the  beginning,  is  now  and
ever  shall  be,  worlds  without  end,
amen  ?"  If  that  is  true,  then  we
ought  to  expect  the  same  things  to-
day as  they  had  then,  that  is,  if  we
profess  the  same  Gospel.  This  is
the  way  I  reason,  I  cannot  get  at  it
any  other  way,  I  cannot  arrive  at  any
other  conclusion.  It  is  reasonable,
rational  and  philosophical ;  it  agrees
with  every  principle  of  science,  with
every  principle  of  intelligence  that
God  has  communicated  to  man.

Well  having  noticed  a  little  of
the  results  of  the  Gospel  in  ancient
days,  let  us  inquire  into  the  princi-
ples taught  in  those  days. We  have
a  very  remarkable  account  of  affairs
on the Day of  Pentecost  The
Apostles  had  been  waiting  at  Jeru-
salem for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost
They  had  been  promised  it  by  Jesus
and  they  expected  it Neither  the
Church  nor  the  Apostles  had  had
time,  from  the  ascension  of  Jesus,
to  get  corrupted,  nor  to  introduce
any  false  principles* They  were  the
recipients  of  the  favor  of  God,  and
his  Spirit  finally  rested  upon  them
as  in  cloven  tongues  of  fire  and  when
the  people  of  the  various  nations
assembled  at  Jerusalem  heard  them
declare  the  wonderful  works  of  God,
many  of  them  were  pricked  in  their
hearts,  and  they  cried  out — "  Men
and brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?
We  btlieve  the  statement  you  have
made;  we  believe  that  the  Messiah,
promised  by  our  ancient  Prophets,
has  been  taken  by  wicked  hands  and
crucified  and  slain ;  we  believe  what
you  say  concerning  his  resurrection,
and  that  although  he  was  placed  in
the  tomb  he  has  burst  its  barriers


and  has  ascended  to  the  right  hand
of  his  Father  ;  we  believe  all  these
tiling  now  what  shall  we  do  ? "
Said  P*  ter — u  Repent  and  be  bnp-
tis&ed,  every  one  of  you,  for  the
remission  of  your  sins,  and  you
shall  receive  the  Holy  Ghost"
Who  were  they  whom  he  told  to
rtpent  and  be  baptized  ?  The  Jews
and  the  Gentiles,  the  Pharisees,  doc-
tori,  lawyers,  rabbies,  and  nil  men  of
every  creed,  profession  and  nation,
"  Repent  and  be  baptized  every  one
of  you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,
fur  the  remission  of  your  sine."
"  What,  we  doctors  ?"  "  Yes/1  "  We
lawyers  F  "  Yes."  "  We  divines  ?"
"  Yes,  all  of  you."  "What  shall  we
receive  it  we  do  ?  "  "  The  Holy
Ghost."  "  What  is  that  ?"  "  Jast
what  you  have  seen  here."  "  Shall
we  all  have  it  if  we  do  this?"
"  Yes*"  And  they  went  forth  and
were  baptized,  and  three  thousand
were  added  to  the  Church  the  same
day.  The  Apostle  did  not  tell  them
to  come  to  any  class  meeting,  mourn-
ing bench  or  anything  of  that  kind.
There  was  not  anything  of  that  sort
in  the  programme.  They  were  not
so  well  educated  in  sectarianism  then
as  we  are  now,  and  had  not  invented
so  many  systems  of  religion  or  bodies
of  divinity  then  as  now.  In  those
days  they  had  to  take  things  as  God
gave  them,  that  was*  to  repent  and
be  baptized  in  the  name  of  Jesus  for
the  remission  of  sins,  and  they  should
receive  the  Holy  Ghost.

Will  obedience  to  that  Gospel  do
the  same  thing  for  us?  Yes.  Why  ?
Peter  said,  "  The  promise  is  unto
you  and  your  children,  and  to  all  who
are  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord
our  God  shall  call"  This  thing  was
not  confined  to  one,  two,  three,
twelve  or  seventy  individuals,  but
said  Peter,  "It  extends  to  you" —
the  vast  concourse  then  before  him —
"to  your  children,  and  to  all  that


are  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord
our  God  shall  call."  If  you  can
show  me  a  people  that  the  Lord  our
God  does  riot  call,  I  will  show  you  a
people  to  whom  this  promise'  does
not  apply.

Here  are  things  that  are  very
simple  and  straightforward.  Why
can't  we  investigate  them.  The
same  cause  will  produce  the  same
effect  now  as  then.  It  is  in  vain  for
us  to  deny  those  things ;  we  have  no
right  to  do  so  until  we  have  com-
plied with  the  requisitions  made  and
applied  the  tests.  If  we  were  using
any  chemical  tests,  for  scientific  an*
alysis,  we  should  go  strictly  by  the
rules  laid  down ;  why  should  we  not
do  the  same  with  regard  to  the  Gos-
pel <»f  life  and  salvation  ?  Here  is
the  law  laid  down,  plain  and  straight-
forward, in  the  word  of  (.Sod,  for  it
is  in  the  Christian's  Bible  that  these
things  are  contained.  It  is  this  very
Jesus  that  they  all  believe  in  who
talks  about  these  things,  and  his
twelve  Apostles  bear  him  out,  and
bear  testimony  to  the  same  things,
Hure  is  a  religious  law  plainly  indi-
cated, which  we  have  no  more  right
to  ignore  than  we  have  any  scientific
formula  in  relation  to  earthly  things.

But  to  proceed.  We  find  his  dis-
ciples baptizing;  and  after  Jesus  rose
from  the  dead  lie  appeared  to  them,
and  he  told  them  to  go  forth  and
preach,  not  the  theories  and  opinions
of  men,  but  the  Gospel  that  brought
life  and  immortality  to  light.  Said
he — "  Go  and  preach  the  Gospel  to
every  creature,  lie  that  belie  vet  1 1  and
is  baptized  shall  be  saved,  he  that
believeth  not  shall  be  damned ;  and
these  signs  shall  follow  them  that
believe,  <fec."  They  went  forth  and
proclaimed  his  word,  in  his  name  and
by  his  authority,  and  whatever  they
did  they  did  in  his  name  and  by  his
authority*  Jesus  said  unto  them,
u Whatsoever  you  shall  bind  on  earth.


HONESTY  OF  PURPOSE,  ETC.


311


shall  be  bound  in  heaven,  and  what-  |
soever  yon  shall  loose  on  earth  shall
be  loosed  in  heaven."  Some  may
say,  "That  is  Catholicism."  Well,
then,  so  far,  I  am  a  Catholic,  for  I
believe  in  everything  contained  in  the
Scriptures  pertaining  to  these  raaU
ters."  "Don't  you  think  this  is  a
great,  heresy  ?  "  I  think  it  would  be
greater  heresy  to  disbelieve  it.  I  do
not  believe  that  everybody  has  this
authority  and  power ;  but  only  those
whom  God  calls  and  sets  apart  in  the
way  here  spoken  of.  They  had
power  "  to  bind  on  earth  and  to  bind
in  heaven, — to  loose  on  earth  and  to
loose  in  heaven,"  That  is  Catholi-
cism, is  it  ?  Well,  let  us  see  a  little
farther  how  it  goes.  "  Peter,  how
did  you  forgive  sins  ?  Bid  you  have
power  to  forgive  sins  ?  "  "  Yes."
"How  did  yon  exercise  it?"  "I
called  upon  the  people  to  repent  and
to  be  baptized  in  the  name  of  Jesus
for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  pro-
mised them  that  they  should  receive
the  Holy  Ghost  That  is  the  way
that,  I  furgave  sins*  And  then  I  laid
on  bands  for  the  reception  of  the
Holy  Ghost;  and  when  men  received
this  Holy  Ghost  it  took  of  the  things  j
of  God  and  showed  them  unto
them,"

These  are  some  of  the  leading
principles  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.
I  might  talk  for  hours  on  the  subject
These  are  the  kind  of  things  God  has
revealed  to  us.  People  say  we  are
fanatics.  Perhaps  we  are,  but  if  we
are,  Peter,  James,  John  and  Paul
were  fanatics,  for  they  believed  in
the  very  principles  that  I  have  been
laying  before  you  to  day  ;  and  when
God  restored  tins  Gospel,  he  simply
restored  what  is  called  "the  ever-
lasting Gospel."  John  said,  "  I  saw
another  angel  flying  in  the  midst  of
heaven,  having  the  everlasting  Gos-
pel to  preach  to  those  who  dwell  on
the  earth." What  do  you  mean  by


|  the  everlasting  Gospel  ?  Why  the
Gospel  that  Adam  had,  the  Gospel
that  Noah,  Abraham  and  the  Pro-
phets hat! ;  the  Gospel  that  Jesus
brought — the  everlasting  Gospel,  the
Gospel  that  existed  from  eternity  to
eternity,  the  system  or  medium
through  which  God  saves  the  hu-
man family, — the  Gospel  which
brings  life  and  immortality  to  light.
Why,  say  some,  "  I  thought  nobody
had  the  Gospel  until  Jesus  came."
You  thought  very  foolishly  if  you
thought  that,  tor  Jesus,  speaking  of
Abraham  said — "  Abraham  yaw  my
day  and  was  glad."  He  had  com-
munication with  God  and  revelation
from  him.  And  how  did  he  have
it  ?  Through  the  Gospel.  How  da
you  know  it  ?  Paul  tells  us  so  ;  your
Paul,  you  know,  that  you  believe  in,
h«  tells  us  so*  What,  that  Abraham
had  the  Gospel  ?  Yes,  he  says,
"God,  foreseeing  that  he  would
justify  the  heathen  through  faith,
preached  before  the  Gospel  unto
Abraham,"  Did  he  have  it  ?  Yes,
it  was  through  that  medium  that  life
and  immortality  were  brought  to
light  And  Moses,  in  the  wilderness,
i  had  the  Gospel,  and  preached  it  to
the  people.  "  What,  Moses  f  "  Yes,
"  Well,  I  thought  there  was  no  Gos-
pel until  Jesus  came."  Yuu  thought,
I  say  again,  very  foolishly.  "We,"
says  the  apostle,  "  have  the  Gospel
preached  unto  us  as  well  as  they ;
but  the  word  preached  did  not  profit
them,  not  being  mixed  with  faith
in  those  who  heard  it;  wherefore  the
law  was  added,  because  of  transgres-
sion." Added  to  what  ?  Why,  to
the  Gospel  which  ihey  had  before.
What  was  the  law  ?  The  law  of  car-
nal commandments  and  ordinances
which  the  Apostle  says — "  neither
we  nor  our  fathers  wereafre  to  bear"
How  long  did  the  law  cou t nine  ?
Until  Christ  came,  Who  was  Christ  ?
|  A  priest  tor  ever  after  the  order  of


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


Mel«h isedec.  Who  wag  Melehisedec ?
A  greater  than  Abraham,  for  he  had
the  Gospel  and  blessed  Abraham.
All  of  those  ancient  worthies  had  a
knowledge  of  the  Gospel,  and  of  life
and  immortality  through  the  Gos-
pel,

This  is  the  same  thing  that  is  com-
municated unto  us.  It  is  our  privi*
lege,  it  is  the  privilege  of  all  men
who  yield  obedience  to  the  Gospel.
It  is  your  privilege,  you  Latter-day
Saints,  to  lire  in  the  enjoyment  of
this  light  and  immortality.  Accord-
ing to  your  faithfulness  you  have
experienced  more  or  les§  of  this  spirit
of  revelation,  light  and  truth,  and
the  power  of  God,  and  by  living  your
religion  you  can  go  on  from  strength
to  strength,  intelligence  to  intelli-
gence, from  revelation  to  revelation,


until  you  can  "see  as  you  are  seen,
and  know  as  you  are  known/*
Having  commenced  in  the  princi-
ples of  truth  and  obtained  the  Spirit
of  light  and  intelligence  that  ilows
from  God  through  obedience  to  the
Gospel,  it  is  for  us  to  "  purify  our-
selves even  as  God  is  pure,"  and
purge  from  ourselves  all  corruption,
iniquity,  fraud,  lying  and  evil  of
every  kind,  all  adultery,  fornication,
seduction  and  lasciviousness  j  and
everything  that  would  corrupt  and
deitroy  the  human  family,  and  seek
:iftcr  everything  that  is  high,  noble,
exalting  and  praiseworthy  among
men,  and  among  the  Gods,  that
when  we  get  through  with  this  world
we  may  obtain  an  everlasting  inherit-
ance in  the  celeb tial  kingdom.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,
Delivered  ix  the  Sixteenth  Ward  Meetoto  Rooms,  Nov,  22,  1873,

(Reported  by  David  W.  Evans.)

THE  CREATION — THE  SEVENTH  THOUSAND  YEARS,  AND EVENTS  WHICH

ARE  TO  FOLLOW  THE  PERIOD  OF  THE  MILLENNIUM*


I  will  read  the  first  ten  verses  of
the  20th  chapter  of  the  Revelations
given  to  St,  John,  the  "  beloved
disciple,"  while  on  the  Isle  of  Pat-
mos :

"And  I  saw  an  angel  come  down
from  heaven,  having  the  key  of  the
bottomless  pit  and  a  great  chain  in
bis  hand.


"  And  he  laid  hold  on  the  drugon,
that  old  serpent,  which  is  the  devil,
and  Satan,  and  bound  him  a  thou-
sand years,

"And  ca*t  him  into  the  bottomless
pit,  and  shut  him  up,  and  set  a  seal
upon  him,  that  he  should  deceive
the  nations  no  more,  till  the  thou-
sand years  should  be  fulfilled:  and


after  that  he  must  be  loosed  a  little
season,

*4  And  I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat
upon  them,  and  judgment  was  given
unto  them :  and  I  saw  the  souls  of
them  that  were  beheaded  for  the
witness  of  Jesus,  and  for  the  word
of  God,  and  which  had  not  wor-
shiped the  beast,  neither  his  image,
neither  had  received  his  mark  upon
their  foreheads,  or  in  their  hands;
and  they  lived  and  reigned  with
Christ  a  thousand  years,

"  But  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived
not  again  until  the  thousand  years
were  finished*  This  is  the  first
resurrection.

"  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath
part  in  the  first  lesuirection :  on
such  the  second  death  hath  no  power,
but  they  shall  be  priests  of  God
and  of  Christ,  and  shall  reign  with
him  a  thousand  years.

*fc  And  when  the  thousand  years
are  expired,  Satan  shall  be  loosed
out  of  his  prison,

"  And  shall  go  out  to  deceive  the
cations  which  art*  in  the  four  quarters
of  the  earth,  Gog  and  Magog,  to
gather  them  together  to  battle;  the
number  of  whom  is  as  the  sand  of
the  sea*

"  And  they  went  up  on  the  breadth
of  the  earth,  and  compassed  the
camp  of  the  saints  about,  and  the
beloved  city  :  and  fire  came  down
from  God  out  of  heaven,  and  de-
voured them.

"And  the  devil  that  deceived  them
was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  and
brimstone,  where  the  beast  and  false
prophet  are,  and  shall  be  tormented
day  and  night  forever  and  ever*"

In  the  words  which  I  have  read,
we  have  perhaps  as  much  revealed
in  regard  to  the  Millennium,  as  we
will  find  in  any  of  the  revelations
which  God  has  given  to  man.  We
cau  understand  from  these  words
that  a  time  is  to  come  in  which  the


devil  will  have  no  power  to  tempt
the  children  of  men,  and  this  happy
period  will  last  for one  thousand
years. There never  has  been  a
period  since  the  creation,  but  what
the  devil  has  had  more  or  less  power
or  influence  over  the  inhabitants  of
our  world. Such  has  been  the  case
from  the  day  that  he  came  before
our  first  parents  in  the  Garden  of
Eden,  until  the  present We  have
an  account,  however,  of  a  period  of
time  when  he  had  not  much  domi-
nion, that  was  in  the  days  of  the
flood* After  the  wicked  were  des-
troyed, there  were  eight  persons  in
the  ark,  sailing  upon  the  waters,
over  whom,  I  presume,  Satan  had
very  little  power. With  the  excep-
tion of  this  short  period,  in  which
the  earth  was  submerged  and  the
ark  was  sailing  upon  the  waters,  the
devil  has  exercised  power  over  the
hearts  of  the  children  of  men  in  all
ages  and  countries. There  seems
to  be  a  very  great  amount  of  evil  in
existence  at  the  present  time,  fur
people  are  being  continually  stirred
up  to  cof limit  all  manner  of  abomina-
tion— robbery,  murder,  blaspheming
the  name  of  the  Deity,  and  the  vio-
lation of  every  command  that  he  has
ever  given. There  is  a  time,  how-
ever, to  come,  when  this  earth  will
be  depopulated  of  the  wicked  to  the
same  extent  as  it  once  was  by  the
waters  of  the flood. The  waters
then  made  au  entire  sweep  of  the
wicked,  they  were  laid  low,  and  the
earth  was  cleansed* We  might,  in
other  words,  call  it  a  baptism  of  the
earth  by  water,  or  a  cleansing  of  it
from  sin* You  know  that  baptism
is  intended  for  the  remission  of  sins;
it  is  the  ordinance  through  which  our
heavenly  Father  forgives  the  sins  of
those  who  believe  in  his  Son  Jesus
Christ. The  promise  of  forgiveness,
however,  is  on  condition  that  we  be-
lieve in  the  atonement  made  by  the


314


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Savior,  that  we  repent  of  our  sins,
and  that  we are  baptized  or  im-
mersed in  water  for  the  remission
thereof! That  was  the  way  with  our
earth. Some  eighteen  hundred  or
two  thousand  years  after  the  fall  oar
earth  was  immersed  in  water,  and
every  sin  was  swept  from  the  face  of
it,  the  same  as  your  sins  were  for-
given when  you  acknowledged  your
belief  in  the  atonement  of  the  Son  of
God,  and  were  baptized  by  immersion
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the
remission  of  your  sins. There  seems
to  be  a  similarity,  then,  so  far  as
these  ordin winces  are  concerned,  be-
tween the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
who  are  saved  and  the  earth  itself;
there  is  also  a  similarity,  in  the
process  of  creation, between  the
earth  and  its  inhabitants. The  earth
when  created,  according  to  the  ac-
counts we  have,  was  covered  with  a
flood  of  waters  ; no  dry  land,  in  fact
no  land  at  all,  appeared,  but  a  flood
of  writers  seemed  to  encompass  it.
By  and  by,  in  the  providence  of
God,  in  what  way  we  know  not,  this
flood  of  waters  was  gathered  together
into  one  place,  and  the  dry  land
appeared,  emerging  from  the  waters.
This  was  the  birth  of  creation,  the
same  as  we  are  born  here  into  this
world,  from  one  element  into  another.
After  having been brought  forth
from  the  element  of  water,  the  pro-
cess of  creation,  or  the  further  de-
velopment of  the  earth  continued.
It  did  not  come forth  perfect  iD
every  respect  at  the  time  of  birth,
it  had  to  undergo  other  processes
necessary  to  prepare  it  for  the  abode
of  man. It  seems,  from  the  account
contained  in  the  first  of  Genesis,
that  the  earth was not  only  im-
mersed in  a  flood  of  waters,  but  that
darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the
earth,  that  is,  the  earth  seemed  to  be
enclosed  or  enveloped  in  darkness*
The  cause  ot  this  darkness,  in  Kin  or


James1  translation,  is  not  fully  re-
vealed. There  is  a  translation^  how-
ever, that  was  given  by  inspiration,
which  makes  the  subject  more  clear
and  plain,  and  more  easy  to  be  under-
stood, than  the  uninspired  translation
that  is  generally  called  King  James'
translation  of  the  Bible.  This  in-
spired translation  by  the  Prophet
Joseph  Smith,  says — "  1  the  Lord
God  created  darkness  upon  the  face
of  the  great  deep,  and  I,  God,  said
let  there  be  light,  and  there  was
light,  and  the  evening  and  the  morn-
ing were  the  first  day  "  This  makea
it  very  plain  compared  with  the  old
uninspired  translation.  I  will  repeat
the  quotation,  "  I,  the  Lord  God,
created  darkness  upon  the  face  of  the
great  deep."

It  would  seem,  that  light  had  been
shining  previous  to  this  time.  The
universe,  probably  was  lighted  up,
so  far  as  it  existed,  and  that  light
shone  forth  over  the  face  of  this  em-
bryo creation.  Where  that  light
came  from  or  how  it  was  produced
is  not  mentioned ;  but  the  Lord  was
obliged  to  create  darkness  in  order
to  envelop  the  earth  therein*  There
are  many  ways  in  which  this  might
have  been  accomplished.  The  sun
was  not  permitted  to  shine  forth  on
tit©  first,  second,  or  third  day  of
creation,  but  on  the  fourth  day  it
was  permitted  to  give  its  light  to
the  earth.  Whether  the  sun  shone
upon  the  face  of  this  creation,  be-
fore the  Lord  created  darkness,  ia
not  for  me  to  say.  If  it  did,  it  would
be  an  easy  matter  for  him  to  with-
hold the  rays  of  that  bright  lumi-
nary in  such  a  manner  as  seemed
good  in  his  sight,  the  same  as  he
did  among  the  ancient  Nephites
who  dwelt  on  this  continent  at  the
time  of  the  crucifixion.  During  the
three  days  and  three  nights  that
our  Savior  was  in  the  tomb,  thick
darkness  covered  the  face  of  this


THE  CREATION,  ETC.


315


land,  so  that  there  was  no  light  of
the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon,  nor
stars;  and  so  great  was  the  darkness
during  that  period,  that  the  inhab-
itants who  had  not  fallen  could  feel
it.  The  Lord  had  some  method  by
which  he  created  or  produced  that
darkness  by  shading  tne  eartn  from
the  rays  of  the  sun  ;  but  by  and  by
he  said,  4t  Let  there  be  light/'  and
light  was  again  restored.

Now  these  two  state**  of  being  in
which  oar  earth  existed  are  called
firsl,  the  evening,  and  second,  the
morning — and  the  evening  and  the
morning  were  the  first  day.  Whether
the  day  here  mentioned  was  a  pe-
riod such  as  the  one  to  which  we
now  apply  that  term,  we  are  not  in*
formed  in  the  Bible,  but  from  what
has  been  revealed  to  the  Latter-day
Saints  we  have  great  reason  to  be-
lieve that  it  was  a  very  long  period
of  time,  and  that  this  darkness  ex-
isted over  the  face  of  the  great  deep
for  a  lo.jg  time. It  might  have  been
for many centuries, we  have  no
dehnite  information  on  this  point*
We  tind  th?**,  after  the  dry  land  ap-
peared by  the  gathering  together  of
the  waters  in  one  place,  <  iud  t*iv;ib  d
a  firmament, dividing  the  waters
from  the  waters — the  waters  that
were  above  the  firmament  from  the
waters  that  were  beneath. We  do
not  exactly  understand  the  meaning
of  this. If  we  had  the  process  of
creation  unfolded  to  us,  we  should
probably  find  that  many  of  the  ma-
terials of  our  globe  once  existed  in
a  dispersed  or  scattered  forir,  in  a
state  of  chaos,  and  that  the  Lord,
in  collecting  them  together,  brought
them  from  a  distance  in  the  solar
system,  and  that  in  so  doing,  he
took  hie  own  time  and  way,  and
wrought  according  to  his  own  laws,
for,  as  far  as  we  are  acquainted,  the
Lord  works  by  law,  and  why  not
create  by  law  ? I  do  not  mean  make


ont  of  nothing.  I  hope  that  none
of  my  audience  will  suppose  for  a
moment  that  I  believe  in  such  aa
absurdity  as  this.  There  is  not  a
hint  in  all  the  Bible  that  God  crea-
ted this  or  any  other  world  out  of
nothing.  The  work  of  creation  was
to  take  the  materials  that  existed
from  all  eternity,  that  never  were
created  or  made  out  of  nothing,  to
take  these  self-existent  materials
and  organize  them  into  a  world.
This  is  called  creation.  There  isf
however,  a  declaration  made  by
many  religious  people,  that  u  God
created  all  things  out  of  nothing. ,f
They  even  teach  it  in  their  Sunday
schools ;  but  they  have  never  beea
able  to  prove  any  such  thing.  It  in
one  of  those  ideas  which  have  got
into  the  minds  of  people  through
the  teachings  of  uninspired  men.
The  ancients  —  those  who  lived
many  centuries  before  Christ,  did
not  believe  this  doctrine;  but  since
the  days  of  Christ,  and  since  the
days  of  the  great  apostacy,  they
have  got  up  the  idea  that  God  made
all  things  ont  of  nothing,  and  they
have  incorporated  it  into  their  dis-
ciplines, catechisms,  Sunday  school
hooks,  and  various  works  which
they  have  published.  The  Scrip-
tures say — "  In  the  beginning  God
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth."
The  word  "create"  does  not  mean
make  out  of  nothing*  For  instance,
when  he  says — "  I  created  darkness
and  I  created  light,"  what  does  he
do?  Docs  he  absolutely  form  light
out  of  nothing  ?  No,  he  causes  the
light  that  existed  from  all  eternity
to  shine  where  darkness  existed,  and
it  is  light  creating  light,  the  same  as
you,  when  you  attend  meeting,  look
up  your  house  and  blow  out  the
lights.  When  you  return,  supposing
you  say  in  your  own  hearts,  or
to  your  wife,  daughter,  or  son,  "  Let
there  be  light." Do  you  create  it


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


out  of  nothing  ?  No,  you  look  for  a
match,  or  for  some  means  by  whioh
you  can  start  the  light  and  cause  it
to  be  exhibited 5  where  darkness  was
before.  So  when  God  creates  light
he  calla  forth  and  makes  to  shine  that
light  which  has  existed  from  all
eternity.  We  read  that  God  is  light.
Was  there  ever  a  time  that  God  did
Dot  exist?  No,  and  if  he  is  light
there  never  was  a  time  when  light
did  not  exist,  one  being  as  eternal  as
the  other.

In  order  to  prove  that  light  did
exist  long  before  this  world  was
called  forth  from  the  womb  of  the
great  waters,  long  before  God  said,
"  Let  there  be  light,'*  so  far  as  this
earth  was  concerned,  I  will  refer  you
to  bomo  discoveries  that  have  been
made  by  philosophers  and  astrono-
mers of  the  present  day.  They
have  invented  telescopes  that  are  of
■uch  penetrating  power  that  they
have  discovered  systems  of  worlds
at  such  an  immense  distance  in
space,  that  they  calculate  their  light
would  take  Bix  hundred  thousand
years  to  reach  our  system.  Very
well  then,  how  long  must  it  hare
been  on  the  journey  when  the  Lord
gaid — "  Let  there  be  light,"  so  far  as
tins  creation  is  concerned?  I  an-
swer, that  light  was  traveling  live
hundred  and  ninety-four  thousand
years  before  that  time;  consequently
light  must  have  existed,  at  least,
half  a  million  years  before  the  Lord
said — "  Let  there  be  light,"  so  far  as
this  globe  was  concerned.

lu  gathering  together  the  materi-
als that  were  scattered  in  space,
the  tirtnanent  that  I  was  speaking
of  seenis  to  have  been  one  of  the
pftrts  of  creation,  necessary  in  the
grand  process  of  collecting  and  con-
densing the  constituents  of  our
globe  j  and  in  doing  this  I  do  not
know  but  what  some  portions  of
the  atmospheric  materials  collected


together  helped  to  form  some  other
worlds.  At  any  rate  the  firmanent
was  placed  in  such  a  manner  as  to
divide  the  waters  beneath  it  from
those  which  were  above  it  Ac-
cording t>  the  theory  which  is
accepted  by  some  as  being  true,
the  planets  cf  our  system  are  sup-

;  posed  to  have  been  originally  formed
by  a  rotation  on  its  axis  of  a  nebu-
lous fluid,  that  was  expanded  far
beyond  the  bounds  of  our  present
solar  system ;  that  by  rotation  and
condensation  nebulous  masses  were
thrown  off  or  detached  from  the
great  parent  body,  and  that  the
orbits  assumed  by  the  parent  mass
and  its  detached  masses,  are  the
necessary  results  of  their  respective
directions  and  velocities  at  the  in-
stant of  detachment,  combined  with
the  laws  of  gravitation,  and  the  rela-
tive positions  of  their  respective
centres  of  gravity.  That  in  like
manner,  a  still  further  operation  of
similar  laws  finally  formed  second-
ary planets  or  moons.  This  nebu-
lous fluid,  extending  for  millions  of
miles,  might  indeed  be  called  a  Arma-
ment, containing  the  constituents  of
water,  both  above  and  beneath,  as
recouled  in  Genesis,

I  But  what  I  wish  to  more  fully
explain,  on  thin  occasion,  is  the
length  of  the  days  of  creation — the
days  mentioned  in  which  God  per-
formed certain  portions  of  his  work.
It  is  said,  that  in  six  days  he  forra-

i  ed  this  world  of  ours,  and  that  on
the  fourth  day  he  formed  the  sun
and  the  moon  and  the  stars.  What
I  understand  by  the  formation  of
these  celestial  luminaries,  is  that
he  then  caused  them  to  shed  forth
their  light I  can  not  suppose  that

I  it  would  take  the  Lord  six  days  to
form  such  a  little  speck  of  a  world
as  oars,  and  then  for  him  on  the

!  fourth  day  to  form  a  globe  fourteen
hundred  thousand  times  largor  than


the  earth.  This  does  not  look  con-
sistent to  me.  If  it  took  six  days
to  form  a  small  world  like  ours,  we
might  certainly  suppose  that  it
would  require  more  than  one  day  to
form  the  sun,  which  contains  a
quantity  of  matter  sufficient  to
make  some  three  hundred  and  fifty-
fonr  thousand  worlds  like  this,
and  whose  actual  size  or  magnitude
is  fourteen  hundred  thousand  times
larger  than  our  globe;  consequently
I  understand  by  the  formation  of
the  sun  and  of  the  moon  and  stars,
an  i  setting  them  in  the  firmament
of  the  heavens,  that  he  merely  suf-
fered their  light  to  shine  on  the
fourth  day,  to  regulate  the  e?enings
and  mornings  that  were  produced
prior  to  that  time,  probably  by  some
other  cause.  The  Lord  wanted,  by
these  luminaries,  io  divide  the  day
from  the  night,  and  he  set  them  for
times  and  for  seasons  in  the  firma-
ment of  the  heavens.

These  six  days  in  which  the  Lord
performed  this  work,  I  do  not  be-
lieve, were  each  limited  to  twenty-
four  hours,  aa  are  the  periods  which
we  now  call  day;  indeed,  when  we
come  to  new  revelation,  we  find
some  light  on  this  subject.  In  the
Book  of  Abraham,  as  well  as  in  the
inspired  translation  of  the  Scrip-
tures, given  through  Joseph  Smith,
the  Lord  says,  in  speaking  of  the
work  of  creating  this  earth,  that  he
was  governed  by  celestial  time,
A  ceo  nling  to  this  new  revelation,
there  is  a  certain  great  world,  called
Kolob,  placed  near  one  of  the  celes*
tial  kingdoms,  whose  diurnal  rota-
tion takes  place  once  in  a  thousand
of  our  years  ;  and  that  c<  lestiat  time
was  measured  by  those  celestial  be-
ings, by  the  rotations  of  Kolob,
hence  one  day  with  the  Lord  was  a
thousand  of  our  years.  If  this  was
the  case,  the  six  days  of  the  creation
of  our  earth,  the  six  days  during


which  it  was  being  prepared  as  a
habitation  for  man,  must  have  been
six  thousand  of  our  years.  When
the  Lord  spoke  to  Aolam,  :*fter  hav-
ing placed  him  in  the  Garden  of
Eden,  concerning  the  forbidden
fruit,  saying — "  In  the  day  that  thoa
eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely
die!"  we  can  not  suppose  that  the
day  thore  referred  to  meant  a  day  of
twenty- four  hours.  It  could  not
have  meant  that,  for  history  informs
us  that  Adam  lived  almost  one  thou-
sand years  from  the  time  of  the  Fall;
but  before  the  day  of  a  thousand
years  had  wholly  passed  away  his
death  did  take  place.

The  book  of  Abraham,  translated
by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  also
contains  an  account  of  the  creation
and  the  fall  of  man  ;  but  the  word
translated  "  day"  in  Genesis  is  trans-
lated in  the  Book  of  Abraham
"  time'' — u  in  the  time  that  thou  eat-
est thereof  thoa  shalt  surely  die."
In  the  next  sentence  the  same  book
says,  speaking  of  time — u  The  reck-
oning of  time  was  not  yet  given  to
man,"  that  is,  the  Lord  had  reck-
oned previous  to  that  perio  1  by  the
diurnal  rotations  of  Kolob,  an  J  that,
without  doubt,  was  the  day  referred
to  in  which  our  first  parents  should
die,  if  they  ate  of  the  forbidden  fruit.

We  will  now  come  to  the  seventh
period  of  creation, — the  seventh
thousand  years;  that  is  called  in
Scripture  a  day  of  rest,  that  is
supposing  that  what  were  called
days  in  the  beginning  were  a  thou-
sand years.  The  Lord  rested  from
his  labors  the  seventh  day.  What
particular  period  of  time  within  that
day  Adam  fell  I  do  not  know ;  but
one  thing  is  certain,  that  in  the
morning  of  the  seventh  day  the
Garden  of  Eden  was  planted  and  he
was  placed  therein,  and  during  that
morning  a  great  many  tilings  tran-
spired pertaining  to  this  temporal


318


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


creation.  In  the  preceding  nx  days
was  completed  the  formation  or
creation  of  the  earth,  after  the
spiritual  order  that  mat?  was  formed
or  bom  in  the  heavens.  All  men,
male  and  female,  that  ever  have
lived,  or  that  ever  will  live  on  this
earth,  had  a  pre-existence  before  the
formation  of  the  earth  commenced ;
and  during  our  pre-exiatence  in  the
heavens,  the  earth  was  undergoing
this  formation.

After  man  and  woman  were  placed
in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  we  find  that
they  were  tempted.  By  whom  ?  By
a  being  or  beings  who  once  dwelt
in  the  presence  of  God,  in  his  celes-
tial kingdom.  They  once  were  angels
of  light  and  troth,  having  authority
in  the  presence  of  the  Father.  But
they  rebelled  against  God ;  and  one
of  those  angels,  named  Lucifer,  when
they  were  talking  over  the  great  plan
of  redemption  and  salvation  for  the
inhabitants  of  the  future  creation,
proposed  a  plan  by  which  he  would
redeem  all  mankind,  that  not  one
soul  should  be  lost.  But  his  plan
was  rejected,  because  it  destroyed
the  agency  of  man,  being  contrary
to  God's  plan ;  for  he  desires  that  all
intelligent  beings  shall  be  free  in
the  exercise  of  their  agency.  Be-
cause his  plan  was  rejected,  Lucifer
rebelled,  and  a  third  part  of  the
hosts  of  heaven  joined  him,  and
they  were  all  cast  down,  and  it  was
this  being  who  entered  into  a  beast,
called  a  serpent  and  tempted  Eve
in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  and  that
was  the  beginning  of  his  power  on
this  earth.

The  events  of  this  creation,  the
formation  of  the  earth,  the  differ-
ent day's  work,  <fcc,  and  finally  the
great  day  of  rest  after  the  six  days
were  ended f  were  all  typical,  the
latter  especially,  typifying  what
fchould  take  place  in  regard  to  the
future  existence  of  this  creation. '


After  six  thousand  years  should
pass  away,  during  which  Satan
should  have  more  or  less  dominion
over  the  inhabitants  of  this  world,
he,  in  the  seventh  period,  or  the
seventh  thousand  years,  should  be
bound,  should  have  no  dominion
over  the  earth  or  its  inhabitants.

In  order  to  show  you  this  type
still  fur ih er,  we  will  pass  along
over  the  flood,  which  was  merely  a
type  of  the  baptism  of  redemption,
and  we  will  come  down  to  the
day  when  this  great  period  shall  ar-
rive, when  Satan  shall  be  bound
and  wickedness  be  swept  from  the
face  of  the  earth.  This  is  to  be  done
by  a  variety  of  judgments,  the
last  of  which  is  called  fire.  The
Prophet  Malachi  says  —  **  The  day
shall  come  that  shall  burn  as  an
oven,  and  all  the  proud  and  they
who  do  wickedly  shall  become  a§
stubble,  and  the  day  that  comes
shall  burn  them  up,  saith  the  Liord
of  hosts,  that  it  shall  leave  them
neither  root  nor  branch,  but  an  to
them  who  fear  my  name  shall  the
sun  of  righteousness  arise  with
healing  in  his  wings,  and  they  shall
go  forth  and  grow  up  like  calves  of
the  stall,  and  they  shall  tread  down
the  wicked,  and  they  ft  hall  be  ashes
under  the  soles  of  their  feet  in  the
day  that  I  do  this,  saith  the  Lord  of
hosts."

Here  then  is  a  declaration  how
this  earth  is  to  be  cleansed  the  second
time  from  wickedness,  namely,  by
fire,  which  is  a  more  powerful
element  than  water.  The  earth  is
to  be  cleansed  by  fire;  in  other
words,  the  elements  are  to  be  melted
with  fervent  heat.  This  is  the  de-
claration of  several  of  the  prophets.
David,  in  speaking  of  this  period,
in  one  of  his  psalms,  says,  the
mountains  shall  melt  like  wax  be-
fore the  presence  of  the  Lord  when
he  shall  come. You  know  how  wax


melts  when  exposed  to  the  infiu- 1
ence  of  heat.  So,  when  the  Lord
comes,  will  the  elements  melt  and
the  mountains  flow  down  at  his  pre-
sence with  fervent  heat.  This  will
cleanse  the  earth  as  it  was  cleansed
in  the  days  of  Noah,  only  by  an-
other element  called  fire.  This  is
typical  of  the  cleansing  of  those
who  embrace  the  plan  of  salvation.
After  you  have  been  immersed,  as
this  earth  wad,  in  the  water,  and
been  cleansed  and  received  the  re
mission  of  your  sins,  you  also  have
the  promise  of  baptism  of  tire  and
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  which  you-
are  purified,  as  well  justified  and
sanctified  from  all  your  evil  affec-
tions, and  you  feel  to  lore  God  and
that  which  is  just  and  true,  and
to  hate  tbat  which  is  sinful  and
evil.  Why  ?  Because  of  this  sanc-
tifying, purifying  principle  that
comes  upon  you,  by  the  baptism
of  fire  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  So
mast  this  earth  be  baptised  by
fire,  it  must  be  cleansed  from  all  ,
sin  and  impuritv.  Will  it  be  filled
with  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Yes.  These
elements  that  melt  like  wax  before
the  presence  of  the  Lord  will  again
be  filled  with  his  Spirit  and  will  be
renewed,  and  the  earth  itself  will
be  full  of  the  know  ledge  of  God  as
the  waters  cover  the  channels  of
the  great  deep.  It  will  enter  into
the  elements  of  creation,  so  that  the
curse  which  came  in  consequence
of  the  fall  of  man  will  be  removed
from  the  earth,  and  the  elements
will  be  cleansed,  not  only  by  fire
but  by  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,
which  will  mingle  with  and  purify  ,
them.  Satan,  that  arch  -  deceiver,  '
will  be  bound,  and  a  seal  will  be
set  upon  "him,  and  King  James*
translation  of  the  Scriptures  tells  us
that  he  will  be  cast  into  the  bottom-
less pit  But  in  the  inspired  trans-
lation I  have  referred  to,  it  reads,  if '


!  I  remember  correctly,  "  the  lower-
most pit,"  which,  to  my  mind  is
more  consistent  than  a  pit  that  has
no  bottom.  Satan  is  to  be  cast  into
this  pit,  and  a  seal  set  upon  him,  and
he  is  to  be  bound  with  a  chain,  and
will  have  no  power  or  dominion
upou  this  earth.  He  and  all  the
fallen  angels  with  him,  aro  to  be  kept
in  that  pit  until  the  thousand  years
are  ended.

Now,  then,  all  the  inhabitants
who  are  spared  from  this  fire — those
who  are  not  proud,  and  who  do  not
do  wickedly,  will  be  cleansed  more
fully  and  filled  with  the  giory  of
God.  A  partial  change  will  be
wrought  upon  them,  not  a  change
to  immortality,  like  that  which  all
the  Saints  will  undergo  when  they
are  changed  in  the  twinkling  of  an
eye,  from  mortality  to  immortality;
bat  so  great  will  be  the  change  then
wrought  that  the  children  who  are
born  into  the  world  will  grow  up
without  sin  unto  salvation.  Why
will  this  be  so  ?  Because  that  fallen
nature,  introduced  by  the  Ml,  and
transferred  from  parents  to  chil-
dren, from  generation  to  genera-
tion, will  be,  in  a  measure,  eradi-
cated by  this  change.  Then  the
righteous  will  go  forth,  and  grow
up  like  calves  of  the  stall;  and  one
revelation  says,  thdr  childien  shall
grow  up  without  sin  unto  salvation,
Satan  having  no  power  to  tempt
them,  these  children  will  not  sin.

The  question  may  arise here —
"  Will  it  be  possible  lor  men  to  sin
during the Millennium  ? "  Yes.
Why  ? Because  they  have  not  lost
their  agency ♦ Agency  always  con-
'  tinues  wherever  intelligent  beings
are, whether in heaven, on  thft
earth,  or  among  any  of  the  creations
that  God  has  made;  wherever  you
find intelligent beings,  there  yon
I  will  find  an agency, not  to  thi
'  same  extent  perhaps,  under  all  oir-


320


JOURNAL  OF  DISCO n:SE8


cu  instances,  bat  yet  there  13  always
the  exercise  of  agency  where  there
is  intelligence.  For  instance,  when
Satan  is  bound  and  a  sod  ser  upon
him  in  this  lowermost  pit,  his
agency  is  partially  destroyed  in
same  things.  He  will  not  have
power  to  come  out  of  that  pit;  now
he  has  that  power;  then  lie  will  not
have  power  to  tempt  the  children
of  men,  now  he  has  that  power;
consequently  his  agency  then  will
be  measurably  destroyed  or  taken
away,  but  not  in  full.  Thtf  Lord
will  not  destroy  the  agency  of  the
people  during  the  Millennium,  there-
fore there  will  be  a  possibility  of
their  sinning  during  that  time*
Bnt  if  they  who  live  fchen  do  sin,
it  will  not  be  because  of  the-  power
of  the  devil  to  tempt  them,  fur  he
will  have  no  power  over  them,  and
they  will  sin  merely  because  they
choose  to  do  so  of  their  own  free
will.

To  show  you  that  such  will  be  the
case,  let  me  quote  some  Scripture*
After  Jems  comes  with  all  his
Saints  with  him,  and  stands  on  the
Mount  of  Olives,  we  find  that  the
Lord  will  require  all  the  nations
round  about  Jerusalem,  to  go  up
and  worship  the  King,  the  L  >rd  of
Hosts,  and  to  keep  the  feast,  of  tab-
ernacles, and  that  there  shall  be  one
Lord  and  his  mime  one.  There
will  be  no  heathen  g  >ds  in  those
days,  but  during  the  Millennium
he  will  require  all  the  people  to  go
to  Jerusalem,  the  headquarters  on
that  continent,  to  worship  hi:u.
Nowt  will  it  be  possible  for  the  peo-
ple in  that  day  to  sin  ?  Yes ;  for
we  read,  in  the  same  chapter,  if  the
people  go  not  up,  that  upon  all  such
nations  there  shall  no  rain  descend
during  the  time  of  their  transgres-
sion. It  seems  then  by  this  that
there  will  be  a  chance  for  the  peo-
ple, during  that  happy  period,  to


refuse  to comply  with the  com-

mauds  of  the  Most  High,  and  thug
bring  upon  themselves  *<peedy  des-
truction, by  famine,  through  the
rain  being  withheld.  And  in  the
case  of  the  people  of  Egypt,  where
the  withholding  of  rain  does  not
•  now  affect  them,  they  being  sup-
plied by  water  from  t lie  Kile,  the
Lord  has  prepared  a  special  judg-
ment. If  they  will  not  come  up  to
Jerusalem,  year  by  year,  we  are  told
that  their  eyes  shall  consume  away
in  their  holes,  and  their  flesh  fall
from  their  hones.  Then  again,  we
read  in  the  sixty-fifth  chapter  of
Isaiah  that — u  There  shall  be  no
more  thence  an  infant  of  day?,  nor
an  old  man  that  hath  not  filled  his
davs,  for  the  child  shall  die  a  hun-
dred  years  old,  but  the  sinner,
being  a  hundred  years  old,  shall  be
accursed,"  showing  that,  when  that
day  shall  come,  the  people  will  have
their  lives  prolonged  on  the  earth
to  the  age  of  a  tree,  growing  up  to
be  a  hundred  years  old,  then  if  thej
sin  they  shall  be  accursed,  proving
that  there  ia  a  possibility  of  sin-
ning,..* * \  .  4  \

In  regard  to  tins  partial  change
that  will  be  wrought  upon  the  peo-
ple in  those  days,  let  no  one  suppose
that  this  is  inconsistent  with  the
dealings  of  the  Lord,  for  we  have
on  record  in  the  Book  of  Mormon,
that  he  did  accomplish  a  work  sim-
ilar to  this  upon  the  bodies  of  at
least  four  men  who  once  lived  upon
this  globe,  three  of  whom  belonged
to  the  twelve  disciples  which  Jesus,
personally,  chose  to  minister  ou
this  western  continent.  They  bad
a  desire  to  live  while  the  world
should  stand,  for  the  purpose  of
bringing  souls  unto  Jesus,  and  the
Lord  granted  unto  them  their  de-
sire. But  first  the  heavens  were
opened,  and  they  were  caught  up,
and  they  saw  and  Ji£grd  unspeakable


THE  CREATION,  ETC,


321


tilings,  Hiings  that  were  not  lawful
to  he  uttered,  and  which  they  were
forbidden  to  utter,  and  it  seemed  to
them  like  unto  a  transfiguration.
They,  nevertheless,  came  down  again
out  of  heaven,  after  having  had  this
great  feast,  and  they  went  forth  upon
the  face  of  this  land  in  connecting
with  nine  others  of  their  quorum,
and  ministered  among  the  people,
and  Bp  ureal  was  their  faith,  that
when their  enemies  shut  them  in

ns were  rent  in


prisons.


the


fcwajtt,  and  they  came  forth  from
their  confinement.  Again,  when
they  dog  pi  s  in  tha  earth,  however
det*p,  and  cast  th  >ni  down  into  them,
they  mote  the  earth  by  the  word  of
God,  and  were  delivered  oat -of  the
pits  and  came  forth  unharmed.
A/aiu,  when  they  cast  them  threfe
times  into  furnaces  of  fire,  they  came
forth  unharmed;  and  when  they
cast  them  into  dens  of  wild  beasts,
they  played  with  them  as  a  child
would  play  with  a  suckling  lamb,
and  eanie  turth  unharmed,  and  they
performed  mighty  miracles,  and
BififQfl,  and  wonders  in  connection
Willi  the  other  members  of  the
Twelve,  They  al<o  built  up  the
Church  of  (J od  upjn  all  the  face  of
tliis  land,  and  all  the  inhabitants
thereof  were  con  verted  and  brought
to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth.

These  three  men  tarried  among
the  Nephites  until  between  three
and  four  hundred  years  after  Christ,
and  until  the  wickedness  of  the  peo-
ple became  so  great  that  the  Lord
took  the  i  out  of  their  midst.  Mor-
mon, in  speaking  of  these  three
men,  inquired  of  trie  Lord,  whether
they  did  receive  a  change  to  im-
mortality at  the  time  they  were
caught  up  into  heaven.  The  Lord
answered  and  told  him,  that  they
did  not  receive  a  full  change,  but
only  so  ruueh^that  Satan  had  no
power  aver  the  n,  and  sickness  had
No.  2L


no  power  over  their  bodies.  This
partial  change,  then,  was  sufficient
to  preserve  them  to  live  without
pain  and  sickness,  and  without  Satan
having  power  to  tempt  them  and
lead  them  astray,  and  they  would
have  no  sorrow  in  relation  to  them-
selves, but  only  in  regard  to  the  sins
of  the  world,  and  on  this  account
they  sorrowed  considerably.

It  seems  then,  that  if  God  did,  in
ancient  times,  so  show  forth  his
power,  as  to  operate  upon  three  men
on  this  American  Continent,  and  one
on  the  Eastern  Continent,  namely,
John  the  Revel ator,  so  that  the  power
of  death  could  not  be  exercised  over
theqj,  tjiat  they  could  tarry  and  livt
heW  on  the  earth  for  eighteen  bun-
dled or  two  thousand  years,  as  the
case  may  be,  he  can  perforin  the
same  in  regard  to  the  Latter-day
Saints,  t  hut  they  also  shall  live ;
and  inasmuch  as  they  are  permitted!
to  dwell  here  in  the  presence  of
Jesus,  it  is  reasonable  to  believe  that
they  will  ask,  and  desire,  and  seek
unto  him  to  receive  this  partial
change.  And  will  he  grant  it?
|  Yes.  But  yet  there  h  to  be  a  falling
asleep ;  notwithstanding  this  partial
cfatege,  they  will  fall  asleep,  when
th<9  have  come  to  full  maturity,  or
tlierful I  age  of  man.  But  they  will
not  be  deposited  in  the  grave — this
is  what  the  Lord  has  told  us — they
will  be  raised  again  immediately
after  having  fallen  asleep,  raised
again  to  immortality  and  eternal
life,  instead  of  being  buried  and  see-
ing corruption.  Those  persons,
therefore,  who  die  under  these  cir-
cumstances, have  not  the  experience
of  a  long  absence  from  their  bodies,
their  spirits  are  only  separated  for  a
moment,  as  it  were,  and  then  they
are  permitted  to  come  forth  in  the
beauty  of  immortality  and  eternal

Ufa. >4uV/'*:  ,>

The  same  revelation  that  speaks

Vol  XVI,


822


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


of  tbe  Saints  being  raised  after  fall-
ing asleep,  in  the  twinkle  of  an  eye,
pays  they  shall  be  caught  up,  and
their  rent  shall  he  glorious.  Now,
if  all  the  immortal,  resurrected  Saints
are  10  be  here  on  the  earth,  and
Jesus  himself  here,  where  will  they,
tvlio  live  and  die,  arid  are  rt^m  reeled
during  the  Millennium,  go  to  when
they  are  caught  up?  They  go  away
from  Jesus,  if  Jesus  is  to  be  here  all
the  time,  and  they  will  also  go  away
from  the  rest  of  the  resurrected
Saints,  who  reign  on  the  earth,  if  the
latter  arc  wholly  limited  to  this
earth.  But  the  idea  is  that  they  are  (
caught  up  and  have  the  privilege  of
beholding  the  heavenp,  the  celestial
paradise,  the  celestial  mansions ;  and  ;
then,  whenever  it  is  wisdom  and
necessary  to  come  down  here  on  the
earth  to  reign  as  kings  and  priests,
the  same  as  Jesus,  and  tie  Twelve  \
Apustles  will  have  their  thrones,  and
eat  and  drink  at  the  Lord's  table  here
cm  the  earth,  and  judge  the  twelve
tribes  ut  Israel;  &o  will  all  those;.
Other  Saints  reign  on  earth  who  are
counted  worthy  to  receive  kingdoms
and  thrones.

When  the  period  called  the  Mil-
lennium has  passed  away,  Satan  will
again  be  loosed.  Now  the  query
r rises,  Will  Satan  have  power  to
deceive  those  who  have  lived  on  the
earth,  and  have  fallen  asleep  for  a
moment,  and  have  received  their
immortal  bodies  ?  No,  he  will  not.
When  they  have  passed  through  j
their  probation,  and  have  received
their  immortal  bodies,  Satan  will
Ixave  no  power  over  them.  Thus
generation  alter  generation  will  pass
away,  during  the  Millennium,  but  '
by  and  by,  at  the  close  of  that  period,
annum  be  red  millions  of  the  posterity
•f  those  who  lived  during  the  Mil-
lennium will  be  scattered  in  the  four
quarters  of  the  earth,  and  Satan  will
lie  loosed,  and  will  go  forth  and  tempt


them,  and  overcome  some  of  them,  so
that  they  will  rebel  against  God;
not  rebel  in  ignorance  or  dwindle  in
unbelief,  as  the  Lanianites  did  ;  but
tbey  will  sin  wilfully  against  the  law
of  heaven,  and  so  great  will  the
power  of  Satan  be  over  them,  that
he  will  gather  them  together  against
the  Saints  and  against  the  beloved
city,  and  Hre  will  come  down  out  of
heaven  and  consume  them.

After  this  shall  have  taken  place,
a  great  white  throne  will  appear,
on  which  the  Diviue  Judge  will  be
seated,  from  before  whose  face  the
heaven  and  earth  shall  ike  away,
and  no  place  will  be  found  for  them.
Th is  change  in  the  earth  is  very
different  from  the  one  I  have  spoken
of,  wrought  by  the  baptism  of  fire*
One  is  a  sanctification  and  cleansing
of  the  earth,  the  other  is  a  complete
dissolution  and  passing  away  thereof.
When  the  earth  is  thus  dissolved
and  passes  away,  where  vv ill  it  go  to?
Will  it  go  out  of  existence?  No,
not  one  particle  of  material  that  now
enters  into  all  the  creations  which
God  has  made  ever  had  a  beginning,
or  will  ever  have  an  end.  The
imperials  exist  co-elenmlly  with  God.
The  materials  uf  which  the  earth  is
composed  may  be  dispersed,  and  the
earth  may  pusi)  away  as  an  organized
globe,  before  the  (ace  of  him  who
sits  upon  the  throne,  and  this  may
be  accomplished  by  tire,  which  not
only  melts  the  elements,  but  causes
them  to  be  separated  and  scattered
in  space.

Before  this  takes  place  the  last
trump  will  sound.  All  the  Saints
that  are  on  the  earth,  in  the  camp,
and  in  the  beloved  city,  around  about
the  old  and  new  Jerusalems,  when
Satan's  army  is  consumed  and  this
trump  shall  sound,  will  be  caught
up,  and  those  who  have  not  under-
gone their  full  change  from  mortality
to  immortality  will  be  changed  in


THE  CUFATION,  ETC.


323


the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  As  Paul
said  to  the  Corinthians — "  We  shall  ,
not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  be  changed
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye."  At
what  time  ?  When  the  last  trump
ahall  sound,  after  the  thousand  years
are  ended,  they  shall  be  changed  aud
caught  up.  Where  are  they  taken
to?  Up  into  the  celestial  heavens,
to  those  invisible  creations  that  are
in  space,  which  have  passed  through
their  ordeals,  and  been  sanctified,
glorified  and  made  celestial.  What
will  they  be  caught  up  for?  That
they  m:iy  not  pass  away,  whem  the
earth  pauses  away.  What  becomes
of  the  wicked,  those  who  were  con- .
sumed  to  ashes,  who  lived  before  the
Millennium  ?  They  are  called  forth
by  the  sound  of  the  last  trump,  and
caught  up  also  to  be  judged  ;  and
they  who  are  filthy  will  be  filthy
still,  and  they  who  are  unholy  will
remain  unholy  still,  they  who  arc
happy  will  be  happy  still;  both
small  and  great  in  that  day,  a  ill
stand  before  God,  ami  be  judged  out
of  the  things  written  iu  the  books,
every  mau  according  to  his  works.

We  might  say  considerable  in  re-
lation  to  these  books,  as  they  are
revealed  in  the  Buok  of  Mormon
and  elsewhere,  but  we  will  pass
along*  By  and  by  it  will  be  needful
to  hare  a  new  earth.  Now  hosv  does
the  Lord  make  this  new  earth  ?
He  makes  it  out  of  the  materials  of
the  old  one.  Thi<  vety  earth  on
which  we  dwell,  whose  <  laments  are
to  be  melted  aud  sanctified  with  ler-
vent  heat,  in  order  that  the  Saints
may  reign  upon  it  for  a  thousand
years;  this  very  earth  that  will  pass
away  and  no  place  be  found  for  it  as
an  organized  earth,  will  be  resur-
rected, the  elements  thereof  will  be
brought  together  again,  as  they  were
in  the  beginning,  and  they  will  be
sanctified  and  purified,  and  made
holy  and  celestial,  and  become  like  a


sea  of  glass,  and  then,  after  all  things
are  made  new,  and  old  things  have
passed  away,  the  two  Jerusalems
will  come  down  from  God  out  of
hen ven,  and  will  rest  upon  the  new
earth,  the  new  Jerusalem  standing
upon  this  continent,  aid  the  old
Jerusalem  bio^gbfc  again  to  where  it
formerly  stood.  Then  God  himself
will  be  with  them,  and  he  will  wipe
away  all  tears  from  their  eyes,  and
there  will  be  no  mote  sorrow,  nor
mourning,  neither  any  more  death,
for  the  former  things  will  have  passed
away,  and  all  things  will  have  be-
come new.  This  land  or  hemisphere
will  be  the  abiding  place  of  the  New
Jerusalem  for  ever  and  ever.

Now,  do  yon  not  see  that  there  it
a  similarity  in  regard  to  God's  deal-
ings with  the  earth  and  with  the  in-
habitants who  dwell  upon  its  face  ?
The  earth  has  to  undergo  a  change  as
well  as  our  bodies. As  our  bodies
may  be  burned  at  the  stake  and  the
ashes  blown  to  the  four  winds  of
heaven,  so  will  the  earth  be  burned
and  pass  away ;  and  in  the  same
njM riner  as  our  bodies  are  renewed
[  out  of  the  elements  which  once  en-
I  tered  into  their  composition,  or  at
'  least  a  sufficient  quantity  there-  f  to
'  make  a  new  body,  so  will  the  earth
have  to  be  renewed  again  and  resur-
rected, redeemed  and  m.-ide  immortal
from  the  elements  of  which  it  was
'  formerly  composed,  so  that  those  im-
mortal beings  who  are  brought  forth
hum  the  ^ravo  will  have  an  immortal
earth  to  dwell  upon.  There  is  a  type
of  this  thing  also  in  regard  to  our
first  parents When  this  earth  is-
sued from  the  hands  of  the  Almighty
1  it  was  intended  for  an  eternal  dura-
tion; in  other  words,  it  was  an  im-
mortal earth  or  creation,  all  things
being  pronounced  very  gocd.  But
man  brought  a  curse  upon  the  earth,
he  brought  death  into  the  world,  he
brought  a  cu^e  upon  the  waters  and


324


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


upon  all  the  materials  of  our  globe,
and  hence,  hr  man  has  t«i  be  aanct irttnl
and  1 1 j-  pa^s  through  the  several  or-
deal* necessary  for  that  purpose,  so
does  the  earth  j  and  when  man  has
got  through  with  these  ordeals  and
becomes  immortal,  sb  will  bin  abid-
ing place  become  immortal,  and  he
will  inherit  it  for  ever  and  ever.  Our
first  parents  wore  not  mortal  when
they  were  placed  on  this  earth,  but
they  were  as  immortal  as  those  who
an1  resurrected  in  the  presence  of
God,  Death  came  into  the  world  by
their  transgression,  they  produced
mortality;  hence  this  will  be  a  com-
plete restoration,  of  which  I  am
speaking,

We  are  living,  Latter-day  Saints,
near  the  close  of  the  sixth  thousand
veurs  from  the  iall  of  man;  how
near  I  do  not  know,  and  there  is  a
great  change  about  to  take  place,
inquires  one — "Is  there  not  some
way  by  which  we  can  fix  the  time,
and  arrive  at  a  certainty  in  regard  to
the  age  of  our  globe  since  the  fall  of
man  ?"  I  do  not  know  of  any  way
except  by  new  revelation,  for  chrono-
logy is  so  imperfect  that  many  hun-
dreds who  have  spent  their  lives  and
fortunes  in  studying  it,  differ  from
each  other  in  their  conclusions.  One
has  one  date  for  the  age  of  the  world,
and  another  has  another.  Let  me  give
to  you  a  few  specimens.  We  will
take  one  of  the  oldest  eras — the
Alexandrian  —  computed  by  Julius
African  us.  In  this  Alexandrian  era,
the  time  from  the  creation  to  the
birth  of  Christ  is  set  down  at  5,500
years ;  in  the  Antioch  era,  computed
by  Pan  nor  us,  it  is  set  down  at  5,493
years;  in  the  Constantinople,  or
Greek  era,  it  is  set  down  at  5,509
years;  you  take  Scaliger,  another
great  chronoligist,  and  he,  by  a  com-
parison of  the  text  of  various  ancient
manuscripts,  makes  the  age  of  the
world, from the  creation to  the


coming  of  Christ,  3,950  years.  Then
you  take  another  celebrated  man,
Father  Pezron,  and  he  makes  it
:>,87ii  years  from  the  creation  to
Christ,  Then  you  take  the  one  who
has  given  the  chronology  to  the  Bible,
At ch bishop  Usher,  and  he  makes  it
4,004  years  from  the  creation  to
Christ.  Another  chronologist,  Jose-
ph us,  makes  it  4,163  yenrs;  and
you  take  some  other  Jewish  chrono-
logist $,  and  they  make  it  as  high  as
6,024  years  from  the  creation  to
Christ  How  are  you  going  to  judge  ?
You  may  take  over  two  hundred
other  chronologists,  whose  names
are  given,  and  they  all  have  their
special  dates;  consequently,  you  see,
we  are  utterly  at  a  lj*s,  and  without
new  revelation,  we  are  no  more  sure
that  Archbishop  Usher  s  chronology,
contained  in  King  James's  Bible,  is
correct,  than  we  have  to  suppose  that
that  many  of  those  others  are  correct
What  shall  we  do,  then  ?  The  best
thing  for  us  to  do  is  to  depend  upon
what  God  reveals.  If  he  gives  us
any  knowledge  regarding  chronology,
depend  upon  it ;  and  he  has  given  us
a  great  deal  of  information  with  re-
gard to  the  signs  of  the  times.  If
be  has  not  given  as  the  age  of  the
world,  he  has  given  us  that  whereby
we  may  know  that  we  live  in  the
generation  in  which  the  times  of  the
Gentiles  will  be  fulfilled.  He  in-
formed us,  in  the  rise  of  this  Church,
that  that  generation  should  not  pass
away  until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles
should  be  fulfilled.  And  then  we
have  other  revelations,  showing  that
when  their  times  are  fulfilled  there
is  a  speedy  and  short  work  to  be
accomplished  in  the  gathering  of  the
house  of  Israel  from  the  four  quar-
ters of  the  earth.  They  are  to  be
brought  out  of  all  nations,  kindreds,
tongues,  and  people  with  a  mighty
hand  and  outstretched  arm.  We  are
told  that  God  will  then  perform  wo*-


f


THE  CREATION,  ETC.


325


ders,  miracles  and  signs,  greater  than
ever  have  been  performed  since  the
creation  of  the  world ;  that  he  will
bring  back  his  covenant  people.  Af-
ter the  Jews  have  rebuilt  Jerusalem,
and  after  the  Temple  is  erected,  the
Lord  Jesus  will  come,

How  much  of  this  work  will  he
performed,  after  the  sixth  thousand
years  have  passed  away,  t  do  not
know.  Inquires  one — "  Don't  you
think  it  will  all  be  completed  before
the  last  day  of  the  six  thousand
years  from  creation  *r"  No,  I  do
not;  the  Lord  has  told  ns  differently,
Bead  the  kej  to  John's  revelations,
published  in  the  ''Pearl  of  Great
Price,"  and  you  will  find  that  there
is  a  very  great  work  to  be  performed ,
alter  the  seventh  thousand  years,
called  the  Millennium,  has  com-
menced. You  will  find  that  the
seven  trumpets  are  to  aound,  pre-
paratory to  the  beginning  and  finish-
ing of  his  work  in  the  morning  of
the  seventh  thousand  years,  just  as
the  Lord  performed  a  work  in  the
seven tli  day  of  creation,  when  he
planted  the  Garden  of  Eden  and
placed  the  man  Adam  therein*  He
performed  quite  a  temporal  work  in
the  process  of  creation  on  the  morn-
ing of  the  seventh  day;  and  so  he
will  perform  a  work  at  the  beginning
of  the  seventh  thousand  years,  after
the  seventh  millennium  shall  open;
and  the  nature  of  the  work,  which
will  then  be  pet  formed,  was  typified
by  that  which  God  performed  in  the
beginning.  In  the  beginning  of  the
seventh  day  or  "  time"  of  creation
be  placed  man  in  the  Garden  of  Eden,
free  from  the  curse,  and,  says  the  key
to  John's  revelations,  in  the  morning
of  the  seventh  thousand  years  will
he  sanctify  the  earth,  redeem  man
from  the  grave,  and  seal  all  thing*
to  the  end  of  all  things;  and  the
Bounding  of  these  trumpets,  and  the
work  which  is  to  be  performed,  as


each  trumpet  shall  sound  in  its  turn,
will  accomplish  that  which  is  neces-
sary as  a  preparation  for  the  sealing
up  of  all  things  to  the  end  of  all
tilings  before  he  eomes.  Some  have
supposed  that  during  the  Millennium
a  great  work  would  be  performed  for
and  in  behalf  of  the  dead.  This
may  be;  but  this  revelation  would
weem  to  indicate  that  everything  will
be  pre  pared  before  the  Savior  comes,
everything  sealed  to  its  position,
everything  reduced  to  its  standard
and  to  its  sphere;  that  there  will
be  no  links  in  the  chain  but  what
will  be  completely  welled,  and
every  tiling  completely  prepared  by
the  sounding  of  these  trum-
pets.

Then  again,  after  the  six  thou-
sand years  have  ended,  before  the
Lord  shall  come  while  these  trumpets
are  sounding,  or  about  that  time,  we
find  that  there  is  to  be  a  great  work
among  the  nations — which  will  pro-
bably take  place  in  the  morning  of
the  seventh  thousand  years.  The
ten  tribes  will  have  to  come  forth
and  come  to  this  land,  to  be  crowned
with  glory  in  the  midst  of  Zion  by
the  hands  of  the  servants  of  God,
even  the  Children  of  Ephraim ;  and
twelve  thousand  High  Priests  will  bo
elected  from  each  of  these  ten  tribes,
as  well  as  from  the  scattered  tribes,
and  sealed  in  their  foreheads,  and
will  be  ordained  and  receive  power  to
gather  out  of  all  nations,  kindreds,
tongues  and  people  as  many  as  will
come  unto  the  general  assemblage  of
the  Church  of  the  first-born.  Will
not  that  be  a  great  work  ?  Imagine
one  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand
High  Priests  going  forth  among  the
nations,  and  gathering  out  as  many
as  will  come  to  the  Church  of  the
first-born.  All  that  will  be  done,
probably,  in  the  morning  of  the
seventh  thousaad  years.  The  work
is  of  great  magnitude,  Latter-day


32S


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


Saints,  and  we  are  living  aloiost  upon
the  eve  of  it.  Six  thousand  years
have  nearly  gone  by,  the  world  is
getting  aged,  and  Satan  has  iiccom-
plished  almost  all  that  the  Lord
intends  that  he  shall  accomplish,
before  the  day  of  rest.  With  a  work
of  such  magnitude  before  them,  the
Latter-day  Saints  should  he  wide
awake,  and  should  nut  have  their
minds  engaged  in  those  fooleries  in
which  many  indulge  at  the  present
time.  We  should  put  these  things
away,  and  our  inquiry  should  be, —
<£  Lord,  how  can  we  prepare  the  way
before  thy  coming  ? How  can  we


prepare  ourselves  to  perform  the
great  work  which  must  be  performed
in  this  greatest  of  dispensations,  the
dispensation  of  the  fullness  of  times?
How  can  we  be  prepared  to  behold
the  Saints  who  lived  on  the  earth  m
former  dispensations,  and  take  tbena
by  the  hand  and  fall  upon  their  necks
and  they  fall  upon  ours,  and  we  em-
brace each  other  ?  How  can  we  be
prepared  for  this?"  How  can  all
things  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  both
which  ate  in  heaven  and  on  the  earth,
be  assembled  in  one  grand  assembly,
wit  hout  we  are  wide  awake  ?
May  God  bless  you.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  in  the  First  Ward  School -house,  Sunday  Afternoon,
;  Dku,  28,  1873,  '  r  1


(Reported  hy  David  W.  Evans.)

REVELATION  ON  THE  JUDGMENTS  OF  Til  K  LOUD— FIRST  FRUITS  Of  THE
RESURRECTION— WHAT  BECOMETH  OF  THE  SOULS  OF  MEN— KEDEM-
T10N  UNIVERSAL.


We  will  commence  our  discourse
by  rending  a  part  of  the  25th,  and
the  26th  and  27th  sections  of  a  reve-
lation, given  December  27,  1332,
contained  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and  Covenants.

"  And  angels  shall  fly  through  the
midst  of  heaven,  crying  with  a  loud
Toice,  sounding  the  trump  of  God,
saying,  prepare  ye,  prepare  ye,  0
inhabitants  of  the  earth ;  for  the
judgment  of  our  God  is  come  :  be-


hold, and  lo !  the  Bridegroom  com-
et h,  go  ye  out  to  meet  hira.

"  And  immediately  there  ahull  ap-
pear a  great  sign  in  heaven,  and  all
people  shall  see  it  together.  And
another  angel  shall  sound  his  trump,
saying,  that  great  church,  the  mother
of  abominations,  that  made  all  na-
tions drink  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath
of  her  fornication,  that  persecuteth
the  Saints  of  God,  that  shed  their
bloud  ;  her  who  sittetli  upon  many


REVELATION,  ETC


waters,  and  upon  the  islands  of  the
sea ;  behold,  she  is  the  tares  of  the
earth,  she  is  bound  in  bundles,  her
bands  are  made  strong,  no  man  can
loose  them ;  therefore,  she  is  ready
to  be  burned.  And  he  shall  sound
his  trump  both  long  ami  kmd,  and
all  nations  shall  hear  it  '  |

"And  there  shall  l^e  silence  in
heaven  for  the  spara  of  half  an  hour,
and  immediately  after  shall  the  cur*
tain  of  heaven  be  unfolded,  as  a  scroll
is  unfolded  after  it  is  rolled  up,  and
the  face  of  the  Lord  shall  be  unveiled;
avid  the  Saints  that  are  upon  the
earth,  who  are  alive,  shall  be  quick-
ened, and  be  caught  up  to  meet  him.
And  they  who  have  slept  in  their
graves  shall  come  forth;  for  their
graves  shall  he  opencl,  and  they
also  shall  be  caught  up  to  meet  him
in  the  midst  of  the  pillar  of  heaven:
they  are  Christ's,  the  first  fruits:
they  who  shall  descend  with  him
first,  and  they  who  are  on  the  earth
and  in  their  graves,  who  are  first
caught  np  to  meet  him  5  and  all  this
by  the  voice  of  the  sounding  of  the
trump  of  the  angel  of  God."

This  revelation  was  given  through
our  Prophet,  and  Seer,  and  Relator,
Joseph  Smith,  who  was  one  of  the
greatest  men  who  ever  lived  iu  this
probation,  one  of  the  greatest  Pro-
phets, with  the  except i.  1  u  of  our  L  <vd
and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,  ever  sent
to  our  earth. I  think  it  is  forty-one
years  yesterday since  this  revela-
tion was  given In  it  are  revealed
many  things  pertaining  to  the  sal-
vation of  the  children  of  men,  and
pertaining  to  the  great  and  event-
ful works  of  the  Lord  which  are
about  to  take  placo  on  the  earth.
In the sections preceding  those
which  I  have  read,  we  have  an  ac-
count of  certain  great  events  that
have  not  yet  transpired,  namely,  that
after  the  testimonies  of  the  servants
of  God  among  the  nations  comes


the  testimony  of  many  judgments,
which  will  be  poured  upon  the  na-
tions,  such as earthquakes,  wars,
the  sea  heaving  beyond  its  bounds,
and  a  variety  of  calamities  which
shall  make  the  hearts  of  all  the
wicked fail them  for  fear.  After
these great  judgments  are  poured
upon  the  nations  of  the  earth,  then
will  be  fulfilled  the  words  which  I
have  read,  "and angels  will  tiy
1  through  the  midst  of  heaven  sound*
I  ing  the  trump  of  God,  saying  pre*
p. ire  ye,  prepare  ye,  0  inlnbiMnta
of  the  earth,  for  the  judgment  of
our  God  is  come,  behold  and  lo!
'  the  Bridegroom  Cometh,  g>  ye  out
to  meet,  him." After  these  angvls
I  have  flo  vn  through  the  midst  of
heaven  calling  upon  the  inhabitants
of  the  ear tli  to  prepare  for  the  com-
ing of  tho  Bridegroom,  seven  m-»re
angels  are  to  sound  their  trumps.
The  first  one  aoan  Is,  and  his  pro-
clamation is  concerning  groat  Baby-
lon,  "who  has made  all  nations
I  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of
1  her fornication, concerning  her
who  sits  upon  many  waters,  who
I  has  her  dominion  among  many  na*
tioriH,  kindreds,  tongues  and  people,
behold  she  is  the  tares of  all  the
earth ,  she  is  bound  iu  bundles,  her
I  bands  are  made  strong,  no  man  can
loose them, therefore  she  is  ready
to  be burned,  and  he  shall  sound
his  trump  both  long  and  loud,  and
all  nations  shall  hear  it/'

Titers  must  be  something  con-
nected with  the  sounding  of  this
trump  that  ia  miraculous  in  order
that  all  nations  may  hear  it  Any
sound  that  can  be  produced  by  mor-
tal man  does  not  reach,  generally
speaking,  over  about  thirty  milea
from  where  it  originates,  which  is
a  very  small  space  indeed.  But
there  will  be  something  connected
with  tho  sounding  of  the  trump  of
the  first  of  the  seven  angels  which


1


32S


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


will  manifest  a  power  which  we
know  nothing  of.  The  sound  of
that  trump  will  be  heard  by  all  j>eo-
ple,  nations,  kindreds  and  tongues
in  the  four  quarters  of  our  globe.  I
do  not  know  that  the  sound  will  be
io  much  louder  than  some  we  have
beard,  but  it  will  be  carried  by  some
miraculous  power  so  that  all  people
will  hear  it,

w  Immediately  after  the  sounding
of  this  trump  there  will  be  silence
in  heaven  for  tht  space  of  half  an
hour."  Whether  the  half  hour  here
spoken  of  is  according  to  our  reck-
oning—  thirty  minutes,  or  whether
it  be  according  to  the  reckoning  of
the  Lord  we  do  not  know.  We
know  that  the  word  hour  is  used  in
some  portions  of  the  Scriptures  to
represent  quite  a  lengthy  period  of
time.  For  instance,  we,  the  Latter-
day  Saints,  are  living  in  the  eleventh
hour,  that  is  in  the  eleventh  period
of  time;  and  for  aught  we  know  the
half  hour  during  which  silence  is  to
prevail  in  heaven  may  be  quite  an
extensive  period  of  time.  During  the
period  of  silence  all  things  are  perfectly
still  j  no  angels  flying  during  that  half
hour  j  no  trumpets  sounding;  no  noise
in  the  heavens  above;  but  imme-
diately affer  this  great  silence  the
•curtain  of  heaven  shall  be  unfolded
as  a  scroll  is  unfolded.  School  chil-
dreu,  who  are  in  the  habit  of  seeing
maps  hung  upon  the  wall,  know  that
they  have  rollers  upon  which  they  am
rolled  up,  and  that  to  expose  the  face
of  the  maps  they  are  let  down.  So
will  the  curtaiu  of  heaven  be  unrolled
eo  that  the  people  may  gaze  upon
thost  celestial  beings  who  will  make
their  appearance  in  the  clouds.  The
face  of  the  Lord  will  be  unveiled,
and  those  who  are  alive  will  be  quick-
ened, and  they  will  be  caught  up;
and  the  Saints  who  are  in  their
graves,  will  come  forth  and  be
caught  up,  together  uith  those  who


art  quickened,  and  they  will  be
taken  into  the  heavens  into  the
midst  of  those  celestial  beings  who
will  make  their  appearance  at  that
time.  These  are  the  ones  who  are
the  first  truits,  that  i*,  the  Gist  fruits
at  the  time  of  his  coming.

There  was  a  period  some  eighteen
centuries  ago,  when  the  Saints  arose
from  their  graves,  after  the  resurrec-
tion of  Christ,  he  being  the  first  fruits.
That  is  called  in  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon the  first  resurrection;  it  took
plact  about  the  time,  or  a  little  after
the  resurrection  of  Jesus.  Hut  when
he  comes  the  second  time,  the  first
fruits  of  the  resurrection  will  be  the
Saints  who  come  out  of  their  graves.
They,  in  connection  with  the  Saints
of  all  ages,  will  be  the  Church  of
the  first  -  born,  and  they  will  de-
scend with  the  Savior  when  he
comes.

There  are  some  who  suppose,  when
these  Saints  are  thus  resurrected  and
taken  up  into  heaven,  that  this  will
be  the  precise  period  when  Jesmswill
descend  on  the  earth  ;  but  I  wish  to
correct  I  his  idea  by  the  aid  of  both
old  and  new  revelation.  Instead  of
Jesus  immediately  descending  to  the
earth,  when  these  Saints  are  thus
taken  into  heaven,  he  will  stay  until
the  seven  angels  have  sounded  their
tramps.  There  will  be  quite  a  lapse
of  time  between  the  sounding  of
each  of  these  seven ;  some  months
will  intervene;  they  do  not  all  fol-
low directly  one  after  the  other  or
in  the  course  of  a  few  hours  time;
but  there  will  be  a  period  between
in  which  certain  great  and  marvelous
e%Tents  will  take  place.  For  in-
stance, if  we  read  the  revelations
of  St,  John,  we  find  that  when  the
fifth  angel  shall  sound  his  trump,
the  bottomless  pit  shall  be  opened,
and  there  shall  come  forth  a  great
smoke,  and  a  cloud  of  locusts,  so
great  that  the  sun  and  air  bhall  be


0

REVELATION,  ETC.


329


darkened;  and  these  locusts  shall
have  power  to  torment  men  five
months  before  the  sounding  of  the
sixth  trump.  This  shows  that  there
will  be  a  period  of  at  least  fire
months,  between  the  sounding  of
the  trumps  of  the  fifth  and  sixth
angels.  Read  also  eon  cam  ii  ig  the
sounding  of  the  sixth  trump,  and
yon  will  find  that  there  i$  a  great
work  to  be  accomplished  before  the
seventh  angel  shall  sound,  for  in  the
time  intervening  between  the  sounding
of  the  sixth  and  seventh  trumps  the
four  angels  which  are  bound  in  the
groat  river  Euphrates  are  to  be  loosed,
and  they  are  to  gather  together  a  very
great  army.  If  I  recollect  aright,
that  army  is  to  consist  of  two  hun-
dred millions  of  people,  who  are  to
ride  on  some  kind  of  beasts  or  ani-
mals which  the  Lord,  probably  by
some  supernatural  means,  will  pre-
pare for  the  occasion.  These  per-
sonages who  come  forth  riding  upon
these  beasts  are  prepared  for  an
Lour,  for  a  day,  for  a  month,  and
fur  a  year ;  and  their  work  is  to  slay
ft  third  part  of  the  hosts  of  men  then
existing  upon  the  earth,  and  as  they
arc  prepared  for  an  I) our,  a  day,  a
month,  and  a  year,  it  shows  there  will
bt*  quite  a  lapse  of  time  between  the
sounding  of  the  trump  of  the  sixth
and  seventh  angel.

We  might  bring  up,  also,  the  de-
claration of  John  in  relation  to  the
two  witnesses  who  are  to  prophecy
about  that  period.  They  are  to
prophecy  three  and  a  half  years,  and
their  tield  of  labor  will  be  Jerusalem,
after  it  shall  have  been  rebuilt  by  the
Jews.  By  means  of  their  prophecies
and  the  power  of  God  attending  them,
the  nations  who  are  gathered  together
against  Jerusalem  will  be  kept  at  bay,
these  Prophets  will  hold  them  in
check  by  their  faith  and  power.  By
and  by  these  nations  overcome  the
two  witnesses  and,  having  finished


their  mission,  they  are  slain,  and
their  bodies  will  lie  three  days  and  a
half  in  the  streets  of  the  city.  Then
a  great  earthquake  will  take  place,
and  these  two  witnesses  will  be  caught
up  to  heaven.

All  this  takes  place  after  these
trumps  begin  to  sound  ;  and  if  these
two  witnesses  are  to  fulfill  a  mission
of  three  and  a  half  years,  it  shows
that  the  sounding  of  the  trumpets
does  not  take  place,  as  many  have
supposed,  in  rapid  succession,  but
certain  events  have  to  be  accom-
plished between  their  respective
soundings.  By  and  by  the  whole
seven  will  have  sounded,  and  then
they  commence  to  sound  a  second
time.  According  to  the  revelation
from  which  1  have  read,  the  second
mounding  of  the  trumpets  is  not  to
produce  destruction  among  the  na-
tions, but  the  sound  of  the  first  one
will  reveal  the  secret  acts  of  God,  his
'  purposes  and  doings  on  the  earth
during  the  fir*t  thousand  years;  the
sounding  of  the  second  will  reveal
the  doings  and  purposes  of  the  Great
Jehovah  during  the  second  thousand
years,  and  so  on,  until  the  seventh
shall  sound  the  second  time,  and  pro-
nounce the  work  of  God  finished,  so
far  as  the  great  preparation  needful
for  his  second  coming  is  concerned.

Notice,  now,  tnat  it  is  the  first
sounding  of  the  first  of  these  seven,
when  the  first  resurrection  takes
place;  and  all  these  great  woiks  are
to  be  performed  on  the  earth,  and
yeais  elapse  before  Jesus  descends
with  all  his  Saints;  that  is,  if  we
understand  these  things  correctly,
by  what  little  is  revealed  upon  the
1  subject.  There  are  many  things
which  I  would  like  to  dwell  upon
in  connection  with  the  resurrec-
'  tion  of  the  Saints  and  their  being
caught  up  into  the  heavens.  The
subject  of  the  resurrection  is  one  that
we  all  are  very  mucn  interested  in  ;


330


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


it  is  something  which  concerns  all
mankind,  more  or  less,  bat  especi-
ally the  Latter-day  Saints  who  are
now  living  on  the  earth.  We  all
see  that  our  brethren  and  sisters,
as  well  as  the  wicked,  are  passing
away,  leaving  ns;  they  are  called
upon  to  lay  aside  these  bodies,  which
are  deposited  in  the  grave.  They
are  passing  off  by  scores,  by  hun-
dreds and  by  thousands,  and  we  ex-
pect to  follow  them,  that  is  the
must  of  us.  Perhaps  some  may  live
until  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man,
or  the  sounding  of  the  first  tramp ;
but  inasmuch  as  most  of  us  expect
to  lay  our  bodies  down  to  sleep,  it
must  be  interesting  to  every  Latter-
day  Saint  to  know  something  about
the  resurrection.

What  can  we  know  about  it?
Nothing  except  what  the  Lord  has
revealed,  and  let  me  here  say  that
perhaps  no  subject  pertaining  to
salvation  was  ever  so  fully  revealed
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  as
that  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body.
Many  pro  pie  have  thought  that
very  little  has  been  revealed  on
this  subject;  but  if  I  am  not  mis-
taken we  have  an  abundance,  al-
though there  are  many  things  in
regard  to  it  about  which  we  are  still
in  the  dark,  because  they  have  not
been  revealed.  Bat  if  we  will  care-
fully search  the  revelations  that
have  been  given,  we  may  learn
many  things  in  regard  to  this  great
event  which  will  be  satisfying  to
our  minds.  >  *

When  we  carry  our  friends  to
the  grave  y ard  we  feel  sorrowful,
because  we  have  to  leave  them,  and
because  they  are  separated  f  rom  us,
for  a  short  time.  All  that  kindness
and  sociability  which  existed  are
no  more  experienced,  and  we  no
longer  have  the  privilege  of  their
society  as  we  had  formerly,  and  con-
sequently we  mourn. But  what  a


consolation  it  is  to  realize  that,
when  our  friends  are  laid  down,  we
are  not  separated  from  them  for-
ever, if  they  have  died  in  the  faith,
and  if  we,  ourselves,  endure  faith-
ful to  the  end;  for  if  we  keep  the
commandments  of  God  as  we  should,
we  have  an  assurance  and  a  hopo
within  us  which  can  not  be  shaken
that  we  shall  rise  again,  and  that
nur  todies  will  come  forth  from  tha
grave.

Now  let  us  try  to  understand
how  much  i>3  revealed  upon  this
subject ;  and  in  order  to  understand
it,  let  me  refer  you  to  some  things
that  are  contained  in  the  Book  of
Mormon.  On  page  240  of  that  book
we  tint!  something  on  the  subject
of  the  resurrection.  That  which  I
am  about  to  read  was  spoken  by
the  Prophet  Amdek,  in  the  city  of
Ammonihuh,  to  a  very  wicked  peo-
ple, who  were  shortly  afterwards
totally  destroyed  because  of  their
wickedness.

4 4  Now,  there  is  a  death  which  is
called  a  temporal  death :  and  the
death  of  Christ  shall  loose  the
bands  of  this  temporal  death,  that
all  shall  bo  raised  from  this  tempo-
ral death;  the  spirit  and  the  body
shall  be  re- united  again  in  its  per-
fect form :  both  limb  and  joint  shall
be  restored  to  its  proper  frame,  even
as  we  now  are  at  this  time ;  and  we
shall  be  brought  to  stand  before  God,
knowing  even  as  we  know  now,  and
have  a  bright  recollection  of  all  our
.guilt.  Now  this  res  oration  shill
come  to  all,  both  old  and  younsr*
both  bond  and  free,  both  male  and
female,  both  the  wicked  and  the
righteous;  and  even  there  shall  not
so  much  as  a  hair  of  their  heads  ba
lost;  but  all  things  shall  be  restored
to  its  perfect  frame,  as  it  is  new  or
in  the  body,  and  shall  be  brought,
and  l)o  arraigned  before  the  bar  of
Christ  the  Son,  and  God  the  Father,


REVELATION,  ETC.


331


and  tlie  Holy  Spirit,  which  i*  one
eternal  God,  to  be  judged  according
to  their  works,  whether  they  be
good  or  whether  they  be  evil/*

Thus  we  see  that  there  will  be
no  limbs  lacking.  If  a  person  has
lost  his  arm,  his  leg,  or  his  eyes,
they  will  be  restored,  and  will
stand  before  God  perfect,  and  the
wicked  will  have  a  bright  reco'lec-
tion  of  all  their  guilt.  The  Pro-
phet Araulek  was  trying  to  explain
all  this*  to  a  people  who  were  full  of
guilt,  having  disobeyed  the  com-
mandments of  heaven,  until  they
were  almost  ripened  for  destruction,  ,
He  informed  them  that  they  should
have  a  perfect  knowledge  of  al!  their
gnilt.  In  this  life  there  are  many
things  that  people,  whether  righte-
ous or  wicked,  forget.  Our  memo-
ries are  so  weak  that  many  things
done  in  years  passed  are  oblitera-
ted ;  but  when  they  come  forth  in
the  morning  of  the  resurrection,
the  wicked  as  well  as  the  righteous,  I
their  memories  will  be  restored,  so
that  every  act  of  their  lives,
whether  good  or  evil,  will  be  per-
fectly remembered,  and  the  wicked
will  have  a  perfect  know  ledge  of
all  their  guilt  Will  not  this  be
sufficient  to  create  an  unquencha-
ble tire  in  their  breasts,  and  with
this  recollection,  to  behold  the  face
of?  he  Lord?  Will  not  this  cause
them  to  shrink  from  Ins  presence?
I  think  it  will.  The  Prophet  Moro-
ni, speaking  on  this  subject,  and
addressing  himself  to  the  unbe-
lieving who  should  live  on  the  earth
at  the  time  the  Book  of  Mormon
ub<  aid  come  forth,  buys  —  '*  You
would  be  more  miserable  to  dwell
is  the  presence  ot  that  holy  and
pure  Being  than  you  would  to  dwelt
with  the  damned  souls  in  hell."
That  is  perfectly  reasonable ;  for  a
wicked  person  in  the  presence  of
God  would  be  a  place  not  adapted


to  his  evil,  corrupt,  carnal  nature*
There  must  be  a  place  of  filth  iness
prepared  for  that,  which  is  filthy,
that  those  who  are  filthy,  wicked
and  cormpt  may  be  placed  m  cir-
cumstances adapted  to  their  condi-
tion. Such  persons,  when  in  the
presence  of  God,  would  be  glad  for
the  rocks and mountains to  fall

i  upon  and  hide  lliem,  for  the  recol-
lection of  their  iniquities  will  emjte
them,  and  kindle  within  them  a
flame  like  an  unquenchable  fire,
for  their  consciences  will  have  a
bright  recollection  of  all  their  guilt.

!  Now  this  restoration  will  comu  to
all,  both  old  and  young,  bond  and
free,  male  and  female,  righteous
and  wicked,  and  there  shall  nui  so
much  as a  hair  of  their  heads  be

i  lost.  Many  persons,  when  they
advance  in  years,  lose  their  hair,  and
become  baldheaded.  Will  they  rise
in  the  resurrection  without  hair,
because  they  have  been  laid  in  the
grave  in  that  condition?  No,  that
would  be  imperfection,  and  we  have
a  statement  in  the  Book  of  Mormon
that  not  so  much  as  one  hair  shall
be  lost.  Again  the  Prophet  Amu-
lek  says — u  But  all  things  shall  be

'  restored  to  its  perfect  frame,  as  it  is
now,  and  shall  be  arraigned  before
the  bar  of  Christ,  the  Son,  and  God
the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,
which  is  one  eternal  God,  to  be
judged  according  to  their  works,
whether  they  be  good,  or  whether
they  be  evil.  Now,  behold  I  have
spoken  onto  you  concerning  the
death  of  the  mortal  body,  and  also

.  concerning  the  resurrection  of  the
immortal  body.  I  say  unto  you  that
this  mortal  body  is  raised  to  an  im-
mortal body,  that  is  from  death,
even  from  the  first  death,  unto  life,
that  they  can  die  no  more."  What
this  means  is  this — there  can  be  no
further  dissolution  between  the  spi-
rit and  the  body ;  they  ean  not  ba


separated,  and  they  -  can  die  no
more.  This  seems  to  make  it  plain
that  their  spirits  unite  with  their
bodies  never  to  be  separated  again,
and  return  to  dust,  as  in  the  first
death,  and  thus  becoming  spiritual
and  immortal,  "they  can  no  more
see  corrupt  ion."

We  will  now  turn  to  what  the
Prophet  Alma  said  to  his  son  Cori-
an  ton,  not  only  concerning  the  res*
urrection,  but  also  concerning  tl^e
condition  or  state  of  the  spirit  of
man,  between  the  time  of  death  and
the  resurrection.  This  is  on  page
31*  of  the  Book  of  Mormon.

14  And  now  I  would  inquire  what
becometh  of  the  souls  of  men  from
this  time  of  death,  to  the  time  ap-
pointed for  the  resurrection?  Now
whether  there  is  mure  than  one
time  appointed  for  men  to  rise,  it
mattereth  not ;  for  all  do  not  die  at ,
once,  and  this  mattereth  not ;  all  is  as
one  day  with  God,  and  time  only  is
measured  unto  men,  therefore  there
is  a  time  appointed  unto  men,  that
they  shall  rise  from  the  dead ;  and
there  is  a  space  of  time  between  the
time  of  death  and  the  resurrection.
And  now  concerning  this  space  of
time.  What  becometh  of  the  souls
of  men,  is  the  thing  which  1  have
inquired  diligently  of  the  Lord  to  '
know  ;  and  this  is  the  thing  of  which
I  do  know.  And  when  the  time  j
Cometh  when  all  shall  rise,  then
shall  they  know  that  God  knoweth
all  times  which  are  appointed  unto
man.  Now  concerning  the  state  of
the  soul  between  death  and  the  res-
urrection. Behold,  it  has  been  made
known  unto  me,  by  an  angel,  that
the  spirits  of  all  men,  as  soon  as
they  are  departed  from  this  mortal
body;  yea,  the  spirits  of  all  men,
whether  they  be  good  or  evil,  are
taken  home  to  that  God  who  gave
them  life.  And  then  shall  it  come
to  pass  the  spirits  of  those  who*  are


righteous,  are  received  into  a  state  of
happiness,  which  is  called  paiadise;
a  state  of  rest,  a  state  of  peace,  where
they  shall  rest  from  all  their  troubles,
and  from  all  care  and  sorrow,  &c.

"And  then  shall  it  come  to  prtss,
that  the  spirits  of  the  wicked,  yea,
who  are  evil;  for  behold,  they  have
no  part  nor  portion  of  the  Spirit  of
the  Lord; for  behold,  they  choose
evil  works  rather  than  good;  there-
fore the  spirit  of  the  devil  did  enter
into  them,  and  take  possession  of
their  house  ;  and  these  shall  be  cast
out  into  outer  darkness;  there  shall
be  weeping,  wnd  wailing,  and  gnash-
ing  of  teeth ; and  this  because  of
their  own  iniquity; being  led  cap-
tive by  the  will  of  the  devil.  Now
this  is  the  state  of  the  souls  of  the
wicked; yea,  in  darkness,  and  in  a
itate  of  awful,  fearful,  looking  for
the  fiery  indignation  of  the  wrath
of  God  upon  them; thus  they  re-
main in  this  state,  as  well  as  the
righteous  in  paradise,  until  the  time
of  their  resurrection,"
IThere  is  an  idea  prevalent,  I  do
not  know  how  prevalent,  among  the
Saints,  that  we  do  not  go  directly
home to God, when our  spirits
leave  these  bodies,  but  that  there  is
a  kind  of  intermediate  state  where
we  have  to  go  through  further  pre
i  parations;  but  if  I  can  understand
the  language  contained  in  this  de-
claration of  Alma,  it  seems  that  the
spirits  of  all  men,  whether  wicked
or  righteous,  as  soon  as  they  leave
this  mortal  body,  "go  home  to  that
God  who  gave  them  life,"  that  is,
they  return  to  the  place  and  posi-
tion that  they  occupied  while  they
were  in  the  eternal worlds. It,  is
called  "  home,"  because  they  once
bad  their  abiding  place  there,  and
they  have  been  absent  from  home,
while  here  in  the  body ;  but  as  soou
as  they  are  separated  from  the  body,
they  all  return  to  that  ancient  home,


into  the  presence  of  the  Lord.

After  they  i>et  buck  there,  they  :
are  completely  redeemed,  so  far  as
the  original  sin  is  concerned  The
original  sin  shut  them  out  from  the
presence  of  God  ;  did  it  not  ?  Every
one  will  say  yea.  The  redemption
made  hy  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus
Christ  redeems  mankind  from  the
penalty  of  t  he  original  sin,  folly
and  completely  and  the  wicked  and
the  righteous,  without  any  respect
of  persons,  are  brought  back  into
his  presence,  the  same  as  they  were
before  they  came  from  his  presence
into  these  fallen  bodies.  This  makes  |
the  redemption  universal  No  per-
son, however  wicked,  if  he  be  as
corrupt  a  man  as  ever  lived  on  the
earth  even  a  son  of  perdition,  can
avoid  being  brought  back  into  the
presence  of  God,  that  his  redemption
may  be  complete,  so  far  as  the  original
sin  is  concerned.  Anything  short  of
this  would  be  a  failure  in  t  he  redemp-
tion of  man  from  the  fall  The
righteous,  after  death,  are  received
into  a  state  of  rest,  peace,  and  hap-
piness, in  Paradise,  Ther  ■  they  will
be  free  from  all  cure  and  Borrow,  and
Satan  will  have  no  power  over  themj;
If  they  should  be  sum  n  a  mission
from  Paradise  to  any  part  of  the  do-  ■
minion  of  the  Almighty  to  admin-
ister, as  Jesus  administered  whih-
his  body  was  in  the  tomb,  evil  powers
and  spirits  and  fallen  angels  are
subject  to  their  c  mimand,  an- 1  they
are  not  in  the  least  subject  to  these
evil  beings.  Herein  is  t lie  freedom
of  the  righteous,  an  1  the  victory
they  obtain,  for  in  (he  name  of  Jesus
they  can  command  these  fallen
angels,  and  thev^are  compelled  to
yield  obedience,  L^ut  how  is  ii  with
the  wicked  ?j  They  have  not  learned
to  command  these  evil  powers,
they  have  not  placed  themselves
in  a  position  here  in  this  life  to  do  !
so ;  they  can  not  cast out  devils.


Why  ?  Because  they  &re  wicked
and  corrupt,  and  when  they  meet
with  the  devil  or  any  of  the  fallen
angels,  they  are  immediately  en-
slaved and  brought  into  captivity
to  them,  and  that  is  the  worst  kind
of  slavery;  and  according  to  what  I
h  ve  read  here,  the  spirit  of  the
devil  enters  into  their  house.  What
house  ?  The  spiritual  house,  for
they  have  not  got  hod  its  of  Hesli
and  bones  yet,  the  resurrection  has
not  taken  place  yet,  and  that  spirit,
that  spiritual  body,  becomes  subject
to  the  devil,  ami  tie  enters  their
house,  anil  they  are  east  out  into
outer  darkness,  and  are  in  captivity
ti>  the  devil,  and  are  his  slaves,  until
the  resurrection,  when  their  bodies
and  spirits  will  be  reunited.  .

Let  us  enquire,  for  a  few  moments,
concerning  the  nature  of  these  spirit^
ual  bodies  which  are  thus  restored
back  into  the  presence  of  God.  A
great  many  people  have  supposed
that  the  spirit  which  exists  in  the
tabernacle,  for  instance,  of  an  infant,
is  of  the  same  size  as  the  infant  tab-
ernacle when  it  enters  therein.  No
one  will  depute  that  it  is  of  the  same
size  when  it  is  enclosed  therein ;  but
how  large  was  the  spirit  before  it  en-
rered  the  tabernacle  F  Was  it  a  full
grown  male  or  female  spirit,  or  was  it
a  little  infant  spirit  in  its  pre-existent
state  ?  We  have  no  account  that  I
know  of,  in  any  revelation  which  God
has  given,  of  any  infant  spirit  coofe*
ing  from  the  eternal  worlds  to  take
infant  bodies;  but  we  have  an  op-
posite account  in  the  revelations
which  God  has  given ;  for  if  we  turn
to  the  Book  of  Ether  we  shall  find
that  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  was  ono
uf  these  spirit*,  and  the  first- bora
of  the  whole  family,  was  a  personage
like  unto  a  man,  without  flesh,  blood
or  bones,  but  a  full  -  grown  spirit,
thousands  of  years  before  he  came
to  take  his  infant  tabernacle* Is  it


13  i


JOLUNAL  OF  lilSCOUirsKS.


10  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Ether  ?
Yea.  You  will  no  doubt  recollect  the
words  of  the  brother  of  Jared,  at  the
time  that  he  prayed  unto  the  Lord,
when  he  carried  in  Ins  hand  sixteen
small  transparent  stones,  and  went
to  the  lop  of  Mount  Sheiem.  He
said — "Lord,  stretch  forth  thine
hand  and  touch  these  stones  with  thy
finger  one  by  one,  that  they  may  shine
forth  and  give  light  unto  us  in  the
vessels  which  thou  hast  commanded
us  to  prepare,  arid  suffer  not  that
thy  people  shall  cross  this  great
deep  in  darkness  ?  Behold,  0  Lord,
thou  canst  do  these  things,"  &c.
The  Lord,  in  answer  to  his  prayer,
stretched  forth  his  hand  and  touched
these  stones  one  by  one,  sixteen
of  them.  Eight  vessels  were  pre-
pared, and  the  Prophet  wanted  one
in  each  end  of  each  vessel ;  and  be-
cause of  the  faith  of  the  brother
of  Jared  the  Lord  could  not  hide
his  finger  from  him,  and  hence  the
vail  was  taken  from  before  his  eyes,
and  he  saw  the  finger  of  the  Lord,
an  1  it  was  like  unto  the  finger  of  a
man,  and  not  like  an  infant,  which
when  the  brother  of  Jared  saw  he
fell,  through  lear,  lest  the  Lord
should  smite  him,  it  being  the  first
time  he  had  ever  seen  any  part  or
portion  of  the  spiritual  body  of  Jesus.
The  Lord  said  unto  him — u  Arisen
why  hast  thou  f'allun  ?  And  the
brother  of  Jared  said,  11 1  saw  the
finger  of  the  Lord,  and  I  knew  not
the  Lord  had  flesh  and  blood."  The
Lord  said — "  Because  of  thy  faith
thou  hast  seen  that  I  shall  take  upon
me  flesh  and  blood ;  and  never  bps
man  come  before  me  with  such  ex-
ceeding faith  as  thou  hast;  for  were
it  not  so,  ye  could  not  have  seen  my
finger.  Sawest  thou  more  than  this?
And  he  answered,  nay ;  Lord,  shew
thyself  unto  me*  And  the  Lord
said  unto  him,  Bui ie vest  thou  the
words  which  I  shall  speak  ?  And


he  answered,  yea,  Laid,  I  kuow
that  thou  speakest  the  truth,  for
thou  art  a  God  of  truth  and  canst
not  lie.  And  when  he  had  said  these
words,  behold,  the  Lord  shewed
himself  onto  him,  and  said,  Because
thou  knowest  these  things  ye  are
redeemed  from  the  fall;  therefore,
ye  ate  brought  back  into  my  pre-
sence ;  therefore  I  shew  myself  unto
you."

Here  was  the  redemption  of  a
man  restored  back  a^ain  into  the
presence  of  the  Lord  while  yet  in
the  flesh ;  he  saw  with  his  eyes
what  lie  had  before  seen  by  faith*
Then  the  Lord  said  — (*  Behold  I  am
Jesus  Christ,  I  am  the  Father  at: J
the  Son,  and  in  me  shall  all  man*
kind  have  light,  and  that  eternally,
even  they  who  shall  believe  on  my
name.  Behold,  this  body  which
you  now  see  is  the  body  of  my  spirit,
and  all  men  in  the  beginning  have
I  created  after  the  body  of  my  spirit."
Notice  now,  they  were  created  after
the  same  form  and  fashion,  and  no
doubt  attain  by  growth  to  similar  di-
mensions as  the  body  of  hie  spirit,
without  flesh  and  bones.  The  ex-
pression is,  "  All  men  in  the  begin-
ning"— you  were  there,  all  this  crea-
tion were  there ;  all  the  inhabitants
i*f  the  earth  who  now  live,  all  that
have  lived,  and  all  that  will  live  in
times  to  come,  were  all  created  after
the  body  of  his  spirit  in  the  begin-
ning before  this  world  was  made.

When  all  these  spirits  were  sent
forth  from  the  eternal  worlds,  they
were,  no  doubt,  not  infants ;  but
when  they  entered  the  infant  taber-
nacle, they  were  under  the  necessity,
the  Rame  as  our  Lord  and  Savior,
of  l>eing  compressed,  or  diminished
in  size  so  that  their  spirits  could  be
enclosed  in  infant  tabernacles.  If
their  bodies  die  in  infancy,  do  their
spirits  remain  infants  in  stature  be-
tween death  and  the  resurrection  of


\


the  body  ?  I  think  not  Why  not  ?
Because  the  redemption  must  re-
store everything  to  its  natural  order,
I'  they  were  of  the  size  and  a  tat  tire
of  manhood  or  womanhood  before
they  entered  into  the  tabernacle
would  the  redemption  be  complete,
when  they  came  out  of  that  taber-
nacle, unless  they  were  restored  to
their  former  dimensions  ?  I  thinic
not ;  there  would  not  be  a  full  res-
toration, and  consequently,  there
would  seem  to'  be  an  imperfection
in  the  plan.  There  are  some  of  our
brethren  and  sisters,  perhaps,  who
are  very  anxious  to  see  their  little
children  after  they  depart  this  life.
The  Lord  sometimes  gives  thorn  a
vision  of  their  departed  little  ones,
not  of  their  spirits,  bat  as  they  will
appear  in  the  morning  of  the  resur-
rection, in  order  that  they  may
know  and  recognize  them.  But
supposing  that  he  should  show  them
the  spirits  uf  their  little  children  as
they  are  after  leaving  their  infant
tabernacles,  would  they  be  satisfied  ?
I  think  not  Why  ?  Because  I
think  they  would  not  recognise
them,  for  I  am  of  the  opinion  that
the  spirits  of  children  who  die  here
regain  their  former  dimensions  of
manhood  or  womanhood,  and  hence
if  you  were  to  see  them  you  would
perhaps  be  disappointed.  But  by  and
by  the  resurrection  will  come,  then
these  full  grown  spirits,  who  have
died  iu  infancy  here,  will  again  en-
ter into  the  infant  tabernacle,  and
they  will  come  forth  as  infants,  as
they  were  at  the  time  they  laid
down  their  bodies ;  then  their  pa-
rents will  have  no  difficulty  iu  recog-
nizing  them.

There  is  quite  an  anxiety  at  the
present  time,  about  one  thing,  con*
nected  with  the  resurrection,  and
that  is,  will  those  spirits,  whose
bodies  died  here  in  infancy,  when  re-
united with  their  infant  bodies,  re-


main of  that  stature  through  all  the
ages  of  eternity  ?  There  is  a  sermon
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  re-
ported by  long- hand  reporters,  in
which  it  is  stated  that  resurrected
infants  will  for  ever  remain  infants.
But  I  doubt  very  much  in  my  own
mind  if  those  who  reported  that  ser-
mon got  the  full  idea  on  this  subject;
and  if  they  did,  I  very  much  doubt
whether  the  Prophet  Joseph,  at  the
time  he  preached  that  sermon,  had
been  fully  instructed  by  revelation
on  that  point,  for  the  Lord  has  re-
vealed a  great  many  things  to  Pro-
phets  and  re  relators,  and  among
them  to  Joseph  Smith,  the  fullness
of  which  is  not  at  first  given.  For
instance,  in  baptism  for  the  dead,  in
Joseph's  day  women  were  baptised
for  men,  and  men  for  women  as
well  as  for  men,  The  Lord  had  at
first  revealed  a  few  things  to  him,
showing  that  baptism  for  the  dead
was  a  true  principle,  without  giv-
ing him  all  the  particulars  at  once.
Hut  lie  continued  to  enquire  of  the
Lord,  and  he  received  more  and
more  in  regard  to  this  principle.
So  in  regard  to  the  resorreciion,
there  may  have  been  many  things
revealed  to  him  that  were  true,  and
others  upon  which,  without  hav-
ing revelation,  he  would  draw  his
own  conclusions,  until  it  should
please  the  Lord  to  give  further  re-
velation. There  is  no  revelation
given  that  gives  us  a  full  knowledge
upon  that  point, — but  I  will  give
you  my  reasons,  merely  as  reasons,
to  show  that  they  who  die  here  in
infancy  will  grow  up  to  the  full
siature  of  manhood  or  womanhood,
after  the  resurrection,  I  do  not  sny
that  it  is  so,  but  my  reasons  for  hc-
lieving  that  they  do  are  these  :  How
could  they  be  restored  completely
to  all  that  perfection  of  man  hood
and  have  a  perfect  tabernacle,  adapt
ed  to  the  dimensions  of  the  spirit


3W


JOURNAL  OF  DISrOCKSES.


as  it  existed,  before  it  came  here,
unless  their  bodies  should  grow  tip
front  a  state  of  infancy,  and  he  sat-
ficiently  enlarged  to  become  a  per-
fect house  Jur  the  fullgrown  spirit,
whether  man  or  woman  ?  I  have
heard,  whether  it  be  true  or  not  I
do  not  know,  that  before  Joseph  was
martyred,  lie  had  obtained  further
light  and  in  format  ion  on  this  sub-
ject! to  the  effect  that  there  would
be  a  growth  after  the  resurrection .
How  this  may  be  I  do  not  know,  and
it  does  not  particularly  matter;  still
it  is  something  that  we  have  the
nVht  and  the  privilege  of  reflecting
upon,  for  there  is  no  harm  for  any
man  or  woman  letting  the  mind  ex-
pand to  lay  hold  upon  all  that  Gorl
has  revealed,  and  to  ponder  upon  it,
as  the  ancient  children  of  God  did.
Nophi  says — u  I  ponder  upon  the
things  of  God  continually  which  he
has  revealed  unto  one,"  and  there  is
no  harm  fur  us  to  do  the  same.  We
should  not  get  into  that  old  sec-
tarian notion,  that  we  have  no  right
to  know  anything  about  this,  that
or  the  other,  and  that  we  must  not
pry  into  this,  that  or  the  other.
That  is  an  old  sectarian  notion,  which
we  have  fought  against  all  the  day
long,  and  we  do  not  want  it  to  creep
into  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
Latter-day  Saints.  It  is  the  privi-
lege of  its  members  to  let  their
minds  expand,  and  to  ponder  upon
the  things  of  God,  and  to  enqnire
of  him,  and  by  and  by,  when  we  have
prepared  ourselves  by  getting  all  the
knowledge  we  possibly  can  from  that
which  is  written,  God  will  give  us
more.

There  are  many  other  things  I
would  like  to  touch  upon  in  regard
to  the  resurrection.  We  often  reflect
in  our  minds  upon  the  capacity  and
power  we  shall  have  after  the  resur-
rection, when  we  are  quickened  by
the  celestial  spirit  ? To  dwell  upon


this  subject  would  take  up  another
discourse,  and  I  sre  I  have  not  time
fur  that,  for  I  have  to  be  at  another
meeting  soon  after  I  o'clock.  Hut
I  will  just  mention  a  few  things
which  we  shall  enj  iy,  after  the  re-
surrection that  we  do  not  have  here.
For  instance,  we  are  limited  in  our
vision  here,  we  can  see  only  a  few
things  round  about  us,  and  they
must  be  in  the  immediate  neigh-
borhood. We  can  not  see  away  off
to  England,  or  the  European  coun-
tries, and  we  can  not  see  anything
unless  it  reflects  the  natural  light  of
the  sun  or  some  other  luminous
body,  and  sends  Hip  light  into  our
eye,  and  by  that  means  the  mind
is  informed  concerning  objects  out-
side  of  us.  But  how  vnrv  limited
this  sight  of  ours  is  !  D  •  you  sup-
pose that  the  sight  of  the  immortal
body  will  be  thus  limired  to  the  na-
tural light  that  shines  V  No,  there
arc  a  great  many  kino's  of  light  be-
sides the  light  which  shines  from
the  sun,  moon  or  stars,  or  for  some
artificial  light  that  may  be  created
on  the  earth.  There  is,  for  instance,
the  light  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  by
which  the  elements  are  controlled
and  governed;  that  is  in  all  the  ele-
ments, it  matters  not  w lie t her  l>e-
neath  or  above  the  surface  of  the
earth.  Now,  there  may  he  a  per-
fect organization  in  the  resurrection,
wherein  this  other  kind  of  light,  as-
sociated with  the  elements,  will  be
permitted  to  affect  the  eye  of  the
immortal  body,  so  that  it  can  see
into  the  earth  as  well  as  on  its  sur-
face, I  do  not  wish  you  to  take  my
statement  only  in  regard  to  this,
but  the  revelations  of  God  inform
us  that  there  have  been  men  here  in
mortality  who  have  had  their  eyes
quickened  by  this  other  species  of
light  so  that  they  could  see  things
j  under  the  earth  as  well  as  things
j  on  its  surface. Moses  was  one  of


REVELATION j  ETC*


337


these  men,  and  we  have  an  account, 1
in  the  Pearl  of  Great  Price,  of  the
great  vision  ho  had  concerning  this
earth.  Before  the  hm\  revealed  to
him  the  history  of  its  creation
Moses  beheld  every  particle  of  the
earth,  and  the  account  says  there
was  not  a  particle  that  he  did  not
behold,  discerning  it  by  the  Spirit
of  God#  One  of  the  revelations  says?,
that  whatsoever  is  light  is  spirit,
and  there  are  degrees  of  this  spirit-
ual influence  that  will  alfect  the
natural  or  mortal  eye;  then  there
are  other  degrees  more  refined,  per-
haps,  which  do  not  affect  the  mor-
tal eye,  but  will  affect  the  immortal
eye,  yet  the  Lord  would  be  able  to
touch  tiie  eyes  of  a  man  like  unto
Moses  or  any  other  man  of  God,  so
as  to  show  him  every  particle  of  the
earth,  inside  and  outside.

Now,  if  the  mortal  man  can  see
this,  as  Moses  certainly  did,  why
should  we  suppose  that  we  will  be
limited  in  that  state  of  immortality
which  all  Latter-day  Saints  expect
to  enjoy  ?  It  is  inori;  probable  that
we  s  iall  be  able  to  discern,  not  only
everything  pertaining  to  this  little
speck  of  creation  which  we  now  in-
habit, but  alsj  other  worlds  and
what  takes  place  thereon,  as  easily
as  that  which  takes  place  on  our
own.  We  have  revelations  also  in
regard  to  this.  When  Enoch  was
expressing  his  mind  about  the
greatness  of  the  creations  of  the  Al-
mighty, he  said  that  if  a  man  could
nuaiber  millions  of  earths  like  this,
and  all  t\m  separate  particles  which
enter  into  their  composition,  it
would  not  he  a  beginning  of  those
creations,  yet,  said  he  to  the  Lord
— "  Thou  art  here,  thy  bosom  is
here;'*  a;al  the  Lord  said  unto
Enoch — "I  can  stretch  forth  mine
hand  and  hold  all  the  creations  that
I  have  made,  and  mine  eye  can  pierce
them  also," By  what  power  can

No.  22.


his  eye  pierce  them  ?  By  the  same
power  that  quickened  the  eyes  of
Moses  while  yet  a  mortal  man  ;  that
same  power  can  quicken  the  eyes  of
immortality  to  behold  all  the  crea-
tions that  the  Lord  has  made,  and
hence  there  will  be  an  enlargement
of  vision  in  the  resurrection*

We  might  dwell  on  the  enlarge-
ment of  bearing  as  well  as  of  vision.
Do  you  suppose  that  immortal  beings
depend,  for  sound,  upon  the  mere
vibrations  of  an  atmosphere  like  ours?
This  atmosphere  only  extends  about
forty- five  miles  above  the  surface  of
the  earth.  How  could  beings,  away
above  this  atmosphere  of  ours,  com-
municate sounds  to  us  here  ?  There
are  other  principles  and  elements  of
a  more  refined  nature  that  intervene
between  these  creations  that  God  has
made,  and  these  elements  may  be
brought  into  perfection,  and  by  their
vibratory  powers  they  may  communi-
cate sounds  from  one  world  to  ano-
ther, just  the  same  as  light  is  com-
municated from  world  to  world,  and
the  immortal  ear  would  be  adapted  to

this.  , J '  J. , .  f  j|  v  \U^oS^»w r ■"

We  have  not  time  to  dwell  upon
this,  I  merely  men t ion  it  as  one  of
the  great  blessings  of  immortality.  -
We  might  men t ion  too,  concern-
ing sleep*  We  have  to  sleep  away
about  one-third  part  of  our  time  here;
will  immortal  beings  be  obliged  to  da
the  same,  and  spend  one* third  of  the
eternal  millions  on  millions  of  the
ages  to  come  in  dormancy  r  I  do
not  think  any  such  thing.  Inquires
one— "Are  not  things  hero  typical
of  things  bereatter  Some  are  not
We  die  here,  but  that  is  not  typical
of  any,  death  that  will  come  on  the
righteous  hereafter,  and  there  are  a
great  many  things  winch  we  pass
through  here  that  mo  not  typical  of
things  hereafter.  All  physical  iiB-
per Sections  will  be  done  away  with
hereafter,  and we shall enjov  a

Vol  XVI,


338  JOURNAL  OF

greater  fullness  and  power,  and  I  can
not  see  that  it  will  be  necessary  for
the  immortal  body  to  be  vivified  or
quickened  and  refreshed  by  sleep.
They  will  no  doubt  eat  and  drink  in
an  immortal  state,  but  whether  it
will  be  necessary  to  do  this  is  ano-
ther question  entirely^  The  Twelve
Apostle,  Jesus  said,  "  shall  eat  and  ,
drink  at  my  table,  and  shall  sit  upon
twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve
tribes  of  Israel/1  showing  that  the
Lord  will  have  a  table,  and  that  he
will  have  food  upon  it,  and  that  they
will  eat  and  drink  at  that  table,
though  they  are  immortal ;  but
whether  it  will  be  necessary  in  order
that  their  immortality  may  endure  is
another  question,  and  we  have  not
time  to  dwell  upon  it  Suffice  it  to
gay  that,  even  children  of  mortality,
when  quickened  by  the  Spirit  of  God,
have  often  lived  for  quite  a  period  of
time  without  eating  or  drinking.
Moses,  for  instance,  on  two  occasions,

E.ssed  forty  days  and  forty  nights  in
ount  Sinai,  and  neither  did  eat  nor
drink  during  that  time.

We  might  go  on  and  speak  of
other  enlargements  that  we  will  have
that  we  do  not  have  here,  besides
eating,  drinking,  hearing,  seeing,  &c.
We  might  mention  the  perfection  of
'  locomotion,  passing  to  and  fro  from
world  to  world,  and  the  power  of
nslug  contrary  to  the  principla  of


DISCOURSES.

gravitation,  showing  that  man  will
have  superior  power,  even  as  Jesus
did,  when  he  ascended  heavenward,
contrary  to  the  laws  of  gravitation.
We  might  speak  of  the  velocity  of
locomotion ;  but  it  will  not  do  for  me
to  dwell  upon  these  subjects  at  the
present  time.  But  I  pray  that  the
Lord  God  will  pour  out  his  Spirit
upon  the  Litter-day  Saints  through-
out all  the  earth,  and  quicken  our
minds  and  understandings,  and  every
power  and  faculty  that  he  has  given
us,  that  we  may  search  after  know-
ledge, and  be  obedient  to  all  that  the
Lord  requires  at  our  hands,  If  we
do  this  the  time  will  come,  by  and
by,  when  we  will  have  faith  in  God,
even  as  the  brother  of  Jared  had ;
and  when  we  possess  faith  like  unto
his,  we  are  promised  in  the  Book  of
Mormon  that  all  the  great  things
which  he  saw  shall  be  revealed  uuto
us.  But  we  shall  have  to  obtain
them  as  he  obtained  them — by  faith*
fulness.  By  the  quickening  power
which  was  bestowed  upon  him,  the
brother  of  Jared  beheld  all  the  inha-
bitants of  the  earth  that  had  been
before  his  day,  all  who  existed  when
he  existed,  and  all  who  would  exist
even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.  The
power  of  God  rested  upon  him  and
enlarged  his  vision,  enabling  him  to
see  all  these  objects.  Amen.


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,


Delivered  in  the  Fourteenth  Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake

City,  Sunday  Afternoon,  Jan.  25,  1874.


(Reported  hj  David  IK  Evans.)


THE  STICK  OF  -U  )SEPH  AND  OF  JUDAH— TIMES  OF  THE  GENTILES—
APOSTACY  FROM  THE  AX  CI  EXT  ORDER— RESTORATION  OF  THE  EVER'
LASTING  GOSPEL.


I  will  read  a  portion  of  a  prophecy,
written  in  the  Book  of  Mormon,  in
the  second  chapter  of  the  second
book  of  Nephi.  The  Prophet  who
spoke  the  words  I  am  about  to  read,
and  who  also  quoted  the  words  of
another  Prophet,  was  named  Lehi ;
he  lived  about  six  hundred  years  be-
fore Christ,

"For  behold,  thou  art  the  fruit  of
my  loins;  and  I  am  a  descendant  of
Joseph,  who  was  carried  captive  into
Egypt,  And  trreat  were  the  cov-
enants of  the  Lord,  which  he  made
unto  Joseph  ;  wherefore  Joseph
truly  saw  our  duy.  And  he  obtained
a  promi.-e  of  the  Lord,  that  out
of  the  fruit  of  his  loins  the  Lord
God  would  raise  up  a  righteous
branch  unto  the  house  of  Israel;  not
the  Messiah,  but  a  branch  which
was  to  be  broken  off ;  nevertheless,
to  be  remembered  in  the  covenants
of  the  Lord,  that  the  Messiah  should
be  made  manifest  onto  them  in  the
latter  days,  in  the  Spirit  of  power,
unto  the  bringing  of  them  out  of
darkness  unto  light;  yea,  out  of  hid-
den darkness  and  out  of  captivity
unto  freedom.

For  Joseph  truly  testified,  saying  :
A  seer  shall  the  Lord  my  God  raise
up,  who  shall  be  a  choice  seer  unto


the  fruit  of  my  loins*  Yea,  Joseph
truly  said,  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto
me:  A  choice  seer  will  I  raise  up
out  of  the  fruit  of  thy  loins ;  and  he
shall  be  esteemed  highly  among
the  fruit  of  thy  loins.  And  unto
him  will  I  give  commandment,  that
he  shall  do  a  work  for  the  fruit
of  thy  loins,  his  brethren,  which
shall  be  of  great  worth  unto  them,
even  to  the  bringing  of  them  to  the
knowledge  of  the  covenants  which
I  have  made  with  thy  fathers*  And
I  will  give  uuto  him  a  command-
ment, that  he  shall  do  none  other
work,  save  the  work  which  I  shall
command  him*  And  I  will  make
him  great  in  mine  eyes;  for  he  shall
do  my  work.  And  he  shall  be  great
like  unto  Moses,  whom  I  have  said
I  would  raise  up  unto  you,  to  deliver
my  people,  O  house  of  Israel,
And  Moses  will  I  raise  up,  to  de-
liver thy  people  out  of  the  land  of
Egypt*  But  a  seer  will  I  raise  up
out  of  the  fruit  of  thy  loins ;  and
unto  him  will  I  give  power  to  bring
forth  my  word  unto  the  seed  of  thy
loins ;  and  not  to  the  bringing  forth
my  word  only,  saith  the  Lord,  but
to  the  convincing  them  of  my  word,
which  shall  have  already  gone  forth
among  them. Wherefore,  the  fruit


of  thy  loins  shall  write;  and  the
fruit  of  the  loins  of  Judah  shall
write;  and  that  which  shall  be  writ-
ten by  the  fruit  of  thy  loins,  and
also  that  which  shall  be  written  by
the  fruit  of  the  loins  of  Judah,  shall
grow  together,  unto  the  confound-
ing of  false  doctrines,  and  laying
down  of  contentions,  and  establish-
ing peace  among  the  fruit  of  thy
loins,  and  bringing  them  to  the
knowledge  of  their  fathers  in  the
latter  days;  and  also  to  the  know-
ledge of  my  covenants,  saith  the
Lord.  And  out  of  weakness  he
shall  be  made  strong,  in  that  day
when  my  work  si  mil  commence
among  all  my  people,  unto  the  re-
storing thee,  0  house  of  Israel,  saith
the  Lord.  ■  «

And  thus  prophesied  Joseph,  say-
ing :  Uphold,  that  seer  will  the  Lord
bless;  and  they  that  seek  to  destroy
bini,  shall  be  confounded;  for  this
promise,  which  I  have  obtained  of
the  Lord,  of  the  fruit  of  my  loins,
shall  be  ful tilled.  Behold,  I  am  sure
of  the  fulfilling  of  this  promise.
And  his  name  shall  be  called  after
me:  and  it  shall  be  after  the  name
of  his  father*  And  he  shall  be  like
unto  me;  for  the  thing  which  the
Lord  shall  bring  forth  by  his  hand,
by  the  power  of  the  Lord  shall
bring  my  people  unto  salvation;
yea,  thus  prophesied  Joseph,  I  am
sure  of  this  thing,  even  as  I  am
sure  of  the  promise  of  Moses,  for
tho  Lord  hath  said  unto  me,  I  will
preserve  thy  seed  for  ever.  And
the  Lord  hath  said,  I  will  raise  up
a  Moses;  and  I  will  give  power
unto  him  in  a  rod;  and  I  will  give
judgement  unto  him  in  writing.
Yet  I  will  not  loose  his  tongue,  that
be  shall  speak  much  j  for  I  will  not
make  him  mighty  in  speaking.  But
I  will  write  unto  him  my  law,  by  the
finger  of  mine  own  hand  ;  and  I  will
make  a  spokesman  for  him. And  the


Lord  said  unto  me  also,  I  will  raise
up  unto  the  fruit  of  thy  loins;  and
I  will  make  for  him  a  spokesman.
And  I,  behold,  I  will  give  unto  him,
that  be  shall  write  the  writing  of  the
fruit  of  thy  loins,  unto  the  fruit  of  thy
loins;  and  the  spokesman  of  thy
loins  shall  declare  it.  And  the  words
which  he  shall  write,  shall  be  the
wouls  which  are  expedient  in  my
wisdom  should  go  forth  unto  the
fruit  of  thy  loins.  And  it  shall  be
as  if  the  fruit  of  thy  loins  had  cried
unto  them  from  the  dust;  for  I
know  their  faith.  Aud  they  shall
cry  from  the  dust;  yea,  even  repent-
ance unto  their  brethren,  even  after
many  generations  have  gone  by
them.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass
that  their  cry  shall  go,  even  accord-
ing to  the  simplenfiss  of  their  words.
Because  of  their  faith,  their  words
shall  proceed  forth  out  of  my  mouth
unto  their  brethren  who  ate  the  fruit
of  thy  loins;  and  the  weakness  of
their  words  will  I  make  strong  in
their  faith,  unto  the  remembering  of
my  covenant  which  I  made  unto  thy
fathers/*

Corresponding  with  this  prophecy,
twill  read  a  few  verses  in  the  37th
chapter  of  Ezekiel,  commencing  at
the  15th  verse.

"  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  again
unto  me,  saying,

"  Moreover,  thou  son  of  man,  take
thee  nne  stick,  and  write  upon  it,
For  Judah,  and  for  the  children  of
Israel  his  companions :  then  take
another  stick,  aud  write  upon  it,  For
Joseph,  the  slick  of  Epbraim,  and
for  all  the  house  of  Israel  his  com-
panions :

*fi  And  join  them  one  to  another
into  one  stick;  and  they  shall  be-
come one  in  thy  hand.

"  And  when  the  children  of  thy
people  shall  speak  unto  thee,  saying,
Wilt  thou  not  shew  us  what  thou
meanest  by  these  ?


u  Say  unto  them,  Thus  saith  the
Lord  God;  Behold  I  will  t^ike  the
stick  of  Joseph,  which  is  in  the
hand  of  Ephraim,  and  the  tribes  of
Israel  his  fellows,  and  will  put  them
with  him,  even  with  the  stick  of
Judah,  arid  make  them  one  stick,
and  tbev  shall  be  one  in  mine  hand.

"And  the  sticks  whereon  thou
writest  shall  be  in  thine  hand  before
their  eyes,

"  And  nay  unto  them,  Thus  saith
the  Lord  God;  Behold,  I  will  take
the  children  of  Israel  from  among
the  heathen,  whither  they  be  gone,
and  will  gather  them  on  every  side,
and  bring  them  into  their  own  land  :

"And  I  will  make  them  one  na-
tion  in  the  land  upon  the  mountains
of  Israel;  and  one  king  shall  be  king
to  them  all  :  and  they  shall  be  no
more  two  nations,  neither  shall  they
be  divided  into  two  kingdoms  any
more  at  all

I  have  read  these  two  prophecies ;
One,  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon, delivered  by  Joseph  in  Egypt,
written  upon  brass  plates  and  brought
by  the  descendants  of  Joseph  from  the
city  of  Jerusalem,  about  six  hundred
years  before  Christ,  with  their  colony
that  came  from  Palestine  and  were
located  on  the  western  coast  of  South
America,  having  crossed  the  mighty
waters  under  the  direction  of  the
Almighty;  the  other,  and  corres-
ponding prophecy,  was  written  by
Ezekiel  the  Prophet,  a  short  time
after  this  colony  left  the  city  of  Jeru-
salem. Ezektel  informs  us  in  this
chapter,  that  prior  to  the  great  res-
titution of  the  House  of  Israel,
never  to  be  scattered  or  divided  into
two  nations  again,  the  Lard  would
bring  forth  the  stick  of  Joseph,
written  upon  for  the  tribe  of  Joseph,
and  the  other,  written  upon  for
Judah,  and  cause  them  to  grow
together  in  His  hand,  and  when
this  great  event  should  take  place.


it  should  be  the  period  when  he
would  take  Israel  from  among  the
heathen,  whither  they  be  gone,  and
gather  them  on  every  sirle,  and
bring;  them  into  their  own  lauds,
and  when  he  had  accomplished  this
work,  he  would  make  them  one  na-
tion upon  the  mountains  of  Israel,
and  they  should  no  more  become  two
nations,  neither  should  they,  from
that  time  forward,  be  two  kingdoms
any  more  at  all.

It  is  very  evident  to  every  person
who  believes  in  the  Scriptures  of
truth  that,  so  far  as  the  gathering
of  Israel  and  their  becoming  one
cation  in  their  own  land  are  con-
cerned, this  prophecy  has  never  yet
been  fulfilled,  it  is  therefore  among
those  great  events  which  the  Lord
has  decreed  and  determined  to  bring
to  pass  in  a  period  of  time  yet  in
the  future;  and  he  has  pointed  out,
in  this  chapter  of  Bzekiel,  the  man-
ner and  method  in  which  he  will
commence  the  great  work  of  the
restitution  of  Israel A  great  deal
lias been done by the  religious
world,  so  far  as  dollars  and  cents,
and  the  formation  of  societies  are
concerned,  for  the  amelioration  of
the  condition  of  the  scattered  Jews.
But  what  ate  the  results  of  all  the
labors  of  the  various  Christian  sects
i  in  this  direction  Y Have  they  sue*
ceeded  in  gathering  the  Jews  from
the  nations  of  the  earth  ? Not  at
all. A  very  few  Jews  at  the  pre-
sent time  are  residents  of  Palestine,
and  they  are  not  converted  to  the
truth. They  believe  in  the  religion
of  their  ancient  fathers,  and  all  of
,  them  who  dwell  there  are  very  poor,
many  of  them are  what may  be
termed beggars, being  sustained
principally  by  the  charity  of  travel-
ers and  other  visitors  to  that  land,
and  by  donations  from  charitable
Christians  and  Jews  abroad.  But
all  the  Jews  dwelling  in  Palestine


342


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


are  but  a  very  email  handful,  com-
pared with  the  immense  numbers
of  their  brethren  who  are  scattered
to  the  four  winds  of  heaven.  Then,
besides  the  Jews  thus  scattered,  there
are  the  ten  tribes,  who  are  not
called  Jews,  who  were  led  away  out
of  the  land  of  Palestine  about  seven
hundred  and  twenty  years  before 1
Christ,  and  who  have  never  dwelt
in  that  land  since.  They  were
taken  captive  by  the  king  of  Assyria
and  taken  to  his  dominions,  and
never  since  the  day  of  their  cap-
tivity, now  almost  twenty-six  cen-
turies, have  they  or  their  descend-
ants had  a  residence  in  the  Promised
Land,  * 1  .

Prior  to  their  captivity  the  House
of  Israel  were  divided  into  two
kingdoms;  one,  called  the  Ten
Tribes,  who  had  their  capital  city
in  Samaria,  north  of  Jerusalem,
Numerous  kings  reigned  over  them,
from  the  days  of  Rehoboam,  son  of
Solomon,  until  the  time  of  their
captivity.  They  were  a  separate  and
distinct  nation  from  the  Jewish  na-
tion, which  consisted  of  the  tribes
of  Judah  and  Levi,  a  very  few  of
the  remnants  of  Joseph,  and  a  por-
tion of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  who
were  not  taken  away  with  the  ten
tribes.  About  a  hundred  and  thirty
years  afrer  the  ten  tribes  were  taken  '
from  Palestine,  the  Jewish  nation
were  taken  into  captivity  by  Nebu-
chadnezzar, King  of  Babylon,  and
they  dwelt  in  Babylon  seventy
years,  after  which  they  returned  to  I
Palestine,  rebuilt  their  capital  city
and  its  walls,  and  re-established  their
Temple,  and  continued  to  dwell
in  the  land  of  their  fathers  until  the
coming  of  Christ,  and  for  about
seventy  years  after  his  coming;  and  '
tbe«,  in  fulfillment  of  a  certain  pro-
phecy, tho  Jewish  nation  were  scat-
tered by  the  Roman  army  under
Titus. About  eleven  hundred  thou-


sand Jews  perished  by  the  sword,
and,  according  to  history,  about
ninety-seven  thousand  were  dispersed
among  the  nations.

This  great  calamity  happened  to
the  Jewish  nation  in  fulfillment,  of
many  prophecies,  among  which  I
will  quote  one  by  our  Savior,  re-
cord <  d  in  the  21st  chapter  of  Luke.
Says  our  Savior — **  For  there  shall
be  great  distress  in  the  land,  and
wrath  upon  this  people.  And  they
shall  full  by  the  edge  of  the  sword,
and  they  shall  be  led  away  captive
into  all  nations,  and  Jerusalem  shall
be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles
until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are
fulfilled/*  That  portion  of  this  pro-
phecy, concerning  the  Jews  perish-
ing by  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and
their  being  scattered  among  all  na-
tions, and  Jerusalem  being  trodden
down  under  the  feet  of  the  Gentiles,
has  had  a  literal  fulfillment;  but
there  is  one  saying  of  our  Savior
that  has  not  yet  been  ful61Ied —
u  Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden  down
by  the  Gentiles,  until  the  times  of
the  Gentiles  are  fulfilled/'  That
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  not
yet  fulfill  d  is  proven  by  the  fact
that  Jerusalem  is  still  in  possession
of  the  Gentiles,  and  under  their
control  When  the  time  shall  have
arrived  for  the  fulfillment  of  the
prophecy  recorded  by  Ezekiel  the
Prophet,  when  the  Jews  and  the  ten.
tribes  shall  return  and  they  shall
no  more  be  divided  into  two  king-
doms, Jerusalem  will  be  redeemed
from  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles,  and
it  will  be  again  inhabited  by  the
Jews  as  a  nation  ;  not  by  a  poor  mis-
erable remnant,  dependent  upon  the
charity  of  foreign  nations  for  sub-
sistence, but  hundreds  of  thousands
of  the  twelve  tribes  will  return  to
Palestine,  and  their  capital  city  will
be  Jerusalem,  not  Samaria,

This  fulfillment  of  the  times  of


THE  STICK  OF

the  Gentiles  is  something  to  which  I
I  wish  to  call  the  special  attention
of  my  hearers  this  afternoon.  In
what  manner  will  the  Lord  fulfill
this  work  among  the  Gentiles,  that
the  fullness  of  their  times  may
come  in  ?  We  have  a  little  informa-
tion on  this  subject,  recorded  in  the
eleventh  chapter  of  Romans,  which
makes  the  subject  very  plain  in  re-
gard to  the  two  great  classes  of
people — the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles.
They  are  spoken  of  in  that  chapter
under  the  figure  of  two  olive  trees,
one — the  house  of  Israel — being  re-
presented by  a  tame  olive  tree,  and
the  other — the  Gentiles— by  a  wild
olive  tree.  Paul,  in  speaking  of  the
branches  of  Israel,  says — u  If  some
of  the  branches  be  broken  off  and
thou,  (the  Gentiles)  being  a  wild
olive  tree,  wcrt  grafted  in  among
them,  and  with  them  partakest  of
the  root  and  fatness  of  the  olive
tree,  boast  not  against  the  branches.
But  if  thou  boast  thou  bearest  not
the  root,  but  the  root  thee.  Thou
(that  is  the  Gentiles)  wilt  say  then,
the  branches  were  broken  off  that  I
might  be  graffed  in.  Well ;  because
of  unbelief  they  were  broken  off,
and  thou  standest  by  faith.  Be  not
high-minded  but  fe^ir,  for  if  God
spared  not  the  natural  branches,
take  heed  lest  he  also  spare  not
thee.  Behold  therefore  the  good-
ness and  severity  of  God  on  them
(meaning  Israel)  which  feel  severity  ;
but  towards  thee  (the  Gentiles)
goodness  if  thou  continue  in  his
goodness,  otherwise  thou  also  bhalt
be  cut  off.  And  they  also  (the  house
of  Israel)  if  they  abide  not  in  un-
belief shall  be  grafted  in  again,  for
God  is  able  to  graff  them  in  again.
Fur  if  thou  (the  Gentiles)  were  cut
out  of  the  olive  tree  which  is  wild
by  nature  and  wert  graffed  contrary
to  nature  into  a  good  olive  tree,
how  much  more  shall  these,  which


JOSEPH,  ETC.  343

be  the  natural  branches,  be  graffed
into  their  own  olive  tree  ?  For  I
would  not,  brethren,  that  ye  should
be  ignorant  of  this  mystery,  lest  ye
should  be  wise  in  your  own  con-
ceits, that  blindness  in  part  is  hap*
pened  to  Israel,  until  the  fullness  of
the  Gentiles  be  come  in.  And  so
all  Israel  shall  be  saved.  As  it  is
written,  There  shall  come  out  of
Siou  the  Deliverer,  and  shall  turn
away  ungodliness  from  Jacob.  For
this  is  my  covenant  unto  them^
when  I  shall  take  away  their  sins.
As  concerning  the  Gospel,  they  are
enemies  for  your  sakes;  but  as  touch-
ing the  election  they  are  beloved
for  the  fathers'  sake."  Again  he
says  in  the  30th  and  Slat  verses —
c*  For  as  ye  in  times  past  have  not
believed  God,  yet  huve  now  obtained
mercy  through  their  unbelief,  even
so  have  these  now  not  believed,  that
through  your  mercy  they  also  may
obtain  mercy."

We  can  see  from  the  instructions  .
that  Paul  has  given,  in  this  chapter,
that  the  Gentiles  were  grafted  in
instead  of  the  House  of  Israel ;  in
other  words,  the  Jews  were  broken
off,  as  our  Savior  predicted  to  them.
Said  he — "  Therefore  say  I  unto  you
that  the  kingdom  of  God  shall  be
taken  from  you,  and  shall  be  given
to  a  nation  bringing  forth  the  fruits
thereot."  Thafc  is,  it  should  be
taken  from  the  Israelites,  and  deli-
vered over  into  the  hands  of  the  Gun-
tiles.  The  kingdom  that  was  thus
rent  from  the  Jews  aud  transferred
to  the  Gentiles  may  be  called  a
spiritual  kingdom,  inasmuch  as  the
Saints,  to  whom  the  kingdom  was
given  in  that  day,  did  not  form  any
particular  constituent  portion  of  the
nations  of  the  earth,  but  here  was  a
branch,  and  there  was  a  branch,  • ne
in  one  place  and  another  in  another;
having  received  the  blessings  of  the
fullness  of  the  Gospel,  the  blessings


34  4


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


of  that  spiritual  kingdom  winch  was
bo  ill  up  in  their  midst,  they  partook
of  the  fatness  of  the  olive  tree,  though
tbey  were  wild  branches.  But  by
and  by  we  find  the  Gentiles  following
after  the  same  example  of  unbelief;
they  to  whom  the  kingdom  had
been  transferred  fron  Israel  got  into
darkness,  unbelief  and  apostacy,  the
same  as  t he  Jews  had  done  before
them*  Paul  further  warns  them  in
this  chapter  not  to  boast.  Says  he —
4t  Boast  not  against  the  bran c hes,  but
if  thou  boast  thou  bearest  not  the
root  but  the  rout  thee.  Thou  wilt
Bay  then,  the  branches  were  broken
off  that  I  might  be  grafted  in.  Take
heed,  therefore,  lest  you  also  shall
fall  after  the  .same  example  of  un-
belief."

Have  they  taken  heed  ?  No,  they
have  not  Where  is  that  kingdom
that  was  transferred  to  the  Gentiles,
that  had  inspired  Apostles  and  Pro-
phets in  it?  That  kingdom  upon
which  the  Lord  shed  forth  the  lluly
Ghost  and  all  its  gifts— the  gift  of
revelation,  discerning  of  spirits,
ieeing  angels,  healing  the  sick,  lore-
telling  future  events,  visions  and
fill  the  other  gifts  which  came
through  the  operation  of  his  Spirit
upon  the  wild  branches  ot  the  olive
iree,  after  they  were  grafted,  th rough
obedience  to  the  Gospel,  and  became
pai  takers  of  the  root  and  fatness  of
the  tame  olive?  Where  is  that
kingdom  ?  In  other  words,  where  is
the  church  ?  It  is  said  by  some  that
the  church  has  continued  from  the
Apostolic  period  down  until  the  pre-
sent century  of  the  Christian  era.
But  if  it  has,  I  cannot  find  it,  the
researches  I  have  made  give  me  no
indication  of  the  existence  of  the
kingdom  that  was  transferred  to  the
hands  of  the  Gentiles. I  know  of  no


way  to  distinguish  the  church of '  fore  them.
God,  only  by  comparing  it  with  the
pattern  given  in  the  New  Testament


Can  1  find  among  any  of  the  Gentile
nations  a  church  with  inspired
Apostles  in  it?  If  I  cannot,  I  have
no  authority  to  pronounce  any  such
church  the  church  of  God.  Its
members  may  believe  in  the  Bible,
and  they  may  be  honest,  we  do  not
dispute  tho  honesty  of  men  ;  hut
unices  they  h;ive  this  distinguishing
characteristic  of  the  church  of  the
living  God,  we  havo  no  right  to  sup-
pose them  to  be  the  real,  true
Christian  church.  Let  us  hear  what
Paul  says  in  the  12th  chapter  of
Corinthians  in  relation  to  the  orga-
nize ion  of  the  church  of  Christ
We  there  find  that  the  church  have
placed  within  it,  first,  Apostles,
secondarily,  Prophets,  thirdly,  Teach*
ers,  after  that  working  of  miracles,
healing  the  sick,  speaking  with  divers
tongues,  interpretation  of  tongues,
Ac*,  and  all  these  were  helps,  gov-
ernments, gift?,  blessings,  authorities
and  powers  that  served  to  characterize
the  true  kingdom  or  church  of  God
from  all  those  that  were  destituie  of
this  power  and  authority*  Did  this
authority,  these  gifts  and  blessings
exist  towards  the  close  of  the  second
century  of  the  Christian  era  ?  No.
What  had  become  of  them?  The
people  had  entirely  apostanz-d  from
that  ancient  order  of  things.  There
were  no  doubt  many  who  were  very
zealous  and  who  professed  Christian-
ity, and  claimed  to  be  the  church  of
God,  but  where  were  their  Apostles  ?
Nowhere  to  be  found  among  men.
Where  were  the  Prophets  in  what
w;*s  called  the  Christian  church  to-
wards the  hitter  part  of  the  second
century  ?  Nowhere  upon  the  face  of
the  earth ;  the  spirit  of  prophecy
was  entirely  rooted  out,  and  the  Gen-
tiles, through  apostacy  and  unbelief,
had  fallen  as  the  Jews  had  d  no  be-


Again,  where  were  the  healing  of
the  sick,  opening the  eyes  of  the


THE  SUCK  OF  JOSEPH,  ETC


345


blind,  unstopping  deaf  ears,  and  the
lame  leaping  like  a  lmrt  ?  Where
were  all  those  ancient  gifts,  such  as
speaking  with  tongues,  interpretation
of  tongues,  beholding  angels,  dis-
cerning spirits  and  the  things  of  God
as  did  the  church  of  Christ  in  the
first  century  ?  Nowhere  to  be  found ;
but  instead  of  this  we  find  the  people
Called  Christians,  spreading  and  in-
creasing in  the  second,  third,  fourth
and  61  th  centuries,  but  destitute  of
the  spirit,  power  and  gifts  which
characterized  the  ancient  church,  so
much  so  that  they  even  denied  that
there  could  be  any  mure  revelation,
and  instead  of  there  being  Prophets
to  give  revelation  day  by  day,  week
by  week  and  year  after  year  from
one  generation  to  another,  they  were
obliged,  at  the  Council  of  Carthage,
held  at  the  close  of  the  fourth  cen-
tury of  the  Christian  era,  to  gather
up  such  fragments  of  the  ancient
revelations  as  they  c  mid  find,  here
and  there,  scattered  in  manuscript
among  the  various  nations,  sit  in
judgment  upon  them,  without  any
spirit  of  revelation  to  designate  to
them  whet  tier  they  were  true  or
false;  and  they  compiled  them
together,  and  pronounced  the  canon
of  Scripture  full.

No  v ,  if  they  had  had  the  ancient
Christian  church,  there  would  have
been  revelations  during  all  of  the
second  century  as  well  as  the  first,
and  there  would  have  been  revela-
tions in  the  third  century,  and  in
the  fourth  century,  and  in  all  the
subsequent  centuries  down  to  the
present  period  of  time,  and  there
would  have  been  no  such  doctrine
promulgated  among  the  children  of
men  as  the  canon  of  Scripture  being  fulh
It  is  one  of  the  must  false  doctrines
ever  advanced  among  the  children
of  men.  God  never  yet  had  a  people  on
the  face  of  the  earth  in  any  aye  of
the  world  from  the  creation  down


through  all  the  dispensations,  without
having  inspired  men  a  nong  them,
who  conld  call  upon  God  and  receive
revelations,  and  their  revelations
were  just  as  sacred  as  those  which
hid  preceded  them,  and  that  had
been  bound' into  volumes;  hence  the
canon  of  Scripture  would  have  been
enlarged  every  century  down  to  the
present  time  had  the  Church  of  God
continued  on  the  earth,  But  like
the  ancient  Jews,  the  Christians  of
the  second  and  following  centuries
had  apostatized,  and  were  entirely
destitute  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The
Jews  had  apostatized  before  Jesus
came  among  them  to  that  degree,
that  there  were  sects  and  parties
among  them,  just  as  we  find  in  the
Christian  world  since ;  and  these
Jewish  sects  were  destitute  of  the
spirit  of  prophecy  which  their  nu-
cient  fathers  had  ;  they  were  desti*
tute  of  the  ministration  of  angels,
and  seireely  one  feature  existed
which  was  among  their  fathers  in
the  days  of  their  righteousness.  It
was  because  of  this  that  the  Jews
were  broken  off,  and  the  Gentiles
were  grafted  in,  und  were  made
partakers  of  the  riches,  blessings
i  and  glories  formerly  enjoyed  by  the
ancient  Jews.

"  Well,1'  says  one,  11  am  I  to  under-
stand from  your  remarks  that  there
has  been  no  real  Christian  Church
on  the  earth,  tor  a  great  many  cen-
turies that  are  passed  ?"  These  are
my  views,  and  these  are  the  views
of  the  Latter-day  Saints — we  be-
lieve that,  so  far  as  the  eastern  hemi-
sphere is  concerned,  there  has  been
no  true  Christian  Church  for  some
seventeen  centuries  past.  I  say  the
eastern  hemisphere,  for  we  believe
that  there  was  a  true  Christian
Church  on  this  continent,  which
continued  for  nearly  four  centuries
after  Christ ;  but  so  far  as  the  east-
ern hemispheie  is  concerned,  it  ex-.


346


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


isted  in  name  only,  with  some  few
of  the  ordinances  administered  by
persons  without  authority.  We
read  in  the  works  of  the  early
Christian  fathers,  po  called,  when
they  found  themselves  destitute  of
all  power  to  get  new  revelation  from
God,  that  they  tried  to  persuade,  and
did  finally  persuade,  the  people  that
the  canon  of  Scripture  wag  full,  and
that  God  did  not  design  to  give  his
people  any  more  revelation,  and  that
wicked  delusion  continued  for  a  great
many  generations.  It  was  necessary
to  form  some  excuse,  for  those  few
among:  the  people  who  had  the  pri-
vilege of  reading  the  Bible  would
naturally  see  the  distinguishing
characteristics  between  the  ancient
Church  and  that  with  which  they
were  connected,  and  unless  there
had  been  something  to  quiet  their
consciences  they  would  have  been
continually  asking  the  quest  ion —
"Why  do  we  not  have  Apostles?
Why  do  we  not  have  Prophets?
Why  do  we  not  have  the  gifts  which
characterized  the  ancient  Church  ?'*
and  hence  the  religious  teachers  of
thos^  days,  us  in  ours,  were  com-
pelled to  tell  the  people  that  the
canon  of  Scripture  was  full,  and  that
the  ancient  Scriptures  and  the  tra-
ditions of  the  Church  were  their  only
guides.

Perhaps  yon  may  think  I  am  mis-
representing this  matter;  if  you  do,
go  and  read  the  works  of  the  Roman
Catholic  Church  written  before  there
were  any  Protestant  seceders  from  it,
and  you  will  find  that  this  doctrine
is  universally  inculcated  therein,  I
should  like  to  know,  and  I  will  ask
the  question,  how  it  would  be  possible
to  transfer  the  Christian  ministry
from  generation  to  generation,  and
from  one  century  to  another,  without
revelation  ?  It  could  not  be  done  ;
it  wuuld  be  an  utter  impossibility,
A  true  Christian  ministry  must  be


|  called  of  God  as  Aaron  was  called,  so
J  says  the  Apostle  Paul  in  writing  to

I  the  Hebrews.  He  declares  that  "  no
man  taketh  this  honor  unto  him-
self, save  he  be  called  of  God  as  was
Aaron."  If  we  turn  to  the  fore
part  of  the  Bible,  we  shall  find  that
Aaron  was  called,  not  by  revelation
given  to  his  ancient  fathers,  Abra-
ham, Isaac  and  Jacob,  not  to  Joseph
in Egypt,  to  Noah  or  to  Enoch,

|  who  lived  before  the  flood ;  none  of
the  revelations  giver,  to  those  an-
cient servants  of  God  called  Aaron

,  to  the  ministry,  but  he  was  called
by  new  revelation,  direct  from  hea-
ven to  Moses,  his  brother,  com-
manding Moses  to  set  apart  Aaron
to  the  ministry;  giving  htrn  direc-
tions respecting  his  duty;  and  God
spake  to  both  Moses  and  Aaron.
That  was  the  way  Aaron  was  called.
Now  look  at  the  ministry  from  the
first  century  down to  the  present

'time.  All  its  members  have  denied
new  revelation,  and  have  declared

J  that  the  ennon  of  Scripture  was  full.
Who,  among  the  whole  of  them,  was
ever  en] led  by  new  revelation  ?  Why,
if  a  man  made  any  such  pretence  he
was  excommunicated  from  the  Church
unless  he  repented  of  the  sin,  as  they

'  called  it  To  believe  that  God  would
again  speak  and  call  men  by  new
revelation,  as  Aaron  was  called,  was
in  their  idea  a  heresy,  and  they  were
not  to  believe  in  anything  except
it  was  bound  in  their  ancient  books.
\Yc  will  take,  for  instance,  the  hi^h-*
est  authority  in  the  Church  of  Rome.
The  members  of  that  church  say  that
the  right  to  sit  in  the  papal  chair  has
been  handed  down  in  unbroken  suc-
cession from  the  Apostle  Peter.
Now,  tnke  away  new  revelation,  and
how  could  you  choose  from  among
the  millions  who  professed  Christian-
ity the  one  that  should  sit  in  that
chair?  There  is  no  means  what-
soever of  distinguishing  him,  unless


THE  STICK  OF  JOSEPH,  ETC.


347


he  was  called  of  God  as  was  Aaron,
and  this  would  introduce  new  reve-
lation, and  hence,  when  it  ceased,
the  real  authority  ceased,  and  the
Pope  had  no  more  authority  than
a  heathen  priest,  neither  could  he
confer  authority  upon  a  second  man,
neither  could  the  church  itself  give
authority  without  new  revelation
from  God.  The  Bible  could  not
give  this  authority,  for  there  is  not  a
word  said  in  all  the  Old  or  New
Testament  that  such  and  such  a  man,
by  such  a  name  and  at  such  a  period
in  the  future,  should  occupy  the
chair  of  St.  Peter;  hence,  without
new  revelation,  the  selection  of  the
successive  Popes  would  be  mere  guess
work.

How  is  it  with  the  Protestants  ?
Let  us  come  down  to  the  Waldenses,
to  Luther,  Calvin,  Henry  the  Eighth,
and  those  who  dissented  from  the
Catholic  Church  ;  have  they  autho-
rity ?  Let  us  inquire  a  little  into
their  belief  and  views.  Did  those  I
have  named  believe  there  was  any
later  revelation  than  that  which  was
given  on  the  Isle  of  Patmos  ?  No,
in  this  respect  the  Protestants  fol-
lowed after  the  same  heresy  as  the
mother  church ;  she  had  taught  for
many  generations  that  the  canon  of
Scripture  was  full,  and  those  who
dissented  and  came  out  from  her
declared  the  same  thing,  and  the
people  believed  it,  and  finally  the
Church  of  England  incorporated  it
into  their  thirty-nine  articles  of  faith,
and  no  person,  according  to  their
creed,  was  to  receive  anything  as  a
part  of  his  religious  faith,  except  that
which  was  contained  in  the  books
they  called  the  canon  of  Scripture,
which  they  said  was  full  and  com-
plete. They  never  have  found,  in
any  revelation  which  God  has  given,
that  no  more  revelation  or  Scrip-
turo  was  to  be  given  so  long  as
there  was  a  Christian  Church  on  the


face  of  the  earth.  These  Protest-
ants, then,  were  excommunicated
from  the  mother  church,  were  they
not  ?  I  have  heard  some  say,  when
asked  about  their  authority  to  bap-
tise and  preach,  and  to  administer
the  Lord's  Supper,  11  We  do  it  by
the  authority  of  our  priesthood  and
of  the  office  we  hold,"  11  Who  gave
you  that  office  and  authority  ?"
"Such  a  man."  "Where  did  he
get  it  ?"  "  He  got  it  from  another,
who  preceded  him."  "  And,  pray,
how  far  back  can  you  trace  your
priesthood  ?"  "  We  can  run  it  back
to  Martin  Luther,  John  Calvin,
Henry  the  Eighth,"  or  some  of
those  relormers  who  came  out  from
the  Roman  Catholic  Church."
£t  Where  did  the  first  ones  whom
you  crdl  reformers  get  their  priest-
I  hood  from,  inasmuch  as  they  de-
nied new  revelation,  and  wetc  not
called  of  God  as  Aaron  was?"  "  Oh,
they  got  it  from  the  mother  church,
the  Roman  Catholic  Church."
"  But  what  do  you  Protestants  say
about  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  ?"
u  Why,  we  say  that  she  is  that
1  great  and  abominable  power  that
I  is  called  the  mother  ot  harlots  and
Mystery  Babylon  the  Great,  that
she  is  one  of  the  most  corrupt  pow-
ers on  the  face  of  the  earth,  hence
the  Protestants,  who  could  not  en-
dure all  this  corruption,  came  onfc
i  from  her."  "  And  yet  yoo  get  your
priesthood  from  this  source."  Do
you  not  see,  at  once,  the  dilemma
into  which  they  fall,  when  they  at-
tempt to  run  their  priesthood  back  ?
In  one  of  the  homilies  of  the
!  Church  of  England,  it  is  stated  that
for  eight  centuries  the  whole  Chris-
tian world,  every  man,  woman  and
child  therein,  were  in  the  depths
of  idolatry,  so  that  there  was  no
individual,  during  that  long  period,
who  had  any  authority  whatever.
But  supposing  that  you  grant  that


348  JOURNAL  OF  I

the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  winch
the  Protestants  denounced  as  so
corrupt,  had  power  to  hand  down
authority,  and  that,  by  the  authority
which  they  held  they  ordained
Martin  Luther,  John  Calvin  and
others  of  those  early  reformers,
they  had  power  to  take  their
priesthood  from  them,  had  they  not?
Certainly,  if  they  could  bestow  au-
thority they  could  take  it  away
again.  Did  they  do  that?  Yes.
Read  the  declarations  of  the  Roman
Catholic  Church  respecting  these
Protestant  leadens,  and  see  if  they
did  not  cut  them  off  from  everything
that  was  ever  conferred  upon  them
in  that  church,  every  office*,  every
authority  and  all  power,  and  then
denounced  them  to  the  very  lowest
abyss  of  bell ;  consequently,  if  you
should  even  pretend  that  authority
could  he  transferred  to  the  Protest,
ants,  it  was  taken  from  them.  Says
one,  "Do  you  mean  to  uuchrisfianize
not  only  the  Roman  Catholic  and
Greek  Chutches,  but  also  all  those
Protestant  denominations  who  have
sprung  from  them  f "  Certainly  I
do,  and  it  is  in  fulfillment  of  that
which  was  spoken  of  by  Paul  in  the  1
11th  chapter  of  Romans,  where  he
declares  that  if  they  do  not  continue
in  the  goodness  of  God,  they  also
shall  be  cut  off,  that  is,  cut  off  from
all  those  blessed  privileges  and  spi-
ritual gifts  which  characterized  the
Church  of  Christ  whilst  it  was  on  the

«arth.

This  being  the  condition  of  things
no  wo::der  that  God  has  left  on  re-
cord, in  this  good  old  book,  that  in
the  latter  days  he  would  again  re-  '
Store  the  kingdom  to  the  earth  ;  as
there  has  been  no  Christian  Church,
with  divine  authority,  in  the  four
quarters  of  the  globe  for  many  cen-
tones  past,  it  is  no  wonder  that  the
ancient  Prophets  saw  a  period  of
time  when  Uod  would  restore  to  the


ISCOURSES.

earth  the  true  Church.  Hence,  we
find,  in  the  14th  chapter  of  (he  reve-
lations of  St  John,  that  among  tho
things  which  he  saw,  which  were  to
transpire  in  the  future,  was  the  resto-
ration of  the  everlasting  Gospel  to
earth  by  an  angel  flying  through  the
midst  of  heaven.  It  seems  then,  that,
at  the  eleven  111  hour,  the  last,  period
of  time,  God  would  again  visit  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth  by  sending
a  messenger  from  the  courts  above
with  glad  tidings  of  great  joy,  not
for  a  few  pe  pie  dwelling  in  some
particular  coiner  of  the  earth,  but
for  all  people — every  nation,  kindred
and  tongue  upon  the  four  quarters  of
our  globe.  Go  and  ask  any  of  these
fallen  churches, — go  to  rise  oldest
among  them,  the  Roman  Catholic,
or  the  Greek  church,  and  ask  them
if  God  has  -scut  another  angel  with
the  everlasting  Gospel  to  oe  preached
to  all  nations,  and  lias  committed
it  to  them,  and  they  will  tell  you
no,  they  do  not  believe  it  is  ever  to
be  sent  in  that  manner,  but  that
it  has  continued  on  the  earth  from
the  time  it  was  introduced  by  the
Savior,  and  consequently  there  is
no  need  of  any  such  restitution,
there  is  no  need  of  any  angel  com-
ing to  restore  it,  for  they  have  it
already.  They  will  tell  you  that
they  have  the  good  word  of  God,
which  already  contains  the  ever*
lasting  Gospel;  but  if  they  have  the
word  of  God,  I  think  I  have  proved
to  my  hearers  this  afternoon,  that
they  have  not  the  authority  to  ad-
minister it,  and  that  makes  all  the
difference.  They  may  have  the  word,
but  the  Bible  itself  guys  that  the  let-
ter ki]letb.  The  word  is  not  calcu-
lated to  save  unless  we  can  obey  it.
Can  I  be  bapt  ized  if  there  is  no  man
on  the  eartli  authorized  to  baptize
me  ?  No.  He  that  is  not  born  of
the  water  and  of  the  soirit  can  in  no

L

wise  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Uod*


THE  STICK  OF  JOSEPH,  ETC


349


How  can  I  partake  of  the  emblems
of  the  broken  body  and  she  1  blood
of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,
unless  there  is  some  man  on  earth
authorized  to  administer  that  or.
dinanee  ?  I  can  not  do  it*  How
can  I  receive  the  baptism  of  are
and  the  Holv  Ghost  it  there  bo  no
person  on  the  earth  who  has  the
authority  to  lay  on  hands  in  the
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  confer


that  b


>,  the  same  as  tho  apos-


tles did  in  ancient  times  ?  Ho.v
can  1  obey  any  institution  that  he-
lontfs  to  the  Christian  Church,
wherein  authority  is  necessary,  un-
less such  authority  be  on  the  earth  ?
Consequently  if  they,  in  their  zeal
towards  Go  1,  Sky  that  they  have
the  Gospel,  i  will  admit  it  so  far  as
the  letter  of  the  word  is  concerned,
but  they  have  not  the  authority  to
administer  its  ordinances,  having
lost  it,  because  they  have  lost  the
power  of  revelation,  and  the  power
of  the  Priesthood,

Well  then,  what  am  we  to  look  for
and  expect  ?  We  are  to  look  fur
the  Lard  to  restore  it  In  what
manner  ?  Just  as  he  has  predicted
through  the  mouths  of  !iis  servants.
If  Joseph  Smith  had  received  the
Book  of  Mormon  without  the  min-
istration of  an  angel,  and  pretended
that  it  was  a  revelation  from  God,
every  person  acquainted  with  the
Scriptures  would  have  known  that
he  was  an  impostor.  How  would
they  have  known  it  ?  Because  the
Bible  >ays  that  when  the  everlasting
Gospel  is  restored  it  shall  be  by
sending  another  angel  flying  through
the  midst  of  heaven,  with  the  joy  hit
message  to  be  preached  to  all  the  in-
habitants of  the  earth,  to  all  nations,
kindreds,  tongues  and  people;  there-
fore, if  Joseph  Smith  had  come  pre-
tending that  no  angel  had  revealed
this  to  him,  but  that  he  was  inspired
from  on  High  to  bring  forth  the  re-


cords called  the  Book  of  Mormon,  we
should  have  set  him  down  at  once  as
one  of  the  basest  of  impostors,  be-
cause it  would  have  been  contrary  to
the  Scriptures.

Again,  supposing  that  Joseph
Smith  had  neglected  to  organize
the  Church  of  Latter-day  Saints
according  to  the  ancient  pattern,
leaving  out  Apostles  and  inspired
Prophets,  as  all  the  sects  have  done,
all  sensible  men  who  believe  in  the
Bible  would  have  been  compelled
to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  in
its  organization  this  Church  was  de-
fective, and  did  not  agree  with  the

ancient  pattern,  and  they  might
have  said — "  You  have  no  Prophets,
you  have  no  Apostles,  and  hence
wo  reject  you  Joseph  Smith,  and
your  Book  of  Mormon;  tor  if  you
were  an  inspired  man,  sent  of  God
to  raise  np  and  establish  his  latter-
day  Church  and  kingdom  up  mi  the
earth,  you  would  have  among  yon
inspired  Apostles  and  Prophets,  and
your  Church  would  have  agreed  in
alt  respects  with  the  anoient  pat-
tern/' But  although  Joseph  Smith
was  but  a  farmer's  boy,  and  had
bat  a  very  limited  education  when
the  Lord  called  him,  we  fit  id  nothing
lacking  in  the  organization  of  the
Church,  wo  find  that  it  agrees  in
every  respect  with  the  Church  as
organized  anciently  by  the  Savior,
God  even  told  him  the  very  day  on
which  it  should  bs  organized,  and
also  named  the  various  offices  that
should  be  contained  therein,  and
he  also  gave  him  revelation  con-
cerning tho  names  of  the  individ-
uals  who  should  be  ordained,  from
time  to  time,  until  there  were  twelve
Apostles  and  until  the  Priesthood
was  restored  in  all  its  branches.
And  when  we  compare  the  Gospel
taught  by  this  young  man  we  find
that  it  agrees  in  every  particular
with  the  ancient Gospel, as  re-


350


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES


corded  in  the  New  Testament  He
preached  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  just  as  the  ancients  did,  also
repentance  of  all  sins,  as  the  an-
cients did ;  be  baptized  by  immer-
sion in  water  for  the  remission  of
Bins  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,
just  as  the  ancients  did;  God  com-
manded him  to  lay  hands  upon  those
who  belie  red,  repented  and  were
baptized  for  the  remission  of  their
Bins,  that  the  baptism  of  the  Holy
Ghost  might  be  given  to  them,  just
as  the  ancients  did*  God  promised,
in  this  last  dispensation,  that  the
Saints  should  enjoy  all  the  gifts
enjoyed  by  his  people  in  ancient
days — that  they  should  lay  bauds
upon  the  sick  and  they  should  re-
cover; that  in  the  name  of  Jesus
they  should  cast  oat  devils,  open
the  eyes  of  the  blind,  unstop  deaf
ears,  cause  the  lame  to  walk,  and
that  through  them,  God  would  show
forth  his  power  in  this  latter-day
Church  and  kingdom  as  be  did  in
the  former -day  Church  and  king-
dom. These  promises  were  made
to  the  believers  in  our  day;  and
moreover  Joseph  Smith  declared
that  when  he  obtained  the  plates
of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  it  was  by
an  angel  flying  through  the  midst
of  heaven,  who  directed  him  by
vision  to  the  place  wheie  these  plates
were  deposited — the  hill  Cumorah
in  the  State  of  New  York.  He  was
also  commanded  of  the  Almighty
to  translate  the  content!  of  these
plates  by  the  aid  of  tho  Urini  and
Thummim,  which  were  found  de-
posited with  the  plates,  and  he
translated  them  according  to  God*a
command.

God  raised  up,  before  this  Church
was  organized,  three  other  witnesses
and  they  beheld  an  angel  in  his
glory  and  power;  they  saw  him
descend  from  the  heavens,  and
heard  his  voice,  and  they  heard


the  voice  of  the  Lord  testify  unto
them  that  the  translation  by  this
young  man,  from  these  plates,  had
been  given  by  the  inspiration  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  they  were  com-
manded to  bear  record  to  all  people,
nations  and  tongues  to  whom  this
work  should  be  sent  In  all  of  these
respects,  there  is  a  perfect  correspon-
dence between  this  latter-day  work
of  God  and  the  Bible,

Now  let  us  come  to  those  passages
of  Scripture  which  I  read  at  the  com*
menceinent  of  my  discourse.  The
thirty -seventh  chapter  of  Ezekiel  in-
forms us  that  before  God  should
restore  the  House  of  Israel  to  their
own  lands  lie  would  bring  forth  the
stick  of  Joseph,  written  upon  for
Joseph,  and  put  it  with  the  stick  of
Judah,  written  upon  for  Judah,  and
that  he  would  make  these  two  records
one  in  his  own  hands ;  and  then,  for
fear  the  children  of  Israel  would  not
understand  what  Esekiel  meant  by
writing  upon  one  stick  for  Joseph,
the  stick  of  Ephraim,  and  then  wait-
ing upon  the  second  stick  for  Judah,
he  was  required  to  bold  up  these  two
sticks,  after  having  joined  them  in
one  before  the  children  of  Israel,  and
then  says  the  Lord — "When  the
children  of  thy  people  shall  speak
unto  thee,  saying,  Wilt  thou  not
show  us  what  thou  meanest  by  these
two  sticks,  written  upon  for  these
two  tribes,  say  unto  them,  thus  saith
the  Lord  God,  Behold  I  will  take
the  stick  of  Ephraim,  the  stick  of
Joseph,  and  I  will  put  it  with  the
stick  of  Judah,  and  they  shall  become
one  in  mine  hands;  but  the  sticks
whereon  thou  writest  shall  be  in
thine  hands  before  their  eyes;**
showing  that  that  which  was  in
Ezekiel's  hands  was  to  typify  that
which  the  Lord  said  should  be  in
his  own  hands.

Now  yon  see  that  this  record  of
I  the  tribe  of  Joseph,  called  the  Book  of


THE  STICK  OF  JOSEPH,  ETC


351


Mormon,  agrees  in  all  its  particulars,
so  far  as  doctrine  is  concerned,  with
the  record  of  the  tribe  of  Judab ;
hence  the  testimony  of  two  nations
should  be  a  witness  to  all  people,
nations  nnd  tongues  respecting  the
truth  of  Christianity :  and  instead
of  doing  away  with  Christianity,  the
Book  of  Mormon — the  record  or
stick  of  Joseph,  is  an  additional  tes-
timony to  the  great  and  important
truths  contained  in  the  Bible;  it  is  a
testimony  against  the  corruptions
that  have  been  introduced  into  the
world  under  the  name  of  Chris-
tianity,

Had  we  lime  we  might  refer  you
to  many  other  prophecies  that  have
been  given  and  written  in  the  Jewish
record  concerning  the  coming  forth
of  the  record  of  Joseph  in  the  latter
days,  just  prior  to  the  gathering  of
the  House  of  Israel.  The  Christian
world  may  use  all  the  exertions  they
are  capable  of,  and  spend  all  the  mo-
ney they  please,  to  bring  about  the
gathering  of  the  Jews  in  the  land  of
Palestine,  never  to  be  divided  again,
but  they  cannot  accomplish  it.  Why  ?
Because  God  has  his  own  way  to
fulfill  and  bring  about  his  purposes,
and  they  must  be  accomplished  as  he
has  decreed  in  order  that  the  pro-
phecies may  be  fulfilled.  .Read  the
29th  chapter  of  Isaiah.  Nearly  the
whole  chapter  speaks  of  future
events,  declaring  bow  another  book
should  come  forth,  and  that  before
it  was  translated  the  words  of  the
book,  not  the  book  itself,  should  be
delivered  to  the  learned,  saying,
"  Read  this,  I  pray  thee ;  *  and  he
replied,  that  it  was  a  sealed  book,
and  he  could  not  read  it.  Then  the
book  is  delivered  to  him  that  is  not
learned,  and  he  is  requested  to  read
it,  but  lie  replies,  u  I  am  not  learned/'
The  next  passage  says — <u  Forasmuch
as  this  people" — the  people  to  whom
the  book  is  revealed — "  draw  near  to


me  with  their  mouth,  do  honor  me
with  their  lips,  and  their  hearts  are
removed  far  from  me,  and  the  fear  of
the  Lord  is  taught  to  them  by  the
precepts  of  men,  behold  I  will  pro-
ceed to  do  a  marvelous  work,  even
a  marvelous  work  and  a  wonder;  the
wisdom  of  their  wise  men  shall
perish,  and  the  understanding  of
their  prudent  men  shall  be  hid."

All  this  was  fulfilled  when  the  Lord
brought  forth  the  Book  of  Mormon.
According  to  the  prediction  of  Isaiah,
a  copy  of  some  of  the  words  or  charac-
ters on  the  plates  was  sent,  by  him
who  found  them,  to  the  city  of  New
York,  and  were  presented  to  the
learned  for  translation,  but  they  could
not  translate  them.  They  were  the
inscriptions  of  the  ancient  fathers
of  the  Indians,  and  the  learned  knew
nothing  about  them ;  they  were  as  a
sealed  book  to  them.  Then  the  Lord
commanded  this  young  man  to  trans-
late the  book,  not  by  learning,  but
by  inspiration,  and  in  that  respect
the  wisdom  of  the  wise  and  learned
did  perish,  and  a  marvelous  work
even  a  wonder  was  accomplished.  In
the  same  chapter  it  says  that,  "  in
that  day  shall  the  deaf  hear  the
words  of  the  book/'  What  book  ?
Answer,  the  book  that  was  previously
spoken  of."  4£  The  eyes  of  the  blind
shall  see  out  of  obscurity  and  dark-
ness, the  meek  also  shall  increase
their  joy  in  the  Lord,  and  the  poor
among  men  shall  rejoice  in  the  Holy
One  of  Israel."

Would  you  like  to  know  who  it  is
who  have  settled  this  Territory,  and
built  up  between  one  and  two  bun*
dred  towns  and  villages  now  existing
within  its  borders  ?  It  is  the  poor
among  men.  The  rich  and  great,
the  highminded  and  noble  have
despised  the  work  of  the  Lord  ;  but
the  poor  among  men,  from  many
nations,  have  received  the  message
and  testimony  which  God  has  re-


352  JOURNAL  OF

vealcd  by  the  ministration  of  an  ]
ant*el  fly  In  lc  through  the*  midst  of
heaven.  They  have  left  their  native
com  i  tries,  and  have  gat  beted  here,
and  here  they  are  in  the  possession
of  a  rich  country  and  they  have  been  .
made  to  u  rejoice  in  the  Holy  One  of
Israel"  '  !

And  then  again,  what  does  the
Lord  say  about  the  gathering  of
Jacob,  when  this  book  shall  come
forth  ?  Read  a  little  further  on  in
the  same  chapter  and  you  will  find
these  words — "  Therefore  thus  saith
the  Lord,  who  redeemed  Abraham,
concerning  the  house  of  Jacob.
Jacob  shall  no  longer  be  made
ashamed,  neither  shall  his  face  wax
pale,  but  when  he  scetli  his  children,
the  work  of  my  hand**3,  in  the  midst
of  him,  they  shall  sanctify  the  Holy
One  of  Jacob,  and  shall  fear  the  God
of  Israel."  No  longer  be  made
ashamed !  Why  ?  Because  the
book  that  Isaiah  speaks  of,  that
should  come  forth,  should  be  the
menus  of  gathering  them  and  restor-
ing them  to  their  own  land,  and  they
should  never  become  two  kingdoms
and  two  nations  any  more  at  all  In-
quires one — "  Why  do  you  not  go  to
the  House  of  Israel,  what  have  you
Latter-day  Saints  been  doing  for
forty  year's  prist  ?  Have  you  gathered
Israel  ?*'  No,  we  have  nut;  if  we
had  the  Scriptures  would  not  have
been  fulfilled.  Why  ?  Because  the
times  of  the  Gentiles  must  first  be
ful tilled,  and  Jerusalem  must  be
troddeu  down  by  them,  until  their
times  are  fultilled.  What  do  you
mean  by  their  times  being  fulfilled,
and  the  fullness  of  the  Gentiles  com-
ing in  ?  I  mean  just  what  the  Lord
mean?,  that  this  Gospel,  which  God
sends  by  the  miuistration  of  "  ano-
ther angel"  from  heaven,  must  be
preached  to  all  nations,  kindreds,
tongues  and  people,  to  the  Gentiles
first;  and  when  they  get  through


DISCOURSES.

■

with  (hem,  it  will  go  to  Israel,  for  the
times  of  the  Gentiles  will  I  hen  be
fulfilled;  in  other  words,  when  God
shall  speaix  to  his  servants,  and  say
unto  them — "  It  is  enough,  you  have
been  faithful  in  your  ministry,  yoa
have  warned  the  nations,  kindreds
and  tongues  of  the  Gentiles  suffi-
ciently, now  I  chII  you  to  a  still
greater  work,  and  will  give  you  a
new  mission,  not  to  go  and  preach
to  the  Gentiles,  but  go  to  the  remnants
of  the  House  of  Israel  wherever  they
can  be  fuiHid,  and  let  your  testimony
be  to^them,  Hunt  them  up  from  the
four  quarters  of  the  earth,  gather
them  out  with  a  mighty  hand  and
with  an  on tst retched  arm,  and  bring
them  bnck  to  their  own  land/*
When  that  time  shall  come  Israel
will  be  gathered  and  not  ti!I  then.

Inquires  one — 11  How  long  will  the
Go-pel  still  b;?  preached  to  the  Gen-
tiles ?"  I  do  not  know;  I  can  give
vol]  r  i  rain  limits,  but  within  those
limits  I  cannot  decide.  God  told  u3
in  the  early  days  of  this  Chnreh,  by
new  revelation,  that  the  limes  of  the
Gentiles  would  be  fulfilled  in  the
generation  then  living  upon  the
earth,  Forth-tbree  vears  of  that
generation  have  already  gone  by.
How  many  more  years  it  will  be  be-
fore their  times  are  fulfilled  I  cannot
tell ;  but  1  know  the  d^y  is  not  far
distant  when  young  men,  now  living
in  these  mountains,  will  b;_?  e  >m mis-
sioned to  go,  not  to  the  Gentiles,  for
their  times  will  be  fulfilled,  but  the
Lord  will  say  to  them — "Go  forth
and  fish  and  hunt  up  Israel  in  the
four  quarters  of  the  earth.  Go  to
the  remnants  of  Joseph  that  are  in
South  America,  and  scattered  over
;  this  vast  continent  from  the  frozen
regions  of  the  north  to  Cape  Horn
in  South  America ;  go  and  teach
them  the  Gospel,  for  they  are  a  rem-
nant of  the  tribe  of  Joseph :  and  his
arm  will  be  made  bare  in  that  day


THE  INCREASED  POWERS,  ETC


353


in  sach  a  manner  that  they  will  riot
reject  the  truth,  and  they  will  be
grafted  in  again  into  their  own  olive
tree,  and  become  a  righteous  branch
of  the  house  of  Israel.  1

That  is  the  destiny  of  our  Indian
tribes.  Many  may  yet  Buffer  and
perish,  bat  when  the  time  of  their
tribulation  is  past,  when  the  Lord
has  rewarded  unto  them  double  for
all  the  sins  that  were  committed  hy
their  ancient  father  in  their  apo3~- ,
tacy,  and  when  he  has  visited  them
in  judgment  according  to  the  pro-
phecies that  are  contained  in  this
Book  of  Mormon,  and  the  times  of
the  Gentiles  who  dopy  occupy  this
land  are  fulfilled,  then  the  Lord  will
make  bare  his  arm,  and  he  will  re-
deem these  remnants  of  Israel,  that
they  may  inherit  the  blessings  pro-
mised to  their  ancient  fathers.  I

I  do  not  know  that  I  have  time  to
say  anything  more  on  this  subject.  :
To  those  who  are  nn acquainted  with
the  vast  amount  of  testimony  in  the
Scriptures  in  relation  to  tins  work,


I  say,  read  the  ancient  prophecies,
Isaiah  especially ;  read  the  Psalmg
of  David,  those  which  speak  of  tha
events  which  are  to  precede  tha
second  coming  of  Christ  ;  read  the
prophecy  of  Daniel,  about  the  set-
ting up  of  the  latter-day  kingdom,
whose  beginning  should  be  like  ft
little  stone  cut  out  of  the  mountains
without  hands,  rolling  forth  and  be-
coming a  great  mountain  and  filling
the  whole  earth,  not  like  the  destiny
of  the  ancient  kingdom,  to  be  des-
troyed oat  of  the  earth  through  apos-
tacy.  The  latter-day  kingdom  is  to
increase  in  greatness,  power  and
glory  ^  until  the  kingdom  and  domi-
nion under  the  whole  heaven  shall
he  given  into  the  hands  of  the  Saints
of  the  Most  High,  and  the  wicked
shall  be  entirely  swept  from  the  face
of  the  earth.  Head  all  these  prophe-
cies, and  when  you  have  read  and
understood  them,  you  will  know  what
the  Latter-day  Saints  believe,  and
what  are  their  views  in  relation  to
the  future.  Amen.


A  LECTURE  BY  ELDER  ORSON  PRATT,

Delivered  before  the  Young  Men's  Literary  Association,  Ogden

City,  Tuesday  Evening,  January  27,  1874.

(Reported  hij  David  W.  Evans.)


THE  INCREASED  POWERS  AND  CAPACITIES  OF  MAN  IN  HIS  FUTURE  STATE*

I  have  been  requested  by  brother  in  Ogden,  together  with  such  indi-

Richards  to  address  the  Young  Men's  viduals  as  should  be  present  on  the

Literary  Association,  organized  here  occasion,  I  do  so  cheerfully,  &1-

No.  *3.  Vol.  XVL


334  JOURNAL  OF

though,  I  must  say,  in  the  commence*
Dient  of  my  remarks,  that  1  have  had
no  time  whatever  to  digest  the  sub*
ject  I  propose  to  speak  upon  this
evening;  other  duties  have  been  so
numerous,  including  those  in  the
Legislative  Assembly,  that  I  have
scarcely  had  a  moment's  leisure  to
devote  to  its  consideration.  ]_The
■uhject  upon  which  it  has  been  pro-

?>sed  that  I  should  address  you  is,
he  Increased  Capacities  and  Powers
of  Man  in  his  Future  State.  It  is  a
subject  which  is  theological  in  its
nature,  and  cannot  be  treated  alto-
gether in  a  scientific  point- of  view,
f  r  nil  that  we  know  concerning  the
future  state  of  man  is  by  divine  reve-
lation, and  in  no  other  way ;  hence
we  shall  he  under  the  necessity,  from
the  very  nature  of  the  subject,  to
appeal  to  the  revelations  which  God
has  given,  both  ancient  and  modern,
in  relation  to  the  future  state  of  man,
and  the  capacities  with  which  he  will
bo  endowed  in  the  world  to  come.
However,  there  may  be  conuecled
with  this  suhject  many  scientific
ideas  by  way  of  illustration.

We  6nd  ourselves  here  in  this
world  in  the  enjoyment  of  intelli-
gence, light  and  truth  in  some
incisure  far  above  any  creatures
which  (Jod  has  made.  Piaced  here
upon  the  earth  among  the  myriads
ef  its  creatures,  man  seems  to  be
prominent,  in  fact  the  masterpiece
of  creation,  a  being  endowed  with
intelligence  and  reasoning  powers,
and  with  more  or  less  power  over
mil  other  beings  and  creatures  upon
the  face  of  the  earth.  But  still,  not-
withstanding his  intellectual  powers
and  faculties,  man,  in  bis  present
condition,  is  a  poor,  weak,  frail,
fallen  being,  subject  to  afflictions,
pains,  accident  and  sickness,  and
after  a  while  he  passes  off  from  this
stage  of  action.

The  inquiry  naturally  arista  among


DISCOURSES.

all  people,  whether  this  being  called
man  exists  after  this  body  crumbles
back  to  its  mother  earth,  and  whether
the  intelligent  part  of  man  continue!
to  exist,  or  whether  it  dies  with  the
body  ?  There  are  many  reasons  to
suppose  that  man  will  exist  in  a
future  slate.  Those  who  believe  in
a  Supreme  Being,  capable  of  pro-
ducing man  and  the  earth  upon
which  he  dwells,  might  almost
without  the  aid  of  revelation,  na-
turally conclude  that  man,  being  the
workmanship  of  the  hands  of  that
Supreme  Being,  was  not  intended  to
pass  ft  way  and  be  forgotten  with  the
termination  of  this  brief  existence,
but  that  lie  was  inteuded  to  live  here-
alter.  But  when  we  search  the
sacred  records  on  this  subject,  we
find  an  abundance  of  evidence  and
proof  to  thoroughly  satisfy  ourselves
that  when  we  lay  down  these  bodiea
to  rest  in  the  grave,  if  we  are  Saints,
we  lay  them  down  with  the  expecta-
tion and  with  the  full  assurance  and
hope  that  they  will  bo  resuscitated
and  will  again  live,  in  a  more  perfect
form  than  what  they  exist  at  the
present  time.  We  look  for  this,  we
liope  for  it,  we  pray  for  it,  we  seek
with  all  our  hearts  to  be  prepared  for
this  future  state  of  being  and  the
first  resurrection.

When  we  examine  divine  revela-
tion upon  the  subject  of  the  resur-
rection, we  find  that  every  part  of
this  mortal  tabernacle  that  is  laid
down  in  the  grave,  so  far  as  needful
to  constitute  a  perfect  body,  will  be
resurrected.  We  are  informed  to
this  effect  in  various  revelations,  but
more  especially  in  the  Book  of  Mor-
mon ;  and  I  suppose  that  the  young
men  who  organized  this  Association
believe  in  that  sacred  and  divine  re-
cord as  well  as  in  the  Bible,  and  also
in  the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove-
nants, therefore  I  shall  address  my-


THE  INCREASED  POWERS,  ETC,


355


self  to  them  as  to  persons  who  are
bel  levers  therein.

In  the  BkKik  of  Mormon  we  find
Alma  discoursing  upon  the  resur-
rection of  the  dead,  and  also  Amu.
lek,  and  they  both  testify  that  the
bodies  we  lay  down  in  the  grave
will  come  forth  again ,  that  every
part  will  bo  restored  to  its  perfect
frame;  both  those  Prophets  declare
that  every  limb  and  joint  will  be
restored,  though  the  body  crumble
back  to  mother  earth,  and  tlie  bones
— the  most  solid  portions  of  the  hu-
man system,  mil  he  dissolved  and
return  sixain  to  the  dust.  They  de- '
clare  that  the  materials  will  be
brought  together  and  reconstructed,
that  bone  will  come  to  its  bone,  and
that  the  flesh  that  now  clothes  these  j
bones,  and  tho  sinews  and  skin
which  cover  the  flesh  will  also  be
restored.  Ezekiel  the  Prophet,  in
the  37th  chapter  of  Ids  prophecy,
says  that  bones  and  flesh,  sinews
arid  skin  will  all  come  forth  and  be
made  out  of  the  dust  into  a  perfect
tabernacle,  and  everything  will  be;
restored  to  its  perfect  frame;  and  so
particularly  do  the  Prophets  Anni-
lek  and  Aim  a  discourse  upon  this
•object,  that  they  declare  that  not

even  one  hair  of  the  head  shall  be  I
lost.

Some,  perhaps,  might  suppose
that,  as  the  human  tabernacle  is
composed  of  certain  familiar  ele-
ments, such  as  hydrogen,  oxygen,
carbon  and  the  various  elementary
principles  that  exist  around  us,
when  the  body  is  dissolved  and
those  various  elements  are  scattered
and  driven  to  the  four  winds,  as  in
the  case  of  the  burning  of  a  body,  P
and  those  elements  enter  into  the
composition  of  vegetables,  and  the
vegetables  are  eaten  by  animals, '
serving  to  increase  their  flesh,  and  1
again,  these  animals  are  eaten  by
human  beings,  that  these  continual


transfers  of  matter  from  one  state  and
condition  to  another  would  preclude
I  lie  idea  of  the  resurrection  of  t  he
same  body  a^ain. But  there  are
several  things  to  be  considered  in
relation  to  this  matter. We  have  a
revelation  in  the  Book  of  Doctrine
and Covenants,  called  "The  Olive
Leaf,"  which  says— u  Ye  which  have
been  quickened  by  a  portion  of  ihe
Celestial  glory,  shatl  in  that  day  re-
ceive even  a  fullness,  even  ye  shall
receive  your  bodies,  which  are  i he
same  bodies  that  you  now  have."
Tnis  stems  to  be  so  plain  that  we  are
obliged  to  admit  that  we  shall  receive
the  sjime  bodies,
j Now  the fact  that  the  particles
which  compose  our  bodies  undergo
so many transmutations after  we
have  this  mortal  existence,  entering
into  the  flesh  of  animals,  then  help-
ing to build np the bodies  of
:  hatnan  beings  would  almost  seem,
especially  to  the  minds  of  iuii  lels  ill
opposition  to  the  idea  of  a  resur-
rection ; and  I  do  not  believe  that
every  particle  that  is  ever  incorpo-
rated in  the  systems  of  human  crea-
tures will  be  resurrected  with  them,
I  have  no  such  idea. But  a  suffi-
cient amou  it  of  the  particles  which
I  have  once  been  incorporated  in  the
system will l>e used  by the  Al-
mighty in  the  resurieclion  to  make
perfect  and  complete  tabernacles  for
celestial  spirits  to  dwell  in,  The  idea
that  every  particle  that  ever  entered
into  the  composition  of  our  mortal
bodies  will  be  resurrected  is  iucon-
sistant;  for  who  does  not  know  that
a  man  often  changes  in  weight  ?
For  instance,  when  he  is  an  in  tan  t
he  weighs  but  a  few  pounds;  he  con-
tinues to  increase  in  flesh  through
the  food  that  he  partakes  of,  and  not
only  in  flesh  but  also  in  the  sisse  of
his  bones  until  he  attains  perhaps  a
hundred  and  ninety  pounds  in  ad-
dition to  the  ten  or  twelve  pounds


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES*


that  be  weighed  in  infancy.  Then
ajrsun  lie  wastes  away  by  some  long
lingering  gicknen,  and  after  hav-  j
ing  bern  several  months  brought
down  he  weighs  himself  and  finds
that  he  has  lost  sixiy  or  seventy
pounds  of  flesh.  Where  has  it  gone?
Somewhere;  it  has  disappeared.
AgJiin  he  revives  from  his  sickness
and  he  begins  to  recruit  by  partaking
of  various  kinds  of  nourishment,  and
by  and  bye  he  weighs  perhaps  two
hundred  pounds.  Another  lit  of
sickness  overtakes  him  and  he  loses
fifty  or  aixty  pounds  in  weight  again,
and  thus  in  the  course  of  a  long  life,
by  intervals  of  sickness  and  health,
perhaps  some  twelre  or  fifteen  hun-
dred pounds  of  matter  have  departed
from  his  body,  and  been  renewed
again  through  the  food  that  he  has
eaten.

Then  again,  we  are  in  the  habit
of  taking  knives  or  rasors  and  par-
ing our  nails  every  little  while,  fto
much  so  that  we  can  safely  say  that
in  the  course  of  a  year  we  cut  off
or  pare  irom  our  fingers  and  toes,  as
the  case  may  be,  perhaps  an  inch  of
nail,  at  this  rate,  a  man  who  lives
to  be  seventy-two  years  of  age  would
pare  off  seventy-two  inches  of  nail,
which  would  be  six  feet  Now  can
we  suppose  than  when  a  man  rises
from  the  dead  that  be  will  come
forth  with  nails  iix  feet  long  ?
(laughter,)  I  cannot  conceive  any
such  thing,  and  yet  this  is  a  portion
of  the  body,  and  men,  in  the  resur-
rection, will  have  nails  the  same  as
they  have  here,  but  I  expect  they
will  be  of  a  reasonable  length,  and  !
a  sufficient  portion  of  the  nails  of
his  fhgei.  and  toes  will  be  resur-
reeted  to  make  handsome  comely
nails  on  the  fingers  and  toes,  while
all  the  rest  will  be  surplus  and  un-
necessary.

Then  again,  we  are  in  the  habit
of  having  our  hair  shingled.  This


custom  is  generally  commenced  in
childhood,  say  three  or  four  years
old,  and  continued  through  life,
and  in  tLe  course  of  a  year  perhaps
four  or  five  inches  of  hair  may  be
cut  from  the  head  and  cast  away*
Now,  in  seventy- two  years,  if  a  man
did  not  lose  his  hair  altogether,  he
would  perhapi  cut  off  something
like  twenty-four  feet  of  hair  and
beard.  Can  we  suppose  that  in  the
resutrection  we  shall  come  forth
with  our  hair  and  beard  a  rod  long  ?
I  do  not  look  for  any  such  thing,
I  When,  therefore,  we  read  in  the
Book  of  Mormon  that  every  hair  of
the  head  nhall  be  restored,  1  do  not
expect  that  the  whole  of  the  matter
that  has  been  incorporated  in
the  hair  or  in  the  beard  will  bo  re-
stored, but  I  look  for  a  sufficient
quantity  of  the  material  once  existing
,  in  the  hair  and  beard  to  be  restored
to  make  one  appear  comely,  for  the
hair  is  an  ornament.

It  is  said  by  some,  whether  true
or  false  I  shall  not  pretend  to  say,
that,  independent  of  sickness  and
losing  and  regaining  our  flesh,  a
robust  man  once  in  seven  years,
throws  off  the  greater  portion  of  the
materials  of  his  body ;  that  even  the
very  bones  of  our  bodies  give  out
material  which  is  thrown  off,  and
so  much  so  that  when  a  part  of  a
bone  is  taken  away  it  is  replaced  bj
the  ordinary  process  of  partaking  of
food,  &c.  This  may,  or  may  not
be  so,  I  do  not  pretend  to  say,  al-
though it  is  generally  believed  by
scientific  mtn,  physicians  and  those
who  have  made  experiments  that
this  is  the  case.  Now  supposing  it
i  is  true,  a  man  who  lives  to  be  sev-
enty-seven years  old  would  change
his  entire  body  eleven  times  during
the  course  of  his  life.  Do  we  sup-
pose that,  when  man  comes  forth  in
the  resurrection,  he  will  possets  all
the  flesh  he  has  gained  and  lost  by


THE  INCREASED  POWERS,  ETC.


357


sicklies  and  regained  in  health,  and
all  that  he  has  lost  and  recovered  in
these  septennial  changes  ?  If  so  he
would  possess  one  or  two  tons  of
matter  in  his  physical  system  as  a
tabernacle  for  the  spirit  to  dwell  in,
I  do  not  for  a  moment  suppose  any
such  thing,  but  all  this,  except  the
amount  really  necessary  to  make  a
perfect,  proportionate  labernacle  for
the  spirit  to  dwell  in,  will  be  surplus
matter.

What  becomes  of  this  surplus
matter  ?  The  beasts,  fowls  and  tUh
and  all  living  creatures  are  to  be
resurrected,  and  if  man  has  had
incorporated  in  his  system  in  the
course  of  his  mortal  life  nine- tenths
more  matter  than  it  needs  to  make
a  perfect  resurrected  body,  why  not
let  that  surplus  matter  go  where  it
belong* — to  the  beasts  of  the  fieH,
to  the  tow  Is  of  the  air  and  the  fish
of  the  sea,  that  they  may  receive
i  h  e  i  r  t  a  her  n  ad  es,  and  be  resu  r  rec-
ted  ?  It  is  said  by  gomo  that  there
are  certain  portions  of  the  body
which  do  not  dissolve.  If  (heie  are,
I  do  not  know  anything  about  it
The  bones  dissolve,  and  the  flesh,
sinews,  skin,  teeth  and  hair,  and
every  part  of  the  human  body  with
which  we  are  acquainted  returns  to
dust.  If  such  be  the  case  there  must
be  a  restoration,  for  if  the  body  did
not  dissolve,  there  could  not  be  a
restoration.

We  will  now  pass  along,  and  ask,
in  regard  to  the  condition  of  the
body  after  its  resurrection,  will  it
then  be  subject  to  pain,  sickness
and  sorrow  ?  No,  we  are  told  in
Scripture,  upon  which  we  found  our
arguments,  that  when  the  new  hea-
vens an  !  the  new  earth  are  made,
God  will  make  all  tilings  new,  and
there  shall  be  no  more  sorrow  nor
pain,  neither  shall  there  be  any
m-ire  death,  but  pain,  sorrow,  weep-
ing and  death  will  be  done  sway  ;


consequently  the  immortal  body  will
h?  free  from  all  those  evils  that
have  come  by  the  fall  Let  us  ex-
amine another  thing  in  regard  to
the  immortal  body.  Will  it  be  ab-
solutely necessary  to  receive  nour-
ishment hy  food  ?  I  do  not  ask
whether  immortal  beings  will  par-
tike  ot  food — that  is  another  sub-
ject— but  will  it  be  necessary  to  par-
take of  food  to  sustain  and  preserve
the  immortal  body  ?  We  read  that
immortal  beings  have  eaten  food,
that  even  our  first  parents,  A  lam
and  Eve,  before  they  fell,  while  they
were  yet  immortal,  were  permitted
to  enter  into  the  Garden  of  El  en,
and  that  they  had  food  to  eat  of  a
vegetable  nature,  that  they  were
perm  it  ted  to  eat  of  all  the  fruits  of
the  garden  except  one.  tint  wa3
that  absolutely  necessary  that  they
might  remain  immortal  beings  ?  I
doubt  it  very  much.  Immortality
was  stamped  upon  their  very  sys-
tems, and  they  would  have  been
this  day  alive  had  they  not  trans-
gressed the  commandments  of  God
whether  they  had  eaten  food  or  not*
In  the  beginning  the  beasts  of  the
Held  fed  upon  vegetables.  In  the
lirst  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Genesis
we  read — l*  And  God  said,  Behold  I
have  given  you  every  herb  bearing
seed,  which  is  upon  the  face  <>f  all
the  eartb,  and  ^every  tree,  in  tbt
which  is  the  fruit  of  a  tree  yielding
seed ;  to  you  it  shall  be  for  meat.
And  to  every  beast  of  the  earth,  and
to  every  fowl  of  the  air,  ami  to
every  tiling  that  creepeth  upon  the
earth,  wherein  there  is  life  I  have
given  every  gn  en  herb  tor  meat*"
In  those  days,  while  Adam  and  live
were  immortal,  the  beasts,  fowls
and  tish  did  not  destroy  each  other,
which  would  indicate  immortality*
If  ia  those  days  the  lion  would  eat
the  Iamb,  the  wolf,  the  kid,  and
ravenous  beasts  would  devour  their


fellow  beast i,  it  would  have  been  an
indication  that  mortality  existed
then  in  the  earth;  but  thr-re  wsig  no
such  thing  as  mortality  when  man
wan  first  placed  in  the  Garden  of
Eden,  V either  beast  of  (lie  Bold,
fowl  of  the  air  nor  fish  of  the  sea
was  then  subject  to  dentil,  hat  all,
like  man,  were  immortal,  and  yet  they
partook  of  food,  but  their  food  was  of
a  vegetable  nature.

We read  thai,  after  Jesus  rose
from  the  dead,  he  appeared  to  his
disciples  while  they  were  out  fishing,  I
and  lie  called  them  to  the  shore  and
said — Children, have  ye  any  u  eat  F"
They  soon  discovered that  it  was
the  Lord  who  had  appeared  to  them,
and  t hey  came  to the  shore,  and
broiled  some  fish  on  a  fire  of  coals,  i
and  Jesus  partook  with  them,  yet
he  w;is  an  immortal being.  But
whether  it  wag  necessary  for  him  to
eat  in  order  to  sustain  himself  is
another  question. But  can  immortal
beings live without food  ?  Yes,
even  the  children  of  mortality  can
live  without  food  when  the  Lord
sees  proper. For  instance,  Moses,
on  two  different  occasions,  when  he
went  up  into  the  mount,  was  there
forty  days  and  forty  nights,  and  the
Scripture  says,  expressly, that  he
neither  ate  nor  drank  during  that
time. Now,  if  a  person  in  mortality
could  he  sustained forty  days  and
forty  nights,  on  two  occasions,  as
Muses  was,  why  would  it  be  neces-
sary for  an  immortal  personage  to
eat  to  preserve  life, I  think  they
eit,  perhaps,  because  it  is  a  pleasure,
and,  it  may  have  certain  beneficial
tendencies  that  we know  nothing
about ;  but  as  they  are  raised  to
immortality  it  scarcely  seems  pro-
bable that  that  immortality  will  be
dependent  upon  eating  and  drink-
ing for  its  preservation. In  the  tes-
timony of  our  Savior  to  his  Apos-
tles, we  learn  that  resurrected  beings


will  eat  and  drink,  for  say*  he— "  Ye
that  have  followed  me  in  the  regene-
ration shall  sit  npon  twelve  thrones
judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,
and  ye  shall  eat  and  drink  at  my
table/*  When  will  that  be  ?  Da*
rim?  the  Millennium,  after  the  resur-
rection of  tliose  twelve  Apostles,  and
when  Jesus  descends  Prom  heaven
they  will  deseend  with  him,  and
when  he  sits  upon  hie  throne  in  one
of  the  apartments  of  the  Temple,
the  twelve  Apostles  will  sit  upon
their  thrones,  each  one  having  a
separate  tribe  of  Israel  over  whom
he  will  reign;  and  when  dinner  is
ready,  or  supper,  as  the  case  may  be,
they  will  sit  down  at  the  Lord's
talkie,  and  will  eat  and  drink  in  his
presence.  We  might  say  much
more  in  relation  to  this  matter,  but
if  there  is  anything  revealed  to
prove  that  immortality  is  depen-
dant upon  eating  and  drinking,  the
same  as  our  mortal  lives  are  depend-
an upon,  I  am  not  aware  of  it.

There  is  another  subject  that  na-
turally arises  in  reflecting  upon  the
future  state  of  man,  and  his  physi-
cal and  menial  capacities  in  t hat
state,  and  that  is,  Will  man,  after
the  resurrection,  require  sleep  ?  I
think  not  Many,  perhaps,  will
ar^ne  that  things  of  this  life  are
:  typical  of  those  which  will  take
place  in  the  world  to  come.  I  deny
it  in  some  things.  There  are  many
I  things  as  they  were  originally  de-
signed and  organized,  which  were
typical  of  things  to  come  or  as  they
will  exist  hereafter;  then  thete  ;ire
many  things  that  are  not  typical  of
the  world  to  come.  For  instance,
we  die  here ;  is  that  any  evidence
that  we  shall  die  hereafter  ?  Oh  no,
death  is  a  consequence  of  the  imper-
fections introduced  by  the  Fall;  it
was  not  in  the  body  when  our  first
parents  were  placed  in  the  Garden
of  Eden, ilan  brought  death  upon


THE  INCREASED  POWERS,  ETC.


359


himself,  and  it  and  othpr  evils  in-
troduced by  that  event  will  be  done
away,  and  hence  in  a  future  state
will  not  exist.  Sleep  refreshes  us
here  in  this  life,  and  we  spend  about
one-third  paft  of  our  time  in  that
Condition,  and  it  is  absolutely  neces-
sary to  our  existence  in  mortality;
for  without  it  we  should  soon  pevwh
and  die*  But  because  that  is  the
case  here,  shall  we  fcny  that  it  will
be  necessary  in  a  future  state  ?  I
think  not.  It  looks  inconsistent  to
me,  and  like  an  imperfect  ion  in  the
great  work  of  the  Creator,  to  sup-
pose that  for  about  one-third  part
of  all  future  eternity  intelligent
beings  are  to  forget  even  their  own
existence  in  slumber,  knowing  no-
thing that  is  transpiring  around
them  in  the  one- third  part  of  the
thousands  and  millions*  of  ages  to
come. It  does  not  look  reasonable.

Having  said  this  much  in  regard
to  the  immortal  body  and  its  in-
creased powers  and  faculties,  let  me
inquire  still  further,  Will  this  tab-
ernacle, after  the  resurrection,  be
subject  to  the  same  universal  laws
ot  nature  that  now  regulates  terres-
trial things,  and  not  only  terres-
trial but  celestial,  that  is  the  heavens
and  planetary  system  above  us  ?
Will  mankind,  in  other  words,  be
chained  down  and  limited  by  those
laws  that  now  prevail?  Will  boat
burn  an  immortal  being  and  pro-
duce pain  as  it  burns  the  tabernacle
of  mortality  ?  1  think  not.  Even
here  in  this  world  children  of  mor-
tality have  been  placed  in  condi-
tions where  they  have  been  subject
to  the  most  intense  heat,  as  iu  the
case  of  Shadrach,  Meshach  and
Abednego,  the  three  Heorew  chil-
dren, who  were  placed  in  a  furnace
where  the  fire  had  been  made  seven
times  hotter  than  it  was  wont  to  be;
probably  the  most  intense  heat  they
knew  how  to  produce  was  prepared


for  these  men  of  God,  so  great  in-
deed was  it  that  those  who  cast  them
into  the  flames  were  consumed  by
it  while  so  doing,  but  the  three  He-
brews were  not  affected  by  it.  Now
if  children  of  mortality  can  so  far
prevail  against  the  element  of  fire
that  it  has  not  power  even  to  scorch
a  hair  of  their  heads,  how  much
greater  will  be  the  power  of  those
who  are  immortal  !  Hence,  I  do  not
believe  that  heat  will  have  any  ten-
dency to  dissolve,  destroy,  injure  or
to  produce  any  unpleasant  effects
upoti  them,  ari  it  has  with  us  here  in
this  world.  Here  then  will  be  an
increase  of  power  and  capacity,  so  far
as  the  body  is  concerned,  over  and
above  that  which  we  have  in  this  life.

Again,  we  find  that  here  in  this
life  we  are  chained  down  by  another
law,  namely  the  la*  of  gravitation,
which  hfis  such  power  and  influence
over  us  that  with  all  the  exeitions
we  can  make  with  our  bodily  ener-
gies, we  can  only  rise  a  few  feet,  by
a  spring,  above  the  surface  of  the
earth,  and  by  bringing  into  activity
some  of  the  elements  of  nature,  for
instance,  inflating  a  balloon  with
hydrogen  gas,  or  some  gas  that  iff
much  lighter  than  the  common
atmosphere  that  we  breathe,  a  person
is  enabled  to  ascend  some  six  or
seven  miles  into  the  air.  But  this
is  in  obedience  to  certain  laws  with
which  we  are  well  acquainted,  bung-
ing into  requisition  certain  mate-
rials lighter  than  the  atmosphere,
which  it  buoys  up  as  it  does  smoke.
Now  will  the  children  of  immortality
be  subject  to  the  law  of  gravitation  ?
When  they  please  to  walk  upon  the
earth — an  act  performed  by  virtue  of
the  law  of  gravitation — they  can  do
so.  We  have  an  example  of  this  in
our  Savior  walking  alter  his  resur-
rection, with  two  ot  his  disciples,  and
conversing  with  them  on  many  sub-
jects ;  also  when  he  descended  on


ibis  American  continent  arid  walked
around  among  the  Nephites,  going
a  little  way  and  kneeling  down
upon  the  ground  and  praying  to  his
Father,  showing  that,  for  the  time
being,  ho  was  subject  to  the  law  of
gravitation,  that  is,  he  permitted  it
to  have  power  over  him.  But  lie
had  a  superior  power  given  to  hirn,
by  which  he  could  control  the  law
of  universal  gravitation  just  as  he
pleased,  as  in  the  ea=e  of  his  ascen-
sion from  the  Mount  of  Olives  con-
trary to  the  laws  of  gravitation  and
a  cloud  receiving  him  from  the  sight
of  his  disciples  who  stood  gazing  on
the  scene.  |

Again,  we  find  that,  besides  the
immortal  Savior,  mortal  men  have  i
had  power  over  gravitation,  so  that
they  could  mount  up.  as  the  Prophet
Isaiah  has  said,  "  on  wings  as  eagles."
We  have  an  instance  in  the  case  of
Philip,  who  baptized  the  eunuch  :
as  soon  as  be  had  performed  that
ordinance  be  was  caught  away  bv
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  he  found
himself  at  Azotus.  This  was  no
doubt  a  miracle,  which  was  performed
before  the  celebrated  man  who  had
just  been  baptised  to  confirm  his
faith,  for  in  seeing  a  man  thus  caught
away,  Lie  would  undoubtedly  be  con-
vinced that  he  was  a  man  who  had  some
Godlike  powers  connected  with  bim.

Again,  we  have  an  instance  in  the
case  of  Nephi,  who  lived  on  this  ;
continent  just  before  the  coining  ot
Christ  He  was  commanded  to  go
forth  and  warn  the  people  of  the
terrible  judgments  that  were  about
to  befall  them  if  they  did  not  re-
pent; and  the  Lord  gave  him  power
that  if  be  shoul  1  say  to  this  temple
— '*  Be  thou  vvui  in  twain,"  it  should
be  dune;  and  if  he  should  sny  to
this  mountain — 4t  Be  thou  removed,"
it  should  be  done ;  and  whatsoever  he
should  seal  upon  the  efirth  should  lie
•ealed  iu heavtn,  and  whatsoever


judgment  be  pronounced  in  the  name
of  the  Lord  upon  that  people,  it
should  he  done  even  according  to
his  word*  He  went  forth  in  the
midst  of  the  Nephites,  from  city  to
city,  and  so  great  was  their  wicked-
ness that  tbey  would  not  repent  of
fheir  sins,  bat  sought  to  destroy  bim;
but  as  often  as  they  gathered  in
multitudes  to  rush  upon  and  destroy
him,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  took  bim
up,  and  curried  him  away  to  another
place,  that  he  might  warn  them  also.
Now,  if  a  man  in  a  state  of  mortality
can  gain  such  potter  and  influence
with  God  as  to  prevail  against  and
overcome  the  law  of  gravitation,
which  chains  us  down  to  the  surface
of  tbe  earth,  how  much  more  power
will  immortal  beings  have!

Again  we,  by  the  laws  which  sur-
round us,  are  limited  in  oar  hearing.
What  man  ever  heard  a  sound  fifty
miles  off?  There  may  have  been
such  instances,  but  as  a  general  thing
there  are,  1  presume,  very  few  men
on  th  •  surface  of  our  globe  who  ever
heard  a  sound  that  came  thirty  miles
through  our  atmosphere;  hence  the
faculty  of  hearing,  through  the
organs  of  the  mortal  tabernacle,
through  the  medium  of  the  atmo-
sphere, which  transfers  the  sound,  is
extremely  limited  in  its  action.  But
will  that  faculty  be  thus  limited  in
the  immortal  state?  I  think  not
I  think  there  will  be  facilities  for
hearing,  not  only  at  a  greater  dis-
tance, bat  also  through  a  mere  per-
fect medium,  transferring  sound  with
immensely  greater  velocity  than  it
now  travels  through  our  atmosphere.
We  all  know  that  sound  is  trans-
ferred, at  sea  level,  where  the  air  is
dense,  about  eleven  hundred  and
eighty  feet  in  a  second,  taking  almost
(ive  seconds  to  travel  a  mile,  which
fa  very  slow  motion,  yet  very  swift
compared  with  the  motion  of  our
railway  cars. Experiment  has  de-


THE  INCREASED  FOWEKS,  ETC.


361


monstrated  that  with  a  more  perfect
medium  for  conveying  it,  sound  will
travel  very  rapidly.  For  instance,
place  your  ear  over  a  tube,  the  other
eud  of  which  is  under  water,  and  let
a  bell  be  struck,  stationed  under
water  at  some  miles  distance,  and  it
will  be  found  that  the  sound  will
travel  through  the  particles  of  water
much  more  rapidly  than  through  the
atmosphere.

Again,  let  a  succession  of  timbers
be  joined,  extending  one  or  two  miles,
and  let  a  Found  be  made  at  the  end
of  the  wood  farthest  from  yon,  and
you  will  find  that  it  will  reach  your
ear  at  a  much  quicker  rate  than  that
at  which  sound  travels  through  the
atmosphere.  Again,  you  take  metal
rods  and  connect  them  together,  and
let  a  sound  be  made  at  the  end  re-
mote from  you,  and  it  is  found  that,
in  some  metals,  the  sound  will  travel
many  times  fasH-r  along  the  metal
rods  than  it  will  through  the  atmo-
sphere; hence  you  see  that  the  velo-
city of  sound  is  really  dependent
upon  the  nature  of  the  elements  or
substance  through  which  it  is  con-
veyed- JH

Now  how  do  we  know  but  what
the  immortal  body  may  be  so  con-
structed that  there  may  be  certain
fluids — fluids,  perhaps  with  which
we  are  not  acquainted — intervening
between  world  and  world,  and  be-
tween one  star  and  another, — certain
thin  elastic  fluids,  so  bub  le  in  their
nature  that  we  cannot  see  them  with
the  natural  eye,  or  perceive  the  in  by
any  of  the  senses  of  the  mortal  body,
yet  the  immortal  ear  may  be  so  con-
structed that  this  refined  substance
would  transmit  sound  with  the  velo-
city of  light  itself.  There  may  be
such  tilings  in  nature;  we  cannot  say
they  do  not  exist  We  do  know,  so
far  as  light  is  concerned,  that  it  is
transferred  from  world  to  world  by
the  vibrations of  the waves  of  a


luminous  ether  intervening  between
world  and  world;  consequently,  if
these  waves  can  preceed  forth  for
thousands  and  thousands  of  millions
of  miles,  it  proves  to  us  that  all  space
is  tilled  with  an  ether,  which  we  can-
not see,  and  yet  we  know  it  must
exist,  in  order  to  transfer  light.

Now,  supposing  that  this  svme
kind  of  ether,  or  some  other  substance,
which  might  not  in  all  cases  affect
the  eye,  but  which  would  yet  be
susceptible  to  the  impressions  of
sound,  then  sounds,  voices  or  noises
in  one  world  might  be  transferred
through  that  medium  to  the  immortal
beings  in  another  world.  There  is
nothing  inconsistent  id  this.  It  may
be  inconsistent  according  to  our
limited  ideas;  but  it  is  not  inconsist-
ent with  the  power  of  that  Almighty
Being  who  controls  all  these  materi-
als. To  prove  this  to  you,  let  me
refer  you  to  that  revelation  in  the
Bonk  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants
called  the  "Olive  Leaf?*  We  read
there  that  when  the  first  angel  among
the  seven  shall  sound  his  trump,  all
nations  and  kindreds  and  tongues  of
the  earth  shall  hear  it.  Will  it  be
so  much  louder  than  any  sound  we  now
hear,  that  it  will  go  to  all  the  nations
and  tongues  of  the  earth  and  all  men
hear  it  ?  "  Every  ear,"  the  revela-
tion savs.  shall  hear  the  sound  of
that  trump;  it  will  be  something
that  ail  \  he  kindreds,  peoples,  tongues
and  nations  upon  the  face  of  the
whole  earth  will  be  able  to  perceive
and  understand.  Now,  there  must
be  some  medium  through  which  this
sound  is  transferred,  different  from
our  atmosphere  ;  or,  in  other  words,
the  Lord,  by  his  miraculous  power,
will  cause  this  sound  to  proceed
forth  through  the  atmosphere  in  a
different  manner  from  what  it  now
proceeds,  for  it  it  look  the  sound  of
that  tiump  five  seconds  to  go  a  mile,
it  would  requite  a  long  time  for  it  to


36 J  \  JOURNAL  OF

travel  eight,  ten  or  fifteen  thous-tnd
milts,  so  as  to  reach  the  ears  of  the
different  nations  of  the  earth.  Dots
not  this  prove  then,  that  God  will,
at  that  time,  either  effect  the  ear  of
man  or  act  upon  some  m liter ials  in
connection  with  our  globe,  so  that
sound  will  be  more  rapidly  conveyed
than  it  is  at  t lie  present  time?
Now,  if  this  change  is  effected  anions
the  children  of  mortality,  what  may
we  not  expect  among  the  children  of
immortality  ?  Is  it  not  reasonable
to  believe  that  among  them  there  will
not  only  be  enlarged  capacities  of
bearing,  but  enlarged  facilities  by
which  the  Lord  will  communicate
with  the  people  of  different  worlds?

Again,  we  will  take  the  sense  of
vision.  Although  that  sense  is  not
limited  like  bearing,  yet  it  is  limited
so  far  as  opaque  bodies  are  concerned.
What  man,  of  all  the  children  of
mcrtality,  without  the  miraculous
power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  resting
upon  him,  is  able  to  pee  into  the
depths  of  our  globe?  No  man  liv-
ing, naturally,  can  see  through  any-
thing that  is  opaque,  and  no  man,
naturally,  can  penetrate  with  his
powers  ot  vision  into  the  inferior  of
the  earth.  It  is  not  transparent  to
the  visual  organs  of  mortal  beings,
no  light,  apparently,  proceeds  there-
from, and  affects  the  optic  nerve  of
man,  bo  as  to  produce  the  sense  of
seeing.  Man,  in  this  state,  can  only
see  those  objects  from  which  light
cum  be  radiated  or  reflected.  Shall
we  be  thus  limited  in  our  perceptions
when  we  receive  our  immortal  bodies?
By  no  means.  Immortal  beings  will
have  their  capacity  for  seeing  so
much  enlarged,  that  they  will  be
able  to  see  down  into  the  earth  just
as  easily  as  they  can  see  tilings
around  about  them,  or  the  bo  lies
that  revolve  in  space.  I  will  refer
you  to  modern  revelation  to  prove
that  immortal  beings  will  be  able  to


DISCOURSES.

see  through  opaque  bodies,  and  into
materials  from  which  the  natural
light  does  not  radiate,  as  is  the  c*se
here  among  the  children  of  mortality.
Yon  among  my  hearers  \vho  are  ac-
quainted with  the  lit  fie  work  called
*  The  Pearl  ot  Great  Price" — a  very
precious  book,  because  it  contains
many  important  ideas  given  hy  reve-
lati  (»n — will  recollect  the  revelation
given  to  Moses.  He  inquired  of  God
concerning  the  creation  of  this  hea-
ven and  this  earth,  and  obtained  the
information  now  contained  in  the
Book  ot  Genesis  respeciiug  the  crea-
tion of  the  world.  But  before  this
he  had  a  great  vision  in  relation  to
the  earth,  the  revelation  informing
us,  in  substance,  as  follows:  "Moses
was  again  clothed  upon  with  the
glory  of  God,  and  he  beheld  every
particle  of  the  earth,  and  there  wa*
not  a  particle  of  it  which  he  did  not
behold,  discerning  it  by  the  Spirit
of  God. "  Now,  tl  us  was  a  very  ex-
tended vision.  He  saw  something
which  you  and  I  have  never  seen,
unless  we  have  had  a  similar  vision.
Only  think  of  a  man,  here  in  a  state
of  mortality,  being  permitted  to  look
down  into  the  earth,  which  is  about
eight  thousand  miles  in  diameter,
and  seeing  not  only  large  portions  of
its  interior,  but  discerning  every  par-
ticle of  it.  There  was  not  a  particle
of  it  that  he  did  not  behold,  discern-
ing it  by  the  Spirit  of  God.

Now,  how  do  we  know  but  what
the  Spirit  of  God  which  exists  in
connection  with  the  .elements,  is  able
to  quicken  the  sight  of  an  individual
so  that  he  can  see  even  to  the  very
centre  of  the  solid  earth  with  all  the
apparent  ease  with  which  he  can  see
objects  near  him  on  its  surface  ?
Now,  for  instance,  what  human  being
ever  saw  an  ultimate  particle  of  the
elements  of  nature?  We  can  see
their  compounds;  we  can  see  the
particles  when  united  in  sufficient


THE  INCREASED  POWERS,  ETC.


3GS


bulk  to  affect  our  vision.  We  can
construct  instruments  which  will
magnify  a  common  house  fly's  eye
mud  make  it  appear  twelve  feet  in
diameter;  we  can  look  into  a  drop
of  water  and  see  creatures  apparently
two  or  three  inches  long  float  ins;
there,  while  with  the  naked  eye  we
cannot  see  anything.  If,  then,  no
man  living  without  the  aid  ot  the
Spirit  of  God,  has  ever  been  able  to
detect  even  one  of  these  elementary
&toms  or  particles  of  matter,  how
great  must  have  been  the  enlarge-
ment of  the  vision  of  Moses — a  man
still  in  mortality — to  enable  him  to
discern  every  particle  of  the  earth,
inside  as  well  as  on  its  surface  !  If
a  mail  in  a  state  of  mortality  could
have  his  vision  so  enlarged  that  he
could  see  all  these  particles  at  once,
what  may  be  expected  when  we  are
immortal,  and  entirely  freed  from  all
the  delects  of  mortality  ?  We  may
expect  that  the  immortal  being  will
have  his  vision  so  enlarged  that  he
can,  not  only  look  with  all  ease  upon
every  particle  of  this  earth,  bat  on
the  particles  of  millions  of  worlds
like  this.  I  can  see  nothing  that
would  hinder  an  immortal  being
from  having  his  vision  enlarged  far
beyond  the  enlargement  which  the
moi  tal  Moses  received  before  ho  ob-
tained a  knowledge  of  this  creation.

Another  thing  occurs  to  my  mind
in  connection  with  this.  You  read
in  that  same  *'  Pearl  of  Great  Price"
concerning  the  vastness  of  the  num-
ber  of  the  creations  of  the  Almighty,
The  language  is  something  like  this
— "  Enoch  beheld  the  Lord  and  the
heavenly  hosts  weeping  over  the
fallen  inhabitants  of  this  world,  and
he  marveled  at  it,  and  he  said  unto
the  Lord,  *  How  is  it  that  thou  canst
weep,  seeing  that  thou  art  holy  and
from  all  eternity  to  eternity,  and
were  it  possible  that  man  could  num-
ber all  the  particles  of  this  earth  and


millions  of  earths  like  this,  it  would
not  be  a  beginning  to  the  number  of
thy  creations,  and  thy  curtains  are
stretched  out  still,  and  yet  thou  art
there,  and  thy  bosom  is  there,  and
out  of  all  the  creations  which  thou
hast  made,  thou  hast  taken  Zion  to
thine  own  bosom.*"  The  Lord  nave
Enoch  a  reason  why  the  heavens
wept  and  shed  forth  their  tears  like
rain  on  the  mountains;  he  told  him
that  it  was  in  consequence  of  the
wickedness  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
earth.  And  the  Lord  said — "Man
of  Holiness  is  my  name,  and  Endless
is  my  name,  and  I  can  stretch  forth
mine  hand  and  hold  all  the  creations
that  I  have  made,  and  mine  eye  can
pit  rc  f  them  also,"

Do  you  not  see,  then,  the  increased
[lowers  and  Lenities  which  the  Al-
mighty has?  His  creations  are  so
numerous  that  the  number  of  parti-
cles composing  this  earth  would  not
be  a  beginning  to  them,  yet  the
Lord's  eye  can  pierce  all  these  crea-
tions, and  he  can  hold  them,  hs  it
were,  in  his  hand.  Not  physically,
not  hold  them  in  the  hollow  of  his
hand  as  we  can  a  ball  or  an  orange;
but  by  the  power  which  he  possesses
he  can  hold  them  and  his  eye  can
pierce  them*  Would  not  this  be  a
far  more  extensive  vision  than  that
which  Moses  had,  when  under  the
influence  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  ?
Why,  yes;  he  was  enabled  to  sec  (he
particles  of  this  one  creation,  a  mere
1  speck  among  God's  works,  while  the
Lord  was  able  to  pierce  all  these
creations  which  Enoch  speaks  of.
Does  it  not  show  an  increased  capacity
in  those  who  are  immortal  in  a  future
state  ?  in  other  words,  among  those
who  dwell  in  the  celestial  worlds?
It  certainly  does.

Now,  tlmll  we  be  made  like  the
Lord,  or  are  we  some  other  species  of
beings,  so  far  disconnected  with  him
1  that  we  never  need  expect  to  reach


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES,


this  high  standard?  How  is  it?,
Who  are  we?  We  are  told  by
Divine  revel  fit  ion  that  we  are  the
aons  of  God ;  we  are  told  in  the  !
vision  received  by  the  Prophet
Joseph,  concerning  these  different
creations,  that  the  inhabitants
thereof  are  begot  ten  sons  and  ij
daughters  unto  God/*  Indeed  !  Be-
gotten mjhs  and  daughter  unto  God  ?
The  inhabitants  of  these  creations?
Yes.  This  agrees  with  what  the
New  and  Old  Testaments,  and  the
various  revelations  which  God  has
given,  clearly  declare — that  God  is
the  Father  of  our  spirits.  A  writer
in  the  New  Testament  says — 11  Be-
loved, now  arc  we  the  sons  of  God" —
that  is,  in  this  life — u  but  it  does  not
yet  appear  what  we  .shall  be,  but
when  he  shall  appear  we  shall  be
like  him."  Not  unlike  him,  not  so
far  sep  rated  from  him  that  the  one
will  be  finite  and  the  other  infinite;
but  44  we  shall  be  like  him."

This  is  consistent  and  reasonable
Every  species  of  being  with  which  we
are  acquainted  begets  its  own  kind,
and  the  youn^  thereof,  whether  man,
quadrupeds,  fowls  or  fish,  finally
grow  up  and  become  like  their  pa-
rents. This  is  a  universal  law  of
nature,  so  far  as  we  know ;  therefore
if  we  are  begotten  sons  and  daugh-
ters of  God,  if  we  are  his  offspring,
he  is  our  Father,  and  why  separate
man  from  all  the  rest  uf  creation,  and
say  that  he  can  never  become  like  his
father  ?  If  all  other  beings  become
like  their  parents,  why  not  we  aitain
to  the  same?  and  if  our  Father  and
Ood  can  pierce  all  those  creations
mentioned  by  Enoch,  and  his  eye  dis-
cern w mit  is  going  on  in  the  midst
of  them  all,  why  may  not  his  chil-
dren become  like  him  in  this  respect  ?
•  This  is  what  the  beloved  disciple
John  the  Revel ator,  one  of  the  Apos-
tles of  Christ,  meant.  He  says, —
**JSow}  we  aie  the  Sons  of  God,  it


does  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be,
but  when  he  shall  appear  we  shall  be
like  him."  He  knew  that  much,
though  he  did  not  comprehend  all  of
the  perfect  capacities  of  man  in  thii
state.  Though  we  are  chained  down
here  by  the  laws  of  nature,  yet  re-
alizing that  we  are  the  children  of
that  Almighty  Being  who  con  h  ols
universal  nature,  and  all  the  worlds
that  are  spoken  of,  we  expect  to  come
up,  and  that  the  attributes  which  our
eternal  Father  possesses  will  he  fully
developed  in  us,  and  that  ive  also
shall  be  able  to  penetrate  tha  immen-
sity of  space  and  gaze  upon  the  work-
manship of  our  Father's  hands.

It  is  said  concerning  us  that  we
shall  be  in  the  presence  of  God  when
we  become  immortal  and  perfect  be-
ings. We  are  now  not  in  his  pre-
sence; the  Fall  has  let  down  a  vail
between  us  and  our  Father  and  God*
This  vail  does  not  prevent  the  eye  of
the  Almighty  from  seeing  an-i  dis-
cerning the  conduct  of  his  children,
but  it  prevents  us,  while  in  this  state
of  mortality,  from  beholding  his
presence,  unless  we  rend  the  vail  by
our  faith  and  obedience  and,  like  the
brother  of  Jared,  are  permitted  to
come  back  into  his  presence.  But  to
1  be  in  t he  presence  of  God  is  it  abso-
lutely necessary  that  our  earth  should
be  wafted  away  from  its  present  orbit
iu  the  solar  system  and  carried  oil"  to
some  immense  distance  in  space  ?
is  this  really  necessary  ?  What  are
we  to  understand  by  being  in  the  pre-
I  sence  of  God  ?  Is  it  necessary,  to
do  so,  that  we  should  be  in  the  earn©
vicinity  or  within  a  lew  yards  or  :ect
of  hirn?  I  think  not.  We  aie  no^v
I  laboring  under  the  im  perfections  of
the  fall,  and  because  of  that  fall  a
|  vail  shuts  us  from  his  presence;  but
|  let  the  effects  of  the  full  be  removed
and  mankind  be  able  to  again  look
upon  the  face  of  their  Father  and  Cre-
ator, and  they  will  be  in  his  presence.


THE  INCREASED  POWERS,  ETC,


365


Will  the  spirits  of  men,  before
they  receive  their  resurrected  body,
return  into  the  presence  of  Got!  ?
Yes. Read  what  Alma  said  to  his
son  Corianion  on  this  subject,  de-
scribing the  state  of  the  spirit  between
the  time  of  death  and  the  resurrec-
tion P He  says — u  It  has  been  made
known  to  me  by  an  angel  that  the
spirits  of  all  men,  as  soon  as  they  are
dead,  whether  wicked  or  righteous,
shall  return  home  to  that  God  who
gave  them  life ; n  that  is,  they  go
back  into  his  presence. The  wicked,
however,  are  again  oust  out  into  outer
darkness,  the  light  of  the  counte-
nance of  their  Lord  is  again  with-
drawn from  them,  a  vail  is  let  down
bet  ween  them  and  their  Father  and
God,  But  how  is  it  with  the  right-
eous ? When  they  go  back  and  be-
hold the  face  of  their  Father  they
will  continue  in  the  light  of  his  coun-
tenance, and have  the  privilege  of
seeing  him. They  have  returned  to
their  ancient  home,  to  that  Cod  who
gave  them  life,  to  the  mansions  and
familiar  places  where  they  dwelt  ages
and  ages  before  they came  here.
They  have  gone  back  to  meet  with
familiar acquaintances, and  their
memories  will  be  so  increased  and
perfected  after  they  leave  this  body
that  the  things  of  their  former  state
and  condition  will  be  fresh  to  them,
and  they  will  look  upon  this  little
speck  called  time,  in  which  they  have
dwelt  seventy,  eighty  or  ninety  years,
as  bat  a  dream  or  night  vision  during
which  the  things  of  former  ages  were
shut  from  their  memories;  but  when
they  get  back  to  their  ancient  home
they  will  have  a  bright  recollection
of  all  these  things,  and  of  the  famil-
iar countenance  of  their  Father,  and
the  countenance  of  his  only  begotten
Son,  and  the  countenances  of  the
millions  on  millions  of  their  brother
and  sister  spirits,  with  whom  they
once  lived. And  the  memories  of


the  wicked,  after  they  leave  this  body,
will  be  so  increased  that  they  will
have  a  bright  recollection,  Alma  says,
of  all  their  guilt.  Here  they  forget
a  good  many  things  wherein  they
have  displeased  God;  but  in  that
condition,  even  before  the  resurrec-
tion, they  will  have  a  bright  recollec-
tion of  all  their  guilt,  which  will
kindle  in  them  a  flame  like  that  of
an  unquenchable  fire,  creating  in
their  bosoms  a  feeling  of  torment,
pain  and  misery,  because  they  have
sinned  against  their  own  Father  and
their  own  God,  and  rejected  his  coun-
sel s.  ;  *'ri

To  go  back  then,  into  the  presence
of  God,  is  to  be  placed  in  a  condi-
tion wherein  his  presence  can  be
seen.  It  does  not  mean,  in  all  cases,
that  people  who  return  into  Ida
presence  are  immediately  placed  with-
in a  few  yards  or  rods,  or  within  a
short  distance  of  his  person.  Is  there
any  revelation  to  prove  this  ?  Yes.
1  have  already  quoted  what  the  Lord
said  in  relation  to  all  these  creations.
He  said  that  from  the  whole  of  them
which  he  had  made  he  had  taken  Zioa
to  his  own  bosom.  Now  if  he  has
taken  Zion  to  his  own  bosom  from
all  these  numberless  creations,  can
they  all  be  concentrated  in  a  little
spot  of  a  few  rods  in  diameter  in
order  to  get  into  his  presence  ?  Why
no.  If  each  Zion  did  not  occupy
any  more  space  than  one  particle
of  our  globe,  yet  inasmuch  as  the
worlds  are  more  numberless  than  the
particles  of  millions  of  earths  like
this,  how  could  they  all  get  into  so
small  a  space  as  to  get  near  to  the
person  of  the  Lord  r  They  could
not  do  it.  But  suffice  it  to  say  the
vail  is  removed,  and  no  matter  how
distant  a  redeemed  world  may  be,
it  will  be  in  the  presence  of  God,

In  order  to  make  it  familiar  let  me
bring  up  an  illustration  well  known
among  the  children of  mortality.


For  instance,  we  have,  within  the
present  century,  invented  methods  (if
communicating  by  telegraph,  by
menus  of  which,  with  the  proper
facilities,  we  in  this  room  in  Ogden
can  cun verse  with  the  fieople  in  Lon-
don, and  they,  by  menus  of  the
wires  laid  on  I  he  bed  of  the  great
Atlantic  Ocean,  can  rcoly  in  about
tivo  seconds.  This  wonderful  inven-
tion has,  in  some  measure,  diminished
the  distance  between  the  inhabitants
of  Ou'den  and  those  of  London,  has
It  not  V  The  people  of  the  last
century  and  of  centuries  preceding
Would  have  had  to  wait  lor  a  long
period  of  time,  before  they  could  get
a  communication  from  London;  but
now  a  few  seconds  are  all  that  is
necessary.  We  will  suppose  that  it
Was  within  the  scope  of  man's  power
—  which  it  is  not — to  hear  as  well  as
to  converse  through  the  aid  of  the
telegraph  line.  Supposing  that  by
such  means  we  could  hear  the  peo-
ple in  London  ;  or  that  there  was  a
facility  for  so  doing,  such  as  is  men-
tioned in  the  Doctrine  and  Cove-
n  nts,when  the  firstangel  shall  sound,
by  which  the  people  of  all  the  earth  will
hear  tike  words  that  he  speaks  :4-say,
eupposing  there  was  such  a  principle
brought  into  operation  so  that  we
could  actually  hear  the  words  spoken
by  the  people  in  London,  would  not
that  also  diminish  the  impressions
of  distance  ?  Now,  supposing  still
further,  that  there  was  a  principle
differing  from  our  natural  light,  a
principle  of  light  of  a  more  refined
nature,  that  could  penetrate  from
London  to  this  point,  so  that  it  would
affect  our  eyes,  enabling  us  to  see
persons  there,  then  we  could  both  see
and  hear  them  at  eight  or  nine  thou-
sand miles  distant.  Would  we  not
be  in  their  presence  ?  Would  it  be
really  necessary  for  us  to  travel  eight
or  nine  thousand  miles  to  get  into
the  same  room  with  them,  in  order


to  get  into  their  presence  ?  We
should  consider  ourselves  in  their
presence  if  we  could  see  them;  and
if  in  addition  to  this  we  could  com-
municate with  and  make  them  hear
us,  we  should  feel  all  that  familiarity
and  sociability  that  we  should  if  we
were  within  a  few  steps  of  them.  I
look  upon  the  condition  of  things  in
this  respect  in  a  future  state  as  some-
what similar  to  that.  If  you  or  I
lived  upon  one  of  the  most  remote
stars  that  has  ever  been  seen  by  the
most  powerful  telescopic  instruments
invented  by  man,  from  which  it  wuuld
rake  light,  traveling  at  the  immense
rate  ot  one  hundred  and  ninety-two
thousand  miles  every  beat  of  the
pulse,  six  hundred  thousand  yeats  to
reach  this  planetary  system  ;  I  s ay,
suppose  we  were  living  on  one  of
these  very  remote  bodies,  and  sup.
pose  there  was  a  principle  pervading
all  space  that  would  transmit  to  the
immortal  eyes  much  more  swiltly
than  the  natural  light,  and  that
ItJii.OOO  miles  a  second  would  be
considered  a  very  slow  motion  com-
pared with  that  still  more  refined
light  that  shines  forth  from  the  per.
son  age  of  our  Father  and  God  ;  and
supposing  that  our  eyes  were  so  con.
structed  and  adapted  that  we  could
behold  the  light  of  his  countenance
without  traversing  this  space,  or  in
a  time  much  less  than  six  hundred
thousand  years,  but  aiill  taking  a
certain  length  of  time  to  go  all  that
distance,  would  we  not  be  in  the  pre.
seoee  of  God  ?  If  every  world  has
got  to  be  removed  iuto  his  presence
one  by  one,  and  all  the  inhabitants
I  thereof,  how  many  millions  on  rail-
lions  of  ages  would  it  take,  before
all  these  successively  could  enter  into
his  presence  so  as  to  be  near  by  him?
If  each  world  should  roll  into  hie
presence  successively,  and  then  give
place  to  others,  we  should  be  out  of
his  presence  almost  continually,  for


THE  INCREASED  POWERS,  ETC,


367


all  those  worlds  I  have  named  are
not  a  beginning,  not  even  a  begin-
ning to  the  number  of  his  creation  a,
and  yet  if  they  had  to  come  along
and  be  successively  rolled  into  his
presence,  so  as  to  be  near  him  per-
son ?d  I  y,  if  each  one  stayed  there  only
five  minutes,  there  is  no  man  who
could  calculate  or  realize  anything
about  the  almost  in  finite  duration
that  would  have  to  elapse  before  they
could  come  round  a  second  tune  into
his  presence.  Hence  there  is  some-
thing more  perfect  in  the  construc-
tion of  the  works  of  the  Almighty
that  lets  man  into  his  presence  what-
soever part  of  the  universe  he  may
exist  in — we  may  have  the  veil  re-
moved, and  his  presence  become
visible.

Can  they  converse  with  him  when
situated  at  these  immense  distances
from  his  person  ?  Yes,  How  ?
Through  those  more  perfect  faculties
which  God  will  give  to  immortal
man.  It  is  as  easy  for  his  children,
when  they  are  perfected  and  made
like  him,  to  converse  with  him  at
tbe.se  immense  distances  and  for  their
eyes  to  pierce  all  these  creations  as
it  is  for  their  Father  and  God  to  do
ao.

Thus  we  see  that  man  is  a  God  in
embryo,  agreeing  with  that  which
the  Lord  has  revealed  to  us  in  the
vision  giveu  to  Joseph — "  They  shall
be  Gods*  even  the  Sons  of  God/'
growing  up  like  their  Father,  their
bodies  fashioned  like his  glorious
body* The  attributes  and  faculties
with  which  man  is  endowed  in  a
mortal  state  are  Godlike in  their
nature,  but  they  are  weakened  and
incapable  of  any  very  great  expan-
sion by  being  shut  up  in  this  frail
mortal  body  ;  but  when  we  are  freed
from  mortality  we  have  the  promise
that  we  shall  become  like  him,  and
if  he  can  grasp  in  his  comprehension
and  vision  all  these  numberless  crea-


tions, so  will  those  who  are  made  like
him  be  able  to  do  the  same.

There  aire  many  other  things  that
would  be  profitable  to  dwell  upon  in
discussing  the  increased  capacities
and  powers  of  man  in  his  future  state
besides  the  physical  qualities  1  have
spoken  of.  Tnere  is  his  increased
knowledge  and  the  proportionate  in*
crease  of  power  that  will  accompany
it ;  the  great  creative  principle,  the
mechanical  work  which  was  per-
formed by  our  Father  and  Go  J  in
construct  nig  creations,  arid  in  re-
deeming mtd  glorifying  them;  that
great  principle  of  knowledge  by  which
our  Father  and  God  can  call  forth
from  a  shapeless  muss  of  dust  an
immortal  tabernacle,  into  which  enters
an  immortal  spirit.  All  these  prin-
ciples of  wisdom,  knowledge  find
power  will  l>e  given  to  his  children,
and  will  enable  t  hern  to  organize  the
elements,  form  creations,  and  call
fnrl.h  from  the  dust  intelligent  beings,
who  will  be  under  their  charge  and
control.  These  things  might  be  spo-
ken of,  had  wo  time  this  evening;
indeed  it  is  a  subject  that  is  almost
inexhaustible  in  its  nature.  When
we  commence  to  speak  upon  it,  we
scarcely  know  where  to  begin,  and
having  launched  out  upon  it,  we
scarcely  know  where  to  end,  for  there
is  no  end  to  it

Man  is  destined  for  all  future  da-
ration — destined  to  act  in  the  capa-
city of  a  celestial  being.  The  facul-
ties he  now  possesses  in  embryo  are
but  little  understood,  yet  we  occa-
sionally see  them  developed  among
holy  men,  hs  in  the  case  of  Enoch,
Moses  and  Abraham,  who  had  the
Urim  and  Thummin,  and  who  were
able  to  behold  many  of  those  crea-
ons  of  which  I  have  sp-jken,
mong  the  many  attributes  and
powers  which  man  will  possess  in  a
future  state,  I  will  mention  that  of
being  able  to  comprehend  more  than


368  JOURNAL  OF

one  thing  at  a  time.  Here  we  are  j
chained  down  to  one  thing  at  a  time,
End  while  a  man  is  attending  to  and
trying  to  comprehend  one  tiling  he
almost  loses  sight  of  everything  else,
except  it  be  some  few  things  that  are
very  familiar  to  him.  If  he  under-
takes  to  work  a  mathematical  pro-
blem, he  can  not,  at  the  same  time,
work  out  a  hundred  problems  more,
and  come  to  a  conclusion  in  regard
to  them.  He  has  to  concentrate  his
mind  on  one  subject  and  bring  forth
the  demonstrations  step  by  step  in
order  to  arrive  at  certain  conclusions.

Will  man  in  a  future  state  have
increased  faculties  in  regard  to  this  ?
Yes.  Our  Heavenly  Father  notices
every  hair  of  the  heads  of  the  chil-
dren of  men  that  falls  to  the  ground  ;
not  one  of  your  hairs  shall  fall  to  the
ground,  says  Jesus,  unnoticed  by  your
Father  which  is  in  heaven.  If  he
were  noticing  a  hair  fulling  from  my
head,  could  he  notice  at  the  same  1
time  the  falling  of  a  hair  from  your
head  ?  Yes ;  and  if  the  hair  were  falling
from  the  heads  of  every  individual  on  ■
the  earth  at  the  same  instant  he  could
notice  the  whole  of  it,  fur  he  has  this
increased  faculty  by  which  he  can
grasp  in  his  vision  myriads  of  things
at  once.

We  might  also  speak  of  the  faculty
of  going  back  into  the  past  ages  of
eternity,  and  comprehending  works


DISCOURSES.

[  that  have  been  millions  of  ages  in
progress,  also  the  faculty  of  seeing
and  comprehending  that  which  will
take  place  in  the  future  ages  of  eter-  „
nity,  for  millions  of  years  to  come.
Here  we  prophecy  in  part,  and  here
we  have  knowledge  in  part ;  here  we
gne  upon  one  thing  at  once;  here
we  can  comprehend  the  future  in
some  measure.  But  we  *'  see  through
a  glass  darkly,"  then  we  shall  see  face
to  face;  then  knowledge  in  part  will
be  done  away,  for  the  pist,  present
and  future,  and  millions  on  millions
of  creations  will  come  before  us  and
be  alike  comprehended  by  the  vision
of  immortal  man.

'  I  will  not  detain  you  any  longer.
God  bless  tli is  Association,  and  we
hope  that  it  may  exert  a  salutary  in-
fluence not  only  over  the  young  men
of  Ogden,  but  over  the  young  ladies
also,  and  over  the  middle-aged  and
old,  and  that  they  may  seek  every
opportunity  to  develop  the  godlike
qualities  with  which  they  are  en-
dowed, that  in  a  time  to  come  the
young  men  here,  being  filled  with
the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  under-
standing and  the  knowledge  of  God,
may  be  able  to  bear  off  His  kingdom
victoriously,  and  be  prepared  for  the
time  when  the  knowledge  and  glory
of  God  shall  cover  the  earth  as  the
waters  cover  the  great  deep.  Amen.


4


DISCOURSE  BY  ELDER  JOHN  TAYLOR,


elivbred  in  the  fourteenth  ward  assembly  rooms,  salt  like

City,  Sunday  Afternoon,  Feb,  1,  3874*

(Beportid  by  David  W.  Evans.)

WHAT  THE  GOSPEL  TEACHES — REVELATION  FROM  OOD  NECESSARY— THE
FAITH  AND  DOCTRINES  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  SAINTS.


I  hare  had  a  note  forwarded  to  me
since  I  came  here,  by  a  party  who  is  a
stranger  to  me,  requesting  that  I  would
speak  on  our  leading  doctrines.  There
are  so  many  great  principles  developed
in  the  eternal  truths  of  God  that  we
believe  in,  that  it  is  a  somewhat
difficult  task  to  attempt,  in  so  short
a  time,  any  adequate  exposition
thereof,  and  if  I  touch  upon  any  of
t  facie  principles,  it  must  be  very
lightly.  The  request  reminds  me  of
an  anecdote  which  I  rqad  aho*f
time  ago.  A  lady  mef  wlh  *jE
tlcman  who  had  traveled  very^x-
tensively  over  the  world*  He  was  a
statesman,  a  philosopher,  and  quite  a
celebrity.  He  and  the  lady  were
going  to  take  dinner  together,  and
some  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  before
dinner  was  served,  the  lady  said  to

him— "  Mr,  ,1  am  very  happy

to  have  the  privilege  of  seeing  and
speaking  with  you,  and  now  while
they  are  preparing  dinner,  we  shall
have  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  will  yon
please  tell  me  all  you  know  and  'have
seen  in  your  travels

In  regard  to  our  religion,  I  will
say  that  it  embraces  every  principle
of  truth  and  intelligence  pertaining
to  us  as  moral,  intellectual,  mortal
and  immortal  beings,  pertaining  to

No,  24.


this  world  and  the  world  that  is  to
come.  We  are  open  to  truth  of
every  kind,  no  matter  whence  it
comes,  where  it  originates,  or  who
believes  in  it-  Truth,  when  preceded
by  the  little  word  "  all,"  comprises
everything  that  has  ever  existed  or
that  ever  will  exist  and  be  known  by
and  among  men  in  time  and  through
the  endless  ages  of  eternity ;  and  it
is  the  duty  of  all  intelligent  beings
who  are  responsible  and,  amenable  to
Qod  for  their  acts,  to*  search  after
truth,  and  to  permit  it  to  influence
them  and  their  acts  and  general
course  in  life,  independent  of  all  bias
or  pre-conceived  notions,  however
[  specious  and  plausible  they  may  be.

We,  as  Latter-day  Saints,  believe,
first,  in  the  Gospel,  and  that  is  a
great  deal  to  say,  for  the  Gospel  em-
braces principles  that  dive  deeper,
spread  wider,  and  extend  further
than  anything  else  that  we  can  con-
ceive. The  Gospel  teaches  us  in
regard  to  the  being  and  attributes  of
God ;  it  also  teaches  us  our  relation*
■hip  to  that  God  and  the  various
responsibilities  we  are  under  to  him
as  his  offspring;  it  teaches  ns  the
various  duties  and  responsibilities
that  we  are  under  to  oar  families
and  friends,  to  the  community,  to

Vol.  XVL


370


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


the  living  and  the  dead  j  it  unfolds
to  ns  principles  pertaining  to  futu-
rity ;  in  fact,  according  to  the  say-
ing of  one  of  the  old  disciples,  it
"  brings  life  and  immortality  to
light,"  brings  us  into  relationship
with  God,  and  prepares  us  for  an  ex-
altation in  the  eternal  world.  There
is  something  grand,  profound  and
intellectual  associated  with  the  prin-
ciples of  the  Gospel  as  it  stands  con-
nected  with  the  salvation  and  ex-
altation of  man.  A  man  in  search
of  truth  has  no  peculiar  system  to
sustain,  no  peculiar  dogma  to  defend
or  theory  to  uphold  5  he  embraces
all  truth,  and  that  truth,  like  the
sun  in  the  firmament,  shines  forth
and  spreads  its  effulgent  rays  over
all  creation,  and  if  men  ^ill  direst
themselves  of  bias  and  prejudice,  and
prayerfully  and  conscientiously  search
after  truth,  they  will  find  it  wherever
they  turn  their  attention.  But  in
regard  to  the  leading  principles  of
the  Gospel,  there  are  some  distinctive
feature*  connected  therewith,  which,
like  all  the  laws  of  nature  and  of
nature's  God,  require  implicit  obedi-
ence and  compliance  therewith  in
order  to  insure  a  realization  of  the
results  which  flow  therefrom.  The
earth  on  which  we  live,  the  matter  of
which  it  is  composed,  the  elements
with  which  we  are  surrounded,  as
well  as  the  planetary  system,  have
certain  inscrutable,  eternal,  unchange-
able laws  connected  with  them  that
can  not  be  departed  from.

We  talk  sometimes  about  the  great
discoveries  men  have  made  connected
with  electricity,  steam,  light  and  its
properties,  and  a  variety  of  other
principles  that  exist  in  nature;  all
these  principles  are  governed  by
certain  specific  laws,  which  are  im-
mutable and  unchangeable;  and  all
of  the  great  discoveries  which  men
have  made,  have  only  developed
certain  properties  that  have  always


existed.  They  have  not  created
anything,  and  their  discoveries  are
nothing  particularly  worth  boasting
of.  A  child,  in  its  infancy,  possesses
certain  reasoning  faculties,  but  they
are  only  developed  by  a  long  course
of  training  and  experience.  It  pos-
sesses arms,  legs,  feet,  a  head  and
body,  eyes,  ears,  nose,  &a,  but  it  is
unconscious  of  this ;  by  and  by,  when
its  reasoning  faculties  begin  to  be
developed,  it  discovers  that  it  has
hands.  It  had  them  before,  but  it
did  not  know  it.  It  is  a  good  deal
so  with  us  and  the  generations  which
have  preceded  us — we  live,  and  have
lived  in  a  world  in  which  from  the
beginning  there  have  existed  prin-
ciples, organisms  and  systems, — h\l
that  are  now  known  or  that  ever  will
be  discovered,  but  we  have  been  igno-
rant of  them,  and  only  become  aware
of  their  existence  by  what  is  called
the  progress  of  science  and  the  dis-
coveries of  scientific  and  ingenious
men.  And  as  earthly  things  are
governed  and  controlled  by  unchang-
ing laws,  bo  it  is  with  heavenly
things.  In  optics  certain  lenses  are
needed  for  the  reception  and  refrac-
tion of  light;  in  chemistry  a  certain
combination  of  elements  is  necessary
to  produce  magnetism  or  electricity,
and  you  may  have  these  elements
ever  so  perfect,  and  without  the  wire
you  cannot  use  them  to  convey  in-
telligenee;  and  you  may  have  the
wire  without  the  necessary  combina-
tion of  chemical  elements,  and  the
result  is  the  same^f  I  have  a  watch ;
if  I  wind  it  up  i*  will  tell  the  time,
if  I  neglect  to  do  that  it  will  stop.
You  have  your  steam  engine,  if  yon
shut  up  the  valve  you  turn  off  the
steam,  and  it  ceases  to  move.  You
have  a  water  wheel  possessing  certain
power,  but  turn  off  the  water  from
that  wheel  and  its  power  ceases.  It
is  just  so  in  regard  to  all  the  opera-
tions of  nature — they  are  governed


WHAT  THE  GOSPEL  TEACHES,  ETC.


by  certain  laws  which  are  understood
by  those  who  study  them.

There  are  laws  pertaining  to  eter-
nal things — the  things  of  God — that
are  just  as  immutable  and  unchange-
able as  those  of  which  I  have  been
speaking,  and  fo  realize  the  results
they  are  calculated  to  produce,  you
mast  submit  to  and  obey  them.  God
has  distinctly  told  us  in  his  revela-
tions that  u  no  man  knows  the  things
of  God  but  by  the  Spirit  of  God,
even  as  no  man  knows  the  things  of
man  but  by  the  spirit  of  man  that  is
within  him,"  then  how  can  men  ob-
tain a  knowledge  of  the  things  of
God  except  they  first  take  the  course
which  he  has  pointed  out  ?  They
can  not  do  it  If  the  laws  which
govern  terrestrial  things  are  immu-
table, the  laws  which  govern  celestial
things  aVe  certainly  not  less  so,  and
this  brings  me  to  the  consideration
of  some  of  the  first  principles  of  the
Gospel  which  we  as  a  people  believe
in.

We  believe  that  it  is  necessary  for
man  to  be  placed  in  communication
with  God  ;  that  he  should  have  reve-
lation from  Him,  and  that  unless
he  is  placed  under  the  influence  of
the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
he  can  know  nothing  about  the
things  of  God.  I  do  not  care  how
learned  a  man  may  be,  or  how  ex-
tensively he  may  have  traveled;  I
do  not  care  what  his  talent,  intel-
lect or  genius  may  be,  at  what  col-
lege he  may  have  studied,  how  com-
prehensive his  views  or  what  his
judgment  may  be  on  other  matters,
he  cannot  understand  certain  things
without  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  that
necessarily  introduces  the  principle
I  before  referred  to — the  necessity
of  revelation.  Not  revelation  in
former  times,  but  present  and  im-
mediate revelation,  which  shall  lead
and  guide  those  who  possess  it  in  all
the  paths  of  life  here,  and  to  eternal


life  hereafter,  A  good  many  people,
and  those  professing  Christians,  will
sneer  a  good  deal  at  the  idea  of  pre-
sent revelation.  Whoever  heard  of
true  religion  without  communication
with  God  ?  To  me  the  thing  is  the
most  absurd  that  the  human  mind
could  conceive  of.  I  do  not  wonder,
when  the  people  generally  reject  the
principle  of  present  revelation,  that
skepticism  and  infidelity  prevail  to
such  an  alarming  extent.  I  do  not
wonder  that  to  many  men  treat  reli-
gion with  contempt,  and  regard  it  as
something  not  worth  the  attention
of  intelligent  beings,  for  without
revelation  religion  is  a  mockery  and
a  farce.  If  I  can  not  have  a  religion
that  will  lead  me  to  Gcd,  and  place
me  en  rapport  with  him,  and  unfold
to  my  mind  the  principles  of  im-
mortality and  eternal  life,  I  want
nothing  to  do  with  it.

The  principle  of  present  revela-
tion, then,  is  the  very  foundation  of
our  religion. The  Christian  world
reject  that,  and  say  the  Bible  is  all-
sufficient. I  can  rt member  in  my
younger  days  searching  its  contents
very  diligently. It  is  a  glorious
book  to  study,  and  I  earnestly  re-
commend it  to  the  attention  of  our
young  men  and  young  women,  and
of  our old  men  and  old  women,
"Search  the  Scriptures,1*  was  the
com  mand  of  Jeaus,  "  for  in  them  ye
think  ye  have  eternal  life,  and  they
are  they  that  testify  of  me,"  I
would  not  only  search  the  Scriptures
that we  now  have,  but  I  would
search  also  every  revelation  that  God
has  given,  does  give,  or  will  give  for
the  guidance  and  direction  of  his
people,  and  then  I  would  reverence
the  Giver,  and  those  also  whom  he
makes  use  of  as  his  honored  instru-
ments to  promulgate  and  make  known
those  principles ;  and  I  would  itek  to
be  governed  by  the  principles  that
are  contained  in  that  sacred  word.


372  JOURNAL  OF

Now  then  let  me  look  back  a  little,
arid  examine  things  as  they  have
existed.  What  kind  of  a  Gospel  was
it  that  Jesus  introduced?  We  are
told  that  it  was  the  Gospel;  bat
what  sort  of  an  organization  did  his
Church  hare  ?  Apostles,  Prophets,
Pastors,  Teachers  and  Evangelists —
inspired  men  —  men  who  had  the
ministering  of  angels,  the  spirit  of
prophecy,  and  the  principle  of  reve-
lation; men  who  had  the  heavens
opened  to  them,  so  that  they  eould
contemplate  the  purposes  of  God  as
tbey  should  roll  along  throughout
every  subsequent  period  of  time
until  the  winding  up  scene.  Whence
did  they  obtain  this  knowledge  ?
They  obtained  it  through  obedience
to  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and
hence  it  is  very  properly  said  that
"life  and  immortality  are  brought
to  light  by  the  Gospel/'

Well,  who  were  the  ancient  Apos-
tles ?  They  were  men  chosen  and
selected  by  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of
God.  Who  were  these  Prophets  ?
Men  who  were  in  possession  of  the
spirit  of  prophecy ;  and  you  show
me  a  man  who  is  called  and  inspired
of  God  to  preach  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  I  will  shew  you  a  Pro-
phet, for  we  are  told  that  i(  the  testi-
mony of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  pro-
phecy ; "  and  if  a  man  has  not  the
spirit  of  prophecy  and  revelation  he
is  not  the  man  to  teach  the  things  of
God,  for  that  is  the  principle  by  which
all  God's  chosen  and  authorized  min-
isters in  every  age  have  been  in-
spired, and  by  which  they  have
taught  the  things  of  eternal  life  to
the  children  of  men.

How  was  it  with  Jesus  ?  He
said  that  "he  came  not  to  do  his
own  will ;  but  the  will  of  the  father
who  sent  him ;  "  and  said  he — "  The
words  that  I  speak  I  speak  not  of
myself;  but  the  Father  which
dwelleth  in  me,  he  doeth  the  work/'


DISCOURSES.

When  the  disciples  went  forth  to
preach  the  Gospel,  Jesos  told  them
to  go  without  purse  and  scrip,  trust*
ing  in  him ;  and  he  told  them  that
when  they  were  brought  before
kings,  rulers  and  governors,  they
were  not  to  think  beforehand  what
they  should  say,  for  it  should  be
given  to  them  in  the  self-same  hour
that  they  needed  it*  Paul  said  that
the  Gospel  that  he  preached  "  he  re-
ceived not  of  man,  neither  by  man ;
but  he  received  it  of  God,  and  the
words  that  he  spake  were  not  his
own,  for  he  told  the  people  definitely
and  distinctly  that  their  words  came
to  them  "  not  in  word  only,  but  in
power  and  in  the  demonstration  of
the  Spirit  of  God,  and  with  much
assurance/*  They  were  under  the
inspiration  of  the  Almighty,

And  Where  did  we  get  our  Bible
from  ?  "No  Scripture  is  of  any
private  interpretation,**  we  are  told,
"  but  holy  men  of  old  spake  as  they
were  moved  upon  by  the  Holy
Ghost,"  a*d  while  under  that  inspi-
ration they  uttered  the  word  of  God,
and  that  word  became  the  Scripture
of  truth,  as  we  here  find  it.  It  was
given  by  dreams,  visions  and  reve-
lations, and  that  which  was  thus
communicated  to  man  was  written,
and  has  become  what  we  call  the
Bible,

When  the  inspired  revelnfionef
which  we  call  the  Gospel  were  given
to  men  there  were  ApostItg  and  Pro-
phets, pastors,  teachers  and  evange-
lists ;  and  how  did  Jesus  tell  his  dis-
ciples to  teach  his  Gospel  ?  He  told
them  to  "go  inlo  all  the  world  and
preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature/*
the  promise  being  that  "he  that
believed  and  was  baptized  should  be
saved."  And  it  was  also  said  that
certain  signs  should  follow  them
that  believed:  they  should  cast  out
devils  in  the  name  <rf  Jesus,  "they
should  lay  hands  on  the  sick  and


WHAT  THE  GOSPEL  TEACHES,  ETC


37  J


they  should  recover,"  &c,  showing
that  there  was  a  living,  vital,  ener-
getic power  associated  with  the  Gos-
pel that  was  enunciated  by  Jesus
Christ  and  taught  by  his  Apostlei.
It  was  not  connected  alone  with  the
Apostles,  as  some  suppose.  It  does
not  read  *'  these  signs  shall  follow  the
Apostles  who  believe,  or  the  disciples
who  believe,"  but  the  signs  would
follow  them  that  believe  wherever
the  Gospel  was  preached  in  all  the
world.  The  Gospel  and  its  blessings
were  not  restricted  either  to  time,
person  or  place;  but  were  to  be
enjoyed  in  all  the  world  by  all  who
believed.

Paul  tells  03  that  Apostles,  Pro-
phets, evangelists,  pastors,  and  teach-
ers were  placed  in  the  Church,  for
what  ?  For  the  establishing  of
Christianity  ?  No,  it  does  not  read
in  that  way.  For  the  benefit  of  the
Apostles  and  those  immediately  sur-
rounding them  ?  No.  To  convince
the  pagan  Gentiles  and  unbelieving
Jews  ?  No,  he  tells  us  they  were
placed  in  the  Church  **  for  the  per-
fectisg  of  the  Saints,"  that  they  who
believed  in  and  obeyed  the  Gospel
might  go  on  from  strength  to
strength  and  be  enabled  to  endure
faithful  to  the  end.  It  was  for  the
perfecting  of  such  persons,  that,  as
immortal  beings,  they  might  increase
in  light,  intelligence  and  truth,  and
be  prepared  to  dwell  with  the  Gods
and  tnc  sanctified  hosts  in  the  eternal
worlds.

These  officers  were  for  the  perfect-
ing of  the  Saints  then;  were  they
for  anything  else  ?  Yes,  "  for  the
work  of  the  ministry  and  for  the
edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ."
Why  ?  "  That  they  should  be  no
more  children,  tossed  about  by  divers
winds  of  doctrine  and  the  craft  of
cunning  men  whereby  they  lie  in
wait  to  deceive;"  but  that  they
might  "  be  built  on  the  foundation


of  the  Apostles  and  Prophets,  Jesus
Christ  himself  being  the  chief  cor-
ner stone:"  that  they  might  have
a  knowledge  of  the  truth  of  the
Gospel  for  themselves,  glowing  in
characters  of  living  fire  written  in
their  hearts,  which  no  man,  influence
or  power  could  obliterate;  but  that
it  might  dwell  there  like  a  fire  upon
the  altar  eternally  burning  and  from
thence  spread  its  radiant  effulgence
glowing,  increasing  and  spreading.
This  is  the  kind  of  Gospel  the  an-
cients preached  and  believed  in,  and
which  we,  the  Latter-day  Saints,
preach  and  believe  in.

But  where  is  the  necessity  of  a
new  revelation,  some  may  inquire,
to  restore  this  Gospel,  seeing  that  it
is  the  same  Gospel  that  is  recorded
in  the  Scriptures  ?  The  Catholics
would  tell  us  there  is  no  need  of  it,
for  they  obtained  it  from  God  in
ancient  times,  and  have  retained  it,
and  it  has  been  handed  down  in
regular  succession  to  the  present
day*  I  am  not  going  to  investigate
all  these  theories  to-day,  there  would
not  be  time,  suffice  it  to  say  that
they  are  mere  fallacies,  neither
Catholics,  Greeks,  or  Protestants
have  retained  the  Gospel  and  the
power  to  administer  it.  When  we
come  to  the  Protestant  world  there
is  a  great  deal  of  credit  due  to  them
for  the  course  they  have  taken.  Bui
has  the  Gospel  been  continued
among  them  in  its  purity  from  the
time  that  Jesus  lived  on  the  earth  ?
Is  there  any  man  who  has  the  har-
dihood to  say  so  ?  I  do  not  think
you  can  find  one.  Whence  origi-
nated these  notions,  opinions,  theo-
ries, principles  and  dogmas  that
ex:st  among  men  in  the  religioui
world  at  the  present  day  ?  Did  they
originate  with  God  ?  nre  told

that  "  he  is  not  the  author  of  confu-
sion, but  of  order,"  Did  he  inspire
men  with  ail  these  various  dogmaa


374


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


and  theories  ?  Certainly  not*  Who
did  ;  where  did  they  come  from  ?
Why,  men,  in  various  ages,  many
of  them  very  good  men,  have  tried
to  stop  the  flood  of  evil,  false  doc-
trine, error  and  crime,  and  in  doing
so,  unaided  by  inspiration,  they
have  made  very  great  blunders.
When  the  pope,  through  the  instru-
mentality of  Loyola,  was  selling
indulgences  in  a  shameful  and  dis-
graceful manner,  Martin  Luther  and
other  reformers  rose  up  and  de-
nounced it  as  an  evil,  and  they  were
right  in  that,  for  it  was  an  evil,  and
a  crime  and  an  outrage  upon  society,
for  it  was  bartering  that  for  money
which  God  never  intended  or  autho-
rized. Inquires  one  —  "  Did  not
Jesus  give  to  his  disciples  *  the  keys
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,'  and  say
that 4  whose  soever  ains  they  remitted
should  be  remitted,  and  whose  soever
sins  they  retained  should  be  re-
tained ?f  *  "Yea,"  "Then  why
did  not  others  have  that  power  ?  "
They  did,  if  they  obtained  it  legiti-
mately; but  not  in  that  kind  of  a
way-  Peter  never  possessed  power
to  sell  forgiveness  of  sins.  In  the
days  of  the  Apostles  there  was  a
certain  man  who  saw  the  power  of
God  made  manifest  through  their
administrations,  and  he  offered  them
money  to  confer  the  same  power  upon
him,  but  he  was  told  that,  inasmuch
as  he  had  thought  the  gift  of  God
could  be  purchased  with  money,  his
money  should  perish  with  him,
"But  did  not  Peter  and  the  other
disciples  possess  the  power  to  for-
give sins  ?  "  Yes*  How  did  they
exercise  it  ?  The  Scriptures  are
very  plain  on  that  point.  Read  the
account  of  Peter,  on  the  day  of  Pen-
ticost,  addressing  thousands  of  peo-
ple who  were  assembled  at  Jerusalem
on  that  occasion.  They  cried  out
to  Peter  and  the  rest  of  the  Apos-
tles—  "Men and brethren,  what


shall  we  do  to  be  saved  ?  We  be-
lieve your  statement,  we  believe  we
are  sinners,  we  believe  we  have  con-
sented to  the  death  of  the  Son  of
God,  now  what  shall  we  do  ?"  Did
he  say — t(  I  will  forgive  you  your
sins?"  Mo,  no  such  thing.  Did  he
have  the  power  ?  Yes.  How  did
he  exercise  it  ?  Said  be — "  Repent
and  be  baptized,  every  one  of  you,
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the
remission  of  yonr  sins,  and  you  shall
receive  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  they
took  them  and  led  them  down  into
the  water,  and  baptized  them,  and
their  sins  were  forgiveu.  That  is  the
way  the  Apostles  forgave  sins,  it  was
not  by  selling  indulgences*

Martin  Luther  introduced  some
good  principles,  but  did  he  bring
back  the  Gospel  Jesus  brought  ?  No,
verily  no.  Did  Melancthon  ?  No.
Zwingler  ?  No.  John  Knox  ?  No,
Did  Calvin  ?  No,  none  of  them
brought  back  the  Gospel  of  Jesus,
They  went  about  teaching  good
principles  of  morality,  and  the  Gos-
pel as  far  as  they  knew  it.  But  God
did  not  impart  to  them  the  light  of
revelation  which  the  ancient  Saints
enjoyed,  and  as  each  of  those  re-
formers had  his  peculiar  views  and
ideas  in  regard  to  the  Gospel,  they
were  the  originate!  s  of  the  multi-
tudes of  sects  and  parlies  now  ex-
isting in  the  Christian  world.  La-
ther promulgated  his  views  very
extensively  in  Germany,  Calvin,
who  differed  from  him  in  regard  to
the  doctrine  of  free  will,  and  was  a
believer  in  the  doctrine  of  fate,  elec-
tion or  reprobation,  promulgated
his  views  extensively,  and  so  with
others.  If  they  had  had  the  light
of  revelation  this  variation  would
not  have  existed,  the  Spirit  of  Gt>d
would  have  led  them  into  all  truth
and  brought  them  to  the  unity  of
the  faith,  and  they  would  have  seen
eye  to  eye,  as  the  Scriptures  say  men


WHAT  THE  GOSPEL  TEACHES,  ETC.


375


will  do  *'  When  God  brings  again  )
Zion,  and  with  their  voice  together
^vill  they  sing,"

We  will  refer  to  some  of  these  se-
ceding churches,  but  first  for  a  mo-
ment  will  notice  the  Greek  church.
This  church  seceded  front  the  Latin
church, or the Latin from  the
Greek, 1 do  not  care  which  way
yon  take  it. There  was  a  schism
between  these  two  bodies,  and  each
pursued  its  own  peculiar  course,  and
that  course  has  been  very  erratic,
foolish  and  far  from  the  principles
of  truth. Then  there  is  the  Episco-
pal Church. How  did  it  originate  ?
Through  Henry  the  Eight  How
was  it  that  he  started  a  church  ?
History  informs  us  that  it  was  sim-
ply on  this  ground— he  was  desirous
of  having  a  divorce  from  his  wife
and  the  Pope  would  not  grant  it.
Before  this  Henry had  written  a
book or pamphlet in defence  of
popery  and  in opposition to  the
Reformation, for  which the  Pope
styled  him  u  Defender  of  the  Faith  ;  "
but  when  the  Pop©  would  not  con-
sent to  grant  the  English  king  this
divorce  he  became  angry,  and  de-
termined to  start  a  church  of  his
own ; and fortunately  or  unfortu-
nately he  had  two  pliant  tools,  ec-
clesiastics in  the  Catholic  church,  and
to  gratify  their  sovereign  they  lent
themselves  to  him  to  assist  in  carry-
ing out  his  plan,  and  together  they
started  the  Church  of  England,  or
the  Episcopal  Church  as  it  is  now
called. When Henry  had  got  a
priesthood  of  his  own  he  got  the
divorce  be  wanted,  and  went  on  his
way  rejoicing  I  suppose,  at  least  in  his
way.

We  will  now  come  to  some  others
among  the  reformers.  There  was
Johu  Knox,  in  Scotland  a  very
zealous  and  very  intolerant  man,
nothing  very  pleasant  about  him,
some  traits  of  his  character  I  never


admired, and I have read  some
things  in  his  works  that  are  not
very pleasant, gentle  or  amiable;
but  he  was  no  doubt  a  very  sincere
and  zealous  Christian  in his  way,
and  sought  to  do  good* Then  there
was  Calvin,  another  tolerably  sin-
cere man  in  my  opinion,  and  judging
from  what  history  tells  about  him,
he  was  desirous  of  stemming  the
torrent  of  evil  and  advancing  good
principles  as  far  as  he  knew  how.
But  who  among  them  brought  back
the  Gospel  which  Jesus  taught  ?  Not
one. Leaving  Calvin,  Knox,  Luther
and  the  early  reformers  we  comedown
to  later  times,  and  we  find  that  in  the
Church  of  England  there  were  some
things  which  the  conscientious  por-
tion of  its  members  could  not  sus-
tain, and  a  reformation  was  inaugu-
rated by  John  and  Charles  Wesley,
and  a  Mr.  Fletcher. They  taught
many  good  principles;  but  they  did
not  bring  back  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Obrist,  although  they  were  very  zeal-
ous and  very  desirous  of  doing  good,
and  I  think  there  was  something  very
creditable  in  their  efforts  to  stem  the
current  of  evil  and  to  resist  and  un*
mask  the  corruption  that  was  creep-
ing in  under  the  name  of  religion
and  to  unmask  the  hypocricy  that
existed ;  but  they  did  not  restore  the
Gospel,  and  one  of  thorn,  in  singing
said  he  looked  forward  to  and  hoped
the  time  would  come  when—

; **  From  chosen  Abraham**  aced
The  new  Apostles  choose
OVr  isles  and  continents  to  spread
The  dead -reviving  new*.*'

They  did  not  have  it,  however  he
knew  that,  and  although  he  was  de-
sirous of  having  such  a  state  of  things
restored,  he  was  not  able  to  introduce
it,  for  God  had  not  called  upon  him
to  perform  that  work-
There  have  been  various  othei
isms  besides  those  I  have  mentioned,
in  some  instances  arising  more
from  personal  pique,  prejudice  and


S76


JOURNAL  OF  DISCOURSES.


contradictions  and  personal  inter,
eats  of  men  than  for  the  glory  of
God  and  for  the  good  of  mankind,
and  I  am  afraid  their  originators
cared  more  about  preaching  the
Gospel  according  to  certain  men,
rather  than  the  Gospel  according  to
Jesus  Christ.  In  such  a  state  of
things  what  is  to  be  done  ?  We  are
living  in  a  world  in  which  the  spirits
who  have  dwelt  in  the  bosom  of  God
are  coming  into  and  leaving  this
state  of  existence  at  the  rate  of
abont  a  thousand  millions  in  every
thirty-three  years;  and  here  are
thousands  of  so-called  ministers  of
religion  with  an  inefficient  Gospel,
that  God  never  ordained,  trying  to
ameliorate  the  condition  of  man
kind,  and  sending  what  they  call  the
Gospel  to  the  heathen,  and  they  are
continually  calling  for  the  pecan iary
aid  of  their  fellow  Christians  to  as-
sist them  in  this  enterprise.  But
if  they  have  not  the  truth  them-
selves how  can  they  impart  it  to
others  ?  How  can  blind  leaders  lead
people  in  the  way  of  life  and  salva-
tion ?  Was  it  not  necessary,  in  view
of  the  ignorance  and  blindness  of  the
people  everywhere,  in  regard  to  the
principles  of  salvation,  that  some*
thing  should  be  done  to  ameliorate
the  condition  of  a  fallen  world  ?
Tbe  Christian  world,  by  their  unbe-
lief, have  made  the  heavens  as  brass,
and  wherever  they  go  to  declare
what  they  call  the  Gospel  they  make
confusion  worse  confounded;  but
who  shall  debar  God  from  taking
care  of  his  own  creation,  and  saving
his  creatures  ?  Yet  this  is  the  posi-
tion that  many  men  have  taken.
But  notwithstanding  the  unbelief
so  prevalent  throughout  Christen-


dom, God  restored  his  ancient  Gos-
pel to  Joseph  Smith,  giving  hi  in
revelation,  opening  the  heavens  to
him,  and  making  him  acquainted
with  the  plan  of  salvation  and  ex-
altation of  the  children  of  men.  I
was  well  acquainted  with  him,  and
have  carefully  examined  the  reve-
lations given  through  him,  and  not*
withstanding  all  the  aspersions  that
have  been  oast  upon  him,  I  be-
lieve that,  with  the  exception  of
Jesus  Christ,  there  never  was  a
greater  Prophet  upon  this  wide
earth  than  he;  and  to  the  revela-
tions he  made  known  are  we  in*
debted  for  the  glorious  principles
that  God  has  communicated  to  the
world  in  these  last  days.  We  were
as  much  in  the  dark  as  other  people
were  about  the  principles  of  salva-
tion, and  the  relationship  we  hold
to  God  and  each  other,  until  these
things  were  made  known  to  us  by
Joseph  Smith,  A  great  deal  is  said
at  the  present  time  about  the  re-
lation of  husband  and  wife;  but
where  i%  there  a  man  outside  of  this
Church  who  understands  anything
about  this  relationship,  as  well  as
that  of  parents  to  children  ?  There
is  not  one,  and  the  Latter-day  Saints
knew  nothing  about  it  until  it  was
revealed  by  Joseph  Smith }  through
the  Gospel.  It  is  the  Gos|>el  that
teaches  a  woman  that  she  has  a
claim  upon  a  man,  and  a  man  that
he  has  a  claim  upon  a  woman  in
the  resurrection ;  it  is  tbe  Gospel  that
teaches  them  that,  when  they  rise
from  the  tombs  in  the  resurrection,
they  will  again  clasp  hands,  be  re-
united, and  again  participate  in  that
glory  for  which  God  designed  thtm
before  the  world  was.


[to  be  continued  ox  page  1,  vol.  17.]
